 
 
 
  
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT, FORESTS AND 
CLIMATE CHANGE 
 
 
  
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
August, 2025/ Sravana, 1947 (Saka) 
THREE HUNDRED NINETY SEVENTH REPORT 
 
Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations 
contained in the Three  Hundred Ninetieth Report of the Department-related 
Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science and Technology, 
Environment,  Forests and Climate Change on the Demands for Grants 
(2025-26) of the Department of Science and Technology 
 (Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 8th August, 2025) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 8th August, 2025) 
 
REPORT NO. 
397 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Website: http://rajyasabha.nic.in 
Email: rsc-st@sansad.nic.in 

 
Hindi version of this publication is also available 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT, FORESTS AND 
CLIMATE CHANGE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
August, 2025/ Sravana, 1947 (Saka) 
 
THREE HUNDRED NINETY SEVENTH REPORT 
 
Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations 
contained in the Three  Hundred Ninetieth Report of the Department-related 
Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science and Technology, 
Environment,  Forests and Climate Change on the Demands for Grants 
(2025-26) of the Department of Science and Technology 
 
 (Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 8th August, 2025) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 8th August, 2025) 
 

 
C O N T E N T S   
            
  PAGES 
   
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE  (i) 
2. INTRODUCTION  (ii) 
3. ACRONYMS  (iii)  
4. REPORT       1-17 
 Chapter I.       Recommendations/Observations which  have been  
                       accepted by the Government 
 
2-10 
 Chapter II.  Recommendations/Observations which the   Committee does not 
desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies 
11-12 
 Chapter III.   Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies 
                      of the Government have not been accepted by the Committee 
 
13 
 Chapter IV.   Recommendations/Observations in respect of which Final 
                      Replies of the Government are still awaited 
 
14 
5. Minutes 15-17 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                             
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
(2024-25) 
 
(Constituted w.e.f. 26th September, 2024) 
 
1. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita -    Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Narayanasa K. Bhandage  
3. Shri Damodar Rao Divakonda 
4. Ms. Indu Bala Goswami 
5. Dr. Wanweiroy Kharlukhi 
6. Shri Parimal Nathwani 
7. Shri Sharad Pawar 
8. Shri Jairam Ramesh   
9. Shri Sujeet Kumar 
10. Vacant  
LOK SABHA 
11. Shrimati Sajda Ahmed 
12. Shri Alfred Kanngam S. Arthur 
13. Shri Pradyut Bordoloi  
14. Shri Phani Bhusan Choudhury 
15. Shri Biplab Kumar Deb 
16. Shri Vamsi Krishna Gaddam 
17. Shri Tapir Gao 
18. Adv K. Francis George  
19. Shri Eswarasamy K. 
20. Shri Mahesh Kashyap 
21. Dr. Anand Kumar 
22. Shri Mohibbullah 
23. Shri Jagdambika Pal 
24. Shri Jashubhai Bhilubhai Rathva  
25. Shri Trivendra Singh Rawat 
26. Shrimati Himadri Singh 
27. Shri Tejasvi Surya  
28. Shri Durai Vaiko  
29. Shri Yaduveer Wadiyar 
30. Shri Balwant Baswant Wankhade  
31. Shri Akhilesh Yadav  
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
Dr. K.S. Somashekhar, Additional Secretary 
Shri Rakesh Naithani, Joint Secretary  
Shri Arun Kumar, Director  
Shri Rajiv Saxena, Deputy Secretary 
Ms. I. V. Rajya Laxmi, Committee Officer  
Shri Vaibhav Jain, Committee Officer  
 
 
(i) 
                                                 
 Nominated w.e.f. 23rd January, 2025. 

 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
  I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science 
and Technology, Environment, Forests and Climate Change, having been authorised by the 
Committee to present the Report on its behalf, present this Three Hundred Ninety Seventh Report 
on Action Taken by the Government on the  recommendations/observations contained in the Three 
Hundred Ninetieth Report  of the Committee on  Demands for Grants (2025-2026) of the 
Department of Science and Technology, which was presented to/ laid on the Table of both the 
Houses of Parliament on the 25th March, 2025.  
2.   There were 16 recommendations/observations in the Three Hundred Ninetieth Report of the 
Committee. Action Taken Notes on the recommendations/observations of the Committee were 
received from the Department on 28th May, 2025.   
3.   In the meeting held on 8th August, 2025, the Committee considered the draft Report and 
adopted the same. 
   
 
 
 
 
 (BHUBANESWAR KALITA) 
NEW DELHI;    Chairman, 
08 August, 2025   Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on 
Sravana 17,  1947 (Saka)  Science and Technology, Environment, Forests and  Climate Change, 
 Rajya Sabha . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(ii) 
 
 

ACRONYMS 
 
ACE ANRF Centre of Excellence 
ANRF Anusandhan National Research Foundation 
ATRI ANRF Translational Research and Innovation  Initiative 
CDSCO Central Standard Drug Control Organization 
DST Department of Science and Technology 
IRG Inclusivity Research Grant 
ITDD Innovation, Technology Development and Deployment 
LFP Lithium Iron Phosphate 
MAHA- EV Mission for Advancement in High-Impact Areas - Electric Vehicle 
NATMO National Atlas and Thematic Mapping Organization 
NBFC Non-Banking Financial Companies 
NM-ICPS National Mission on Interdisciplinary Cyber Physical System 
NQM National Quantum Mission 
NRF National Research Foundation 
NSM National Supercomputing Mission 
PAIR Partnerships for Accelerated Innovation and Research 
PMECRG Prime Minister Early Career Research Grant 
PJY Platinum Jubilee Year 
R&D Research and Development 
SDG Sustainable Development Goals 
SERB Science & Engineering Research Board 
STI Science Technology and Innovation Hub 
T-Hubs Thematic Hubs 
TiN Titanium Nitride 
TMT Thirty Meter Telescope 
TIH Technology Innovation Hubs 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iii) 

1 
 
 
REPORT 
The Action Taken Report (ATR) of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing 
Committee on Science and Technology, Environment, Forests and Climate Change deals with the 
action taken by the Government on the recommendations/observations of the Committee 
contained in its ‘Three Hundred Ninetieth Report’ on “Demands for Grants (2025-26) of the 
Department of Science and Technology.  The Report was presented to/ laid on the Table of both 
the Houses of Parliament on the 25th March, 2025. 
2. Action Taken Notes (ATNs) have been received from the Department of Science and 
Technology in respect of all the 16 recommendations/observations contained in the ‘Three 
Hundred Ninetieth Report’. The replies of the Department of Science and Technology have been 
categorized as follows:- 
Chapter I: Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the 
Government: Para Nos.:- 2.8, 3.6, 4.5, 5.5, 5.6, 6.6, 6.7, 6.8, 6.9, 6.10, 6.11, 
6.12, 6.13 and 7.6  
 Total recommendations – 14 
Chapter II: Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government’s replies:  
  Para Nos.:- 2.10 and 7.4 
  Total recommendations – 02  
Chapter III:  Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee: NIL 
Chapter IV:  Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited: NIL 
3. The details of the ATNs have been analyzed in the succeeding Chapters.  
  

2 
 
CHAPTER-I 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT 
OVERALL BUDGETARY DETAILS FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2024-25 (BE, RE & 
ACTUAL EXPENDITURE) AND ALLOCATION FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2025-26  
Recommendation/Observation 
1.1         A significant restructuring has taken place in the funding mechanism for institutional and 
human capacity building. The previously existing three schemes under this category have been 
merged into a single entity called 'Vigyan Dhara,' which has now been allocated ₹1,425 crore for 
the upcoming year. This consolidation suggests a move towards greater efficiency in fund 
utilization and streamlined administration. While this restructuring is intended to simplify 
processes, it will be crucial to ensure that it does not lead to disruptions in existing projects. 
 
(Para 2.8 of the 390th Report) 
  
Action Taken: 
 
1.2 The merger of three schemes; into a single unified scheme “Vigyan Dhara” is aimed to 
simplify the process, provide flexibility in reappropriation of fund among the programmes 
towards greater efficiency in fund utilization and streamlined administration. The Department is 
taking adequate measures to avoid any adverse impacts of this merger. 
 
RESEARCH, DEVELOPMENT & INNOVATION FUND 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
1.3         Although the Committee acknowledges the bold initiatives undertaken by the Department 
to encourage private sector participation in cutting-edge research in deep tech and sunrise 
sectors, it also recognizes certain concerns. These include the potential risk of fund misallocation, 
the competence of fund managers in identifying suitable recipients and impactful projects, 
implications for national security, the limited rate of return on investment, the possibility of 
private entities benefiting disproportionately at the Government’s expense, and the extent to 
which the outcomes of such research will ultimately benefit the common citizen. The Committee is 
also concerned that such a substantial allocation of funds could have yielded a significant impact 
if directed towards Government institutions. Therefore, the Committee strongly recommends that 
the Department should keep these apprehensions in mind while formulating the detailed 
framework and guidelines to implement this scheme. 
(Para 3.6 ibid) 
  
Action Taken: 
 
1.4 Research, Development & Innovation:       Department appreciates the 
acknowledgement of committee for the initiative to encourage the private sector participation in 

3 
 
deep tech and sunrise sectors. Research Development, and Innovation (RDI) Scheme has been 
conceptualized to establish a corpus of ₹1 lakh crore for providing long-term financing or 
refinancing with long tenors and low or nil interest rates to encourage the private sector to scale 
up research, development and innovation in sunrise domains. As the lead ministry, the 
Department of Science and Technology (DST) convened a post-budget webinar with India’s 
leading industrialists, venture capitalists, and startup founders to gather strategic insights for the 
effective rollout of the RDI scheme in March 2025.  
The detailed framework and guidelines for implementation process is currently underway to 
operationalize the fund in a structured and impactful manner. 
 
ANUSANDHAN NATIONAL RESEARCH FOUNDATION 
 
Recommendation/ Observation 
1.5         The Committee acknowledges and appreciates the establishment of the Anusandhan 
National Research Foundation (ANRF) as a significant and progressive initiative to strengthen 
research and innovation in the country. However, the Committee is of the view that the 
Department could have demonstrated greater foresight in expediting the procedural formalities 
and operationalization of the ANRF. With better planning and timely execution, a portion of the 
allocated funds could have been effectively utilized during the financial year. The Committee, 
therefore, urges the Department to ensure a more structured and time-bound approach in the 
future to optimize the utilization of budgetary allocations, thereby facilitating the timely 
implementation of research initiatives under ANRF.  
(Para 4.5 ibid) 
  
Action Taken: 
 
1.6 Anusandhan National Research Foundation: The government has established the 
Anusandhan National Research Foundation (ANRF) through ANRF Act of 2023. The 
Anusandhan National Research Foundation (ANRF) has been operationalized since February 05, 
2024. The first meeting of the Governing Board (GB) of ANRF was held on 10th September, 
2024 which discussed about India’s Science and Technology landscape and redesigning of 
research and development programmes. As per the recommendation of the GB, ANRF has 
launched multiple programmes aiming to position India as global player in select key sectors, 
driving scientific advances and innovation ecosystem, and for promoting the research and 
innovation in partnership with the private sector. These include Prime Minister's Early Career 
Research Grant (PM-ECRG) to assist young researchers for initiating their research career; EV-
Mission program under MAHA (Mission for Advancement in High-impact Areas) to promote 
research & development of Electric Vehicle (EV) adoption in India; Partnerships for Accelerated 
Innovation and Research (PAIR) in line of Hub and Spoke model, as a first step towards 
fostering research across a broader range of institutions; and  Inclusivity Research Grant (IRG) 
to provide funding support to researchers belonging to the Scheduled Caste /Scheduled Tribe for 
undertaking research in frontier areas of science and engineering. 

4 
 
ANRF endeavors to take all possible measures with better planning and timely execution for the 
effective, efficient and impactful utilization of its fund.  
 
NATIONAL QUANTUM MISSION (NQM) 
Recommendation/ Observation 
1.7 The Committee notes that the ₹ 427 crores were allocated in B.E. 2024-25 which were 
significantly reduced to ₹ 86 crores and Department could spent only 64.30 per cent of the R.E. 
till 31st January, 2025. Even after such gross under-utilization of funds, ₹ 600 crores has been 
allocated for this Mission in B.E. 2025-26. The Committee enquired about the increased budget 
allocation for the National Quantum Mission (NQM) in B.E. 2025-26 and the Department 
informed that the increased allocations will play a pivotal role in expanding and scaling up 
ongoing initiatives while accelerating the development of a robust quantum technology ecosystem 
in India. A significant portion of this funding will be dedicated to strengthening the four 
established Thematic Hubs (T-Hubs), each focused on a key vertical—Quantum Computing, 
Quantum Communication, Quantum Sensing & Metrology, and Quantum Materials & Devices. 
The enhanced funding will empower these T-Hubs to fulfill their mandates effectively by: 
Technology Development, Human Resource Development, Entrepreneurship Development and 
Industry Collaborations and International Collaborations.  
(Para 5.5 ibid) 
 
1.8         The Committee acknowledges that the launch of a dedicated Mission for research in 
Quantum Technologies is a strategic and forward-looking initiative, aligning with global 
technological advancements. However, the underutilization of allocated funds raises concerns 
about the Department's commitment and operational efficiency. The Committee emphasizes the 
need for the Department to adopt a more proactive and results driven approach to ensure the 
Mission's success. Rather than merely playing catch-up to Google’s Willow and Microsoft’s 
Majorana 1, the Committee strongly recommends that the Department adopt an ambitious vision 
to position India as a global leader in Quantum Technology.  
(Para 5.6 ibid) 
  
Action Taken: 
 
1.9 The concerns of the Committee regarding the underutilization of allocated funds in 
National Quantum Mission in the previous financial year are duly noted. The Department would 
like to submit the following clarifications and forward-looking commitments: 
  
1. Initial Underutilization: 
 The year 2024–25 marked the foundational phase of the Mission, during which the 
selection and establishment of the four Thematic Hubs (T-Hubs) was carried out. 
 The time-intensive nature of establishing these hubs at premier academic 
institutions, ensuring due diligence contributed to a slower pace of fund utilization. 
2. Corrective Measures and Acceleration: 

5 
 
 Following the establishment of the T-Hubs, the Mission has now entered its 
implementation phase with clearly defined technology development targets. 
 Robust mechanisms have been instituted for monthly monitoring, milestone-based 
disbursements, and timely approvals, ensuring improved fund absorption. 
3. Strategic Vision for Global Leadership: 
 The Department supports the Committee’s view that India must not merely play 
catch-up to international players but also work toward global leadership in 
Quantum Technologies. 
 To this end, the enhanced allocation of ₹600 crores in B.E. 2025–26 will directly 
support technology development, human resource development, entrepreneurship 
and startup ecosystem and international collaborations. 
  
PERFORMANCE OF THE AUTONOMOUS INSTITUTIONS UNDER THE 
DEPARTMENT DURING 2024-25 
 
Sree Chitra Tirunal Institute for Medical Sciences & Technology (SCTIMST), 
Thiruvananthapuram 
 
Recommendation/ Observation 
1.10 The Committee commends the efforts of Sree Chitra Tirunal Institute of Medical Sciences 
and Technology (SCTIMST) in advancing biomedical technology development, fostering industry 
collaboration, and translating research into commercially viable products. The successful 
development and market launch of innovations such as the AG Chitra Tuberculosis Diagnostic 
Kit, Titanium Nitride (TiN) coated coronary stent, Automatic Contrast Injector, and Automated 
Trolley e-drive highlight the Institute’s significant contributions to the healthcare sector.  
(Para 6.6 ibid) 
 
 
1.11         Given the impact of these developments, the Committee recommends that the 
Department extend greater financial and infrastructural support to SCTIMST to further 
strengthen its research and development capabilities. Additionally, the Committee urges the 
Department to facilitate wider adoption and deployment of these indigenous technologies across 
healthcare institutions in India, ensuring affordability, accessibility, and scalability. The 
Committee also emphasizes the need for an enabling ecosystem to promote industry partnerships 
and expedite regulatory clearances, thereby accelerating the commercialization of innovative 
medical technologies for the benefit of the healthcare sector and the common citizen. 
(Para 6.7 ibid) 
 
 
Action Taken: 
 
1.12 1. There has been a 12% increase in financial allocation to SCTIMST for FY 2025-26 when 
compared to the FY 2024-25. The Department is providing necessary support for improving the 
infrastructure to strengthen the R&D capabilities of the Institute.  

6 
 
2. SCTIMST has a dedicated 'Technology Business Division' (TBD) to take care of the 
deployment of indigenous technologies developed by the research team of the Institute. TBD-
SCTIMST co-ordinates the various activities related to the commercialisation of the know-how 
and technologies developed at the Institute and liaison between the Institute and industry. The 
information about new technologies and other developments are disseminated through SCTIMST 
Website and social media handles.  
3. The products developed at the Institute are publicized through an Expression of Interest for 
Technology Transfer whereby the medical device industry can collaborate and take ahead the 
products into commercialization. Such collaborations have happened with TTK Healthcare Ltd, 
Terumo Penpol, HLL Lifecare Ltd, Anabond Stedmann Pharma Ltd, Basic Healthcare Ltd, Meril 
Lifesciences, Wipro 3D, Biorad Medisys Pvt Ltd etc.  
4. Many of the technologies like heart valve, blood bag, oxygenator, dental and orthopaedic 
composites, Intrauterine Device, Vein veiwer, bioceramic beads to treat bone infections, bioink 
for 3D bioprinting, etc have been commercialized to benefit the patient population.  
5. The Institute provides all kind of technical support to the industry partner for regulatory 
submissions. The Regulatory cell interacts with the Technology partner and guide on regulatory 
submissions wherever required.  
6. The testing services of the Institute offer various preclinical evaluations including 
physicochemical, biocompatibility and large animal safety and functional evaluations to the 
medical device industry for submission to the regulatory authorities.  
7. The incubator facility of the Institute SCTIMST TIMed supports the medical device industry by 
providing the incubates with seed funds and mentoring for the development of their devices.  
8. SCTIMST, being a pioneering institution in MedTech research, creates an enabling ecosystem 
for MedTech translation. The Institute has implemented Medical Device Regulatory Compliance 
Facility (MDRCF), Industry Institute Partnership Cell (IIPC) and the Technology Business 
Incubator (TIMed) from the period 2016-17 onwards. This system has catered to many 
entrepreneurs and other R&D setups, through direct interactions and facilitations in product 
translation.  
International Advanced Research Centre for Powder Metallurgy & New Materials (ARCI), 
Hyderabad 
Recommendation/ Observation 
1.13  The Committee acknowledges the significant contributions of the International 
Advanced Research Centre for Powder Metallurgy and New Materials (ARCI) in advancing 
research across critical domains such as energy storage, nanomaterials, engineered coatings, 
additive manufacturing, and advanced powder metallurgy. The successful development and 
technology transfer of battery-grade Lithium Iron Phosphate (LFP) as a cathode material for Li-
ion batteries to M/s. Altmin Pvt. Ltd., Hyderabad, marks a commendable step towards 
strengthening India's indigenous battery manufacturing capabilities. 
 (Para 6.8 ibid) 
 

7 
 
1.14         In view of the growing demand for energy storage solutions, the Committee 
recommends that the Department provide enhanced support to ARCI for scaling up its research 
and accelerating commercialization efforts in battery technology and other advanced materials. 
The Committee also emphasizes the need for wider industry collaboration, strategic partnerships, 
and policy interventions to facilitate domestic production, reduce import dependency, and 
position India as a global leader in energy storage technologies. Furthermore, it is imperative to 
ensure that such technological advancements are leveraged for broader industrial applications 
and made accessible to multiple stakeholders, thereby fostering self-reliance and sustainability in 
the sector.  
(Para 6.9 ibid) 
  
Action Taken: 
1.15 
1. The budget allocation for ARCI for FY 2025-26 has been enhanced when compared to the 
FY 2024-25.  
2. The Department is providing necessary support to ARCI for scaling up its research and 
accelerating commercialization efforts in battery technology and other advanced materials.  
3. The ongoing research projects are being periodically monitored. Their readiness levels are 
assessed, gaps are identified, and required collaborations are forged to conduct field trials / 
to access complementary resources and capabilities / to commercialize ARCI technologies 
related to battery and other advanced materials. 
4. ARCI has continuously been collaborating with appropriate industry partners, including 
Startups, in its efforts aimed at research scaling-up, field trials, and technology transfer. 
Lithium Iron Phosphate (LiFePO4) technology has been transferred to a company, another 
company has been provided with know-how for setting up a Lithium Ion Battery (LIB) 
production line.  
5. Other collaborations are ongoing to support the product development efforts of Indian 
companies/ startups operating in energy storage technologies. 
6. Efforts have been made to utilize ARCI's research capability for multiple industrial 
applications, thereby increasing the impact of available knowledge-base / developed 
technologies for multiple stakeholders.  
  
7. Research capabilities have been developed in ceramic, nanomaterials, laser processing, 
energy, and surface engineering domains has been utilized to provide technology solutions 
to industrial and strategic sectors.  Knowledge-base in aforementioned domains has been 
used to develop, demonstrate, and transfer technologies to foster self-reliance and 
sustainability through technology recipient organizations / industrial entities. 
  
 Indian Institute of Astrophysics (IIA), Bengaluru 
 
 
Recommendation/ Observation 

8 
 
 
1.16 The Committee recognizes the Indian Institute of Astrophysics (IIA) as a premier 
institution dedicated to research and development in Astronomy, Astrophysics, and Astronomy 
Instrumentation. The successful fabrication and verification of the first 1.44-meter mirror segment 
for the international Thirty Meter Telescope (TMT) at the India-TMT Optics Fabrication Facility 
is a significant achievement, demonstrating India's capability in high-precision optics and 
advanced astronomical instrumentation. 
 (Para 6.10 ibid) 
 
1.17        The Committee recommends that the Department extend continued support to IIA for the 
successful completion of India’s commitments to the TMT project and other international 
collaborations in astrophysics. Additionally, the Committee urges the Department to explore 
opportunities for further strengthening indigenous expertise in astronomical instrumentation, 
including the development of next-generation telescopes and space-based observational facilities. 
Ensuring adequate funding, infrastructure, and skilled workforce development will be crucial for 
positioning India as a global leader in cutting-edge astronomical research and technology. 
(Para 6.11 ibid) 
  
Action Taken: 
1.18 
1.  The Department is extending continued support to IIA for the successful completion of 
India’s commitments to the TMT project and other international collaborations in 
astrophysics.  
2. The TMT project has brought in the know-how of making a segmented telescope in the 
country and IIA is in the processing of building the first segmented telescope in Hanle, 
Ladakh. This segmented 3.7 m telescope with 6 mirrors or a 6.5m telescope with 18 mirrors 
to harvest and showcase all the technologies culminated in developing segmented mirrors 
for TMT project. 
3. National Large Solar Telescope: As the Kodaikanal solar observatory (KSO) is celebrating 
125 years of its operation, the scaling up of the solar studies from the ground are being 
augmented. The proposal to set up a 2-m National Large Solar Telescope is under 
consideration. This telescope will help in continuing the legacy the country has established 
as well as to train upcoming generations of scientists. This will also bring development and 
generate employment in the remote area of the country. 
4. Space program:  
(a) IIA delivered the Ultraviolet Imaging Telescope on AstroSat which is completing 10 
years of its operation in September 2025. The VELC on Aditya-L1 is operational for 
more than a year. Currently, a proposal to build a next generation UV-optical space 
telescope is in Phase-A and further steps awaited from ISRO. With the success of the 
Aditya-L1, there are efforts to start planning the next generation solar missions.  
(b) In the space sector IIA has already established MOU with many start-ups to share/extent 
its expertise in building satellites and testing including discussions with space industries 
to open up IIA facilities for critical space instruments assembly and integration. The 

9 
 
engineers and technicians who have worked on the MGK Menon Laboratory for space 
sciences on various projects are absorbed by various companies such as Dhruva, Pixxel, 
Digantara etc. 
5. IIA is extending its resource of scientific knowledge and technical expertise in the cutting-
edge technologies like space science, navigation systems, space debris mapping etc, to both 
government and private sectors (start-ups). Based on the initial experience of extending the 
IIA facilities, there appears a potential for generation of revenue from these sectors.  
 
Raman Research Institute (RRI), Bengaluru 
 
Recommendation/ Observation 
1.19 The Committee commends the Raman Research Institute (RRI) for its outstanding 
contributions to scientific research across vast spatial and temporal scales, from cosmology to 
atomic physics.  
(Para 6.12 ibid) 
 
1.20 The successful design and development of POLIX, the world's first instrument operating in 
the medium X-ray band (8 to 30 keV), and its launch onboard ISRO’s XPoSat mission on 1st 
January 2024, is a remarkable achievement in space-based X-ray astronomy. The Committee 
appreciates the Institute’s efforts in pioneering X-ray polarisation measurements, which hold 
immense potential for advancing our understanding of high-energy astrophysical phenomena. In 
light of these achievements, the Committee recommends that the Department provide continued 
support to RRI for further advancements in space-based astronomy and astrophysics. 
Strengthening collaborations with national and international agencies, investing in cutting-edge 
instrumentation, and facilitating knowledge transfer will be crucial in reinforcing India’s 
leadership in high-energy astrophysics research. The Committee also emphasizes the need for 
sustained funding, enhanced infrastructure, and skilled human resources to propel future 
discoveries and innovations in this critical domain. 
(Para 6.13 ibid) 
  
Action Taken: 
 
1.21 The Department is providing continued financial and infrastructure support to RRI for 
further advancements in space based astronomy and astrophysics. RRI’s quest to understand the 
high energy universe continues with its participation in DAKSHA, an ambitious proposal to study 
explosive events in the universe. RRI also has a dedicated program to study the early high energy 
universe - an epoch known as cosmic dawn when the first stars and galaxies formed in the 
universe- via its in-house designed and built ground based and space based high precision spectral 
radiometers. Through these research programs, RRI has built robust and fruitful research 
collaborations with multiple national and international research labs and universities. RRI has also 
contributed to the AstroSat Mission of ISRO. The POLIX instrument was built by a team 

10 
 
consisting of senior faculty members, senior engineers and bright young minds in the form of PhD 
students, visiting students and research assistants resulting in scientific and technological 
knowledge transfer to the next generation of researchers and engineers. 
 
HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT AND CAPACITY BUILDING 
Recommendation/ Observation 
 
1.22       The Committee observes that the existing provisions for capacity building and skill 
enhancement are inadequate in effectively cultivating scientific talent. To address this gap, the 
Committee strongly recommends that the Department formulate a comprehensive policy dedicated 
to capacity building programs for its staff. This policy should focus on structured training 
initiatives, skill development, and continuous learning opportunities. Additionally, the 
Department should actively explore and establish collaborations with internationally renowned 
scientific institutions to facilitate knowledge exchange, exposure to global best practices, and 
advanced research training.  
  
(Para 7.6 ibid) 
  
Action Taken: 
 
1.23 For capacity building and effectively cultivating scientific talent several efforts are being 
undertaken in the DST, which are as under: 
 For implementation of National Programme for Civil Service Capacity Building 
(NPCSCB) - Mission Karmayogi - Finalization of Annual Capacity Building Plan 
(ACBP), the department has formulated the ACBP calendar by identified level-wise 
courses (based on competencies i.e. Domain, Functional and Behavioral) on iGOT 
Karmayogi Platform. 
 Seven (07) Training Sessions  have been organized in DST under Rashtriya karmayogi 
training initiative of Capacity Building Commission to instil “Seva Bhav” in the 
officials/scientists. So, far total of 254 employees of DST have been trained under this 
initiative.  
 14 Lectures/talks were also conducted in the Department. Two immersion programme 
were also conducted for the newly recruited scientists at INST, Mohali  and WIHG, 
Dehradun. 
  Learning Hour is observed in DST on every Monday from 4:30 PM to 5:30 PM. 
 Seven (07) mandatory  courses of iGOT Karmayogi Portal have been identified in DST for 
all the officials of DST. 
A sub committee has been formed for exploring the potentiality of collaborations with 
internationally renowned scientific institutions to facilitate knowledge exchange. 
  

11 
 
 
CHAPTER – II 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT'S REPLIES 
 
OVERALL BUDGETARY DETAILS FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2024-25 (BE, RE & 
ACTUAL EXPENDITURE) AND ALLOCATION FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2025-26 
Recommendation/Observation 
2.1         The Committee emphasizes the need to ensure that administrative and procedural 
challenges do not become significant obstacles to the Department's planned activities in the long 
term. It, therefore, recommends that the Department exercise due diligence in managing its 
expenditures to guarantee optimal fund utilization for 2025-26 while ensuring the successful 
achievement of its set objectives. Furthermore, the Committee urges the Department to make 
every possible effort in the current financial year to compensate for the suboptimal performance 
recorded during 2024-25. 
 (Para 2.10 of 390th Report) 
  
Action Taken: 
 
2.2 Based on the lessons learnt in the past, the department is taking all possible efforts towards 
optimal fund utilization during 2025-26 towards smooth execution of the planned activities 
boosting the impetus of research & development in the country.  
 
HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT AND CAPACITY BUILDING 
Recommendation/Observation  
2.3       The Committee expresses deep concern over the significant number of vacancies in the 
Department, as well as in the Autonomous Institutions (AIs) under its administrative control. It is 
particularly dismayed by the persistent reliance on contractual appointments as a stopgap 
measure to address short-term manpower shortages. The Committee firmly believes that a highly 
skilled and dedicated workforce is the cornerstone of any scientific institution’s success and 
output. Therefore, it strongly recommends that the Department adopt a mission-mode approach to 
expeditiously fill all vacant positions. This will ensure the availability of a competent and stable 
workforce, essential for advancing scientific research and institutional excellence. 
(Para 7.4 ibid) 
  
Action Taken: 
 
2.4 Most of the vacancies in Group A, Group B and Group C posts of DST Secretariat, pertain 
to CSS, CSCS, CSSS and CS (OL) cadres for which the Department of Personnel & Training 

12 
 
(DOP&T) and Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA) are the Cadre Controlling Authorities. This 
Department has been requesting DOP&T and MHA time and again to allocate manpower as per 
the sanctioned strength and DOP&T and MHA have been posting officials of these cadres on an 
ongoing basis. For filling up other vacant posts, recruitment processes have been initiated in this 
Department which are at various stages of recruitment. 
  
It is submitted that the Autonomous Institutions get various extra mural research projects funded 
by government and industry funded projects and the existing permanent manpower is not 
sufficient to execute these projects. Hence, project staff are appointed on tenure and contractual 
basis for implementation of these projects. However, efforts are underway by all the AI’s to fill 
the vacant positions and many AI’s in the recent past has added young and dynamic researchers 
who have now gone on to establish research groups on par with the best in the world. The AI’s are 
making substantial efforts and several AI’s had initiated recruitment to fill up vacant permanent 
posts following the reservation roster for permanent recruitment, which is under process. 
  

13 
 
 
CHAPTER – III 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
NIL 
 
 
 
 
  

14 
 
CHAPTER – IV 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES 
OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-NIL- 
  

15 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINUTES 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

16 
 
MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED 
PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, 
ENVIRONMENT, FORESTS AND CLIMATE CHANGE (2024-25) 
 
XII 
TWELFTH MEETING 
 
The Committee met at 10:00 A.M. on Wednesday, the 6th August, 2025 in Committee 
Room No. B, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
1. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita – Chairman  
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Ms. Indu Bala Goswami 
3. Shri Sujeet Kumar 
 
LOK SABHA 
4. Shri Mahesh Kashyap 
5. Dr. Anand Kumar 
6. Shri Mohibbullah 
7. Shri Jagdambika Pal 
8. Shri Jashubhai Bhilubhai Rathva  
9. Shri Balwant Baswant Wankhade  
10. Shri Yaduveer Wadiyar 
11. Shri Vamsi Krishna Gaddam 
12. Shri Eswarasamy K 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Dr. K.S. Somashekhar, Additional Secretary  
2. Shri Rakesh Naithani, Joint Secretary  
3. Shri Rajiv Saxena, Deputy Secretary 
4. Ms. I.V. Rajya Laxmi, Committee Officer 
5. Shri Vaibhav Jain, Committee Officer  
                                     
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the meeting of the Committee. The 
Committee then took up consideration of the draft 394th,  395th, 396th, 397th, 398th, 399th and 400th 
Reports of the Committee on Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations/ 
observations contained in the Reports  on  Demands for Grants (2025-2026) of the 

17 
 
Ministries/Departments of Atomic Energy; Biotechnology; Scientific and Industrial Research; 
Science & Technology; Space; Environment, Forest and Climate Change; and Earth Sciences, 
respectively and adopted the same after some deliberations.  
3. The Committee decided to present/lay the above mentioned Reports in both the Houses of 
Parliament on the 8th August, 2025.  
4. *  *  *  *  * 
5. The meeting of the Committee adjourned at 10:46 a.m. 
 
 
NEW DELHI                                RAJIV SAXENA 
  06.08.2025                           DEPUTY SECRETARY 
 
 
 
 
 