Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
RAJYA SABHA
ON SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT & FORESTS
REPORT NO.
270
( 23 , 2015)Presented to the Rajya Sabha on rd December
( 23 , 2015)Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on rd December
TWO HUNDRED SEVENTIETH REPORT
December, 2015/Agrahayana, 1937 (Saka)
Environmental Issues of Kerala in General
and Kochi/Ernakulam in Particular


Website : http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail : rsc-st@sansad.nic.in

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
ON SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT & FORESTS
TWO HUNDRED SEVENTIETH REPORT
Environmental Issues of Kerala in General and
Kochi/Ernakulam in Particular
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 23rd December, 2015)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 23rd December, 2015)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
December, 2015/Agrahayana, 1937 (Saka)
Hindi version of this publication is also available

CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ....................................................................................... (i)-(ii)
2. I NTRODUCTION ...................................................................................................................... (iii)
3. A CRONYMS ............................................................................................................................ (iv )
4. R EPORT ............................................................................................................................... .. 1-7
5. R ECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV A TIONS — A T A G LANCE .......................................................... 8-9
6. M INUTES ............................................................................................................................... 11-14
7. A NNEXURES ........................................................................................................................... 15-23

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(Constituted on 1st September , 2015)
1. Shri Ashwani Kumar —   Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Anil Madhav Dave
3. Shri Prem Chand Gupta
4. Shri C.P. Narayanan
5. Shri Parimal Nathwani
   6. Shri Paul Manoj Pandian
7. Dr. T. Subbarami Reddy
8. Shri Arvind Kumar Singh
 9. Shri Bhupinder Singh
10. Shri Ronald Sapa Tlau
LOK SABHA
11. Shri Badruddin Ajmal
   12. Shri Muzaffar Hussain Baig
13. Shrimati Bijoya Chakraborty
     14. Shri Prabhatsinh Chauhan
15. Shri Pankaj Chowdhary
16. Kum. Sushmita Dev
17. Shri Ninong Ering
18. Shri Laxman Giluwa
      19. Dr. K. Gopal
20. Shri Daddan Mishra
21. Shri Chirag Paswan
22. Shri Shivaji A. Patil
23. Shri Nanabhau Falgunrao Patole
24. Shri Nagendra Kumar Pradhan
25. Shri Harinarayan Rajbhar
26. Shrimati Sandhya Roy
27. Shri Kirti Vardhan Singh
28. Shri Nagendra Singh
29. Shrimati Renuka Sinha
30. Shri Vikram Usendi
31. Shrimati M.Vasanthi
(i)

(ii)
SECRETARIAT
Shri M.K. Khan, Joint Secretary
Shri Rohtas, Director
Shri Mohd. Salamuddin, Deputy Director
Shri Rajiv Saxena, Assistant Director

INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science &
Technology, Environment & Forests, having been authorized by the Committee to present the report
on its behalf, present this Two Hundred Seventieth Report on "Environmental issues of Kerala in
General and Kochi/Ernakulam in particular".
2. During its study visit to Kerala from 23rd to 26th November, 2015, the Committee heard the
views of the officers of the Central Government and State Government of Kerala and Experts and
Civil Society Organisations/NGOs on "Environmental issues of Kerala in General and Kochi/
Ernakulam in particular".
3. The Committee expresses its thanks to the officers of the Central Government and State
Government of Kerala and Experts and Civil Society Organisations/NGOs for rendering their
valuable views/replies to clarifications sought by the Committee.
4. In its meeting held on 22nd December, 2015, the Committee considered the draft report and
adopted the same.
ASHWANI KUMAR
N
EW D ELHI; Chairman,
December 22,  2015 Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on
1 Pausha, 1937 (Saka)  Science & Technology, Environment & Forests,
Rajya Sabha.
(iii)

ACRONYMS
DMRC : Delhi Metro Rail Corporation
KMRL : Kochi Metro Rail Ltd.
CRZ : Coastal Regulation Zone
(iv)

1
REPORT
The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science & Technology,
Environment & Forests has been undertaking study visits in various States/cities across the country
to assess their environmental status. As part of this exercise, the Committee undertook a study visit
inter-alia  to Kochi from 23rd to 26th November, 2015. During the visit, the Committee held
meetings at Kochi with NGOs/Civil Society Organisations/Experts as well as officials of
Government of Kerala and Union Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change to apprise
itself of the environmental issues of Kochi/Kerala.
2. At Kochi on 25th November, 2015, the Committee first heard the views of NGOs/Civil
Society Organisations/Experts on the environmental issues of Kerala in general and Kochi/Ernakulam
in particular. The Principal Secretary, Forest & Wildlife Department, Government of Kerala was
also present during the meeting. A list of NGOs/Civil Society Organisations/Experts and their
representatives who attended the meeting is at Annexure-I. A list of officers of Government of
Kerala and Union Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change who were present in the
meeting is at Annexure-II. Some NGOs/Civil Society Organisations/Expert also submitted written
memoranda.
3. Initiating the discussion with the NGOs/Civil Society Organisations, the Chairman of the
Committee urged the participants to give viable proposals which could be implemented straightway
without any major policy changes especially with regard to solid waste management, sewerage and
untreated water disposal to water bodies, regeneration of water resources, afforestation and
protection of mangroves on the banks of the wetlands in Kochi in particular and Kerala in general.
During the meeting, the members of the NGOs/Civil Society Organisations expressed their views
on a number of issues pertaining to the environmental issues of Kochi and Kerala. Later the
Committee held discussion with the officers of Government of Kerala and Union Ministry of
Environment, Forest and Climate Change on the subject.
4. Some of the views expressed by the NGOs/Civil Society Organisations/Experts are as
under:-
(i) The representative of All India River Protection Council drew attention to the air,
water and soil pollution in Kochi. He stated that the various water bodies in the state
were polluted, have become waste dumping places and nearing extinction but the
concerned authorities were not addressing the issue. He also stated that rainwater
harvesting should be made compulsory. He mentioned about lack of liquid waste
disposal facilities in Kerala. The liquid waste mixed with fresh water was a source
of mosquitoes and other bacterial diseases. He also stated that there was no proper
drainage system in Kochi and the existing system needed to be redesigned. He further
stated that the solid and liquid waste of the city finally went into V embanad Lake and
stressed the need for a decentralized solid waste disposal system. He further stated
that the only solid waste treatment plant at Bhramapura was not sufficient for the
city.
1 Meeting also Chaired by Shri Bhupinder Singh in absence of the Chairman.

2
(ii) Shri K. Binu from Bazhoor, Kottayam District brought out the condition of mangrove
and stated that Kochi had lot of mangrove forests which have been totally destroyed
but nothing has been done.
(iii) The representa tive of Matsyafed brought out the problems regarding the
rehabilitation of coastal fishermen. He stated that the steady rise in sea levels and
the resultant ingress of the sea to the coastal land and swelling of water bodies
was causing irreparable damage to the livelihood opportunities of the fishermen. He
expressed concern on the fishermen and residents not being consulted by local
authorities to construct homes in coastal areas. He requested that the Central
Government should take steps for rehabilitation of the poor people in the coastal
area.
(iv) The representatives of Kerala Vrikhsa Prakrithi Samrakshana Samiti pointed out that
there has been severe destruction of trees for construction of metro rail corridor and
the wastes from of slaughter houses were being disposed into the water bodies. He
stated that the number of unauthorised slaughter houses in the city was very large.
(v) The representative of River Research Institute, Thrissur commented on the bad shape
of the 44 rivers in Kerala. She expressed her apprehensions on the illegal sand mining
and suggested sand holidays for 5 years, so that rivers get enough time to
accumulate sand. She suggested that catchment area treatment plants should be
established for increasing the capacity of irrigation. Ecological flow assessment and
Western Ghat Conservation should be given due importance. She also pointed out the
loss of fishes in riverine stretches and stated that tree plantation needs to be
supported.
(vi) The representative of Amicus Associates, Ernakulam referred to Supreme Court
judgment whereby river sand mining cannot be permitted below the summer water
level. He stated that illegal mining permits were being issued by the State Government
itself to the sand mafia.
(vii) The representative of Salim Ali Foundation emphasised the importance of conservation
of Western Ghats and was of the view that the word afforestation is a misnomer. He
said that it was impossible to calculate the loss of biodiversity and aesthetic value of
forest.
(viii) The representative of Kerala Tree Protection Council pointed out that the EIA
conducted by Delhi Metro Rail Corporation (DMRC) for metro rail project in Kochi
envisaged cutting of 443 trees and the project was sanctioned. However, later, the
implementing agency, Kochi Metro Rail Ltd. (KMRL) conducted another EIA and
cut 1400 trees. He also expressed the need for extending small area of
Mangalavanam bird sanctuary (3.7 hectare) by including the nearby area owned by
Bharat Petroleum Corporation Ltd., which they were not utilising. He also stated
that there was no ambient air quality monitoring equipment in the city. He also
dwelt upon violation of norms in issuance of sand mining orders and encroachment
in the rivers of the state.

3
(ix) Shri T.K. Suresh Kumar, a resident of Ambalappuzhha stated that the local residents of
Ambalapuzhha around Kapthithode are facing serious health problems like cancer due
to waste dumped from the adjacent fish and prawn processing plants/peeling sheds. He
requested for relocation of fish processing units.
(x) The representative of Topical Institute of Ecological Sciences pointed out that the
Vembanad Lake is heavily infested with the Eichhornia and Salvinia and action needs
to be taken to remove these weeds. He also demanded transparency in utilizing river
management funds.
(xi) Shri Sreedhar a resident of Kochi stressed the need for a wetland authority to preserve
the paddy fields and for wetland protection.
(xii) The representative of Port Watch Cochin stated that a huge quantity of sand had been
removed from the riverbed. He also stated that massive dredging had been carried out
in Cochin Harbors.
(xiii) Shri Vishunu Katha, Assistant Registrar, CUSAT, Kalamssary stated that waste
management in Kochi was a total failure and suggested for the waste segregation at
household levels apart from solid and liquid waste management. He also expressed his
views for promoting planting of medicinal trees, birth star trees and endangered trees
by subsidizing the cost involved.
(xiv) The representative of Lawyers Environment Awareness Forum, Kerala High Court
Advocates Association stated that the District Collector should be made the coordinator
to identify the ecologically sensitive areas.
(xv) Shri Premchand T.P., a resident of Kochi, pointed out the water logging, siltation and
deposition of dredging waste in Kochi.
5. The Committee thereafter heard the representatives of Government of Kerala and Union
Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change on the issues. While welcoming the officers
of the Central and State Government the Chairman stated that although Kochi can claim to be one
of the largest industrial hubs in Kerala, unscientific and environmental unfriendly disposal of solid
waste, ambient air quality reaching a critical level and high level of air pollution have led to Kochi
being the one of the India's top most environmentally problematic city. He also brought out the
issues of environmental degradation put forth before the Committee by the representatives of
NGOs/Civil Society Organisations and local people. He asked the officials to apprise the Committee
of the steps taken by different agencies to address these environmental issues.
6. The Principal Secretary, Forest and Wildlife Department, Government of Kerala, in his
presentation before the Committee gave an overview of state of forest and wildlife in Kerala. He
stated that Kerala had 14 districts and the density of the population was very high i.e. 859 per
sq/km, which was the highest in the country. The geographical area of the state is 38688 sq. km.
As per the Forest Survey of India the forest and tree cover of the state was 54.21% against the
national figures of 24.01%. The state maintained 28.42% of the forest area as Protected Area
which included 2 Tiger Reserves, 5 National Parks, 15 Sanctuaries and 1 Community Reserve. He
also pointed out that 410 sq. km. of forest land was diverted under forest (Conservation) Act,

4
1980. Some other points covered in this presentation were that many of the private forest (1696
sq km2) areas have been nationalised; land filling has been completely banned; the forest area is
increased based on the ecology; Kerala maintains 29% of total area as forest, which is higher than
any other state in south India; and boundary has been marked to separate the forest area.
7. Thereafter, the Committee identified following issues for interaction and makes observations/
recommendations thereon.
SOLID WASTE DISPOSAL/MANAGEMENT
8. The Chairman drew attention of the Principal Secretary, Government of Kerala to the pathetic
sight of waste dumping site at Kalamassary in Kochi. He also goaded the Principal Secretary to
give a definite time frame for deliberations on this issue and finding a solution therefor. The
Principal Secretary, while promising to take action in the matter, stated that there was only one
solid waste disposal unit at Bhramapuram, Kochi which was not able to take the load of whole city.
He also stated that it was difficult to process all the waste material, especially due to the rains and
humid conditions of Kochi which necessitated 6-8 months for drying. He also stated that they were
trying to find out another alternative site for a waste disposal plant. However, there was resistance
from the local people and the Government was not getting any land for the same.
9. The Committee is of the view that waste disposal management is integral part of any
city's planning. Not having adequate number of waste disposal plants does not reflect well
on the administration of Kochi. The Committee, therefore, recommends as under:-
(i) The waste dumping site in Kalamassery should be cleared within six months from
January, 2016. The plea of the State Government that Government was not
getting any land for the waste disposal plant is not tenable. The Committee
recommends that necessary action should be taken to identify a suitable site for
establishing a waste disposal plant, which could cater to the growing needs of
Kochi.
(ii) Open dumping sites are an eyesore and environmental hazard and can become a
health hazard too. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the State
Government should establish covered dumping sites which should be equipped
with incinerators.
(iii) Waste disposal plants should have modern methodologies for segregation and
scientific disposal of wastes.
(iv) Segregation of waste should become a part of waste disposal management. People
should be educated about the benefits of waste segregation and encouraged to
segregate the plastic and non-plastic waste at the household level itself. Requisite
mechanism for collection of such segregated waste should also be put in place.
REHABILITATION OF COASTAL FISHERMEN
10. The Committee drew the attention of the representative of State Government to the problem
of rehabilitation of coastal fishermen brought out by the representative of one of the organisations
appearing before the Committee. The Committee was informed by the Principal Secretary that the

5
State Government had spent a lot of money for their rehabilitation and they planned to construct
5000 flats for the fishermen for which budget allocation has already been made.
11. The Committee, while taking note of the Government's efforts, is of the view that
devising a strategy for rehabilitation of the fishermen is vital. Fishermen face a lot of
vagaries of nature on sea shore but often prefer to have their homes near the sea.
Therefore, the Committee recommends that the site for construction of their homes should
be carefully chosen so that they are away from high tide areas, floods etc. and their lives
are secured.
PROTECTION OF MANGROVE AREAS
12. The Committee drew attention of the State Government to the destruction of mangrove
forests, as brought out by some of the NGOs appearing before the Committee and sought
response. The Committee was informed by the Principal Secretary that Government of Kerala had
embarked on a mission in Konnore District in this regard. They had already taken over about 40
acres of mangroves forests and plan to expand this project in three more districts where mangrove
forests existed.
13. The Committee is of the view that mangroves act as buffers between the land and the
sea and are very important part of our biodiversity and their destruction in Kerala is a
matter of concern. The Committee, while taking note of the fact that Government of Kerala
has taken over 40 hectares of mangrove forests and intends to extend the project to other
three districts, feels that the Union Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change
and State Government of Kerala should coordinate in this regard and take all necessary
steps to save and protect the mangrove areas from destruction, encroachment and garbage
dumping.
STATE OF RIVERS OF KERALA
14. The Committee was informed that all the 44 rivers originating from the Western Ghats and
its surrounding hills in Kerala are facing slow ecological death and losing their natural flow pattern
due to culminative impact of various interventions in the catchments and inside the river channel
including deforestation of the catchment areas, forest fragmentation, blocking the flows by dams,
encroachment and massive mining of hills.
15. The Committee is of the view that to preserve rivers Government should chalk out a
sustainable action plan. The Government should also consider declaring sand holidays in
identified rivers for a certain period to allow replenishment of sand and revival of the
ecological balance of the rivers. The restoration of river catchments should be taken up by
concerned authorities alongwith the NGOs etc. working towards forest protection. The
awarding of permits for sand mining from rivers in violation of Hon'ble Supreme Court
judgment also needs to be looked into seriously.
CONSERV ATION AND MANAGEMENT OF VEMBANAD LAKE
16. The Committee was informed that there were around one thousand five hundred to two
thousand boats in the lake to cater to the tourists and, all along the bank of the lake, residential

6
units had come up by reclaiming the part of the lakes. As per an estimate around 40% of the area
of the lake had been reclaimed due to increasing industrialisation and urbanisation. In the absence
of any proper sewage or drainage system, the sewerage from the residential units is drained into
the lake. It was also noticed that the colour of the lake water has turned into dark black and was
eutrophicated with sparse to dense infestation of water hyacinth and other submergent weeds. No
trace of aquatic life was noticeable.
17. Director, NIO informed that the problems of eutrofication and encroachment in the lake were
due to the deterioration of water quality caused by indiscriminate use of fertilizers and dumping
of agricultural and domestic waste. Growth of water weeds decreases water flow, block sunlight
from reaching aquatic plants and depletion of oxygen affecting the fishing community adversely.
18. The Committee had visited Vembanad Lake on 8th November, 2014 during its visit to Kochi
in November, 2014 and had reviewed the ecological health of the Lake.
19. The Committee expresses its serious concern over the pathetic condition of the lake
and the over-increasing eutrophication and pollution in the backwaters caused mainly due
to reckless reclamation, completely obstructing inflow of sea water into it and also due to
discharge of untreated sewerage into it. The Committee is of the view that the condition
of Vembanad Lake instead of improving during the period of one year since the last visit
of the Committee to Kochi, has deteriorated further.
20. The Committee feels that for ensuring the revival of the Kochi Backwaters, its
conservation and management, there is an urgent need to constitute an Independent
Vembanad Lake Development Authority with full powers on the lines of Chilika Lake
Development Authority in Orissa as the present arrangement lacked the requisite support
and coordination among different agencies. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the
Ministry of Environment, Forests & Climate Change should devise an Action Plan to be
implemented within a definite time-frame in coordination with the State Administration /
State Pollution Control Board, to restore the health of the backwaters urgently. Following
steps need be taken within the time limit stated against each for restoration of the health
of the backwaters:-
(i) Mapping the residential structures along the lake by using technology like
satellite imagery etc. and placing the same in public domain, within six months.
Preventing further encroachments and reclamations by enforcing Coastal
Regulation Zone (CRZ) rules strictly;
(ii) Establishing treatment plants by the end of financial year 2015-16 for treating the
effluents/sewage falling into the lake;
(iii) Making regulations by March, 2016 for aqua tourism, especially house boats and
making them environment-friendly;
(iv) Establishing online pollution monitoring mechanism within nine months at the
strategic locations;
(v) Strict enforcement of environment / pollution norms and punishing the violators
severely with immediate effect.

7
(vi) Taking appropriate remedial measures with three months for aquatic weed
infestation.
Action taken in this regard within the prescribed time frame be notified to the Committee.
ISSUE OF ILLEGAL SLAUGHTER HOUSES
21. The Committee's attention was drawn to the issue of illegal slaughter houses and disposal of
slaughter house wastes into the water bodies. The Principal Secretary assured the Committee to
look into the issue of illegal slaughter houses and dumping of slaughter house waste in the water
bodies in Kochi.
22. The Committee recommends that the Government must take immediate necessary
action in the matter by either regularising or closing down such slaughter houses. It should
also be ensured within three months that wastes from such slaughter houses is disposed off
in a scientific and environment friendly manner at designated places.
23. During the meeting on 25th November, 2015 inter-alia  with the officers of the State
Government of Kerala, the Chairman of the Committee had sought a commitment to fix a time
schedule for an action plan from the Principal Secretary, Government of Kerala regarding the
problems related to waste disposal at Kochi. In response, the Secretariat of the Committee received
communication, dated 1st December, 2015 and 15th December, 2015 (Annexure-III & IV) from the
Additional Chief Secretary, Government of Kerala detailing the action plan for the scientific waste
management at Brahmapuram and Kalamasey in Kochi. It was assured that the action taken by the
local bodies will also be closely monitored.

RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV A TIONS –– AT A GLANCE
The Committee is of the view that waste disposal management is integral part of any
city's planning. Not having adequate number of waste disposal plants does not reflect well
on the administration of Kochi. The Committee, therefore, recommends as under:-
(i) The waste dumping site in Kalamassery should be cleared within six months from
January, 2016. The plea of the State Government that Government was not
getting any land for the waste disposal plant is not tenable. The Committee
recommends that necessary action should be taken to identify a suitable site for
establishing a waste disposal plant, which could cater to the growing needs of
Kochi.
(ii) Open dumping sites are an eyesore and environmental hazard and can become a
health hazard too. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the State
Government should establish covered dumping sites which should be equipped
with incinerators.
(iii) Waste disposal plants should have modern methodologies for segregation and
scientific disposal of wastes.
(iv) Segregation of waste should become a part of waste disposal management. People
should be educated about the benefits of waste segregation and encouraged to
segregate the plastic and non-plastic waste at the household level itself. Requisite
mechanism for collection of such segregated waste should also be put in place.
(Para 9)
The Committee, while taking note of the Government's efforts, is of the view that
devising a strategy for rehabilitation of the fishermen is vital. Fishermen face a lot of
vagaries of nature on sea shore but often prefer to have their homes near the sea.
Therefore, the Committee recommends that the site for construction of their homes should
be carefully chosen so that they are away from high tide areas, floods etc. and their lives
are secured. (Para 11)
The Committee is of the view that mangroves act as buffers between the land and the
sea and are very important part of our biodiversity and their destruction in Kerala is a
matter of concern. The Committee, while taking note of the fact that Government of Kerala
has taken over 40 hectares of mangrove forests and intends to extend the project to other
three districts, feels that the Union Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change
and State Government of Kerala should coordinate in this regard and take all necessary
steps to save and protect the mangrove areas from destruction, encroachment and garbage
dumping. (Para 13)
The Committee is of the view that to preserve rivers Government should chalk out a
sustainable action plan. The Government should also consider declaring sand holidays in
identified rivers for a certain period to allow replenishment of sand and revival of the
ecological balance of the rivers. The restoration of river catchments should be taken up by
8

9
concerned authorities alongwith the NGOs etc. working towards forest protection. The
awarding of permits for sand mining from rivers in violation of Hon'ble Supreme Court
judgment also needs to be looked into seriously. (Para 15)
The Committee expresses its serious concern over the pathetic condition of the lake
and the over-increasing eutrophication and pollution in the backwaters caused mainly due
to reckless reclamation, completely obstructing inflow of sea water into it and also due to
discharge of untreated sewerage into it. The Committee is of the view that the condition
of Vembanad Lake instead of improving during the period of one year since the last visit
of the Committee to Kochi, has deteriorated further. (Para 19)
The Committee feels that for ensuring the revival of the Kochi Backwaters, its
conservation and management, there is an urgent need to constitute an Independent
Vembanad Lake Development Authority with full powers on the lines of Chilika Lake
Development Authority in Orissa as the present arrangement lacked the requisite support
and coordination among different agencies. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the
Ministry of Environment, Forests & Climate Change should devise an Action Plan to be
implemented within a definite time-frame in coordination with the State Administration /
State Pollution Control Board, to restore the health of the backwaters urgently. Following
steps need be taken within the time limit stated against each for restoration of the health
of the backwaters:-
(i) Mapping the residential structures along the lake by using technology like
satellite imagery etc. and placing the same in public domain, within six months.
Preventing further encroachments and reclamations by enforcing Coastal
Regulation Zone (CRZ) rules strictly;
(ii) Establishing treatment plants by the end of financial year 2015-16 for treating the
effluents/sewage falling into the lake;
(iii) Making regulations by March, 2016 for aqua tourism, especially house boats and
making them environment-friendly;
(iv) Establishing online pollution monitoring mechanism within nine months at the
strategic locations;
(v) Strict enforcement of environment / pollution norms and punishing the violators
severely with immediate effect.
(vi) Taking appropriate remedial measures with three months for aquatic weed
infestation. (Para 20)
The Committee recommends that the Government must take immediate necessary
action in the matter by either regularising or closing down such slaughter houses. It should
also be ensured within three months that wastes from such slaughter houses is disposed off
in a scientific and environment friendly manner at designated places. (Para 22)

MINUTES

13
V
FIFTH MEETING
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Tuesday, the 22nd December, 2015 in Room No. ‘63’,
First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Ashwani Kumar  —  Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri C.P. Narayanan
3. Shri Arvind Kumar Singh
4. Shri Bhupinder Singh
LOK SABHA
5. Kum. Sushmita Dev
6. Shri Daddan Mishra
7. Shri Shivaji Adhalrao Patil
8. Shri Nana Patole
9. Shri Nagendra Kumar Pradhan
10. Shri Nagendra Singh
11. Shrimati Renuka Singh
12. Shri Vikram Usendi
SECRETARIAT
Shri M. K. Khan, Joint Secretary
Shri Rohtas, Director
Shri Mohd. Salamuddin, Deputy Director
Shri Rajiv Saxena, Assistant Director
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the Committee and informed them that
the meeting had been convened to consider and adopt the draft 269th and 270th Reports on
“Environmental Issues of Himachal Pradesh in general and Shimla in particular” and “Environmental
Issues of Kerala in general and kochi/Ernakulam in particular” respectively.
3. After a brief discussion, the Committee adopted the draft 269th report and 270th Report
with some amendments. The Committee also decided to present/lay its 269th and 270th reports
to both the Houses of Parliament on 23rd December, 2015. The Committee authorised the
Chairman and, in his absence, Shri C.P. Narayanan to present the reports in the Rajya Sabha and
Kum. Sushmita Dev and, in her absence, Shri Nagendra Singh to lay the reports on the Table
of Lok Sabha.
4. * * *
*** Relates to other matter.

14
***Relate to other matters.
5. * * *
6. * * *
7. The meeting of the Committee adjourned at 3.45 
P.M.

ANNEXURES

ANNEXURE-I
Representatives of Civil Society Organizations/NGOs at Kochi
1. Shri T.K. Suresh Kumar
2. Shri C.G. Thampi, Port Watch Cochin
3. Dr. C.M. Joy, Kerala Tree Protection Council
4. Shri Jose Kutty J. Ozhukayil, Malanadu Karshaka Reksha Samithi, Idukki
5. Shri Premchand T.P.
6. Shri K.S. Mani, Ayurvedic Medicine Manufactures Organisation of India
7. Shri V . Dinakaran, Matsyafed
8. Shri T.N. Prathapan, Kerala Vriksha Prakrithi Samrakshan Samithi
9. Dr. Sitaraman, All Kerala River Protection Council
10. Dr. Latha, River Research Institute, Olloor
11. Shri K. Binu, Binu Mandiram, Therthapadapuram
12. Justice Sukuman
13. Dr. Seetharaman, Ramapriya High Road
14. Dr. Shaju Thomas, Topical Institute of Ecological Sciences
15. Shri Vishunu Katha, Asst. Registrar, CUSA T
16. Dr. Sreekumar, Bharat Hospital
17. Shri Chandrashelhar, Lawyers Environment Awarenes Forum
18. Shri Harish Vasudevan, Amicus Associates
19. Shri Sridhar R., Thanal
20. Shri Ranjan Mathew Varghese, Director WWF State Office Vanchiyoor
21. Dr. V .S. Vijayan, Salim Ali Foundation
17

ANNEXURE-II
Representatives of Government of Kerala and Union Ministry of Environment,
Forest and Climate Change at Kochi
1. Shri Marapandiyan, Principal Secretary, Forest & Wildlife Department, Government of Kerala
2. Dr. B.S. Corrie, Principal Chief Conservator of Forests & Head of Forest Force
3. Shri C.S. Yalaki, Principal Chief Conservator of Forests (Social Forestry)
4. Shri O.P. Kaler, Additional Principal Chief Conservator of Forests (Bio Diversity Cell)
5. Shri K.J. Varghese, Additional Principal Chief Conservator of Forests (Eco-development)
6. Shri K. Sajeevan, Chairman, Kerala State Pollution Control Board
7. Er. M.S. Mythili, Member Secretary, State Pollution Control Board
8. Shri Amarnath Shetty, Additional PCCF, Bangalore, Ministry of Environment, Forest & Climate
Change, Government of India
9. Shri M.S. Negi, IGF Forest, Ministry of Environment, Forest & Climate Change, Government
of India
10. H.C. Choudhry, Director, Ministry of Environment, Forest & Climate Change, Government of
India
18

ANNEXURE-III
BY SPEED POST
GOVERNMENT OF KERALA
Environment (B) Department
No. 381 1/B1/2015/Envt. Thiruvananthapuram,
Dated: 01.12.2015.
From
Additional Chief Secretary to Government.
To
Sri. Rohtas
Director,
Parliamentary Standing Committee on
Science & Technology, Environment and Forest.
Rajya Sabha Secretariat,
Parliament House (annexe), New Delhi-110001
Email: rohtas@sansad.nic.in
Sir,
Sub: Environment Department-Visit of the committee in Kochi-Kerala on 25.l1.2015- Interim
Report furnishing of - reg.
Ref: Your letter No.RS.8/7/2015-S&T dated 10.11.2015
I may recall your attention to the discussions on the problems related to waste disposals at
Kochi in the meeting held on 25.11.2015. Based on the ·discussion held thereon, the following
actions have been taken by the State Govemment on the recommendation/suggestion of the
Committee.
A meeting was convened by the undersigned with the concerned on 28.11.2015 itself to
discuss the issue of unscientific disposal of solid waste at Brahmapuram & Kalamassery, identified
by the Committee. The Chairperson, Kalamassery Municipality attended the meeting and explained
that there are 42 wards in Kalamassery Municipality and an .average 20 tons of waste is generated
in the Municiplity. Waste is being collected from each houses and commercial establishments in
these wards by Municipality through Kudumbasree workers by charging a fee. Seventeen (17) Auto
Rickshaws and three (3) lorries are being used at present for collection of waste. The bio
degradable waste thus collected is treated at Brahmapuram plant for which the Municipality have
entered into an agreement with Kochi Corporation. The amount charged by the Corporation is
` l /kg. On an average 4 tones of waste is sent to the treatment plant. There is no own facilities
for disposal of non bio degradable waste including plastic. The non bio degradable wastes are
19


20
dumped on the land, by the side of National Highway, owned by the Municipality. Steps are being
taken to remove the waste deposited at the dumping yard on contract basis. The Municipality has
decided to collect and segregate waste from 5 wards at a pilot level under the Appolo tyres
foundation dry waste project. It was also decided to allot 1000 sqft. of land in the dumping yard
to construct a shed there at the cost of MIS Appolo Tyres. The Municipal Chairperson informed
that waste removal work is interrupted due to Cochin Metro Construction Work and hence the
waste is heaped at Kalamassery which led to the adverse remarks of the parliamentary committee.
More than 80 percentage of the waste dumped is plastic which can be disposed through recyclers.
A net work will be formed for regular collection and disposal of non bio-degradable waste.
Municipal Chairperson also assured that steps for removing the waste have already been started and
the waste dumped at the side of National Highway will be removed from the site within one month.
Hundred acres of land is available with Cochin Corporation at Brahmapuram yard for waste
disposal of the Corporation and nearby local bodies. Out of which 9 acres of. 1 and, is being
utilised. Officials from Kochin Corporation are-being called for the next meeting scheduled on
05.12.2015 with details of existing waste disposal mechanism and future plan. The Chairman, State
Pollution Control Board has been directed to conduct an urgent site visit and to give necessary
instructions to the Corporation and Municipal authorities for effective waste management.
In the next. meeting scheduled on 05.12.2015 detailed action plan will be prepared for the
scientific waste management at Brahmapuram & Kalamassey in Kochi. The action taken by local
bodies will 'also be Closely monitored and final. report will be submitted at the earliest.
The above details may kindly be brought to the notice of Hon'ble Chairman of Parliamentary
Standing Committee on Science & Technology, Environment and Forest.
Yours faithfully,
Sd/-
P. MARA PANDIYAN
Additional Chief Secretary to Government

ANNEXURE-IV
BY F AX / SPEED POST
Fax: 011-23794328
GOVERNMENT OF KERALA
Environment (B) Department
No. 381 1/B1/2015/Envt. Thiruvananthapuram,
Dated: 15.12.2015.
From
Additional Chief Secretary to Government.
To
Sri. Rohtas
Director,
Parliamentary Standing Committee on
Science & Technology, Environment and Forest.
Rajya Sabha Secretariat,
Parliament House (annexe), New Delhi-110001
Email: rohtas@sansad.nic.in
Sir,
Sub: Environment Department-Visit of the committee in Kochi-Kerala on 25.l1.2015- Waste
Management at Kalamassery and Brahmapuram in Kochi- Plan of action - reg.
Ref: Your letter No.RS.8/7/2015-S&T dated 07.12.2015
I am to invite your kind attention to the reference cited. The action plan for Scientific, Waste
Management at Kalamassery Municipality and Corporation of Kochi, Kerala is forwarded herewith,
as desired in the letter cited. The same may kindly be brought to the notice of the Chairman of
the Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science & Technology, Environment and Forests.
Yours faithfully,
Sd/-
P.S. PRASAD
Additional secretary
For Additional Chief Secretary To Government
Encl: As above
21


GOVERNMENT OF KERALA
Environment Department
Action Plan for Scientific Waste Management at Brahmapuram &
Kalamassery in Kochi
Department related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science & Technology, Environment
and Forests visited Kechi on 25.11.2015. In pursuance to the discussions with the Committee the
Additional Chief Secretary, Environment Department has convened two meetings on 24.11.2015 and
05.12.2015 with office bearers of the Kalamassery Municipality and Kochi Corporation respectively
to discuss the issues in connection with scientific waste management, Officials .frorn State-
Pollution Control Board and District Administration had attended. In the meeting the Local Self
Government authorities explained the present status as follows :
(a) Kalamassery Municipality
There are-42 wards in Kalamassery Municipality and all average of 20 tons of waste is being
generated every day. Waste is being collected from .each households and commercial
establishments through Kudumbasree workers. The bio degradable waste thus collected is treated
at Brahmapuram plant for which the Municipality has entered into an agreement with Koohi
Corporation. On an average 4 tones of waste per day is being sent to the treatment plant. There
is no own facilities for disposal of non bio degradable waste including plastic, The non-bio
degradable wastes are dumped by the side of National Highway. The Municipality has decided to
collect and segregate waste-from 5 wards as a pilot project under the Appolo tyres foundation dry
waste project. It was also decided to allot 1000 sqft. of land in the dumping yard to construct
a shed at the cost of M/S Appolo Tyres. Waste removal work is interrupted due to the on going
Cochin 'Metro Construction Work and hence the waste is heaped at Kalamassery, which has led
to adverse remarks of the Parliamentary Committee, More than 80 percentage of the waste dumped
is plastic, which can be disposed through recyclers.
(b) Kochi Corporation
In Kochi corporation, waste generated is segregated and collected from the source itself An
average of 200 tons of waste per day are being collected from the Corporation area, Out of which
around 20 tons are plastic waste. The Bio-degradable waste is processed in Brahmapuram plant and
the left out are land filled. Plastic waste are being handed over to the registered recycler. The
corporation machinery is utilised for processing of bio-degratble waste at source by way of pipe
compost, Bio-gas plants etc. GPS tracking system is used for close monitoring of the vehicles used
for transporation of waste.
As directed by the Committee, the Additional Chief Secretary (Environment), after detailed
discussion with the authorities concerned, has given strict instructions to carry out the following.
activities towards scientific waste management in Kalamassery Municipality and Kochi Corporation:
(i) Construction of Compound wall shall be completed around the Sewage Treatment Plant
at Brahmapuram urgently.
(ii) As an immediate measure to avoid foul smell and thereby to address the grievance raised
by the public, the solid wastes already dumped in 10 acres of land at Brahmapuram
22

23
waste yard shall be capped scientifically. Technical advice in this regard shall be given
by the State Pollution Control Board.
(iii) Plastic waste shall be seperated from Bio-degradable waste and recycled/treated using
scientific and practicable methods .
(iv) The river Kadambrayar flowing adjacent to Brahmapuram waste dumping yard shall be
protected from Pollution by constructing sheet piling retaining wall so as to prevent
slitting of seepage.
(v) Leak-Proof Container vehicles shall be used for transportation of wastes from collection
points to dumping yard ..
(vi) The Public-Private Participation Project for generating energy from waste, proposed to
be commissioned in Brahmapuram yard, shall be expedited:
(vii) The plastic waste dumped by Kalamassery Municipality in the side of NH 47 should be
removed with immediate effect and submit report to Government within one month.
(viii) Kalamassery Municipality shall identify methods for Scientific Waste Management to be
implemented with the help of the State Pollution Control Board and report to
Government urgently.
Sd/-
P. MARA PANDIYAN
Additional Chief Secretary