116TH REPORT
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/116threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:26:51]
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT & FORESTS
 
ONE HUNDRED-SIXTEENTH REPORT
 
ON
 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2003-2004)
OF THE
DEPARTMENT OF BIOTECHNOLOGY
(MINISTRY OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY)
(DEMAND NO. 82)
 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON THE 2ND MAY, 2003)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON THE 2ND MAY, 2003)
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
MAY, 2003/VAISAKHA, 1925  (SAKA)
Email: rsc-st@sansad.nic.in
Website : http://parliamentofindia.nic.in 
C O N T E N T S
                       
1.         COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE  
2.         INTRODUCTION     
3.         REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE                                                                              
4.         SUMMARY OF THE RECOMMENDATIONS                                                                                
5.         ANNEXURE       
6.         MINUTES OF THE MEETINGS OF THE COMMITTEE                                                      
COMPOSITION OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY,
ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS (YEAR 2003)
 
 
Shri C. Ramachandraiah  –– Chairman
 
RAJYA SABHA
 
Shri C. Apok Jamir
Shri M. V. Rajasekharan
Shri Dwijendra Nath Sharma

116TH REPORT
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/116threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:26:51]
Prof. Saif-ud-Din Soz
Shri B.P. Singhal
Shri Lalitbhai Mehta
Smt. Savita Sharda
Smt. S. G. Indira
Shri Manoj Bhattacharya
Shri Lalit Suri
Shri T. S. Bajwa
   * 13.Prof. Alka Balram Kshatriya
   * 14.Dr. C. Narayana Reddy
  @15.Vacant
 
LOK  SABHA
 
Smt. Margaret Alva
Shri Nihal Chand Chauhan                   
Dr. (Smt.) Beatrix D’ Souza
Chowdhary Talib Hussain
Adv. Suresh Ramrao Jadhav                            
Shri G.J.Javiya
Shri Babubhai K. Katara
Shri C. Kuppusami
Dr. Charan Das Mahant
Shri Kailash Meghwal
Shri Madhusudan Mistry
Shri Rupchand Murmu
Shri S. Murugesan                               
Shri A. Venkatesh Naik                       
Shri B.K. Parthasarathi
Shri Suresh Pasi                                               
Dr. Ashok Patel                                               
Shri Prahlad Singh Patel           
Shri Shriniwas Patil
Prof. R.R. Pramanik
Shri Naresh Puglia       
___________________________________________________________________________
            *          Nominated w.e.f. 23
rd Janaury, 2003.
@        Dr. Vijay Mallya ceased to be a Member of the Committee w.e.f. 27th February, 2003 consequent upon his  
         nomination to the Committee on Defence.
           
Shri Ganta Sreenivasa Rao       
Prof. I.G. Sanadi
Kunwar Akhilesh Singh
Shri Vishvendra Singh  
Smt. Jayaben B. Thakkar
Shri Akhilesh Yadav
Shri Balram Singh Yadav
                #44.Dr. Bikram Sarkar
                  45.Vacant
 
SECRETARIAT
 
            Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary

116TH REPORT
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/116threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:26:51]
            Shri S.N. Sahu, Director
            Shri Alok Kumar Chatterjee, Deputy Secretary
Shri Momraj Singh, Under Secretary
            Shri S. Rangarajan, Committee Officer
Shri Triloknath Mishra, Research Officer
 
____________________________________________________________________________
#          Nominated w.e.f. 7th April, 2003.
INTRODUCTION
 
            I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science & Technology,
 Environment & Forests, having been authorised by the Committee to present the Report on its behalf, present this One
 Hundred-Sixteenth Report of the Committee.  This Report deals with the detailed Demands for Grants (2003-2004) of
 the Department of Biotechnology (Ministry of Science and Technology) (Demand No.82).
 
2.         In the meeting of the Committee held on 1
st April, 2003 the Secretary and other Officers of the Department of
 Biotechnology gave an overview of the various activities of the Department and the Members sought clarifications on
 various aspects of the performance of the Department to enable it to scrutinise the Demands for Grants.
 
3.         The Committee expresses its thanks to the Officers of the Department for replying to the clarifications sought by
 the Members and placing before it the required material to enable the Committee to scrutinise the Demands for Grants
 of the Department of Biotechnology.
 
4.         The Committee considered and adopted the Report at its meeting held on 29
th April, 2003.
 
 
NEW DELHI;
April  29 , 2003
 
 
 
C. RAMACHANDRAIAH,
Chairman,
Parliamentary Standing Committee on
 Science & Technology, Environment & Forests.
       
 
R E P O R T
 
            Focus on biology has brought about a paradigm shift in the understanding of human life and the entire
 ecosystem.  The hallmarks of the second half of the 20
th century were the discovery of double helix, DNA structure,
 transfer of genes from one unrelated organism to another and the sequencing of human genome.  Much before all these
 path-breaking scientific activities were undertaken, Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru had written, with rare far sightedness in
 the Discovery of India.  “Perhaps new developments in biology……… and other similar sciences and the interpretation
 of biology may help man to understand and control himself more than he has done in the past”.  While 20
th century was
 the age of physical sciences, the 21st century has been perceived as the century of biology.  India, with its vast
 biological resources is poised to reap rich harvests in the century of biology.  Establishment of the Department of
 Biotechnology is a significant step in that direction.
2.         Biotechnology as a branch of modern biology is hardly two decades old and it is the fastest growing branch of
 modern science.   It is rapidly becoming the cornerstone of industrial development and leading us to the brink of bio-
industrial revolution.  In fact, we are now in biotech century and our way of life is likely to be more fundamentally
 transformed in the decades to come. The present day definition of biotechnology is the application of scientific and
 engineering principles to the processing materials by biological agents to produce goods and services.  The applications
 of biotechnology are so wide that virtually every industry including pharmaceuticals, textiles, aquaculture, chemicals,

116TH REPORT
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/116threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:26:51]
 household products, manufacturing, environmental cleaning, food processing and forensics, are using such technology. 
3.         Biotechnology is emerging as a major player for enhancing the food productivity, nutritional status, sustainable
 utilization of biological resources, prospecting of new molecules and genes, identification and characterization of
 biological wealth, development of new vaccines, diagnostics and drugs, pollution abatement through biotechnological
 route, waste recycling, etc.  Bioinformatics and human resource development have given rich dividends in terms of
 highly skilled and trained human resource available in the country and a strong information network being utilized by a
 large number of scientists. The Department of Bio-technology under the Ministry of Science & Technology was set up
 in February, 1986 to give a greater impetus to the development of biotechnology in the country.  The objectives of the
 Department include development of products and processes and technologies whose large scale applications would
 result in societal and economic benefits.
4.         The main responsibilities of this Department are :
To evolve integrated plans and programmes in Biotechnology.
Identify, specific programmes of Research and Development and oversee related research and manufacturing activities
 for biologicals.
Identify, set up and support centres of excellence for research and development in biotechnology and ensure proper
 dovetailing of these activities with national priorities.
To act as a screening, advising and approving body of Government with regard to import and transfer of new
 technologies for the manufacture of biological and biotechnological products.
To evolve safety guidelines for biotechnology research, development and manufacturing in India.
To act as the Central agency for the import of genetically manipulated/modified materials, culture cells, specimens,
 tissues and biotech products including DNA and RNA of any type and for promoting their production in the country.
To serve as the inter-ministerial and inter-agency nodal point for all specific international, bilateral and multilateral
 research and development collaboration in the area of biotechnology and act as the nodal point for all technology
 transfers in the area of biotechnology.
For manufacturing and application of cell-based vaccines.
To evolve programmes of human resource development in the area of biotechnology.
To act as the administrative department for autonomous institutions
Serve as the authorised Department of the Government in respect of legislative Parliamentary requirements in all areas
 mentioned under Allocation of Business for the Department.
5.         The biotechnology programmes are being implemented through a number of autonomous and statutory
 institutions and Universities to which assistance is provided by the Department by way of grants-in-aid.  The
 Department is also looking after the work relating to the International Centre for Genetic Engineering and
 Biotechnology (ICGEB).  The autonomous institutions established by the department under Societies Registration Act,
 1860, include: National Institute of Immunology (NII), New Delhi, National Centre for Plant Genome Research, New
 Delhi, National Centre for Cell Science (NCCS), Pune, Centre for DNA Finger Printing and Diagnostics, Hyderabad,
 National Centre for Plant Genome Research, New Delhi, National Brain Research Centre, New Delhi, Institute of
 Bioresources and  Sustainable Development (ISBD), Imphal, Institute of Life Sciences, Bhubaneshwar.  A Public
 Sector undertaking namely, the Bharat Immunologicals and Biologicals corporation Ltd. (BIBCOL), Bullandshahr is
 engaged in manufacturing Oral Polio Vaccine (OPV) and other immunologicals under Prime Minister’s Technology
 Mission on Immunization, with a view to achieving self-sufficiency in manufacturing of Oral Polio Vaccine (OPV).
6.         The major programmes /projects to be taken up during 2003-04 include: six new P.G. teaching programme in
 regions not represented, NMR facility at Indian Institute of Chemical Biology (IICB) Kolkata, upgradation of some of
 the major bioinformatics centres as centres of Excellence for undertaking advanced research and postgraduate
 education; collaborative mutli-institutional research projects on functional genomics of rice, biotechnology for
 improvement of semi-arid crops; post harvest biotechnology for improved shelf life, nanobiotechnology, development
 of cocktail diagnostic molecular tools for infectious diseases, drugs through combinatorial chemistry and high
 screening throughput, basic research on diarrheal diseases, sequencing and molecular typing of infectious agents,
 neurodegenerative diseases, edible vaccines and contraception mission programmes on h
erbal
Products development, new generation vaccines, vaccines research and development, food and nutritional security,
 bioenergy and biofuels, genomics, oncology, advanced research in stem cell biology, the genomic sequencing of
 microbes relevant to India, establishment of bio-villages, international collaborations as per agreements and work plans
. The proposals for establishment of biotech parks, biotech incubators and other centralized facilities specially from
 State Governments will also be taken up.

116TH REPORT
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/116threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:26:51]
7.         Keeping in view the above programmes, recent trends and international developments, the Department had
 projected a requirement of Rs.450.00 crores for the year 2003-04 to the Planning Commission. However, an allocation
 (plan side) of Rs.260.00 crores has only been provided. During the year 2002-03, the plan allocation at B.E. and R.E.
 stages was Rs.225.00 crores and Rs.205.00 crores respectively. The enhanced allocation for 2003-04 will primarily be
 utilized on new programmes/initiatives. Functional genomics, vaccines and plant based products will be a priority.
8.         The Committee was informed that one of the recurring problems of the Department is the shortfall of the non-
plan budget. Recurrence of such problems on year to year basis, the Committee was apprised,  has created a compelling
 situation for the autonomous bodies whereby they had to cut down from plan funds to pay salaries to the scientists. The
 Committee is constrained to note that scientific institutions engaged in research in frontier areas of science have to
 confront such a situation. The additional requirement of the Department for non-plan expenditure is to the tune of
 Rs.5.00 crores. The Committee, therefore, recommends that sufficient funds may be provided to the Department to
 overcome this problem. It further underlines that the Departments dealing with science and technology should be
 accorded priority for allocation of funds  and  if  necessary,   special  provisions  may  be  made  for  them  so  that they
 do not face such problems.  Biotechnology era is waiting to dominate the World  economy in the next twenty years. 
 Investment in this field is not commensurate with the potential of this branch of Science.
9.         The new areas covered during 2002-03 are related to agriculture and plants, healthcare, bioresource conservation
 and utilization, societal development and biotech industrial growth.
10.       It has been informed that the proposed programmes are based on the Vision Document of the Department as well
 as Tenth Plan proposals. These programmes aim at enhancing the knowledge base and generating highly skilled human
 resource, nurturing leads of potential utilityby emerging bioscience enterprises areas of agriculture, health care and the
 environment and bringing bio-products to the marketplace for generation of wealth, import substitutions, export
 promotion and technological self sufficiency. The emphasis would be on excellence and relevance for socio-economic
 progress. Agricultural Biotechnology programmes such as rice genome sequencing, development of pest and disease
 resistant varieties, nutritionally rich crops, virus free tissue culture plants, improved biofertilisers and biopesticides will
 have great impact on farmers and consumers in terms of food, nutrition, health, environment and livelihood security. A
 mission mode project on food and nutritional security is under implementation.
11.       To a specific query of the Committee as to how the Department monitors and reviews the progress of its on-
going schemes before formulating/finalising proposals for budgetary support, the Department stated that elaborate
 mechanisms have been established to review its activities.  It has got specific area wise sixteen Task Forces on various
 disciplines to review the activities and progress of all the schemes and programmes at periodic intervals, 2-3 times in a
 year.  Besides, the Department stated that a multidisciplinary high level Biotechnology Research and Promotion
 Committee consisting of experts from research institutions, universities, industry and NGOs does the same exercise. 
 Further, the Department maintained that the Scientific Advisory Committee of the Department and Standing Advisory
 Committee (Overseas) with eminent NRIs Scientists assess the overall policy issues, identify priority areas and review
 major projects. In addition to these, the Planning Commission also undertakes review of plan schemes at quarterly
 intervals. 
HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT
12.       The focus of the programme has been to train a large number of scientists/students. An integrated manpower
 development programme comprising M.Sc./M.Tech./Post doctoral courses in biotechnology at various universities/
 institutes of many states and union territories is in operation. Programmes such as Biotechnology national and overseas
 associates, short-term training courses, seminars and symposia, popular lectures, biology scholarships, publications etc.
 have been implemented.  Five bioscience career development awards and three women bio-scientists awards were
 given to eminent scientists. The main focus of the programme has been to generate a large number of highly trained
 scientists/students. 
13.       The method of selecting a University for starting a teaching programme in biotechnology was based on the
 scientific merit of the proposal.  A DBT-UGC joint Task Force considers the proposals based on the evaluation by
 experts.  Generally, the DBT insists that a strong faculty and diverse expertise in biotechnology should be available
 with the University before starting a teaching programme.  The Department also provides for guest faculty from
 neighbouring institutions to enable better type of teaching programmes in the absence of many well-trained faculty
 members.
14.       The Committee was informed that as a result of continued support to this programme, a large number of highly
 skilled manpower in the field at Postgraduate as well as Post Doctoral levels have been generated which is catering to
 the requirements of academics, R&D and Biotech industries including pharmaceutical sector.  The proposed
 activities/programmes will further strengthen human resource development to meet the growing needs of this sector and

116TH REPORT
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/116threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:26:51]
 promote academic excellence at par with international standards. 
15.       During the year 2003-04 an allocation of Rs.13.00 crores has been earmarked for Human Resource Development
 programme as compared to last year’s allocation of Rs.10.00 crores which will be utilised for on-going PG Teaching
 (M.Sc./M. Tech/Diplomas) and Post Doctoral Fellowship Programmes with increased intake of students and supporting
 6 new PG Teaching Programmes (including Post MD/MS Training Courses).
16.       The Committee recommends the Department to accord high priority to the issue of Human Resource
 Development and should coordinate with the University Grants Commission to implement the programme all over the
 country. 
PLANT TISSUE CULTURE
17.       Tissue culture is an important tool of biotechnology which can be used to improve the productivity of planting
 material through enhanced availability of identified plant stock with desired traits.  The main object of the programme
 is to develop protocols for regeneration of economically important plant species covering Forest Trees, Horticulture and
 Plantation Crops.  Plant Tissue Culture technology is being used for mass multiplication of elite forest species and also
 for producing large quantities of planting material with desired characteristics.   The shortage of biomass and the
 increasing gap between supply and demand due to the mounting population pressure necessitated the mass propagation
 of trees through Tissue Culture.  The tree species identified cover a wide spectrum including trees of desert and arid
 zones, tropical and temperate zones.  DBT has supported programmes on priority crops to increase productivity per unit
 area by developing a strong R&D component concentrating on the production of high yielding and improved varieties
 and fresh methods of multiplication of elite plus trees.
18.       The Committee was informed that during 2003-04 the ongoing efforts in R&D programmes on tissue culture
 protocol standardization would continue for the identified priority crops.  Protocols for in vitro production of Saffron
 and Kalazira will be refined and scaled up.  Studies will continue for complete technology development for coffee, tea,
 spices, apple and citrus.  The Network programmes on Apple and Citrus will be launched and the germplasm will be
 characterized.  The certified virus free plants would be field planted and evaluated.  The novel orchid hybrids produced
 will be evaluated based on commercial parameters and an effort will be made to take these hybrids for commercial
 production.  Field demonstration of tissue culture raised Black pepper will be taken up in all identified sites.
19.       The Committee was apprised that under Plant Tissue Culture, 20 regeneration protocols have been developed
 and a molecular diagnostic kit for detection of Bunchy top Virus in Banana is in use at present.  The Micropropagation
 Technology Parks are serving as a platform for transfer of proven technologies and training in tissue culture.  So far,
 6.5 million plants have been produced and planted in 7500 hectares in 17 States.  Technologies for 10 species have
 been transferred to the industry.  A satellite park has been setup in North-East for popularization of technology and
 production of planting material for the region.  In addition, five Regional Hardening Units in different States are
 functioning well.
20.       The Committee is of the view that efforts should be made to make use of the tissue culture and floriculture
 technology in rural areas. Additional incentives should be given to persons willing to work in these areas.
BIO-INFORMATICS
21.       The plan scheme of bio-informatics envisages to provide a National Bio-informatics Network in the country
 designed to bridge the gaps in Biotechnology information and to establish links among scientists in Biotechnology. 
 The network aims to provide a single reference to various information resources of importance to biotechnology and
 modern biology including data banks of genetic importance published literature, patents and other information of
 scientific and commercial value.  It also aims to provide necessary infrastructural support for modern research in
 biology involving computationally intensive analysis.  The network consists of 11 Distributed Information Centers
 (DICs) and 46 sub-DICs computational facilities at the national level.  It has also established linkages with international
 institutions like International Centre for Co-operation in Bio-informatics (ICCB), a UNESCO based funded bio-
informatics programme and is also linked with EMB net, as well as international legume-data base and information
 services (ILDIS).  Educational and training activities in bio-informatics will also form part of the scheme.  National Jai
 Vigyan Mission on Mirror Sites for Genomic Research to establish four major databases have progressed well. These
 projects are being pursued at Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore; University of Pune; Jawaharlal Nehru University
 and Institute of Microbial Technology, Chandigarh.  New projects for establishing Centres of excellence in bio-
informatics will be taken up.
22.       The Committee was informed that there are 57 Bioinformatics centres at various research
 institutions/universities.  Each centre of the network has built up Bioinformatics resources in their specialized areas in
 the form of databases, software packages for application to Biotechnology and Molecular Biology, which are shared by
 the researchers in the country.  Towards the development of molecular modelling and simulation studies in

116TH REPORT
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/116threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:26:51]
 biotechnology, six interactive graphic facilities have been established and they act as a National facility for the benefit
 of researchers in the country.   Four one-year Post-graduate Diploma courses on Bioinformatics  are being offered by
 major universities with a view to enhancing human resource in the field.  Every year more than 50 short-term training
 programmes are being conducted to promote awareness for the utilisation of Bioinformatics resources.  Under the
 National Jai Vigyan Science & Technology Mission, mirror sites of internationally recognized databases have been
 established for unhindered access to large amount information resources for the acceleration of R&D activities in
 genomics and proteomics.
23.       The Bio-informatics programme offers a single window information resource in the country covering inter-
disciplinary areas of biotechnology and molecular  biology.    Human resource development has been recognized as an
 important area for effective sustenance of the bioinformatics programme.  Towards meeting the needs for trained
 bioinformatics professionals, long-term courses are being run as part of this network in five reputed Universities. 
 About 50-60 short-term courses are being offered every year to train the researchers and scholars in bioinformatics.  Six
 National Facilities on interactive graphics are dedicated to the promotion of molecular modeling and other related
 activities.  The Biotechnology Information  System (BTS) centers have developed more than 100 databases on various
 aspects of biotechnology.  Several major International databases for application to genomics and proteomics have been
 established in the form of mirrors as part of the network.  A Virtual Private Network (VPN) has been established to link
 these databases through high speed and large bandwidth network to promote faster sharing of information. 
24.       The Biotechnology Information System Network (BTISnet) under the bioinformatics programme presently
 consists of sixty-one centres spread all over the country. Over the years, the network has created a resource base
 including computational infrastructure, databases and software. Six National Facilities on Interactive Graphics are
 dedicated to the promotion of molecular modelling and other related activities. The five one year advanced diploma
 courses and a M.Tech course on bioinformatics are being conducted through the reputed institutions for development of
 leadership quality in human resources on bioinformatics. About 100 subject specific databases have been developed
 through the BTISnet. Several major International databases for application to genomics and proteomics have been
 established in the form of Mirror sites as part of the network. These databases are being linked through high speed and
 large bandwidth network in the form of VPN, now termed as BIOGRID INDIA, to promote faster sharing of
 information as well as to encourage tandem research by various R&D labs and industrial units. At the micro level, the
 programme deals with the various issues related to the biological data. It covers the development of data analysis tools,
 modelling of biological macromolecules and their complexes, metabolic pathways, designing of new molecules such as
 drugs, peptide vaccines, proteins etc.
25.       During 2003-04, the Department proposes to upgrade five of the Distributed Information Centres (DICs) into
 Centres of Excellence (CoEs) on bioinformatics to generate high quality human resource and to carry out competitive
 R&D activities in the area of bioinformatics and computation biology for producing world class bioinformatics tools. 
 This will in turn help in revealing several applications in the area of molecular biology in general and genomics and
 proteomics in particular. It has also been recommended to upgrade five Sub-DICs in to the level of DICs to enhance the
 activities. More and more institutions have been proposed to be part of the Biogrid India in its second phase execution.
 At least three new Bioinformatics centres might be established to cover un-represented and remote institutions as part
 of the BTISnet.  More than 50 short-term courses have been proposed to be organized for training the researchers and
 scholars on the latest developments, which are taking place on bioinformatics.
26.       The Committee commends the efforts made by the Department in the field of bioinformatics  which are expected
 to yield multidimensional results in variety of areas. The Committee, however, recommends that the Department should
 make all out efforts to ensure that biological data created in agricultural and other sectors is disseminated in a way that
 it also reaches the people working at grassroot levels.
JAI VIGYAN NATIONAL S&T MISSION
27.       Of the 21 National Jai Vigyan Missions initiated by Ministry of Science & Technology, four were launched by
 DBT in the areas of new generation vaccines, herbal product development, improvement of coffee and establishment of
 mirror sites of genomic databases in India. 
28.       The objectives of the programme include generating candidate vaccine(s) for diseases like cholera, rabies,
 Japanese encephalitis, tuberculosis, malaria and HIV.  The programme has been grouped under three categories. 
 Category (A) includes those ‘candidate vaccines’ where potential research leads are available and which now require
 clinical trials for generating pre-clinical data.  Under this category, vaccines for cholera and rabies are being attempted. 
 The programmes under category (B) are related to available leads on candidate vaccines where efficacy and
 immunogenicity need to be worked out.  The target vaccines are tissue culture-based Japanese encephalitis, DNA
 vaccines.  Under category (C), programmes require sustained R&D efforts with the possibility for development of

116TH REPORT
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/116threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:26:51]
 candidate vaccine(s).  Under this category, efforts would be made to produce candidate prophylactic anti-HIV and
 DNA vaccines for tuberculosis.
29.       The Committee was informed that under the programme about 25 technologies have been transferred to different
 industries. These include, diagnostic kits for detection of HIV, Hepatitis, Dengue, assessment of reproductive
 hormones, Japanese Encephalitis, Vaccines for leprosy, drug formulation for septic shock, plant tissue culture
 protocols, formulation of biofertilizers, high protein gene from Amaranthus and bioremediation technology for mine
 spoiled dumps and crude oil spillage.  The Indo-US Vaccine Action  programme has led to development of two
 candidate vaccine strains (116E & I321) against rotaviral diarrhoea which is now entering into the phase of clinical
 trials. 
30.       The Committee appreciates the efforts made by the Department in vaccine research and development. The
 Committee hopes that the research done by the Department on microbial genomes, especially pathogens, in view of the
 burden of   infectious diseases on our people, will result in the elimination of diseases like Malaria and Tuberculosis in
 a time bound manner.  The Committee understands that India is on the threshold of producing the first ever DNA
 vaccine in the world, for rabies.  It is appropriately said that “In the area of infectious diseases, drugs, vaccines and
 diagnostics are the ultimate products expected out of genomic information”.  While the Committee commends the
 efforts of the Department and notes such achievements with satisfaction, it hopes that vaccines/medicines would be
 priced reasonably so that these are within the reach of common people.
BIO-TECHNOLOGY FOR SOCIETAL DEVELOPMENT
31.       Under this project, the Department is pursuing three programmes. Under Bio-technology programme for SC/ST,
 the aim is to provide the benefits for biotechnological processes and techniques to SC/ST people.  The projects funded
 under the programme are generally focused on technology transfer covering training, field demonstration and extension
 oriented activities on proven biotechnologies with the involvement of targeted groups.  The programme helps in
 increasing  skills  and income  of  the SC/ST people.  The  Bio-technology  based programme for Women aims to
 promote and use biotechnological processes and tools for entrepreneurship development and provide employment
 opportunities especially for women.  One of the objectives of the programme is to set up Women Biotechnology Park
 for economic empowerment of urban as well as rural women.  The Biotechnology Park aims to establish linkages
 between research institutions and industrial units.  The Park would also scale up the basic technologies for commercial
 utilization, and impart training in relevant areas to develop a pool of skilled and well trained women.  It would also
 evolve cooperation among women entrepreneurs and the corporate sector for joint marketing strategies.  The objectives
 of the third programme i.e. Programme for Rural Areas is to create awareness on biotechnology packages for income
 generation and better health care in rural areas; to use biotechnological process and tools for creating new avenues of
 employment for people living in rural areas; and to promote bio-village concept for socio-economic upliftment of rural
 areas. 
32.       The Committee was informed that several biotechnological programmes for the benefit of SC/ST population,
 women and rural areas have been implemented in the areas of biopesticides, biofertilisers, vermicompost &
 vermiculture, sericulture, floriculture, mushroom cultivation and medicinal plant production, poultry & fish farming
 and improvement of human health.  Universities, national laboratories, state government institutions, krishi vigyan
 kendras, NGOs and voluntary organisations implemented the projects under the programme. Fifty-five thousand
 families have benefitted through more than 125 projects. Further, special projects for earthquake victims of Kutch
 region of Gujarat benefitted 4000 families.
33.       When the Committee wanted to know as to why funds at the R.E. stage have been reduced for the year 2002-03,
 the Department explained that such reduction took place because many of the proposals received under the programme
 lacked scientific merit or relevance to the objectives of the programme.   However, The department has written to a
 large number of institutions covering ICAR institutions, CSIR laboratories, agriculture & other universities, Krishi
 Vigyan Kendras, State S&T Councils etc. to make them aware of the programme and encourage them to submit their
 proposals.  The Department also invited fresh proposals for Bio-village projects, organic farming, redressal of the
 problems of food and nutritional, health and hygiene particularly among women, SC/ST population and other weaker
 sections.  It is expected that during the year 2003-2004, many new projects in the above areas would be implemented in
 addition to the ongoing activities and keeping the same in view the enhanced allocation has been earmarked for 2003-
2004.
34.       The Committee is of the view that the farmers and other needy people from the target groups should be provided
 with latest biotechnologies for mushroom cultivation and vermi-composting. The Committee notes with satisfaction
 that the Department has started approaching the State Governments for getting their support for production of bio-
fertilizer. While it is important for the Department to augment their efforts in this regard, the Committee recommends

116TH REPORT
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/116threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:26:51]
 that small and medium enterprises and industries may also be approached for this purpose. 
35.       The Committee also recommends that under the programme for women, emphasis should be given to take up
 programmes in a comprehensive and an integrated manner for the benefit of women in remote areas such as islands,
 hilly regions and desert areas. The Committee notes with satisfaction that the first ever   bio-technology park for
 women established in Chennai in 1998 has become a huge success. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the
 Department may take initiatives to establish more such parks in different parts of the country for the benefit of women
 and society at large. 
HUMAN GENETICS
36.       The programme aims at identifying, mapping and characterizing genes associated with genetic disorders
 prevalent in India and exploiting the knowledge created by available human, microbial and parasitic genomic sequences
 so as to usher in the tools of molecular medicine for better management of diseases and disorders.
37.       Under Human Genetics, sixteen genetic clinics were established for providing molecular diagnosis and
 counselling for the common genetic disorders such as beta-thalassemia, Duchenne Muscular Dystrophy (DMD) and
 other haemoglobionpathies prevalent in the country. About 18000 affected families benefitted from these units for
 genetic diagnosis including prenatal diagnosis and counselling for major genetic disorders. In the programme on
 functional genomics, powerful computational capability for handling large scale human genome sequence data, robotic
 methodologies for genotyping and PCR based diagnostics for common genetic disorders have been developed.
38.       The Committee commends the efforts made by the Department to provide molecular diagnosis and counseling
 for the common genetic disorders prevalent in the country.   The Committee recommends that the Department may
 provide wide publicity to the programme through print as well as electronic media so that the benefits of these activities
 of the Department could percolate to the underprivileged and weaker sections of society.
SERI-BIOTECHNOLOGY
39.       The objective of the programme is to apply the biotechnology for increasing silk productivity, enhancing quality
 of silk and improvement of host plants. The Committee has been informed that the efforts of the Department in
 developing silkworm genome were showing positive results and a programme was being undertaken at Centre for DNA
 Fingerprinting and Diagnostics, Hyderabad. The Department aims to produce transgenic silkworm cell/caterpillars and
 mulberry plants to produce transgenic silkworm cell/caterpillars and mulberry plants to produce better quality silk. 
 Diverse silkworm strains characterized and transgenic silkworm  lines/caterpillars are being developed.  The technique
 has been standardized for effective degumming of silk using fungal enzyme for better lustre and softness of silk. 
 During the year 2003-04 more projects are being planned to be taken up on various aspects of genomics of silkworm
 (both mulberry and non-mulberry silkworm) and mulberry, and also improvement of host-plants.
40.       The Committee feels that the country has the advantage of production of all four commercial silk varieties viz;
 mulberry, tusser, eri and muga.  The Committee notes with satisfaction that the Department is according priority on
 Seri biotechnology with special focus on non-mulberry silk. It is heartening for the Committee to know that the Indian
 Institute of Science, Bangalore has, for the first time, done the important job of adopting control measures for pests of
 silk worm. As sericulture is suitable for marginal, small and landless farmers, it has tremendous scope for expansion in
 view of its employment generation potential.  Efforts should therefore be made to strengthen the linkages between
 extension and R&D units.  The technology delivery systems should be streamlined by providing need based training
 and effective field demonstration. Various communication channels should also be used to disseminate information
 about the new measures to improve Sericulture.
MICROBIAL AND INDUSTRIAL BIOTECHNOLOGY
41.       The main emphasis is to develop novel products and processes and to evolve updated skilled industrial
 knowledge for utilization by various biotech industries.  Using microbial process, genetic engineering, computational
 analysis, computer simulation and other biotech processes, new products and process development in the area of
 medicine, agriculture, environment, diagnostics are to be undertaken.  The endeavour is to provide need based scientific
 leads to generate and transform R&D results in the form utilizable by the  industry and beneficial for the common man. 
 The technologies developed are to be supported for patenting purposes so as to give full protection to the process
 developed under Patent Act.  More and more technologies developed out of the R&D projects would be transferred to
 the industry and the potential business houses.  Special efforts would be made for networking of the facilities for the
 development of biomedical instruments to enhance biotechnological activities with close collaboration between
 scientists of diverse fields in the area of biomedical engineering, agriculture, basic research and chemical engineers.
42.       The Committee was informed that under the programme a immunodiagnostics kit for early detection of fungal
 pathogens in soil, harmful to tea plants and bio-formulations for control of pathogens in the young tea plant roots have
 been developed and successfully applied by the tea growers.  Besides, a novel bio-reactor has been developed which

116TH REPORT
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/116threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:26:51]
 can be used for biological treatment of waste waters at much high loading rates compared to existing reactors. 
43.       The Committee recommends that the technology developed at the laboratory stage under the programme should
 be brought to the level of pilot plant scale and should be transferred to the industry.  Moreover, the technology
 developed should be patented so as to safeguard the rights of those who develop it.  
44.       The Committee also recommends that some new projects in the area of microbial and industrial bio-technology
 should be started with emphasis on development of novel molecules for application in the pharmaceutical and industrial
 sectors.
45.       The Committee recommends that the Department may explore the possibilities of applying for a patent at the
 midway stage of producing a product so as to safeguard the rights of scientists engaged in doing valuable research in
 biotechnology.
FOOD BIOTECHNOLOGY
46.       The focus of the food bio-technology programme is on the development of novel products and processes and to
 generate new knowledge which can be utilised by the industry using microbial processes, genetic engineering, down
 stream processing, utilizing membrane filtration processes, column chromatography, ultra-filtration, computational
 analysis, modeling, and other biotech processes by providing need based scientific inputs to generate and transform
 R&D results into utilizable ones.  In food biotechnology, great emphasis is to be made to generate knowledge base, to
 develop value added processed food, development of natural food additives, safe food colorants, bio-surfactants, low
 cost food supplements, and development of rapid, sensitive, cost-effective and reliable diagnostic tools for quick
 detection and estimation of pesticides, toxins, unwanted chemical substances entering into processed food and
 beverages through processing or through use of improper packing materials, besides estimation of food borne
 pathogens.  Taking into account the developments in the area of Genetically modified foods; various issues on their
 safety evaluation, and detection of transgenic traits are also to be undertaken  for  development of  suitable  protocols 
 through R&D.   During the year 2002-03,  a Mission Mode Inter-institutional programme has been executed on Food
 and Nutritional Security and efforts are underway to transfer the technologies emanating from the completed R&D
 projects.
47.       The Committee notes that biotechnology holds the key to food security as well as farmers’ security.  Therefore,
 the            Committee recommends that the on-going and new initiatives concerning food biotechnology may be further
 augmented. It notes with satisfaction that the Department has developed a food which is so nutritious that One kg. of
 food is equivalent to five 5kg. of normal food. While producing more such foods, care must be taken to make the price
 affordable. The Committee understands that the technology for such foods is transferred to industry and therefore it is
 all the more important to remain vigilant about keeping the price of such products affordable.
AUTONOMOUS INSTITUTION
48.       The Department has under its control seven autonomous institutions namely National Institute of Immunology,
 New Delhi; National Centre for Cell Science, Pune; Centre for DNA Finger Printing and Diagnostics, Hyderabad;
 National Centre for Plant Genome Research, New Delhi; National Brain Research, Gurgaon; Institute of Bio-resources
 and Sustainable Development, Imphal; and Institute of Life Sciences, Bhubaneswar.
National Institute of Immunology (NII)
49.       The mandate of the National Institute of Immunology (NII) is to undertake, aid, promote, guide and coordinate
 research of a high caliber in basic and applied immunology; to carry out research for development of new vaccines,
 immunodiagnostic kits, immunological reagents; to interact with industry for manufacture of products developed from
 the research leads; to organise post-graduate courses leading to Ph.D. degree; to organise workshops, seminars,
 symposia, training, programmes of specialised nature in immunological methods and related areas. It also serves as a
 national reference centre for immunology and provides consultancy services. It promotes linkages between various
 scientific research agencies/ laboratories in the field of immunology, vaccine development and related areas; to
 collaborate with foreign research institutions, laboratories and other international organizations in the field relevant to
 the objectives mentioned above.  Besides continuation of ongoing research activities, other projects to be taken up are
 on signal transduction in neuro degeneration, signal transduction through heterotrimeric G. Protein during
 developmental transformation of Leishmania donovani, role of cell signaling in eukaryotic development, upgrading
 Electron/Scanning Transmicroscope facility, initiation of work on incubator laboratory facility in the second campus.
50.       The Committee was informed that with the budgetary allocation of Rs.25.85 crores to the NII for 2003-2004,
 there is an increase of Rs.0.88 crores as compared to 2002-03.  This increase is likely to be sufficient to support the
 ongoing research on major initiatives that have been taken up during the current financial year. The initiatives taken
 include: transgenic animals, virology–HIV/AIDS and Japanese encephalitis, small animal facilities, technology
 incubator etc.   

116TH REPORT
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/116threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:26:51]
51.       A number of prototype technologies emerge from the R&D activities pursued by the Institute.  These are to be
 fine tuned, upscaled and commercialized for their availability in the market.  The institute holds regular dialogue with
 the prospective industrial partners for the transfer of technology. The Department also assists the autonomous
 institutions to identify suitable industrial partners directly or through agencies like Biotechnology Consortium India
 Ltd. (BCIL) and National Research  Development  Corporation (NRDC).  In addition,  the Department regularly
 organizes meetings between academia and industries to make each other aware of their potentials and perspective
 technologies. These mechanisms have helped in transfer of technologies.
52.       The Committee observes that the National Institute of Immunology (NII) should also take steps to focus its
 research activities on certain unexplored areas in the field of Immunodiagnostics.
53.       The Committee also recommends that the Department may explore the possibility of raising funds by
 collaborating with the industry for providing additional support to research activities. It will open opportunities for
 making the Institute self-sufficient.
National Centre for Cell Science (NCCS)
54.       The National Centre for Cell Science (NCCS) has the mandate for research and development, teaching and
 training and to act as a national repository for cell lines/hybridomas etc. It has expanded its scientific base to strengthen
 research in the areas of cancer biology, cell biology, immunology, gene therapy and proteomics. The ongoing as well as
 new projects are in the field of cell repository, human resource development, cancer biology, cell biology, molecular
 biology, diabetes, infection and immunity, drug discovery, tissue engineering, genomics & proteomics and support
 facility. Activities of cell repository, human resource development and R&D will be continued and work on transgenic
 mice, proteomics and exploitation of micro-array technology for understanding of disease and immune response will
 continue.  Necessary infrastructure for transgenic mice will be developed
.
55.       The Committee has been informed that new activities proposed by NCCS during 2003-2004 are design of new
 generation therapeutic molecules for cancer; further characterization of anti-diabetic factors; identification and
 screening of Indian flora and fauna of deep-sea origin; generation of  arteries/veins in vitro which will be useful in
 CABG or bypass surgeries and exploitation of micro-array technology towards identification of molecules involved in
 disease susceptibility/ resistance.
56.       It was also informed that the promising research leads available in the areas of diabetes, cancer biology, cell
 repository, gene therapy etc. are being pursued further with the core grant of the institute. The institute also receives
 extramural R&D funding from India as well as from abroad in order to conduct research in the identified new thrust
 areas. Industries may also be suitably involved towards preclinical (animal experimentation), clinical trials, etc. if
 necessary. Therefore, the budgetary allocation should be sufficient.
Centre for DNA Finger Printing and Diagnostics (CDFD)
57.       The Centre for DNA Finger Printing and Diagnostics (CDFD) is an R&D institute with the twin objectives of
 providing services in the areas of DNA fingerprinting and diagnostics and to conduct state-of-the-art basic science
 research. In addition, it conducts training courses and programmes for manpower development in different areas of
 biotechnology and modern biology. The center has also created core /common facilities like EMBNet, Genome
 Sequencing and Analyses facility, Molecular Pathogenesis Database Core Facility, National Microarray Facility and P3
 Containment Aerosol Challenge Facility. The ongoing projects in the centre include  bacterial genetics, silkworm
 genetics, cell and molecular biology ,molecular pathogenesis and bio-informatics. It will continue with the major
 service component such as DNA fingerprinting, diagnostics, genome analysis of human pathogens and bioinformatics.
 A disaster management cell and new DNA based services for GM food detection, wild life and animal identification
 will also be started.
58.       Over the period, the required infrastructures have been established by the CDFD, Hyderabad to provide DNA
 fingerprinting services for crime investigations, settling paternity disputes and to provide DNA fingerprinting services.
 Though, there is an increase in the number of DNA fingerprinting cases by 20-25% every year, the Centre can sustain
 the thrust of its activities with the same allocation of the budget. 
59.       CDFD has constructed a laboratory complex on a 13 acre plot of land given by the Government of Andhra
 Pradesh at Gandipet. The construction of laboratory has been completed and the contract for services, interior work,
 furnishings landscaping, etc. will be awarded soon .It is expected that CDFD will move to its own complex before the
 end of this year. Initially, the cost of the building of the CDFD was estimated at Rs.3.63 crores and as per the revised
 cost estimate, it amounts to Rs.13.55 crores. The cost revision in the building is primarily because of construction of
 separate research complex.  CDFD was earlier supposed to be a small centre working on DNA fingerprinting for which
 it was proposed to be housed in the land adjoining the IICT campus, Hyderabad with the main building area of only

116TH REPORT
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/116threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:26:51]
 2305 sq.m.  Subsequently, the CDFD Governing Council decided to have a separate large complex in the light of its
 status as a National Centre of excellence in DNA fingerprinting, diagnostics and related R&D activities as well as
 rendering services to many countries. Therefore, an independent large campus with the expanded range of activities in
 both services and research became necessary and was duly approved.
60.       While the Committee notes with satisfaction the contributions of the Centre to forensic medicine and wildlife
 preservation, it recommends that in order to disseminate the DNA fingerprinting technology, a number of lectures and
 workshops should be conducted for the benefit of various police officers, judicial officers, forensic scientists and
 environmentalists.  This technology also needs to be included in the syllabus of National as well as State Police
 Training Academies & Institutions.
National Brain Research Centre (NBRC)
61.       The National Brain Research Centre (NBRC), an autonomous body of the Department, was registered as a
 society in June 1999. The mandate of the Centre is to undertake basic research to understand brain function in normal
 health and disease and establish linkages with national/international organizations involved in neuroscience research. It
 would not only have infrastructure facilities and a coordinated multi-disciplinary team of scientists working in the
 frontier area of neuroscience but also to support and network the existing groups in the country. Thus, the centre would
 act as National Apex Centre for Brain Research to promote neuroscience research. NBRC has been recently recognized
 by UGC as deemed university for  post graduate education in neurosciences.  The centre would continue research work
 on basic brain function, disorders, imaging and neurosciences and neuroinformatics and human resource development.
 Construction of the phase II of the campus will also be undertaken.
62.       An amount of Rs.16 crores was proposed for 2003-04 to carryout research activities of NBRC and to execute
 Phase-II of the center. However, outlay has been scaled down to Rs.11 crores as the Phase-II proposal of the NBRC is
 under consideration. EFC memo has been circulated for the comments of the concerned Ministries/Departments. The
 outlay will be suitably adjusted   upwards  after the  EFC is  approved  and  in  accordance  with  the  budget 
 provisions.  During the last year NBRC has initiated new research activities in areas like computational neuroscience,
 system and cognitive neuroscience and understanding gender differences in pathogenesis of neuro generative disorders
 and theoretical neurobiology. Functional Micro-array facility for neuro-genetic disorders has also been established. 
 Further, the centre has already initiated projects in the frontier area of research, which includes Stem Cell Research,
 Developmental neurobiology and basic research towards understanding of neurological and psychological disorders.
 The NBRC has been accorded the status of Deemed University.
63.       The Phase-I construction of its permanent campus at Manesar has been completed ahead of time without any
 time and cost overrun and laboratories of the centre have been shifted from its interim facility at Gurgaon to Manesar. 
 At present, the NBRC is functioning from its new campus. EFC for Phase-II has been circulated and construction is
 expected to be completed by March, 2007.   
64.       The Committee notes with satisfaction the research activities undertaken at the National Brain Research Centre
 (NBRC). 
65.       Moreover, in order to inform Medical Colleges and concerned Departments of Neurology about the research
 findings of the NBRC, the Department should undertake activities in a networking manner with the existing
 neuroscience groups/institutions in the country and promote multidisciplinary research in neuroscience. 
National Center for Plant Genome Research (NCPGR)
66.       TheNational Centre for Plant Genome Research (NCPGR) is mainly working to understand the structure,
 expression and function of genes and their arrangement on plant genomes and their manipulation to breed improved
 varieties of food and industrial crops for high yields of better quality products.  The Centre is pursuing projects on
 functional and application genomics of chickpea (pulse) and Catharanthus roseus (important medicinal plant),
 development of nutritionally enhanced potato, tomato with reduced oxalate contents and tolerant to fungal infections,
 improvement of protein contents in rice, sweet potato and cassava  Lathyrus sp. (Khesri Dal) free of neurotoxin.  The
 Centre is also engaged in human resource development in the core-areas of plant molecular biology, genetic
 engineering and genome analysis by way of imparting   advanced training at pre-and post-doctoral levels. 
67.       The Committee was informed that the building of NCPGR is under construction.  Out of budgetary  allocation of
 Rs.7.00 crores for the year 2002-2003, approximately      Rs.4.5 crores is meant for building construction.
68.       The Committee endorses the vision of the Department to make agriculture sustainable by using biotechnology.
 To get better yields, we need plants and methods of cultivation which will be in harmony with biodiversity and eco-
system and therefore will not bring down the fertility of land and kill useful animals, pests and weeds. This objective
 can be achieved by, among others, changing plant characteristics through genetic modification. The Committee
 impresses upon the Department to work with full vigour to realise this objective. Prof. M.S.Swaminathan, one of the

116TH REPORT
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/116threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:26:51]
 leading figures who spearheaded green revolution in our country, has said that green revolution can become ever green
 revolution by making it pro-nature, pro-poor and pro-women. Therefore, the Committee emphasizes that the
 Department while focusing on biotechnology should also harness social forces for making our agriculture sustainable.
MEDICAL BIOTECHNOLOGY
69.       Medical Biotechnology has come to the centrestage with spectacular advances in biology. This is due to a
 number of emerging and re-emerging infections requiring development of suitable diagnostics and therapeutics. Several
 events at the international biotech scene such as the rise of genomics era, stem cell research and bioinformatics have
 percolated down to the national biotechnology scene with a large number of scientists galvanized to reap the benefits.
 The Department of Biotechnology has continued its efforts for the development of suitable diagnostics, vaccines,
 therapeutic and better drug delivery systems.
70.       The objectives of the medical biotechnology programme are:
Development of suitable diagnostics for early detection of major communicable & non-communicable diseases.
Development of new generation vaccines for prophylaxis and therapeutic use.
Development of newer and alternate drug delivery system.
Production of important biological and bioactive molecules using suitable expression systems and modern fermentation
 technology.
Programme support for creation of infrastructures in newer areas of biotechnological research.
Transfer of prototype technologies to suitable industries for refinement, upscaling and commercialization.
To develop multi centric programme on stem cell biology.
71.       During the year 2001-2002, 12 prototype diagnostics/other technologies relating to medical biotechnology
 discipline have been transferred to industry for refinement, up scaling and commercialization. The diagnostic
 technology relating to ELISA system to measure Alpha feto protein levels in pregnant women is ready for launching. 
 During the year 2002-2003, after an interactive discussion meeting with industrial entrepreneurs, three entrepreneurs
 have agreed to take up three systems to diagnose pulmonary and extra pulmonary tuberculosis. In addition, the
 industries have joined hands with the Department to develop prototype/candidate vaccine for Malaria, Rota Virus and
 DNA Rabies Vaccine.
72.       Medical biotechnology and health care areas lay emphasis on molecular diagnostics, genetic vaccines, molecular
 characterization of pathogens, new drug targets and new drug delivery systems relating to viral, bacterial and parasitic
 infections.  Also, major programmes have been implemented in the areas of cervical and oral cancers, stem cell
 biology, development of products and processes, development of products and processes, development of advanced
 infrastructure and expertise.  Currently, about 115 R&D projects are under implementation and during the reporting
 period, 165 papers have been published in national and international journals from these projects.  Four patent
 applications have been filed and industrial partners for several diagnostics technologies have been identified for
 upscaling and commercialization.
AGRICULTURE BIO-TECHNOLOGY
73.       The department is supporting three main types of research activities under the scheme; R&D projects in priority
 crops, multi-institutional projects and plant molecular programmes in certain institutions/universities.  The multi-
institutional project involves interaction amongst a number  of  institutions  with  well  defined  objectives.  The project
 on  (a)  the  development  of transgenic crops – cotton, rice, mungbean and tomato resistance to biotic stresses deal with
 cotton bollworm CLCV, in rice – RTSV and RTVV, in mungbean MYMV and in tomato TMV (b) the project on
 molecular characterization and field trials of mustard transgenic for hybrid seed production and low – till cultivation is
 being pursued by three institutions.  The project involves studies on characterization of male sterility/restoration lines
 and improvement of technology, testing of male sterile lines and the identify homozygous barstar the storer liens and    
 (c) development of varieties with durable resistance to leaf and stripe rust using molecular marker technology in wheat. 
 This project deals with validation of genetic stocks for documented genes conferring seed and adult plant resistant to
 leaf rust and stripe rust, identification of molecular markers for important gene and pyramiding important APR and
 seed resistance genes in common cultivars.
INTERNATIONAL COOPERATION
74.       The allocation for the International Cooperation has been increased to Rs.8.00 crores for the year 2003-04. The
 budget was enhanced for implementing the on-going commitments and new initiatives.  Several new bilateral
 programmes have been initiated with countries like Denmark, Mauritius, Brazil and Sudan.    New programmes are
 being identified with UK, Norway, Chile and Mongolia.  Ongoing programmes have been expanded with countries like
 USA, Germany, Sri Lanka, Israel, Syria, Myanmar, Russia, Belarus and Switzerland. There are proposals to establish
 Indo-ASEAN Biotechnology Network, Asian biotechnology consortium, and India – Singapore Joint Biotechnology

116TH REPORT
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/116threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:26:51]
 Park in association with Ministry Of External Affairs. Indo-Russian centre for biotechnology will be fully operational.
75.       The Committee was informed that International cooperation is pursued for R&D work with the most advanced
 countries for mutual benefit.  It also helps in implementation of national R&D programmes and to open up avenues for
 collaborative interaction in advanced areas leading to transfer of technologies / knowledge into the country.  The
 activity has already resulted in training of large number of young scientists. A diagnostic to identify Sea food pathogens
 was developed and transferred to Industry under Indo-German Programme.  Further, three new genes responsible for
 cerulean cataract were identified.  Under Indo-US collaboration, cellulose sulphate and polystyrene sulphonate
 preparations were developed as vaginal anti-microbial contraceptives.  Technologies were developed for treatment of
 waste water from textiles.  Under Indo-Swedish programme, integrated approaches have been developed for prevention
 of heavy metal leaching from the over burdened heaps of iron, copper and zinc mine spoil dumps. Techniques have
 been standardized for micro-propagation of tree species etc.  There are several leads already available for technology
 development under bilateral programme with Switzerland such as molecular markers specific to rust disease resistance
 in wheat; field testing of bio-pesticides formulation for management of insects of pulses; a phytoremediation protocol
 for remediation of pesticide contaminated soils; a biosensor for detection of pesticide residue in soil and water;
 regeneration and transformation protocols of chickpea for insect resistance and a bioremediation protocol for pesticide
 degradation. Gene constructs, reagents, protocols, sophisticated equipment, tools and techniques have also been made
 available to Indian laboratories through joint R&D projects. Several interactive workshops and seminars have added
 value to the knowledge base. Financial support from some of these collaborations to the Indian laboratories is about
 Rs.20 crores.
 
EXPEDITIOUS CLEARENCE OF PROJECTS SUBMITTED BY THE DEPARTMENT
76.       The Committee was apprised that the proposals submitted by the Department are subjected to periodic review
 and assessment by different agencies including the Planning Commission. The Department further stated that it
 remained ever ready to subject itself and its activities to scrutiny. However, it informed the Committee that time taken
 for review of its projects is too long and therefore comes in the way of its expeditious implementation. While pursuing
 research in the field of science, the Department has to constantly innovate to remain abreast of the ever-evolving
 activities of the scientific community across the globe. Delay in clearing a project, therefore, will throw a spanner in the
 wheel of scientific progress which the Department is carrying forward within a limited budget, to fulfil the objectives
 set before them in a goal oriented and time bound manner. Therefore, the Committee strongly recommends that all the
 proposals of the Department must be cleared expeditiously and within a set time frame.
BUDGET PROPOSALS AT R.E.STAGE
77.       The Department informed the Committee that the reduction of its budget at the R.E. stage causes a lot of
 problem in resetting its priorities. It prepares its plan as per the budget proposals and accordingly prepares its schedule
 of activities. Time taken to re-do the priorities due to cut in R.E. stage is not less than three or four months. Such re-
planning for scientific projects deviates the Department from the set objectives. The Committee is constrained to note
 that such problems are confronted by the Department.
Professor G. Padmanabhan, the UNESCO Professor in Biotechnology Department of Biochemistry, Indian Institute of
 Science, Bangalore in an important article “Contrary to reports, India has not missed the biotech bus” has written about
 the budget requirements of biotechnology which is revealing:
“A single funding agency in the USA has a Rs.4,000 crores budget for genomics. In India, all the funding agencies
 together can mobilise about Rs.100 crores a year for research in this area. It is interesting to note that the country can
 still come up with new drugs, vaccines and diagnostics within this limited budget. If India plays its cards right, it can
 hope to become a world leader in modern vaccine manufacturing, since MNCs are not interested in this field due to
 poor economic returns. All that is needed is a commitment on the part of the Government to ensure availability of the
 committed amount for the next five years, release of grants in time, a mechanism for quick clearance of clinical trials to
 convert the results of the laboratory into commercial products”.
78.       Determination and will of the scientists to achieve the goal which is comparable to international standards and
 within a limited but committed fund is indeed heartening. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the budgets for
 all the Departments dealing with science and technology including that of the Department of Biotechnology may not be
 reduced at the R.E. stage.
USE OF TRADITIONAL KNOWLEDGE
79.       India is rich with traditional knowledge. Our people with centuries of experiences have emerged as practitioners
 of such knowledge.  This rich reservoir of such resources must  be  understood  scientifically  and safeguarded.  The 
 Committee  was  informed  by a Member that Ganga Jal, Gou Mutra and Gober have anti-bacterial properties. It was

116TH REPORT
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/116threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:26:51]
 also told that Gober is radiation resistant. It was told that when hospital wastes were treated with layers of Gober for
 five months, it was found that all bacteria, toxin and poison had been neutralised.  Therefore, the Committee
 recommends that steps must be taken by the Department to explore the anti-bacterial properties of Ganga  Jal, Gou
 Mutra and Gober, specially the effectiveness for treating hospital waste.
80.       After considering the Demands for Grants of the Department of Bio-technology and assessing the progress of
 various important programmes and projects administered by it, the Committee recommends that the budgetary
 allocation of Rs.273.35 crores, as sought by the Department for the year 2003-2004, under Demand No. 82, may be
 approved.
SUMMARY OF THE RECOMMENDATIONS
 
1.         The Committee was informed that one of the recurring problems of the Department is the shortfall of the non-
plan budget. Recurrence of such problems on year to year basis, the Committee was apprised,  has created a compelling
 situation for the autonomous bodies whereby they had to cut down from plan funds to pay salaries to the scientists. The
 Committee is constrained to note that scientific institutions engaged in research in frontier areas of science have to
 confront such a situation. The additional requirement of the Department for non-plan expenditure is to the tune of
 Rs.5.00 crores. The Committee, therefore, recommends that sufficient funds may be provided to the Department to
 overcome this problem. It further underlines that the Departments dealing with science and technology should be
 accorded priority for allocation of funds  and  if  necessary,   special  provisions  may  be  made  for  them  so  that they
 do not face such problems.  Biotechnology era is waiting to dominate the World  economy in the next twenty years. 
 Investment in this field is not commensurate with the potential of this branch of Science.
(Para 8)
2.         The Committee recommends the Department to accord high priority to the issue of Human Resource
 Development and should coordinate with the University Grants Commission to implement the programme all over the
 country. 
(Para 16)
3.         The Committee is of the view that efforts should be made to make use of the tissue culture and floriculture
 technology in rural areas. Additional incentives should be given to persons willing to work in these areas.
(Para 20)
4.         The Committee commends the efforts made by the Department in the field of bioinformatics  which are expected
 to yield multidimensional results in variety of areas. The Committee, however, recommends that the Department should
 make all out efforts to ensure that biological data created in agricultural and other sectors is
 disseminated in a way that
 it also reaches the people working at grassroot levels.
 (Para 26)
5.         The Committee appreciates the efforts made by the Department in vaccine research and development. The
 Committee hopes that the research done by the Department on microbial genomes, especially pathogens, in view of the
 burden of   infectious diseases on our people, will result in the elimination of diseases like Malaria and Tuberculosis in
 a time bound manner.  The Committee understands that India is on the threshold of producing the first ever DNA
 vaccine in the world, for rabies.  It is appropriately said that “In the area of infectious diseases, drugs, vaccines and
 diagnostics are the ultimate products expected out of genomic information”.  While the Committee commends the
 efforts of the Department and notes such achievements with satisfaction, it hopes that vaccines/medicines would be
 priced reasonably so that these are within the reach of common people.
(Para 30)
 6.        The Committee is of the view that the farmers and other needy people from the target groups should be provided
 with latest biotechnologies for mushroom cultivation and vermi-composting. The Committee notes with satisfaction
 that the Department has started approaching the State Governments for getting their support for production of bio-
fertilizer. While it is important for the Department to augment their efforts in this regard, the Committee recommends
 that small and medium enterprises and industries may also be approached for this purpose. 
(Para 34)
7.         The Committee also recommends that under the programme for women, emphasis should be given to take up
 programmes in a comprehensive and an integrated manner for the benefit of women in remote areas such as islands,
 hilly regions and desert areas. The Committee notes with satisfaction that the first ever   bio-technology park for
 women established in Chennai in 1998 has become a huge success. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the
 Department may take initiatives to establish more such parks in different parts of the country for the benefit of women

116TH REPORT
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/116threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:26:51]
 and society at large. 
 (Para 35)
8.         The Committee commends the efforts made by the Department to provide molecular diagnosis and counseling
 for the common genetic disorders prevalent in the country.   The Committee recommends that the Department may
 provide wide publicity to the programme through print as well as electronic media so that the benefits of these activities
 of the Department could percolate to the underprivileged and weaker sections of society.
(Para 38)
9.         The Committee feels that the country has the advantage of production of all four commercial silk varieties viz;
 mulberry, tusser, eri and muga.  The Committee notes with satisfaction that the Department is according priority on
 Seri biotechnology with special focus on non-mulberry silk. It is heartening for the Committee to know that the Indian
 Institute of Science, Bangalore has, for the first time, done the important job of adopting control measures for pests of
 silk worm. As sericulture is suitable for marginal, small and landless farmers, it has tremendous scope for expansion in
 view of its employment generation potential.  Efforts should therefore be made to strengthen the linkages between
 extension and R&D units.  The technology delivery systems should be streamlined by providing need based training
 and effective field demonstration. Various communication channels should also be used to disseminate information
 about the new measures to improve Sericulture.
(Para 40)
10.       The Committee recommends that the technology developed at the laboratory stage under the programme should
 be brought to the level of pilot plant scale and should be transferred to the industry.  Moreover, the technology
 developed should be patented so as to safeguard the rights of those who develop it.
(Para 43)
11.       The Committee also recommends that some new projects in the area of microbial and industrial bio-technology
 should be started with emphasis on development of novel molecules for application in the pharmaceutical and industrial
 sectors.
(Para 44)
12.       The Committee recommends that the Department may explore the possibilities of applying for a patent at the
 midway stage of producing a product so as to safeguard the rights of scientists engaged in doing valuable research in
 biotechnology.
(Para 45)
13.       The Committee notes that biotechnology holds the key to food security as well as farmers’ security. Therefore,
 the            Committee recommends that the on-going and new initiatives concerning food biotechnology may be further
 augmented. It notes with satisfaction that the Department has developed a food which is so nutritious that One kg. of
 food is equivalent to five 5kg. of normal food. While producing more such foods, care must be taken to make the price
 affordable. The Committee understands that the technology for such foods is transferred to industry and therefore it is
 all the more important to remain vigilant about keeping the price of such products affordable.
(Para 47)
14.       The Committee observes that the National Institute of Immunology (NII) should also take steps to focus its
 research activities on certain unexplored areas in the field of Immunodiagnostics.
(Para 52)
15.       The Committee also recommends that the Department may explore the possibility of raising funds by
 collaborating with the industry for providing additional support to research activities. It will open opportunities for
 making the Institute self-sufficient.
 (Para 53)
16.       While the Committee notes with satisfaction the contributions of the Centre to forensic medicine and wildlife
 preservation, it recommends that in order to disseminate the DNA fingerprinting technology, a number of lectures and
 workshops should be conducted for the benefit of various police officers, judicial officers, forensic scientists and
 environmentalists.  This technology also needs to be included in the syllabus of National as well as State Police
 Training Academies & Institutions.
(Para 60)
17.       The Committee notes with satisfaction the research activities undertaken at the National Brain Research Centre
 (NBRC). 
(Para 64)
18.       Moreover, in order to inform Medical Colleges and concerned Departments of Neurology about the research
 findings of the NBRC, the Department should undertake activities in a networking manner with the existing

116TH REPORT
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/116threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:26:51]
 neuroscience groups/institutions in the country and promote multidisciplinary research in neuroscience. 
(Para 65)
19.       The Committee endorses the vision of the Department to make agriculture sustainable by using biotechnology.
 To get better yields, we need plants and methods of cultivation which will be in harmony with biodiversity and eco-
system and therefore will not bring down the fertility of land and kill useful animals, pests and weeds. This objective
 can be achieved by, among others, changing plant characteristics through genetic modification. The Committee
 impresses upon the Department to work with full vigour to realise this objective. Prof. M.S.Swaminathan, one of the
 leading figures who spearheaded green revolution in our country, has said that green revolution can become ever green
 revolution by making it pro-nature, pro-poor and pro-women. Therefore, the Committee emphasizes that the
 Department while focusing on biotechnology should also harness social forces for making our agriculture sustainable.
(Para 68)
20.       The Committee was apprised that the proposals submitted by the Department are subjected to periodic review
 and assessment by different agencies including the Planning Commission. The Department further stated that it
 remained ever ready to subject itself and its activities to scrutiny. However, it informed the Committee that time taken
 for review of its projects is too long and therefore comes in the way of its expeditious implementation. While pursuing
 research in the field of science, the Department has to constantly innovate to remain abreast of the ever-evolving
 activities of the scientific community across the globe. Delay in clearing a project, therefore, will throw a spanner in the
 wheel of scientific progress which the Department is carrying forward within a limited budget, to fulfil the objectives
 set before them in a goal oriented and time bound manner. Therefore, the Committee strongly recommends that all the
 proposals of the Department must be cleared expeditiously and within a set time frame.
(Para 76)
21.       The Department informed the Committee that the reduction of its budget at the R.E. stage causes a lot of
 problem in resetting its priorities. It prepares its plan as per the budget proposals and accordingly prepares its schedule
 of activities. Time taken to re-do the priorities due to cut in R.E. stage is not less than three or four months. Such re-
planning for scientific projects deviates the Department from the set objectives. The Committee is constrained to note
 that such problems are confronted by the Department.
Professor G. Padmanabhan, the UNESCO Professor in Biotechnology Department of Biochemistry, Indian Institute of
 Science, Bangalore in an important article “Contrary to reports, India has not missed the biotech bus” has written about
 the budget requirements of biotechnology which is revealing:
“A single funding agency in the USA has a Rs.4,000 crores budget for genomics. In India, all the funding agencies
 together can mobilise about Rs.100 crores a year for research in this area. It is interesting to note that the country can
 still come up with new drugs, vaccines and diagnostics within this limited budget. If India plays its cards right, it can
 hope to become a world leader in modern vaccine manufacturing, since MNCs are not interested in this field due to
 poor economic returns. All that is needed is a commitment on the part of the Government to ensure availability of the
 committed amount for the next five years, release of grants in time, a mechanism for quick clearance of clinical trials to
 convert the results of the laboratory into commercial products”.
(Para 77)
22.       Determination and will of the scientists to achieve the goal which is comparable to international standards and
 within a limited but committed fund is indeed heartening. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the budgets for
 all the Departments dealing with science and technology including that of the Department of Biotechnology may not be
 reduced at the R.E. stage.
(Para78)
23.       India is rich with traditional knowledge. Our people with centuries of experiences have emerged as practitioners
 of such knowledge.  This rich reservoir of such resources must be understood scientifically and safeguarded.  The
 Committee was informed  by a Member that Ganga Jal, Gou Mutra and Gober have anti-bacterial properties. It was also
 told that Gober is radiation resistant. It was told that when hospital wastes were treated with layers of Gober for five
 months, it was found that all bacteria, toxin and poison had been neutralised.  Therefore, the Committee recommends
 that steps must be taken by the Department to explore the anti-bacterial properties of Ganga  Jal, Gou Mutra and Gober,
 specially the effectiveness for treating hospital waste.
(Para 79)
24.       After considering the Demands for Grants of the Department of Bio-technology and assessing the progress of
 various important programmes and projects administered by it, the Committee recommends that the budgetary
 allocation of Rs.273.35 crores, as sought by the Department for the year 2003-2004, under Demand No. 82, may be
 approved.

116TH REPORT
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/116threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:26:51]
(Para 80)
ANNEXURE
 
BUDGET ESTIMATES 2003-2004
            ( Rs. in crores)
SR.
NO.
HEAD OF DEVELOPMENT PROJECTS/
 PROGRAMMES/ SCHEMES
 
       Plan                  Non-Plan             Total
1. Secretariat Economic Services -- 4.58 4.58
 Other Scientific Research    
2.
 
Assistance to Scientific Institutions/Professional
 Bodies
   
2.01 National Institute of Immunology 25.00 0.85 25.85
2.02 National Centre for Cell Sciences 9.00 0.42 9.42
2.03
 
2.04
 
2.05
 
2.06
 
2.07
Centre for DNA Finger printing and Diagnostics
 
National Brain Research Centre
 
National Centre for Plant Genome Research
 
Institute of Bioresources and Sustainable
 Development
 
Institute of Life Sciences
 
8.00
 
11.00
 
7.00
 
2.00
 
4.00
--
 
--
 
--
 
--
 
--
8.00
 
11.00
 
7.00
 
2.00
 
4.00
 
TOTAL: 66.00 1.27 67.27
3. Assistance to Other Scientific Bodies    
3.01 Human Resource Development 13.00 -- 13.00
3.02 Bioinformatics 10.00 -- 10.00
 
3.03
 
 
Biotech Facilities, Centres of Excellence and
 Programme Support
 
20.00
 
--
 
20.00
 
3.04
 
Research and Development
 
114.00
 
--
 
114.00
 
3.05
 
Biotechnology for Societal Development
 
7.00
 
--
 
7.00
 
3.06
 
Bio-Process and Product Development
 
7.00
 
--
 
7.00
 
 
 
4.
 
TOTAL
 
I&M Sector-Assistance for Technology incubators,
 Pilot Project, Biotechnology Parks and Biotech
 Development Fund
 
171.00
 
 
1500
 
--
 
 
--
 
171.00
 
 
1500
 
5.
 
International Cooperation
 
8.00
 
--
 
8.00
 
6.
 
International Centre for Genetic Engineering & Bio-
Technology
 
--
 
7.50
 
7.50

116TH REPORT
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/116threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:26:51]
  
GRAND TOTAL:
260.00 13.35 273.35
     
     
 
MINUTES
VI
SIXTH MEETING
 
 
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Tuesday, the 1st April, 2003 in Committee Room ‘A’, Ground Floor, Parliament
 House Annexe, New Delhi.
                       
PRESENT
 
Shri C. Ramachandraiah  –– Chairman
 
RAJYA SABHA
 
Shri M. V. Rajasekharan
Prof. Saif-ud-Din Soz
Shri B.P. Singhal
Shri Lalitbhai Mehta
Smt. S. G. Indira
Shri Manoj Bhattacharya
Shri T. S. Bajwa
Prof. Alka Balram Kshatriya
 
LOK  SABHA
 
Smt. Margaret Alva
Shri Nihal Chand Chauhan                   
Dr. (Smt.) Beatrix D’ Souza
Chowdhary Talib Hussain
Shri C. Kuppusami
Dr. Charan Das Mahant
Shri Madhusudan Mistry
Shri Suresh Pasi                                               
Dr. Ashok Patel                                               
Shri Prahlad Patel        
Shri Shriniwas Patil
Prof. R. R. Pramanik                           
Shri Ganta Sreenivasa Rao
Kunwar Akhilesh Singh
Smt. Jayaben B. Thakkar
Shri Balram Singh Yadav
 
SECRETARIAT
                       
                        Shri S.N. Sahu, Director

116TH REPORT
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/116threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:26:51]
                        Shri Mom Raj Singh, Under Secretary
                        Shri S. Rangarajan, Committee Officer
 
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE DEPARTMENT OF BIO-TECHNOLOGY
Dr. (Mrs.) Manju Sharma, Secretary
Dr. V. K. Vinayak, Adviser
Dr. S. N. Natesh, SG
Dr. V. P. Gupta, SG
Dr. (Mrs.) Seema Wahab, SG
Dr. K. K. Tripathi, SG
Shri Arun Sharma, JS & FA
Shri S. L. Bhat, JS
Shri Ajay Kumar, Director
Shri M. P. Banga, DS
Dr. (Ms) Kana Talukdar, DS
Dr. (Ms.) Renu Swarup, SF
Dr. K. S. Charak, SF
Dr. S. R. Rao, SF
Dr. Mohd. Aslam, SE
Shri Sham Lal, US
Shri K. K. Khattar, US
Shri O. P. Rastogi, US
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE DEPARTMENT OF OCEAN DEVELOPMENT 
*                                                          *                                                          *
REPRESENTATIVES FROM OTHER OFFICES/ORGANISATIONS
*                                                          *                                                          *
2.                     At the outset the Chairman welcomed the Secretary and other representatives of the Department of Bio-
technology and requested them to make a brief presentation on Demands for Grants (2003-04) of the Department.  The
 Secretary made visual presentation on the activities and achievements of the Department of Bio-technology and briefly
 explained the budgetary allocations on different heads as also the functioning of the Department.
3.         The Secretary requested the Committee to recommend more budgetary allocation especially in the non-plan side
 to take care of the requirements of the demands of the Institutes/Organisations under the Department. She also pointed
 out that during the year 2002-2003 at R.E stage, a drastic cut was made on the allocations of the Department which
 hampered the progress of its scientific activities.  Then, the Committee decided to meet Finance Minister to impress
 upon him to make more financial allocation for the Scientific Departments and not to reduce plan allocations at R.E
 stage. 
4.         Thereafter, Members sought clarifications on points relating to the Demands for Grants of the Department.  The
 Committee also decided to hold a separate meeting to understand and assess the policies and achievements of the
 Department and the institutions under its control.
            The witnesses then withdrew.
______________________________________________________________________________
*** Relates to other matters.
31
 
5.         The Committee, thereafter, adjourned at 02.00 P.M. for lunch and re-assembled at 3.00 P.M. to hear the
 Secretary, Department of Ocean Development.
6.         *                                                          *                                                          *
                        A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
7.         The Committee then adjourned at 05.30 P.M.
______________________________________________________________________________
*** Relates to other matters.

116TH REPORT
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/116threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:26:51]
VII
SEVENTH MEETING
 
The Committee met at 03.00 P.M. on Wednesday, the 23rd April, 2003 in Committee Room ‘E’, Basement, Parliament
 House Annexe, New Delhi.
                       
PRESENT
 
Shri C. Ramachandraiah  –– Chairman
 
RAJYA SABHA
 
Shri M. V. Rajasekharan
Prof. Saif-ud-Din Soz
Shri B.P. Singhal
Smt. S. G. Indira
Shri Manoj Bhattacharya
Shri Lalit Suri
Prof. Alka Balram Kshatriya
       
LOK  SABHA
 
Smt. Margaret Alva
Dr. (Smt.) Beatrix D’ Souza
Chowdhary Talib Hussain
Shri G.J.Javiya
Shri C. Kuppusami
Shri S. Murugesan
Shri A. Venkatesh Naik
Shri Naresh Puglia
Prof. I. G. Sanadi
Smt. Jayaben B. Thakkar
 
SECRETARIAT
                       
                        Shri S.N. Sahu, Director
                        Shri Mom Raj Singh, Under Secretary
                        Shri S. Rangarajan, Committee Officer
 
2.         *                                                          *                                                          *
            After some discussion, the Committee directed the Secretariat to incorporate the suggestions made by Shri
 Singhal in all the reports on Demands for Grants.  The Committee also requested three of its Members, Shri Manoj
 Bhattacharya, Dr. (Smt.) Beatrix D’Souza and  Smt. Margaret Alva, to go through the reports to suggest further
 amendments, if any.  The Committee decided to meet for consideration and adoption of the reports after these were
 received from the above Members.
______________________________________________________________________________
*** Relates to other matters.
3.         *                                                          *                                                          *
4.         The Committee then adjourned at 04.00 P.M.
______________________________________________________________________________
*** Relates to other matters.
VIII
EIGHTH MEETING

116TH REPORT
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/116threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:26:51]
 
            The Committee met at 03.00 P.M. on Tuesday, the 29th April, 2003 in Committee Room ‘B’, Ground Floor,
 Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
                       
PRESENT
 
Shri Manoj Bhattacharya   –– In the Chair*
 
RAJYA SABHA
 
Shri C. Apok Jamir
Shri M. V. Rajasekharan
Shri Dwijendra Nath Sharma
Prof. Saif-ud-Din Soz
Shri B.P. Singhal
Shri T. S. Bajwa
Prof. Alka Balram Kshatriya
       
LOK  SABHA
 
Dr. (Smt.) Beatrix D’ Souza
Shri G. J. Javiya
Shri Babubhai K. Katara
Dr. Charan Das Mahant
Shri Suresh Pasi
Prof. I. G. Sanadi
Kunwar Akhilesh Singh
Smt. Jayaben B. Thakkar
Dr. Bikram Sarkar
 
SECRETARIAT
                       
                        Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary
Shri S.N. Sahu, Director
                        Shri Alok Kumar Chatterjee, Deputy Secretary
Shri Mom Raj Singh, Under Secretary
                        Shri S. Rangarajan, Committee Officer
 
2.         The Committee took up consideration of Draft ***, ***, ***, ***, 116
th and *** Reports of the Committee on
 Demands for Grants (2003-2004) pertaining to ***,***,***,***, Department of Biotechnology and *** respectively. 
 The Committee considered and adopted each of the above reports.
 ____________________________________________________________________________
* In the absence of Chairman Shri Manoj Bhattacharya was voted to the Chair.
*** Relates to other matters.
3.         The Committee authorised the Chairman and in his absence Shri Manoj Bhattacharya and Shri B. P. Singhal to
 present the Reports in the Rajya Sabha and Dr. Charan Das Mahant and in his absence Shri Suresh Pasi  to lay the
 Reports on the table of the Lok Sabha.
4.         The Committee placed on record its deepest appreciation for the officers and staff attached with the Committee
 for their painstaking effort in drafting quality reports. It further referred to the style of writing of the Reports and noted
 that these blended substantive information on science and environment with literature.
5.         *                                                            *                                                               *
6.                     The Committee then adjourned at 03.30 P.M.
______________________________________________________________________________

116TH REPORT
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/116threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:26:51]
*** Relates to other matters.
 