13th Report of Committee on S & T
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/13threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:09:55]
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
 
DEPARTMENT- RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
 COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY,
 ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS (1994-95)
 
THIRTEENTH REPORT
ON
 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (1994-95) OF THE DEPARTMENT OF
 SCIENTIFIC AND INDUSTRIAL RESEARCH
(MINISTRY OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY)
(Demand No. 72)
(PRESENTED ON APRIL 22, 1994)
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
APRIL, 1994/VAISAKHA 1916
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
CONTENTS
COMPOSITION
INTRODUCTION
REPORT OF TIIE COMMITTEE
SCHEDULE
MINUTES OF THE MEETINGS OF THE COMMITTEE
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
COMPOSITION OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY 
 STANDING COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY,
 ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS  (1994-95)
 
1.         Syad Sibtey Razi  ---- Chairman
 
RAJYA SABHA
 
2.         Shri Ajit P.K. Jogi
3.         Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi
4.         Prof. M.G.K. Menon
5.         Shri Suresh Pachouri
6.         Shri N. Giri Prasad
7.         Shri W. Kulabidhu Singh
8.         Shri Ram Gopal Yadav
 
LOK SABHA
 
9.Shri E. Ahamed
10.Shri P.C. Chacko
 11.Shrimati Bhavna Chikhalia
 12.Shri Jitcndra Nath Das
 13.Shri Sharad Dighe
 14.Shrimati Saroj Dubey
 15.Shri Oscar Fcmandes
 16.Shfi Shankarrao D. Kale
 17.Shri P.R. Kumamaangalam
 18.Shri P. Kumarasamy
 19.Shrimati .Mahendra Kumari
 20.Shri  M.V.V.S. Murthy
 21.Shri Harpal Panwar
 22.Shri Balraj Pasi
 23.Shri Bheem Singh Patel

13th Report of Committee on S & T
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/13threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:09:55]
 24.Shri Chandresh Patel
 25.Shri Praful Manohar Bhai Patel
 26.Shri Vijay Naval Patil
 27.Prof. Radhika Ranjan Pramanik
 28.Shrimati Vasundhara Raje
 29.Shri Rama Chandra Rath
 30.Shri M.G. Reddy
 31.Pt. Vishwanath Sharma
 32.Shri Brij Bhushan Sharan Singh
 33.Shri Harchand Singh
 34.Shri Ram Prasad Singh
                                                                                                                                                                                   
                                                                                                                                                                        
35.       Shri  K.G. Shivappa
36.       Kumari Frida Topno
37.       Shri Ram Kirpal Yadav
 
SECRETARIAT
 
Shri N. C. Joshi, Joint Director
Shri G. C. Miglani, Under Secretary
Shri N. K. Singh, Assistant Director
Shri Jagdish Kumar, Committee Officer
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
INTRODUCTION
 
            I, the Chairman of the Committee on Science and Technology Environment and Forests, having been authorised by the
 Committee to submit the report on its behalf, present the thirteenth report on the Demands for Grants pertaining to the Department of
 Scientific and Industrial Research (Ministry of Science and Technology) for the year 1994-95 (Demand No.72)
 
2.     In its, meeting held on April 11, 1994, the Committee considered the Demands for Grants of the Department of Scientific and
 Industrial Research on the basis of the documents made available to it and the submission made before it by the Secretary and the
 other representatives of the Department.
 
3.     The Committee expresses its thanks to the officers of the Department for replying to the clarifications sought by the Hon'ble
 Members and for placing before it the required material to enable the Committee to scrutinise the Demands for Grants of the
 Department of Scientific and Industrial Research.
 
4.         The Committee considered and adopted the report at its meeting held on April 21, 1994.
 
NEW DELHI
April 21, 1994.
SYED SIBTEY RAZI
Chairman,
  Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
REPORT
 
            The Department of Scientific and Industrial Research forms part of the Ministry of Science and Technology. DSIR is
 concerned mainly with the activities of tile Council of Scientific and Industrial Research (CSIR) - an autonomous body registered
 under the Registration of Societies Act. It also supports two public sector undertakings viz. the National Research and Development
 Corporation (NRDC) and the Central Electronics Limited (CEL). DSIR also undertakes various schemes in specific areas like
 Research and Development by industry, Programme Aimed at Technological Self Reliance (PATSER), Scheme to Enhance the
 Efficiency of Transfer of Technology (SEETOT) and National Information System for Science and Technology (NISSAT), and
 international scientific institutions such as Asia and Pacific Centre  for Transfer of Technology. The Committee was told that the
 CSIR constitutes the largest component of DSIR activities. DSIR, in fact, provides the administrative link between the Government
 on the one hand and the CSIR, NRDC and CEL on the other.
 
2.     While giving a brief account of the activities of CSIR, the Secretary DSIR informed the Committee that the CSIR has a network
 of 40 National laboratories and 81 Field Stations/Extension Centres, located all over the country, which undertake R&D activities in
 various areas and disciplines of science & technology. The involvement of CSIR in accelerating industrial development has been in
 terms of providing technical know how for up gradation of existing technologies as well as generating new indigenous technologies
 in response to emerging needs of the industry. Over the years, CSIR has made significant contributions to industrial and socio-
economic development and promoting the growth of S&T manpower in the country. Secretary, DSIR apprised the Committee of
 major achievements made by CSIR in the areas of drugs, catalysts, chemicals, biotechnology, equipment and machinery, etc. He also
 made a mention about the work done for prevention of environmental pollution, disaster mitigation, quality assessment and

13th Report of Committee on S & T
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/13threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:09:55]
 conservation of water. Regarding programmes oriented towards social welfare, Secretary, DSIR mentioned about improved devices
 of palm oil extraction and oil expeller developed by the CSIR, S&T services being provided by CSIR in the areas of primary
 standards, testing at international standards of transmission line towers, air quality trend analysis, wind tunnel testing, toxicological
 evaluation, etc. were also mentioned. The Committee was informed about the policy initiatives taken to reorient CSIR in the light of
 the changed environment of liberalised economic and industrial policies. Secretary, DSIR stated that the laboratories of the CSIR are
 becoming increasingly market-oriented and user-responsive, and the activities are being decided on the basis of the needs of the user
 industries and agencies. The clientele of CSIR has been enlarged by cultivating new client groups such as large industrial houses,
 PSU's., Government departments etc. and by globalizing its R&D in association with agencies abroad. Secretary, DSIR informed the
 Committee about the taking up  Mission Mode programmes in leather, clean coal technologies, drinking water and wood substitutes.
 Besides taking up the upgradation of existing technologies, CSIR is giving importance  to strategic area needs and societal needs in
 choosing its programmes.
 
3.    Budget Estimates of the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research (DSIR) for the year 1994-95 have been placed at
 Rs.360.45 crores, of which Rs.161.00 crores constitute the plan
 
component and Rs.199.45 crores the non-plan component. Budget Estimate for the year 1994-95. is Rs. 17.51 crores more than the
 revised estimate for the year 1993-94.* While examining the Demands for Grants of the Department for the year 1994-95, the
 Committee noted that during the years 1991-92 and 1992-93 the approved budgetary plan outlay could not be utilised fully. The
 Committee was informed that this had happened because of economy measures and budgetary cuts proposed by the Government. It
 was further noted that economy cuts were applied in the case of plan component only which included R&D, and various other
 important initiatives. The Committee is happy to see that the Department was able to utilise the entire amount provided ill 1993-94
 under plan, and hopes that it would be able to do so in 1994-95 also. The Committee is of the view that scientific and technological
 researches by their nature are long term continuing processes which once started should not be stopped or delayed as it effects the
 morale, tempo and environment for producing results. A developing country like ours can ill-afford to allow its research and
 development activities, when the amounts involved are relatively small to suffer. The Committee, therefore, is of the opinion that the
 economy measures and budgetary cuts applied by the Government from time to time should not affect scientific and technological
 researches per se that have been approved after careful consideration.
 
4.     The Committee further noted that in the case of CSIR, monies demanded and approved have consistently been morn lot the non-
plan component than for the plan-component. The rate of increase in the non-Plan expenditure is more than that in the case of plan
 expenditure. It is also noted that the utilisation of funds in the non-plan category has exceeded the approved amount during the last
 two years i.e. 1992-93 and 1993-94. When the Committee desired to know the reasons for such an unusual feature in the case of
 CS1R, Secretary DSIR (who is also the Director-General, CSIR) explained to the Committee that CSIR being an old established
 agency has a lot of financial obligations relating to salary, allowances and pensions to its employees, Council contribution and
 interest payment on GPF/CPF, contingency and maintenance expenditure, etc. Besides, CSIR has also to maintain its infrastructure
 created over the last 50 years. The expenditure under non-plan has also been increasing due to payment of higher rates of DA,
 increased pay and allowances on account of promotions and normal increments. These facts arc mainly responsible for demands
 being more under non-plan. These are also the reasons for utilisation being more than the approved amount under non-plan,
 particularly since the financing provided by Government in this category has been at a lower growth rate than the actual.
 
5.     The Committee drew the attention of the Secretary towards another unusual situation, where CSIR has been diverting funds from
 plan to meet the expenditure under non-plan. Secretary, DSIR explained to the Committee that the budgetary support given by the
 Government in the non-plan category is generally not sufficient to take care of the increase in committed liabilities on sub-heads
 mentioned above and other committed non-plan expenditure on Extra Mural Research (EMR) and Scientist's Pool etc. He accepted
 that this gap between committed liabilities and non-plan budget allocations
________________________________________________________________________*
*For details see schedule
 over the years have been met by diverting plan fund to non-plan sector adversely affecting thereby the R&D activities. Secretary,
 DSIR observed that besides depletion of plan financial resources due to such diversion of funds, the increase in prices of scientific
 equipments chemicals, journals,etc., due to rise in general price-index and rupee devaluation have seriously hampered the capabilities
 to procure essential R&D inputs even at minimum sustenance level When the Committee asked him to provide the percentage of
 such expenses to the total outlay of CSIR vis-à-vis the percentage spent on R&D, Secretary DSIR informed that the expenditure on
 pay and allowances in 1992-93 was 46.35% of the total expenditure viz, RS.301.50 crores. The expenditure on R&D was 30.60% of
 the total expenditure in that year. In 1993-94 the expenditure on pay and Allowances was43.02% of the total expenditure viz.
 Rs.353.50 crores. The expenditure on R&D was 31.84% of the total expenditure in that year. The Committee was informed that the
 expenditure on pay and allowances is expected to go up by 13% in 1994-95 primarily due to increase in DA and clearance of backlog
 in promotions of staff after Merit and Normal Assessment Scheme (MANAS) is finally approved. Secretary, DSIR submitted before
 the Committee that the new industrial and economic policies are expected to generate more demand for indigenous technologies
 which are internationally competitive. This scenario puts additional responsibility on CSIR, being the primary scientific and
 industrial research organisation in the country. CSIR, therefore, has to intensify its efforts to generate new and viable
 environmentally sound technologies especially in the areas of drug, leather, agro-chemicals, catalysts, coal, building materials, new
 biological, food, processing, hi-tech areas of aerospace materials and electronics and many others.
6.     After considering the explanation given, and the facts placed before the committee by Secretary, DSIR, the Committee notes that
 the funds provided to the CSIR under non-plan exceed those under plan, that the non-plan budgetary support is not sufficient to meet
 increases in committed liabilities of the CSIR; and that the gap between the non-plan budgetary support is not sufficient to meet
 increases in committed liabilities of the CSIR; and that the gap between the non-plan budget allocations and expenditure on

13th Report of Committee on S & T
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/13threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:09:55]
 committed liabilities over the years is being met by diverting plan funds which is meant primarily for R&D activities. The Committee
 agrees with the Secretary, DSIR that in the wake of globalisation of economy CSIR is certainly called upon to speed up its R&D
 efforts in important and critical areas and that it would need higher investments. In view of the fact that a large part of the CSIR
 budget is spent on paying salary, allowances, pension and other committed liabilities, the committee feels flint the expenditure on pay
 and allowances in the posts continuing from Seventh plan period is of recurring nature and should be met in entirety from the non-
plan allocations during the Eighth Plan period. The Committee, therefore, recommends that enough funds for meeting committed
 liabilities of CSIR should be provided under non-plan, so that the need for diverting plan allocations does not arise and the plan fund
 could be fully available for R&D activities.
 
7. The Committee notes further that the budget estimate of CSIR for the year 1994-95 under the non-plan sector is only Rs. 4.43
 crores more than what was allocated during the year 1993- 94. Secretary, DSIR told the Committee that he anticipates an increase of
 Rs.21.00 crores under pay and allowances and pension payments only. The Committee feels, if increase under other heads due to
 normal inflation is also taken into account, the additional allocation of Rs. 4.43 crores in non-plan in 1994-95 appears to be
 inadequate and this situation needs to be remedied at the appropriate stage.        
____________________________________
*          For details see Schedule
 
Modernisation
8.    The Committee was informed that most of the laboratories of CSIR are four decades old and while new equipment and facilities
 have been inducted over the years, by and large the equipment and facilities are fast becoming obsolete.  Some of the CSIR
 laboratories like Indian Insitute of Chemical technology ( IICT) are 50 years old.  The Committee is of the view that in the present
 context, developing internationally competitive technologies and providing high quality S&T services is absolutely necessary.
  Therefore, there is an urgent need to modernize these facilities as well as to acquire state-of-the-art-equipment so that CSIR is able
 to meet the challenges and become globally competitive.  This is particularly so considering the rapid change on the S&T scene in
 the world in terms of infrastructural capabilities and facilities.  With the present level of allocations, Committee feels that it is not
 possible for CSIR even to think of sparing any funds for the major procurement of modern equipment, apparatus and instruments. 
 When the Committee asked as to how much fund was required for this purpose, Secretary, DSIR pleaded that SCER would need a
 minimum additional amount of Rs. 200.00 crore towards removing obsolescence and modernization for the remaining period of the
 Eighth Plan.  He also informed the Committee that in December 1986, the Abid Hussain Committee has recommended a one-time
 grant of Rs. 100.00 crores for CSIR to remove obsolescence and for modernization.    
            In view of the above, the Committee feels that there is imperatives need to provide a suitable amount as one-time grant to tile
 CSIR for the removal of obsolescence and to modernise its laboratories. As the Abid Hussain Committee had recommended Rs.
 I00.00 crores for this purpose in the year 1986, the demand of Rs. 200.00 crores appears to be reasonable keeping in View tile overall
 inflation and escalation in tile cost of equipment, etc. since 1986. These funds can be administered on a highly selective basis with
 outside monitoring where necessary to ensure that we capitalize on our strengths and not distribute the funds on a uniform basis.
 
Manpower
 
9.     The Committee during the course of examination came to know that the existing staff strength of CSIR as on 1-3-94 is about
 23500 under different categories, against the sanctioned strength of 27768. The staff strength in  CSIR was determined in 1987. Since
 then there has been practically no increase in the staff strength. This is in line with the Government directive to reduce staff strength
 by 10%. As a consequence, the scientific and technical staff strength has declined over the years.  The strength would go further
 down due to the freeze on all new recruitments.  The Committee expresses its concern about the situation, which does not permit
 induction of young talent in the system.  No R&D system can remain competitive in the absence of induction of bright young
 scientists in it at all levels in the system.   The members of the Committee were apprehensive that if the situation is not corrected it
 could lead to decline of expertise and excellence in the national laboratories which our country needs most at this juncture.  The
 Committee, therefore, is of the view that in order to sustain the level of excellence of these excellence of these R&D institutions as
 well as to build up expertise in new and emerging areas, it is imperative that S&T institutions should be exempt from the blanket ban
 on the recruitment of scientists and technical personnel and cut, if any, should  applied on those posts which are not absolutely
 necessary for carrying out R&D activities.  This could be achieved by modernizing the administration and support structures.
 
Emeritus Scientists Scheme
 
10.    The Committee is of the view that the expertise and experience of retired scientists should be made use of appropriately. The
 Committee desired to know whether the talents of S&T Personnel after retirement are being utilized by CSIR. Secretary  DSIR
 informed that there is an Emeritus Scientists Scheme operating at CSIR. At present 100 scientists have been appointed under this
 scheme. A fixed grant of Rs.4000.00 for pursuing research work in the areas of their interest and in the institutes of their choice is
 provided. The Secretary submitted that it is not possible to increase the number unless more funds are made available for this
 purpose. The Committee feels that the Emeritus Scientists Scheme should be examined in detail from the viewpoint of funds
 available, effectiveness, desirability of enlargement, etc. and put up for consideration at -the time of mid-term appraisal of the Eighth
 Plan.
 
Internal Resources
 
11.    The Committee notes that the Department has many avenues for raising its resource by way of earnings from exports and from

13th Report of Committee on S & T
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/13threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:09:55]
 sponsored research programmes consultancy, etc. Generating more extra budgetary resources has been mentioned as one of the
 policy initiatives of the CSIR in the year 1994-95.  The Committee wanted to know as to what the Department is doing in this area. 
 The committee was apprised that CSIR has already initiated efforts to raise resources from external sources arising out of the
 recommendations of Abid Hussain Committee.  Extra budgetary resources (FBR)  through R&D are being raised by contract R&D,
 consultancy, S&T Services, licensing of know how technology, business development from foreign clients and by providing
 specialized training
            Several initiatives have been taken to, raise extra budgetary resources which include inter alia, reorienting R&D
 programmes/activities to be user responsive  widening of clientele base, putting emphasis is on marketing of CSIR knowledge base,
 developing strong linkages with other constituents to offer value added packages, etc. The committee notes that devising a marketing
 set up for commercialising its research outputs and capabilities is one of the thrust areas of the DSIR. When, the Committee asked as
 to how the Department was going to achieve this, the Secretary, DSIR replied that the National Research Development Corporation
 (NRDS), a Public Sector enterprise under DSIR was created for licensing and commercialisation of indigenous technologies as well
 as export of technologies. In order to strengthen and enlarge the marketing set `up and provide specialized technical services, the
 CSIR has now decided that its laboratories can also license the technologies directly, if necessary.
 
N.R.D.C.
 
12.    Since NRDC has recently strengthened its activities in the area of export of technologies and executing turnkey projects abroad,
 the laboratories are taking advantage of NRDC's expertise for licensing their technologies wherever necessary. In addition, CSIR is
 strengthening its marketing set up to commercialise its research outputs and capabilities through establishing business development
 groups in each laboratory, creating a separate budget head for marketing in the laboratories, enlarging the marketing network through
 engagement of consultants for business development and through across the counter sale of simpler technologies. The committee
 noted that NRDC has performed reasonably well and its earnings from premia; royalty and exports have increased over the years.
 The committee, however, is of the opinion that NRDC needs to be strengthened and its role has to be expanded-with a view to
 increasing its earnings which are at a very small level at this stage. It has to play a more dynamic and aggressive role in the area of
 patents, venture and risk capital projects (with the collaborating financial institutions); etc.
 
Programmes Aimed at Technological Self-Reliance (PATSER)
 
13.    Under this programme, DSIR supports activities relating to technology absorption, adaptation and demonstration as also capital
 goods development. The committee noted that while the actual expenditure on the Programmes Aimed at Technological Self
 Reliance was Rs. 1.68 crores in 1992-93 and Rs. 2.94 crores in 1993-94, Budget estimate for the year 1994-95 are placed at Rs. 7.68
 crores for this purpose. When the Committee asked the Department to explain the reasons for this increase, the Secretary DSIR
 replied that earlier, DSIR support covered only those public sector units which under took Research, Development, Design and
 Engineering (RDDE) projects mainly for absorption and up gradation of imported technology. However, from April, 1993, DSIR
 support has been extended, to both public and private sector units. Further more, the scope of the programme has been expanded
 from absorption of foreign technology to development and demonstration of new or improved technologies including those of special
 purpose capital goods. DSIR is now actively involved in discussing and identifying priority RDDE projects with various Public
 Sector units, particularly those in important sectors. While the bulk of these projects would be supported by public Sector units
 themselves, DSIR support will be considered on a selective basis to some of the important projects having wide sector impact and
 requiring networking of R & D organisations to assist these industrial units. Besides, out of around 80 project proposals received
 from industrial units, in both the public and private sectors, 12 new projects have already been financed. Due to these initiatives,
 according to the Secretary, over 25 new R&D projects with a support of about Rs. 6.00 crores during 1994-95 are likely to be
 approved, in addition to a support of about Rs. 1.70 crores required for the on-going R&D projects and Technology Evaluation
 Studies which are in their final stages. This would amount to a total support of Rs. 7.7 crores during 1994-95 which explains the
 increase in budget provision for PATSER over 1992-93 during 1994-95.
 
Scheme to Enhance the Efficacy of Transfer of Technology (SEETOT):
 
14. The scheme run by DSIR essentially aims at facilitating acquisition of technologies, accelerating export of technologies and
 services, enhancing the consultancy capabilities and increasing awareness about the usefulness of consultancy services among its
 customers. Development and commercialisation of indigenous technologies is encouraged and mechanisms for technology transfer
 such as Asian and Pacific Centre for Transfer of Technology (APCTT) located at New Delhi are supported. The scheme has four
 major programmes. The Committee notes that the actual expenditure for SEETOT has comedown from Rs. 2.21 crores in 1992-93 to
 Rs. 1.93 crores in 1993-94. Budgets estimate for this scheme has further been reduced to Rs. 1.35 crores in 1994-95. When the
 Committee asked the reason for the decline in allocation for this scheme, the Secretary DS1R said the SEETOT is essentially a
 continuing scheme from the Seventh plan, envisaging activities mentioned above. In December 1992, the scheme was reviewed and
 it was decided that the emphasis should now be on identification and supporting of developmental projects with the participation of
 the national R & D system, industry and consultants, on a highly selective basis, particularly in the context of new policies. It was
 also decided that the funding of the projects Should be generally through one scheme only within the DSIR, and the capabilities and
 experience built up in the Department Should be fully utilised to implement the projects. In view of the changed priorities, no new
 studies have been taken up since December, 1992 except in special cases, and hence expenditure towards preparation of reports was
 substantially reduced. Besides, the Department is also providing support to Consultancy Development Centre (CDC) situated in New
 Delhi to meet recurring expenses and other capital requirements. There is no budgetary provision for the capital requirement of CDC
 from 1994-95 onwards. Thus the expenditure under SEETOT has declined mainly due to the change in emphasis from studies and
 other promotional activities to projects and reduced requirements of capital funds for CDC. The Committee appreciates the efforts

13th Report of Committee on S & T
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/13threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:09:55]
 made by the Department under this scheme and the fact that allocations for the CDC are coming down gradually. The Committee still
 feels that the CDC should be impressed upon to generate revenues on its own to reduce its continuing dependence on funds from
 DSIR.
 
Research and Development by Industry (RDI):-
 
15.  DSIR deals with all activities relating to recognition of In-house R&D units in Industry and non-commercial Scientific and
 Industrial Research Organisations, providing fiscal incentives and other mechanisms towards supporting and encouraging the R&D
 initiatives of industry. When the Committee asked as to how the Department has planned to make investment in R&D by industry
 morn attractive and productive; and how much are the industries public and private sector, contributing towards total industry related
 R&D efforts, Secretary DS1R replied that several fiscal incentives and support measures have been announced for encouraging R&D
 by industry and enhancing investments in R&D. These include relief from taxes, exception from government control measures,
 nation’s awards for outstanding R&D achievements, etc. Besides, DSIR is providing direct support to industry for undertaking R&D
 projects in the form of co-financing specific R&D projects undertaken in-house in industry either by a company alone or jointly
 between a company and a Government laboratory/ IIT/University. The DSIR share of the total project cost ranges typically from 20-
50% of the project cost and is provided in the from of a grant. Such direct R&D financing is undertaken by DSIR through its
 Programmes Aimed At Technological Self-Reliance and Research and Development by Industry programmes using budgetary
 resources. Resources from the Venture Capital Fund (VCF) of IDBI and IFCI and Technology Development and Information
 Company of India (TD1CI) of the ICICI are also facilitated for supporting technology development and commercialization
 programmes.
 
16.    As regards contribution by industry in total R&D efforts. The, Secretary informed that over 1200 in house R&D Centres have
 been recognised by DSIR.  Of these, around 135 are in public sector, 35 in joint sector and around 1075 in private sector.  R&D
 expenditure incurred by the recognised in-house R&D units is estimated to be Rs. 1100  crores during 1992-93 which is around 23%
 of the total R&D expenditure in the country. The share of the in-house R&D expenditure   by the Public and Joint sectors is 45% and
 by the Private sector is 55%. The average ratio of R&D expenditure to annual turnover for the 1200 units as a whole is 0.68% The
 committee finds that While he percentage share of Private Sector in in-house R&D activity is more than that of the public and joint
 sectors put together, the percentage share of private sector to the total R&D expenditure in the country, and the average ratio of R&D
 expenditure to the annual turnover for the 1200 Units as whole also is very low.  The Committee therefore, feels that in the wake of
 various incentives, and concessions given to the industry, the Government Should strive to strengthen in-house R&D ill Industry by
 encouraging more and more private sector industries to put more money into it.
  
Information Pool                                     
 
            17.    The Committee notes that R &D, activities  are being carried out in the country by Several Ministries, Departments.
 Industries and autonomous bodies.  The committee wanted to know whether any information pool exists in the DSIR  from where
 information can be obtained regarding R&D activities going on at various places.  DSIR explained that DSIR is the nodal
 Department for granting recognition to in-house  R&D units in industry.  DSIR also has a scheme of granting recognition to non-
commercial Scientific and Industrial Research Organisations (SIROs).  Some of these SIROs also undertake industrial R&D units in
 industry.  DSIR also has a scheme of granting recognition to non-commercial Scientific  and Industrial Research Organistaion
 (SIROS).  Some of these SIROs also undertake industrial R&D Centres. “Profile of Scientific and Industrial Research Organisations”
 and other related DSIR  publications.  Besides, industrial R&D is also being pursued in the laboratories of national R&D
 organizations such as DRDO, Department of Atomic Energy, Electronics and Space, R&D institutions attached to various economic
 Ministries (e.g. Central Power Research Institute attached to Department of power, Research, Designs and Standards Organisations
 attached to the Ministry of Railways), universities, IITs, cooperative industrial research association (e.g. Indian Plywood Industry
 Research Institute and the various Tetile Industry Research Institutes) and R&D institutions of State  Governments.  The Committee
 notes that the information pool available with CSIR covers only its recognized in-house R&D units and non-commercial SIROs and
 national laboratories run by it, It does not cover, however, works being done in the Government Departments, universities and other
 autonomous bodies.  The committee, therefore, emphasizes the need to extend the scope of existing information pool in DSIR to
 cover information about R&D works being done at other places also with a view to creating a national information pool in this area.
 
Societal Programmes
 
18.    CSIR is undertaking some societal programmes aimed at making the benefits of S&T available to the welfare of the
 economically weaker sections of the society and the people living in rural areas.  The Committee wanted to know the areas in which
 the benefits have already been provided to the weaker sections in the rural areas.  The Secretary, DSIR, informed that CSIR has been
 developing appropriate technologies for rural population and as a result, a basket of technology has been accumulated by now.  The
 appropriate technologies, relevant for rural areas, offered by CSIR are for meeting (a) minimum needs i.e. providing safe drinking
 water, building low-cost dwelling units, etc; (b) for employment generation/income enhancement; i.e. cultivation and processing of
 medicinal, aromatic and other economic plants, food processing and post harvest technologies, improved technologies for leather
 sector; alternate building materials ad housing, simple brick making etc., improved technology for leather flaying, tanning, carcass
 processing; and (c)           for improvement in quality of life i.e. energy efficient smokeless chullas. Improved latrines and sanitation
 systems water purification and treatment technologies etc.
 
19.    Members of the Committee evinced keen interest in society-related programmes, particularly those which aim at mitigating
 hardships faced by the poor people living in rural areas. The Committee appreciates the work being done by the Department in this

13th Report of Committee on S & T
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/13threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:09:55]
 regard. But in view of the magnitude and nature of the problems faced by people in different climatic and geographical regions,
 committee is of the opinion that the society-related programmes have to be gradually undertaken by adopting locale or region-
specific approach. Special emphasis has to be provided to develop appropriate technologies in such areas as rural development,
 'housing "and disaster mitigations' in collaboration with the concerned socio-economic Ministries/Departments. 'Particular emphasis
 has to be placed on close collaboration with non-governmental organisations with good grassroots linkages, which can mobilize the
 beneficiaries and society as a whole.
 20.    Another related aspect gone into by the committee in technologies developed, particularly technologies developed by CSIR.
 The committee showed interest by the Central Building Research Institute and the Centre Road Research Institute. The Committee
 was told that CSIR develops technologies and demonstrates it. It also trains the people for making use of such technologies though it
 is not the implementing agency. The Committee notes that though the Department is coordinating its efforts with the socioeconomic
 Ministries in this regard, there is a need to have an effective agency for this purpose so that these technologies can be popularised in
 the shortest possible time.
 
21.       After making a detailed scrutiny of the Demands for Grants of the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research and
 assessing the progress of various important programmes and projects administered by it. The Committee recommends that the
 Demands for Grants of Rs. 360.45 crores, as sought by the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research for the year 1994-95,
 under demand No. 72. are in order and may be approved.
 
New Delhi
April 21, 1994
SYED SIBTEY RAZI
Chairman
Committee on Science and Technology, Environment & Forests.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
MINUTES OF THE MEETINGS OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED
PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND
TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS
 
II
 
SECOND MEETING
 
            The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests met from
 11.00 A.M. to 1.30 P.M. and again from 3.00 P.M. to 5.40 P.M. on Monday, the l lth April, 1994 in Committee Room 'A' Ground
 Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
 
       PRESENT
 
1.         Syed Sibtey Razi - Chairman
 
RAJYA SABHA
 
2.         Shri Ajit P.K. Jogi
3.         Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi
4.         Prof. M.G.K. Menon
5.         Shri N. Giri Prasad
6.         Shri W. Kulabidhu Singh
 
LOK SABHA
 
   7.        Shri Oscar Femandes
   8.        Shri P. Kumarasamy
   9.        Shrimati Vasundhara Raje
   10        Shri Ram Prasad Singh
   1 i.       Kumari Frida Topno
  12.       Shri Ram Kirpal Yadav
 
SECRETARIAT
 
Shri N.C. Joshi, Joint Director
Shri G,C. Miglani, Under Secretary
Shri N.K. Singh, Assistant Director
Shri Jagdish Kumar, Committee Officer
 
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE DEPARTMENT OF SCIENTIFIC AND INDUSTRIAL RESEARCH

13th Report of Committee on S & T
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/13threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:09:55]
 
Prof. S.A. Joshi, Secy. DSIR & DG-CSIR.
Shri Ashok Parthasarthi, Addl. Secretary
Shri S.B. Krishnan, JS & FA
Shri Dilip Kumar, JS (A), CSIR Hqrs, New Delhi
Dr. H.R, Bhojwani, Adviser (TU) CSIR Hqrs. N. Delhi
Shri S.D. Carg, Adviser (PC), CSlR Hqrs. N. Delhi
Shri N.R. Rajagopal, Head Aviser (HRD), CSIR Hqrs. N. Delhi.
Shri K.V. Srinivasan, Joint Adviser
Dr. A. Lahiri, Jt. Adviser
Shri S.P. Agarwal, Director
Dr. D.M. Pande, Director
Dr. K.V. Raghavan, Director, CLRI Madras
Dr. A.V. Rama Rao, Director, IICI Hyderabad
Dr. V.P. Kamboj, Director, CDRI, Lucknow
Prof. P. Khanna, Director NEERI Nagpur
Dr. R. A. Mashelker, Director, NCL, Pune
Dr. T.S.R. Prasada Rao, Director, IIP, Dehradun
Dr. C.M. Gupta, Director, IMT, Chandigarh
Dr. Sushil Kumar, Director, CIMAP, Lucknow
Dr. T.C. Rao, Director, RRL, Bhopal
Dr. E.S.R. Gopal, Director, NPL, New Delhi.
Dr. D.N. Trikha, Director, SERC, Ghaziabad
Dr. T.V.S.R. Appa Rao, Scientist (Dir. Cde.), SERC, Madras
Dr. D.V. Singh Director, CRRI New Delhi
Dr. M.P. Dhir, Director (EC), CSIR Hqrs. N. Delhi
Dr. B.R. Somashekar, Actg. Director, NAL, Bangalore
Shri Hardyal Singh, Acting Director, CMERI, Durgapur
Shri N.C. Agarwal, F.A. CSIR Hqrs. New Delhi.
Shri N.D. Seth, Scientist, CSIR Hqrs. New Delhi
Shri S. Chandrasekaran, Scientist, CSIR Hqrs., New Delhi
 
Shri S.K. Chakladar, Scientist, CSIR Hqrs. N. Delhi.
Dr. O.P. Agarwal, Scientist, CSIR Hqrs. N. Delhi
Shri N.B. Coswami, Scicntist, CSIR Hqrs. N. Delhi
Shri O.P. Rao, Scientist, CSIR Hqrs. N. Dclhi
Dr. J.S. Khan, Scientist, CSIR Hqrs. N. Delhi
Dr. Surya Prakash, Scientist, CSIR Hqrs. N. Delhi
Shri A. K. Verma, Scientist, CSIR Hqrs. N. Delhi.
Shri  P.S. Sinha, Sr. GM.                                     
Dr. D. Madhavan, ACM
Shri Mylar Rao, CM (M&P)
Shri N.K. Sharma, M, D.
Shri R. Dayal, Chief Enginccr
Shri B.C. Joshi, Dy. FA, CSIR Hqrs. N. Dclhi
Shri S.K. Venna, Sr. DS, CSIR Head Qters. N. Dclhi
Shri R.R. Abhyankar, PSO
Shri R.P. Sharma, US, CSIR Hqrs. N. Delhi
Shri S. K. Sharma, Parliament Asstt. CSIR Hqrs. N. Delhi
Shri Pat Ram, Section Officer, CSIR Hqrs. N. Delhi
Shri A. K. Kukreja, PA to Adviser (PC), CSIR Hqrs. N. Delhi
Shri Rain Bhool, CSIR Hqrs. N. Delhi
Shri Om Prakash, CSIR Hqrs. N. Delhi
 
2.              The Committee took up for consideration the Detailed Demands for Grants (1994-95) of the Department of Scientific and
 Industrial Research. The Secretary of the Department and DG,CSIR briefly explained, for the benefit of the Members the allocations
 on different activities/projects of the Department as proposed in its Detailed Demands for Grants. The Members then sought
 clarifications from his and other officials of the Department as also from those of the CSIR and its attached Institutions/Laboratories
 on various points relating to the Demands for Grants. Thereafter the Secretary and other officials concerned replied to the
 clarifications sought by the members.
 
3.     The Committee concluded its deliberations on the Demands for Grants of the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research
 
            A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
 

13th Report of Committee on S & T
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/13threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:09:55]
4.           The Committee then adjourned at 5.40 P.M. to meet again at 11.00 A.M. on
Tuesday, the 12th April, 1994.
 
                                                                                          V
                                                                                                                         
                                                                            FIFTHMEETING
 
          The Department-related Parliamentary       Standing Committee on Science and Technology,        Environment and Forests met
 at 9.30 A.M. on Thursday, the 21
st April, 1994 in Committee Room No. ‘A' Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
                                                                                                                  
PRESENT
1.       Syed Sibtey Razi - Chaimlan
 
RAJYA SABHA
 
2.   Shri Ajit P.K. Jogi
3.   Prof. M.G.K. Menon
4.   Shri  Suresh Pachouri
5.   Shri N. Giri Prasad
6.   Shri W. Kulabidhu Singh
 
LOK SABHA
 
7.          Shri E. Ahamed
8.          Shri P.C. Chacko
9.          Shri Jitendra Nath Das
10.        Shri Oscar Femandes
11.        Prof. Radhika Ranjan Pramanik
12.        Shrimati Vasundhara Raje
13.        Kumari Frida Topno
 
            SECRETARIAT
 
`           Shri N.C. Joshi, Joint Director
            Shri G.C. Miglani, Under Secretary
            Shri Jagdish Kumar, Committee Officer
 
   2.      The Chairman, at the outset, informed the committee about the sad and untimely demise of Shri Ram  Prakash Chaudhary, a
 sitting Member of Lok Sabha. The Committee expressed
 
 
condolences over his, death, with all Members standing and observing two minutes silence as a mark of respect to the memory of the
 departed.
 
3.     The Committee then took up for consideration its draft Twelfth and Thirteenth Reports on the Detailed Demands lot Grants
 (1994-95) of the Departments of Science & Technology and Scientific & Industrial Research, respectively and adopted the same
 unanimously.
 
4.         The Committee decided to present these Reports to both the Houses of Parliament on the 22nd April, 1994. The committee
 authorised its Chairman and in his absence, Shri W. Kulabidhu Singh to present these Reports to the Rajya Sabha. The Committee
 also authorised Shri E. Ahamed and in his absence. Prof. Radhika Ranjan Pramanik or Shri Jitendra Nath Das to lay these Reports of
 the Table of the Lok Sabha, along with Committee's Eighth, Ninth, Tenth and Eleventh Reports  which could not be laid on the Table
 of the House despite being put in the Agenda on the 18th,  19th and 21st April, 1994 because of abrupt adjournment of the House on
 each of these days.
 
5.     The Committee then adjourned at 9.55 A.M. to meet again at 10.00 on Friday, the 22
nd April. 1994.                       
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------