126threport of Science and Technology
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/126threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:28:59]
      PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT & FORESTS
 
ONE HUNDRED- TWENTY SIXTH REPORT
 
ON
 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2004-2005) OF THE
DEPARTMENT OF SCIENTIFIC & INDUSTRIAL RESEARCH
(MINISTRY OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY)
 (DEMAND NO. 84)
 
 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON THE   18TH  AUGUST, 2004)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON THE 18TH  AUGUST, 2004)
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
AUGUST, 2004/SRAVANA, 1926  (SAKA)
 
Email: rsc-st@sansad.nic.in
Website : http://rajyasabha.nic.in
 
 
C O N T E N T S
 
1.      COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE                                                                                  
2.      INTRODUCTION                                                                                                                      
3.      REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE         
4.      SUMMARY OF THE RECOMMENDATIONS                                                                                                           
5.      ANNEXURE
6.      MINUTES OF THE MEETINGS OF THE COMMITTEE       
                                                                                                                                                                                          
                                                                                                                                      
COMPOSITION OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY,
ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS (YEAR 2004)
 
1. Shri P.G.Narayanan  –– Chairman
 
RAJYA SABHA
 
2. Prof. Saif-ud-Din Soz
3. Dr.Prabha Thakur
4. Shri Jaswant Singh
5. Shri Dilip Singh Judev
6. Dr Biplab Dasgupta
7. Shri Nand Kishore Yadav

126threport of Science and Technology
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/126threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:28:59]
8. Shri Ravula Chandra Sekar Reddy
9. Smt. Kum Kum Rai
10. Shri Birabhadra Singh
 
LOK  SABHA
 
11. Shri Sukhbir Singh Badal
12. Shri Jasubhai D. Barad            
13. Shri Sujan Chakraborty
14. Shri Pankaj Chaudhery
15. Shri Mohan S. Delkar              
16. Shri Anantrao Gudhe
17. Shri Babubhai Katara
18. Shri A. Venkatesh Naik           
19. Shri Brahmananda Panda
20. Smt. Neeta Pateriya
21. Shri Bachi Singh Rawat                        
22. Shri K.C.Singh Baba   
23. Smt. Jayaben  Thakkar
24. Shri Kirti Vardhan Singh                                              
25. Dr. Ramlakhan Singh                           
26. Shri D. Venugopal
27. Shri Sita Ram Yadav
28. Shri V.Aruna Kumar
    *29. Shri Rakesh Singh        
      30. Vacant
      31. Vacant
 
SECRETARIAT
      Shri N.C. Joshi, Additional Secretary
      Shri R.K. Singh, Officer on Special Duty
      Shri Alok Kumar Chatterjee, Deputy Secretary
      Shri S. Rangarajan, Committee Officer
            Shri Triloknath Mishra, Research Officer
_____________________________________________________________________
    * Nominated w.e.f. 13
th August, 2004.
 
INTRODUCTION
            I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science & Technology,
 Environment & Forests, having been authorised by the Committee to present the Report on its behalf, present this One
 Hundred-Twenty Sixth Report of the Committee.  This Report deals with the detailed Demands for Grants (2004-2005) of
 the Department of Scientific & Industrial Research, (Ministry of Science & Technology) (Demand No.84).
2.         In the meeting of the Committee held on the 10
th August, 2004 the Secretary and other Officers of the Department of
 Scientific & Industrial Research gave an overview of the various activities of the Department and the Members sought
 clarifications on various aspects of the performance of the Department to enable it to scrutinise the Demands for Grants.
3.         The Committee expresses its thanks to the Officers of the Department for replying to the clarifications sought by the
 Members and placing before it the required material to enable the Committee to scrutinise the Demands for Grants of the
 Department of Scientific & Industrial Research.
4.         The Committee considered and adopted the Report at its meeting held on the16th August, 2004.
 
NEW DELHI;
August 16, 2004
P.G.NARAYANAN,
Chairman,
Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on
 Science & Technology, Environment & Forests
 

126threport of Science and Technology
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/126threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:28:59]
 
REPORT
 
 
The Department of Scientific and Industrial Research (DSIR) is a part of the Ministry of Science and Technology
 with the mandate of indigenous technology promotion, development, utilization and transfer. Establishment of the Council
 of Scientific & Industrial Research in 1942 was a landmark event in our quest for using science and technology for national
 reconstruction.
 
2.         The primary endeavour of DSIR is to encourage industry to increase their share in country’s R&D expenditure,
 support a larger cross section of small and medium industrial units to develop state-of-the art globally competitive
 technologies of high commercial potential, catalyze faster commercialization of lab-scale R&D, enhance the share of
 technology intensive exports in overall exports, strengthen industrial consultancy & technology management capabilities
 and establish user friendly information network to facilitate scientific & industrial research in the country.  It also provides a
 link between scientific laboratories and industrial establishments for transfer of technologies through National Research
 Development Corporation (NRDC) and facilitate investment in R&D through Central Electronics Limited (CEL).
3.         The above objectives are sought to be achieved through the following during Tenth Plan:
(i)
                    Technology Promotion, Development and Utilization (TPDU) Programmes.
(ii)                  National Research Development Corporation (NRDC)
(iii)                 Central Electronics Limited (CEL)
(iv)                Council of Scientific and Industrial Research (CSIR)
 
4.         Other activities assigned to the Department are:
(i)
                  Matters relating to International R&D collaboration involving industrial companies and industrial R&D
 centres.
(ii)                International Cooperation/Collaboration agreements with other countries relating to industrial R&D with the
 concurrence of the Ministry of External Affairs.
(iii)               Matters concerning domestic technology, particularly the promotion of ventures involving the
 commercialization of such technologies other than those under the Department of Science & Technology.
(iv)              Matters relating to Technology Trade including exports of Technology and Technical Consultancy Services,
 in close cooperation with the Ministry of Commerce.
(v)                Matters relating to technical, engineering and management consultancy organizations and services.
 
5.         The Department of Scientific and Industrial Research in the Ministry of Science and Technology provides the
 administrative link between the Government of India and the CSIR Society.
COUNCIL OF SCIENTIFIC & INDUSTRIAL RESEARCH
6.         The Council of Scientific and Industrial Research (CSIR), an autonomous organization with its 38 laboratories and
 fifty outreach, centers has recently completed sixty years of their existence. CSIR has emerged as a scientific institution
 which has been highly acclaimed inside and outside India.  It aims at achieving global excellence with local relevance; it
 symbolizes a culture that links science with society through technology, industrial manufacture, and dissemination of
 scientific temper among people.
7.         The detailed functions assigned to the Council of Scientific & Industrial Research (CSIR) are as follows:
(i)
                  Promotion, guidance and coordination of scientific and industrial research in India, including the institution and
 financing of specific researches;
(ii)                Establishment or development and assistance to special institutions or departments of existing institutions for
 scientific study of problems affecting particular industries and trade;
(iii)               Establishment and award of research studentships and fellowships;
(iv)              Utilization of the results of the researches conducted under the auspices of the Council towards the development
 of industries in the country and the payment of a share of royalties arising out of the development of the results
 of researches to those who are considered as having contributed towards the pursuits of such research;
(v)                Establishment, maintenance and management of laboratories, workshops, institutes and organizations to further
 scientific and industrial research and to utilize and exploit for purposes of experiment or otherwise any discovery
 or invention likely to be of use to Indian industries;
(vi)
              Collection and dissemination of information in regard not only to research but also to industrial matters
 generally;
(vii)             Publication of scientific papers and journals; and
           

126threport of Science and Technology
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/126threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:28:59]
(viii) Any other activity or activities to promote generally the objectives of the Department.
8.         CSIR has been striving to perform these functions in accordance with the priorities laid down in Five Year Plans and
 perceived needs of the nation from time to time.
9.         The Committee was informed that during the Ninth Five Year Plan, CSIR had effected wide spread changes to meet
 the challenges of economic reform, introduction of new industrial and trade policies and liberalization of economy. It also
 effected a reorientation of its programmes with the aim to make CSIR more responsive and move towards a self sustaining
 R&D institution. The cardinal feature of the Ninth Five Year Plan was the White Paper on CSIR focusing on its Vision and
 Strategy. Some of the reform process effected relate to re-engineering of the organizational structure; linking research to
 market place; mobilizing and optimizing the resources base; creating conducive and workable infrastructure and investing
 in high quality science that would be a harbinger of future technologies.
10.       As a result, CSIR stands today amongst the finest publicly funded scientific and industrial research establishments of
 the whole world. As the nation’s strongest holder of intellectual property rights (IPR), it leads the way in protecting
 traditional knowledge strength while adding to the new IPR capital.    CSIR today ranks second amongst the major PCT
 applicants from developing countries at USPTO.
11.       CSIR has also promoted excellence in science and is the only S&T organization which had nurtured and supported
 human-tech from 16 to 65 years of age through numerous schemes on human resource for scientific research.   CSIR’s
 mission is to provide scientific and industrial R&D that maximizes the economic, environmental & societal benefits for the
 people of India.
12.       The Committee was informed that the guiding principle for CSIR during the Tenth Five Year Plan would be to
 provide scientific industrial R&D that maximizes the economic, environmental and societal benefits for the people of India
 and accordingly, the Tenth Five Year Plan of CSIR and the Annual Plans have been formulated keeping in mind 8% growth
 rate envisaged by the Planning Commission and Government policy to invest 2% of GDP on Science & Technology. 
13.       CSIR seeks to foster the organizational values of: Excellence in science; Global competitiveness in technology based
 on high science; Local relevance in tune with socio-cultural and economic ethos of the people; and Innovation ranging in all
 the spheres of activities from science to technology and from management to financing.   These principles coupled with
 detailed analysis on strength, weakness, opportunities and threats carried out by CSIR laboratories were taken into
 consideration in deriving the opportunities for CSIR in the market place as well as for socio-economic development.
14.       The other factors which have a bearing on CSIR programmes for the Annual Plans are responsibilities on CSIR
 arising out of International Intellectual Property Rights arena, continuous training and re-training of CSIR staff,
 advancement of knowledge through enlarging the scope of fellowships to trans-disciplinary areas and supporting basic
 research that dovetails with its own requirement and expansion of S&T to proliferate CSIR technologies to the masses.
 
BUDGETARY ALLOCATION
15.       The approved outlay for the 10
th five-year plan has been kept at Rs.2575.00 crores as against Rs.1356.23 crores for
 the 9th Plan (1999-2002). The Department during the 10 th Five year Plan proposes to operate six schemes based on zero
 base Budgetary (ZBB) review.  Five of the Schemes are ongoing schemes of the Ninth Five Year Plan and a new scheme on
 Infrastructure Renovation and Refurbishment is being implemented from the Tenth   Five Year Plan.   The detailed breakup
 is given below:
TENTH PLAN APPROVED OUTLAY (2002-07)
                                                                (Rupees in Crores)
CSIR 2430
Department of Scientific &
 Industrial Research
145
Total 2575
 
16.       The Department has been allocated Rs.1300.00 crores (Rs.650 crores under plan and Rs.650 crores under Non-Plan)
 for the year 2004-05 as against Rs.1136.41 crores in B.E. and Rs.1100.00 crores in the R.E. of the year 2003-04.The details
 of the budgetary projections for the programmes of DSIR during the year 2004-05 are given in Annexure-I. The breakup of
 the financial allocation of DSIR, CSIR and Public Sector enterprises is given below:
FINANCIAL SUMMARY FOR 2004-2005 PLAN & NON-PLAN
 
                                                                                                                (Rupees in Crores)
 
 Plan Non-Plan Total
 Demands Approved Demands Approved Demands Approved

126threport of Science and Technology
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/126threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:28:59]
Made Made Made
A. CSIR 785.00 619.00 706.50 645.04 1491.50 1264.04
B. DSIR 21.25 20.00 5.16 4.81 26.41 24.81
C. PSE 12.05 11.00 5.15 0.15 17.20 11.15
Total 818.30 650.00 716.81 650.00 1535.11 1300.00
 
17.       The Committee was informed that in the Tenth Plan CSIR has endeavoured to create major and innovative
 knowledge networks across and beyond CSIR laboratories.   In persuing this, some well focused programmes/projects were
 identified and formulated with a view to synergise the competencies developed in laboratories and get them implemented in
 a network mode.  The enhanced allocation of Rs. 163.59 crore (Rs. 130 crore Plan and Rs. 33.59 crore Non Plan) is
 essentially to provide appropriate support to the projects approved by the Planning Commission, in the last quarter of the
 previous financial year, under “National Laboratories” Scheme.  Further, the increase in the Non-plan allocation would help
 to meet partly, shortfall in grant for payment of research fellowship etc. It would also meet the increased pensionary
 requirement of CSIR pensioners.
18.       It was also informed that during the current year, under Technology Promotion, Development and Utilization
 (TPDU) Programmes it is proposed to provide support to: consortium projects for technology development; setting up of
 technology and innovation management centres, technology trade facilitation centres, consultancy clinics & design
 engineering centres; and development of IT based modern tools for optimum utilization of resources available in the
 country and promoting collaborative research among industries and institutions.
NATIONAL LABORATORIES      
19.       CSIR has a network of 38 Laboratories and 47 field stations/extension centres/regional centres located all over the
 country that undertake R&D in various S&T areas and disciplines.   The extension and regional centres have been
 established to reach the diverse users and disseminate knowledge and information of R&D capabilities, techniques and
 technologies developed by the National laboratories of CSIR.
 20.      Under the National Laboratories, three types of activities are carried out, namely:
·
                    Continually building and refurbishing competence at globally competitive level, skills and
 competency in all scientific areas;
·                    Taking up in-house projects with well defined objectives, deliverables, time frame; and
·                    Performing contract R&D for industry and other users to deal with problems through expertise gained
 over the years.
 
21.       A key feature of CSIR’s programmes during the Tenth Plan is the creation of major and innovative knowledge
 networks across and beyond CSIR laboratories.The focus of the programmes thus evolved have been to synergise the vast
 competence developed in CSIR Laboratories and to implement the programmes/projects in network mode.  The emphasis is
 also on deriving maximum output from less input.  Accordingly, categorisation of programmes under National Laboratories
 have been carried out keeping in view the requirement at the national level, at CSIR level and at the laboratory level.   Some
 of the projects would be implemented in a mission mode while others would be to further develop core competence.
 22.       In Tenth Five year Plan period, CSIR will undertake programmes that promote:
·
                    excellence in science-science that will lead and not follow;
·                    global competitiveness-technology based on high science rooted wherever feasible in India’s rich
 heritage of knowledge;
·                    local relevance-finding holistic and optimal solutions to the pressing problems of the people; and
·                    innovation in all spheres of activities ranging from science to technology management to financing.
 
23.       Projects of the Tenth Five Year Plan have been evolved over a period of one year, through interactive and repetitive
 consultations with the Steering Committee on S&T, Working Group for Tenth Five Year Plan, Sectoral Subgroup of the
 Working Group, and Research Councils of the respective National Laboratories.  The evolution of the Projects, thus, have
 gone through a great deal of churning of vast S&T expertise available in the country and also in the concerned
 departments/agencies of the Government.
24.       The Committee was informed that the major chunk of financial allocation (Approx. 72%) is incurred to meet
 requirements of National laboratories, thirty eight in number and its forty seven outreach centres which undertake scientific
 and industrial R&D to maximize economic, environmental & societal benefits for the people of India.  While doing so CSIR
 continuously seeks to foster the organizational value of Excellence in Science.  Global Comptitivencess in technology based
 on high science, local relevance in tune with socio-cultural and economic ethos of the people; and innovation in all spheres
 of activity ranging from Science & Technology to management to financing.  The emphasis is placed on deriving maximum
 output from minimal input.

126threport of Science and Technology
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/126threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:28:59]
25.       Some of the areas identified for networking are aerospace S&T, genomics & proteomics, integrative biology, herbal
 preparations, bioinformatics, green technologies, neutraceuticals & neutrogenomics, speciality materials, waste
 minimization, new building & road construction technologies, new advanced manufacturing technologies, etc.
26.       In reply to a question regarding the details of projects, the Committee was informed that CSIR under the scheme of
 National laboratories during the Tenth Plan is implementing 57 new projects in network mode, besides programmes for
 enhancing core competencies in various areas, residential and laboratory buildings and other establishment expenses.  Out
 of the 57 new networked projects 12 projects were approved during the last quarter of the previous financial year costing
 around Rs.188 crore.  The allocation of Rs.927 crore under the National Laboratories is to meet the requirement of these
 projects as well as projects approved earlier and other programmes and establishment expenses. The short fall between the
 sanctioned grant and anticipated expenditure under the scheme on National S&T Human Resource Development is of the
 order of Rs.35 crore.
27.       The Committee appreciates the Department for carrying out research in many frontier areas of science and
 technology.  It is true that science is one of the areas, which can bring leadership and meet the kind of objectives that India
 has set for itself.   However, the Committee is of the opinion that the Department should make efforts for transfer of
 technologies to industry and also strive for wider dissemination of technologies to raise funds from Industry by having a
 greater interface between Industry & R&D laboratories.   
 
RESEARCH SCHEMES, SCHOLARSHIPS AND FELLOWSHIPS
28.       Over the years CSIR has evolved a broad based portfolio of highly versatile and well targeted schemes aimed at
 developing and retaining S&T manpower; nurturing young talent and promoting and facilitating basic research, and put in
 place mechanism for their smooth operation and implementation.   CSIR provides financial assistance in the form of
 junior/senior research fellowships and research associateships for pursuing doctoral and postdoctoral research. Research
 grants are given to universities/institutes for overall promotion of scientific research in the country.
29.       It was informed that keeping in view the declining trend in the brightest of youth taking to science education and
 R&D as a career, CSIR has already operationalised CSIR Programme on Youth for Leadership in Science (CPYLS) and
 Shyama Prasad Mukherjee (SPM) fellowship.  In the Tenth Five Year Plan period, the ongoing programmes would aim to
 rectify this situation further and take up training and motivation pogramme for selected science teachers and adopt at least
 one school and college; inculcate a spirit of entrepreneurship in research scholars; and establish fellowships in trans-
disciplinary areas.        
30.       The Committee was further informed that the scheme on National S&T Human Resource Development comprising
 Research Scheme, scholarships & fellowships and Scientists Pool has been provided with a budgetary allocations of Rs. 70
 crore (Rs. 8 crore  Plan and Rs. 62 crore Non-Plan) during 2004-05 which is higher by Rs. 9 crore against BE (2003-04). 
 This marginal increase in outlay does permit CSIR to initiate new schemes under Plan.  However, it is not adequate to meet
 the committed liability of the existing level of scholarships and fellowships being provided under Non-Plan allocation.
 During 2003-04, the gap between commitments & government grant of Rs. 25 crore was met by providing the funds from
 the internal resources of CSIR.  This gap would further increase to the extent of Rs. 35 crore during the current year if full
 support is not provided.
31.       In reply to a question regarding the details of fellowships and scholarships, the Committee was informed that the
 total number of Pool Scientist (SRAs) as on April, 2002, April, 2003 and April, 2004 were 210, 202 and 206 respectively.  
 They were provided temporary employment to work in Chemical Sciences, Earth Sciences, Engineering & Technology,
 Life Sciences, Mathematical Sciences, Medical sciences, Physical Sciences and Social Science and Humanities. About 125
 to 150 Pool Scientists (SRAs) are expected to be selected during the current year.  The existing level of Scholarships and
 Fellowships is 7272 for which budgetary support of Rs.58 crore has been provided for 2004-05.  The committed liability
 during the current year would be Rs.93 crore.  Thus a gap of Rs.35 crore exists.
32. The Committee notes with satisfaction the efforts made by Department for stimulating interest and awareness among
 students for science. The Committee recommends that the fellowships be given for basic sciences as fewer students are
 showing interest in them.  It is hoped that individual record of progress of scholarship holders is being maintained. 
INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY AND TECHNOLOGY MANAGEMENT
33.       The scheme basically seeks to capture, secure, enhance and realize the value from the Intellectual Property of CSIR. 
 This would be done by developing mastery over management of Intellectual Property by forming homogenous patent
 portfolios, valuing and valorizing these through leveraging and forging strategic alliances, bartering and licensing and even
 outright sale.  In the Tenth Five Year Plan period the emphasis will be on exploiting this portfolio internationally and
 expanding it rather selectively based on commercial potential, strategic reasons or for pioneering and positioning CSIR in
 new direction.
34.       CSIR has truly made Intellectual Property its business, and it continued to be the number 1 Indian entity securing
 patents in India and abroad.  In 2002-03, CSIR was granted a record 146 patents in USA, a feat unmatched by any other
 Indian firm or organization.  During the year 2003-2004, CSIR has filed 896 patents of which 490 patents were filed abroad

126threport of Science and Technology
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/126threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:28:59]
 and 406 patents in India.  None of the patents filed by CSIR are in dispute. During the year 2004-05, CSIR filed around 700
 Foreign and 400 Indian Patents.  It is by far the largest patent holder in India and ranked at first position along with
 Samsung in PCT filing from developing countries in the year 2002.
35.       For the first time CSIR instituted the Diamond Jubilee Awards for school going children upto the age of 18 years and
 announced the competition on 26
th April, 2002 the day celebrated as world intellectual property day all over the world. 
 Around 570 applications were received from various parts of the country during 2002 ad fourteen inventions were selected
 for five categories of prizes.  To protect IP rights, provisional patents applications have been filed for these inventions.
 During 2003 in all 383 applications were received from various parts of the country and Eight inventions for five categories
 of prizes were selected.  To protect IP rights, provisional patent applications are being filed for these inventions.
           
36.       It was informed that the scheme basically seeks to capture, secure, enhance and realize the value from the intellectual
 property of CSIR.  The emphasis is to form homogenous patent portfolios and exploit the same.  The increased allocation
 would enable CSIR to meet the cost of filing patents, maintenance of the enlarged portfolio of existing patents, building
 capacity to defend and initiate patent infringement action and training of CSIR personnel on advanced aspects of
 Intellectual Property & Technology Management.
37.       The Committee was further informed that the budgetary estimates, Revised Estimates and actual expenditure under
 the Scheme on Intellectual Property & Technology Management was Rs.15 crore, Rs.20 crore and Rs.24.72 crore
 respectively.  The excess expenditure beyond RE was met from internal resource of CSIR. 
38.       The Committee commends the Department for emerging as a pioneering institute to achieve number one position in
 Indian & Foreign patent filings.  The Committee hopes that the Department would maintain its position.    The Committee
 hopes that CSIR will remain vigilant to safeguard our age old indisputable rights over our traditional knowledge.
 
 
NEW MILLENIUM INDIAN TECHNOLOGY LEADERSHIP INITIATVE (NMITLI)
39.       The New Millennium Indian Technology Leadership Initiative  (NMITLI) scheme envisages to catalyze innovation
 centered scientific and technological developments as a vehicle to attain for Indian economy a global leadership position in
 selected niche areas in a ‘Team India’ partnership.   NMITLI therefore looks beyond present day technologies and seeks to
 build, capture and retain for India a leadership position in the global arena based on technology by synergising the best
 competence of publicly funded R&D institutions, academia and private industry.
40.       During the financial year 2003-2004, a next generation bioinformatics software, “ Bio-Suite” has been soft
 launched.   It is comprehensive, portable, modular and scalable software, which has more features than any existing
 commercial product.  The project, which symbiotically and synergistically networks over 20 partners from academic, R&D
 institutions and industry, was conceptualized and developed under NMITLI.  A new herbal formulation for the treatment of
 psoriasis has been developed.  Industrial partner intend to file IND application to US-FDA by December 2003.
41.       It was informed that NMITLI looks beyond present day technologies and seeks to build, capture and retain for India
 a leadership position in the global arena based on technology by synergising the best competencies of publicly funded R&D
 institutions, academia and private industry, Thus, it is based on the premise of consciously & deliberately identifying,
 selecting and supporting potential winners.  With over 50 private sector companies and over 150 institutes & laboratories
 networked together, NMITLI is the largest public private partnership in India today.
42.       The Committee was informed that the New Millennium Indian Technology Leadership Initiative (NMTLI) being a
 proactive scheme, the endeavour is to select and support, through churning of best of the minds, the projects which are in
 potential niche areas to achieve technology leadership for the country.   The projects supported so far are in the following
 areas: advanced nano-materials and composities; nano-material catalysts; decentralized power packs; fictionalization of
 alkane; defunctionalisation of carbohydrates; biodegradable plastics; value added polymeric materials; environmentally
 secure rare earth based colorants for surface coatings; hydrogen based fuel cells; novel office computing platform;
 mesoscale modeling; low cost horizontal axis wind turbine; microbiological conversions; biotech molecules; new targets
 and markers for cancer; therapeutics for latent M. tuberculosis; herbal therapeutics for degenerative disorders; advanced
 drug delivery systems; oral delivery of insulin; gene expression modulation; oral herbal therapeutics for psoriasis;
 diagnostics for eye diseases and low vision enhancement devices; software for bioinformatics; pharmacological and
 genomic investigations on withania somnifera; improvement of plant species with special reference to pulp and paper and
 novel fungicides.  The scheme operates on the premise of consciously & deliberately identifying, selecting and supporting
 potential winners. Thus the partners in the projects scheme are the identified “Winners”   It may be further emphasized that
 in each project – after the concept proving stage, the commercialization will be taken up by the concerned industrial
 partners on their own or by seeking further development funding.  For example, in the case of Biosuit, a unique
 bioinformatics software created by the partnership of Tata Consultancy Services (TCS) & nineteen institutional partners, the
 commercialization is now being done internationally by TCS.  Similarly in the case of the new Psoriasis drug, Lupin
 laboratory have moved from IND filing to phase I clinical trials and will complete the rest o the Phase II & phase III trials

126threport of Science and Technology
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/126threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:28:59]
 on their own, before commercializing the drug.  The institutional  partners will receive appropriate royalty.
43.       The Committee feels that the Department should take utmost care to closely monitor and assess all ongoing projects;
 and initiate critical assessment of the completed projects for their up-scaling and further advancement, if any. Besides, it
 should organize evaluation of new projects to be taken up.
INFRASTRUTURE RENOVATION AND REFURBISHMENT
44.       The infrastructure for most of the CSIR laboratories was built or acquired over four decades ago, some are even of
 older vintage.  Thus, the infrastructure is not suited for modern day globally competitive R&D especially in terms of Good
 Library Practice (GLP), International Organization for Standardization (ISO), National Accredition Board for Testing and
 Calibration Laboratories (NABL) requirements for accreditation and certification.   These are proposed to be refurbished
 through a new scheme of infrastructure renovation.
45.       Under Information Technology Infrastructure, in 1997 CSIR was amongst the first to plan for V-SAT connectivity to
 all its laboratories.  To some limited extent this could be established, however, the delays in implementation and the radical
 changes in communication set-up since then have made it imperative that it be upgraded into an efficient internet.  CSIR has
 been advising and assisting other organizations to take up computerization and the use of information technology but it has
 not benefited fully from the revolution, except in isolated pockets.  Thus the organizational benefits of the radical gains in
 productivity brought about by IT have not yet been realized.   The IT Task Force has also enjoined that every organization
 devote 2% of its outlay on IT.  In order to inculcate an IT culture in the system, it would be assigned a driving role. For the
 last year, the Department had targets to initiate minimum IT infrastructure and to study and proliferate the best practices by
 imparting training of over 1000 man weeks. Besides, for the current financial year, IT infrastructure will be created fully in
 all the laboratories and connectivity provided to establish online management of resources.
46.       The Committee was informed that the infrastructure Renovation & Refurbishing scheme is a new scheme of CSIR
 for the Tenth Plan with the emphasis on renovation and refurbishment of infrastructure facilities of CSIR laboratories which
 are few decades old.  It originally had two components: (i) IT infrastructure & (ii) Building infrastructure.   Subsequently,
 with the approval of the Planning Commission, Building Infrastructure Renovation component was made part of National
 Laboratories scheme and an outlay of Rs. 20 crore was provided under it.  The IT infrastructure scheme component is to
 provide on real time basis internet connectivity to all the laboratories.   The schema could not be initiated during 2003-2004
 due to non-availability of approval.  An outlay of Rs. 10 crore has been provided during 2004-2005 to initiate the Scheme.
47.       The Committee was informed that as per the requirement, the proposal on Infrastructure Renovation &
 Refurbishment was sent to the Planning Commission for in principle approval.   After obtaining the in principle approval,
 detailed project report and the Expenditure Finance Committee proposal has been sent to the Planning Commission and
 other appraising agencies.  The response from the Planning Commission & other agencies are awaited.   The renovation and
 refurbishment of infrastructure on selective basis would be taken up in the current year.
48.       The Committee feels that to face the challenges coming from research initiatives from developed countries, India
 needs the state-of-art infrastructure and laboratories. The infrastructure should be seen as a strategic national resource and
 funding should be given on a long-term basis so that the modernization becomes a continued process for effectiveness,
 improvement in our scientific growth.  The Committee is of the view that the university laboratories need to be upgraded so
 that a world-class infrastructure is provided for research in under-graduate and post-graduate level so that the interest for
 further research is sustained in young students. This in the long term would facilitate advances in the scientific research.
TECHNOLOGY PROMOTION, DEVELOPMENT AND UTILISATION PROGRAMME
49.       This scheme is the result of merger of some of the ninth plan schemes.  Programmes and activities under the scheme
 are centered around promoting industrial R&D, development and commercialization of technologies, acquisition,
 management and export of technologies, promotion of consultancy capabilities, etc.
            The specific components of the scheme are:
·
                    Industrial R&D Promotion Programme
·                    Technology Development ad Innovation Progamme
·                    Technology Management Programme
·                    International Technology Transfer Programme
·                    Consultancy Promotion Programme
·                    Industrial R&D and Technology Information Facilitation Programme
50.       During the year 2003-2004, 17 th National Conference on in-house R&D in Industry was organized and National
 Awards for outstanding R&D achievements were presented to 8 companies. 12 publications were brought out; 75 new in-
house R&D units were recognized; 20 new SIROs (Scientific and Industrial Research Organization) were recognized;
 renewal of recognition to in-house R&D units of nearly 250 companies were given.        Under the Technopreneur
 Promotion Programme (TePP), 5 new proposals of individual innovators were supported.
51.       During the year, several analytical, technology status and development studies including those on Aromatic and
 Medicinal Plant species in the State of Sikkim, Assessment of Forest Wealth based Industries of Maharashtra and Goa,

126threport of Science and Technology
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/126threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:28:59]
 Technology Audit in a fertilizer industry based unit, Technology status of Guar Gum based industries and on the Status of
 electronic industries cluster of Karnataka have been completed.
52.       Consultancy Development Centre (CDC) has organized 6 training/awareness-cum-implementation programmes on
 ISO-9001: 2000 Quality Management System for Professionals, Military Engineering Services and for CSIR labs. Services,
 Business Presentation Skills for Consultants, Creativity and Innovation for Firm Level Competitiveness, Understanding
 Macro Analysis Designing a Consulting Strategy, Structural Analysis and Design including Detailing of RCC and Steel
 Structures and Business Process Analysis, Socio-Economic and Environmental Engineering, State Management System,
 balance Score Card, and for DRDO and two seminars of Fuel Gas Conditioning for Thermal power Plants and moving
 markets for energy efficiency in India.
53.       The Committee was informed that the Department is proposed to utilize the increased allocation for TPDU
 programmes during 2004-2005 for: supporting Research, Development, Design & Engineering (RDDE) projects and
 technology development & demonstration projects in frontier areas with larger outlays; marketing and commercialization of
 technologies and products developed under the programme; facilitating technology acquisition, absorption & management
 by industry through setting up of technology and innovation management centres; creating awareness about exportable
 technologies and projects in target markets through technology trade facilitation centres & exhibitions; providing technical
 consultancy & design engineering services in specific industrial clusters through setting up of consultancy clinics & design
 engineering centres; enabling content development capacities; developing information support systems including virtual
 information systems for industrial clusters & community; developing a national website/portal on S&T and launching an
 open archives initiative.
54.       In reply to a question regarding the details of programmes as well as their continuation, the Committee was informed
 that details of the programmes for which funds were utilized for the “Technology Promotion Development and Utilization
 Programme, during 2003-04 were:
·
                    Industrial R&D Promotion Programme:  deals with activities relating to recognition of in-house R&D
 units in industry and non-commercial Scientific and Industrial Research Organisations, fiscal incentives and
 other mechanisms and initiatives towards supporting and encouraging R&D efforts of  industry.
·
                    Technology Development and Demonstration Programme:  Under the Scheme, research, development,
 design and engineering projects for absorption and upgradation of imported technology as well as
 development and demonstration of new and improved technologies have been supported.
·
                    “Technopreneur Promotion Programme (Tepp)” : to tap the vast innovative potential of the citizens of
 India.  Under the scheme, financial support were provided to individual innovators having original ideas and
 convert them into working models, prototypes etc.
·
                    Technology Management Programme: to enhance knowledge and skills in the efficient management and
 transfer of technology.
·                    International Technology Transfer Programme: aims to promote international technology transfer and
 trade including exports of technologies, projects services and hi-tech products.
·                    Consultancy Promotion Programme: to promote and strengthen consultancy capabilities for domestic use
 and export requirements. Developed sector specific consultancy capabilities to provide door step consultancy
 services to SMEs, Design Engineering and Consultancy Services and Consultancy Clinics were promoted.
55.       The Committee was informed that during 2004-05 the Department would be taking up the following new
 programmes/activities :
·                    A new component “Industrial R&D and Technology Information Facilitation Programme to develop
 appropriate endogenous information capacities to support the R&D activities, to enable the development of
 local information and to promote indigenous knowledge and to develop information support systems
 including virtual information systems for industrial clusters and community; collection of national S&T
 information through websites/portals, and to map the national S&T productivity in relation to the
 international trend.
·
                    Marketing and commercialization of technologies and products developed under the Technology
 Development and Demonstration Programme of DSIR.
56.       The Committee feels that the scientific bodies in India need more interaction with industrial houses and if the
 industrial and scientific communities work in tandem both stand to benefit from the other’s expertise.   In the present age of
 competition there should be proactive approach from the CSIR to reaching to industry for finding sponsor for research
 instead of waiting for industry to approach them.
INVESTMENT IN PUBLIC ENTERPRISES
Central Electronics Limited (CEL)
57.       Central Electronics Limited (CEL) holds a unique position among the family of public sector enterprises in
 electronics, with its emphasis on indigenous technology inducted both from its in-house developments and from the

126threport of Science and Technology
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/126threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:28:59]
 country’s national laboratories for its production programmes in diverse hi-technology areas national relevance. The
 company’s operations are structured in terms of three product categories, which are also its corresponding business groups,
 as under.
i)                    Solar Photovoltaics (SPV): Crystalline Sillcon Solar Cells, Modules and SPV Energy Systems for rural,
 remote areas and industrial applications.
ii)                   Electronic Systems: Railway Electronics Equipment, Cathodic Protection System for Oil/Gas Pipelines,
 Projection Television (PTV) Systems and Rural Automatic Telephones Exchanges (RAX) &Very Small
 Aperture (Satellite) Terminals (VSAT).
iii)                 Electronic Components: Electronic Ceramics, Professional Ferrites for TV, Telecommunication and
 Defence, Microwave Ferrite Phase Shifters for Missile Radars, Microwave Components.
58.       During the year 2003-2004, CEL has developed Building Inegrated photovoltaic  (BIPV) modules which was CEL’s
 USP bagging an order for a SPV power plant from Punjab Energy Development Agency, Chandigarh.  The order has been
 executed.  The company has carried out SPV electrification of two remote villages in Nepal.  After a visit to Afghanistan by
 a CEL officer, negotiations for SPV electrification of Teacher’s Training Centre’ in Afghanistan are at advanced stage. CEL
 put up for funding a Department of Scientific & Industrial Research two project proposals one for “Capacity Enhancement
 and Process Development for Crystalline Silicon Solar Cells and Modules” and second to carry out “Development of
 Higher Rating ie 110/120 Watt Modules”.
59.       In the field of Railway Electronics, the company manufactured and supplied 700 nos. of analog axle counters and
 200 nos. of digital exle counters. In the field of Strategic Electronics, the company has obtained order for 12,000 PCMs and
 one IFF System from BEL.  12,000 PCMs were supplied during the year.  The company executed orders worth Rs. 210
 lakhs for ANC piezo electric devices to NPOL, BEL and keltron. Pilot production of Cadmium-Zinc-Telluride (CZT)
 substrates was commenced and 300 nos. supplied to SSPL as per their requirements.
60.       The Committee was informed that the Department could not release the budgetary allocation amounting to Rs. 8.00
 crore to the company during 2003-2004 since the company made a proposal to the Department for investment of Rs. 25
 crore to upscale and upgrade SPV activities to generate revenue for sustainability and also to develop new technologies.   A
 High Powered Committee was constituted by the Department to examine the proposal.  The High-powered Committee has
 recommended the proposal of the company.  The proposal is under approval in the Department.   ‘In principle approval’
 from the Planning Commission for the said proposal has been now received. The Department shall request for additional
 funds towards the proposal at the RE stage in the current year. 
61.       The Committee commends the efforts of the company for giving emphasis on indigenous technology. But the
 Committee feels that the Department should make efforts to see that the company continued to pursue the programme of
 Development and Promotion of Technologies appropriate for rural areas.
DEVELOPING NEW GENERATION FUELS & LUBRICANTS
62.       There is a need for adoption of new generation alternative fuels as this would , apart from curbing the consumption
 of petroleum, help in reduction of pollution in our cities and towns.
63.       The Committee was informed that CSIR is implementing a project on Development of new generation fuels and
 lubricants in the Tenth Plan.  The objective of the project includes:
a.
                   Development of gas to liquid technologies for dimethyl ether and Fischer Tropsch fuels;
b.                  Production of liquid fuels and ethanol from biomass;
c.                   Development of biodegradable lubricants from vegetable oils, sugars, starches and cellulose; and
d.                  Performance evaluation of new generation fuels to meet future emission norms.
64.       The Committee appreciates the Department for developing Biofuels.  The Committee feels that there is a need for
 adoption of wide variety of new generation alternative fuels as this would, apart from reducing the dependence on
 petroleum, help in reduction of pollution in our cities.   The Committee would like the Department to conduct research in
 developing fuels from waste matter and other non-bio-degradable substances which otherwise cause environmental
 degradations.
 
INSTITUTE OF GENOMICS AND INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY (IGIB)
65.       The Committee has been given to understand that IGIB is doing pioneering research on molecular mechanism of host
 pathogen interactions and immunological and molecular analysis of allergens.  The Committee, therefore, feels that IGIB by
 exploration and exploitation of microbial wealth can produce novel compounds through bio-transformation process for
 pollution monitoring by mitigation systems and devices for industrial waste minimization and clean up.
66.       The Committee is also given to understand that IGIB has developed improved methods for diagnosis and therapy of
 allergy disorders.  Several antigen preparations have been standardized and characterized using bio-chemical methods and
 have pioneered production and dissemination of   therapeutic allergens to diverse sources for immunization to allergic
 patients.
67.       However, the Committee is of the opinion that the major constraints in the effective diagnosis, treatment and control

126threport of Science and Technology
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/126threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:28:59]
 of allergic disorders is the lack of detailed information on prevalence of pollen grains/spores (Bio-Pollutants) in outdoor and
 in door environments and scarcity of information on allergenically important texa from different eco-geographical regions
 of the country.
68.       In order to address the above problem, the Committee feels that IGIB should undertake All India Coordinated project
 on aeroallergens and human health in different strategic   areas of the country in close collaboration with the Ministry  of 
 Environment and Forests  so that a continuous monitoring of pollen in the country could drastically reduce   their
 concentration  in ambient  air over a long period of time:
69.       Apart from this, the Committee is of the opinion that since bacteria have the ability to degrade biological wastes, it
 enables pollution control and waste management.   This process can act as energy source.  Hence, the emphasis of the work
 of this Institute should be on anaerobic digestion of vegetable and fruit wastes which is also known as municipal market
 wastes with a mission to achieve:-
1)
                  Industrial waste minimization and clean up through.
2)                  Pollution monitoring mitigation systems and devices.
70.       The Committee is pleased to know that Institutes programme in Environmental Bio-Technology also includes
 projects for development of know how for monitoring and treatment of effluents and biological wastes by anaerobic
 digestion.   The Committee is given to understand that the know how for monitoring the pollution load i.e. Biological and
 Chemical Oxygen Demands i.e. BOD and COD in wastewater has also been developed at IGIB.  The know how has been
 named as BODSEED and has been validated by Central Pollution Control Board after receiving cross validation by seven
 states in the country.
71.       Yamuna River is constantly polluted by domestic and industrial wastes.  About 2,700 million Liters of Domestic
 Sewage per day (mld), are discharged, of which more than 60% goes untreated in the river Yamuna.  The problem is
 complicated by the 300 mld of untreated industrial sewage discharge in the river.
72.       The Committee therefore, feels that an Anaerobic digestion method for treatment of sewage waste water is
 undoubtedly a good alternative application of anaerobic   digestion theory. The Committee is of the opinion that with this
 simple,  rapid and cheap technology, it will be possible to treat 3000 (cu.m)   of sewage waste water per day and bring the
 pollution load BoD and CoD within  permissible limits.
73.       The Committee is also given to understand that presently, research is underway at IGIB to develop pollution
 sensitive BoD Biosensor for rapid estimation of BoD i.e. in 10 minutes as against 5 days by conventional methods for BoD
 estimation.  Hence, the know how developed is a refinement of the existing method in order to monitor the pollution load
 precisely, accurately and rapidly.  The Institute has also undertaken research of Total Dissolved Solids (TDS) reduction, a
 major unsolved problem of wastewater management by making a breakthrough in reducing TDS to 10 per cent by using
 biotechnological approach.
74.       The Committee is strongly convinced that environmental biotechnological research of the institute can prove to be a
 boon particularly for environmental management and control and disposal of municipal market waste, wastewater treatment
 and management, treatment and monitoring of Effluents, for TDS reduction and BoD and CoD estimation for monitoring
 pollution load in waste water.
75.       The Committee would therefore, like to recommend the Department of Scientific & Industrial Research to explore
 the possibilities of working jointly with the Ministry of Environment & Forests to develop a comprehensive waste
 management programme including both municipal market waste, management of waste water and control of bio-pollutants
 concentration in ambient air in the country so that the entire issue of waste management and control could be given a new
 dimension.
ENVIRONMENT FRIENDLY PLASTICS
76.       Plastic being xenobiotic is not degradable and in recent years search is being made for producing environment
 friendly plastic particularly biodegradable plastic like bacterial plastic. Since plastic are non-degradable, they have become
 a serious environmental threat.   Developing expertise and state-of-the-art know how for environment friendly plastic i.e.
 bacterial plastic production has been identified as a major challenge before environment friendly researchers.  In the post
 genomic era, where more than 100 bacterial genome have been sequenced, the Committee is, happy to know that IGIB has
 combined the power of bio-informatics tools to the genetic engineering tools to show that soil bacteria can degrade many
 biological fibers/polymers.  The plastic is also a sheet of synthetic fibers.  In fact, strategy has been applied at IGIB to
 search novel hydrogen producing microbes through bio-informatics tools using genomic databases; novel metabolic
 pathways have been identified by IGIB for developing know how to produce environment friendly plastics from cheap raw
 materials like bio-wastes. IGIB is also trying to train bacteria to take up the wastes from environment and clean the
 atmosphere.
77.       The Committee feels that in view of its environment friendly importance further effective research should be
 undertaken for production of such plastics by IGIB so that new areas of knowledge for production of environment friendly

126threport of Science and Technology
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/126threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:28:59]
 plastics could get wide open to give a new dimension to the entire issue.
 PROMOTION OF SCIENTIFIC TEMPER
78.       The Committee was informed that the Department publishes popular science journals in English, Hindi, Urdu besides
 reader friendly S&T books and encyclopedias to spread the scientific temper in larger sections of society.   CSIR
 laboratories regularly organize several Melas, open-houses to keep the public informed about the current development in the
 respective field of competence.  NRDC also brings out two popular publications in English, Hindi to popularize science and
 spread scientific temper.
79.       In a country where literacy has eluded nearly a third of the population, promoting scientific awareness is not an easy
 task.  In view of the rapid strides being made in the field of science and technology, and their influence on the day-to-day
 life of the people, inculcating a scientific temperament and rational outlook in them has become all the more important.  
 This would help people to make the right choices.   It is in this context that the science popularization assumes significance.
 Therefore the Committee feels that inculcating scientific temper among the people should be one of the priorities of the
 Department.
80.       After considering the Demands for Grants of the Department of Scientific & Industrial Research and assessing the
 various programmes and projects administered by it, the Committee Recommends that the Demands for Grants of
 Rs.1300.00 crores, as sought by the Department of Scientific & Industrial Research for the year 2004-2005 under, Demand
 no.84 may be approved.
SUMMARY OF RECOMMENDATIONS
1.         The Committee appreciates the Department for carrying out research in many frontier areas of science and
 technology.  It is true that science is one of the areas, which can bring leadership and meet the kind of objectives that India
 has set for itself.   However, the Committee is of the opinion that the Department should make efforts for transfer of
 technologies to industry and also strive for wider dissemination of technologies to raise funds from Industry by having a
 greater interface between Industry & R&D laboratories.                                                                                     
(Para 27)
2.         The Committee notes with satisfaction the efforts made by Department for stimulating interest and awareness among
 students for science. The Committee recommends that the fellowships be given for basic sciences as fewer students are
 showing interest in them.  It is hoped that individual record of progress of scholarship holders is being maintained. 
(Para 32)
3.         The Committee commends the Department for emerging as a pioneering institute to achieve number one position in
 Indian & Foreign patent filings.  The Committee hopes that the Department would maintain its position.    The Committee
 hopes that CSIR will remain vigilant to safeguard our age old indisputable rights over our traditional knowledge.
(Para 38)
4.         The Committee feels that the Department should take utmost care to closely monitor and assess all ongoing projects;
 and initiate critical assessment of the completed projects for their up-scaling and further advancement, if any. Besides, it
 should organize evaluation of new projects to be taken up.
(Para 43)
5.
                  The Committee feels that to face the challenges coming from research initiatives from developed countries, India
 needs the state-of-art infrastructure and laboratories. The infrastructure should be seen as a strategic national resource and
 funding should be given on a long-term basis so that the modernization becomes a continued process for effectiveness,
 improvement in our scientific growth.  The Committee is of the view that the university laboratories need to be upgraded so
 that a world-class infrastructure is provided for research in under-graduate and post-graduate level so that the interest for
 further research is sustained in young students. This in the long term would facilitate advances in the scientific research.
(Para 48)
6.         The Committee feels that the scientific bodies in India need more interaction with industrial houses and if the
 industrial and scientific communities work in tandem both stand to benefit from the other’s expertise.   In the present age of
 competition there should be proactive approach from the CSIR to reaching to industry for finding sponsor for research
 instead of waiting for industry to approach them.
(Para 56)
7.         The Committee commends the efforts of the company for giving emphasis on indigenous technology. But the
 Committee feels that the Department should make efforts to see that the company continued to pursue the programme of
 Development and Promotion of Technologies appropriate for rural areas.
(Para 61)

126threport of Science and Technology
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/126threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:28:59]
8.         The Committee appreciates the Department for developing Biofuels.  The Committee feels that there is a need for
 adoption of wide variety of new generation alternative fuels as this would, apart from reducing the dependence on
 petroleum, help in reduction of pollution in our cities.   The Committee would like the Department to conduct research in
 developing fuels from waste matter and other non-bio-degradable substances which otherwise cause environmental
 degradations.
(Para 64)
9.         In order to address the above problem, the Committee feels that IGIB should undertake All India Coordinated project
 on aeroallergens and human health in different strategic   areas of the country in close collaboration with the Ministry  of 
 Environment and Forests  so that a continuous monitoring of pollen in the country could drastically reduce   their
 concentration  in ambient  air over a long period of time.
(Para 68)
10.       Apart from this, the Committee is of the opinion that since bacteria have the ability to degrade biological wastes, it
 enables pollution control and waste management.   This process can act as energy source.  Hence, the emphasis of the work
 of this Institute should be on anaerobic digestion of vegetable and fruit wastes which is also known as municipal market
 wastes with a mission to achieve:-
3)
                  Industrial waste minimization and clean up through.
4)                  Pollution monitoring mitigation systems and devices.
(Para 69)
11.       The Committee is pleased to know that Institutes programme in Environmental Bio-Technology also includes
 projects for development of know how for monitoring and treatment of effluents and biological wastes by anaerobic
 digestion.   The Committee is given to understand that the know how for monitoring the pollution load i.e. Biological and
 Chemical Oxygen Demands i.e. BOD and COD in wastewater has also been developed at IGIB.  The know how has been
 named as BODSEED and has been validated by Central Pollution Control Board after receiving cross validation by seven
 states in the country.
(Para 70)
12.       Yamuna River is constantly polluted by domestic and industrial wastes.  About 2,700 million Liters of Domestic
 Sewage per day (mld), are discharged, of which more than 60% goes untreated in the river Yamuna.  The problem is
 complicated by the 300 mld of untreated industrial sewage discharge in the river.
(Para71)
13.       The Committee therefore, feels that an Anaerobic digestion method for treatment of sewage waste water is
 undoubtedly a good alternative application of anaerobic   digestion theory. The Committee is of the opinion that with this
 simple,  rapid and cheap technology, it will be possible to treat 3000 (cu.m)   of sewage waste water per day and bring the
 pollution load BoD and CoD within  permissible limits.
(Para 72)
14.       The Committee is also given to understand that presently, research is underway at IGIB to develop pollution
 sensitive BoD Biosensor for rapid estimation of BoD i.e. in 10 minutes as against 5 days by conventional methods for BoD
 estimation.  Hence, the know how developed is a refinement of the existing method in order to monitor the pollution load
 precisely, accurately and rapidly.   The Institute has also undertaken research of total Dissolved Solids (TDS) reduction, a
 major unsolved problem of wastewater management by making a breakthrough in reducing TDS to 10 per cent by using
 biotechnological approach.
(Para 73)
15.       The Committee is strongly convinced that environmental biotechnological research of the institute can prove to be a
 boon particularly for environmental management and control and disposal of municipal market waste, wastewater treatment
 and management, treatment and monitoring of Effluents, for TDS reduction and BoD and CoD estimation for monitoring
 pollution load in waste water.
(Para 74)
16.       The Committee would therefore, like to recommend the Department of Scientific & Industrial Research to explore
 the possibilities of working jointly with the Ministry of Environment & Forests to develop a comprehensive waste
 management programme including both municipal market waste, management of waste water and control of bio-pollutants
 concentration in ambient air in the country so that the entire issue of waste management and control could be given a new
 dimension.
(Para 75)

126threport of Science and Technology
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/126threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:28:59]
17.       The Committee feels that in view of its environment friendly importance further effective research should be
 undertaken for production of such plastics by IGIB so that new areas of knowledge for production of environment friendly
 plastics could get wide open to give a new dimension to the entire issue.
(Para 77)
18.       In a country where literacy has eluded nearly a third of the population, promoting scientific awareness is not an easy
 task.  In view of the rapid strides being made in the field of science and technology, and their influence on the day-to-day
 life of the people, inculcating a scientific temperament and rational outlook in them has become all the more important.  
 This would help people to make the right choices.   It is in this context that the science popularization assumes significance.
 Therefore the Committee feels that inculcating scientific temper among the people should be one of the priorities of the
 Department.
            (Para 79)
ANNEXURE
              ANNEXURE
BUDGET ESTIMATES – 2004-05
            (Rs. in crores)
 
S. No. Head of Development Projects Budget Estimates 2003-04
 Programmes / Schemes Plan Non-Plan Total
1. Assistance to Council of Scientific & Industrial Research    
1.1 Administration 12.00 180.00 192.00
1.2 National laboratories 509.00 403.04 912.04
1.3 Scientists’ Pool 0.00 4.00 4.00
1.4 Research Schemes, Scholarships and Fellowships 8.00 58.00 66.00
1.5 Intellectual Property & Technology Management 20.00 0.00 20.00
1.6 New Millenium Indian Technology Leadership Initiative 45.00 0.00 45.00
1.7 Infrastructure Renovation and Refurbishing 25.00 0.00 25.00
 Total: 619.00 645.04 1264.04
2. Technology Promotion Development and Utilisation Programmes 20.00 0.00 20.00
3. Investment in Public Enterprises    
3.1 Central Electronics Limited 4.00 0.00 4.00
4. Non plan Subsidies    
4.1 Interest Subsidy to NRDC 0.00 0.15 0.15
5. Assistance to other Scientific Bodies    
5.1 Support for R & D Schemes to Central electronics Limited 3.00 0.00 3.00
5.2 Other Schemes/Programmes 4.00 0.00 4.00
 Total: 7.00 0.00 7.00
6. Secretariat-Economic Services 0.00 4.81 4.81
8. VRS in CEL 0.00 0.00 0.00
 GRAND TOTAL 650.00 650.00 1300.00
 
 
MINUTES
 
II
SECOND MEETING
 
The Committee met at 10.00 A.M. on Tuesday, the 10
th August, 2004 in Committee Room ‘A’, Ground Floor,
 Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
 
PRESENT     
 
1.   Shri P.G.Narayanan  –– Chairman
 

126threport of Science and Technology
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/126threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:28:59]
 
RAJYA SABHA
 
2. Shri Ravula Chandra Sekar Reddy
3. Smt. Kum Kum Rai
4. Shri Birabhadra Singh
 
LOK  SABHA
 
5. Shri Sujan Chakraborty
6. Shri Pankaj Chaudhery
7. Shri Anantrao Gudhe
8. Shri Babubhai Katara
9. Shri Brahmananda Panda
10. Shri Bachi Singh Rawat                        
11. Dr. Ramlakhan Singh                           
 
SECRETARIAT
           
            Shri R.K.Singh, Officer on Special Duty
            Shri Alok Chatterjee, Deputy Secretary
Shri S. Rangarajan, Committee Officer
Shri Trilok Nath Mishra, Research Officer
 
            REPRESENTATIVES OF THE DEPARTMENT OF SCIENTIFIC & INDUSTRIAL RESEARCH
 
1.      Dr. R. A. Mashelkar, Secretary
2.      Shri Sudhir Kumar, Joint Secretary
3.      Mrs. Rama Murali, FA
4.      Dr. O. P. Agarwal, Head, RPBD
5.      Dr. D. Yogeshwar Rao, Head, TNBD, CSIR
6.      Dr. A. Wahid, Scientist, ITD
7.      Dr. A.K. Verma, Scientist, RDPD, CSIR
8.      Dr. A. Lahiri, Adviser, DSIR
9.      Shri Jagdish Singh, Scientist ‘G’ DSIR
10.  Smt. S. Ravindran, Scientist, G’ DSIR
11.  Shri N.K. Sharma, managing Director, NRDC
12.  Dr. D.K. Bhardwaj, Group General Manager, NRDC
13.  Shri B.A. Mylar Rao, Chairman cum Managing Director, CEL
14.  Shri S.C. Tyagi, Dy. Secretary (Parl.) CSIR
 
2.         *                                                          *                                                                 *
3.         *                                                          *                                                                 *
4.         *                                                          *                                                                  *
5.         The Chairman welcomed the Secretary and other representatives of the Department of Scientific & Industrial
 Research and requested them to make a presentation on Demands for Grants (2004-05) of the Department.   The Secretary
 made a visual presentation of the activities and achievements of the Department of Scientific & Industrial Research and
 explained about the budgetary allocations on different heads as also the functioning of the Department.   The Members then
 sought clarifications on various issues relating to the Demands for Grants.  On the aspects relating to research on drugs and
 pharmaceuticals, the Committee suggested to the Secretary to orient the research with a view to make available the
 medicines at a price within reach of a common man.     
                        The witnesses then withdrew.
            A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
6.
      The Committee then adjourned at 01.30 P.M. to meet again on 11th August, 2004

126threport of Science and Technology
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/126threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:28:59]
 
________________________________________________________________________
*** Relates to other matters.
 
V
FOURTH MEETING
     
The Committee met at 03.00 P.M. on Monday, the 16
th August, 2004 in Room No. 63, First Floor, Parliament
 House, New Delhi.
           
PRESENT
1.   Shri P.G.Narayanan  –– Chairman
 
RAJYA SABHA
 
2. Dr. Prabha Thakur
3. Shri Nand Kishore Yadav
4. Shri Ravula Chandra Sekar Reddy
5. Shrimati Kum Kum Rai
6. Shri Birabhadra Singh
 
LOK  SABHA
 
7. Shri Sujan Chakraborty
8. Shri Brahmanada Panda
9. Shri Bachi Singh Rawat                        
10. Shrimati  Jayaben Thakkar       
11. Shri Sita Ram Yadav
12. Shri V. Aruna Kumar   
 
SECRETARIAT
           
            Shri R.K.Singh, Officer on Special Duty
            Shri Alok Chatterjee, Deputy Secretary
Shri S. Rangarajan, Committee Officer
Shri Trilok Nath Mishra, Research Officer
 
2.   The Committee took up consideration of Draft ***, 126
th and *** Reports of the Committee on Demands for Grants
 (2004-2005) pertaining to ***, Department of Scientific  & Industrial Research and ***, respectively.  After discussion and
 suggesting minor changes,  the Committee considered and adopted each of the above reports.
3.         The Committee authorised the Chairman and in his absence Shrimati  Kum Kum Rai and Shri Ravula Chandra Sekar
 Reddy to present the Reports in the Rajya Sabha and Shri Bachi Singh Rawat and in his absence Shri Sujan Chakraborty to
 lay the Reports on the table of the Lok Sabha.
4.      The Committee then adjourned at 03.20 P.M.
________________________________________________________________________________________________
*** Relates to other matters.