 
       
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTAR 
ON TRANSPORT, TOURIS 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
THREE HUNDRED 
Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/ 
Observations of the Committee contained in its Three Hundred 
Thirteenth Report on the subject ‘Promotion of Indian Tourism 
in Overseas Markets 
 (Presente 
(Laid on t 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA  
RAJYA SABHA 
 
RELATED PARLIAMENTAR Y STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON TRANSPORT, TOURIS M AND CULTURE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi  
March, 2023/ Chaitra, 1945 (Saka) 
 
THREE HUNDRED FORTY FOURTH REPORT 
Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/ 
Observations of the Committee contained in its Three Hundred 
Thirteenth Report on the subject ‘Promotion of Indian Tourism 
in Overseas Markets – Role of Overseas Tourist Offices and 
Indian Embassies’ 
 
resente d to the Rajya Sabha on 24 th  March, 2023 ) 
aid on t he Table of Lok Sabha on 24 th  March, 2023 ) 
 
Y STANDING COMMITTEE  
REPORT NO.  
344 
REPORT   
Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/ 
Observations of the Committee contained in its Three Hundred 
Thirteenth Report on the subject ‘Promotion of Indian Tourism 
Role of Overseas Tourist Offices and 

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Website:      https://rajyasabha.nic.in   
 E-mail:     rsc-tt@sansad.nic.in  

 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA  
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT,  
TOURISM AND CULTURE  
 
 
THREE HUNDRED FORTY FOURTH REPORT  
Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/ 
Observations of the Committee contained in its Three Hundred 
Thirteenth Report on the subject ‘Promotion of Indian Tourism 
in Overseas Markets – Role of Overseas Tourist Offices and 
Indian Embassies’ 
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 24 th  March, 2023 ) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 24 th  March, 2023 ) 
 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
March, 2023/ Chaitra, 1945 (Saka) 
Hindi version of this publication is also available 

 
 
 
C O N T E N T S 
 
P A G E S  
 
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE     i 
2. INTRODUCTION       ii 
3. ACRONYMS               iii 
4. REPORT                                1-9 
5. RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS-AT A GLANCE   10-11    
    6. *MINUTES   
 
         
        
        
      
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
______________________________________ 
 
*To be appended  
12-14

i 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE  
 (2022-23) 
 
 (Constituted on 13 th  September, 2022) 
 
1. Shri V. Vijayasai Reddy   - Chairman 
 
Rajya Sabha 
2. Shri Mohammed Nadimul Haque 
3. Shrimati S. Phangnon Konyak 
4. Shri Jugalsinh Lokhandwala 
5. Shri Manas Ranjan Mangaraj 
6. Dr. Sonal Mansingh 
7. Shrimati Rajani Ashokrao Patil 
8. Shri A. A. Rahim 
9. Dr. C. M. Ramesh 
10. Shri Vinay Dinu Tendulkar 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
11.  Shri Anto Antony 
12.  Shri Ram Margani Bharat 
13.  Shri Tapir Gao  
14.  Shri Rahul Kaswan 
15.  Shri Ramesh Chandra Majhi 
16.  Shri Sunil Baburao Mendhe 
17.  Shri K. Muraleedharan 
18.  Shri S. S.Palanimanickam  
19.  Shri Chhedi Paswan   
20.  Shri Kamlesh Paswan  
21.  Shri Sunil Kumar Pintu 
22.  Shri Prince Raj 
23.  Shri Tirath Singh Rawat 
24.  Shrimati Mala Roy 
25.  Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
26.  Shri Dushyant Singh 
27.  Shri Rajbahadur Singh 
28.  Shri Ramdas Chandrabhanji Tadas 
29.  Shri Manoj Kumar Tiwari 
30.  Shri Krupal Balaji Tumane 
31. Shri Dinesh Lal Yadav "Nirahua"  
 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Sumant Narain, Joint Secretary 
Shri Swarabji B., Director 
Shrimati Monica Baa, Additional Director 
Shrimati Subha Chandrashekar, Deputy Secretary  
Shri Ranajit Chakraborty, Under Secretary 
Ms. Jahanvi, Assistant Committee Officer 

ii 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairman, Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport, 
Tourism and Culture, having been authorized by the Committee to present on its behalf, do 
hereby present this Three Hundred Forty Fourth Repo rt on the Action Taken by the 
Government on the recommendations/ observations of the Committee contained in its Three 
Hundred Thirteenth Report on the subject ‘Promotion of Indian Tourism in Overseas Markets 
– Role of Overseas Tourist Offices and Indian Embassies’. 
2. The Three Hundred Thirteenth Report  of the Department-related Parliamentary 
Standing Committee on Transport, Tourism and Cultur e was presented on the 3 rd  February, 
2022 to the Parliament.  
3.  The Action Taken Replies on the recommendations  of the Committee contained in its 
Three Hundred Thirteenth Report were received from the Ministry of Tourism on 21 st  
October, 2022 and 5 th  January, 2023. 
4. The Committee considered and adopted the Report in its meeting held on the 23 rd  
March, 2023.   
 
 
(V. Vijayasai Reddy) 
NEW DELHI;                                                           Chairman,  
March 23, 2023                                                       Department-related Parliamentary Standing             
Chaitra 2, 1945 (Saka)                                       Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture,  
                                                                                                                                 Rajya Sabha 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

iii 
 
 
ACRONYMS  
COVID  Coronavirus Disease 
DCG  Deputy Consul General 
DCM  Deputy Chief of Mission 
ER  Economic Relations 
ICCR  Indian Council for Cultural Relations 
IFS  Indian Foreign Service 
ITA  International Tourist Arrival 
MEA  Ministry of External Affairs 
MICE  Meetings, Incentives, Conferences, Exhibitions 
TSA  Tourism Satellite Account 
UT  Union Territory 
 

Page 1 of 11 
 
REPORT  
 
 The Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Ministry of Tourism on 
the recommendations/observations as contained in it s Three Hundred and Thirteenth Report on 
‘Promotion of Indian Tourism in Overseas Markets – Role of Overseas Tourist Offices and 
Indian Embassies’ which was presented to both the Houses of Parliament on 3 rd  February, 2022. 
 
2. The Action Taken Replies were received from the Min istry on 21 
st  October, 2022 and 5 th  
January, 2023 in respect of all the recommendations /observations contained in the Report. The 
replies have been categorized as follows:- 
 
Chapter-I: 
Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the Ministry: 
 
Paragraph Nos.:  44 
Total: 1 
 
Chapter-II: 
Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do es not desire to pursue in view of 
the replies of the Ministry: 
 
Paragraph Nos.: 45 
Total: 1 
 
Chapter-III:  
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which re plies of the Ministry have not been 
accepted by the Committee: 
 
Paragraph Nos.: 41, 42, 43, 46 
Total: 4 
  
Chapter-IV: 
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which th e final replies of the Ministry are still 
awaited: 
 
Paragraph Nos.: Nil. 
Total: Nil.  
 
 
 
 
 

Page 2 of 11 
 
CHAPTER-I 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
MINISTRY 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
1. The Committee observes that Souvenir shops selli ng miniatures of historical monuments 
are very popular among tourists in foreign countrie s. However, these sorts of souvenir shops are 
very scanty in India. The Committee would, therefor e, recommend that the Government ought to 
take initiatives to help establish genuine outlets for the sale of miniature replicas of historical 
monuments near such monuments. 
(Para 44) 
Reply of the Ministry  
1.1 Under ‘Adopt a Heritage’ project, advanced amen ities are planned as per the identified 
monument’s tourist footfall and financial feasibility of proposed interventions. Provision of basic 
souvenir shop promoting local art and craftsmanship  is covered under advance amenities and 
may be implemented at the site upon adoption. It wo uld provide a platform to local 
artisans/craftsmen to sell their product and support the local community.  
 
1.2 The Ministry of Tourism has noted the recommend ation of the Committee. The Ministry 
will take up with the States to promote miniature s ouvenirs of historic monuments at various 
tourist destinations to create opportunities for the local community. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Page 3 of 11 
 
CHAPTER-II  
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES OF THE MINISTRY 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
1. The Committee notes that Prime Minister, Shri Na rendra Modi has mooted three 3-Ts -
 Trade, Tourism and Technology - to boost Indian ec onomic diplomacy and suggested that the 
functioning of Indian Missions and embassies should  be judged from their ability to inter alia 
boost tourist inflows. The Committee also takes not e of the submission made by Secretary (ER), 
Ministry of External Affairs before it that his Min istry will be closely working with the Ministry 
of Tourism to ensure greater progress in promotion of tourism and observes that apart from 
providing foreign exchange and mass employment, the  tourism sector has an economically 
beneficial cascading impact on other associated ind ustry segments and, therefore, the Ministry 
of External Affairs in coordination with the Minist ry of tourism and stakeholders needs to move 
quickly towards reworking India's strategy on attra cting foreign tourists to the country and help 
unleash the true potential of tourism sector in Ind ia. The Committee desires to be kept apprised 
of the progress made in this regard. The Committee also recommends that Indian Ambassadors 
as leaders of Indian Missions abroad must set targe ts for the growth of Indian tourism in key 
markets across the world with the objective of incr easing foreign tourist arrivals to the country 
and increasing the share of India in World Tourist Arrivals. The Committee desires to be kept 
apprised of the specific steps taken in this direction. 
(Para 45) 
Reply of the Ministry 
1.1 It has been informed by the Ministry of Externa l Affairs that Indian Missions regularly 
organize events to promote culture and tourism. The se events include around Indian festivals, 
Indian products, performances with Indian/local art ists etc. Missions also regularly engage with 
the Tour Operators, in coordination with Indian Tourism Offices. 
 
1.2 Missions regularly organize quizzes related to India like ‘Bharat ko Jaaniye’ quizzes. 
Through activities such as inviting foreign dignitaries at Kumbh Mela, International Conferences 
in India, their visits to pilgrimage centers and in viting distinguished guests under Gen next 
Democracy Programme, MEA plays an important role in promotion of tourism abroad.  
Likewise ICCR’s Cultural Centers and Chairs program me organize activities promoting Indian 
Culture which reflects every aspect of life.   

Page 4 of 11 
 
CHAPTER-III  
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
THE MINISTRY HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
1. Modern tourism industry is a key driver of socio -economic growth through creation of 
jobs, infrastructure development and the export rev enues earned because it has potential to 
stimulate other sectors through its backward and fo rward linkages and cross-sectoral synergies 
with airlines, transport, basic infrastructure, agr iculture, handicrafts etc. Despite vast tourism 
resources in the form of its unique endowments of b iodiversity and rich culture and heritage, 
lndia's total share in International Tourist Arriva ls remains a modest l.24%, which is certainly 
below India's huge potential. The Committee is of t he firm view that focused marketing and 
promotion efforts go a long way in promoting growth  of inbound tourism to India. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry should formulate an integrated marketing 
and promotional strategy to position India as a fav oured tourism destination in the 
tourism generating markets overseas and increase In dia's share of the global tourism 
market from the present 1.24% to 5% in the years to  come. The Committee feels that one of 
the effective steps in this direction would be re-c asting the website of the Ministry in 
an attractive and user-friendly manner. 
(Para 41) 
Reply of the Ministry 
1.1 The Ministry of Tourism, through its India Tour ism Offices Overseas along with Indian 
Missions abroad endeavours to position India as a p referred tourism destination in the tourism 
generating markets to promote various tourism produ cts and destinations and to increase India’s 
share in the global tourism market. The objectives are met through an integrated marketing and 
promotional strategy, global media campaign and syn ergized promotional measures in 
association with the Travel trade, State Governments and Indian Missions overseas. 
 
1.2 On the request of the Ministry of Tourism, the Ministry of External Affairs has 
designated Tourism Officers in the Indian Missions of top 20 source markets in October, 2021. 
The Ministry of Tourism has carried out a detailed benchmarking of global tourism marketing 
strategies and National Tourism Boards of the top 10 source markets.  The Ministry of Tourism is 
in process of revamping the Incredible India Websit e to make it more attractive and user-
friendly. 

Page 5 of 11 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation  
1.3 The Committee would like to know the details of  the integrated marketing and 
promotional strategy employed by the Ministry to po sition India as a preferred tourism 
destination and the targets set and achieved by the  Ministry to increase International 
Tourist Arrivals (ITAs) and share of India in the g lobal tourist market. The Committee 
believes that empowering tourism industry stakehold ers results in higher tourist 
satisfaction and desires to know whether the said s trategy encourages participation and 
empowerment of various Indian travel agencies and l ocal tourism stakeholders, 
cooperative groups and companies, in identifying ba rriers and enablers for destination 
tourism promotion.  
 
1.4 The Committee would like to be apprised of the outcome of the detailed 
benchmarking of global tourism marketing strategies  and National Tourism Boards of the 
top 10 source markets carried out by the Ministry of Tourism.  
 
Recommendation/Observation 
2. The Committee observes that one of the major rea sons for India's Inbound 
Tourism remaining grossly under-utilized has been t he high rates and multiplicity of taxes 
that deter inbound Tourism and have led to tourist packages being out priced vis-a-vis those in 
competing tourist destinations of other countries. The tax structure applicable to hotel 
accommodation, air travel, food and beverages consu mption, etc., not only leads to tourist 
packages being overpriced but also obstructs seamless flow of tourists to our historical sites. The 
Committee notes that despite Inbound Tourism being a major foreign exchange earner with 
foreign exchange earnings of Rs. 2,11,661/- crore i n 2019, the taxes levied on Inbound Tourism 
are among the highest in the country. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the tax regime 
applicable to the travel and tourism sector be revi ewed holistically so that with suitable 
amendments India can convert its comparative natura l and economic advantages into 
competitive advantages for the tourism sector. The Committee desires to be kept apprised of the 
steps taken and the result achieved in this regard. 
(Para 42) 
Reply of the Ministry  
2.1 The Ministry of Tourism has noted the recommend ation of the Committee. The Ministry 
will take up with the States to promote miniature s ouvenirs of historic monuments at various 
tourist destinations to create opportunities for the local community.  
 

Page 6 of 11 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation  
2.2 The Committee notes that the Ministry’s reply i s not in line with the 
recommendation of the Committee. The Committee reit erates that higher tax on inbound 
tourism raises tax revenue but can have a detriment al impact on the economy, foreign 
tourist arrivals and tourism competitiveness of a c ountry. Evaluating/reviewing the effect 
of tourism tax on Indian destinations that are entirely tourism dependent is also essential to 
sustain the local communities and various tourism a gencies. The Committee would like to 
be apprised of the steps taken by the Ministry as r egards the holistic review/evaluation of 
the tax regime applicable on the Indian travel and tourism sector. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
3. The Committee takes note of the written submissi ons of the Ministry of Tourism that “In 
order to forge partnership with Indian Missions for  Inbound Tourism and ensure effective 
implementation, a detailed framework has been evolv ed covering the vision and objectives, key 
strategic areas and governance of the institutional  arrangements.” The Committee also takes 
note of the key strategies envisaged by the Ministr y for promotion of Inbound Tourism like a 
holistic approach to it, country-specific strategic  plans, promotion of Medical and Wellness 
Tourism, promotion of MICE Tourism, etc. The Commit tee welcomes these developments but 
would like the Ministry to undertake concurrent and  impact evaluation of these strategies. 
Surveys may also be conducted periodically in impor tant source markets for India to assess the 
impact of the publicity campaigns on the decision of foreign tourists to visit India, the perception 
of the foreign tourists about the various facilitie s at tourist destinations, the preference of 
foreign tourists about the tourism products and destinations. 
(Para 43) 
Reply of the Ministry 
3.1 The Country specific strategy papers have been prepared by 20 Indian missions abroad 
for the focused promotion of Incredible India in re spective source markets. After due 
consultation with identified Central Ministries/ St ate Governments/ UT Administrations and 
Industry stakeholders, Ministry of Tourism has form ulated National Strategy and Roadmap for 
Medical  and Wellness Tourism and National strategy  for MICE Industry in January, 2022 and 
April, 2022, respectively. 
 
3.2 The recommendations/observations of the Committ ee are noted.  
 
 

Page 7 of 11 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
3.3 The Committee notes that the Ministry has not g iven any details of proposed 
surveys to be conducted in important source markets  for India.  The Committee observes 
that as per the information on the Website of the M inistry, the Market Research Division 
of the Ministry had last conducted surveys in the O verseas Markets of Japan, Germany, 
Russia, South Africa, South Korea and Turkey in Aug ust, 2016. The Tourism Satellite 
Account (TSA) which helps in assessing the size and  contribution of tourism to the 
economy using data from domestic and international tourism surveys was also last 
conducted in 2015-16.  The COVID pandemic had a per vasive effect on tourist behavior, 
impacting travel patterns, destination preferences,  duration of trips etc.  The Committee 
observes that no significant post-COVID surveys app ear to have been conducted by the 
Ministry to assess the changes in travel behaviour and attitudes, the Indian tourism 
industry’s post COVID preparedness and the perceptions of foreign tourists about India as 
a Safe Travel Destination in the post pandemic era.  The Committee desires to know about 
the action taken by the Ministry regarding periodic conduct of such surveys.  
 
Recommendation/Observation 
4. The Committee notes that on a request from Minis try of Tourism, the Ministry of External 
Affairs has appointed dedicated tourist officers in  20 Indian Missions abroad, which are key 
tourism source markets or potential markets for Ind ia. The Committee welcomes this step but 
exhorts the Government to create convergence and sy nergy among various ministries and 
stakeholders so that brand 'Incredible India' can b e promoted more effectively. The Committee 
would like to be apprised of the efficacy of appoin ting dedicated tourism officers in Indian 
Missions and embassies in showcasing and promoting the tourism destinations of the country in 
source markets. 
(Para 46) 
Reply of the Ministry  
4.1 The Ministry of External Affairs has informed t hat  Missions/Posts regularly promote 
‘Incredible India’ including Indian culture, herita ge, cinema, food, Indian Perspective, etc. 
through advertisements, seminars, exhibitions, show s, social media handles. The Twitter and 
Facebook page followers of the Missions/Posts have been growing consistently along with an 
increase in percentage of local followers. 
 
4.2 Dedicated Tourism Officers have been appointed in 20 Missions. Tourism Officers in the 
Missions/Embassies are of the rank Second Secretary /First Secretary. They report to 

Page 8 of 11 
 
Ambassador/ Consul General/ DCM/ DCG and have 1-2 s upport staff usually. An IFS 
Officer/MEA personnel serving in the Mission is appointed as Tourism Officer. 
 
4.3 The officer working in the Commerce Wing is usu ally given the responsibility of 
handling the tourism work. These Officers have subm itted to Ministry of Tourism, country-
specific strategy papers for promoting tourism to I ndia, in which they have shared valuable 
suggestions like giving free familiarization differ ent parts of India, organizing Thematic 
Conclaves such as on Yoga, Gastronomy, Buddhism; Ma rketing may be increased by Blog 
Writers/ Travel Writers etc. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
4.4 The Committee would like to be informed about t he impact of the appointment of 
Tourism Officers in 20 Indian Missions abroad, the action taken by the Ministry on each of 
the country-specific strategies and suggestions sub mitted by the Tourism officers and the 
outcomes of the same.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Page 9 of 11 
 
CHAPTER-IV  
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE FINAL 
REPLIES OF THE MINISTRY ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
-NIL- 
 
* * *  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Page 10 of 11 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/ OBSERVATIONS - AT A GLANCE  
CHAPTER-III  
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
THE MINISTRY HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
The Committee would like to know the details of the  integrated marketing and 
promotional strategy employed by the Ministry to po sition India as a preferred tourism 
destination and the targets set and achieved by the  Ministry to increase International 
Tourist Arrivals (ITAs) and share of India in the g lobal tourist market. The Committee 
believes that empowering tourism industry stakehold ers results in higher tourist 
satisfaction and desires to know whether the said s trategy encourages participation and 
empowerment of various Indian travel agencies and l ocal tourism stakeholders, 
cooperative groups and companies, in identifying ba rriers and enablers for destination 
tourism promotion.  
 (Para 1.3) 
The Committee would like to be apprised of the outc ome of the detailed 
benchmarking of global tourism marketing strategies  and National Tourism Boards of the 
top 10 source markets carried out by the Ministry of Tourism.  
 (Para 1.4) 
The Committee notes that the Ministry’s reply is no t in line with the 
recommendation of the Committee. The Committee reit erates that higher tax on inbound 
tourism raises tax revenue but can have a detriment al impact on the economy, foreign 
tourist arrivals and tourism competitiveness of a c ountry. Evaluating/reviewing the effect 
of tourism tax on Indian destinations that are entirely tourism dependent is also essential to 
sustain the local communities and various tourism a gencies. The Committee would like to 
be apprised of the steps taken by the Ministry as r egards the holistic review/evaluation of 
the tax regime applicable on the Indian travel and tourism sector.  
(Para 2.2) 
The Committee notes that the Ministry has not given  any details of proposed 
surveys to be conducted in important source markets  for India.  The Committee observes 
that as per the information on the Website of the M inistry, the Market Research Division 
of the Ministry had last conducted surveys in the O verseas Markets of Japan, Germany, 
Russia, South Africa, South Korea and Turkey in Aug ust, 2016. The Tourism Satellite 
Account (TSA) which helps in assessing the size and  contribution of tourism to the 
economy using data from domestic and international tourism surveys was also last 
conducted in 2015-16.  The COVID pandemic had a per vasive effect on tourist behavior, 
impacting travel patterns, destination preferences,  duration of trips etc.  The Committee 
observes that no significant post-COVID surveys app ear to have been conducted by the 
Ministry to assess the changes in travel behaviour and attitudes, the Indian tourism 
industry’s post COVID preparedness and the perceptions of foreign tourists about India as 
a Safe Travel Destination in the post pandemic era.  The Committee desires to know about 
the action taken by the Ministry regarding periodic conduct of such surveys.  
 (Para 3.3) 

Page 11 of 11 
 
The Committee would like to be informed about the i mpact of the appointment of 
Tourism Officers in 20 Indian Missions abroad, the action taken by the Ministry on each of 
the country-specific strategies and suggestions sub mitted by the Tourism officers and the 
outcomes of the same.   
(Para 4.4) 
 
 
* * * * 
 
 

12 
 
 
 
MINUTES 
  

13 
 
MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED 
PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM & 
CULTURE (2022-23) 
XIV 
FOURTEENTH MEETING 
  
The Committee met at 3:00 P.M. on Thursday, the 23rd March, 2023 in Committee Room 
„4‟, First Floor, Parliament House Annexe Extension, New Delhi. 
  
Members present: 
1. Shri V. Vijayasai Reddy             -             Chairman   
 
Rajya Sabha 
2. Shrimati S. Phangnon Konyak 
3. Shri Jugalsinh Lokhandwala 
4. Shri A. A. Rahim 
5. Dr. C. M. Ramesh 
6. Shri Vinay Dinu Tendulkar 
  
Lok Sabha 
7.  Shri Tapir Gao 
8.  Shri Sunil Baburao Mendhe 
9.  Shri K. Muraleedharan 
10. Shri Kamlesh Paswan 
11.  Shri Sunil Kumar Pintu 
12.  Shri Prince Raj 
13.  Shri Tirath Singh Rawat 
14.  Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
15.  Shri Dushyant Singh 
16.  Shri Ramdas Chandrabhanji Tadas 
17.  Shri Manoj Kumar Tiwari 
18.  Shri Dinesh Lal Yadav “Nirahua” 
  
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Swarabji B., Director 
Shrimati Monica Baa, Additional Director 
Shrimati Subha Chandrashekar, Deputy Secretary  
Shri Ranajit Chakraborty, Under Secretary 
 
 Shri Kaustubh Sudhakar Bhalekar, OSD to Hon‟ble Chairman  
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman extended a warm welcome to the Members of the 
Committee. He informed the Members that the agenda of the meeting was to consider and adopt 
four draft Action Taken Reports of the Committee    xxx    xxx    xxx. 
3. The Committee, thereafter, took up the first agenda for the meeting i.e., consideration and 
adoption of the following draft Action Taken Reports on:- 

14 
 
i. 313th Report on 'Promotion of Indian Tourism in Overseas Markets - Role of Overseas 
Tourist Offices and Indian Embassies'; 
ii. xxx    xxx    xxx; 
iii. xxx    xxx    xxx; and 
iv. xxx    xxx    xxx 
4.         The Committee considered the aforesaid draft Reports.  After a brief discussion, the 
Committee adopted the four draft Action Taken Reports and authorized the Chairman to carry 
out minor modifications of typographical and factual errors and formatting in all the Reports. 
5.         The Committee authorized the Shri Jugalsinh Lokhandwala, M.P. and in his absence, 
Shri A. A. Rahim, M.P., to present the abovementioned Reports in Rajya Sabha o n 24th March 
2023. The Committee also authorized Shri Tapir Gao, M.P. and in his absence, Shri Kamlesh 
Paswan, M.P. to lay the Reports on the Table of Lok Sabha on the same date. 
WITNESSES 
 
xxx    xxx    xxx 
 (The witnesses then withdrew) 
24.       A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept. 
25.       The meeting adjourned at 5:31 PM. 
 
New Delhi,                                                                                                  Swarabji B. 
23rd March, 2023                                                                                                            Director 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
_____________________ 
*Relates to other matters 