 
       
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTAR 
ON TRANSPORT, TOURIS 
Rajya 
September 
  
THREE HUNDRED 
Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/ 
Observations of the Committee contained in its Three Hundred 
Thirty Ninth Report on Demands for Grants (2023 
Ministry of Civil Aviation 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 21 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 21 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA  
RAJYA SABHA 
 
RELATED PARLIAMENTAR Y STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON TRANSPORT, TOURIS M AND CULTURE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya  Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
September , 2023 / Bhadra, 1945 (Saka) 
 
 
THREE HUNDRED FIFTY FIFTH REPORT  
Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/ 
of the Committee contained in its Three Hundred 
Thirty Ninth Report on Demands for Grants (2023 
Ministry of Civil Aviation  
 
resented to the Rajya Sabha on 21 st  September, 2023 ) 
Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 21 st  September, 2023 ) 
 
Y STANDING COMMITTEE  
REPORT NO.  
355 
 
Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/ 
of the Committee contained in its Three Hundred 
Thirty Ninth Report on Demands for Grants (2023 -24) of 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Website:      https://rajyasabha.nic.in   
 E-mail:     rsc-tt@sansad.nic.in  
 

 
 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA  
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT,  
TOURISM AND CULTURE  
 
 
THREE HUNDRED FIFTY FIFTH REPORT  
Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/ 
Observations of the Committee contained in its Three Hundred 
Thirty Ninth Report on Demands for Grants (2023-24) of 
Ministry of Civil Aviation 
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 21 st  September, 2023 ) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 21 st  September, 2023 ) 
 
 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
September, 2023 / Bhadra, 1945 (Saka) 
 
Hindi version of this publication is also available  

 
 
 
C O N T E N T S 
 
P A G E S  
 
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE      i 
2. INTRODUCTION        ii 
3. ACRONYMS                iii-vii 
 4. REPORT                                1-73 
5. RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS-AT A GLANCE   74-80  
6. ANNEXURES         81-108 
    7. *MINUTES   
 
         
        
        
      
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
______________________________________ 
 
*To be appended 
109-111

i 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE  
 (2023-24) 
 
 (Constituted on 13 th  September, 2023) 
 
1. Shri V. Vijayasai Reddy   - Chairman 
 
Rajya Sabha  
2. Shri Mohammed Nadimul Haque 
3. Shrimati S. Phangnon Konyak 
4. Shri Manas Ranjan Mangaraj 
5. Dr. Sonal Mansingh 
6. Shrimati Rajani Ashokrao Patil 
7. Shri A. A. Rahim 
8. Dr. C. M. Ramesh 
9. (vacant ) 
10. (vacant ) 
 
Lok Sabha 
11.  Shri Anto Antony 
12.  Shri Ram Margani Bharat 
13.  Shri Tapir Gao  
14.  Shri Rahul Kaswan 
15.  Shri Ramesh Chandra Majhi 
16.  Shri Sunil Baburao Mendhe 
17.  Shri K. Muraleedharan 
18.  Shri S. S.Palanimanickam  
19.  Shri Chhedi Paswan   
20.  Shri Kamlesh Paswan  
21.  Shri Sunil Kumar Pintu 
22.  Shri Prince Raj 
23.  Shri Tirath Singh Rawat 
24.  Shrimati Mala Roy 
25.  Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
26.  Shri Dushyant Singh 
27.  Shri Rajbahadur Singh 
28.  Shri Ramdas Chandrabhanji Tadas 
29.  Shri Manoj Kumar Tiwari 
30.  Shri Krupal Balaji Tumane 
31. Shri Dinesh Lal Yadav "Nirahua"  
 
SECRETARIAT 
Dr. Raghab Prasad Dash, Joint Secretary 
Shrimati Monica Baa, Additional Director 
Shrimati Subha Chandrashekar, Deputy Secretary  
Shri Ranajit Chakraborty, Under Secretary 
Shri Shrey Kansal, Secretariat Assistant  
 
 

ii 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairman, Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport, 
Tourism and Culture, having been authorized by the Committee to present on its behalf, do 
hereby present this Three Hundred Fifty Fifth Repor t on the Action Taken by the 
Government on the recommendations/ observations of the Committee contained in its Three 
Hundred Thirty Ninth Report on Demands for Grants ( 2023-24) of Ministry of Civil 
Aviation. 
2. The Three Hundred Thirty Ninth Report  of the Department-related Parliamentary 
Standing Committee on Transport, Tourism and Cultur e was presented to the Parliament on 
the 13 th  March, 2023. 
3.  The Action Taken Replies on the recommendations  of the Committee contained in its 
Three Hundred Thirty Ninth Report were received fro m the Ministry of Civil Aviation on 
19 th  June, 2023. 
4. The Committee considered and adopted the Report in its meeting held on the 19 th  
September, 2023.   
 
 
(V. Vijayasai Reddy) 
NEW DELHI;                                                           Chairman,  
September 19, 2023                                                 Department-related Parliamentary Standing             
Bhadra 28, 1945 (Saka)                                     Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture,  
                                                                                                                                 Rajya Sabha 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

iii 
 
 
 
ACRONYMS  
AAAL  Alliance Air Aviation Limited 
AAI  Airports Authority of India 
AAIB  Aircraft Accident Investigation Bureau  
AAICLAS  AAI Cargo Logistics and Allied Services Company Limited  
ACI  Airports Council International  
AED  Aircraft Engineering Directorate 
AERA  Airports Economic Regulatory Authority  
AI  Air India 
AIAHL  Air India Assets Holding Limited 
AIASL  Air India Airport Services Limited 
AIESL  Air India Engineering Services Limited 
AIL  Air India Limited 
AIP  Aeronautical Information Publication 
AISAM  Air India Specific Alternative Mechanism  
AISATS  Air India SATS Airport Services Private Limited 
AIXL  Air India Express Limited  
ALG  Advanced Landing Ground 
AME  Aircraft Maintenance Engineer  
AMO  Aircraft Maintenance Organisation  
ARFF  Aircraft Rescue and Fire Fighting  
ASA  Air Services Agreement 
ASFI  Air Sports Federation of India  
ASKM  Available Seat Kilometre 
ATC  Air Traffic Control 
ATCO  Air Traffic Controller 
ATF  Aviation Turbine Fuel 
ATM  Air Traffic Management  
BCAS  Bureau of Civil Aviation Security 
BE  Budget Estimates 
BIS  Bureau of Indian Standards 
BVLOS  Beyond Visual Line of Sight Operations  
CACS  Centralised Access Control System  
CAG  Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
CAR  Civil Aviation Requirements 
CBIC  Central Board of Indirect Taxes and Customs 
CCEA  Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs 
CCRC  Customs Cost Recovery Charges 
CCTV  Closed Circuit Television 
CERT-In  Computer Emergency Response Team - India 
CGHS  Central Government Health Scheme  
CGST  Central Goods and Services Tax 

iv 
 
CISF  Central Industrial Security Force 
CNG  Compressed Natural Gas 
CNS  Communications, Navigation and Surveillance Systems 
CORSIA  Carbon Offsetting and Reduction Scheme for International Aviation 
COVID  Corona Virus Disease 
CPL  Commercial Pilot License 
CS-UAS  Certification Scheme for Unmanned Aircraft Systems 
CUP  Central Utility Plant 
DBFOT  Design-Build-Finance-Operate-Transfer 
DGCA  Directorate General of Civil Aviation  
DGFT  Directorate General of Foreign Trade 
DIAL  Delhi International Airport Limited 
DIPAM  Department of Investment and Public Asset Management  
DME  Di-Methyl Ether 
DO  Demi-Official 
DPR  Detailed Project Report 
EBITDA  Earnings Before Interest, Taxes, Depreciation and Amortization 
EI  Effective Implementation  
EOI  Expression of Interest  
EPC  Engineering, Procurement and Construction 
ESS  East Substation  
EV  Enterprise Value 
FAA  Federal Aviation Administration  
FAI  Fédération Aéronautique Internationale 
FDI  Foreign Direct Invesstment 
FRP  Financial Restructuring Plan 
FTO  Flying Training Organisation 
FTWZ  Free Trade and Warehousing Zones  
FUA  Flexible Use of Airspace  
FY  Financial Year 
GAGAN  GEO Augmented Navigation  
GAL  GMR Airports Limited 
GEO  Geostationary Earth Orbit 
GFA  GreenField Airports 
GIA  Grants-In-Aid 
GMR  Grandhi Mallikarjuna Rao 
GOI  Government of India 
GoMH  Government of Maharashtra 
GPS  Global Positioning System 
GST  Goods and Services Tax 
GTO  Gross Turnover Tax 
HAL  Hindustan Aeronautics Limited 
HCI  Hotel Corporation Limited 
HFM  Honourable Finance Minister 
HMCA  Honourable Minister of Civil Aviation 

v 
 
IACS  International Air Connectivity Scheme  
IAF  Indian Air Force 
IB  Intelligence Bureau 
ICAO  International Civil Aviation Organization  
ICVM  ICAO Coordinated Validation Mission 
IEBR  Internal External Budgetary Resources 
IFR  Instrument Flight Rules 
IGRUA  Indira Gandhi Rashtriya Uran Akademi  
IGST  Integrated Goods and Services Tax 
ILS  Instrument Landing System 
INLUS  Indian Land Uplink Station  
INMCC  Indian Master Control Centre  
INR  Indian Rupee 
INRES  Indian Reference Station  
IOC  International Olympics Committee  
IP  Internet Protocol 
IPD  Indoor Patients Department  
ISMS  Information Security Management System 
ISO  International Organization for Standardization 
ISRO  Indian Space Research Organisation 
IT  Information Technology 
ITC  Input Tax Credit 
JDC  Justice dharmadhikari Committee 
JV  Joint Venture 
JVC  Joint Venture Company 
KL  KiloLitre 
KSIDC  Kerala State Industrial Development Corporation 
LEA  Law Enforcement Agency 
LPV  Localizer Performance with Vertical Guidance  
MIAL  Mumbai International Airport Limited 
MIHAN  Multi Modal International Cargo Hub and Airport at Nagpur 
MIL  MIHAN India Limited 
MM  Multi-Mode 
MoCA  Ministry of Civil Aviation 
MoD  Ministry of Defence 
MoF  Ministry of Finance 
MoP&NG  Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas 
MoU  Memorandum of Understanding  
MPPA  Million Passengers Per Annum  
MRO  Maintenance, Repair and Overhaul 
MRP  Maximum Retail Price 
MRSS  Main Receiving Substation 
MSME  Micro, Small and Medium Enterprise  
MSW  Municipal Solid Wastes 
NAL  National Aerospace Laboratories 

vi 
 
NASG  National Air Sports Guidelines  
NASP  National Air Sport Policy  
NCAP  National Civil Aviation Policy  
NCD  Non-Convertible Debenture  
NCIIPC  National Critical Information Infrastructure Protection Centre 
NE  North East 
NER  North Eastern Region 
NHA  National Health Authority  
NIAL  Noida International Airport Limited 
NMP  National Monestisation Pipeline 
NSOP  Non-Scheduled Operator's Permit 
OBW  Office Block West  
OEM  Original Equipment Manufacturer 
OLS  Obstacle Limitation Surfaces 
OM  Office Memorandum 
OMC  Operations Management Center 
OPD  Out Patient Department  
PAF  Project Affected Families 
PIM  Preliminary Information Memorandum 
PLI  Production Linked Incentive  
PM  Prime Minister 
PMIC  Project Monitoring and Implementation Committee 
PPL  Private Pilot License  
PPP  Public Private Partnership  
PSU  Public Sector Undertaking 
RBD  Reservation Booking Designator  
RCS  Regional Connectivity Scheme 
RDE  Radiological Detection Equipment  
RDG  Route Dispersal Guidelines  
RE  Revised Estimates 
RED  Regional Executive Director 
RFP  Request For Proposal 
RGNAU  Rajiv Gandhi National Aviation University  
RNFC  Route Navigation Facility Charges  
RNP  Required Navigation Performance 
RoFR  Right of First Refusal 
RPTO  Remote Pilot Training Organsation 
RTR (A)  Radio Telephony Restricted (Aeronautical)  
SAF  Sustainable Aviation Fuel 
SAO  Select Airline Operator 
SARP  Standards and Recommended Practice  
SATS  Singapore Airport Terminal Services 
SBAS  Satellite Based Augmentation System  
SCOMET  Special Chemicals, Organisms, Materials, Equipment and Technologies  
SEZ  Special Economic Zone 

vii 
 
SFC  Standing Finance Committee 
SID  Standard Instrument Departure  
SLB  Sale LeaseBack 
SoD  State of Design 
SoR  State of Registry 
SPV  Special Purpose Vehicle 
STAR  Standard Instrument Arrival 
STC  Supplemental Type Certificate 
TAP  Turn-Around Plan  
TNLC  Terminal Navigational Landing Charges 
UAS  Unmanned Aircraft System 
UDAN  Ude Desh ka Aam Nagrik 
UP  Uttar Pradesh 
URL  Uniform Resource Locator 
US  United States 
USA  United States of America 
USD  United States Dollar 
USOAP  Universal Safety Oversight Audit Programme  
UT  Union Territory 
UTIITSL  UTI Infrastructure Technology And Services Limited 
UTM  UAS Traffic Management  
VAT  Value Added Tax 
VFR  Visual Flight Rule 
VGF  Viability Gap Funding 
WA  Water Aerodromes 
YIAPL  Yamuna International Airport Private Limited 
 

1 
 
REPORT 
 
The Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Ministry of Civil 
Aviation on the recommendations/observations as contained in its Three Hundred Thirty -
Ninth Report on Demands for Grants (2023 -24) of Ministry of Civil Aviation which  was 
presented to both the Houses of Parliament on 13th March, 2023.  
 
2.  The Action Taken Replies were received from the Ministry on 19 th June, 2023 in 
respect of all the observations/ recommendations contained in the Report. The replies have 
been categorized as follows:- 
 
Chapter-I: 
Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the Ministry: 
Paragraph Nos.: 12, 24, 26, 32, 35, 41, 43, 71, 170, 175 and 203.   
Total: 11 
 
Chapter-II:  
Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not desi re to pursue in 
view of the replies of the Ministry: 
Paragraph Nos.: 13, 14, 15, 25, 36, 44, 56, 57, 66, 67, 72, 73, 75, 77, 79, 80, 81, 82, 
92, 103, 105, 106, 115, 119, 120, 126, 127, 128, 136, 137, 141, 145, 146, 150, 155, 
156, 162, 164, 167, 173, 174, 1 78, 179, 180, 181, 186, 189, 190, 195, 196, 204 and 
205.    
Total: 52 
 
Chapter-III: 
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replie s of the Ministry have not 
been accepted by the Committee: 
Paragraph Nos.: 27, 30, 37, 42, 48, 52, 60, 61, 64, 85, 86, 88, 104, 113, 114, 116, 
139, 149, 151, 159, 160, 185 and 197. 
Total: 23 
 
Chapter-IV:  
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which the final replies of the Ministry 
are still awaited: 
Paragraph Nos.: 161  
Total: 1 
 
  
  
  

2 
 
CHAPTER-I 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY 
THE MINISTRY 
 
Assessment of Demands for Grants (2023-24) and Annual Plan (2022-23) 
Recommendation/Observation 
1. The Committee notes that the projected demand of the Ministry for B.E. 2023 -24 was 
Rs.3,532.13/- crore. The Ministry of Finance reduced it to Rs. 3,113.36/ - crore, which 
indicates a reduction of Rs. 418.77/ - crore. The Budget allocation for 2023 -24 is 66.75% 
lower than R.E. 2022-23. The Ministry also stated that the Ministry of Finance d id not assign 
any reasons for the reduction. However, the requirement of additional funds to meet the 
activities of the Ministry will be taken up at R.E. 2023-24 stage. 
 (Para 12) 
Reply of the Ministry 
1.1 The requirement of additional funds to meet the activities of the Ministry will be 
taken up at R.E. 2023-24 stage. 
 
Regional Connectivity Scheme – UdeDeshkaAamNagrik (RCS-UDAN) 
Recommendation/Observation 
2. The Committee was apprised of the R.E., Actual Expenditure and Actual/R.E. 
percentage since the introduction of the RCS Scheme. The Committee notes that the Ministry 
has been able to make utilization of the R.E. allocated to it with utilization figures as high as 
100% (2017 -18); 91.61% (2018 -19), 108.26% (2019 -20); 100% (2020 -21); and 98.62% 
(2021-22). The Committee was also informed that 53.67% of the R.E. allocation for 2022 -23 
has been utilized upto 31.01.2023. 
(Para 24) 
Reply of the Ministry 
2.1 The entire allocation of Rs 900.00 crore at RE 2022 -23 stage for the scheme RCS -
Udan has been fully utilised (100%). 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
3. The Committee hopes that the Ministry would be able to utilize the funds allocated for 
B.E. 2023 -24 to the maximum extent possible, by removing the shortcoming and obstacles 
observed earlier and through bette r planning. The need for better planning in the RCS is the 
need of the hour, since a major allocation of Rs. 1,244.07/ - crore, accounting to 39.95% of 
the B.E. 2023-24 allocation of Rs. 3,113.36 has been made in the scheme. Besides, RCS is the 
second highe st expenditure of the Ministry for 2023 -24. This greatly illustrates the 

3 
 
importance the Government attaches to the Scheme. The Committee would like to highlight 
the fact that a major allocation of B.E. for the Ministry is towards AIAHL for disinvestment 
of Air India, which is not creating any asset for the Nation. Hence, the allocation for RCS 
assumes more significance as it creates permanent assets for the Nation and adds to its Gross 
Domestic Product. 
 (Para 26) 
Reply of the Ministry 
3.1 Recommendations of the committee have been  noted. All efforts would be made 
for utilization of funds allocated under B.E. 2023-24 for RCS to the maximum extent. 
 
Achievements in 2022-23 
Recommendation/Observation 
4. The Committee notes that as per the Output Outcome Monit oring Framework for 
2022-23 (till 31.12.2022), the Ministry has not been able to achieve the targets in most cases, 
with achievements in the range of 40% to 67% only. Only in the case of passengers travelled 
in NER, it has achieved a percentage of 261.5%. The Committee notes the low performance 
of the Ministry on almost all the constituents of the RCS -UDAN Scheme, except one. The 
Committee hopes that with the increased allocation, the Ministry would do meticulous 
planning to ensure full utilization of funds and achievement of targets. 
 (Para 32) 
Reply of the Ministry 
4.1 Recommendations/observations of the Committee have been noted. 
 
Revival of Underserved and Unserved Airports 
Recommendation/Observation 
5. The Committee during its earlier deliberations was informed that the reasons for the 
delay in operations of RCS projects, relate to delay in completing the work owing to land 
issues; delay in removing obstacles; and delay in regulatory clearances. Further, there were 
Airline related issues such as delay in  obtaining Scheduled Commuter Operators Permit by 
new entrant Airlines; non -availability of suitable aircraft; aircraft leasing issues; long lead 
time for delivery; maintenance issues of small aircraft; difficulties in procuring spares from 
abroad. Also, C OVID-19 pandemic has severely impacted domestic and international flight 
operations, due to suspension of scheduled commercial operations. Furthermore, reduced 
passenger demand, un-viability of flight operations, collapse of revenue streams coupled with 
high fixed costs resulted into liquidity crunch for airlines. The Committee notes that the 
delays are mostly due to operational issues or lack of compliance of agreements by the Select 
Airline Operators (SAOs) or issues such as land availability, pend ing with concerned State 
Governments. The Committee feels that such impediments should be removed at the earliest 

4 
 
to enable the Ministry to achieve its set targets. The Committee, therefore, recommends that 
before allotment of RCS routes, the antecedents a nd past performance of SAOs may be 
thoroughly scrutinized, so that difficulties are not faced at a later stage. The defaulting SAOs 
should be held accountable for not meeting deadlines. The Committee also recommends close 
coordination with State Government s to remove bottlenecks, such as land availability issues 
in operationalization of RCS routes. 
(Para 35) 
Reply of the Ministry 
5.1 Recommendations/observations of the Committee have been noted. 
 
NER Schemes: Providing Air Connectivity and Aviation Infrastructure in NER 
Recommendation/Observation 
6. The Committee notes that out of the total B.E. 2023 -24 for NER Schemes amounting 
to Rs.230.01/ - crore (S. Nos. 1, 2, 3 & 4), Viability Gap Funding (VGF) amounts to Rs. 
190.01/- crore for Alliance Air; SAO ; and Alliance Air for Dornier Operations in NER. The 
Committee hopes that VGF will give a helping hand in improving air connectivity in NE 
Region, which has suffered due to the non -commercial viability of routes and uncertainty of 
operations due to weathe r conditions which led to non -operation of scheduled airlines. The 
Committee notes that out of the total Scheme allocation of Rs. 500/ - crore from 01.04.2021 to 
31.03.2024, Rs. 230.01/- crore has been allocated for B.E. 2023-24, accounting to 46% of the 
total budget allocation for the Scheme, while it was allocated Rs. 178.77/ - crore at R.E. 
20223-23 stage. This indicates the priority of the Government towards this Scheme. 
 (Para 41) 
Reply of the Ministry 
6.1 Recommendations/observation of the Committee have been noted. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
7. The Members of the Committee during its earlier deliberations, repeatedly pointed 
out the remoteness of the NER and the need for adequate air connectivity in the Region. The 
Committee had taken up the issue of the development of Advanced Landing Grounds (ALGs) 
for the State of Arunachal Pradesh, specifically at Dirang, Daporijo and Anini, with the 
Ministry. Besides, the extension work at Dibrugarh Airport; direct flight for Itanagar; and 
modernisation work at  Dimapur Airport has also been highlighted by the Committee, since 
these are the main airports connecting the NE Region to the rest of the country. Besides, the 
Committee had also taken up the issue of high prices of air tickets for the NE flights. 
(Para 43) 
Reply of the Ministry 
7.1 Recommendations/observation of the Committee have been noted. 

5 
 
 
Surge in Air Fares and Rationalisation 
Recommendation/Observation 
8. The Committee takes note of the fact that after the repeal of the Air Corporations Act, 
1953, the airfare is market driven and depends on market fares, and is neither established 
nor regulated by the Government. It notes the DGCA’s comments that the airfares were 
regulated for a fixed period during the COVID pandemic in compliance with Aircraft Act , 
1934 and the regulation was withdrawn as the COVID pandemic abated and that airlines are 
free to fix reasonable tariffs under the Aircraft Rules, 1937, with regard to cost of operation, 
services, reasonable profit and generally prevailing tariff. 
 (Para 71) 
Reply of the Ministry 
8.1 Observation of the Committee has been noted. 
 
International Operations 
Recommendation/Observation 
9. The Committee notes the Ministry’s reply with regards to granting ‘Point of Call’ 
status to International Airports in the country. The Committee feels that parity should be 
maintained between the international and domestic carriers for operating passenger services 
in the country. The Committee recommends that Ministry should identify a balanced 
approach to liberalize the guid elines for granting of ‘Point of Call’ status to the Indian 
airports to ensure better air connectivity. The Committee opines that better connectivity to 
international airports in the country will give passengers more options to choose from and 
increase the  influx of international passengers. The enhanced number of international 
passengers/tourists will eventually boost the tourism prospects of the country and aid in 
economic development. 
 (Para 170) 
Reply of the Ministry 
9.1 The Ministry has noted the Committee‟s observations. 
 
Sustainable Aviation 
Recommendation/Observation 
10. The Committee recommends that the Government should encourage the use of Bio -
ATF and formulate a policy in this regard. The Ministry should also assess the requirement 
of necessary technological innovations to ensure that the use of Bio -ATF is promoted. The 
Committee opines that the FUA will lead to optimal utilization of Indian airspace and result 
in reduction of flight time; fuel consumption; and carbon emission. 

6 
 
 (Para 175) 
Reply of the Ministry 
10.1 The Ministry has noted the Committee‟s observations. 
 
Promotion of Research and Development 
Recommendation/Observation 
11. The Committee notes the progress of Research and Development initiatives that the 
Ministry has introduced with respect to access control and security at airports. The 
Committee appreciates that the Ministry has switched to a biometric enabled system from the 
earlier paper -based permits for the movement of employees in Indian airports, ensuring a 
paperless environment. The Committee would like to know the details of the 48 airports 
which are planned to be covered under the Centralised Access Control System in the 1st 
phase. The Committee desires to know whether the Ministry plans to cover the remainin g 
airports in the subsequent phases and the details thereof. The Committee recommends that 
the Ministry should devise a foolproof mechanism to keep a check on the automated access 
control of employees and vehicles to ensure unauthorized intrusion in the airports. 
 (Para 203) 
Reply of the Ministry 
11.1 The recommendations of the Committee are noted. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

7 
 
CHAPTER-II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES OF THE MINISTRY 
 
Assessment of Demands for Grants (2023-24) and Annual Plan (2022-23) 
Recommendation/Observation 
1. The Committee notes that the B.E. allocation for 2023 -24 is Rs. 3,113.36/ - crore, 
which is by far the lowest of all the B.E. allocation in the last five years. In fact, th e B.E. 
allocation has been steadily decreasing from Rs. 6,602.86/ - crore (2018 -19), to Rs. 
4,500.00/- crore (2019-20), to Rs. 3,797.71/ - crore (2020-21), to Rs. 3,224.67/ - crore (2021-
22), barring the year 2022 -23 when the Ministry received a B.E. allocati on of Rs. 10,667/ - 
crore on account of disinvestment of Air India., and now the lowest at Rs. 3,113.36/ - crore 
for B.E. (2023 -24). These decreasing allocations have been made despite the increasing 
trend of inflation in the country, which implies that the effective allocations are ever lower. 
Even during allocations at R.E. stage, the fund allocation remained below the projected 
demand of the Ministry, other than the year 2021 -22, though the Ministry has shown a good 
capacity to absorb the funds allocated to it, with percentage expenditure as compared to R.E. 
allocations i.e., as high as 98.96% (2018 -19), 98.56% (2019 -20), 99.07% (2020 -21) and 
98.99% (2021 -22). For the year 2022 -23, the percentage expenditure was 86.14% as on 
31.01.2023. The Ministry assured the Committee in its Demands for Grants meeting that full 
utilization of the R.E. allocation would be achieved. 
 (Para 13) 
Reply of the Ministry 
1.1 The actual expenditure up to 31.03.2023 during the FY 2022 -23 is Rs 9321.06 crore 
which is 99.54% of RE allocation of Rs 9363.70 crore, hence the consistency of absorbing 
capacity of the funds allocated to the Ministry is maintained over the years. 
  
Safety of Air Transport Operations 
Recommendation/Observation 
2. The Committee is of the view that the projected demand of the Ministry reflects the 
expenditure on targets and objectives it seeks to achieve in that particular financial year.  The 
Committee is aware that the Civil Aviation Industry had suffered a major setback on account 
of Covid-19 pandemic and needs full budgetary support from the Government at this critical 
juncture, where it has to recover its losses and come up to its earlier level in the first instance 
and then grow at an even faster rate. The Committee recommends that the Ministry of 
Finance should favourably consider additional grant of funds to the Ministry at R.E. stage, to 
enable the Ministry to achieve its set targets and achieve the aim of the Indian Civil Aviation 
Industry. 

8 
 
 (Para 14) 
Reply of the Ministry 
2.1 The recommendation o f the Committee has been noted for compliance.  Ministry of 
Civil Aviation will take the issue with the Ministry of Finance for provisioning of additional 
grant favourably at RE stage to enable the Ministry to achieve its set targets and achieve the 
aim of the Indian Civil Aviation Industry. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
3. The Committee notes that a major part of the B.E. allocation in the financial years 
2021-22, 2022 -23 and 2023 -24 consists of the budgetary allocation towards the 
disinvestment of Air India, which effectively did not create any asset for the Civil Aviation 
Sector in the long run. The Committee hopes that the trend would be reversed with the 
completion process of the disinvestment of Air India and more focus would be laid towards 
asset creation in the Civil Aviation Sector. 
(Para 15) 
Reply of the Ministry 
3.1 During the process of disinvestment of Air India, calculation was done for 
requirement of funds for repayment of past Government borrowing, past Government 
guaranteed SLB Lease rentals and past dues/liabilities of Air India after the taking over of the 
debt of Rs. 15,300 crore by M/s Talace Pvt. Ltd. Accordingly, financial support was sought in 
FY 2021-22 for payment of remaining debt and liabilities.  
3.2 Accordingly, financial support of Rs. 61,130.96 crore was provided to Air India 
through AIAHL in the form of equity in FY 2021 -22 in respect of repayment of past govt. 
borrowing, past govt. guaranteed SLB Lease rentals and past dues/liabilities of AIL.  
3.3 In FY 2022-23, the BE allocation of Rs. 9,259.91 crore included   the provision of Rs. 
7,000 crore towards redemption of Series 1 NCDs issued by AIAHL. The allocation was, 
therefore, substantially higher compared to other financial years. Series 1 NCDs were 
redeemed on the due date i.e. 16 Dec 2022 from  the funds provided by GOI through 
budgetary allocations. 
3.4 In FY 2023 -24, the BE Allocation of Rs. 1144.49 crore is provided towards interest 
servicing of NCDs and Admin expenses for AIAHL.  Budget allocated to AIAHL  is 
specifically for payment of liability on account of interest payment of Government 
guaranteed NCDs issued by AIAHL. 
  
Regional Connectivity Scheme – UdeDeshkaAamNagrik (RCS-UDAN) 
Recommendation/Observation 
4. The Committee appreciates the high levels of utilization of the allocated budget at 
R.E. levels, particularly from 2018 -19 to 2021 -22, which indicates the proper planning and 

9 
 
expenditure of funds on part of the Ministry. The Committee notes that due to the  renewed 
thrust of the Government in the Scheme, a major allocation of Rs. 1,244.07/ - crore has been 
made under the RCS, which is more than double the earlier allocation of Rs. 600/ - crore in 
B.E. 2022-23. However, it also notes that there has been an unde rutilization of funds for the 
year 2022 -23, wherein an amount of Rs. 578.98/ - crore accounting to 53.67% of the 
allocated R.E. could be utilized out of a total of Rs. 1,078.81/ - crores. The Committee feels 
that at the present pace of utilization, the Minis try may not be able to fully utilize the 
allocated funds. The Committee desire to know the reasons for the underutilization for 2022 -
23, whereas it has continued to fully utilize the funds earlier. 
(Para 25) 
Reply of the Ministry 
4.1 The allocation at BE 2 023-24 is Rs. 1244.07 crore which includes Rs. 1014.06 crore 
against RCS Udan and Rs. 230.01 crore for RCS (NER). The allocation of RE 2022 -23 was 
Rs. 1078.81 crore which includes Rs. 900.00 crore against RCS Udan and Rs. 178.81 crore 
for RCS (NER).  
4.2 The total utilization of funds upto 31 st  March, 2023 was Rs.1063.81 crore which 
includes Rs. 900.00 crore for RCS  Udan and Rs. 163.81 for RCS(NER) which is 98.61% of 
the RE 2022 -23 allocation. Major challenges faced in revival of  airports/Heliports & Wat er 
Aerodromes and the subsequent under-utilisation of funds are given below: 
i) Delay in completing the work owing to land requirements and further there is a delay 
in removing obstacles resulting in the delay in regulatory clearance.  
ii) Non-readiness of civil airports/heliports due to unavailability of land. 
 
Revival of Underserved and Unserved Airports 
Recommendation/Observation 
5. The Committee was informed that as per the Output Outcome Monitoring Framework 
(2023-24), the Ministry intends to facilitate affordable air transport across regional routes 
with an aim to increase the number of passengers travelled in RCS flights to 30 lakh in 2023 -
24, which comes to an average of 2.5 lakh passengers per month. Hence, the Committee is of 
the opinion that the Min istry has to improve its performance in the RCS passenger segment 
considerably to achieve the set targets, which presently stands at 20.1 lakh passengers or 
67% of the set targets. The Committee hopes that the Ministry would be able to remove the 
bottlenecks to help it achieve its targets. 
 (Para 36) 
Reply of the Ministry 
5.1 Corrective steps taken by the Government to improve the performance of the RCS 
flights and increase the number of passengers   include:-  
i) Periodic review of the progress of upgradation  works and removal of bottlenecks in 
operationalization of airports. 

10 
 
ii) Provided certain financial flexibilities as a temporary measure which included 
reduced performance guarantee and return of addl. performance guarantee subject to 
fulfilment of certain conditions.  
iii) Flexibility to convert RCS seats to non -RCS seats, flexibility to operate between 3 
and 7/14 flights per week, suspension of performance criteria and extension in 
contract period for lockdown duration. 
iv) Allowed NSOP operations in fixed wing (i/c s eaplanes) apart from operations of 
helicopters allowed earlier for expeditious operationalization of routes. 
v) Reduction in VGF by at least 40% for specific categories of routes had been mandated 
as per the policy reform order dated 7th January 2021 and were  made effective from 
17th July 2020 as per the policy reform dated 27th January 2021. This reduction was 
effective till 1st March 2022. The SAOs have been compensated for their actual 
number of RCS seats lost instead of compensating for the absolute VGF lo st in that 
tenure to keep the  routes  sustainable. 
 
NER Schemes: Providing Air Connectivity and Aviation Infrastructure in NER 
Recommendation/Observation 
6. The Committee notes that in the Budget for 2023-24, a special emphasis has been laid 
on providing air connectivity and aviation infrastructure in NE Region, with an allocation of 
Rs. 230.01/- crore. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry may make all out 
efforts to create a viable air connectivity network in the NE Region, which will co nnect this 
remote Region to the rest of the country, both in economic and cultural terms. The Committee 
may also be informed about the detailed plans for development/ modernization of the airports 
mentioned by the Committee, alongwith the other airports to be developed in this Region. 
 (Para 44) 
Reply of the Ministry 
6.1 During four round of biddings, 142 valid Fixed wing and Helicopter routes were 
awarded in North Eastern States, which will help  promote tourism, investments and  ease of 
doing business.   
6.2 36 airports / Heliports / Water Aerodromes are identified under the UDAN scheme in 
NER out of which 10 have been operationalized so far. Details are attached at Annexure-II. 
 
Air India Assets Holding Limited (AIAHL) 
Recommendation/Observation 
7. The Committee notes that AIAHL has received a major portion of the total budget 
allocation for the Ministry of Civil Aviation, since its incorporation. The allocation share for 
AIAHL shot up from 57.78% (2019 -20), to 58.06% (2020 -21), to 70.36 (2021 -22) to  a 
massive 86.81% in the year 2022-23. The Committee also notes that the budgetary allocation 
is reduced for the F.Y. 2023-24 as compared to the previous years, since only a provision has 

11 
 
been made for the payment of interest due on Series 2 and Series 3 N CDs during the F.Y. 
2023-24. 
 (Para 56) 
Reply of the Ministry 
7.1 The Special Purpose Vehicle (SPV), namely, AI Assets Holding Limited (AIAHL) 
was formed in 2018 for warehousing accumulated working capital loan not backed by any 
asset along with four subsidiaries, non -core assets, painting and art efacts and other non -
operational assets of Air India Limited.  
7.2 During the year 2019, in order to prepare Air India for strategic disinvestment, a 
strategic plan had been approved by the Government to estab lish a strong competitive and 
self-sustaining airline. The plan, inter -alia, included transfer of debt amounting to Rs 29,464 
crore from Air India Ltd to the SPV viz. Air India Assets Holding Co Ltd.(AIAHL). Non -
convertible Debentures (NCDs) for an amount of Rs. 21,985 crore were subsequently issued 
by AIAHL in September and October 2019 under three (3) Series of listed NCDs, which are 
fully assured for servicing and repayments through the budgetary support/grants from the 
Government. The proceeds of these NCDs, along with the monetization proceeds from sale of 
properties identified for transfer to AIAHL, were utilized in 2019 -20 to settle the debts 
identified by AIL totalling to Rs.22,064 crore. The remaining AIL identified debt of Rs.7400 
crore was paid at the time of disinvestment of AIL. 
7.3 Out of the aforesaid NCDs issued by AIAHL, NCD amounting to Rs. 7000 crore was 
due on 16.12.2022 and the same has been paid on 16.12.2022. Therefore, there is an increase 
in budgetary allocation of AIAHL. 
7.4 Further, the tenure of the remaining NCDs of Rs. 7000 crore (series -2) and of Rs. 
7985 crore (series -3) is of 10 years which will be due in 2029. Therefore, till FY 2029 -30, 
interest payment for these NCDs will be paid through Budgetary support provided to MoCA 
and realization of monetization proceeds. After completion of tenure of the NCDs of Rs. 
7000 crore and Rs. 7985 crore, budgetary support will be provided for principal payment of 
these NCDs. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
8. The Committee further observes that an actual amount of Rs. 14,429.67/ - crores has 
already been utilized by AIAHL from 2018 -19 to 2022 -23 (till 31.01.2023), out of which Rs. 
7,000/- crore was spent alone in the F.Y. 2021 -22 for servicing of loan transferred to SPV as 
a result of financial re structuring of Air India. Further, the Committee understands that the 
remaining two NCDs (Series 2 and Series 3) are due for payment in F.Y. 2029 -2030 and till 
then, budgetary support is required only for payment of interest of the NCDs. The Committee 
would like to know the Ministry’s annual budgetary requirements in the coming years for 
payment of interest on the NCDs (Series 2 & 3). Also, the Committee may be apprised of the 
projected amount which will be required for the redemption of these NCDs in the y ear 2029-
30.  

12 
 
(Para 57) 
Reply of the Ministry 
8.1 This Ministry‟s annual budgetary requirements in the coming years for payment of 
interest on the NCDs (Series 2 & 3) is Rs. 1107.39 crore per year till FY 2028 -29. NCD 
amounting to Rs. 7000 crore and Rs. 7985 crore will be due in 2029-30. Therefore, budgetary 
allocation of Rs. 16,089.56 crore (14985 (principal) + 1104.56 (interest)} will be required in 
FY 2029-30 for payment of interest as well as principal payment. 
 
Surge in Air Fares and Rationalisation 
Recommendation/Observation 
9. The Committee during its deliberations expressed concerns about the high fares 
charged by the private airlines in the domestic sector. The Committee also pointed out the 
wrong information published by the private airlines on t heir websites, regarding the number 
of seats left in the flight and the prices of the tickets. The level of misinformation can be 
gauged from the fact that even after the last tickets have been sold, the same number of seats 
show on the website, as indicated before the tickets sale. This indicates that airline operators 
are misguiding the public and forcing passengers to pay more. In view of the above, the 
Committee recommends that the Ministry should formulate appropriate guidelines regarding 
rationalization of fares and publishing the correct information on the website of the airlines. 
 (Para 66) 
Reply of the Ministry 
9.1 Currently there is no provision under the obligation of which airlines are required to 
publish number of seats left in the flight on their website. The airlines are selling tickets as 
per their respective distribution system, which is in line with the practice followed 
worldwide. However, the observations of the Committee have been noted. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
10. The Committee also pointed that 'Predatory Pricing' is being restored to by the 
domestic airlines sector. A particular airline may sell its air tickets at such a low level, that 
other competitors cannot compete and are forced to exit the market. A company that does this 
will see initial losses, but eventually it benefits by driving competitions out of the market and 
raising its prices again. The Committee desired to know whether the DGCA had at any point 
of time, intervened to check the fares of air tickets. The Committe e also expressed concern at 
the fact that in the domestic sector, private airlines are charging different fares for same 
sector, route and same direction of flights. This is specifically so for the NE Region and Hilly 
areas including Jammu & Kashmir and La dakh, where the prices of domestic sector tickets 
are, sometimes even more than the international airline sector prices. 
 (Para 67) 

13 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
10.1 Under the provision of Sub Rule (1) of Rule 135 of the Aircraft Rules, 1937, every air 
transport undertaking engaged in scheduled air services require to establish tariff having 
regard to all relevant factors, including cost of operation, characteristic of services, 
reasonable profit and the generally prevailing tariff. 
10.2 Government has laid down route dispersal  guidelines with a view to achieve better 
regulation of air transport services taking into account the need for air transport services of 
different regions of the country. It is, however, up to the airlines to provide air services to 
specific places depending upon the traffic demand and commercial viability. As such, the 
airlines are free to operate anywhere in the country subject to compliance of route dispersal 
guidelines issued by Government. 
10.3 The airlines are required to deploy adequ ate capacity in NE region, Jammu & 
Kashmir and Ladakh as per the provisions of the RDG (Copy of RDG is enclosed)  
Annexure-IV. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
11. The Committee is fully aware that the Indian domestic Aviation sector is growing in 
an open marke t and acknowledges that the private airline operators should be given a free 
hand to decide the air fares as they are governed by competition and depends on market 
fares. It also notes that there is a provision in the Aircraft Rules, 1937, which inter -alia has a 
provision for fixing the air fares after considering ‘reasonable profit and generally prevailing 
tariff’ amongst other factors. The Committee observes that presently the surge in air fares 
does not reflect any sort of mechanism on part of the Minist ry to control the fares, based on 
existing Aircraft Rules, 1937, as during surge in air fares the prices go beyond the acceptable 
or justifiable limits of 'reasonable profit and generally prevailing tariff'. 
 (Para 72) 
Reply of the Ministry 
11.1 Under the provision of the sub Rule (1) of Rule 135 of the Aircraft Rules, 1937, every 
air transport undertaking engaged in scheduled air services requires to establish tariff having 
regard to all relevant factors, including cost of operation, characteristic of serv ices, 
reasonable profit and the generally prevailing tariff. Airlines are free to charge reasonable air 
fares as per their operational viabilities subject to compliance to above said rule. The airline 
pricing system runs in multiple levels (buckets or RBDs ) which are in line with practice 
being followed globally. The prices are fixed by airlines keeping in mind the market, 
demand, seasonality and other market forces. The airfare increases with increas e in demand 
of seats as the lower fare buckets get sold o ut fast when bookings are offered by airlines. 
Some of the airlines have introduced Apex -90, in addition to existing advance purchase 
schemes of 60 days, 30 days, 14 days etc., in which highly discounted fares being offered 
which would entail travelling ev en during peak seasons on low fares. The fare structures 
stated above have been displayed by airlines on their websites. The airlines are compliant to 

14 
 
the prevailing regulation as long as fares charged by them are in line with fare displayed on 
their website. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
12. The Committee notes that while on one hand Government plans to make air transport 
affordable for the common man and the air capacity is being increased, on the other hand 
there is no commensurate expansion of the capacity to bring in aircrafts. This creates lack of 
airline tickets considering the high demand and leads to increase in the prices. The 
Committee recommends that there should be a mechanism with the Ministry such as capping 
of upper and lower prices to s top the practice of 'Predatory Pricing' or the sudden surge in 
prices. The Committee is of the firm opinion that a perfect balance has to be maintained 
between the commercial interest of the private airlines and the interest of the passengers so 
as to enab le the private airlines to grow and at the same time the interest of passengers 
should also be kept in mind, so that they are not fleeced in the garb of commercialization. 
The Committee feels that even though price buckets are being created as per internat ional 
aviation norms, a close watch has to be maintained by the DGCA & the Ministry and a 
mechanism should be devised to monitor the websites of various airlines to prevent them from 
misguiding passengers. And, in case the private airlines do not publish t he correct 
information regarding fares, they should be penalized for it. The Committee observes that the 
Ministry of Civil Aviation has a responsibility to the travelling public and the nation at large 
to ensure that predatory pricing mechanism are not ado pted by the airlines under the cloak 
of free market economy. The Committee recommends the Ministry should formulate a pricing 
mechanism for air fares to ensure that passengers are not charged exorbitant prices. The 
Committee also recommends that DGCA may b e empowered to regulate tariffs based on the 
data generated by their monitoring Department or otherwise. Further, the passengers may 
also be given an option to approach the said Department with their grievances. 
 (Para 73) 
Reply of the Ministry 
12.1 DGCA has not been empowered with the economic regulation of civil aviation and air 
transport services under Section 5A of Aircraft Act, 1934. 
12.2 Also, Competition Commission of India has issued order dated 06/03/2013 that the 
Commission can neither go into th e issue of MRP i.e. what should be the MRP for any 
product or service and fix the MRP, nor the Commission can give direction to the 
Government of India that it should fix MRP of a service being provided by private 
entrepreneur. In fact, that will be contra ry to the spirit of competition law. At present, the 
forces of demand and supply govern the air fares. Whenever supply is more and demand is 
less, air fares fall and in lean season the airlines do decrease air fares. It is only when demand 
is more and supply is less that the airlines venture to increase the air fares (Copy of the  said 
order is enclosed) Annexure-IV(A). 
 

15 
 
Flying Training Organisations (FTOs) 
Recommendation/Observation 
13. The Committee notes that there would be a growing requirement of around  1000 
pilots every year in the near future. The Committee commends that a liberalized FTO policy 
has also been brought out, wherein new and attractive incentives have been given to private 
entities who want to start an FTO. To reduce the initial capital in vestment on starting an 
FTO, airport royalty for new FTOs have been abolished and land rentals have been 
rationalized and minimum annual fee has also been brought down. The Committee feels that 
with the expected growth of the Civil Aviation Sector in the country, there would be increased 
demand for trained pilots and therefore supports the new initiatives of the Ministry to 
promote FTOs. 
(Para 75) 
Recommendation/Observation 
14. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry should draw up a 
comprehensive plan for requirement of FTOs and trained pilots for future, for a period of at 
least 30 years in advance and should accordingly plan for setting up FTOs of International 
standards, in a time bound manner in various parts of the country itself, in lin e with the goal 
of ‘Atmanirbhar Bharat Abhiyan’. 
(Para 80) 
Reply of the Ministry 
14.1 India had 28 FTOs as on 31 March 2016. There are currently 35 DGCA -approved 
Flying Training Organisations (FTO) in the country as of June 2023. IGRUA at Amethi (UP) 
is under the administrative control of the Central Government. Eight FTOs are under State 
Governments and 26 are owned by the private sector. Indian FTOs have 264 aircrafts for 
flying training as on 8th May 2023.  
i. From 28 FTOs in March 2016, the number of FTOs has increased to 35 in June 2023. 
The total number of CPL issued is 1165. 
ii.  Our FTOs ar e of International Standards and we anticipate that in future use of 
drones and use of AI in aviation will influence the demand for pilots. We have 
sufficient no. of FTOs are per demands of Industry. Since new FTOs are coming in 
Private Sector, they are li kely to grow as per demand of Industry. MoCA has 
maintained a high level of regulatory safety standard and it will continue to do so. 
Request that 30 years advanced plan will not be consistent with dynamic nature of aviation 
industry. 
 
 
 
 

16 
 
Impact of Taxation on Aviation Gasoline (AvGas) on FTOs 
Recommendation/Observation 
15. The Committee appreciates that the Ministry has taken up the issue of reduction of 
IGST and GST on AvGas with the Ministry of Finance, as FTOs account for almost 80% of 
the AvGas imported into the country. The Committee hopes that the Ministry of Finance will 
look into the genuine request of the Ministry and request the GST Council to substantially 
reduce the GST levied from the present level of 18%. The Committee notes that the Indian Oil 
Corporation has initiated efforts to produce AvGas in the country itself, which was so far not 
manufactured in the country and the first consignment was delivered in September, 2022. The 
Committee feels that this move beside s bringing self -sufficiency and ‘Atmanirbharta’, will 
create a technological base, which will not only benefit the FTO but the Indian Petroleum 
industry as well, in the long run. The Committee notes that FTOs are involved in skill 
development of our youths. Though FTOs are priva tely owned entities, the ultimate is to 
produce human resources/ skilled manpower for Civil Aviation Sector. Therefore, the 
Committee recommends that the Government may take all possible steps to reduce the tax 
component of Aviation Gas. 
 (Para 77) 
Reply of the Ministry 
15.1 Ministry of Civil Aviation has requested Ministry of Finance to support the proposal 
of this Ministry for the following: 
a. Requesting the GST Council to reduce the IGST levied on import of AvGas from 
18% to zero or one percent. 
b. Requesting the GST Council to reduce the GST levied on sale of AvGas from 18% to 
zero or one percent. 
15.2 The request of MoCA has been examined by Department of Revenue (DoR), Ministry 
of Finance (MoF) and DoR has informed that: 
a. ITC is available of GST paid on Avgas used for supplying pilot training services. 
15.3 GST rates and exemptions are prescribed by the GST Council which is a 
constitutional body consisting of representatives of State/ UT and Centre. In view of the 
Standing Committee‟s observation, the proposa l for reduction of GST on Avgas will be 
placed before the Hon‟ble GST Council for due deliberations. 
15.4 It may be noted that Ministry of Civil Aviation has already requested Ministry of 
Finance vide DO letter AV -22011/1/2022-ER Section -MOCA dated 16.06.2 022, to reduce 
the IGST levied on import of AvGas and the GST levied on sale of AvGas respectively. 
 
 
 
 

17 
 
Skilled and Trained Manpower 
Recommendation/Observation 
16. The Committee analyzes that the share of cadets from Indian FTOs has reduced from 
59% to 53% over the years as compared to the share of cadets from foreign FTOs, which is 
quite a low share taking into account the fact that 1000 pilots per annum are required. The 
Committee is also aware that presently due to lack of FTOs of International standards , many 
of our youth have to go abroad and obtain Pilot training at exorbitant costs. The Committee 
is also aware that many of the pilots employed by the domestic airlines are expatriate pilots 
from foreign countries. The Committee is of the opinion that em ploying such expatriates 
decreases the employment potential of our youth, who aspire to become pilots. 
 (Para 79) 
Reply of the Ministry 
16.1 DGCA-India has already implemented CAR -147(Basic) for Approval of Aircraft 
Maintenance Training Organization to harmonize best international practices and more 
practical training to fulfil aviation industry needs. Currently India has 54 DGCA approved 
AME training institutes under CAR -147(Basic) and 18 Type Rated Training Organization 
under CAR 147 which are playing a major role to cater to the requirements of skilled 
manpower for the Indian Civil Aviation Sector. As per information provided by DGCA, the 
estimated supply from AME training institutes approved under CAR 147 (Basic) is around 
3500 candidates passing out per year which is sufficient to cater to the demand of Indian civil 
aviation industry. Since July, 2021, 04 new AME institutes have been approved by DGCA. 
16.2 DGCA as a regulator, reviews its regulations as per international practices from time 
to time to  maintain the standards of Flying Training Organisations (FTOs) and to encourage 
more number of operators to set up FTOs in India. FTOs impart flying training to candidates 
to acquire Commercial Pilot License (CPL) and Private Pilot License (PPL).  
16.3 In last five years total no. of CPLs issued for Indian FTOs are 2653. Therefore, it is 
clear that Indian FTOs are optimally working and producing sufficient no. of Pilots. In 
addition to this five FTOs at eight location namely Belagavi, Khajuraho, Kishangarh , 
Bhavnagar, Salem, Kadappa and Hubbali, are under construction and likely to be 
operationlised within one year and it will cover the gap.  This is also submitted that Indian 
FTOs maintain International Standard and regulated by DGCA. This is also submitted  that 
liberalized FTO policy has given boost to growth of FTOs which will continue to grow as per 
demand of the industry. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
17. The Committee notes that the Aero Club of India (ACI) had been functioning as an 
autonomous body under the Ministry of Civil Aviation for more than seven decades and has 
partnered and promoted Flight Training Schools. The Aero Club of India, with more than  
twenty affiliate Flight Training Organizations with Government and private, has significantly 
contributed to the flight training of the country, producing thousands of pilots from these 

18 
 
Institutes post-independence. It also must be noted that the Aero Clu b of India while working 
as an autonomous body under the Ministry earlier, was given ample financial support by the 
means of promoting of assets while procuring flight training which were in turn partnered 
with other Flight Training Organizations and has i mmensely contributed to the training of 
pilots. 
 (Para 81) 
Recommendation/Observation 
18. The Committee, however, notes that in absence of further support to the Aero Club of 
India, which has been the pioneer of flight training, the organization should be extended all 
financial support to enhance the flying training capacity by means of contributing to the asset 
creation and support, as has been done by the Ministry on earlier occasions and support ACI 
as an arm of the Ministry to enhance flight training in India. 
 (Para 82) 
Reply of the Ministry 
18.1 The Ministry is in the process of revisiting the National Air Sports Policy, 2022. In 
this connection, draft National Air Sports Guidelines  (NASG), 2023, has been circulated for 
stakeholder comments. The recommendations of Committee have been duly noted. 
 
Rajiv Gandhi National Aviation University (RGNAU) 
Recommendation/Observation 
19. The Committee notes the acute shortage of skilled manpower and proper training 
institutes in the Civil Aviation industry which has the potential of creation of employment 
opportunities for the youth. The Committee observes that other than the highly specialized 
jobs like commercial pilots and aircraft engineers, there are no n-technical jobs like 
airhostess, flight attendants, flight pursers, cabin crew, ground/ cargo handling staff, 
administrative/ sales staff, where there can be a lot of job creations. The Committee notes 
that a token provision of Rs.0.01 crore has been prov ided for the financial year 2023 -24, 
under the head of Skill Development– Grants-in-Aid to Institutions in Civil Aviation Sector in 
India to encourage/promote different institutions to nurture talent/skills of trainees 
undergoing different type of training in institutes in Aviation Sector in India. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends that proper training institutes at low cost, may be setup all across the 
country to provide requisite training in the aforesaid airlines services, so that the youth of the 
country may be gainfully employed. 
 (Para 92) 
Reply of the Ministry 
19.1 The Aviation industry requires highly specialized manpower for jobs such as pilots 
and engineers along with non -technical jobs viz., air hostess, flight attendant, cabin crew, 
ground handling staff etc.  

19 
 
19.2 The industry specific skill development and training activities are carried out through 
approved FTOs, RPTOs and Rajiv Gandhi National Aviation University. The funds sought at 
BE stage were token provisions to cater for unforeseen demand for skill development/training 
activities, if it so arises. However presently, no such proposal has be en received nor any 
scheme is be ing implemented in respect of grant for skill development/train ing in this 
Ministry.  
19.3 In addition to the above, to cater to the training and skill development requirements of 
the Industry, PSUs, attached offices/sub-ordinate offices under the Ministry of Civil Aviation, 
various training institutes viz. Indian Avi ation Academy (Manesar), Civil Aviation Training 
College (Prayagraj), Fire Training Centre (Delhi), Fire Service Training Centre (Kolkata) do 
impart industry specific training.  
 
Unmanned Aircraft System (UAS)/ Drones 
Recommendation/Observation 
20. The Committee commends the thrust given by Government to the Drone Industry, 
through various policy decisions and legislative enactments such as enactment of liberalized 
Drone Rules, 2021; Drone Airspace Map; PLI Scheme for Drones; UTM Policy Framework, 
2021; Single Window DigitalSky Platform; Certification Scheme for Drones; Drone Import 
Policy; and Drone (Amendment) Rules, 2022 to give requisite support and encourage the 
growth of the nascent Drone Industry in the country. The Committee notes that the Ministr y 
had organized ‘Drone Melas’ and ‘Bharat Drone Mahotsav, 2022’ for popularization of 
Drones and policy reforms across the country. The Committee especially appreciates the PLI 
Scheme for Drones & Drone Components and recommends that all out efforts may be  made 
by the Ministry in coordination with Ministry of Micro, Small and  Medium Enterprises 
(MSME) so that the Drone start -ups and MSMEs get preferential treatment under the 
Scheme. The Committee hopes that the Ministry through its proactive measures will e nsure 
handholding of the start -ups both financially & technically and ensure the ground 
implementation of the said Rules. 
 (Para 103) 
Reply of the Ministry 
20.1 The encouragement of the committee is gratefully acknowledged and the Ministry 
shall continue to proactively implement the Rules.  
 
Recommendation/Observation 
21. The Committee recommends that the Ministry may follow the practices of various 
countries like the United States of America; Netherlands; China; Russia etc. and explore the 
application and utilization and focus at increasing the usage of Drones for various purposes 
viz., Emergency Response; Disaster Relief; Weather Forecasting; Maritime; Wildlife 
Conservation; Construction Planning; Live Entertainment etc. Further, the Committee would 

20 
 
like to know the Ministry’s roadmap to promote manufacturing of Drones and Drone 
Components in India under the ‘Atmanirbhar Bharat Abhiyan’ and to make all out efforts to 
promote the Drone Industry at a global level. 
 (Para 105) 
Reply of the Ministry 
21.1 The observations/directions of committee are very valid and the Committee would be 
happy to note that drones are already being used in areas such as agriculture, medical 
supplies, disaster relief, geo -spatial mapping, surveillance, project monitoring, defence and 
law enforcement in the country to name a few.   
 
21.2 To promote manufacturing of Drones and Drone Components this Ministry has 
implemented a Production Linked Incentive (PLI) Scheme for Drones and Drone 
Components with a total outlay of Rs 120 crores over three years. Further, Drone import 
policy has been notified banning import of foreign drones and freeing up import of drone 
components. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
22. The Committee would also like to know the present status of Ministry’s plans to 
develop additional features for safety and security of Drones and recommends that these 
features may be notified at the earliest so that the Government may exercise effective control 
over the drone operations in the country and prevent their misuse. 
 (Para 106) 
Reply of the Ministry 
22.1 (a) The issues related to safety and security of drones and its operations such as real 
time tracking, GPS enabled equipment, Beyond Visual Line of Sight operations (BVLOS), 
mandatory passport for remote pilot license and ex clusion of agricultural drones from 
DGFT‟s SCOMET list etc., are being discussed with the stakeholders such as Ministry of 
Home Affairs (IB and LEAs), Ministry of Defence, Quality Council of India, DGFT, 
Ministry of Agriculture etc., 
(b) A Drone Act is env isaged to provide a legal framework addressing the issues of 
development of drone ecosystem while not compromising with the safety and security 
aspects of drones. 
(c) Geo-fencing capability 
22.2 In this context, MOCA has notified the CS -UAS vide Gazette no tification dated 26-
01-2022 where in geo fencing requirement has been already mandated. Accordingly, drones 
are being type certified keeping in view the Geo fencing requirements.  With respect to (a) 
and (b), it may be noted that discussions with stakeholde rs for development of technical 
specification and implementation of the same are underway.   

21 
 
Maintenance, Repair and Overhaul (MRO) Services 
Recommendation/Observation 
23. The Committee feels that one of the most significant benefits that India provides to the 
rest of the world is the availability of highly qualified engineers, with the capability of being 
trained for an array of technical MRO activities. Besides, India is better placed for MRO 
activity due to its cost advantage. Labour cost is comparativel y lower in India, thereby 
ensuring more economic operation of MRO activity as compared to global counterparts. The 
Committee recommends that the Ministry may focus on aforesaid aspects, while planning for 
the MRO industry. 
 (Para 115) 
Reply of the Ministry 
23.1 DGCA-India has already implemented CAR -147(Basic) for Approval of Aircraft 
Maintenance Training Organization to harmonize best international practices and more 
practical training to fulfil aviation industry needs. Currently India has 54 DGCA approved  
AME training institutes under CAR -147(Basic) and 18 Type Rated Training Organization 
under CAR 147 which are playing a major role to cater to the requirements of skilled 
manpower for the Indian Civil Aviation Sector. As per information provided by DGCA, t he 
estimated supply from AME training institutes approved under CAR 147 (Basic) is around 
3500 candidates passing out per year which is sufficient to cater to the demand of Indian civil 
aviation industry. Since July, 2021, 04 new AME institutes have been approved by DGCA. 
Aviation Turbine Fuel (ATF) 
Recommendation/Observation 
24. The Committee examined a sample case of increase in ATF prices at Delhi Airport 
(T3) and found the prices of ATF have been affected by various factors such as depreciating 
value of Rupee; Ukraine-Russia War; State Taxes and Central Excise Duty, in recent times 
and has resulted in higher ATF prices. The price of ATF, Exchange Rate and Price of ATF 
before Taxes & after Taxes for Delhi (Terminal -3) as on 1st January, 2022 & 16th July, 
2022, is as follows:- 
Price 
Effective 
ATF (Jet 
Kero) 
(*)($/bbl
) 
Exchange 
Rate 
(*)(Rs/KL
) 
Price of ATF at Delhi– T3 
Price 
Before 
Tax(Rs/KL
) 
ExciseDuty
-
11%(Rs/K
L) 
VATDelhi-
25%(Rs/K
L) 
Price After 
Tax (Rs/KL) 
01.01.2022 83.28 75.56 54,839.49 6,032.34 15,217.96 76,089.79 
16.07.2022 159.21 78.70 99,566.08 10,952.27 27,629.59 1,38,147.93 
Increase 75.93 3.14 44,726.59 ,919.93 12,411.63 62,058.15 
* Average of Pricing period of effective date. 

22 
 
 (Para 119) 
Recommendation/Observation 
25. As per the above table, the Committee notes that there was a steep increase of Rs. 
62,058.15/- per KL in price of ATF at Delhi Airport (Terminal -3), in just a short period of 6 
months, which led to increase in operating costs of airlines and a resultant increase in air 
fares. 
(Para 120) 
Reply of the Ministry 
25.1 The encouragement of the committee is gratefully acknowledged and the Ministry 
shall continue to proactively implement the Rules.  
 
Steps taken to rationalize Taxes on ATF 
Recommendation/Observation 
26. The Committee notes that the airlines in the country are spending a significant 
amount on Aviation Turbine Fuel and rationalization of VAT rates will be very crucial in 
reducing the operating cost which will improve the viability of the airlines. The Committee  
feels that lowered rates of VAT on ATF may result in reduced price of air tickets, enhanced 
air connectivity and fuel uplift. The Committee notes that airlines are picking up ATF from 
those States/UTs where VAT rates on ATF are lower. Also, the resultant increase in revenue 
from sale of aviation fuel may aid in the growth of tourism, better employment opportunities 
in the States/UTs. 
(Para 126) 
Recommendation/Observation 
27. The Committee notes that the pricing of Aviation Turbine Fuel is majorly influence d 
by the international product prices, depreciating value of Rupee and other market conditions. 
The Committee further observes the high ATF prices prevailing in the country which is 
further aggravated by high taxes such as customs duty, excise duty, sale/S tate tax, Value 
Added Tax (VAT) levied thereon. The Committee recommends that all out efforts should be 
made to lower the taxes being levied on the ATF. The Committee has been given to 
understand that the cost of ATF nearly accounts for approximately 40% of the total operating 
cost of airlines and impacts the financial viability of their operations and affects their 
competitiveness because Indian carriers are unable to compete against their global 
counterparts on account of the exorbitantly higher prices of ATF. 
(Para 127) 
Recommendation/Observation 
28. The Committee notes the efforts being made by the Ministry in coordination with the 
respective State/UT Governments, to bring down the State Tax/ VAT. The Committee notes 
that 18 States/UTs have lowered the tax levied on ATF while 6 States/UTs are still le vying 

23 
 
high rates of Tax. The Committee recommends that the Ministry should proactively follow -up 
with the remaining States/UTs especially Assam, Maharashtra, Delhi, Bihar, Tamil Nadu and 
West Bengal which are charging high VAT rates on ATF. The Committee a lso notes that 
despite ATF being an input fuel (similar to coal and gas), the issue to include ATF under the 
ambit of GST is a long pending issue and requires final resolution by the GST Council. The 
Committee recommends the Ministry to take up this issue with the Ministry of Finance with 
renewed efforts. 
(Para 128) 
Reply of the Ministry 
28.1 Government has consistently engaged in consultations with Airlines and OMCs on the 
issue of ATF pricing. Taking cognizance of the high value added tax (VAT) on ATF levied 
by States, the issue was taken up with the States/ Union Territories. As a result, VAT on ATF 
has been reduced by 19 States/ UTs viz. (i) Andaman & Nicobar Islands; (ii) Uttarakhand; 
(iii) Jammu & Kashmir; (iv) Ladakh; (v) Himachal Pradesh;(vi) Trip ura; (vii) Madhya 
Pradesh; (viii) Haryana; (ix) Uttar Pradesh; (x) Dadra and Nagar Haveli & Daman and Diu; 
(xi) Arunachal Pradesh; (xii) Manipur; (xiii) Jharkhand; (xiv) Mizoram; (xv) Gujarat; (xvi) 
Goa; (xvii) Karnataka; (xviii) Rajasthan; and (xix) Mahar ashtra. The issue has also been 
taken up with Hon‟ble Chief Ministers of Delhi, Assam and West Bengal. 
28.2 MoCA has also taken up the issue of inclusion of ATF under the ambit of GST with 
MoF on various levels. MoF has stated that Article 279 A (5) of the  Constitution prescribes 
that the GST Council shall recommend the date with effect from which the GST would be 
levied on petroleum crude, high speed diesel, motor spirit (petrol), natural gas and ATF. As 
per the section 9(2) of the CGST Act, 2017, inclusio n of these products in GST will require 
recommendation of the GST Council. So far, the GST Council, in which the states are also 
represented, has not made any recommendation for inclusion of these goods under GST. 
 
Safety in Civil Aviation Sector and India ’s ranking in International Civil Aviation 
Sector 
Recommendation/Observation 
29. The Committee takes note of the extant practices of the Ministry, which are monitored 
by the DGCA and other agencies to prevent aircraft/ helicopter accidents to ensure safety  in 
Civil Aviation sector. The Committee notes that the ICAO, an international Civil Aviation 
body, of which India is a Member, inter -alia, undertakes compliance audits of Members 
states as regards Aviation Safety. It observes that the ICAO Coordination Va lidation Mission 
of India was conducted in November, 2022 and its effective Implementation Score has risen 
from previous 69.95% to 85.49%, thereby improving the India’s Safety Oversight ranking 
from 102 to 48 among 193 contracting States. The Committee appreciates the improvement in 
ranking to 48 and hopes that Ministry may put in concerted efforts and plan towards 
improving the Oversight Ranking further, so as to be amongst the top ten nations of the 
world, as far as ranking is concerned. 

24 
 
(Para 136) 
Reply of the Ministry 
29.1 ICAO, under the Universal Safety Oversight Audit Programme (USOAP) carries out 
audit of the State to assess the effective implementation of the critical elements of safety 
oversight system by the State along with its compliance with th e provisions of the Chicago 
Convention. 
29.2 The ICAO Coordinated Validation Mission (ICVM) is an onsite activity during which 
ICAO team of Subject Matter expert collect and assess evidence provided by the State 
demonstrating that the state has implemented  corrective actions to address previously 
identified findings.   
29.3 ICAO carried out an ICVM of India from 9th to 16th November 2022 covering the 
following areas: 
a. Legislation 
b. Organisation 
c. Personnel Licensing 
d. Aircraft Operations 
e. Airworthiness of aircraft 
f. Aerodrome and Ground Aids 
29.4 The current Effective Implementation (EI) for India stands at 85.65%. However, areas 
of Aircraft accident and incident investigation and Air Navigation Services were not audited 
during ICAO ICVM in 2022. In future, if, ICAO schedules to audit these areas, EI would 
further change/improve, which would further help to improve India‟s Effective 
Implementation (EI) in near future.  
29.5 During the ICVM 2022, ICAO did not audit area related to Aircraft Accident 
Investigation hence the score has remained stagnant at the figure of 64.56% which was the 
score during 2018 ICAO Audit.  India is not lagging behind as the global average in Aircraft 
Accident Investigation area as per figures available on ICAO website is 54.43%.  
29.6 The major areas of concern during the 20 18 were Manpower, Training, Read out 
facility for Flight Recorders and Follow -up on Recommendations issued by AAIB etc. 
During the current FY year various actions have been taken which are mentioned below: 
i) Sanctioned posts at AAIB have been enhanced to 34 and Recruitment Rules have 
been formulated. The recruitment process for filling up the posts is underway. 
ii) AAIB has formulated Training Policy for its officers and the officers are being 
trained as per guidelines given in ICAO Circular 298. Officers are bei ng trained 
in-house and also being sent on Foreign Training under fellowship programs 
available from ICAO, France and Singapore. 
iii) Status of Recommendations since 2012 has been compiled and regular follow -up 
is being obtained from DGCA. 

25 
 
iv) AAIB is in process of setting up state of the art Flight Recorder Lab. A feasibility 
study has been carried out and AAIB, and MoU has been signed with HAL, which 
in only Indian aerospace company manufacturing Civil Aircraft and Flight 
Recorders, for set-up of Flight Recorders Lab.  
29.7 Considering the significant progress that has been made in the current FY and is likely 
to be made in near future, the score is likely to improve further whenever ICAO audits 
Aircraft Accident Investigation area" . Further, DGCA is committed to ensure more effective 
implementation of the critical elements of a safety oversight system, ICAO Standards and 
Recommended Practices (SARPs), associated procedures etc., so that India EI may further 
improve. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
30. The Committee is  aware that besides the Government agencies involved in ensuring 
safety in Civil Aviation Sector, many other agencies are also involved in providing security in 
the Domestic Civil Aviation Sector, viz. various Airline/ Airport operators and ground staff 
employed for security. The Committee recommends that DGCA may regularly monitor and 
coordinate with AAI, airport/ airlines operators and ground staff to ensure proper 
implementation of specifications and guidelines regarding Aviation Safety and also ensure 
that human resource requirements are adequately met. State of Art technology may be 
installed and utilized at airports to avoid air accidents. The Committee recommends that the 
Budgetary requirements of all the Government bodies involved in providing Aviati on security 
may be adequately met, and if required, the Ministry of Finance may provide increased 
allocation at the R.E. stage for this important aspect of the Civil Aviation sector. 
 (Para 137) 
Reply of the Ministry 
30.1 Aerodrome Standards Directorate, DGCA conducts regular surveillance inspection  of 
Aerodrome, Ground handling Agencies, Breath Analyser and other inspections at airports to 
ensure the implementation of applicable Civil Aviation requirements for maintaining 
Aerodrome in Licensing condition  and safety of Aircraft and passengers. If any observation 
noticed during inspection, then same is    communicated to concerned agencies for necessary 
compliance in timely manner.  
30.2 The Airports are using the best suitable technologies to fulfil the ICAO Annex 
requirements. Moreover DGCA also mandate availability of competent and trained 
manpower to perform safety sensitive functions.  The adequacy and competency of 
Equipment's and manpower is being checked during various inspections.  The Budgetary 
requirements of DGCA and BCAS are fully met, preferably at BE stage and any further 
requirements are provided at RE stage.  The recommendations of the Committee are noted so 
far as aviation security is concerned. 
 
 

26 
 
Digital Initiatives-DGCA, BCAS and DigiYatra 
Recommendation/Observation 
31. The Committee commends the digital initiatives taken up and implemented by the 
Ministry viz., e-DGCA, e-BCAS and DigiYatra, which have made the procedural systems fully 
IT based and online and also ensured faster security clearance for passengers at airports. 
The Committee notes that through the DigiYatra, a facial recognition app that is presently 
available at 4 airports, seamless entry for passengers has been ensured which ultimately 
enhances passenger experience at airpo rts and decreases human interface at entry/exit 
points. The Committee appreciates that DigiYatra App is the first of its kind globally and 
commends the Ministry and the software personnel for designing a first -of-its-kind 
application and its successful imp lementation. The Committee also suggests that the use of 
latest technologies such as Artificial Intelligence etc., should be explored in this regard, so as 
to increase the accuracy of surveillance and ensure minimum human intervention. The 
Committee recomm ends that the Ministry may implement the DigiYatra initiative at other 
airports too, in a planned and phased manner, so as to cover all the airports of the country. 
The Committee recommends that the Ministry should maintain close coordination with the 
Private airline, airport operators and the Government and private security agencies and also 
ensure close monitoring to remove any shortcomings to make the DigiYatra App a complete 
success. 
 (Para 141) 
Reply of the Ministry 
31.1 The suggestions and recommendations of the Committee are noted so far as aviation 
security is concerned. 
 
Construction, Modernisation and Expansion of Airports 
Recommendation/Observation 
32. The Committee notes a reduction in the allocation at B.E. 2023 -24 for the Airports 
Authority of India as compared to R.E. 2022 -23 in light of the budgetary requirement of 
Hollongi Airport. The Committee observes that against the balance amount of Rs. 44.39/ -
crore of the Government share in Hollongi Airport, only an allocation of Rs. 30.00/ crore has 
been made for B.E. 2023-24. The Ministry may clarify the reasons for the reduced allocation 
and its plans to utilize the entire amount of Rs. 44.39/ - crore with regard to the Hollongi 
Airport. 
 (Para 145) 
Reply of the Ministry 
32.1 MoCA conveyed the approval of competent authority for “Construction of New 
Greenfield Airport at Hollongi, Itanagar, Arunachal Pradesh” at an estimated cost of rupees 
645.63 crore out   of which 90% i.e. Rs. 581.97 crore funding is to be done by   GoI. Till the 
end of Financial Year 2022-23 MoCA has released an amount of Rs. 536.67 crore as share of 

27 
 
GoI to AAI for the expenditure occurred. As such, against original approved cost of   the 
project, only Rs. 45.3 crore are to be released to AAI as GoI share against which allocation of 
Rs. 30 crore has been allocated in the B.E. 2023 -24 for the construction of New Greenfield 
Airport at Hollongi. Additional funds, if required, for the project will be taken up at the R.E. 
stage. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
33. The Committee assessed the reasons for the reduced amount in IEBR support for AAI 
for the FY 2023 -24 and urges the Ministry to analyze the shortfall of Rs. 551.79/ - crore 
between the projected total Capital Budget and amount to be funded through IEBR, in light of 
the dynamic requirements of the Civil Aviation Sector. The Ministry may also apprise the 
Committee about the present status of the arbitration award against AAI in the Hon’ble High 
Court of Delhi, which is adversely impacting the revenue and profitability of AAI. 
 (Para 146) 
Reply of the Ministry 
33.1 There has been a dispute between AAI and JV Airports i.e. DIAL and MIAL 
regarding the revenue share accrued to AAI from its JV partners.  The parties had gone to the 
arbitration and the award of the said arbitration has gone against AAI.  However, AAI has 
challenged the arbitration award before the Hon'ble High Court of Delhi for which the 
hearing of the case is under progress and therefore the matter is sub-judice. 
33.2 In view of the above, AAI has toned down its Capital Expenditure (CapEx) plan from 
earlier Rs. 5500 crore annually in 2023 -24 and 2024 -25 to Rs.4000 crore annually in the 
respective years. However, AAI has achieved higher CapEx than its target in 2022 -23 and 
also exceeded its performance compared to that of 2021-22. 
 
National Monetisation Pipeline 
Recommendation/Observation 
34. The Committee observes that the plan of monetisation of the airports has been 
successful and the revenue share agreement of PPP airports, has significantly contributed  to 
the revenue of AAI, as it received more than Rs. 30,000/ - crore, till date. The Committee 
commends the fact that AAI has channelized the revenue obtained from the Tier -I Cities, 
towards the development of airports in Tier -II & Tier -III cities, where th ere was lack of 
capital investment for the development of airports. The Committee feels that such a plan 
would eventually lead to better air connectivity across the country and supports the PPP 
mode of operation of more airports in the country. The Committ ee also recommends that to 
maintain Government oversight on the functioning of PPP Airports, a robust regulatory 
framework may be devised, to protect the rights of the airlines and consumers and to keep a 
check on increased charges at PPP airports resulting in enhanced air fares. 
 (Para 150) 

28 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
34.1 Government of India has established an independent regulatory authority i.e. Airports 
Economic Regulatory Authority (AERA) constituted under AERA Act 2008 to regulate and 
determine the aeronau tical tariff/charges at major airports in the country including PPP 
airports.  
34.2 AERA follows internationally accepted practices and principles supported by ICAO 
manuals. Further, AERA has also prepared a regulatory framework in the form of AERA 
(Terms and conditions for determination of Tariff for Airport operators) guidelines, 2011.  
These guidelines are equally applicable to all the major airports in the country including PPP 
airports.   
34.3 AERA determines aeronautical charges based on key principle for tariff determination 
which include non -discrimination, cost -relatedness, transparency, and consultation with 
stakeholders. Section 13(4) of the AERA Act mandates transparency through consultations 
with stakeholders, including airlines. AERA aims to ens ure fairness and efficiency in 
regulating aeronautical tariffs while protecting the interest of airlines, users and airport 
developers, under a robust and transparent regulatory framework. 
 
Upgradation and Modernisation of Airports 
Recommendation/Observation 
35. The Committee applauds the Ministry’s efforts for development and 
operationalization of Greenfield Airports in the country and urges the Ministry to devise a 
strategy to link all these 21 airports with the existing airports to ensure strong air 
connectivity in the country. The Committee notes the Ministry’s reply in respect of the 
construction of an airport near Sabarimala and would like to remind that appropriate 
clearance to start the airport, may be granted at the earliest and the Committee may be  
informed about its present status. The Committee also observes that such inordinate delays in 
granting required clearances hamper the development of Greenfield Airports in the country. 
The Committee recommends that the Government must ensure time -bound gr ant of 
clearances which will lead to strict adherence to timelines. 
 (Para 155) 
Reply of the Ministry 
35.1 The introduction of air services to/from any airport in the country is up to the airline 
operator depending upon their operational and commercial viabilities. It may please be noted 
that with repeal of Air Corporation Act in March 1994, the Indian domestic aviation has been 
deregulated. Airlines are now free to induct capacity with any aircraft type, free to select 
whatever markets and network they wish to service and operate with subject to the 
compliance of Route Dispersal Guidelines (RDG) issued by the Government. However, it is 
submitted that observations/recommendations of the Committee in respect of the linking all 
21 airports with the existing  airports to ensure strong connectivity have been noted for 
consideration. 

29 
 
35.2 Sabrimala airport:   Kerala State Industrial Development Corporation (KSIDC), a 
Government of Kerala enterprise submitted an application under Greenfield Airports (GFA) 
Policy to Ministry of Civil Aviation (MoCA) for grant of 'Site Clearance' for development of 
Greenfield airport at Kottayam (Sabarimala) in Kerala. The proposal of KSIDC was 
considered in consultation with stakeholders including Airports Authority of India (AAI), 
Directorate General of Civil Aviation (DGCA), Ministry of Defence (MoD).  
35.3 The proposal was subsequently deliberated in the 32nd and 33rd meeting of the 
Steering Committee on Greenfield airports and the Steering Committee in its 33rd Meeting 
on 03.04.2023 has recommended for grant of 'Site Clearance' approval.  
35.4 Based on the recommendations of Steering Committee, Ministry of Civil Aviation 
vide letter dated 13.04.2023 has granted the 'Site Clearance' to KSIDC for development of 
Greenfield Airport at Kottayam.  
 
Recommendation/Observation 
36. The Committee notes that the redevelopment of the Patna Airport is on. However, 
witnessing the constraints faced at Patna in terms of safety and growing traffic demand, it 
has been felt that the development of a Greenfield project in Bihar is much needed and has 
been awaited for the last seventy years as the State of Bihar does not have a single Greenfield 
project. The Committee notes that the basic groundwork done to develop a Greenfield project 
at Saran in Bihar  where the Obstacle Limitation Surfaces (OLS) and  feasibility Report has 
been prepared, needs to be expedited to cater to the requirement of the State of Bihar which 
has a population of 14 crore. The same has also been observed in a recent ruling of the 
Patna High Court where it has been ruled that Right to Safe Travel is a Fundamental Right, 
directing the AAI, the Ministry and the State Government to come forth with a proposal of a 
Greenfield airport in Bihar, with particular reference to Saran, Sonepur Greenfield project. 
 (Para 156) 
Reply of the Ministry 
36.1 The State Government of Bihar proposed to construct a Civil Enclave at Indian Air 
Force Station in Bihta which is approximately 30 km. from Patna. For this purpose, the State 
Government of Bihar (G oB) provided 108 acres of land free of cost to AAI. AAI submitted 
the Master Plan and requested GoB to acquire and hand over additional 191.5 acres of land. 
36.2 In the meantime, Hon‟ble Member of Parliament (Lok Sabha) Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy, 
Member, Committee on Estimates, Committee on Transport, Tourism & Culture, suggested a 
site at Sonepur, Saran for development of Greenfield Airport. Pre -feasibility Study of the 
suggested site was conducted on 23rd December 2019 by a multi-disciplinary team from AAI 
and Obstacle Limitation Surfaces (OLS) survey was conducted in January, 2020. Pre -
feasibility Study report, OLS Survey report and other details were forwarded by MoCA to the 
Government of Bihar for comments on 29.04.2020. 
36.3 Ministry of Civil Aviation  (MoCA) gave option to Government of Bihar to choose 
between two alternatives i.e. Bihta or Saran along with the features/ characteristics of the 

30 
 
sites. However, Government of Bihar, vide their letters dated 12.10.2020 and 04.10.2021, 
categorically insisted for development of Bihta as an alternate airport to Patna for which they 
have already provided 108 acres of land free of cost and requested this Ministry to commence 
the work of development of civil enclave at Bihta airport at the earliest. 
36.4 In compl iance with the directions of the Hon‟ble High Court of Bihar, MoCA and 
AAI have been mutually discussing with the State Government of Bihar, where AAI has 
mentioned that they need adequate land free of cost and free of all encumbrances to develop 
the Greenfield airport which is compatible for wide bodied aircraft as an alternative to Patna 
Brownfield airport. Now, vide recent Letter dated 09.05.2023, Government of Bihar has 
again requested to develop Bihta as a Civil Enclave by Airports Authority of India ( AAI) and 
to utilize the already provided 108 acres of land. Government of Bihar has also given “in -
principle” approval for making additional 08 acres of land available for city -side 
development to AAI. 
36.5 With regards to airport at Saran, it is important  to state here that such projects without 
the support of the State Government are not viable. To establish an airport and make it 
operational, continuous support of any State Government is very crucial since the inception, 
such as acquisition of land, remo ving the obstacles around the site identified, providing 
approach road accessibility, water connection, power, maintenance of Law and Order etc.  
36.6 Since the Government of Bihar has already made clear its stand to develop the Civil 
Enclave at the Bihta for which it has already provided 108 acres of land and has assured 
another 8 acres land for city side development, it is difficult to compel them to abandon Bihta 
project and start afresh at another site if no such separate proposal to set up a Greenfield  
airport at a different place instead of Bihta is received further. 
 
National Infrastructure Pipeline 
Recommendation/Observation 
37. The Committee has also reviewed the issues related to congestion at various airports 
including Delhi and Mumbai. The Committee feels that such capacity constraints at major 
airports of the country reflect poor planning and urges the Ministry to issue necessary 
guidelines to the concerned airport operators in this regard. The Committee recommends 
that the Ministry should focus on the expansion of terminals including the enhancement of 
number of check -in counters and security check gates to facilitate the smooth movement of 
passengers. The Committee notes that in order to increase the revenue from non-aeronautical 
activities, the passengers are made to walk through the F&B outlets and retail shops at 
airports. The Committee proposes that the Ministry should direct the airport operators to 
identify an alternate passage to the boarding gates, for the aged and passengers with reduced 
mobility and provide them special assistance at all times. 
 (Para 162) 
 
 

31 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
37.1  A number of measures/steps have since been taken for seamless movement of 
passengers in the terminal building at major airports like Delhi and Mumbai. These are as 
follows:- 
i. Board displaying least waiting time along with the entry gate number has been put up 
at vantage points to guide passengers in advance. 
ii. Display boards have been installed at entry gates providing real time data regarding 
waiting time. The information on the same is also being shared via social media. 
iii. Awareness poster at the entry gate for passengers to be ready with Air ticket/ 
Boarding pass and Identity proof document. Dedicated staff has been deployed at the 
entry gate to help passengers. 
iv. Additional entry gates have been opened for passenger entry. 
v. At Delhi Airport new security zone- Zone 0 has been created inside the Terminal 3. 
vi. Installation and Commissioning of additional X -ray machines for baggage check to 
address bottleneck at security points. 
vii. At Delhi airport, additional 15 X -BIS machines have been added taking the total 
number of X-ray machines to 25 in T-3 Domestic and 19 in T-3 International. 
viii. Mumbai Airport operator has commissioned a Domestic to Domestic (D2D) tran sfer 
facility, cutting down  the Minimum Connection Time for transfer of passengers and 
crew members and add flexibility to the airline  operators in planning their flight 
schedule and rostering of crew members. Three new security lanes have been added at 
Mumbai airport for reducing waiting time for passengers. 
ix. Deployment of additional manpower by CISF has been ensured. 
x. Monitoring through CCTV & Command Centre. 
xi. Use of Count Meter for Crowd Management. 
xii.  Airport operators have been advised to re -balance peak ho ur traffic between 
terminals by shifting slots to optimise flights during peak hours. 
xiii. Airlines have been advised to deploy sufficient manpower at all check -in/baggage 
drop counters. 
xiv. Air travelers are encouraged to use DigiYatra, a Biometric Enabled Seamles s Travel 
experience based on  Facial Recognition Technology. In -flight announcement to 
encourage usage of DigiYatra platform are being made. 
xv. 2D Bar code scanner installed at all the Entry Gates to facilitate automated entry. 
xvi. Airlines advised to have full compliance to Barcode on tickets issued, to help easy 
flow of passengers at entry/security gates. 
xvii. Monitoring on daily basis at level of airport operators, airlines and Ministry of Civil 
Aviation for ensuring compliance of mitigation measures. 

32 
 
xviii. All these mea sures are implemented with the utmost consideration for maintaining 
airport security. 
37.2 So far as facilities to aged and passengers with reduced mobility is concerned, the 
Ministry has has formulated harmonized guidelines and space standards for providing barrier-
free environment and services to such passenger at airports in India in coordination with 
Ministry for Social Justice and empowerment.   
37.3 The accessibility standards and guidelines for civil aviation have been published in 
Gazette of India f or compliance of guidelines.  Comprehensive guidelines contain all the 
accessible features and services to be provided by airport operator, airlines and security 
agencies.  
 
Amenities for Differently Abled Passengers 
Recommendation/Observation 
38. The Committee appreciates the sensitivity shown towards the needs of the differently 
abled persons and urges the Ministry to ensure implementation of all the 10 accessibility 
features as prescribed by the Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment viz., access ible 
route/approach; accessible parking; accessible entrance to the building; accessible reception 
(helpdesk); accessible corridor/tactile flooring; accessible lift; staircase with handrails 
(main passenger movement zone); accessible toilets; accessible dr inking water facility; and 
signage. The Committee feels that utmost care and assistance shall be provided to the 
differently abled and passengers with reduced mobility, so that they can travel without any 
hassle. The Committee would like to know the details of the existing airports which have been 
equipped with the requisite accessibility features and recommends the Ministry to ensure 
installation of all the aforesaid 10 accessibility features in all the functional airports as well. 
 (Para 164) 
Reply of the Ministry 
38.1  Ministry of Civil Aviation has formulated harmonized guidelines and space standards 
for providing barrier -free environment and services for Persons with reduced mobility at 
airports in India in coordination with Ministry for Social Justice and empowerment.  
38.2 The accessibility standards and guidelines for civil aviation have been approved and a 
notification dated 09.01.2023 has been published in Gazette of India for compliance of 
guidelines. Comprehensive guidelines contain all the access ible features and services to be 
provided by airport operator, airlines and security agencies.  
38.3 Most of the accessibility features as prescribed by the Ministry of Social Justice and 
Empowerment are available at 87 AAI airports having scheduled flights. Efforts are being 
made to ensure availability of all the accessibility features at all AAI airports having schedule 
flights in due course. 
 
 

33 
 
PM Gati Shakti National Master Plan 
Recommendation/Observation 
39. The Committee observes that under the a mbitious PM Gati Shakti – National Master 
Plan, only one airport viz., Dholera, Gujarat, has been identified by the Ministry. The 
Committee would like to know the present status of the completion of this project and urges 
the Ministry to expedite the devel opment process. The Committee recommends that in 
consonance with the vision of the Government of India, more airport projects should be 
identified and included in the plan. The Committee also notes that no budgetary support has 
been provided for any specif ic plan/proposal under PM Gati Shakti and desires to know the 
reasons for the same. 
 (Para 167) 
Reply of the Ministry 
39.1  Apart from the Dholera Airport in Gujarat, the Noida International Airport, Jewar in 
Uttar Pradesh is also identified as High Impact Project under PM GatiShakti National Master 
Plan.   
39.2 Development of New Greenfield Airport at Dholera, Gujarat Phase -I has been 
identified under PM Gati Shakti National Master Plan. The status of work is as under: 
Name of Project Development of New Greenfield Airport at Dholera, 
Ahmedabad (Gujarat). Phase‐1. 
Expected date of 
Completion December 2025 
Sanctioned/Projected Cost Rs 1305.00 Cr. 
Physical Progress (%) 8% 
Progress Status: 
Completed/Under 
Implementation/Yet to 
initiate action 
Under implementation 
Latest Status 
1. CCEA clearance received in June‟22. 
2. Work for Runway and operational area awarded on 
13/07/2022. 
3. Site clearance work 85% completed. 
4. Earth work excavation and soil stabilization work about 
16% completed. 
5. Quarry permit given by Geological & Mines Dept. for 
4.14 Lakhs Cum out of total 1.75 Crores Cum on 23.02.23 
6. Tender Action for Terminal Building, Technical Block, 
ATC Tower and other associated works in city side is under 

34 
 
process. 
Issues Faced 
1. Permission for excavation of earth from borrow pit for 
balance major quantity is awaited from the State Govt. 
2. About 16.60 Ha of private land and 102.5 Ha of Govt. 
land needs to be handed over by State Govt. for overall final 
completion of project. 
 
39.3 The current status of Jewar Airport project is as under: 
 M/s. Zurich Airport International AG formed a SPV -Yamuna International Airport 
Private Limited (YIAPL) which is the concessionaire of the project. 
 Land of 1334 hectare for Phase 1 project has been acquired by Government of Uttar 
Pradesh. Resettlement & Rehabilitation of 3003 Project Affected families (PAF) of 
07 villages has been completed. 
 Grant of leave, license and Right of Way for 1334 hectare of land for the 
development of 1st phase of airport to concessionaire -YIAPL has been done by 
NIAL. 
 Financial close has been achieved on 10.08.2021. On 17.08.2021, Mas ter Plan for the 
development of Airport was approved. 
 Clearing, Grubbing and installation of boundary wall at Airport Site has been started 
by the Concessionaire from 23.08.2021. Clearing and grubbing for runway has been 
completed. 
 Environment Clearance and Forest Clearance have been obtained on 09.03.2020 and 
10.04.2018 respectively. Tree Cutting Permission has also been received from Forest 
department on 08.02.2021 and on 25.05.2021. 
 Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) for reserved services was signed by MoCA 
and YIAPL on 22nd November 2021. 
 Foundation Stone of Airport was laid on 25th November 2021 by Hon‟ble PM. 
 CNS-ATM Agreement between AAI and YIAPL has been signed on 28.02.2022. 
 Development plan has been approved by NIAL on 18.04.2022. 
 Engineering, Pr ocurement and Construction (EPC) works Contract awarded on 
08.06.2022. EPC Contractor mobilization has commenced and contractor has started 
the work at site. 
 Design Development works are in progress. Excavation works completed for 
Terminal and is under progress for Runway/Airside, Landside and Ancillary Building 
areas.  

35 
 
 Concrete works were commenced for Terminal Building, MRSS and ESS. At present, 
Raft and Footing casting are in progress for Terminal Building, Main Receiving 
Substation (MRSS) and East Subst ation (ESS). Foundation works is in progress for 
Air Traffic Control (ATC)/ Aircraft Rescue and Fire Fighting (ARFF), Central Utility 
Plant (CUP), and Office Block West (OBW) buildings. 
 Financial progress of 53.70 % and Physical progress of 16.4% has been achieved in 
project till February, 2023. 
 Regular review meetings are taken at the level of Secretary (CA) to monitor the 
progress of project. 
39.4 The PM Gati Shakti seeks to create a digital platform for integrated planning and 
coordinated execution by va rious central Ministries and State Governments. Accordingly, 
MoCA has uploaded data on 215 Airports/ Heliports/ Water Aerodromes in 7 layers on the 
PM Gati Shakti NMP portal. 
39.5 As envisaged under PM Gati  Shakti, this data shall be visible to all implementing 
agencies at the Central and State levels and shall be utilized for the synergistic development 
of their infrastructure. Therefore, no separate funds are required to be allocated under it. 
 
Sustainable Aviation 
Recommendation/Observation 
40. The Committee welcomes Ministry’s vision to develop a sustainable Indian Aviation 
Industry through energy conservation, the adoption of sustainable practices, and 
improvements in emission measurement. The Committee notes that the Ministry has decided 
not to participate in the voluntary phases of Carbon Offsetting and Reduction Scheme for 
International Aviation (CORSIA). The Committee would like to know the reasons for India’s 
non-participation in the voluntary phases of CORSIA and how it benefits the Indian 
scheduled carriers with international operations. The Committee also notes that the offsetting 
requirement f or Indian carriers under CORSIA  will start in 2027. The Committee may be 
apprised of the Ministry’s plans with regard to the issuance of necessary g uidelines to 
Airlines to motivate them to either use Sustainable Aviation Fuel (SAF) or offset their 
emissions by purchasing carbon credits from ICAO approved scheme. 
 (Para 173) 
Reply of the Ministry 
40.1  Government has decided to participate in CORSIA scheme only from the mandatory 
phase i.e. 2027, so that the airlines of developing countries like India get time to grow more 
and do not face any financial consequences due to CORSIA by joining in voluntary p hase. 
Due to the COVID pandemic, there were  no offsetting requirements in the years 2019 -2020-
2021 as per ICAO. The Ministry of Civil Aviation and the Directorate General of Civil 
Aviation have held meetings with the Indian airlines to sensitize them regarding the impact of 

36 
 
CORSIA on them once the mandatory phase starts and the resultant need to be prepared for 
the same. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
41. The Committee notes that no funds have been allocated to the Ministry towards 
sustainable aviation and urg es the Ministry to furnish the reasons for it. The Committee 
would like to know the present status of the Ministry’s Report containing its views on the 
recommendations of the Bio -ATF Programme Committee. The Committee may also be 
apprised of the details of  the plan being formulated by the MoP&NG for production, supply 
and related issues of SAF for use in the aviation sector. 
 (Para 174) 
Reply of the Ministry 
41.1  CORSIA is applicable only to international flights originating from one country to 
another. The financial implications due to offsetting under CORSIA (on account of use of 
SAF or purchase of Carbon credits) will be borne by individual airlines depending upon their 
international operations as and when applicable. 
41.2 The Bio -ATF Programme Committee report has been circulated by M inistry of 
Petroleum and Natural Gas (M oP&NG) to other relevant stakeholders on 19.12.2022. The 
comments on the same are awaited.  MoP&NG has notified the National Policy on Biofuels 
2018. The Government is adopting a multi-pronged approach to promote and encourage use 
of biofuels by focusing on advanced biofuels including bio -CNG, bio-methanol, Di-Methyl 
Ether (DME), bio-hydrogen, bio-jet fuel, etc. The scope of the Policy encompasses jet fuel as 
a 'drop in' fuel produced from Biomass, agri-residues, wastes such as Municipal Solid Wastes 
(MSW), Plastic wastes, Industrial wastes etc. which meets the Indian standards for Jet fuel, in 
pure or blended form. Oil Public Sector Undertakings (PSUs) have identified Mangalore a nd 
Panipat for setting up Bio-ATF pants based on different technologies. 
 
National Air Sports Policy 
Recommendation/Observation 
42. The Committee is of the opinion that Air Sports have a huge potential for growth, in 
terms of tourism and employment generation, in the country. The Committee notes that under 
the head of Skill Development for Promotion/Development of Aero Sports, with an objective 
to provide Grants -in-Aid to Institutions in the Civil Aviation Sector for 
Promotion/Development of Aero Sports, th e projected demand was of Rs. 1.00/ - crore 
however, only Rs. 0.01 crore has been allocated in B.E. 2023 -24. The Committee would like 
to know the reasons for this token provision. The Committee underlines the need for bringing 
in the latest technology; equi pment; and infrastructure, to promote air sports in the country. 
The Committee is aware that the International Olympics Committee (IOC) is considering the 
inclusion of air sports in IOC -approved sporting events. In this regard, the Committee 

37 
 
recommends the Ministry to popularize air sports and take concentrated steps in consultation 
with State Governments; the Ministry of Youth Affairs & Sports; and the Ministry of Tourism, 
along with the Air Sports Federation of India. 
 (Para 178) 
Reply of the Ministry 
42.1 The funds sought at BE stage were a token provision to cater for any unforeseen 
demands for aero sports activities in future, if it so arises. The recommendation has been duly 
noted. 
 
National Air Sports Policy 
Recommendation/Observation 
43. The Committee notes that with the formulation of the National Aero Sports Policy 
(NASP), 2022, a great fillip is required towards the Aero Sports sector in the country. 
However, the Committee feels that the Aero Club of India (ACI) which was the nodal 
organization and the National Aero Sports control authority designated under the Fédération  
Aéronautique Internationale (FAI), the equivalent of the International Olympics Committee, 
has not been  positioned as the nodal body in the Policy, which could restrain the  future of 
Aero Sports in India. 
 (Para 179) 
Recommendation/Observation 
44. The Committee also notes that the FAI has given recognition to the Aero Club of 
India (ACI), an autonomous body under the Ministry of Civil Aviation, for conducting, 
certifying, sponsoring and authenticating Aero Sports bodies in India. Hence, the Committee 
feels that the Policy may be fine -tuned to incorporate a provision to have the Aero club of 
India as the Nodal Aero Sports development centre for promotion of Aero Sports which  it has 
been handling prior to and post-independence as well. 
 (Para 180) 
Recommendation/Observation 
45. The Committee would like to note that under the NASP, 2022, the Ministry is in the 
process of establishing the Air Sports Federation of India (ASFI), which shall be an 
autonomous body under the Ministry of Civil Aviation, to represent India in the FAI and 
other global platforms related to Air Sports. However, the FAI recognizes the Aero Club of 
India as the longstanding autonomous body of the Ministry of Civil Aviation which is audited 
by the CAG and the audit Report is submitted in Parliament, as the sole authority and 
authorised body of the FAI, as the National Aero Sports control authority in India. The 
creation of the new ASFI under the NASP, 2022 may not have the same legitimacy and as it  
 

38 
 
may hamper the growth and development of Aero Sports in the cou ntry at the national and 
international level. 
 (Para 181) 
Reply of the Ministry 
45.1 The Ministry is in the process of revisiting the National Air Sports Policy, 2022. In 
this connection, draft National Air Sports Guidelines  (NASG), 2023, has been circulated for 
stakeholder comments. The recommendations of Committee have been duly noted. 
 
Trans-Shipment Hubs 
Recommendation/Observation 
46. The Committee notes the various steps taken specifically the reduction of GST from 
18% to 5% on air cargo, to simplify and reduce the charges to make India a more attractive 
logistics destination. The Committee also notes that AAICLAS has made budgetary allocation 
only for cargo terminals at Kolkata & Chennai and would like to know the reasons for the 
non-inclusion of other terminals/States. The Committee desires to know the present status of 
rolling out simplified single charges for domestic air cargo facilitated by AAICLAS and the 
status of the proposal to the Ministry of Finance for exemption from Cust oms Cost Recovery 
charges. 
 (Para 186) 
Reply of the Ministry 
46.1 At present fund is allocated for Chennai and Kolkata facilities by AAICLAS for 
transhipment hub. However, at other airports fund for transhipment hub is not being allotted 
due to limited international flight movements/cargo. 
46.2 AAICLAS vide letter No. AAICLAS/CHQ/FIN/405 dated 09.03.2023 has issued 
simplified single charges for Domestic Air Cargo facilities established at Non -AERA 
airports. MoCA had raised the issue of exemption of Custo ms Cost Recovery Charges with 
MoF/CBIC at various international facilities in Tier -II & III city airports. The matter was 
examined by CBIC and the request of MoCA was not found feasible as per the extant Rules 
(communicated to MoCA vide D.O. letter dated 10.01.2023). 
46.3 MoCA vide D.O. letter dated 5/5/2023 to Hon‟ble Finance Minister has requested 
Ministry of Finance (MoF) that for Tier -II/ III international airports: (i) Customs Cost 
Recovery charges (CCRC) may be borne by MoF for cargo and (ii) CCRC nee ds to be 
exempted on passenger side. MoF has also been requested that for smaller airports custom 
cost recovery charges for Cargo and Passenger should be supported by Ministry of Finance 
till the period they attain scale instead of loading them with high f ixed costs, which 
discourages smaller airports from providing these facilities. 
 
 

39 
 
Issues of Cyber Safety and Security 
Recommendation/Observation 
47. The Committee opines that the aviation sector is highly vulnerable to cyber security 
threats as most major airlines have reported incidents of cyber -attacks, putting air 
operations and passenger data at huge risk, in the past few years. The Committee is aware 
that recently several flights in the United States of America were grounded or delayed due to 
a possibl e cyber attack that incapacitated the airlines websites. The Committee notes the 
issuance of necessary circular/order for countering cyber attacks and protection of sensitive 
data in the Aviation Sector in India. The Committee appreciates Ministry’s move t o seek 
Reports from Airport/Aircraft Operators on preventive measures taken to protect the Civil 
Aviation Sector from potential cyber security threats. The Committee recommends that the 
Ministry may expedite the replies from the concerned stakeholders and would like to be 
informed of the summary of all the cyber security measures taken by the Airport/ Aircraft 
Operators. 
 (Para 189) 
Reply of the Ministry 
47.1 The recommendations of the Committee are noted.  
47.2 Further, Bureau of Civil Aviation Security has issued the guidelines for protection of 
sensitive data in the aviation sector vide  AvSec Order 06/2022  dated 23.09.2022 along with 
its addendum dated 06.04.2023.  Cyber security measures taken by Airports Autho rity of 
India (AAI) – 
i) Airports Authority of India (AAI) is having its own Information Security 
Management System (ISMS) and Information Security Policies. ISO 27001:2013 
certification ensures compliance of various cyber security measures which include 
monitoring, reporting and mitigation mechanism against cyber threats. 
ii) AAI has been declared as Critical Information Infrastructure under Transport sector 
by NCIIPC. 
iii) Cyber security Infrastructure such as NextGen Firewall, Advance Persistent Threat 
device, Advan ce Phishing Protection and Endpoint security solutions etc have been 
incorporated in various operational system(s), Data Centre as well as Disaster 
Recovery site. 
iv) Cyber Security Awareness Programs are being conducted at regular intervals for all 
Employees and passengers. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
48. The Committee also notes that in the last 5 years, 13 incidents of cyber -attacks have 
been reported with AAI. The Committee would like to know the details of these attacks and 
the action taken by the Ministry, thereof. The Committee recommends the Ministry  
orchestrate a robust and comprehensive mechanism to counter cyber attacks/ terrorism. The 

40 
 
Committee notes that AAI has utilized Rs. 51.80/ - crore for the implementation of Cyber 
Security in civil aviation , from 2019 -2022. The Committee feels that the Mini stry should 
make concentrated efforts to overcome the challenges viz., adoption of a multidisciplinary 
approach; data protection; and lack of skilled manpower. The Committee further 
recommends that for proper monitoring of the challenges with respect the c yber security, the 
Ministry may explore the possibility of including a separate budget head and enhancing the 
budgetary allocations. 
 (Para 190) 
Reply of the Ministry 
48.1 To develop a robust and comprehensive mechanism to counter cyber attacks/ 
terrorism, Cyber security is duly provisioned in Annex -17 vide Standard and Recommended 
Practices 4.9.1 and 4.9.2 respectively and measures related with Cyber threats are also 
incorporated in National Civil Aviation Security Programme vide para 6.12. 
48.2 Further, the recommendations of the committee are noted. 
48.3 Noted. 13 Incidents were reported by CERT -In and NCIIPC. Action Taken Report 
towards mitigation of reported malicious URLs, IPs on Network Security devices were 
submitted to reporting agencies. Details are placed in Annexure – V. 
 
Use of GEO Augmented Navigation (GAGAN) 
Recommendation/Observation 
49. The Committee appreciates that India is one of the very few countries in the world, 
other than the USA and Japan, to have its own Satellite Based Augmentation  System (SBAS) 
i.e., GAGAN. The Committee applauds Ministry’s as well as the ISRO’s coordinated efforts 
in this regard, which is a firm step towards ‘Atmanirbhar Bharat’. The Committee 
recommends that all out efforts should be made to ensure the installati on of GAGAN in all 
registered Indian aircraft, in consultation with concerned stakeholders & expert agencies. 
 (Para 195) 
Reply of the Ministry 
49.1 Agency responsible for mandating GAGAN in all Indian registered aircraft is DGCA. 
Localizer Performance with Vertical Guidance (LPV) has been installed at various airports. 
GAGAN signals are available 24x7 in space. National Civil Aviation Policy (NCAP -2016) 
prescribes that new aircraft being registered in India from 1st January 2019 will mandatorily 
have GA GAN enabled GPS receivers onboard.. However, owing to the fact that certain 
aircraft/avionics cannot be made GAGAN compliant due to technology challenges and non 
feasibility of change of design, certain concessions/exemptions have been accorded. The 
Ministry is however, making all efforts to ensure provision of NCAP. 
 
 

41 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
50. The Committee notes that GAGAN will provide additional accuracy to the pilots, for 
all phases of flight, from enroute and through approach for all qualified air ports within the 
GAGAN service volume. The Committee would like to know the details of the airports 
identified for the GAGAN system and the basis for selection. The Committee feels that it 
should be implemented at all the airports in the country especially  the ones which have 
difficult airstrips/runways to ensure smooth and safe take -offs and landing. The Committee 
may also be provided with a brief note on GAGAN including the details of INRES, INMCC 
and INLUS. 
 (Para 196) 
Reply of the Ministry 
50.1 The suggestion of the Committee is noted.  Brief Note on GAGAN is attached as 
Annexure – VI. 
 
Promotion of Research and Development 
Recommendation/Observation 
51. The Committee welcomes the usage of Radiological Detection Equipment (RDE) to 
prevent the entry/exit of radioactive material which may be used to commit an act of unlawful 
interference and to eliminate the hazard generated by radioactive material substances by 
passenger, cargo and staff. The Committee desires to know the details of the 14 airpo rts 
where RDE was installed in the 1st phase and the 10 airports which are planned to be 
covered in the 2nd phase. The Committee may also be apprised of the Ministry’s roadmap for 
installing and commissioning RDE at the remaining Indian airports. 
 (Para 204) 
Reply of the Ministry 
51.1 The recommendations of the Committee are noted. 
51.2 The RDE scheme was approved by  the SFC for the installat ion of RDEs for  24 
Airports. It was divided into two phases for its smooth execution (Phase -I, 14 Airports and 
Phase-II, 10 Airports. The details of Airports under Phase I & II is given below: 
i) (RDE Phase -I ):- These 14 airports are Amritsar, Ahmadabad, Bangalore, Chennai, 
Cochin, Calicut, Delhi, Guwahati, Hyderabad, Kolkata, Lucknow, Goa, Mumbai, 
Trivandrum. 
ii) (RDE P hase-II):- 10 airports Mangalore, Jaipur, Coimbatore, Pune, Tiruchirapalli, 
Varanasi, Bagdogra, Madurai, Bhubaneswar, Gaya ) are to be covered in phase-II. 
Recommendation/Observation 
52. The Committee notes that the Ministry has under -utilised the budget allocated for 
CACS and RDE, over the years and desires to know the reasons for the same. The Committee 
is also aware that for B.E. 2022 -23, an amount of Rs. 20.00/ - crore was allotted unde r the 

42 
 
head of Bureau of Civil Aviation Security (BCAS) for 2022 -23 which included a provision for 
installation of RDE (2nd Phase). The Committee recommends that the Ministry may lay its 
focus on more R&D projects and work towards making optimal utilization  of funds allocated 
to them. 
 (Para 205) 
Reply of the Ministry 
52.1 The recommendations of the Committee are noted. 
52.2 Funds are only being utilized once the milestone/ deliverables have been completed 
by the vendor / Firm. Further, CACS and RDE funds have been provisioned on the basis of 
project progress and discussion with the firm as per the given milestones.  Sincere efforts are 
being made for utilization of allocated funds. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

43 
 
CHAPTER-III 
  
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
THE MINISTRY HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
  
Regional Connectivity Scheme – UdeDeshkaAamNagrik (RCS-UDAN) 
Recommendation/Observation 
1.        The Committee observes that under International Air Connectivity Scheme’s (IACS 
4.0), 4th round of bidding for the selection of airlines, international routes have been awarded 
to Scheduled Airline Operators (SAOs). The Committee appreciates the initiation of the new 
Scheme, as it will bring in foreign tourists and promote touri sm. The Committee desires to 
know the details of routes/ countries covered under the IACS 4.0 Scheme. 
 (Para 27) 
Reply of the Ministry 
1.1      The State Governments of Assam, Manipur, Tripura and Odisha had requested to 
provide the International Air Connectivity from Guwahati, Imphal, Agartala and 
Bhubaneshwar.  
1.2      Under International Air connectivity scheme -IACS-UDAN 4.0 round of bidding, the 
following 13 bids for the IACS UDAN 4.0 for selection of Airline(s) under International Air 
Connectivity Scheme (IACS)-UDAN, December, 2021 were received on 31.12.2021:  
Sl. No. Network 
1. Guwahati-Bangkok-Guwahati 
2. Guwahati-Dhaka-Guwahati 
3. Guwahati-Kathmandu-Guwahati 
4. Guwahati-Hanoi-Guwahati 
5. Bhubaneshwar-Bangkok-Bhubaneshwar 
6. Bhubaneshwar-Abu Dhabi-Bhubaneshwar 
7. Bhubaneshwar-Singapore-Bhubaneshwar 
8. Imphal-Bangkok-Imphal 
9. Imphal-Mandalay-Imphal 
10. Agartala-Dhaka-Agartala 
11. Agartala-Chittagong-Agartala 
12. Imphal-Kunming-Imphal 
13. Guwahati-Yangon-Guwahati 

44 
 
1.3      Under International Air Connectivity Scheme (IACS) -UDAN 4.0 round of bidding, 
the following International routes have been awarded to the Selected Airline Operators on the 
request of the State Governments:  
Route Airline Operator 
Imphal – Mandalay - Imphal M/s Spicejet Ltd. 
Agartala – Chittagong – Agartala M/s Spicejet Ltd. 
Guwahati – Bangkok – Guwahati M/s Air Asia 
Guwahati – Dhaka – Guwahati M/s Air Asia 
  
1.4      Remaining routes will be awarded subject to  the consent of the State Governments for 
providing the VGF before award of the routes. 
  
Further Recommendation/ Observation 
1.5      The Committee notes the details of the 13 bids received and 04 routes awarded 
under the International Air Connectivity Scheme (IACS) – UDAN 4.0. Th e Committee 
appreciates the steps taken by the Ministry to boost air connectivity to international 
destinations, especially from the North-East Region. The Committee would like to know 
the status of the remaining nine bids and by when these routes would be awarded to the 
Airline Operators. The Committee may also be apprised of the Ministry’s plans to 
initiate more bidding rounds under the Scheme, to enhance international air 
connectivity.       
  
Recommendation/Observation 
2.        The Committee notes that  there has been a fluctuation in the number of RCS 
passengers who have benefitted for the UDAN Scheme. While the number of RCS passengers 
rose from 3 lakh (2017 -18), to 12 lakh (2018 -19), to 31 lakh (2019 -20) after the initiation of 
the Scheme in 2016, it dipped to 15 lakh in 2020 -21. Though, the number of RCS passengers 
benefitted grew to 33 lakh in 2021 -22, it has again come down to 20 lakh passengers as on 
31.01.2023. The Committee would like to know the reasons for the reduction in number of 
passengers benefitting from this Scheme during 2022-23. The Committee also desires to know 
the details of plans for the year 2023-24, wherein the Ministry aims to increase the number of 
passengers benefited to 30 lakh. 
 (Para 30) 
Reply of the Ministry 
2.1      Additional benefits provided to Priority Area(s) under UDAN 4.0 onwards. Helicopter 
services increased under the scheme for better connectivity of Priority Area(s). Number of 
passengers on RCS flights in the FY 2022 -23 till 3rd quarter is 20,26,800. Reason s for 
reduction of passengers in the FY 2022-23 are as under: 

45 
 
 Collapse/Management Issues of Turbo Megha airways Private Limited affected 
closure of routes awarded to them. 
 Delay in obtaining Scheduled Commuter Operators Permit by new entrant Airlines 
delays the flights operations. 
 Non-availability of suitable aircraft, leasing issues, long lead time for delivery of 
small aircraft, difficulties in procuring spares from abroad. 
 Lack of Night Landing Facility at the RCS airports. 
 Capacity requirement at the le vel of State Governments/ UTs to develop 
infrastructure. 
2.2      Corrective steps taken by the Government are as under: 
i. Periodic review of the progress of upgradation works and removal of bottlenecks in 
operationalization of airports. 
ii. Provided certain fin ancial flexibilities as a temporary measure which included 
reduced performance guarantee and return of addl. performance guarantee subject to 
fulfilment of certain conditions.  
iii. Flexibility to convert RCS seats to non -RCS seats, flexibility to operate betwe en 3 
and 7/14 flights per week, suspension of performance criteria and extension in 
contract period for lockdown duration. 
iv. Allowed NSOP operations in fixed wing (i/c seaplanes) apart from operations of 
helicopters allowed earlier for expeditious operationalization of routes. 
v. Reduction in VGF by at least 40% for specific categories of routes had been mandated 
as per the policy reform order dated 7 th January, 2021 and were made effective from 
17th  July, 2020 as per the policy reform dated 27 th January, 2021. This reduction was 
effective till 1 st March, 2022. The SAOs have been compensated for their actual 
number of RCS Seats lost instead of compensating for the absolute VGF lost in that 
tenure to keep the  routes  sustainable. 
Further Recommendation/ Observation 
2.3      The Committee notes that Regional Connectivity Scheme – Ude Desh ka Aam 
Nagrik (RCS-UDAN) is the flagship Scheme of the Ministry of Civil Aviation with an 
aim to make air travel affordable and widespread. The Committee observes that the 
number of passengers availed this Scheme has reduced in 2022 -23 and only 20,26,800 
passengers benefited till December, 2022. The Committee notes some of the 
contributory reasons for this scenario which include, among others, the  delay in 
attaining scheduled commuter  operators permit by the Airlines, non -availability of 
suitable aircraft and leasing issues, The Committee recommends that before awarding 
the routes, all such issues, having potential to undermine the strength and efficacy of the 
scheme, may be looked into and appropriately resolved.  
  
Recommendation/Observation 
3.        Further, the Committee is aware that earlier, under RCS, there were operational 
flights to/from the State of Kerala, however, these flights were stopped without citing any 
reasons. The Committee would like to know the reasons for the discontinuation of RCS flights 

46 
 
in the State of Kerala. The Committee also urges the Ministry to explore the possibility of 
including the Nagpur-Shirdi route under the ambit of RCS. 
(Para 37) 
Reply of the Ministry 
3.1      MoU was signed between State Government of Kerala, AAI &MoCA on 27 th 
December, 2017. In 2nd round of bidding under RCS -UDAN, two airports Chillary and 
Kannur were included for bidding. Kannur airport was awarded the UDAN scheme in the 
State of Kerala. 
3.2      The status of routes awarded under UDAN connecting Kerala is given below: 
i. Awarded routes- 32 
ii. Operationalized routes- 18 
iii. Cancelled routes- 08 
iv. Balance routes yet to commence- 06  
3.3      RCS routes from Kannur Airport connecting to Co chin, Bangalore, Chennai, Goa, 
Hubli and Thiruvananthapuram awarded to M/s Indigo on 24.01.2018   and routes connecting 
Kannur to Goa, Bangalore, Hubli commenced on 25.01.2019 and routes connecting Kannur 
to Cochin, Chennai and   Trivandrum commenced on 31.0 3.2019. RCS flights connecting 
Kannur with Goa and Hubli have been discontinued by the SAO after completion of 3 years 
tenure.  However, the other routes are still in operations even after the completion of 3 years 
tenure.  
3.4      RCS routes connecting Cochin with Hubli and Mysore commenced on 28-06-2018 and 
19.07.2019.  RCS flights connecting Cochin with Hubli has been discontinued by the SAO, 
after the completion of 3 years tenure.   However, the route; Cochin-Mysore-Cochin is still in 
operation even after the completion of 3 years tenure.  
3.5      Tourism RCS route; Calicut -Delhi-Calicut commenced on 24.01.2021 is still in 
operation. As regards the  connectivity between Shirdi and Nagpur, it is stated that as per 
provisions under the UDAN scheme, Shirdi and Nagpur are both Served Airports since the 
departure from these airports is more than 7 per week.   Such routes do not come under the 
purview of UDAN, which primarily aims to provide air connectivity to unserved and 
underserved airports. 
3.6      If the State Government of Maharashtra or the Ministry of Tourism requests to include 
the said routes and commits to bear entire VGF to be paid to selected Airline Operator as per 
provisions in the UDAN scheme, the same can be considered in future rounds of biddi ng as 
„State RCS Routes‟ or 'Tourism RCS Routes respectively'.   In case valid bids are received, 
the same will be considered as per UDAN provisions. 
  
Further Recommendation/ Observation 
3.7      The Committee observes that Kannur is a major international airport in the 
State of Kerala which became operational in 2018, however, till date, it does not have 

47 
 
many flights operating from the airport. The Committee also notes that out of a total 32 
awarded routes under the UDAN Scheme connecting Kerala, 8 were cancelled and 6 are 
yet to commence. The Committee would like to know the reasons for cancellation/ non -
operationalization of these routes.    
  
3.8      Further, the Committee notes that RCS flights on various sectors were 
discontinued by the Selected Airline Operators (SAOs) after completion of 3 years 
tenure. The Committee recommends that the Ministry should look into the possibility of 
extending the stipulated tenure of contracts with the SAOs, to ensure that the flight 
operations are not affected and can continue without any interruption.  
  
NER Schemes: Providing Air Connectivity and Aviation Infrastructure in NER 
Recommendation/Observation 
4.        The Committee was informed that during 4 rounds of bidding under UDAN, 142 valid 
fixed wing and helicopter routes have been awarded in NER, which will help in attracting 
tourists, investors and add to ease of doing business in the Region. Further, 36 airports/ 
heliports/ water aerodromes have been identified and 64 routes have commenced so far. The 
Committee observes that the Government, besides promoting air connectivity in the Region, 
is also planning to encourage the investments in industry in th is Region which will bring 
about economic prosperity and lead to rise in employment potential in the Region. The 
Committee desires that a comprehensive plan may be proposed to provide connectivity to the 
places of tourist interest/ industries in the Region  and also provide last mile local 
connectivity from airports to these places. The Committee recommends that concentrated 
efforts should be made to improve the air connectivity in the country especially in the North -
Eastern Region, Hilly Areas and Islands i ncluding Lakshadweep and Andaman & Nicobar 
Islands which are hotspots for tourism. 
 (Para 42) 
Reply of the Ministry 
4.1      With a view to provide connectivity to the places of tourist interest/ industries in the 
region and also to provide last mile local  connectivity from airports to these places, 1152 
routes, including 63 Tourism RCS routes, have been awarded under the UDAN scheme so 
far. 473 RCS routes have commenced as of 31.03.2023.   
4.2      Further, it is pertinent to mention that UDAN plays an imp ortant role in improving the 
air connectivity and  is focused on priority areas and helicopter operation in North -East 
Region, Hilly Areas and Islands including Lakshadweep and Andaman & Nicobar Islands 
which are  important for tourism by reviving unserved and underserved airports, heliports and 
Water Aerodromes (WA) through fiscal support to ensure adequate infrastructure 
development at regional airports. 

48 
 
4.3      In order to expand air travels to promote tourism in hilly areas viz. NER, 
Uttarakhand, Himachal Pradesh, A&N Island and Lakshadweep, the following airports, 
heliports & water aerodromes have been identified for the operation of RCS flights. The 
details are as per Annexure-I. The break-up is as follows: 
 S. No. Area Airport Heliport Water Aerodrome 
1. North-East Region 13 21 2 
2. Uttarakhand 2 12 - 
3. Himachal Pradesh 2 6 1 
4. Andaman & Nicobar Islands 3 - 5 
5. Lakshadweep - - 8 
  
4.4      The details of routes connecting “North -Eastern Region, Hilly Areas and Islands 
including Lakshadweep and Andaman & Nicobar Islands” awarded under the UDAN scheme 
are enclosed at Annexure-II.  
4.5      Once the works at  Water Aerodromes are completed, the Selected Airline Operators 
may commence seaplane operations on seaplane routes. The development works of water 
aerodromes is under the planning stage. 
  
Further Recommendation/ Observation 
4.6      The Committee notes that to boost the air connectivity in the North -Eastern 
Region (NER), the Ministry has identified 13 Airports, 21 Heliports and 2 Water 
Aerodromes in the region. However, out of 13, only 10 Airports are operational as on 
date, whereas none of the identified Heliports and Water Aerodromes has been 
operationalized as yet. The Committee would like to be briefed about  the reasons for 
non operationalization of remaining Airports, Heliports and Water Aerodromes and the 
expected timeline by when these will be made functional.  
  
4.7      The Committee also observes that as per the details provided by the Ministry, 142 
RCS routes have been awarded in the NER . However, out of these, only 56 are 
operational and 16 have been cancelled. Furt her, the number of routes operationalised 
in other areas as compared to the awarded routes  in NER, are really low wherein only 
38% and 50% of the total awarded routes have been operationalised in Uttarakhand 
(Hilly area) and Himachal Pradesh (Hilly area), respectively. The Committee also notes 
that none of the RCS routes ha s been operationalised in Lakshadweep and Andaman & 
Nicobar Islands. The Committee would like to know the reasons for the non - 
operationalization of routes in all these areas which have i mmense tourism potential 
and urges the Ministry to take up the issues of air connectivity under RCS scheme to 
these areas with priority.     

49 
 
Krishi Udaan Scheme 
Recommendation/Observation 
5.        The Committee commends the detailed plans of the Ministry to start 58 airports, 
especially in the remote NER, Hilly Airports, Airports in Tribal areas and Islands, besides, 
new airports. However, the Committee notes the nominal allocation of Rs. 0.01/- crore for the 
Krishi Udaan Scheme, both at R.E. 2022 -23 and B .E. 2023-24. The Committee also opines 
that India’s economy is largely based on Agriculture and promoting the Krishi Udaan 
Scheme would help in transporting agricultural produce in large quantities over long 
distances economically, which will bring prosper ity for the farmers and add to our economy. 
The Committee also feels that in the remote regions of the NE, where the economy is 
primarily based on horticulture; agriculture; and tea cultivation, air connectivity can provide 
proper markets for the sale of t hese products. The Committee notes that the intention of the 
Ministry is not translated into providing budgetary support to the Krishi Udaan Scheme. It 
seems no planning has been done to implement the scheme effectively and sincerely. The 
Committee, theref ore, recommends that the ‘Krishi Udaan Scheme’ should be given full 
budgetary support and if necessary, the Ministry should be given additional allocation at 
R.E. stage. 
 (Para 48) 
Reply of the Ministry 
5.1      Krishi Udaan Scheme 2.0 was announced on 27 th October, 2021 enhancing the 
existing provisions, mainly focusing on transporting perishable food products from the hilly 
areas, North-Eastern States and tribal areas. 
5.2      The Scheme covers 58 airports in the country, primarily focusing on 25 airport s 
focusing on North Eastern, Hilly and Tribal region besides 33 airports in other regions/areas. 
At present the following airports in the North Eastern Region are covered under Krishi Udaan 
Scheme 2.0: 
State Airport 
Arunachal Pradesh 1. Tezu 
Assam 
2. Dibrugarh 
3. Jorhat 
4. Lilabari 
5. Rupsi 
6. Silchar 
Manipur 7. Imphal 
Meghalaya 8. Shillong 
Mizoram 9. Lengpui 
Nagaland 10. Dimapur 
Sikkim 11. Pakyong 
Tripura 12. Agartala 
  

50 
 
5.3      For facilitating and incentivising movement of agri -produce by air transportation, 
Airports Authority of India (AAI) provides full waiver of Landing, Parking, Terminal 
Navigational Landing Charges (TNLC) and Route Navigation Facility Charges (RNFC) for 
Indian Registered freighters and P2C (Passenger-to-Cargo) Aircraft at its 21 selected airports. 
5.4      Following the strong advocacy by MoCA, the MoD has also issued a Gazette 
Notification on 25.03.2023 notifying that it shall not levy Landing Charges and Parking 
Charges (if applicable) or any other charge subsuming a charge for such aspects in fu ture, 
from Airline Operators when operating within the watch hours from 21 defence airfields/ 
airports under the Scheme. The same has been circulated vide OM dated 10.04.2023. 
5.5      It may be noted that Krishi Udaan is essentially a convergence scheme w here eight 
Ministries/Departments namely Ministry of Civil Aviation, Department of Agriculture & 
Farmers' Welfare, Department of Animal Husbandry and Dairying, Department of Fisheries, 
Ministry of Food Processing Industries, Department of Commerce, Ministry of Tribal Affairs, 
Ministry of Development of North -Eastern Region are to leverage their existing schemes to 
strengthen the logistics for transportation of Agri -produce.  Therefore, there is no specific 
budget allocation under Krishi Udaan Scheme besides a token provision. 
  
Further Recommendation/ Observation 
5.6      The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry that Krishi Udaan is a 
convergence Scheme wherein various Ministries/ Departments, leverage their existing 
schemes to strengthen the logistics for transportation of Agri -produce, and hence, no 
specific budget allocation is made under Krishi Udaan Scheme, except a token 
provision. The Committee would like to know the plans of the Ministry of Civil Aviation 
in this regard and whether the Ministry is going to successfully implement the scheme 
only by way o f token allocation. A list of 58 airports , covered under the Scheme , may 
also be provided to the Committee with the justification of their selection.   
 
Air India Assets Holding Limited (AIAHL) 
Recommendation/Observation 
6.        The Committee observes that between 2015 -16 and 2019 -20 (till 31.12.2019), the 
actual passenger revenue from Air India fell short of the budgeted passenger revenue. The 
decline in performance of Air India is evident from the upward trend in shortf all percentage 
of Revenue from 8% (in 2015 -16) to 6.77%, 11.24%, 10.88% (respectively in years 2016 -17, 
2017-18 and 2018 -19) and then reaching a high level of 32.09% in 2019 -20. The revenue 
shortfall clubbed with other major factors such as low monetizatio n of assets, ordering new 
fleet which affected the equity capital, non -availability of adequate connectivity to 
international sectors, manpower issues etc. lead to the decline in performance and eventual 
disinvestment of the national carrier. In this regar d, the Committee would like to know the 
details of the amount which has been invested by the Government in Air India since it was 

51 
 
nationalized in 1953 till the date of disinvestment. Further, the Committee may also be 
apprised of the total loss that Air India has incurred over the years till its disinvestment. 
 (Para 52) 
Reply of the Ministry 
6.1      Prior to implementation of  Turn-Around Plan (TAP) / Financial Restructuring Plan 
(FRP) in 2012, an equity of Rs. 145 crore, Rs. 800 crore and Rs. 1200 crore w as infused in 
Air India in FY 2007-08, 2008-09 and 2009-10 respectively. 
6.2      Further, Cabinet Committee of Economic Affairs (CCEA) in 2012 approved the Turn -
Around Plan (TAP)/ Financial Restructuring Plan (FRP) for Air India for operational and 
financial turnaround of Air India. As per TAP/FRP, an amount of Rs. 30,520.22 crore was 
released to Air India in the form of equity during the period 2011-12 to 2018-19. 
6.3      In 2019, the debt of Rs. 22,064 crore of Air India was transferred to AI Assets Holding 
Limited. Accordingly, NCDs of Rs. 21,985 crore in three phase (Rs 7000 crore + Rs 7000 
crore +Rs. 7985 crore) was issued by AIAHL to pay the partial debt of Air India and the 
remaining Rs 79 crore (22,064 -21,985) was adjusted by AI from the monetizati on proceeds. 
Servicing of the interest of the same was done through budgetary support provided by Govt. 
of India. 
6.4      Financial support for closure of strategic disinvestment of Air India:  
 Ministry of Finance provided financial assistance amounting to Rs. 64,026.40 crore in 
2021-22 in the form of equity to AIAHL for repayment of past Government 
borrowing, past Government guaranteed SLB Lease rentals and past dues/liabilities of 
Air India. 
 An amount of Rs. 61,130.96 crore was utilised by AIAHL for rep ayment of past 
Government borrowing, past Government guaranteed SLB Lease rentals and past 
dues/liabilities of Air India and Rs. 1234.44 crore was utilized by AIAHL for 
servicing the interest of NCDs for FY 2022 -23 with the approval of the Ministry of 
Finance.  
 The remaining amount of Rs. 1661 crore [Rs. 64,026.40 crore - Rs. 61,130.96 crore – 
Rs. 1234.44 crore] was utilized for partial recouping the amount of Rs. 1969.40 crore 
provided by Ministry of Finance from Contingency Fund of India for premium 
payment in respect of early redemption of NCDs. 
 
Further Recommendation/ Observation 
6.5      The Committee notes the details as regards the debt incurred by Air India over 
the years and that the Ministry of Finance provided financial assistance amounting to 
Rs. 64,026.40/ - crore in the form of equity to Air India Assets Holding Limited 
(AIAHL). The Committee may be apprised of the details of the amount which has been 
invested by the Government of India in Air India over the years, since its 
Nationalization in 1953 till the date of its strategic disinvestment.   
 

52 
 
Disinvestment of Air India 
Recommendation/Observation 
7. The Committee notes that during the disinvestment of Air India, the Government had 
provided financial assistance amounting to Rs. 64,026.40/ - crore in the form of equity to 
AIAHL. However, subsequent to the disinvestment, the Government received only a cash 
component of Rs. 2,700/ - crores and also retained a debt of Rs. 15,300/ - crore. The 
Committee would like to know the details of the actual r evenue the Government has 
generated by disinvesting a massive company like Air India, as financial support given for 
closure of strategic disinvestment of Air India amounting to Rs. 64,026.40/ - crore is nothing 
but public money. The Committee notes that th e Enterprise Valuation (EV) Method was 
adopted for disinvestment of Air India. The highest bidder i.e., M/s Talace Private Limited 
estimated the EV at only Rs. 18,000/- crore. In this regard, the Committee would like to know 
the details of the procedure fo llowed to arrive at this valuation. The Committee may also be 
apprised of the details regarding the total liability of Air India and Ministry’s roadmap to 
clear the entire liability in the coming years. 
 (Para 60) 
Reply of the Ministry 
7.1      The Preliminary Information Memorandum (PIM) for inviting Expression of Interest 
(EOI) for sale of 100% equity share capital of Air India Limited (AIL) including AIL's 100% 
shareholding in the Air India Express Limited (AIXL) and 50% shareholding in Air India 
Airport Services Private Limited (AISATS) was  issued on 27.01.2020. 
7.2      In view of the excessive debt and other liabilities of Air India arising out of huge 
accumulated losses, the bidding construct was revised in October 2020 to Enterprise Value 
(EV) to al low prospective bidders an opportunity to resize the balance sheet and increase 
chances of receiving bids and competition. The EV construct allowed the bidders to bid on 
the total consideration for equity and debt instead of a pre -determined fixed debt wit h 
minimum cash consideration of 15% for equity. 
7.3      The winning bid was for Rs 18,000 crore of M/s Talace Pvt. Ltd. as Enterprise Value 
(EV) consideration for AI (100% shares of AI along with AI‟s shareholding in AIXL and 
AISATS. Accordingly, the stra tegic investor took debt amounting to 15,300 crore (85% of 
Rs. 18000 crore) and deposited remaining 2,700 crore (15% of Rs. 18000 crore) cash to the 
Government. 
7.4      Financial support of Rs. 61,130.96 crore was provided to AIAHL for repayment of 
past govt. borrowing, past govt. guaranteed SLB Lease rentals and past dues/liabilities of AI 
Limited in FY 2021-22. Further, there is no other liability on the part of Air India. 
7.5      As indicated in the reply of part 56 & 57, AIAHL had issued Government o f India 
guaranteed NCDs amounting to Rs. 21,985 crore in three phase (7000 crore + 7000 crore 
+Rs. 7985 crore). Out of the aforesaid NCDs issued by AIAHL, NCD amounting to Rs. 7000 
crore was due on 16.12.2022 and the same has been paid on 16.12.2022 throug h the 
Budgetary allocation. 

53 
 
7.6      Further, the tenure of the remaining NCDs of Rs. 7000 crore (series-2) and of Rs. 7985 
crore (series-3) is of 10 years which will be due in 2029. Therefore, till FY 2029 -30, interest 
payment for these NCDs will be paid through Budgetary support provided to MoCA and 
realization of monetization proceeds. After completion of tenure of the NCDs of Rs. 7000 
crore and Rs. 7985 crore, budgetary support will be provided for principal payment of these 
NCDs. 
Further Recommendation/ Observation 
7.7      The Committee notes that Enterprise Valuation method was adopted for inviting 
bids for disinvestment of Air India which afforded the  prospective bidders an 
opportunity to resize the balance sheet. The Committee would like to know as to how 
the enterprise valuation of Rs. 18,000/ - crore was arrived at. Further, the Committee 
may also be apprised of the assets of Air India including office buildings and whether all 
the assets were taken into consideration for valuation.   
 
Recommendation/Observation 
8.        The Committee desires to know the details regarding the financial performance (for 
last 5years) of the four subsidiaries of Air India viz., Alliance Air Aviation Limited; AI 
Airport Services Limited; AI Engineering Services Limited;  and Hotel Corporation of India 
Limited, which have been transferred to AIAHL and are due for disinvestment. The 
Committee also observes that two of these four Subsidiaries viz., AI Engineering Services 
Limited and AI Airport Services Limited, have reporte d Profits in the financial year 2021 -22. 
The Committee may be apprised about the Government’s Policy for disinvestment of 
enterprises with respect to their financial performance. Also, it may be clarified whether 
disinvestment of enterprises which are earn ing profits is justified or not. Further, the 
Committee would like to know the basis of EV method being followed for the process of 
disinvestment. 
 (Para 61) 
Reply of the Ministry 
8.1      The financial performance of the four subsidiaries is enclosed as Annexure-III. 
Disinvestment of these subsidiaries are policy decision which is taken by Department of 
Investment and Public Asset Management. 
8.2      Basis of Enterprise Value adoption: 
 The Preliminary Information Memorandum (PIM) for strategic disinvestment of Air 
India Limited (AI) including AI‟s shareholding interest in Air India Express Limited 
(AIXL) and Air India SATS Airport Services Private Limited (AISATS), was issued 
on 27th January 2020.  
 As a part of the first process (PIM issued in Jan 2020), it was decided by GOI that at 
the time of closing of the Proposed Transaction, the debt to be retained in AI & AIXL 
(combined) would be INR 23,287 Cr (it was clarified that there would be no re-
allocation of debt & liabilities of AISATS) and the IBs had to submit their Financial 

54 
 
bid (at the RFP stage) considering that the debt of INR 23,287 Cr would have to be 
serviced by AI & AIXL (combined) post the strategic disinvestment exercise. 
 However, the strategic disinvestment exercise got adversely impacted by the outbreak 
of COVID-19 pandemic in India/world starting mid-March, 2020. Considering 
significant deterioration in operating environment for airlines (including AI) due to 
COVID, it was difficult for potential bidders and GOI to determine level of 
sustainable debt for AI + AIXL, upfront, at the EOI stage itself. COVID-19 resulted 
in a dynamic market situation which continued to be unpredictable and fast changing. 
It may be noted that final difference between the EOI submission date and RFP 
submission date was around 9 months and hence within long period of time any 
decision taken at the EOI stage would have been impacted by the dynamic situation 
that existed in the next 9 months. 
 Due to the effects of COVID, the operations of AI got significantly reduced and the 
amount of support needed from AI to run the reduced operations and meet the fixed 
costs, increased significantly. A snapshot of the key operating and financial 
parameters of AI in the first 4 months of FY21 (as provided by AI) is given below: 
Particulars (INR Cr) FY20 FY 21 (4 month actual) 
Revenue 27,284 2,260 
EBITDA (-)323 (-)1,366 
Cash loss (-) 3,323 (-)2,738 
ASKMs  (Mn) 63,200 3,348 
 
 It may be noted that the ASKM (Available Seat Kilometres) of AI have dropped by 
~85% in the first 4 months of FY21 and the cash loss in the first 4 months is nearly 
82% of the cash loss achieved in the whole of FY20.  
 Considering the above factors, GOI deliberated multiple alternate divestment options 
and decided that instead of pre-fixing debt level at EOI stage – bidders may be asked 
to quote combined debt + equity value (Enterprise Value) to GOI in their financial 
bid.  
 This Enterprise Value (EV) approach allowed for market price discovery based on 
real time assumptions at time of financial bid submission allowing for a better price 
discovery process which was not anchored to a “debt level” fixed at the time of EOI 
submission, which was almost – months earlier than the financial bid submission date. 
EV approach had also been suggested by some potential investors (written query 
received post PIM issuance but declined prior to commencement of COVID) and the 
same is also inter-alia used in a lot of private sector transactions. 
 It was considered that EV approach may expand the universe of bidders resulting in a 
more competitive bidding process and by extension may further result in better value 
realisation for GOI, on account of the following: 
i. All interested bidders (conservative as well as aggressive) may be able to submit bids, 
as each bidder would be free to work out the total EV which it was willing to service 
post privatisation; 
ii. Since there is no pre-determined debt level, no bidder would be dissuaded from 
submitting bids in case his bid was lower than the pre-determined debt level at the 
time of EOI. 

55 
 
iii. It would prevent a situation where the debt level determined at the time of the EOI, 
became a de-facto floor for the EV. 
iv. For GOI also, since Reserve Price is determined close to actual bid submission, GOI 
Reserve price will also better reflect the situation at the time of financial bid. GOI‟s 
interest continued to be protected as only that bidder would be selected as the 
successful bidder, whose bid is better than the Reserve Price. 
  
Further Recommendation/ Observation 
8.3      The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry regarding the disinvestment of 
four subsidiaries of Air India (AI) viz., Alliance Air Aviation Limited (AAAL); AI 
Airport Services Limited (AIASL); AI Engineering Services Limited (AIESL); and 
Hotel Corporation of India Limited (HCI). The Committee would like to know the 
details of the disinvestment plans of these subsidiaries and the mechanisms put in place 
by the Ministry to oversee the disinvestment process in a time bound manner.  
  
Post Disinvestment Scenario 
Recommendation/Observation 
9. The Committee appreciates that as a humanitarian measure, the Ministry has taken 
over the responsibility of providing medical facilities to the employees of Air India especially 
the retired employees. The Committee notes the increase in the B.E. allocation from 
Rs.125.00/- crore in 2022-23 to Rs. 130.00/ - crore in 2023-24 for providing medical benefits 
to Retired Employees of Air India and would like to know the details and the status of 
medical facilities being provided to the beneficiaries. The Committee may also be apprised of 
the issues relating to medical facilities including other iss ues, being faced by the serving and 
retired employees, arising out of the disinvestment of Air India. 
 (Para 64) 
Reply of the Ministry 
9.1      The retired employees of Air India were being provided medical facilities as per Air 
India‟s (AI) Medical Scheme . In the wake of the disinvestment of Air India, Government 
decided to extend medical benefits to retired and retiring AI beneficiaries and a scheme was 
prepared in consultation with M/o Health & Family, Central Govt. Health Scheme (CGHS), 
National Health Agency (NHA) and Air India as under: 
i. Outpatient Department (OPD) facility, supply of medicines and referral to CGHS 
Specialists in empanelled CGHS hospitals is provided by CGHS on similar lines as in 
the case of Autonomous Bodies/ Statutory Bodies.         
ii. In Patient Department (IPD) treatment and OPD referral treatment is to be provided as 
per MoU with NHA. A draft MoU was finalized by the stakeholders (M/o Health & 
Family Welfare, NHA, CGHS, MoCA& AI) wherein it was mentioned that NHA 
would act as a Payment Authority for AIAHL. NHA expressed its inability to act as a 

56 
 
Payment Authority as per the draft MoU finalized. Since AIAHL is a SPV 
incorporated for a specific purpose with a limited time period of existence, therefore, 
the proposed role of Payment Auth ority was not feasible at the AIAHL level and in 
view of   the stalemate with NHA, AIAHL Board decided to engage UTIITSL to 
implement the IPD facilities. 
iii. CGHS as on 31 Mar 2023 has issued approx. 47,000 cards to AI Retired employees & 
their spouses and OPD facility through CGHS Wellness Centres has commenced.  
iv. IPD facility is operational in Delhi and implementation of the same in pan India is 
underway. However, in the interim, an online portal has been opened for Retired 
employees to enable them to claim rei mbursement for medical expenses incurred by 
them pending the implementation of the IPD facility by UTIITSL. 
9.2      Payment of Justice Dharmadhikari Committee dues: 
 There was an unpaid liability towards 25% wages and flying allowance which was 
deducted from the salaries of employees with effect from 01.07.2012 till the 
recommendations of Justice Dharmadhikari Committee were implemented in respect 
of various categories of employees. Government of India decided for payment of JDC 
dues prior to disinvestment of Air India. 
 Financial support was provided to Air India through AIAHL for settling 
guaranteed/other past dues/overdues including employees‟ dues of Air India. AIAHL 
provided an amount of Rs. 1327.02 crore to Air India against the request of Air India 
for making payment of JDC arrears. 
9.3      Vacation of AI Housing Colonies: 
 In pursuance of the directive of the Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs (CCEA) 
constituted Air India Specific Alternative Mechanism (AISAM) and as part of the 
disinvestment process, this Ministry issued the mechanism for prompt vacation of the 
accommodation at Air India (AI) colonies on 29.09.2021. As per the mechanism, all 
occupants of AI colonies were required to provide an undertaking that they shall 
vacate and hand over the peaceful possession of the accommodation at AI colonies 
within a period of six months post disinvestment i.e., by 27.07.2022.  
Further Recommendation/ Observation 
9.4      The Committee commends the Ministry for taking considerate measures for 
providing medical facilities to the employees of Air India, especially the retired 
employees. The Committee would like to know the status of implementation of the  pan 
India IPD facility for the AI retired employees.  
9.5      The Committee notes that an amount of Rs. 1,327.02 crore was provided to Air 
India by AIAHL for making payments of arrears to employees, based on the 
recommendations of Justice Dharmadhikari Committee. The Committee would like to 
know the status of arrear payment and whether the entire liability has been paid off.    
  
 

57 
 
Indira Gandhi Rashtriya Uran Akademi (IGRUA) 
Recommendation/Observation 
10.      The Committee notes that the CPL contribution of IGRUA, which is India’s largest 
FTO, has been decreasing over the year viz. 67 (FY 2019-20), 62 (FY 2020-21), 58 (FY 2021-
22) and in the FY 2022 -23 (till 31.01.23) only 42 CPLs were produced. The Committee 
analyses that despite being the largest Indian FTO, such a low number of CPLs are being 
produced, which points out the need for renewed thrust in this direction. 
 (Para 85) 
11. The Committee, therefore, recommends the Ministry to explore the possibility of 
opening more Aviation Universities in the country, in addition to the existing ones. The 
Committee also opines that the Ministry should take requisite steps to improve the 
infrastructure and enhance the capacity of the IGRUAs. 
 (Para 86) 
Reply of the Ministry 
11.1    The main reason for decrease in the number of CPL pass outs in IGRUA during FY 
2020-21 and 2021 -22 as compared to FY 2019 -20 was due to the effects of first and second 
wave of Covid pandemic as a result of which DGCA Examination and Radio Telephony 
Restricted (Aeronautical) [RTR (A)] Examination got delayed and did not take place as per 
their regular schedule. However, as the problems eased out and the DGCA Examination as 
well as RTR (A) Examination started taking place on routine basis there was a quantum jump 
in production of CPL and in the FY 2022-23 IGRUA was able to produce 85 CPLs.   
11.2    The other reason for low number of CPLs being produced is due to reduction of 
aircraft fleet in IGRUA from 20 in the FY 2019 -20 to 15 in FY 2022 -23 as a result of 
completion of their service life or total loss of aircraft in an accident. Despite of that with a 
reduced fleet of 15 aircraft, IGRUA was able to produce 85 CPLs in FY 2022 -23 as 
mentioned above. 
11.3    It has been a constant endeavour on part of IGRUA to enhance production of CPLs in 
the country under „Atmanirbhar Bharat‟ plan and in order to renew the thrust in this direction, 
following initiatives have been either already taken or is in the process: 
i. IGRUA started operations all seven days flying in a week.  
ii. In addition to its main base, IGRUA has also started alternate base for round the year 
detachment flying at Birsi Airport, Gondia (Maharashtra) and plan to fly at other 
places like Kalaburagi Airport, Karnataka subject to availability of additional fleet of 
aircraft. 
iii. To enhance existing fleet, IGRUA has signed a non -binding MoU of t hree years 
validity with NAL for supply of five Hansa NG aircraft. The type certification of the 
aircraft is yet to be completed; subsequent to which it will go for production. IGRUA 
is monitoring the progress of its production, features and specifications  required for 
training purposes and the final cost of the aircraft to be offered by NAL. Based on the 

58 
 
said conditions a decision will be taken in the present FY 2023 -24 on whether to go 
for this aircraft or purchase any other proven trainer aircraft availa ble in the world in 
the near future through tendering process.  
11.4    IGRUA is also continuously expanding its portfolio as an Aviation Training Hub by 
imparting training and testing in English Language Proficiency for Pilots, training to Drone 
Pilots, Drone Instructors, Flying Instructors, ATCOs and Aircraft Maintenance Engineers. It 
is also in the process of starting RCS operations. IGRUA demanded Rs. 12.75 crore to 
procure three Aircraft through Grant -in- Aid from Government. If the demand is fulfille d, 
then required CPL will be produced. 
  
Further Recommendation/ Observation 
11.5    The Committee notes that the Indira Gandhi Rashtriya Uran Akademi (IGRUA) 
produced a meagre 85 Commercial Pilot Licenses (CPLs) in financial year 2022 -23 as 
compares to pre covid pandemic years . The Committee would like to know the target 
the Ministry has set for the year 2023 -24. The Committee also notes that one of the 
reasons for low number of CPLs being produced is due to reduction of aircraft fleet in  
IGRUA from 20 in financial year 2019 -20 to 15 in financial year 2022 -23, as a result of 
completion of their service life or total loss of aircraft in an accident. The Committee 
would like to know the action plan of the Ministry to procure more trainer air crafts so 
that the number of commercial pilot licenses could be increased, making available 
adequate trained commercial pilots to the Airline operators. 
 
Surge in Air Fares and Rationalisation 
Recommendation/Observation 
12. The Committee notes that the Government grants for RGNAU has decreased 
considerably from Rs. 18.00 crores in F.Y. 2018 -19 to only Rs. 6.00 crores in 2022 -23, 
wherein a capital allocation of only Rs. 1.5 crore has been made. The Committee feels that 
the allocation to RGNAU is not enoug h keeping in view the increased requirements of skilled 
and trained manpower in for RGNAU over the years and also recommends that the Ministry 
may approach the Ministry of Finance for increased allocations at R.E. stages. 
 (Para 88) 
Reply of the Ministry 
12.1    The demands of allocation have not decreased. An amount of Rs. 10 crores was 
demanded in RE 2022-23, against which an allocation of Rs. 6.06. crores was made. Further, 
Rs. 16.65 crores was demanded in BE 2023 -24 against which an allocation of 7 cror es has 
been made.  
12.2    The Budgetary allocation for BE 2022 -23 was Rs.8.00 crore out of which Rs.2.00 
crore was for GIA salaries. As the requirement of RGNAU for GIA salaries was reduced 
substantially, Ministry of Finance made a cut on the budget for G IA salaries was reduced. 

59 
 
The Budgetary allocation under GIA capital has been reduced over the years as the 
expenditure required for construction of building and for purchase of capital equipment is 
completed. The budget allocation for current year is suffi cient for to meet their current 
requirements, however any further requirement of funds will be taken care at RE 2023-24. 
Further Recommendation/ Observation 
12.3    The Committee notes the significant variation between the demand placed and 
budget allocated for the Rajiv Gandhi National Aviation University (RGNAU) for 2023 -
24 wherein an amount of only Rs. 7.00 crores was allocated which is merely 42% of the 
demand. The Committee feels that such a significant reduction in allocation may 
adversely impact the operations of the National University especially affecting the 
quality of the manpower produced by them. The Committee, therefore, recommends 
that the Ministry  may reconsider the allocation for BE 2023 -24 and supplement the 
financial requirements of the RGNAU at the RE stage.  
 
Unmanned Aircraft System (UAS)/ Drones  
Recommendation/Observation 
13.      The Committee notes that the total outlay for the PLI Scheme  for Drones and Drone 
Components was Rs. 120.00/ - crore spread over three financial years beginning from 2021 - 
22, wherein no allocation was made for the financial year 2021-22. The Committee desires to 
know the reasons for not making any allocation for th e year 2021 -22. The Committee 
recommends that the Ministry should ensure optimum utilization of Rs. 40.00/ - crore and Rs. 
33.00/- crore allocated under the Scheme at R.E. 2022 -23 and B.E. 2023 -24 stages, 
respectively. The Committee also recommends that Min istry should envisage and establish 
measurable targets to enhance the budgetary requirement at the R.E. 2023 -24 under the 
Scheme. 
 (Para 104) 
Reply of the Ministry 
13.1    PLI Scheme for Drones and Drone Components was notified on 30th September 2021. 
The total outlay is INR 120 crore spread over three financial years.   PLI payout projected at 
approval stage for the year 2021 -22 was Rs 16 crores. However, no budgetary allocation was 
actually made for FY 2021 -22.  As per the PLI Scheme for Drones and Drone C omponents 
the tenure of this scheme shall be three years starting from the financial year 2021 -22. 
Further, for checking the eligibility of the applicants, the turnover for the first year for the 
currency of the scheme has been taken. The PLI for a particular financial year will be claimed 
and disbursed in the subsequent financial year. 
13.2    As against a BE of Rs 16 crore, an amount of Rs 29,43,11,461/ - has been disbursed to 
eligible beneficiaries of Drone manufacturers and Drone components manufacturers  during 
the FY 2022-23 under PLI Scheme for Drones and Drone Components. 
  

60 
 
Further Recommendation/ Observation 
13.3    The Committee notes that a total outlay of Rs. 1 20.00 crore over three financial 
years was notified under the Production Linked Incentive (PLI) Scheme for Drones and 
Drone Components, on 30 th September, 2021. The Committee would like to know the 
plans of the Ministry to utilize this fund. The Committee may also be  apprised of the 
details of the beneficiaries who have been identified for availing the Scheme, the amount 
disbursed so far and the impact of the budgetary allocation on the growth of this 
emerging sector. 
  
Maintenance, Repair and Overhaul (MRO) Services 
Recommendation/Observation 
14. The Committee notes that India is predicted to be a front runner among nations so far 
as Global Annual MRO demand, with an Annual Growth rate of 9.10% for the period 2021 -
2031. The Committee notes that MRO demand in India is also anticipated to grow at a much 
faster rate than the rest of the world, thereby entailing attractive investment opportunities for 
domestic as well as foreign investors, OEMs and leading MROs across the world. Therefore, 
the Ministry should avail the opp ortunity and make all out efforts to ensure various domestic 
and foreign investors invest in the MRO sector in India by way of alliance and collaboration 
and make detailed plans accordingly. The aforementioned statistics substantially validate the 
potential of India to become a significant regional MRO hub and gradually strive to establish 
its foothold in the global MRO supply chain. Further, rising demand, as shown in graphical 
predictions for the next decade, makes the Indian MRO industry an ideal destina tion for 
strategic investors, Original Equipment Manufacturers (OEMs) and global MRO players. 
 (Para 113) 
15.      The Committee commends the policy initiatives such as the MRO Policy 2021, 
National Civil Aviation Policy 2016, and fiscal policies such as r ationalisation of GST, 
removal of Gross Turnover Tax (GTO), etc. which reflect the vision of the Government to 
develop India as a global MRO hub. The Committee appreciates that a French company, 
Safran, has announced its intention to set up an MRO at Hyder abad, after 100% FDI was 
permitted, which implies that the change in policies are showing positive results. The 
Committee is of the view that the growth of the MRO sector will also depend on how 
efficiently it can address and remove the key challenges face d by MRO players in India. The 
Committee hopes that the Ministry will make all out efforts to implement the various fiscal 
measures at the ground level and also ensure proactive interaction with MRO industry to 
remove any bottlenecks that may arise. Since MRO services constitute 12% to 15% of overall 
expenditure of any airlines operator, setting up MRO services in the country would reduce 
the expenditure on MRO services and subsequently reduce the airfares in the domestic 
routes, which will consequently reduce the cost of air travel and benefit the passengers. 
 (Para 114) 
 

61 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
15.1    Government seeks to facilitate setting up of aircraft MRO services in India through 
various policy, regulatory and other incentives and the Government has tak en various 
measures to create a conducive environment for the development of Aircraft Maintenance, 
Repair and Overhaul (MRO) services. 
15.2    With a view to incentivise the growth of MROs in the country and also contribute to 
the ease of doing business, M oCA has brought out the new MRO Guidelines in Sept. 2021. 
Salient features of the guidelines are as follows: 
a. Concession fee, in any manifestation including royalty, shall not be leviable on new/ 
renewal of existing contracts. 
b. Selection of agency and procedures for allotment of land/ space under rationalized 
land/ space rental for new MRO contracts and renewal of existing MRO contracts, 
shall be through e-tender by AAI. 
c. The renewal of the existing land leases/ space license of MRO service providers/ 
Aircraft Maintenance Organizations (AMOs) shall be on the basis of bidding wherein 
Right of First Refusal (RoFR) shall be given to the existing lessee/ licensee to match 
the first rank bid in terms of the Selection criteria provided its bid is within 15% of 
the most competitive bid received. 
d. The quoted/ accepted lease fee shall be escalated @15% after every 3rd year. 
e. The maximum period of contract, new or renewal, for allotment of land/ space shall 
be 30 years from the date of handing over of site. 
15.3    The other key measures taken by the Government to incentivise MROs in the country 
are:  
i. GST on MRO has been reduced from 18% to 5% with full Input Tax Credit from 1st 
April, 2020. 
ii. Transactions sub -contracted by foreign original equipment manufacturers (OEMs) / 
MRO to domestic MRO are treated as 'exports' with zero -rated GST from 1st April, 
2020 
iii. Exempted Customs Duty on tools and tool kits 
iv. Reduced Goods and Services Tax rates on various spare parts, accessories, and 
consumables 
v. Simplified clearance processing of parts 
vi. Relaxed restriction on utilization of duty-free parts from one year to three years 
vii. Extended stay in India of foreign aircraft for entire duration of MRO work or 6 
months, whichever is lesser 
viii. Revised the Notification to enable export of serviceable parts 
ix. 100% Foreign Direct Investment permitted via automatic route for MRO 
x. Liberalized policy for borrowing and lending in Foreign Currency and Rupees on 
competitive terms for MROs 

62 
 
xi. Modalities prescribed for concessional temporary imports of spare parts by  foreign 
airlines for repair of their aircraft in transit. 
15.4    As on date there are 150 (Operator + Standalone) AMOs/ MROs approved in India for 
Line/ Base maintenance. Since July, 2021, twenty seven (27) new AMO/ MROs have been 
approved by DGCA.  
15.5    Several rounds of discussions were held with the representatives of Safran at various 
levels regarding the proposed MRO facilities in India. Safran has evinced keen interest in 
making investment in MRO space and has committed to invest USD 150 million for setting 
up an aircraft engine MRO at Hyderabad. Further, HAL has aligned itself to achieve 
objectives of MoCA to make India a Global MRO hub. Various MRO services are planned at 
HAL Nasik for narrow body and general aviation aircraft.   In this regard H AL is 
collaborating with OEMs as well as Global MRO players. 
  
Further Recommendation/ Observation 
15.6    The Committee appreciates the measures taken by the Ministry to incentivize 
Maintenance, Repair and Overhaul (MRO) Services in the country. The Committee 
would like to know the details regarding the present status; location; timeframe for 
completion; expected budgetary requirement; and capacity to handle aircrafts of the 
150 approved MROs/ Aircraft Maintenance Organisations (AMOs) for Line/Base 
maintenance. The Committee recommends that the Ministry should expedite the 
process and ensure operationalization of maximum MROs/ AMOs in the country.  
15.7    The Committee  also notes that Safran, a French company , has committed to 
invest 150 US Dollars for setting up an aircraft engine MRO at Hyderabad. The 
Committee welcomes the move and recommends the Ministry to make concerted efforts 
to create a favourable eco system so  that various domestic and international investors 
invest in setting up of MRO facilities in India.   
  
Recommendation/Observation 
16.      The Committee notes that Air India Engineer Services Ltd. (AIESL), which is one of 
the remaining subsidiaries of Air India and for which the disinvestment process has been 
initiated, is one of the main players in the Indian market so far as MRO serv ices are 
concerned and is also a profit making company. The AIESL has been engaged in the task of 
MRO services, which is evident from its MRO services to both domestic and international 
airlines operators and even Defence aircraft. AIESL has been engaging in tie ups with 
foreign MROs which shows that it has in -house talent in the field of MRO services. The 
Committee hopes the Ministry will make policy decisions so as to encourage and further 
develop this in -house talent of the AIESL even after disinvestment  to the maximum extent 
possible and further develop itself through international collaborations in the MRO sector, 
which will improve the employment potential of Indian Engineers/ technicians as well as 
achieve the objective of becoming the MRO hub of the International Civil Aviation sector. 

63 
 
Further, Committee notes that there is no major helicopter MRO facility in India except for 
Pawan Hans and Hindustan Aeronautics Limited (HAL). The Committee hopes that the 
Ministry will make all-out efforts to exploit this significant business opportunity of Helicopter 
MRO, with considerable potential for the future, especially in view of the fact that helicopter 
operations are expected to grow in the near future, with the thrust given by Government on 
helicopter operations, especially in the North-East. The Committee also recommends that the 
purchase of new aircraft by airlines may be subject to the OEMs opening/ permitting MRO 
operations of those aircraft within India. 
 (Para 116) 
Reply of the Ministry 
16.1    The proc ess of disinvestment of AIESL is a policy decision and is driven by 
Department of Investment and Public Asset Management (DIPAM). In so far as growth of 
Helicopter MRO is concerned, the issue of rationalisation of Customs Duty and GST charges 
for NSOP and General Aviation has been taken up with Ministry of Finance. Most recently, a 
D.O. letter dated 6/4/2023 from Hon‟ble Minister of Civil Aviation (HMCA) has been sent to 
Hon‟ble Finance Minister (HFM) with a request that custom duty on the import of 
commercial aircraft, smaller or bigger, be rationalized to zero, irrespective of scheduled or 
non-scheduled operations. 
16.2    Majority of the aircraft operated in India by Airlines in India are on lease. In order to 
give effect to the recommendation of the Comm ittee that the purchase of new aircraft by 
airlines may be subject to the OEMs opening/ permitting MRO operations of these aircraft 
within India, it will have to be mandated that the Airlines at the time of negotiations with the 
lessor/ OEM for leasing of the aircraft, impress upon the lessor/ OEM the need to set up 
MRO in India and provide Maintenance data, tooling & equipment, training for personnel for 
the overhaul of engines, landing gear, components etc. which will be performed at the MRO. 
The lessor/ OEM may agree to provide the same but it will come at an additional cost to the 
Airlines.  The increased cost of acquisition will be passed on to the passengers/cargo which 
may be prohibitive.  
  
Further Recommendation/ Observation 
16.3    The Committee notes that the decision to disinvest of Air India Engineer Services 
Limited (AIESL), a subsidiary of Air India, is driven by Department of Investment and 
Public Asset Management (DIPAM) . However, the Committee feels that AIESL is 
competent enough to facilitate MRO services to both domestic and international airline 
operators, owing to i ts innate e xpertise in the field. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that the Ministry should devise a plan to channelize the talent and 
expertise available with AIESL in realizing the objective of making India, a major hub 
of the International Civil Aviation Sector.  
  
 

64 
 
State-of-the-Art Flight Recorders Laboratory 
Recommendation/Observation 
17.      The Committee notes the steps taken by the Ministry for  setting up of the State -of-the-
Art Flight Recorders Laboratory for investigation of aircraft accidents. The Committee notes 
that the work for installation of the lab will start in full swing after possession of lab space is 
handed over to AAIB. The Commit tee recommends that the procedural work as regards 
setting up of the lab, may be completed at the earliest so that the investigation of air 
accidents can be carried out using the latest technological tools, which will help in 
accurately pin-pointing the cause of the accidents, so that it can be avoided in future. 
 (Para 139) 
Reply of the Ministry 
17.1    All efforts are being made to get procedural work completed before the space for 
setting up Flight Recorders Lab is allotted to AAIB. AAIB has signed a MoU  with HAL as a 
step towards obtaining consultancy service for Lab setup. Discussions with HAL are 
underway to prepare "Facility Requirement Document" so that modalities and costing of 
consultancy service from HAL can be finalized by the time space is allotted to AAIB. 
17.2    In accordance with ICAO Annex 13, AAIB is able to gain access to Flight Recorders 
Lab and other technological tools available with State of Manufacturer and full use of these 
facilities is made to conduct investigation so as to be able  to pin point the causes of accidents 
and issue safety recommendations to prevent their re-occurrence. 
  
Further Recommendation/ Observation 
17.3    The Committee notes the Ministry’s reply regarding setting up of a s tate-of-the-
art Flight Recorders Laboratory for effective investigation of aircraft accidents and 
would like to know the s tatus regarding its  probable completion; budgetary 
requirement; and available features. The Committee also recommends that the process 
of establishment of the laboratory may be expedited so as to enable Aircraft Accident 
Investigation Bureau (AAIB) to pin point the causes of accidents and accordingly issue 
safety recommendations to the DGCA/Airlines for preventing re-occurrence of 
accidents. 
  
National Monetisation Pipeline 
Recommendation/Observation 
18. The Committee observes the steps taken by the Ministry with regard to the National 
Monetisation Pipeline, over the years. Keeping in mind the international trends of 
privatization in Civil Aviation Sector, the Committee notes the Ministry’s efforts at 
identifying 25 more airports for privatization over the years 2022 to 2025. The Committee 
would like to know the present privatization status of all these 25 earmarked airports 
specifically Calicut Airport in the State of Kerala. 

65 
 
 (Para 149) 
Reply of the Ministry 
18.1    As per the National Monetization Pipeline (NMP) of Govt of India, twenty -five (25) 
airports have been identified for monetization over FY 2022 -25. The NMP provides for 
monetization of following airports as per phasing specified below: 
S. No. Name of Airport S. No. Name of Airport 
1 Bhubaneswar 14 Jodhpur** 
2. Varanasi 15 Chennai 
3. Amritsar 16 Vijayawada 
4. Trichy 17 Tirupati 
5. Indore 18 Vadodara 
6. Raipur 19 Bhopal 
7 Calicut 20 Hubballi 
8 Coimbatore 21 Imphal 
9 Nagpur* 22 Agartala 
10 Patna 23 Udaipur 
11 Madurai 24 Dehradun 
12 Surat 25 Rajahmundry 
13 Ranchi     
*Note: Nagpur is a JV airport (AAI holds 49% and Govt. of Maharashtra (GoMH) holds 51 
% equity) and the airport is under the process of PPP by GoMH. 
** Note: Jodhpur is a civil enclave. Ministry of Defence to act in this regard.  
18.2    AAI has identified 11 airports (Amritsar, Varanasi, Bhubaneswar, Raipur, Trichy, 
Kangra, Kushinagar, Gaya, Hubali Aurangabad and Tir upati) for leasing by clubbing/pairing 
of bigger airports with smaller airports for their Operations, Management and Development 
under PPP. Advance copies of final Cabinet Note in this regard has been sent to Cabinet 
Secretariat   on 06.01.2023. 
  
Further Recommendation/ Observation 
18.3    The Committee acknowledges the Ministry’s initiative to identify 25 more 
airports for monetization over Financial Years 2022 -25, under the National 
Monetisation Pipeline (NMP). The Committee would like to be  apprised of the 
monetization status of these airports, airport -wise along with the details of the private 
partners/ organizations which have been selected for each airport for the purpose.   
  

66 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
19.      The Committee also notes that PPP transactions are prone to be challenged at various 
courts for many reasons which stall the projects for several months. The Committee is aware 
that there was a legal issue between the Concessionaire and AAI for the Nagpur Airport. The 
Committee would like to k now the main reasons for the legal issues involved and the steps 
taken by the Ministry in trying to overcome such obstacles. The Committee may also be 
apprised of the present status of all the litigation(s), if any, at PPP airports including 
Nagpur. 
 (Para 151) 
Reply of the Ministry 
19.1    In May, 2016, MIHAN International Limited (MIL) had initiated steps for the 
selection of Strategic Partner (PPP Partner) for Dr. Babasaheb Ambedkar Intl. Airport, 
Nagpur. MIL invited tender for upgradation, modernization, operation and maintenance of  
Nagpur airport through PPP on DBFOT Basis for 30 years.   M/s. GMR Airports Ltd. was the 
highest bidder with quote of revenue share @5.76% of Gross Revenue.  
19.2    The Revenue Share quoted by GMR was further   negotiated by the both parties to 
14.49% of Gross Revenue. AAI Board, in its meeting held on 07.03.2019, approved the 
proposal of leasing out of airport to the 2nd JVC. Subsequently, MIL issued Letter of Award 
(LoA) to GAL on 07.03.2019. This LoA was subject to further approval of Government of 
India for (a) alienation of land owned by AAI in favour of 2nd Party i.e. GAL (b) Formation 
of SPV for the project (“Approval”). 
19.3    Subsequently, AAI, vide UO Note dated 26.07.2019, forwarded a draft Cabinet Note 
along with AAI Board approval for seeking approval of Union Cabinet. During the 
examination, certain deficiencies were observed by the MoCA which needed to be addressed 
for preparing the Note for Cabinet. Hence, a clarification was sought from both AAI and 
State Government of Maharashtra.   However, pursuant to the observations by MoCA, 
MIL annulled the process in March, 2020 as per the directions of Project Monitoring and 
Implementation Committee (PMIC), headed by Chief Secretary, Govt. of Maharashtra. 
19.4    GMR questioned the decision of the Sta te Government/ MIL in the High Court of 
Bombay.  Hon‟ble High Court (Nagpur Bench), in its judgment dated 18.08.2021, ruled in 
the favour of GMR quashed the cancellation of Letter of Acceptance. Consequently, being 
aggrieved by the High Court Judgement, MI L along with Government of Maharashtra, 
Airports Authority of India and Ministry of Civil Aviation, Government of India   filed 
separate Special Leave Petitions before the Hon‟ble Supreme Court of India which was 
dismissed by  the apex Court vide its judgement dated 09.05.2022. 
19.5    Thereafter, MIHAN India Limited, GoM and AAI filed  Review petitions in the 
Hon'ble Supreme Court.   The Hon'ble Supreme Court  dismissed all the above review 
petitions vide a common order dated  12.08.2022 and has upheld the judg ement of Hon'ble 
High Court of Mumbai, Nagpur Bench. AAI has filed a Curative petition on 22nd September 
2022 against the dismissal of the Review Petition by the Hon'ble Supreme Court for which 

67 
 
decision is awaited. MoCA also filed review petition in Suprem e Court on 01.03.2023 which 
has been dismissed by the Apex Court. 
  
Further Recommendation/ Observation 
19.6    The Committee notes  the Ministry’s reply regarding the outstanding legal issue 
impinging the modernisation, upgradation, operation and maintenance of the Nagpur 
Airport. The Committee may also be apprised of the probable adverse impact of such 
litigations on the operations alongwith the financial loss incurred by AAI/ Ministry of 
Civil Aviation. The Committee would like to know whether the Ministry approves of the 
action of AAI in filing the Curative petition against the dismissal of all the Review 
petitions by the Supreme court and whether such efforts of AAI unnecessarily 
contribute to the litigation costs apart from the impending cost escalation of the project 
due to delayed work. The Committee also recommends that the Ministry should learn 
from this experience and take necessary steps to avoid such litigation in future.     
  
National Infrastructure Pipeline 
Recommendation/Observation 
20.      The Committee also takes into account the Ministry’s plans to utilize an amount of 
more than Rs. 91,000/ - crore over a period of 6 years from F.Y. 2019 -20 to F.Y. 2024 -25 on 
construction, expansion and modernization of airports and terminals. The Committee notes 
that in last 4 years, till January, 2023, the Ministry has utilized approximately 61% (Rs. 
55,899/- crore only) out of the total allocation of Rs. 91,637/ - crore. The Committee 
recommends the Ministry to monitor the pace of fund utilization and ensure optimum 
utilization in the next two financial years. The Committee would like to know the number of 
airports which are proposed to be operationalised by the end of March, 2024 in comparison  
to the number of airports in other developing/ developed countries including the ones with 
lesser population and land area. The Committee feels that while constructing and developing 
new airports, Ministry should also focus on expanding the capacity of ex isting airports and 
terminals. The Committee recommends the Ministry to conduct comprehensive planning of 
the cities/sectors/destinations where the Ministry intends to construct new airports, keeping 
in mind the projected requirement for at least the next 30 years. 
 (Para 159) 
Reply of the Ministry 
20.1    Recommendations of the Committee are noted. 
i. Ministry of Civil Aviation (MoCA) has made various efforts to operationalise 11 
Greenfield airports in the last 9 years since 2015.  
ii. Three more Greenfield airports at Hirasar (Rajkot) in Gujarat, Vijaypura and Hassan 
in Karnataka are targeted to be operationalised by March 2024.   

68 
 
iii. Besides MoCA has added 63 Million Passengers Per Annum (MPPA) Airport 
capacity in 2022-23 and targeted to add another 60 MPPA Airport capacity to achieve 
cumulatively 530 MPPA by March 2024.  
iv. The Metro airports capacity is going to be augmented from 220 MPPA to around 400 
MPPA. 
  
Further Recommendation/ Observation 
20.2    The Committee notes that in addition to 11 new Greenfield Airports which have 
been operationalized since 2015, the Ministry plans to operationalise three more 
Greenfield Airports at Hirasar (Gujarat), Vijaypura and Hassan (Karnataka), by 
March, 2024. The Committee would like to know the status of the budget utilized till 
March, 2023, out of the total budget allocation of Rs. 91,637/ - earmarked for 
construction, expansion and modernization of airports under the National 
Infrastructure Pipeline. The Committee may also be apprised of the Ministry’s plans to 
meet the future expansion requirements of the airports and terminals.  
  
Recommendation/Observation 
21.      The Committee is aware that there are few existing airports in the country including 
Gondia and Kadapa (Cuddapah), where airports were operationalized but due to some or 
other reasons, the flights couldn’t be scheduled/ operated from such airports. The Committee 
recommends that the Ministry should conduct a detailed feasibility study with regards  to the 
expected passenger traffic; commercial viability; socio -economic considerations; and 
willingness of SAOs to operate flights from/to the proposed airport. The Committee 
recommends that the Ministry should take initiatives to operationalise the Gondi a and 
Kadapa airports. The Ministry should also do a comparable study of the proposed airport 
with the existing airport(s) within a radius of 150 -200 km, to check the viability of the 
upcoming airport at the DPR stage and ensure optimum utilization of reso urces. The 
Committee also feels that Ministry should prioritize installation of latest Instrument Landing 
System (ILS) at all the existing airports including Bagdogra & Pasighat as well as the 
upcoming ones, so that the aircraft are able to land/ takeoff a t night and during adverse 
weather conditions. The installation of requisite ILS at airports may ensure safer flying 
conditions reducing the number of accidents and will also help the airlines/ airports in 
increasing their efficiency. 
 (Para 160) 
Reply of the Ministry 
21.1    Kadapa (Cuddapah) airport is having scheduled operations with following routes and 
frequencies: 
o Kadapa-Hyderabad and vice-versa: Daily flights 
o Chennai-Kadapa-Vijayawada and vice-versa: 4 days a week 
o Bengaluru-Kadapa-Vizag and vice-versa: 3 days a week 

69 
 
21.2    Gondia Airport was operationalised for scheduled operation under RCS on 13.03.2022 
but the status changed from Scheduled Operations to Non -Scheduled Operations on 
01.02.2023 owing to withdrawal of service of the Selected A irline Operator (SAO). The 
airport has been again included in the recent bidding under UDAN 5.0 as an unserved airport. 
21.3    Under the Greenfield Airport Policy 2008, if a Greenfield airport is proposed by some 
project proponent, they may carry out impa ct assessment report on the existing airport in the 
vicinity of the proposed site for feasibility and viability of operations of both the airports. The 
proposal is examined by Ministry of Civil Aviation on case to case basis in the light of such 
assessment carried out. 
21.4    Besides, Airports like Bagdogra is Customs Civil Enclave and the Runway being used 
by IAF and AAI has the facilities of advanced landing systems like ILS/Night landing 
facilities but Airports like Pasighat being very small and caterin g to smaller aircrafts and 
hence based on the requirement, ILS/IFR are not required and operated under Visual Flight 
Rule (VFR). 
21.5    Expansion and upgradation of airports is a continuous process which is done 
depending on various factors such as demand , availability of land, commercial viability, 
socio-economic considerations and traffic demand. Ministry of Civil Aviation is continuously 
monitoring the performance of the operational airports at the highest levels .Besides these 
projects are regularly monitored at various fora. 
  
Further Recommendation/ Observation 
21.6    The Committee is dismayed to note that the status of the Gondia Airport, an 
airport under the RCS , was changed from Scheduled Operations to Non -Scheduled 
Operations, within a year after it was operationalized. The Committee would like to 
know the reasons as to why the services were withdrawn by the Selected Airline 
Operator (SAO). The Committee, there fore, recommends that the Ministry should 
devise a policy and put in place a mechanism to maintain supervision and monitoring of 
the SAOs, as such unilateral withdrawal action  hampers the overall Civil Aviation 
operations resulting in losses and inconvenience to the public. 
  
21.7    The Committee also notes the Ministry’s reply regarding the installation of 
advanced landing systems like Instrument Landing System (ILS) and Night Landing 
facilities at various airports in the Country. The Committee, therefore , reiterates its 
earlier recommendation that the Ministry should prioritize installation of latest landing 
systems at all the existing airports as well as the upcoming ones, so that the aircraft s are 
able to land/ takeoff at night and during adverse weathe r conditions, obviating the 
possibility of any risk of any untoward event.  
  
 

70 
 
Trans-Shipment Hubs 
 Recommendation/Observation 
22.      The Committee is of the opinion that given India's strategic geographical location 
between Europe and Southeast Asia, it  has the potential to become a leading air cargo 
transhipment hub. The National Civil Aviation Policy, 2016 also envisages un -tapping this 
trans-shipment opportunity and also proposes setting up of Free Trade and Warehousing 
Zones to facilitate trans -shipment cargo. The Committee notes that after the SEZ Act, 2005, 
only 8 FTWZs have been set up and out of these, 4 are non -operational. The Committee notes 
the low number of FTWZs set up since the Act was enacted in 2005 and desires to know the 
reasons for the obstacles and the steps taken by the Ministry to remove the bottlenecks. 
 (Para 185) 
Reply of the Ministry 
22.1   The Department of Commerce has informed that SEZs/ FTWZs being set up under the 
SEZ Act, 2005 and SEZ Rules, 2006 are primarily driven by private investment. No funds are 
sanctioned by the Central Government for setting up of SEZ and the infrastructure facilities 
of the SEZs are normally provided by the Developer/ Co-developer. 
 
Further Recommendation/ Observation 
22.2    The Committee is not satisfied with the reply given by the Ministry and urges the 
Ministry to exploit India’s strategic geographical location between Europe and 
Southeast Asia, which has the potential of becoming a leading air cargo trans  shipment 
hub. The Committee, therefore, recommends the Ministry to make concentrated efforts 
to augment Government interface to boost air cargo in the country instead of passing 
the buck to the private investor.    
 
Use of GEO Augmented Navigation (GAGAN) 
Recommendation/Observation 
23.      The Committee further notes that the Ministry has successfully tested GAGAN based 
approach procedures at the Kishangarh Airport, Rajasthan on 28th April, 2022. The 
Committee notes that NCAP, 2016 mandatorily prescribes that new aircrafts registered in 
India will have GAGAN onboard. But, it also notes that the major challenge for GAGAN is 
that the design changes required to be made in the aircraft has to be approved by the 
concerned regulator of that country, before importing the aircraft in India for regist ration. 
The Committee feels that this issue is a major obstacle to the complete implementation of 
GAGAN, as all the aircraft are presently imported. The Committee recommends that 
proactive steps may be taken by the Ministry to approach the foreign aircraft  manufacturer 
and the regulator to resolve this issue. 
 (Para 197) 

71 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
23.1    Following regulations are currently in place in the design certification regulatory 
mechanism for installation of Global positioning system Aided Geostationary  earth orbit 
Augmented Navigation (GAGAN) enabled GPS receivers: 
 As State of Registry (SoR), Recognition of Supplemental Type Certificate (STC) 
under the Rule 49G of the Aircraft Rules 1937. 
 As State of Design (SoD). Modification of change to the Type Cert ificate/Restricted 
Type Certificate under Subpart D of the CAR 21. 
23.2    Further, it is submitted that in the recent past, AED -DGCA type accepted FAA STC 
ST04436AT dated 13th December, 2018 vide IN23ASA035 dated 24 th March, 2023 to install 
Rockwell Colli ns GLU -2100 Multi -Mode Receiver (MM) for Boeing B737 -800 aircraft 
model to make the aircraft GAGAN enabled. The aircraft has been imported by M/s. Bluedart 
Aviation Limited for their operation. 
  
Further Recommendation/ Observation 
23.3    The Committee notes the reply and urges the Ministry to take corrective steps to 
ensure that all the operating aircrafts in the Country are GAGAN compliant. The 
Committee, further recommends that the Ministry should urge all aircraft 
manufacturers to provide for built in system to comply with GAGAN requirement and 
also disseminate the benefits of the GAGAN features to all the stakeholders.  
   
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

72 
 
 CHAPTER-IV 
  
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE FINAL 
REPLIES OF THE MINISTRY ARE STILL AWAITED 
   
National Infrastructure Pipeline 
Recommendation/Observation 
1.        The Committee opines that there are various capacity constraints at the existing 
airports/ terminals. For instance, a fourth runway (29 ‘right’) at Terminal -1 of the Indira 
Gandhi International Airport, Delhi has not been operationalised due to some administrative 
reasons. The delay in operationalization of this runway is hampering the capacity of a 
critical airport as flights are being delayed affecting the operational cost of airl ines. The 
Committee recommends that this 4th runway (29 ‘right’) at the Delhi airport should be 
operationalised at the earliest and an Action Taken Report may be furnished to the 
Committee. The Committee would also like to know the details regarding the ai rcrafts of 
old/discontinued/non-operational airlines which are parked in the hangars/ on the runways 
of various airports. The details regarding the parking fee being charged by the respective 
airport operators and plans to remove these aircraft, may also be furnished. 
 (Para 161) 
Reply of the Ministry 
1.1       The 4th runway in Delhi (RWY11L/29R) has not been operational on account of the 
following: 
i. Publication of Standard Instrument Departure (SID) and Standard Instrument Arrival 
(STAR): The DGCA approval  for the publication of AIP Supplement for 
commissioning 4th runway at Delhi Airport was received on 22nd May 2023 and the 
draft AIP Supplement was prepared by AAI and shared with DIAL for vetting of 
contents and comments on the draft.  The response was re ceived from DIAL on 24th 
May 2023. The AIP Supplements will be issued by 30th June2023 and will be 
effective from date 13th July 2023. 
ii. Publication of RNP Procedure: AAI has designed RNP Procedures and has submitted 
to DGCA for approval.   
iii. Delay in the proc urement of ILS: AAI was to procure and install ILS for Runway 
29R. However, there was a  delay in supply of ILS   due to Force Majeure conditions 
by virtue of Ukraine war,   imposition of  sanctions by US and Europe on Russia and 
shipment problems from Russia n ports. ILS equipment has now reached the site on 
13th May 2023 and ILS installation is in process, flight calibration is planned on 6-7th 
June 2023.   
iv. AAI RED Building was one of the obstacles in operationalization of Runway 29, 
requiring lowering of its height, which has been completed recently.  

73 
 
v. A new Obstacle Survey has been submitted on 10.05.2023. ILS Runway 11L has been 
calibrated and ILS procedures developed and submitted to DGCA for approval, 
subsequent to which it will be published.   
  
1.2       Based on the current status, 4th runway is likely to be commissioned and 
operationalized by 02.11.2023 with ILS. Although, DIAL is planning to use it for Departure 
only in the month of July, 2023. 
1.3      The Ministry vide its O.M. dated 19.06.2023 also informed that the information 
desired by the Committee has to be obtained from all the airlines and from airports for 
parking of old/discontinued/non -operational airlines, which is going to take some time. As 
regards the issue of parking fee being charged by AAI for the airports maintained by AAI and 
in respect of private airport operators, the Ministry informed that the data is required to be 
collected from the various divisions of the MoCA, which is also a time consuming process. 
Hence, the Ministry stated that reply for above referred part of the para 161 will be sent after 
complete data is collected. 
  
Further Recommendation/ Observation 
1.4      The Committee notes the undue delay in furnishing of the aforesaid information 
by the Ministry and desires th at the information may be provided at the earliest, 
without any further delay for the perusal of the Committee.  
 
*** 
  
  

74 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/ OBSERVATIONS AT A GLANCE 
CHAPTER-III 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
THE MINISTRY HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
  
Regional Connectivity Scheme – UdeDeshkaAamNagrik (RCS-UDAN) 
The Committee notes the details of the 13 bids received and 04 routes awarded under 
the International Air Connectivity Scheme (IACS) – UDAN 4.0. The Committee  
appreciates the steps taken by the Ministry to boost air connectivity to international 
destinations, especially from the North-East Region. The Committee would like to know 
the status of the remaining nine bids and by when these routes would be awarded to  the 
Airline Operators. The Committee may also be apprised of the Ministry’s plans to 
initiate more bidding rounds under the Scheme, to enhance international air 
connectivity.      
(Para 1.5)  
  
The Committee notes that Regional Connectivity Scheme – Ude Desh ka Aam Nagrik 
(RCS-UDAN) is the flagship Scheme of the Ministry of Civil Aviation with an aim to 
make air travel affordable and widespread. The Committee observes that the number of 
passengers availed this Scheme has reduced in 2022 -23 and only 20,26,8 00 passengers 
benefited till December, 2022. The Committee notes some of the contributory reasons 
for this scenario which include, among others, the delay in attaining scheduled 
commuter operators permit by the Airlines, non -availability of suitable aircra ft and 
leasing issues, The Committee recommends that before awarding the routes, all such 
issues, having potential to undermine the strength and efficacy of the scheme, may be 
looked into and appropriately resolved.  
(Para 2.3)  
 
The Committee observes that Kannur is a major international airport in the State of 
Kerala which became operational in 2018, however, till date, it does not have many 
flights operating from the airport. The Committee also notes that out of a total 32 
awarded routes under the UDAN Scheme connecting Kerala, 8 were cancelled and 6 are 
yet to commence. The Committee would like to know the reasons for cancellation/ non -
operationalization of these routes.    
(Para 3.7)  
 
 

75 
 
Further, the Committee notes that RCS flights on various sectors  were discontinued by 
the Selected Airline Operators (SAOs) after completion of 3 years tenure. The 
Committee recommends that the Ministry should look into the possibility of extending 
the stipulated tenure of contracts with the SAOs, to ensure that the fl ight operations are 
not affected and can continue without any interruption.  
(Para 3.8)  
NER Schemes: Providing Air Connectivity and Aviation Infrastructure in NER 
The Committee notes that to boost the air connectivity in the North -Eastern Region 
(NER), the Ministry has identified 13 Airports, 21 Heliports and 2 Water Aerodromes 
in the region. However, out of 13, only 10 Airports are operational as on date, whereas 
none of the identified Heliports and Water Aerodromes has been operationalized as yet. 
The Committee would like to be briefed about the reasons for non operationalization of 
remaining Airports, Heliports and Water Aerodromes and the expected timeline by 
when these will be made functional.  
(Para 4.6)  
The Committee also observes that as per the details provided by the Ministry, 142 RCS 
routes have been awarded in the NER. However, out of these, only 56 are operational 
and 16 have been cancelled. Further, the number of routes operationalised in other 
areas as compared to the awarded routes in NER,  are really low wherein only 38% and 
50% of the total awarded routes have been operationalised in Uttarakhand (Hilly area) 
and Himachal Pradesh (Hilly area), respectively. The Committee also notes that none of 
the RCS routes has been operationalised in Lak shadweep and Andaman & Nicobar 
Islands. The Committee would like to know the reasons for the non - operationalization 
of routes in all these areas which have immense tourism potential and urges the 
Ministry to take up the issues of air connectivity under RC S scheme to these areas with 
priority.     
(Para 4.7)  
Krishi Udaan Scheme 
The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry that Krishi Udaan is a convergence 
Scheme wherein various Ministries/ Departments, leverage their existing schemes to 
strengthen the lo gistics for transportation of Agri -produce, and hence, no specific 
budget allocation is made under Krishi Udaan Scheme, except a token provision. The 
Committee would like to know the plans of the Ministry of Civil Aviation in this regard 
and whether the Mi nistry is going to successfully implement the scheme only by way of 
token allocation. A list of 58 airports, covered under the Scheme, may also be provided 
to the Committee with the justification of their selection.   
(Para 5.6)  
 

76 
 
Air India Assets Holding Limited (AIAHL) 
The Committee notes the details as regards the debt incurred by Air India over the 
years and that the Ministry of Finance provided financial assistance amounting to Rs. 
64,026.40/- crore in the form of equity to Air India Assets Holding Lim ited (AIAHL). 
The Committee may be apprised of the details of the amount which has been invested 
by the Government of India in Air India over the years, since its Nationalization in 1953 
till the date of its strategic disinvestment.   
(Para 6.5)  
Disinvestment of Air India 
The Committee notes that Enterprise Valuation method was adopted for inviting bids 
for disinvestment of Air India which afforded the prospective bidders an opportunity to 
resize the balance sheet. The Committee would like to know as to ho w the enterprise 
valuation of Rs. 18,000/ - crore was arrived at. Further, the Committee may also be 
apprised of the assets of Air India including office buildings and whether all the assets 
were taken into consideration for valuation.   
(Para 7.7)  
The Com mittee notes the reply of the Ministry regarding the disinvestment of four 
subsidiaries of Air India (AI) viz., Alliance Air Aviation Limited (AAAL); AI Airport 
Services Limited (AIASL); AI Engineering Services Limited (AIESL); and Hotel 
Corporation of Ind ia Limited (HCI). The Committee would like to know the details of 
the disinvestment plans of these subsidiaries and the mechanisms put in place by the 
Ministry to oversee the disinvestment process in a time bound manner.  
(Para 8.3)  
Post Disinvestment Scenario 
The Committee commends the Ministry for taking considerate measures for providing 
medical facilities to the employees of Air India, especially the retired employees. The 
Committee would like to know the status of implementation of the pan India IPD 
facility for the AI retired employees.  
(Para 9.4)  
The Committee notes that an amount of Rs. 1,327.02 crore was provided to Air India by 
AIAHL for making payments of arrears to employees, based on the recommendations 
of Justice Dharmadhikari Committee. The Commi ttee would like to know the status of 
arrear payment and whether the entire liability has been paid off.    
(Para 9.5)  
Indira Gandhi Rashtriya Uran Akademi (IGRUA) 
The Committee notes that the Indira Gandhi Rashtriya Uran Akademi (IGRUA) 
produced a meagre 85 Commercial Pilot Licenses (CPLs) in financial year 2022 -23 as 
compares to pre covid pandemic years. The Committee would like to know the target 
the Ministry has set for the year 2023 -24. The Committee also notes that one of the 

77 
 
reasons for low number of CPLs being produced is due to reduction of aircraft fleet in 
IGRUA from 20 in financial year 2019 -20 to 15 in financial year 2022 -23, as a result of 
completion of their service life or total loss of aircraft in an accident. The Committee 
would like to know the action plan of the Ministry to procure more trainer aircrafts so 
that the number of commercial pilot licenses could be increased, making available 
adequate trained commercial pilots to the Airline operators. 
(Para 11.5)  
Surge in Air Fares and Rationalisation 
The Committee notes the significant variation between the demand placed and budget 
allocated for the Rajiv Gandhi National Aviation University (RGNAU) for  2023-24 
wherein an amount of only Rs. 7.00 crores was allocated which is merely 42% of the 
demand. The Committee feels that such a significant reduction in allocation may 
adversely impact the operations of the National University especially affecting the 
quality of the manpower produced by them. The Committee, therefore, recommends 
that the Ministry may reconsider the allocation for BE 2023 -24 and supplement the 
financial requirements of the RGNAU at the RE stage.  
(Para 12.3)  
Unmanned Aircraft System (UAS)/ Drones  
The Committee notes that a total outlay of Rs. 120.00 crore over three financial years 
was notified under the Production Linked Incentive (PLI) Scheme for Drones and 
Drone Components, on 30 th September, 2021. The Committee would like to know th e 
plans of the Ministry to utilize this fund. The Committee may also be apprised of the 
details of the beneficiaries who have been identified for availing the Scheme, the amount 
disbursed so far and the impact of the budgetary allocation on the growth of t his 
emerging sector. 
(Para 13.3)  
Maintenance, Repair and Overhaul (MRO) Services 
The Committee appreciates the measures taken by the Ministry to incentivize 
Maintenance, Repair and Overhaul (MRO) Services in the country. The Committee 
would like to know t he details regarding the present status; location; timeframe for 
completion; expected budgetary requirement; and capacity to handle aircrafts of the 
150 approved MROs/ Aircraft Maintenance Organisations (AMOs) for Line/Base 
maintenance. The Committee recom mends that the Ministry should expedite the 
process and ensure operationalization of maximum MROs/ AMOs in the country.  
(Para 15.6)  
 
The Committee also notes that Safran, a French company, has committed to invest 150 
US Dollars for setting up an aircraft  engine MRO at Hyderabad. The Committee 
welcomes the move and recommends the Ministry to make concerted efforts to create a 

78 
 
favourable eco system so that various domestic and international investors invest in 
setting up of MRO facilities in India.   
(Para 15.7)  
The Committee notes that the decision to disinvest of Air India Engineer Services 
Limited (AIESL), a subsidiary of Air India, is driven by Department of Investment and 
Public Asset Management (DIPAM). However, the Committee feels that AIESL is 
competent enough to facilitate MRO services to both domestic and international airline 
operators, owing to its innate expertise in the field. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that the Ministry should devise a plan to channelize the talent and 
expertise available with AIESL in realizing the objective of making India, a major hub 
of the International Civil Aviation Sector.  
(Para 16.3)  
State-of-the-Art Flight Recorders Laboratory 
The Committee notes the Ministry’s reply regarding setting up of a state-of-the-art 
Flight Recorders Laboratory for effective investigation of aircraft accidents and would 
like to know the status regarding its probable completion; budgetary requirement; and 
available features. The Committee also recommends that the process of establishment of 
the laboratory may be expedited so as to enable Aircraft Accident Investigation Bureau 
(AAIB) to pinpoint the causes of accidents and accordingly issue safety 
recommendations to the DGCA/Airlines for preventing re-occurrence of accidents. 
(Para 17.3)  
National Monetisation Pipeline 
The Committee acknowledges the Ministry’s initiative to identify 25 more airports for 
monetization over Financial Years 2022 -25, under the National Monetisation Pipeline 
(NMP). The Committee would like to be  apprised of the monetization status of these 
airports, airport-wise along with the details of the private partners/ organizations which 
have been selected for each airport for the purpose.   
(Para 18.3)   
The Committee notes the Ministry’s reply regarding the outstanding legal issue 
impinging the modernisation, upgradation, operation and maintenance of the Nagpur 
Airport. The Committee may also be apprised of the probable adverse impact of such 
litigations on the operations alongwith the financial loss incurred by AAI/ Ministry of 
Civil Aviation. The Committee would like to know whether the Ministry approves of the 
action of AAI in filing the Curative petition against the dismissal of all the Review 
petitions by the Supreme court and whether such efforts of AAI unnecessarily 
contribute to the litigation costs apart from the impending cost escalation of the project 
due to delayed work. The Committee also recommends that the Ministry should learn 
from this experience and take necessary steps to avoid such litigation in future.    
(Para 19.6)  

79 
 
National Infrastructure Pipeline 
The Committee notes that in addition to 11 new Greenfield Airports which have been 
operationalized since 2015, the Ministry plans to operat ionalise three more Greenfield 
Airports at Hirasar (Gujarat), Vijaypura and Hassan (Karnataka), by March, 2024. 
The Committee would like to know the status of the budget utilized till March, 2023, out 
of the total budget allocation of Rs. 91,637/ - earmarked for construction, expansion and 
modernization of airports under the National Infrastructure Pipeline. The Committee 
may also be apprised of the Ministry’s plans to meet the future expansion requirements 
of the airports and terminals.  
(Para 20.2)  
The Co mmittee is dismayed to note that the status of the Gondia Airport, an airport 
under the RCS, was changed from Scheduled Operations to Non -Scheduled Operations, 
within a year after it was operationalized. The Committee would like to know the 
reasons as to why the services were withdrawn by the Selected Airline Operator (SAO). 
The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry should devise a policy and put 
in place a mechanism to maintain supervision and monitoring of the SAOs, as such 
unilateral withdrawal action hampers the overall Civil Aviation operations resulting in 
losses and inconvenience to the public. 
 (Para 21.6)  
The Committee also notes the Ministry’s reply regarding the installation of advanced 
landing systems like Instrument Landing System (ILS) and Night Landing facilities at 
various airports in the Country. The Committee, therefore, reiterates its earlier 
recommendation that the Ministry should prioritize installation of latest landing 
systems at all the existing airports as well as the up coming ones, so that the aircrafts are 
able to land/ takeoff at night and during adverse weather conditions, obviating the 
possibility of any risk of any untoward event.  
(Para 21.7)  
Trans-Shipment Hubs 
The Committee is not satisfied with the reply given by the Ministry and urges the 
Ministry to exploit India’s strategic geographical location between Europe and 
Southeast Asia, which has the potential of becoming a leading air cargo trans shipment 
hub. The Committee, therefore, recommends the Ministry to ma ke concentrated efforts 
to augment Government interface to boost air cargo in the country instead of passing 
the buck to the private investor.    
(Para 22.2)  
Use of GEO Augmented Navigation (GAGAN) 
The Committee notes the reply and urges the Ministry to t ake corrective steps to ensure 
that all the operating aircrafts in the Country are GAGAN compliant. The Committee, 
further recommends that the Ministry should urge all aircraft manufacturers to 

80 
 
provide for built in system to comply with GAGAN requirement a nd also disseminate 
the benefits of the GAGAN features to all the stakeholders.  
(Para 23.3)  
***** 
 
  

81 
 
 
 
 
 
ANNEXURES 

1 
 
Annexure-I 
Details of Airports/Heliports 
 
 
NE Region:  
Airport: Passighat, Tezu, Holongi, Jorhat, Kaziranga, Lilabari, Rupsi, Tezpur, Shillong 
(Barapani), Tuna, Dimapur, Pakyong, Kailashahar. 
Heliport: Daparizo, Itanagar, Tuting, Walong, Yinghiong, Ziro,Geleki. Misa, Nagaon, 
Jiribam, Moreh, Parbung, Tamenglong, Thanlon, Dawki, Jowai, Khliehrat, Nongstoin, 
Shella, Sohra, Williamnagar. 
WA: Guwahati River Front, Umrangso Reservoir 
 
Uttarakhand 
Airport: Pithoragarh & Pantnagar 
Heliport: Almora (H), Chinyalisaur (H), Gaucher (H), Haldwani (H), Haridwar(H), 
Joshimath(H), Mussoorie(H), Nainital(H), New Tehri(H), Ramnagar(H), Sahastradhara (H) 
and Srinagar (H) 
 
Himachal Pradesh 
Airport:Shimla&Kullu 
Heliport: Rampur Hut (H), Naphtha Jakhri (H), Mandi (H), Manali (H), Baddi/Kasauli (H)& 
Shimla-Sanjoli (H) 
WA:Dalhousie  
 
A&N Island  
Airport:Shibpur, Campbell way & Car Nicobar 
(WA):Swaraj Dweep (Havlock), Long Island, Shaheed Dweep (Neil Island), Port Blair & 
Mayabunder  
 
Lakshadweep  
WA: Kavaratti, Minicoy, Agatti, Kalpeni, Bitra, Kadmat, Kiltan, & Bangaram  
 
 
 
82

2 
 
Annexure-II 
 
Status of North Eastern Region under UDAN 
 
 
During four round of bidding, 142 valid Fixed wing and Helicopter routes are awarded in North 
Eastern States, which will help in attracting tourist, investors and add to ease of doing business.  
 
The following airports/Heliports/Water Aerodromes are identified under the UDAN scheme in 
NER; 
 
Identified: 36 
Operationalized: 10 
 
The details of fund allocated for the development of these airports, heliports & water 
aerodromes along-with the operationalization status & RCS routes awarded under the UDAN 
scheme are given below:  
 
S. 
No. 
State Airport/Heliport/ 
WA 
Budget 
allocation in 
Crores 
Expenditure as 
on 30.04.2023 
in Crores 
Remarks 
1.  Arunachal 
Pradesh 
Daparizo (H) 8.50 3.64 Yet to operationalize 
2.  Itanagar(H) 4.26 1.17 Yet to operationalize 
3.  Passighat 5.07 0.07 Operationalized 
4.  Tezu 76.46 81.14 Operationalized 
5.  Tuting (H) 4.10 3.90 Yet to operationalize 
6.  Walong (H) 8.00 4.52 Yet to operationalize 
7.  Yinghiong (H) 5.00 0.63 Yet to operationalize 
8.  Ziro (H) 7.50 6.44 Yet to operationalize 
9.  Holongi Nil - Operationalized 
10.  
Assam 
Geleki (H) 8.00 0.53 Yet to operationalize 
11.  Guwahati River 
Front (W) 
20.00 8.81 Yet to operationalize 
12.  Jorhat  0.00 0.03 Operationalized 
13.  Kaziranga Not allocated  Yet to operationalize 
14.  Lilabari 9.65 8.78 Operationalized 
83

3 
 
S. 
No. 
State Airport/Heliport/ 
WA 
Budget 
allocation in 
Crores 
Expenditure as 
on 30.04.2023 
in Crores 
Remarks 
15.  Misa (H) Dropped - Dropped as per the 
request of State 
Govt. 
16.  Nagaon(H) 10.49 1.00 Yet to operationalize 
17.  Rupsi 84.50 84.47 Operationalized 
18.  Tezpur  0.00 0.19 Operationalized 
19.  Umrangso 
Reservoir (W) 
20.00 3.81 Yet to operationalize 
20.  
Manipur 
Jiribam(H) 15.00 11.56 Yet to operationalize 
21.  Moreh(H) 8.00 1.86 Yet to operationalize 
22.  Parbung(H) 8.50 5.61 Yet to operationalize 
23.  Tamenglong(H) 8.00 1.60 Yet to operationalize 
24.  Thanlon(H) 13.50 8.06 Yet to operationalize 
25.  
Meghalaya 
Dawki (H) Not allocated - Yet to operationalize 
26.  Jowai (H) Not allocated - Yet to operationalize 
27.  Khliehrat (H) Not allocated - Yet to operationalize 
28.  Nongstoin (H) Not allocated - Yet to operationalize 
29.  Shella (H) Not allocated - Yet to operationalize 
30.  Shillong (Barapani) 56.35 57.11 Operationalized 
31.  Sohra (H) 8.00 - Yet to operationalize 
32.  Tura 8.00 - Yet to operationalize 
33.  Williamnagar (H) Not allocated - Yet to operationalize 
34.  Nagaland Dimapur 0.00 - Operationalized 
35.  Sikkim Pakyong 203.38 202.17 Operationalized 
36.  Tripura Kailashahar Not allocated - Yet to operationalize 
 Total 608.27 302.12  
Note: (H) for Heliport and (W) for Water Aerodrome. 
  
84

4 
 
STATUS OF NER ROUTES AWARDED UNDER REGIONAL CONNECTIVITY SCHEME (RCS)  
 
Awarded:142 
Operationalized: 64 
S. No. State Round Fixed-wing            
/Helicopter/     
Sea Plane 
Departure 
Airport 
Arrival 
Airport 
Operator Started on Remarks 
1.  
Arunachal 
Pradesh 
4 Fixed-wing Passighat Shillong Big Charters    Yet to commence 
2.  4 Fixed-wing Passighat Guwahati Big Charters 24-05-2021 Operational 
3.  4 Fixed-wing Tezu  Guwahati Big Charters 19-08-2021 Operational 
4.  4 Fixed-wing Tezu  Imphal Big Charters 26-09-2022  Operational 
5.  4.1 Fixed-wing Passighat Jorhat Alliance Air   Yet to commence 
6.  4.2 Helicopter Itanagar (H) Tezpur Pawan Hans  Itanagar (H) under 
development 
7.  4.3 Fixed-wing Holongi Guwahati Big Charters 15-01-2023 Operational 
8.   
 
 
 
2 Fixed-wing Guwahati Pakyong Spicejet 28-10-2018 Non-operational  
9.  2 Fixed-wing Lilabari Kolkata Spicejet 15-01-2019 Non-operational 
10.  2 Fixed-wing Kolkata Lilabari Spicejet 15-01-2019 Non-operational           
11.  2 Fixed-wing Jorhat Kolkata Indigo 01-08-2018  Operational 

5 
 
12.   
 
 
 
Assam 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2 Fixed-wing Kolkata Jorhat Indigo 01-08-2018  Operational 
13.  2  Helicopter Jorhat Dibrugarh Pawan Hans 08-02-2023 Operational 
 
14.  2  Helicopter Jorhat Tezpur Pawan Hans 08-02-2023 Operational 
15.  2  Helicopter Dibrugarh Jorhat Pawan Hans 08-02-2023 Operational 
16.  2  Helicopter Tezpur Jorhat Pawan Hans 08-02-2023 Operational 
17.  3 Fixed-wing Guwahati Dimapur Alliance Air 07-12-2019 Operational 
18.  3 Fixed-wing Guwahati Lilabari Indigo   Cancelled  
19.  3 Fixed-wing Guwahati Lilabari Spicejet 31-03-2019 Cancelled 
20.  3 Fixed-wing Lilabari Guwahati Indigo   Cancelled 
       
21.   
 
 
 
 
 
3 Fixed-wing Lilabari Guwahati Spicejet 31-03-2019 Cancelled 
22.  3 Sea Plane Guwahati River 
Front 
Jorhat Spicejet    Cancelled 
23.  3 Sea Plane Guwahati River 
Front 
Jorhat Spicejet   Cancelled 
24.  3 Sea Plane Guwahati River 
Front 
Shillong Spicejet   Cancelled 
85

6 
 
25.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Assam 
 
 
 
3 Sea Plane Guwahati River 
Front 
Umrangso 
Reservoir 
Spicejet   Cancelled 
26.  3 Sea Plane Jorhat Guwahati River 
front 
Spicejet   Cancelled 
27.  3 Sea Plane Jorhat Guwahati River 
front 
Spicejet   Cancelled 
28.  3 Sea Plane Umrangso 
Reservoir 
Guwahati River 
front 
Spicejet   Cancelled 
29.  3 Fixed-wing Dibrugarh Imphal Indigo 12-07-2021 Operational. TRCS 
30.  3 Fixed-wing Dibrugarh Dimapur Indigo 28-03-2021 Operational 
31.  4 Fixed-wing Dibrugarh Agartala Big Charters 25-06-2021 Operational 
32.  4 Fixed-wing Dibrugarh Shillong Indigo 26-10-2021  Operational 
33.  4 Fixed-wing Silchar Imphal Alliance Air  25-11-2022 Operational 
34.  4 Fixed-wing Silchar Shillong Indigo 29-03-2021 Operational 
35.  4 Fixed-wing Rupsi Guwahati Big Charters 08-05-2021 Operational 
36.  4 Fixed-wing Rupsi  Kolkata Big Charters 08-05-2021 Operational 
37.  4 Fixed-wing Kolkata  Rupsi Big Charters 08-05-2021 Operational 
38.  4 Fixed-wing Tezpur  Aizawl Big Charters    Yet to commence 
39.  4 Fixed-wing Guwahati  Shillong Alliance Air 22-11-2021 Operational 
86

7 
 
40.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4 Fixed-wing Guwahati Tezu Big Charters 19-08-2021 Operational 
41.  4 Fixed-wing Guwahati  Rupsi Big Charters 08-05-2021 Operational 
       
42.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4 Fixed-wing Guwahati  Passighat Big Charters 24-05-2021 Operational 
43.  4 Helicopter Guwahati  Tezpur Pawan Hans  08-02-2023  Operational 
44.  4 Helicopter Tezpur Guwahati Pawan Hans  08-02-2023  Operational 
45.  4 Helicopter Guwahati Misa Pawan Hans     
Geleki Heliport yet to 
develop. Misa heliport 
dropped. 
  
46.  4 Helicopter Misa Geleki Pawan Hans   
47.  4 Helicopter Misa Guwahati Pawan Hans   
48.  4 Helicopter Geleki Jorhat Pawan Hans   
49.  4 Helicopter Geleki Misa  Pawan Hans   
50.  4 Helicopter Jorhat  Geleki  Pawan Hans  
87

8 
 
51.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
Assam 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4.1  Helicopter Nagaon(H) Guwahati Heritage   Cancelled 
52.  4.1  Helicopter Guwahati Nagaon(H) Heritage   Cancelled 
53.  4.1  Helicopter Guwahati Tura (H) Heritage   Tura (H) yet to develop 
54.  4.1 Fixed-wing Tezpur Kolkata Spicejet  Yet to commence 
55.  4.1 Fixed-wing Kolkata Tezpur Spicejet  Yet to commence 
56.  4.1 Fixed-wing Guwahati Cooch Behar GSEC 
Monarch 
 Yet to commence 
57.  4.1 Fixed-wing Cooch Behar Guwahati GSEC 
Monarch 
 Yet to commence 
58.  4.1 Fixed-wing Lilabari Tezpur Alliance Air 30-10-2022 Operational 
59.  4.1 Fixed-wing Tezpur Lilabari Alliance Air 30-10-2022  Operational 
60.  4.1 Fixed-wing Jorhat Passighat Alliance Air   Yet to commence 
61.  4.1 Fixed-wing Lilabari Shillong Alliance Air  31-10-2022 Operational 
62.  4.2 Helicopter Tezpur Itanagar (H) Pawan Hans  Itanagar (H) under 
development 
63.  4.2  Helicopter Nagaon(H) Guwahati Pawan Hans  Nagaon (H) under 
development 
64.  4.2  Helicopter Guwahati Nagaon(H) Pawan Hans  Nagaon (H) under 
development 
88

9 
 
 
 
 
 
 
65.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Assam 
4.2  Helicopter Nagaon(H) Tezpur Pawan Hans  Nagaon (H) under 
development 
66.  4.2  Helicopter Tezpur Nagaon(H) Pawan Hans  Nagaon (H) under 
development 
67.  4.2  Seaplane Kaziranga (W) Guwahati Spicejet  Kaziranga (W) yet to 
develop 
68.  4.2  Seaplane Guwahati Kaziranga (W) Spicejet  Kaziranga (W) yet to 
develop 
69.  4.2 Sea Plane Guwahati River 
Front 
Jorhat Spicejet  Guwahati River Front 
(W) yet to develop 
70.  4.2 Sea Plane Jorhat Guwahati River 
front 
Spicejet  Guwahati River Front 
(W) yet to develop 
71.  4.2 Sea Plane Guwahati River 
Front 
Umrangso 
Reservoir 
Spicejet  Water aerodromes yet to 
develop 
72.  4.2 Sea Plane Umrangso 
Reservoir 
Guwahati River 
front 
Spicejet  Water aerodromes yet to 
develop 
89

10 
 
73.  4.2 Sea Plane Guwahati River 
Front 
Shillong Spicejet  Guwahati River Front 
(W) yet to develop 
74.  4.3 Fixed-wing Guwahati Holongi Big Charters 15-01-2023 Operational 
75.  
Manipur 
2 Helicopter Imphal Moreh(H) Pawan Hans    
 
Heliports are under 
development. 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
76.  2 Helicopter Imphal Tamenglong(H) Pawan Hans   
77.  2 Helicopter Imphal Thanlon(H) Pawan Hans   
78.  2 Helicopter Jiribam(H) Tamenglong(H) Pawan Hans   
79.  2 Helicopter Moreh(H) Imphal Pawan Hans   
80.  2 Helicopter Parbung(H) Thanlon(H) Pawan Hans   
81.  2 Helicopter Tamenglong(H) Imphal Pawan Hans   
82.  2 Helicopter Tamenglong(H) Jiribam(H) Pawan Hans   
83.  2 Helicopter Thanlon(H) Imphal Pawan Hans   
84.  2 Helicopter Thanlon(H) Parbung(H) Pawan Hans   
85.  3 Fixed-wing Imphal Dibrugarh Indigo 12-07-2021 Operational. TRCS 
86.  3 Fixed-wing Imphal Dimapur Alliance Air 07-12-2019 Operational 
87.  4 Fixed-wing Imphal Silchar Alliance Air  25-11-2022 Operational 
88.  4 Fixed-wing Imphal Tezu Big Charters 26-09-2022  Operational 
89.  4 Fixed-wing Imphal Shillong Indigo 03.08.2021 Operational 
90

11 
 
90.  4.1 Fixed-wing Imphal Aizawl Alliance Air  31-10-2022 Operational 
91.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Meghalaya 
3 Fixed-wing Shillong Kolkata Indigo 20-07-2019  Operational 
92.  3 Fixed-wing Kolkata Shillong Indigo 20-07-2019  Operational 
93.  3 Sea Plane Shillong Guwahati River 
front 
Spicejet    Cancelled 
94.  4 Fixed-wing Shillong  Guwahati Alliance Air 22-11-2021 Operational 
95.  4 Fixed-wing Shillong Dimapur Alliance Air 22-11-2021 Operational 
96.  4 Fixed-wing Shillong Passighat Big Charters    Yet to commence 
97.  4 Fixed-wing Shillong Agartala Indigo 30-03-2021 Operational 
98.  4 Fixed-wing Shillong Imphal Indigo 03-08-2021 Operational 
99.  4 Fixed-wing Shillong Silchar Indigo 29-03-2021 Operational 
100.  4 Fixed-wing Shillong Dibrugarh Indigo 26-10-2021  Operational 
101.  4.1 Helicopter Shillong Sohra Pawan Hans    
 
Heliports yet to develop. 
102.  4.1 Helicopter Sohra Shillong Pawan Hans   
103.  4.1 Helicopter Shillong Dawki Pawan Hans   
104.  4.1 Helicopter Dawki Shillong Pawan Hans   
105.  4.1 Helicopter Shillong Tura Heritage   
106.  4.1 Helicopter Tura Shillong Heritage   
91

12 
 
107.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4.1  Helicopter Tura (H) Guwahati Heritage   Tura (H) yet to develop 
108.  4.1 Helicopter Shillong Williamnagar 
(H) 
Heligo   Cancelled 
109.  4.1 Helicopter Williamnagar 
(H) 
Shillong Heligo   Cancelled 
110.  4.1 Fixed-wing Shillong Lilabari Alliance Air  31-10-2022 Operational 
111.  4.2 Helicopter Shillong Khliehrat(H) Pawan Hans  Khliehrat (H) yet to 
develop 
112.  4.2 Helicopter Khliehrat(H) Shillong Pawan Hans  Khliehrat (H) yet to 
develop 
113.  4.2 Helicopter Shillong Shella (H) Pawan Hans  Shella (H) yet to develop 
114.  4.2 Helicopter Shella (H) Shillong Pawan Hans  Shella (H) yet to develop 
115.  4.2 Helicopter Shillong Jowai(H) Pawan Hans  Jowai (H) yet to develop 
116.  4.2 Helicopter Jowai(H) Shillong Pawan Hans  Jowai (H) yet to develop 
117.  4.2 Helicopter Shillong Nongstoin(H) Pawan Hans  Nongstoin (H) yet to 
develop 
118.  4.2 Helicopter Nongstoin(H) Shillong Pawan Hans  Nongstoin (H) yet to 
develop 
119.  4.2 Helicopter Shillong Williamnagar 
(H) 
Pawan Hans  Williamnagar (H) yet to 
develop 
92

13 
 
120.   
 
 
 
 
 
Meghalaya 
4.2 Helicopter Williamnagar 
(H) 
Shillong Pawan Hans  Williamnagar (H) yet to 
develop 
121.  4.2 Sea Plane Shillong Guwahati River 
Front 
Spicejet  Guwahati River Front 
(W) yet to develop 
122.  
Mizoram 
3 Fixed-wing Aizawl Agartala Indigo 29.02.2020  Operational 
123.  4 Fixed-wing Aizawl Tezpur Big Charters   Yet to commence 
124.  4.1 Fixed-wing Aizawl Imphal Alliance Air  31-10-2022 Operational 
125.  
Nagaland 
3 Fixed-wing Dimapur Guwahati Alliance Air 07-12-2019 Operational 
126.  3 Fixed-wing Dimapur Dibrugarh Indigo 28-03-2021 Operational 
127.  3 Fixed-wing Dimapur Imphal Alliance Air 07-12-2019 Operational 
128.  4 Fixed-wing Dimapur Shillong Alliance Air 22-11-2021 Operational 
129.  Sikkim 
 
 
 
2 Fixed-wing Pakyong Delhi Spicejet 23-01-2021 Operational 
130.  2 Fixed-wing Delhi Pakyong Spicejet 23-01-2021 Operational 
131.  2 Fixed-wing Pakyong Guwahati Spicejet 28-10-2018 Non-operational  
132.  2 Fixed-wing Pakyong Kolkata Spicejet 04-10-2018 Non-operational  
93

14 
 
133.  Sikkim 2 Fixed-wing Kolkata Pakyong Spicejet 04-10-2018 Non-operational  
134.  2 Fixed-wing Pakyong Kolkata Spicejet   Yet to commence 
135.  2 Fixed-wing Kolkata Pakyong Spicejet   Yet to commence 
136.  
Tripura 
3 Fixed-wing Agartala Aizawl Indigo 29.02.2020  Operational  
137.  4 Fixed-wing Agartala  Dibrugarh Big Charters 25-06-2021 Operational 
138.  4 Fixed-wing Agartala  Shillong Indigo 30-03-2021 Operational 
139.   4.2 Fixed-wing Agartala Kailashahar Big Charters  Kailashahar yet to 
develop 
140.   4.2 Fixed-wing Kailashahar Agartala Big Charters  Kailashahar yet to 
develop 
141.   4.2 Fixed-wing Kailashahar Kolkata Alliance  Kailashahar yet to 
develop 
142.   4.2 Fixed-wing Kolkata Kailashahar Alliance  Kailashahar yet to 
develop 
 
 
 
94

136/153
ANNEXURE-III
95

ANNEXURE-IV
96

97

98

ANNEXURE-IV A
99

100

1 
 
ANNEXURE – V 
S.No. Date of Incident Incident Action Taken 
1 10-12-2022 NTRO, NCIIPC-Malicious 
Communication Quarantine 15 IP addresses 
2 11-09-2021 
Online Flight Planning 
System-Malicious 
Communication 
1. Configuration for retention for web server logs for longer duration 
2.Firewall has been configured for retention 
3. Firewall has been replaced by a new Firewall with a valid license 
4.Password of all devices has been changed and been maintained as per AAI 
Information SEcurity Policy.  
3 24-11-2021 NTRO,NCIIPC-Malicious 
Communication 
Block malicious URL on web gateway and firewall and endpoint AV. Block 
maliciuous IP on firewall, Qurantined on IPS 
4 29-12-2021 Calicut CISF Malware 
Infection Formatted C Drive, Antivirus installed and updated 
5 28-04-2022 Phishing Attack 
1. Blocked phishing URL on the web gateway 
2.Blocked IP on firewall 
3.Mail Exchange credentials were reset for the user who was found to be 
communicating with phishing URL 
6 07-01-2022 SAP XSS Mail 
Communication SAP Team applied the fixes on the dispatcher 
101

2 
 
7 07-06-2022 Surat Ransomware 
1. Root cause analysis initiated post isolating the system from other endpoint 
to avoid further impact.  
2. It was observed that system was running without the antivirus solution, 
which exposes the system for virus attacks 
3. The threat actor was identified as a malicious IP address 35.236.159.79 
and associated URL (collect.installeranalytics.com) 
4. Post identification, malicious IP and URL was blocked over Web Gateway 
and Firewall to contain the impact 
8 20-07-2022 AAI Website Access to directory was forbidden 
9 09-02-2022 Certin-Malicious 
Communication 
1. No Connection was made and no logs were generated which means traffic 
was dropped. 
2. IP addresses were already blocked in IPS, Web Gateway and Firewall 
10 09-12-2022 E-office Necessary fixes were applied and security posture was hardened 
11 21-10-2022 Wifi-Shirdi Airport The Wifi management team applied the necessary fixes to change the 
password of the mentioned access point  
12 21-12-2022 Botnet-CSK NTP Service has been disabled over interface 
13 01-10-2023 Malicious Activities by China 
based threat actors  Blocked Malicious IPs from Internet Firewall and APT. 
  
 
  
102

3 
 
 
103

Brief note on GAGAN
(GPS Aided GEO Augmented Navigation)
GPS Aided GEO Augmented Navigation (GAGAN)is an Indian Satellite Based navigation
program, developed jointly by Airports Authority of India and Indian Space Research
Organization.
 ISRO provides Space Segment which includes 3 GEO Stationary Satellites.
 AAI provides all ground infrastructure and is responsible for Operation &
Maintenance of GAGAN system
Global Positioning System (GPS) alone does not meet the civil aviation requirements of
accuracy, integrity and availability. GAGAN enhances GPS Performance by providing better
horizontal and vertical accuracy, along with integrity information.
The ground segment of GAGAN architecture comprises of following components:
1. Indian Reference Stations (INRES): These are set of 15 reference stations strategically
located at precise locations within India to provide coverage over the required service
volume. INRES track all the GPS satellites and SBAS GEO in view and forward the
measurement data to Master control centre for further processing.
2. Indian Master Control Centres (INMCC):Master control centres use the real-time
measurement data from all the reference stations (INRES) and their precise known
positions to generate the correction and integrity messages for the designated service
volume. GAGAN consists of 3 INMCCs (Two INMCC at Bengaluru and one INMCC at
Delhi).
3. Indian Uplink Stations (INLUS): INLUS receives correction messages from the INMCC,
formats the messages for GPS compatibility and transmit them to GEO satellites.
GAGAN consists of 3 INLUS (Two INLUS at Bengaluru and one INLUS at Delhi).
The space segment of GAGAN comprises of three Indian GEO satellites (GSAT-8, GSAT-10 &
GSAT-15) with PRN codes 127, 128 &132 respectively. GAGAN system monitors the GPS
satellites & broadcast the correction messages to GPS signal through three Indian GEO
satellites and hence improves the accuracy and integrity compared to standalone GPS.
GAGAN was certified by Directorate General of Civil Aviation, India (DGCA) for operations of
RNP 0.1 services (enroute operations) in the year 2013 and for APV I services (approach
operations) in the year 2015. GAGAN can support operations for all phases of flight including
Oceanic, Approach, Terminal, Surface. Since May 2015, GAGAN Signal-In-Space is available.
National Civil Aviation Policy (NCAP-2016) prescribes that new aircrafts being registered in
India from 1st January 2019 will mandatorily have GAGAN enabled GPS receivers onboard.
Accordingly,DGCA issued a public notice stating that “All aircraft being registered in India
from 1st January 2019 will mandatorily have to be GAGAN enabled.” (subsequently revised
to 1st July 2021).
104

1 
 
Annexure- VII 
List of Airports under implementation of CACS project in first phase 
Sl.No. Name of the Airport Sl.No. Name of the Airport 
1 AHMEDABAD  30 RANCHI  
2 VADODARA  31 JAIPUR  
3 AMRITSAR  32 JODHPUR  
4 CHANDIGARH  33 UDAIPUR  
5 BHUBANESHWAR  34 LUCKNOW  
6 BHOPAL  35 VARANASI  
7 INDORE  36 COIMBATORE  
8 KIAL-BANGALORE  37 MADURAI  
9 MANGALORE  38 CHENNAI*  
10 GOA  39 TIRUCHIRAPPALLI  
11 MUMBAI  40 PATNA  
12 JUHU  41 RAIPUR  
13 NAGPUR  42 JAMMU  
14 PUNE  43 LEH  
15 KOLKATA  44 SRINAGAR  
16 BAGDOGRA  45 AGATTI  
17 PORT BLAIR  46 CALICUT  
18 DEHRADUN  47 COCHIN  
19 SHIMLA  48 TRIVANDRUM  
20 IGI(DEL)  
  21 DELHI (SFD)  
22 GUWAHATI  
105

2 
 
23 SHILLONG  
24 HYDERABAD  
25 VISHAKHAPATNAM  
26 DIMAPUR  
27 IMPHAL  
28 AGARTALA  
29 LINGPUI  
 
  
106

3 
 
 
107

108

109 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINUTES 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

110 
 
MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED 
PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM & 
CULTURE (2023-24) 
I 
FIRST MEETING 
  
The Committee met at  3:00 P .M. on  Tuesday, the 19th September, 2023 in Committee 
Room-D, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe Building, New Delhi. 
  
Members present: 
1. Shri V. Vijayasai Reddy           - Chairman  
 Rajya Sabha 
2. Shri A.A. Rahim 
3. Dr. C.M. Ramesh 
 Lok Sabha 
4. Shri Anto Antony 
5. Shri Tapir Gao  
6. Shri Ramesh Chandra Majhi 
7. Shri Sunil Baburao Mendhe 
8. Shri Prince Raj 
9. Shri Tirath Singh Rawat 
10. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
11. Shri Manoj Kumar Tiwari 
12. Shri Krupal Balaji Tumane 
13. Shri Dinesh Lal Yadav “Nirahua” 
  
SECRETARIAT 
Dr. Raghab Prasad Dash, Joint Secretary  
Shrimati Monica Baa, Additional Director 
Shrimati Vishwarupa Bhattacharya, Additional Director  
Shrimati Subha Chandrashekar, Deputy Secretary  
 
At the outset, the Chairman extended a warm welcome to the Members of the Committee. 
He informed them that the agenda for the meeting is to consider and adopt t he following 
Reports:- 
(i) Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations/ observations of the Committee 
contained in its Three Hundred Thirty Ninth Report on Demand s for Grants (2023 -24) of 
Ministry of Civil Aviation; 
(ii) ******  
(iii)  ****** 
(iv) ****** 

111 
 
(v) ******1 
 
2. The Committee took up for consideration the draft Reports, one by one . After a brief 
discussion, the Committee adopted the aforesaid five draft Reports and authori sed the Chairman 
to carry out minor modifications of typographical and factual errors and formatting , if need be in 
all the Reports. 
 
3.       The Committee authorised Dr. C. M. Ramesh, M.P., and in his absence, Shri A.A. Rahim, 
M.P., to present the aforesaid Reports in Rajya Sabha on 21st September, 2023. The Committee 
also authorised Shri Tapir Gao, M.P. and in his absence, Shri Prince Raj, M.P. to lay the Reports 
on the Table of Lok Sabha on the same date. 
 
4. ****** 
 
5. ****** 
 
6. ****** 
 
7. The Meeting adjourned at 4:00 P.M.                                                                                     
                                          
New Delhi,                                                                                                 Monica Baa 
19th September, 2023                                                                                    Additional Director  
                                                           
1 Relates to other matter 