 
 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
February, 2024/ Magha, 1945 (Saka) 
 
  
THREE HUNDRED SIXTY NINTH REPORT 
Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/ 
Observations of the Committee contained in its Three Hundred 
Fifty Second Report on Functioning of Major Ports in the 
Country 
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 08th February, 2024) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 08th February, 2024) 
 
REPORT NO. 
369 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Website:https://rajyasabha.nic.in 
E-mail:rsc-tt@sansad.nic.in 
 

 
 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT,  
TOURISM AND CULTURE 
 
 
THREE HUNDRED SIXTY NINTH REPORT 
 
Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/ 
Observations of the Committee contained in its Three Hundred 
Fifty Second Report on Functioning of Major Ports in the 
Country 
 
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 08th  February, 2024) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 08th  February, 2024) 
 
 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
February, 2024 / Magha, 1945 (Saka) 
Hindi version of this publication is also available 

 
 
 
 
C O N T E N T S 
 
P A G E S 
 
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE     i 
2. INTRODUCTION       ii 
3. ACRONYMS        iii-v 
4. REPORT         1-65 
5. RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS-AT A GLANCE   66-68   
6. ANNEXURE        69-84 
7. *MINUTES   
 
         
        
        
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
______________________________________ 
 
*To be appended
85-87

i 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE  
 (2023-24) 
 
 (Constituted on 13th September, 2023) 
 
1. Shri V. Vijayasai Reddy  - Chairman 
 
 Rajya Sabha 
2. Shri Mohammed Nadimul Haque 
3. Shrimati S. Phangnon Konyak 
4. Shri Manas Ranjan Mangaraj 
5. Dr. Sonal Mansingh 
6. Shrimati Rajani Ashokrao Patil 
7. Shri A. A. Rahim 
8. Dr. C. M. Ramesh 
9. Shri Zala Kesridevsinhji* 
10. Shri Surendra Singh Nagar* 
 
 Lok Sabha 
11.  Shri Anto Antony 
12.  Shri Ram Margani Bharat 
13.  Shri Tapir Gao  
14.  Shri Rahul Kaswan 
15. Shri Ramesh Chandra Majhi 
16.  Shri Sunil Baburao Mendhe 
17.  Shri K. Muraleedharan 
18.  Shri S. S.Palanimanickam 
19.  Shri Chhedi Paswan  
20.  Shri Kamlesh Paswan  
21.  Shri Sunil Kumar Pintu 
22.  Shri Prince Raj 
23.  Shri Tirath Singh Rawat 
24.  Shrimati Mala Roy 
25.  Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
26.  Shri Dushyant Singh 
27.  Shri Rajbahadur Singh 
28.  Shri Ramdas Chandrabhanji Tadas 
29.  Shri Manoj Kumar Tiwari 
30.  Shri Krupal Balaji Tumane 
31. Shri Dinesh Lal Yadav "Nirahua"  
 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri D. S. Prasanna Kumar, Joint Secretary 
Shrimati Monica Baa, Director 
Shrimati Subha Chandrashekar, Deputy Secretary  
Shri Ranajit Chakraborty, Deputy Secretary 
Shri Satish Kumar, Senior Secretariat Assistant 
 
_____________________________________________________________________ 
*Nominated as Member w.e.f. 26th September, 2023 
 

ii 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairman, Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport, 
Tourism and Culture, having been authorized by the Committee to present on its behalf, do 
hereby present this  Three Hundred Sixty -Ninth Report on the Action Taken by the 
Government on the recommendations/ observations of the Committee contained in its Three 
Hundred Fifty- Second Report on Functioning of Major Ports in the Country. 
2. The Three Hundred Fifty- Second Report of the Department -related Parliamentary 
Standing Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture was presented to the Parliament on 
10th August, 2023. 
3.  The Action Taken Replies on the recommendations of the Committee contained in its 
Three Hundred Fifty- Second Report were received from the Ministry of Port, Shipping & 
Waterways on 24th January, 2024. 
4. The Committee considered and adopted the Report in its meeting held on the  6th 
February, 2024. 
 
 
(V. Vijayasai Reddy) 
NEW DELHI;                                   Chairman,  
February 06, 2024        Department-related Parliamentary Standing 
Magha 17, 1945 (Saka)          Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture, 
                            Rajya Sabha 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

iii 
 
 
ACRONYMS 
 
ANIIDCO 
Andaman and Nicobar Islands Integrated 
Development Corporation Limited 
APSEZ Adani Ports and Special Economic Zone 
ASI Archaeological Survey of India 
BSI Botanical Survey of India 
CAG Comptroller and Auditor General 
CA Chartered Accountant 
CBA Cost-Benefit Analysis 
CAQ Chartered Accountants of Quebec 
CBSE Central Board of Secondary Education 
CDO Chief Data Officer 
CEO Chief Executive Officer 
CIO Chief Information Officer 
CO2 Carbon Dioxide 
CPCP Comprehensive Port Connectivity Plan 
CRZ Coastal Regulation Zone 
CSC Conciliation and Settlement Committee 
CTU Central Transmission Unit 
CTO Consent to Operate 
DBFOT Design, Build, Finance, Operate, Transfer 
DFCCIL 
Dedicated Freight Corridor Corporation of India 
Limited 
DP Data Processing 
DPIIT 
Department for Promotion of Industry and Internal 
Trade 
DPS Digital Port System 
DPR Detailed Project Report 
DPA Deendayal Port Trust 
DTEPA Dahanu Taluka Environment Protection Authority 
EC Environmental Clearance 
EQ East Quay 
EV Electric Vehicle 
EXIM Export-Import 
FC Floating Crane 
FY Fiscal Year 
GDP Gross Domestic Product 
GIS Geographic Information System 

iv 
 
GPS Global Positioning System 
GHG Greenhouse Gas 
GSPCB Goa State Pollution Control Board 
GST Goods and Services Tax 
GTMP Goa Tourism Master Plan 
GTI Gateway Terminal India 
ICTP International Container Transshipment Port 
ICTT International Container Transshipment Terminal 
IOCL Indian Oil Corporation Limited 
IPA Indian Ports Association 
IPRCL Indian Port Rail Corporation Limited 
IPPTA Indian Private Ports and Terminals Association 
IT Information Technology 
JNPA Jawaharlal Nehru Port Authority 
JD Jawahar Dock 
KPL Kamarajar Port Limited 
LOA Length Overall 
MCA Model Concession Agreement 
MbPA Mumbai Port Authority 
MCGM Municipal Corporation of Greater Mumbai 
MIV Maritime India Vision 
MCA Model Concessionaire Agreement 
MTPA Million Tonnes Per Annum 
MMT Million Metric Tons 
MMCL Mumbai Metro Corporation Limited 
MMRC Mumbai Metro Rail Corporation 
MMTP Million Metric Tons Per Annum 
MSDE Ministry of Skill Development and Entrepreneurship 
MoPA Mormugao Port Authority 
MoPSW Ministry of Ports, Shipping and Waterways 
MoR Ministry of Railways 
MoRTH Ministry of Road Transport and Highways 
MPA Maritime and Port Authority 
MT Metric Ton 
NLP National Logistics Portal 
NLP-M National Logistics Portal - Marine 
NCSCM National Centre for Sustainable Coastal Management 
NHP National Hydrogen Mission 
NICDIT 
National Industrial Corridor Development and 
Implementation Trust 

v 
 
NOC No Objection Certificate 
NMPA New Mangalore Port Authority 
NSDC National Skill Development Corporation 
NSICT Nhava Sheva International Container Terminal 
OTB Outer Tuna Buoy 
PCS Port Community System 
PPP Public-Private Partnership 
PGLM Policy Guidelines for Land Management 
POS Port Operating System 
RECC Renewable Energy Certificate 
RESCO Renewable Energy Service Company 
SAROD Society for Affordable Redress of Disputes - Ports 
SVRS Special Voluntary Retirement Scheme 
TEU Twenty-foot Equivalent Unit 
TEUs Twenty-foot Equivalent Units 
TOS Terminal Operating System 
TAMP Tariff Authority for Major Ports 
TRT Turnaround Time 
VRC Vessel Related Charges 
WPI Wholesale Price Index 
WQ West Quay 
ZSI Zoological Survey of India 
 
 
 
 

1 
 
REPORT 
  
The Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Ministry of Ports, 
Shipping and Waterways  on the recommendations/observations as contained in its Three 
Hundred Fifty Second  Report on “Functioning of Major Ports in the Country ” which was 
presented to both the Houses of Parliament on 10th August, 2023.  
  
2.         The Action Taken Replies were received from the Ministry of Ports, Shipping and 
Waterways on 24th January, 2024  in respect of all the observations/ recommendations 
contained in the Report. The replies have been categorized as follows:- 
  
Chapter-I: 
Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the Ministry:  
Paragraph Nos.:22, 27, 30, 33, 34, 43, 44, 52, 53, 63, 70, 73, 94, 96, 97, 98, 99, 102, 
103, 120, 136, 153, 174, 180, 186, 214,  
Total: 26 
  
Chapter-II:  
Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue in 
view of the replies of the Ministry: 
Paragraph Nos.:13, 14, 15, 26, 31, 35, 45, 46, 48, 54, 61, 62, 64, 65,  66, 69, 71, 72, 
77, 81, 82, 95, 100, 101, 104, 109, 110, 112,121,122, 123, 124, 138, 149, 150, 151, 
152, 154, 169, 170, 172, 173, 175, 187, 200, 201, 202, 203, 204, 208, 210, 211, 
212,213, 215,  
Total: 55 
  
Chapter-III: 
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Ministry have not 
been accepted by the Committee: 
Paragraph Nos.: 18, 19, 25, 28, 111, 118, 119, 171, 191, 192,193, 194,209 
Total: 13 
  
Chapter-IV:  
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which the final replies of the Ministry 
are still awaited: 
Paragraph Nos.: Nil                                                                                              
Total: Nil 
  
 
  

2 
 
CHAPTER-I 
  
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY 
THE MINISTRY 
  
Capacity of Major Ports 
Recommendation/Observation 
1.        The Committee observes that of all the Major Ports, only the JNPA has achieved a 
world-class Turn Around time of 24 hours for Containers. The Committee commends the 
JNPA for this seminal achievement and exhorts the other Major Ports to follow the good 
practices of the JNPA to improve their respective Turn Around times. 
 (Para 22) 
Reply of the Ministry 
1.1      The recommendation of the Committee is well noted. 
  
Recommendation/Observation 
2.        The Committee also notes that the Average Ship Output Per Berth Day, like the TRT, 
shows only a marginal increase for many ports, and some ports have even shown a decline in 
output. Though the Paradip Port has crossed the threshold of 30,000 tones, yet unless all 
Major Ports project discernible increase in their performance parameters, the efforts of 
individual Ports would not help achieve the objectives. The Committee recommends that the 
Ministry takes special efforts towards monitoring the ground situation at ports that impede 
the performance progress.. 
(Para 27) 
Reply of the Ministry 
2.1      The recommendation of the Committee is well noted. Several mechanization projects 
are currently underway at various stages in t he Ports. The completion of these mechanization 
projects will contribute significantly to the overall improvement of OSBD. These projects are 
monitored at both the port and ministry levels, ensuring effective oversight and successful 
implementation. Additionally, the Ministry is focusing on enhancing the OSBD through an 
increased share of Public -Private Partnership (PPP) berths, which will not only improve 
operational efficiency but also boost OSBD. 
  
Recommendation/Observation 
3.        The Committee observes that mechanization of berths, minimum dwell time, skilled 
labor, and port connectivity for reduction in evacuation time are essential to reduce the 

3 
 
Turnaround time and recommends that the Ministry may make efforts toBring in greater PPP 
partnerships for mechanization of berths. 
 (Para 30) 
Reply of the Ministry 
3.1      Noted. 
 
DRAFTS OF INDIAN PORTS VERSUS FOREIGN PORTS 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
4.        The Committee observes that the world over, the shipping industry is moving towards 
mega-size vessels with ships of 20,000 TEU and above. While a Capesize vessel requires 
upwards of 18m draft, the draft at Indian ports is in the range of 14 -16 metersonly, owing to 
siltation. The Committee observes that the geographical and topogra phical limitations being 
are identical for both the public and private ports inIndia, how but the private ports have 
been able to develop drafts matching with world class ports whereas the public ports have 
lagged behind. The Gujarat Pipavav port has a dra ft of 18.5 metres and plans to extend it to 
20.5 metres. The Committee, while acknowledging the high dredging costs, underscores that 
the ports drafts must be in sync with the growing size of the ships in the interest of 
maximizing the benefits of large ships in cargo handling. 
 (Para 33) 
Reply of the Ministry 
4.1      Most of the Major Ports have achieved a draft depth of 14 meters, while other Major 
Ports i.e. Kamarajar, Paradip, Deendayal, and Cochin, are working towards achieving even 
deeper drafts of up to 18 meters. Furthermore, the development of Vadhavan Port into a 
Mega Port, boasting an impressive draft depth of 20 meters, is a strategic move aimed at 
further bolstering the capabilities and competitiveness of maritime infrastructure. To make 
the major ports more competitive with Global Ports, the Ministry is exploring the possibility 
of treating the channel as a national asset and also examining the feasibility of funding the 
entire dredging cost, after studying the extant practices followed by the  other countries in the 
world. 
  
Recommendation/Observation 
5.        Ports must increase draft according to the respective cargo profile. Indian container 
terminals must target an 18m+ draft. With the evolving ship types andIncreasing port parcel 
sizes, loading and discharge rates must be enhanced. The Committee also emphasizes that 
greater ship sizes and container loads need increased mechanization at Indian ports to 
improve the loading and unloading ecosystem. Dual cycle cranes and Automated Guided 
Vehicles (AGVs) may be introduced in ports to ensure incremental productivity. 

4 
 
 (Para 34) 
Reply of the Ministry 
5.1      The recommendation of the Committee is well noted. 
 
 
 Recommendation/Observation 
6.        The Committee notes the huge pension liabilities of the Mumbai port. However, it feels 
that such liabilities did not emerge in a day and are known from the time it got accumulated. 
Necessary contingency planning should have been effected and due mechanism put in place. 
The Committee appreciates that the  port has now limited induction to technical and 
professional posts but notes that the present sanctioned strength of port employees at 7,462 is 
still much higher than JNPA and private ports of Mundra and JSW Jaigarh. 
 (Para 43) 
Reply of the Ministry 
6.1      The observations of the Committee are well noted. During the fiscal year 2022 -23, the 
port has contributed ₹ 825 crore to bridge the gap. The shortfall in the pension fund 
investments and actuarial valuation as of 31.03.2023 is ₹2108.57 crore which is a reduction 
as compared to previous years. Considering the trend in the coming years the gap is expected 
to reduce further. Furthermore, the port is wholeheartedly committed to addressing this gap. 
The Mumbai Port Authority has formulated a plan, as ev ident in the commitment to 
contribute 90% of the amounts received from land monetization proposals. In the fiscal year 
FY 2023-24, an amount of ₹520 crore has already been contributed (up to 31.08.2023) to the 
Pension Fund as a commitment towards meeting t he pension liabilities. Current working 
strength of employees is 3327. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
7.        The Committee observes that automation being critical to productivity enhancement is 
also necessary to reduce the staff strength of the port. But, the Digitalization process is still 
ongoing in the port with Port Enterprise Business System, GIS -based Estate Operations 
Management System, and Integrated Access Surveillance System. The Committee 
recommends that the Port implements the digitization and a utomation programme in a time 
bound manner without any further delay. 
(Para 44) 
Reply of the Ministry 
7.1      The suggestion is well noted. 
 Recommendation/Observation 
8.The Committee observes that the iron ore in Goa is of low -grade material for which 
beneficiation needs to be done before it is exported. Moreover, a grade of only up to 62.5 per 
cent can be exported. The Committee observes that the Mormugao port relied hea vily on the 

5 
 
revival of iron ore export for its sustenance. As dependence on one commodity is laden with 
risk for any port, the Committee suggests that the port explores the possibility of other 
commodities, like bauxite, gypsum etc. from Goa and other neig hboring States for 
transportation. The Committee observes that the Mormugao Port authorities had informed 
that transportation of iron ore cargo from Karnataka could be a possible alternative in case 
the iron ore mines in Goa were not  revived. The Committee feels that as there are ports like 
Krishnapatnam, Kakinada and Vishakhapatnam which can handle the cargo, it is unlikely 
that interstate cargo would come to Mormugao port unless attractive rates and concessions 
are offered by the Port. The Committee recom mends that the Mormugao Port may put in 
place, proactive strategies to attract cargo from neighboring states. 
 (Para 52) 
Reply of the Ministry 
8.1      Mormugao Port has set up a Business Development Cell which is actively working in 
line with the recommendations of the committee. Further the Port is offering concessions to 
attract cargo on case to case basis. 
  
Recommendation/Observation 
9.        Regarding the development of the cruise terminal, at the meeting in Goa with the 
Mormugao Port Authori ty, the Ministry of Tourism, the State Government of Goa and 
various Tour Operators, the Committee was informed that there are only day cruises 
operating at present. The Committee had enquired about media reports on Goa port being 
dropped from the cruise c ircuit of three top cruise liners. The Committee was informed that 
there had been an incident with one cruise liner due to an altercation with taxi drivers at the 
port gates. As such, the issue had been taken up with the Goa government. There was now 
better coordination with all parties, including the taxi drivers. The Committee observes that 
globally, the cruise industry was dominated by a few companies and such incidents would 
mar the prospects of Goa in the international cruise circuit. The Committee obs erved that the 
long and beautiful coastline of Goa presents huge potential for cruise tourism. The success of 
the cruise industry would depend on having an ideal ecosystem in which local conveyance 
plays a major role.  
(Para 53) 
Reply of the Ministry 
9.1      Mormugao Port Authority has taken up the issue directly with Department of Tourism, 
Government of Goa for compliance of the parliamentary committee. 
 
 ISSUES IN OTHER MAJOR PORTS 
KANDLA PORT 
 

6 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
10.        The Committee also  recommends that the Ministry makes every effort to implement 
the Landlord Port Model in the Major Ports. 
 (Para 63) 
Reply of the Ministry 
10.1      Noted. 
 
PORT MECHANIZATION AND MODERNIZATION 
Recommendation/Observation 
11.        The Committee finds it difficult to appreciate the position of the Ministry that all 
berths in the Major Ports would be mechanized by 2030, i.e. in a span of seven years. The 
Maritime Vision Plan is to position India as a top maritime nation. For this, the Ministry 
should make all efforts for mechanization and automation of all the Major 
Ports by that year.  
(Para 70) 
  
Reply of the Ministry 
11.1      The recommendation of the Committee is well noted. The Ministry is regularly 
monitoring the progress of mechanization projects. 
  
Recommendation/Observation 
12.      Mechanization of berths remained at the core of the measures taken by the JNPA in 
reducing its Turn Around Time from 52 hrs to 28 hours in a span of 05 years. The Committee 
recommends that the Ministry as also the Major Ports take expeditious action for the time -
bound implementation of the 31 mechanization projects and also draw up actionable plans 
for the mechanization of the remaining berths at the earliest. The Committee also 
recommends that the Major Ports may take th e initiative to replace the old, outdated 
equipment at the old berths with modern equipmentsso as to enhance their productivity.  
 (Para 73) 
Reply of the Ministry 
12.1    This Ministry, vide its letter No. PD -13/98/2023-PPP/e-362935 dated 4th December, 
2023 has shared the recommendation of the Committee with all Major Ports for necessary 
action and compliance. 
  
DEVELOPMENT OF TRANSHIPMENT HUBS 

7 
 
VOC 
Recommendation/Observation 
13.      The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry but feels that the distance between two 
ports should be a matter of consideration as it impacts the overall productivity of both the old 
and also the upcoming ports. The Committee recommends that the distance between an 
upcoming port and another port in the region serving th e same hinterland should form a part 
of the study before establishing the need for a new port.  
 (Para 94) 
Reply of the Ministry 
13.1    In this regards, it is pertinent to mention that a new Major port i.e. Vadhavan port is 
under development stage and will be jointly implemented by JNPA and Maharashtra 
Maritime Board with a shareholding of 74% and 26% respectively. 
Further, the recommendations of the committee are well noted. 
  
Recommendation/Observation 
14.      The Committee notes that one of the main  problems obstructing the development of 
Transshipment in India emanates from the lack of deep drafts of Indian ports, Especially 
those on the Eastern Coast and Southern coast. While dredging is necessary to deepen the 
drafts, the costs of dredging are charged to the shipping lines, adding to the cost of port calls 
in India compared to the foreign ports, thus, discouraging big ships from coming to Indian 
ports. The Committee has been informed that foreign ports do not bear the costs of dredging, 
which are borne by respective Government.  
 (Para 96) 
 
15.      Upon enquiry by the Committee, the Ministry acknowledged that the Syama Prasad 
Mookerjee Port, Kolkata, receives a dredging subsidy from the Government. But, the other 
Major Ports are responsible for their dredging expenditure, both capital and maintenance. 
The Committee desires to know why only the Kolkata port receives a dredging subsidy from 
the Government. The Committee would like the Ministry to give a comparative data on the 
number of foreign gov ernments which bear the cost of dredging and the number of foreign 
ports which bear the cost of dredging themselves without any government help. 
 (Para 97) 
 
16.      If the former is a practice worldwide, the Committee recommends that the Ministry 
may explore the possibility of government support for dredging in Major Ports so that a 
globally uniform practice is followed so as to make our ports cost effective and competitive. 
 (Para 98) 

8 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
16.1    Syama Prasad Mookerjee Port, being a riverine port, is located in a unique and 
challenging environment. The Hooghly River on which it is located has a high rate of 
siltation. This means that the port needs to be dredged more frequently and at a higher cost 
than other ports. Therefore, dredgin g subsidy is given to the Port to maintain its draft and to 
continue to operate efficiently. 
 
16.2 To make the Major Ports more competitive with global ports, the Ministry is 
exploring the possibility of treating the channel as a national asset and also ex amining the 
feasibility of funding the entire dredging cost, after studying the extant practices followed by 
the other countries in the world. 
  
Recommendation/Observation 
17.      The Committee also notes that solutions like Floating Cranes, which unload the cargo 
from Capesize Ships anchored in mid -sea into barges that take the cargo to the port, have 
helped ports like Kandla, a low draft port, to improve productivity and increase cargo 
volumes. The Committee desires to know if such solutions can be appli ed at other ports. In 
particular, it recommends that the Ministry looks into the solutions where dredging costs are 
prohibitive. 
 (Para 99) 
Reply of the Ministry 
17.1    The recommendation of the Committee is well noted. Ports like Deendayal and 
Mormugao currently use floating cranes for mid sea barge operations whereas ports such as 
JNPA, KPL, VPA and ChPA do not have a need for this service due to their cargo profile, 
draft availability and adequate berthing facilities. Some of the ports are exploring th e 
possibility of using floating cranes for mid sea barge operations in the future. 
 
DPA 
As far as DPA is concerned, yes the port users have the option of utilizing floating cranes 
available for mid sea barge operations at its port limits at O.T.B. (Outer Tuna Buoy), for 
handling Dry cargo ships. 
 
JNPA 
JNPA is predominantly a container port. Other than containers, JNPA handles small amount 
of Liquid and break bulk. JNPA do not handle bulk cargo. 
 
KPL 

9 
 
KPL is a deep draft Port which can handle larger vessels with a draft of 16m. 
KPL has initiated action for becoming the Cape Compliance Port to handle Cape size vessels. 
Hence, Barge operation at anchorage is not necessarily felt at this juncture. 
 
MoPA 
At Mormugao Port Floating cranes / Transhippers are used to unload/ load 
cape size vessels at outer anchorage through/into barges by taking advantage of natural deep 
water draft available at Outer anchorage. 
 
NMPA 
The Port  is  exploring  the  possibility  of  handling  cape  size  vessels  at 
Anchorage to handle iron ore. 
 
VOCPA 
Deploying floating crane for Anchorage operations & lightering from higher capacity vessels 
would augment the cargo handling potential of the Port. 
 
At VOC Port, floating crane was deployed from 15.02.2015 to 27.10.2016, for lightering at 
Anchorage using FC and barges and Subsequently handling the deeper draft vessel at berth. 
However, the Operator discontinued the services 
 
VPA 
At VPA there are adequate    berthing facilities in outer harbour  to accommodate cape size 
vessels with a permis sible draft of 18.10 mtrs. and LOA 390 mtrs. &in inner harbour to 
accommodate Babycape vessels with a permissible draft of 14.50 mtrs. and LOA 260 mtrs. 
 
As such the trade is not felt to handle cargo by floating cranes at ships anchored in mid sea by 
barges as the Port is equipped with international standards of Navigational and cargo 
handling facilities. 
 
MbPA 
Mumbai Port is also low draft port especially in the Dock Basin which cannot accommodate 
mother vessels. About 23.50 % of cargo of Mumbai Port is handled at anchorages where dry 
bulk cargo is discharged from Mother vessels to barges and these barges carry the cargo to 

10 
 
nearby ports like Dharamtar, PNP and Karanja. This cargo is discharged by Ships own 
cranes. 
 
ChPA 
There is no such requirement for deployment of floating cranes at ChennaiPort considering 
its cargo profile, volume and draft availability. 
  
Recommendation/Observation 
18.      The Committee recommends that the digitization of ports be given utmost priority so 
that automation would reduce transshipment cost. 
 (Para 102) 
Reply of the Ministry 
18.1    The recommendation of the Committee has been well noted. The Major ports have 
already taken various initiatives in port digitalization and automation such as the 
implementation of Single Window Platform –NLP Marine (Sagarsetu), 100% RFID -based 
tracking and tracing, Standard ERP system, e -DO and e -BoL for shipping lines, automation 
of weighbridges etc. 
  
Recommendation/Observation 
19.      The Committee also recommends that involving the private sector by way of 
investment in infrastructure, provision of ancillary services and streamlining of Immigration 
and Customs formalities, would be crucial for developing Transshipment Hubs. 
 (Para 103) 
Reply of the Ministry 
19.1    Various fiscal incentives and other support measures such as longer concession period, 
discounted tariffs, waivers in custom duties and GST etc are proposed in the draft DPR to 
encourage private participation and the investments to make ICTP an attractive destination 
for transshipment. 
  
PRIVATE PUBLIC SECTOR PARTNERSHIPS IN THE PORTS SECTOR 
Recommendation/Observation 
20.      The Committee notes that the Comptroller and Auditor General of India, in their 2015 
Performance Audit report on the Public Private Partnership Projects in Major Ports, had 
commented that the PPP mode of implementation suffered delays mainly due to protrac ted 
time taken for finalization of tenders, time taken for obtaining security clearance of 
shortlisted bidders, time taken for the signing of Chartered Accountant (CA) and litigations 

11 
 
by bidders during the tender process. The Committee observes that with 6 9 projects yet to be 
awarded, the Ministry needs to ensure that there is timely implementation of the projects to 
achieve the targeted timeline. TheCommittee understands that one of the primary objectives 
of resorting to PPP is for faster development of in frastructure, and delays in implementation 
of PPP projects defeat this very objective. The Committee recommends that the Ministry 
takes efforts to increase the percentage of PPP investments in major ports and speed up 
theImplementation of PPP projects in t he Pipeline which are still in the under 
development/Inter-ministerial Consultation/Bidding stage.. 
 (Para 120) 
Reply of the Ministry 
20.1    Noted. It has been experienced, delays are mostly observed in getting security 
clearance which is under purview of  MoD, MHA & MEA. MHA furnish clearances 
sometimes get delayed, depending on case to case basis. Ministry of PS&W is not directly 
engaged and has no role to play in the process. However, the Ministry regularly follows up 
and approaches competent authority f or intervention, as and when required.  Moreover, in 
some cases the market response to the tenders is extremely poor leading to restructuring of 
the projects. 
  
LOGISTICS AND EASE OF DOING BUSINESS 
Recommendation/Observation 
21.      The Committee observes  that since it is the older ports which have legacy pension 
issues and most of the newer ports have mainly contractual employees and a fewer regular 
employees, pension liabilities cannot be cited as a universal contributory factor for high 
operating expens es. Besides, salary payments are obligation of every organization and 
cannot be a reason for high VRC. The requirement of 50% discount on cruise tourism is 
relatively recent and does not explain why the VRC has always been high in Indian ports. The 
Committee desires that the Ministry finds ways and means to reduce Vessel Related Charges 
and Lighthouse Dues to lower the logistics costs. The Committee also reiterates its earlier 
recommendation that the Ministry may explore the possibility of the government su pport for 
dredging in Major Ports to curtail high VRC in ports. 
 (Para 136) 
Reply of the Ministry 
21.1    The recommendation of the Committee is well noted. To make the major ports more 
competitive with Global Ports, the Ministry is exploring the possibility of treating the channel 
as a national asset and also examining the feasibility of funding the entire dredging cost with 
the government support to curtail high VRC in ports, after studying the extant practices 
followed by the other countries in the world. 
  
Port Community System (PCS) 

12 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
22.      While the Committee appreciates the initiatives taken for digitalization, it urges upon 
the Major Ports to adopt the state -of-the-art technologies to remain globally competitive. To 
stay abreast of the rapidly evolving technology should be integral to the digitalization efforts 
of the ports.  
 (Para 153) 
Reply of the Ministry 
22.1    Noted.  
 
NATIONAL HYDROGEN MISSION 
Recommendation/Observation 
23.      The Committee observes that Shore to  Ship Supply is a significant contributor to 
reduction in carbon emissions and recommends that the facility be provided to all vessels 
including cruise ships and coastal vessels. The Committee also observes thatcargo like coal 
and iron ore cause a lot of d ust pollution and recommends that all Major Ports should have 
covered sheds for the storage of such cargo to prevent pollution. The Committee hopes that 
the Ports endeavor to achieve 100% electrification of Port Equipment/Vehicles by 2030.. 
 (Para 174) 
Reply of the Ministry 
23.1    The recommendation of the Committee is well noted. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
24.      The Committee observed that Singapore cruises go to international waters and allow 
the casinos to be operated from there and then return which is why such cruises are able to 
attract more tourists and enquired from the Ministry whether similar cruise was operating in 
India. The Ministry informed that the Cordelia cruise goes out beyond 12 nautical miles 
which allows people to enjoy casinos.  The Committee recommends that cruises could initiate 
from Mumbai to Mangalore and to Goa via Cochin from where the ship could go to 
international waters to attract more tourists.  
 (Para 180) 
Reply of the Ministry 
24.1    The cruise itineraries are determined by the respective Cruise Lines. The upcoming 
cruise itinerary of Cordelia Cruises for upcoming cruise season 2023-2024 are:  
 
a)    Mumbai – High Seas – Mumbai, 
b)    Mumbai – Cochin – Lakshadweep – Mumbai,  

13 
 
c)    Mumbai – Cochin – Mumbai,  
d)    Mumbai – Lakshadweep – Mumbai,  
e)    Mumbai – Goa – Mumbai,  
f)    Mumbai – Goa – Lakshadweep – Mumbai,  
g)    Mumbai – Lakshadweep – Mumbai 
 
However, for necessary action, the issue will be taken up with relevant stakeholders  such as 
Customs, Bureau of Immigration and respective cruise lines through Cruise Task Force. 
 
ACTS AND LEGISLATIONS, MODEL CONCESSIONAIRE AGREEMENTAND 
THE ISSUES IN PRIVATE PUBLIC PARTNERSHIPS 
LANDLORD PORT MODEL 
Recommendation/Observation 
25.      The Committee observes that the JNPA, the first Landlord Port in the country, is a 
good Landlord Port model that showcases the advantages which the Major Ports can benefit 
from. JNPA, the top Container Port of the country, ranks 54 in the global rankings and t he 
efficiencies brought to the port have enabled it to achieve performance Parameters which are 
far ahead of the rest of the Major Port.. 
 (Para 186) 
Reply of the Ministry 
25.1    The observation of the Committee is well noted. 
 
PORT EMPLOYEES WELFARE 
Recommendation/Observation 
26.      The Committee recommends that ports which have a huge number of vacancies 
especially Mumbai Port and SMPK may review their sanctioned strength and take action to 
either fill the vacancies if necessary or abolish posts wh ich are lying vacant for a long time. 
The Committee also exhorts the ports to expedite mechanization so that the employee 
strength could be restricted to only the essential posts.  
 (Para 214) 
Reply of the Ministry 
26.1    Noted. 
 
  
  

14 
 
 CHAPTER-II 
  
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES OF THE MINISTRY 
  
TRAFFIC HANDLED BY MAJOR PORTS 
Recommendation/Observation 
1.        The Committee observes that the cargo handling of the Major Ports has been steadily 
increasing over the years, and only in the last year has there been an increase of 10%. On a 
query by the Committee, the Ministry replied that to augment the volume ofcargo handling, 
the Port Authorities have also explored the possibility of generating new cargo to reduce the 
gap between the actual traffic and the capacity. Major Ports also organize trade meets to 
attract traffic from their hinterland/region. Several steps have also been taken to boost 
coastal shipping.. 
 (Para 13) 
2.        The Committee also observes that the increase of 10% has come primarily due to 
JNPA’s impressive performance, followed by Paradip and Deendayal Port. There is only a 
marginal increase in the figures of the remaining Ports, while the Mormugao Port has 
witnessed a decline in traffic. The growth trend in the market share of cargo is, therefore, 
confined to only three of the Major Ports while the remaining show barely perceptible 
improvements. The Committee underscores the need for better performance by the rema ining 
nine Major Ports and recommends that the Ministry come out with a focused and calibrated 
strategy to raise the cargo handling performance of such MajorPorts. 
 (Para 14) 
Reply of the Ministry 
2.1      FY 2022-23 has marked a positive trend in traffic growth across most of the Major 
Ports, surpassing the figures from FY 2021 -22. To capitalize on this growth and ensure a 
robust future, the Ministry has proactively identified a series of initiatives aimed at enhancing 
cargo handling capabilities at these ports. These initiatives include the addition of new berths 
for meeting the anticipated cargo profiles, upgrading existing berths to boost handling 
capacity, converting existing berths to accommodate new commodities, and exploring 
promising avenues such as  cruise shipping. All of these measures are aligned with the 
overarching Maritime India Vision -2030, charting a course towards a thriving maritime 
sector. 
  
Recommendation/Observation 
3.        The Committee observes that India occupies the 11th position globally regarding 
container traffic handled. Massive Container Ships invariably require deep drafts, and the 

15 
 
ports must remain alive to their requirements. At present, most Indian Ports have dra fts of 
about 14 mts, with only a few having 16 mts drafts, while Container Ships require drafts of 
upto 18-20 mts.. 
(Para 15) 
Reply of the Ministry 
3.1      Most of the Major Ports have achieved a draft depth of 14 meters, while other Major 
Ports i.e. Kama rajar, Paradip, Deendayal, and Cochin, are working towards achieving even 
deeper drafts of up to 18 meters. Furthermore, the development of Vadhavan Port into a 
Mega Port, boasting an impressive draft depth of 20 meters, a strategic move aimed at further 
bolstering the capabilities and competitiveness of maritime infrastructure. 
  
TURNAROUND TIME AND AVERAGE SHIP OUTPUT PER BERTH DAY 
Recommendation/Observation 
4.        Against this backdrop, the Committee calls upon the Port authorities to redouble their 
efforts on multiple fronts, lest achieving the goal of less than 20 hours Turnaround Time as 
envisioned in the Maritime Vision 2030 would remain elusive.. 
(Para 26) 
Reply of the Ministry 
4.1      The international benchmark for container Turn Around Time ( TRT) stands at 
approximately 20 hours. As a container port, JNPA has already made significant strides by 
achieving a container TRT of 24 hours. Furthermore, JNPA is committed to exerting every 
possible effort to meet the ambitious target of achieving a 20 hours TRT, as outlined in the 
Maritime India Vision 2030.  
  
Recommendation/Observation 
5.        The Committee has also been informed about the lack of availability of skilled 
Workforce in the port sector that hampers productivity growth. The Committee Recommends 
that Logistics Skills may be included in the training programmes being conducted under the 
auspices of the National Skill Development Corporation (NSDC) to cater to the ever dynamic 
needs of the port sector.  
 (Para 31) 
  
Reply of the Ministry 
5.1      The recommendations of the committee are noted. ln this connection, it may be 
appreciated that a Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) was signed between Ministry of 
Ports, Shipping and Waterways (MoPSW) and Ministry of Skill Development and 
Entrepreneurship (MSDE) in August 2020 which establishes a framework of collaboration 

16 
 
for creating and implementing efficient and effective training, assessment and certification 
process and platform, for skill development and placement of skilled and certified Work force 
in the job market. National Skill Development Corporation (NSDC) has trained more than 
90,000 Candidates across the country in logistics related courses since the MoU. MoPSW is 
further collaborating with NSDC through MSDE for conducting training in c ourses related to 
maritime sector. 
  
Recommendation/Observation 
6.        The Committee observes that the Indian Private Ports and Terminals Association 
(IPPTA) had stated in its deposition before the Committee that most of the tugs deployed by 
major ports had outlived their effective life and are operating beyond economic conditions. 
The service levels rendered by them do not match the Industry Standards. Private Tug 
Companies should be encouraged to render towage services at Major Ports in line with the 
international practices. The Committee calls upon the Ministry to consider this issue on 
merit.  
 (Para 35) 
Reply of the Ministry 
6.1      Major Port Authorities Act, 2021, provides greater autonomy to Major Ports. It has 
reoriented the governance model in central Ports to the landlord port model, in line with the 
successful global practice, where the core infrastructure is developed by the Port Authority 
and the commercial operation and services are bid out to private players. Hence, Major Ports 
have liberty to take decision in respect of purchasing/hiring/outsourcing of the towage service 
based on their local requirements. 
  
FINANCIAL PERFORMANCE OF MAJOR PORTS 
Recommendation/Observation 
7.        The Committee also observes that expansion in Cruise Tourism after completion of the 
International Cruise Terminal would boost the revenue accrued significantly. However, the 
Port should adopt proactive marketing strategies for promotion of cruise tourism by building 
appropriate interface with relevant stakeholders . The Committee observes that the Ropeway 
project has innate potential for tourism promotion and recommends that the Port may take up 
with the ASI for early resolution of the issue.  
 (Para 45) 
Reply of the Ministry 
7.1      Following measures are taken for the adoption of a proactive marketing strategy for 
the promotion of Cruise Tourism: 
 

17 
 
a)    Cruise Community Platform is being developed where all stakeholders will come on the 
same platform for ease of doing business. 
 
b)    With a view to ensure unifo rm practices across all Terminals and Departments, 
Sensitizing Trainings are arranged by involving stakeholders across all segments - Ports, 
Security, Immigration, and Customs.  
 
c)    Prior to every cruise call, Customer Facilitation Meetings are held wit h all stakeholders 
i.e. Security, Immigration, Agents, Tour Operators, etc. are also conducted to ascertain 
requirements and providing solutions.  
 
d)    India Tourism with the help of inputs from States, Maritime Boards, Forest Authorities, 
Urban Developm ent, Ministry of Ports, Shipping & Waterways have been engaged for 
preparation of an attractive brochure showing information about tourist spots, infrastructure 
facilities available and other useful information pertaining to the tourist places.  
 
e)    Sta tes have been advised to enhance tourist experience throughout the journey from 
arrival to return, destination centric approach for planning, development and its maintenance.  
 
f)    States have also been told to develop online information related to servi ces and facilities 
around the destinations and physical help desk for assistance of tourists.  
 
g)    For promoting Cruise Tourism, International Cruise Conferences are being organized 
annually.  1st Incredible India International Cruise Conference was hel d in May 2022 at 
Mumbai.  In 2023, a break out session on Cruise Tourism is scheduled during the Global 
Maritime India Summit 2023 held in October 2023, New Delhi.  
 
h) Department of Tourism, Government of Goa has already taken action for development of 
Ropeway Projects. Tourism department has identified the location on both sides i.e. Dona 
Paula and Mormugao Port for which M/s. Indian Port Rail Corporation Limited (M/s. 
IPRCL) & Ropeway Ltd. Mumbai have been engaged as a nodal agency. 
  
Recommendation/Observation 
8.        The Committee observes that the Mumbai Port has a sizeable land bank and 
recommends that land monetization options may be explored in the interest of creating a 
credible industrial ecosystem that supports the Port while strengthening its resources. 
(Para 46) 

18 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
8.1      The observations of the Committee are well noted. MbPA has sizeable land bank in 
the heart of Island City of Mumbai. These land parcels of various sizes are scattered from 
Wadala to Colaba, which is a 14 KM stretch. Historically these land parcels were let out to 
various government and private parties on various tenures such as Long leases, Fifteen 
monthly leases, Monthly tenancies. Major land use was warehousing, commercial 
establishment which were assisting the development of the Port and Mumbai City. 
 
8.2 As per Policy Guidelines for Land Management by Major Ports (PGLM) 2015, no 
new residential/real-estate development including individual residential unit should be taken 
up and hence MbPA land cannot be allotted for residential purpose. 
 
8.3 Port is monetizing its vacant land parcels, as per PGLM 2015, for commercial, 
warehousing, service industries, office purposes as per Development Plan of MCGM and 
MbPA Development Plan as per Major Port Authority Act, 2021. Vacant structures/land 
parcels have already been monetized through government such as Government of Bihar, RBI, 
Navy, Coast Guard, MMRDA, MMRCL, TAMP and IPRCL. 
 
8.4 In order to monetize the MbPA vacant land effectively, land rates have been 
rationalized and formulated at competitive rates for leasing of lands considering the market 
scenario which has now made leasing of land at par with other public land owners in 
Mumbai. A Monetization Cell is formed under the supervision of Chief Engineer, MbP A and 
assisted by Asset Monetization experts. Also an expert advisory committee comprising of 3 
No. Retired Senior Bureaucrats has been formed to oversee monetization of MbPA assets in 
an efficient and effective manner. 
  
Recommendation/Observation 
9.        The Committee observes that Cochin port has much the same problems as that of the 
Mumbai port. Like the Mumbai port, land monetization could be one of the solutions. The 
Committee has learnt from media reports that the port is planning to lease l and for logistics-
related activities and recommends that the port may make all concerted efforts for maximum 
land monetization. The Committee has also learnt that the port plans to change the system of 
granting concessions in vessel -related charges to ship s calling at International Container 
Transshipment Terminal (ICTT) by shifting to a cargo -based discount scheme instead of a 
call-based discount scheme. The Committee observes that due to the economic crisis in Sri 
Lanka, many ship operators would divert t heir ships to Cochin, and the port should take 
advantage of such an opportunity by realigning its strategies. The Committee desires to be 
apprised of the Concessions in Vessel-Related Charges (VRCs) offered to Containers and the 
impact thereof. However, tw o Members of the Committee opined that the process of land 
monetization should not be done through giving control of valuable land held by the Cochin 

19 
 
Port Trust to private monopolies and businesses. The port trust should use the land 
productively and produce profits through its initiatives and not hand over the valuable public 
land to private parties. 
 (Para 48) 
Reply of the Ministry 
9.1      Cochin Port allows up to 90% rebate on notified Vessel Related Charges (VRC) to the 
Mainline Container Vessel Services and rebates up to 50% on the notified VRC to Feeder 
Container Vessel Services to be competitive in port charges with respect to Colombo and the 
neighboring Indian Ports, towards promoting ICTT as a Transshipment Hub. 
 
9.2 CoPA has leased out an ar ea of 1055 Acres of Land to various port users. The land 
parcels have been allotted for port related activities as per approved Land Use Plan. The 
allotments have been made according to the procedures laid down in the Policy Guidelines 
for Land Management (PGLM) issued by Ministry from time to time. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
10.        Observing that the local conveyance in Goa was a State wide problem, the 
Committee recommended that solutions like the development of an app like “Savari” of 
Kerala which every taxi driver could join in Kerala may be developed for Goa too. 
 (Para 54) 
Reply of the Ministry 
10.1      Goa, a small state, but a large tourism destination has a dynamic management system 
governing the state's ever flourishing Tourism industry. The  Department of Tourism, 
Government of Goa at the apex is the agency for administration and enforcement of tourism 
related policies, legislation, and rules. Goa Tourism Development Corporation is the 
Implementation Body, or the primary agency for developmen t and management of tourism 
infrastructure, marketing and promotion activities and development of new tourism products. 
The strategic location of Goa along with coastlines and inland waterways, is very well 
connected to the major cities of the country thro ugh roadways, railways, waterways and 
Airways. Development of core infrastructure is another key objection of Goa Tourism Master 
Plan (GTMP). Further to leverage the potential of Goa Waters, potential locations for 
developing transport hubs, tourist Jettie s and terminal buildings have been identified. River 
Cruises and Edutainment Nautical Tours are being identified as new tourism services. 
10.2 Tourism in Goa is emerging as the backbone of Goa's economy and tourists across the 
world and India are used to o nline app-based taxi services which gives number of advantages 
to the customers including cashless payment, efficient tax collection, GPS-based tracking and 
passenger safety which was not available in Goa. Hence, with the objective of providing 
online app-based taxi services for tourists and locals, Goa Tourism Development Corporation 
through an online tender process had selected an operator namely M/s. Frotamiles Private 

20 
 
Limited who had launched APP based Taxi hailing system for the state of Goa under bran d 
name "Goa Miles". The said initiative has also received National Award for the most 
innovative use of IT for the tourism. 
10.3 Apart from 'Goa Miles' app, the Department of Tourism, Government of Goa has also 
developed Goa Taxi app through Goa Electronic  Limited and both of this technological 
application will create an optimum hassle -free environment for the domestic as well as 
international tourists and enhance the tourism development in Goa. 
 
 ISSUES IN OTHER MAJOR PORTS 
KANDLA PORT 
Recommendation/Observation 
11.      The Committee notes that while the Mumbai, Cochin and Goa ports have faced 
financial difficulty due to some unique issues, most of the Major Ports suffer from common 
problems of outdated infrastructure, low capacity util ization, and poor performance 
Parameters. The Committee observes that mechanization, connectivity and good evacuation 
capacity are essential for increasing the performance of the ports and recommends that the 
Ports may endeavor to do the same with PPP partnerships.  
 (Para 61) 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
11.1    Noted. The projects for mechanization, automation, digitization etc. are already being 
undertaken at the major ports and it‟s a continuous process. 
  
Recommendation/Observation 
12.      The Committee notes the benefits of the PPP model and recommends that all Major 
ports may make all efforts to achieve their targets of PPP partnerships as per the Maritime 
India Vision to improve their productivity and competitiveness.  
 (Para 62) 
Reply of the Ministry 
12.1    Noted. A pipeline of PPP projects has been identified and being processed. Major 
Ports have been advised to expand the project pipeline. 
             
Recommendation/Observation 
13.      The Committee also observes that land is one of the crucial resources of the port, 
which can be gainfully monetized. The Committee has been informed that Ports have allotted 

21 
 
the land parcels for various purposes such as viz. liquid storage terminal, Godown  / 
Warehouse, Salt Industries and Port-related Activities, etc.  
 (Para 64) 
Reply of the Ministry 
13.1    Noted. 
  
Recommendation/Observation 
14.      The Committee has been informed that the total land area available with the 12 Major 
Ports is about 2,71,043 acres. The land leased or sold by various Major ports is as given in 
Annexure – IV. 
 (Para 65) 
Reply of the Ministry 
14.1    Noted.             
  
Recommendation/Observation 
15.      The Committee desires to know about the land monetization plans of the Major Ports, 
and whether any of the Ports have plans for industrial townships in the available port lands. 
Leasing port land to private investors on PPP basis for setting up of industries/facilities 
would go a long way in promoting the Port Led Indu strialization agenda of the Government 
while accruing sizeable revenues for the ports to address their resource concerns. 
 (Para 66) 
Reply of the Ministry 
15.1    To regulate allotment of lands owned by the Major Ports, the Ministry issued Policy 
Guidelines for Land Management by Major Ports in 2014 to ensure that land resources are 
put to optimum use as per the approved Land Use Plan with focus on retaining / attracting 
port traffic and optimum value is realized by licensing / leasing Port land th rough a 
transparent tender-cum-auction methodology. 
 
15.2 The Policy is amended from time to time.Major Ports leased out their unused land for 
port-led industrialization under the comprehensive land use plan.             
 
PORT MECHANIZATION AND MODERNIZATION 
Recommendation/Observation 
16.      The Committee observes that only 35% of total berths are mechanized in the Major 
Ports. Only Kandla port has all of its berths mechanized.  

22 
 
 (Para 69) 
Reply of the Ministry 
16.1    Kamarajar Port which has all the berths mechanized. Details of other ports are briefly 
given below:  
 DPA 
All berths are not mechanized at DPA. However, Mechanization of cargo berth no. 8, 9 and 
13 to 16 for various types of multipurpose clean cargo (coal, fertilizer, food grains, containers 
etc.) are under process. 
 
As far as DPA (erstwhile Kandla Port Trust) is concerned, during FY 2022 -23, it has 35 
berths (with barge handling points included) including berths at Kandla, Vadinar and those 
operated by private terminal operators, out of which there are 18 Dry cargo berths & 2 berths 
for containers. Among these 18 dry cargo berths, only 2 berths (Berth nos. 1 & 3) have been 
mechanized. These berths are operated by the port‟s private terminal operator viz. AK BTPL 
at Tuna Tekra. There are, however, concrete plans to mechanize some of the port operated 
Dry cargo berths. 
 
JNPA 
At JNPA all the berths are already mechanized except Coastal Berth which was 
commissioned in 2021. Now, JNPA has awarded Concession in May  2023 to PPP Operator 
M/s NSDTPL. As per the Concession Agreement, the Concessionaire will install the 
mechanization for Coastal Berth within construction period of 3 years. 
 
KPL 
All the berths at KPL have already been mechanized. Presently KPL has 8Nos. o f terminals 
in operations out of which 4 Nos. are BOT terminals, 3 Nos. are Captive user‟s terminals and 
1 No. KPL owned terminal for Automobiles export / import. All the terminals are equipped 
with state of the art infrastructure facilities with fully mec hanized cargo handling operations 
for faster evacuation and pollution free environment. The RoRo terminal meant for 
Automobiles export / import does not require any cargo handling equipment, since the 
Automobiles are loaded / unloaded from the vessels through self-driven method (RoRo). 
 In addition, KPL constructed two more Coal berths with a Capacity of 9 MTPA each to meet 
out the Coal requirements of TANGEDCO's upcoming new Thermal Power Plants. These 
berths were handed over to TANGEDCO for installation o f top unloading equipment (i.e. 
Ship unloaders) and closed conveyor system and the works are in progress. 
 
MoPA 
Outof  the  total  6  berths  4  are  mechanized,  which  amounts  to  66.6%Mechanized berths. 

23 
 
 
NMPA 
Out of 16 berths at the Port, 10 berths are mechanized out of which 5 are oilBerths, 2 are coal 
berths, 1 container berth, 1 iron ore berth(KIOCL),1 berth is cement/edible oil berth & 1 
berth is leased out to Indian Coast Guard. Thus 67% of berths at NMPA are fully 
mechanized. Other 5 berths are ge neral cargo berths with lesser draft with semi -mechanized 
operation. 
 
VOCPA 
5 Nos of Port owned ELL cranes installed at Berth No.1 to 4 for handling all cargoes except 
containers. 
 Further 3 HMCs of 120T capacity deployed on PPP basis for handling cargoes in berth 1 to 6 
and 9th berths. Also Berth No.9 is fully mechanized with conveyor system. Also, in berths 
NCB-I, CJ-I are equipped with shore unloaders and conveyors by captive users for handling 
respective cargoes. Oil Jetty is fully mechanized with unloa ding arms. In view of above the 
Berths of VOCPA are fully mechanized or semi-mechanized. 
 
VOCPA 
Out of 73.75 million tones volume of cargo handled in FY 2022 -23, 46.58 million tones 
handed by mechanical means (63%) and 27.17 million tones handled by conven tional means 
( 37%) respectively. 
 The Port has fully mechanized facilities for handling coal, iron ore, crude, petroleum 
products, LPG, fertilizers, liquid fertilizers raw materials, chemicals, alumina and containers. 
 Only the dry bulk and break bulk car goes are being handled at East quay 2,3,6,7 berths and 
West quay 1,2,3,4,5,7 & 8 berths by means of 100 tonnesHarbour Mobile Cranes and Ship 
Cranes are also more prominent in handling dry bulk at these berths. 
 
MbPA 
About 60 % of cargo of Mumbai Port is handled at JD and Pir Pau terminals where Liquid 
cargoes such as Crude Oil, POL Products, LPG and liquid chemicals are handled. All the 
berths at these terminals are fully mechanized. 
 About 23.50 % of cargo of Mumbai Port is handled at anchorages where dry bulk cargo is 
discharged from Mother vessels to barges and these barges carry the cargo to nearby ports 
like Dharamtar, PNP and Karanja. This cargo is discharges by Ships own cranes.  Hence in 
this case there is no question of mechanization. The remaining cargo is handled at Indira dock 
and Bunders which is mostly handled by Ships own cranes and whenever necessary private 
cranes are deployed as per requirement. 
 

24 
 
ChPA 
Remarks may be tak en as „Nil‟ as it is an observation therefore no clarification 
hasbeensought.. 
  
Recommendation/Observation 
17.      The Committee understands that the cargo should reach a threshold for financial 
viability for the mechanization of berths. The average capacity utilization of the Major Ports 
is 49%, and many of the Major Ports are operating at much below this average. The 
Committee wishes to know how the Ports plan to increase their cargo handling capacity in 
the next few years to make the investments vi able in the sphere of mechanization and 
modernization.  
 (Para 71) 
Reply of the Ministry 
17.1    Expansion, infrastructure development and capacity augmentation of Major Ports is a 
continuous process. It involves construction of new berths and terminals, mechanization of 
existing berths and terminals, capital dredging for deepening of drafts for attracting larger 
vessels, development of road and rail connectivity etc. 
 DPA 
As far as DPA is concerned, in FY 2022-23, the port had a (rerated) capacity of 263.10 MMT 
(for 35 berths & barge handling points combined) against which it handled 137.56 MMT of 
cargo. Thus, the Port‟s capacity utilization during FY 2022- 23 was 52.28%. 
Following major projects pertaining to Deendayal Port Authority are under progress w. r.t. 
Port mechanization and modernization at DPA: 
•  Mechanization for Fertilizer and Other Clean Cargo Handling facilities at Berth No. 
14, 
•  Procurement of 4 nos. Harbor Mobile Cranes (HMCs) having capacity of 100 Tones 
and above, 
•  Development of Multipurpose (Clean Cargo) and Container cargo handling facilities at 
Berth No. 13, 
• Development of Container Cargo and Multipurpose Cargo (Clean Cargo) handling 
facilities on Berth No. 15 to 16, 
•   Rapid rake loading system, 
•   Sprinkling System for coal dust suppression in 34-hectare coal yard, 
•  08 Nos. Quick Release Mooring Hook (QRMH) units, integral capstan and remote 
control type facilities at Oil Jetty no. 7 & 8, 
•  10 nos. of 120 T capacity each Automated road weighbridges on Revenue Sharing 
basis at DPA (with buy back of 10 nos. of existing Road weighbridges) 

25 
 
 
JNPA 
At JNPA, the current capacity is 7.7 MillionTeus and JNPA handled 6.05Million TEUs in 
2022-23. This works out to about 78% of capacity utilization. As per the expansion plan, 
JNPA will achieve 10.4 Million TEUs capacity by 2025 and by 2030, JNPA will reach 10 
Million TEUs. Further expansion / capacity addition will be at Vadhavan Port. 
 
KPL 
The Designed Berth Capacity of KPL from its operating 8 Nos. of Terminals is 54.44 MTPA. 
During th e financial year 2022 -23, KPL has handled 43.51 Million Tonnes. Hence, the 
Capacity utilization achieved during the financial year 2022 -23 is 79.92%. However, the Re -
rated Capacity for 8 Nos. of Terminals is 91.10 MTPA. The Capacity utilization during 2022-
23 as against the Re-rated Capacity is 47.76%. 
 As a Capacity augmentation measure, KPL is in the process of developing two Terminals 
with capacity of 3 MTPA each. (1) RoRo Terminal No. 2 with Capacity of 3 MTPA by KPL 
own resources. (2) Oil jetty on Captive basis by IOCL with Capacity of 3 MTPA. 
 
MoPA: As seen in Annexure 10, Mormugao Port operates at 68°/o of its Usable Capacity, 
and 27% of its Re-rated capacity. The capacity as per CTO at Mooring Dolphins is only 4.75 
as against re -rated capacity of 18. 50 Milliontones. Also seen from the table the rerated 
capacity of berth no 6, 7 and 8 is 17.40, 13.70 and 5.20 respectively as against usable 
capacity of 6.50, 5.20 and 1.00 Milliontones. Thus due to the restrictions imposed by Goa 
State Pollution Control Board for handling cargo at Mooring Dolphins and other berths Port 
is unable to handle cargo beyond the prescribed limit by GSPCB. 
Due to single Railway line from Vasco to Tinaighat, Mormugao Port is unable to evacuate 
cargo effectively through rakes. This affects the discharge of vessel as it cannot discharge the 
cargo in stockyard, unless the cargo from the yard is evacuated. 
 
NMPA 
The capacity utilization at NMP during the FY 2022 -23 is 56%(on usableCapacity). Some of 
the old berths are having draft rang ing from 9.50 to 10.50 Mtrs only which are having less 
demand due to increase in larger vessels which need higher draft. 
The Port will be adding one more deep draft general cargo berth (No.17) to accommodate 
large vessels. The work will be commenced shortl y. In addition to the above, one of the oil 
berths, No.9 will be upgraded to handle larger vessels on PPP mode. Other initiatives are 
adding the capacity of mechanized coal berth (PPP) No.16 by 2.67 MTPA and also by 
utilizing the under-utilized coal berth (PPP) No.15 by handling other liquid cargo. 
VOCPA 

26 
 
In the sphere of mechanization and modernization the following projects have been 
undertaken by VOCPA. 
i)  Conversion  of  9th  berth  as  container  terminal  on  DBFOT  basis  -Construction  
phase  is under  progress 
ii)  Mechanization of NCB III berth at VOCPA for handling dry bulk cargoes on DBFOT 
basis- Tender floated on 24.02.2023 and evaluation of RFQ bids is under progress. 
iii)  Deployment of 4Nos of HMCs at berths I to VI- Tendering is under process. 
 VPA 
At VPA, out of 73.75 Million cargo handled exclusively VPA berths handled39.70 million 
tonnes and PPP berths handled 34.05 i.e., 53.84% by Port berths and 46% by Private berths 
respectively. As part of mechanization of berths, VPA is taken up  the following berths on 
PPP mode. 
 1.   Revamping of existing mechanized EQ -1 terminal in the Inner Harbour on DBFOT 
basis at a cost of Rs. 347.79 Crore. 
 2.   Revamping of existing WQ -6 terminal in the Northern Arm of Inner Harbo ur on 
DBFOT basis at a cost of Rs. 165.70 Crore. 
 
3.    Mechanization of EQ-7 berth through PPP mode at VPA on DBFOT basis at a cost of 
Rs. 200.99 Crore. 
 
4.            Mechanization of WQ -7&8 berths through PPP mode at V PA on DBFOT basis 
at a cost of Rs. 288.47 Crore. 
 
5.    Development and Mechanization of EQ -1A berth in the Inner Harbo ur on DBFOT 
basis at a cost of Rs. 350 Crore. 
 
6.     Development and Mechanization of EQ -6 berth in the inner harbour for handling of 
all types of cargoes on DBFOT at a cost of Rs. 66.12 crore. 
 
As on date, the Port capable to handle 136.39 million tones and on completion of future 
expansion projects on modernization and mechanization there may be promised increase in 
capacity nearly10 million tones in subsequent years. 
MbPA 
Assessed Capacity o f Mumbai Port is 83.85 million tones. During the year2022 -23 Mumbai 
Port handled 63.61 million tons of cargo resulting in capacity utilization of 75.86 % Plan for 
increasing cargo handling capacity: Mumbai Port has planned a Third Chemical Berth at Pir 

27 
 
Pau for handling Liquid Chemicals with a capacity of 2 million tones. Likely to be 
commissioned in 2024. 
ChPA 
The current rated capacity of Chennai Port is 135.6 MTPA and the capacity at desired 
occupancy (85% for Containerized cargo & 70 for Other cargoes) i s 103.9 MTPA. The cargo 
handled during the year 2022-23 is 48.95 MMT and hence the capacity utilization is 47.11%. 
The Cargo Projections as per the Master Plan of Chennai Port for FY 2025, FY 2030 & FY 
2035 are 54.6 MMT, 64.1 MMT & 76.2 MMT respectively. 
As observed by the Committee, Chennai Port could achieve the saturated capacity utilization 
of 70 -75% by FY 2035 only. Hence capacity addition is not necessary as Chennai Port is 
having surplus capacity until FY 2035. However, in order to continue meeting the trade 
requirements and further facilitate EXIM trade for the regional businesses and thereby 
increasing the capacity utilization in the next few years, Chennai Port has envisaged 
investments on Projects like, 
(a)   Development of Buffer Parking Yard for trailers / trucks 
(b)   Development of dedicated container corridor inside the port for quick evacuation 
(c)  Strengthening and Widening of Jawahar Dock (JD) entrance wall 
(d)    Construction of 4 EXIM godowns and development of concrete roads around the  EXIM 
godowns 
(e)     Development of paved storage yard 
(f)     Multi Modal Logistics Park at Port Land at Mappedu 
(g)    New Four Lane Elevated Road from Chennai Port to Maduravoyal 
(h)   Development of Goods Shed at Jolarpettai 
(i)    Installation of Drive-through Container Scanner etc. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
18.      The Committee notes that 31 port projects involving mechanization and modernization 
have been identified to be developed on PPP basis to be completed by 2024 -25. The 
Committee would like to have the list of said 31 projects and the percentage of the total 
berths in all Ports which will be covered under this project.  
 (Para 72) 
Reply of the Ministry 
18.1    List of the 31 PPP Projects are enclosed at Annexure - 11. 
 
DEVELOPMENT OF MEGA PORTS, NEW PORTS AND TRANSHIPMENTHUBS 

28 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
19.      The Committee observes that the economies of scale in maritime trade have given rise 
to Mega ships or Capesize Ships, which naturally require larger terminals and ports. Indian 
ports presently lack the infrastructure to deal with Capesize ships which are vital to 
international maritime trade. As Indian ports are gearing up to handle these giant ships by 
increasing their draft depths and modernizing the ports, India should also pl an for 
developing Mega Ports to handle the ever -increasing size of vessels and Containers. The 
Committee also recommends that while planning for the mega port, the Ministry may also 
arrange for linkages with the local economy, creating industrial clusters to be economic 
drivers for the region.  
 (Para 77) 
Reply of the Ministry 
19.1    The Ministry has identified two existing Major Ports i.e. Deendayal and Paradip Ports 
to be transformed into Mega Ports having cargo handling capacity of 300+ MTPA. Vadhavan 
Port is also being developed as a Mega Port of the country having a cargo handling capacity 
of about 300 MTPA and draft of 20+ meters along with the development of industrial clusters 
to be economic drivers for the region. 
  
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS 
Recommendation/Observation 
20.      The Committee observes that most of the Major Ports of India were constructed more 
than 50 years ago, some a century old. JNPA, the 12th Major port of India was developed in 
1989 and no other major port has been developed in the last three decades. The Vadhavan 
port, with its advantages of a natural draft of 18 -20 m, proximity to the Mumbai Port and 
JNPA and to the upcoming Delhi Mumbai Freight corridor, was a much -needed addition to 
India’s Major Ports.  
 (Para 81) 
Reply of the Ministry 
20.1    The observation of the Committee is well noted. 
  
Recommendation/Observation 
21.      The Committee has learned from media reports that the Dahanu Taluka Environment 
Protection Authority (DTEPA) has now granted No Objection Certificate (NOC) for the Port. 
The matter being sub -judice, the Committee would like to be informed of any further 
developments on the issue.  
 (Para 82) 
Reply of the Ministry 

29 
 
21.1    NOC from DTEPA has been received to develop Port at Vadhavan in Dahanu Taluka 
of Palghar District. This Ministry is in the process of obtaining Environmental Clearance for 
the project. 
  
DEVELOPMENT OF TRANSHIPMENT HUBS 
VOC 
Recommendation/Observation 
22.      The Committee also notes the reply of the Ministry regarding the environmental 
impact studies done and conservation plans proposed in the upcoming Transshipment Hub at 
Galathea in Great Nicobar. As the proposed Hub is in an ecologically sensitive seismic zone, 
the Committee exhorts the Ministry to evaluate all ecologica l considerations before project 
implementation.  
 (Para 95) 
Reply of the Ministry 
22.1    Considering the ecologically sensitive nature of the proposed hub, the Environmental 
Clearance (EC) dated 11th November, 2022 received for International Container 
Transshipment Port (ICTP) Galathea Bay stipulates stringent measures and compliances. 
Accordingly, Andaman and Nicobar Islands Integrated Development Corporation Limited 
(ANIIDCO) – the project proponent of holistic development of Great Nicobar Island 
coordinated with all key stakeholders including Zoological Survey of India (ZSI), Botanical 
Survey of India (BSI) and National Centre for Sustainable Coastal Management (NCSCM), 
for EC compliance related matters and accordingly prepared Environmental Managemen t 
Plan (EMP). The EMP includes for continuous process of field investigations, monitoring and 
a continuously evolving environmental management and mitigation plan to ensure that 
safeguards are in place i.e. before, during and after construction as well as in the operation 
phase.  
  
Recommendation/Observation 
23.      The Committee also observes that in the early 2000s, the Container giant Maersk had 
shifted to the Tanjung Pelapas Terminal in Malaysia from Singapore, which is one of the 
world’s largest transshipment hubs, which changed the face of the transshipment business in 
the entire region. 
 (Para 100) 
Reply of the Ministry 
23.1    On boarding a shipping line in the development of transshipment hub is beneficial to 
attract and build cargo base. MAERSK acquired a 30% stake in the port of Tanjung Pelepas 
and shifted its south East Asian transshipment centre from Singapore. This provided the 
Malaysian port and shipping industry its biggest boost in early 2000s. 

30 
 
  
Recommendation/Observation 
24.      The reason behind the move was stated to be the offer of a stake to the Company. The 
Committee observes that the crisis in Sri Lanka offers an opportunity to divert Transshipment 
operations from Colombo and recommends that the Ministry explores the possibility of  
offering such attractive package deals to Shipping Corporations to incentivize them to 
transfer their transshipment operations to Indian ports.  
 (Para 101) 
Reply of the Ministry 
24.1    Ships plying in the Indian ocean, one of the busiest shipping routes, have long been 
dependent on hub ports in Colombo, Singapore, and Dubai for transshipment of cargo 
containers. At these transshipment hubs, the containers are handled and stored temporarily, 
before being transferred to other smaller ships for the onward destination. 
 
24.2 Among the various initiatives and reforms introduced by the government, the goal of 
making India a transshipment hub is a critical one. This will help to make India‟s trade cost -
effective, time efficient and less prone to geopolitic al and economic disturbances in the 
region. 
 
24.3 The government of Kerala has been a frontrunner in making the best of this mater this 
material opportunity that India has. The State government in the last decade itself has 
initiated the development of Vizhinjam International Transshipment Deepwater Multipurpose 
Seaport near the capital city of Thiruvananthapuram. Vizhinjam‟s location has the unique 
advantage of 20 meters natural water depth,  which makes it easy for berthing of large ships, 
a key requir ement for hosting a a transshipment hub. Further, the port is only 12 nautical 
miles from the international shipping channel, giving direct access to the international trade 
route. This project being developed by the Adani Group under the public -private- partnership 
(PPP) mode, is targeted for commissioning by end 2023. However, the port is facing delays 
on various accounts viz. cyclones and pandemic which has retarded the process of completion 
of this port. 
 
24.4 Furthermore, Consultative discussions with key global shipping lines were held and 
the suggestions & expectations to initiate business at Galathea Bay International Container 
Transshipment Port (ICTP) were also taken into consideration while preparing its DPR. 
24.5 Also suggestions received during the process of invitation of Expression of Interests 
(EOIs) for development of ICTP during January 2023 are incorporated appropriately in the 
draft DPR by consultant.. 
  

31 
 
PORT CONNECTIVITY 
Recommendation/Observation 
25.      Port connectivity is one of the critical enablers for improving the efficiency of the 
maritime logistics ecosystem. By linking the port network with other connectivity modes such 
as rail, road, and air, India’s port trade competitiveness can grow exponentially, giving it a 
significant edge.  
 (Para 104) 
Reply of the Ministry 
25.1    The Sagarmala Programme has identified connectivity between ports and domestic 
production and consumption centres under the dedicated pillar of port connectivity. Further, 
under Gati Shakti, port connectivity has received an impetus by the preparation of the 
Comprehensive Port Connectivity Plan (CPCP). Efficient port connectivity allows for the 
swift movement of goods to and from ports, reducing transportation bottlenecks and delays. 
This, in turn, can lead to cost savings, increased trade volumes, and enhanced reliability for 
international trading partners. Additionally, effective connectivity can attract investments, as 
businesses are more likely to invest in regions with streamlined logistics infrastructure. 
  
Recommendation/Observation 
26.      The Committee appreciates the initiatives of the DFCCIL for building the network of 
freight corridors, connecting the Major ports, which will present tremendous advantage in 
the connectivity of Major Ports and enhancing their productivity. 
 (Para 109) 
Reply of the Ministry 
26.1    Appreciation by the Committee is noted. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
27.      The Committee has been informed that although most ports have a reasonably good 
04 Lane Road Connectivity, Rail congestion is a concern in certain sectors, which affects 
freight movement. Combined with this, the availability of rakes has also adversely impacted 
the evacuation of cargo from/to ports.  
(Para 110) 
Reply of the Ministry 
27.1    Transportation by railways is an essential condition for reducing India‟s logistics cost. 
Cost of transportation by rail is less than half the cost of transportation by road. Rail being the 
most optimal mode for transporting long lead cargo vis a vis other mode, and has a p otential 
to impact the competitiveness of ports and shipping industry. 

32 
 
27.2 Under PM Gati Shakti National Master Plan, a comprehensive Port Connectivity Plan 
(CPCP) has been prepared in September 2022, in consultation with MoPSW, MoR, MoRTH, 
and State Mari time Boards. CPCP incorporates 298 connectivity projects, of which 191 
projects (101 road connectivity and 90 rail connectivity projects) are under the 
SagarmalaProgramme, and 107 are new connectivity infrastructure gaps (60 road and 47 rail). 
In the Union  Budget 2023 -24, it was announced that one hundred critical transport 
infrastructure projects, for last and first mile connectivity for ports, coal, steel, fertilizer, and 
food grains sectors have been identified. They will be taken up on priority with inv estment of 
Rs. 75000crore, including Rs. 15,000 crore from private sources. 
27.3 Additionally, under National Industrial Corridor Programme, NICDIT is 
implementing 32 Industrial Nodes to come up alongside 11 Industrial Corridors. For 
enhancing connectivity of these industrial nodes to seaports, MoPSW has prepared a report in 
consultation with State Multimodal Committees. The report proposes 62 new projects (38 rail 
and 24 road) to enhance connectivity of industrial nodes to ports. The report has been shared  
with stakeholders (MoRTH, MoR, DPIIT, NICDC) in October 2023 for further action on the 
proposed projects. 
27.4 Further, M/o Railways is working on corridor -bases approach focused on augmenting 
rail connectivity to ports (Rail Sagar). This has an estimated  completion cost of ₹ 
98,000crore. To be incurred between FY 2024 -25 to FY 2031 -32. Rail Sagar aims to expand 
rail infrastructure providing them last mile rail connectivity based on their growth and needs. 
Rail Sagar is proposed to be funded and executed through Capital (Gross Budgetary Support), 
Extra Budgetary Resources, and PPP/ private investment wherever required. 
27.5 Ports are facing congestion due to non - availability of required number of rakes. For 
instance, Paradip Port is one of the best perform ing major ports in India in terms of cargo 
handled and handled 135.36 MMT cargo during FY 2022-23. At present, there is a demand of 
40- 42 rakes per day for meeting the requirements of the GENCO‟s of Andhra Pradesh, Tamil 
Nadu, Karnataka, Maharashtraect. Which use the M/s Mahanadi Coalfields Ltd, Talcher coal 
transported by coastal shipping through Paradip Port. The Port has capacity to unload 62 
rakes per day and present supply is only 31.48 rakes per day in current FY. Further, supply of 
25 nos. of empty BOXN/BOBR rakes per day is required for the evacuation of imported dry 
bulk cargo, however the present supply is only 16.55 rakes per day in current financial year. 
376 nos. of railway indents are pending with Railways for supply of empty rakes 3.2 million  
tones of import cargo is lying inside the Port for evacuation. 
27.6 The issue has been taken up with Ministry of Railways at highest levels. The issue 
needs to be addressed to improve the evacuation of cargo from the ports for optimal 
utilization of port capacities. 
  
Recommendation/Observation 
28.      The Committee recommends that while conceiving a Port project, connectivity issues 
should invariably form part of the integrated planning for the project at the DPR stage and 
involve all the agencies like NHAI or the Ministry of Railways. The Committee has  been 

33 
 
informed at its meetings that while the mechanism for such consultation exists, there are 
concerns with regard to implementation. The Committee urges upon the Ministry to look into 
the concerns and ensure that all stakeholders and agencies are involv ed while planning for 
connectivity in a port project.  
(Para 112) 
Reply of the Ministry 
28.1    MoPSW has constituted State wise Multimodal Committees for port connectivity 
which has representation from Major Ports, State Maritime Boards, Regional / Zonal Offices 
of MORTH and MoR, and Indian Navy for integrated planning of the ports and project wise 
assessment of feasibility, funding arrangement, timelines, implementing agencies etc. 
 
PRIVATE PUBLIC SECTOR PARTNERSHIPS IN THE PORTS SECTOR 
Recommendation/Observation 
29.      The Committee desires to know whether the PPP Cell in the Ministry is monitoring the 
projects on a regular basis and the effectiveness of such monitoring on the PPP projects.  
(Para 121) 
Reply of the Ministry 
29.1    Regular meetings are being taken with Major Ports at various level by PPP Cell to 
review of the progress/implementation of PPP Projects. Secretary (MoPSW) takes weekly 
Project Review meeting with Major Ports. Meeting with the concerned Major Port on specific 
PPP Projects is also being taken from time to time. As a result, 14 projects of value ~INR 
10,743 Crore have been awarded. Whereas, the current status of other PPP Projects are as 
under:  
 
24 projects of worth value ~INR 12,551 crore have been identified for FY22-23 under NMP, 
their status till date as follows:- 
•              13 projects of INR 8,687 cr have already been approved and some are under 
bidding process. 
•              2 projects of worth ~INR 2544 Cr. SFC/PPAC received and under consultation. 
•              4 Projects worth ~827 Cr. SFC proposal in pipeline. 
•              3 projects worth ~156 Cr are under PGLM and 2 projects worth ~340 Cr are 
dropped/abeyance.  
  
Recommendation/Observation 
30.      As required by the Committee, the Ministry provided statistics relating to the 
comparative performance of berths operated on PPP basis to that of the Port’s ownberths, 

34 
 
which is placed at Annexure -IX. The Committee observes that the PPP berths, though less in 
number, outperform the Port’s own berths in most ports. For example, in Chennai port, the 
07 PPP berths handle a sizeable 63.68% of the total traffic, while the Port’s own 19 berths 
handle only 36.32%. In New Mangalore Port, the 03 PPP berths handle a w hopping 82.22% 
of the total traffic, while the Port’s own 14 berths handle a meager 17.78%.. 
(Para 122) 
Reply of the Ministry 
30.1    Noted. This is an indication Ministry is promoting PPP in Major Ports.  
 
Recommendation/Observation 
31.      The Committee observes that a capacity addition of 103.03 MT has been made to the 
Major Ports in the last five years, in which an investment of Rs. 12,065 crores in 15 projects 
is under PPP mode. The Committee desires to know the contribution of PPPProjects to this 
capacity addition in the last five years. The Committee also desires to know the planned 
capacity addition of the remaining 81 projects in the Pipeline for the years FY 2021 -22 to FY 
2024-25.  
(Para 123) 
Reply of the Ministry 
31.1    No. of PPP projects operationalized since 2018-19 at Annexure-13. 
 
31.2 Till date, the operational projects have contributed to enhanced capacity of the order 
of ~ 550 MTPA. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
32.      The Committee has been informed that there is no dedicated investment mechanism for 
the maritime sector or even the infrastructure sector that impinges on the viability of project. 
The Committee recommends that the Ministry may examine the need to create a dedicated 
Maritime Development Fund for long-term financing of PPP projects in the maritime sector.  
(Para 124) 
Reply of the Ministry 
32.1    Ministry is exploring the possibility of setting up the Maritime Development Fund. 
  
LOGISTICS AND EASE OF DOING BUSINESS 
Recommendation/Observation 
33.      The Committee recommends that each Major Port may make every effort to provide 
ancillary services to its users to improve the value addition in its supply chain.  

35 
 
(Para 138) 
Reply of the Ministry 
33.1    Major Ports provide a variety of ancillary services to their users  to encourage 
businesses and also improve the logistics supply chain. These include: 
•    Access control systems 
•   Cargo handling and loading/unloading 
•    Equipment parking and storage 
•    Office space 
•    Port reception facilities 
•    Crew change, bunkering, and fresh water supply 
•     Provisions and spares supply 
•     Mobile X-ray container scanner systems 
•     RFID-based gate control systems 
•     Parking yards for container trailers 
•     Pre-delivery inspection facilities 
•     Car wash facilities 
•      Heavy equipment assembling 
•    Full rake automated wagon loading/unloading systems 
•    Bunkering, fresh water and stores supply, crew repatriation, surveys & inspections of 
vessels, landing of garbage, under water surveys including diving 
•   Trade incentives such as rebates on port dues and pilotage, concessions in railway terminal 
charges, and free anchorage charges for the first 48 hours for bunkering purpose, etc. Brief 
Major Port wise position is also given below. 
 
DPA 
DPA is giving many ancillary services as listed below : R.F.I.D. based access control system 
implemented at all Port gates for entry / exit of commercial vehicles, Automated bagging & 
rake loading of fertilizers at NG-34 godown inside cargo jetty area to reduce the loading time 
of rakes, mobile bagging plants for bagging of fertilizers, outsourcing of 10 nos. of existing 
weighbridges for faster movement of vehicles, parking of equipment inside port area, 
allotting space to Port users inside Dock for their day to day office works. 
 
JNPA 
• JNPA Provides Port Reception Facility through empanelled vendor as per MARPOL 
annexes. 

36 
 
• JNPA provides crew change, bunkering and Fresh water facility 
• Supply of Provisions and Spares 
 
KPL 
KPL makes every effort to provide ancillary services to the users to improve 
the Logistics supply chain. Some of the initiatives are provided below: 
 
(i)            Mobile X-Ray Container Scanner system: 
KPL has installed one Mobile X-Ray Container Scanner System with an investment of Rs. 35 
Crores and oper ational w.e.f 01.07.2021. The Mobile X -Ray Container scanner system is 
capable of scanning 22 Container per hour at normal scan speed. DGFT has issued a 
notification for enlisting Kamarajar Port as 18th Port for import of un -shredded metallic 
scrap. The Co ntainer Scanner system is being operated by the Chennai Customs. The 
Installation of Container Scanner System at KPL is one of the initiatives of "Ease of Doing 
Business" under the Ministry of Ports, Shipping and Waterways. 
 
(ii)          RFID based Gate Control system: 
KPL implemented the RFID based Gate control system with effect from 15.11.2016 to ease 
the process involved in entry & exit of men and vehicles in the Port. RFID system installed at 
KPL is a web based online fully automated system which sign ificantly enhances the security 
of the Port, speeds up the movement, tracks every movement of men and Vehicle across the 
Port. The implementation of RFID Automated Gate Control System significantly reduced the 
waiting time at Gate. The Port Users, Contract ors and Agents are obtaining their passes 
through online without spending time at the Gate. The implementation of RFID system is one 
of the initiatives of "Ease of Doing Business" under the Ministry of Ports, Shipping and 
Waterways. 
 
(iii)          Parking yard for Container trailers: 
KPL developed an exclusive Truck parking yard of size 62,500 sq.m for parking and faster 
clearances of Containers handled. The Container trailers arriving to the Port from other than 
the CFS without online RFID passes are perm itted to enter the Truck parking yard to obtain 
the RFID passes which facilitate to reduce the waiting time of Container trailers and to avoid 
congestion at Port. 
 
(iv)          Pre Delivery Inspection facility: 
KPL has provided Pre Delivery Inspection (PD I) facility for Automobile Exporters to ensure 
the quality of cars exported. 

37 
 
 
(v)          Car wash facility: 
KPL has facilitated the Automobile exporters with Automatic Car wash facility near General 
Cargo Berth along with water treatment plant to ensure the cleanliness of cars exported. 
 
(vi)          Heavy Equipment assembling: 
KPL has allocated a dedicated area for Heavy Equipment manufacturer's viz., VI/s Caterpillar 
and Mis Komatsu for assembling their Heavy Equipment prior to exports. 
 
MoPA 
Mormugao Port has provided Full Rake automated Wagon loading/unloading 
system with 25 -30 metres pavement for quick evacuation of cargo thus providing value 
addition in its supply chain. 
 
NMPA 
Ancillary services i.e. Bunkering, supply of fresh water and stores, crew 
Repatriation, surveys & inspections of vessels, landing of garbage, under water surveys 
including diving, etc. are being provided at New Mangalore Port. 
 
VOCPA 
VOC Port has provided concessions in VRC to M/s. IOCL to promote Bunkering services in 
the Port ‟s limits. Further the port is taking action to promote Green Ammonia / Methanol 
bunkering facilities and has entered into an MoU with M/s. NGEL, a subsidiary of M/s. 
NTPC in this regard. 
 
VPA 
Being complied to improve the additional ancillary services as recommended 
by the Committee by reviewing the issues in Port Working Group Committee meetings. The 
following trade incentives are also extended to encourage our existing and prospective 
business partners. 
• 50% Rebate on Port Dues and Pilotage for Containe r vessels less than 50,000 GRT 
and 70% Rebate on Port Dues and Pilotage for vessels having more than 50,000 GRT. 
• 50% concession in Railway terminal charges for Iron ore received in Railway wagons 
and un-loaded manually and mechanically up to 31.03.2024. 

38 
 
• Concession of 70% in Port Dues and Pilotage with GRT less than 50,000 MMT 
carrying minimum inward 250 TEUs for transhipment of Containers. 
• Concession of 80% in Port Dues and Pilotage with GRT more than 50,000 MMT 
carrying minimum in ward 250 TEUs for transhipment of Containers. 
• Extension of Concession on vessel related charges for Container traffic up to 
30.9.2023. 
• Free Anchorage charges for first 48 hours for Bunkering purpose. 
• License fee ₹ 7.88 per sq.mtr. per week is reduced to ₹3.94 for allot ment of land at 
areas. 
• VPA is promoting additional Coastal cargo by interacting with clients viz., NTPC, 
HINDUJA, and NTECL etc., 
• The levy and collection of Labour incentive has been dispensed with and VPA 
collects a per tonne rate for supply of CHD labour @ ₹50.00 and ₹56.00 for Bulk and Break 
Bulk cargoes respectively. 
 
MbPA 
Mumbai Port makes all efforts to provide ancillary services to its users to improve value 
addition in its supply chain. For example Pre Delivery Inspection facility is being provided to 
the Automobile Exporters. Providing storage facility for storage of Cargo Handling 
Equipment / Spare parts required for cargo handling. 
  
Port Community System (PCS) 
Recommendation/Observation 
34.      The Committee is pleased to note the initiatives taken for digitalization as it will 
increase the efficiency and productivity of Indian ports, enabling them to compete on the 
global scale. Shipping has traditionally been a conservative industry, slow to adapt to 
technological changes, mainly due to the enormous and complex logistics chains 
characteristic of this industry. However, adopting new technology is critical to increase 
operational efficiencies and competitiveness.  
(Para 149) 
Reply of the Ministry 
34.1    Noted. 
  
Recommendation/Observation 
35.      The Committee notes with satisfaction the implementation of Port Operating System 
(POS), Terminal Operating System (TOS) and the National Logistics Portal – Marine (NLP-

39 
 
M) in all ports and the merging of Port Community Systems withNational Logistics Portal -
Marine. The Committee notes that other technologies like Blockchain Technology, 
Automation, and Artificial Intelligence are in the process of being implemented. The 
Committee would like to know the status of implementa tion of cutting -edge technologies like 
Digital Twin, which can be used to monitor and manage port operations, fleet management, 
optimization of the end -to-end-supply chain, Advanced Monitoring systems to monitor the 
state of the weather, Advanced Sensor Te chnology, Augmented Reality for maritime training, 
3D Printing and other related technology-based applications.  
(Para 150) 
Reply of the Ministry 
35.1    Major Ports have implemented various digital initiatives like iPOS, Marine NLP, Gate 
Automation, Automated Weigh bridges, Vessel Traffic Management System in operation to 
monitor vessel traffic, etc. Regarding implementation of cutting -edge technologies like 
Digital Twin, which can be used to monitor and manage port operations, fleet management, 
optimization of the end -to-end-supply chain, Advanced Sensor Technology, Augmented 
Reality for maritime training, 3D Printing and other related technology -based applications, 
ports are exploring the feasibility of adopting these technologies. It may also be noted th at 
Major Ports are transitioning towards the landlord model. 
  
Recommendation/Observation 
36.      The Committee notes that the Port Authority of Singapore (MPA) has opted to build a 
3D Printing and Additive Manufacturing Centre (Centre of Excellence in Modelling and 
Simulation of Next Generation Ports C4NGP) that will allow it to build adigital twin port. 
Singapore has recently inaugurated the Tuas Port which when fully operational in the 2040s, 
is expected to be the world’s largest fully automated conta iner terminal in a single location, 
with an annual handling capacity of 65 million TEUs. The Rotterdam port with its digital 
transformation aims for ships to enter and leave the port autonomously in 2030. In Jebel Ali 
port after implementation of a Terminal Operating System, ZODIAC, the Container Terminal 
(CT3) will be able to integrate with any Terminal that uses the same operating system and 
can become part of the largest global network of supply chains.  
(Para 151) 
Reply of the Ministry 
36.1    Noted. 
Recommendation/Observation 
37.      Private ports and Terminals in India have embraced the advanced technologies to 
surpass many of the Major Ports performances. The Committee has been informed that 
Digital twin technology is operational at the GTI Private Terminal at Nhava Sheva as well as 
the latest Terminal Operating Systems, navigation simulation for training, etc. 
(Para 152) 

40 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
37.1    Noted. 
  
Recommendation/Observation 
38.      The Committee also observes that upgrading skill sets of employees and training 
programmes for the future workforce would be crucial to keep pace with the digitalization of 
the maritime sector. The Committee recommends that the Ministry and the Major Port 
Authorities should partner with Maritime Institutes fo r conduct of training and capacity 
building programmes for port employees.  
(Para 154) 
Reply of the Ministry 
38.1    Port officials are being nominated for various training programmes   conducted by 
various external agencies like JNPA -Antwerp Training Centre, IMU Chennai etc. in various 
fields to update their knowledge, skills and abilities to facilitate the development and growth 
of the port. 
  
NATIONAL HYDROGEN MISSION 
Recommendation/Observation 
39.      The Committee notes the targets set by the Ministry for Green and Sustainable Ports. 
As per the requirement of the Committee, the Ministry has provided details of the status of the 
Environment Performance Indicators of some of the Major Ports(Annexure XI). The 
Committee notes that the figures prese nt a dismal picture. Some Ports like Deendayal and 
New Mangalore Ports have achieved 100% targets in renewable energy while many ports for 
example, Chennai port, VoC Port, Mormugao Port have barely achieved 4 -6% of the target. 
Paradip Port has achieved onl y 0.60% of the target. The Committee further notes that the 
target of usage of renewable energy in ports to 60% by 2030 i.e. within a span of seven years 
appears to be unrealistic giventhat the usage of renewable energy at present by most Major 
Ports is in the range of 10- 12% only.  
(Para 169) 
Reply of the Ministry 
39.1    Three major ports, namely New Mangalore, Deendayal, and Visakhapatnam, are 
currently generating surplus renewable energy. Additionally, other ports are actively working 
to augment their share of renewable energy. This increase will be facilitated through t he 
installation of new renewable energy power plants by the ports themselves or by procuring 
grid power from renewable energy sources. In the upcoming days, the development of green 
energy in the country is poised for substantial growth. Ports will also ha ve the opportunity to 
access renewable energy generated from anywhere in the country through the Central 

41 
 
Transmission Unit (CTU) system. These efforts are aligned with the targets established in the 
Green Port Guidelines. 
 Inputs received from Ports: 
JNPA 
• JNPA is the first major port who has entered into Distribution Franchisee (DF) 
agreement with DISCOM. DF has been operationalized in January 2023.  
• According to the regulations of Distribution Franchisee (DF), only Consumers under 
DF can go for Open Access PPA but DF itself not as a whole. 
• Now as per the conditions, any individual PPP Terminal Operator (Consumer under 
DF) can go for open access with renewable (Green) energy PPA subject to their feasibility.  
• As JNPA is DF, with present Renewable Energy (RE) Regulations in place, share of 
renewable energy may not increase beyond 50-60% of total power requirement (in KWH) i.e. 
even under Open Access PPA. Unless storage type grids are made available to increase in 
share of Renewable Energy (RE) but beyond certain limit is difficult. 
• It may please be noted that Deendayal Port is a Distribution Licensee (DL). 
Therefore, they can show their entire Energy consumption as RE through Power Purchase 
Agreement (PPA). Hence 100% RE status.  
• At JNPA, already 2 PPP Terminal operators are in the advance stage for processing of 
Green PPA. Other PPP Terminal Operators are also planning to go for Green PPA through 
Open Access Regulations.  
• At present JNPA total Solar Power installed capacity is 4.10 MWp and 1.5 MWp 
installations is in progress.  
• Therefore, after entering of all these Major consumers in Green Power Purchase 
Agreement through Open Access Regulations, it is expected that Renewable Energy share of 
entire JNPA will be in tune of 50-60% by 2030. 
KPL 
KPL has installed 300KWp ground mounted solar power plant in RESCO 
Model which fulfills 50% of its captive usage. KPL is in the process of enhancing its 
renewable power capacity. ROT operator M/s AdaniEnnore Container Terminal Pvt Ltd and 
Captive user M/s Indian Oil LNG Pvt Ltd have installed portable solar power plants in their 
respective terminals premises which fulfill 30% of their captive usage. KPL has advised all 
the other Terminal operators to transit to renewable energy from conventional energy 
consumption. 
MoPA 
MoPA is in the process of installing a 3 MW solar power plant by end of 2024, thereby 
achieving 100% usage of Renewable Energy. 
 

42 
 
NMPA 
NMPA has  already  achieved  100%  in  usage  of  renewable  energy  by 
generating 5.19 MW solar power from the solar power plant and roof top solar panels at the 
Port. 
VOCPA 
Following Renewable energy projects are commissioned: 
•   640 KW roof top solar plant 
•   5 MW Ground based solar Further 2 MW wind energy farm is on the verge of completion. 
Hence on commi ssioning 2 MW Wind Project VOCPA will able to meet its full electrical 
requirement (captive consumption) through Renewable Energy, with the present connected 
load. 
Tendering for Installation of 400 KW roof top solar is also under process. Development of 
50.9 MW Solar - Wind Hybrid power plant at CRZ lands of 
VOCPA through PPP mode is under process. 
Development of Green Hydrogen Hub at VOCPA - VOCPA has signed an MOU with NTPC 
Green Energy Limited, a subsidiary of NTPC Limited, to develop a Green Hydrogen Hub  at 
VOCPA. 
 The hub will produce Green Hydrogen and its derivatives such as Green Ammonia and 
Green Methanol for both domestic and export use. 
 
VPA 
Port of Visakhapatnam commissioned 10 MW solar Power project with a 
power generation of about 178 lakh units  per annum and connected to the grid. The plant is 
meeting the entire power requirement of the port making itself sufficient. The power 
generated over and above the requirement of the port is being supplied to the pooled bank. 
MbPA 
Presently MbPA is using 90% renewable energy of our own. 
ChPA 
As per the feasibility study carried out by the Consultants M/s. KITCO, 500 Kw Roof top 
solar power system was installed in the total available area at Chennai Port in a phased 
manner during the year 2016 (100 Kw) and 2018 (400 Kw). From the installed 500 Kw 
capacity roof fop solar system 6.5 lakh units per annum is being generated. 
 However, it is planned providing additional roof top solar system in the upcoming 4 nos. 
eximgodowns and 2 nos. existing godowns. Feasibil ity study by engaging consultant during 
the construction of eximgodowns construction work will be made. 
 

43 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
40.      The targets achieved so far by ports are very low in case of reduction in CO2 
emissions and reduction in GHG emissions. Besides, in case of Green Hydrogen/Ammonia 
bunkers, most Major Ports are still in the planning stage. The target of reduction in carbon 
emissions by 30% taking 2023 as the Baseline Year also appears to be over -optimistic as the 
only major initiative in this direction is the Shore to Ship Power supply.  
(Para 170) 
Reply of the Ministry 
40.1    All Major ports are in the process of study for establishing the baseline for carbon 
reduction in GHG emission. Three major Ports namely Deendayal, Paradip,  and VOC Ports 
have been identified as Hydrogen Hub and export terminal for Green Hydrogen and its 
derivatives along with the development of Hydrogen /Ammonia bunkering facilities. To 
reduce the carbon emission various measures such as use of renewable ene rgy, shore to ship 
power, adoption of green alternate fuel in port crafts, electrification of cranes and vehicles etc 
have been taken by the major ports. 
 Inputs received from ChPA: 
Chennai Port is already providing power supply to the Port crafts and Navy  vessel shore to 
ship power supply. However, action is being taken for creation of shore power supply facility 
at WQ III & IV wharf for Andaman passenger vessel and research vessel. 
  
Recommendation/Observation 
41.      The Committee would also like to know the number of EV charging Stations by 2025 
which would be considered adequate as the data provided by the Ministry shows the present 
status to be 01 in JNPA, 02 in New Mangalore and 01 in Kamarajar Port only.  
(Para 172) 
Reply of the Ministry 
41.1    The number of EV charging stations at ports which would be considered adequate will 
vary depending on the specific needs of the port. However, efforts are underway to provide 
EV charging stations at all Major Ports by 2025. 
Inputs received from Ports:  
DPA 
At present contract of hiring of 64 Nos. of vehicles for the period of 03 years has been 
awarded to M/s.Rishabh Enterprises, Gandhidham. Out of these 64 Nos. of vehicles, 14 Nos. 
are Electric Vehicles. Accordingly, for charging of these Electric Vehicles,  07 charging 
points have been allotted. Further, there is proposal to hire 8 nos. EV Busses having 30 to 35 
seat capacity from Jan.2024 onwards, for which the invitation of Tender is under process. 
 

44 
 
JNPA 
• At JNPA One EV Charging Station is already installed and working satisfactorily. 
• Another EV Charging Station is planned to be installed inside port area in Q2-2024. 
• In future depending upon the requirement additional EV charging facilities will be 
provided. 
KPL 
KPL has  already  established  one  EV  Charging  station  to  charge  the 
Electrically operated vehicles deployed for Solid Waste Management within the port. KPL is 
in the process of establishing more points inside the Port premises to facilitate Automobiles 
exporters / importers. 
MoPA 
Adequate number of EV charging stations will be installed by 2025. 
 NMPA 
The Port has provided 8 charging stations for charging E-vehicles. 
VOCPA 
VOCPA has already installed 5 Nos. of Charging stations at various locations and the facility 
will be available for charging the cars moving in and out of the Port. 
VPA 
As on date, there is no EV charging stations at VPA Port operational areas. 
However, towards sustainability of Green energy, steps are being taken to setup phase wise 
installation of EV charging sta tions at identified locations as replacement of conventional 
energy to attain Zero Carbon emission by 2025. 
MbPA 
MbPA has appointed consultant for installation of EV charging facilities andShore to Ship 
power supply. 
ChPA 
There is a plan to explore the fea sibility of hiring / purchasing electric vehicles for inner 
harbour movement work along with EV charging station. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
42.      Zero-carbon fuels and technologies are not currently available at the size, scale or 
price, the shipping industry needs for wide-scale adoption. For a ship to be zero emissions, it 
must be capable of operating on fuels like green hydrogen which produces ze ro carbon 
emissions. The Ministry has stated that the Cochin Shipyard is building a hydrogen fuel cell 
powered ferry vessel as a pilot project and all tests & trials for using the same for marine 

45 
 
application will be completed by end of August, 2023. At the  timeof Demands for Grants 
2023-24, the Committee had been informed that the project had been stalled and funds were 
unutilized due to non -availability of special grade aluminium plates. The Committee desires 
to know the exact status in the matter.  
(Para 173) 
Reply of the Ministry 
42.1    Currently the project is in the final stage of completion with the hydrogen  fuel cell 
system‟s Factory Acceptance Test (FAT) is completed and the system integrated with the 
ship systems and the vessel was launched in water on November 01, 2023. The vessel is now 
preparing towards sea trials and  operation trials at Kochi backwaters which is scheduled to 
commence from  first week of December 2023 for a minimum period of four weeks for 
demonstration and stabilization of the systems. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
43.      The Committee observes that the Ministry has issued guidelines and set targets but 
does not appear to have formulated a Green Policy. The Committee refers to the green 
initiatives of the Maritime and Port Authority (MPA) of Singapore and Port of Rotterdam 
placed at Annexure XII. The Committee recommends that the Ministry may form a similar 
blueprint for reduction of CO2 from different spheres of port activity rather than having a 
total reduction which may b e more difficult to implement. The Committee also recommends 
that the Ministry may form a Green Policy comprising green initiatives and targets for 
different aspects of the port sector. The Committee also desires to know the infrastructure 
planned or devel oped for the green energy of the future as timely development of such 
infrastructure would be crucial for timely implementation of green policies. The Port of 
Rotterdam for instance is working on a public hydrogen pipeline through the port which in 
the future will be connected to the national and international hydrogen network.  
(Para 175) 
Reply of the Ministry 
43.1    The Ministry has laid out a comprehensive framework through the introduction of the 
Green Port Guidelines. Under these guidelines, major por ts have been entrusted with the 
responsibility of adopting appropriate mechanisms to incentivize various stakeholders, 
including shipping lines, exporters/importers, stevedores, PPP operators, and others. The goal 
is to foster green shipping and sustainabl e practices within the ports. While the ministry has 
provided a foundational framework in the form of the Green Port guidelines, it's important to 
note that ports have the flexibility to formulate their own Green Policy. This individualized 
approach allows each port to effectively work towards achieving the targets outlined in these 
guidelines. 
 

46 
 
ACTS AND LEGISLATIONS, MODEL CONCESSIONAIRE AGREEMENTAND 
THE ISSUES IN PRIVATE PUBLIC PARTNERSHIPS 
LANDLORD PORT MODEL 
Recommendation/Observation 
44.      The Committee observes that the operational cost of a PPP operated berth will be 
substantially lower compared to a port operated berth due to several reasons like less 
number of staff employed, improved productivity due to adoption of technology, etc. 
There is  no cost involved to the Port Authority as the entire cost of port operations is 
undertaken by the PPP operator. The Landlord Port Model has been a successful global 
practice and the Committee recommends that the Ministry may make all -out efforts to 
implement the model in the remaining Major Ports.  
(Para 187) 
Reply of the Ministry 
44.1    Noted. As per MIV 2030, significant progress has been made with respect to PPP in 
the ports sector in the last 15 years. Currently, approximately 28% of the berths across  Major 
Ports are under PPP/captive mode which handles around 51% of the total cargo.  Major Ports 
have prioritized more private sector participation with focus to drive operational efficiency 
and to move to a landlord model. Details are provided in the reply of para 121 above. 
  
 REVIEW PROVISIONS UNDER MAJOR CONCESSION ACT  
 
Recommendation/Observation 
45.      Upon enquiry by the Committee, the Ministry has submitted that the MCA, 2021 has 
been made more investor friendly. In the new MCA, 2021 the total project cost shall be 
deemed to be modified to the extent of variation in Price Index occurring in respect of 
Adjusted Equity as defined in Article 1.1, The revised MCA, 2021 also provides for payment 
of Royalty by private operators to port on per Million Ton of Cargo handled instead of 
Percentage of Gross Revenue Basis. As per Article 9.2 clause (c), royalty per MT of 
Cargo/TEUs will be indexed to as per variations in the Wholesale Price Index (WPI) 
annually as declared by the Ministry of Commerce and Indu stry. The royalty payment to 
ports will undergo the same variation as WPI variation which is a rise for general inflation 
and is not an increase on royalty. Regarding Schemes like Export Promotion Capital Goods 
(EPCG) and Service Export from India Scheme ( SEIS), they are operated by the Ministry of 
Commerce and Industry.  
(Para 200) 
Reply of the Ministry 

47 
 
45.1    Noted. Mechanism for royalty payment as a bid parameter has been kept as per the 
demand of market and to keep the revenue sharing as a standardised  parameter with 
transparency. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
46.      The Committee observes that while clauses relating to Amendments, Modifications etc 
are built into almost every agreement or contract, at the same time Agreements have a 
certain sanctity and adherence to its conditions is always expected. A Concession Agreement 
is signed, knowing fully well the duration of the contract, the market conditions and the risks 
involved and it is expected that the Concessionaire evaluated all costs and benefits at the 
time of the agreement.  
(Para 201) 
Reply of the Ministry 
46.1    Noted. 
  
Recommendation/Observation 
47.      As such, Private Public Partnerships require a framework that would enable the 
private sector partner to secure a reasonable return while enabling value addition for public 
resources. This can only be achieved by establishing clear and transparent norms for the 
PPP and by entering into unambiguous and specific contractual relationship. Concession 
Agreements are generally made for 30 years an d with the rapidly changing market scenario, 
every change cannot be anticipated at the bidding stage in contractsspanning three decades. 
In fact private players are now looking for even longer concession periods in the port sector. 
The Adani Ports and Spec ial Economic Zone (APSEZ) has won a bid to build a Greenfield 
port in Tajpur, West Bengal for aConcession period of 99 years. The MCA, 2021 also has 
provisions for 45 years Concession Period for multi -phase investments. The port sector is 
capital intensive and longer Concession periods which would lead to gestation for a larger 
Capital cycle may become the norm in future. It is unimaginable that the conditions 
prevailing at the time of the Agreement would remain the same in the next century.  
(Para 202) 
Reply of the Ministry 
47.1    Reply already given at para 200. 
  
Recommendation/Observation 
48.      Regarding the argument that the Port Authorities are reluctant to make changes due to 
audit/vigilance, the Committee observes that the issue of Royalty or revenue share raised 
above had, in fact been raised by the CAG in its 2015 Performance Audit Report o f Public 
Private Partnership Projects. The project under examination of the CAG was the agreement 

48 
 
of the JNPA with the Nhava Sheva International ContainerTerminal (NSICT) for operation of 
a Container Terminal where the JNPA had switched to the revenue shar ing model after 18 
years of operation from the earlier royalty model due to high royalty rate per TEU which 
increased progressively. The CAG had commented adversely on the design deficiencies of the 
model due to which the port had to migrate to the revenue  share mode after 18 years of 
operation. The CAG had also commented that a PPP Project would succeed only if the risks 
are uniformly apportioned between the two parties and that a Concession Agreement is 
unlikely to succeed if it has conditions which are harsh on the operator.  
(Para 203) 
Reply of the Ministry 
48.1    Noted. 
  
Recommendation/Observation 
49.      In the considered opinion of the Committee, much of the issues arising from the 
Concession Agreements can be avoided by adopting the right models for the project from the 
beginning and ensuring that the Concessionaire Agreements retain an element of flexibility to 
incorporate necessary changes which would benefit both parties. Rigid Agreements have the 
potential to defeat the purpose of successful P PP partnerships. While the provisions of the 
Agreement should be largely adhered to, no purpose is served by an unyielding observance of 
faulty policies. The Committee recommends that the Ministry may examine the issues raised 
by the IPPTA in the light of the above position.  
(Para 204) 
Reply of the Ministry 
49.1    As time progresses, every policy requires revision. Scope of refinement always 
remains in all policies depending upon market demand or unexpected change of scenarios. 
Ministry has carefully examined the issues arising from the past Concession Agreements, and 
ministry believed by adopting the right models for the project from the beginning and 
ensuring that the Concessionaire Agreements retain an element of flexibility to incorporate 
necessary changes, which would balance the risk and benefit both parties i.e. Concessioning 
Authority and Concessionaire. In this regard, the Model Concession Agreement of 2018 was 
also modified in November, 2021, with due diligence and stakeholder consultation. Th e 
market has positively responded which has been experienced in the recently concluding 
bidding process.  Moreover, stakeholder grievances or suggestion are normally considered by 
the government depending upon the feasibility and viability. 
  
INITIATIVES FOR LEGAL DISPUTES AND ARBITRATION 
Recommendation/Observation 
50.      The Committee observes that a thorough discussion on all aspects of a proposed 
policy with all stakeholders and taking into consideration the viewpoints of the stakeholders 

49 
 
should be sufficient to make a policy which would address all the concernsof the stakeholders 
to the extent possible. It is understandable that once a policy is in place, the Government 
does not wish to make frequent changes in it. However, the success of the PPP pr ojects is 
essential for the achievement of the Maritime India Vision and the Ministry should make 
every effort to address the stakeholders’ concerns. The Committee recommends that in case 
of contentious issues emerging from the discussions with the stakeho lders, the Ministry may 
again consult the stakeholders and try to resolve their concerns. The Committee also 
recommends that the Ministry may explore the possibility of creating a standing mechanism 
consisting of representatives of the Ministry, concerned Port and the PPP Operators to 
discuss outstanding issues at specified periodic intervals so that issues can be settled at an 
early stage without resorting to arbitration which has not proved to be very successful.  
(Para 208) 
Reply of the Ministry 
50.1    Noted. MoPSW has announced the revised Model Concession Agreement (MCA) - 
2021 on 18th November, 2021. Article 19 has the mechanism for dispute resolution. In case 
of a dispute between the parties,  
 a)            The parties shall first meet so as to disc uss and resolve the matter in mutual 
agreement.  
b)            If above fails, the Concessionaire may agree to refer the matter to a conciliation and 
settlement committee established by the Concessioning Authority in line with the Arbitration 
and Conciliation Act, 2015.  
c)            In case both above processes fail, the dispute shall be referred to SAROD – Ports.  
d)            In the event of constitution of a statutory Adjudicatory Board as per provision of 
Major Port Authorities Act, 2021 or such othe r forum with powers to receive and adjudicate 
upon disputes between the Concessionaire and the Concessioning Authority, all disputes not 
settled through conciliation, can alternatively be referred to the Adjudicatory Board or such 
other forum with mutual consent of the parties in accordance with the applicable laws. 
e)            Both parties can challenge the award in a Court of Law in case they are aggrieved 
with award. Approaching SAROD Ports or CSC depends on mutual agreement between the 
Port Authority and the Concessionaire. The Ministry in holistic manner considers issues 
necessitating any policy amendments or formulations. 
  
Recommendation/Observation 
51.      The Committee observes that the Adjudicatory Board was introduced under the Major 
Port Authorities Act, 2021 and yet no Board has been formed as yet. The Committee desires 
to know the reasons for non -formation of the Board and recommends that the same may be 
constituted at the earliest. 
(Para 210) 
Reply of the Ministry 

50 
 
51.1    The Major Port Authorities Act, 2021 was notified on 18.02.2021 and came into force 
on 03.11.2021. Section 54 of the Act provides for constitution of Adjudicatory Board which 
will replace the tariff authority for Major Ports (TAMP). Accordingly, the Major Ports 
Adjudicatory Board Rules 2023 were notified on 17.01.2023.  
51.2 The Rules lay down that the Presiding Officer and Members of the Adjudicatory 
Board shall be appointed by the Central Government on the recommendations of a Selection 
Committee headed by Chief Justice of India or his Nominee. Accordingly, the Supreme Court 
of India has nominated a sitting Judge as Chairperson of the Selection Committee. 
51.3 The Ministry thereafter through advertisement in newspapers invited applications for 
the Post of Presiding Officer and Members of the Adjudicatory Board. The Ministry also 
wrote to the different High Courts of India to forward names of retired Chief Justices of High 
Courts for consideration as Presiding Officer of the Adjudicatory Board.  
51.4 The list of retired Chief Justices received from different High Courts for the post of 
Presiding Officer and eligible candidates for the post of Members have been forwarded to the 
Supreme Court for convening a meeting of the Selection Committee. 
  
Recommendation/Observation 
52.      Of the dispute mechanisms, it appears that only the Conciliation and Settlement 
Committees have had reasonable success in the resolution of disputes. The Ministry has 
provided information that out of 43 cases referred to  the CSC, 15 have been resolved while 8 
are at final stages of settlement. The Committee recommends that the Ministry may provide 
all assistance to such Committee for their functioning and ensure that Port Authorities have 
no hesitation either in referring  the disputes to these Committees or in implementing their 
decisions.  
(Para 211) 
Reply of the Ministry 
52.1    Noted.  Indian Ports Association (IPA) has been providing administrative support to 
CSC. 
  
  
Recommendation/Observation 
53.      The Committee also notes that the vision is to have 85% PPP partnerships in Major 
Port projects by 2030. The increase in the number of partnerships would throw up more 
issues between the parties which would need successful arbitration otherwise more projects 
would get b ogged down in arbitration issues. The Committee recommends that the Ministry 
pay adequate attention to resolution of arbitration issues and setting up of successful forums 
for arbitration for implementation of PPP projects.  
(Para 212) 

51 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
53.1    Noted.  Board of the Major Ports is empowered in MPA Act 2021 to take a call on the 
arbitration issues through various already established mechanism. MoPSW has announced 
the revised Model Concession Agreement (MCA) - 2021 on 18thNovember, 2021. Article 19 
has the mechanism for dispute resolution. In case of a dispute between the parties,  
 a)    The parties shall first meet so as to discuss and resolve the matter in mutual agreement.  
b)    If above fails, the Concessionaire may agree to refer the matter to a conciliation and 
settlement committee established by the Concessioning Authority in line with the Arbitration 
and Conciliation Act 2015.  
c)    In case both above processes fail, the dispute shall be referred to SAROD – Ports.  
d)    In the event of constitution of a statutory Adjudicatory Board as per provision of Major 
Port Authorities Act, 2021 or such other forum with powers to receive and adjudicate upon 
disputes between the Concessionaire and the Concessioning Authority, all disputes not settled 
through conciliation, can alternatively be referred to the Adjudicatory Board or such other 
forum with mutual consent of the parties in accordance with the applicable laws. 
e)    Both p arties can challenge the award in a Court of Law in case they are aggrieved with 
award. Approaching SAROD Ports or CSC depends on mutual agreement between the Port 
Authority and the Concessionaire.  
 
53.2 Ministry interventions are normally not necessary a s concessions are governed by the 
provision of Concession Agreement signed between the Concessioning Authority and 
Concessionaire. The Ministry in holistic manner considers issues necessitating any policy 
amendments or formulations. 
  
PORT EMPLOYEES WELFARE 
Recommendation/Observation 
54.      Upon enquiry by the Committee, the Ministry gave details of the sanctioned strength of 
employees and vacancies at the 12 Major Ports (ANNEXURE XV). The Committee observes 
that a majority of the Major Ports have a  shortfall of vacancies and some like the Mumbai 
Port, SMPK, Cochin Port, Paradip Port and Chennai Port have about half of the sanctioned 
posts vacant. The Committee desires to be informed about the reason for the large number of 
vacancies, the duration fo r which the posts have been vacant and the timeline by which the 
vacancies are likely to be filled up. The Committee observes that JNPA and SMPK have 
employed a large number of contractual workers, presumably against the vacant regular 
posts. The Committee also observes that there appears to be a great disparity in the number 
of employed personnel across the ports. For instance, Kamarajar Port, VoC Port and JNPA 
have sanctioned strengths of only 92, 458 and 1660 employees respectively while Mumbai 
port and SMPK have sanctioned strengths of 7417 and 10,096 of which as stated earlier 
about half are vacant. Even keeping in view the varying capacities and traffic handled by the 

52 
 
ports, the disparity in number of employees is striking. The Committee observes that 
automation and mechanization of operations in ports like JNPA have reduced the employee 
strength. The private ports of Pippavav and Jaigarh in Gujarat have employee strengths of 
500 and 1700, respectively.  
(Para 213) 
Reply of the Ministry 
54.1    The reasons for large number of vacancies in Major Port Authorities is due to 
superannuation of the personnel employed in the port. Further, the strength in some ports 
have also been reduced due to Special Voluntary Retirement Scheme (SVRS). The proposals 
received from Major Port Authorities for filling up the vacant posts are considered from time 
to time and as per requirements keeping in view the technological advances and 
mechanization in port sector. Thus, the right sizing of manpower in Major Ports is bein g 
decided in consultation with Major Port Authorities. 
  
Recommendation/Observation 
55.      The Committee notes the different Welfare Schemes for the Shipbuilding, Ship 
breaking and Dock Workers. The Committee desires to know whether residential quarters are 
provided to the employees and whether skill development courses are offered for upgradation 
of their skills. The Committee also desires to know whether the contractual workers are given 
the same benefits as regular workers. 
(Para 215) 
  
Reply of the Ministry 
55.1    The residential quarters are being provided to eligible employees at various Major Port 
Authorities and with regard to skill development courses, training program for officers and 
staff (including contractual) are provided for upgradation of skills of employees and officers. 
  
  

53 
 
 CHAPTER-III 
  
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
THE MINISTRY HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
  
CAPACITY OF MAJOR PORTS 
Recommendation/Observation 
1.        The Committee observes that while port capacity is considered to be saturated at 70 -
75% of capacity, some of the Major Ports are functioning far below the mark. Mormugao 
operates at only 27% capacity, while Chennai and VoCA operate just at 32%.. 
 (Para 18) 
Reply of the Ministry 
1.1      The capacity of Major Ports has been re -rated with respect to global bench marks as 
per Berthing Policy 2016. The actual usable capacity of the ports is lower than the re -rated 
capacity. Hence, the utilization percentage against actual usable capa city is higher in these 
ports. However, a number of factors contribute to the low capacity utilization at these ports, 
including restrictions imposed by Goa State Pollution Control Board for handling cargo at 
Mooring Dolphins and other berths, single Railw ay line from Vasco to Tinaighat, challenges 
due to common hinterland and competition from other ports. The ports are taking steps to 
improve their capacity utilization, such as mechanizing berths, converting berths into 
container terminals, and promoting the use of oil jetties. 
1.2 Marmugao Port Authority (MoPA): Mormugao Port operates at 68% of its Usable 
Capacity, and 27% of its Re -rated capacity. The capacity as per CTO at Mooring Dolphins is 
only 4.75 as against re -rated capacity of 18.50 Milliontones. A lso seen from the table the 
rerated capacity of berth no 6, 7 and 8 is 17.40, 13.70 and 5.20 respectively as against usable 
capacity of 6.50, 5.20 and 1.00 Milliontones. Thus due to the restrictions imposed by Goa 
State Pollution Control Board for handling  cargo at Mooring Dolphins and other berths, Port 
is unable to handle cargo beyond the prescribed limit by GSPCB. Due to single Railway line 
from Vasco to Tinaighat, Mormugao Port is unable to evacuate cargo effectively through 
rakes. This affects the disc harge of vessel as it cannot discharge the cargo in stockyard, 
unless the cargo from the yard is evacuated. Details may be seen at Annexure-1. 
 
1.3 VO Chidambarnar Port Authority (VOCPA) 
VOC Port‟s has the rated capacity of 111.46 MMT and Usable Capacity o f81.47 MMT in FY 
2022-23. Against the Usable Capacity of 81.47 MMT, VOC Port has achieved the utilization 
of 46.7% in FY 2022 -23 by handling 38.04 MMT. Further, it is informed that 5 Port viz., 
Cochin, Chennai, Kattupalli, Ennore and Karaikal are competing  with VOC Port for the 
Common Hinterland Cargo Traffic. 

54 
 
 In-depth breakup of the Rated Capacity, Usable Capacity and its utilization are furnished at 
Annexure-2. 
a. Captive Berths are operated by Power plants and are functioning to its requirements and its  
coal needs / availability. 
b. Container terminals are operating at the Capacity of above 75% and to cater to the 
increasing container handling needs, action has been taken to convert the Port operated berth 
into an additional Container Terminal and Conces sion agreement in this regard was signed 
with M/s J M Baxi Ports & Logistics Limited on 03.09.2022. 
c. Tender for mechanization of the North Cargo Berth -III is in process. 
d. Oil jetty is being used for handling the defined cargoes and its promotion to im prove its 
utilization has been taken up. 
e.            One Berth, NCB II which was under PPP is presently non - operational and is under 
NCLT. 
f. Further, Berth Utilization was measured based on the tonnage basis. However, certain 
cargoes like Windmill Blades& Machinery, Iron and Steel, RoRo -Rock Boulders and other 
break bulk cargo have lesser handling rate and higher berth occupancy, which impacts the 
capacity utilization to a certain degree. Hence, based on the nature of cargo being handled at 
the Port, Berth Utilization and its occupancy differ across Ports. 
 
1.4 Chennai Port Authority (ChPA) 
The Capacity Utilization of Chennai Port during the last 3 years ending FY2022 -23 
has been 42%, 47% and 47% respectively at desired (ideal) occupancy level (85% f or 
Containerized Cargo & 70% for Other Cargoes). The national average of Capacity Utilization 
of Major Ports as observed in the report is only 49%. The marginal shortfall is only due to the 
common hinterland being shared by 3 major ports & 2 private ports operating in the state of 
Tamil Nadu and the ports in the adjacent states of Kerala, Andhra Pradesh and Karnataka.  
  
Further Recommendation/ Observation 
1.5      The Committee appreciates the steps being taken by ports to improve their 
capacity utilization, mechanization of berths, promotion of use of oil jetties etc and 
desires to know if any action has been taken to resolve the issue of  the single railway 
line from Vasco to Tinaighat which is hindering the evacuation of cargo and such other 
port specific issues which are contributing to the low capacity utilization of ports.  
  
Recommendation/Observation 
2.        The Committee observes that there is still much untapped potential to be harnessed so 
as to increase the capacity of most of the Maj or Ports. The Committee points out that the 
capacity utilization of the Non -Major Ports in India has remained at 64%, which is much 

55 
 
higher than the average capacity utilization in the Major Ports and recommends that the 
Major Ports may set targets to incre ase the utilization of their existing capabilities to an 
optimum level.  
 (Para 19) 
Reply of the Ministry 
2.1      Major ports have experienced remarkable traffic growth of approximately 10% during 
the fiscal year 2022 -23. Recognizing the importance of accommodating future demand in 
light of this substantial growth, it has become imperative to ensure spare capacity. To address 
this need, we are focusing on capacity expansion on two fronts: firstly, by introducing new 
berths, and secondly, by optimizing o ur existing infrastructure through the mechanization of 
berths, deepening of channels, and enhancing evacuation capacity. These strategic initiatives 
are vital for not only sustaining our current momentum but also for effectively meeting the 
increasing demands of the future. 
  
Further Recommendation/ Observation 
2.2      The Committee appreciates the capacity expansion initiatives taken by the 
Ministry and the Major Ports but the Ministry has not commented on the much higher 
capacity utilization in the Non -Major Ports, pointed out by the Committee. The 
Committee recommends that the Ministry may evaluate the reasons for the higher 
capacity utilization in Non -Major Ports and incorporate the same if possible, in their 
initiatives for capacity expansion. 
  
TURNAROUND TIME AND AVERAGE SHIP OUTPUT PER BERTH DAY 
Recommendation/Observation 
3.        The Committee notes that while the TRT may have come down considerably from 80 -
90 hours, there has been only marginal improvement in the last five years despite the massive 
investments in technology, mechanization and infrastructure. Of the 12 Major Ports, only 3 -4 
are functioning well with acceptable performances. The performance of other Major Ports in 
Turn Around Time must attract the undivided attention of the res pective Port authorities in 
the larger interest of ensuring greater operational efficiency.  
 (Para 25) 
Reply of the Ministry 
3.1      The average total Turn Around Time (TRT) has improved from 59.51 hrs. to 52.43 
hrs. in last five years showing around 12%  improvement. Most of the Major Ports have 
shown improvement in TRT during the last 5 years and Ports are taking various steps such as 
mechanization of berths, deepening of draft, and digitalization of processes and procedures to 
further improve the TRT. 
  

56 
 
Further Recommendation/ Observation 
3.2      The Committee reiterates its opinion that the improvement of Turn Around Time 
(TRT) from 59.51 hours to 52.43 hours is only marginal and falls far short of 
international benchmark for TRT.  Even this marginal i mprovement is only in some 
Major Ports.  The Committee reiterates its recommendation that the Ministry make all 
efforts to ensure that all Major Ports function with greater operational efficiency.   
  
Recommendation/Observation 
4.        The Committee note s that every year, each Major Port enters into a MoU with the 
Ministry in which targeted efficiency parameters are agreed upon. The Committee desires to 
know the targets set for all four efficiency parameters and whether the ports have achieved 
the same. The Committee observes that due to infrastructure development and technological 
advancements, a proportional increase in productivity is only expected. As such productivity 
enhancement is invariably contingent upon and commensurate with the volume of investment. 
The Committee draws the attention of the Ministry to the imperative need for targeted 
performance by the major ports as agreed to in the MoU and recommends that each Major 
Port may fix a target proportional to the amount of investments in infrastruct ural 
development. 
 (Para 28) 
Reply of the Ministry 
4.1      Based on the achievement, the proportional targets for the major ports have been fixed 
by the Ministry. The target and achievement of major ports for the FY 2022 -23 are given at 
Annexure-3. 
DPA: The target set by Ministry for volume of cargo / efficiency parameters, during FY 
2022-23 vis-a-vis the achievements is appended at Annexure-4. 
JNPA: For the year 2023 -24, MoPSW has fixed the target for JNPA. The target for 2023 -24 
is at Annexure-5. 
 KPL: KPL signed a MoU with Ministry of Ports, Shipping & Waterways for the first time in 
the financial year 2006 -07. Since then, MoU with Ministry of Ports, Shipping & Waterways 
has been executed till the financial year 2019-20. 
Consequent to the disinvestment process in March 2020, Chennai Port Authority owns 100% 
shares of KPL and thus KPL has become a Company of Chennai Port Authority. 
Accordingly, KPL is signing the MoU with Chennai Port Authority from the financial year 
2020-21. 
 
MoPA: The targets set and achieved are shown in Annexure-6. 
VOCPA: Targets set for FY 2022-23and achievements are furnished at Annexure-7. 

57 
 
VPA: During the year 2022-23 there is no MoU with the Ministry. However, the achievement 
against the target enunciated by VPT on four parameters is at Annexure-8. 
However, Port targets in respect of cargo: 83 Million Tones, ship berth day output (OSBD) 
16000 Tonnes, turnaround time: 65 hours, pre -berthing delay: 1.2 hours and idle time: 14% 
for FY 2023-24 has been finalized by the Ministry. 
MbPA: The targets set and achieved is shown at Annexure-9 
ChPA: The committee has observed that each Major Port enters intoanMoU with the 
Ministry in which targeted efficiency parameters are agreed upon. In this regard, it is 
submitted that, the practice of ent ering into MoU with the Ministry had been dispensed with 
the preparation of Annual Results Framework Document (RFD) for each Ministry of the 
Government and their subordinate departments from the year 2012-13 to 2019-20. 
 Subsequently, from the year 2020 -21 Ministry has been reviewing and fixing the targets on 
Key Parameters of Physical & Financial Efficiency and Projects to be awarded & completed 
during the year. For the current year 2023 -24, Ministry of Ports, Shipping &Waterways vide, 
O.M. No. PD-24015/35/2023-PD-IV dated 01.05.2023 has forwarded the Port Targets for all 
the Major Ports in respect of Cargo Traffic, Ship Berthday Output (OSBD), Turn Round 
Time (TRT), Pre -berthing detention & Idle Time at berth and the same is being reviewed 
every month. 
  
Further Recommendation/ Observation 
4.2      The Committee notes that the Ministry has been fixing Port Targets on key 
parameters of Physical and Financial Efficiency for all Major Ports. Reviewing the 
statistics provided on individual Ports the Committee observes that some ports like 
MoPA, VoCPA, MbAA fall far short of the targets set by the Ministry.  The Committee 
desires to know the subsequent action taken by the Ministry in such cases.   
  
PORT CONNECTIVITY 
Recommendation/Observation 
5.        The Committee had also been informed in its meetings that despite having the requisite 
infrastructure and land, the Jaigarh port could not handle containers due to lack of major 
rail connectivity. The Committee observes that one of the main factors for the low cap acity 
utilization of the Ports pertains to absence of road and rail connectivityto the hinterland to 
cater to the emerging demands. The need for good rail and road port connectivity for hassle -
free cargo transport must assume importance. It should be the p riority of the Ministry to 
ensure proper connectivity to all ports, which would driveup the cargo traffic and increase 
the revenues from this sector. The Committee is pleased to note that the PM Gati Shakti 
Programme is taking up 101 connectivity projects for both Major and Minor Ports, and the 
SagarmalaProgramme is also addressing the road and rail connectivity infrastructure gaps 

58 
 
and recommends that the Ministry may ensure that all such projects are implemented on a 
priority basis in aTime-bound manner. 
 (Para 111) 
Reply of the Ministry 
5.1      Under PM Gati Shakti, a Comprehensive Port Connectivity Plan (CPCP)has been 
prepared by DPIIT in September 2022 in consultation with MoPSW, MoR, MoRTH, and 
State Maritime Boards. CPCP incorporates 298 connectivity projects, of which 191 projects 
(10l road and 90 rails) are under SagarmalaProgramme, and an additional 107 new 
connectivity infrastructure gaps (60 road and 47 rail. These infrastructure gap projects will be 
taken up by MoRTH and MOR as a priority. The rail connectivity to Jaigarh port is one of the 
infrastructure gaps identified in the CPCP. 
  
Further Recommendation/ Observation 
5.2      The Committee appreciates the initiative taken to address the infrastructure gaps 
in connectivity to ports and reiterat es that priority may be given to such projects for 
their time bound completion.  
  
PRIVATE PUBLIC SECTOR PARTNERSHIPS IN THE PORTS SECTOR 
Recommendation/Observation 
6.        The Committee observes that the investments through PPP mode in the last five years 
are a mere 8% of the total investments made in the projects at Major Ports. The Committee 
desires to know the status of the seven projects awarded from 2018-19 to 2021-22. 
 (Para 118) 
Reply of the Ministry 
6.1      The Current Status of PPP Project awarded so far is at Annexure-12. 
  
Further Recommendation/ Observation 
6.2      The Committee observes that all the 13 PPP projects including the 7 projects 
undertaken in the years 2018 -19 to 2021 -22 seem to have been finally awarded only in 
2022-23. The Committee wishes to know the reason for the delay in award of these 
projects and expresses its displeasure at the slow pace of progress in the PPP projects 
which defeats the very objective of resorting to the PPP mode of implementation.   
  
Recommendation/Observation 
7.        Regarding the Pipeline of 81 PPP projects for FY 2022 -21 to FY 2024 -25, only 12 
projects, which is less than 15%, have been awarded by 2022 -23, leaving 85% of the 81 

59 
 
projects in the Pipeline to be awarded till the next financial year.  The Committee also 
observes that 298 projects have been taken up under Sagarmala Scheme in the Major Ports 
out of which 140 have been completed, 78 are under implementation, 26 have been 
sanctioned, and the rest are still in planning stage. The Committee feels that the Ministry is 
not making enough efforts to achieve the targets set in the Maritime India Vision 2030 
regarding PPP projects.  
 (Para 119) 
Reply of the Ministry 
7.1      As far as the Pipeline of 81 PPP projects for FY 2022 -21 to FY 2024-25 is concerned, 
in total, there is a pipeline of 81 projects to be executed under PPP till FY 2025 under 
National Monetization Pipeline for capacity augmentation and berth development / 
modernization / mechanization. Out of this, 14 projects of value ~INR 10,743 crore have 
been awarded.  
7.2 24 projects of worth value ~INR 12,551 crore have been identified for FY22 -23 under 
NMP, their status till date as follows: 
•  13 projects of INR 8,68 7 Cr have already been approved and some are under bidding 
process  
•    2 projects of worth ~INR 2544 Cr. SFC/PPAC received and under consultation 
•    4 Projects worth ~827 Cr SFC proposal in pipeline 
•  3 projects worth ~156 Cr are under PGLM and 2 proj ects worth ~340 Cr are 
dropped/abeyance 
7.3 Out of 20 identified Projects under NMP of worth value ~INR6761 Cr for the 
FY2023-24, 03 projects of INR 716 cr have already been approved and are under bidding 
process. 1 project of worth ~INR 340 Cr. SFC/PPAC r eceived and under consultation. 8 SFC 
/ PPPAC Projects proposals costing ₹ 3,431 Cr are expected from Major Ports. 
7.4 Currently, there are 839 projects worth investment of ₹ 5.8 lakh Cr. For 
implementation under the SagarmalaProgramme. Out of these, 241 projects worth ₹1.23 lakh 
Cr. Have been completed and 234 projects worth ₹1.79 lakh Cr. Are under implementation. 
Further, 364 projects worth ₹ 2.78 lakh Cr. Are under various stages of development. It is 
pertinent to mention that projects are progressively added in the SagarmalaProgramme after 
consultation with the States/UTs and other stakeholders.  
7.5 The Ministry is st eadfastly committed to meet the goals set in the Maritime India 
Vision 2030 and are planning and taking actions to improve the maritime sector. By focusing 
on sustainable growth, better infrastructure, and new ideas, they aim to push India‟s maritime 
industry forward according to the Vision 2030.  
 Further Recommendation/ Observation 
7.6     The Committee notes the comments of the Ministry but reiterates its 
recommendation that the Ministry may step up its efforts with regard to 
implementation of PPP projects. 

60 
 
NATIONAL HYDROGEN MISSION 
Recommendation/Observation 
8.        The target for percentage of Port Equipment/vehicles electrified is more than 50% by 
2030 but the Cochin Port has achieved only 8%, VoC Port 9% and Kamarajar 5%. Mumbai 
and Mormugao have not yet achieved any target. 
 (Para 171) 
Reply of the Ministry 
8.1      All the ports are working towards the target of 50% electrification of port equipment 
and vehicles by 2030. This includes electrifying quay cranes, RTGCs, ITVs, grab unloaders, 
solid waste management vehicles, and inter -carting buses. Ports are also working with PPP 
operators to electrify their equipment. 
8.2 Mormugao Port is also planning to migrate to electric cars/jeeps in the ensuing hiring 
contracts. Mumbai Port does not own any e quipment for electrification. All Vehicles on hire 
will be turned in to electrical vehicle once current contract for the vehicles is over. 
8.3 Inputs received from Ports:  
KPL 
All Quay Cranes (RMQC), RTGC's and ITV's used for loading and unloading of Conta iners 
in the Port are fully electrified. The grab unloaders used for coal unloading operations are 
fully electrified. The Marine liquids unloaded from the Liquid terminal arc being transported 
to Tank farms through pipeline. KPL has deployed 3 Nos. of Elec trically operated vehicles 
for Solid Waste Management within the Port. KPL is in the process of deploying 2 Nos. of E -
buses (14seater) for inter carting of manpower. Presently, the percentage of Port 
equipment/vehicle electrified is 5% and KPL will take efforts to reach the target. 
 
MoPA 
It is planned to migrate to electric cars/jeeps in the ensuing hiring contracts for cars and jeeps 
ensuring achievement of the target of more than 50% electrification by 2030. 
 
VOCPA 
All the Port owned Wharf cranes are electrically operated. Further 6 Nos. of RMQCs & 9 
Nos. of RTGCs equipment deployed by PPP operators are electrically operated. All the 
equipment will be deployed on electrical mode through PPP in future. Transition of Port 
vehicles from conventional fuel to Electric Vehicles is implemented in phased manner. As on 
date, 6 e-cars are in service at VOCPA. Tenders are under process for 14 Nos. of E-cars and 4 
Nos. of E-buses, and after launch of these EVs by 2023/2024, 40% Electrification of the Port 
vehicles will be achieved. Hence, by 2030 VOCPA would achieve the target of 50 % 
electrification of Port equipment/ vehicles. 
 

61 
 
MbPA 
Target of 50% electrification of Port equipment / Vehicles by 2030 is well 
noted. MbPA does not own any equipment for electrification . All Vehicles on hire will be 
turned in to electrical vehicle once current contract for the vehicles is over. 
 
ChPA 
Action initiated to hire one or two Electric Vehicle to ply inside the Port. 
  
Further Recommendation/ Observation 
8.4      The Committee notes the submissions of the Ministry and reiterates its earlier 
observation that the Ministry and the Major Ports should make more efforts if the 
target for electrification of more than 50% of Port Equipment/ Vehicles is to be 
achieved. 
  
ISSUES ARISING OUT OF THE PROSPECTIVE APPLICATION OF THE 
NEWMODEL CONCESSION AGREEMENT 
Recommendation/Observation 
9.        The Committee had requested the Ministry to give its comments on the issue of 
extending the benefits of the MCA, 2021 to both the existing as well as newConcessionaires. 
The Ministry has put forth the arguments that the PPP projects are executed through 
Concession Agreements which are legally binding and are governed by the policies that are 
applicable in that time period. Any post - bid changes in theConcession Agreement is open to 
litigation. The Ministry has also informed that a Committee consisting of the Chairmen of 
VoCPA, ChPA& JNPA was constituted in May, 2023 for deliberation on whether the 
provisions of MCA, 2021 can be made retrospective and the report of that Committee is 
awaited. 
 (Para 191) 
10.      The Committee observes that the within the past two decades, the Model 
Concessionaire Agreement has been changed thrice, in 2008, 2018 and 2021 
(Comparative statement of the provisions of the three MCAs placed at Annexure XIV). The 
first revision came after a decade and brought only minor changes in a few of the provisions. 
The second revision came within 03 years and brought about a major overhaul in existing 
regulations, with the introduction of market based tariff fixation, abolition of the authority of 
TAMP, provisions for change in cargo, etc. It is not surprising that the existing 
Concessionaires find themselves in a disadvantageous position vis -a-vis the new 
Concessionaires under the MCA, 2021.  
 (Para 192) 

62 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
10.1    Noted. The proviso clause to Section 27(1) of the Major Port Authorities Act, 2021, 
provides freedom to the Concessionaire to fix tariff based on the market conditions.  
10.2 The existing PPP concessions would be governed by the respective signed Concession 
Agreement and tariff provisions contained in respective signed Concession Agreement and 
tariff guidelines, if any, stipulated at the time of the Concession agreement. Government of 
India requires the Project sponsors (Major Ports) to award PPP projects through a transparent 
open competitive bidding process, due diligence through DPR, research and analysis for both 
short and long term business continuity during concession period are part of this process. 
This is also to ensure greater transparency and consistency to the bid process and terms of 
contract, level playing field to all players, throughout the project life cycle and market 
discovery of rates.  Hence, saying existing Concessionaires are in a disa dvantageous position 
vis-a-vis the new Concessionaires under the MCA, 2021 does not seem correct in full merit. 
  
Further Recommendation/ Observation 
10.3    The Committee may be informed of the report of the Committee for deliberating 
on the issue.   
  
Recommendation/Observation 
11.      The Committee also observes that the new Agreement was issued with the purpose of 
countering the lukewarm response of the private sector in PPP projects and to provide a 
framework to increase PPP participation to boost p ort performances. The Committee 
observes that in 2019, on the issue of periodic revision of SoR (Schedule of Rates) for land, it 
had been decided not to apply revision of SoR for land every 05 years for PPP projects as it 
may not be in the overall interest  of the Major Ports. TheCommittee feels that the 
retrospective application of the MCA, 2021 should be examined in the same spirit. The 
Concessions given to the private operators generally are passed on to exporters/importers by 
leveraging costs and therefo re the general public can only benefit by these measures. The 
Committee feels that the Ministry may take these concerns into account while examining the 
requests of the existingConcessionaires.  
 (Para 193) 
Reply of the Ministry 
11.1    In MCA 2021, the Concessionaire shall, as consideration for the use, in its capacity as 
a bare licensee of the Project Site and the equipment comprised in the Port‟s Assets, made 
available in accordance with Article 2.4, pay to the Concessioning Authority ₹ 1 (the 
“License Fee”). 
11.2 On the aspect of making enabling provisions to provide option to the existing PPP 
Concessionaires for migration to the market determined tariff regime, as has been done for 
the prospective bidders / concessionaires for new PPP projects, the majority of the  Major 

63 
 
Ports Chairpersons opined that such an arrangement would be desirable as it would provide a 
level playing field to the Concessionaires, presently being governed under different tariff 
norms, operating at a Port. However, considering the procedural c omplexities involved in 
drafting a workable solution within the framework of the existing rules and regulations, a 
detailed comprehensive study of the whole issue, including legal, financial and contractual 
aspects, would be advisable. 
11.3 Based on the vi ews expressed by Chairpersons of the Major Port Authorities during 
the meeting, the Ministry has decided to constitute a Committee of Chairpersons, to study the 
whole issue in a holistic manner. Report of the committee is yet to be received.. 
  
Further Recommendation/ Observation 
11.4   The Committee may be informed of the report of the Committee for deliberating 
on the issue.    
  
Recommendation/Observation 
12.      The Committee notes that the issue is under examination by a Committee consisting of 
the Chairmen of various Major Ports and desires that the Ministry may update the Committee 
on its outcome. 
 (Para 194) 
Reply of the Ministry 
12.1    The Committee has not yet submitted its recommendations. 
  
Further Recommendation/ Observation 
12.2    The Committee may be informed of the report of the Committee for deliberating 
on the issue.   
  
INITIATIVES FOR LEGAL DISPUTES AND ARBITRATION 
Recommendation/Observation 
13.      The Committee has been informed by the IPPTA that in many cases, the Ports have not 
honoured the verdict of the Expert called for amicable settlement and have also refused to 
refer the issue to arbitration. The Committee would like to have the views of the Ministry on 
this issue. The Committee desires to have a list of such cases  where amicable settlement was 
not reached through discussion and it was not referred to arbitration or the Conciliation 
Committees. The Committee wishes to know the action taken by the Ministry in such cases for 
resolution of the issues.  
 (Para 209) 

64 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
13.1    Both parties can challenge the award, arise from already established resolution 
mechanism, in a court of law in case they are aggrieved with award. Opting any dispute 
resolution mechanism and expert appointment depends on mutu al agreement between the 
Port Authority and the Concessionaire. 
  
Further Recommendation/ Observation 
13.2    The Ministry has not provided a list of such cases where issues which could not 
be settled though discussion were also not referred to arbitration or the Conciliation 
Committees, and the action taken by the Ministry in such cases as requested by the 
Committee.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
   
  
  

65 
 
CHAPTER-IV 
  
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE FINAL 
REPLIES OF THE MINISTRY ARE STILL AWAITED 
   
-Nil- 
  
***** 
  

66 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/ OBSERVATIONS AT A GLANCE 
CHAPTER-III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
THE MINISTRY HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
CAPACITY OF MAJOR PORTS 
The Committee appreciates the steps being taken by ports to improve their capacity 
utilization, mechanization of berths, promotion of use of oil jetti es etc and desires to 
know if any action has been taken to resolve the issue of  the single railway line from 
Vasco to Tinaighat which is hindering the evacuation of cargo and such other port 
specific issues which are contributing to the low capacity utilization of ports.         
      
(Para 1.5) 
The Committee appreciates the capacity expansion initiatives taken by the Ministry and 
the Major Ports but the Ministry has not commented on the much higher capacity 
utilization in the Non -Major Ports, pointed out by the Committee. The Committee 
recommends that the Ministry may evaluate the reasons for the higher capacity 
utilization in Non -Major Ports and incorporate the same if possible, in their initiatives 
for capacity expansion. 
(Para 2.2) 
 
TURNAROUND TIME AND AVERAGE SHIP OUTPUT PER BERTH DAY 
The Committee reiterates its opinion that the improvement of Turn Around Time 
(TRT) from 59.51 hours to 52.43 hours is only marginal and falls far short of 
international benchmark for TRT.  Even this marginal improvement is only in some 
Major Ports.  The Committee reiterates its recommendation that the Ministry make all 
efforts to ensure that all Major Ports function with greater operational efficiency.   
(Para 3.2) 
The Committee notes that the Ministry has been fixing Por t Targets on key parameters 
of Physical and Financial Efficiency for all Major Ports. Reviewing the statistics 
provided on individual Ports the Committee observes that some ports like MoPA, 
VoCPA, MbAA fall far short of the targets set by the Ministry.  Th e Committee desires 
to know the subsequent action taken by the Ministry in such cases.   
(Para 4.2) 
 
 

67 
 
PORT CONNECTIVITY 
The Committee appreciates the initiative taken to address the infrastructure gaps in 
connectivity to ports and reiterates that priority may be given to such projects for their 
time bound completion.  
(Para 5.2) 
PRIVATE PUBLIC SECTOR PARTNERSHIPS IN THE PORTS SECTOR 
The Committee observes that all the 13 PPP projects including the 7 projects 
undertaken in the years 2018 -19 to 2021 -22 seem t o have been finally awarded only in 
2022-23. The Committee wishes to know the reason for the delay in award of these 
projects and expresses its displeasure at the slow pace of progress in the PPP projects 
which defeats the very objective of resorting to the PPP mode of implementation.      
   (Para 6.2) 
 
The Committee notes the comments of the Ministry but reiterates its recommendation 
that the Ministry may step up its efforts with regard to implementation of PPP projects. 
(Para 7.6) 
NATIONAL HYDROGEN MISSION 
The Committee notes the submissions of the Ministry and reiterates its earlier 
observation that the Ministry and the Major Ports should make more efforts if the 
target for electrification of more than 50% of Port Equipment/ Vehicles is to be 
achieved. 
(Para 8.4) 
ISSUES ARISING OUT OF THE PROSPECTIVE APPLICATION OF THE 
NEWMODEL CONCESSION AGREEMENT 
The Committee may be informed of the report of the Committee for deliberating on the 
issue.   
(Para 10.3) 
The Committee may be informed of the report of the Committee for deliberating on the 
issue.                 
 (Para 11.4) 
The Committee may be informed of the report of the Committee for deliberating on the 
issue.   
    (Para 12.2) 
 
 
 

68 
 
INITIATIVES FOR LEGAL DISPUTES AND ARBITRATION 
The Ministry has not provided a list of such cases where issues which could not be 
settled though discussion were also not referred to arbitration or the Conciliation 
Committees, and the action taken by the Ministry in such cases as requested by the 
Committee.  
    (Para 13.2) 
 
 
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 

69 
 
  
  
ANNEXURES 
  
 
 
  
 

70 
 
Annexure-1(Para no 18) 
  
  
Berth No. 
  
Re- 
rated 
Capacity 
  
Capacity 
as                
  per CTO 
  
  
Usable 
Capacity 
  
Actual 
Handled 
in          
2022- 
2023 
% 
Variation 
as 
against 
Usable 
Capacity 
% 
Variation 
as against 
re-rated 
capacity 
5 2.20 2.00 2.00 0.54 27 25 
6 17.40 6.50 6.50 6.53 100 38 
7 13.70 5.20 5.20 4.48 86 33 
8 5.20 1.00 1.00 0.56 56 11 
9 0.00 11.50 0.00 0.01     
10 3.20 6.00 6.00 1.15 31 29 
11 3.20 0.70 
Mooring 
Dolphins 
18.50 4.75 4.75 3.37 71 18 
Total 63.40 36.95 25.45 17.33 68 27 
  
  

71 
 
Annexure-2 (Para no 18) 
Sl. 
No Type of Berths Rated 
Capacity 
Usable 
Capacity 
Tonnage 
(FY2022-23) % Utilisation 
1 Captive 38.83 27.18 10.06 37.01% 
2 Port Operated 39.35 27.55 12.86 46.68% 
3 Containers 22.98 19.53 14.67 75.12% 
4 Oil Jetty 3.30 2.31 0.45 19.48% 
5 Non            
Operational (NCB 
II) 
  
7 
  
4.9 
  
0 
  
0.00% 
6 Total 111.46 81.47 38.04 46.69% 
  
  

72 
 
Annexure-3 (Para no 28) 
Metrics Target 
2022-23 
Achievements 
2022-23 
Average vessel turnaround time (hrs) 52 52.43 
Traffic volume handled in major ports (MT) 790 795 
Average Ship Berth day Output (tonne) 18000 17239 
Investment (INR Crores) 6000 7117 
  
  

73 
 
Annexure-4 (Para no 28) 
Sr. 
No. 
Description Target (given 
to Port, by 
Ministry) 
Actuals 
(by 
Port) 
Remarks 
1 Avg. Turnaround time - 
Overall(Hrs.)-Based on 
Berman application 
120.00 96.24 Achieved 
2 Avg. Turnaround time – 
containers (Hrs.) - Based 
on Berman application 
55.20 60.24 Very close to target, 
but not achieved 
3 Avg. Per berth day output 
– in MTs 
16100 16074 Extremely close to 
target, but not 
achieved 
4 Overall (DPA )Traffic – 
in MMT. 
130.00 137.56 Achieved 
  
  

74 
 
Annexure-5 (Para no 28) 
Cargo          
  (In MMT) 
OSBD          
(In MT) 
TRT              
(In 
Hours) 
Pre-Berthing          
Delay      (In Hours) 
Idle        
Time (%) 
91 30000 24 4.5 8 
  
  

75 
 
Annexure-6 (Para no 28) 
Parameter Target Achievement 
  
2023-24 
2023-24 
(upto 
August 
2023) 
  
2022-23 
  
2021- 
22 
  
2020-21 
Avg.      
Turn 
Round(Hrs.) 
51 65.69 61.47 71.77 75.66 
Avg. Output per ship 
berthday( Tonnes) 
18000 13019 15699 11824 12431 
Avg.      Pre-Berthing 1.60 2.35 2.04 3.02 3.60 
Detention time(hrs.)           
% idle Time 12 16.67 20.34 15.27 15.27 
Traffic( MMT) 25 7.41 17.33 18.46 21.99 
  
  

76 
 
Annexure-7 (Para no 28) 
Sl. No. Parameters Ministry        
Target ( 2022-
23) 
Achieved 
(2022-23) 
1. Cargo 
(In Million Tonnes) 
36 MMT 38.04 MMT 
2. Average vessel turnaround time 50 Hrs 46.80 Hrs 
3. Average vessel  turnaround time- 
container 
22.00 Hrs 18.24 Hrs 
4. Av. Ship Berth day output 16000 MT 15852 MT 
5. Time for border compliance – 
Container Dwell Time Shipping 
(export) 
70.00 Hrs 63.12 Hrs 
6. Time      for      border        
compliance          – Container        
Dwell        Time      Shipping 
(Import) 
25.00 Hrs 24.00 Hrs 
7. Coastal tonnage 10.60 MMT 12.57 MMT 
  
  

77 
 
Annexure-8 (Para no 28) 
Metrics Unit FY                
2022-23 
Proposed target 
by VPA 
FY                  
2022-23 
Cumulative 
Achievement 
Average vessel turnaround time Hours 70.00 74.97 
Average vessel turnaround time - 
Containers 
Hours 28.00 24.17 
Average output per ship berthday Tonnes 13000 12421 
Traffic volume MT 71.00 73.75 
  
  

78 
 
Annexure-9 (Para no 28) 
Parameters 2022-23 2023-24 
TARGETS ACHIEVEMENTS TARGETS ACHIEVEMENTS 
(Upto August) 
          
Cargo 
(in              
Million 
Tonnes) 
60.00 63.61 70.00 27.54 
Avg O.S.B.D. 
(in Tonnes) 
10000 10035 11000 11661 
Avg. TRT 
(in hours.) 
70.00 67.42 60.00 63.04 
Avg.                
Pre- Berthing 
delay (in 
hours.) 
--- 0.67 0.00 0.00 
Idle      Time      
at 
Berth (%) 
--- 36.69 25.00 36.07 
  
  

79 
 
Annexure-10 (Para no 71) 
Berth 
No. 
Re-rated 
Capacity 
Capacity 
as per 
CTO 
Usable 
Capacity 
Actual 
Handled 
in 2022- 
23 
% 
Variation 
as against 
Usable 
Capacity 
% 
Variation 
as against 
re-rated 
capacity 
5 2020 2.00 2.00 0.54 27 25 
6 17.40 6.50 6.50 6.53 100 38 
7 13.70 5.20 5.20 4.48 86 33 
8 5.20 1.00 1.00 0.56 56 11 
9 0.00 11.50 0.00 0.01     
10 3.20 6.00 6.00 1.15 31 29 
11 3.20 0.70 
Mooring 
Dolphins 
18.50 4.75 4.75 3.37 71 18 
Total 63.40 36.95 25.45 17.33 68 27 
  
  

80 
 
Annexure-11 (Para no 72) 
List of first 31 Projects identified for Asset Monetization from 2021-22 to 2024-25 
Sl.  
No.  
Project  Port  Estimated Project Cost  
1  
& 
2 
Deepening and optimization of 
Inner Harbor facilities including 
Development Western Dock 
Captive berth (two no.) to handle 
capsize vessels 
Paradip Port ₹612.50 Crore (by Port) 
₹2,392.13 Crore (by 
Concessionaire)  
3 Mechanization of CQl& CQ2 
Berth 
Paradip Port ₹1103 Crore 
4 Development of Marina (PPP) 
Capacity 300 yacht 
Mumbai Port  ₹357.33 Crore 
5 Operation & Maintenance of 
Mumbai International Cruise 
Terminal (PPP) MbPT 
Mumbai Port  ₹303.3 Crore 
Concessionaire- ₹192.04 
 Crore 
6 Mechanization of Berth no. 3 
(PPP) 
SMP, Kolkata  ₹331.94 Crore 
7 Conversion of 2 berths as 
Container Betty at Khidderpore 
Dock (PPP) 
SMP, Kolkata  ₹95.66 Crore (Ph.I) 
₹86.15 Crore (Ph.II) 
8 Operation Maintenance proposed 
Mormugao Port International 
Cruise Terminal on PPP mode 
Mormugao 
Port 
₹22.00 Crore 
9 Oil Jetty No.9 Deendayal Port  ₹123.40 Crore 
10 Oil Jetty No.10 Deendayal Port ₹123.12 Crore 
11 Oil Jetty No.11 Deendayal Port ₹361.70 Crore 
12 Container Terminal Jawaharlal 
Nehru Port 
Jawaharlal 
Nehru Port 
₹863.31 Crore 
13 Operationalization of coastal berth  
  
Jawaharlal 
Nehru Port 
₹125 Crore 
14 Mechanization of SQB berth- Paradip Port ₹75 Crore 
15 Berth No.14: Mechanization of 
Fertilizer Berth 
Deendayal Port ₹300.28 Crore 
16 Berth No. 9 at V.O. 
Chidambaranar 
Port 
V.O. 
Chidambaranar 
Port 
₹435 Crore 
17 NCB-3 Berth  
  
V.O. 
Chidambaranar 
Port 
₹420 Crore 
18 WQ-7 & 8  
  
Visakhapatnam 
Port 
₹288.47 Crore 
19 Berths 1,2,3 & 4   
  
V.O. 
Chidambaranar 
Port 
₹2144 Crore 
20 Berths 9, 10 & 11   
  
New 
Mangalore Port 
₹200 Crore 

81 
 
21 Development of Additional 
Liquid Cargo jetty at JNPT 
Jawaharlal 
Nehru Port 
₹90 Crore 
22 Redevelopment of Berth No. 9 
and three nos. barge berth of PPP 
basis 
Mormugao Port ₹842 Crore 
23 Operation and Maintenance of 
Berth Nos. 10 & 11 on PPP basis 
Mormugao Port ₹139.63 Crore 
24 Mechanization of EQ-6 berth Visakhapatnam Port ₹250 Crore 
25 Mechanization of EQ-7 berth Visakhapatnam Port ₹200.99 Crore 
26 Mechanization of WQ-6 berth Visakhapatnam Port ₹250 Crore 
27 Mechanization of Berths4&5NSD 
on DBFOT basis 
SMP, KDS ₹270 Crore 
28 Strengthening and Mechanization 
of Berth 7,8 NSD on DBFOT 
basis 
SMP, KDS ₹340 Crore 
29 Construction and Mechanization 
of Container berths at KDS Outer 
Terminal 
SMP, KDS To be updated after 
finalization of DPR 
30 Mechanization of Berth No. 10 SMP, 
HDC 
₹350 Crore 
31 Mechanization of Berth No. 5 SMP, 
HDC 
₹325 Crore 
  
  

82 
 
Annexure-12 (Para no 118) 
List PPP Projects under the Asset Monetization Pipeline awarded till date: 
S. 
No. 
Project Name and Monetization 
value Date of Award Status 
1 
Jawaharlal Nehru Port Authority 
(JNPA) - Container Terminal on 
UOMT basis (~ INR 863 Crore) 
Awarded on 
28.06.2022. 
  
CA signed on 29/07/2022. 
Award of concession given 
with effect from 11.2.2023 
and the Concessionaire started 
operation on the same day. 
2 
Mormugao Port Authority 
(MgPA) - International Cruise 
Terminal (~INR 22 Crore) 
Awarded in 
03.07.2023.  
Concession Agreement signed 
on 21.09.2023. Under 
Implementation 
3 
Mumbai Port Authority (MbPA)-
International  Cruise  Terminal 
(~INR 495 Crore) 
Awarded in 22 
Jan, 2022.  Date of approval -29.05.2020. 
Under Implementation 
  
4, & 
5 
Paradip Port Authority (PPA), 
Odisha – Deepening and 
optimization of Inner Harbour 
including Western Dock (~ INR 
3000 Crore) 
Awarded on 
27.5.2022  
CA signed on 11 th July 2022. 
Currently under Financial 
Closure. Under 
Implementation 
6 
Syama Prasad Mookerjee Port 
Authority (SPMPA), Kolkata - 
Mechanization of Berth No. 2 
(erstwhile Berth No. 3) at HDC(~ 
INR 298.26 Crore) 
Awarded on 
10.02.2022  
  
CA signed in July, 2023, 
Under Implementation 
7 
SMPA - Conversion of 2 berths as 
Container Jetty at 
KidderporeDock  (~INR 182 
Crore) 
Awarded on 
25.3.2022  
  
CA signed on 24 June 2023, 
Under Implementation 
8 
Visakhapatnam Port 
Authority(VPA)-    Development  
of WQ -7& 8   on  DBFOT  basis  
(~ INR 288 Cr) 
Awarded on 
25.1.2023. 
  
Under Implementation 
9 
V.O. Chidambaranar Port 
Authority (VOCPA) - 
Development of Berth No. 9 as 
Container Terminal on DBFOT 
basis (~lNR 435 Crore) 
Awarded on 
08.08.2022. 
  
CA signed on 03.09.2022. 
Under Implementation 
10 
DPA  -  Development  of  
Container  Terminal  at  Tuna 
Tekra, Deendayal Port on BOT 
basis under PPP mode(~INR 
4,244 crore) 
Awarded on 
27.01.2023  
  
CA signed on 25.08.2013. 
Under Implementation 
  
11 Jawaharlal      Nehru   CA signed on 15.11.2022. 

83 
 
Authority        (JNPA) 
Port- Operationalization of Coastal 
Berth          and Shallow Water 
Berth (- INR 343crore) 
Awarded on 
27.10.2022  
Under Implementation 
  
12 
MgPA- O&M of Berth Nos.   10 
&11 on PPP (- INR200 
crore) revised cost INR 139.63 Cr. 
Awarded in 
27.10.2023.  
  
Under Implementation 
13 
Visakhapatnam Port 
Authority(VPA) Mechanization of 
EQ-7 berth (- INR200Crore) 
Awarded on 
30.01.2023  
  
Under Implementation 
14 
VPA  -  Mechanization BerthWQ-
6            (INR 166 Crore) 
  
Awarded on 
30.01.2023 Under Implementation 
  
  

84 
 
Annexure-13 (Para no 123) 
Year No. of Projects ~Value 
(₹ Crore) 
Capacity of 
Projects 
(MTPA) 
2017-18 3 8,300 71 
2018-19 5 7,650 57.3 
2019-20 2 900 12 
2020-21 1 750 10 
2021-22 5 3,200 58 
  
  
***** 
 
 

85 
 
 
 
MINUTES 

86 
 
VIII 
EIGHTH MEETING 
  
The Committee met at  10:00 A.M. on  Wednesday, the 6th February, 2024 in 
Committee Room -2, First Floor, Parliament House Annexe Extension Building, New 
Delhi. 
  
  
Members present: 
1. Shri V. Vijayasai Reddy           - Chairman  
 Rajya Sabha 
  
2. Shrimati S. Phangnon Konyak  
3. Shrimati Rajani Ashokrao Patil  
4. Shri A. A. Rahim 
5. Dr. C. M. Ramesh 
6. Shri Zala Kesridevsinhji 
  
 Lok Sabha 
  
7. Shri Anto Antony 
8. Shri Ramesh Chandra Majhi 
9. Shri Sunil Baburao Mendhe 
10. Shri K. Muraleedharan 
11. Shri Tirath Singh Rawat 
12. Shri  Dushyant Singh 
13. Shri Manoj Kumar Tiwari 
14. Shri Krupal Balaji Tumane 
  
SECRETARIAT 
Shri D. S. Prasanna Kumar, Joint Secretary  
Shrimati Vishwarupa Bhattacharya, Additional Director  
Shri Ranajit Chakraborty, Deputy Secretary 
  
 At the outset, the Chairman extended a warm welcome to the Members of the 
Committee and informed  that the agenda for the meeting is to consider and adopt 
the following draft Reports of the Committee: - 

87 
 
1) ***1 
2) *** 
3) *** 
4) *** 
5) *** 
6) Action Taken by the Government  on the Recommendations/ Observations of the 
Committee contained in its Three Hundred Fifty Second Report on the subject 
'Functioning of Major Ports in the Country' 
2.        The Committee took up for consideration the draft Reports, one by one. After a 
brief discussion, the Committee adopted the aforesaid six draft Reports and authorized the 
Chairman to carry out minor modifications of typographical and factual errors and 
formatting, if needed in all the Reports. 
3.       The Committee authorized Dr. C. M.  Ramesh, M.P., and in his absence, Shri A. A. 
Rahim, M.P., to present the aforesaid Reports in Rajya Sabha on 8 th February, 2024. The 
Committee also authorized Shri Anto Antony, M.P. and in his absence, Shri K. 
Muraleedharan, M.P. to lay the Reports on the Table of Lok Sabha on the same date. 
4.        *** 
5.        A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept. 
6.       The Meeting adjourned at 10:35 A.M. 
                                                                                                                                      
New Delhi,                                                                                      D. S. Prasanna Kumar 
6th February, 2024                                                                                    Joint Secretary 
 
                                                           
1 Relates to other matter 