 
 
       
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
December, 2024 / Agrahayana, 1946 (Saka) 
REPORT NO. 
370
_ 
THREE HUNDRED SEVENTIETH REPORT  
Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/ 
Observations of the Committee contained in its Three Hundred Fifty- 
First Report on the subject Functioning of National Akademis and other 
Cultural Institutions  
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 19th December, 2024) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 3rd February, 2025) 
 

 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Website:     https://sansad.in/rs  
 E-mail:     rsc-tt@sansad.nic.in 


 
 
 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT,  
TOURISM AND CULTURE 
 
 
THREE HUNDRED SEVENTIETH REPORT  
Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/ 
Observations of the Committee contained in its Three Hundred 
Fifty- First Report on the subject Functioning of National 
Akademis and other Cultural Institutions  
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 19th December, 2024) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 3rd February, 2025) 
 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
December, 2024 / Agrahayana, 1946 (Saka) 
Hindi version of this publication is also available 

 
 
 
 
C O N T E N T S 
 
P A G E S 
 
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE      i 
2. INTRODUCTION        ii 
3. ACRONYMS                iii 
 4. REPORT                                1-37 
5. RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS-AT A GLANCE   38-40 
6. ANNEXURES         41-52 
    7. *MINUTES   
 
         
        
        
      
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
______________________________________ 
 
*To be appended
53-55


i 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
(2024-25) 
 
(Constituted on 26th September, 2024) 
 
1. Shri Sanjay Kumar Jha   - Chairman 
 
Rajya Sabha 
s 
2. Shri M. Mohamed Abdulla 
3. Shri Mohammed Nadimul Haque 
4. Shri Jaggesh 
5. Shri Kesridevsinh Jhala  
6. Shrimati S. Phangnon Konyak  
7. Shrimati Sudha Murty  
8. Shri Surendra Singh Nagar  
9.  Shri Imran Pratapgarhi 
10.  Shri Neeraj Dangi* 
 
Lok Sabha  
11. Shri Mian Altaf Ahmad  
12. Shri Pradan Baruah 
13. Shri R. K. Chaudhary 
14. Shri Anil Firojiya  
15. Shri Tapir Gao  
16. Shri Vishweshwar Hegde Kageri  
17. Shri Rahul Kaswan 
18. Shrimati June Maliah  
19. Shri Ajay Kumar Mandal  
20. Shri K. E. Prakash  
21. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy  
22. Dr. M. P. Abdussamad Samadani  
23. Kumari Selja  
24. Shri Avimanyu Sethi  
25. Shri Anurag Sharma  
26. Shri Suresh Kumar Shetkar  
27. Shri Tangella Uday Srinivas 
28. Shri Devesh Chandra Thakur  
29. Shri Amarsing Tisso 
30. Shri Manoj Tiwari  
31. Shri K. C. Venugopal 
 
SECRETARIAT 
Dr. Kushal Kumar Pathak, Joint Secretary 
Shrimati Monica Baa, Director 
Shri T. Kennedy Jesudossan, Deputy Secretary 
Shri N. Romesh Singh, Under Secretary  
___________________________________________________________________________ 
*Nominated as Member w.e.f.  10th October, 2024 in lieu  of  Shri  V. Vijayasai Reddy who ceased to 
be  Member of Committee w.e.f. 10th October, 2024. 
 

ii 
 
 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairman, Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport, 
Tourism and Culture, having been authorized by the Committee to present on its behalf, do 
hereby present this  Three Hundred Seventieth Report on the Action Taken by the 
Government on the Recommendations/ Observations of the Committee contained in its Three 
Hundred Fifty - First Report on the subject Functioning of National Akademis and other 
Cultural Institutions.. 
2. The Three Hundred Fifty First  Report of the Department -related Parliamentary 
Standing Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture was presented to the Parliament on 
the 24th July, 2023. 
3.  The Action Taken Replies on the recommendations of the Committee contained in its 
Three Hundred Fifty First Report were received from the Ministry of Culture on 22nd July, 
2024. 
4. The Committee considered and adopted the Report in its meeting held on the  16th  
December, 2024.   
 
 
(Sanjay Kumar Jha) 
NEW DELHI;                                                           Chairman, 
December 16, 2024                                                 Department-related Parliamentary Standing            
Agrahayana 25, 1946 (Saka)                            Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture, 
                                                                                                                                 Rajya Sabha 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

iii 
 
ACRONYMS 
 
AIIMS All India Institute of Medical Sciences 
AKAM Azadi Ka Amrit Mahotsav 
ATR Action Taken Report 
BASS Besant Arundale Senior Secondary School 
BE Budget Estimates 
CAG Comptroller and Auditor General 
CCRT Centre for Cultural Resources and Training 
CSR Corporate Social Responsibility 
CTSSS Cultural Talent Search Scholarship Scheme 
DISHA District Development Coordination and Monitoring Committees 
G20 Group of Twenty 
GFR General Financial Rules 
ICH Intangible Cultural Heritage 
IGNCA Indira Gandhi  National Centre for the Arts 
MoA Memorandum of Association 
MPLAD Member of Parliament Local Area Development 
NEP New Education Policy 
NER North East Region 
NMCM National Mission on Cultural Mapping 
NSD National School of Drama 
OTT Over the Top 
PPP Public Private Partnership 
RE Revised Estimates 
SNA Sangeet Natak Akademi 
SOP Standard Operating Procedure 
UNESCO United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization 
ZCC Zonal Cultural Centre 

 
1 
  
 REPORT  
 
The Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport, 
Tourism and Culture deals with the Action Taken by the Ministry of Culture on the 
recommendations/observations as contained in its T hree Hundred Fifty-First Report on  
„Functioning of National Akademis and other Cultural Institutions‟ which was presented to both 
the Houses of Parliament on 24th July, 2023.  
 
2.  The Action Taken Replies were received from the Ministry on 22nd July, 2024 in respect 
of all the observa tions/recommendations contained in the Report. The replies hav e been 
categorized as follows:- 
 
Chapter-I: 
Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the Ministry:  
Paragraph Nos.: 6, 12, 13, 19, 70, 86, 118, 128, 129(ix) and 129(x). 
Total: 10 
 
Chapter-II:  
Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue in view 
of the replies of the Ministry: 
Paragraph Nos.: 10, 11, 14, 15, 20, 28, 29, 30, 31, 33, 34, 44, 49, 50, 51, 52, 54, 56, 57, 
62, 63, 64, 68, 69, 71, 77, 78, 79,  85, 87, 88, 89, 102, 103, 108, 117, 127, 129(i), 129(iv), 
129(v), 129(vii), 129(viii), 129(xi), 129(xii) and 129(xiii). 
Total: 45 
 
Chapter-III: 
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Ministry have not been 
accepted by the Committee: 
Paragraph Nos.: 17, 18, 32, 37, 38, 55, 67, 82, 92, 93, 94, 95, 121, 129(ii), 129(iii) and 
129(vi).  
Total: 16 
 
Chapter-IV:  
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which the final replies of the Ministry are 
still awaited: 
Paragraph Nos.: Nil  
Total: Nil 
 

 
2 
  
CHAPTER-I 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
MINISTRY 
 
Achievements, Programmes and Initiatives of the National Akademis 
Recommendation/Observation 
1. The Committee appreciates the efforts made by the Akademis in organizin g various 
cultural programmes and events to achieve their mandate to preserve and promote the diverse 
cultures and art forms of the country. 
(Para 6) 
Reply of the Ministry 
1.1 Ministry places high regard to the appreciation given by the august Committee.  
 
Budgetary Allocation and Issues  
Recommendation/Observation 
2. The Committee recommends the Akademis to explore the option of CSR (Corporate 
Social Responsibility) Funds available for "protection of national heritage, art and culture 
including restoration of buildings and sites of historical importance and works of art; setting up 
public libraries; promotion and development of traditional arts and handicrafts;" as provided in 
clause (v) of Schedule VII of the Companies Act, 2013 read with Section 135. The Committee 
recommends that some portion of the CSR Fund may be mandatorily earmarked for the 
development and promotion of Culture and Cultural Institutions. Government can think of 
making such amendments in the legislation related to CSR. 
 (Para 12) 
Reply of the Ministry 
2.1 The autonomous bodies are encouraged to garner CSR funds, funds from other Ministries 
and also from Non-Government Sources. An SOP is being issued to all in this regard. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
3. In Committee's view a long -term guarantee of sustained funding will go a long way in 
creating a stable environment to implement ambitious plans. Artistic excellence can flourish 
only in good cultural infrastructure. Thus, Committee feels that Private partners can also 
provide financial support t hrough sponsorships, grants, donations, or investments under PPP 
mode. 

 
3 
  
(Para 13) 
Reply of the Ministry 
3.1 The recommendation of the Committee has been communicated to all autonomous 
bodies under Akademi division of Ministry of Culture . Ministry has, other wise also, been 
directing its bodies to increase their sustainable internal revenue through sponsorships,  
collaborations and investments under PPP.  A comprehensive SOP is being issued in this regard. 
 
Election and Tenure of Heads of the National Akademis and Cultural Institutions 
Recommendation/Observation 
4. Committee, further, suggests that one Member of Parliament should be included on the 
Governing Board of each of the Institutions on the lines of All India Institute of Medical Sciences 
and other such institutions to assist the working of Akademis and to provide ground reports to 
the Akademis. 
 (Para 19) 
Reply of the Ministry 
4.1 Akademis invite the nominations from States and Union Terr itories for its General 
Council. I t is purely a prerogative of Stat es and UTs to nominate legislature or Member of 
Parliament. The recommendation of the Committee will be placed for approval while 
formulating new constitutions and governing boards. 
 
Outreach and Inclusivity 
Recommendation/Observation 
5. The Akademis must work towards increasing cultural public infrastructure such as 
affordable workspaces and easy access to cultural centres and cultural hubs across the country. 
They should bring activities closer to people and increase outreach through different means such 
as the EAST (Easy, Attractive, Social and Timely) principle. 
 (Para 70) 
Reply of the Ministry 
5.1 Different Akademis have devised programs and events which are closer to the public 
viz., gramlok by Sahitya Akademi, theatre training workshops by NSD and SNA , outreach 
training programs by Kalakshetra and CCRT. The suggestion of the Committee would be taken 
seriously and all Akademis will be directed to enlarge the domain of their activities bringing the 
public closer and to build new audiences. 
Technological Advancements/Digital accessibility  

 
4 
  
Recommendation/Observation 
6. Akademis should develop online learning platforms or learning management systems that 
offer courses, workshops, and educational resources. These platforms can provide a range of 
content, including video lectures, interactive modules, downloadable materials, and assessments. 
 (Para 86) 
Reply of the Ministry 
6.1 The institutes employ online learning management systems to offer courses, workshops 
and educational resources. The Vedic Heritage Por tal of the Indira Gandhi National Centre for 
Arts (IGNCA) in an online portal that is serving as a  one-stop solution for the user, for any 
information regarding the Vedic heritage. 
6.2 The suggestion of the esteemed Committee has been informed to all Akademis and they 
are working on developing such modules. 
 
Protection of rural and tribal culture 
Recommendation/Observation 
7. The Committee also believes that it is important to prioritize the voices and perspectives 
of tribal communities, while also providing platforms for them to share their culture with a wider 
audience. Akademis should develop educational outreach programs that   promote tribal and 
rural culture in schools, colleges, and local communities. There is also a need for collaboration 
with tribal organizations, NGOs, and tribal development agencies to jointly support initiatives 
for the promotion of tribal culture. Further, Akademis must promote rural stays and tribal stays, 
especially among the younger generation to acquaint them with the cultural  heritage of the 
country. 
 (Para 118) 
Reply of the Ministry 
7.1 The Committee's recommendation is noted for compliance. 
 
Leveraging G20 
Recommendation/Observation 
8. The Committee recommends that Akademis should collaborate with tourism authorities 
and G-20 stakeholders to promote cultural tourism in India. Akademis should also encourage G -
20 delegates to explore Indian cultural treasures beyond the conference venues, thus promoting 
tourism and economic opportunities. Akademis can initiate collaborative pro jects between 
National Akademis and cultural institutions from G -20 member countries. This can involve joint 
exhibitions, performances, artist residencies, or cultural exchanges. Digital platforms like social 

 
5 
  
media handles, live streaming, and virtual exhi bitions can be utilised to extend the reach of 
National Akademis cultural initiatives during the G -20 summit and to engage a global audience 
and promote cultural exchange beyond physical boundaries. 
(Para 128) 
Reply of the Ministry 
8.1 The Committee's recommendation is noted for compliance. 
 
Need for international recognition of Kalaripayattu, Kathakali and other art forms  
Recommendation/Observation 
9. Ministry may take a look into the matter and take appropriate action in the matter. 
(Para 129{ix}) 
Reply of the Ministry 
9.1 Sangeet Natak Akademi being the nodal agency for Intangible Culture Heritage (ICH) 
has succeeded in inscribing the Kutiyattam and Mudiyettu art forms of Kerala in the 
Representative List of Intangible Culture Heritage of Humanity of UNE SCO in 2008 and 2010 
respectively. As regards the international recognition of Kalaripayattu and Kathakali, Akadem i 
will take up this matter at the appropriate level. 
 
Details of cultural activities organized in Kerala in Thrissur and Thiruvananthapuram  
Recommendation/Observation 
10. The details of the same may be provided to the Committee for information 
(Para 129{x}) 
Reply of the Ministry  
10.1 The details of cultural activities organized in Kerala in Thrissur and Thiruvananthapuram 
of various academies is enclosed at Annexure IV. 
 
 

 
6 
  
 
CHAPTER-II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES OF THE MINISTRY 
 
Budgetary Allocation and Issues  
Recommendation/Observation 
1. The Committee notes that the overall budget allocation for the Ministry of Culture is only 
0.075% of the total budget, which is grossly inadequate. In particular, the combined budgetary 
allocation (2023 -24) for the National Akademis is just Rs. 401 crore. The Committee in this 
regard, recommends that the Ministry of Culture should increase the budgetary allocation to the 
National Akademis and other Cultural Institutions in order to increase their efficiency and 
outreach. 
 (Para 10) 
Reply of the Ministry 
1.1 The budget allocated to the Minis try is distributed among the stakeholders in accordance 
with the programmes/activities planned during the year. The total budget allocation to the 
Ministry for 2023-24 was Rs. 3399.65 crore. Out of which funds allocated to the Akademis was 
Rs. 401.27 crore  i.e. about 11.8% of the total allocation of the Ministry. Whenever, additional 
fund requirement is requested by the Akademis, during the year, the same is considered 
generously by the Ministry based on merits and required funds are made available through 
supplementary grants. 
  
Recommendation/Observation 
2. Committee observes that countries like China, the U.K., U.S., Singapore and Australia 
spend roughly 2%-5% of their budget on the promotion of art and culture and a majority of the 
amount spent by these countries on art and culture is sourced from non -Government sources 
which is not the case in India. 
 (Para 11) 
Reply of the Ministry 
2.1 Funds are allocated to various academies as per the budgetary alloca tion of Ministry of 
Finance. Ministry encourages th ese autonomous bodies to garner funds from other Non -
Government Sources as well, wherever feasible.   

 
7 
  
 
Recommendation/Observation 
3. Further, funds can also be raised as monetary benefits from YouTube channels and other 
OTT platforms. Akademis can organize  fundraising events such as galas, auctions, benefit 
concerts or cultural festivals. These events can attract donors, sponsors, and supporters who are 
interested in experiencing cultural performances and supporting the academy's mission. 
 (Para 14) 
Reply of the Ministry 
3.1 The Ministry of Culture advocates for improving source of revenue and encourages the 
institutions under the Ministry to explore all possible avenues for increasing their income, apart 
from grants received from the Government.  
 
Recommendation/Observation 
4. Akademis must augment resources to become sustainable and resilient. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends that in order to develop a strong sustainable cultural environment, 
Akademis need to take significant steps to attract investment s from the Government and private 
sectors, to develop and maintain their cultural and social infrastructure. Akademis should start 
thinking outside the box with 'imagination and a vision' and draw up a plan to explore other 
suitable types of external finan cing. Investments should include audience engagement, 
supporting artists and subsidizing performance to optimize  public engagements. The Committee 
believes that along with tourists and visitors, citizens also constitute a major part of the 
consumers, who are willing to spend larger portions of their disposable income to seek 
entertainment. The Akademis should tap such potential of the citizens. 
(Para 15) 
Reply of the Ministry 
4.1 The Akademis generate revenue by way of sell ing tickets for their events, and  also 
renting out their performing spaces/ auditoriums at their campuses. These Akademis also engage 
and partner with other Ministries for various eve nts organized by the Government . Thus, the 
Ministry of Culture continuously encourages the Akademis to become self-dependent. 
 
Election and Tenure of Heads of the National Akademis and Cultural Institutions 
Recommendation/Observation 
5. The Committee also recommends that there is a need to increase the involvement of 
States in the overall functioning of the Na tional Akademis and other Cultural Institutions and 
this may be done by giving representation to all States in the administrative set -up and through 

 
8 
  
collaboration with cultural bodies at the state level. In this regard, proper consultations must be 
conducted with all States. 
 (Para 20) 
Reply of the Ministry 
5.1 Involvement of the States and UTs is already there in the administrative set up of the 
Akademis as their  General Council has representatives from all States and UTs. All the 
Akademis organize their festivals, events etc., in collaboration with State Governments and State 
Akademis.  
 
Regional Centres and Zonal Cultural Centre (ZCCs) 
Recommendation/Observation 
6. The Committee observes that at present, only a few National Akademis and Cultural 
Institutions have established regional centres across the country. States are not evenly covered 
in so far as the establishment of regional Centres in the country is concerned. The map given 
above shows that there is no representation of culturally rich regions lik e Mizoram, Nagaland, 
Himachal Pradesh,  Haryana, Punjab, Chhattisgarh, Bihar, Arunachal Pradesh and Madhya 
Pradesh. The Committee notes that a substantial chunk of the population is left out of the reach 
of the Cultural Institutions and Akademis. In Committee's view, this has greatly restricted the 
active local presence of these national cultural bodies. 
(Para 28) 
Reply of the Ministry 
6.1 Ministry would like to apprise the esteemed Committee that all the National Akademis 
have national presence through thei r regional centres (not state specific centres). Also some 
Akademis have project offices in different states for particular art form s. A list of all the 
Regional Centres and project offices of Akademis may be seen at Annexure I. Also, Ministry of 
Culture h as set up seven Zonal Cultural Centres (ZCCs) in the country with headquarters at 
Patiala (Punjab), Nagpur (Maharashtra), Udaipur (Rajasthan), Prayagraj (Uttar Pradesh), 
Kolkata (West Bengal), Dimapur (Nagaland) and Thanjavur (Tamil Nadu) to protect, promo te 
and preserve various forms of folk art & culture throughout the country and also to set up 
mechanism for development of the cultures of various regions. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
7. The Committee notes most of the cultural institutions are headquarter ed in Delhi. The 
Committee reminds that these cultural bodies can be relocated to various other parts of the 
country to ensure Pan India presence of the Institutions. 

 
9 
  
 (Para 29) 
Reply of the Ministry 
7.1 The Akademis have presence across the coun try through regional centres which help in 
organizing activities / programmes / events Pan India. The list of the Regional Centres may be 
found at Annexure II. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
8. The Committee, therefore, recommends that there is a need for establishing regional 
Centres in each State as well as in remote areas like tribal areas to promote tribal culture, and 
in rural areas to promote village culture. Further, Regional Centres must be set up in all 
culturally rich regions to promote art and culture at gras sroots level. The Committee also 
suggests that there is a need for cultural mapping of districts using the Standard Operating 
Procedure (SOP). Regional Centres must cater to all the aspects of art and culture of that 
region. 
(Para 30) 
Reply of the Ministry 
8.1 The Ministry is already working on setting up more regional hubs of all Akademis in 
regions where there are no presence as of now. The National Mission on Cultural Mapping 
(NMCM) is an initiative of the Ministry of C ulture, to develop a comprehensive database of art 
forms, artists, and other resources across the country. The consolidated detail of NMCM is 
attached at Annexure II. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
9. Zonal Cultural Centres (ZCCs) provide facilities for the promotion of arts and culture in 
their respective regions. The Committee, however, observes that the functioning of ZCCs is not 
always uniform across the States, thereby defeating the very purpose of fostering cultural 
activities equitably throughout the country. The Committee also recommends that the National 
Akademis and other Cultural Institutions must collaborate with ZCCs to remove this disparity 
across States. The Ministry of Culture needs to play a lead role in such coordination works. 
Ministry/ National Akademis must evolve a mechanism to ensure effective coordination of efforts 
between National Akademis/Cultural Institutions and ZCCs. 
(Para 31) 
Reply of the Ministry 
9.1 Ministry of Culture, through its Akademis and Zonal Cultural Centers has been 
executing the mandate of promotion and  preservation of tangible and intangible cultural 

 
10 
  
heritage.  State governments are involved in promotion of their re spective art forms through the 
state cultural academies. 
9.2 Further, Akademis alway ensure maximum participation of Zonal Centres in their 
activities and have already organized a number of festivals in different parts of the country in 
collaboration with the Zonal Centres. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
10. The Akademis, during the course of the discussion, agreed to the view that Members of 
Parliament and MLAs of the region can help the Akademis with outreach and accessibility to the 
interior parts as they are more aware of the cultural spread in their regions. The Committee 
appreciates that the views of the Committee in this regard are well tak en by the Akademis. 
Popular participation is essential to propagate and preserve various forms of our culture. The 
elected representatives of the area can contribute immensely to popularize the art and art forms. 
The Committee, therefore, recommends that all MPs and MLAs of the region should be invited to 
the events organized by the respective organizations. Also, Ministry/ Akademis should actively 
involve Members of the Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture. 
(Para 33) 
Reply of the Ministry 
10.1 The cultural activities and programmes are conducted by Akademis at the Headquarters 
and at various locations across the country. These academies are advised and persuaded to 
involve public  representatives including MLAs  and MPs, and civi l society and civic body 
workers/ members.  The suggestions of the august Committee have been well taken and will be 
kept in mind. Suitable instructions have been given to the Akademis in this regard. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
11. Committee recommends th e Ministry/ Akademis to attend the DISHA meetings. 
Representatives of the Ministry/Akademis should be encouraged to attend the DISHA meetings 
for consultation with Members of Parliament, State Legislatures and Local Governments 
(Panchayati Raj Institutions /Municipal Bodies). These Committees can monitor the 
implementation of the programmes and promote synergy and convergence for greater impact. 
They can also facilitate coordinated solutions to remove constraints, if any. 
(Para 34) 
Reply of the Ministry 
11.1 DISHA District Development Coordination and Monitoring Committees (DISHA), have 
been constituted by Ministry of Rural Development at district levels under the Chairpersonship 
of concerned Member of Parliament to monitor proper implementation of key Centra l Schemes/ 

 
11 
  
Programmes. The nature of activities carried out by the Akademis under the Ministry of Culture 
for promotion of culture, do not strictly conform to the object of the DISHA meetings. However, 
the suggestions of the august Committee have been well taken and will be kept in mind. 
 
Cultural knowledge and Expertise of Staff 
Recommendation/Observation 
12. The Committee notes that a majority of the administrative staff have little 
knowledge/expertise in arts and culture management. The Committee feels t hat extensive 
training programmes are required for better expertise of staff to enable proficiency and 
competency at scale, and across levels. The Committee, therefore, recommends that a 
comprehensive assessment of the training needs of the staff may be un dertaken to identify the 
areas where they require skill development or additional knowledge in art and culture and 
specific domains. The Ministry can also establish mentoring or coaching programmes where 
staff members are paired with experienced professionals in the field. 
(Para 44) 
Reply of the Ministry 
12.1 Training and skill upgradation of the staff and officers of the Akademis is an ongoing 
process, and Akademis will be advised to take the august Committee‟s suggestions into 
consideration. 
 
Governance and related issues 
Recommendation/Observation 
13. Committee feels that resolving governance issues in National Akademis requires a 
systematic and proactive approach. First of all, Committee suggests identifying the specific 
areas where governance problems exist, acknowledging the issues, and committing to addressing 
them. Further, there is a need to enhance transparency and accountability and promote a culture 
of ethical conduct and integrity within the Akademis. 
(Para 49) 
Recommendation/Observation 
14. Committee, further, flags that continuous monitoring and evaluation of the effectiveness 
of governance practices is also required at regular intervals. Akademis should seek feedback 
from stakeholders, conduct internal and external evaluations, and use the find ings to identify 
areas for improvement. 
(Para 50) 
 

 
12 
  
Reply of the Ministry 
14.1 It is submitted that the p ortals such as Public Grievance and  Right to Information are 
already in place to track the complaints, governance issues, and requests to enhance 
transparency and accountability and promotion of culture of ethical conduct and integri ty within 
the Akademis. The Akademis also regularly seek  feedback from Artists and general public 
through different platforms like social media etc. However, the august Committee's 
recommendation is noted for compliance. 
  
Recommendation/Observation 
15. In cases where governance issues persist or are complex, the Akademis should consider 
seeking external expertise or consulting services. Independent evaluations or audits can pr ovide 
valuable insights and recommendations for addressing governance challenges. 
(Para 51) 
Reply of the Ministry 
15.1 Regular audit of annual accounts  of the Akademis are already carried out by the CAG. 
Sufficient provisions for review of the functioning of autonomous organizations are already in 
place under Rule 229 (ix) of General Financial Rules, 2017. The suggestions of the august 
Committee are welcomed. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
16. Further, the Ministry/Akademis may also consider the possibility of  adopting new 
technological advancements in administration for improving the day -to-day functioning of the 
Akademis. 
(Para 52) 
Reply of the Ministry  
16.1 The Min istry of Culture persuades the Akademis to adopt the technological 
advancements in their day to day functioning. It is a continuous process. 
 
Segregation of Functions 
Recommendation/Observation 
17. The Committee feels that the function of the Akademis is to enable artists to create and 
express their creativity. The role of the Ministry should be to  help the organizations and their 
artists to realize the organizational vision and fulfil their mission. Its responsibility is to provide 
an atmosphere for artists to develop and realize their vision with resources that would otherwise 

 
13 
  
be unavailable or gr eatly diminished in the face of lack of opportunities. The Committee notes 
that the 2014 High Powered Committee also expressed that the Ministry has to work as a point 
of coordination for cultural expression and a catalyst for the dissemination of that exp ression 
through the encouragement and sponsorship of multifarious artistic activity. To this end, 
Committee feels that there should be proper and clear segregation of functions among the 
Akademis. 
(Para 54) 
Reply of the Ministry 
17.1 Ministry agrees with t he view point of Committee and would like to submit that each 
Akademi is established with a distinctive mandate.  The Sangeet Natak Akademi is responsible 
for promoting and preserving the performing arts, including music, dance, and theatre.  The Lalit 
Kala Akademi focuses on promoting and developing visual arts, including painting, sculpture, 
and graphic art.  The Sahitya Akademi, on the other hand, is dedicated to promoting and 
developing literature in Indian languages.  National School of Drama, which was i nitially a part 
of Sangeet Natak Akademi, is now the most premier theatre training in stitute in India that offers 
courses and workshops in dramatic arts.  The Centre for Cultural Resources and Training is 
dedicated to promoting cultural education and training for Indian youth. Kalakshetra Foundation 
is known for its unique approach to arts education, which combines traditional Indian art forms 
with modern pedagogy and techniques, and its emphasis on the holistic development of the 
individual through arts and  culture. The Indira Gandhi National Centre for the Arts, is focused 
on the study and preservation of India's diverse cultural heritage through research, 
documentation, and dissemination of knowledge and cutting edge technology. 
 
17.2 The M inistry provides  financial assistance to these academies for organizing various 
cultural events and activities, such as exhibitions, festivals, workshops, and seminars. It also 
supports research and documentation of various aspects of Indian culture and provides 
scholarships and awards to artists and scholars. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
18. Roles and responsibilities need to be clearly defined. The Heads of these institutions must 
be domain experts for such bodies. They must be persons with knowledge and work experience in 
the cultural domain of their institutions. More autonomy and proper policy or guidelines to 
guide the working of these institutions will enable them to carry on their designated tasks 
efficiently and effectively. This will further create transparency and  build stronger working 
relationships and clear dissemination of information across the organizations. 
(Para 56) 
 

 
14 
  
Reply of the Ministry 
18.1 In pursuance of the objectives set out in the Constitution of each Akademi, the Central 
Government appoint s Chairma n / President in each A kademi who  are mostly experts in their 
respective field .  Further, to create transparency, each Akademi functions as per their 
Constitution approved by the Ministry.    
 
Recommendation/Observation 
19. The working of the cultural inst itutions and the inherent gaps and discrepancies suggest 
that there is still significant room for improvement. There is a need to strengthen the technical 
and financial capacities of government departments responsible for cultural policy in order to 
enable them to harness potential synergies with all agencies. Cooperation is needed to develop 
regulatory frameworks, policies and strategies. Effective decentralization, government 
engagement and collaboration between the Government, Akademis and multi -stakeholders can 
improve policy design, implementation and monitoring for the cultural institutions by adhering 
to shared principles and developing complementary strategies. This will strengthen informed and 
transparent systems of governance. 
(Para 57) 
Reply of the Ministry 
19.1 Suggestions of the august Committee have been well taken. The M inistry of Culture 
envisages to carry out rationalization of organizational structure, staff structure, recruitment 
procedures, etc., as per need in consultation with the Akademis. 
 
Synergy and coordination among the Institutions 
Recommendation/Observation 
20. The Committee, in this regard, recommends that Inter -Akademi cooperation is the need 
of the hour for a coordinated and effective promotion of art and culture across the cou ntry. 
Akademis should establish formal channels of communication between different cultural 
Akademis.  The Ministry can encourage the Akademis to share best practices, lessons learned, 
and resources with each other. This can also resolve the issue of lack of infrastructure. 
Moreover, it can lead to optimum utilization of resources. The Committee is also of the view that 
the Ministry can explore the streamlining of the functions of the Akademis, defining separate 
functions and compartmentalization of the sam e. The Committee notes that “Azadi ka Amrit 
Mahotsav” was a stellar success in promoting and promoting and propagating our culture in 
various nooks and corners of the country. The Committee reminds that the lessons learned in 
organizing “Azadi ka Amrit Mah otsav” should be further utilised to generate synergies among 

 
15 
  
all the cultural institutions and those lessons may be converted into Institutional mechanisms to 
administer the cultural Institutions and Akademis. 
(Para 62) 
Reply of the Ministry 
20.1 Ministry agrees with the views of the Committee and further submits that the Akademis 
always extends support and cooperation to its sister organizations in their activities. Recently, 
Sangeet Natak Akademi  in conjunction with UNMESHA – International Literature Festival by 
the Sahitya Akademi, organized UTKARSH - festival of folk and tribal art forms from 2 -5 
August 2023 in Bhopal with full zeal, enthusiasm and fervor. Mos t of the AKAM events have 
also been done with close co ordination with all Akademis and ZCCs. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
21. Further, the Committee recommends that the Ministry must facilitate joint research 
projects, exchange programs and interdisciplinary collaborations between Akademis to 
encourage scholars, researcher, artists from different ac ademies to work together on shared 
research interests cultural preservation projects and innovative initiatives. Ministry must 
establish common standard, policies and guidelines across different Akademis to ensure 
consistency and alignment. This can includ e areas such as governance, ethical practices, 
financial management and quality assurance. 
(Para 63) 
Recommendation/Observation 
22. The Akademis can also explore opportunities for collaborative funding and resource 
mobilization By jointly applying for gran ts sponsorships or donations, academies can enhance 
their chances of securing funding for larger projects or infrastructure development. 
 (Para 64) 
Reply of the Ministry 
22.1 Ministry agrees with the view of the Committee and would like to submit that rece ntly 
Ministry has formulated policies concerning Payment to artists, template for sponsorships and 
grants by Ministry to artists and institutions and SOP for the faculties in training  institutes under 
the Ministry. These policies will serve the following purpose:- 
(i) Eliminate the difference in the remuneration being paid to artists by  the different 
institutions of Ministry and bring uniform rates into the system. 
 (ii) Will give an  opportunity to artists from  far flung areas to get  benefits of the various  
schemes / programmes being organized by the Ministry and its organizations. 

 
16 
  
(iii) It will bring in the discipline among the teaching faculty and to reestablish the pristine 
glory of the training/educational institutions of the Ministry. 
  
Outreach and Inclusivity 
Recommendation/Observation 
23. The Committee, therefore, recommends that to address these challenges, National 
Akademis should prioritize outreach efforts by actively engaging with communities, promoting 
accessibility, fostering partnerships, and utilizing various communication channels to raise 
awareness about their activities and opportunities. By doing so, they can broaden their impact, 
increase inclusivity, and promote cultural exchange and understanding. 
 (Para 68) 
Reply of the Ministry 
23.1 The cultural activities and programmes are conducted by Akademis at the Headquarters 
and at various locations across the country. These academies are advised and persuaded to 
involve public representatives including MLAs, and MPs, and civil society and civi c body 
workers/ members.  The suggestions of the august Committee have been well taken and will be 
kept in mind. Moreover, the Akademis prioritize their outreach through social media channels, 
and by signing MoUs with various other similar organizations. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
24. Further, the Akademis must evolve a cultural landscape that ensures the creation of 
culture platforms, supports cultural diversity and provides sustainable employment/ jobs for 
artists after the Akademis programmes. 
(Para 69) 
Reply of the Ministry 
24.1 Over the years, the Akademis have conducted its events/ programmes providing stage to 
artists from various locations. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
25. The Akademis must also leverage technology for coordination between the Akadem is to 
improve outreach and promote each other. 
(Para 71) 
 
 

 
17 
  
Reply of the Ministry 
25.1 It is submitted that social media platforms such as Youtube, Facebook, and Instagram is 
leveraged to create awareness about the upcoming programmes, and many shows are li ve-
streamed/published for maximum outreach. 
 
Interaction between Akademis and educational institutions  
Recommendation/Observation 
26. The Committee observes that in the past our cultural Akademis did not seem to interact 
nor did they have any sustained or  meaningful dialogue with schools, colleges and universities - 
even in the metros, leave alone the vast remainder of the country. As a result, the Akademis, for 
the most part, worked like museums in the wilderness. The Committee, however, notes that 
various initiatives have been taken by the cultural institutions to interact with educational 
institutions. In the existing scenario, the Committee feels that our schools need to integrate 
cultural education as part of their curriculum as mentioned in New Education Policy. This has to 
become mandatory for it to be effective. 
(Para 77) 
Reply of the Ministry 
26.1 A number of steps ha ve been taken to improve the interface between Akademis and 
education institutions in the country like showcasing documentaries, short films etc. from its 
specialized archives in schools for schoolchildren to make them aware about our cultural 
traditions, organizing workshops and  seminars for teachers on the importance of cultural 
education, etc.  Akademis will continue to make interactio ns with schools / colleges in future 
also. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
27. The Committee emphasizes the significance of an interdisciplinary approach in schools 
and higher education and also introducing students to tangible and intangible heritage as 
suggested by New Education Policy. Teachers need to be groomed as specialists and an 
excellent team of teachers and faculty will have to be developed. Also, local artists and crafts 
persons have to be hired as guest faculty to promote local music, art, language s, and handicraft, 
and to ensure that students are aware of the culture and local knowledge where they study. 
(Para 78) 
Reply of the Ministry 
27.1 Ministry agree s with the comments of the Committee and would like to apprise that  
Centre for Cultural Resources and Training (CCRT) is giving training to Teachers and Teachers 
Educators in this direction. Training programmes are also being revamped in consonance with 

 
18 
  
NEP – 2020.  Akademis like SNA, LKA have been providing materials to CBSE and NCERT 
on Art and p erformance. However , the mandate of art education and appreciation has to be 
widened in the school curriculum and the Akademis will be of great source of information and 
pedagogy in this regard. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
28. Education and culture are ins eparable and will remain incomplete without one another. 
The Committee, therefore, feels that the mandate of the Akademis needs to be rearticulated to 
emphasize links among the Akademis as well as with a range of educational institutions. They 
should interact with Indian universities and educational institutions to propagate, preserve, and 
enrich our heterogeneous culture. Such a link would also promote arts education, essential if we 
are to build a new generation of culture and arts "managers" with a vision. 
(Para 79) 
Reply of the Ministry 
28.1 Centre for Cultural R esources and Training (CCRT) is signing MoUs with Institutes for 
strengthening the objective of cultural education in line with the recommendation of NEP 2020 
at the University level. 
 
28.2 Also, the Chairman, Sangeet Natak Akademi (SNA) has recently been nominated by the 
NCERT to the Committee Curricular Area Groups (CAG) to revamp the national teaching -
learning materials of school education – to make them more holistic, interdisciplinary, 
experiential, engaging and enjoyable. The Sangeet Natak Akademi is constantly providing 
inputs/suggestions in bringing education and culture closer. 
 
Technological Advancements/Digital accessibility  
Recommendation/Observation 
29. The Committee appreciates the e fforts being made in the direction of digitalisation. 
However, it feels that more can be done in achieving the goal of Digital Platforms like OTT 
apps, promoting the creation of content, creation of productions, etc., to be facilitated by them 
online. Akademis the explore the provision of online membership programs that offer exclusive 
benefits, such as access to premium content, discounts on events, or personalized Akademis 
should also utilize live -streaming technologies to broadcast performances, lectures , workshops, 
and other cultural events in real time. This allows people to experience cultural activities from 
anywhere in the world, fostering engagement and participation.  
(Para 85) 

 
19 
  
Reply of the Ministry 
29.1 It is submitted that the programmes/ events are published and live streamed on the social 
media platforms to enhance awareness, engagement and outreach. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
30. Akademis can also venture into the creation of virtual spaces that showcase exhibitions 
and galleries, allowing use rs to explore artworks and cultural artefacts virtually. These 
platforms can provide 360 -degree views, detailed descriptions, audio guides, and interactive 
elements to enhance the user experience. Virtual exhibitions can reach a wider audience. 
(Para 87) 
Reply of the Ministry 
30.1 The Min istry of Culture persuades the Akademis to adopt the technological 
advancements in their day to day functioning. T hey have been directed to adopt AI and other 
technological advancements in order to build new audiences and t aking art and culture closer to 
the public especially the young generation. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
31. The Committee also recommends that Akademis should develop comprehensive digital 
archives and libraries that provide searchable databases, high -resolution images, and detailed 
metadata. These digitized collections enable researchers, scholars, and the general public to 
access and study cultural heritage materials remotely. 
(Para 88) 
Reply of the Ministry 
31.1 The Sangeet Natak Akademi has a specialize d library and archives with more than 
twenty five thousand books and archival material and recordings of eminent artists of the 
country of last more than six decades respectively in the Akademi. The Akademi has digitized 
most of these materials and made th em available to the public. IGNCA launched the Vedic 
Heritage Portal, a digital repository of Vedic Knowledge and tradition form across the country. 
National School of Drama digitizes the Play Videos and audios of songs. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
32. Akademis should also utilize social media platforms to engage with audiences, share 
updates, and promote cultural programmes. Further, fostering collaborations with other cultural 

 
20 
  
institutions, universities, and organizations to create joint digital initi atives can also be a great 
help. 
(Para 89) 
Reply of the Ministry 
32.1 The Akademis leverage number of social media platforms to enhance engagement, and 
awareness about the programmes. 
 
Community participation and public awareness 
Recommendation/Observation 
33. In Committee's opinion, artistic and cultural activities can engage a wide audience in a 
way that resonates with their cultural background. They are an effective forum for community 
collaboration and engaging marginalized communities. 
 (Para 102) 
Reply of the Ministry 
33.1 Ministry agrees with the view of the Committee. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
34. The Committee feels that there is a need to strengthen ties with local communities, artists, 
and cultural organizations. Further, a bottom -to-top approach is  required for a better 
understanding of the ground level requirements. Akademis should involve communities in 
decision-making processes, co-creation  of programs, and the preservation of intangible cultural 
heritage. Engaging with the community helps ensur e relevance and authenticity in cultural 
activities, further, leading to the revival of lost traditions, languages and customs. 
 (Para 103) 
Reply of the Ministry 
34.1 The Ministry of Culture recognizes the vital role that Akademis play in promoting and 
disseminating our nation's rich cultural heritage. To further strengthen this important work, the 
Ministry encourages the Akademis to explore enhanced engagement strategies, both online and 
offline, to connect more effectively with local artists and cultural organizations. 
 
 
 
 

 
21 
  
Public-Private Partnership (PPP) 
Recommendation/Observation 
35. The Committee feels that little has been done in engaging the private sector and there is 
still a wider scope for exploration in this field. Private partners can provide fin ancial support 
through sponsorships, grants, donations, or investments. Private partners can also provide 
expertise, resources, and technical assistance to the Akademis. Collaboration with private 
partners in the co -creation and co -production of programs, exhibitions, festivals, or other 
cultural events can bring diverse perspectives, innovative ideas, and broader networks to the 
cultural Akademis. 
 (Para 108) 
Reply of the Ministry 
35.1 Akademis have started implementing PPP projects in collaboration with t he private 
organizations / institutions / S tate Akademis / Governments/ Artistic Societies and other 
Akademis, though on a small canvas. However, they are continuous ly making efforts to involve 
more participation by private partners in the field of academic and cultural programs. 
 
Protection of rural and tribal culture 
Recommendation/Observation 
36. The Committee is not satisfied with the reply of the Ministry. The Committee feels that the 
specialized body for Rural, Tribal and Folk Arts could if set up, be  a vehicle for the propagation 
of folk and tribal art forms effectively. This would also mean nurtur ing these forms and 
preserving them in their original form as well as encouraging innovation in presentation without 
destroying the authenticity of these ar t forms. This could perhaps also be a way to raise the 
status as well the remuneration of these artists to levels comparable to those of the classical 
artists. In addition, it can facilitate a cultural dialogue between all art forms from classical to 
traditional. 
 (Para 117) 
Reply of the Ministry 
36.1 The mandate of each Akademi is different from each other. However, Committees / 
sections are established in each Akademi which are dedicated to the cause of  folk and tribal art 
forms and their artists of the c ountry. Further, every year Ministry earmarks 4.3% of the total 
budget allocation under Centre Sector Schemes for the betterment and upliftment of Tribal 
people / Arts. Through these schemes, monthly scholarships / pensions are also given to tribal 
artists and thus, Ministry is not only able to keep alive the folk art traditions of the country but 
also help the folk artists to be empowered monetarily. 
 

 
22 
  
36.2 In addition, it may be noted that the ZCCs under the Ministry already cater to the need of 
promotion of the Folk Arts which include Tribal Arts of the concerned zone. 
 
Leveraging G20 
Recommendation/Observation 
37. The Committee appreciates the initiatives taken by the Ministry of Culture and various 
cultural institutions in showcasing India's rich cultura l heritage and art forms at various G20 
forums and Conferences. The Committee observes that this is a golden opportunity to propagate 
and exhibit our thousands of years old continuous cultural heritage to the world community. 
 (Para 127) 
Reply of the Ministry 
37.1 Ministry places its gratitude to the  Committee and would like to apprise  the Committee 
that Ministry has arranged various programs during G20 S ummit in India. Few of them are like 
Gandharva – Aatodyam – a unique performance by a musical ensemble f eaturing 78 artists 
including 11 children, 13 women, 7 differently abled (Divyang) artists, 26 young man and 21 
seniors with different rare folk musical instruments, IGNCA has installed the world‟s tallest (27 
feet) Ashtadhatu statue of Natraj at Bharat Mandapam (ITPO), New Delhi. The golden coloured 
statue of Natraj was well appreciated by all the foreign del egates and visitors during G20 
Summit, etc.  The events were not only enjoyed and appreciated by Indian leaders but also 
greatly applauded by the G20 leaders. 
 
Incentives for artists showing their talent on trains, buses, etc. 
Recommendation/Observation 
38. Some people beg for money in trains, buses in exchange of a devotional song, a qawwali 
or a melodious Bollywood number. While most of them are physic ally challenged, some just take 
up the practice out of sheer poverty. However, many of these beggars are also musically trained 
or belong to families that have been practising music for generations together. 
Ministry/Akademis must take measures to identify  such artists and provide them a platform to 
showcase their talent and also provide monetary support to them. 
 (Para 129{i}) 
Reply of the Ministry 
38.1 Ministry thrusts high regard to the suggestions of the august Committee. The SNA and 
other performing Akademis have been directed to identify such talents and provide platform to 
hitherto unnoticed artists. It is significant to mention that SNA has conducted a historic 5 day 
festival -jyotirgamaya-festival of unsung artists in Delhi in 2022. 

 
23 
  
Need for promotion of art and culture in schools 
Recommendation/Observation 
39. Arts in modern education help to stimulate creativity, inspire confidence, and foster 
personal growth. It is a necessary part of any student's education and should be encouraged in 
all schools. Indian arts of all kinds must be offered to students at all levels of education, starting 
with early childhood care and education. Outstanding local artists and crafts persons should be 
hired as guest faculty to promote local music, art, languages, and h andicraft, and to ensure that 
students are aware of the culture and local knowledge of the region where they study. 
 (Para 129{iv}) 
Reply of the Ministry 
39.1 Centre for Cultural Resources and Training (CCRT) , an autonomous organization of the 
Ministry of Culture established in the year 1979 , with objective of linking education with 
culture and to fulfill the above said objective, CCRT took over the scheme “Propagation of 
Culture among college and school students” which was being implemented by Delhi Univer sity, 
since 1970. 
39.2 Since then CCRT has been working tirelessly not only for promotion of Indian  Art and 
Culture in schools by organizing various Training programmes i.e. orientation courses (for in -
service Senior Secondary level teachers, teachers edu cators including DIET Lecturers) and 
Thematic workshops specifically “Role of Puppetry in School Education in line with NEP 
2020”  (for primary level in -service teachers) etc., but also at the same time developing the 
cultural educational resources on vari ous facets of art and culture, which consist of  160 
publications and 41 audio-visual documentations. 
39.3 Further, the NEP -2020 has been also emphasizing on the introduction of language, art 
and culture in schools from the foundation level itself and CCRT  has been training the teachers 
where teachers are made aware of incorporating Cultural components in classroom teaching by 
using methodologies prepared by the CCRT for cultural orientation and preparation of teaching -
learning material under the mandated objectives of CCRT. 
39.4 Also, the Besant  Arundale Senior Secondary School (BASS), a unit of Kalakshetra 
Foundation has a separate group in Classes XI and XII where Bharatanatyam and Carnatic 
Music are taught as a subject.  Further Children studying in Classes IV to VIII are taught Dance, 
Music and Visual Arts. 
 
Lack of career guidance programmes in the arts for school children 
Recommendation/Observation 
40. Most teenagers are receiving little to no career guidance outside the home. Choosing a 
career path af ter school can be challenging, especially for students who have pursued arts. 

 
24 
  
However, with the growing demand for creative and artistic talents in various industries, the 
careers options  for art student s have increased significantly.  Arts need no longer r emain a 
passion and hobby. Career option guidance programmes must be encouraged in schools to help 
students who want to pursue a career in the arts and creative field full-time. 
 (Para 129{v}) 
Reply of the Ministry 
40.1 CCRT is providing Scholarships under  the scheme CTSSS and Scholarship to Young 
Artists to facilitate their training in their specified field and also helps in pursuing a career in the 
arts and creative field full time. 
40.2 In two programmes , namely, Extension Services & Community Feedback P rogram and 
Cultural Club Scheme, children are getting exposure to work under traditional professional 
artists to learn Art and Craft. These programme s are organized for students of class 06 -12 in 
Government and Government aided schools , in which teenage ch ildren and  adolescence are 
covered. 
40.3 Also, the Sangeet Natak Akademi through its two teaching institutions of dance and 
music Kathak Kendra in Delhi and Jawaharlal Nehru Manipur Dance Academy in Imphal have 
been running Diploma Courses in dance and music.  These courses are not only job oriented but 
also help the teenagers to opt for the performing arts as a career option to become self reliant.     
 
No mention of Gujarat which is famous for various cultural values like Garba, Navratri 
and other traditional dances, nataks like Bhavai 
Recommendation/Observation 
41. Ministry must take measures for equitable representation of all states in the field of art 
and culture. 
 (Para 129{vii}) 
Reply of the Ministry 
41.1 Akademis gives equal importance to all States  in its activities.  As regards Gujarat, 
Sangeet Natak Akademi being the nodal agency for Intangible Culture Heritage (ICH) 
successfully submitted the dossier of Garba for its inscription on UNESCO‟s heritage list 
resulting in Garba getting inscribed on the  Representative List of Intangible Culture Heritage of 
Humanity of UNESCO. 
 
 
 

 
25 
  
Lack of infrastructure in various Akademis and regional centres in Arunachal Pradesh 
Recommendation/Observation 
42. Ministry/ Akademis may look into the matter and ensure that ne cessary measures are 
taken in this regard. 
 (Para 129{viii}) 
Reply of the Ministry 
42.1 The efforts are on to develop/implement advanced infrastructure in all Akademis and 
regional centres. Ministry is continuously sending proposals to Ministry of Finance to enhance 
the budget of these Akademis for improving the infrastructure. 
 
Provision for assisting State Akademis in Kerala  
Recommendation/Observation 
43. The Ministry/ Akademis may take necessary measures to implement schemes for 
providing support and financial assistance to the State Akedemis in Kerala. 
 (Para 129{xi}) 
Reply of the Ministry 
43.1 Ministry of Culture does not provide financial support to any state academies. However, 
Ministry through its various schemes and organizations makes its best eff ort to organize 
programs / activities / events across the country to promote art and culture like  Sahitya  
Akademi organizes several literary programmes in collaboration with the State Akademis across 
the country including in Kerala. Examples of this are t he collaborative events organized in 
association with Odisha Sahitya Akademi, Karnataka Sahitya Akademi, Kerala Sahitya 
Akademi, J&K Academy of Art, Culture and Languages, Lakshadweep Kala Academy, Goa 
Konkani Academy etc.  Both Sahitya Akademi and the Sta te Akademi also collaborate during 
the participation in book fairs and festivals. 
 
Number of Cultural Akademis in Andhra Pradesh  
Recommendation/Observation 
44. The total number of Akademis in Andhra Pradesh may be furnished to the Committee. 
 (Para 129{xii}) 
Reply of the Ministry 
44.1 As of now, no akademi is present in Andhra Pradesh. With the limited fund allocated to 
Akademis, it is difficult to establish Akademi in each state of the country. To overcome this, 
Ministry has set up seven Zonal Cultural Ce ntres (ZCC). These centers aim to conserve and 

 
26 
  
develop art, culture and crafts across the country. South Zone Cultural Centres headquarters at 
Thanjavur (Tamil Nadu) covers almost each state of South India including Andhra Pradesh. 
 
Plans for future expansion of such Akademis, especially in Rajamundry Constituency, etc. 
Recommendation/Observation 
45. The Ministry/Akademis may take measures for the expansion of Akademis and other 
cultural institutions in Rajamundry and other constituencies for the promotion of local art and 
cultures in these regions. 
 (Para 129{xiii}) 
Reply of the Ministry 
45.1 Ministry/Akademi is working on it. 

 
27 
  
 
CHAPTER-III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
MINISTRY HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
Election and Tenure of Heads of the National Akademis and Cultural Institutions 
Recommendation/Observation 
1. The Committee notes that only the Chairman of Sahitya Akademi is elected. The process 
for appointment of the Chairman/President as also their tenure varies between the Akademis. 
The tenure of the Governing Body is also different for the different Akademis, ranging between 3 
years for Lalit Kala Akademi to 10 years for Kalakshetra Foundation. There are no fixed 
guidelines with regard to the number of me mbers of the Governing Council, the number of 
meetings to be held, etc. Also, there are no people's representatives in the Governing Council of 
the Akademis. 
 (Para 17) 
Recommendation/Observation 
2. The Committee observes that there are different parameter s for different Akademis. In 
Committee's view, this lack of uniformity is not desirable as it leads to administrative and 
organisational inconsistencies among the various Akademis and Institutions. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends Government to formula te a policy emphasizing uniformity among all the 
Akademis in terms of the tenure of the Chairman/President, representation and election of the 
General Council, and the minimum number of meetings to be held each year. If required, 
legislation governing the Akademis/ Institutions may be amended to ensure uniformity among the 
Akademis and their functionaries. 
 (Para 18) 
Reply of the Ministry 
2.1 It is submitted that the Memorandum of Association (MoA)/Constitution of each 
Akademi has the set guidelines for app ointment of Chairman / President, tenure of the General 
Council, number of members of the General Council and number of meetings to be held. 
Ministry is making efforts to bring uniformity in appointment and governance structure across 
all the Akademis. 
 
Further Recommendation/ Observation 
2.2 The Committee notes the Ministry’s reply and reiterates its recommendation for 
establishing a uniform policy regarding appointment and governance structure across all 

 
28 
  
the Akademis. It believes that having fixed guideli nes will promote  parity and  effective 
functioning within the Akademis and will also aid the Ministry in exercising administrative 
control.  Additionally, the Committee urges the Ministry to consider the inclusion of a  
Member of Parliament (MP) on the Governing Councils of each Institution.   
 
Regional Centres and Zonal Cultural Centre (ZCCs) 
Recommendation/Observation 
3. The Committee takes note of IGNCA's reply that the opening of Regional Centres in more 
number of States would be feasible subject to the a llocation of more funds for staff as well as 
establishment costs. The Committee takes note of the fund constraints faced by the Institutions. In 
this regard, the Committee recommends that the Ministry of Culture should seriously consider 
enhancing the budgetary allocation for the Akademis. The Committee also noted the suggestion 
from the National School of Drama, requesting Hon'ble MPs to contribute funds from MPLAD 
funds which could be used in the enhancement of art and culture education. 
(Para 32) 
Reply of the Ministry 
3.1 The total budget allocation to the Ministry for 2023 -24 is Rs. 3399.65 crore an d the 
allocation to the Akademis is Rs. 401.27 crore which is about 11.8% of the allocation.  In order 
to meet the additional requirement, if any, during the year, funds ar e made available to the 
Akademis through supplementary grants. It may kindly be appreciated that the grants allocated 
to the Ministry is decided by the Ministry of Finance. 
 
Further Recommendation/ Observation 
3.2 The Committee feels that sufficient budget is crucial for the Akademis growth. In 
the light of the repl y of IGNCA regarding establishing of new Regional Centres, the 
Committee  emphasizes that the Ministry should re assess the budgetary requirements  at 
the RE 2024-25 stage and at BE s tage in subsequent financial years. Also, Ministry should 
prepare a consolidated proposal for additional budget, keeping in view  the expansion 
requirements of each Akademi and the same may be taken up with the Ministry of Finance  
for approval.  
  
Administrative Staff and Vacancies 
Recommendation/Observation 
4. The Committee observes that the Government's Cultural Institutions are affected by 
vacancies and a lack of trained manpower. Lack of manpower not only affects the working of 

 
29 
  
these organizations but also hinders their efficiency. The Committee, therefore, recommends that 
the Ministry of Culture should urgently take measures to fill up the said vacancies at each level 
since manpower is the backbone of these organizations. The Committee also emphasizes that the 
Ministry must conduct the recruitment process in a fair and transparent manner, adhering to 
equal opportunity for all and non -discrimination principles. The Committee may be apprised of 
the recruitment process being followed in the Akademis and Cultural Institutions to fill in posts. 
(Para 37) 
Recommendation/Observation 
5. The Committee desires the Ministry to complete the recruitment process and fill up all the 
vacancies within a fixed period. The Ministry may also apprise the Committee of the status of the 
matter. 
(Para 38) 
Reply of the Ministry 
5.1 As per Ministry of Finance guidelines dated 05.01.2024 regarding creation / revival / 
abolition of post s, all the p osts which are lying vacant for  more than five (05) years stand  
abolished, and to f ill these posts administrative M inistry needs to revive these posts by taking 
Ministry of Finance‟s approval. Ministry of Culture is making continuous efforts to revive these 
posts. Further, the posts which are lying vacant for less than 5 years, the recruitmen t process for 
these vacancies are undergoing expeditiously in all the academies. 
5.2 The current sanctioned / vacant strength of each Akademi is enclosed at Annexure III. 
 
Further Recommendation/ Observation 
5.3 The Committee is concerned about the  huge difference between the sanctioned and 
in-position strength across all  seven Central Akademis. Specifically, three Akademis viz., 
Sangeet Natak Akademi, CCRT,  and Lalit Kala Akademi, are functioning with less than 
40% of the ir sanctioned strength. National Sc hool of Drama has approximately 48%, and 
IGNCA has around 36% vacancies against their sanctioned strengths.   
5.4 The Committee may be apprised of the reasons for such meager working strength in 
the Akademis and urges the Ministry to make concentrated effo rts to streamline the 
processes and initiate the recruitment process at the earliest.   
 
Segregation of Functions 
Recommendation/Observation 
6. The Committee observes that segregation of functions is also an important concept to 
internal control frameworks , financial reporting and regulatory compliance. The overall 

 
30 
  
effectiveness of the organization depends on an effective internal administration, adequate 
division of responsibilities, and the requirement of a sufficient number of staff who are 
adequately trained. Separation of functions is an important mechanism to help reduce the risk of 
fraud, error and other financial misconduct. In addition, it helps to promote accountability, 
transparency and ethical behaviour within the organization. The Committee, the refore, 
recommends segregation of the purchasing, provisioning, financing and policy -making functions 
within the Akademis. 
(Para 55) 
Reply of the Ministry 
6.1 There are various verticals  under each A kademi to handle internal frameworks. As per 
the Memorandum of Associations / Constitutions of th ese Academies, the Governing Board / 
Society is the supreme authority in each Akademi which formulates policies as per the mandate. 
Further, General Financial Rules (GFR) is applicable to all Autonomous Bodies of the  Ministry 
and hence follows all purchasing, financial policies as per GFR. Administration Unit of each 
Akademi is responsible for hiring manpower as per approved RRs. 
 
Further Recommendation/ Observation 
6.2 The Committee is of the opinion that , given their distinct frameworks and mandate, 
each Akademi should have its own  dedicated functioning authority. The Committee notes 
the Ministry’s reply and reiterates that the administrative sections responsible  for tasks 
such as hiring manpower, purchasing, HR issues, and budget management  should be 
clearly defined in each Akademi and be empowered to ensure efficient functioning.  
 
Outreach and Inclusivity 
Recommendation/Observation 
7. The Committee feels that the National Akademis need to enhance its outreach, both  
within urban and rural areas, to make the arts more accessible and inclusive. Without effective 
outreach programmes, Akademis may struggle to reach a broader audience, beyond their 
immediate surroundings. A lack of outreach can reinforce existing cultural  hierarchies and 
exclude cultural practices that are not adequately represented or recognized. This exclusion can 
lead to marginalization of certain art forms, traditions or communities, thereby, limiting cultural 
diversity and stifling creativity. There i s also a risk of losing intangible cultural heritage, as 
there may be insufficient engagements with communities, artists and practitioners who are the 
custodians of these traditions. 
(Para 67) 
Reply of the Ministry 

 
31 
  
7.1 All the Akademi s through their  various regional centres try their  best to reach out to 
artists who are unaware of the functions and activities of t he Akademis. Also, some Akademis 
have project offices in different states for  particular art form. Further, Ministry of C ulture has 
set up seven Z onal Cultural Centres (ZCCs) in the country to protect, promote and preserve 
various forms of folk art & culture throughout the country and also to set up mechanism for 
development of the cultures of various regions. 
 
Further Recommendation/ Observation 
7.2 The Committee feels that to enhance outreach and awareness, Ministry should issue 
directives to all the Akademis to implement specific measures.  Akademis could leverage  
social media platforms, radio stations, local newspapers , and other channels to enga ge 
communities, art practitioners and artists from across the country and tap into their full  
potential.  Additionally, t he Akademis should explore ways to publicize  their events, 
seminars and workshops through various platforms to reach a wider  audience a nd 
encourage greater participation.  
 
Infrastructure and Facilities  
Recommendation/Observation 
8. The Committee observes that investing in infrastructure for cultural Akademis is essential 
for supporting the growth, development, and sustainability of arti stic and cultural practices. 
Committee recommends that informal education may also be imparted through these Institutions. 
Ministry should provide the necessary funds and also promote synergy among the Institutions for 
sharing of infrastructural facilities. Committee also suggested Akademis to explore CSR funds to 
mobilise the resources for infrastructure developments including auditoriums, classrooms, 
studios, rehearsal halls and exhibition areas.  
(Para 82) 
Reply of the Ministry 
8.1 This Ministry envisage s to  strengthen regional presence to facilitate the people of 
different region s and promote synergy among the Akademis for sharing of infrastructural 
facilities. All Akademis are autonomous in nature and they are free to obtain CSR funds. 
 
Further Recommendation/ Observation 
8.2 The Committee is of the opinion  that CSR funding could serve  as an additional 
budget source for the dev elopment and growth of Akademis.   The Committee may be 
apprised of the steps being taken by both the Ministry and the Akademis to secure and 

 
32 
  
utilize this funding.  The Committee also seeks information on the CSR funds received by 
each Akademi in the last three years and how these funds have been utilized.  
Returning of Awards  
Recommendation/Observation 
9. The Committee notes the i nstances of recipients of awards, given by Akademis (such as 
Sahitya Akademi Awards), returning their awards in protest of certain political issues which are 
outside the ambit of the cultural realms and the autonomous functioning of the concerned 
Akademi. Such inappropriate incidents involving the return of awards undermine the 
achievements of the other awardees and also impact the overall prestige and reputation of the 
awards. 
(Para 92) 
Recommendation/Observation 
10. A Member of the Committee opined agains t the view that artists, authors and other 
intellectuals and performers who have been recommended for awards must sign a commitment 
that they will not return the awards as a form of protest at any point in the future before they are 
able to receive it. He was of the view that India is a democratic country, and our Constitution 
has provided to every citizen the freedom of speech and expression and also the freedom to 
protest in any form. Returning of awards is only a form of protest. The Member added that th e 
Committee must strongly recommend to the Government to look into the actual issues in protest 
of which such awards have been returned and work towards resolving them. He was seconded by 
another Member. 
(Para 93) 
Recommendation/Observation 
11. The Committee questioned the re-engagement of such awardees who joined the Akademi 
after insulting it. Such inappropriate incidents involving the return of awards undermine the 
achievements of other awardees and also impact the overall prestige and reputation of the 
awards. The Member again submitted that the Akademis and the other Institutions should 
continue to work together with these artists and not shun them. 
(Para 94) 
Recommendation/Observation 
12. The Committee observes that the awards given by each Akademi con tinue to be top 
honors for an artist in India. The Committee emphasizes that Sahitya Akademi or other 
Akademis are apolitical organizations. There is no place for politics. The Committee, therefore, 
suggests that whenever an award is given, the consent of the recipient must be taken, so that 
he/she does not return it because of political reasons; as it is disgraceful to the country. The 
Committee recommends prior concurrence of short -listed candidates for awards before 

 
33 
  
finalization. A system may be put in p lace where an undertaking is taken from the proposed 
awardee citing acceptance of the award and that the awardees cannot dishonour the award at 
any point of time in future. Awards may not be given without such an undertaking. In the event 
that the awards a re returned, the awardee shall not be considered for such award in the award 
in the future. 
(Para 95) 
Reply of the Ministry 
12.1 The Ministry agrees with the Committee's perspective and would like to avoid 
controversies in all regards. However, obtaining a  signed commitment from the writer prior to 
the award announcement would unfortunately compromise the confidentiality surrounding the 
selection process. Additionally, the legal enforceability of such a pre -declaration commitment 
might be uncertain. 
 
Further Recommendation/ Observation 
12.2 The Committee acknowl edges the  Ministry’s reply  and understands its concern 
about confidentiality and legal implications related to obtaining signed commitment s. The 
Committee suggests that the commitment document should  include a non-disclosure clause 
to protect against  breach of confidentiality. Alternatively, the Ministry should explore 
other measures to prevent similar issues i n the future. A dditionally, a policy should be 
established to monitor  artists who have return ed their award s but remain affiliated with 
the Akademi.  
 
Youth Engagement 
Recommendation/Observation 
13. The Committee notes that the efforts are largely targeted at getting children to learn art 
forms - namely dance and music. The Committee feels that intervention is required to make them 
aware of what these traditions are; at least to a point where they can identify some very basic 
ideas of the performing and visual arts. While the Ministry of Culture set up the CCRT with 
somewhat a similar idea of reach ing out and creating opportunities for young children, 
especially from smaller cities, and all regions including the North -East, the program needs to be 
seriously reviewed and updated. Further, it should be linked with other ongoing efforts of the 
Ministry. 
(Para 121) 
Reply of the Ministry 
13.1 The Sangeet Natak Akademi has two teaching institutions of dance and music , namely, 
Kathak Kendra in Delhi and Jawaharlal Nehru Manipur Dance Academy in Imphal. Akademi 

 
34 
  
through these institutions is imparting training of Kathak dance and Manipuri dance and music , 
respectively. These centres are also running Diploma Courses in their respective places. Sangeet 
Natak Akademi is also running various type of training programmes of local arts forms through 
its centres in Guwahati, Agartala, Chandankiyari and Thiruvananthapuram. 
13.2 In addition, internship programs are also provided by IGNCA to young artists and 
talented youth artists to provide them an opportunity for a direct learning in the field of art, 
dance, craft, music etc. 
 
Further Recommendation/ Observation 
13.3 The Committee feels that  given the vast number of traditional dance and music 
forms in the country, it is crucial to support and nurture the talents of the youth. A handful 
of institutions and centres may n ot be adequate to address the diverge range of art forms. 
Therefore, it recommends that the Ministry and concerned Akademis make dedicated 
efforts to establish additional teaching institutions and centres, particularly in the North-
East Region, hilly areas, and islands, to create more opportunities for the young children.  
 
Representation and promotion of culture of North East States of India  
Recommendation/Observation 
14. North East India is known for its geographical location, ecology and diverse culture . It is 
the homeland of large number of ethnic groups. Each ethnic community has its own distinct 
culture including food, music, dance, dress, language, etc. However, despite this, the North East 
has not been represented to the degree it deserves to be rep resented. Ministry must take 
measures in this direction and implement more schemes to preserve and promote various forms 
of art and culture in the NER. Ministry must extend all kinds of assistance including financial 
support to the individual artists and organizations in this region. 
(Para 129{ii}) 
Reply of the Ministry 
14.1 Akademis through their region al centres established in North -East make  all possible 
efforts to preserve and promote various forms of art and culture in the NER. These centres also 
ensure the maximum participation of North-East in all their activities. 
 
Further Recommendation/ Observation 
14.2 The Committee notes the reply and urges  the Ministry to allocate a specific portion 
of the budget for each Akademi to the development and promotion  of the rich  culture of 

 
35 
  
the North -East Region. It also reiterates the need for special emphasis on providing 
assistance to NER to ensure maximum support and cultural growth in the region.  
 
Handling, preservation and digitization of Manuscripts 
Recommendation/Observation 
15. Manuscripts are the primary source of historic information. Manuscripts are diminishing 
along with time. Despite their best efforts, it is difficult to save manuscripts in a physical form 
beyond a time frame. Digital preservation of man uscripts restores them from damage, larceny 
and decay. The Ministry should evolve a well -designed digitization program that includes not 
just digital capture, but also appropriate care and repair of original materials, and long -term 
management of the digital files it produces. 
(Para 129{iii}) 
Reply of the Ministry 
15.1 National Mission on Manuscripts (NMM) since its inception in 2003 till today has 
contributed immensely to the preservation, documentation and dissemination of Ind ia's rich 
manuscript heritage . As of now, NMM has documented 5.2 million number of manuscripts, 
conserved 90 Million folios, digitized 3.30 lakhs number of manuscripts, organized  228 
preventive and 33 curative conservation workshops, published 114 books, organized  78 Basic 
level and  26 Advance level workshops on Manuscript logy  and Paleography,  1.28 lakh  
digitized manuscripts have been uploaded in the cloud server, out of which 70 Thousand 
manuscripts are available online for research purpose without download/ print facility. 
 
Further Recommendation/ Observation 
15.2 The Committee acknowledges the Ministry’s reply and applauds the Ministry for its 
efforts in preserving, documenting and disseminating the country’s rich  manuscript 
heritage. The Committee  seeks information on  the numbe r of manuscripts still pending 
digitization and Ministry’s roadmap to achieve 100% digitization.   
 
Non-availability of information in Hindi or any other local language 
Recommendation/Observation 
16. Culture is encased in our languages. Art, in the form of  literature, plays, music films etc. 
cannot be fully appreciated without language. In order to preserve and promote our diverse 
culture, we need to preserve and promote a culture’s languages. Further, information on the art  
and culture must also be made available in Hindi and the local languages. 
(Para 129{vi}) 

 
36 
  
Reply of the Ministry 
 
16.1 The Ministry is continuously striving to disseminate information regarding the art and 
culture, in various languages. 
 
Further Recommendation/ Observation 
16.2 The Committ ee recommends the Ministry to take necessary steps to at least first 
make the various art forms available in Hindi and English languages in order to maximize 
reach and accessibility . Following this, t he Ministry, should work on making the 
information avail able in scheduled and other local languages, based on regional 
requirements, in a phased manner.  
 
 
 

 
37 
  
 
CHAPTER-IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE FINAL 
REPLIES OF THE MINISTRY ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
 
-Nil- 
 
***** 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
38 
  
RECOMMENDATIONS/ OBSERVATIONS AT A GLANCE 
CHAPTER-III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
MINISTRY HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
Election and Tenure of Heads of the National Akademis and Cultural Institutions  
The Committee notes the Ministry’s reply and reiterates its recommendation for 
establishing a uniform policy regarding appointment and governance structure across all 
the Akademis. It believes that having fixed guidelines will promote parity and effective 
functioning within the Akademis and will also aid the Ministry in exercising administrative 
control.  Additionally, the Committee urges the Ministry to consider the inclusion of a  
Member of Parliament (MP) on the Governing Councils of each Institution.   
(Para 2.2) 
 
Regional Centres and Zonal Cultural Centre (ZCCs) 
The Committee feels that sufficient budget is crucial for the Akademis growth. In the light 
of the reply of IGNCA regarding establishing of new Regional Centres, the Committee  
emphasizes that the Ministr y should reassess the budgetary requirements at the RE 2024 -
25 stage and at BE stage in subsequent financial years. Also, Ministry should prepare a 
consolidated proposal for additional budget, keeping in view the expansion requirements of 
each Akademi and the same may be taken up with the Ministry of Finance for approval.  
(Para 3.2) 
  
Administrative Staff and Vacancies 
The Committee is concerned about the huge difference between the sanctioned and in -
position strength across all seven Central Akademis. Spe cifically, three Akademis viz., 
Sangeet Natak Akademi, CCRT, and Lalit Kala Akademi, are functioning with less than 
40% of their sanctioned strength. National School of Drama has approximately 48%, and 
IGNCA has around 36% vacancies against their sanctioned strengths.   
(Para 5.3) 
The Committee may be apprised of the reasons for such meager working strength in the 
Akademis and urges the Ministry to make concentrated efforts to streamline the processes 
and initiate the recruitment process at the earliest.   
(Para 5.4) 

 
39 
  
 
Segregation of Functions 
The Committee is of the opinion that, given their distinct  frameworks and mandate, each 
Akademi should have its own dedicated functioning authority. The Committee notes the 
Ministry’s reply and reiterates that the admin istrative sections responsible for tasks such 
as hiring manpower, purchasing, HR issues, and budget management should be clearly 
defined in each Akademi and be empowered to ensure efficient functioning.   
(Para 6.2) 
 
Outreach and Inclusivity 
The Committee feels that to enhance outreach and awareness, Ministry should issue 
directives to all the Akademis to implement specific measures.  Akademis could leverage 
social media platforms, radio stations, local newspapers, and other channels to engage 
communities, art practitioners and artists from across the country and tap into their full 
potential.  Additionally, the Akademis should explore ways to publicize their events, 
seminars and workshops through various platforms to reach a wider audience and 
encourage greater participation.  
(Para 7.2) 
 
Infrastructure and Facilities  
The Committee is of the opinion that CSR funding could serve as an additional budget 
source for the development and growth of Akademis.   The Committee may be apprised of 
the steps being taken  by both the Ministry and the Akademis to secure and utilize this 
funding.  The Committee also seeks information on  the CSR funds  received by each 
Akademi in the last three years and how these funds have been utilized.  
(Para 8.2) 
Returning of Awards  
The Committee acknowl edges the  Ministry’s reply  and u nderstands its concern about  
confidentiality and legal implications related to obtaining signed commitment s. The 
Committee suggests that the commitment document should  include a non-disclosure clause 
to prot ect against  breach of confidentiality. Alternatively, the Ministry  should explore 
other measures to prevent similar issues i n the future. A dditionally, a policy should be 
established to monitor  artists who have returned their award s but remain affiliated with 
the Akademi.  
(Para 12.2) 

 
40 
  
 
Youth Engagement 
The Committee feels that given the vast number of traditional dance and music forms in 
the country, it is crucial to support and nurture the talents of the youth. A handful of 
institutions and centres may not  be adequate to address the diverge range of art forms. 
Therefore, it recommends that the Ministry and concerned Akademis make dedicated 
efforts to establish additional teaching institutions and centres, particularly in the North -
East Region, hilly areas, and islands, to create more opportunities for the young children.  
(Para 13.3) 
 
Representation and promotion of culture of North East States of India  
The Committee notes the reply and urges  the Ministry to allocate a specific portion of the 
budget for eac h Akademi to the development and promotion of the rich culture of the 
North-East Region. It also reiterates the need for special emphasis on providing assistance 
to NER to ensure maximum support and cultural growth in the region.  
(Para 14.2) 
 
Handling, preservation and digitization of Manuscripts 
The Committee acknowledges the Ministry’s reply and applauds the Ministry for its efforts 
in preserving, documenting and disseminating the country’s rich manuscript heritage.  The 
Committee seeks information on  the number of manuscripts still pending digitization and 
Ministry’s roadmap to achieve 100% digitization.   
(Para 15.2) 
Non-availability of information in Hindi or any other local language 
The Committee recommends the Ministry to take necessary steps to at le ast first make the 
various art forms available in Hindi and English languages in order to maximize reach and 
accessibility. Following this, the Ministry, should work on making the information 
available in scheduled and other local languages, based on regio nal requirements, in a 
phased manner.  
(Para 16.2) 
 
 
 
 

 
41 
  
 
 
ANNEXURE 

 
42 
Annexure--I 
DetailsofexistingRegionalCentres 
 
Akademi 
 
Number  
 
EstablishedRegionalCentres 
 
SangeetNatakAkademi 
 
 
7 
 
Manipur, Assam (2), Tripura, Jharkhand, 
Delhi, Kerala 
 
 
SahityaAkademi 
 
 
5 
 
Maharashtra, Bengal, Karnataka, Tamil Nadu, 
Tripura 
 
 
National School of 
Drama 
 
 
5 
 
Sikkim, Tripura, Karnataka, Uttar Pradesh, 
J&K 
 
 
Lalit Kala Akademi 
 
 
5 
 
Odisha, Uttar Pradesh, West Bengal, Tamil 
Nadu, Delhi 
 
Indira Gandhi 
National Centre 
Centre for Arts 
9 Varanasi, Guwahati, Bangluru, Ranchi, 
Puducherry, Goa, Vadodara, Srinagar, Thrissur 
Centre for Cultural 
resources and Training 
4 Guwahati, Udaipur, Hyderabad, Damoh 
 
 
 

Annexure-II
Mission Mandate 
• To envision and address the necessity of preserving the threads of rich Indian An and
Cultural Heritage.
• To create a national database through Cultural Mapping with the aid of extensive
ground surveys and documentation.
• To Design a mechanism to fulfil the aspirations of the whole artiste community of the
nation.
• To Preserve, safeguard. revitalise and disseminate the rich cultural heritage of this
country for future generations.
• To create a strong "Cultural Vibrancy" throughout the nation with the help of digital
platforms and outreach.
Objectives 
• To culturally map the art traditions and .cultural practices along with the artists and
craft-persons engaged in the preservation of these art fonns.
• To create National Registers of Artists and Art Form.
• Ranking, Branding and VIC of Artists.
• To create awareness about the strengths of cultural heritage of diverse communities of 
India and develop an interface between culture and identity.
• To provide a single onlinc platform for Cultural Service Providers and link them to
welfare Schemes of the Government.
• The above-mentioned objectives will be carried out with the help of three interlinked
programmes.
National Mission on Cultural Mapping 
43

Meri Saaskriti Meri Pehchau lllera Gaon Meri
Dharohar (MGMD)
a
a
a
Mera Gaol Meri Dhgrohsr (Mcl!rD) is a component of NMCM undertaken as a pan ol
^zadi 
Ka Amrit lvla.horsav (AKAM).
uuder the MGMD culturat }lapping of d.5 lakb viilages is being carried out and more
lhan' 2'14 Lakh villages have arre*.dJ' beeu uapped and uploaded on the Missioa portal
that s€ryss as the National Cultural Workplacr.
The cultural mapping covers several domains coverirg geographic, devetopmeotat andcultural protile induding vill&ge stories, traditiotrat tno*age aud wisdom traditious,cusfo,s' ortrsme,ts, food, feirs and festivals, rifuals, village gods and goddesser,
physical ald historlcar landmarks, lrchitecture, praces of worship, art foris - orat,visua! performed aod crafted (folk songs, folk dances, folk taresi iegenas, epics, rot*theatre, iandlooms, haudicrafts).
360 degree angle vidoo shoots of 750 villages have beeo done under the project.
A web portal has been developed under the M6MD to serve as tbe National culturalworkplace and provide a single window online platform for curture service pro,iders
a
a
44

. CSC collect! field data from viilages
. 6L6,217 (Surveyed); 405,201 {Verilied); 296,584 (Approved)
. UWEUS edits CSC-approved data
. 215,948 (Verified)
rcr uplo:drng
. IGNCA au
. 25,450 lA
dits 1096 of UWEUS verified data. :
udited)
\\Iork Do ne So Far
Villrges surveved rnd dossicrs prepared undcr the Mera Gron \leri Dherohar
(l\ICMD). { component of NMCM underatken es r prrl of Azedi Kn .Amrit \'tahotser
(AKA.!t):
r 215,94E village dossiers have bcen edited so fal.
o 201.080 village dossiers have been uploaded on the ponal.
r IGNC'A has audited 25.450 dossien so far which is l0c'o sampie of the toul
cd rted village dossiers
IGNCA
UWEUS
I
45

 
46 
Annexure-III 
Number of sanctioned posts 
Organization Name  Sanctioned Strength Filled 
Sangeet Natak Akademi 111  42  
Centre for Cultural 
resources and Training 
85  32  
Lalit Kala Akademi 170  66  
Sahitya Akademi 175  135 
Kalakshetra Foundation 120  88 
Indira Gandhi National 
Centre for Arts 
248  160 
National School of Drama 176  92 
 

 
46 
 
 
 
Annexure- IV 
 
Cultural Activities  
SahityaAkademi 
 
Sl 
No. 
Name of the Programme Date Venue 
 
1 Two Day Seminar on the Birth Centenary 
of MahakaviOlappamanna 
In collaboration with Deviprasadam Trust, 
OlappamannaMana, Vellinezhi 
14&15 January 
2023 
OlappamannaMana, 
Vellinezhi, Palakkad – 
679504, Kerala 
2 Birth Centenary Seminar on Kovilan 
In collaboration with International Kovilan 
Study Group, Guruvayur 
9 July 2023 Guruvayur Municipal 
Library Hall, East Nada, 
Guruvayur, Thrissur, Kerala 
3 Literary Forum: “To discuss the creative 
writings of young Malayalam Writers” 
In association with Calicut Book Club, # 
52, C.H. Fly Over, Kozhikode-673001 
19 July 2023 Calicut Book Club, 
Kozhikode 
4 Literary Forum: Asmita Programme on 
Malayalam Literary Talk show 
In association with 
DarsanamSamskarikaVedi, # 16/2392, 
Darsanam Buildings, 
Kalandhithazham, Chelavoor Post, 
Kozhikode-673571 
23 July 2023 MN Sathyardhi Hall, 
Darsanam, Kozhikode 
5 Literary Forum: “Re -reading of Narrative 
Changes in Post Modern Malayalam Poetry 
” 
(in association with Mahakavi P. Memorial 
Cultural Committee Kasargod District 
13.08.2023 Function Hall, Mahakavi P. 
Memorial Cultural 
Committee, Kasargod 
District. 
6 Literary Forum: “Narrative Experience : In 
contemporary Novel and Short Story 
Writing 
(in association with State Central Library, 
Thiruvanantapuram 
13.08.2023 State Central Library Hall, 
Thiruvanantapuram 
7 Gramalok : Poetry Recitation and Readings 
of Short Stories 
(in association with Government 
MuliyarGrama Panchayat, PO., Muliyar , 
Kasargod Dist.) 
19.08.2023 Kasturba Gandhi 
Grandhalaya, PO., Muliyar, 
Kasargod Dist. 
8 Literary Forum: Challenges Facing New 
Writers 
In Collaboration with KarumamPaurnami 
Cultural Organization 
16 September 2023 U. P. School Auditorium, 
Karumam, 
Thiruvananthapuram, Kerala 
9 Sree Narayana Guru Festival 
In Collaboration with Palakkad District 
Public Library, Palakkad, Kerala 
22& 23 September 
2023 
Palakkad District Public 
Library, Seminar Hall, 
Palakkad, Kerala 
10 Birth Centenary Symposium on R. 
Ramachandran 
(In Collaboration with Vallathol 
Vidyapeetham) 
07.10.2023 Vallathol Sabha Mandapam, 
Sukapuram, Edappal, 
Malappuram Dist., Kerala. 
11 Birth Centenary Symposium on M. 12.10.2023 Seminar Hall, Maharaja’s 

 
47 
 
Krishnan Nair 
(In collaboration with Maharaja’s College, 
Ernakulum) 
College, Ernakulum 
12 Symposium on Knowledge in Malayalam 
Novel 
In Collaboration with 26 th Kochi 
International Book Festival 
07.12.2023 Stage-1, 
ErnakulathappanGournds, 
Ernakulum, Kochi, Kerala 
13 Symposium on Polyphony in contemporary 
Malayalam Poetry 
In Collaboration with 26 th Kochi 
International Book Festival 
08.12.2023 Stage-1, 
ErnakulathappanGournds, 
Ernakulum, Kochi, Kerala 
14 Literary Forum: The Shift frm 
Conventional to Digital Reading 
In Collaboration with Department of 
Malayalam, Alphonsa College, Pala 
12.12.2023 Alphonsa College, Pala, 
Kerala 
15 Literary Forum: Scope of translations in 
Cultural Perspectives    held in association 
with  Department of Hindi,  University of 
Kerala, Thiruvananthapuram-695581 
14.12.2023 University of Kerala, 
Thiruvananthapuram-695581 
 AWARD FUNCTION   
16 Translation Prize Ceremony and Abhivyakti 30 September 2022 
– 2  October 2022 
Kerala Sangeet Natak 
Academy and Sahitya 
Akademi, Thrissur 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
48 
 
Indira Gandhi National Centre for the Arts - 
 
Sl No Date Event Item Programme Title 
1.  
23.01.2023 
 
 
Republic Day Celebrations 
 
 
Talk 
 
 
History of the Indian 
Republic 
 
 
 
2.  
24.01.2023 
 
 
Republic Day Celebrations 
 
 
Talk 
 
 
History of the Indian 
Republic 
 
 
3.  11.02.2023 
to 
16.02.2023 
 
Shivratri Dance Festival 
 
 
Performance 
 
 
Bharathanatyam /  
Mohiniyattam 
 
 
4.  
20.02.2023 Shivrathri Talk 
Relevance of Shiva in 
Vedic Studies 
5.  
20.02.2023 Shivrathri 
 
Performance 
 
Shiva: The Bhakti aspect 
in Classical dance 
followed by a 
demonstration 
performance  
 
6.  
08.03.2023 International Women’s 
Day Celebration Felicitations 
Felicitations to the 
women achievers 
followed by a 
motivational talk and an 
interactive session. 
7.  
12.03.2023 Gopeetham Seminar 
Kalam: A Depiction of 
Belief and Culture  
8.  
19.03.2023 Foundation Day 
Celebration Vedic Recitation - 
9.  
19.03.2023 Foundation Day 
Celebration 
Classical Music 
Concert - 
10.  
19.03.2023 Foundation Day 
Celebration Photo Exhibition 
Thrissur- As Cultural 
Capital 

 
49 
 
11.  
21.03.2023 Monthly lecture series Lecture 
Technical Components in 
Bharatanatyam 
12.  
23.04.2023 
25-04-2023 Three-day International 
Seminar Seminar 
Seminar-
SreeShankaraDarshans’ -
in association with 
ThekkeMadham Thrissur 
Cultural Activities-Dance 
Performance (based on 
SreeShankaracharyaKrith
is -with Live Music) 
 
 
Ottanthullal Performance 
(with live music) 
Lecture Demonstration 
(Odissi) 
 
 
Instrumental Music 
Concert 
13.  
08.05.2023 ‘Adhyay 2023’  
Kalari -Presentation, 
lecture and 
Demonstration 
14.  
09.05.2023 ‘Adhyay 2023’  
Puppetry- Presentation, 
lecture and 
Demonstration 
15.  
13-05-2023 
to               
17-05-2023 Kathakali Festival & video 
documentation  performance 
In collaboration with 
VazhenkadaKunchu Nair 
Smaraka Trust, 
Karalmanna, Palakkad 
16.  
05-06-2023 World  Environment Day 
Celebration  
Talk and 
performance  
NokkuvidyaPavakkali  & 
Celebration of World    
Environment Day at 
SreePoornathrayeeshaVri
dhaSadanam Charitable 
Trust, Ernakulam 
 
17.  
19-06-2023  International Yoga day 
Lecture 
Demonstration  
18.  
21-06-2023 World music day 
Lecture 
Demonstration & 
Performance  
19.  
30.06.2023  Lecture 
Temple Architecture of 
Kashmir 

 
50 
 
20.  
27.07.2023  Lecture 
Architectural Heritage 
Conservation in the 
Kerala Context 
21.  
09.08.2023- 
13.082023 
InternationalDayoftheWorl
d’sIndigenousPeoples. 
 
NationalWorksho
ponTribal 
Heritage 
 
Intangible Cultural 
Heritage 
Intangible Natural 
Heritage 
Traditional Crafts 
 
22.  
13.08.2023 Independence Day 
Celebration Music Concert 
in association with 
NadopasanaIrinjalakkuda 
23.  
13.08.2023 Independence Day 
Celebration 
Talk on Historic 
Theme, 
Selfie Frame, 
Flag Distribution 
 
in association with 
Chavara Cultural Centre, 
Kochi 
24.  
14.08.2023 Independence Day 
Celebration 
Patriotic Song 
Competition, Quiz 
Competition, 
Rangoli 
Competition 
in association with IES 
College of Architecture, 
Chittilappilly 
25.  
15.08.2023 Independence Day 
Celebration 
Cultural 
Activities, Yoga 
Demonstration 
in association with 
Airforce Veteran’s 
association, Ayyanthole 
26.  
15.08.2023 Independence Day 
Celebration 
Patriotic Song 
Competition, 
Rangoli 
Competition, 
Tableau 
in association with 
BharatiyaVidyaBhavan, 
Pottore 
27.  
15.08.2023 Independence Day 
Celebration 
Patriotic song, 
Patriotic Dance, 
Patriotic Dress 
in association with 
BharatiyaVidyaBhavan, 
Thrissur Kendra 
28.  
15.08.2023 Independence Day 
Celebration Puppetry 
in association with 
Swathi Central School, 
Vaniyamkulam 
29.  
01st August 
2023 to 10th 
August 2023 
Research on 
AranmulaKannadi 
   
30.  25th August 
2023 to 3rd 
September 
2023 
Research on Rock Art in 
the region of Kerala 
   
31.  August-
September 
Research on Panchatantra 
(UNESCO Memory of the   

 
51 
 
2023 World) 
 
32.   
August-
September 
2023 
Conservation of 
Koothambalam of 
Vadakkunnathan Temple, 
Thrissur 
   
33.  
October 
2023 
Lecture & Performance 
 
 
Lecture on the topic 
“Importance of 
Sanskrit Language 
and Performing 
Arts, Challenges 
and Opportunities 
in Choreography” 
followed by an 
Odissi performance 
in association with Govt. 
Sanskrit College 
(Thrippunithura) and the 
AbhivyaktiCultural Trust 
(Bangalore)on October 
28th, as part of the 
Monthly Lecture Series 
at Govt. Sanskrit College 
(Thrippunithura). 
 
34.  
Data Collection   
35.  
November 
2023 
  
Photo 
Documentation 
Photo Documentation of 
selected Mural Paintings 
in Association With 
Institute of Mural 
Painting, Guruvayur 
36.  
December 
13th 2023 
Lecture Series in 
Association 
BharatiyaVidyaBhavan, 
Thrissur Kendra 
Lecture & 
Presentation 
Glove Puppetry 
(Paavakathakali) 
37.  
December 
15th 2023 
Lecture Series in 
Association 
BharatiyaVidyaBhavan, 
Thrissur Kendra 
Lecture & 
Demonstration 
Handicrafts of Kerala “ 
Know Your Local Crafts 
Heritage” 
38.  
December 
21ST  2023 Lecture 
  
"Mythological Stories 
through Mural Painting 
Traditions of Kerala” 
39.  
08th Jan 
2024 
Lecture Series in 
Association 
BharatiyaVidyaBhavan, 
Thrissur Kendra 
Lecture 
Demonstration 
Lecture Demonstration 
related to Sculpture 
40.  
08th Jan 
2024 
Talk Talk 
A Talk on   
“Arts, Music & 
Museums: Cultivating 
Social, Psychological & 
Cultural Development in 
Young People” 

 
52 
 
41.  
18th Jan 
2024 
Lecture Series in 
Association 
BharatiyaVidyaBhavan, 
Thrissur Kendra 
Lecture 
Demonstration 
Workshop on 
Ottanthullal 
Kalakshetra Foundation 
On 8th and 9th of January 2023, Kalakshetra Foundation in collaboration with Kerala Kalamandalam 
organized “MargazhiMahotsavam in which Carnatic Vocal, Instrumental, Bhajanai artists 
participated. 
 
Centre for Cultural Resources and Training 
Offline intervi ew/ renewal test (Regional Selection Committee Meeting) is being conducted every 
year by CCRT for the candidates of Kerala applying under CTSS Scheme at Thiruvananthapuram, 
Kerala.  
 
 

53 
 
MINUTES 
  

54 
 
 
MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF THE DEPARTMENT -RELATED 
PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON TR ANSPORT, 
TOURISM & CULTURE (2024-25) 
VI 
SIXTH  MEETING 
  
The Committee met at  10:00 A.M. on  Monday, the 16th December, 2024 
in Committee Room-“B”, First Floor, Parliament House Annexe Building, New 
Delhi. 
  
  
1. Shri Sanjay Kumar Jha   -  Chairman 
 
Rajya Sabha 
s 
2. Shri M. Mohamed Abdulla 
3. Shri Mohammed Nadimul Haque 
4. Shri Jaggesh 
5. Shri Kesridevsinh Jhala  
6. Shrimati S. Phangnon Konyak  
7. Shri Neeraj Dangi 
 
Lok Sabha  
8. Shri R. K. Chaudhary 
9. Shri Vishweshwar Hegde Kageri  
10. Shrimati June Maliah  
11. Shri Ajay Kumar Mandal  
12. Shri K. E. Prakash  
13. Shri Amarsing Tisso 
14. Shri Manoj Tiwari  
  
SECRETARIAT 
Smt. Monica Baa,  Director  
Shri T. Kennedy, Deputy Secretary 
Shri N. Romesh Singh, Under Secretary 
  

55 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman extended a warm welcome to the Members of 
the Committee and informed  that the agenda for the meeting is to consider and 
adopt the following draft Action Taken Reports of the Committee: - 
(i)     Action Taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee contained 
in its Three Hundred Fifty -First (351st) Report on 
‘Functioning of National Akademis and other Cultural 
Institutions; 
 
(ii)    XXXXX i 
(iii)   XXXXX 
(iv) XXXXX 
(v)    XXXXX 
3. The Committee took up for consideration the draft Action Taken Reports, 
one by one. After a brief discussion, the Committee adopted the aforesaid five 
draft Action Taken Reports and authorized the Chairman and in his absence 
Shri Neeraj  Dangi, MP  or Shri M. Mohamed Abdulla  to present the aforesaid 
Reports in Rajya Sabha on 19 th December, 2024. Additionally, the Co mmittee 
authorized Shri Vishweshwar  Hegde Kageri, MP and in his absence Shri Rajiv 
Pratap Rudy, MP to lay the Reports on the Table of Lok Sabha on the same 
date. 
4. XXXXX 
5. XXXXX 
The meeting adjourned at 10:40 A.M. 
 
Monica Baa 
Director 
New Delhi, 
16th December, 2024 
 
                                                             
i  Relates to other matters 