Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
RAJYA SABHA
ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE
REPORT NO.
268
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on st December )21 2018
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on st December )21 2018
TWO HUNDRED SIXTY EIGHTH REPORT
December, 2018/Agrahayana, 1940 (Saka)
Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations
of the Committee contained in its Two Hundred and Fifty Sixth
Report on ‘Issues Related to Improving Consumers’
Satisfaction of Airlines’

Website : http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail : rsc-tt@sansad.nic.in

41
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE
TWO HUNDRED SIXTY EIGHTH REPORT
Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations
of the Committee contained in its Two Hundred and Fifty Sixth
Report on ‘Issues Related to Improving Consumers’
Satisfaction of Airlines’
 (Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 21st December, 2018)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 21st December , 2018)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
December, 2018/Agrahayana, 1940 (Saka)
Hindi version of this publication is also available


CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ....................................................................................... (i)-(ii)
2. I NTRODUCTION ...................................................................................................................... (iii)
3. A CRONYMS ............................................................................................................................ (iv )-(v)
4. R EPORT ............................................................................................................................... .. 1-23
Chapter I : Recommendations/Observations which have been Accepted by ................ 2-5
the Ministry
Chapter II : Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not ............... 6-7
Desire to Pursue in view of the Replies of the Ministry
Chapter III : Recommendations/Observations in Respect of which Replies ................... 8-22
of the Ministry have not been Accepted by the Committee
Chapter IV : Recommendations/Observations in Respect of which the final .................. 23
Replies of the Ministry are still Awaited
5. R ECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS — A T A G LANCE .......................................................... 24-27
6. M INUTES ............................................................................................................................... 29-32
6. A NNEXURES ........................................................................................................................... 33-39

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(2018-19)
(Constituted on 1st September, 2018)
1. Shri Derek O’Brien   — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Ritabrata Banerjee
3. Shri Sambhaji Chhatrapati
4. Dr. L. Hanumanthaiah
5. Dr. Sonal Mansingh
6. Shri Praful Patel
7. Kumari Selja
8. Shri Rewati Raman Singh
9. Shri Narendra Kumar Swain
10. Shri Vinay Dinu Tendulkar
LOK SABHA
11. Shri Subrata Bakshi
12. Shri Ramcharan Bohra
13. Shri Vinod Chavda
14. Shri Rajeshbhai Naranbhai Chudasama
15. Kumari Arpita Ghosh
16. Shri Parvatagouda Chandangouda Gaddigoudar
17. Shri Rahul Kaswan
18. Maj. Gen. Bhuwan Chandra Khanduri, A VSM (Retd.)
19. Shri P. Kumar
20. Shri Kristappa Nimmala
21. Shri Ram Charitra Nishad
22. Shri Rajesh Pandey
23. Shri Rajesh Ranjan (Pappu Yadav)
24. Shri Ponguleti Srinivasa Reddy
25. Shri Ram Kumar Sharma
26. Shri Dushyant Singh
27. Shri Kunwar Haribansh Singh
28. Shri Rakesh Singh
29. Shri Shatrughan Prasad Sinha
30. Shri Manoj Kumar Tiwari
31. Shri K.C. Venugopal
(i)

SECRETARIAT
Shrimati Sunita Sekaran, Joint Secretary
Shri Swarabji B., Director
Shri Dinesh Singh, Additional Director
Shrimati Monica Baa, Additional Director
Ms. Catherine John L., Under Secretary
Shri K.V . Ramana Rao, Committee Officer
Shri Gaurav Singh Gahlain, Assistant Committee Officer
Ms. Vunglunmoi Hangzo, Assistant Research Officer
(ii)

INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman, Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport, Tourism
and Culture, having been authorized by the Committee to present on its behalf, do hereby present
this Two Hundred and Sixty Eighth Report on Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations/
observations of the Committee contained in its Two Hundred and Fifty Sixth Report on ‘Issues
Related to Improving Consumers’ Satisfaction of Airlines’.
2. The Two Hundred and Fifty Sixth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture was presented on the 4th January, 2018 to the
Parliament.
3. The Action Taken Replies on the recommendations of the Committee contained in its Two
Hundred and Fifty Sixth Report were received from the Ministry of Civil Aviation on 29th August,
2018.
4. The Committee considered and adopted the Report in its meeting held on the 19th December,
2018.
DEREK O’ BRIEN
N
EW D ELHI; Chairman,
December 19,  2018 Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Agrahayana 28,  1940 (Saka) Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture,
Rajya Sabha.
(iii)

                  ACRONYMS
AAI : Airports Authority of India
AASSC : Aerospace and Aviation Skill Sector Council
A-CDM : Airport Collaborative Decision Making
ADS-B : Au tomatic Dependent Surveillance – Broadcast
AIESL : Air India Engineering Services Ltd.
AME : Aircraft Maintenance Engineering
AOCC : Airport Operational Control Centers
ASG : Aviation Security Group
ASMGCS : Advanced Surface Movement and Guidance System
A TC : Air Traffic Control
A TF : Aviation Turbine Fuel
A TM : Air Traffic Management
A VDGS : Adv anced Visual Docking Guidance System
A VSEC : A viation Security
BCAS : Bureau of Civil Aviation Security
CAR : Civil Aviation Requirements
C-A TFM : Central Air Traffic Flow Management
CCTV : Closed Circuit Television
CDR : Cabin Defect Report
CEO : Chief Executive Officer
CIDS : Counter Information Display System
CISF : Central Industrial Security Force
CPGRAM : Centralized Public Grievance Redress and Monitoring system
CSIA : Chhatrapati Shivaji Maharaj International Airport
CUSS : Common User Self Service
CUTE : Common User Terminal Equipment
DGCA : Directorate General of Civil Aviation
FAQ : Frequently Asked Questions
FIDS : Flight Information Display System
(iv)

(v)
FRRO : Foreigner Regional Registration Offices
GST : Goods and Services Tax
HV AC : Heating, Ventilation and Air Conditioning
IA T A : International Air Transport Association
ICAO : International Civil Aviation Organization
ICP : Immigration Check Posts
ITB : Integrated Terminal Building
JVC : Joint Venture Company
MoCA : Ministry of Civil Aviation
MoU : Memorandum of Understanding
MPP A : Million Passengers Per Annum
MRO : Maintenance, Repair and Overhaul
MSR : Magnetic Strip Reader
NSOP : Non-Scheduled Operator Permit
OCR : Optical Character Reader
OTP : On—Time Performance
PBB : Passengers Boarding Bridges
PDC : Probable Date of Completion
PHP : Peak Hour Passengers
PMC : Project Management Consultancy
QP-NOS : Qualification Packs-National Occupational Standards
R&D : Research & Development
RBD : Reservation Booking Designator
RCS : Regional Connectivity Scheme
ROT : Runway Occupancy Time
SOP : Standard Operating Procedure
TOT : Training of Trainers
UIDAI : Unique Identification Authority of India

1
REPORT
The Report of the Department-Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport, Tourism
and Culture deals with the Action Taken by the Ministry of Civil Aviation on the observations/
recommendations as contained in its Two Hundred and Fifty Sixth Report on ‘Issues related to
improving consumer’s satisfaction of airlines’ presented to both the Houses of Parliament on 4th
January, 2018.
2. The Action Taken Replies were received from the Ministry of Civil Aviation on 29th August,
2018, in respect of all the observations/recommendations contained in the 256
th Report. The replies
have been categorized as follows:-
Chapter I : Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the Ministry:
Paragraph Nos.: 31, 44, 51, 55
TOTAL: 4
Chapter II : Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue
in view of the replies of the Ministry:
Paragraph Nos.: 46, 54,61
TOTAL: 3
Chapter III : Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Ministry have
not been accepted by the Committee:
Paragraph Nos.: 7, 8, 9, 11, 12, 15, 16, 17, 18, 20, 21, 22, 25, 27, 28, 29,
40,41, 42, 48, 49, 57, 60, 62
TOTAL: 24
Chapter IV : Recommendations/Observations in respect of which the final replies of the Ministry
are still awaited:
Paragraph Nos.: Nil
T
OTAL: Nil

CHAPTER-I
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS WHICH HA VE BEEN ACCEPTED BY
THE MINISTRY
UNSERVICEABLE SEATS
Recommendation/Observation
1. The Committee has been informed by all airlines that no unserviceable seats are being offered
to passengers. However, the Committee has noted that unserviceable seats are in fact offered to
passengers and complaints made to the cabin crew in this regard have gone unheeded. The Committee
noticed that though all the airlines have a policy of non-offering unserviceable seats, the practice
is that these are silently offered to the unsuspecting passengers. It is a cruel joke to offer unserviceable
seats even to Business Class Passengers. Due to their busy schedule, the passengers are compelled
to travel by availing the unserviceable seats. The committee observes that it is a deficiency of
service by service airlines. The airlines should take an initiative to ensure that unserviceable seats
are either replaced or repaired at the earliest. Monetary compensation may be given to the affected
passengers who are offered the unserviceable seats. The Government should formulate a policy to
restrict the use of unserviceable seats. (Para 31)
Reply of the Government
1.1. A circular {No. 28/1/2015-AI(1)} dated 30.01.2018 (Annexure-I), enclosed has been issued
to advise all airlines not to allot Unserviceable seats to passengers. The Un-serviceability of the
seats should be recorded by the Aircraft Maintenance Engineers (AMEs) while offering the aircraft
to the Commercial department. During every transit, the cabin crew should also record serviceability
of seats in their Cabin Defect Report (CDR) and the AME should cross-check CDR before offering
the aircraft for flight to the pilot.
1.2. Further, Spot Checks will be carried out by regional Airworthiness office on departing aircraft
to avoid occurrence of such lapses by the operator/airlines.
1.3. Any seat in the aircraft that is notified in advance as un-serviceable by Engineering Department
is not assigned to any passenger. If during a flight any seat becomes un-serviceable all efforts are
made by Cabin Crew to shift the passenger to an alternate seat if feasible. In addition in line with
Star alliance practices, Air India also has a policy to offer Goodwill Compensation by way of
Frequent Flyer mileage points to affected passengers who experience services deficiency during
their flights including due to un-serviceable seats.
Further Recommendation/Observation
1.4. The Committee notes the reply and desires that the Ministry should ensure that the
above cited circular is scrupulously adhered to by the Airlines.
FRISKING OF PASSENGERS
Recommendation/ Observation
2. The Committee notes that even after the existence of guidelines of BCAS, there are instances
of misbehavior by CISF and other security personnel. The Committee observes that the Government
2

3
needs to be pro-active to face the emerging challenges of the growth of Civil Aviation Sector. The
recent incidents of misbehavior definitely show CISF in poor light and prove that the training
programmes are insufficient and more needs to be done. The Committee, therefore, recommends that
the Government should reevaluate the soft skill training programmes of CISF and security personnel
and motivate them to be passenger friendly. (Para 44)
Reply of the Government
2.1. 593 personnel from the CISF Aviation Security Group [ASG] are trained in soft skills on TOT
[Training of Trainers] basis by various specialized professional agencies, have expertise in the field
of soft skills. These TOT trained personnel train other CISF personnel at the ASGs on a continuous
basis. A training Film forms a part of this performance.
2.2. Soft skill training is imparted at the Unit Level and the following ASG personnel have attended
Soft Skill Training at Unit Level in the Last three years as per details given below:
S. No. Period Total Personnel attended
 01 August to December 2015 18795
 02 January to December 2016 43290
 03 January to December 2017 35294
 04 Till January 20 th 2018 1984
2.3. Suitable instructions have been issued by the Bureau of Civil Aviation Security (BCAS) from
time to time for the courteous and polite behavior of security personnel at airports while carrying
out security checks/screening of passengers at airports.
Further Recommendation/Observation
2.4. The Committee notes the reply.
IMMIGRATION COUNTERS
Recommendation/Observation
3. The Committee notes that officials of immigration counters have no right to be rude and
discourteous. They are just Government servants regulated by the set of rules and regulations. Their
main role is to facilitate the passenger’ s journey and not to misbehave. The Committee recommends
that soft skills training be imparted to the persons at immigration counters given their direct
dealings with foreign tourists. (Para 51)
Reply of the Ministry
3.1. The Bureau of Immigration (M/o Home Affairs) has informed that they are imparting soft
skills training, since 2015 through two services‘ agencies, to its personnel, including those manning
immigration counters, to develop their inter-personal skills, behavioural aspects and inculcate
professionalism in dealing with passengers, including foreign tourists.
3.2. The training modules also cover stress management, conflict management, personal excellence,

4
etiquette, and cultural sensitization apart from effective communication style, goal-setting and personality
development.
 Soft skills training was organized for BoI-controlled Immigration Check Posts (ICPs)
from December 2015 to March 2016 at 7 nodal Foreigner Regional Registration Offices
(FRROs) for 1,668 Immigration officers in 68 batches of 25 each.
 Training for Trainers (ToT) in soft skills was organized for 48 immigration officials to
impart in-house training to the left-out personnel.
 All immigration officials of BoI-controlled ICPs were imparted training on soft skills and
behavioural aspects by July 2016 and a total of 2,883 personnel were imparted training
during 2016 and 1,123 during 2017.
3.3. Imparting soft skills has been incorporated in the curriculum of Basic Immigration Training
since March 2016 and each immigration official who is to deal with passengers is imparted soft
skills’ training on induction in BoI.
3.4. Refresher courses are also being organized by BoI at regular intervals.
Further Recommendation/Observation
3.5. The Committee notes the reply.
AIRPORT INFRASTRUCTURE
Recommendation/Observation
4. The Committee realizes that so far, the growth of airport infrastructure has not been commensurate
with the growth in the number of passengers. Keeping in view the pace at which Indian aviation
is growing, the Committee recommends that AAI and other Airport Operators should bolster their
efforts to build new infrastructure and to expand existing airports to enhance the facilities available
at airports. Decongesting the airports, decongesting the runway and the airspace should be the top
priority of the Government. Airport facilities need to be upgraded on an urgent basis. (Para 55)
Reply of the Ministry
4.1. AAI has already prepared the roadmap for meeting the challenges of creating the requisite
capacity in time. The action plan for this has also been made. An investment of ` 20000 Crores
by 2021 is contemplated towards expansion and upgradation of airport and ANS Infrastructure at
AAI airports. (Annexure-II)
4.2. This covers the upgradation and expansion of existing airports, revival of non-operational
airports, up gradation of ANS infrastructure and the telecommunication infrastructure. Further, AAI
will provide logistical and technical supports to the State Governments for bringing up Greenfield
airports and operationalization of their airports.
4.3. AAI has also taken various initiatives to decongest the airspace and to reduce Runway
Occupancy Time (ROT). Measures which have been implemented are listed below:-
1. Implementation of Central Air Traffic Flow Management [C-ATFM] to balance demand
and capacity.

5
2. Reduction in inter-arrival spacing.
3. Creation of new ATS route/direct routes under flexible use of airspace.
4. Airport Collaborative Decision Making [A-CDM] has been implemented at Indira Gandhi
International airport New Delhi & Mumbai airport.
5. Sectorisation of upper-airspace at high density traffic airport.
6. Rapid exit taxiways/parallel taxiways have been provided at various airports to reduced
runway occupancy time.
7. Multiple runway operations at IGI airport.
8. Trial for cross-runway operation at Chennai airport is in process.
9. Advanced Surface Movement and Guidance System [ASMGCS] has been installed at
various airports.
10. Automatic dependent surveillance – broadcast [ADS-B] has been installed at various
airports.
4.4. Also, other airport operators are also planning to expand the capacities to meet the traffic
growth.
Further Recommendation/Observation
4.5. The Committee notes the reply.

CHAPTER-II
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES OF THE MINISTRY
CLEAN TOILETS AT THE AIRPORTS
Recommendation/Observation
1. Poor experiences in the toilets are often very strongly linked to passengers’ overall satisfaction.
Having enough washrooms in the right places and keeping the washrooms clean should be the
priority of the AAI and Airport operators. The toilets should be the statement of quality. The
Committee recommends that cleanliness should be given utmost importance by AAI and various
other airport operators and they should take effective steps to ensure that toilets at the airports
should be maintained in a clean and tidy manner . The Government of India should also monitor
the quality of the toilets of all the airports. (Para 46)
Reply of the Ministry
1.1. W ith regard to the cleanliness of the washrooms, it is informed that AAI is giving lot of
importance to cleanliness of washrooms and instructions have been issued to all the airports in this
regard. Further SOPs for maintaining the cleanliness at the airports has been issued and new
techniques are also being implemented. New facilities like sanitary pads vending machines are also
to be introduced. The airport operators follow a stringent and environment friendly cleanliness
program to ensure that toilets are clean and serviceable at all times.
Further Recommendation/Observation
1.2. The Committee notes the reply.
AIRPORT INFRASTRUCTURE
Recommendation/Observation
2. The Committee is aware that airport infrastructure has a major role to play in extending
amenities and conveniences to the passengers. The Committee is of the view that there is a need
for adequate technology driven infrastructure in our country to enable airlines to improve their on-
time performance. (Para 54)
Reply of the Ministry
2.1. W ith regard to providing adequate technology driven infrastructure for improving the OTP ,
DGCA has issued Air Transport Circular 4 of 2009 titled “Airport Level Monitoring of On-Time
Performance (OTP)” for compliance of all stake holders.
2.2. AAI and all the airport operators have taken number of initiatives to upgrade Airport and
Airspace infrastructure to cater for the continued growth in air traffic with enhanced information
Technology, Safety and efficiency.
2.3. For automation of the terminal & apron operations, AAI is establishing the Common Use IT
infrastructure with Common Use Terminal Equipment (CUTE), Common Use Self-Service Kiosks
(CUSS) and overall integration of all systems through establishment of Airport Operational Control
6

7
Centers (AOCC) at airports. AAI is implementing the Baggage Re-Conciliation System (BRS) for
facilitating faster baggage handling and re-conciliation at all major airports. The baggage drops
facility and self-baggage checking through self-service kiosks has also been introduced. Sensor
controlled Elevators, Escalators, Passengers Boarding Bridges (PBBs) with Advanced Visual Docking
Guidance System (A VDGS) and Walkalators are being provided in the new terminal buildings. BMS
controlled Heating, Ventilation and Air Conditioning (HV AC) System is being adopted in the Terminal
Buildings to have better temperature control for comfort of passengers and for energy efficiency.
In order to enhance the security surveillance, upgraded CCTV Systems are being provided at all
the airports.
2.4. The comprehensive strategy has been towards transition from voice to data-link, Transition
from ground based Navigation to Satellite – based Navigation, Augmentation of Radar surveillance,
implementation of ATM Automation, enhancement in A TM procedures, state-of-the-art training and
developing a sound R & D capability.
Further Recommendation/Observation
2.5. The Committee notes the reply.
CORPORATE SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY
Recommendation/Observation
3. The Committee is of the view that the airlines should strike the right balance between profit
making and social responsibility. The Committee, therefore, appreciates the various CSR initiatives
undertaken by airlines and expects that they should do more. (Para 61)
Reply of the Ministry
3.1. Duly Noted.
Further Recommendation/Observation
3.2. The Committee notes the reply.

CHAPTER-III
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF
THE MINISTRY HA VE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE
PRICING OF AIR TICKETS
Recommendation/Observation
1. The Committee is of the view that the pricing mechanisms applicable in the developed
countries may not be suitable for India. The Committee also notes that even after 50% reduction
of the ATF prices, the airlines have not passed on the benefit of reduction in ATF prices to the
consumers. (Para 7)
Reply of the Ministry
1.1. Duly Noted.
Further Recommendation/Observation
1.2. The Committee is not happy with the reply of the Ministry. Simply noting the
recommendation will not serve the purpose of providing relief to the customers. The Aviation
Industry has, all the time, voiced is concerns over rising international oil prices and asked
the Government to take up some measures by lowering taxes to help the industry. But even
after excise duty cut, airlines never reduced its fares. The recommendation of the Committee
should be given serious thought and consideration and concerted efforts shall be made by
the Ministry to prevail upon the airline operators to pass on the full benefits to the
consumers. The Ministry should also apprise the Committee of the steps taken in this
regard.
1.3. At this juncture, it is relevant to state that the Committee examined the subject ‘Exorbitant
increase in the excess luggage charges by different airlines’ in the backdrop of the major airlines
enhancing the excess baggage charges with effect from June, 2018. The Committee understands
that with a view to make basic fare more affordable, the Government issued Air Transport Circular
01 of 2013, wherein the airlines were allowed to unbundle certain services and fees, which were
previously included in the airfare. The said circular provided consumer an option of paying for the
services which he/she wishes to avail on opt-in basis.
1.4. The Committee is of the view that the maximum limit prescribed by the airlines
except Air India, for charging excess baggage charges should be enhanced. Also, the excess
baggage charges, charged by the airlines, are on the higher side. The Committee feels that
the airlines should not consider excess baggage charges as an opportunity to increase their
revenue apart from their ticket sales. Therefore, the Committee recommends that the
Ministry may prevail upon the airlines to ensure that the excess baggage charges are
lowered to a reasonable level.
Recommendation/Observation
2. The Committee notes that around festivals and for bookings made closer to the date of travel,
some airlines are charging more than ten times of the advance booking fare. The committee
8

9
observes that this is arbitrary. A deregulatory environment does not mean unlimited freedom of
exploitation. Windfall profits cannot be taken from the hapless passengers especially from those
working class passengers who are travelling in the Gulf sector . The committee believes that the
Ministry of Civil Aviation has a social responsibility towards its citizens. Economic viability cannot
be the only criteria for decision making. The Ministry of Civil Aviation, though aware of the
rampant exploitation, is not showing any proactive role in regulating the airfares. The Committee,
therefore, recommends the Ministry of Civil Aviation to consider fixing an upper limit of the air
tickets for every sector. (Para 8)
Reply of the Ministry
2.2. W ith regard to fixing of upper limit of the air ticket on every sector, it is stated that with
the repeal of Air Corporations Act in Mar 1994, the airfare approval was dispensed with by the
Government. At present, airfares are neither controlled nor approved by the Government. Factual
information in respect of air fare is as follows:-
2.3. Airlines are free to fix the reasonable tariff under the provision of Sub-rule (1) of Rule 135,
Aircraft Rules 1937 having regard to all relevant factors, including the cost of operation, characteristics
of service, reasonable profit and the generally prevailing tariff.
2.4. The airline pricing system runs in multiple levels (buckets or RBDs) which are in line with
practice being followed globally. The prices are fixed by airlines keeping in mind the market,
demand, seasonality and other market forces. The airfare increases with increases in demand of
seat as the lower fare buckets get sold out fast when bookings are offered by airlines. Some of
the airlines have introduced Apex-90, in addition to existing advance purchase schemes of 60 days,
30 days, 14 days etc., in which highly discounted fares being offered which would entail travelling
even during peak seasons on low fares. The fare structures stated above have been displayed by
airlines on their websites.
Further Recommendation/Observation
2.5. The reply does not reflect the seriousness of the efforts made by the Ministry in
containing the surge in airfares and the resultant profiteering by different airlines. The
Committee desires that concerted efforts shall be consistently made by the Ministry to
prevail upon different Airlines not only to make available more and more low-fare bucket
seats, but also to keep the airfares at minimum affordable level for the benefit of common
man. The Committee strongly feels that an upper cap of airfare in each Sector is the need
of the hour to discourage the Airlines from predatory pricing of air tickets. The Committee
notes that the Ministry has taken refuge in global practices in fixing the luggage charges
and uncontrolled airfares. The Committee feels that it is a faulty premise; and the Indian
conditions and need of the people should be given due consideration while regulating the
airfares and luggage charges. The Committee recommends that the Ministry of Civil Aviation
and DGCA should come forward to regulate baggage charges and airfares in such a way to
facilitate and benefit the air passengers.
BEHA VIOUR OF AIRLINES STAFF
Recommendation/Observation
3. The Committee noted that recently there were many incidents of manhandling, discourteous

10
and rude behavior by airlines staff, both ground staff and cabin crew. Some of them were reported
in the media and a large number of them went unreported. While narrating some of the incidents
of misbehavior in airlines, especially in Indigo, majority of the Members opined that the attitude
of airlines staff is very condescending, often unco-operative and on many occasions, downright
rude. (Para 9)
3.1. The Secretary, Ministry of Civil Aviation assured the Committee that any employee of an
airline who is found to be indulging in some kind of unnecessary and violent behavior may be
debarred from entering into any of the civil aviation airports as an employee. The Committee
opined that merely taking strictest action against the employers does not absolve the airline of its
guilt of the incident. (Para 11)
3.2. The Committee observes that the problems affecting the airlines are not personal; it is
institutional. An institution like Indigo has to develop a consumer friendly approach in dealing
with their passengers. The Committee believes that being a leader in market share, Indigo needs
to look inward and find out the reasons for the discourteous attitude and rude and indifferent
behavior of their employees, whether it is their cabin crew or the ground staff. The Committee
emphasizes that the arrogant behavior of employees should stop. (Para 12)
Reply of the Ministry
3.3. DGCA has amended the Civil A viation Requirements Section-3, Series-M, Part VI titled
“Handling of unruly passengers to address the issue of Unlawful/disruptive behaviour on board
the aircraft”, where the issues of training and behaviour of airline staff have been address ed. The
amended CAR has been uploaded on DGCA website 
www.dgca.nic.in effective 08/09/2017 under
URL http://dgca.nic.in/rules/car-ind.htm.
3.4. W ith regard to behavior of airline staff, it is submitted that under the provision specified at
Para 4.3 of the said CAR, airline shall establish Standard Operating Procedure (SOP) including the
role of ground staff, flight crew, airline airport manager and airline central operational control to
deal with unruly passengers while at airport or on-board the aircraft. The SOP shall be communicated
throughout the organization and especially to all employees who are in direct contract with passengers,
both on the ground and on the aircraft.
3.5. Mitigations are in place to prevent occurrence of customer-staff confrontation. All customer
contact staff undergo periodic training in handling unruly and disruptive customers as part of their
refresher curriculum.
3.6. W ith regard to training of airline staff, it is submitted that under the provision specified at
Para 05 of the said CAR, flight crew, cabin crew and ground staff should be properly trained and
be in knowledge of procedures to deal with unruly passengers. The training should provide knowledge
on how to detect, defuse and prevent critical situations, about the causes of various types of
disruptive behaviour and ways to handle critical situations along with reporting thereto. The training
modules so designed must include duties of such operating personnel, ground staff, cabin crew and
flight crew dealing with conflict and its aftermath, ways/means to mitigate the situations that occur
due to long waiting lines, flight being overbooked, delays & diversion/cancellation and lack of
information. In an endeavour do defuse a volatile situation, airline shall establish a mechanism to

11
continuously observe and analyse incidents of disruptive behaviour in order to impart relevant
training to frontline staff to equip them manage rude and aggressive passengers and prevent such
occurrences.
3.7. The training modules cover soft skills‘ competencies such as safety and security of passengers,
first-aid covering sickness and injury on board, handling specific situations (delays in flight take-
off, delays in landing, diversion of flights, etc.), capabilities, performance, communication, behaviour,
personality, etiquette and manners, personal grooming, voice modulation, etc.
Further Recommendation/Observation
3.8. The Committee feels that despite the mitigations and mechanisms put in place, the
Ministry’s role in containing the discourteous, rude, arrogant and aggressive behavior of
airlines staff with customers/passengers is far from satisfactory. Almost all airlines have
introduced a ‘No-Fly’ list for the unruly passengers, but when it comes the turn of airlines
to contain their unruly staff, they escape from their responsibility by saying that necessary
training is being imparted upon. It is very essential that the airlines have to adopt consumer
friendly approach. In fact, cooperative, courteous and polite behavior should be a pre-
requisite for a person to join the airline sector. One should continue to exhibit the same
qualities till they are in the service of the airlines. The Committee desires that the Ministry
shall ensure that strictest possible action is taken against unruly staff and heavy penalties
imposed on them.
TRAINING OF AIRLINES STAFF
Recommendation/Observation
4. The Committee totally disagrees with the proposition that the students coming out of Government
Schools and colleges cannot be trained. Our Government schools and colleges produce the best
students of the country and we have a duty to nurture and promote such students to achieve their
full potential. If a particular airline has grown exponentially, they should deploy a proportionate
amount to the training of their staff instead of misbehaving and manhandling the passengers or
blaming the youngsters from Tier II and III cities and Government schools. (Para 15)
4.1. The Committee, keeping in view the recent incidents of misbehavior of airline staff including
the manhandling of a passenger by staff of Indigo airlines, emphasizes on the need for soft skills
training and functionality training for all employees across airlines. (Para 16)
4.2. The Committee desires that the employees be provided training in order to effectively manage
crisis situations such as delay in flight take-off, delay in landing, diversion of flights etc. Further
training should also be given to the airlines staff to sensitize them to meet the needs of persons
with disability. Intensive training should be given to the crew and staff to extend courteous and
decent behavior to the passengers. The crew should be trained to be more polite than saying please
or thank you. The passengers expect a civilized behavior from the cabin crew and the ground staff
as the salaries to the cabin crew and ground staff are paid from the income earned from the
passengers. (Para 17)
4.3. The Committee notes that the training modules, training schedules, content of training, duration
of training, budget allocation for training etc. varies from airline to airline. In some of the cases,

12
the training programmes are non-existent or just for namesake. The Government should come up
with a training programme suitable to Indian conditions emphasizing on the courteous behavior to
the passengers. The committee underlines the need to standardize the training programmes of all
the airlines. The Committee recommends that the Government should formulate the guidelines for
such training programmes applicable to all the airlines, at the earliest. (Para 18)
Reply of the Ministry
4.4. The Government has taken up the development of Qualification Packs-National Occupational
Standards (QP-NOS) for 38 critical Job Roles (including for airlines‘ cabin crew, reservation agent,
etc.) of the civil aviation sector in accordance with the standardized National Skill Qualification
Framework for uniform application across all airlines (and other stakeholders). These are developed
and the progress is monitored through the Aerospace and Aviation Skill Sector Council (AASSC).
4.5. The regulatory authorities, namely, Directorate General of Civil Aviation (DGCA) and Bureau
of Civil Aviation Security (BCAS), have also been issuing standardized requirements on various
aspects of employee-passenger interface from time to time keeping in view global best practices
and international norms of ICAO, IA TA, etc. Recently, with the approval of DGCA, (i) a Standard
AME Apprenticeship Training was launched in collaboration with airlines, Maintenance, Repair and
Overhaul (MRO) organizations and Non-Scheduled Operator Permit (NSOP) holders to develop
core skills and enhance employability; and (ii) an Accelerated AME Apprenticeship Program was
launched jointly by Air India Engineering Services Ltd. (AIESL) and M/s. Boeing to enhance hands-
on-experience which also has employment facilitation.
Further Recommendation/Observation
4.6. The Ministry, in their reply, has stated that there exist various measures and standardized
guidelines to regulate the behaviour of the airlines. However, the Committee notes that
despite all such guidelines, the behaviour of the employees is not improving which shows
that the measures in existence are inadequate or poorly implemented. The Committee is of
the view that the training given to airlines staff should be more effective, intensive and
thorough. The Committee, therefore, desires that the Ministry shall ensure to provide
thorough training to all categories of airlines staff, particularly the cabin and ground crew,
to maintain friendly relations with customers/passengers and to sensitize them in that
direction. There should a proper monitoring system in place to check the behaviour of
employees of airlines.
CHECK-IN COUNTERS
Recommendation/Observation
5. The Committee notes that the check-in process and collection of luggage are cumbersome and
time consuming. What the passenger wants is a quick check-in, without long queues and a smooth
process of security check. Despite the huge claims of airlines regarding the check-in process, the
Committee is compelled to observe that the check –in counters are in a mess, especially those of
the low cost airlines such as indigo. (Para 20)
5.1. The Committee has noticed reports of some private airlines creating long queues at the check-
in counters to delay the process of check-in so that passengers miss their scheduled flights. This

13
compels them to buy tickets at exorbitant prices to travel in the next available flight. The Committee
also notes that airlines are overbooking flights and creating later, artificial situations to deny
boarding to the confirmed ticket holders. Many a times it has been noticed that adequate number
of personnel are not posted to man the check-in counters. (Para 21)
Reply of the Ministry
5.2. It is stated that Check-in Process, Check-in Counters and Collection of Luggage are the
commercial issues and Government does not interfere with the commercial activities of the airlines.
Further, there is no regulation issued by DGCA in this regard.
5.3. To reduce the check-in time at the airports, following additional equipment have been provided
at 40 AAI Airports:
1 Common User Terminal Equipment (CUTE) : 160 Nos.
2 Common User Self Service (CUSS) Kiosk : 200 Nos.
3 Scanners : 1000
4 MSR/OCR Key board : 200
5.4. In addition to check-in counters at the airports, Air India has introduced the following off
counter check-in facilities to enable passengers to complete their check-in formalities in a seamless,
faster and convenient manner:
 I Check (Web Check-in): Available through Air India website www.airindia.in , I Check
enables passengers to check-in for their flights using E-Ticket Number / Booking Reference
(PNR) or Frequent Flyer Card Number. Passengers can check-in for their flights starting
48 hours in advance and upto 2 hours before flight departure time.
 I Travel (Mobile Check-in): Passengers can download the “I Travel” Air India Mobile
App from Google Play Store for Android mobile users and from iOS App Store for
Apple iPhone mobile users. Passengers can do mobile check-in for their flights starting
48 hours in advance and upto 90 minutes before flight departure time.
 City Check-in:City Check-in / Baggage drop facility is available at select stations on the
Airport Metro Express Line in Delhi. Passengers can complete their check-in formalities
at these counters and also deposit their checked in Baggage.
 Tele-Check-in:Business Class passengers and Frequent Flyer Members, having confirmed
reservation and travelling without check-in baggage, can avail the facility of Tele Check-
in on AI domestic flights. This facility is available on Air India 24x7 Toll Free number
1800-180-1407.
 Kiosk Check-in:Self Service check-in Kiosks are available at select airports to enable
passengers to check-in themselves and obtain boarding pass from the Kiosk machine.
5.5. In addition to the above, Floor Walkers are also deployed at major airports to supervise and
manage the queues at the Check-in counters and facilitate the passengers. Air India also provides
the facility of through check-in of passengers travelling on connecting flights to enable seamless
transfers at transfer airports.

14
Further Recommendation/Observation
5.6. The Ministry has not properly understood the recommendation of the Committee. The
Committee specifically pointed out the malpractices adopted by low cost airlines like Indigo.
The Ministry, it seems, is following a hands-off approach so far as check-in process and
check-in counters are concerned. The Committee recommends that the number of check-
in counters and personnel deployed at the counters should be directly proportional to the
number of flights being operated by the airlines from a particular airport. The Committee
reiterates its recommendation that the Ministry should take proactive steps to contain
malpractices committed by private airlines in deliberately delaying check-ins and artificial
overbooking of flights not only by taking strict action against them, but also imposing
heavy penalties on them.
Recommendation/Observation
6. The Committee recommends that arrangements be made to ensure that the passengers does not
spend more than 10 minutes in a queue of the check-in counter to get a boarding pass. Whenever
there is rush of passengers, additional staff should be deputed at the check-in counters. AAI and
the other airport operators may provide adequate number of check-in counters and self check-in
kiosks at the airports. The Government should also ensure that if a passenger is denied boarding
due to rush at the counter or due to overbooking, the passenger may be compensated adequately
and he/she may be sent in an alternative flight. (Para 22)
Reply of the Ministry
6.1. To meet the increasing passenger growth and reduce the passenger processing time in checking
in at AAI airports, additional hardware comprising of 160 Nos. of check-in counters, 200 Nos. of
CUSS Kiosks, 1000 Nos. of scanners and 200 Nos. of passport reader keyboards are being
procured. Procurement of Counter Information Display System (CIDS) is also in progress for
providing smooth checking-in facility.
6.2. Additionally, airport operators have installed infrastructure such as self-check-in kiosks, baggage
tag printers and self-bag drop machines to encourage self-check-in by passengers and thereby
reduce the burden on conventional check-in counters.
6.3. During bad weather, excessive congestion in metro airports, and construction/traffic on approach
roads, airport entrance security congestion, a further advisory by text message to report earlier is
sent.
6.4. In accordance with the Standing Committee directions, Air India has devised a concessional
scheme for rebooking such passengers on alternate flights, versus what the fare conditions incorporate,
in order to facilitate the passengers.
Further Recommendation/Observation
6.5. The Committee is happy to note that in accordance with the recommendations of the
Committee, Air India has devised a concessional scheme for rebooking such passengers who
miss the flights due to delay in check-in counters. The Committee recommends that the
Ministry should give appropriate direction to the private airlines also to implement the

15
concessional rebooking mechanism adopted by Air India. The Committee desires that the
Ministry should prevail upon the airlines to devise and implement schemes to compensate
the passengers who cannot board the flight due to negligence of the airlines.
E-BOARDING FACILITY
Recommendation/Observation
7. The Commi ttee takes note of the steps taken by the Airport operators to provide e-boarding
facility at certain airports to reduce waiting time for baggage check-in and security clearance.
The Committee desires that e-boarding facility should be made available to passengers at all
airports. (Para 25)
Reply of the Ministry
7.1. Ministry of Civil Aviation constituted a Digital Cell and Technical Working Committee consists
of representatives from all the airport operators to formalize the standards for Aadhar Enabled Entry
& Biometric E-boarding Process for uniform implementation Aadhar Enabled Entry & Biometric
E-boarding system at all Indian airports.
7.2. The Digital Cell and Technical Working Committee have finalized the draft Digi-Yatra policy
document on implementation of Aadhar Enabled Entry & Biometric E-boarding Process which will
be submitted to Ministry of Civil aviation shortly after receiving comments/ concurrence from
UIDAI with respect to use of Aadhar Biometric data for identity verification. The implementation
of e-boarding facility of Digi-Yatra will be implemented in phased manner after due approval of the
Competent Authority.
Further Recommendation/Observation
7.3. The Committee reiterates its recommendation that e-boarding facility should be made
available to passengers at all airports, so as to reduce waiting time for all passengers,
particularly those with hand baggage or no baggage . Moreover, all security personnel deputed
at various airports shall be apprised of new technological steps taken by the Ministry to
avoid any instance of tussle between them and passengers.
QUALITY OF FOOD SERVED
Recommendation/Observation
8. The Committee was informed that there are great difficulties in getting water and food in low
cost airlines especially in Indigo. In Indigo, the food has to be pre-booked and on board, if
someone demands food, they refuse to provide the food even to those who are diabetic and
suffering from other medical conditions. A passenger has to report to the airport counter 2 hours
before the departure time and one has to spend a few more hours in the flight without food and
water and it is a horrible thing to face. The Committee, therefore, recommends that Indigo and
other low cost airlines should take adequate steps to ensure that food is available to the passengers
on demand especially to those who are having some medical conditions. (Para 27)
8.1. The Committee notes that the main difference a low cost carrier and the full cost carrier is
the serving of food. It is unacceptable for airlines to serve unsatisfactory food after having

16
charged customers for it. Every airline should maintain the highest quality of food and they should
also change the menu occasionally instead of keeping a cold sandwich in their menu throughout
the year . The Committee recommends that random audits of the catering kitchens should be held
to ensure quality, quantity and hygiene and that feedback from customers may also be taken into
account. The cost of food may be separately printed on the ticket. (Para 28)
Reply of the Ministry
8.2. W ith regard to quality of food served, it is stated that DGCA is the safety regulator, engaged
in promoting safe and efficient air transportation through regulation and proactive safety oversight
system. Matter related to quality of the food is a business policy of the airline and Government
does not interfere in the commercial practices of the airlines.
Further Recommendation/Observation
8.3. The Committee’s recommendation has been wished away by the Ministry on the plea
that matters related to quality of food is a business policy of the airlines and Government
does not interfere in the commercial practices of the airlines. The Committee feels that
ensuring quality of the food served by Airlines is part of the responsibility of the Ministry
of Civil Aviation. The Committee recommends that the Ministry should have relook into
their roles and responsibilities as far as food served in aircrafts is concerned. The Committee
recommends that the Ministry should take up the matter with all airlines to make hygienic
food items available to the passengers at affordable rates, as and when needed.
SEATING SPACE IN THE AIRCRAFT
Recommendation/Observation
9. The Committee raised the issue of inadequate seating space and inadequate legroom in the
aircrafts. Air India informed the Committee that their seats are wider and have enough leg space.
However, many of the other airlines including the full service carriers are having smaller cramped
seats. Due to their profit motive, the airlines are not providing adequate leg space to the passengers.
The Committee desires that the Ministry of Civil Aviation may prepare a guideline laying down a
minimum space standard in respect of seats and legroom. (Para 29)
Reply of the Ministry
9.1. Aircraft are designed and manufactured in accordance with design standards laid down by
state of design. No requirements specifying the seating space and leg room have been specified in
their standards. However, as per design standards the manufacturer before certification of aircraft
is required to demonstrate that the seats are so designed and laid down so as to enable rapid
evacuation of occupants in case of emergency. The seats are also subjected to dynamic tests.
These requirements also ensure that there is adequate seating space and leg room in each aircraft
so manufactured. Therefore, no specific requirement is required to be laid down by the Ministry
of Civil Aviation.
Further Recommendation/Observation
9.2. The Committee desires that the Ministry shall consider laying down the design standards

17
and guidelines for aircraft seating, especially in long haul flights, so as to improve
maneuverability and convenience of passengers.
CANCELLATION CHARGES
Recommendation/Observation
10. The Committee notes that cancellation charges levied by private airlines are arbitrarily set.
There are no uniformity or minimum standards to impose charges for rescheduling, cancellation and
no-show. Attractive offers by private airlines veil the fact that passengers are charged the entire
ticket amount if they want to cancel the tickets. The airlines must be restricted to charging not
more that 50% of the base fare as  cancellation char ges. The tax and fuel surcharge collected
should be refunded to the passengers on cancellation of tickets. The Committee desires that
DGCA may conduct periodic checks to ensure that the cancellation charges are not a burden on
consumers. (Para 40)
10.1. The cancellation charges may be printed prominently in the ticket itself and not as a fine print.
Norms for cancellation should be given more publicity through posters and websites. (Para 41)
Reply of the Ministry
10.2. With regard to cancellation charge, it is submitted that airlines are free to fix the reasonable
tariff under the provision of Sub-rule (1) of Rule 135, Aircraft Rules 1937 having regard to all
relevant factors, including the cost of operation, characteristics of service, reasonable profit and
the generally prevailing tariff including cancelation charges of pre booked ticket also. The airlines
are compliant to the Sub Rule (2) of Rule 135 of the Aircraft Rules, 1937 as long as fare charged
by them is in line with fare displayed on their website.
10.3. DGCA has also issued CAR Section 3, Series ‘M’, Part II titled “Refund of Airline tickets
to passengers of public transport undertakings”. Under the provision of the said CAR, airlines
should indicate in an unambiguous manner the amount of refund of money admissible on cancellation
of a ticket. Further, also under no circumstances, the airline shall levy cancellation charge more
than the basic fare plus fuel surcharge.
10.4. All scheduled domestic airlines are displaying the same on their respective websites in compliance
to the above regulations.
10.5. As mandated by DGCA, the fare sheets, related cancellation charges and any change effected
is notified to DGCA and uploaded on the AI website accordingly. Furthermore the fare sheets
appended with Business rules (change and cancellation fees) are filed with DGCA every month.
10.6. The maximum cancellation charges levied by Air India are INR 2500 plus GST or the Basic
Fare, whichever is less. Air India does not levy Fuel Surcharge in the Domestic sectors. The Taxes
and other levies are refunded to the passenger.
10.7. As mentioned, AI’s cancellation charges are uploaded in the Tariff sheet in Air India website.
Further Recommendation/Observation
10.8. It is unfortunate that the Ministry is so callous and irresponsible that they did not
examine the recommendation made the Committee. They furnished the Action Taken Reply

18
by simply stating the already existing procedure. The Committee made its recommendations
due to the problems in the existing procedure and large number of complaints of overcharging
and misappropriation by Airlines. The Committee, therefore, reiterates its recommendation
that the airlines must be restricted to charging not more that 50% of the base fare as
cancellation charges. The tax and fuel surcharge collected should be refunded to the passengers
on cancellation of tickets .
Recommendation/Observation
11. The Ministry of Civil Aviation informed the Committee that adequate instructions have been
given to the Airlines and the Airport operators to facilitate the travel requirements of persons with
disability. However, the Committee has noted that the airlines are not giving adequate support and
priority to the differently abled persons. Therefore, the Committee recommends the Ministry to
reissue guidelines reiterating already existing guidelines, hence ensuring strict compliance by all the
airlines. If needed, the schemes and guidelines may be strengthened for the smooth travel of
differently abled persons. (Para 42)
Reply of the Ministry
11.1. Ministry of Civil Aviation and its attached and subordinate offices are sensitive towards the
needs of persons with disabilities and scrupulously follow government instructions to take care of
Persons with Disabilities and senior citizens. DGCA has issued Air Transport Circular 01 of 2014
on ¯Facilities/Courtesies to air passengers at airports  and Civil Aviation Requirements (CAR),
Section-3, Air Transport, Series-M, Part-I on ¯Carriage by Air of Persons with Disability and/or
Persons with Reduced Mobility  in order to protect the travelers from any form of discrimination
and to ensure that all estimated travelers should receive all possible assistance during their travel.
The CAR also recognizes needs of senior citizens who require special assistance subject to the
condition that request for provision of assistance is submitted in advance to the airline. Further,
Bureau of Civil Aviation Security has also issued Aviation Security (AVSEC) Circular regarding
Standard Operating Procedure for screening of passengers with special needs and medical conditions.
The advice of the committee has been noted and DGCA has been asked to re-circulate the
guidelines/instructions to all stakeholders with directions to scrupulously follow instructions concerning
persons with disabilities.
11.2. Said CAR is available on DGCA website wwww.dgca.nic.in. The provisions contained in this
CAR shall be applicable to all Indian operators engaged in scheduled and non-scheduled air transport
services both domestic and international for carriage of passengers, all foreign carriers engaged in
scheduled air transport operating to and from Indian Territory and all airport operators Within
Indian Territory.
11.3. Also, there ramps, tactile floor marking, PRM compliant lifts and washrooms etc. available
for the convenience of passengers with disability at different airports. CSIA recently got “Compliance
Certificate” for being an accessible Building/infrastructure for persons with disabilities from “Samarthyam”,
an organization specialized in buildings‘/facilities‘ accessibility assessment and for conducting accessibility
audit and training.
Further Recommendation/Observation
11.4. The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry. As airlines have explored a new source

19
of revenue by asking customers to pay more for advance seat selection, the Committee
desires that passengers with disabilities should be offered better seats at no additional cost.
COMPLAINT REDRESSAL MECHANISM
Recommendation/Observation
12. The Ministry of Civil Aviation has developed an Air Sewa Application which can be availed
through Web portals and mobile phones, with an aim to help the air travelers. It contains a module
for receiving, tracking and monitoring of grievances with the stakeholders. Around 20,000 people
downloaded this application and the Ministry has received 6,000 complaints from passengers during
the last year . The Committee is surprised to note that in a country where there are more than
16 crores passengers using air services, just 20,000 people are using the application developed by
the Civil Aviation Ministry. It should be improved and the App may be advertised to ensure that
every passenger is aware of the existence of the App. Every grievance redressal mechanism of the
Airlines may be integrated with the Air Sewa App of the Government so that better monitoring
can be done. (Para 48)
Reply of the Ministry
12.1. The Ministry of Civil Aviation has launched AirSewa web portal and mobile app on 25.11.2016
which includes mechanism for grievance redressal, flight status/schedule information, airport Information
and FAQs. AirSewa has brought various stakeholders in aviation sector such as airlines, airports
etc. on a single platform. As on 31.03.2018, more than 30,000 AirSewa apps have been downloaded
and there are over 1,70,000 views of web portal. 96% of grievances have been resolved, mostly
within the stipulated time frames decided in consultation with the stakeholders.
12.2. Campaign to create awareness has been undertaken by way of display of AirSewa messages
on hoardings/digital screens/FIDS/scrollers/standees etc. at airports, publication of advertisements in
in-house magazines and in-flight announcements. With regard to creating awareness about Airsewa
App. amongst passengers/general public, advertisements are being planned to put at the back of the
Boarding Pass printed at CUSS Kiosks and AAI‘s newsletters/magazines. Subsequent to approval
by the Hon‘ble Minister of State for Civil Aviation, 6 Nos. of creatives of Airsewa Portal/Mobile
App. were displayed at all the operational airports of AAI, JVC Airports in the form of Standees/
Hoardings to bring awareness amongst the travelling public. The Airsewacreatives were also published
in various magazines supported by AAI.
12.3. Further, new improved versions of the mobile app/web portal is being developed to include
features like escalation mechanism, integration of social media platforms with AirSewa etc. with an
objective to make it more user-friendly and also to ensure that it meets the needs of the air
passengers.
Further Recommendation/Observation
12.4. The Committee is of the view that more efforts are needed to give wide publicity to
AirSewa mobile app and web portals through print and electronic media so that more and
more people make use of these two apps.

20
Recommendation/Observation
13. During the deliberations of the Committee, the CEO, Jet Airways was requested to address
the issue of customer complaints. The Committee also notes, through personal anecdotes of Committee
Members, the deliberate reluctance of Jet Airways to note customer complaints. The Committee is
of the view that a proper complaints redressal mechanism should be in place with all airlines. The
complaints received from the customers should be redressed in a time bound manner. It should be
ensured that the complaints have been redressed to the satisfaction of the customers. The details
of the complaint redressal mechanism should be adequately advertised and printed bold in the
tickets of the airlines. (Para 49)
Reply of the Ministry
13.1. With regard to complaints redressal mechanism, it is submitted that systematic grievance
redressal mechanism has already put in place through which passenger grievances received by this
office are forwarded to the concerned airline for redressal directly with the complainant as the
travel by air is a contractual matter between the airline and the passenger. Grievances redressal
mechanism platforms of this office are as follows:
  sugam.dgca@nic.in
  Centralized Public Grievance Redress and Monitoring system (CPGRAM)
  Air Sewa portal
  Consumerhelpline.gov.in
Further Recommendation/Observation
13.2.  The Committee feels that the role of the Ministry should be more than being a
transmitter of passenger grievances to the respective airlines. The Ministry should ensure
that the respective airline has taken necessary action to redress the grievance within a
stipulated timeframe. The Ministry should also penalize the airlines in case of not solving
the grievances to the satisfaction of passengers.
ERRONEOUS PRACTICE OF “NON-UNIFORM BLOCK TIME”
Recommendation/Observation
14. The Committee notes that due to ‘non-uniform block time’, the passengers often have to
spend more time on board the aircraft. The practice of ‘non-uniform block time’ is obviously not
desirable. The Committee, therefore, recommends that all the airlines may follow uniform block
time. The Committee also recommends that a co-ordinated effort should be made by Air Traffic
Control, Airports Authority of India, Airport operators and Airlines for maintaining punctuality in
air services. (Para 57)
Reply of the Ministry
14.1. Efforts are being made to allocate the slots to the airlines in accordance with the block time
issued by DGCA. However, it is a worldwide practice there is a variance of 15 to 20 minutes in

21
the block time between various city pairs. The recommendation of Committee to maintain punctuality
is noted for compliance.
Further Recommendation/Observation
14.2. The Committee is not satisfied with reply of the Ministry that worldwide practice of
‘non-uniform block time’ is followed in India. The Committee wanted the Ministry to relook
into the entire aspect. The Committee reiterates that ‘non-uniform block time’ is an erroneous
practice. The Government should make efforts to make the airlines follow ‘uniform block
time’.
A V AILABILITY OF SLOTS/BILATERALS
Recommendation/Observation
15. The Committee notes that in granting traffic rights, home carriers’ interests, whether Government
owned or private, are always considered. The incremental capacity generated by the bilateral could
not be used by the home carriers due to the limitation of non-availability of landing slots and
parking slots in foreign destinations. The Government which is aware of the limitations, knowingly
and willingly, allowed incremental capacity to foreign airlines whereas the home carriers are left
in lurch. The Committee, therefore, recommends that all bilateral rights may be directly linked with
the slots being given to the Indian carriers in foreign destinations. The Committee recommends that
the Ministry should thoroughly examine this issue of making slots available to the Indian airlines
and ensure that airlines of India get fair allocations. (Para 60)
Reply of the Ministry
15.1. As per the latest best practices in the world, the slot allocations at various airports are
entrusted to an independent slot allocation authority or this job is carried out by the Airport
Operator in a transparent manner, according to IATA slot allocation system.
15.2. The Governments are not involved in the slot allocation process. Generally, in India also,
there are slot constrained airports like Mumbai and the responsibility of allocation of slots rests
with Airport Operator. It is therefore difficult to link allocation of Traffic Rights with Allocation
of slots.
15.3. However, whenever such problems are projected by Indian Carriers to the Government,
efforts are made to raise the issue with the concerned foreign Governments and impress upon them
the need to help the Indian Carriers to get their traffic rights. But this is treated as an informal
process and it is not possible to link allocation of Traffic Rights with Allocation of slots.
Further Recommendation/Observation
15.4. The Committee notes that the Government is quite lethargic in grasping the importance
of the recommendation of the Committee. Indian carriers are suffering due to the increased
bilaterals with the foreign countries. Many of Indian carriers could not use the traffic rights
due to the non-availability of time slots/parking slots and there has been one way benefit
to foreign carriers due to this bilaterals. The foreign carriers are increasing the number of
flights and are carrying more Indian passengers. Therefore, the Committee reiterates its

22
recommendation that the Ministry should thoroughly examine bilaterals and ensure that
airlines of India are getting slots in foreign countries to utilize the increased traffic rights.
GENERAL OBSERV ATION
Recommendation/Observation
16. The Committee notes with dismay that the Government has adopted the open sky policy
without laying down the necessary guidelines, rules and regulations to control the activities of the
airlines. The consumers are at the receiving end and at the mercy of the private airlines for any
kind of services. The Committee is not clear who fixes the standards and what are the standards,
be it training, quality of food, amenities to passengers, behavior of airlines staff, quality of seats,
cancellation charges, pricing of air tickets etc. The Committee desires that the Government should
wake up from its slumber and perform their duties to save the airline passengers from the vices and
to make the air travel an enjoyable experience for them. Civil Aviation and Airlines industry is
service industry and any service industry has to be user friendly and customer friendly. (Para 62)
Reply of the Ministry
16.1. DGCA has issued the following passenger centric initiatives to safeguard the interest of the
travelling public:
 Carriage by Air of Persons with Disability and or Persons with ReducedMobility [Civil
Aviation Requirement (CAR) Section 3, Series M, Part I].
 Refund of Airline Tickets to Passengers (CAR Section 3, Series ‘NI’, Part (II).
 Facilities to be provided to passengers by airlines due to denied boarding, cancellation
of flights and delays in flights (CAR Section 3, Series M. Part IV).
 Facilitation in case of diversion of aircraft (CAR Section 3, Series M, Part V).
Further Recommendation/Observation
16.2. The Committee in previous paragraphs, have pointed out the need that the Ministry
of Civil Aviation should take initiatives to control and regulate the matters related to
passenger amenities. There exists a big vacuum and the media reports, on a daily basis,
suggest that the passengers are at the mercy of profit hungry private airlines. The reply
submitted by the Ministry is inadequate to address the recommendations made by the
Committee. The Committee, therefore, reiterates its recommendations. The Committee is
of the considered view that the Ministry should have an effective mechanism to monitor and
regulate all airlines in order to ensure that passengers are not affected adversely due to
lapses, shortcomings, etc. of the concerned airlines and to penalize them as the situation
warrants.

CHAPTER-IV
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE FINAL
REPLIES OF THE MINISTRY ARE STILL A WAITED
Nil
23

RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS — AT A GLANCE
CHAPTER -III
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF
THE MINISTRY HA VE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE
The Committee is not happy with the reply of the Ministry. Simply noting the
recommendation will not serve the purpose of providing relief to the customers. The Aviation
Industry has, all the time, voiced is concerns over rising international oil prices and asked
the Government to take up some measures by lowering taxes to help the industry. But even
after excise duty cut, airlines never reduced its fares. The recommendation of the Committee
should be given serious thought and consideration and concerted efforts shall be made by
the Ministry to prevail upon the airline operators to pass on the full benefits to the
consumers. The Ministry should also apprise the Committee of the steps taken in this
regard. (Para 1.2.)
The Committee is of the view that the maximum limit prescribed by the airlines
except Air India, for charging excess baggage charges should be enhanced. Also, the excess
baggage charges, charged by the airlines, are on the higher side. The Committee feels that
the airlines should not consider excess baggage charges as an opportunity to increase their
revenue apart from their ticket sales. Therefore, the Committee recommends that the
Ministry may prevail upon the airlines to ensure that the excess baggage charges are
lowered to a reasonable level. (Para 1.4.)
The reply does not reflect the seriousness of the efforts made by the Ministry in
containing the surge in airfares and the resultant profiteering by different airlines. The
Committee desires that concerted efforts shall be consistently made by the Ministry to
prevail upon different Airlines not only to make available more and more low-fare bucket
seats, but also to keep the airfares at minimum affordable level for the benefit of common
man. The Committee strongly feels that an upper cap of airfare in each Sector is the need
of the hour to discourage the Airlines from predatory pricing of air tickets. The Committee
notes that the Ministry has taken refuge in global practices in fixing the luggage charges
and uncontrolled airfares. The Committee feels that it is a faulty premise; and the Indian
conditions and need of the people should be given due consideration while regulating the
airfares and luggage charges. The Committee recommends that the Ministry of Civil Aviation
and DGCA should come forward to regulate baggage charges and airfares in such a way to
facilitate and benefit the air passengers. (Para 2.5.)
The Committee feels that despite the mitigations and mechanisms put in place, the
Ministry’s role in containing the discourteous, rude, arrogant and aggressive behavior of
airlines staff with customers/passengers is far from satisfactory. Almost all airlines have
introduced a ‘No-Fly’ list for the unruly passengers, but when it comes the turn of airlines
to contain their unruly staff, they escape from their responsibility by saying that necessary
training is being imparted upon. It is very essential that the airlines have to adopt consumer
friendly approach. In fact, cooperative, courteous and polite behavior should be a pre-
requisite for a person to join the airline sector. One should continue to exhibit the same
24

25
qualities till they are in the service of the airlines. The Committee desires that the Ministry
shall ensure that strictest possible action is taken against unruly staff and heavy penalties
imposed on them. (Para 3.8.)
The Ministry, in their reply, has stated that there exists various measures and standardized
guidelines to regulate the behaviour of the airlines. However, the Committee notes that
despite all such guidelines, the behaviour of the employees is not improving which shows
that the measures in existence are inadequate or poorly implemented. The Committee is of
the view that the training given to airlines staff should be more effective, intensive and
thorough. The Committee, therefore, desires that the Ministry shall ensure to provide
thorough training to all categories of airlines staff, particularly the cabin and ground crew,
to maintain friendly relations with customers/passengers and to sensitize them in that
direction. There should a proper monitoring system in place to check the behaviour of
employees of airlines. (Para 4.6.)
The Ministry has not properly understood the recommendation of the Committee. The
Committee specifically pointed out the malpractices adopted by low cost airlines like Indigo.
The Ministry, it seems, is following a hands-off approach so far as check-in process and
check-in counters are concerned. The Committee recommends that the number of check-
in counters and personnel deployed at the counters should be directly proportional to the
number of flights being operated by the airlines from a particular airport. The Committee
reiterates its recommendation that the Ministry should take proactive steps to contain
malpractices committed by private airlines in deliberately delaying check-ins and artificial
overbooking of flights not only by taking strict action against them, but also imposing
heavy penalties on them. (Para 5.6.)
The Committee is happy to note that in accordance with the recommendations of the
Committee, Air India has devised a concessional scheme for rebooking such passengers who
miss the flights due to delay in check-in counters. The Committee recommends that the
Ministry should give appropriate direction to the private airlines also to implement the
concessional rebooking mechanism adopted by Air India. The Committee desires that the
Ministry should prevail upon the airlines to devise and implement schemes to compensate
the passengers who cannot board the flight due to negligence of the airlines. (Para 6.5.)
The Committee reiterates its recommendation that e-boarding facility should be made
available to passengers at all airports, so as to reduce waiting time for all passengers,
particularly those with hand baggage or no baggage . Moreover, all security personnel deputed
at various airports shall be apprised of new technological steps taken by the Ministry to
avoid any instance of tussle between them and passengers. (Para 7.3.)
The C ommittee’s recommendation has been wished away by the Ministry on the plea
that matters related to quality of food is a business policy of the airlines and Government
does not interfere in the commercial practices of the airlines. The Committee feels that
ensuring quality of the food served by Airlines is part of the responsibility of the Ministry
of Civil Aviation. The Committee recommends that the Ministry should have relook into their
roles and responsibilities as far as food served in aircrafts is concerned. The Committee

26
recommends that the Ministry should take up the matter with all airlines to make hygienic
food items available to the passengers at affordable rates, as and when needed.
(Para 8.3.)
The Committee desires that the Ministry shall consider laying down the design standards
and guidelines for aircraft seating, especially in long haul flights, so as to improve
maneuverability and convenience of passengers. (Para 9.2.)
It is unfortunate that the Ministry is so callous and irresponsible that they did not
examine the recommendation made the Committee. They furnished the Action Taken Reply
by simply stating the already existing procedure. The Committee made its recommendations
due to the problems in the existing procedure and large number of complaints of overcharging
and misappropriation by Airlines. The Committee, therefore, reiterates its recommendation
that the airlines must be restricted to charging not more that 50% of the base fare as
cancellation charges. The tax and fuel surcharge collected should be refunded to the passengers
on cancellation of tickets . (Para 10.8.)
The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry. As airlines have explored a new source
of revenue by asking customers to pay more for advance seat selection, the Committee
desires that passengers with disabilities should be offered better seats at no additional
cost. (Para 11.4.)
The Committee is of the view that more efforts are needed to give wide publicity to
AirSewa mobile app and web portals through print and electronic media so that more and
more people make use of these two apps. (Para 12.4.)
The Committee feels that the role of the Ministry should be more than being a
transmitter of passenger grievances to the respective airlines. The Ministry should ensure
that the respective airline has taken necessary action to redress the grievance within a
stipulated timeframe. The Ministry should also penalize the airlines in case of not solving
the grievances to the satisfaction of passengers. (Para 13.2.)
The Committee is not satisfied with reply of the Ministry that worldwide practice of
‘non-uniform block time’ is followed in India. The Committee wanted the Ministry to relook
into the entire aspect. The Committee reiterates that ‘non-uniform block time’ is an erroneous
practice. The Government should make efforts to make the airlines follow ‘uniform block
time’. (Para 14.2.)
The Committee notes that the Government is quite lethargic in grasping the importance
of the recommendation of the Committee. Indian carriers are suffering due to the increased
bilaterals with the foreign countries. Many of Indian carriers could not use the traffic rights
due to the non-availability of time slots/parking slots and there has been one way benefit
to foreign carriers due to this bilaterals. The foreign carriers are increasing the number
of flights and are carrying more Indian passengers. Therefore, the Committee reiterates
its recommendation that the Ministry should thoroughly examine bilaterals and ensure
that airlines of India are getting slots in foreign countries to utilize the incr eased traffic
rights. (Para 15.4.)

27
The Committee in previous paragraphs, have pointed out the need that the Ministry
of Civil Aviation should take initiatives to control and regulate the matters related to
passenger amenities. There exists a big vacuum and the media reports, on a daily basis,
suggest that the passengers are at the mercy of profit hungry private airlines. The reply
submitted by the Ministry is inadequate to address the recommendations made by the
Committee. The Committee, therefore, reiterates its recommendations. The Committee is
of the considered view that the Ministry should have an effective mechanism to monitor and
regulate all airlines in order to ensure that passengers are not affected adversely due to
lapses, shortcomings, etc. of the concerned airlines and to penalize them as the situation
warrants. (Para 16.2.)

MINUTES

31
*** Relate to other matters.
III
THIRD MEETING
The Committee met at 10:00 A.M. on Wednesday, the 19 th December, 2018 in Committee
Room No.-62, First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Derek O’Brien   —  Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Sambhaji Chhatrapati
3. Dr. L. Hanumanthaiah
4. Dr. Sonal Mansingh
5. Shri Rewati Raman Singh
6. Shri Narendra Kumar Swain
7. Shri Vinay Dinu Tendulkar
LOK SABHA
8. Shri Ramcharan Bohra
9. Km. Arpita Ghosh
10. Shri Rahul Kaswan
11. Shri Parvatagouda Chandangouda Gaddigoudar
12. Shri Rajesh Pandey
13. Shri Kunwar Haribansh Singh
SECRETARIAT
Shrimati Sunita Sekaran, Joint Secretary
Shri Swarabji B., Director
Shri Dinesh Singh, Additional Director
Ms. Catherine John L., Under Secretary
Shri K.V . Ramana Rao, Committee Officer
2. At the outset, the Chairman extended a very warm welcome to the Members of the Committee.
He informed them that the agenda for the meeting is to consider and adopt the following Reports:-
(i) Draft Report on Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations
of the Committee contained in its Two Hundred and Fifty Sixth Report on ‘Issues
Related to Improving Consumers’ Satisfaction of Airlines’;
(ii) * * *;
(iii) * * *;
(iv) * * *;

32
*** Relate to other matters
3. The Committee, thereafter, considered the above stated draft Reports and adopted them after
a brief discussion.
4. The Committee then decided to present/lay the Reports to both the Houses of Parliament on
21st December, 2018. The Committee, accordingly, authorized Shri Vinay Dinu Tendulkar, M.P. and
in his absence, Dr. L. Hanumanthaiah, M.P. and in his absence Shri Sambhaji Chhatrapati, M.P. to
present the Reports in Rajya Sabha. Kumari Arpita Ghosh, M.P . and in her absence, Shri Rajesh
Pandey, M.P. was authorized to lay the above mentioned Reports on the Table of Lok Sabha on
21st December, 2018.
5. * * *.
6. The meeting adjourned at 10:23 A.M.

ANNEXURES

35
ANNEXURE-I
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
Office of the Directorate General of
Civil Aviation
Opp Safdarjung Airport
NEW DELHI – 110 003
TELEPHONE: 91-11-24644764
Ref. No: ÃÖÓÜµÖÖ : F. NO. 28/1/2005–AI(1)
Dated: ×¤ü®ÖÖÓÛú : 30.01.2018
To
The Dy. Director General of Civil Aviation
Mumbai/ Kolkata/ Delhi/ Chennai/ Bangalore
The Dy. Director of Airworthiness
Lucknow/ Patna/ Hyderabad/ Guwahati/ Bhubaneswar/ Bhopal
The Asstt. Director of Airworthiness
Kochi/Kanpur/Patiala
Subject: Observations by Department-related Parliament Standing Committee on Transport,
Tourism and Culture on the “Issues related to improving consumers’ satisfaction
of airlines”
The Parliament Standing Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture in its 256th report has
pointed out that airlines are allotting unserviceable seats to the passengers, including Business Class
passengers on long haul flights. The committee has also pointed out that such seats are allotted
to passengers in spite of complaints made to the cabin Crew.
In view of the foregoing, all operators/airlines under the jurisdiction of your region shall be
advised not to allot Unserviceable seats to passengers, The un-serviceability of the seats shall be
recorded by the AMEs while offering the aircraft for operation and the cabin crew shall record
serviceability of seats in their Cabin Defect Report (CDR). Further, the AME shall review the CDR
before offering the aircraft for flight.
All heads of the Regional/Sub-regional offices are advised to ensure that regular spot checks
are carried Out on departing aircraft to ensure adherence to the above. Compliance of the same
should be intimated to Headquarters by 10th February 2018.
(K P Srivastava)
Dy. Director General of Civil Aviation
For Director General of Civil Aviation
³ÖÖ¸üŸÖ ÃÖ¸üÛúÖ¸ü
®ÖÖÝÖ¸ü ×¾Ö´ÖÖ®Ö®Ö ×¾Ö³ÖÖÝÖ
´ÖÆüÖ×®Ö¤êü¿ÖÛú ®ÖÖÝÖ¸ü ×¾Ö´ÖÖ®Ö®Ö ÛúÖ ÛúÖµÖÖÔ»ÖµÖ
ÃÖ±ú¤ü•ÖÓÝÖ ‹µÖ¸ü¯ÖÖê™Ôü Ûêú ÃÖÖ´Ö®Öê
®Ö‡Ô ×¤ü»»Öß – 110 003

ANNEXURE-II
MAJOR WORKS PLANNED BY AAI WITH A CAPEX OF ````` 20000 CR.
1. Works in progress/ planning stage.
(i) Calicut: Construction of New Arrival Hall for ITB & Modification of existing ITB and
Extension of apron including allied work is in progress at Calicut Airport.
PDC June 2018.
(ii) Port Blair: The Phase-II work at Port Blair i.e. C/o New Integrated Terminal Building
is in progress.
PDC June 2020.
(iii) Agartala: Work in Progress for construction of New Terminal Building to enhance the
annual passenger capacity from 0.50 MPPA to 2 MPPA (1000 Dom. + 200 Intl. PHP)
at an estimated cost of `438 crores. New Terminal Building work awarded on 15.06.2017.
PDC is May, 2019.
(iv) Lucknow: Construction of New Integrated Passenger Terminal Building at Lucknow
Airport at a cost of `1383 Cr.
Pax capacity: (3200 Dom. + 800 Intl.) PHP
Award of work — Mar-18
PDC Feb-21.
(v) Dehradun: Construction of New Integrated Terminal Building at Dehradun Airport at a
cost of `348 Cr. Pax capacity: 1300 PHP
Award of work — Apr-18
PDC Mar 2020.
(vi) Jaipur: Development of New Integrated Terminal Building at Jaipur Airport at a cost of
`1441 Cr. Pax capacity: 5000 PHP
Award of work —Sep 2018
PDC Aug 2021.
(vii) Srinagar: Construction of New Integrated Terminal Building at Srinagar Airport at a
cost of `495 Cr. Pax capacity: 2300 PHP
Award of work — Aug. 2018
PDC — Feb. 2021.
(viii) Tiruchirapalli: Construction of New Integrated Passenger Terminal Building at Tiruchirapalli
Airport at a cost of `764 Cr.
Award of work — Jun. 2018
PDC Dec. 2020.
36

37
(ix) Chennai: Modernization of Chennai Airport Phase-II at Chennai Airport at a cost of
`2100 Cr.
Award of work — Mar 2018
PDC Jan 2022.
(x) Pune: Construction of New Integrated Terminal Building at Pune Airport at a cost of
`408.48 Cr.
Paxcapacity:(1700 Dom. + 600 Intl.)
PHP Award of work — Jul 2018
PDC J 2021.
(xi) Patna: Construction of New Domestic Terminal Building & other allied structures (Ph-1&I1)
at Patna Airport at a cost of `722.05 Cr.
Award of work — Jun 2018
PDC May 2021.
(xii) Guwahati: Construction of a New Integrated Terminal Building at Guwahati Airport at
a cost of `1142 Cr.
Award of work — Jan. 2018
PDC Nov. 2020.
(xiii) Jabalpur: Construction of New Terminal Building, ATC Tower cum Technical Block,
Fire Station Category VII and all other associated works at Jabalpur Airport at a cost
of `163 Cr.
Award of work — Jun 2018
PDC May 2020.
(xiv) Vijayawada: Construction of New Integrated Terminal Building at Vijayawada Airport, at
a cost of `420 Cr.
Award of work — Mar 2019
PDC Jan 2022.
(xv) Goa: Extension of Existing Terminal Building and allied works at Dabolim Airport, Goa
at a cost of ` 230 cr.
Award of work — Jan. 2019
PDC Dec. 2020.
(xvi) Leh: IAF has accorded working permission for development of Civil Enclave in Jun,
2017 which includes construction of Terminal Building for 800 peak hour passengers
(PHP) and other associated facilities at a cost of `267 Cr. Project Management Consultancy
(PMC) is awarded. Work is likely to start on March 2018.
PDC Feb. 2021.
(xvii) Jammu:
 Land transfer from Army/State Govt. waited for extension of Runway.

38
 State Government to hand over 138 acres of land for development of New Civil
Enclave on Tawi river side along with diversion of Public road, Canal & HT lines.
(xviii)200 additional aircraft parking bays are planned at various airports in next 5 years for
night parking of new aircrafts being purchased by airline operators.
2. Development of State Government Airstrips:
 Government of India is exploring the possibility of operationalizing the Unused Airports/
Airstrips in the country. At the request of the State Governments, feasibility of developing
State Government airstrips into a full-fledged Airport for commercial operations are also
being examined.
 MOU between AAI and State Government of Uttar Pradesh has been signed for the
development of 4 Civil Enclaves at Agra, Allahabad, Bareilly and Kanpur (Chakeri) and
for development of airports at Moradabad, Meerut and Faizabad.
 AAI Board has accorded AA&ES of ` 125.76 cr. for development of new civil
enclave at Allahabad and ` 61 Cr. for development of new civil enclave at Bareilly.
Work awarded for New Civil Enclave at Allahabad.
 AAI is in the process of preparing TEFR for development of airport at Meerut,
Moradabad and Faizabad. Consultant have been Appointed for environmental clearance.
Development of these Airports will be taken up when Airline operators bid for RCS
routes from these airports.
 MoU was signed for development of Jharsuguda, Raipur, Deoghar and Adampur (CE)
airports with State Governments of Odisha, Chhattisgarh and Jharkhand and Punjab
respectively.
  Jharsuguda:-Cost ` 177 Cr., work in progress. PDC Sep 2018.
  Raipur: Cost ` 128.4 Cr. Work in progress. PDC Sep 2018.
  Deoghar: Cost ` 185 Cr. Land acquisition in final stage. AAI has appointed
consultant for soil investigation. PDC Sept. 2019.
 Adampur: Construction of Temporary civil enclave for starting RCS flights completed.
Cost ` 9 Cr. Work in progress.
3. Regional Connectivity Scheme (RCS)
 Civil Aviation Policy-2016 has been approved by the Ministry of Civil Aviation in which
there is special emphasis on Regional connectivity.
 Regional Connectivity Scheme (RCS) has been promulgated which will give definite
impetus to domestic air traffic in the country.
 In the Phase-I of bid Airlines has shown interest to operate flights at 43 Airports in the
country.

39
 In Phase II bids have been received for operation of flights from 64 unserved and
underserved airports subject to State Govt. agree to provide the requisite support listed
in the National Civil Aviation Policy 2016, for which State Govt has to sign anMoU with
MoCA/ Govt. of India.