 
       
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTAR
ON TRANSPORT, TOURIS
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
December
THREE HUNDRED 
Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/ 
Observations of the Committee contained in its Three Hundred Fifty 
Eighth Report on the subject 
and National Inland waterways
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 
(Laid on the Table of
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
December, 2024 / Agrahayana, 1946 (Saka) 
THREE HUNDRED SEVENTY THIRD REPORT  
Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/ 
Observations of the Committee contained in its Three Hundred Fifty 
Eighth Report on the subject Development and Expansion of Existing 
and National Inland waterways 
 
resented to the Rajya Sabha on 19th December, 2024) 
Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 3rd  February, 2025) 
 
Y STANDING COMMITTEE 
REPORT NO. 
373
 
Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/ 
Observations of the Committee contained in its Three Hundred Fifty 
Development and Expansion of Existing 

 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Website:     https://sansad.in/rs 
 E-mail:     rsc-tt@sansad.nic.in 

 
 
 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT,  
TOURISM AND CULTURE 
 
THREE HUNDRED SEVENTY THIRD REPORT  
Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/ 
Observations of the Committee contained in its Three Hundred 
Fifty Eighth Report on the subject Development and Expansion of 
Existing and National Inland waterways 
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on  19th December, 2024) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on  3rd February, 2025) 
 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
December, 2024 / Agrahayana, 1946 (Saka) 
 
Hindi version of this publication is also available 

 
 
 
C O N T E N T S 
 
PAG E S 
 
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE      i 
2. INTRODUCTION        ii 
3. ACRONYMS                iii-iv 
 4. REPORT                                1-41 
5. RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS-AT A GLANCE   42-45 
6. ANNEXURES         46-48 
    7. *MINUTES   
 
         
        
        
      
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
______________________________________ 
 
*To be appended
49-51


i 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
(2024-25) 
 
(Constituted on 26th September, 2024) 
 
1. Shri Sanjay Kumar Jha   - Chairman 
 
Rajya Sabha 
2. Shri M. Mohamed Abdulla 
3. Shri Mohammed Nadimul Haque 
4. Shri Jaggesh 
5. Shri Kesridevsinh Jhala  
6. Shrimati S. Phangnon Konyak  
7. Shrimati Sudha Murty  
8. Shri Surendra Singh Nagar  
9.  Shri Imran Pratapgarhi 
10.  Shri Neeraj Dangi* 
 
Lok Sabha  
11. Shri Mian Altaf Ahmad  
12. Shri Pradan Baruah 
13. Shri R. K. Chaudhary 
14. Shri Anil Firojiya  
15. Shri Tapir Gao  
16. Shri Vishweshwar Hegde Kageri  
17. Shri Rahul Kaswan 
18. Shrimati June Maliah  
19. Shri Ajay Kumar Mandal  
20. Shri K. E. Prakash  
21. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy  
22. Dr. M. P. Abdussamad Samadani  
23. Kumari Selja  
24. Shri Avimanyu Sethi  
25. Shri Anurag Sharma  
26. Shri Suresh Kumar Shetkar  
27. Shri Tangella Uday Srinivas 
28. Shri Devesh Chandra Thakur  
29. Shri Amarsing Tisso 
30. Shri Manoj Tiwari  
31. Shri K. C. Venugopal 
 
SECRETARIAT 
Dr. Kushal Kumar Pathak, Joint Secretary 
Shrimati Monica Baa, Director 
Shri T. Kennedy Jesudossan, Deputy Secretary 
Shri N. Romesh Singh, Under Secretary  
___________________________________________________________________________ 
*Nominated as Member w.e.f.  10th October, 2024 in lieu  of  Shri  V. Vijayasai Reddy who ceased to 
be  Member of Committee w.e.f. 10th October, 2024. 
 

ii 
 
 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairman, Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport, 
Tourism and Culture, having been authorized by the Committee to present on its behalf, do 
hereby present this Three Hundred Seventy Third Report on the Action Taken by the 
Government on the Recommendations/ Observations of the Committee contained in its Three 
Hundred Fifty-Eighth Report on the subject Development and Expansion of Existing and 
National Inland waterways. 
2. The Three Hundred Fifty Eighth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary 
Standing Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture was presented to the Parliament on 
the 21st September, 2023. 
3.  The Action Taken Replies on the recommendations of the Committee contained in its 
Three Hundred Fifty Eighth Report were received from the Ministry of Ports, Shipping and 
Waterways on 5th July, 2024. 
4. The Committee considered and adopted the Report in its meeting held on the 16th 
December, 2024.   
 
 
(Sanjay Kumar Jha) 
NEW DELHI;                                                           Chairman, 
December 16, 2024                                                 Department-related Parliamentary Standing            
Agrahayana 25, 1946 (Saka)                            Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture, 
                                                                                                                                 Rajya Sabha 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

iii 
 
 
 
ACRONYMS 
AIS Automatic Identification System 
ATR Action Taken Report 
BOI Bureau of Immigration 
CAG Comptroller and Auditor General 
CBIC Central Board of Indirect Taxes and Customs 
DoP&T Department of Personnel and Training 
EDFC Eastern Dedicated Freight Corridor 
EOT Equipment-On-Top (PPP model for terminal operations) 
FACT Fertilizers and Chemicals Travancore 
GPS Global Positioning System 
IBP Indo-Bangladesh Protocol 
IMD India Meteorological Department 
IOCL Indian Oil Corporation Limited 
IWAI Inland Waterways Authority of India 
IWDC Inland Waterways Development Council 
IWT Inland Water Transport 
JMVP Jal Marg Vikas Project 
MoPSW Ministry of Ports, Shipping, and Waterways 
MTPA Million Tons Per Annum 
NDMA National Disaster Management Authority 
NINI National Inland Navigation Institute 
NIT Notice Inviting Tender 
NRL Numaligarh Refinery Limited 
NTCPWC National Technology Centre for Ports, Waterways, and Coasts 
NW National Waterway 
ODC Over Dimensional Cargo 
OMT Operation, Maintenance, and Transfer (PPP model) 
PIWTT Protocol on Inland Water Transit and Trade 
PPP Public-Private Partnership 
PWRD Public Works Road Department 
Ro-Pax Roll-on/Roll-off Passenger (Ferry Services) 

iv 
 
Ro-Ro Roll-on/Roll-off (Ferry Services) 
 SAIL Steel Authority of India Limited 
SOP Standard Operating Procedure 
SPCB State Pollution Control Board 
STP Sewage Treatment Plant 
TCC Travancore Cochin Chemicals Ltd. 
 
 
 
 
 

1 
 
REPORT 
The Report of the Department -related Parliamentary Standing Committee on 
Transport, Tourism and Culture deals with the Action Taken by the Ministry of Ports, 
Shipping and Waterways on the recommendations/observations as contained in its Three 
Hundred Fifty Eighth Report on ‘Development and Expansion of Existing and National 
Inland waterways’ which was presented to both the Houses of Parliament on 21 st September, 
2023.   
2.         The Action Taken Replies were received from the Ministry on 5 th July, 2024 in 
respect of all the observations/ recommendations contained in the Report. The replies have 
been categorized as follows:- 
Chapter-I: 
Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the Ministry: 
Paragraph Nos.: 18, 19, 21, 23, 25, 57, 60, 7 5, 77, 87, 94, 100, 103, 110, 119, 122, 
123, 127, 128 
Total: 19 
  
Chapter-II: 
Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue in 
view of the replies of the Ministry: 
Paragraph Nos.: 16, 36, 37, 39, 45, 46, 54, 55, 56, 68, 81, 83,  92, 98, 99, 111, 112, 
138, 142 
Total: 19 
Chapter-III: 
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Ministry have not 
been accepted by the Committee: 
Paragraph Nos.: 24, 27, 29, 38, 69, 70, 78, 101, 106, 131, 137 
Total: 11 
  
Chapter-IV: 
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which the final replies of the Ministry 
are still awaited: 
Paragraph Nos.: Nil 
  
Total: 0 
  
3. The Committee desires that final reply in respect of the recommendation/observation 
which has been categorized as inte rim reply by the Committee should be furnished at 
the earliest. 
  

2 
 
  
  
  
Chapter-I 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY 
THE MINISTRY 
  
Recommendation/Observation 
1.     The Committee notes the IWAI’s submission that the manpower sanction ed in 
IWAI is for 3 National Waterways only. During the discussions with the IWAI at the 
time of deliberations on the National Waterways Bill, 2015, (223 rd Report of the 
Committee) the Committee had been informed that the IWAI had a sanctioned strength 
of 419 with additional floating and contractual staff. Further, cadre reorganization in 
IWAI was underway.  
    The Committee desires to know the present sanctioned manpower in IWAI, the 
number of vacancies available and whether the sanctioned strength had be en increased, 
after the said reorganization, at the time of notification of the new 106 waterways or 
anytime thereafter. The Committee would like to know the reasons if such review was 
not carried out, as it reflects on poor management skills on the part o f the Ministry and 
IWAI. The Committee recommends that the Ministry and IWAI may take immediate 
steps to review the manpower requirement for the 23 Operational Waterways so that 
such constraints which are having a negative impact on the waterways developme nt 
could be removed. The Committee is of the opinion that manpower constraints cannot 
be allowed to be the limiting conditions for the implementation of the development 
projects that are crucial for ensuring the country’s economic prosperity. 
(Para 18) 
Reply of the Ministry 
1.1    The recommendations have been noted and the following process has been initiated: 
         Quotations from IPA/ NIC Empanelled Firms has been sought for a Comprehensive 
Review for the following: 
a. Organization Restructuring 
b. Cadre Review & Creation of Posts 
c. Comprehensive Revision of Recruitment Rules & HR Policy with DoP&T Guidelines 
 

3 
 
d. Framing of IWAI Employees Handbook and 
e. Preparation of Inspection Manual. 
      Based on the recommendation/ report of the Firm, proposal for creation of  posts/ Review 
of manpower is under formulation. 
Recommendation/Observation 
2.       Regarding the lack of cargo earmarked for IWT and insufficient facilities, the 
Committee observes that after decades of dependence on road and rail transport, 
shifting fro m road and rail to waterways would entail redesignating entire supply 
chains. The factors such as the slow pace of development of IWT, poor hinterland 
connectivity, high investment costs of vessels and equipments, etc. all discourage 
companies and shippers from shifting to the inland waterways mode. The Committee 
notes the Ministry’s submission that waterway usage charges have been kept at Nil 
and other charges kept at a low level to promote inland water transport. The 
Committee, however, feels that substan tial financial incentives rather than mere 
waiver of charges would be necessary to facilitate the modal shift to waterways. The 
Committee has been informed that no financial incentives are at present proposed by 
the IWAI. 
(Para 19) 
Reply of the Ministry 
2.1       The observation of the Committee for Financial Incentives to facilitate the modal shift 
to waterways is noted for compliance. 
 The logistics movement through inland waterways in the country has increasing 
trends after the initiative taken by the MoPSW, IWAI. 
 The Inland Water Transport sector of the country is at a very nascent stage and 
growth of IWT ecosystem would take time but the consistent efforts over decade 
make possible to reach expected outcome. However, as indicator, we are observing 
that after intervention and investment made in development of IWT infrastructure that 
bringing trends for positive growth in movement of cargo and passenger traffic along 
National Waterways is registered.  
 The initiative of Jal Marg Vikas Project is one of the r emarkable projects in this 
sector which envisages capacity augmentation of NW -1 (Ganga) from Varanasi to 
Haldia. 
 The multimodal terminal developed at Varanasi, Sahibganj and Haldia provides 
multimodal connectivity and the efforts are on to operationalize t hese terminals by 
engaging PPP concessionaire under suitable model of PPP projects. Haldia Terminals 
has already been awarded to Private Concessionaire. 

4 
 
 The tariffs for terminals along NW -1 were notified and stakeholders are being 
encouraged to shift their logistics movement along National Waterways. 
 IWAI has also initiated efforts for anchoring stakeholders by facilitating pilot 
movements, signing of long term transport agreements, providing green transportation 
solutions and storage facilities at terminal sites etc.   
         The development of freight village at Varanasi and Industrial Cluster cum Logistics 
Park (ICLP) at Sahibganj is under implementation by IWAI to facilitate modal shift of cargo 
from rail/ road to waterways. 
Recommendation/Observation 
3.    The Committee recommends that given the long term and slow nature of 
development of IWT, and the huge investments in the creation of requisite 
infrastructure and facilities and the fact that a large number of waterways are being 
developed in the coun try simultaneously, the Ministry and IWAI may consider giving 
certain financial incentives to shippers for the modal shift to waterways. The Committee 
is aware that Terminals for loading/unloading of cargo at various locations along the 
waterways are one o f the three essential requirements for successful navigation on 
Inland Waterways, apart from navigable fairways and aids to navigation. The 
Committee observes that while limited depths of rivers, erosion and meandering are 
determined by the forces of natur e and cannot be easily controlled, factors such as 
development of loading/unloading facilities at Terminals, increase of staff strength to 
deal with the expansion of operational waterways, connectivity to rail and road 
networks are not insurmountable obsta cles and should be taken up with priority in the 
usual course along with the development plans. The Committee observes that the CAG 
in its Performance Audit Report of Kerala Waterways (2015) had pointed out that 
several PSUs near the Kochi Port were transporting large volumes of cargo by road and 
were willing to shift to waterways mode if proper loading/unloading facilities were 
created. The Committee recommends that the Ministry and IWAI should focus on 
creating adequate terminal facilities at the loading and unloading points and ensure the 
availability of hinterland connectivity to encourage potential users, manufacturers and 
shippers to prefer waterways to rail and road. The Committee also observes that one of 
the proposed initiatives under the Blue Econo my Vision 2047 is mandating PSUs and 
Cooperative Companies to divert 10% of their cargo by coastal or inland waterways. 
The Committee desires to know as to whether at present, PSUs have been required to 
transport some percentage of their cargo by waterways. 
(Para 21) 
Reply of the Ministry 
3.1       Keeping in view the fact that incentives for modal shift to waterways can act as a 
driver for promoting the utilisation of these NWs by the cargo owners, a cargo promotion 
scheme is under active consideration. 

5 
 
3.2       Further, efforts are being made by IWAI for operationalization of terminals made 
under JMVP through hiring of PPP concessionaire and suitable PPP models are being 
developed to incentivize the users of IWT  
3.3   The river morphology and hydro -dynamics are very crucial for facilitating navigation 
therefore the expert’s team and help of IIT Madras (NTCPWC) are being taken in fairway 
development activities.  
3.4    The bottleneck for cargo handling infrastructures is resolved at identified O -D pairs, 
however, based upon requirement identified, the IWAI is taking speedy action to mitigate 
these issues. The authority is also encouraging private stakeholders to make investment in 
promotion of IWT business and developed several models, where private stakeho lders may 
invest in terminal operations and maintenance, vessel construction and operations and 
dredging activities etc.  
3.5       IWT sector is at nascent stage and this sector has shortage of skilled manpower to 
deal with daily affairs of IWT and expand  business. Therefore, IWAI has established new 
training institution and also strengthening NINI Patna for coping up with this issue. 
3.6   The infrastructure created under Jal Marg Vikas Project is planned to be operationalized 
by engaging PPP concessionai re which expect to provide end -end solution of logistics for 
stakeholders and also build market and eco -system with private parties for development of 
first mile and last mile connectivity solutions. IWAI has been making consistent efforts for 
development of road and railways connectivity along MMT Varanasi, MMT Sahibgnaj and 
MMT Haldia. The community jetties and Ro -Ro facilities that are being developed under 
JMVP-II initiatives, is also planned to be operated through respective agencies of State 
Government where O&M is expected to be done by the local Gram Sabhas. So, the JMVP 
project is an inclusive development initiative where every type of stakeholders are tried to be 
anchored in development of National Waterways.  
3.7       Under JMVP initiative the IWAI has made world record of piloting the journey of the 
World’s Longest River Cruise Journey from Varanasi to Dibrugarh of 3200 Kilometers and 
development initiatives of JMVP has led for promoting several river cruise vessels and they 
are presently operati onal to facilitate religious, cultural and heritage tourism activities along 
Ganga – Bhagirathi – Hooghly River system.  
3.8       There are 11 IWT Terminals on NW -3. All the terminals are provided with Cargo 
handling equipment (such as, Cranes & Fork lift s) and 24 Hours Navigation Aids are 
installed in entire route of NW -3. In addition, IWAI has taken up the modification of the 
navigational lock gate at Trikkunnapuzha on NW -3 (through Govt. of Kerala, on deposit 
basis), at a cost of Rs.38 Crore. The Cargo mobility by IWT mode is expected to increase 
once the lock gate is made operational. 
3.9       Efforts to increase cargo with other ministries & PSUs have been taken up as detailed 
– 

6 
 
3.9.1    IWAI approached more than 140 PSUs to consider using IWT mode fo r their freight 
operations. A significant number of PSUs have expressed interest and are willing to explore 
the possibility for transportation of their raw and finished goods via Inland Waterways 
Transport (IWT). 
3.9.2    Meetings have been organized with most of the potential PSUs like Food Corporation 
of India, IFFCO, CONCOR, Fertilizers and Chemicals Travancore (FACT) and Travancore 
Cochin Chemicals Ltd. (TCC), Indian Oil Corporation Limited (IOCL), Numaligarh Refinery 
Limited (NRL), SAIL, etc. in additi on to private companies like Tata Steel, Star Cement, 
Dalmia Cement, etc. 
3.9.3    Stakeholders Conference with cargo owners, shippers, vessel operators, ship builders 
were also organized at Kolkata, Kochi, Bhubaneshwar, Vijayawada and Goa in March/ April,  
2024 to discuss the challenges/ issues and their future plans for cargo enhancement on NWs. 
3.10     Parallel action has been taken to enhance the river cruise tourism by organizing the 
stake holders’ consultations with river cruise operators and State Tourism departments. 
Recommendation/Observation 
4.         The Committee further notes that while Inland Waterways is undeniably the 
most environment friendly mode of transport, development of waterways cannot be 
undertaken without its environmental costs as  development activities change a river’s 
hydrology and morphology. Indian rivers support much biodiversity and aquatic life, 
many of which are already endangered due to high levels of pollution. Dredging of the 
riverbed for providing requisite draft advers ely affects the ecology of the river 
systems and fish breeding activities. While river systems could play a crucial role in 
cargo transportation and reduction in logistics costs especially in landlocked States 
and thus, could be an economic gamechanger, th e concerns of environmental 
sustainability should also be given equal importance. A case in point is India’s 
national aquatic animal, the endangered Gangetic Dolphin. The NW -1 passes through 
the Vikramshila dolphin sanctuary, India’s only dedicated protect ed area for the 
Gangetic Dolphin, one of the only three surviving freshwater dolphin species in the 
world. The Gangetic Dolphins, essentially blind, rely heavily on echolocation, i.e., 
using sound to navigate and locate prey, and developmental activities s uch as capital 
dredging and construction interfere with their activities. The Committee observes that 
speed regulations, buffer zones and regulation of dredging were some of the measures 
proposed to be taken to minimize the deleterious impact on dolphins a nd other 
aquatic life and desires to know the status of implementation in this regard. 
(Para 23) 
Reply of the Ministry 
4.1       The inland transportation system of India aspires to become game changer for 
improving logistics performance for promoting trades to achieve five trillion economy. NW-1 

7 
 
(Ganga – Bhagirathi – Hooghly river system) from Varanasi to Haldia is prioritized for the 
development of river transportation with international benchmarking.  
4.2       The emphasis given on environment control m easures is highly monitored during 
development and operation phase of logistics movement along NW -1; the Environment 
Management Plan for NW -1 is already in place and its compliances are being regularly 
monitored.  
 State of the Art dredgers have been deploy ed for the dredging work. They are 
equipped with the noise reduction/ Masking equipment like AVP (Anti Vibration 
Pads) used in engine room foundation to reduce the noise generation inside water and 
outside, AVP is also bridged to reduce the high noise exposure to cabin crew.  
 Spill Kits are being placed on board containing Floating booms, socks, pads, pillows, 
Granular absorbent, PPEs and handling instruction. All necessary precautions are 
exercised to avoid oil spills of leakage. Daily weekly and monthly dredgers inspection 
checklist is maintained on board to ensure regular servicing and maintenance of 
dredgers to prevent any leakage of the equipment and machinery. Regular training is 
being imparted to the operation team and crew about the implementation of  
emergency response plan, handling of emergency response equipment. No spillage 
and accident to the dolphins recorded till date.  
 Dolphin deflector has been installed onboard dredgers to keep the dolphin away from 
the dredging areas. Dredging operation is halted in case of sighting of aquatic 
mammals.  
 Waste management plan is in place for the dredgers and vessels. Waste oil is stored & 
disposed as per the Hazardous and Other Waste Management Rules 2016. 
Authorization has also been obtained by contractor, a nd agreement with SPCB 
authorized vendor is also there.  
 STP/ Bio toilets are installed on board dredgers and no solid and liquid waste is being 
discharged in the river to follow the Zero discharge policy. Municipal waste is being 
segregated at the source and being stored in the color -coded bins and disposed as per 
the Solid Waste Management Rules 2016 through municipal corporation/local body 
along with river banks. Bilge water is being stored in closed containers and disposed -
off through authorized recycler regularly.  
 Apart from this, bandalling is being done to concentrate the flow of water towards the 
river channel as well as to prevent the deposition of silt from outside the channel to 
reduce the requirement of dredging.  
 Dredging is being avoided durin g the rainy season, while during the normal days 
dredged materials are discharged close to surface of the water body to minimize the 
dispersal of sediments. Disposal is being done at approx. 100 -150 m away from the 
channel.  

8 
 
 As part of the exercise dredged material is checked regularly for toxicity.  
 No contract for dredging operation is being done inside the Vikramshila Gangetic 
dolphin sanctuary area.  
 IWAI has obtained the Wildlife clearance for the vessel movements through Kashi 
Turtle Sanctuary.  
4.3       Vessel operators have been sensitized to maintain the buffer zone and speed limits 
upto 5 knots/ hr within sanctuary areas. 
  
Recommendation/Observation 
5.      Considering the constraints, the Committee recommends that the IWAI should 
concentrate its  efforts in developing the 23 Operational National Waterways. The 
Committee desires to know whether all requisite hydrographic and techno -economic 
feasibility studies and environmental and forest clearances have been obtained for these 
23 Operational NWs as no such studies had been carried out prior to the notification of 
the new waterways. The Committee exhorts the IWAI to give due importance to 
environmental studies along with techno -economic studies in the development projects 
on the 23 Operational NWs. The Committee has been informed that the Least Available 
Depth (LAD) for a waterway to be made operational in a profitable way must be two 
meters. The Committee recommends that those waterways which have a naturally 
available depth of two meters and above may be given top priority for development. 
The Committee also recommends that wherever Inland Water Authority of India 
proposes to conduct feasibility study, the State’s representation should be ensured in the 
proposed feasibility study and the State shoul d be given opportunity to be heard and its 
views on feasibility should be adequately taken into account. 
(Para 25) 
Reply of the Ministry 
5.1       Feasibility Studies (FSs) have been completed for almost all new NWs declared vide 
National Waterways Act, 20 16 by the Government. Further, based on the findings of FSs, 
Detailed Project Reports (DPRs) of 36 NWs have also been completed by IWAI to draw the 
contours of development. All these study reports have been shared with the States and also in 
public domain on IWAI website.   The selection of most viable 26 NWs have been done on 
the basis of these studies and as per extent regulations applicable.  
Waterways are having their own right of way since centuries and their development is at 
nascent stage in the count ry. Accelerated growth on development of Road and Rails along 
with bridges across the waterways have further dwindled the prospects of IWT. However, the 
bulk commodities and over dimensional cargo (ODC) are favorable choice for their 
movement on waterways which is cost -effective and environment friendly.   Unlike road and 

9 
 
rail, waterways may not be developed everywhere but is location specific in nature and these 
may provide an alternate mode of transport for relieving congestion on the speedy modes of 
road and rail transport wherever possible. 
  
5.2       The present strategy is to avail the naturally available depths in a deepest channel of 
32 to 45 m width of navigation channel for a least available depth (LAD) of 2 to 3 m. During 
the flood season, it is a vailable in the waterway for about 3 to 4 months, and only depth 
monitoring monthly surveys are done to record/earmark the route. Maintenance works such 
as bandalling/ channel stabilisation works using the energy of river are taken up during lean 
season at  shoal locations only wherever the LAD is less than 2 m. The depth is also 
maintained by taking up maintenance dredging for increasing less than 2 m depth to required 
LAD a per need basis.  
  
5.3       The recommendation of the Committee for inclusion of t he State’s representation at 
feasibility study is noted for compliance. Involvement of States has been taken up through 
newly constituted Inland Waterways Development Council (IWDC) in waterway 
development process as detailed in previous Para. 
  
Recommendation/Observation 
6.     The Committee had asked for information about any surveys done by the IWAI to 
tap the potential of developing waterways systems in the North Eastern Region beyond 
Dibrugarh but the IWAI has only replied that Regular Thalweg Surveys are being 
carried out up to Sadiya beyond Dibrugarh, i.e., up to the declared National Waterway 
No. 2 stretch. The Committee notes that only the NW -2 is presently operational in the 
North-East region though four NWs i.e., NW no. 2, 16, 31 and 57, all in As sam have 
been identified as viable. Besides, the work on the development of NW -2 has also been 
going at a much slower pace. The Committee recommends that the IWAI may give 
special consideration to the North -Eastern region and attach top priority to the 
development of waterways in that region. 
(Para 57) 
Reply of the Ministry 
6.1     The stretch from B’ Border to Dibrugarh (Ch. 0 Km to 768 Km) of River Brahmaputra 
National Waterway -2 (NW -2) has been developed with fairway, navigational aids and 
terminal facilities at strategic locations as per traffic potential. From Dibrugarh (Ch. 768 Km) 
to Sadiya (891 Km), presently since there is no traffic potential, only thalweg survey on 
regular interval is being carried out for collection of Water Level Data. However, the stretch 
can also be developed with required depth and other infrastructure if there is demand from 
stakeholders. 
  

10 
 
6.2       The stretch from Lakhipur to Bhanga (121 Km) of Barak River was declared as NW -
16. Under Phase-I Silchar to Bhanga (71 Km) was taken up for development with fairway & 
navigational aids. The two IWT terminals viz. Karimganj & Badarpur, taken over from 
CIWTC, also renovated and made operational. 
  
6.3       River Dhansiri (NW-31) is rain fed river and in lean season there is hardly any depth 
available for movement of vessel. However, as per demand from Numaligarh Refinery Ltd 
(NRL), the stretch from Brahmaputra confluence till NRL Jetty (Approx. 31 Km) is being 
developed with fairway of 2.5 m using the rain discharge received from U/S catchment area. 
With respect to River Kopili (NW -57), as per FSR the waterway was not found to be 
developed for cargo transportation. However, considering demand from Cement Industry, 
development of 12 Km stretch from Brahmaputra confluence is envisaged. 
Development of NW-16 and Indo-Bangladesh Protocol (IBP) 
Recommendation/Observation 
7.        The Committee notes though that the date of completion of the Sonamura 
Terminal is in October, 2023, yet the physical progress is merely 25%. The Committee 
also n otes that the scheduled completion time of the upgradation of Badarpur and 
Karimganj Terminals was March, 2023 and desires to know whether the work on these 
projects could be accomplished as per schedule. 
(Para 60) 
Reply of the Ministry 
7.1      The “Design, construction and development of Inland Water Transport (IWT) terminal 
at Sonamura” has been completed on 31.01.2024 and inaugurated on 15.02.2024. It is ready 
for operation. Further, the work related to up -gradation of Karimganj Ternminals has been 
completed February, 2024. 
  
  
Recommendation/Observation 
8.       The Committee feels that with the huge increase in NWs after 2016 and the 
requirement of more inland vessels, the Ministry should consider the scheme for 
subsidizing the manufacture of inland ve ssels. The incentives for manufacturing may 
persuade reluctant shippers to switch to the waterways mode. 
(Para 75) 
Reply of the Ministry 
8.1      To meet the required subsidy demand of the Inland Vessels developers and to give 
impetuous to cargo movement t hrough National Waterways Ministry following two schemes 
are under active consideration of Ministry: - 

11 
 
  
    a)  IWT-Cargo Promotion Scheme 
    b)  Harit Nauka- Inland Vessels Green Transition Scheme 
  
Development of other National Waterways 
Waterways Project in the State of Odisha 
Recommendation/Observation 
9.     The Committee observes that the NW -5 was declared as a National Waterway on 
25th November, 2008 but there had been no action for further development for several 
years. The proposal to connect the  coal belt of Talcher with Dhamra and Paradip ports 
had been initiated during the last few years and targeted to be completed by 2021 but 
again due to no progress and the MoU signed between IWAI, Paradip Port, Dhamra 
Port and the State Government expired i n 2018. Now the IWAI has initiated Phase – I 
of the project and Phase -II and III would be taken up after completion of Phase -I. The 
Committee is disappointed at the tardiness in the implementation of this project which 
would have provided a cost-effective route for transportation of bulk cargo to the ports. 
The Committee would like to know the reasons for the lack of progress earlier and the 
targeted date of completion of the first phase of the project. The Committee 
recommends that the IWAI may set targets  and a schedule for completion of Phase -I of 
the project and the NW 64 project which have already been much delayed and 
endeavour to complete it as scheduled. 
(Para 77) 
Reply of the Ministry 
9.1       IWAI has initiated development of Phase -1 and Phase -2 of the NW -5 project as per 
the directive received in the meeting of the Committee of Secretaries (CoS) on 21.06.2023 
and decided that action be taken by IWAI to develop an Inland Waterway Project for 
evacuation of the coal. 
  
9.2       The action was initia ted earlier in the year 2017 with mathematical modelling and 
preparation of DPR for cross structures proposed across NW -5 to make it feasible for 
navigation. The vetting of the cross structures was entrusted to CWC in year 2020 and the 
project was delayed as the CWC couldn’t complete the project. 
  
In addition, the following additional steps has been taken up for development of NW-5 
9.3       For development of Phase -I (Phase -II included later on as per directive of CoS 
during the meeting dated 21.06.2023),  IWAI has initiated action i.e., engaged the 
Transaction Advisor (TAs) M/s. KPMG -HSA for development and  operationalization of 
NW-5 & NW -64 in PPP mode. As per the request of M/o Coal, an SPV between Ministry 
of Coal (MoC), MoPS&W / IWAI, Paradip Port Auth ority, & Govt. of Odisha to transport 
the Coal by IWT mode from Talcher in NW-5 has been formed.  

12 
 
9.4       IWAI has taken back the work of vetting of cross structures from CWC and has 
entrusted the same to NTCPWC, IIT Madras on 10.08.2023 which in turn ha s submitted the 
interim report on 06.12.2023. The final report with all the modifications suggested by 
NTCPWC is likely to be received soon. In addition, for the TEFR/DPR for Phase -II is also 
being prepared by NTCPWC which has submitted the interim report on 08.01.2024 and as 
per suggestions/deliberation the cost given therein is being optimised and the final report is 
expected soon. 
  
9.5       Accordingly, IWAI has planned to take up Phase -1 and Phase-2 simultaneously with 
an SPV comprising of Govt. of Odisha, Paradip Port Authority, Coal India Ltd and IWAI. 
  
Recommendation/Observation 
10.     The Committee observes that the proposed Waterway in Kerala, which passes 
through nine districts, will connect Thiruvananthapuram to Kasorgod and the 
international airports at Thiruvananthapuram, Kozhikode and Kannur, and will have 
much impact on both logistics and tourism. The backwaters of Kerala with its innate 
serenity and beauty can rival the canals of Amsterdam which are visited by millions of 
tourists. Develop ment of waterways in the state is key to its tourism centric 
development. The Committee recommends that the IWAI and the Ministry of Ports, 
Shipping & Waterways should address the concerns and resolve the issues in 
coordination with the State Government of  Kerala, and if necessary, involve the public 
representatives for finding durable solutions to vexatious problems. 
(Para 87) 
Reply of the Ministry 
10.1     Recommendation of the Committee to address the concerns and resolve the issues in 
coordination with the State Government of Kerala have been noted for compliance. 
Recommendation/Observation 
11.       The Committee further notes that certain waterways projects are delayed due to 
issues that fall in the domain of the State. The Committee opines that such i ssues can be 
resolved by establishing necessary co -ordination mechanism to address state level and 
local concerns. The Committee, therefore, recommends that IWAI and the Ministry 
may take up the pending issues with the concerned authorities to accelerate t he 
development of already declared Inland Waterways. 
(Para 94) 
Reply of the Ministry 
11.1     Necessary action will be initiated with concerned authority of State Government. 

13 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
12.   The Committee recommends the Government to provi de institutional framework 
for development of IWT sector in the country so as to increase the capacity of IWT 
agencies, commercialisation of IWT industries, increased cost recovery through user 
charges and creation of a vibrant IWT sector in the country. 
(Para 100) 
Reply of the Ministry 
12.1   Recommendation of the Committee is noted for compliance for effective 
implementation of development of IWT sector as per the action plan formulated in line with 
Maritime India Vision (MIV) -2030 prepared by the Govt. t o enhance cargo and passenger 
movement on waterways. Further, targets have been set for development of 50+ National 
Waterways (NWs) for a quantum of cargo movement of 500 million tons per annum (MTPA) 
by the year 2047 as per Blue Economy Vision Action Plan  prepared by the Govt. including 
IWT in the maritime sector. 
  
Ro-Ro (Roll-on, Roll-off) and Ro-Pax (Roll-on/Roll-off with passenger) Ferry Services 
  
Recommendation/Observation 
13.       The Committee observes that Ro -Ro projects have the potential to ope n up 
connectivity for the geographically disadvantaged areas and have the advantages of 
speed of operation due to less cargo handling and ability to integrate with other 
transport systems. The Committee recommends that the Ministry and IWAI may 
ensure the operationalization of Ro-Ro ferries National Waterways wherever possible. 
(Para 103) 
Reply of the Ministry 
13.1     As per recommendations of the Committee, measures have been taken up for the 
operationalization of Ro -Ro ferries on National Waterways where ver possible with State 
Governments- 
  
i.    Assam- Four Ro -Pax vessels have been handed over to the State Government during 
October, 2020. As per MoU with Assam Government, the Joint Management Committee 
(JMC) meetings quarterly for review of smooth opera tion & management of the said vessels 
to be done. 
  
ii.   Uttar Pradesh - Two Ro -Pax vessels have been handed over to the State Government 
during July, 2021. As per MoU with UP Government, the Joint Management Committee 
(JMC) meetings quarterly for review o f smooth operation & management of the said vessels 
to be done. 
  

14 
 
iii.   Kerala- Two terminals with Ro -Ro facilities have been constructed at Bolghatty and 
Willingdon Island in Cochin Port limits, and 2 nos. of Ro -Ro vessels built by IWAI were 
deployed for Ro-Ro service between these two terminals since February 2021. 
  
iv.  Jharkhand- IWAI has offered its Ro -Ro/ Ro-Pax vessel to Government of Jharkhand to 
promote IWT in the State. 
  
v.  Bihar- IWAI has offered its Ro -Ro/ Ro-Pax vessel to Government of Biha r to promote 
IWT in the State. 
  
vi.   Andhra Pradesh - Land acquisition for development of Ro -Ro terminals at 
Harischandrapuram, Muktyala have been acquired and for Ibrahimpatnam is under progress 
with the State Govt. 
Accidents in National and Inland Waterways 
Recommendation/Observation 
14.       The Committee notes that the number of accident cases due to boat capsizing has 
seen an increasing trend especially in the last two years, resulting in many deaths and 
injury to the passengers. With the increase in  the number of waterways, the number of 
accidents may also increase unless remedial measures are put in place to enhance boat 
safety and prevent accidents. The Committee observes that one of the main reasons for 
most boat accidents in India is overloading of passengers, imbalance due to lack of 
proper distribution of weight of the running boat, and dangerous working practices, 
followed by poor quality of vessels and unregistered vessels, violating rules, vessel 
traffic etc. In their deposition before the Co mmittee, the representatives of the IWAI 
had stated that a system is in place to survey and certify the vessels for balance and 
stability, fire safety and training of manpower manning the vessel, etc. before 
registration and certification. Accidents taking  place are registered by the State 
Government and feedback is taken for improvement. 
(Para 110) 
Reply of the Ministry 
14.1      Observation of the Committee is noted for effective compliance through State 
Governments as mandated. Efforts in this regard are detailed- 
  
14.1.1    As per National Disaster Management Guidelines on Boat Safety (September 2017) 
published by NDMA, Govt. of India, the following prime factors contribute to boat/ferry 
accidents in most of the inland waterways for implementation by the States – 
  
      • Understaffing/Unqualified crew  
      • Severe overcrowding  
      • Ageing vessels  
      • Lack of regulatory standards  
      • Faulty boat design and stability 

15 
 
  
14.1.2     The Inland Vessels Act, 2021 (24 of 2021) has been enacted  in August 2021 and 
nine rules have been framed thereunder. The Rules contains various provisions such as 
lifesaving appliances, firefighting appliances, navigational safety and signals etc. This will 
help in prevention of accidents and lead to fewer accid ental deaths in future once 
implemented by letter and spirit by the Designated Authorities of the State Governments. The 
responsibility of the implementation of rules and regulations related to safety of inland 
vessels primarily rests with the Designated A uthorities of the State Governments. IWAI has 
already published (with the prior approval of the Central Govt.) through Gazette Notifications 
the following rules & regulations: 
  
      i) Prevention of Collision on National Waterways Regulations, 2002;  
      ii) National Waterways, Safety of Navigation and Shipping Regulations, 2002; 
  
Digital initiatives in the Waterways Sector 
Recommendation/Observation 
15.    The Committee appreciates the digital initiatives taken by the IWAI to enhance 
availability of i nformation in waterways and recommends that River Information 
Services may be implemented in at least five National Waterways existing before 2016 
in a scheduled manner. The Committee understands that River Information Services 
should support both traffic and transport management, by not only ensuring the safety 
and efficiency of inland navigation but also enhance the resource management of the 
waterways transport chain by enabling information exchange between vessels, locks, 
bridges, terminals and ports. T he Committee also recommends that IWAI may make 
concerted efforts to develop the phone software which would enable small operators 
who are unable to afford the AIS system to avail of the facilities for safe navigation. 
(Para 119) 
  
Reply of the Ministry 
15.1     Following efforts are taken up to develop Mobile App for Car -D Portal through 
NICSI –  
Key Features of IWAI Vessel Tracker & PANI Portal: 
 GPS Tracking both onboard device as well as external GPS Interface using NMEA 
protocol. 
 Real Time/Live Tracking of Vessels. 
 Admin web portal to have e-tracking of 500 vessels with single user id & password. 
 Support Web based/Android Application. 
 Activity report and Log History. 

16 
 
 Accessible to external stakeholders and general public. 
15.2     Key Benefits: 
 Integrated solution: All the River Navigation and Infrastructure information is easily 
available on a single platform. 
 Ease of Navigation: With the timely updating of survey data and virtual buoys the 
difficulty in navigation is reduced significantly, especially in IWT sector. 
 Accident Prevention: As the movement of all the vessels is available and all the 
obstructions are also updated in the software, accidents can be prevented. 
15.3     Accessibility: It is accessible over large portion of the IWT navigation             
community through hand held mobile devices. 
  
Connectivity of National Waterways to road-rail-air and constraints faced 
Recommendation/Observation 
16.     The Committee desires to know whether the Broad Gauge Rail Siding at Pandu is 
now operational a s the CAG in its Report 15 of 2016 had commented adversely on the 
same. The Committee observes that with the exception of Pandu and Jogighopa 
Terminals, none of the other Terminals have railway connectivity at present and 
recommends that the IWAI may take all efforts to develop the connectivity of the 
Terminals with rail and road at the earliest. Connectivity ensures a smooth and 
predictable supply chain which is essential for reduction of logistics costs. 
(Para 122) 
Reply of the Ministry 
16.1     The Broad  Gauge Rail Siding at Pandu is now operational. All Inland Water 
Transport terminals have been constructed with road connectivity and the recommendation of 
the Committee for rail connectivity is noted for compliance. 
Recommendation/Observation 
17.      The Committee also observes that connectivity of waterways with Major Ports 
and transferring some of the cargo evacuation to waterways would relieve congestion of 
ports and lessen the burden on rail and road besides reducing the logistics costs. 
Interlinking waterways and ports with coastal shipping would ensure development of 
the entire hinterland. The Committee recommends that for the newly notified 
waterways under development, the IWAI may ensure that the connectivity to rail, road 
and ports be comprehensively dealt with in the Detailed Project Report (DPR) itself. 
(Para 123) 
Reply of the Ministry 

17 
 
17.1     Feasibility studies and detailed project reports (DPRs) for selected National 
Waterways (NWs) for development out of newly notified NWs, are in place. The  
recommendation of the Committee to ensure the connectivity of these NWs to Rail, Road and 
Ports is noted for effective implementation. 
Tourism around National Waterways 
Recommendation/Observation 
18.      The Committee strongly believes that taking into a ccount the navigable 
waterways length of around 14,500 km, India has enormous potential to develop 
tourism in and around the country’s inland waterway system. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends that a robust mechanism has to be devised in co -ordination with 
the Union Ministry of Tourism and various State Governments to promote/ develop 
tourism across the waterways network in the Country, especially in the North -Eastern 
Region; Buckingham Canal including the areas in Kadiyam; and backwaters of Kerala. 
                                                                                  (Para 127) 
Reply of the Ministry 
18.1   For effective implementation of the recommendation by the Committee, Government 
constituted Functional Group (Cell) for Tourism which is r esponsible for monitoring the 
tourism related activities, preparation of Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs) applying 
National and International best practices, innovative ideas. 
  
18.2     The following actions have been taken for enhancement of river cr uise tourism with 
the neighboring countries: 
  
 MoU for passengers and cruise services on the coastal and protocol routes between 
India and Bangladesh was signed on 8th April, 2017 
 SOP for MoU on passengers and cruise services on coastal and protocol route was 
also signed between India and Bangladesh on 25th October, 2018.  
 Pilot movements of Indian cruise vessels and Bangladesh cruise vessels between 
Kolkata and Dhaka and vice-versa were performed during March, 2019.  
 SOP for Immigration and Customs at Dhubri and Indenture Memorial Jetty at Kolkata 
for the cruise and passengers travelling on Indo -Bangladesh Protocol Route between 
India and Bangladesh have also been issued with the approval of BOI and CBIC on 
29.09.2023. 
 Regular movements of vessels carrying foreign tourists on cruise vessels are taking 
place in India and Bangladesh Protocol Route from NW -1 to NW -2. The details of 
voyages performed on IBP route carrying foreign tourists are as given below: 
a. Indian Vessels 
i. RV Bengal Ganga – Kolkata to Dhaka 
ii. MV Mahabaahu – Guwahati to Kolkata 
iii. MV Ganga Vilas – Varanasi to Dibrugarh 
iv. MV Ganga Vilas – Kolkata to Dhaka 
v. MV Charaidew-II – Dhaka to Guwahati 

18 
 
vi. MV Charaidew-II – Narayanganj (Dhaka) to Pandu 
vii. RV KindatPandaw – Kolkata to Pandu (twice – in October and November 2023) 
b. Bangladeshi Vessels 
i. MV Madhumoti – Dhaka to Kolkata 
ii. MV Razarhat – Narayanganj to Kolkata  
Development of river cruise terminal infrastructure along 10+ prioritized circuits on 06 
National Waterways. 
Recommendation/Observation 
19.       The Committee a lso observes that there are many fascinating places near the 
Canal like the Kadiyam nursery spread over 25,000 hectares and the Kolleru lake, 
home to several species of migratory birds. The Committee, therefore, recommends that 
the Ministry and IWAI may ta ke up the issue of removal of encroachments with the 
State Government from the Buckingham canal to ensure for its further development at 
least for promoting tourism. 
(Para 128) 
Reply of the Ministry 
19.1     Necessary action will be taken up with the conce rned authorities of State Government 
for removal of encroachments from Buckingham Canal. 
**** 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Chapter-II 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES OF THE MINISTRY 
  
Recommendation/Observation 

19 
 
1.     The Committee notes that in the past 05 years, 18 more National Waterways have 
been operationalized making a total of 23 Operational Waterways from the earlier 05 
and one more Waterway is to be made operational by 2024. The Committee 
appreciates that the pace of development of Inland Waterways has gained 
considerable traction. The Committee has also been informed that presently 
development activities are being taken up only on 20 NWs out of the 23 Operational 
Waterways. The Committee desires to know the reason for lack of development 
activities on 03 of the 23 Operational NWs, notwithstanding the policy priority to 
develop the Inland Waterways in the country. The Committee may also be informed 
about the action taken and timeline chalked out fo r the development of the 26 
potentially viable NWs. 
                                                                                                                            (Para 16) 
Reply of the Ministry 
1.1       Development activities on 03 of the 23  operational NWs have not been carried out as 
there is natural availability of more than 2 m least available depth (LAD) in these 3 NWs 
which is adequate for movement of inland cargo vessels and cargo movement is already 
taking place prior to taking up any intervention by IWAI.  
Further, action taken subsequent to declaration of 111 NWs in the country vide National 
Waterways Act, 2016 include completion of 1 st Stage Feasibility Studies (FSs) of new NWs 
and 2 nd Stage Detailed Project Reports (DPRs) prepared for those selected NWs on their 
feasibility studies. Accordingly, Action Plan of 26 potentially viable NWs has been 
formulated for their development till the year 2030 keeping into account the NWs listed in 
the Maritime India Vision 2030 prepared by the Government which also include development 
of NWs for cargo and passenger movement. 
  
Recommendation/Observation 
2.       The Committee notes that the existing navigational lock at Farakka was 
constructed in 1987 and is in need of major repairs. Due to lack o f proper 
maintenance of lock, the waterways infrastructure is facing a great deal of problems 
which is causing inefficiencies in movement of vessels. Development of a new lock 
would immensely enhance transport efficiency on NW -1 as it will reduce the 
turnaround time from the present 02 hours to 23 minutes only (for a two way traffic). 
The project was conceived in November, 2014 and received the Cabinet approval in 
January, 2018. The Committee is dismayed to note that the project which is so 
essential to JMV  Project has been much delayed. The Committee recommends the 
IWAI to take all efforts to complete the project expeditiously in a time-bound manner. 
(Para 36) 
Reply of the Ministry 
2.1      The construction of New Navigation Lock Gate at Farakka taken up un der Jal Marg 
Vikas Project (JMVP) has been completed and also inaugurated by Hon’ble Prime Minister 

20 
 
on 17 th October 2023. Successful operation of this lock gate started with passing of vessels 
through it. 
  
2.2       Presently, the New Navigational Lock Gate is operational and now, it is expected that 
modernization and re -innovation of old lock gate will be started soon. The procurement 
activities for the Renovation & modernization of the existing lock are in advance stage and 
expected to be awarded by July, 2024.  
  
Recommendation/Observation 
3.      The Committee observes that the IWAI had received cargo commitments from 
various industries, shippers and manufacturers before the operationalization of the 
Haldia MMT mainly for fly -ash, edible oil, vegetable oil and gypsum. The Committee 
would like to be informed about the types of major cargos handled at these Terminals in 
the last three years, whether the targeted cargo handling capacity of the Multi -Modal 
Terminals at Varanasi, Sahibganj and Haldia have bee n achieved, and the total 
employment generated by the operationalization of these three MMTs. The Committee 
has also been informed that the Varanasi MMT is proposed to be linked by rail to the 
Eastern Dedicated Freight Corridor at Jeonathpur and the Sahibg anj MMT is to be 
linked by rail to the SakriGali Station. The Committee understands that while both 
MMTs have dependable road connectivity, rail connectivity is yet to be established. The 
Committee recommends that the Ministry may ensure that rail connecti vity is 
established as per a targeted schedule for both MMTs. 
(Para 37) 
Reply of the Ministry 
3.1       Three Multimodal Terminals were developed under the initiative of the Jal Marg 
Vikas Project i.e. MMT Varanasi, MMT Sahibganj, MMT Haldia. These termina ls are 
targeted to handle break-bulk, neo-bulk, container cargo, project cargo and natural aggregates 
etc. Presently the terminals are completed along with roadways connectivity.  
  
3.2      The IWT market scenario is at nascent stage. IWAI is continuously  striving for the 
development of market and making efforts to anchor the stakeholders to use National 
Waterways for their logistics movement.  
  
3.3       The sector has identified that engagement of Private Parties in operationalization of 
waterways will be extremely beneficial for the sector and accordingly the various PPP 
models are being explored. 
  
3.4       The PPP concessionaire for operationalization of MMT Haldia on EOT model of PPP 
is already engaged and the contract agreement is also signed with M/s IRC Natural Resource 
Pvt Ltd.  

21 
 
  
3.5     Similarly, the Authority has already made four attempts in the past for engagement of 
PPP concessionaire for MMT Varanasi and Sahibgnaj, now, the fifth attempt on OMT model 
of PPP is decided by the MoPSW and ten dering activity is ongoing, the NIT was published 
on 02.02.2024 and pre bid was held on 22.02.2024 and LOA is expected by June 2024. 
   
3.6      The Railways connectivity for linking MMT Varanasi, MMT Sahibganj and MMT 
Haldia is expected to be completed by  December 2025. The rail connectivity with EDFC line 
from Jeonathpur station to MMT Varanasi will enhance the multi -modal movement of cargo 
and also facilitate in first mile and last mile connectivity.  
  
3.7        It is expected that operationalization o f terminals, vessels, fairway development and 
associated direct and indirect economic activities in IWT sector will generate various types of 
employment opportunities. 
  
Recommendation/Observation 
4.       In its interaction with the IWAI in 2013, the Comm ittee had been informed that 
IWAI aimed to provide LAD of 3.0 m in Haldia -Farakka, 2.5 m in Farakka -Barh and 
2.0 m in Barh -Ghazipur. The Committee desires to know whether the IWAI has been 
successful in maintaining the targeted LAD in the respective Fairways. 
(Para 39) 
Reply of the Ministry 
4.1       As per the classification (class of the river), IWAI is successful in providing the 
required LAD in maximum period, however, during lean season period IWAI has prepared 
dredging plan to ensure the required LAD.  The contractor for performing dredging activities 
from Farakka – Kahalgaon, Sultanganj – Mahenderpur and Mahenderpur to Barh are in place 
and recently LOA is issued to engage contractor for Digha – Majhuwa, Digha-Barh, Farakka 
– Katwa and Katwa – Tribeni also. The contract is likely to be awarded for the remaining 
stretches also by June 2024. 
Recommendation/Observation 
5.       The Committee has been informed that 12 Community Jetties have been 
completed in UP and work is in progress in the remaining Jetti es in UP, Bihar, 
Jharkhand and West Bengal. The Committee observes that out of the 62 Community 
Jetties, 15 are in Uttar Pradesh, 22 in Bihar & Jharkhand and 22 in West Bengal. 
(ANNEXURE) No Community Jetty has yet been completed in Bihar, Jharkhand, and 
West Bengal. NIT (Notice Inviting Tender) has been floated in 11 of the 22 proposed 
Community Jetties in West Bengal and there is no work in progress in the remaining 11 

22 
 
Jetties. No Tenders have been floated as yet for any of the 22 Community Jetties in 
Bihar and Jharkhand as work is claimed to be in progress in all of them. 
(Para 45) 
Reply of the Ministry 
5.1       The work of Community Jetties under the JMVP -II (Arth Ganga Project) are as 
follows: 
  
i. Uttar Pradesh: 11 Numbers Jetties inaugurated. 
  
ii. Bihar: 19 jetties have been commissioned and inaugurated. The foundation stone of five 
out of these 19 was laid by Hon’ble Prime Minister. 
  
iii. Jharkhand: 02 Jetties have been commissioned and are ready for inauguration. 
  
iv. West Bengal : Work has been a warded for 15 number (HDPE -11 & Concrete -4) 
community jetties, which will be ready soon in this year. The bidding is under finalization for 
remaining 07 number steel community jetties. 
Recommendation/Observation 
6.         The Committee observes that the Ganga is a part of Indian identity and the very 
embodiment of Indian Culture. The extensive basin of the Ganga accounts for one -
fourth of India’s water resources and is home to a third of India’s population. Life 
without the Ganga is unimaginable to the com munities living beside the river and the 
entire concept of the Arth Ganga programme is to link people with the river through 
the bridge of economy. The development of Community Jetties and Ro -Ro Terminals 
are thus, essential for channelizing economic activ ity along the banks of the Ganges and 
the Committee is dismayed to observe the slow pace of construction of such essential 
infrastructure. The Committee desires to know the reasons behind the lack of progress 
in construction of community jetties and RO -RO Terminals in Bihar and Jharkhand 
and West Bengal. 
(Para 46) 
Reply of the Ministry 
6.1     In respect of Ro -Ro/Ro-Pax facilities the following locations were not found feasible 
due to low traffic potential: 
1. Saraikota 
2. Buxar 
3. Hasanpur 

23 
 
4. Baktiyarpur 
  
6.2     The following two locations are coming in Dolphin Sanctuary for which necessary 
clearance is being obtained: 
      1. Tintanga 
      2. Kahalgaon 
  
6.3    Further the following two locations shall be taken up with MMT Sahibganj terminal 
O&M contract. 
     1. Manihari 
     2. Samdaghat 
  
6.4      The remaining two locations shall be developed as berthing facilities to the Ro -Pax 
vessels. The bidding formalities for which is being done.  
   1. Manikchak 
   2. Rajmahal  
  
Projects in NW-2 in the North Eastern Region 
Recommendation/Observation 
7.         The Committee notes that presently 80 MTPA cargo moves into and within the 
North Eastern Region and is handled by either rail or road. The landlocked NER is 
connected with mainland by only the narrow 22 -km-long Siliguri corridor which along 
with the challenging geography and topography of the region creates road and rail 
congestion and hampers connectivity of the north -eastern states. Development of NW -2 
as a Multi Modal Terminal is therefore, important to augment t he Logistics 
infrastructure of the North -Eastern Region, hitherto largely dependent on rail and 
road. Jogighopa, due to its geographical location, holds immense potential to serve the 
hinterlands of Upper Assam, Arunachal Pradesh, Meghalaya, and Nagaland. The 
Committee appreciates the initiative of IWAI and the Ministry as the Terminal 
proposed here would prove to be a game changer for the entire North Eastern Region as 
well as the neighbouring countries of Bhutan, Nepal, and Bangladesh. The Committee, 
however, expresses concern at the slow pace of the project. Besides, the NHIDCL is yet 
to appoint an Authority Engineer for the project. The Committee desires to know the 
reasons for the same and recommends that action may be taken at the earliest in this 
regard. 
(Para 54) 
Reply of the Ministry 

24 
 
7.1    Development of Multi-Modal Terminal with Rail Connectivity at Pandu (Guwahati) on 
National Waterway (NW)-2 is complete and operational. 
  
7.2       Further, development of Inland Water Transport (IWT) terminal at Jogighopa on NW-
2 is at 81% progress so far and targeted for completion by June, 2024. NHIDCL also assured 
appointment of Authority Engineer for the project. Main reasons for slow pace of the project 
are heavy rains during monsoon 2022 -23, time taken to re ceive design/drawing from IIT 
Mumbai and in finalizing /shifting of site and fixing of level of jetty (in view of the existing 
HT line). 
Recommendation/Observation 
8.         The Committee understands that the ship repair facility at Pandu will enable 
repair of inland vessels with dry docking in the North -Eastern Region itself instead of 
having to go to Kolkata, which will result in less cost and shorter repair time. The 
Committee observes that the announcement of the Ship Repair Project at Pandu was 
made i n August, 2021 and the construction was to commence from May, 2022 to be 
completed by 2024. The project is now rescheduled for completion by 2025. While some 
delay is understandably due to the Covid pandemic, the Committee notes that as 
proposals for const ruction of a ship repair facilities at Guwahati were under 
consideration for many years before the finalization of this project, the IWAI should 
take every measure to ensure that the project is completed as per schedule.  
(Para 55) 
  
8.1.     The Committee notes that an alternative road to Pandu port had been roposed 
since 2011 at a then estimated cost of Rs. 12.32 crores but due to various reasons could 
not be constructed. CAG in its Report No. 15 of 2016 had commented adversely that 
due to the lack of thi s alternate road, the available infrastructure at Pandu port was 
lying largely unutilized. The Committee observes that the proposal has been deferred 
for nearly more than a decade despite CAG observations and the Alternate Road is now 
proposed to be built at a cost of Rs. 180 crores by 2026. The Committee feels that this 
indicates apathy on the part of the Ministry and IWAI that an important infrastructure 
project which would have benefitted the region should have been allowed to be delayed 
for such a long time and recommends that the IWAI may ensure that there is no further 
delay in this project. The Committee also desires to have the feedback from the IWAI 
on the reasons for the cost escalation of this project. The Committee also desires to 
know whether th e broad gauge rail siding between Pandu Terminal and Guwahati 
Railway station is now fully operational as the CAG had in its report commented 
adversely on the same. 
  
(Para 56) 
  

25 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
8.2     The work of ‘Construction of alternative from P andu Port to NH -27’, was awarded to 
Public Works Road Department (PWRD), Government of Assam on nomination basis. 
PWRD, Govt. of Assam appointed the executing agency on 17.02.2023. The work is under 
progress in full swing. The schedule completion as per Lo A is February, 2026, however, the 
project is likely to be completed by March, 2025. The main reason for the cost escalation of 
this project is due to its elevated construction on pillars on river site conditions. 
  
8.3     The broad gauge rail siding betwe en Pandu Terminal and Guwahati Railway station is 
now fully operational. 
  
Trade on the Indo-Bangladesh Protocol Route 
Recommendation/Observation 
9.       The Committee observes that the North -Eastern Region is strategically and 
economically important bein g the gateway to the South East Asia but in the decades 
since independence, the region had to face connectivity hurdles with mainland India due 
to poor conditions of roads, frequently washed away by floods. The River navigation 
system offers natural navigation channels connecting the entire NER region. 
(Para 68) 
Reply of the Ministry 
9.1     To provide alternate connectivity to the NER, Govt. of India (GoI) & Govt. of 
Bangladesh (GoB) have signed various agreements to facilitate movement of vessels 
thorough the designated routes under Protocol on Inland Water Transit & Trade (PIWTT). An 
MoU was signed on 08.04.2017 between GoB & GoI on “Development of Fairway from 
Sirajganj to Daikhowa and Ashuganj to Zakiganj on Indo -Bangladesh Protocol Route”. As 
per MoU t he Project cost sharing ratio is 80 (India): 20 (Bangladesh). Initial dredging 
completed till 2021 and the maintenance dredging under progress on both the stretches for 
maintaining minimum assured Least Available Depth (LAD) to continue till 2026. 
  
9.2     The connectivity with NW -1 (Ganga) with NW -2 has been established and several 
cargo vessels move from Kolkata / Haldia to Guwahati through Indo -Bangladesh Protocol 
(IBP) route. 
  
Waterways Project in the State of Kerala 
  
Recommendation/Observation 

26 
 
10.       The Committee notes that the reconstruction of new navigational lock at 
Thrikkunnapuzha had been sanctioned in 2018 -19 with an initially scheduled 
completion period of 26 months. Ever since, only 64% of the work has been awarded / 
completed. 
(Para 81) 
10.1     The Committee does not find the reasons for delay very convincing as the initial 
scheduled completion time was only little over about 02 years. Despite the fact that 
more than four years have passed since the sanction of the project, one third of  the 
work is still pending. The Committee also observed that the proposed Kovalam -Bekal 
waterways under the State Government, has also been much delayed and the deadline 
extended to 2025. 
(Para 83) 
Reply of the Ministry 
10.2     The reconstruction of navig ation lock at Thrikkunnapuzha on NW -3 (in Kerala) was 
awarded to the Inland Navigation Directorate, Govt. of Kerala on deposit basis, to have 
bigger lock size (viz., length and breadth) to match with the optimum capacity of vessels in 
line with the bigger locks at Thanneermukkom. 
  
10.3     Though the initial period of completion was 26 months, the project is delayed due to 
Covid 19, diversions of existing road traffic across the waterway by ferry service, other local 
issues and severe floods etc., as repor ted by the State officials. The matter has been taken up 
by IWAI at the highest level in Govt. of Kerala for its early completion. 
  
10.4     Further, during the floods in August, 2018, the initial bund proposed for a water depth 
of 6 m, got eroded up to 1 0.50 m. Hence, the bund redesigned to provide with 2 sheets of 
piles having 12 m length, apron with 6 m on upstream and 12 m on down -stream also caused 
the delay in completion of the project. The revised timeline of the completion is December 
2025. 
  
10.5     With regard to the delay in proposed Kovalam -Bekal waterways, the same is beyond 
the limits of declared NWs and falls under state waterways. Hence, no comments. 
Recommendation/Observation 

27 
 
11.   The Committee enquired about the status of encroachments i n the Buckingham 
Canal. The IWAI informed that the Madras High Court had directed the State 
Government to remove the encroachments but no action has been taken so far. Upon 
enquiry by the Committee whether sufficient water was available in the Canal from 
Chennai to Marakonnam especially during summer season, the IWAI replied in the 
negative, stating that even in earlier times, the Canal was fed not by natural river 
systems but by barrages and dams. 
(Para 92) 
Reply of the Ministry 
11.1    The ground realitie s at various locations / stretches in NW -4 including Buckingham 
Canal in Chennai city have changed. The presence of existing structures (road bridges, foot 
over bridges, Chennai MRTS pillars and other cross structures etc.) in the canal bed of 
Buckingham C anal are obstructions for the Navigation. To know the feasibility for 
Navigation as per Class -I standards with the above existing structures, IWAI has initiated 
action for study based on existing ground realities including Buckingham Canal for the 
purpose of safe Navigation.  
  
Waterways Projects in the States of Mumbai, Gujarat and Goa 
Recommendation/Observation 
12.      The Committee observes that the two states of Goa and Maharashtra have 
promising inland water prospects with Maharashtra accounting for a bout 50% 
waterway cargo movement across the country. Out of 126.15 MMT cargo movement on 
National Waterways in FY 2022 -23, around 63 MMT cargo movement was through 
NWs in the state of Maharashtra. The Committee notes that NW -10 (Amba River) in 
Maharashtra has two Major Ports, Mumbai Port and JNPA, in its vicinity, and two 
functional non-major ports namely, Dharmatar Port and PNP port on its banks. NW -8 
(Revdanda Creek-Kundalika River) also in Maharashtra has a large industrial area in 
its catchment. The Com mittee observes that despite promise and potential, the 
development of waterways in Maharashtra is still in its preliminary stages and 
recommends that the IWAI may make all efforts for development of waterways in 
Maharashtra in a targeted and time-bound schedule. 

28 
 
(Para 98) 
Reply of the Ministry 
12.1     IWAI management has taken prominence in Maharashtra and Goa NWs. For Goa 
NWs, the development activities are being carried out in consultation with Government of 
Goa. 4 nos jetties have already been develope d by IWAI in Goa. In addition, 10 nos. 
community jetties will also be completed by December 2024. 
  
12.2     IWAI has planned to develop the NWs in the State Maharashtra. IWAI has appointed 
PwC as a transaction advisor and based on the inputs, IWAI has flo ated a tender for 
operationalisation of NW -10 and NW -28. In addition, the development of NW -53 is also 
being planned. 
  
Recommendation/Observation 
13.    The Committee observes that the state of Gujarat is only second to Maharashtra in 
transport of cargo t hrough waterways. Out of the total 111, there are four NWs in the 
State of Gujarat i.e., NW -48, 66, 73 and 87. The Committee understands that there is a 
proposal for development of terminals at Barwani, Sakarja and Hanfeshwar on the 
banks of the river Narmada for starting to and fro cruise services to the Statue of Unity 
in Kevadia, Gujarat and desires to know the details of the steps taken on the 
commencement of the proposed cruise services and its likely impact on the tourists’ 
footfall to the statue. 
(Para 99) 
Reply of the Ministry 
13.1     IWAI has entered into a tripartite agreement with Govt. of MP and Govt .of Gujarat 
on 19.04.2024. The cruise will be run by Govt. of Gujarat and Govt. of MP respectively. 
IWAI will provide floating jetties at Hanfeswar  and Sardar Sarovar Dam (Mokhdi Village). 
As the River Narmada has not been declared as a NW in the state of MP, IWAI has provided 
2 nos jetties at Kukshi and Sakarja on behalf of MP Govt. 
  
13.2     The tender for floating jetties is being floated. The 2 jetties at Hanfeswar and Sakarja 
will be completed by October - 2024. In addition, IWAI intends to operationalise NW -100 
within the upcoming Financial Year. 
Recommendation/Observation 
14.       The Committee notes that though passenger boat safety is a subj ect under the 
State list yet, it is also the responsibility of the Ministry to see that states have the 

29 
 
financial and organization as support to institutionalize the enforcement of regulations 
in boat safety. 
(Para 111) 
Reply of the Ministry 
14.1     Inland Vessels (Life Saving Appliances) Rule 2022, Inland Vessels (Fire Fighting 
Appliances) and Inland Vessels (Safe Navigation, Communication and Signals) Rule, 2022 
have been notified and in force w.e.f. 07th Jun 2022. 
Recommendation/Observation 
15.       The Committee takes serious note of these cases and urges the Ministry to take 
corrective actions to prevent such accidents in the future. The State Disaster 
Management Authorities must be a part of the regulatory mechanism of the State to 
bring about greate r boat safety. The IWAI must set up observational network and 
infrastructural facilities at the regional, state, and local levels for safe navigation and 
ensure the proper implementation of warnings and weather advisories given by IMD, 
from time to time. 
(Para 112) 
Reply of the Ministry 
15.1    Remedial measures by Central Government include notification of implementation of 
the Rules. The Central Government has framed rules under the Inland Vessels Act, 2021 for 
Life Saving Appliances and Fire-fighting Appliances to be carried onboard the inland vessels 
registered under this Act, and also prescribed Safe Navigation and, Communication and 
Signals Rules 2022, The responsibility of the implementation of rules and regulations related 
to safety of inland vessels  primarily rests with the State Governments. The responsibility of 
issue of Survey and Registration Certificates of inland vessels plying in rivers, lakes etc. also 
lie with the States as per Inland Vessels Act, 2021. 
  
15.2     Safety devices compulsory w hile ferrying passengers and goods as listed in National 
Disaster Management Guidelines on Boat Safety (September 2017) issued by NDMA, Govt. 
of India is issued for strict adherence by the concerned States as the operation of Ferries is 
mandated with States as per State Ferry Acts. 
Recommendation/Observation 
16.       The Committee may also be apprised about the details of the proposed River 
Cruises and an estimated timeframe for their development, along with the details of the 
revenue that is presently bei ng generated by operational River Cruise circuits in the 
country. 
(Para 138) 

30 
 
  
Reply of the Ministry 
16.1     Routes and circuits proposed to be developed for river cruises is attached at 
Annexure-A. River cruises are operated by private sector and IWAI do  not have details of 
revenue generated by cruise operators. 
  
Waterways – A Global Perspective 
Comparison of Indian Waterways with other Countries 
  
Recommendation/Observation 
17.       Considering India’s marginal share in global IWT and its subdued posit ion in 
the development of waterways as a viable mode of transportation, and its huge 
untapped potential, the Committee calls upon the Ministry and IWAI to come out with 
a credible action plan with implementable time schedules for harnessing the full 
potential of the waterways both as an option for sustainable transport and also as a 
tourism product. The Government’s increased focus on and priority for development of 
NWs can usher in waterways-led development in the country. 
(Para 142) 
Reply of the Ministry 
17.1     In consonance with the recommendation of the Committee, steps taken by the 
Government to make use of waterways through Promotion of cost -effective and eco – 
friendly mode of Inland Water Transport (IWT) to reduce overall logistics cost of transport in 
the country, Government declared 111 (including 5 existing and 106 new) National 
Waterways (NWs) spread over 24 States vide National Waterways Act, 2016 w.e.f. 
12.04.2016.  
17.2     Action plan has been formulated for development of 26 most viable NWs  based upon 
the outcome of study reports and development taken up in 20 NWs. A total fund of Rs. 5911 
cr. allocated for capacity augmentation of existing and new waterways development and 
jetties to improve the navigation facilities in the country. 
  
17.3     Measures taken to promote movement of cargo through NWs include interaction with 
cargo operators through stakeholders conferences, commencement of Ro -Ro/Ro-Pax Service 
in Various National Waterways, Revision of Levy & Collection of Fees of waterways us er 
charges, Enhanced regional trade with Bangladesh using IWT mode and implementation of 
Arth Ganga programme developed on an approach based on the principles on the sustainable 
development model to energize economic activities which will impact on overall  ecosystem 
along the riverbank (Ganga). 
  

31 
 
**** 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Chapter-III 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
THE MINISTRY HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
  
Recommendation/Observation 
1.    The Committee opines that while dev elopment of waterways is crucial for reduction of 
logistics costs and boosting economic growth, the environmental costs and the cost 
effectiveness of waterways on case to case basis have to be assessed in tandem with the 
overall economic goals. Moreover, a s stated by the Ministry, it takes close to a decade for 
the development and full utilization of a waterway. Out of the five NWs existing prior to 
2016, two NWs have still not been fully developed while development activities have only 
been started on 20 more waterways. In such a scenario, the Committee is in agreement with 
the IWAI that the 63 NWs which are not found to be viable, should at present not be taken 
up for development. The Committee also expresses its displeasure at the declaration of a 
huge number of NWs without making proper assessment about their viability. The 63 NWs, 
which have been found to be non -viable have created a peculiar situation whereby 
declaration of a NW through enactment has generated massive popular expectation about 
the devel opment of waterways by the Central Government thus absolving the State 
Government from its responsibility in the development and maintenance of the waterways 
in question, leaving the waterways in a state of perennial neglect and abandonment. 
(Para 24) 
Reply of the Ministry 
1.1       Declaration of all probable waterways as National Waterways has safeguarded their 
future navigational aspects in respect of structures like bridges to be constructed across such 
waterways with adequate vertical and horizontal na vigational clearance as per their 
classification of navigational capacities. Smaller waterways also help to promote inland water 

32 
 
transport as feeder routes with National Waterways creating fish -bone structure similar to 
State Highways connect with National Highways.  
Further, for better co -ordination with States for development of waterways sector in the 
country, Ministry of Ports, Shipping & Waterways constituted Inland Waterways 
Development Council (IWDC) in November 2023 which will be holding regular 
consultations with all concerned stakeholders including State Governments. First meeting of 
IWDC has been held on 08.01.2024 with stakeholders in this regard.   
Further Recommendation/Observation 
1.2       The Committee notes the Ministry's establishment of t he Inland Waterways 
Development Council (IWDC) in November 2023 to enhance coordination with State 
Governments for the development of waterways. While this is a positive step towards 
better stakeholder engagement, the Committee stresses the need for more r obust and 
transparent mechanisms to ensure effective participation of State Governments in the 
development and maintenance of NWs. 
1.3       The Committee suggests that the Ministry should work closely with State 
Governments to explore alternative uses and  development opportunities for the 
National Waterways currently deemed non -viable. This collaborative approach can 
help in optimizing the use of these resources for local economic development while 
ensuring environmental sustainability. 
  
Cargo Traffic on National Waterways 
Recommendation/Observation 
 2.       The Committee observes that while the quantum of cargo moved on the National 
Waterways shows a huge increase post the declaration of new Waterways in the year 2016, 
much of the cargo movement is still  contributed by the state of Maharashtra (63.15 MMT) 
i.e., nearly 50% of the total cargo moved on National Waterways. Gujarat contributes 
27.66 MMT that is about 21% of the total cargo and the NW -1 contributes 13.17 MMT that 
is about 10% of the total cargo  moved on National Waterways. The states of Maharashtra 
(mainly NW -10 and NW -91) and Gujarat (mainly NW -100) and the NW -1 combined 
contribute about 80% of the total cargo moved on NWs, whereas the balance is contributed 
by the NW -3, NW -4, NW -68 in Goa and the Sunderbans. The contribution of all the 
remaining NWs is rather miniscule. Even prior to the notification of the NWs, the 
Maharashtra waterways had accounted for more than 50% of the cargo movement in the 
country and as such, post notification of NWs, and this has led to increase in the cargo 
movement in NWs. While the Committee acknowledges the Ministry’s submission that it 
takes about a decade for proper development of a waterway, the targeted MMTP for 2029 - 
30 does not appear to be significant. 
(Para 27) 

33 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
2.1       The target of FY 2029 -30 is set at >200 million tons, i.e. an increase of  73.85 million 
T (10.55 million T per year on an average) which is based on the increase of cargo movement 
on NWs noticed during past few years. F or diversion of cargo to IWT, the cargo which 
originates and destined on the river bank is essential to make it viable (since multiple 
handling cost becomes expensive). To overcome this, more industrial clusters need to be 
created along the river banks. Th ere is also shortage of Inland vessels for carriage of goods 
which needs to be addressed, and MoPSW & IWAI are making concerted efforts to address 
this issue. 
  
Further Recommendation/Observation 
2.2       The Committee concurs with the Ministry's observat ion that creating more 
industrial clusters along the river banks is crucial for increasing cargo movement via 
inland waterways. The Committee recommends that the Ministry, in collaboration with 
State Governments, identify potential sites for industrial clu ster development. 
Additionally, the Ministry should provide necessary support and incentives to attract 
industries to these clusters, thereby facilitating the growth of cargo movement on 
underutilized NWs. 
2.3       The Committee notes the shortage of inland vessels as a significant barrier to the 
increased movement of cargo on NWs. The Committee recommends that the Ministry 
should expedite its efforts to address this issue. This could involve incentivizing private 
sector investment in the construction and operation of inland vessels, as well as 
exploring partnerships with international stakeholders experienced in inland water 
transport. 
Recommendation/Observation 
3.         While the Committee accepts the fact that development of waterways is a long -term 
project, the targeted cargo throughput on 16 of the NWs presently under development seems 
too slow to be of much value. The Committee desires to know the reason for the Nil target for 
NW-14 and NW-31 for the year 2030. The Committee again recommends that the  IWAI may 
concentrate on the 23 NWs presently operational and review the impact of the investments on 
the cargo output by 2030 before initiating development work on the remaining NWs. Any 
plan for development of more NWs at this juncture needs to be eschew ed as the resources 
available are too thin for any tangible returns on investment. 
(Para 29) 
Reply of the Ministry 
3.1       At present, there is not much requirement of movement of cargo on NW -14 and NW-
31, therefore, low targets have been set for the NW -14 (Baitarni river in Odisha) and NW -31 
(River Dhansiri in Assam). Only occasional ODC movement is taking place on NW -31 as of 

34 
 
now. An MoU with Numaligarh Refinery Ltd is signed on 24.08.2023 for movement of their 
products through NW-31. Once it gets materialized, the target for NW-31 may be revised. 
  
Further Recommendation/Observation 
3.2       Given the Ministry's indication of potential future utilization of NW -31, the 
Committee recommends a periodic re -evaluation of targets for NW -14 and NW -31 
based on  emerging demands and agreements such as the MoU with Numaligarh 
Refinery Ltd. This dynamic approach will ensure that targets remain relevant and 
achievable. 
Recommendation/Observation 
4.         The Committee notes that Performance Based Dredging Contracts awarded pertain to 
only 3 stretches, Farakka -Kahalgaon, Sultanganj-Mahendrapur and Mahendrapur -Barh out 
of which only the Farakka -Kahalgaon stretch has been physically completed. Dredging 
contracts are yet to be awarded in the remaining seven stretches. Bids received are being 
evaluated in the stretches pertaining to Varanasi -Ghazipur, Ghazipur -Majhaua, Majhaua -
Digha, Digha-Barh, Farakka-Katwa, Farakka-Tribeni and the Haldia Access Channel. Out 
of the nearly 1217 kms, dredging contract has been awarded in  a portion of 291 kms and 
completed in a small portion of 146 kms. The remaining stretches have tentative completion 
dates mostly in 2026. The Committee finds that the work pertaining to dredging for 
development of the fairways has a sluggish pace and recommends that it may be completed in 
a time-bound schedule. 
(Para 38) 
Reply of the Ministry 
4.1       As informed earlier that IWT sector is at nascent stage and this sector is facing issues 
of capacity constraints in terms of technical know -how as well as a vailability of experts, the 
market of river dredging in India is still not yet developed properly. There are limited 
numbers of stakeholders in river dredging activities and the dredgers which can be functional 
in the river systems are still very less in numbers as per the requirement.  
  
4.2    However, IWAI has made sustained efforts in gauzing market possibilities, prepared 
detailed plan for dredging activities along NW -1 in consultation with the World Bank and 
IITs and procurement activities for engaging contractor for dredging is ongoing.   
  
4.3   Fairway development contracts for Farakka – Kahalgaon, Sultanganj – Mahenderpur, 
Mahenderpur – Barh are ongoing, and the procurement is under different stages for the 
balance contracts for Barh – Ghazipur, Ghazipur – Varanasi, access channel for Kalughat & 
Haldia and U/s Farakka lock bend corrections etc. Recently, the notification of award for 
Digha – Majhuwa, Farakka -Kahalgaon, Farakka -Katwa, Katwa -Tribeni and Barh – Digha 
totalling a distance of 666 km has been issued. 

35 
 
Further recommendation/Observation 
4.4       The IWAI should intensify its efforts to expedite the procurement process and 
award remaining dredging contracts for the identified stretches.  The Committee 
strongly recommends that the IWAI impleme nt a time-bound schedule for all dredging 
activities. This schedule should include clear milestones and deadlines for each stretch, 
with regular monitoring and reporting mechanisms to ensure adherence to timelines 
and to identify potential bottlenecks early. 
Recommendation/Observation 
5.       The Committee observes that the “Act East Policy” (AEP) of the Government strives to 
promote economic cooperation and cultural ties with the countries in the Asia -Pacific region 
by providing enhanced connectivity to t he North -Eastern States. Regional connectivity 
initiatives act as force multipliers for regional growth and development while enhancing 
people to people contact and enhancing economic cooperation. One of the important 
components of the Act East Policy is t he Kaladan Multimodal Transit Project in Myanmar. 
The Committee appreciates the efforts made for the operationalisation of the Sittwe port 
which connects Kolkata with Myanmar over the Kaladan River, thus promoting bilateral and 
regional trade. The Committe e, however, notes that the Kaladan project has seen many 
delays in the implementation of the first phase and revised deadlines and recommends that 
the IWAI and the MEA may ensure that the second phase of the project in which the 
waterway and road component s of KMTTP will link the East coast of India to the North -
eastern states through the Sittwe port would be completed as per schedule. 
(Para 69) 
Reply of the Ministry 
5.1       On part of waterway component, Phase -I of the IWT component of the project which 
involved fairway development/Sea dredging in Sittwe port area; construction of Port and 
IWT terminals at Sittwe and Paletwa; fairway development/dredging at Sittwe -Paletwa 
stretch of Kaladan River and construction of 06 IWT vessels (300 ton each) is comple ted and 
handing over also completed on 31.01.2020. 
  
5.2       Sittwe Port constructed under this project has been designated on 29.11.2022 as 
International Multi -Modal customs transit jetty by Govt. of Myanmar and is ready for 
operation. 
  
5.3      Trial Run of Cargo Ship with 2500T of Rice from Sittwe, Myanmar to Chittagong, 
Bangladesh completed in Jan 2023. Inaugural run of cargo vessel with 1000T cement from 
Kolkata to Sittwe Port in Myanmar has successfully completed and the Sittwe port 
inaugurated on 09.05.2023. 
  
Further Recommendation/Observation 

36 
 
5.4       The IWAI and MEA should continue to strengthen bilateral cooperation with 
Myanmar to facilitate smooth implementation of the project. This includes resolving 
any logistical, regulatory, or operatio nal challenges that may arise during the execution 
of the second phase. 
5.5     Along with the completion of Phase -II, the Committee stresses the importance of 
regular maintenance of the infrastructure developed under the KMTTP. Ensuring the 
sustainability and functionality of the ports, terminals, and vessels will be crucial for the 
long-term success of the project. 
  
Recommendation/Observation 
6.         The Committee desires to know the number of voyages made in the IBP route in 2022-
23. The Committee notes that the Protocol provides for a 50:50 ratio for sharing on tonnage 
basis for inter -country and transit cargo by Indian and Bangladeshi vessels. The Committee 
desires to know the number of Indian vessels actually plying on the Indo - Bangladesh 
Protocol Route as compared to Bangladeshi vessels in 2022 -23. The Committee has been 
informed that in 2018-19, approximately 600 Bangladeshi vessels and 40 Indian vessels used 
the IBP route and in subsequent years also the number of Indian vessels has been much le ss 
than Bangladeshi vessels and desires to know the reasons for the same. The Committee 
further observes that the IWAI, as per its website, has 121 vessels (including 13 
accommodation boats, 07 cargo vessels, 03 classic watermaster, 01container crane, 09 crane 
pontoons, 12 cutter suction dredgers, 03 hydraulic surface dredger, 01 container crane, 07 
inspection boats, 01 Ro -Ro cargo, 18 survey vessels, 34 terminal barges and 12 work boats/ 
tugs) and desires to know whether the number is sufficient for full u tilization of the protocol 
route. 
(Para 70) 
Reply of the Ministry 
6.1       3,348 voyages were made during 2022 -23 on IBP route for transportation of cargo 
(mainly export of fly -ash) to Bangladesh. Out of these, 3,248 voyages were performed by 
Bangladeshi vessels and 100 voyages by Indian vessels. 
  
6.2        As per Protocol between India and Bangladesh on sharing of inter -country trade and 
transit cargo, it has been inter alia mentioned at Para 18 that “ the two Governments agree to 
sharing of the carriage  of inter country trade and transit cargo on an equal tonnage basis 
(i.e., 50:50) as far as practicable by the vessels of signatory countries”. 
  
6.3        The vessels owned by IWAI, as mentioned in the report, include dredgers, survey 
vessels, container crane, crane pontoons, etc., which includes only 11 no. of cargo vessels. 
The 11 nos. cargo vessels of IWAI are used for transportation of cargo only for 
demonstration of technical feasibility of the waterways on various stretches of National 
Waterways. Th e commercial operation on National Waterways as well as on IBP route is 
done by the private entities only. 

37 
 
  
6.4        The equal share of movement of cargo on IBP route could not be maintained due to 
following reasons. 
a. The number of Indian vessels is very less as compared to Bangladeshi vessels.  
b. Lower Capex and Opex of Bangladesh vessels as compared to Indian vessels.  
c. The trade is only for export cargo, i.e., India to Bangladesh and import cargo is almost 
nil through waterways. 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
6.5       The Committee recommends that efforts be made to increase the number of 
Indian vessels operating on the IBP route. This could involve incentivizing private 
entities to invest in and operate vessels on this route, potentially through s ubsidies, tax 
benefits, or low-interest financing options. 
6.6       To make Indian vessels more competitive, the Ministry should explore measures 
to reduce capital expenditure (Capex) and operational expenditure (Opex) for Indian 
vessel operators. This ma y include financial assistance, fuel subsidies, and streamlining 
regulatory processes to reduce administrative costs. 
6.7       The Committee suggests that the Ministry, in collaboration with relevant trade 
bodies, work on promoting and facilitating bilate ral trade via waterways. Identifying 
potential import cargo from Bangladesh to India and creating a balanced trade flow 
could significantly enhance the viability and utilization of Indian vessels on the IBP 
route. 
  
Recommendation/Observation 
7.         As per the information given to Parliament, funds to the tune of Rs. 43.70 crores have 
been allocated to develop Phase -I of the project in the last five years. (Details placed at 
Annexure-X). The Committee desires to be informed of the expenditure incurred i n this 
regard. 
(Para 78) 
Reply of the Committee 
  
7.1       The quantum of funds allocated by the Inland Waterways Authority of India (IWAI) 
to develop Phase I of the system, year-wise, for the last five years and expenditure incurred is 
detailed hereunder- 
  
Sr. 
No. 
Year 
wise 
Sanction amount 
approved from H.O. 
(Rs. in cr.) 
Exp. Incurred  
(Rs. in cr.) 
1. 2018-19 2.08 2.24 
2. 2019-20 11.70 3.29 

38 
 
3. 2020-21 5.16 2.13 
4. 2021-22 6.81 2.58 
5. 2022-23  17.95 0.90 
  Total 43.70 11.14 
  
Further Recommendation/Observation 
7.2       The Committee is concerned about the low expenditure relative to the allocated 
funds over the past five years. This underutilization of funds indicates potential 
inefficiencies in project execution and financial management. The Comm ittee 
emphasizes the need for better planning, monitoring, and utilization of allocated 
resources to ensure the timely and effective development of the project. 
  
Recommendation/Observation 
8.         The Committee is of the view that Research and Developm ent activities is the key to 
success of any sector and recommends the Government to strengthen the Research & 
Development facilities for the desired development of Inland Water Transport sector in the 
country. The Committee also urges that Research and Dev elopment studies should be 
conducted for making assessment of the impact of the increased inland water transport 
activities on the aqua -marine life as development should invariably be in sustainable mode 
with due consideration to environment and ecology. 
(Para 101) 
Reply of the Ministry 
  
8.1     In line with the view of the Committee, Government has setup Research & 
Development cells in collaboration with IIT Madras, Chennai & IIT Kharagpur for 
development of IWT sector along with maritime sector in the country as detailed below: 
  
i.    National Technology Centre for Ports, Waterways & Coasts (NTCPWC), 
Department of Ocean Engineering, IIT Madras, Chennai has been envisioned as the Centre 
for technological innovations and evolution of new ideas and breakthr oughs for the port and 
maritime sector. It will work as the technology arm of Ministry of Ports, Shipping & 
Waterways providing the needful technological support to ports, IWAI and other institutions. 
  
ii.      Centre of Inland and Coastal Maritime Techno logy (CICMT) at IIT Kharagpur, to 
undertake R&D works and to provide a facility in Shallow Water Sea -keeping and 
Maneuvering Basin. This facility would be useful for model testing of any new designs being 
developed for inland vessels in future. Further, the Center will also study cargo movement for 
coastal and Inland Waterways and provide for intermodal (Coastal cum Inland) logistic 
solution for cost effective cargo movement. 
Further Recommendation/Observation 

39 
 
8.2     The Ministry should facilitate forums, workshops, and consultations to gather inputs from local 
communities, environmental groups, and industry stakeholders, ensuring that diverse perspectives are 
considered in the development process.  The findings from R&D activities, especially those related to 
environmental impacts and sustainable practices, should be documented and widely disseminated. This 
will help in the sharing of knowledge, best practices, and technological advancements with relevant 
stakeholders and the broader community. 
Public-Private Partnership 
Recommendation/Observation 
9.         The Committee strongly feels that active involvement of the private sector in the inland waterways sector 
is imperative to ensure greater efficiency and competitiveness and attract higher investment for i nfrastructure 
development. The Committee appreciates the efforts of the Ministry and IWAI taken so far to attract private 
investment in this critical infrastructure sector. 
(Para 106) 
Reply of the Committee 
9.1       For active involvement of the private sector in the inland waterways sector, steps have 
been taken up for O&M of terminals on NW -1 & 2 in respect of Multi -Modal terminals built 
under Jal Marg Vikas Project on the Ganga (NW -1) at Varanasi & Sahibganj. The tender 
process to award the work to PPP operator is at advanced stage. Haldia MMT, Pandu & 
Dhubri Terminal have already been awarded for O&M to PPP operators. 
  
9.2       Further, tendering process has been initiated for development of NWs in Odisha, 
Maharashtra & Gujarat on PPP mode by attracting Private Sector Participation. 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
9.3   The Committee recommends expanding the scope of private sector involvement in the inland water 
sector beyond terminal operations to include other critical areas such as vessel operat ions, maintenance 
services and infrastructure development. This broader engagement will enhance overall sector efficiency 
and innovation. 
Kochi Water Metro 
Recommendation/Observation 
10.       The Committee notes the introduction of the Kochi Water Metro a nd would like to 
know its performance assessment, both physical and financial, at periodic interval. The 
Committee would also like to know whether the Ministry has any plan to implement similar 
models in other States for the integration of waterways in the  public transport system or it 
would wait for an annual performance assessment of Kochi water metro for a better and 
meaningful plan for replication. 
(Para 131) 
Reply of the Ministry 

40 
 
10.1     Performance assessment, both physical and financial, at periodic  interval, is beyond the purview of 
Inland Waterways Authority of India (IWAI). IWAI is responsible for regulation and development of NWs for 
Shipping and Navigation in respect of infrastructure facilities primarily for cargo vessels. The facilities such 
created may also be utilised for the vessels and ferries operating on NWs under State Governments. Tourism 
and passenger movement operation is also mandated with State Governments and IWAI plays the role of 
technical facilitator in this regard. 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
10.2     The Committee understands that IWAI’s role is primarily technical. The Ministry should support 
State Governments in planning and implementing similar projects by providing technical guidance, 
funding assistance, and recommen dations on best practices. This support will help ensure that new 
projects are developed with a solid foundation based on the Kochi Water Metro’s experience.  
  
River Cruise-Ganga Vilas 
Recommendation/Observation 
11.       The Committee notes that following  the initiation of Ganga Vilas, the potential of river cruise tourism in 
the country has remained vast. It feels that river cruise will not only promote the tourism sector in the India by 
attracting foreign tourists, it will also aid in boosting the periph eral coastline economy of the country. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry should take concerted efforts to increase the number of 
River Cruises plying in the country. It also recommends that the Ministry should launch programmes to 
incentivize river cruise operators so that the available potential can be fully realised.  
(Para 137) 
  
Reply of the Ministry 
  
11.1       State Governments of Uttar Pradesh, Bihar, Jharkhand, West Bengal, Assam and Odisha are being 
sensitized for increasing and developing tourist circuits in these states. 
  
11.2     60 Community Jetties have been planned in Arth Ganga Project in the Ganga (NW -1), out of which 37 
Jetties have been constructed and 23 are in progress. 
11.3     River cruise tourism is operational i n 09 National Waterways. Floating Terminal infrastructure for river 
cruise is completed at 04 locations on NW -2 (the Brahmaputra) during 2023 -24 in addition to existing terminal 
facilities. 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
11.4    The Committee recommend s launching incentive programs to encourage river cruise operators. 
These programs could include financial subsidies, tax incentives and streamlined regulatory processes to 
reduce operational costs and attract both domestic and international cruise operato rs. The Committee 
also recommends reducing charges for domestic tourists to ensure inclusivity.   
  
**** 
  

41 
 
  
 CHAPTER-IV 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE FINAL 
REPLIES OF THE MINISTRY ARE STILL AWAITED 
  
-NIL- 

42 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/ OBSERVATIONS AT A GLANCE 
CHAPTER-III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
THE MINISTRY HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
National Waterways 
The Committee notes the Ministry's establishment of the Inland Waterways 
Development Council ( IWDC) in November 2023 to enhance coordination with State 
Governments for the development of waterways. While this is a positive step towards 
better stakeholder engagement, the Committee stresses the need for more robust and 
transparent mechanisms to ensur e effective participation of State Governments in the 
development and maintenance of NWs. 
(Para 1.2) 
 
The Committee suggests that the Ministry should work closely with State Governments 
to explore alternative uses and development opportunities for the Nati onal Waterways 
currently deemed non -viable. This collaborative approach can help in optimizing the 
use of these resources for local economic development while ensuring environmental 
sustainability. 
(Para 1.3) 
Cargo Traffic on National Waterways 
The Committee concurs with the Ministry's observation that creating more industrial 
clusters along the river banks is crucial for increasing cargo movement via inland 
waterways. The Committee recommends that the Ministry, in collaboration with State 
Governments, iden tify potential sites for industrial cluster development. Additionally, 
the Ministry should provide necessary support and incentives to attract industries to 
these clusters, thereby facilitating the growth of cargo movement on underutilized NWs. 
(Para 2.2) 
 The Committee notes the shortage of inland vessels as a significant barrier to the 
increased movement of cargo on NWs. The Committee recommends that the Ministry 
should expedite its efforts to address this issue. This could involve incentivizing private 
sector investment in the construction and operation of inland vessels, as well as 
exploring partnerships with international stakeholders experienced in inland water 
transport. 
(Para 2.3) 

43 
 
Given the Ministry's indication of potential future utilization of NW -31, the Committee 
recommends a periodic re -evaluation of targets for NW -14 and NW -31 based on 
emerging demands and agreements such as the MoU with Numaligarh Refinery Ltd. 
This dynamic approach will ensure that targets remain relevant and achievable. 
(Para 3.2) 
The IWAI should intensify its efforts to expedite the procurement process and award 
remaining dredging contracts for the identified stretches.  The Committee strongly 
recommends that the IWAI implement a time -bound schedule for all dredging 
activities. This schedule should include clear milestones and deadlines for each stretch, 
with regular monitoring and reporting mechanisms to ensure adherence to timelines 
and to identify potential bottlenecks early. 
(Para 4.4) 
The IWAI and MEA should continue to strengthen bilateral cooperation with Myanmar 
to facilitate smooth implementation of the project. This includes resolving any logistical, 
regulatory, or operational challenges that may arise during the execution of the second 
phase. 
(Para 5.4) 
 
Along with th e completion of Phase -II, the Committee stresses the importance of 
regular maintenance of the infrastructure developed under the KMTTP. Ensuring the 
sustainability and functionality of the ports, terminals, and vessels will be crucial for the 
long-term success of the project. 
(Para 5.5) 
The Committee recommends that efforts be made to increase the number of Indian 
vessels operating on the IBP route. This could involve incentivizing private entities to 
invest in and operate vessels on this route, potentially  through subsidies, tax benefits, or 
low-interest financing options. 
(Para 6.5) 
 
To make Indian vessels more competitive, the Ministry should explore measures to 
reduce capital expenditure (Capex) and operational expenditure (Opex) for Indian 
vessel operators. This may include financial assistance, fuel subsidies, and streamlining 
regulatory processes to reduce administrative costs. 
(Para 6.6) 
 

44 
 
The Committee suggests that the Ministry, in collaboration with relevant trade bodies, 
work on promoting and facil itating bilateral trade via waterways. Identifying potential 
import cargo from Bangladesh to India and creating a balanced trade flow could 
significantly enhance the viability and utilization of Indian vessels on the IBP route. 
(Para 6.7) 
The Committee is concerned about the low expenditure relative to the allocated funds 
over the past five years. This underutilization of funds indicates potential inefficiencies 
in project execution and financial management. The Committee emphasizes the need for 
better planning, monitoring, and utilization of allocated resources to ensure the timely 
and effective development of the project. 
(Para 7.2) 
The Ministry should facilitate forums, workshops, and consultations to gather inputs 
from local communities, environmental gr oups, and industry stakeholders, ensuring 
that diverse perspectives are considered in the development process.  The findings from 
R&D activities, especially those related to environmental impacts and sustainable 
practices, should be documented and widely di sseminated. This will help in the sharing 
of knowledge, best practices, and technological advancements with relevant 
stakeholders and the broader community. 
(Para 8.2) 
Public-Private Partnership 
The Committee recommends expanding the scope of private secto r involvement in the 
inland water sector beyond terminal operations to include other critical areas such as 
vessel operations, maintenance services and infrastructure development. This broader 
engagement will enhance overall sector efficiency and innovation. 
(Para 9.3) 
Kochi Water Metro 
The Committee understands that IWAI’s role is primarily technical. The Ministry 
should support State Governments in planning and implementing similar projects by 
providing technical guidance, funding assistance, and recommen dations on best 
practices. This support will help ensure that new projects are developed with a solid 
foundation based on the Kochi Water Metro’s experience. 
(Para 10.2) 
 
River Cruise-Ganga Vilas 

45 
 
The Committee recommends launching incentive programs to enc ourage river cruise 
operators. These programs could include financial subsidies, tax incentives and 
streamlined regulatory processes to reduce operational costs and attract both domestic 
and international cruise operators. The Committee also recommends red ucing charges 
for domestic tourists to ensure inclusivity.  
(Para 11.4) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

46 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ANNEXURE 
 
 
 
 
 

47 
 
 Annexure-A 
 
 
Routes and Regions proposed to be developed for River Cruise Map 2047 
 
 Type Proposed Routes In 
Numbers 
Luxury River Cruise FY 30 FY 47 
NW 1 12 Nights / 13 Days Kolkata - Varanasi 7,140 13,776 
NW 2 10 Nights / 11 Days Dhubri - Dibrugarh 2,122 6,912 
NW 3 10 Nights / 11 Days Kottappuram - Kollam 2,194 6,528 
NW 97 4 Nights / 5 Days Namkhana - Bhagabatpur - Sajnekhali - Hemnagar 1,080 2,880 
NW 68 & 
27 2 Nights / 3 Days Tourism Jetty Patto - Chorao Island - Old Goa - 
Divar Island- Tolto ferry ghat - Cortalim 1,344 3,584 
NW 73* 5 Nights / 6 Days Upstream SSD - Barwani 1,344 3,584 
IBP 11 Nights / 12 Days Kolkata - Dhaka 1,104 2,944 
NW 4 2 Nights / 3 Days Srisailam - Nagarjun Dam 2,160 5,760 
NW 5 2 Nights / 3 Days Bhitarkarnika - Hukitola - Paradeep 1,728 4,608 
NW 8 1 Night / 2 Days Alappuzha - Changanessary 2,160 5,760 
NW 9 1 Night / 2 Days Alappuzha - Kodimatha 2,160 5,760 
NW 16 3 Nights / 4 Days Lakhipur - Badarpur - Karimganj 1,080 2,880 
NW 25 1 Night / 2 Days Morjim - ColvaleDhargal Bridge 2,592 6,912 
NW 43 & 
74 1 Night / 2 Days Ashok Nagar - Thumbe Village 1,080 2,880 
NW 51 1 Night / 2 Days Beechanahalli - Beeramballi 1,296 3,456 
NW 52 1 Night / 2 Days Karwar Port - Virje near Kadra Dam 864 2,304 
NW 71 1 Night / 2 Days Britona Jetty - Aldona Jetty 2,160 5,760 
NW 90 1 Night / 2 Days Honnavar Port - Gersoppa 1,296 3,456 
NW 100 1 Night Dumas - Old Surat Castle 3,240 8,640 
NW 111 1 Night / 2 Days Cortalim – Rassaim – Raia – Sanvordem 1,728 4,608 
Local Ferry Cruise     
NW 1 Day Cruise Engineering College - Digha Bridge 21,600 57,600 
NW 4 Day Cruise Polavaram - Pochavaram 5,040 13,440 
NW 4 Day Cruise Srisailam - Akkamahadevi Caves 7,200 19,200 
NW 14 Day Cruise Aradi - Nalitpatia - Khola 2,880 7,680 
NW 24 Day Cruise Kota Barrage - JawaharSagar Dam 7,200 19,200 
NW 40 Day Cruise NayaGhat - GuptarGhat 36,000 96,000 
NW 42 Day Cruise Pucca Bridge - Gomti Barrage 14,400 38,400 
NW 47 Day Cruise Mayapur - KadamtalaGhat 3,840 10,240 
NW 49 Day Cruise Zero Bridge - Chattabal Weir 3,600 9,600 
NW 53 Day Cruise Gaimukh - Panju Island 7,200 19,200 
NW 60 Day Cruise Mukutmanipur- Banpukuria 7,200 19,200 
NW 73 Floating Restaurant Statue of Unity 1,24,801 1,76,634 
NW 83 Day Cruise Murud - Janjira - Padmagurg 21,600 57,600 
NW 84 Day Cruise Near AtalSetu - RanjitSagar Dam 3,600 9,600 

48 
 
NW 87 Day Cruise Gandhi Bridge, Ahmedabad - Nehru Bridge, 
Ahmedabad 14,400 38,400 
NW 89 Floating Restaurant Harihareshwar 31,200 44,158 
NW 110 Day Cruise VishramGhat, Mathura - KeshiGhat, Mathura 36,000 96,000 
Chilika 
Lake Day Cruise Barkul - Kalijai - Nalaban - Nairi - Satapada 7,200 19,200 
             
*** 
 
  
  
  
  
 

 
49 
 
MINUTES 
  

 
50 
 
 
MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF THE DEPARTMENT -RELATED 
PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON TR ANSPORT, 
TOURISM & CULTURE (2024-25) 
VI 
SIXTH  MEETING 
  
The Committee met at  10:00 A.M. on  Monday, the 16th December, 2024 
in Committee Room-“B”, First Floor, Parliament House Annexe Building, New 
Delhi. 
  
  
1. Shri Sanjay Kumar Jha   -  Chairman 
 
Rajya Sabha 
s 
2. Shri M. Mohamed Abdulla 
3. Shri Mohammed Nadimul Haque 
4. Shri Jaggesh 
5. Shri Kesridevsinh Jhala  
6. Shrimati S. Phangnon Konyak  
7. Shri Neeraj Dangi 
 
Lok Sabha  
8. Shri R. K. Chaudhary 
9. Shri Vishweshwar Hegde Kageri  
10. Shrimati June Maliah  
11. Shri Ajay Kumar Mandal  
12. Shri K. E. Prakash  
13. Shri Amarsing Tisso 
14. Shri Manoj Tiwari  
  
SECRETARIAT 
Smt. Monica Baa,  Director  
Shri T. Kennedy, Deputy Secretary 
Shri N. Romesh Singh, Under Secretary 
  

 
51 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman extended a warm welcome to the Members of 
the Committee and informed  that the agenda for the meeting is to consider and 
adopt the following draft Action Taken Reports of the Committee: - 
(i)     XXXXXi 
 
(ii)    XXXXX 
(iii)   XXXXX 
(iv) Action Taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee contained 
in its Three Hundred Fifty Eighth (358 th) Report on 
‘Development and Expansion of Existing and National Inland 
waterways’; and  
(v)    XXXXX 
3. The Committee took up for consideration the draft Action Taken Reports, 
one by one. After a brief discussion, the Committee adopted the aforesaid five 
draft Action Taken Reports and authorized the Chairman and in his absence 
Shri Neeraj  Dangi, MP  or Shri M. Mohamed Abdulla  to present the aforesaid 
Reports in Rajya Sabha on 19 th December, 2024. Additionally, the Committee 
authorized Shri Vishweshwar  Hegde Kageri, MP and in his absence Shri Rajiv 
Pratap Rudy, MP to lay the Reports on the Table of Lok Sabha on the same 
date. 
4. XXXXX 
5. XXXXX 
The meeting adjourned at 10:40 A.M. 
 
Monica Baa 
Director 
New Delhi, 
16th December, 2024 
 
                                                             
i  Relates to other matters 