 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
February, 2021/ Magha, 1942 (Saka) 
 
REPORT NO. 
283 
 
TWO HUNDRED EIGHTY THIRD REPORT  
Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/ 
Observations of the Committee contained in its Two Hundred 
and Seventy Ninth Report on Demands for Grants (2020-21) of 
Ministry of Shipping 
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on3rd February, 2021) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on3rd February, 2021) 
 

  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Website :     https://rajyasabha.nic.in  
 E-mail :     rsc-tt@sansad.nic.in 
 

Hindi version of this publication is also available 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT,  
TOURISM AND CULTURE 
 
 
TWO HUNDRED EIGHTY THIRD REPORT  
Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/ 
Observations of the Committee contained in its Two Hundred and 
Seventy Ninth Report on Demands for Grants (2020-21) of 
Ministry of Shipping 
 
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on3rd February, 2021) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on3rd February, 2021) 
 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
February, 2021/ Magha, 1942 (Saka) 


C O N T E N T S 
 
PAGE S  
 
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE     (i)-(iii) 
2. INTRODUCTION       (iv) 
3. ACRONYMS               (v)-(x) 
4. REPORT         1-46 
CHAPTER-I-     RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY 
THE MINISTRY 
CHAPTER-II-  RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES OF THE MINISTRY  
CHAPTER-III- RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
THE MINISTRY HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
CHAPTER-IV- RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE FINAL 
REPLIES OF THE MINISTRY ARE STILL AWAITED 
                               
5. RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS AT A GLANCE   47-50  
    6. MINUTES         51-55 
         
        
         
        
        
      
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
(2019-20) 
 (Constituted on 13th September, 2019) 
 
1. Shri T.G. Venkatesh   - Chairman 
 
Rajya Sabha 
s 
2. Shri Prasanna Acharya 
3. Shri Raj Babbar 
4. Shri Sambhaji Chhatrapati  
5. Dr. Sonal Mansingh 
6. Shri Derek O’Brien 
7. *Kumari Selja 
8. **Shri Tiruchi Siva 
9. ***Shri K.C.Venugopal  
10. Shri Dharmapuri Srinivas 
 11. Shri Vinay Dinu Tendulkar 
 
Lok Sabha 
12.  Shrimati Sumalatha Ambareesh 
13.  Shri Anto Antony 
14.  Shrimati Veena Devi 
15.  Shri Tapir Gao  
16.  Shri Rahul Kaswan 
17.  Shri Saumitra Khan  
18.  Ms. Goddeti Madhavi  
19.  Shri Ramesh Chandra Majhi 
20.  Shri Sunil Baburao Mendhe 
21.  Shri K. Muraleedharan 
22.  Shri S.S. Palanimanickam  
23.  Shri Chhedi Paswan   
24.  Shri Kamlesh Paswan  
25.  Shri Tirath Singh Rawat 
26.  Shrimati Mala Roy 
27.  Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
28.  Shri Rajbahadur Singh 
29.  Shri Dushyant Singh 
30.  Shri Ramdas Chandrabhanji Tadas 
31.  Shri Krupal Balaji Tumane 
32.  Shri Dinesh Chandra Yadav  
_________________________________________________________  
*Kumari Selja ceased to be Member w.e.f. 10th April, 2020 
**Shri Tiruchi Siva ceased to be Member w.e.f. 3 rd April, 2020 and re-nominated as Member w.e.f. 22nd 
July, 2020 
***Shri K.C. Venugopal nominated as Member w.e.f. 22nd July, 2020 
 
(i)

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
 (2020-21) 
 (Constituted on 13th September, 2020) 
 
1. Shri T.G. Venkatesh                          - Chairman 
 
    Rajya Sabha 
 
2. Shri Prasanna Acharya 
3. *Shri Raj Babbar 
4. Shri Sambhaji Chhatrapati 
5. Dr. Sonal Mansingh 
6. Shri Derek O’Brien 
7. Shri Tiruchi Siva 
8. Shri Dharmapuri Srinivas 
9. Shri Vinay Dinu Tendulkar 
10. Shri K.C.Venugopal 
11. **Shri Sushil Kumar Modi 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
12. Shri Anto Antony 
13. Shri Margani Bharat   
14. Shri Tapir Gao 
15. Shri Rahul Kaswan 
16. Shri Ramesh Chandra Majhi 
17. Shri Sunil Baburao Mendhe 
18. Shri K. Muraleedharan 
19. Shri S.S. Palanimanickam 
20. Shri Chhedi Paswan 
21. Shri Kamlesh Paswan 
22. Shri Sunil Kumar Pintu 
23. Shri Prince Raj 
24. Shri Tirath Singh Rawat 
25. Shrimati Mala Roy 
26. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
27. Shri Dushyant Singh 
28. Shri Rajbahadur Singh 
29. Shri Ramdas Chandrabhanji Tadas 
30. Shri Manoj Tiwari 
31. Shri Krupal Balaji Tumane 
32. Shri Dinesh Chandra Yadav 
 
 
________________________________________________________  
*Shri Raj Babbar  ceased to be a Member w.e.f. 25th November, 2020 
**Shri Sushil Kumar Modi was nominated to be a Member w.e.f. 23rd December, 2020 
 
(ii) 

 
SECRETARIAT 
 Shri J. Sundriyal, Joint Secretary 
 Shri P. Narayanan, Director 
 Shri Dinesh Singh, Additional Director 
Ms. Catherine John L., Under Secretary 
Shri Agam Mittal, Assistant Committee Officer 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iii)

INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairman, Department -related Parliamentary Standing Committee on 
Transport, Tourism and Culture, having been authorized by the Committee to present 
on its behalf, do hereby present this Two Hundred and Eighty Third                             
Report on Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations /observations of the 
Committee contained in its Two Hundred and Seventy Ninth Report on Demands for Grants 
(2020-21) of Ministry of Shipping. 
2.  The Two Hundred and Seventy Ninth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary 
Standing Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture was presented on the  12th March, 
2020 to the Parliament. 
3.  The Action Taken Replies on the recommendations of the Committee contained in its 
Two Hundred and Seventy Ninth Report w ere received from the Ministry of Shipping on            
29th July, 2020. 
4. The Committee considered and adopted the Report in its meeting held on the            
11th September, 2020.   
 
 
 (T.G. VENKATESH) 
NEW DELHI;                                                      Chairman, 
September 11 , 2020                                           Department-related Parliamentary Standing 
20 Bhadra, 1942 (Saka)                               Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture, 
                                                                                                                                Rajya Sabha 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iv) 

ACRONYMS 
 
 
A&N : Andaman and Nicobar 
 
BE : Budget Estimates 
 
BPS : Ballard Pier Station 
 
BPX : Ballard Pier Extension 
 
CACL : Central Advisory Committee for Lighthouses 
 
CCA : Controller of Certifying Authorities 
 
CCEA : Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs 
 
CCPA : Central Consumer Protection Authority 
 
CDC : Continuous Discharge Certificate 
 
CEZ : Coastal Economic Zone 
 
ChPT : Chennai Port Trust 
 
CoPT : Cochin Port Trust 
 
COVID-19 : Corona Virus Disease  
 
CPSE : Central Public Sector Enterprises 
 
CSL : Cochin Shipyard Limited 
 
DIPAM : Department of Investment and Public Asset Management  
 
DCI : Dredging Corporation of India 
 
DFC : Dedicated Freight Corridor 
 
DGLL : Directorate General of Light Houses and Light Ships 
 
DGPS : Differential Global Positioning System 
 
(v) 
 

DGS : Directorate General of Shipping 
 
DPC : Departmental Promotion Committee 
 
DPR : Detailed Project Report 
 
   DPT : Deendayal Port Trust 
 
   DRF : Disaster Response Fund 
 
   DST : Department of Science and Technology 
 
EAT : Expenditure Advance Transfer 
 
EBRs : External Budgetary Resources 
 
ECC : East Coast Canal 
 
EXIM : Export Import 
 
FRM : Fertilizer Related Material 
 
FY : Financial Year 
 
FWB : Fixed Window Berthing 
 
GBS : Gross Budgetary Support 
 
GDP : Gross Domestic Product 
 
GRF : General Research Fund 
 
HSD : Hydraulic Study Department 
 
IMO : International Maritime Organization 
 
IMT : Inter-Modal Terminal 
 
IMU : Indian Maritime University 
 
INR : Indian Rupees 
 
IPA : Indian Ports Association 
 
IT : Information Technology 
(vi) 
 

IWAI : Inland Waterways Authority of India 
 
IWT : Inland Water Transport 
 
IWTA : International Water Technology Association 
 
JVMP : Jal Marg Vikas Project 
 
JNPT : Jawaharlal Nehru Port Trust 
 
KDS : Kolkata Dock System 
 
KITCO : Kerala Industrial and Technical Consultancy Organisation 
 
KoPT : Kolkata Port Trust 
 
KPT : Kamarajar Port Trust 
 
LRIT : Long Range Identification Tracking 
 
MCA : Model Concession Agreement 
 
MIS : Management Information System  
 
MM3 : Million Cubic Meters 
 
MMT : Multi-Modal Terminal 
 
MoEF & CC : Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change 
 
MoPT : Mormugao Port Trust 
 
MoU : Memorandum of Understanding 
 
MPT : Mumbai Port Trust 
 
MRPL : Mangalore Refinery and Petrochemicals Limited 
 
MT : Metric Tonnes 
 
MTPA : Million Tonnes Per Annum 
 
NCB : North Cargo Berth 
(vii) 
 

NCLT : National Company Law Tribunal 
 
NCTPS : North Chennai Thermal Power Station 
 
NER : North East Region 
 
NHAI : National Highways Authority of India  
 
NMPT : New Mormugao Port Trust 
 
NPA : Non Performing Asset 
 
NPP : National Perspective Plan 
 
NSD : Netaji Subhas Dock 
 
NRT : Net Register Tonnage 
 
NTCPWC : National Technology Centre for Ports, Waterways and Coasts 
 
NTECL : NTPC TamilNadu Energy Company Limited 
 
NWs : National Waterways 
 
OSBD : Output per Ship Berthday 
 
PCS : Port Community System 
 
PGLM : Policy Guidelines for Land Management 
 
PIB : Press Information Bureau 
 
PMU : Project Monitoring Unit 
 
PMC : Project Monitoring Committee  
 
POL : Petroleum, Oil and Lubricants 
 
PPP : Public Private Partnership 
 
PSU : Public Sector Undertaking 
 
RCC : Reinforced Concrete Cement 
 
(viii) 

RE : Revised Estimates 
 
RFID : Radio Frequency Identification Document 
 
RFP : Request for Proposal 
 
RoB : Rail over Bridge 
 
RoFR : Right of First Refusal 
 
Ro-Ro : Roll on-Roll off 
 
RPS : Redundant Power Supply 
 
SBM : Single Buoy Mooring 
 
   SCI : Shipping Corporation of India 
 
SCL : Sethusamudram Corporation Limited 
 
SDCL : Sagarmala Development Company Limited 
 
SFC : Standing Finance Committee 
 
SOP : Standard Operating Procedure 
 
SPV : Special Purpose Vehicle 
 
SSCP : Sethusamudram Ship Channel Project 
 
STCW : Standards of Training, Certification and Watchkeeping 
 
TAC : Technical Advisory Committee 
 
TAMP : Tariff Authority for Major Ports 
 
TANGEDCO : Tamil Nadu Generation and Distribution Corporation Limited 
 
TEU : Twenty-foot Equivalent Unit 
 
TRT : Turn Around Time 
 
TSCC : Technical Support Services Consultants 
 
(ix) 

VGF : Viability Gap Funding 
 
VoCPT : V.O.  Chidambaranar Port Trust 
 
VPT : Visakhapatnam Port Trust 
 
VTMS : Vessel Traffic Management System 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(x) 

1 
 
REPORT  
The Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Ministry of 
Shipping on the recommendations/observations as contained in its Two Hundred Seventy 
Ninth Report on Demands for Grants (2020 -21) of the Ministry of Shipping which was 
presented to both the Houses of Parliament on 12th March, 2020.  
 
2.  The Action Taken Replies w ere received from the Ministry on 29 th July, 2020 in 
respect of all the observations/ recommendations contained in the Report. The replies have 
been categorized as follows:-  
 
Chapter-I: 
Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the Ministry: 
Paragraph Nos.:  7, 8, 20, 28, 30, 42, 46, 57, 65, 73, 74, 80, 82, 91, 93, 96, 104, 110, 
118, 119 
Total: 20 
 
Chapter-II:  
Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue in 
view of the replies of the Ministry: 
Paragraph Nos.: 11, 16, 18, 23, 27, 33, 36, 41, 54, 60, 62, 87, 100, 106, 120, 121 
Total: 16 
 
Chapter-III: 
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Ministry have not 
been accepted by the Committee: 
Paragraph Nos.:  4, 6, 9, 15, 17, 25, 34, 44, 48, 52, 63, 70, 83, 102, 112, 114 
Total: 16 
 
Chapter-IV:  
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which the final replies of the Ministry 
are still awaited: 
Paragraph Nos.:  Nil  
Total:   Nil 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

2 
 
CHAPTER-I 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY 
THE MINISTRY 
 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2020-21) OF THE MINISTRY 
Recommendation/Observation  
1. The Ministry of Shipping which has drawn ambitious program for Port infrastructure 
development and capacity augmentation will become handicapped because of the budgetary 
cuts which will jeopardize the targeted outcomes. The Committee takes note of the fisc al 
constraints faced by Ministry of Finance due to moderation in economic growth and the 
impact of global slowdown. Still, while seeking a balance between public good and need for 
containing fiscal deficit, the Committee would advocate higher budgetary pro visions in 
favour of Sagarmala Scheme and Kolkata Port Trust at the RE 2020 -21 stage. The 
Committee recommends that when the growth momentum is revived and the additional 
resources become available as a result of revenue buoyancy, the allocation for the Mi nistry 
should be increased further.              (Para 7) 
Reply of the Ministry 
1.1. The recommendation of the C ommittee has been noted. Based on the expenditure 
trend, targets and absorptive capacity of the implementing agencies, additional fund 
requirement will be assessed from time to time and will be projected to the Ministry of 
Finance at appropriate stage. 
Recommendation/Observation  
2. The Committee observes that there is a huge gap between the projected demand and 
the sanctioned budget for the Ministry for the FY 2020 -21. As against the projected demand 
of Rs. 3328.70 crores, the Ministry has been provided with Rs. 1800.00 crores only. 
Obviously, such huge variation is suggestive of the shortcomings in the budgetary planning. 
The Committee would urge upon the Ministry to exercise due diligence in the budget 
formulation with proper planning and assessment, taking into account its needs an d the 
capacity to deliver the functions assigned to it.          (Para 8) 
Reply of the Ministry 
2.1. The recommendation of the Committee has been noted. As per the availability of 
funds, projects priorities will be re -defined and funds will be released accordingly after due 
assessment of all deliverables. 
PORT CAPACITY- ADDITION WORK 
Recommendation/Observation  

3 
 
3. The Committee observes that in Major Ports productivity in terms of ship turn-around 
time, waiting time and average output per ship berthday  continues to be modest when 
compared with global standards and performance of Ports in developed maritime countries. 
Since globalization, rapid adoption of technology and competitiveness are critical objectives 
to the exporters and importers in India, mod ernization of Major Ports is critical to the 
success of their supply chain objectives. It is in this context that, the capacity addition at five 
Ports, namely, Deendayal Port Trust, Mormugao Port Trust, V.O. Chidambaranar Port 
Trust, Cochin Port Trust and Visakhapatnam Port Trust assumes added significance. The 
Committee desires that the progress of implementation of these projects should be monitored 
regularly and that proper guidelines should be issued for their timely completion. The 
Committee also desir es to know whether traffic flows at the above Ports have shown any 
correlation with the GDP subsequent to the capacity addition during 2019-20.    (Para 20) 
Reply of the Ministry 
3.1. The Ministry is regularly monitoring the progress o f Port modernization projects. In 
case of any deviations from the target date, suitable instructions/guide lines used to be issued 
to the P orts from time to time to streamline the same. Due to the various initiatives taken 
towards modernization of Major Por ts, the average Turn-round time, which was 87.36 hours 
during 2015-16, has come down to 61.75 hours  during 2019-20.  Like -wise, average output 
per ship berthday, which was 13156 tonnes during 2015-16, has increased to 16433 tonnes 
during 2019-20. 
3.2. Capacity available as on 31.03. 2019 and traffic handled at five Ports, namely  viz., 
Deendayal Port Trust, Mormugao Port Trust, V.O. Chidambaranar Port Trust, Cochin Port 
Trust and Visakhapatnam Port Trust, during 2018-19 and 2019-20,  are given as under:- 
 
Port 
Capacity as on 
31-3-2019 
(MTPA) 
Traffic 
(Million Tonnes) 
Capacity Utilisation (%) w.r.t. 
2018-19 2019-20 2018-19 2019-20 
DPT 261.10 115.40 122.50 44.20 46.92 
MGPT 62.50 17.68 16.02 28.29 25.63 
VOCPT 95.00 34.34 36.08 36.15 37.98 
CoPT 73.60 32.02 34.04 43.51 46.25 
VPT 126.89 65.30 72.72 51.46 57.31 
 
3.3. As may be seen from the above, there is no shortage of capacity in these 5 Ports.  If 
traffic grows at the rate of 7% per annum from 2019 -20, there is sufficient capacity available 
to handle traffic for the next 7 -8 years in these ports.  As such, the traffic of P ort could not 
correlate with GDP. 
 
CARGO HANDLING CAPACITY 
Recommendation/Observation  

4 
 
4. The Committee also recommends that uneconomic practices coming in the way of 
efficient operations should be identified and reviewed to bring down the cost of cargo 
handling at the Major Ports.           (Para 28) 
Reply of the Ministry 
4.1. Due to various initiatives taken up under the aegis of ease of doing business and doing 
away with the cum bersome documentation process, P orts have already  moved towards 
paperless regime. Efforts have been made to increase DPE and DPD along with doing away 
with the manual formats. With the above efforts, the World Bank ranking on Ease of Doing 
Business has improved tremendously over the last few years. 
 
AVERAGE OUTPUT SHIP BERTHDAY 
Recommendation/Observation  
5. On comparison of the above figures of 2019 -20 with data of 2018 -19, it has been 
noticed that t here was improvement only in 6 P orts viz., Haldia , Visakhapatnam, Cochin, 
Mormugao, Mumbai and JNPT.  However, in Ports of Kolkata, Paradip, Kamarajar, 
Chennai, V.O. Chidambaranar, New Mangalore and Deendayal, the average Output Per 
Ship Berthday is even less than that of 2018 -19. The Committee desires t hat the Ministry 
should look into the reasons for the decrease in average Output Per Ship Berthday of 7 Ports 
mentioned above and take remedial measures.                   (Para 30) 
Reply of the Ministry 
5.1. The reasons for the decrease in average Output Per Ship Berthday and reme dial 
measures suggested by the Ports are given as under: 
Kolkata: 
(i) Decrease was primarily due to increase in percentage of Non -Working Time, 
which was owing to non-Port account reasons. 
(ii) Poor performance of the handling contractor i n terms of poor equipment 
availability with regard to MHC, RST and TT  led to decrease in average ship -day 
output of container vessels  which in turn affected the overall average Ship -day 
Output. 
(iii) Also, due to Covid -19 impact, both Container import and export generation were 
adversely affected leading to lower output. 
Remedial measures by Port: 
(a) Mechanization of 3 NSD Berth - Converting the berth from non -MHC berth 
(where geared vessels used to be handled) to MHC berth (where gearless vessels 
may be handled). 

5 
 
(b) Introduction of Fixed Window Berthing (FWB):  Two FWBs per week introduced 
w.e.f. 23.09.2019 and the third window became operational from 29.11.2019. 
Paradip: 
OSBD of Liquid Bulk Vessels has been reduced from 52119 MT to 50544 in 2019 -20, which 
has affected the Gross productivity of the Port.  The reduction in average parcel size of the 
vessels resulted in slow discharge rate of the Cargo and thus OSBD of POL is affected. 
Kamarajar: 
(i) At Coal Berth 1, the conveyor system connecting Coal berth and NCTPS stack  
yard is frequently got breakdown due to old age structures and also Belt damages. 
Due to this, the berth stay of the vessels has been increased considerably which in 
turn affects the berth productivity. 
(ii) At Coal Berth 2, the pipe conveyor system of NTECL r uns 4.4 Km along the 
coastline which is getting frequent breakdown. Due to the corrosion effects, the 
pipe conveyor gantries in the conveyor system need to be replaced and the same is 
carried out by NTECL. NTECL informed that it is expected to complete by 
September 2020. Due to this, the berth productivity of Coal Berth 2 has been 
reduced considerably. 
Remedial measures by Port: 
(a) KPL is continuously pursuing with TANGEDCO for the replacement of conveyor 
belts at NCTPS plant in order to improve the performance of Coal Berth 1. 
(b) KPL is continuously pursuing with NTECL for the completion of all the pipe 
conveyor gantry replacement works in order to improve the performance of Coal 
Berth 2 
Chennai: 
(i) Increased number of less productive Project Cargo vessels  & 
other General Cargo vessels; and 
(ii) Decreased number of high productive dry bulk cargoes like Limestone/Dolomite 
vessels and Container vessels  for the year 2019 -20 when compared to 2018 -19. 
The shortfall was only in dry bulk wherein, the output per ship berthday decreased 
due to less number  of limestone / dolomite vessels ( viz., 47 vessels during 2018 -
19 as against  13 vessels during 2019 -20) which are normally handled by mobile 
harbour cranes with higher productivity. 
Remedial measures by Port: 
(a) The increase in draft level to 14 metres at JD2 berth at  Chennai port has attracted 
a Limestone Vessel of all -time high of 76342MT and a Gypsum vessel of 61600 

6 
 
MT during the month of March 2020 and  more such vessels are anticipated 
regularly, which will increase the volume and hence the productivity. 
V.O. Chidambaranar: 
     Increase in less productive cargoes like Machinery, Wind Mill Blade and Project 
Cargoes by 44.64% from 57,412 tonnes in 20l8 -19 to 83.042 tonnes in 2019 -20. 
Also, there was increase in shifting of deep draft vessels from the only 
multipurpose deep draft mechanized berth (IX Berth) which affects the 
productivity. 
Remedial measures by Port: 
(i) Port has constructed NCBIII berth with a proposal to add one more deep draft 
berth to handle multipurpose cargo vessels. However, dredging proposal is 
pending for approval from the Ministry. On addition of one more deep draft berth, 
increase in shifting of deep draft vessels can be avoided which would avoid pre-
Berthing Detention, reduced TRT and improve o verall average output per ship 
berthday. 
(ii) Incentive/ Penalty based on berthing norms reviewed to improve the productivity 
of the vessels at Berth. 
New Mangalore: 
(i) Less Crude Oil Handling at the SBM facility.  Crude oil imports declined due to 
shut down of some units by MRPL during April, May, Augu st and September, 
2019 due to up gradation to Bharat  VI standards, water scarcity, l andslides and 
also three weeks of non -working days on account of cyclonic weather in the 
month of September, 2019. 
(ii) Lower Output of Semi-Mechanized Dry bulk cargo due to Weather Constraint.  In 
the year 2019 -20, the Monsoon extended till October, causing constraints on the 
handling of Dry Bulk cargo such as iron ore fines, coal, urea, limestone etc. which 
resulted in a lower average output per ship berthday.  
Remedial measures by Port: 
(i) The operationalization of the m echanized coal handling facility at berth n o. 16 
will ensure higher output for all types of coal cargo during 2020-21. 
(ii) The port is teaming up with the captive Clients such as MRPL to e nsure smooth 
operations in the year 2020 -21.  The port is in close coordination with the captive 
users to not only handle higher cargo but also to increase the performance of its 
operations.  
Deendayal: 

7 
 
(i) Owing to implementation of the barrier in height for cargo dumping & storage, the 
feeding of cargo from hook point to the storage point & vice-versa, has slowed 
down significantly and this has in turn affected (reduced) the unloading / loading 
rates and the per berthday output for dry cargoes, especially bulk cargoes like coal 
etc. 
(ii) Cyclone warning: The Non weather working day was issued for  4 days (from 11 th 
to 14th June, 2019) at Kandla and for 3 days at Vadinar. At Kandla, this affected 
the normal cargo handling operations for nearly 5 days. 
(iii) Impact of COVID 19 pandemic :  The gradual spread of pandemic and the impact 
on cargo handling operations on account of th e subsequent lockdown from 22 nd 
March, 2020. Also due to problems in adequate supply of labour  for cargo 
handling and for carrying out loading / unloading operations caused significant 
impact in decreasing the output of bulk cargoes handled at the port. 
 
MODERNIZATION OF PORTS 
Recommendation/Observation  
6. The Committee takes note of the initiatives taken for modernization of Minor Ports 
and recommends that specialized Minor Ports should also be developed as an integral part of 
the overall Port system.           (Para 42) 
Reply of the Ministry 
6.1. Recommendation from Committee has been noted. There ar e 71 projects worth Rs. 
15125 crores under Sagarmala Programme which are focused on modernizing Minor Ports of 
our country. The list broadl y includes special projects of u pgrading the existing 
infrastructure; development of new infrastructur e; and Ro-Ro jetties projects for Minor Ports 
in coastal States. 
 
CONNECTIVITY TO PORTS 
Recommendation/Observation  
7. The Committee desires to be updated on the progress made towards route 
rationalization for Visakhapatnam and Dedicated Freight Corridor (DFC) connectivity to 
Deendayal Port.            (Para 46) 
Reply of the Ministry 
7.1. Ministry of Shipping addressed Ministry of Railways for route rationalization of VPT. 
However, Ministry of Railways replied that they will not be able to provide route 
rationalization till completion of two rail lines i.e., Raipur Titlagarh railway line & doubling 
of Titlagarh – Sambhalpur line. 

8 
 
7.2. Regarding DFC connectivity to Deendayal Port, DPT has equipped themselves with 
DFC compliant yard and other necessary infrastructure whereas from Western Railways side, 
work is due starting with electrification of existing rail lines, etc. 
 
SAGARMALA  
Recommendation/Observation  
8. The Committee desires the Ministry to review the requirement of funds based on the 
progress under the ongoing project and newly sanctioned projects, and explore the 
possibility of getting budgetary assistance from the Ministry of Finance or Viability Gap 
Funding (VGP).           (Para 57) 
Reply of the Ministry 
8.1. The observations of the Commit tee have been noted. Sagarmala d ivision of the 
Ministry generally conducts periodic review of the progress of proj ects with respective State 
Governments / Maritime Board/ Major Ports. Based on the feedback, requirement of funds 
are projected to the Ministry of Finance at BE / RE / supplementary grant stage. 
 
SETHUSAMUDRAM CORPORATION LIMITED 
Recommendation/Observation  
9. The Committee observes that this project is a vital link to Gulf region which is a very 
productive corridor from India’s economic point of view. The Committee would, therefore, 
like the Ministry to take all possible steps to expedite adjudication in the matter.  (Para 65) 
Reply of the Ministry 
9.1. The Sethusamudram Corporation Limited (SCL) was created as special purpose 
vehicle vide, Cabinet decision dated 02.09.2004 for raising finance and to undertake activities 
for creation /  operation of a navigable channel connecting Gulf of Mannar to Bay of  
Bengal.  On 19.05.2005, CCEA approved the Sethusamudram Ship Channel Project (SSCP) 
passing through Ram Sethu / Adam’s Bridge (Ali gnment No. 6).  While the said p roject was 
under implementation, due to a large number of court c ases, Hon'ble Supreme Court of India 
ordered on 31.08.2007 and 14.09.2007  to stop dr edging in Adam’s Bridge area.   There has 
been no dredging work in Adam’s Bridge / Palk Strait areas since July, 2009.   On 
23.02.2018, with the approval  of CCPA, the Government filed a ffidavit stating that 
considering the socio -economic dis advantages of a lignment No.6, Go I did not want to 
implement the said a lignment but intended to explore an alternative alignment withou t 
affecting / damaging the Adam's Bridge / Ram Sethu in the interest of the nation.   The 
Hon'ble Apex Court w as requested to dispose of the p etitions accordingly. The matter is sub 
judice since then  and there has been no further n otice from the said Court nor was any 
affidavit filed by the Government.  The recommendations of the Standing Committee have 
been noted.  

9 
 
SHIP BUILDING FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE POLICY FOR INDIAN SHIPYARDS 
Recommendation/Observation  
10. The Committee is deeply concerned that some of the Indian ships which had been 
provided with shipbuilding subsidy/ financial assistance under the Financial Assistance 
Policy have become NPAs and are undergoing insolvency proceedings in the National 
Company Law Tribunal. The Commi ttee would like the Ministry to take effective steps to 
clear pendency of cases in the NCLT and dispose them in a specified time frame by 
rigorously pursuing the cases with NCLT so that the interest of the Government could be 
safeguarded.             (Para 73) 
Reply of the Ministry 
10.1. Ministry has no role to play in National Company Law Tribunal (NCLT) with regard 
to shipyards which have become NPA. Ministry is not a party to these cases. However, 
Ministry would take steps to safeguard the interest of th e Government whenever and 
wherever required. 
Recommendation/Observation  
11. The Committee also expects the Ministry to expedite the formulation of guidelines for 
the disbursal of subsidy to shipyards. The Committee desires that the Ministry should look 
into the reasons as to why sufficient proposals were not received and take remedial steps. The 
Committee desires to be kept apprised in this regard.      (Para 74) 
Reply of the Ministry 
11.1. The guidelines for release of financial assistance have already been formulated and 
updated on website of Ministry in February, 2019. Financial assistance is being released to 
the eligible cases. 
11.2. Shipyards can send proposals for release of subsidy only a fter delivery of vessels. 
Ministry has no control over private shipyards to expedite the delivery of vessels/ships. 
However, the guidelines motivate shipyards to deliver standard and non -specialized ships 
within 3 years from date of contract in order to ge t subsidy. For specialized ships/vessels 
delivery can take up to 6 years. 
11.3. The recommendation of the Committee to keep apprised of the matter has been noted. 
 
DIRECTORATE GENERAL OF SHIPPING 
Recommendation/Observation  
12. The Committee applauds the efforts of Directorate General of Shipping and would 
expect the DGS to formulate policies and activities aiming to harness the potential of 
Shipping sector in coordination with the Ministry. The Committee desires that with the 

10 
 
advancement of the information technology, it is imperative for the Directorate General of 
Shipping to move towards paperless regime so as to reduce the cost and increase 
transparency. Welcoming the initiative of DGS in digitalizing its 99 odd functions, the re is 
still scope of dedicated measures for effective implementation of a definite IT plan in a given 
time-frame. The Committee desires to be kept apprised of the progress made in this regard. 
The Committee also observes that many of the existing operation s and maintenance 
procedures have their origin in decades past and therefore, need to be revised and updated. 
The Committee expects the Ministry to spell out its policy stance in this regard.   (Para 80) 
Reply of the Ministry 
12.1. The Directorate General of Shipping, India deals with implementation of shipping 
policy and legislation so as to ensure the safety of life and ships at sea, prevention of marine 
pollution, promotion of maritime education and training in coordination with the International 
Maritime Organization, regulation of employment and welfare of seamen, development of 
coastal shipping, augmentation of shipping tonnage, examination and certification of 
Merchant Navy officers, supervision and control of the allied offices under its administrati ve 
jurisdiction 
12.2. The Directorate desires to develop a new/updated e-Governance system to bring all its 
functions/processes, across its entire organizational fold, on an integrated holistic e -mode, 
leading to a footfall -free & completely automated serv ice delivery. The Directorate is 
pursuing a comprehensive process transformation to improve its operational efficiency and 
effectiveness leading to a customer centric service delivery, with focus on ease of doing 
business, and an improved stakeholder’s sat isfaction. Existing e -Governance system to be 
replaced by a completely new, updated, state-of-the-art e-Governance.  
12.3. Some of the advantages of new e -Governance project of the Directorate are as 
follows: 
i. Implementation of new citizen centric process d esigned keeping in view the two key 
customers i.e., ship owners / charterers and seafarers.  
ii. An enterprise resource solution which means that data entered for one fi eld in one 
service will get populated in the same field for all services. 
iii. All DGS related services and third parties like MTIs, RPS, Medical Doctors, charters, 
Port services etc. will become part of the same system. 
iv. Adequate system of checks and balances being put in place. 
v. More than 150 services being brought online 
vi. To move towards a paperless regime. 

11 
 
vii. Improve transparency and provide speedy service delivery through adoption of web -
based communication, e-commerce, and latest technology advances. 
viii. Computerize and automate all its functions related to Shipping and seafarer operations 
and maintenance, and internal administration. 
ix. Sustainable IT environment with major IT transformation for DGS that integrates 
technology into the framework of the DGS business, Services and an emphasis on 
compete automation and governance and footfall free office. 
x. Process will be streamlined with easy execution for both internal and external 
stakeholders. 
xi. For every stakeholder/seafarer, there will be a single window exhaustively covering 
all services related to him/her. 
xii. The system will become more transparent and accountable. 
12.4. The Directorate introduced e -learning to ensure that the seafarers should have the 
requisite knowledge to perform their task and duties and for that it is essential that the 
seafarers are well equipped with the quality course material fo r the maritime courses at all 
times. The e-Learning courses are available free of cost to all the seafarers. There are total 23 
such maritime courses which are made available on e-learning platform. 
12.5. Due to the pandemic COVID -19 which has disrupted th e delivery of training 
programs at approved Maritime Training Institute, the DGS has decided use of   digital 
technologies for the training, examination and certification of seafarers so that the effect of 
disruption is countered by conduct of classes online. The Directorate is working on guidelines 
for conduct of maritime courses using virtual classes/live video sessions. 
 
DIRECTORATE GENERAL OF LIGHTHOUSES AND LIGHT SHIPS  
Recommendation/Observation  
13. The Committee underlines the role of lighthouses and lightships in terms of indication 
of dangerous shoals, sandbanks, rocks etc. to obtain a Line of Position and to indicate 
Landfalls, Headlands, entrance to estuaries/ Ports etc. The Committee notes from the 
information made available to it that the fundin g pattern of the Directorate General of 
Lighthouses and Lightships is based on cost recovery system and that the Directorate does 
not burden the taxpayers as all expenditure on management and development is met out of 
the revenue collected by levy of light  dues. The Committee desires to be apprised of the tariff 
setting mechanism in the Directorate General of Lighthouses and Lightships/ Ministry.  
                       (Para 82) 
Reply of the Ministry 

12 
 
13.1. The tariff of Lightdues is prescribed by the DGLL considering the operation cost and 
cost of new establishment of Aids to Navigation (AtoN). The present rate of lightdues are as 
follows: 
i) Rs.8.00 /NRT for ships other than container ships 
ii) Rs.92.00 per TEU for container ships. 
13.2. The lightdues are collected only from foreign going ships. Coastal ships/ Home trade 
ships is exempted from paying lightdues. The following mechanism is followed for paying 
lightdues: 
i. Section-9 of the Lighthouse Act enables the Govt. to levy lightdues an d Section 10 of 
Lighthouse Act provides the fixing of rate of lightdues. 
 
ii. Proposal is made by DGLL based on the cost of establishment, operation of AtoN or 
any new project. 
 
iii. The proposal submitted to the Central Advisory Committee for Lighthouses (CACL) 
for evaluation and requesting them for recommendation as per Section 4(1) (e) of 
Lighthouse Act. 
 
iv. The recommendation of CACL is forwarded to the Ministry of Shipping for approval. 
 
v. After getting the approval from Ministry, the Gazette notification of tariff on rate of 
lightdues is published and will be affected after 30 days from the date of notification. 
INLAND WATERWAYS AUTHORITY OF INDIA 
Recommendation/Observation  
14. The Committee observes that Port traffic in the country is largely carried by railways 
and road transport with pipelines carrying some crude oil and petroleum products. IWT 
which is widely recognized as a fuel efficient, environment friendly and cost effec tive mode, 
especially for bulk goods, has largely remained underdeveloped. Since Indian Ports are 
facing problem of connectivity through rail and road, it is imperative that IWT is exploited to 
the fullest extent possible. The Committee is, therefore, plea sed to note that the Ministry of 
Shipping is implementing the JMVP for capacity augmentation of navigation on NW -1 at an 
estimated cost of Rs. 5369.18 crores in March 2023. The Committee recommends that a 
dedicated monitoring mechanism be put in place to e nsure that the targeted outcomes are 
achieved within the prescribed timeline.         (Para 91) 
Reply of the Ministry 
14.1. IWAI has already put in place  a robust monitoring mechanism for JMVP at the 
project sites and also at the IWAI head office as per details given below: 

13 
 
i. Six Project Implementation Units (PIUs) have been set up in the IWAI field 
Offices at Varanasi, Patna, Sahibganj, Farakka, Kolkata and  Haldia. These PIUs 
are responsible for monitoring the implementation of JMVP in their respective 
areas. 
ii. Three Technical Support Services Consultants (TSSC) have been engaged to 
monitor the project implementation at the sites: TSSC -I for the projects on th e 
Varanasi-Sahibganj stretch; TSSC -II for the projects on the Farakka -Haldia 
stretch; and TSSC-III for supervision the dredging contracts under JMVP. 
iii. A Project Management Unit (PMU) has been set up at the IWAI head office to 
assist the IWAI in project impl ementation and monitoring. A PMC has been 
engaged to assist IWAI in monitoring the project implementation. 
Recommendation/Observation  
15. The Committee would like the Ministry to share with it the details of the projects 
which have become fully operational and the targeted date of completion of the remaining 
projects.             (Para 93) 
Reply of the Ministry 
15.1. Projects that have become fully operational are m ultimodal terminals at Varanasi and 
Sahibganj.  
15.2. Targeted dates of completion of the other projects:- 
i. Fairway development: March, 2023. 
ii. Multimodal terminal at Haldia: December, 2020. 
iii. New navigation lock at Farakka: December, 2020. 
iv. Intermodal terminal at Kalughat: August, 2022. (Timeline extended due to delay in 
acquisition of land by the Govt. of Bihar). 
v. Intermodal terminal at Ghazipur: August, 2022. (Timeline extended due to delay in 
acquisition of land by the Govt. of U.P.). 
Recommendation/Observation  
16. The Committee desires to know whether the above projects have witnessed any  cost 
escalation and the details of funding pattern of these projects.      (Para 96) 
Reply of the Ministry 
16.1. The above projects have not witnessed any cost escalation so far. 

14 
 
16.2. The approved funding pattern of JMVP is as under: 
(i) IBRD Loan- Rs. 2,512.00 crore (US$ 375.00 million); 
(ii)        Government of India Counterpart Funds (budgetary allocation and proceeds 
from issue of infrastructure bonds: Rs. 2,556.00 crore (US$380.00 million); and 
(iii)Private sector participation under PPP mode: Rs. 301.00 crore (US$ 45.00 million) 
 
MARITIME TRAINING IN INDIA 
Recommendation/Observation  
17. The Committee appreciates the efforts of the Ministry in carrying out skill 
development and training programmes in Shipping  sector. The Committee would recommend 
that the Ministry should conduct studies to work out annual manpower requirement and 
supply in the Indian Port sector and formulate suitable approach to augment the supply of 
required manpower to cater to India’s need s, being the 16 th largest Maritime country. The 
Ministry should attach greater importance to the maintenance of high quality training 
imparted to maritime personnel in India, which has facilitated India to emerge as a major 
manpower supply nation to world-wide shipping.                            (Para 104) 
Reply of the Ministry 
171. The Ministry is working on creating multi-skill development centres in Major Ports to 
meet the skill requirement of the P orts. Studies regarding more effective planning are being 
undertaken. Further steps to improve quality of maritime personnel would also be undertaken. 
 
CRUISE SHIPPING  
Recommendation/Observation  
18. The Committee observes that cruise tourism in India is a niche product to attract 
tourists with specific interest. The Committee recommends that the Ministry of Shipping, in 
collaboration with the Ministry of Tourism, should expedite appropriate policy measures and 
joint action plan for developing India’s larg ely untapped and hitherto small cruise market 
and establish dedicated cruise terminals at all the Major Ports including private Ports in the 
country. Concerted efforts are also required in order to take care of the existing cruise 
terminals in terms of promoting tourism, managing sea-traffic and dealing with marine safety 
issues. The Committee desires to be updated on the progress made in this regard.  (Para 110) 
Reply of the Ministry 
18.1. A Task Force  was constituted in  November, 2015 with Secretary, Ministry of 
Tourism, as the Chairman and Secretary, Ministry of Shipping,  as the Co -chairman for 
coordinated efforts to create an enabling eco system for the development of cruise tourism in 
India. B ased on the discussions in  the task f orce meeti ngs and recommendations of the 

15 
 
consultant and  other stakeholders, several policy decisions have been taken including 
revisions of SOPs for efficient handling of cruise vessels and passengers at Indian Ports such 
as extension of c abotage relaxation for passeng er vessels, rationalisation of P ort charges for 
both internationa l and domestic cruise vessels, b iometric exemption to passengers arriving 
with e-visa. E-visa facility has been ext ended to five major cruise sea P orts namely Mumbai, 
Goa, Mangalore, Cochin and Chennai. Immigration counters have also been set up in a ll 
these five major cruise sea P orts. Additional policy measures would be taken to promote 
cruise tourism further in the next meeting of the Task Force this year. 
18.2. Cruise Terminals have been constructed at five major sea ports namely Mumbai Port, 
Cochin Port, Chennai Port, New Mangalore Port and Mormugao Port as cruise  ships to India 
generally call at these Major Ports. 
18.3. Following is the status of cruise terminals at Major Ports:- 
(i)            Mumbai Port Trust: Mumbai Port Trust have developed a domestic cruise 
terminal at Berth No.15, Victoria Dock at an approximate cost of Rs.20 crore and 
commissioned it w.e.f. 20 th October, 2018. They are also building a new international 
cruise terminal at Ballard Pier Extension (BPX) by demolishing the existing old 
terminal, at a cost of Rs.  303 crore. The terminal is proposed to be operated by a PPP 
operator.  The estimated date of commissioning is December 2021. 
 
(ii)           Chennai Port has developed cruise passenger terminal at WQ IV for domestic 
and international cruise services . The cruise terminal  has been commissioned on 
12.10.2018 with facilities of escalator, lift, air conditione rs, etc. The total cost of  the 
above project is Rs 17.24 crores which is funded by the Ministry of Tourism. 
 
(iii)          Cochin Port Trust: Ministry of Tourism has granted Rs.25.72 crores to Cochin 
Port Trust for the construction of cruise terminal which is likely to be commissioned 
shortly. 
 
(iv)           New Mangalore Port Trust is u ndertaking a study regarding up gradation of 
cruise passenger infrastructure and appointed M/s KITCO as consultant to give 
proposal. The study is under progress and is expected to be completed shortly. 
 
(v)           Mormugao Port Trust  (MoPT) has constructe d state of the art three stor eyed 
new cruise terminal building having the facility for custom, immigration and duty free 
shop for the passengers.   This building was inaugurated on 22. 12.2016. MoPT has 
planned creation of facilities for international and domestic cruise with allied facilities 
for ferry services, Ro -Ro, and Ro -pax vessels at Mormugao Port. MoPT has 
forwarded the proposal amounting to Rs 153 c rores to MoT for releasing th e funds 
under the said scheme. 
 

16 
 
(vi)            VOCPT: As an initial step to study the feasibility for developing VOC Port 
into an international tourist gateway,  the Port has r equested for sanction of Rs 10 
lakhs under the ‘Central Agencies Assistance Scheme fo r T ourism Infrastructure 
Development', initiated by Ministry of Tourism. 
 
(vii) Visakhapatnam Port Trust: At VPT an international cruise terminal  is being 
developed as per the Tourism Policy of GoI at an estimated cost of Rs.77 crores  with 
50% support from the Ministry of Tourism under the scheme “Assistance to Central 
Agencies for Tourism Infrastructure Development”. 
18.4. Design consultancy for berth structure is entrusted to IIT Chennai at a cost of Rs.32 
lakhs and architectural con sultancy for terminal building is awarded to M/s. Creative Group, 
Delhi at a cost of Rs.28 lakhs. 
18.5. The Ministry also proposes to tap other Major Ports  viz., Paradip Port, Odisha to 
explore viability of new cruise routes in consultation with  MoT and re spective State 
Governments.  
18.6. Ministry is also exploring the possibility of different itinerary options, cruise 
terminals in Major Ports and other non-Major Ports of Gujarat, Maharashtra, A & N Islands, 
Lakshadweep, Puducherry, Andhra Pradesh, Kolkata etc. 
 
KOLKATA PORT TRUST 
Recommendation/Observation  
19. The Committee notes that due to extensive use of Ganga  water and bank and bed 
erosion in the upstream states, the Hooghly estuary underwent substantial changes and the 
silt that used to be flushed out into the Bay of Bengal through this river channel started to be 
deposited due to reduction in the volume of r iver water.  It is, therefore, essential that the 
existing system of subsidy for dredging and river conservancy works of the Kolkata Port 
Trust should be cautiously monitored and progress be evaluated at regular intervals of time.    
                                (Para 118) 
Reply of the Ministry 
19.1. The issues related to navigation and inadequacy of depths has prompted Kolkata Port 
to set up a Hydraulic Study Department (HSD) with the objectives to carry out applied 
research on the behavior of the Bhagirathi -Hugli river system and formulate necessary river 
regulatory measures for its implementation towards the maintenance and continual 
improvement of depth in the shipping channel of Kolkata Port Trus t and to provide effective 
navigational aids like Differential Global Positioning System (DGPS) for hydrographic 
survey, dredging and VTMS as a tool for surveillance & safe navi gation of vessels in the 
Hugli e stuary. The HSD should ensure scientific study and research on hydraulic 
characteristics and problems of river Hooghly / estuary and monitor the river behavior and 

17 
 
plan remedial measures for the entire river/estuary. The measures are implemented by 
Kolkata Port Trust (KoPT) and the outcome of the remedial measures is taken into 
consideration for assessing the maintenance dredging measures. The Ministry of Shipping has 
issued in 2015 dredging guidelines on undertaking dredging at Major Ports. As per the 
guidelines, KoPT has appointed an agency for the “Technical Auditing of the Ma intenance 
dredging in Hooghly estuary”. Further, KoPT has to carry out capital and maintenance 
dredging as per the laid down procedures mentioned in the guidelines. The Technical 
Advisory Committee (TAC) of the KoPT having technical experts from different institutes 
and departments of the Central Government and also with in -house professionals in the field 
of dredging and river hydraulics has been constituted by Ministry of Shipping to examine the 
issues relating to preservation, maintenance and improvement  of navigable depths in the 
shipping channels of KoPT, recommend river regulatory measures in the form of river 
training/ bank protection works and dredging, impact assessment of river regulatory measures 
executed etc. The KoPT is required to convene regul ar meetings of TAC to assess the output 
of maintenance dredging carried out. 
 
NEED FOR COORDINATION BETWEEN MINISTRIES 
Recommendation/Observation  
20. The Committee is of the opinion that the Ministries of Civil Aviation, Shipping, Road 
Transport & Highways, Culture, Tourism and Railways  are not only inter -related and 
interconnected, but also share a common objective to improve connectivity and better 
amenities for the benefit of tourists, travellers and faster movement of freight within the 
country. The Committee, therefore, feels that there is a pressing need for having an effective 
co-ordination mechanism among these Ministries so that the policies and guidelines being 
formulated by them are executed seamlessly and can supplement each other in ach ieving 
these objectives. This will not only increase effectiveness and efficiency, but will also help in 
utilization of funds and skilled manpower to the maximum possible extent. Therefore, the 
Committee recommends that an easy-to-use interface should be made available which allows 
hassle-free communication and co -ordination amongst them. A hotline number which is 
common to all these Ministries, may be established so that whenever emergency arises, there 
can be effective and prompt coordination among these Ministries and issues in hand can be 
resolved at the earliest. The above said Ministries should work together in this regard and 
the Ministry of Tourism may be made the nodal Ministry for this purpose.              (Para 119) 
Reply of the Ministry 
20.1. A Core Group under the Chairmanship of the Secretary, Ministry of Civil Aviation, 
having representatives from the suggested  Ministries has been set up  to work out the 
modalities for supplementing each other during  various types of a ccident investigation and 
suggesting preventive measures to improve safety and security standards in these sectors. The 
first meeting of the core g roup was held on 23.01.2020. As per indications from Ministry of 
Civil Aviation the proposal of ‘Hot Line Communication’ amongst th e concerned ministries 
will be discussed in the next meeting being planned after COVID -19 pandemic. 

18 
 
CHAPTER-II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES OF THE MINISTRY 
 
SALIENT FEATURES OF DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 2020-21    
Recommendation/Observation  
1. The Committee takes note of the reply from the Ministry regarding developing new 
project MIS tool for Sagarmala Programme and National Maritime Heritage Complex at 
Lothal. The Committee applauds the Ministry  for the efforts, but feels that main emphasis 
should be laid on completion of ongoing and stalled projects under the said programme. 
There should be regular monitoring of funds at each level of work and Committee should be 
apprised of the progress made in this regard.                          (Para 11) 
Reply of the Ministry 
1.1. Sagarmala Projects through MIS tool and various interactions and National Maritime 
Heritage Complex at Lothal are being regularly monitored in the Ministry at the highest level. 
Progress updates will be shared with the Committee. Further , it is informed that MIS tool has 
a feature for alerting the implementing agencies to update project status at regular intervals. 
Also, M inistry monitors delays and  reasons thereof and intervene s as necessary to resolve 
specific issues and expedite the progress. 
ANALYSIS OF ANNUAL PLAN 2019-20  
Recommendation/Observation  
2. Rs. 450.00 crores  was allocated under the head “Grants to Inland Water Transport 
Authority of India”, which was reduced to Rs 236.51 crores at RE stage and the Ministry has 
spent Rs 192.20 crores till 31.01.2020. Since, as per the norms stipulated by the Ministry of 
Finance, there is a ceiling of 25% on expenditure in the last quarter and it should not be 
more than 10% of the BE in the month of March, the Committee apprehends substantial 
underutilization of the budgeted fund under the above heads.                 (Para 16) 
Reply of the Ministry 
2.1. IWAI was allocated Rs. 443.36 crore in B.E 2019 -20 for its budgetary heads except 
JMVP and interest payment on Bonds raised by it. The allocation was reduced to Rs. 220.40 
crore in RE  F.Y. 2019-20. 
2.2. In 2019 -20, Rs. 218.9967 crore has been released to IWAI after considering the 
adjustment of unspent grant of F.Y. 2018-19 of Rs. 1.396 crore under grants to IWAI (NER). 

19 
 
2.3. IWAI has not been affected by the ceiling stipulated by Ministry of Finance for 
release of fund in the last quarter and in the month of March-2020. 
Recommendation/Observation  
3. The Committee notes that a sum of Rs 380.00 crores was proposed in BE 2019 -20 
under the head “Director General of Lighthouses and Lightships”, which was steeply revised 
upward to R s 413.00 crores  at the RE 2019 -20 stage. The Ministry has spent Rs 278.00 
crores till 31.01.2020, leaving 32.45% for expenditure in the last two months of the current 
fiscal year. Since the remaining expenditure would have to be squeezed in the last two months 
of the current financial year, the Committee apprehends the occurrence of saving under this 
head. The Committee also notes that the allocation of Rs 60.00 crores under the Capital head 
of the scheme was reduced to Rs 43.78 crores  at the RE 2019 -20 stage, which points to the 
fact that development oriented activities under the scheme have been curtailed. The 
Committee, while strongly disapproving such variations between BE, RE and Actual 
expenditure for ‘Director General of Lighthouses and Lightships’ urges the Ministry to avoid 
such ritualistic allocations which remain on paper only. The Committee also recommends 
that the Ministry should pay special attention and take proactive steps to avoid the 
occurrence of savings under the scheme because a resourc e constrained country like India 
cannot afford to keep a vast chunk of its financial resources locked up and surrendered 
towards the end of financial year. The Committee desires to be kept apprised of the quantum 
of savings under the above scheme for 2019-20.        (Para 18) 
Reply of the Ministry 
3.1. It is to inform that the expenditure of DGLL upto 31st March, 2020 is given below:- 
Description of Head BE 2019-20 RE 2019-20 Exp. upto 31.03.2020 Savings 
Revenue (3031) 320 320 289.73 9.45% 
Capital (5051) 60 93 88.14 5.22% 
3.2. The r evenue accounting model of DGLL is a unique one. Whatever income is 
projected for the fiscal year , is treated as total revenue expenditure. The expenditure 
including transfer of surplus funds to reserve funds like GRF/DRF will be done after meeting 
the actual expenditure. 
3.3. The revenue expenditure from DGLL is met out from the receipts received through 
lightdues. The expenditure also involves the transfer of amount to saving in GRF and DRF. 
The expenditure of revenue is depen dent on collection of receipts and should not be more 
than the collection of receipt. The collection of lightdues upto 15 th March, 2020 was Rs.  
296.70 crores. Accordingly, the expenditure of DGLL was restricted to balance the 
expenditure within the receipt s of lightdues. Receipts of lightdues upto 31 st March,  2020 is 
Rs.311 crores. 

20 
 
3.4. The expenditure of c apital works is met out from the GRF and DRF of DGLL. The 
RE 2019-20 of Rs.93.00 crores for c apital work received on 26.03.2020 as a second 
supplementary for F.Y. 2019 -20. The expenditure on c apital work achieved to the tu ne of 
Rs.88.14 crores. There was savings due to restriction of movement on import of supplies 
amid Covid-19. 
3.5. DGLL will make its best efforts to achieve set financial targets without saving. 
PORT CAPACITY- ADDITION WORK 
Recommendation/Observation  
4. The Committee observes that the parameter of average Turn -around time does not 
indicate how efficient a Port is. One commonly used parameter which is used to assess a 
Port’s internal efficiency is the quantum of cargo that the Port handles per day (i.e., o utput 
per ship berthday). The Committee desires to be apprised of the output per ship berthday of 
the above Ports subsequent to the improvement of average Turn -around time and also the 
reasons for little or no improvement in the average Turn -around time in  other Major Ports.    
           (Para 23) 
Reply of the Ministry 
4.1. The average TRT and average output per ship berthday for Deendayal Port Trust, 
Mormugao Port Trust, V.O. Chidambaranar  Port Trust, Cochin Port Trust and 
Visakhapatnam Port Trust, during 2017-18, 2018-19 and 2019-20 is given as under: 
Port Average TRT (in hours) 
2017-18 2018-19 2019-20 
DPT 60.24 72.24 70.56 
MGPT 63.18 63.06 65.64 
VOCPT 64.56 47.04 48.24 
CoPT 37.02 35.21 36.15 
VPT 62.00 60.22 59.49 
 
Port Average Output Per Ship 
Berthday (in Tonnes) 
2017-18 2018-19 2019-20 
DPT 18531 17363 16879 
MGPT 14525 12163 13258 
VOCPT 11961 15353 15056 
CoPT 20880 22839 23709 
VPT 13528 13790 14901 
 
4.2. As may be seen from the above in the case of VO Chidambaranar and 
Visakhapatnam, average turn -around time improved and there was an improvement in 
average output per ship berthday also.  In the case of DPT, average turn -around time 

21 
 
increased during 2018-19 and Avg. Output Per Ship Berthday decreased but during 2019 -20, 
average turn-around time improved but average output per ship berthday has not improved.  
As far as Mormugao Port is concerned, during 2018 -19, average turn -around time improved 
but average o utput per ship berthday decreased and in 2019 -20, when Avg. TRT increased, 
there was an improvement in average output per ship berthday.  In the case of Cochin Port 
during 2018 -19, average TRT improved, so a lso the average output per ship berthday but 
during 2019-20, average TRT increased but there was an improvement in average output per 
ship berthday. Other Major Ports where average TRT increased during 2019 -20 are as 
follows: 
 Kolkata: Increase in  average Pre-Berthing Detention owing to non -port account 
reasons viz., Agent's Option, Neaped Bore Tide Restriction, Navigational Constraints, 
bad weather and also due to marginal increase in average parcel load per vessel. 
 Haldia: Increase was due to the shutdown of lock operations due to maintenance, 
break-down of equipment, etc.  There were a good number of dry bulk vessels 
engaged for back -loading of iron ore after completion of import discharge without 
being sailed out from the dock. Also, such vessels had to work with ship crane s when 
all compatible MHC berths were occupied with  working vessels. Thus, the TRT of 
such vessels has increased. 
 Paradip: The increase was due to the non-availability of Two Conventional berths viz; 
EQ2 & 3 as the mechanization of the same is going on. 
 Chennai: Increase in less productive break -bulk cargoes like project cargo vessels & 
other general cargo vessels. 
 Mumbai: The average parcel size of project cargo vessels has increased and also 
handling of slow-moving cargo vessels such as Bitumen and projec t cargo resulted in 
higher TRT. 
PORT CAPACITY- ADDITION WORK 
Recommendation/Observation  
5. The Committee finds that despite adequate allocation of funds towards the 
development and modernization of Major Ports, the cargo handling capacity has not shown 
proportionate improvements and that there remains a big difference in cargo handling 
performance between the Indian Major Ports and Port of Singapore. The Committee is of the 
opinion that introduction of major technological changes in the Indian Major Port s can 
provide stimulus for cargo handling.          (Para 27) 
Reply of the Ministry 
5.1. Due to development and modernization of Major Ports, there is no shortage of cargo 
handling capacity at Major Ports of India at present.  The total capacity as on 31 -3-2019 was 
1452.64 million tonnes.  Against this capacity, the total traffic handled was 6 99.10 million 
tonnes during 2018 -19 with a capacity utilization of only 48%. If total traffic grows at the 

22 
 
rate of 7% per annum, there is sufficient capacity available to handle traffic for the next 10 
years with this capacity. 
TRAFFIC HANDLING AT MAJOR PORTS 
Recommendation/Observation  
6. The Committee notes that only seven Major Ports were able to register positive 
growth in traffic handling parameter, while the remaining Major Ports were in the negative. 
The Committee is of the view that the Ports which have showed negative growth, except  
MoPT, were among the top performers in 2017 -18 in terms of traffic growth. This 
performance does not match with huge funding from Government for various Port 
enhancement programmes and schemes especially designed for Major Ports.    (Para 33) 
Reply of the Ministry 
6.1. The development of the Major Ports is undertaken through Port’s internal resources, 
PPP Participation, etc.  As such, there is no Government budgetary support provided for the 
Port development except for some of the Port specific projects or  through Sagarmala 
Development Fund.   
6.2. Government is regularly monitoring the traffic and the trade at Major Ports.  The Port 
Authorities are also requested to explore the possibility of generating new cargoes, so that the 
gap between the traffic and capacity may be reduced.  User Ministries and departments like 
fertilizers, petroleum, coal, power, food and civil supplies, etc. are also being interacted from 
time to time for assigning their cargo to Major Ports.  Similarly, Major Ports also organize 
trade meets to attract traffic from their hinterland/ region from time to time.  However, due to 
global and local economic slowdown and outbreak of Coronavirus during the last phase of 
F.Y. 2019-20, the growth in traffic was not very impressive. 
6.3. The traffic decreased in the Ports of Kolkata, Kamarajar, Chennai, New Mangalore, 
Mormugao and JNPT during 2019 -20 in comparison to 2018 -19.  Fall in traffic was due to a 
decrease in the following cargos in these Ports during 2019-20:- 
Kolkata: Fall in tra ffic of FRM (-76%), Coking & o thers Coal (-34.51%), POL ( -27.69%), 
other misc. Cargo(-12.74%) and Container Tonnage(-1.48%). 
Kamarajar: Reduction in Thermal and Steam Coal by -19.41% and Coking & others Coal by -
11.51%. 
Chennai: The decline was due to a re duction in other misc. cargo by -23.47%, FRM by -
16.89%, Container Tonnage by -14.56% and other liquid by-13.55%. 
New Mangalore: Reduction in Coking & other Coal by -41.57%, fertilizers raw materials by -
23.13%, Thermal and Steam Coal by -15.90% and POL by -12.51%. 

23 
 
Mormugao: Reduction in Fin. fertilizers by -80.60%, other Liquids by -70.0%, Iron Ore by -
59.10%, Container Tonnage by -10.71%, other misc. c argo by -7.88% and Thermal and 
Steam Coal by -7.74%. 
JNPT: Reduction in POL by -19.33%, other l iquids by -6.66% and Container Tonnage by -
1.89%. 
 
PERFORMANCE OF PORTS 
Recommendation/Observation  
7. The Committee observes that the parameters of Average Turn -around time and 
Average Output Per Ship Berthday  are not much in vogue in international Ports in terms of 
international best practices. One such parameter widely used internationally is “average 
moves per crane hour”. With the advent of full scale containerization of general cargo, Ports 
have witnessed paradigm shift in terms of commissioning of container terminals. The 
Committee would, therefore, like the Ministry to apply the yardstick of “Average moves per 
crane per hour” to measure the performance of the Major Ports. The Committee desires to be 
kept apprised in this regard.          (Para 36) 
Reply of the Ministry 
7.1. The Port p erformance cannot be assessed based on a single measure. A meaningful 
evaluation of a Port’s performance will require sets of measures relating to the duration of the 
ship’s s tay in port (t otal Turnaround Time in Port), the quality of the cargo handling 
mechanism and the quality of service to inland transport vehicles during their passage 
through the port. 
7.2. The average moves per crane hour are one of the yardsticks for meas uring crane’s 
ability to move the number of containers in an hour.  It is more suitable for Container 
handling ports. Whereas, the majority of Indian Major Ports are multi -commodity Ports 
handling around 75 -80% cargo comprising Liquid Bulk, Dry Bulk, Break -Bulk, etc.  The 
level of containerization in India is increasing but still below the level of leading international 
container handling Ports.   Some of the Major Ports like Kolkata, Haldia, Paradip, New 
Mangalore, Mormugao, Mumbai, etc. do not have a dedicated state -of-art container terminal 
at present.   
MODERNIZATION OF PORTS 
Recommendation/Observation  
8. The Committee recommends that the Ministry should recalibrate its policies and 
strategies to keep pace with the growi ng EXIM Trade and equip the Ports with adequate 
capacity to handle various types of cargo.  Special focus is required for creation of additional 
capacity at Major Ports through infrastructure development projects and introduction of 
modern technology. The Ministry should formulate policies and schemes aiming at 

24 
 
mechanization of operations and introduction of modern technique for cargo handling 
particularly in dry bulk cargo to improve performance of the Major Ports. Modernization of 
Port administration shou ld also be undertaken. The Committee also observes that 
tremendous scope exists in the Major Ports to modernize existing conventional berths and to 
convert some of them to dedicated or multipurpose terminals.    (Para 41) 
Reply of the Ministry 
8.1. The Government of India has taken concerted efforts in the direction of expansion and 
modernization of Major Ports of the country.  Out of these efforts, the capacity of the 
country’s Major Ports has grown from 871.52 MTPA during 2014 -15 to 1452.64 MTPA 
during 2018-19. Against the capacity of 1452.64 MTPA, traffic handled during 2018 -19 was 
699.10 MT and 704.82 MT during 2019 -20, which shows the availability of surplus capacity 
around 52%.  Therefore, there is no shortage of capacity at Major Ports of India. 
SAGARMALA  
Recommendation/Observation  
9. The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry and desires to know whether the 
projects under implementation have witnessed any time overrun and cost escalation as 
compared to the original cost and timeline of the projects. The Ministry should also mention 
the precise reasons for delay, if any, Port -wise and steps being taken to address such delays. 
           (Para 54) 
Reply of the Ministry 
9.1. There are several projects which are under implementation and have witnessed 
delay/shifting of timelines for vari ous reasons. Also, there are instances where project cost is 
more than estimated cost of projects. Delays are mainly related to land acquisition, 
environment clearance and execution challenges in some of the projects in coastal regions. 
Port generally has lesser chance of getting affected by delays as majority of the projects are 
being implemented within the Port limit and without interface with local community. 
Although, Ministry intervenes to resolve the issues whenever required by coordinating with 
State Governments, MoEF&CC, etc. 
DREDGING CORPORATION OF INDIA 
Recommendation/Observation  
10. The Committee desires that steps should be taken to reduce the operational cost/ 
overhead expenditure of DCI. The Ministry, in coordination with DCI, should focus on 
reduction in Dry -dock timelines and the expenditure on fuel by adopting remedial measures 
and deploy dredgers along the same coast to reduce the expenditure on voyages etc.  
           (Para 60) 
Reply of the Ministry 

25 
 
10.1. Government of India has by strategic sale transferred its holding in the DCI to four 
Major Ports namely viz., Visakhapatnam Port Trust (VPT), Paradip Port Trust (PPT), 
Jawaharlal Nehru port Trust (JNPT) and Deendayal Port Trust (DPT) as on 08.03.2019 
alongwith the transfer of management and control. 
10.2. The new management has taken over the functioning of the company w.e.f. 
08/03/2019 and the company is no longer a CPSE/ Government Company. 
10.3. With the change in management, the delegation of powers has  been extensively 
rationalized so as to facilitate faster decision making at ground level. The company has taken 
up with the Ports for allocation of works directly so as to facilitate optimal deployment of the 
vessels and facilitate reduction of operationa l costs. The steps are expected to reduce dry -
dock timeline and thus, cost saving. 
DREDGING ACTIVITIES 
Recommendation/Observation  
11. The Committee would like the Ministry to identify the reasons for high expenditure on 
capital dredging at Major Ports such as Mumbai Port Trust, VoCPT, Paradip Port Trust, 
Kamarajar Port Trust and Cochin Port Trust and take corrective steps to address such  issues 
in order to reduce expenditure.        (Para 62) 
Reply of the Ministry 
11.1. In recent times, DCI has executed/  is executing capital dredging at Paradip Port, 
Kamarajar Port and Cochin Port. The rates charged by the company have been reasonable. 
11.2. The capital dredging at Mumbai Port depends upon the strata to be dredged. The 
proposal of capital dredging involves hard rock and soft rock along with other materials. Due 
to high quantity of hard rock, the estimated cost increased. 
11.3. The sea bed of VOC Port is composed mainly of hard or weathered rocks, therefore, a 
cutter suction dredger is required for dredging. Hence, the cost of capital dredging is more. 
The Port has engaged M/s NTCPWC for suggesting ways for optimizing the dredging unit 
rates. Further, there is no maintenance dredging requirement in the VOC Port since there is 
negligible siltation. 
11.4. Cochin Port being a riverine Port is prone to continuous siltation which necessitates 
continuous dredging to keep the channels clear for deep dra fted ships. Cochin Port Trust 
through effective monitoring and contract management has managed to reduce the annual 
cost of dredging. Efforts are being made to explore ways to reduce the expenditure further. 
11.5. The rates of capital dredging negotiated w ith DCI by KPL are based on the rates of 
the neighboring Ports for similar works. Moreover, KPL also did WPI Indexation of its last 
obtained tendered rate for capital dredging for ascertaining the reasonableness of the 
negotiated rates with DCI. During the  entire process of price negotiation National 

26 
 
Technology Centre for Ports Waterways and Coasts (NTCPWC), Indian Institute of 
Technology (IIT) Madras the Centre for Excellence has been associated for its technical and 
domain expertise. 
 
SHIPPING CORPORATION OF INDIA 
Recommendation/Observation  
12. The Committee notes that SCI has reported a net loss of Rs. 122.00 crores  in the FY 
2018-19 and that the company has not paid any dividend during the years 2015 -16, 2016-17, 
2017-18 and 2018 -19. In order to make a fair assessment of SCI’s financial health, the 
Committee desires to know the debt levels of SCI, the debt to equity  ratio, its current 
liabilities and whether its cash flow is adequate to meet the company’s debt liabilities. The 
Committee would also like to know whether the Government is considering any proposal to 
offload its holdings in SCI.                       (Para 87) 
Reply of the Ministry 
12.1. The details of SCI  as on 31.03.2020 are given below:  
i).  Total Debt of SCI:   Rs.4,74,119 Lakhs 
ii). Debt Equity Ratio: 0.39:0.61 
iii). Current Liabilities:    Rs.1,30,581 Lakhs 
12.2. The company has an efficient and strong system of financial management which is 
demonstrated by the timely and regular repayments of all its debt obligations. This has 
effectively brought down the Debt Equity Ratio which stood at  0.51:0.49 as on 31st March, 
2015 to  0.39:0.61 as on 31 stMarch 2020 . It is no teworthy to mention that SCI has 
never defaulted in meeting any of its debt obligations even at high debt levels. The company 
has a credit rating of AA  (-) which it has maintained over the last  9 years. This is 
demonstrative of the credit worthiness of the  company and its ability to service its debt. As 
the debt levels have now come down substantially as demonstrated by the current D:E ratio, 
backed by its continuing sound and effective cash flow   management, the company is 
confident of  meeting its debt liabilities  in a prudent manner. 
12.3. As regards  offloading the Government's holdings in SCI,  it may be informed that on 
20th November, 2019, the Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs (CCEA) had given its "in 
principle" approval for strategic disinvestmen t of Government of India shareholding of 
63.75% in SCI along with transfer of management control to a strategic buyer. Accordingly, 
Department of Investment and Public Asset Management (DIPAM) has appointed M/s RBSA 
Capital Advisor LLP as Transaction Advis or (TA), M/s Luthra & Luthra Partners as legal 
advisor (LA) and M/s Protocol Insurance Surveyors & Loss Assessors Pvt. Ltd. as asset 
valuer vide their letter dated 8th January, 2020. 
INDIAN MARITIME UNIVERSITY 

27 
 
Recommendation/Observation  
13. The Committee desires an explanation from Indian Maritime University (IMU) for an 
unutilized fund of Rs. 336.16 crores found to be parked in various banks of   Indian Maritime 
University by the special Audit conducted by the Pr. CCA.     (Para 100) 
Reply of the Ministry 
13.1. Special Audit was conducted by the Pr.CCA in 2016 -17, observation vide para 4 – for 
an unutilized fund of Rs. 336.16 crores 
13.2. IMU replied for the Special Audit’s observation and based on the reply, the O/o 
Pr.CCA dropped the observation. 
13.3. The balance stated was as on 31.03.2016 and the amount shown is the running 
balances of IMU, which included current liabilities like refundable caution deposits, sundry 
creditors, statutory liabilities such as gratuity, leave encashment liabili ties and other payables 
and amount earmarked towards ongoing capital projects and committed liabilities payable to 
CPWD and others for various works and  procurements and also includes fees and other 
income generated as on that particular date.  In this regard a certificate is already submitted to 
Ministry of Shipping (along with the SFC proposal) that, the funds available in the bank 
accounts of IMU do not have any amount received under Grant -in-aid from Ministry of 
Shipping. 
13.4. After providing for liabi lities, the remaining portion of the fund is being projected to 
be utilised during the proposed SFC plan period 2019 -24 (under consideration by the 
Ministry) as indicated below:- 
 
Description Amount (Rs. Cr) 
Gross Revenue Expenditure 811.40 
IMU’s own revenue projected for the 5 year period 541.11 
Net Short fall 270.29 
Less: IMU’s   fund balances net of Liabilities etc. that cou ld be 
utilized for meeting the shortfall  
150.00 
Balance will be requested from GoI 120.29 
 
RIVER CRUISE TOURISM  
Recommendation/Observation  
14. The Committee would like to know the efficacy of measures taken in promoting cruise 
tourism in the country.  The Ministry should also explore the possibility of cruise services in 
Diu, Jaigad (Ganapatipule, Maharashtra), Porb andar (Gujarat), Lakshadweep and East 
Coast Ports (Andaman & Nicobar Islands).                  (Para 106) 
Reply of the Ministry 

28 
 
14.1. Several steps have been taken by the Ministry to promote cruise shipping and the 
following data indicates the increase in cruise passengers and vessels arriving in India: 
Year No. of ships No. of passengers 
2015-16 128 125838 
2016-17 158 191725 
2017-18 138 176778 
2018-19 157 201872 
14.2. Ministry is also exploring the possibility of  different itinerary options and also Cruise 
Terminals in Gujarat, Maharashtra, A & N Islands, Lakshadweep, Puducherry, 
Andhra Pradesh, Kolkata etc. Ministry is pursuing the matter with the concerned State 
Governments and State Maritime Boards to examine the same and give their 
comments/ views. 
14.3. Under the IWAI Act, 1985, Inland Waterways Authority of India (IWAI) is to 
develop and regulate National Waterways (NWs) for cargo shipping & navigation. The 
infrastructure developed for transportation on NWs by IWAI include fairway, terminals, 
jetties, navigation aids etc. Infrastructure developed on NWs is used by the river cruise 
operators (private sector). IWAI’s role in   development of river cruise is that of a technical 
facilitator only. 
14.4. River cruise tourism, primarily a private sector activity, has been a regular feature on 
NW-1(Ganga-Bhagirathi-Hooghly river system) and NW-2 (river Brahmaputra) since several 
years. To facilitate this activity, IWAI provides navigational channel & assists in 
embarking/disembarking facility to operators/passengers.  
14.5. Various cruise operators viz., M/s Heritage River Cruises Pvt. Ltd., M/s Vivada Inland 
Waterways and M/s Assam Bengal Navigation Company operate their cruise vessels on NW -
1, NW -2 and Sunderban Waterways which have already been developed with fairway, 
navigational aids, jetties and ter minals with mechanized equipment handling facilities for 
loading and unloading of cargo. 
14.6. NW-3 in Kerala, in addition to NW -1 & NW -2, is also a world renowned tourist 
destination for domestic and foreign tourists where house boat tourism with food and  
accommodation facilities is available. The area of operation of these boats includes 
Vembanad lake of Alappuzha, Kuttanad area and Ashtamudi lake of Kollam area. 
 
CORE GROUP ON SAFETY AND SECURITY 
Recommendation/Observation  
15. The Committee emphasizes the need for a combined robust security framework to 
ensure safety and security in sectors of Civil Aviation, Road Transport & Highways, 
Shipping, Tourism and Railways. The Committee desires that in order to facilitate effective 

29 
 
and periodic coordination among the concerned Ministries and agencies, a core group 
comprising officers at the level of Joint Secretary of the Ministries of Civil Aviation, Road 
Transport & Highways, Shipping, Tourism, Railways, Commissioner of Railway Safet y and 
Petroleum may be set up to meet on monthly basis to chalk out ways and means for 
addressing safety and security concerns in these sectors and ensure that international best 
practices are followed. This core group should be headed by Secretary, Minist ry of Civil 
Aviation. In order to upgrade to international standards, the services of consultants (both 
domestic and international) who are experts in the respective fields and have domain 
knowledge, may be engaged for preparing Reports so that they can be  implemented. This 
core group may serve as a think -tank and formulate guidelines and directions to improve 
safety and security standards in these sectors. The Committee would like the Ministry to 
furnish the monthly Reports and status of implementation of its decisions, to the Committee.  
                     (Para 120) 
Reply of the Ministry 
15.1. The recommendations of the Committee have been noted for examination in 
consultation with the suggested Ministries/ Departments and organizations of Ministry of 
Shipping e.g. Director General (Shipping), Indian Ports Association, Inland Waterways 
Authority of India, Director General of Lighthouses and Lightships etc.  
15.2. A core g roup under the chairmanship of the Secretary, Ministry of Civil Aviation, 
having representatives from the suggested  M inistries has been  set up to work out the 
modalities for supplementing each other during  various types of Accident investigation and 
suggesting preventive measures to improve safety and security standards in these sectors. 
 
MISCELLANEOUS 
Recommendation/Observation 
 16. The Committee takes note of the fact that the East Coast Canal in the Balasore 
district of Odisha has been declared as the NW-5 and the vast agricultural land on both sides 
of the canal depends on the drainage of water during heavy rain in the rainy season. During 
summer season, rabi crops used to be irrigated from this canal. Further, it notes that d ue to 
negligence of authorities, growth of wild shrubs and grass makes the little water available, 
poisonous and it dysfunctions the lift irrigation pumps during summers. They also act as a 
blockade for drainage of water during rainy season, making the are a marshy, waterlogged 
and breeding ground for snakes. Therefore, the Committee desires that the Ministry should 
clean the canal from wild shrubs and let the water flow to and fro so that sufficient water is 
available for irrigation during the summer season . The Committee further recommends that 
water gates at Bhograi lock should be maintained and regular dredging of the canal should 
be undertaken by constructing proper embankments to maintain fertility and safety in the 
East Coast Canal.                   (Para 121) 
Reply of the Ministry 

30 
 
16.1. IWAI undertakes development of National Waterways for shipping and navigation 
.IWAI had prepared a Detailed Project Report on NW -5  by M/s WAPCOS in March, 2010 
and this was further evaluated for development of NW 5 on PPP mode by M/s Feedback Infra 
in March, 2016. The findings of this report on development of East Coast Canal (ECC) under 
NW-5 are as under:- 
(i) The canal portion of NW-5 runs from Charbatia lock to Geonkhali lock covering a 
total distance of 217 km. There a re about 93 cross structures including wooden 
bridges, RCC bridges, Railway bridges, Foot bridges run across ECC with 
insufficient vertical clearance. 
(ii) Many sections of the canal are encroached at many locations by cutting and 
earthen bunds are built right across the water course being used for pedestrian 
ways or “Kachha Roads” across the canal. The average width of ECC varies from 
10 to 25 m. 
(iii) Due to relative ease of coastal shipping over inland waterway through ECC 
running parallel to coast, the potential t raffic on ECC has the least possibility of 
modal shift on to the waterway. 
(iv) In view of many technical constraints, encroachments, very little possibility of 
modal shift of cargo to ECC and huge capital investments, ECC stretch of NW -5 
is not found to be fea sible for development of shipping and navigation as of now. 
Therefore, IWAI does not propose to undertake general purpose dredging in ECC. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

31 
 
CHAPTER-III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
THE MINISTRY HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2020-21) OF THE MINISTRY 
Recommendation/Observation  
1. The Committee notes that there has been a reduction in GBS at RE stage of 2019 -20. 
The Committee is not aware of whether this reduction was on account of economic measures 
by the Ministry of Finance or due to the poor trend of utilization of the allotted funds by the 
Ministry of Shipping. The Committee may, therefore, be intimated of the reasons for reduced 
allocation at RE 2019-20 stage.            (Para 4) 
Reply of the Ministry 
1.1. The reason behind the reduction in GBS at RE stage of 2019-20 may be on account of 
economic measures by the Ministry of Finance, as well as low trend of utilization of the 
allotted funds by the Ministry of Shipping because as on 30.09.2019, i.e., after completion of 
six months period, the expenditure was 45% of BE 2019 -20 and 91.21% of the approved 
quarterly expenditure plan after the second quarter as conveyed to Ministry of Finance. 
 
1.2. In respect of budgetary allocations for Inland Water Transport, Gro ss Budgetary 
Support (GBS) Inland Waterways Authority of India (IWAI) was reduced from Rs.750.36 
crore at BE stage in 2019 -20 to Rs. 526.80 crore at RE stage). This was due to slow progress 
on acquisition of land at Varanasi, Gazipur and Kalughat, delay in  construction of Farakka 
lock gate due to local disturbances and decision not to procure the vessels for NW -1 as per 
design approved by DST Germany. In addition, demand at RE stage from GBS was also 
assessed considering the fund availability for capital pr ojects from EBR i.e., Bonds raised by 
IWAI. 
Further Recommendation/ Observation 
 
1.3. The Committee is constrained to note that the reduction in the Gross Budgetary 
Support for Inland Waterways Authority of India from BE 2019 -20 of Rs. 750.36 crores to 
Rs. 526.80 crores at the RE stage due to slow pace of land acquisition, delay in 
construction of Farakka lock gate, etc. The Committee believes that a huge sum of Rs. 
750.36 crores had been allocated at the BE 2019 -20 stage without proper assessment of 
pace of implementation of the project concerning Inland Water Transport, resulting in its 
downward revision at the RE stage and subsequently surrendering it. The Committee 
would therefore recommend that the budgetary exercise be fine - tuned in such a way that 
allocated funds are productively utilized under this head. 
Recommendation/Observation  

32 
 
2. The Committee notes that as against the projected demand of Rs 3328.70 crores for 
the Ministry for FY 2020 -21, an allocation of Rs 1800.00 crores  has been made, leaving a 
shortfall of Rs 1528.70 crores. In comparison to the RE 2019 -20 stage allocation of Rs 
1523.40 crores, the increase in BE 2020-21 is of Rs 276.60 crores only, which, in the opinion 
of the Committee, is inadequate and will be eaten  up by inflation. The Committee gathers 
from the information made available to it that Maritime Transport is a critical infrastructure 
for economic development of the country and approximately 95% of the country’s trade by 
volume and 68% by value is moved through Maritime transport and Shipping continues to 
remain unchallenged as the world’s most efficient means of transportation.       (Para 6) 
Reply of the Ministry 
2.1. IWAI had projected BE 2020 -21 of Rs. 1025 crores and received Rs. 668.30 crores 
under different project heads. In the present scenario due to lockdown it is expected the 
progress of the works/projects will be affected. At present allocation provided to IWAI by 
Ministry of Shipping seems to be adequate. The authority will re -assess the requi rement of 
GBS while preparing RE for F.Y. 2020 -21 and accordingly, same will be projected to 
Ministry of Finance. As per the guidelines of the Government, progress of the projects will be 
monitored at regular intervals and additional funds required, if any , will be requested to the 
Ministry of Finance at the time of Supplementary demands and Revised Estimate stage. 
2.2. Under Revenue budget as against proposal for Rs. 133.85 crores, allocation of Rs. 100 
crores has been made, which is inadequate. Under Capi tal Expenditure, our projection was 
Rs. 133.67 crores. The new e -Governance project and Jahaz Bhavan project have been 
accorded high priority by the Ministry.  As per the RPF, it is already submitted to the 
Ministry for its approval. The estimated amount f or the new e -Governance project during 
F.Y. 2020-21 is Rs.60.20 crores, whereas Rs.15.47 crores is the balance requirement for the 
LRIT project. Thus, total requirement projected under the head 5052 -Informtion Technology 
was Rs. 75.67 crores. The e -Governance project is now being reassessed and the projected 
expenditure is likely to be reduced. Under civil works, Rs. 20 crores are required for 
construction of the new Jahaz Bhavan building, Rs.27 crores for outright purchase of the 
current office building of MMD, Chennai and Rs. 11 crores towards lease rent, major repairs 
of office building/residential accommodation located at various MMDs. The total 
requirement under the head 5052 -Building works would be Rs. 58 crores. In the absence of 
sufficient budget all ocation, all the above mentioned ongoing projects/activities would be 
affected. 
Further Recommendation/ Observation 
2.3. The Committee notes the submission of the Ministry that against the projected 
demand of Rs. 133.67 crores  under Capital Expenditure Budget, a sum of Rs. 100.00 
crores has been provided which is inadequate  and will impinge upon the 
implementation of the key projects of high priority, namely viz., e-Governance and 
Jahaz Bhavan projects. Considering the fact tha t these two projects are targeted to 
strengthen the infrastructure and e -Governance capacity, the Committee le nds its 

33 
 
support to the Ministry’s demand for enhanced alloc ation for the e -Governance and 
Jahaz Bhavan projects. 
Recommendation/Observation  
3. The Committee notes that against the projected demand of Rs 350.00 crores for 
development of Major Ports, the allocation in BE 2020 -21 has been reduced to nil which is 
far below Rs. 107.00 crores in BE 2019 -20. The Committee would like to be apprised of th e 
reasons behind the same. Similarly, the Committee fails to comprehend that no allocation has 
been made for Sagarmala Development Company Limited (SDCL), against projected demand 
of Rs. 250.00 crores despite the fact that  SDCL was formed to provide equity support for the 
project Special Purpose Vehicles (SPVs) set up by the Ports / State / Central Ministries  and 
formulate plans and policies for projects under Sagarmala Programme. The Committee 
apprehends that the prime objective of SDCL would get diluted w ith no funds allocated 
therein. The Committee would like a detailed note with justifications for nil allocation under 
the head “Sagarmala Development Company”.                    (Para 9) 
Reply of the Ministry 
3.1. As per Cabinet decision, Sagarmala Develo pment Company Limited (SDCL) was 
incorporated on 31st August, 2016 with an initial authorized capital of Rs.1000 Cr. with 
budget allocation of Rs. 250 Cr. each year. The objectives of SDCL are: 
• To develop and formulate projects emanating from the National Perspective Plan 
(NPP) and assist the SPVs set up by central line Ministries/State Governments/State 
Maritime Boards/Ports etc. for project implementation. 
• To provide funding window for residual projects that cannot be funded by any other 
means/mode; Residual projects would include important / pilot / path breaking 
projects with high Economic Internal Rate of Return  but low Financial Internal Rate 
of Return. 
3.2. The paid up capital of SDCL as on 30.09.2019 was Rs. 590 Cr. Till date, SDCL has 
made investment of Rs. 489.5 Crore in the following companies:- 
• Krishnapatnam Rail Company Limited. – Rs. 125 Crore 
• Indian Ports Global Limited- Rs. 10 Crore 
• ROB at Haldia Ports- Rs. 50 Crores 
• Vizag Road Connectivity- Rs. 20 Crores 
• HaridaspurParadip Rail company Limited- Rs. 284.50 Crores. 
3.3. Funds under Capital Section are being made for capital investment under Sagarmala 
Development Company Limited (SDCL). Till date, total budgetary support provided by 

34 
 
Ministry of Shipping towards paid up capita l of SDCL is only Rs. 540 Crore. However, 
Ministry of Finance while considering the demand of the Ministry of Shipping, decided that 
no further provision may be kept for BE 2020 -21 for SDCL and directed to explore 
possibility of raising funds from banks, f inancial institutions using appropriate financial 
instruments as per the requirement. 
3.4. It is submitted that current investment in projects by SDCL are expected to start 
giving returns only after 5 -6 years. Therefore, Ministry of Finance will be approac hed at the 
time of Supplementary Demand / RE stage to consider funding the SDCL as approved by the 
Cabinet. 
Further Recommendation/ Observation 
3.5. The Committee notes that under the Sagarmala  Programme, projects are being 
implemented by relevant Central Ministries, State Governments, Ports and other 
agencies mainly through the private or PPP mode. The Committee  would therefore like 
clarification on how Sagarmala Development Company Limited (SD CL) will be treated 
in Budget accounting going forward. If it is meant to be a separate entity, it should be 
able to fund its own operations. 
ANALYSIS OF ANNUAL PLAN 2019-20  
Recommendation/Observation  
4. The scrutiny of Annexure I reveals  significant variation between Budget Estimates, 
Revised Estimates and Actual Expenditure under various heads during the financial year 
2019-20. For instance,  Rs 150.00 crores and Rs 200.00 crores allocated at the stage of BE 
2019-20 under the heads “Saga rmala Schemes and Projects” and “Other Schemes under 
Sagarmala” respectively were reduced to Rs 98.26 crores and Rs 32.60 crores at the RE 
stage and the actual expenditure incurred till 31.01.2020 is only Rs 60.79 crores and Rs 
32.60 crores respectively. S imilarly, against RE 2019 -20 of Rs 42.43 crores, which was a 
reduction from BE of Rs 97.00 crores for the head “Assistance to Ship Building, Research 
and Development”, the Ministry has been able to incur an expenditure of  only a meager Rs 
18.43 crores till 31.01.2020.           (Para 15) 
Reply of the Ministry 
4.1. The allocation was reduced at RE stage as expenditure till September, 2019 was low 
because many projects which were earmarked under Sagarmala  Programme could not be 
funded due to pending statutory clearances. Further, with the introduction of EAT modules of 
Accounting procedure, funds could only be released after award of tender by the State 
Maritime Boards / other State agencies, which are not  under direct control of the Ministry. 
However, Ministry regularly holds review meetings with State Governments and State 
Maritime Boards to resolve the issues. 

35 
 
4.2. The release of funds depends on the number of proposals received from the 
Shipyards. These  proposals are received only after a vessel has been constructed and 
delivered.  Fewer such proposals were received from shipyards till January, 2020. Further, on 
examination of their proposals, the Ministry had sought certain c larifications from shipyards. 
Financial assistance can be released only after  receiving clarifications from s hipyards, which 
took time. However, the entire funds allocated in RE 2019 -20 i.e., Rs. 42.43 Cr , have been 
released to Indian shipyards as financial assistance/subsidy by 31.03.2020. 
Further Recommendation/ Observation 
4.3. The Committee notes the reply and  underlines the need for a digitalized system/ 
software to expedite the process for receiving proposals and to seek clarifications, if any,  
from the Indian Shipyards and track release of funds on a real time basis . The Committee, 
therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Shipping , in consultation with the Ministry of 
Electronics and Information Technology , should develop a software to keep track of the 
project proposals received, clarifications sought, funds released and utilized by the Indian 
Shipyards. 
Recommendation/Observation  
5. The Committee expresses its displeasure at this significant variation between Budget 
Estimates and Revised Estimates which is indicative of serious shortcoming in the budgetary 
planning and monitoring of utilization of the budgeted funds. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that the Ministry should take corrective measures to arrest such an erratic trend 
of projection of fund requirements and be more prudent in their Budget formulation and 
make their estimates only after proper assessment and planning.      (Para 17) 
Reply of the Ministry 
5.1. The recommendation of the Committee has been noted. There are several projects 
which are under implementation and have witnessed delays/shifting of timelines for various 
reasons. Delays are mainly related to land acquisition, environment clearance and exec ution 
challenges in some of th e projects in coastal r egions due to which there was variation 
between BE and RE. However, more assessment will be done during projections of budgetary 
figures to Ministry of Finance. 
Further Recommendation/ Observation 
5.2. The reply of the Ministry does not fully address the recommendation  of the 
Committee.  The Ministry should apprise the Committee of what specific measures have 
been taken to ensure the canons of financial discipline,  instead of just mentioning the 
challenges that are being faced. The Ministry should also inform the Committee of the 
number of projects that are facing implementation/ funding issues  due to land 
acquisition and environmental clearances. The Committee expects the Ministry to brace 
itself for a targeted action in this regard , so that there is absolute clarity on regulatory 
enforcement of environmental issues  and land acquisition and ad -hoc project 
announcements and skewed expenditure pattern are avoided. 

36 
 
PORT CAPACITY- ADDITION WORK 
Recommendation/Observation  
6. The Committee notes that a number of PPP projects involving capacity addition are 
under implementation. The Committee observes that the country's international trade is 
growing fast which warrant s creation of adequate Port infrastructure and capacity. Since 
projects are capital intensive, the resources required to build the Port infrastructure are 
much larger and therefore, public investment has to be supplemented with private sector 
investment in Public Private Partnership (PPP) mode. The Committee desires to be apprised 
as to what extent PPPs have been able to augment resource availability and also minimize 
time overrun and cost escalation in construction of Port projects. The Committee also desires 
to know whether the Model Concession Agreement of 2008 has succeeded in obviating the 
problems faced in execution of PPP projects and make the investment in Port sector 
attractive.             (Para 25) 
Reply of the Ministry 
6.1. The total capacity of Major Ports was 1452 Million Metri c Ton Per Annum 
(MMTPA) as on 3 1st March, 2019. In addition, a capacity of 21 MMTPA was added during 
the year 2019 -20. This includes the capacity created through PPP projects. Out of this, 27 
PPP projects are under operati on, accounting for total capacity of 239.30 MMTPA. Further, 
there are 22 PPP projects under implementation, accounting for capacity of 227.28 MMTPA. 
Furthermore, the Ministry is working on 12 projects, on PPP basis for augmenting the 
infrastructure of the Major Ports. 
6.2. Few PPP projects have got delayed due to various reasons including delay in 
obtaining statutory / security clearances. These projects are facing project cost issue due to 
delay in implementation. The Ministry has developed guidelines to resolve the cost escalation 
issue in delayed PPP projects. These guidelines were developed by the Ministry in 
consultation with the Department of Economic Affairs, Ministry of Finance and have been 
circulated to all Major Ports for implementation. Model Con cession Agreement (MCA) is 
formulated considering the business requirements as well as requirements for the 
implementation and maintenance of PPP projects. Several PPP projects have since been 
awarded by Major Ports based on the MCA, 2008 as well as on MCA, 2018. 
6.3. MCA, 2008 giving various parameters for the implementation and maintenance of 
PPP projects, was brought with the following broad objectives:- 
(i) The agreement envisaged an exclusive license to the concessionaire for designing, 
engineering, financ ing, constructing, equipping, operating, and 
maintaining/replacing the project/project facilities and services. 
(ii) The concession period was for a maximum period of 30 years. 

37 
 
(iii) Concession Period begins only after ‘Conditions Precedent’ prescribed in the 
Concession Agreement are met by the Parties within stipulated time limits after 
signing of the Concession Agreement. Two important ‘Conditions Precedent’ to 
be met by the Concessionaire are furnishing of performance guarantee for 
implementing the project and achievement of financial closure. 
(iv) Independent Engineer to be appointed by the Concessioning Authority in 
consultation with the Concessionaire for approving and monitoring design, 
engineering and construction standards for the Project and to issue Comple tion 
Certificate. Change of scope of the project, if initiated by Port, is allowed at the 
cost of the Concessioning Authority during the construction phase. 
(v) Rights and obligations and risk allocation of both the Concessionaire and 
Concessioning Authority t owards operations and maintenance of the Project 
Facilities and providing supporting infrastructure have been spelt out. Commercial 
operation commences on issue of Completion Certificate. 
(vi) User charges, collected by the Concessionaire are regulated by the T ariff 
Authority for Major Ports (TAMP) or such other Competent Authority under the 
Applicable Laws. 
(vii) As consideration for the Concession awarded, the Concessionaire pays to the 
Concessioning Authority License fee towards project site, equipments and other 
assets /utilities taken over from the Concessioning Authority and a share of gross 
revenue earned from the operation of the project as ‘Royalty’. 
(viii) Provisions have been made for remedial measures to be put in place in case of any 
material adverse effect on account of change in law. 
(ix) Provisions made for (a) premature termination of the Concession Agreement in 
the event of a default in meeting the obligations by either Party, after following 
due consultation process & issue of Termination Notice; and (b) for paym ent of 
compensation on such premature termination arrived as per prescribed basis. 
(x) Dispute Resolution Mechanism under the Arbitration Act, 1996 was prescribed. 
(xi) Procedure to be followed for transfer of project site and assets and equipment 
back to the Conce ssioning Authority by the Concessionaire on expiry of the 
concession period, either by premature termination or by efflux of time was laid 
down. 
6.4. Though Public Private Partnership (PPP) mode had been largely successful in Port 
sector, some PPP projects  experienced difficulties during operations, which necessitated a 
review of the MCA, 2008. 

38 
 
6.5. Keeping in view the recommendations of the Committee constituted in February, 
2010, headed by Shri B.K. Chaturvedi , Member (Planning Commission) with Secretary 
(Ministry of Shipping), Finance Secretary, Secretary (Expenditure) and Joint Secretary 
(PMO) as members; Working group; Committee on revising and revitalising PPP model of 
infrastructure (Kelkar Committee); and the experiences gained in managing PPP projects, the 
MCA, 2008 was amended with a view to obviate the problems being faced in execution of 
PPP Projects on account of certain provisions of the present MCA, in order to enhance 
confidence of investors and ma ke the investments in the Port Sector attractive. The salient 
features of the revised MCA, 2018 are as under:- 
(i) Change in equity holding requirements to provide exit route to developers. 
(ii) Payment of royalty by private operators to Port on “per MT of cargo ha ndled” 
basis instead of “% of gross revenue”. 
(iii) Provision for additional land. 
(iv) Improved utilization of project assets and higher productivity. 
(v) Amendment in definition of “Change in Law”. 
(vi) Provision for commercial operation before COD. 
(vii) Provision for mitigation measures - constitution of a Board. 
Further Recommendation/ Observation 
6.6. The Committee is concerned to note that some PPP projects have witnessed time 
overruns and cost escalation due to delay in obtaining statutory/security clearances. The 
Committee would like the Ministry to put in place systemic improvements to overcome 
delay in obtaining necessary clearances. The Committee desires to be kept apprised of 
the action taken in this regard. 
 
TRAFFIC HANDLING AT MAJOR PORTS 
Recommendation/Observation  
7. The Committee desires to know whether the negative growth of the traffic handled at 
the 6 Ports is a result of competition from Minor Ports due to their growth rates and huge 
capacity addition through private sector. The Committee also desires to be appri sed of the 
remedial measures taken to arrest this trend.                 (Para 34)   
Reply of the Ministry 
7.1. The Major Ports fall under the jurisdiction of a regulator, the Tariff Authority for 
Major Ports (TAMP).  This results in a lack of a level playing field for Major Ports.  Major 
Ports end up losing business opportunities due to certain tariff related uncer tainties as 

39 
 
determined by TAMP.  Tariffs at non -Major Ports are not regulated, and they price their 
services based on market and competition. 
7.2. The Government has introduced Major Ports Authority Bill in the Parliament to 
provide greater autonomy to Ports.  The proposed bill aims at decentralizing decision making 
and to infuse a professional approach in governance of Ports.  The Bill is aimed at reorienting 
the governance model in central Ports to the landlord Port model in line with the successful 
global practice.  
7.3. The role of Tariff Authority for Major Ports (TAMP) for fixation of the tariff has been 
done away with in the Bill. PPP operators will be free to fix tariffs based on market 
conditions, as notified by the Port Authority. The Board of the Port Authority has been 
delegated the power to fix the scale of rates for other Port services and assets. 
Further Recommendation/ Observation 
7.4. The Committee takes cognizance of the fact that the Government has introduced 
the Major Ports Authority Bill in the Parliament which seeks to provide greater 
autonomy to the Major Ports and decentralize decision making. The Committee would 
like the Ministry to pursue vigorously and take the above Bill to its logical conclusion in 
a specified timeframe so that the lack of level playing field for Major Ports is eliminated 
and governance of Major Ports is transformed. The Committee desires to be kept 
updated in this regard.   
 
CONNECTIVITY TO PORTS 
Recommendation/Observation  
8. Lack of rail and road networks has emerged as a major constraint for the Major 
Ports. The Committee observes that connectivity projects are capital intensive and have 
substantial gestation period as they become economically viable over long periods of time. 
The Committee would, therefore, like to know the financial model for implementation of the 
rail-road connectivity projects including sources of their funding and the extent to which 
such models are  viable in India. The Committee is dismayed to note that the Ministry has 
extended timelines for execution of almost three -fourth of the number of projects whereas the 
emphasis should have been on timely and speedy completion of connectivity projects. The 
Ministry should also focus on implementing connectivity projects to link Minor Ports to 
metropolitan cities and State capitals. Processes for all necessary clearances should be 
initiated well in advance to avoid undue bottlenecks and clearance issues.                (Para 44) 
Reply of the Ministry 
8.1. Majority of rail and road projects are being implemented by Indian Railways, NHAI, 
Major Ports and State Governments with their own funding. While implementation of these 
projects, there is requirement of statutory clearances and land acquisition which usually 
causes delay and project implementation timeline gets extended. Regarding projects 

40 
 
identified under Bharatmala P ariyojana, MoRTH through letter dated 10 th October, 2018, 
intimated that they will execute the projects only when the State Government shall provide 
encumbrance free land, shift the utilities and obtain the necessary statutory clearance like 
environmental clearances for NHAI to issue the tenders for the construction of the road 
project. It may be noted that these conditions are not as per mandate of Bharatmala 
Pariyojana nor was its part of Bharatmala Pariyojana for the execution of road project in 
convergence with Sagarmala Programme. Over and above, letter received from NHAI on 25 th 
February, 2020 stated that the Ministry will frame out the recovery formula/ mechanism for 
both Minor and Major Port road connectivity projects and issue policy guideline in th is 
manner, to which Ministry of Shipping has written to NHAI that they are not in agreement to 
frame such policy and NHAI should implement these projects as per cabinet approval. Efforts 
are on to expedite clearances. 
Further Recommendation/ Observation 
8.2. The Committee notes from the reply that  there is difference of opinion between 
the Ministry of Shipping and Ministry of Road Transport and Highways/ NHAI 
regarding fulfillment of certain prescribed conditionalities for execution of connectivity 
projects by NHAI. This does not augur well for speedy execution of these projects. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends that the Inter -Ministerial wrangling should be 
resolved expeditiously at the highest level of Government which should define and spell 
out the future course of action with respect to sanctioned connectivity projects to Ports 
so that there is no disconnect between the Ministries concerned. Th e Committee desires 
to be kept apprised of the tangible action taken in this regard. 
8.3. The Committee also recommends that the Ministry should formulate proper 
guidelines and conduct a n environmental impact assessment before releasing funds for 
any sanct ioned/ stalled/ ongoing project . Therefore, the Ministry of Shipping should 
work in close coordination with Ministry of Road Transport and Highways, NHAI and 
MoEF&CC to address the delay in projects due to land acquisition and environmental 
clearances. 
Recommendation/Observation  
9. Taking cognizance of the fact that a number of projects for widening and upgrading 
the roads and interlinking them are under implementation, the Committee recommends that a 
dedicated monitoring mechanism be put in place to ensure completion of these projects 
within the approved cost and designated timeline. The Committee desires to be kept apprised 
of the measures taken in this regard.           (Para 48) 
Reply of the Ministry 
9.1. Regarding implementation of projects related to widening and upgrading roads, 
Ministry is taking stock of updates from implementing agencies as well as with Ports for their 
requirements. Ministry monitors those projects with MIS tool developed for Sagarmal a 

41 
 
Programme wherein, implementing agencies provide regular updates for all running projects. 
Going further, Ministry is in discussion with Major and Minor Ports for identification of 
critical projects based on their traffic forecast so that funds and effor ts can be provided to 
achieve timely implementation resulting into congestion free movement. 
Further Recommendation/ Observation 
9.2. The Committee feels that the identification of critical projects near Major and 
Minor Ports must also envision the related urbanization and environmental issues of its 
surrounding areas. 
SAGARMALA  
Recommendation/Observation  
10. The Committee expresses its deep concern that an amount of Rs. 150.00 crores was  
allocated in BE 2019 -20 for Sagarmala  Projects/ Schemes which got reduced to Rs 98.26 
crores at the RE 2019-20 stage because many projects approved under this scheme could not 
be funded due to statutory clearances. This speaks of very poor planning and fiscal discipline 
as the budgeted funds have been kept locked up for want of approvals. The Committee would 
also like to be apprised of the measures taken to arrest this trend.      (Para 52) 
Reply of the Ministry 
10.1. Generally Budget provision is  kept keeping in view the physical and financial 
progress of the projects which are under implementation and possible progress under the 
proposed projects which are under consideration. However, due to unforeseen situations on 
the ground, projects are stalled. Review meetings are held in the Ministry to review the status 
and resolve the problems, if any. 
Further Recommendation/ Observation 
10.2. The Committee is constrained to note that the Ministry has given a generic reply 
to a pointed query of the Committee without elaborating the specific action for effective 
utilization of budgetary allocations for Sagarmala projects. The Committee however 
hopes that in future the Ministry will process its reply more professionally. 
DREDGING ACTIVITIES 
Recommendation/Observation  
11. The Committee desires to know whether DCI has entered into joint ventures with the 
Major Ports, for funding the acquisition of dredgers, long term contract for dredging, etc. 
The Committee observes that the dredging work and the dredgers are subject to cha nging 
technology and recommends that DCI should go in for latest technology while procuring the 
dredgers. The Committee also desires to know whether the DCI has the capacity to meet the 

42 
 
dredging requirements of the country and if not, what is the share of DCI in the total 
dredging.             (Para 63) 
Reply of the Ministry 
11.1. The company is proposing for purchasing a higher capacity dredger with latest 
technology. One of the financing options is seeking funds from Ports as works advance. Since 
the management is under the control of four Major Ports, the financing will be explored 
through Ports. 
11.2. With the addition of the proposed acquisition of dredger, the company is expected to 
have the increased capacity to meet the maintenance dredging requi rements for the Major 
Ports. 
Further Recommendation/ Observation 
11.3. The Committee desires to be kept apprised of the further developments in this 
regard. 
SHIP BUILDING INDUSTRY 
Recommendation/Observation  
12. The Committee finds that the shipbuilding industry is facing certain financial and 
infrastructural bottlenecks which tend to push back the progress of Shipping industry. India 
has meager contribution of 1 percent in terms of its share in global shipbuildin g sector. In a 
bid to give major push to shipbuilding industry, the Government has unleashed a slew of 
initiatives like formulation of Financial Assistance Policy on shipbuilding in 2015, provisions 
of Government departments including Central Public Sector  Undertakings giving right of 
first refusal to Indian shipyards while procuring or repairing vessels for Governmental or its 
own use and grant of infrastructure status to Indian shipbuilding industry. Smaller countries 
like Vietnam and Philippines are ahea d of India in terms of shipbuilding. The Committee 
observes that a vibrant shipbuilding industry contributes to national GDP by way of 
employment generation and creation of business opportunities and shipbuilding and 
therefore, can contribute immensely to the vision of making India a 5 Trillion Dollar 
economy. It is, therefore, imperative for the Government to encourage the indigenous 
shipbuilding ecosystem. The Committee is also of the opinion that shipbuilding is a capital 
intensive infrastructure industry and therefore, PPP is the way forward. The Committee also 
recommends that the Ministry must revisit its strategies to enhance the country’s global 
competitiveness in manufacturing of warships and also to build ship equipments for 
Merchant Shipping.                        (Para 70) 
Reply of the Ministry 
12.1. Ministry has taken various steps to encourage the indigenous shipbuilding ecosystem 
such as: 

43 
 
(i) Grant of financial assistance to shipyards 
(ii) ROFR policy which gives right of first refusal to Indian shipyards with regard to 
shipbuilding orders of Government and PSU for procurement of vessels for their 
own use or government use. 
(iii) Infrastructure status has been provided to shipyards to avail cheap loans and 
working capital. 
(iv) Ministry is considering setting up of a Maritime Development fund to cater to the 
fund requirements of ship building and shipping sector in consultation with World 
Bank. It is expected that with the setting up of Maritime Development fund, the 
indigenous ship building industry would be come globally competitive. An 
ancillary unit has been set up by Cochin Shipyard Limited. It is expected that this 
would help to enhance the capacity and capability for manufacturing ship 
equipment for Merchant Shipping. 
Further Recommendation/ Observation 
12.2. The Committee appreciates various steps the Ministry has taken to promote 
indigenous shipbuilding ecosystem in t he country. The Committee would however like 
to be apprised of the efficacy of measures initiated. 
DIRECTORATE GENERAL OF LIGHTHOUSES AND LIGHTSHIPS  
Recommendation/Observation  
13. The Committee notes that a total of 23 projects have been proposed to be undertaken 
during 2020 -21.The Committee recommends the Directorate General of Lighthouses and 
Lightships to chalk out an action plan for implementation of these projects in a time bou nd 
manner.            (Para 83) 
Reply of the Ministry 
13.1. The tendering for most of the projects was completed and work orders have been 
issued. 
Further Recommendation/ Observation 
13.2.  The Committee while making its recommendation had expected the Ministry to 
indicate timelines for implementation of the 23 projects. However, the action taken note 
is silent in this regard. The Committee observes that setting a timeframe for execution 
of the above projects is important from the point of view of insula ting them from cost 
escalation. The Committee, therefore, recommends that a timeframe be fixed for 
implementation of the 23 projects. 
 
INDIAN MARITIME UNIVERSITY 
Recommendation/Observation  

44 
 
14. The Committee observes that the Indian Port sector has undergone substantial 
technological developments during the last 10 years to match with world class standards. 
With the changes in the Port scenario and introduction of high capacity Port equipment, 
there is a need to redefine job description for each level as the strength of manpower has not 
changed much. The Committee, therefore, recommends that IMU should collaborate with an 
International Institute to carry out a training need analysis for such segme nt of employees. 
                  (Para 102) 
Reply of the Ministry 
14.1. IMU has signed a Letter of Intent (LoI ) with Indian Ports Association (IPA), Erasmus 
Centre for Urban, Port and Transport Economics (Erasmus UPT) and STC -Group Holding 
B.V (STC). The aim of this LoI is to jointly design & plan for the introduction of training 
programmes at IMU’s Campuses for the personnel employed at various levels in the maritime 
sector in India. The proposal is being pursued and course works are being planned. 
Further Recommendation/ Observation 
14.2. The Committee  recommends that  the Inland Maritime University , in close 
coordination with Ministry of Shipping , should quickly finalize the proposal for 
introduction of new training programmes at IMU’s campuses. The courses so designed 
should be in sync with the changing environment of the maritime sector. 
 
COCHIN SHIPYARD 
Recommendation/Observation  
15. The Committee welcomes the construction of the New Dry Dock within the premises 
of the Cochin Shipyard under the “Make in India” campaign and hopes that it will help in 
saving of foreign exchange. The Committee, therefore, recommends that shipbuilding and 
ship repair at the Cochin Shipyard may be granted deemed export status.   (Para 112) 
Reply of the Ministry 
15.1. The matter is under process in Ministry of Shipping. 
Further Recommendation/ Observation 
 
15.2. The Committee observes that India’s shipbuilding capabilities have not kept pace 
with its economic development. In order to make Indian Shipyards more competitive in 
the global market, grant of deemed export status for inputs used in shipbuilding and ship 
repair is impe rative. The Committee, therefore, recommends that a decision on granting 
deemed export st atus for shipbuilding and ship repair at the Cochin Shipyard may be 
expedited. The Committee desires to be kept apprised of the decision in the matter. 
Recommendation/Observation  

45 
 
16. The Committee desires to be kept updated on the progress made towards 
implementation of this program.                              (Para 114) 
Reply of the Ministry 
16.1. Progress of civil works has crossed the 50% mark. Work orders for utilities like gas 
system, fire system and electrical works have been released. Purchase orders for major 
machineries and cranes have been placed. Outfitting jetty construction works were co mpleted 
by December 31, 2019, as against MoU target of February 15, 2020. The project is scheduled 
for completion by June, 2021. It is however feared that the Covid -19 situation may affect the 
project. All efforts shall be made to complete the project on schedule. 
Further Recommendation/ Observation 
16.2. The Committee notes the reply and recommends the Ministry to apprise the 
Committee of the policies/ frameworks formulated to quicken the process to ensure 
timely completion of ongoing and stalled projects.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

46 
 
CHAPTER-IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE FINAL 
REPLIES OF THE MINISTRY ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
 
 
- N i l - 
 
**** 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

47 
 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS — AT A GLANCE 
CHAPTER-III 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH 
REPLIES OF THE MINISTRY HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
COMMITTEE 
 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2020-21) OF THE MINISTRY 
The Committee is constrained to note that the reduction in the Gross Budgetary 
Support for Inland Waterways Authority of India from BE 2019 -20 of Rs. 750.36 crores 
to Rs. 526.80 crores at the RE stage due to slow pace of land acquisition, delay in 
construction of Farakka lock gate, etc. The Committee believes that a huge sum of Rs. 
750.36 crores had been allocated at the BE 2019 -20 stage without proper assessment of 
pace of implementation of the project concerning Inland Water Transport, resulting in 
its do wnward revision at the RE stage and subsequently surrendering it. The 
Committee would therefore recommend that the budgetary exercise be fine - tuned in 
such a way that allocated funds are productively utilized under this head.  
                  (Para: 1.3) 
The Committee notes the submission of the Ministry that against the projected 
demand of Rs. 133.67 crores under Capital Expenditure Budget, a sum of Rs. 100.00 
crores has been provided which is inadequate and will impinge upon the 
implementation of the k ey projects of high priority, namely viz., e-Governance and 
Jahaz Bhavan projects. Considering the fact that these two projects are targeted to 
strengthen the infrastructure and e -Governance capacity, the Committee lends its 
support to the Ministry’s deman d for enhanced allocation for the e -Governance and 
Jahaz Bhavan projects.               (Para: 2.3) 
The Committee notes that under the Sagarmala  Programme, projects are being 
implemented by relevant Central Ministries, State Governments, Ports and other 
agencies mainly through the private or PPP mode. The Committee would therefore like 
clarification on how Sagarmala Development Company Limited (SD CL) will be treated 
in Budget accounting going forward. If it is meant to be a separate entity, it should be 
able to fund its own operations.         
                 (Para: 3.5) 
 
ANALYSIS OF ANNUAL PLAN 2019-20  
 The Committee notes the reply and underlines the need for a digitalized system/ 
software to expedite the process for receiving proposals and to seek clarifications, if any, 
from the Indian Shipyards and track release of funds on a real time basis. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Shipping, in consultation with 
the Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology, should develop a software to 
keep track of the project proposals received, clarifications sought, funds released and 
utilized by the Indian Shipyards.                 
                 (Para: 4.3) 

48 
 
 The reply of the Ministry does not fully address the recommendation of the 
Committee.  The Ministry should apprise the Committee of what specific measures have 
been taken to ensure the canons of financial discipl ine, instead of just mentioning the 
challenges that are being faced. The Ministry should also inform the Committee of the 
number of projects that are facing implementation/ funding issues due to land 
acquisition and environmental clearances. The Committee expects the Ministry to brace 
itself for a targeted action in this regard, so that there is absolute clarity on regulatory 
enforcement of environmental issues and land acquisition and ad -hoc project 
announcements and skewed expenditure pattern are avoided.    
                  (Para: 5.2) 
 
PORT CAPACITY- ADDITION WORK 
The Committee is concerned to note that some PPP projects have witnessed time 
overruns and cost escalation due to delay in obtaining statutory/security clearances. The 
Committee would like the  Ministry to put in place systemic improvements to overcome 
delay in obtaining necessary clearances. The Committee desires to be kept apprised of 
the action taken in this regard.       (Para: 6.6)
          
TRAFFIC HANDLING AT MAJOR PORTS 
The Committee takes cognizance of the fact that the Government has introduced 
the Major Ports Authority Bill in the Parliament which seeks to provide greater 
autonomy to the Major Ports and decentralize decision making. The Committee would 
like the Ministry to pursue vigorously and take the above Bill to its logical conclusion in 
a specified timeframe so that the lack of level playing field for Major Ports is eliminated 
and governance of Major Ports is transformed. The Committee desires to be kept 
updated in this regard.           
                  (Para: 7.4) 
 
CONNECTIVITY TO PORTS 
The Committee notes from the reply that  there is difference of opinion between 
the Ministry of Shipping and Ministry of Road Transport and Highways/NHAI 
regarding fulfillment of certain prescribed conditionalities for execution of connectivity 
projects by NHAI. This does not augur well for speedy execution of these projects. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends that the Inter -Ministerial wrangling should be 
resolved expeditiously at the highest level of Government which should define and spell 
out the future course of action with respect to sanctioned connectivity projects to Ports 
so that there is no disconnect between the Ministries concerned. The Committee desires 
to be kept apprised of the tangible action taken in this regard.     
           (Para: 8.2) 

49 
 
The Committee also recommends that the Ministry should formulate proper 
guidelines and conduct an environmental impact assessment before releasing funds for 
any sanctioned/ s talled/ ongoing project. Therefore, the Ministry of Shipping should 
work in close coordination with Ministry of Road Transport and Highways, NHAI and 
MoEF&CC to address the delay in projects due to land acquisition and environmental 
clearances.           (Para: 8.3) 
 
The Committee feels that the identification of critical projects near Major and 
Minor Ports must also envision the related urbanization and environmental issues of its 
surrounding areas.           (Para: 9.2) 
 
SAGARMALA  
   The Committee is constrained to note that the Ministry has given a generic 
reply to a pointed query of the Committee without elaborating the specific action for 
effective utilization of budgetary allocations for Sagarmala projects. The Committee 
however ho pes that in future the Ministry will process its reply more professionally.                     
                    (Para: 10.2) 
        
DREDGING ACTIVITIES 
The Committee desires to be kept apprised of the further developments in this regard.  
                 
                     (Para: 11.3) 
SHIP BUILDING INDUSTRY 
  The Committee appreciates various steps the Ministry has taken to promote 
indigenous shipbuilding ecosystem in the country. The Committee would however like 
to be apprised of the efficacy of measures initiated.          
                     (Para: 12.2) 
DIRECTORATE GENERAL OF LIGHTHOUSES AND LIGHTSHIPS  
The Committee while making its recommendation had expected the Ministry to 
indicate timelines for implementation of the 23 projects. However,  the action taken note 
is silent in this regard. The Committee observes that setting a timeframe for execution 
of the above projects is important from the point of view of insulating them from cost 
escalation. The Committee, therefore, recommends that a ti meframe be fixed for 
implementation of the 23 projects.        
                          (Para: 13.2) 
INDIAN MARITIME UNIVERSITY 
  
The Committee recommends that the Inland Maritime University, in close 
coordination with Ministry of Shipping, should quickly finalize the proposal for 

50 
 
introduction of new training programmes at IMU’s campuses. The courses so designed 
should be in sync with the changing environment of the maritime sector.        (Para: 14.2) 
          
COCHIN SHIPYARD 
The Committee observes that India’s shipbuilding capabilities have not kept 
pace with its economic development. In order to make Indian Shipyards more 
competitive in the global market, grant of deemed export status for inputs used in 
shipbuilding and ship repair is imperative. The Committee, therefore, recommends that 
a decision on granting deemed export status for shipbuilding and ship repair at the 
Cochin Shipyard may be expedited. The Committee desires to be kept apprised of the 
decision in the matter.                     (Para: 15.2) 
The Committee notes the reply and recommends the Ministry to apprise the 
Committee of the policies/ frameworks formulat ed to quicken the process to ensure 
timely completion of ongoing and stalled projects.            
                     (Para: 16.2) 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  


 
XIII 
THIRTEENTH MEETING 
The Committee met at 3:00 P.M. on Friday, the 11th September, 2020 in Main Committee 
Room, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
Members present: 
1. Shri T.G. Venkatesh                   - Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Prasanna Acharya 
3. Shri Sambhaji Chhatrapati 
4. Dr. Sonal Mansingh 
5. Shri K.C. Venugopal 
6. Shri Vinay Dinu Tendulkar 
LOK SABHA 
7. Shri Rahul Kaswan 
8. Ms. Goddeti Madhavi 
9. Shri Sunil Baburao Mendhe 
10. Shri Tirath Singh Rawat 
11. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
12.  Shri Dushyant Singh 
13.  Shri Krupal Balaji Tumane 
 
SECRETARIAT 
      
Shri J. Sundriyal, Joint Secretary 
Shri P. Narayanan, Director 
Shri Dinesh Singh, Additional Director 
Ms. Catherine John L., Under Secretary 
 
Witnesses  
I. *                                             *                                               * 
 
II. *                                             *                                               * 
  
At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the meeting of the Committee. *
 * *.  
* Relates to other matters. 
 
51

 
He informed the Members that the agenda of the meeting was to adopt three draft Reports 
on Action taken by the Government on Recommendations/Observations made by the Committee 
in its Reports on Demands for Grants (2020-21) of the Ministries of ***, *** and Shipping; and 
* * *. 
2. The Chairman then drew the attention of the Members to some important observations of 
Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha, about premature coverage of the proceedings of the      
Committees by the media a bout the subject matters or the legislative Bills under their 
consideration and examination. He informed the Members that the Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya 
Sabha has urged upon the Committees to strictly adhere to the existing provisions/ directions 
relating to confidentiality of the proceedings of the Committee meetings and refrain from 
premature divulgence of any information to the media  about the same , till the Reports are 
presented to the House. 
3. The Committee, thereafter, considered the aforesaid draft Reports and after a brief 
discussion, adopted the same with minor changes. 
 I. *                                             *                                               *. 
4. *                                             *                                               *. 
5.     *                                             *                                               *. 
6. *                                             *                                               *. 
7. *                                             *                                               *. 
II. *                                             *                                               * 
8. *                                             *                                               *. 
9.    *                                             *                                               *. 
10. *                                             *                                               *. 
 
* Relates to other matters. 
 
 
52

 
11.   *                                             *                                               *.  
12.  *                                             *                                               *. 
13. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept. 
14.    The meeting adjourned at 5:18 P.M. 
  
New Delhi,                                                                                               P. Narayanan 
11th September, 2020            Director 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
* Relates to other matters. 
 
53

XII 
TWELFTH MEETING 
The Committee met at 10:00 A.M. on Thursday, the 28th January, 2021 in Committee 
Room No. 4, First Floor, Block A, Parliament House Annexe Extension Building, New Delhi. 
Members present: 
1. Shri T.G. Venkatesh - Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Prasanna Acharya 
3. Dr. Sonal Mansingh 
4. Shri Vinay Dinu Tendulkar 
5. Shri Sushil Kumar Modi 
LOK SABHA 
6. Shri Margani Bharat 
7. Shri Rahul Kaswan 
8. Shri Sunil Baburao Mendhe 
9. Shri Sunil Kumar Pintu 
10. Shri Tirath Singh Rawat 
11. Shri Dushyant Singh 
12. Shri Manoj Tiwari 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri J. Sundriyal, Joint Secretary 
Shri P. Narayanan, Director 
Shri Dinesh Singh, Additional Director  
Ms. Catherine John L., Under Secretary 
 
Witnesses 
*   *   *. 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the meeting of the Committee. * 
 *   *. 
3. *   *   *. 
 
* Relates to other matters 
 
 
54

4. *   *   *. 
5. *   *   *. 
6. *   *   *. 
7. *   *   *. 
8. *   *   *. 
9. *   *   *. 
 (The witnesses then withdrew) 
10. The Committee then decided to present/lay the following Reports to both the Houses of 
Parliament on 3rd February, 2021:- 
i. *   *   *; 
ii. *   *   *; 
iii. *   *   *; 
iv. 283rd Report on the Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/ 
Observations of the Committee contained in its 279 th Report on Demands for  
Grants (2020-21) of Ministry of Shipping; 
v. *   *   *; 
vi. *   *   *; and 
vii. *   *   *. 
11. The Committee, accordingly, authorized Shri T.G. Venkatesh, Chairman and in his 
absence, Shri Prasanna Acharya, M.P. to present the Reports in Rajya Sabha. Shri Rahul  
Kaswan, M.P. and in his  absence, Shri Tirath Singh Rawat, M.P. was authorized to lay  
the above mentioned Reports on the Table of Lok Sabha. 
12. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept. 
13. The meeting adjourned at 11:58 A.M. 
 
 
New Delhi, P. Narayanan 
28th January, 2021 Director 
 
 
 
 
* Relates to other matters 
 
55