 
       
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTAR 
ON TRANSPORT, TOURIS 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
December 
  
THREE HUNDRED 
Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/ 
Observations of the Committee contained in its Three Hundred 
Twenty-Fourth Report on 
Untraceable Monuments and Protection of Monuments in 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA  
RAJYA SABHA 
 
RELATED PARLIAMENTAR Y STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON TRANSPORT, TOURIS M AND CULTURE 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi  
December , 2023 / Agrahayana, 1945 (Saka) 
 
 
THREE HUNDRED SIXTY THIRD REPORT  
Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/ 
Observations of the Committee contained in its Three Hundred 
Report on  the subject “Issues relating to 
Untraceable Monuments and Protection of Monuments in 
India” 
 
resented to the Rajya Sabha on 08 th  December, 2023 ) 
Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on  08 th  December, 2023 ) 
 
Y STANDING COMMITTEE  
REPORT NO.  
363 
 
Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/ 
Observations of the Committee contained in its Three Hundred 
“Issues relating to 
Untraceable Monuments and Protection of Monuments in 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Website:      https://rajyasabha.nic.in   
 E-mail:     rsc-tt@sansad.nic.in  
 

 
 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA  
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT,  
TOURISM AND CULTURE  
 
 
THREE HUNDRED SIXTY THIRD REPORT  
Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/ 
Observations of the Committee contained in its Three Hundred 
Twenty-Fourth Report on the subject “Issues relating to 
Untraceable Monuments and Protection of Monuments in India” 
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 08 th  December, 2023 ) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 08 th  December, 2023 ) 
 
 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
December, 2023 / Agrahayana, 1945 (Saka) 
 
Hindi version of this publication is also available 

 
 
 
C O N T E N T S 
 
P A G E S  
 
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE      i 
2. INTRODUCTION        ii 
3. ACRONYMS                iii 
 4. REPORT                                1-20 
5. RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS-AT A GLANCE   21-24  
    6. *MINUTES   
 
         
        
        
      
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
______________________________________ 
 
*To be appended 
25-27

i 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE  
 (2023-24) 
 
 (Constituted on 13 th  September, 2023) 
 
1. Shri V. Vijayasai Reddy  - Chairman 
 
 Rajya Sabha 
2. Shri Mohammed Nadimul Haque 
3. Shrimati S. Phangnon Konyak 
4. Shri Manas Ranjan Mangaraj 
5. Dr. Sonal Mansingh 
6. Shrimati Rajani Ashokrao Patil 
7. Shri A. A. Rahim 
8. Dr. C. M. Ramesh 
9. Shri Zala Kesridevsinhji* 
10. Shri Surendra Singh Nagar* 
 
  Lok Sabha 
11.  Shri Anto Antony 
12.  Shri Ram Margani Bharat 
13.  Shri Tapir Gao  
14.  Shri Rahul Kaswan 
15.  Shri Ramesh Chandra Majhi 
16.  Shri Sunil Baburao Mendhe 
17.  Shri K. Muraleedharan 
18.  Shri S. S.Palanimanickam  
19.  Shri Chhedi Paswan   
20.  Shri Kamlesh Paswan  
21.  Shri Sunil Kumar Pintu 
22.  Shri Prince Raj 
23.  Shri Tirath Singh Rawat 
24.  Shrimati Mala Roy 
25.  Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
26.  Shri Dushyant Singh 
27.  Shri Rajbahadur Singh 
28.  Shri Ramdas Chandrabhanji Tadas 
29.  Shri Manoj Kumar Tiwari 
30.  Shri Krupal Balaji Tumane 
31. Shri Dinesh Lal Yadav "Nirahua"  
 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri D. S. Prasanna Kumar, Joint Secretary 
Shrimati Monica Baa, Director 
Shrimati Subha Chandrashekar, Deputy Secretary  
Shri Ranajit Chakraborty, Deputy Secretary 
Shri Raj Kamal Singh, Committee Officer 
 
_____________________________________________________________________ 
*Nominated as Member w.e.f. 26 
th  September, 2023 

ii 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairman, Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport, 
Tourism and Culture, having been authorized by the Committee to present on its behalf, do 
hereby present this Three Hundred Sixty Third Repor t on the Action Taken by the 
Government on the recommendations/ observations of the Committee contained in its Three 
Hundred Twenty-Fourth Report on the subject “Issues  relating to Untraceable Monuments 
and Protection of Monuments in India”. 
2. The Three Hundred Twenty-Fourth Report  of the Department-related Parliamentary 
Standing Committee on Transport, Tourism and Cultur e was presented to the Hon’ble 
Chairman, Rajya Sabha on 15 th  June, 2022 and thereafter was presented to the Par liament on 
the 8th  December, 2022.  
3.  The Action Taken Replies on the recommendations  of the Committee contained in its 
Three Hundred Twenty-Fourth Report were received fr om the Ministry of Culture on 4 th  
October, 2023. 
4. The Committee considered and adopted the Report in its meeting held on the 6 th  
December, 2023.   
 
 
(V. Vijayasai Reddy) 
NEW DELHI;                                                           Chairman,  
December 06, 2023                                                 Department-related Parliamentary Standing             
Agrahayana 15, 1945 (Saka)                             Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture,  
                                                                                                                                 Rajya Sabha 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

iii 
 
 
ACRONYMS  
AAT  Antiquities and Art Treasurers Act 
AMASR Act  Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Sites and Remains Act 
ASI  Archaeological Survey of India 
ATN  Action Taken Note 
CAG  Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
CPM  Centrally Protected Monument 
DFO  District Forest Officer 
IIT  Indian Institute of Technology 
INTACH  Indian National Trust for Art and Cultural Heritage 
ISRO  Indian Space Research Organisation 
MoC  Ministry of Culture 
MoU  Memorandum of Understanding 
NGO  Non-Governmental Organization 
NOC  No Objection Certificate 
RD Regional Director 
SSC  Staff Selection Commission 
UPSC  Union Public Service Commission 
 

1 
 
  
The Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on 
Transport, Tourism and Culture deals with the Actio n Taken by the Ministry of Culture on 
the recommendations/observations as contained in it s Three Hundred Twenty Fourth Report 
on ‘Issues relating to Untraceable Monuments and Pr otection of Monuments in India’ which 
was presented to both the Houses of Parliament on 8th  December, 2022.   
2.        The Action Taken Replies were received fr om the Ministry on 4 th  October, 2023 in 
respect of all the observations/ recommendations co ntained in the Report. The replies have 
been categorized as follows:- 
Chapter-I:  
Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the Ministry: 
Paragraph Nos.: 10, 22, 25, 33, 35, 43.2.3, 43.10.3, 43.13.3.  
Total: 8  
  
Chapter-II:  
Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do es not desire to pursue in 
view of the replies of the Ministry: 
Paragraph Nos.: 11, 12, 17, 18, 40.  
Total: 5  
Chapter-III:  
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which re plies of the Ministry have not 
been accepted by the Committee: 
Paragraph Nos.: 13, 14, 23, 28, 30, 37, 43.1.3, 43.3.3  
Total: 8  
  
Chapter-IV:  
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which th e final replies of the Ministry 
are still awaited: 
Paragraph Nos.: 9, 38, 41, 42, 43.4.3, 43.5.3, 43.6.3, 43.7.3, 43.8.3, 43.9.3, 43.11.3, 
43.11.4, 43.12.3, 43.14.3  
Total: 14  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 REPORT

2 
 
Chapter I  
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY 
THE MINISTRY  
  
Recommendation/Observation  
1. The Committee acknowledges the steps taken by AS I to retrace the monuments that 
were deemed to be missing by CAG in its 2013 Perfor mance Audit but feels that the same 
reflects at the questionable state of protection and preservation of monuments, with ASI being 
unaware of the physical untraceability of several o f the Centrally Protected Monuments 
under its ambit.  The Committee recommends that the  ASI immediately undertake a survey of 
the remaining CPMs which were not inspected in the CAG Audit survey and ascertain 
whether there are any other missing monuments in th e country apart from the 24 monuments 
of the original survey.  The Committee further reco mmends that a physical survey of all the 
Centrally Protected Monuments must mandatorily be c arried out by ASI from time to time as 
per a fixed time schedule. Digital log books may be  maintained which may contain textual 
and photographic/video record of the state of physi cal preservation of the monument, exact 
location coordinates and clearly demarcated prohibited and regulated areas in the vicinity of 
the monument. These digital records may be made eas ily accessible to the general public to 
avoid any ambiguities and details may also be published regarding the date on which the last 
survey was conducted, due date for the next survey and the contact details of the ASI officials 
in-charge of maintaining and protecting the monument.   
(Para 10)  
Reply of the Ministry  
1.1 The monuments and the sites has been frequently  inspected at the circle, Regional and 
headquarter level by the officers of the ASI. The w ork of the survey through the Total station 
and Photogrammetric is under process.   
1.2 For keeping all the data of a monument in one p lace, ASI is in the process of 
preparing a “Heritage App” and “Health Card’. Herit age app would be meant for keeping 
monument's record in one place including its year o f notification, area, ownership, 
archaeological significance, internal and external status of the monument and the scope will 
be of adding inspection record in the App. It also will be accessible to the general public. 
 
Assessment of security requirements at Centrally Protected Monuments 
 
Recommendation/Observation  
2. The Committee is concerned to note that out of t he 3693 Centrally Protected 
Monuments, security guards are posted at only 248 C PMs/sites/museums i.e. less than about 
6.7 percent of the total number of CPMs. The Commit tee notes with dismay that out of the 
total requirement of 7000 personnel for protection of Monuments, the Government could 
provide only 2578 security personnel at 248 locatio ns due to budgetary constraints. The 

3 
 
Committee observes that budgetary constraints shoul d not be an excuse for not providing 
security guards to protect our rich cultural herita ge. It is the bounden duty of the 
Government of the day to protect our cultural herit age sites. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that budget may be provided by the Gover nment to appoint 7000 personnel for 
protection of the Monuments or as per the study con ducted by IIT, Delhi. In view of this 
worrying state of affairs, the Committee is of the strong view that the budgetary allocation 
available with the Ministry/ASI for safeguarding our Centrally Protected Monuments needs a 
serious relook. The Committee recommends that the M inistry/ASI may conduct an urgent 
thorough assessment of the security requirements an d budgetary allocation required for the 
same and a strong case may be made to the Ministry of Finance requesting allocation of 
additional funds for this purpose so as to ensure a  basic state of protection for all Centrally 
Protected Monuments across the country to preserve them for generations to come. The 
Committee also recommends that the local Panchayats  and police may be involved in 
safeguarding the monuments and if necessary, the AM ASR Act may be amended in this 
regard.  
(Para 22)  
Reply of the Ministry  
2.1 In 2022, ASI signed an MoU with the Indian Inst itute of Technology, Delhi on 
collaboration for providing expertise in the field of security and surveillance on monuments, 
sites, museums, and offices. A dedicated team of ex perts from the partnered institution will 
visit centrally protected monuments and will furnis h an analysis report containing short, 
medium and long terms security challenges along with solutions. Thereupon a comprehensive 
security policy to combat various identified issues  faced at the CPMS will be drafted. 
Subsequently, the requirement of the funds may be i dentified and accordingly, the 
requirement will duly be placed. The recommendation s of the committee are duly noted for 
exploring feasibility. 
 
Recommendation/Observation  
3. The Committee takes note of the existing framewo rk and recommends that in the 
upcoming amendment of the AMASR Act being worked up on by the Ministry, strong 
provisions may be incorporated for fixing accountab ility of concerned Government officials 
to ensure that necessary steps are taken timely for  tackling encroachment of Centrally 
Protected Monuments. The concerned officials should  be liable to be prosecuted in case of 
gross negligence of their duties with regard to tac kling encroachment of CPMs. The 
Committee further recommends that the Ministry may examine the powers given to District 
Forest Officers (DFOs) under The Wildlife (Protecti on) Act, 1972 and consider granting 
similar powers to ASI officials in order to effecti vely curb the issue of encroachment of 
Centrally Protected Monuments.  
(Para 25)  
 

4 
 
Reply of the Ministry  
3.1 Amendment in the AMASR Act, 1958 is under consi deration. 
 
Recommendation/Observation  
4. The Committee notes that no proposal exists at p resent with ASI for empowering local 
bodies to provide security guards to the unprotecte d monuments. The Committee feels that 
given their proximity and cultural ties with local monuments, local bodies are best suited to 
look after the protection of historical monuments especially those which are not under the list 
of Centrally Protected Monuments (CPMs). Empowering  local bodies to provide security 
guards at such monuments for their protection can g o a long way in ensuring that these 
monuments are preserved in their present state for generations to come. The Committee, 
therefore, strongly recommends that provisions to e mpower the local bodies for the 
protection of historical monuments and to make them accountable may be incorporated in the 
amendment of the AMASR Act that is being worked upon by the Ministry.  
(Para 33)  
Reply of the Ministry  
4.1 Noted for implementation. 
  
Recommendation/Observation  
5. The Committee feels that there is a scope for us ing satellite imagery to monitor the 
Centrally Protected Monuments (CPMs) across the country for encroachment and any illegal 
construction activities in the prohibited and regul ated areas of the same. Satellite imagery 
should also be used to try and trace the monuments which are untraceable at present and to 
ensure that no existing CPMs become untraceable in the future. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that ASI may approach ISRO and, if feasi ble, sign a Memorandum of 
Understanding with ISRO to utilize ISRO satellite imagery for the above mentioned purposes.  
(Para 35)  
Reply of the Ministry  
5.1 Noted for implementation to monitor the central ly protected monuments for 
encroachment to trace the untraceable monuments. 
 
Recommendation/Observation  
6. The Committee may be apprised of detailed guidel ines, if any, issued by the 
Ministry/ASI under the AMASR Act in this regard.  
(Para 43.2.3)  
 

5 
 
Reply of the Ministry  
6.1 A policy for photographers to operate within th e premises of protected monuments 
has been notified in 2017. 
  
Recommendation/Observation  
7. The Committee is surprised to note the reply fur nished by the Ministry, after 9 years 
have passed since the CAG Report was laid before th e Parliament. The Committee may be 
apprised of the specific action taken by the Ministry in this regard, at the earliest.  
(Para 43.10.3)  
Reply of the Ministry  
7.1 In this context it is stated that Rule 8(d) of the AMASR Rules, 1959 specifies 
requirement of a licence from the ASI to undertake photography of a visitor by charging the 
fee. 
  
Recommendation/Observation  
8. The Committee recommends that fixed timelines sh ould be put in place for carrying 
out effective action on-ground to tackle encroachme nts at the earliest and any delays may 
immediately be taken up at higher levels. Accountab ility may be fixed on both Central/State 
officials for time-bound action for removal of encr oachment at Centrally Protected 
Monuments.  
(Para 43.13.3)  
Reply of the Ministry  
8.1 For the effective implementation of the removal  of the encroachments and authorised 
constructions/activities in and around the monument s, the provision will be included in the 
amendment of the AMASR ACT and Rule.       
  
  
 
 
  
  
  
 
 
  
  
  

6 
 
 Chapter II  
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES OF THE MINISTRY  
 
Recommendation/Observation  
1. The Committee further notes that out of the 92 m onuments declared “missing” by the 
CAG, 42 monuments have been identified due to effor ts made by the ASI and out of the 
remaining 50 monuments, 14 are affected by rapid ur banisation, 12 are submerged by 
reservoir/dams while the location of the remaining 24 is untraceable.  The Committee feels 
that the distinction made by the Ministry regarding  the monuments lost to 
urbanisation/reservoirs and 24 monuments which are untraceable is an academic distinction 
since monuments lost to urbanisation/reservoirs are  as irrecoverable as the ones which are 
presently untraceable with scant hope of being foun d in future.  Moreover, the fact that the 
ASI had been unable to prevent the loss of the 14 m onuments to urbanisation and 12 to 
reservoirs/dams and only located them after the stu dy by CAG suggests that the ASI had no 
cognisance of these monuments prior to the study. The number of monuments lost from public 
viewing must therefore be held to be 50 taking into  account those lost to urbanisation or 
reservoirs.  The ASI has assured that the remaining  42 of the 92 monuments exist physically 
but the Committee would like to know whether these monuments exist in their entirety and 
undamaged or whether the ASI has only managed to lo cate some remains and ruins of such 
monuments.   
(Para 11)  
Reply of the Ministry  
1.1 To ascertain the conservation status of these m onuments, they shall be again inspected 
through the field offices of ASI. 
 
Recommendation/Observation  
2. The Ministry has stated that there is no term ca lled “Missing Monuments” in the 
AMASR Act and the term only came into existence as it was used by the Audit team on their 
Report. The Committee opines that the AMASR Act pro vides for the preservation and 
protection of ancient historical monuments and it would have been inconsistent to include the 
concept of “Missing Monuments” in the Act.  That th e situation warrants the use of such 
phrases only serves to underline the apathy of the Ministry and ASI regarding the 
preservation of our historical monuments.  The Mini stry has also stated that the exercise of 
removing the untraceable monuments under Section 35  of the AMASR Act has not been 
initiated by the ASI as there are chances that some  of these monuments shall be traced out in 
near future. The Committee observes that Section 35  of the AMASR Act, 1958 has the 
provision to issue notification only for such CPMs which have as per the opinion of the 
Central Government have ceased to be of national im portance. The monuments which have 
become “untraceable” have become so due to official  apathy and may not have ceased to be 

7 
 
of national importance had they been existing.  The  situation of a “Missing Monument” 
cannot be automatically equated with loss of its hi storical importance.  The Committee 
recommends that the Untraceable Monuments may not b e removed from the list of Centrally 
Protected Monuments by taking recourse to Section 3 5 as that Section provides the exclusion 
only of such monuments which have in the opinion of the Central Government ceased to be of 
national importance.  In fact, there is the danger that in case of such removal, there would be 
no imperative to find the untraceable monument and it would be well and truly lost to 
posterity. Since untraceable monuments also cannot continue to be on the Protected list, the 
Committee recommends that the list of Untraceable M onuments may be maintained as such 
and if necessary, the AMASR Act may be amended to include this terminology.   
(Para 12)  
Reply of the Ministry  
2.1 The observation shall be taken into considerati on while amending the AMASR Act. 
  
Recommendation/Observation  
3. The Committee feels that a thorough review of th e AMASR Act in consultation with all 
stakeholders and State Governments is the need of t he hour. The Committee, therefore, 
appreciates the process initiated by the Ministry o f Culture to amend the AMASR Act. The 
Committee agrees with the view that having the same  limits for all monuments for prohibited 
area and regulated area for restricting/regulating construction-related activities near the 
monument, is not a practical approach as the requir ement for such limitations could vary a 
lot depending on various factors specific to each m onument. The Committee, therefore, feels 
that the upcoming amendment which provides for such  monument-specific prohibited and 
regulated areas is much needed and hopes that once the amendment is passed, all necessary 
steps are taken to ensure that the monument-specifi c limits are decided upon for each 
Centrally Protected Monument at the earliest. The C ommittee notes that the ASI would be 
surveying all 3693 monuments while delineating monu ment specific protected and regulated 
limits and desires that a Report of the survey may be submitted to the Committee. However, 
the provisions of the Act may be strictly adhered t o in terms of the prohibited areas around 
the monument and even Government officials violating the provisions should be prosecuted.  
(Para 17)  
Reply of the Ministry  
3.1 For dealing with the NOCs cases in the circles and RD offices, the google and Bhuvan 
maps, wherever possible to delineate, were created for  showing protected, prohibited and 
regulated limit of the monuments. Since ASI is work ing on the amendment of the AMASR 
Act accordingly the marking of prohibited, regulated and prohibited limits on the Survey map 
would be initiated. 
 
 

8 
 
Recommendation/Observation  
4. The Committee reiterates the following recommend ation made in para 39 of its 311 th  
Report on ‘Creation of Regulatory Framework for pro tection of Historical Sites and 
Monuments’:  
The Committee fails to see why a person living in t he Regulated Area of a CPM 
should be required to seek permission from the Comp etent Authority under the 
AMASR Rules for carrying out innocuous maintenance activities such as filling of 
cracks, whitewashing, replacement of windows etc. T he Committee feels that such 
uncalled-for interference makes lives harder for pe ople living nearby the monuments 
and could slowly cause feelings of anguish towards the monument itself. Given the 
large number of monuments across the country and th e limited budgetary resources 
available with the Government, it is pertinent that  people residing near the 
monuments are encouraged to look after the monument s and protect them. Besides, 
placing such unnecessary curbs and implementing the m is a wastage of limited 
Government resources and turns the focus away from where it should be - actually 
protecting and preserving the monument itself. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that the Ministry may undertake a thorou gh review of the AMASR Act 
and Rules and omit any provisions that provide for seeking permissions for minor 
works where the same is not actually needed and str eamline the process for applying 
for permission in case where the same is actually needed. Steps may urgently be taken 
to make it possible for the entire process for seek ing permission for construction 
activities in prohibited and regulated areas, to be  completed online so as to not cause 
any hassle to bona fide residents living near the monuments.  
(Para 18)  
Reply of the Ministry  
4.1 The Ministry of Culture in consultation with AS I is working on the amendment of the 
AMASR Act, and such issues shall be taken into consideration in the amendment of the act. 
  
Permitting Religious Activities in Religious Historical Monuments  
Recommendation/Observation  
5. The Committee feels that several historical monu ments across the country hold 
immense religious significance to a large number of  people and allowing 
pujas/worship/certain religious activities at such monuments can fulfill legitimate aspirations 
of the people. The Committee, therefore, recommends  that ASI may explore the possibility of 
permitting pujas/worship/certain religious activiti es at historical Centrally Protected 
Monuments of religious significance, subject to the  condition that it can be established that 
such activities would not have any detrimental effe ct on the state of conservation and 
preservation of the monument.  
(Para 40)  

9 
 
Reply of the Ministry  
5.1 Noted for exploring feasibility. In this regard , it is to submit that as per the policy 
decision revival of worship is not allowed where it  was not in vogue at the time of protection 
or abandoned since long. 
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

10 
 
Chapter III  
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
THE MINISTRY HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE  
  
Recommendation/Observation  
1. The Committee observes that the CAG audit had po inted out that the Ministry through 
the ASI had not conducted a comprehensive survey/re view to identify monuments which were 
of national importance for inclusion in the list of  CPMs.  Similarly, there were no efforts to 
identify those monuments which had lost the stature  of national importance over a period of 
time.  The Committee is dismayed to note that even a decade after the CAG Audit Report,  the 
Ministry and the ASI are yet to conduct a comprehen sive survey to identify monuments which 
are of national importance or of those which had lo st their stature of national importance. 
The Committee urges the Ministry and ASI to conduct  surveys to include monuments of 
national importance and also those which have lost their importance over time.  This would 
ensure that the resources of the Ministry and ASI a re utilised  in a justified manner for 
deserving monuments  and are not diverted to protec ting those which are no longer of 
national importance.  
(Para 13)  
Reply of the Ministry  
1.1 ASI is working on preparing the criteria for th e monuments for declaring them as a 
monument of national importance. On the basis of an cientness, architecture, art, history, 
science, religion, tradition, inscriptional value a nd incident and so on another merit of the 
monument and site, the criteria would be determined. On the basis of which the present list of 
the monument could also be assessed. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation  
1.2 The Committee reiterates its earlier position t hat the Ministry and ASI should 
conduct the survey for identifying monuments on pri ority, in a time-bound manner. 
Further, the details and criteria for classificatio n of monuments may also be furnished 
to the Committee.                                                                                                                        
                                                                                                                                                       
Recommendation/Observation  
2. The Committee further recommends that the Minist ry of Culture and ASI should 
undertake a survey of all the 3693 Centrally Protec ted Monuments to ensure that they are in 
existence and to provide adequate maintenance and protection.  
(Para 14)  
 
 

11 
 
Reply of the Ministry  
2.1 As stated in para 10 that the work of Survey is  in progress and monuments are 
frequently being inspected by the ASI officers. For regular maintenance, ASI is taking care of 
all the monuments and sites. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation  
2.2 The Committee further recommends that the surve y results must be placed in 
public domain and it must include data regarding ex penditure incurred on them and 
the problems in and around the monuments.  
 
Recommendation/Observation  
3. It has also come to the notice of the Committee that various important historical 
monuments and sites such as Rama Temple at Peddathu mbalam village, Adoni Taluka; 
Kethavaram Rock Arts and Belum Caves in Kurnool etc. which, although not under the list of 
Centrally Protected Monuments, are of high historical significance but devoid of any security 
guards and proper road connectivity. The Committee,  therefore, recommends that the 
Ministry may urgently make provisions for posting s ecurity guards at these sites and 
adequate measures may be taken for promotion of tou rism at the same, in coordination with 
the concerned Ministries/Departments. The Ministry of Culture may coordinate with the 
Ministry of Road Transport & Highways and State Pub lic Works Department to ensure 
proper road/highway connectivity to these important historical sites in order to allow tourists 
to reach these sites.  
(Para 23)  
Reply of the Ministry  
3.1 These three monuments/sites are already declare d protected by the State Government. 
Therefore, related actions are well within the juri sdiction of State Government (MoC may 
review the reply) 
  
Further Recommendation/Observation  
3.2 The Committee notes that the said monuments com e under the jurisdiction of 
the State Government. However, it is recommended th at the Ministry/ASI can persuade 
or work in coordination with the concerned State Go vernment to take required action 
in this instant case. Further, it is also suggested  that the Ministry/ASI may consider  
inclusion of these monuments in the list of Centrally Protected Monuments.  Decision  in 
this regard may also be communicated to the Committee.  
 
 
 

12 
 
Recommendation/Observation  
4. The Committee feels that State Level Co-ordinati on Committees are a necessary 
instrument for coordination between the Ministry of  Culture and respective State 
Governments for resolving important issues such as removal of encroachment of monuments. 
The Committee may be apprised of the number of Stat es where such State Level Co-
ordination Committee has not been formed so far and the steps taken by the Ministry in order 
to ensure the formation of these Co-ordination Committees.  
(Para 28)  
Reply of the Ministry  
4.1 So far State Level Co-ordination Committee is f ormed in 11 States (Assam, Bihar, 
Chattisgarh, J&K, Kerala, Meghalaya, Odisha, Puduch erry, Punjab, Rajasthan, Sikkim), 
attempts are being made to constitute the committees in rest of the states. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation  
4.2 The Committee reiterates that the process of fo rmation of the State Level Co-
ordination Committee in the remaining States must b e expedited. The State 
Governments should be persuaded to form this Commit tee without further delay within 
a stipulated period.  
  
Recommendation/Observation  
5. The Committee notes that a mere Rs. 3.33 crore b udgetary allocation has been made 
to ASI for the conservation and preservation of unp rotected monuments during the current 
financial year 2022-23. The Committee strongly feel s that this amount seems to be grossly 
insufficient given the large number of unprotected historical monuments in the country, as 
well as a large number of State Protected Monuments  which often face gross neglect by the 
respective State Governments. The Committee is of t he view that the protection and 
preservation of historical monuments other than tho se already under the protection of 
Central and State Governments, should also be looke d after by the Archaeological Survey of 
India, at least to a basic extent.  The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry 
may allocate a special budget for protection, prese rvation and restoration, wherever 
necessary, of unprotected/neglected historical monuments across the country.  
(Para 30)  
Reply of the Ministry  
5.1 The Ministry of Culture has allocated special b udget under budget sub-head 22.01.27 
- Minor Civil Electric works (unprotected monuments ) for conservation, preservation and 
restoration of unprotected/neglected historical mon uments across the country and for this Rs. 
2.50 Crore provision is kept for the financial year  2023-24. This Scheme is continued from 
2013 onward. 

13 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation  
5.2 The Committee notes that the earmarked amount o f Rs. 2.50 crore seems to be 
very meagre given the large number of unprotected m onuments in the country. The 
Committee recommends that the Ministry should incre ase the budgetary allocation 
under sub-head 22.01.27 which is essential for the effective preservation and 
conservation of the unprotected/neglected historical monuments.  
  
Vacancies in ASI  
Recommendation/Observation  
6. The Committee notes that since Monument Attendan ts are responsible for day to day 
cleaning of the monuments as well as its security, 2500 vacancies in this cadre is an 
incredible number and shows that most of the monume nts are not being secured or 
maintained on a day to day basis.  The Committee fe els that while the ASI presents its staff 
shortage as one of the reasons for its apathy in ma intaining monuments, it appears that the 
delay in filling up vacancies is one of the main re asons for the pathetic state of monuments in 
the country. The Committee recommends that vacancies of Monument Attendants and Guards 
should be filled up on a war footing so that none o f the CPMs is left unguarded and 
unmaintained. The Committee desires to be informed about the recruitment status of 
Monument Attendants. The Committee does not find an y reason that vacancies should be 
allowed to accumulate in thousands before action fo r recruitment is taken. Vacancies at 
higher levels may also be filled up at the earliest . The Committee recommends that the 
Ministry may take immediate and effective action to  appoint the remaining 500 vacancies of 
Monument Attendants. The Committee recommends that the ASI may also explore the idea of 
appointing ex-servicemen to guard the monuments.  
(Para 37)  
Reply of the Ministry  
6.1 The vacancies have been reported to SSC. Howeve r, the recommendation for 
appointing ex-servicemen to guard the monuments is being revived in consultation with SSC. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation  
6.2 The Committee observes that till the time the r ecruitment process is complete, 
the Ministry/ASI can hire attendants on contractual  basis to fill up the void so created 
by these vacancies in the management and preservation of the monuments.  
  
 
 

14 
 
Action taken by the Ministry on certain recommendat ions made in the Report of the 
Comptroller and Auditor General of India on Perform ance Audit of Preservation and 
Conservation of Monuments and Antiquities (Report No. 18 of 2013)  
Recommendation/Observation  
7. The Committee is dismayed to note that the CAG A udit had found that no Inspection 
Notes were available without which it is impossible  to ascertain when a particular site was 
last visited.  The Committee notes that the Ministr y and ASI have informed that Inspection 
Notes are now regularly drawn and works done are pu blished in the ASI-Annual Review.  
The Committee recommends that the Annual Review or Reports of the ASI may be 
prominently displayed on the website of the ASI for  information of the general public. The 
Committee may be apprised of the periodicity of suc h inspection by ASI officials for the 
various Centrally Protected Monuments and whether p hotographic evidence is collected 
alongside inspection notes. The Committee recommend s that the ASI may categorize the 
monuments into different classes of importance and the periodicity for official inspection of 
such sites may then be decided upon .  
(Para 43.1.3)  
Reply of the Ministry  
7.1 The monuments and sites has been periodically i nspected by the officers of the circles 
as well as the Regional Directorate and Directorate  General office and inspection report of 
the inspected monument/site are drawn by the respec tive officers both with photographs or 
without photographs. The monuments are inspected as and when required at the site. 
7.2 Since the work of preparing web site of the ASI  is under process, as soon as it is 
completed the ASI publication including Annual Review will be displayed in the same. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation  
7.3 The Committee further recommends that the surve y results must be placed in 
public domain and it must include data regarding ex penditure incurred on them and 
the problems in and around the monuments.  
 
Recommendation/Observation  
8. The Committee is unhappy to note that the recomm endation of the CAG nearly a 
decade back for a centralized database of the most important document of notification of the 
CPMs has still not been carried out.  
(Para 43.3.3)  
Reply of the Ministry  
8.1 A cell has been formed in ASI to work on centra lize database of notifications with 
respect to all protected monuments and sites. 
 

15 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation  
8.2 The Committee is of the view that inordinate de lays in the completion of projects 
raises questions on the efficiency of the organisat ion. The Committee, therefore, 
strongly recommends that the Ministry must wind up its much delayed work of a 
centralized database of the notifications of Centrally Protected Monuments within three 
months.  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

16 
 
Chapter IV  
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE FINAL 
REPLIES OF THE MINISTRY ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
1. The Committee notes that the 324th Report of the  Departmental Standing 
Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture, on "Is sues relating to Untraceable 
Monuments and Protection of Monuments in India", wa s forwarded to the Ministry of 
Culture for necessary action on 15 
th  June 2022.  The Ministry not only failed to send a n 
interim reply within the stipulated period of three  months but also failed to respond to 
the multiple reminders issued by the Secretariat th roughout 2022 and 2023. Further, 
the Ministry could manage to provide Action Taken Notes (ATNs), on only 21 out of the 
total of 35 recommendations as contained in the 324 th  Report, by 4 th  October, 2023, i.e., 
after a period of 1 year and 19 days.  
 
2. The Committee expresses its deep concern and disapp ointment at this apparent 
lack of seriousness, on the part of the Ministry, i n responding to the Committee’s 
recommendations addressing critical issues.  Disreg arding or trivializing the views of 
the Committee undermines the trust, credibility and  seriousness of the Ministry 
towards the development and preservation of the nat ion’s cultural heritage. The 
Committee recommends the Ministry of Culture to re- evaluate its approach and ensure 
that the Committee's reports are acknowledged, thor oughly reviewed, and their 
recommendations implemented for the sustained devel opment and preservation of our 
cultural heritage.  
 
3. Final replies are awaited on the following recom mendations/observations of the 
Committee:  
 Recommendation/Observation  
3.1 The Committee observes that the performance aud it of the CAG had included a joint 
physical inspection, along with ASI, of 1655 monume nts and sites out of the 3678 CPMs and 
sites spread nationwide.  The 24 monuments which ar e reported to be untraceable are from 
this sample of 1655 monuments.  The Committee has p erused the list of 24 untraceable 
monuments submitted by the Ministry and it is pertu rbed to find that the Barakhamba 
Cemetery in the very heart of the Capital city is a mong the untraceable monuments.  If even 
monuments in the Capital city cannot be maintained properly, it does not bode well for 
monuments in remote places in the country. Upon que ry of the Committee, the Ministry has 
informed that no further study of the remaining mon uments has been undertaken for 
ascertaining how many more monuments are missing fr om the total number of 3693 CPMs.  
The Committee is perturbed to note that having foun d out that at least 24 monuments are 
untraceable out of the sample of monuments studied,  no further surveys were conducted for 
the remaining monuments, even nearly a decade after the original study.   

17 
 
(Para 9)  
Recommendation/Observation  
3.2 With regard to vacancies existing in ASI, the C ommittee reiterates the following 
recommendation made in para 35 of its 315 th  Report on Demands for Grants (2022-23) of the 
Ministry of Culture:  
…The Committee feels that the vacancy details refle ct a very pathetic state of 
affairs in all the organizations of the Ministry. I n the Archaeology Cadre of 
ASI, against the total sanctioned strength of 420, the vacant positions are 166, 
similarly in the Conservation Cadre, against the to tal strength of 918, there is 
a mammoth vacancy of 452 positions. The situation i s not any better in other 
Cadres of ASI or other organisations of the Ministr y. The Committee thus 
finds it difficult to understand how the Ministry c an ensure the efficiency of its 
organizations and manage to meet the present human resource needs of the 
respective organisations, leave alone there being a ny scope for new initiatives 
by the organisations. The Committee strongly recomm ends that the Ministry 
may set up a foolproof mechanism in place to ensure  that the staffing 
requirements of all its organizations are met at al l times, so as to enable them 
to carry out their mandate in letter and spirit.  
(Para 38)  
OTHER OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS  
Recommendation/Observation  
3.3 The Committee observes that the Ministry of Tou rism along with the Ministry of 
Culture and ASI has promoted the concept of “Adopt a Heritage” projects which aims to 
develop monuments, tourist and heritage sites acros s India, by inviting corporate entities, 
public sector companies, NGOs and individuals to ta ke up the responsibility of development 
and maintenance of tourist facilities and amenities  at heritage sites.  The Committee 
appreciates the initiative of the Ministries and AS I as a step in the right direction and opines 
that the coronavirus pandemic has showed that the g overnment cannot depend only on 
income from mass tourism to maintain historical mon uments. The Committee recommends 
that the public may similarly be involved in mainte nance and development of lesser known 
monuments through heritage walks and tours, local h eritage festivals and promotion of niche 
tourism. The assistance of NGOs and societies like INTACH may be taken for tracing missing 
monuments. There are many monuments which are centr al to local folklore and legends and 
incorporating the assistance of local Panchayats/Mu nicipalities in preservation of 
monuments in their localities would prove to be ben eficial both in promoting tourism and 
stirring up the interest of people in their history and culture .  
(Para 41)  
Recommendation/Observation  
3.4 The Committee finds that the website of ASI is poorly designed with many features as 
yet inoperative and a general lack of information o n the work of the ASI as well as the built 

18 
 
cultural heritage of India.  The Committee recommen ds that the ASI highlight the CPMs and 
the lesser known monuments on its website and stimu late the interest of the public regarding 
their maintenance as well as raise the profile of M issing Monuments among the general 
public.   
(Para 42)  
Recommendation/Observation  
3.5 The Committee notes that it has been 9 years si nce the publication of the CAG Report. 
The Committee may be apprised of the specific actio n taken by the Ministry to address 
ambiguities in factual information related to the m onuments by publishing correct, 
discrepancy-free information regarding the same in public domain.  
(Para 43.4.3)  
Recommendation/Observation  
3.6 The Committee records its displeasure with the slow progress of the work of 
preparation of Heritage Bye Laws.  
(Para 43.5.3)  
Recommendation/Observation  
3.7 The Committee feels that while all Centrally Pr otected Monuments are of unique 
cultural importance, World Heritage Sites are among st the most important Centrally 
Protected Monuments and therefore, their maintenanc e and security requirements deserve 
special attention. The Committee recommends that du e and appropriate budgetary allocation 
may be made for the protection and maintenance of W orld Heritage Sites and special 
monitoring mechanism may be put in place for the same.  
(Para 43.6.3)  
Recommendation/Observation 
3.8 The Committee recommends that the conservation policy may be updated from time to 
time, incorporating necessary changes and new devel opments in the field of archaeological 
and historical conservation into the policy. The Co mmittee desires to be apprised of the 
monitoring mechanism in place to ensure that log bo oks are being maintained for each 
protected monument with detailed documentation of all conservation efforts.  
(Para 43.7.3)  
Recommendation/Observation  
3.9 The Committee desires to be apprised of the act ion taken by the Ministry for framing 
of such guidelines.  
(Para 43.8.3)  
 
 

19 
 
Recommendation/Observation  
3.10 The Committee may be apprised of the action ta ken by the Ministry for such 
documentation on non-living monuments, in view of t he fact that the CAG Report highlighted 
the need for this about 9 years ago.  
(Para 43.9.3)  
Recommendation/Observation  
3.11 The Committee notes that the numbers of antiqu ities retrieved are scant in 
comparison to the huge number of antiques smuggled out from country. The Committee 
recommends the ASI and Ministry may give wide publi city to the theft of antiquities as soon 
as it takes place through newspaper advertisements etc. because such publicity will act as 
deterrent to buyers who may otherwise not know that it is stolen property.  
(Para 43.11.3)  
Recommendation/Observation  
3.12 The Committee notes that the numbers of antiqu ities retrieved are not even the tip of 
the iceberg in comparison to the huge number of ant iques smuggled out from country.  One 
of the reasons for the vulnerability of Indian anti ques for smuggling is the lack of database 
on the antiques in different parts of the country.  This drawback has not been rectified even 
after the CAG pointed it out nearly a decade before . The stolen idols and antiques are 
auctioned at auctions organized by global auction h ouses but again as pointed out by the 
CAG, the ASI never participates or collects informa tion on Indian antiques put on sale in 
global auctions as there is no explicit provision i n the AAT 1972.  The Antiquities Act also 
does not have any penal provisions which could be a  deterrent.  The Committee recommends 
the ASI and Ministry may give wide publicity to the  theft of antiquities as soon as it takes 
place through newspaper advertisements etc. because  such publicity will act as deterrent to 
buyers who may otherwise not know that it is stolen property.  
(Para 43.11.4)  
Recommendation/Observation  
3.13 The Committee recommends that ASI should facto r in the time it takes for the 
recruitment process on average, and report anticipa ted human resource requirements in 
advance so that vacancies do not remain unfilled fo r years on account of slow recruitment by 
UPSC/SSC.  
(Para 43.12.3)  
Recommendation/Observation  
3.14 The Committee is concerned to note that out of  the 3693 Centrally Protected 
Monuments, security guards are posted at only 248 C PMs/sites/museums i.e. less than about 
6.7 percent of the total number of CPMs. The Commit tee notes with concern that out of the 
total requirement of 7000 personnel for protection of Monuments, the Government could 
provide only 2578 security personnel at 248 locatio ns due to budgetary constraints. The 
Committee observes that budgetary constraints shoul d not be an excuse for not providing 

20 
 
security guards to protect our rich cultural herita ge. It is the bounden duty of the 
Government of the day to protect our cultural herit age sites. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that budget may be provided by the Gover nment to appoint 7000 personnel for 
protection of the Monuments which may be later alte red as per the study conducted by IIT, 
Delhi. In view of this worrying state of affairs, t he Committee is of the strong view that the 
budgetary allocation available with the Ministry/AS I for safeguarding our Centrally 
Protected Monuments needs a serious relook. The Com mittee recommends that the 
Ministry/ASI may conduct an urgent thorough assessm ent of the security requirements and 
budgetary allocation required for the same and a st rong case may be made to the Ministry of 
Finance requesting allocation of additional funds f or this purpose so as to ensure a basic 
state of protection for all Centrally Protected Mon uments across the country to preserve 
them for generations to come.  
(Para 43.14.3)  
***** 
  
 
  

21 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/ OBSERVATIONS – AT A GLANCE  
CHAPTER-III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
THE MINISTRY HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
The Committee notes the cause of delay in the above -mentioned projects. The 
Committee recommends the Ministry to take measures to eliminate such delays for 
timely completion of projects. All stakeholders inv olved must be approached for better 
coordination and resolution of these issues. 
(Para 1.2)  
Quality of Roads  
The Committee recommends that the Ministry should t ake necessary steps for the 
deployment of MQCVs in the remaining States for bet ter inspection and quality 
assessment of NH projects all over the country. 
(Para 3.3)  
The Committee notes that the Concessionaire is resp onsible for the provisions of 
lighting on the entire National Highways network. H owever, the contact details of these 
Concessionaires are not available readily. 
(Para 4.5)  
The Committee also feels that the Ministry needs to  come up with a better policy for 
illumination. In this regard, the Ministry must imp lement smart lighting systems that 
can adjust the intensity of lights based on real-ti me traffic conditions and weather. This 
can help save energy and improve safety. 
(Para 4.6)  
Further, measures should be taken to reduce light p ollution, such as using shields and 
directing light downward to minimize glare and prev ent unnecessary light spillage into 
the night sky. 
(Para 4.7)  
In addition to it, the Ministry should consider int egrating emergency communication 
devices, such as emergency call boxes, into the lig hting infrastructure for the safety and 
assistance of motorists. 
(Para 4.8)  
  

22 
 
The Committee notes that the prices of items at res taurants, food courts, dhabas are 
exorbitantly high which should be kept in check for  all sections of the society. The 
Committee also noted that there is a need for imple mentation of strict cleanliness and 
maintenance standards to keep amenities in good con dition. Regular cleaning, pest 
control, and repairs are essential. 
(Para 5.2)  
Further, the Ministry must establish a feedback mec hanism for travellers to report 
issues or provide suggestions for improvement. The Ministry must act on this feedback 
promptly. 
 (Para 5.3)  
The Committee appreciates the measures taken by the  Ministry in respect of road 
safety. However, the Committee still notes that the re is a need for community training 
programmes for learning better road safety practice s like lane changing, helmets usage, 
etc. 
(Para 6.3)  
The Committee also suggests the introduction of ant i-sleep devices in automobiles that 
helps prevent accidents caused by drivers who fall asleep while driving. 
(Para 6.4)  
The Committee notes the provision given in Section 13 of Motor Transport Workers 
Act, 1961. However, the Committee feels that there is laxity in implementation of this 
provision. It is therefore recommended that the Min istry of Road Transport and 
Highways and other stakeholders must come together to formulate a system for its 
proper implementation. Further, the Ministries must  work in spreading awareness to 
common masses about this provision. 
(Para 7.6)  
Rectification of Black Spots  
The Committee further recommends that the contact i nformation of Road Safety 
Officers must be kept in public domain for better information regarding black spots. 
(Para 8.4)  
Further, there is a need to prioritize black spots based on the severity of accidents, 
traffic volume, and other relevant factors and the focus must be on the most critical 
locations first. 
(Para 8.5)  
The local administration must consider lowering spe ed limits in black spot areas, 
especially in residential or densely populated zones. 
(Para 8.6)  

23 
 
Further, the Ministry must involve local communitie s in identifying and addressing 
black spots, as they often have valuable insights i nto local road safety issues. The 
Ministry should also establish key performance indi cators (KPIs) to measure the 
success of black spot eradication efforts, such as accident rate reduction and traffic flow 
improvements. 
(Para 8.7)  
The Committee appreciates the measures taken by the  Ministry and directs the 
Ministry to approve the request regarding procurement of VIDS. 
(Para 9.2)  
The Committee further recommends that the implement ation of Incident Management 
Service should be expedited and extended to all the  National highways in the country 
with immediate effect. 
(Para 10.4)  
The Committee recommends that the Rajmarg Yatra App should be promoted on wider 
scale for the optimum utilization of Information, Communication and Technology (ICT) 
and for better dissemination of information regarding grievances of common public. 
(Para 11.2)  
The Committee reiterates that the funds should be a llocated to each State and Union 
Territory under the Scheme “Development, customizat ion, deployment and 
management of State-wise vehicle tracking platform”.  
(Para 12.2)  
Further, in order to ensure safety of women, police  patrols must be increased on 
highways, especially during night-time hours. It mu st also be ensured that female police 
officers are part of these patrols to make women travellers feel more secure. 
(Para 12.3)  
The Ministry should also encourage community polici ng initiatives, where local 
residents and volunteers work together with law enf orcement agencies to ensure the 
safety of women travellers. 
(Para 12.4)  
The Ministry should promote and support women-centr ic transport services, such as 
women-only buses or taxi services, especially during night-time hours. 
(Para 12.5)  
  

24 
 
The Committee also recommends that the Ministry sho uld design and maintain 
highways with gender-sensitive infrastructure, incl uding safe pedestrian crossings and 
waiting areas for women. 
(Para 12.6)  
Spur Road for linking Samastipur with NH-119D 
The Committee notes about the progress made in the spur road for linking Samastipur 
with NH-119D. However, the Committee is of the view  that the land acquisition process 
must be expedited and the project must be completed as early as possible. 
(Para 13.2) 
**** 
 

25 
 
 
 
MINUTES 
 
  

26 
 
 
V 
FIFTH MEETING 
  
The Committee met at  10:00 A.M. on Wednesday, the 6th December, 2023 in Committee 
Room-D, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe Building, New Delhi. 
  
 
Members present: 
1. Shri V. Vijayasai Reddy           - Chairman  
 Rajya Sabha 
 
2. Shrimati S. Phangnon Konyak  
3. Dr. Sonal Mansingh 
4. Shrimati Rajani Ashokrao Patil  
5. Shri A. A. Rahim 
6. Shri Zala Kesridevsinhji 
 
 Lok Sabha 
 
7. Shri Tapir Gao 
8. Shri Sunil Baburao Mendhe 
9. Shri K. Muraleedharan 
10. Shri Chhedi Paswan 
11. Shri Sunil Kumar Pintu  
12. Shri Tirath Singh Rawat 
13. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
14. Shri  Dushyant Singh 
  
SECRETARIAT 
Shri D. S. Prasanna Kumar, Joint Secretary  
Shrimati Monica Baa, Director 
Shrimati Vishwarupa Bhattacharya, Additional Director  
Shrimati Subha Chandrashekar, Deputy Secretary  
Shri Ranajit Chakraborty, Deputy Secretary 
 
 
At the outset, the Chairman extended a warm welcome to the Members of the Committee  
and informed that the agenda for the meeting is to consider and adopt the  following Reports of 
the Committee:- 

27 
 
(i) ***1 
(ii) *** 
(iii) *** 
(iv) Action Taken by the Government on the R ecommendations/ Observations of the 
Committee contained in its Three Hundred Twenty Fourth Report on “Issues relating to 
Untraceable Monuments and Protection of Monuments in India”.  
 
2.        The Committee took up for consideration the draft Reports, one  by one. After a brief 
discussion, the Committee adopted the aforesaid four draft Reports and authorized the Chairman 
to carry out minor modifications of typographical and factual errors and formatting, if needed in 
all the Reports. 
3.       The Committee authorized Shri Zala Kesridevsinhji, M.P., and in his absence, Shrimati 
Rajani Ashokrao Patil, M.P., to present the aforesaid Reports in Rajya Sabha on 8 th December, 
2023. The Committee also authorized Shri K. Muraleedharan, M.P. and in his absence, Shri 
Tirath Singh Rawat, M.P. to lay the Reports on the Table of Lok Sabha on the same date. 
4.        *** 
5.       The Meeting adjourned at 10:50 A.M. 
                                                                                                                                       
New Delhi,                                                                                                    Monica Baa 
6th December, 2023                                                                                              Director  
                                                                                                                                                            
                                                                                                                                                             
  
                                                           
1 Relates to other matter 