PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA 140
DEPARTMENT -RELA TED PARLIAMENT ARY STANDING
COMMITTEE  ON TRANSPOR T, TOURISM  AND CULTURE
ONE HUNDRED FORTIETH REPORT
ON
PROMOTION OF TOURISM IN JAMMU AND KASHMIR
RD 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 23 OCTOBER, 2008)
RD 
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 23 OCTOBER, 2008)
RD 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 23 OCTOBER, 2008)
RD 
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 23 OCTOBER, 2008)
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
AUGUST, 2008/SRAVANA, 1930 (SAKA)AUGUST, 2008/SRAVANA, 1930 (SAKA)
TH
(PRESENTED TO THE HON’BLE CHAIRMAN, RAJYA SABHA ON 20  AUGUST, 2008)TH
(PRESENTED TO THE HON’BLE SPEAKER, LOK SABHA ON 20  AUGUST, 2008)
TH
(PRESENTED TO THE HON’BLE CHAIRMAN, RAJYA SABHA ON 20  AUGUST, 2008)TH
(PRESENTED TO THE HON’BLE SPEAKER, LOK SABHA ON 20  AUGUST, 2008)

Website:http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail:rsc-tt@sansad.nic.in

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA  SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE
ONE HUNDRED FORTIETH REPORT
ON
PROMOTION OF TOURISM IN JAMMU AND KASHMIR
(PRESENTED TO THE HON’BLE CHAIRMAN, RAJYA SABHA ON 20 TH AUGUST, 2008)
(PRESENTED TO THE HON’BLE SPEAKER, LOK SABHA ON 20 TH AUGUST, 2008)
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 23 RD OCTOBER, 2008)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 23 RD OCTOBER, 2008)
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
AUGUST, 2008/SRAV ANA, 1930 (SAKA)


CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ......................................................................................... (i)-(ii)
2. I NTRODUCTION ........................................................................................................................ (iii)
3. R EPORT OF THE C OMMITTEE .................................................................................................. 1—30
4. O BSERV A TIONS/CONCLUSIONS /RECOMMENDATIONS — A T A G LANCE .................................... 31—42
5. A NNEXURE ............................................................................................................................... 43—60
6. M INUTES ................................................................................................................................. 61—64

(i)
COMPOSITION OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE (2007-08)
1. Shri Sitaram Yechury — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
^2. Prof. Ram Deo Bhandary
3. Shri Vedprakash Goyal
4. Shri Naresh Gujral
$5. Prof. Alka Balram Kshatriya
^6. Shri Janardhana Poojary
#7. Shri M.V . Mysura Reddy
8. Shri Satish Kumar Sharma
9. Shri Shahid Siddiqui
^10. Shri Shatrughan Sinha
%11. Shrimati Jayanthi Natarajan
@12. Shri Shanta Kumar
@13. Shrimati Hema Malini
@14. Shri Birendra Prasad Baishya
@15. Shri Biswajit Daimary
LOK SABHA
16. Shri Anandrao Vithoba Adsul
17. Shri Sukhbir Singh Badal
18. Shri Joachim Baxla
19. Shri Sartaj Singh Chhatwal
20. Shri N.S.V. Chitthan
21. Shri Adhir Chowdhury
22. Dr. K. Dhanaraju
23. Shrimati Priya Dutt
24. Shri Dip Gogoi
25. Shri P. Karunakaran
*26. Shri Vijay Kumar Khandelwal
27. Dr. P . P . Koya
28. Dr. Ramkrishna Kusmaria
29. Shri Samik Lahiri
30. Shri Alok Kumar Mehta
31. Shri Hemlal Murmu
32. Shri Madan Lal Sharma
33. Shri Akshay Pratap Singh
34. Shri Dushyant Singh
35. Shri Suraj Singh
36. Shri Prahlad Joshi
**37. Shri Rakesh Singh
^ Ceased to be a Member of the Committee w.e.f.  9th April, 2008.
$ Ceased to be a Member of the Committee w.e.f.  9th April, 2008 and re-nominated on 14th May, 2008.
# Ceased to be a Member of the Committee w.e.f. 14th May, 2008.
% Nominated on 14th May, 2008.
@ Nominated on 21st May, 2008.
* Ceased to be a Member of the Committee w.e.f.  13th November, 2007.
** Nominated on 1st December, 2007.

(ii)
(2008-2009)
1. Shri Sitaram Yechury — Chairman
Rajya Sabha
2. Shri Satish Kumar Sharma
3. Shrimati Jayanthi Natarajan
4. Prof. Alka Balram Kshatriya
5. Shri Shanta Kumar
6. Shrimati Hema Malini
7. Shri Shahid Siddiqui
8. Shri Naresh Gujral
9. Shri Birendra Prasad Baishya
10. Shri Biswajit Daimary
LOK SABHA
11. Shri Anandrao Vithoba Adsul
12. Shri Sukhbir Singh Badal
13. Shri Joachim Baxla
14. Shri Sartaj Singh Chhatwal
15. Shri N.S.V. Chitthan
16. Shri Adhir Chowdhury
17. Dr. K. Dhanaraju
18. Shrimati Priya Dutt
19. Shri Dip Gogoi
20. Shri Prahlad Joshi
21. Shri P. Karunakaran
22. Dr. P. P. Koya
23. Dr. Ramkrishna Kusmaria
24. Shri Samik Lahiri
25. Shri Alok Kumar Mehta
26. Shri Hemlal Murmu
27. Shri Madan Lal Sharma
28. Shri Akshay Pratap Singh
29. Shri Dushyant Singh
30. Shri Rakesh Singh
31. Shri Suraj Singh
SECRETARIAT
Shri N.K. Singh, Joint Secretary
Shri Jagdish Kumar, Joint Director
Shri Swarabji B., Deputy Director
Shrimati Nidhi Chaturvedi, Committee Officer
(ii)

(iii)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman, Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport,
Tourism and Culture, having been authorised by the Committee, do hereby present on its behalf
this One Hundred Fortieth Report on ‘Promotion of Tourism in Jammu and Kashmir’.
2. India has always been an attractive tourist destination from far and wide since ages.
Paradoxically, however, India has not been able to exploit this potential. The Committee, therefore,
was of the opinion that much remains to be done to exploit tourism potential significantly, and India
has a long way to go in this regard, it is with this background that the Committee decided to
undertake the promotion of tourism in India as a special study. To begin with, the Committee
decided to take up the State of Jammu and Kashmir first, followed by the North-Eastern Region
for this purpose. Accordingly, the Committee undertook a study visit to Jammu and Kashmir from
the 1st-6th June, 2008. During the visit, the Committee selected four major areas that were of vital
importance to the promotion of tourism at any place. The selected areas were: schemes/efforts
made for developing tourism sector per se ; development and maintenances of national highways in
the State; increasing air connectivity and expansion/modernization of airports and; protection and
preservation of ancient monuments that are aplenty in the State.
3. The Committee found that the Jammu and Kashmir despite having all the features of a
tourist heaven, its potential remains largely unutilized. The near absence of adequate tourist
infrastructure, the Committee feels is main reason behind this. The Committee was apprised of the
difficulties that came in the way of promotion of tourism in the State such as restriction of entry
of tourist, poor infrastructure, lack of transport facility, poor security and road-air network etc.
The Committee, therefore, decided to present a report focusing mainly on these aspects.
4. The Committee expresses its gratitude to the officers of the Ministry of Tourism, Ministry
of Culture, Ministry of Road Transport and Highways, Ministry of Civil Aviation, Airport Authority
of India, National Aviation Company of India Limited, National Highways Authority of India,
Archaeological Survey of India and Officers of the Department of Tourism and Culture of
Government of Jammu and Kashmir, Ladakh Autonomous Hill Development Council, Tour-Travel
and Hotelier Association of Jammu and Kashmir, House Boat Owners Association and others for
their cooperation in furnishing the required feedback and information in connection with the
examination of the subject and also for making valuable suggestions for improving the tourism
scenario in the State.
5. The Committee considered and adopted the Report at its meeting held on the 11th August, 2008.
SITARAM YECHURY
N
EW D ELHI; Chairman,
August 11, 2008 Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Sravana 20, 1930  (Saka) Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture.

1
REPORT
Tourism being one of the world’s fastest growing industries today enjoys a vital
significance in the overall development of a country, mainly due to its multiplier effect-on
different walks of life. India too is not an exception in this regard; Tourism is the second largest
export industry in India. Foreign tourist arrival here rose from 3.46 million in 2004 to 5 million
in 2007. Tourism made a significant contribution to India’s foreign exchange earnings, which
grew from $ 6.17 billion (Rs.27,944 crore) in 2004 to $ 11.96 billion (Rs.49,413 crore) in
2007. The share of India in world tourism receipts went up from 0.65 per cent in 2002 to 1.21
per cent in 2006. The contribution of tourism to GDP of the country had been 6.11% in 2004,
while employment in tourism sector both direct and indirect had been 41.8 million in 2003,
which accounts for 8.74% of total employment in the country.
2. Such an impressive growth in tourism notwithstanding, India’s share in the world’s
tourist traffic was a mere 0.55 per cent in 2007. While the number of tourists visiting
India and earnings therefrom may be increasing, its slow growth rate as well as
insignificant share in world’s tourism has always been a cause of concern to this
Committee.
3. India has always been an attractive tourist destination from far and wide since ages. It
being a land of the most ancient civilization, long and chequered history, birth place of many
religion and sects; its varied topography and climatic conditions, serene and beautiful Himalayas,
long sea-coast, deserts, forests with contrasting flora and fauna, make India to have immense
tourist potential. Paradoxically, however, India has not been able to exploit this potential.
The Committee, therefore, is of the opinion that much more needs to be done to exploit
our tourism potential significantly, if not fully, and we have a long way to go in this
regard. It is with this thinking that the Committee decided to undertake the promotion of
tourism in India as a special study. To begin with, the Committee decided to take up the State
of Jammu and Kashmir first followed by the North-Eastern Region for this purpose.
4. Jammu and Kashmir is one of the most attractive tourist destinations, both for foreign
as well as domestic tourists, which include Jammu, Kashmir valley and Ladakh region. Kashmir
valley is perched securely between bewitching snow-clad peaks, glaciers, interspersed with
beautiful lakes and famous gardens. The emerald blue skies peeping through the chinks of the
clouds, the tall chinar trees swaying to the rhythm of the gusts of wind make the surrounding
breath-taking. It is, therefore, rightly described as the ‘paradise on the earth’. Existence of
important shrines, oldest monasteries, temples and cave temples in all the three regions is other
attraction for the tourist. Jammu is considered to be a hub of pilgrim tourism in the State being
abode of Mata V aishno Devi attracting millions of tourists/pilgrims throughout the year. The valley
has immense potential for adventure tourism such a mountaineering, trekking, skiing, rafting,
hand-gliding and para sailing besides leisure tourism. The cold arid desert area of Ladakh
comprises two districts namely, Leh and Kargil and its surreal landscape has often been termed
as ‘moonland’.
DEVELOPMENT OF TOURISM IN JAMMU AND KASHMIR
5. Till 1989, tourism had been the major economic activity of the State. During the
past one decade, however, the tourist arrival received a major set back affecting the
economic activity of the State adversely due to difficult circumstances prevailing in the
State. But, the things appears to have been improving slowly particularly during the last
a few years. Development of tourism in the State of Jammu and Kashmir, the Committee

2
notes has received priority both by the Central Government as well as the State
Government.
6. The Committee during its visit to Srinagar and Leh discussed the subject “Development
of tourism in Jammu and Kashmir” with the representatives of Union Ministry of Tourism,
Government of Jammu and Kashmir and Ladakh Autonomous Hill Development Council. It also
spoke to the Hotel and Restaurants Federation, Houseboats Owners Association, J and K Shikara
Union, Tourism Hotel Alliance, Travel Agents Society of Kashmir, Travel Agents Association of
India, J and K, Tours Operators Association and Tourist Taxi Operators Union etc. with a view
to ascertaining their views/suggestions on different issues.
7. The State Department of Tourism submitted before the Committee that the State had
taken different initiatives, but much remains to be done to exploit the tourism potential to the
maximum extent. Tourism had been an important and major contributor to the State’s economy.
Keeping this in view, the Government of Jammu and Kashmir had declared tourism as an
industry, extending a number of concessions and incentives. The emphasis has been to revive the
traditional tourist circuits including tourism marketing by involving local travel trade in direct
marketing through the State Tourism Department. The following strategies and initiatives have
been chalked out by the State Department of Tourism to promote Brand Kashmir and to woo
tourists from the domestic and international markets:
➢ Focus on Marketing–Hon’ble Chief Minister, Jammu and Kashmir is personally leading
the campaign, in the country and abroad;
➢ Delinking of Tourism from Law and Order Situation;
➢ Tourism projected as a normal economic activity;
➢ Home and National Media impressed not to hype tourist arrivals;
➢ Increased participation in international Tourism marts; Revitalization of Brand Kashmir;
➢ Focus on expanding the domestic market-promotional campaigns in non-metros like
Indore, Baroda, Nagpur, Pune;
➢ Involvement of private tourism players in marts and festivals;
➢ Publicity in all media;
➢ Publicity grants increased for 2008-09;
➢ Identification and opening up of new areas;
➢ 19 high powered development authorities created for integrated and focused
development of identified areas in all three regions of the State;
➢ Gulmarg, Pahalgam, Sonamarg, Yousmarg, Dodapathri, Verinag, Kokernag, Leh, Kargil,
Patnitop, Lakhanpur-Sarthal, Aharbal, Wular-Manasbal, Zanskar, Rajouri, Poonch,
Bhaderwah, Kishtwar, Surinsar-Mansar;
➢ Master Plans being prepared for land use;
➢ Environment concerns will be addressed;
➢ Involvement of locals in hospitality sector;
➢ Many areas are also being developed outside the jurisdiction of development
authorities—Gurez, Bangus, Baramulla, Uri, Botapathri;

3
8. The Committee appreciates the efforts made by the State Government of Jammu
and Kashmir for development of Tourism in the State. However, the Committee feels that
the strategy and initiatives taken by the State require a more focused approach for
effective and structured growth. The Committee was informed that there was no ‘Tourism
Policy” for the State. The Committee is of the opinion that the policy supports would
certainly help achieves goals and targets in this sector more effectively. The Committee,
therefore, emphasizes the need to have a tourism policy in place. It also emphasizes that
the strategy for marketing tourism products of the State needs to be revisited for tapping
the domestic and International tourism markets. The State should endeavour to assess the
market trend and focus on diverse and varied tourism products of Jammu and Kashmir
targeting specially the domestic middle class tourists.
TOURIST ARRIVALS
9. Till 1989, tourism activities in the State were concentrated around Kashmir Valley, with
few visiting Ladakh and yet fewer interested in Jammu. But due to terrorist activities within the
Kashmir valley since 1989, tourist inflow received a major setback. This has affected the
economic stability as well as employment opportunities of its population. The Government of
Jammu and Kashmir explored the possibilities of its tourism revival and concentrated on Ladakh.
Further, religious traffic to Jammu went up from a few thousands to above 7 million in 2007.
The following table presents a clear picture of tourist arrivals in J and K since 1988 to 2007
and the projections for the year 2008. The 1988 was the peak year for the tourist arrivals in
the State. Since 1989 to 2002, there was a lull and from 2005 onwards the tourist arrival
witnessed an upswing. The arrival figures in the State are very encouraging and the tourists
graph is constantly rising since 2006. Further, the projections for tourist arrivals in the State
for 2008 are also very encouraging. It is expected that the valley will receive around 7 lakhs
tourists during the year besides more than 8 million pilgrims are expected to visit the region.
Kashmir Valley Ladakh Amarnath V aishno
Year Devi
DF T D F T
1988 662097 59938 722035 8608 16256 24864 96055 1992595
2002 24670 2686 27356 2959 5120 8079 1 10793 4432176
2005 585702 19680 605382 13781 24665 38446 388000 6251998
2006 412879 20009 432888 17822 26078 43900 265000 6950573
2007 417264 24576 441840 22102 28477 50579 213565 7222318
2008 600000 30000 630000 25000 32000 57000 – 7500000
(projected)
Note: D — Domestic; F — Foreign; T — Total;
10. The Secretary, Department of Tourism, Government of J and K informed the Committee
that militancy was the main factor responsible for low arrivals of tourist in the valley since
1990-1996. After the Kargil war in 1998, the domestic arrivals had hit a record high in 2005.
The year 2006, witnessed targeted attack on tourists in the valley causing fall in the arrivals.
During 2007, there was a marginal rise in tourist arrivals and the trend of increased arrivals in
the valley augurs well during “off season” months other than April, May and June for enjoying
the adventure and winter sports tourism. The Secretary emphasized that the Kashmir was

4
becoming an, all-the-year round destination, but he pointed out that the negative advisories being
issued by various major countries to their citizens have had an adverse effect on tourist arrival
in the V alley. He desired that tourism should not be linked with the law and order situation of
the region and the media should be advised not to hype the tourist arrivals in any case.
11. The Committee after visiting many places in an around Srinagar had a sense of
satisfaction that normalcy was returning to the valley, as a large number of tourists were
seen at different places that included the local people. The Committee views this as a
positive development reflecting the existing mindset of the people about the law and order
situation of the valley was changing. The Committee feels that this has an impact in
increasing the tourist traffic to the valley not only in summer but during the winter
season as well. The Committee is of the view that to keep pace with the increasing
traffic, efforts be made to develop quality tourism infrastructure and tourism products for
providing better services to domestic and international tourist. The Committee desires
that State Government and Central Government need to work together to provide best
facilities at most economical prices. They should also sensitize/educate all the stakeholder
in tourism industry and the general public about various issues including hygiene,
sanitation and waste disposal system at monuments and tourist places, treatment of
tourist, ensuring safety and security and hassle free comfortable stay for the tourists in
the State.
12. Isolated cases of harassment of tourists severely undermine tourism. The
Committee is concerned to note the recent happenings in Kashmir valley and Jammu
regions after visit of the Committee and hopes that the things will improve very soon.
The Committee feels that the role of media is very crucial in building public confidence
about a place. It needs to be very careful as a report about a small incident may spread
scare all over. A reporting should not have a gap between impression that it creates and
actual ground reality.
ADVENTURE TOURISM
13. Both the valley and Ladakh regions, offer excellent locations for different kinds of
adventure activities such as mountaineering, trekking, skiing, rafting, canoeing, mountain-biking,
hand-gliding, para-sailing, heli-skiing, etc. Apart from the areas selected for adventure
tourism such as Sonamarg, Gulmarg, Aru (Pahalgam), Suru valley (Kargil), Stock (Leh),
Patnitop, Mansar, there are several other areas which need to be developed for this
purpose, particularly in Ladakh region. Kargil is now catching the imagination of tourists
very fast.
14. During the discussion at Leh, the representatives of LAHDC brought to the notice of the
Committee that as a result of development initiatives and as per the aspirations of the people,
new approach roads, even in remote areas were being developed. On the flip side, the
constructions of roads to new villages have had an adverse impact on the tourism in a way that
most of the trekking routes passing through villages have been converted into motorable roads.
In this context, they cited an example of Sham valley trek, from Likr to Temisgam which has
since been become a motorable road. They requested for development of new trekking routes
across Ladakh.
15. During the visit of the Committee to Gulmarg, the Committee noticed that the Indian
Institute of Skiing and Mountaineering (IISM) does not have a proper building of its own and
construction of building is in progress by ITDC for the last three years. The Committee inquired
about the delay in building project, the Ministry of Tourism informed that the delay was mainly
due to the climatic conditions. During the year 2006-07, Rs.4 crore was sanctioned for the

5
purpose but only Rs.2 crore was utilized from the sanctioned outlays. Further, during the
year 2007-08, Rs.7 crore was sanctioned for construction of building of IISM at Gulmarg and
Rs. 4 crore was released for this project. The balance amount was kept for replacement of
skiing equipment, chairlift etc. During the current year, a sum of Rs.3 crore was proposed for
construction of building of IISM for imparting improved training facilities related to winter and
adventure sports. The Committee was informed that the building work for IISM has since been
completed.
16. The Committee notes that Adventure Tourism is relatively a new segment and
Ministry of Tourism is providing financial assistance to the State for development of
infrastructure and other facilities required for trekking, rock climbing, mountaineering,
winter sports, skiing etc. The Committee also notes that J and K Tourism Department
was able to acquire good quality equipment of international standard for these activities.
The Committee feels that the Kashmir Valley and the Ladakh region have immense
potential for adventure tourism that largely remains untapped so far, despite Government
efforts made for this purpose. It has been found that foreign tourists are more attracted
to such tourism and, if, the latest equipments and infrastructure supported by the wider
publicity and human resources were provided, the Committee has little doubt that
adventure tourist would not be attracted to Jammu and Kashmir in large numbers. The
Committee recommends the Ministry to prioritize the Adventure Tourism projects in the
Jammu and Kashmir and give adequate publicity in India and abroad.
17. The Committee also desires the Ministry to identify new/alternate trekking routes
with the help of LAHDC and Jammu and Kashmir Government in the Ladakh region. The
Committee recommends that while going for construction of roads to new villages,
planning may be done in such a way that old and popular trekking route be saved.
Granting a special package to Ladakh region for developing new trekking routes may be
considered and finalized at the earliest.
18. The Committee notes with satisfaction that the construction of building for IISM
at Gulmurg has been completed and will be handed over to the IISM by the ITDC. The
Committee feels, that without proper building, the IISM would not play its role and carry
out its activities. The Committee is of the view that upgradation of the institute will not
only result in increment in the tourist traffic to the valley but also promote adventure
and sports tourism in particular. The Committee, therefore, recommends the Ministry to
ensure early transfer of building to IISM at Gulmarg without further delay.
PILGRIM TOURISM
19. Pilgrim tourism in the State is yet another important aspect of tourist attraction in the
State. Mata Vaishnodevi Temple in Jammu, famous sufi shrines and mosques in Kashmir and the
Holy Amarnath Cave are important centres of pilgrimage. Ladakh region also has been a preferred
tourists destination particularly for foreigners because of the centuries-old monasteries as places
of worship, education and store-house of ancient Buddiest literature, artefacts etc.
20. The J and K Government informed about its initiative to combine pilgrim traffic with
leisure tourism in the State. During the meeting the representatives of LAHDC pointed out that
in the recent past there had been repeated tragedies en-route ‘Kailash Mansarovar Pilgrimage’ via
Uttarakhand in which large number of lives were lost. Due to the vulnerability of this route
possibility of recurrence of such tragedies is always there. Accordingly, they suggested that
an alternative route via Demchok in Ladakh needs to be opened for Kailash Mansarovar
Pilgrimage.

6
21. During the deliberations, the Committee had been informed by the representatives of the
State Governments and LAHDC that ‘Bed and Breakfast’ and ‘Paying Guest Accommodation’
schemes had been introduced with a view to providing comfortable and homely stay to the
tourists and to supplement the availability of accommodation in Jammu and Kashmir. The scheme
was getting momentum in the State and was successful. They suggested that due publicity needs
to be given to the tourists about the location of such accommodation .and that it needed to be
expanded further.
22. T he Committee feels that the pilgrim tourism has great tourist potential in all the
three regions of the State and is one of the major contributors to its economic growth
both in terms of employment and other activities. The facilities for pilgrims need to be
further expanded and the Government of Jammu and Kashmir should exploit the potential
of Jammu as a tourist destination and not just as transit point en route  to Kashmir or
on a pilgrimage to the Vaishno Devi temple.
23. The Committee appreciates the efforts of the State Government for encouraging
local residents to supplement the availability of accommodation for the comfortable stay
of tourists in their homes to experience local customs and traditions and relish authentic
cuisine in the natural and affordable manner. This scheme appears to be working well
both for the tourist as well as the local residents. It needs to be further strengthened and
expanded to many more villages and towns.
24. Since, Ladakh has the best route to Kailash Mansorovar via  Demchok, the
Committee desires that the possibility could be explored for allowing Kailash Mansorover
Pilgrims via Demchok in Ladakh as an alternative route, which is safer, dependable and
shorter. A special promotion campaign should be made to attract larger number of
pilgrims to the places of worship in all the region of the State by offering affordable
packages.
TOURISM INFRASTRUCTURE
25. Tourism infrastructure comprises inter-alia hotels, and other types of accommodation to
tourists. In case of the valley, Houseboats and Shikaras had been the most sought after tourist
accommodation. During the discussion, the Kashmir Hotel and Restaurant Federation brought to
the notice of the Committee that the Kashmir offered a variety of accommodation options for
visitors, ranging from luxury hotels to humble lodges, guest houses etc. There were hotels to
suit every requirement. A number of hotel properties were lying in shambles which should be
brought back to their earlier glory, if, Government of India came forward with plans and
packages for their restoration. It will not need more than a few hundred crore grant-in-aid to
prepare all these properties in places like Srinagar, Pahalgam and Gulmarg for the up market
tourists. The Committee was informed that the Valley had adequate accommodation infrastructure,
to the tune of about 20 lakh for lower, middle and upper middle class tourists. As such, there
is no need of further expansion in this sector it was argued. They demanded that a prudent loan
scheme could be devised for renovation/upgradation of these hotel properties in Jammu and
Kashmir and modalities may be worked out for granting interest free loans for the purpose. In
view of the position of accommodation explained above, and if it is true, the Committee
feels that there is a need to help them renovate. The Committee desires the
Governments to prepare a plan after mutual consultation for revival of these hotel
properties lying in utter neglect. However, the Committee emphasizes the need for bigger
and organized hotels to attract high end tourists in the State.
26. The Committee also recommends the Government to provide grant-in-aid to the
Centaur Hotel, Srinagar located just on the bank of Dal Lake for its total renovation and

7
restoration and providing other facilities. The portion occupied by the security forces also
needs to be vacated by accommodating them elsewhere, except for those needed for its
own security.
27. The Committee had seen the deteriorating condition of the legendary Dal Lake in Srinagar.
The factors responsible for its pollution, encroachment etc. mainly comes from the pressure of
human settlement along its shores and within the lake itself. The present open lake area is only
12 square lan. (approx.), which is but a vestige of what was there even in the 18th century.
The shrinking of the lake is due to “siltification”— where the feed rivers dump huge silt deposits
into the water catchments. These are pointed, source suffocating the lake and contaminating its
water mass. The raw sewage is feeding an already rapid growth of algae and raising weed
growth to critical and unmanageable levels. The Committee expresses its concern over the
fast deterioration of the Dal lake eco-system. The Committee is of the opinion that
conservation and preservation of Dal lake should be our priority. The Committee,
therefore, recommends the Ministry to pursue the matter with the Ministry of
Environment and Forest for formulation of Action Plan to control and manage pollution,
de-silting, and de-weeding for conservation of the lake eco-system. The Committee also
recommends that a proper sewage disposal system should be in place to reduce the
organic discharge into the lake from the cluster of house-boats. The encroachments also
must be removed.
28. The Committee understands that the Government, through its own limited
resources, has not been able to provide the requisite funds for the development of tourist
infrastructure in the country. The Committee is of the opinion that the participation of
the private sector can go a long way in supplementing the efforts of the Government in
developing the tourist infrastructure in the J and K. The Committee, therefore, strongly
recommends that the Central/State Governments must try to remove the obstacles faced
by the private investors and ensure early implementation of the single window clearance
system for tourism projects.
29. The most desirable location is the Boulevard, which overlooks the Dal Lake. Many
tourists are attracted to Srinagar by the charm of staying on a houseboat, which provide the
unique experience of living on the water in a cedar-panelled elegant bedroom, with all the
conveniences of a luxury hotel. These houseboats can be seen along the Dal and Nagin Lakes
and River Jhelum. But, the Committee was told that the Shikarawalas and Houseboat owners, due
to lack of tourists during the last years, are finding it very difficult even to afford their upkeep
and maintenance. The Committee feels that these being symbols of Kashmir and keeping
in view large number of people depending on these for livelihood, need adequate support
to keep them running. It, therefore, recommends that suitable assistance and support be
given to these Shikarawalas and Houseboat owners in the form of soft loans/subsidy for
this purpose.
30. Leh offers a variety of accommodation to suit almost every pocket or preference. Most
hotels are family-run establishments and as such, the services are more personalized than
professional. Restaurants, providing food and beverages; tourist transport system for internal
sightseeing and long-distance travel; Boutiques selling goods of interests to tourists other than
goods of daily use like toiletries, food articles, etc.; entertainment, leisure and sports facilities
which directly serve tourism are there but need to be made more organized.
31. T he Committee finds that Leh generally is a long haul destination among
adventure tourists who love nature and has variety of accommodation suiting to the
requirement of the tourists. The Committee finds that there is a lack of good quality
hotel with convention facilities in Leh and the hotel staff need to be trained in the

8
hospitability industry. The share of local people in the hospitality sector in Leh is
negligible. The Committee, therefore, recommends that local people should be encouraged
and educated by training service providers to take part in the hospitality sector.
CENTRAL FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE SCHEME IN JAMMU AND KASHMIR
32. The Committee noticed that development and promotion of tourism was undertaken
primarily by the State Government; the Ministry of Tourism, Government of India, also extends
following assistance to the State Government:—
(i) Central Financial Assistance under Product/Infrastructure Development for
Destinations and Circuits including Rural Tourism;
(ii) Domestic Promotion Publicity and Hospitality (DPPH);
(iii) Information Technology;
(iv) Financial assistance to Institutes of Hotel Management and Food Craft Institutes; and
(v) Promotional activities and media campaigns for promotion of destinations in the
States.
33. A Statement supplied to the Committee, showing infrastructure projects with Central
financial assistance implemented in the State of Jammu and Kashmir since 2005-06 is placed at
Annexure-I.
34. The Committee notes that three tourist circuits were sanctioned by the Ministry of
Tourism in the State of J and K at a cost of Rs.21.78 crore for Jammu-Rajouri-Poonch,
Lakhanpur-Sarthal and Bhanderwah-Kishtwar-Sinthan-Srinagar. Out of the sanctioned amount of
Rs.21.78 crore, only a sum of Rs.2.90 crore has been spent till date. Further, it notes
that under PM’s Reconstruction Program for creation of infrastructure facilities in the State of
J and K, a sum of Rs.240.00 crore was sanctioned and 201 schemes were identified between
the year 2005-06 to 2007-08 at a cost of Rs.93.05 crore. The Government of India released a
sum of Rs.67.18 crore for development of the projects identified under the package, but the
State Department of Tourism could utilize only Rs.25.71 crore so far. The Committee was
informed that projects worth Rs.150.00 crore were yet to be sanctioned by the Ministry of
Tourism to the State Government.
35. During the course of deliberations, the Committee pointed out shortfalls in expenditure of
budgetary allocations in almost every project and wanted to know the reasons for this. The
Secretary, Government of Jammu and Kashmir while agreeing to the shortfalls in the utilization
of funds sanctioned/released by the Central Government informed the Committee that the major
tourist destinations in Jammu and Kashmir remained snow bound and therefore cut-off for a
considerable period resulting into road-block and shortage of men and material. Hence, delay on
the physical progress of work and under utilization of funds gets delayed. He suggested that if
the sanction of projects were given by October-November, it  would enable them to make use
of non-working months for completing pre-construction procedures so that the work was
immediately started after the snow melted.
36. The representatives of the tour operators at Leh demanded that the new areas need to
be opened in Ladakh region for tourism. It was informed that last major area opened for tourism
was 12 years back and no other areas had been opened thereafter. They submitted that tourism
was a main source of income to the tribal residents of Ladakh and there was utter lack of
infrastructure for this in the area. It was demanded that Leh-Pangong-Spangmik-Hanle-Nyoma-
Mahe-Leh circuit can be developed as a major tourist destination.

9
37. The Committee notes with concern that a large number of tourism projects were
sanctioned by the Union Ministry of Tourism for the State of J and K during the last
three years, but the pace of their progress has been very slow. The Committee
appreciates the constraints faced by the State due to adverse weather, shortage of working
days as well as manpower. The Committee recommends that the Government of India
should consider modifying the norms for release of funds to the State keeping in mind
the topography and difficult terrain of the region and ensure that projects do not lag
behind for want of funds at any time during the financial year. The Committee also
desires that there should be proper co-ordination with the State Government so as to
obtain utilization certificates etc.
38. The Committee was informed that posts particularly at key positions were lying
vacant for years. The Committee desires that the State Government should be impressed.
upon to fill up all the vacant posts specially the key-positions, at the earliest so that the
infrastructure development projects were not unduly delayed.
39. The Committee also recommends that since infrastructure development holds the
key to sustained growth in tourism sector, there is a need that the tourist sites and
destinations should be carefully selected on the basis of their potential to provide all
essential infrastructural facilities required by the tourists. An aggressive marketing and
publicity of these destinations and circuits should be made to generate tourism markets
across the world. The Committee also recommends that possibility be explored to open
“Leh-Pangong-Spangmik-Hanle-Nyoma-Mahe-Leh as a tourist destinations in Ladakh for
inbound tourists. The Committee also impress upon the Ministry of Tourism to identify
more such circuits and destinations in the three regions to offer new products to tourists.
It would give impetus to the socio-economic development of the people living in the State.
RURAL TOURISM
40. The Committee has been informed that in J and K, 50 tourist villages were identified for
tourism development at a cost of Rs.35 crore. Out of these, 9 tourist villages were sanctioned
by the Ministry of Tourism at a cost of Rs.5.06 crore. Only 5 villages have since been
completed (Annexure-II). The Secretary Tourism, Government of J and K informed the
Committee that 34 projects are pending with the Ministry of Tourism for sanction and requested
the Committee that the projects should expeditiously be cleared for development works.
41. The Committee is of the view that rural tourism has great potential in Jammu and
Kashmir where any village could be developed as a tourist destination. It helps provide
boost to the local arts and conserve the local culture apart from preventing rural–urban
migration. The Committee, therefore, feels that the rural tourism needs to be given
added impetus in the State of Jammu and Kashmir. The Committee notes that out of 9
rural tourism projects sanctioned in the State only 5 projects have since been completed.
The Committee is of the view that more villages should be identified for priority
development involving the local bodies in order to promote tourism in rural areas. All the
pending rural tourism projects of the Government of Jammu and Kashmir should be
examined and expedited by the Ministry of Tourism at the earliest.
RELAXATION IN INNER LINE RESTRICTION
42. Ladakh was thrown open for outside world in 1974. However, entry to some areas was
restricted or out-of-bound for foreign as well as domestic tourists. In the year 1994, new areas
were thrown open but only for those holding a valid inner line permit with a restriction of time
limit of a week and a group of minimum four persons. The Chief Executive Councilor, Ladakh

10
Autonomous Hill Development Council, Leh demanded that these restrictions now need to be
relaxed. He further suggested that the duration of the visit to inner line areas should be extended
to 15 days from the existing 7 days and the minimum number in a group travelling to restricted
areas to be reduced from four to one.
43. The Committee is also of the view that normally, any restriction on the number
of tourists and the duration, would certainly impede promotion of tourism in a region; it
is true about Ladakh as well. The issue of relaxation in the existing restrictions needs
to be considered in totality by the concerned authorities of the Governments at various
levels. Much water has run into river Sindhu since this decision was taken; this is high
time that it should be reviewed suitability.
TOURIST TRANSPORT
44. Surface transport is the main mode of transportation in the State of Jammu and Kashmir
and has become one of the vital infrastructures in the process of development of State economy.
New housing colonies and town have come into existence due to increase in human population
which have in turn increased the demands for transport facilities. The State Road Transport
Corporation has been operating a fleet of luxury coaches both for transportation as well as for
sight-seeing of various resorts. There are a large number of taxis catering to the up market
tourists. For local transport, ponies, auto rickshaws, bikes and bicycle are also available. But the
transport sector, both in the form of coaches as well as taxis does not come up to international
standards.
45. The Committee desires that the State Government should come forward by way of
providing low-interest loans to the private transporters for creating a fleet of super deluxe
coaches and luxury cars for the tourists. Till then outside coaches carrying groups of
tourists should be allowed to operate in the State without any hassle.
GONDOLA
46. The experience of setting up of Gondola (rope-way) in Gulmarg has shown that it is a very
viable preposition as a tourist attraction. It has proved to be a great success there. There are
immense possibilities of setting up of such Gondolas in different tourist areas such as Pahalgam,
Sonamarg and Patnitop. Some of these ropeways would not only be a tourist attraction but
would open up areas for tourist who is interested in winter sports, as in Gulmarg. However, the
Committee noticed that many carriages are not being used for want of petty technical repairs and
were lying unattended leading to huge queue at the rope-way.
47. The Committee feels that the installation of more Gondolas would open up new tourist
areas in a sustainable manner without damaging the ecology of the area. The Committee
recommends that the booking of tickets of these Gondolas  at Gulmarg should be de-
centralised through J and K tourism offices in the country to avoid huge rush at the booking
counters in Gulmarg and efforts be made to make the visit to Gondolas as the part of the
package tour so that the tourists are not harassed at the booking windows. The Committee
also desires that online bookings of the tickets should also be made permissible and the
carriages which are not being used for petty technical repairs, should be made functional
without further delay in view of the heavy rush of tourist in Gulmarg.
LEA VE TRA VEL CONCESSION
48. Special offers from the Government and other agencies for their employees have
proved to be successful in the past. The Committee recommends that the LTC packages

11
for Central Government/Public sector employees to visit Kashmir should be re-introduce to
promote tourism and to revive the domestic tourist traffic to the J and K region by Air.
HOTEL MANAGEMENT INSTITUTE AT SRINAGAR
49. There is a Hotel Management Institute in the State being run under Government control.
The new campus of the Institute has been completed and it has become fully functional from
the year 2007-08. There is a Food Craft Institute at Jammu for which the Ministry has
sanctioned Rs.475.00 lakh and released Rs.200.00 lakh during the financial year 2007-08. “The
Ministry has further released Rs.9.60 lakh under the Scheme Capacity Building for Service
Providers Programme (CBSP) to CEO, LAHDC, Leh for skill up-gradation of 60 students during
the financial year 2007-08. During the meeting at Leh, the demand for a training institute was
raised by the CEO of the LAHDC for fulfilling the capacity-building needs in all important aspect
of tourist sector; Ladakh region does not have one, as a result, young person of the area are
not able to pursue career in travel and tourism industry.
50. In view of tremendous potential that the tourism industry has for employment
generation for the people of Jammu and Kashmir, need for more such training Institutes
can hardly be overemphasized. The Committee feels that the existing institutions would
not be sufficient for the need of the growing demand of the trained manpower in the
hospitality sector. Therefore, the Committee recommends that there should be atleast two
more such institutes one to be located in Leh. Besides, more Food Craft Institutes should
also be opened up in consultation with the State Government.
INCREDIBLE INDIA CAMPAIGN
51. The Committee notes that during the last three years Rs.1917 lakhs were released for
media campaign and promotional activities for the T.V ., Magazine and newspapers for the Jammu
and Kashmir region as a tourists and trekking destination.
52. During the meeting Secretary, Jammu and Kashmir Tourism pleaded that the current
spending for publicity was inadequate and it needed to be increased further. Other States were
spending far more than it is being done in Jammu and Kashmir. It was a general feeling amongst
all the stakeholders of tourism in Jammu and Kashmir who appeared before the Committee that
Kashmir was not given due prominence in the Incredible India campaign launched by the
Government of India across the globe. The Committee also feels that the outlay earmarked
for the media campaign and promotional activities for J and K is not sufficient and should
be increased adequately so that the State got adequate publicity both in India and aboard.
‘Incredible India campaign’ should give due prominence to Jammu and Kashmir with
increased participation in international tourism marts for promoting brand Kashmir.
ADVERSE TRAVEL ADVISORIES
53. The Committee recommends that the Government of India must put in all possible
efforts to advise all countries to co-operate and not issue negative travel advisory for its
citizens in the wake of some isolated incidents in J and K. The Committee also desires
that the media may be sensitized not to hype the tourist arrivals in the valley and they
should project the objective situation about the Srinagar in order to de-link tourism from
law and order situation.
DEVELOPMENT OF AIRPORTS AND AIR-CONNECTIVITY
54. Air travel had been till a few years back confined mainly to the upper economic strata

12
of our society largely between the metros. It has, over the years registered unprecedented
growth due to various factors such as rising incomes, more corporate activity, low cost airlines,
cheaper fares and absence of adequate rail and road transport infrastructure. At such a time
when the air travel is becoming affordable, the airport and other infrastructure in the country
have come under tremendous pressure. The existing infrastructure, with the increase in flights
and air traffic has proved to be old and inadequate. This called for not only expansion and
modernization of Airports, across the country but also increase in air connectivity to the existing
as well as to the new cities and places. The pressure was more evident in the States having
much tourism potential, for example, in Jammu and Kashmir. Airports and air connectivity
play a vital role in promoting tourism in the State. The Department-related Parliamentary
Standing Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture, therefore, focused on the status of
airports and air connectivity in Jammu and Kashmir. The Committee during its visit discussed
different aspects of these issues with the representatives of the Government of Jammu and
Kashmir, Union Ministry of Civil Aviation, Airports Authority of India, National Civil Aviation
Company Limited, Indian Air Force, LAHDC and those of tour and travel operators from the
State.
55. The Ministry of Civil Aviation, NACIL and Airport Authority of India furnished a detailed
background notes on the subject for consideration of the Committee. The details of the
discussions held by the Committee and the Committee’s observations thereon have been brought
out in the succeeding paragraphs.
DEVELOPMENT OF AIRPORT INFRASTRUCTURE
56. There are four operational airports in the State of Jammu and Kashmir located in, Jammu,
Srinagar, Leh and Kargil. The first three airports belong to Ministry of Defence, where Airport
Authority of India maintains civil enclaves for handling civil domestic operations. The one at
Kargil belongs to the State Government having the operations of Indian Air Force.
JAMMU AIRPORT
57. Jammu airport belongs to the Ministry of Defence and the Airports Authority of India
maintains a civil enclave. The terminal building has a capacity of 500 passengers at a time and
has passenger amenities like, central air conditioning, CCTV, conveyors, X-ray baggage machines
and fire control system. The domestic traffic handled by this airport for the year 2007-08 is
6.16 lakh passengers and at a level of 20% growth rate it is estimated to have a passenger
inflow of 17.60 lakh passengers by the year 2011-12.
58. Giving the details of developmental works completed so far at the airport of Jammu, the
Ministry informed that resurfacing and extension of runway from 6000 ft. to 6700 ft. with
provision of high intensity lights at a cost of Rs.8 crores, construction and modification of
terminal building at Rs.l0 crores and extension and strengthening of apron at a cost of
Rs.2 crores had since been completed at Jammu Airport. The extension of terminal building from
5250 sqm to 6717 sqm for increasing the capacity from existing 500 passengers to 650
passengers at a cost of Rs.8 crores would be completed during 2008-09. Land is available for
modifications. In addition to this, expansion of apron for parking of aircraft from existing three
to four aircrafts will also be undertaken. Construction of additional link taxi track connecting
runway and apron at a cost of Rs.12 crores is also in the pipeline subject to the availability of
land from the State Government and IAF.
59. When asked about the future development works plans of Jammu airport, the Airports
Authority of India replied that due to land constraints, further development of the Civil Air
terminal was not feasible at present location. They have further stated that new civil air terminal

13
complex on river Tawi side was proposed for which land measuring 137.75 acres has been
requested for acquisition by State Government at an estimated cost of Rs.250 crores. Runway
was proposed to be extended from existing 6700 ft to 9000 ft to cater for wide bodied aircrafts.
Land measuring about seventeen acres would be required ftom Army at an estimated cost of
Rs.50 crores and all these works would involve shifting of HT lines, High Mast towers and
construction of bridge across the river Tawi and diversion of canals.
SRINAGAR INTERNATIONAL AIRPORT
60. Srinagar airport, declared as an international airport by Government of India vide notification
effective ftom 11th March, 2005 belongs to Ministry of Defence Airports Authority of India
maintains a civil enclave for handling civil domestic operations as well as limited International Haj
operations. The terminal building has a capacity of 500 passengers at a time with all modern
passenger amenities including central heating system. The building has been modified to facilitate
operation of limited international haj flights since February, 2008. The domestic traffic handled by
this airport for the year 2007-08 is 8.97 lakh passengers and at a level of 30% growth rate it is
estimated to have a passenger inflow of 25.62 1akh by the year 2011-12.
61. The Airports Authority of India informed the Committee that under phase-l of the
development works of the airport extension of apron from 13000 sqm to 31036 sqm area for
four AB-320 aircraft at a cost of Rs.2.21 crores has been completed. Extension and modification
of terminal building for integrated operations from 500 passengers to 950 passengers (500
domestic and 450 international) with four aerobridges at an estimated cost of Rs.102 crore was
underway. The entire new building was expected to be put into operation by July, 2008.
62. The Committee was informed that under phase-2, expansion of apron from 31036 sqm
to 55820 sqm, strengthening of existing apron and additional link taxi track to increase aircraft
parking stands from four to nine at a cost of Rs.28 crores would be undertaken during 2008-
09. In addition to this construction of cargo complex and extension of car park have also been
planned but above works involve transfer of 14.5 acres of IAF land to AAI. It has a dedicated
HAJ Terminal and during 2007-08, 8100 Haj pilgrims were handle.
KARGIL AIRPORT
63. Kargil Airfield, belonging to the State Government, has been developed by Airports
Authority of India at a cost of Rs.37.81 crores to fulfill the air-traveling needs of the people
of this region, which comprises of very complex and hilly terrain with equally difficult road
connections. The inftastructure at this airport has been developed to cater for operations of ATR
42 type of aircraft. The terminal building of the airport has the capacity of 100 passengers at
a time with all the essential facilities.’
64. In the meeting held at Leh the representative of LAHDC submitted a memorandum to the
Committee stating inter-alia that Kargil Airport was in bad shape and upgrading the Airport,
extensive renovation, expansion and repair works of Kargil Airport has been pending for decades.
He also submitted that the current length of 6000 ft. was not sufficient for Boeing flights.
Therefore runaway was required to be extended at least by 3000 ft. He also submitted that till
the Kargil Airport underwent the face lift, private airlines be asked to operate a 50 seater ATR
aircraft’s regular service to cater passengers for Kargil from Delhi, Jammu, Srinagar and Vice-
versa. The Committee was informed by Chairman, Airports Authority of India that a feasibility
study for extension of runway to 9000 ft was carried out by a joint team of AAI and DGCA
and it was observed that runway was not only required to be extended but also needed to be
widened with standard basis strip as per ICAO recommendations. The land profile and hill terrain
of the area did not permit such expansion and extension of runway and basic strip. Also, airline

14
operators need to decide about the type of aircraft they intend to operate. Thereafter, an expert
team including representatives from airlines can visit and study the feasibility.
LEH AIRPORT
65. Leh Airport situated in the Ladakh Region of Jammu and Kashmir State is the highest
altitude airport in the world for civil aircraft operations. This airport belongs to the Ministry of
Defence, where AAI maintains a civil enclave. The terminal building has the capacity to handle
250 passengers at a time. The domestic traffic handled by this airport for the year 2007-08 is
1.55 lakh passengers and at a moderate level of 10% growth rate it will have an estimated
passenger inflow of 2.27 lakh passengers by the year 2011-12.
66. The Committee was informed that development works such as modification of terminal
building with car park and other associated infrastructure for handling 250 passengers at a time
costing Rs.2 crore, construction of new apron for two AB 320 aircraft costing Rs.8 crore and
construction of new canopy on the city side of terminal Building for meeting adverse weather
conditions at a cost of Rs.2 crore had been completed so far.
67. The Airports Authority of India has planned to construct new terminal building for 500
passengers with two aerobridges, expansion of apron for access to aerobridge at an estimated
cost of Rs.112.15 crore subject to the availability of 5.31 acres of land to be transferred from
IAF. The Chairman, Airports Authority of India informed during the meeting at Leh that
the issue of transfer of land that was pending with the IAF for a long time had been
settled and that the IAF had agreed to transfer an alternate land in lieu of the demanded
one and that the work in this regard would start immediately. The Committee expresses
its happiness and hopes that the work would now be started without further delay. The
Committee hopes that the Ministry of Defence will consider the request of Airports
Authority of India for transferring of land for other Airports also so that the process of
their modernization could be expedited.
AIR CONNECTIVITY
68. Jammu and Kashmir is presently connected by three major airports. Jammu, Srinagar and
Leh are being connected by six, seven and three operators respectively, with the rest of the
country. Majority of these service providers offer direct flights to Srinagar from Delhi and
Mumbai only. There is no direct service between Srinagar or Jammu with other metro or major
airports in the country. In the case of Srinagar-Leh sector and vice-versa , there is no
air-connectivity, except one flight of of Air India operating per week. The Jammu-Leh sector is
also neglected. Except Air Deccan’s daily flight between Delhi-Leh, no other operator is providing
daily service. Even the Air India operates only three days a week citing poor seat factor. On
being asked, representative of NACIL stated that in view of poor seat factor and consequent
cash losses, NACIL did not have any plan to increase services to/from Jammu, Srinagar and
Leh. The Committee was further informed that NACIL had flight specific fares, apex fares and
easy fares to attract the tourists for Jammu and Kashmir.
69. During the deliberations, of the Committee in Srinagar and Leh, the Stakeholders in the
tourism industry emphasized the need for improvement in air connectivity to the State and also
within the State. Promotion of Kargil and Leh as a major tourist destinations would depend on
the air connectivity to these places. Air connectivity assumes great importance in these areas
because there are no good as well as all weather roads. As a result, these areas remain cut-
off from rest of the country when roads are covered with snow during long winters. Lack of
air connectivity therefore, was a major drawback for tourists to reach those areas, particularly
during winters.

15
70. The Committee while on the visit also received representation from Ladakh Autonomous
Hill Development Council, Leh on the following issues:
(i) Increase in the frequency of flights :
At present all the flights from Delhi and back are operating with full occupancy and
it becomes very difficult to get a confirm ticket. The Council has received information
that the flights are booked till September. The non-availability of seats compels the
tourists to visit some other areas or cancel their trip altogether. Further the tourists
visiting Kashmir Valley and opting to extend their trip to Leh cannot do so as there is
only one flight in a week from Srinagar to Leh. Therefore, the Council demand that:
➢ The Airlines operating Delhi-Leh-Delhi should be requested to increase the
frequency of their flights in summer months and the schedules should be
notified at least 6 months in advance.
➢ The private airlines operating Leh-Delhi should be asked to introduce
flights from Srinagar and Jammu also.
On being asked about the reason for private operators not flying on the routes in
Jammu and Kashmir, the Committee was informed that current route disperal guidelines
allowed them to retain their right to determine which route in 2A category they want
to operate. They have to serve 2 per cent of their flights to Jammu and Kashmir and
North Eastern region. To fulfill the obligation, private airlines prefer to fly North Eastern
destination and ignore Jammu and Kashmir as the former gives them more revenue.
71. The Committee feels concerned about the private airlines not flying in Jammu and
Kashmir region and taking advantages of loopholes in the Route Dispersal Guidelines. The
Committee, therefore, strongly recommends to modify the Route Dispersal Guidelines in
such a way so as to make them mandatory to fly to places like Leh and Kargil also.
(ii) Ladakhi Architecture in the new Airport Terminal:
The Council appreciated the funds allotted by the Central Government for up
gradation and modernization of Leh Airport and terminal. The Council emphasized that
terminal building at Leh should be built with Ladakhi Architecture, which has
unfortunately being ignored in the present building.
72. The Committee while appreciating the development works being carried out by the
Airports Authority of India in the State, desires that pending work at Jammu & Srinagar
airports be completed within the scheduled time frame. The Committee emphasizes the
need for increasing the international services from the Srinagar airport to attract mainly
international tourists.
73. The Committee is of the opinion that the Kargil district has not received due
attention and the Kargil airport is not being used to its potential. It has caught the
imagination of the tourist now. The Committee recommends that till the work of
extension of Kargil Airport is undertaken and completed, the Government should operate
ATR 42 between Leh-Kargil-Srinagar. The Committee is not quite convinced with the
shortage of the ATR pilots as was sought to be made out by the NACIL during the
meeting. To begin with this service may be thrice per week, to be made daily later on.
The Committee feels that this would not only help promote tourism but also increase
economic activity in the region. Kargil is an area with lots of scenic beauty and cultural
heritage. The Committee, therefore, recommends strongly that the NACIL must take the
necessary steps in this direction and start services in this sector as early as possible.

16
74. The Committee is constrained to say that the Leh Airport building did not reflect
the local ethnic architecture. In this connection Committee would like to invite the
attention of the Government to its recommendations contained in the 88th report which
is reproduced below:—
“...the Committee emphasized that while constructing the terminal building local
art and architecture should be kept in mind and building should be designed
accordingly. Civil Aviation and Tourism go hand in hand as airport is the gateway
for the tourists, which should unveil the rich cultural and architectural heritage of
the region. This would also attract more and more tourists and would substantially
take care of the capacity under-utilization problem of the airports. The Committee
also pointed out that adequate care should be taken with the help of the State
Government to open shopping outlets/cafeteria for showcasing local cuisines/
handicrafts etc”.
75. The Committee finds that one of the major impediments in development of Leh as
a major tourist destination is the non-availability of direct flight service between Leh and
other major cities. The existing service between Delhi-Leh by the National Carrier should
be made daily service. The Committee hopes that development of airports and increased
air connectivity to this region will definitely play a significant role in increasing the
tourist influx to the State. The Committee expresses its dismay over the fact that NACIL
does not have any plan to increase services to/from Jammu, Srinagar and Leh. The
Committee also feels that there is no adequate publicity about the special fares being
offered by NACIL viz. easy fare, apex fares and flight specific fares and link fares as a
result of which most of the tourists are not able to make use of the packages being
offered by the NACIL. The Committee is of the view that if 50 seater ATR aircraft are
used in this region, the cash losses perhaps may go down. The Committee also
recommends that NACIL should ensure due publicity of its special fares.
76. Sometimes, due to lack of coordination between Airlines, AAI and Air Force
regular commercial flights are cancelled or delayed leading to avoidable inconvenience to
the passengers and loss of revenue. The Committee is of the considered view that under
normal circumstances the regular commercial flights should not be disturbed due to Air
Force sorties.
77. The Committee has learned that A-320 aircraft flying to Leh have to carry more
load than the allowed. The Committee recommends that instead A-320, A-319 aircrafts
should be operated in this sector that comparatively has more load capacity.
78. It was also brought to the notice of the Committee that during peak season airfare
from different stations to Srinagar shoots up and no upper limit has been prescribed for
fare. As a result, journey to Kashmir becomes costlier than going to Singapore, Malaysia,
etc. The Committee is of the view that there should be some regulation of fares for this
sector and people of the Jammu and Kashmir may be given relaxation in airfare on the
pattern of North-East region.
DEVELOPMENT AND MAINTENANCE OF NATIONAL HIGHWAYS IN SRINAGAR
79. During its visit, the Committee discussed the development and maintenance of National
Highways with the representatives of the Union Ministry of Road Transport and Highways,
Government of Jammu and Kashmir, National Highways Authority of India (NHAI) and Border
Roads Organisation (BRO). During the meeting held at Srinagar, the Committee was informed

17
that there were four National Highways passing through the State of Jammu and Kashmir with
the total length of 1245 KM, details of which are as under:—
NH Description Important Cities in Length Agency/
NO. Jammu and Kashmir in Km Entrustment/fund
1-A Jallandhar-Uri Jammu-Banihal 496 402 Km With
Srinagar-Baramula-Uri NHAI and 94
Km with BRO
(Jammu and Srinagar 38 With the NHAI
By passes)
I-B Batote-Khanabal Batote-Doda-Kishtwar- 274 With BRO
Sinthanpass- Khanabal
l-C Domel-Katra Domel-Katra 15 With BRO
I-D Srinagar-Leh-Kargil 422 With BRO
TOTAL: 1245
NATIONAL HIGHWAYS DEVEOPMENT PROJECTS IN JAMMU AND KASHMIR
80. It is seen from the table above that the National Highways Authority of India (NHAI) has
been entrusted with about 402 km of NH-1A, out of the total 496 km. length connecting Jammu
to Srinagar. The Committee was informed that, the work of four laning was under implementation
on 113.65 km. (details given in Annexure-III) Remaining stretch of NH-1A was approved as part
of NHDP Phase-II, at an estimated cost of Rs.1650 crore based on tentative per km cost basis
at 2002 prices. Now, as per the Details Project Reports (DPR), the cost is estimated at Rs.8445
crore at 2007 prices excluding security costs. (details given in Annexure-IV).
81. The, Committee was further informed that the NHAI had engaged consultant for
preparation of DPR for remaining section of Jammu–Srinagar section of NH-1A. The Government
had directed to take up the works on BOT basis. As per financial and economical analysis
submitted by the consultants, the projects were not found viable under BOT (Toll) mode. The
matter was deliberated in the Committee of Secretaries on 1st April, 2008, and was decided that
the Department of Road Transport and Highways may take the proposal of four–laning of
Jammu–Srinagar Section directly to Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs (CCEA), with full
justification of increase in cost and the non-viability of BOT (Toll) option, for taking up the
project on BOT (Annuity) mode, failing which Department of Road Transport and Highways may
be authorized to go ahead on EPC basis. On clearance from CCEA, the project proposals shall
be put up before-Public Private Partnership Appraisal Committee (PPPAC) and thereafter the
document for qualification shall be floated by NHAI.
PRIME MINISTER’S PACKAGE
82. The Ministry further informed that Reconstruction Plan for Jammu and Kashmir was
announced during the visit of Prime Minister to the State on the 17th and 18th November, 2004.
Under the Reconstruction Plan seven roads were proposed to be improved. The details of
reconstruction taken under the Prime Minister’s package are as under:–
1. Construction of Mughal road to connect Shopian in Pulwama district of Kashmir
valley with Poonch and Rajouri regions in Jammu
Executing agency - PWD, J&K

18
Length of road - 84 kms
Cost based on Preliminary survey - Rs.159 crs (central share 50%)
Cost based on DPR - Rs.639.85 cr. (central share 50%)
The original target date of completion - March, 2007
Revised target date of completion - April, 2010
Up-to-date expenditure till April 2008 - Rs.l62.35 crore.
2. Widening of Domel-Katra road (NH-1C)
Executing agency - BRO
Length of the road - 14.4 kms
Cost based on Preliminary survey - Rs.30.00 cr.
Cost based on DPR - Rs.34.39 crs.
The original target date of completion - March, 2007
Revised target date of completion - July 2008
Up-to-date Expenditure till April, 2008 - Rs.27.11 crore.
3. Double-laning of Batote-Kisbtwar-Sinthan pass-Anantnag Road (NH-1B)
Executing agency - BRO
Length of the road - 265 kms
Cost of the project - Rs.463 crs.
(including cost of Rs.l00 crore for advancing the target date from 2013 to 2011)
Anticipated Cost of project - Rs.703.13 cr.
Requirement of fund for - Rs.90-100 crore per year
Expenditure April, 2008 - Rs.133.38 crore
4. Upgrading Srinagar-Uri LoC road
Length of the road - 111.5 kms.
Road is being developed in two stretches as under:
(a) Srinagar-Uri (NH-1A)
Executing agency - BRO
Length of the road - 94 kms.
Cost of work based on Preliminary survey - Rs.121 crore.
Anticipated Cost ofproject - Rs.439.39 cr.
Original Target date of completion - March, 2009
Revised target date of completion - March, 2010
Expenditure April, 2008 - Rs. 208.83 crs.

19
(b) Uri-LOC
Executing agency - BRO
Length of the road - 17.5 kms.
Cost based on Preliminary survey - Rs.34 crore.
Cost of estimate now anticipated - Rs.58.00 cr.
Target date of completion - March, 2009
Expenditure April 2008 - Rs.25.l crore
5. Construction of Khanabal-Pahalgam Road
Executing agency - PWD J&K
Length of the road - 43 kms.
Category of road - Major District Road
Cost based on Preliminary survey - Rs.25 cr.
Anticipated cost of the project - Rs.110.00 crs.
Original target date of completion - March, 2007
Revised target date of completion - Dec. 2008
Expenditure April 2008 - Rs.51.35 crs.
6. Construction of Narbal-Tangmarg road
Executing agency - PWD J&K
Length of the road - 37 kms.
Category of road - Major District Road
Cost based on Preliminary survey - Rs.38 cr.
Anticipated cost of project - Rs.116.00 crs.
Original target date of completion - March, 2007
Revised target date of completion - Sept. 2009
Expenditure April 2008 - Rs.51.90 Crs.
7. Double laning of Srinagar-Kargil-Leh Road (NH-1D)
Executing agency - BRO
Declared as NH-1D - 30th March, 2006
Length of the road - 422 kms.
Cost based on Preliminary survey - Rs.426.4 cr.
Cost of project now anticipated - Rs.807.03 crs.
Target date of completion - March, 2012
Expenditure April 2008 - Rs.105.9 crs.

20
83. The main reasons for delay in execution of almost all the projects in the State of Jammu
and Kashmir were attributed to following:
(i) The availability of limited working months, hardly four months, in a year, due to
difficult climatic conditions of the area. Agencies executing the work, therefore, find
it difficult to spend the desired amount of allocation. Now, on account of less
expenditure, the Ministry of Finance and Planning Commission reduce the plan outlay
at RE stage. This further aggravated the problem and the work cannot be taken up
further for wants of funds, it was argued. Other problem faced in the State are the
difficult and hilly terrain that not only delay the project but also increase the cost
of construction as compared to plain areas.
(ii) Land acquisition and environmental and forest clearances take lot of time. There are
delays in shifting of utilities also. Another peculiar problem in the State is local
opposition to the engagement of outside labourers.
(iii) non availability of manpower/machinery with BRO in case of departmental execution
also faced.
(iv) non availability of Contractors of big financial and technical capability in the State
of Jammu and Kashmir, was also cited as one of the reason for delay.
84. The Committee found that all these projects were running far behind the schedule,
delays being from 2 to 4 years and with this pace, the Committee cannot but apprehend
further delays in future. The Committee is of the view that development of National
Highways in Jammu and Kashmir is not only necessary for promotion of Tourism in the
region but also is of strategic importance for the nation.
85. The Committee appreciates the problem encountered in the construction of National
Highways in Jammu and Kashmir particularly on account of climatic conditions,
topography, hilly terrain including shortage of manpower. Such forced stoppage of work
naturally results in under-utilization of funds. It is unfortunate that this in turn leads to
reduction of plan outlay by the Ministry of Finance and Planning Commission. The
Committee expresses its concern about this and is convinced about the need for providing
special guidelines in respect of Jammu and Kashmir in keeping with these peculiar
problems to ensure that funds are available in time for the work relating to National
Highways in the region. In this connection Committee would like to reiterate its earlier
recommendation made in its 84th report on Demands for Grants (2005-06) of the
Department of Road Transport and Highways :
“The Committee appreciates the concern of the Ministry of Finance for ensuring
that the expenditure position in all the Ministries should have an even flow
throughout the year. In order to achieve this, Ministry of Finance have issued a
direction that only 33% of the BE should be spent in the last quarter of the year.
However, so far as Department of Road Transport and Highways is concerned, the
working in different parts of the country is affected due to weather conditions and
the restriction imposed by the Ministry of Finance creates a setback to the physical
activities in the areas of construction of Highways and Bridges by the Department.
The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Finance may
reconsider its decision and taking into account the peculiarity of the pattern of
utilization of funds due to factors which are beyond the control of the Department,
the Department of Road Transport and Highways should be exempted from any
such restriction on expenditure and should be allowed to spend their allocated
budget on various activities which are required to be carried out during that
particular period”.

21
86. The Committee is constrained to note that the preparation of DPR for remaining
section of Jammu to Srinagar section of NH-IA is still under process. The Government is
still waiting for execution of work under BOT (Toll) mode, which is not a viable
proposition as no private agency will be interested to take up the work in that section
on commercial grounds. The Committee is of the view that the Highway is of vital
importance not only for the economy of the State but also for the security of the Nation.
The Committee, therefore, recommends the Government should do itself and allocate
necessary budgetary provisions for four laning of Jammu-Srinagar Section of NH-l (A) and
provide plan outlay.
87. The Committee feels that some kind of special procedures may be devised for the
State. Funds may be put in non-lapsable category as is being done for other such areas
of the country. Cost-norms of the project also need to be made State specific. For land
acquisition, environmental and other clearances etc. single-window facility be put in place
at the earliest. In view of big contractors not coming forward, BRO need to be
strengthened in a big way both technically and financially. Adequate security, financial and
otherwise needs to be given to the people working on these projects.
88. T he Committee believes that with adequate planning, resources and machinery and
above all with men of strong determination and will, many major projects have been
completed world over even in far more arduous conditions. There is no reason; the
Committee feels that we cannot do it in Kashmir. The need of the hour is to work with
that spirit.
89. The Committee pointed out the poor maintenance of National Highways and desired to
know the justification of having fixed period of five years for repair of National Highways in
hilly terrain that got damaged almost every year due to vagaries of the adverse climatic
conditions. In response thereto the representatives of BRO admitted that the guidelines in this
regard were not relevant and needed modification so as to take the climatic conditions of the
area like J and K into account.
90. The representatives of BRO further submitted that the damages caused to the National
Highways was also due to poor drainage system. The Committee desired to know whether BRO
was involving the local bodies in the planning for the development of National Highways passing
through the towns and villages with a view to avoid the damages to the National Highways by
having proper drainage system to which the representative of BRO replied that they were not
doing.
91. The Committee is also of the view that prescribing the fixed period of 5 years for
repair of NH in hilly-terrain like that of Jammu Kashmir are not practicable as the roads
there get regularly damaged due to frequent rainfall, snow-fall, poor drainage system,
land slide, etc. The Committee, therefore, feels that the concerned guidelines need to be
modified so as to ensure that whenever there is damage to the NH, the repair work
should be taken up immediately. As regards the damage to the National Highways passing
through the towns and villages due to poor drainage, the Committee, recommends that
the agencies engaged in planning and development of NH should consult the local bodies
to obviate the possibility of any damage to the National Highways due to poor drainage
system.
ISSUES RAISED BY THE TRANSPORT DEPARTMENT, JAMMU AND KASHMIR
92. Surface transport being the main mode of transportation in the State is under tremendous
pressure due to new housing colonies and towns coming up and increase in human population.

22
Repair of existing roads, demand of new roads and transport, facilities are required on heavy
scale. Problems faced are:—
Bus Stand:  Taxi, Mini Bus and Bus lack facilities for public and are to be developed on
modern lines for which Government of India may provide financial assistances.
Road Net Work: Due to increased requirement of transport and road net-work, the Cities
and main town need to have redesign, Circular roads around them to decongest the traffic. It
would also has huge financial implication. Government of India may provide necessary
infrastructure and financial assistance for installation of traffic signals at all important crossing
and for construction of fly-overs.
Highway: Highway parks need to be built between Srinagar-Jammu Highway having basic
amenities for both passengers and drivers.
Mode of Transport: The local transporters who have suffered losses during the turmoil
period in the State need to be given package so that the old vehicles can be replaced with latest
model Hi-tech vehicles, both for inter-State and intra-State routes. The State Government has
already declared 25 year old vehicles condemned and the vehicle owners are demanding special
package for which a proposal has already been submitted to the Government of India.
Model Driving Institutes:  Model driving institutes need to be established at all the
District Headquarters to impart training to the drivers and also will become source of public
awareness. These will help in making the State accident free zone.
Vehicular Pollution: In order to reduce the vehicular pollution, environment friendly fuel
like CNG needs to be introduced in the State for which the Government of India has to make
policies for its availability in every district headquarter of the State.
Infrastructure for Motor Vehicles Department: The Motor Vehicles Department has to
develop the infrastructure for the Transport Commissioner’s Office, Srinagar, Regional Transport
Officers and Asstt. Regional Transport Officers except for RTO, Kathua and Transport
Commissioner’s Office, Jammu.
Weigh Bridges: Weigh Bridges are to be installed at Lakhanpur, Udhampur, Lower Munda
and Ganderbal in order to check the menace of over loading which is one of the main causes
of accidents.
Satellite Connectivity between RTOs/ARTOs:  There is dire need to satellite
connectivity of all the RTOs and ARTOs with the Transport Commissioner’s Office.
Specialized design for passengers vehicles and load carriers:  The vehicle
manufacturers need to be advised to develop specialized vehicles and load carriers for
mountainous regions which can be safe for the public.
93. The Committee notes the demand submitted by the State Government. The
Committee finds that most of the demand relates to promotion of Tourism. The
Committee recommends that the matter may be looked into in consultation with State
Government with a view to providing necessary assistance as a special case under
intimation to the Committee.
94. The Committee visited Leh and held meeting with the representatives of Ladakh
Autonomous Hill Development Council, Leh on 5th June, 2008. The representatives of the
Council submitted a memorandum to the Committee wherein inter-alia  following points were
raised:—

23
(i) Construction of road through Parang-La:  It was argued that due to climatic
disadvantage, developmental works had to be suspended in the Ladakh region for 5-
6 months in a year. Construction of road from Tsomoriri in Leh to Spiti in Himachal
Pradesh via Parangla Pass, a stretch of 60 km., becomes very important to provide
connectivity to the region throughout the year.
(ii) Construction of roads on India-China Border: The budgetary allocation for
Ladakh is given on the basis of population and number of a districts, Leh being the
largest district in the country in terms of area. It has sparse population. This puts
them in disadvantage in terms of allocation of funds. The Ladakh Autonomous Hill
Development Council (LAHDC) had to take care of developmental works for its
people scattered over a large area of 45000 Sq. Km. It is bigger then the State of
Himachal Pradesh. There are quite a few areas where the road connectivity if taken
up on priority by providing special funds from the Central Road Fund (CRF) would
prove very beneficial for the people residing particularly in the border areas.
(iii) Kailash Mansarovar road via Domchek (Ladakh)
95. In the recent past there has been repeated tragedies en-route the Kailash Mansarovar
Pilgrimage in which large number of lives were lost. Due to the difficult terrain and vulnerability,
this route, has seen may many tragedies in the past. It may, therefore, be desirable to have an
alternative, safe, dependable and shorter route to Kailash Mansarovar pilgrimage. Domchek in
Ladakh provides this very alternative. This route is motorable, and in fact, one can go to Kailash
and be back in Delhi with in a week. It will not only benefit the pilgrims both Hindu and
Buddhist, but also would lead to economic development in the region. Apart from the above,
representatives of council requested for construction of following roads:
• Loma Bend to Demchok
• Loma Bend to Hanle
• Korzok to Chumur
• Lukung to Chushul
These roads are very near the India-China borders.
96. The Committee recommends construction of roads from Tsomoriri in Leh to Spiti
in Himachal Pradesh via Parangla Pass and opening of Kailash Mansarovar pilgrimage via
Demchok in Ladakh as an alternative pilgrimage route. The Committee finds that the
budgetary allocation for road projects in Ladakh is given on the basis of being a district
which is very meager considering the vast area of Ladakh region for road projects. The
Committee recommends that special fund should be provided for road connectivity projects
in Ladakh region from the Central Road Fund.
CONSERV ATION AND MAINTENANCE OF MONUMENTS IN SRINAGAR CIRCLE
97. The Committee during its visit to J and K, discussed this subject at Leh with the
representatives of the Union Ministry of Culture, Archaeological Survey of India, Department of
Culture, J and K and LAHDC on the 5th June, 2008. During the meeting, the Committee was
informed that the archaeological activities in Jammu and Kashmir had commenced long before
1958, when the ancient monuments and archaeological sites and remains located in the State,
which were considered to be of national importance, were transferred from the State of Jammu
and Kashmir to Archaeological Survey of India, for better maintenance and upkeep. In 1983, a
full-fledged Ladakh Project with adequate staff was created for upkeep and maintenance of
monuments of Ladakh region. In 1985, the project was merged with the Srinagar Circle. Since

24
then the Srinagar Circle had undertaken comprehensive conservation of monuments in a planned
manner and regular maintenance and upkeep, in addition to exploration, excavations, research and
other archaeological activities. The Archaeological Survey of India has made arrangements to
conserve these relics of ancient glory, besides it has taken due care to protect and preserve the
cultural heritage of the State for the posterity.
98. The Buddhist sites and monuments at Harwan (ancient Shadarhadvana), Ushkura (ancient
Huvishkapura), Parihaspora, Malangpora and Pandrethan have also been protected by the ASI.
The Buddhist monasteries (Gonpa) of Ladakh were established during the tenth-eleventh century
A.D. Some of the monasteries and stupas (chorten) were constructed during fourteenth to
seventeenth century A.D. The monasteries at Alchi, Lamayuru, Phyang, Hemis and Thiksey are
treasure houses of ancient murals, thangka paintings, metal sculptures and other artefacts and
continue the ancient Buddhist monastic traditions in Ladakh. Besides, the Archaeological Survey
of India has also protected sculptures at Drass, Mulbeg and a large fourteenth century Stupa at
Tisseru near Leh.
99. Some of the finest specimens of Kashmir Sultanate and Mughal period are protected in
the valley. The earliest among them are Tomb of Zainual-Abdin’s mother and Khanquah of Shah
mosque. The arcade of the spring at V erinag, the source of Vitasta (Jhelum), the mosque of
Akhun Mulla Shah, Pathar Masjid and terraced structural complex called Parimahal attract visitors
very much. The Mughal rulers had constructed carvan-sarais on ancient route which are
protected at Khanpur, Aliabad and Hirpur.
100. The Dogra rulers of Jammu constructed a number of Palaces and Forts in Jammu region,
the more famous among them have been protected at Ramnagar and Akhnoor. The mural
paintings in the Sheesh Mahal at Ramnagar represent the classical Dogra style of nineteenth
century. As on today, in all there are 69 monuments and sites in the care of Srinagar Circle
ranging trom Neolithic to late medieval period. A List of monuments and archaeological site &
remains in the protection of the Archaeological Survey of India, Srinagar Circle is given at
(Annexure-V).
101. The R epresentatives of the State Government informed the Committee that the State
Department of Archaeology was established in the year 1982, was looking after 30 State
Protected Monuments/Archeological sites (15 each in Jammu and Kashmir Division) declared
protected (Annexure-VI)  under the provision of “Ancient Monuments preservation Act 1977. Eight
monuments were under the process of declaration (Annexure-VII). The State Government was
taking every possible effort for the conservation of the protected Monuments. However, they
cited the shortage of human and financial resources for conservation work at number of
important Monuments of historical significance. Such Monuments were in dilapidated condition
before their declaration as State Protected. The timely attention of the Department had saved
them from extinction and human vandalism. Each protected Monument was provided with the
services of a Chowkidar for day and night watch and ward. They informed that the conservation
work was being done by the State Archaeology Department at various important monuments such
as Mosque and Tomb of Madin Sahib, Hawal, Srinagar, Moughal Sarai Chingus, Rajouri, Hari
Parbat Fort Srinagar, Bahu Fort, Jammu, etc.
102. They also brought to notice of the Committee the pending issues with the Central
Government and desired that the State protected monument of Bhimgarh Fort at Reasi should be
taken over by the ASI as the necessary clearance from the State Government was given in the
2004. They further sought an Special Central Assistance of Rs. One crore for maintaining
monuments which were damaged due to earthquake in 2005. They also desired to erect the
historical wall around Hari Parbat Fort and old Nagar city which is most pathetic condition and
nearing extinction, should also be restored by ASI as Centrally protect monument.

25
103. The Committee notes that all the regions of Jammu and Kashmir have enormous
archaeological wealth in different forms that need to be preserved and protected. But only
99 monuments/archaeological sites were declared as protected, either by the ASI or the
State Archaeology Department. Amongst the remaining ones the Committee feels most of
them require to be brought under protected category immediately. The Committee,
therefore, recommends that to save the important historical monuments in the State from
extinction their conservation and restoration should be given top priority by the ASI and
the State Government. To enable the ASI to carry out its activities in a better way, the
Ministry of Culture should consider shifting of Circle office from Jammu to Srinagar for
administrative purposes.
104. It also recommends the Ministry of Culture to examine the proposals submitted by
the State Government for the protection and restoration of Bhimgarh Fort, Hari Parbat
and old Nagar city under Centrally protected monument for expeditious disposal.
Sanctioning a special grant to ASI for maintaining the monuments which were damaged
by the earthquake in the State should be considered and decision be intimated to the
Committee.
CONSERV ATION AND MAINTENANCE OF MONUMENTS
105. The Committee was informed that the conservation and maintenance of monuments under
Srinagar Circle was a difficult task due to inclement weather condition, high altitude and remote
location, inaccessibility during winter season and shortage of staff etc. Moreover, the
accumulation of water, snow and growth of vegetation were cited as other factors causing great
damage to these monuments. During the years 2005-06, 2006-07 and 2007-08, the Archaeological
Survey of India had taken up the following monuments of national importance for conservation
and maintenance in the Circle:
District Leh :  Hemis Gumpha, Hemis, Chansa Jangsa (the Royal Kitchen) of Thiksey Monastery,
Ancient palace, Takchen Assembly Hall, Old Castle, Tsemo Hill, Buddhist Monastery, Alchi,
Buddhist Monastery, Lamayuru, Leh Palace, Shey Palace Shey, Phyang Monastery, Phyang,
Thiksey Monastery, Thiksey, Tsogskhang and adjoining portion at Phyang, Pradakshina path of
Thiksey monastery, Central Portion of Leh Palace.
District Srinagar : Shankracharya temple, Akhun Mulla Shah Mosque, Buddhist site Harwan,
Kathi Darwaza
District Anantnag :  Mughal Arcade Verinag, Bumzuva Cave and Temple, Bumzuva, Sun Temple
Martand, Groups of temples at Naranag
District Pulwama : Avantiswamin temple, Avantipur, Avantisvara temple, Avantipur, Ancient
temple Kakpora, Shiva temple at Kakpora, Shiva temple at Ladhuv
District Badgam :  Khanpur Sarai, Khanpur
District Baramulla :  Ancient Stupa, monastery & Chaitya at Parihaspora, Pratapswamin temple,
Tapper, Buddhist site Ushkara, Shiva temple, fategarh, Sugandesha temple, pattan, Shiva temple,
Buniyar, Detha Mandi, Bandi
District Udhampur : Ancient Palace attributed to Raja Suchet Singh, Ramnagar, Ancient Fort at
Ramnagar, Ancient temple (Kala Dera) Thalora, Ancient temple (Nand Babour) Thalora, Group of
Temples at Kiramchi, Dera Temple Manwal, Devi Bhagwati Temple
District Jammu :  Remains of Ancient Site at Ambaran, Akhnoor, Akhnoor Fort, Akhnoor
District Kathua : Shiva temple, Billawar.

26
106. The Committee notes that conservation, preservation and maintenance of centrally
protected monuments and sites are the prime task of ASI. Inspite of all the adversities,
the Archaeological Survey of India was doing stupendous task of repairs and conservation
of the monuments for maintaining their historical and aesthetic values. The Committee
appreciates the ASI for its work particularly in structural repairs, chemical preservation
and environmental development works around monuments.
107. But at the same time the Committee feels that ASI should conduct preservation,
heritage management and exploration of new destinations of historic importance for
promotion of tourism in the State especially in Ladakh region. Kargil has tremendous
potential for exploring tourism and cultural heritage. The Committee was informed that
three rocks carved statues (Bamyan type) of Avalakateshvara from Ghandhara form of art
situated at Barsoo Nallah, Appatii in Kargil block and Mulbekh in Shargole block are
lying unattended since years and need immediate preservation. The Committee
recommends that the Ministry of Culture and the ASI must undertake for maintenance
and preservation of these historical/religious place, object and buildings on priority basis.
Funds be earmarked for this purpose.
SCIENTIFIC STUDIES AND CHEMICAL PRESERV ATION
108. W ith a view to improve the state of preservation of monuments in the Srinagar Circle,
many significant scientific, technical as well as research studies have been carried out to study
the weathering behaviour of different building materials with a view to evolve appropriate
conservation measures. These studies in the form of scientific articles/research papers have been
published in international as well as national journals. The mural painting which are mainly on
mud plaster have been executed in tempera style. To identify the conservation problems of
various monasteries of the Ladakh region viz. Shey, Alchi, Hemis, Thiksey, likir, Phyang etc. have
been inspected. The general conservation problems from the chemical conservation point have
been studied in depth. The Buddhist monasteries are made of adobe structures and are in
religious use, the paintings have been affected both by natural climatic conditions and human
factors. Besides, in the recent past, there have been significant variations in the environmental
conditions, which are harmful for the adobe structures. A good number of scientific studies have
been carried out to understand and further improve the conservation measures. The ASI informed
that even after great persuasion, chemical conservation work in the monasteries suffered as
Lamas in-charge of the monastery did not agree to permit any chemical conservation work in
the monasteries. The conservation works were taken up in Sum-tesk shrine of Alchi monastery,
preservation of mural paintings in the inner hall of Shey Palace. A workshop was organized by
the Archaeological Survey of India at Shey-Palace in order to make Lamas, and the local people
aware about the care and values of their cultural heritage.
109. The Committee notes that ASI is taking up the scientific study and chemical
preservation in Ladakh region with a view to identify the conservation problem of various
monasteries in the region namely Shey, Alchi, Remis, Thiksey, Lakir, Phyang etc. The
Committee finds that most of the monasteries are living monasteries and are at present
under religious use and many changes in the original structures and painting are being
effected by the Lamas in the monasteries. The Committee feels that this has caused
heavy damage and posed great challenges in protecting of these monuments.
110. The Committee is anxious to note that ASI was not allowed to take up
conservation work at Hemis monastery and Lakir monastery by the management
Committee headed by the Lamas. The Committee feels that these monasteries being the
treasure house of the Buddhist architecture and literature must be preserved to retain its

27
ancient glory. The Committee recommends that ASI in coordination with the local
representatives should make efforts to convince Lamas to persuade them to allow ASI to
take up conservation and preservation work at the monasteries in the region so that the
glory of ancient Buddhist monastic tradition and cultural heritage could be saved. The
Committee saw itself that these monasteries needed urgent help to protect and preserve
their rich cultural heritage that are being damaged in various ways. The Committee
recommends that the schools run by the monasteries were being given some support by
the Ministry of Culture. It was informed that the help was too meagre to have any
impact. The Committee recommends that this cultural support for the schools run by
monasteries be enhanced adequately this financial year itself.
ARCHAEOLOGICAL EXCAV ATIONS
111. Archaeological Survey of India undertook some of the most important excavations in the
past at Burzahom, Semthan and Gufkral in Kashmir Manda (Akhnoor) and small scale excavation
at Ambaran in Jammu for understanding different cultural aspects of the by gone ages in Jammu
and Kashmir. These excavations showed the continuity in cultural development in the valley.
ARCHAEOLOGICAL EXPLORATION
112. Besides regular archaeological excavations, the Srinagar circle has conducted exploratory
surveys in Jammu and Kashmir districts and several new sites with Neolithic, early historical and
early medieval cultural assemblage have been discovered. Important metallic sculptures and other
artifacts have been located in different Buddhist monasteries in Ladakh in particularly in Nubra
and Zanskar areas. This revealed evidence of a large number of camping sites on ancient trade
routes and rock engravings on granite boulders and rocks. The important exploration sites are
in Bhaiya and Satura in district Kathua, Kot-Garhi, Manda, Lam and Nad-Da-Khu in Akhnoor,
District Jammu, Umoh in Anantnag, Nyar-mo in Leh
STRUCTURAL REMAINS
113. During the course of the exploration the remains of a Mughal sarai, Larkipora,
Lookbhawan were noticed. These structures belong to the Mughal period and were in dilapidated
and ruined conditions. These remains were restored to their early glory by the ASI.
114. The Committee wants to put on record its appreciation for ASI’s Srinagar circle for
conducting archeological excavations and exploration in Jammu and Kashmir resulting in
discovery of new sites and structural remains of great cultural and historical importance.
The Committee feels these findings help in understanding sequence of different cultural
assemblage of the by gone era in the State. The Committee desires the need for
increasing the activities of ASI particularly, excavation and exploration to other important
sites in the Jammu and Kashmir. ASI needs to be strengthened adequately for carrying
out such activities.
PUBLICATIONS
115. Archaeological Survey of India, Srinagar Circle has brought out a publication namely,
Material for Indian Archaeology – A Review and published brochures and folders on ticketed
monuments for Ancient Palace, Ramnagar, Group of temples, Kiramchi, Avantiswamin temple,
Avantipur, An Ancient Palace, Leh. It also published a literature on excavated site at Ambaran,
District Jammu.
116. The Committee appreciates that the ASI is publishing brochures on the ticketing
monuments in J and K for information of the tourists. The Committee desires that the

28
brochures should also be published in the regional language besides Hindi and English for
wider coverage.
117. The Committee recommends that the ASI should bring out the field reports and
publish reviews periodically of the activities carried out during each year on time.
BUDGET
118. The Committee enquired about the details of allocation and expenditure incurred
during the last three years by the ASI, Srinagar Circle. It was informed that a provision for
Rs.2.38 crore under the plan and Rs.4.102 crore under the non-plan had been made to the Circle
for carrying out conservation and maintenance activities during the year 2008-09. However, the
details of allocation of funds made and expenditure incurred on the conservation and maintenance
activities in the State of Jammu and Kashmir during last three year i.e. 2005-06 to 2007-08 are
as under:—
(Rs. in crore)
Sl. No. Y ear Pl an/Non-Plan Alloction Expenditure
1. 2005-06 Plan 1.55 1.54
Non-Plan 1.20 1.19
2. 2006-07 Plan 1.62 1.53
Non-Plan 1.15 1.15
3. 2007-08 Plan 1.60 1.60
Non-Plan 1.40 1.40
4. 2008-09 Plan 2.38 Nil
Non-Plan 4.10 -
119. The Committee is of the considered view that allocation of Rs.2.38 crore under
the plan and Rs.4.10 crore under the non-plan made to the Circle would not be adequate
for carrying out conservation and maintenance activities during the year 2008-09. The
Committee feels that apart from on-going projects, a large number of conservation works
are yet to be taken up by the Srinagar Circle, which would require more allocation. The
Committee recommends the Ministry of Culture to enhance the allocation to the Srinagar
Circle for in view of the stupendous task of repairing and conservation of monuments
before them. The Committee also recommends that the Government should identify the
schemes for conservation and maintenance of monuments for which MPLADS and MLA
funds could be utilized, particularly, in Ladakh region so that the dependence over
Government for funds can be reduced to some extent.
TICKETED MONUMENTS
120. The Committee desired to know the name of ticketed monuments and details of revenue
earned during the last three years, the representative of ASI informed the Committee that the
four monuments in the Circle were being ticketed namely; Group of temples Kiramchi, District
Udhampur, Ancient Palace Leh, District Leh, Avantiswamin temple, Avantipur, District Pulwama
and Ancient Palace Ramnagar, District Udhampur. During the year 2005, a total of 12149
domestic tourists and 1804 international tourists visited these monuments and a total revenue of
Rs.2,05,145/- and $720 was earned. In the year 2006, a total of 9109 domestic tourists and
1769 international tourists visited these monuments and a total revenue of Rs.l,97,645/- and $496

29
was earned. In the year 2007, a total of 11544 domestic tourists and 1859 international tourists
visited these monuments and a total revenue of Rs.l,72,720/- and $1418 was earned.
121. The Committee notes with concern the decline in number of persons visiting the
monuments. It, however, recommends that more monuments be brought under the
ticketed category but the charges be kept as nominal and the revenue earned should be
given to the ASI for the conservation and maintenance of the monuments.
TOURIST AMENITIES AT THE MONUMENTS
122. During the course of deliberations the Committee was informed that the drinking water
and toilet facilities had been provided at the monuments. Drinking Water facilities had been
provided by the installing water coolers and water purifier at Ancient Palace, Ramnagar, Ancient
Fort Ramnagar, Samadhi of Queen Ramnagar, Devi Bhagwati Temple, Manwal and Group of
temples at Kiramchi. They further informed that the toilets were proposed to be refurbished and
modernized at Group of temple, Kiramchi, Ancient Palace, Ramnagar, Buddhist Monastery, Alchi,
Group of temples, Naganag, Akhnoor Fort, Akhnoor. Besides new toilet blocks will be provided
at monuments during 2008-09, Chaitya, Stupa and Monastery Parihaspora, Ancient site at
Harwan, Excavated site Ambaran. During 2008-09, the Approach pathways would be provided at
Group of temple Kiramchi, Ancient temples Kala Dera I and II, Manwal, Ancient Palace
Ramnagar, Shankargaurisvara Temple Pattan, Leh Palace, Leh.
123. The Committee notes that besides the conservation and maintenance works, the
ASI, Srinagar Circle was also improving to a great extent the environs of the monuments
by providing roads, electrification, etc. as also amenities to the tourist including toilet and
drinking water facilities at different places.
124. The Committee however during its visit to Leh noted that Remis and Thiskey
monasteries did not have basic facilities like drinking water and toilets. The Committee
recommends that these basic facilities should be provided in all the monuments in the
State, especially, the Hemis and Thiskey monasteries in Leh that attract large number of
tourists.
SECURITY OF MONUMENTS
125. When pointed out about the encroachment at monuments and shortage of monuments
attendants, the representatives of the ASI informed that the shortage of staff was due to a
number of posts lying vacant in the Circle. However, with the remaining regular staff and casual
labourers, watch and ward of the monuments had been arranged, round the clock. Necessary
steps were being taken to fence the areas around the monuments to avoid encroachment. This
way the services of the staff were utilized fully but they felt that the watch and ward
staff was inadequate as per the requirement and many group ‘D’ posts were lying vacant. They
also informed that the total sanctioned strength of Srinagar Circle was 101, out of these 83
posts were filled and 18 posts were lying vacant. The details of vacant posts are given at
(Annexure-VIII).
126. The Committee notes with concern that large number of group ‘D’ posts are lying
vacant, as a result, the ASI was facing difficulties in ensuring the security of the
monuments in the State. The Committee considers this as a major obstacle in the process
of maintenance of monuments. The Committee recommends that the Ministry of Culture
should ensure that the vacant posts in the Circle be filled up on priority and new posts
also be created as per the requirements. Steps may also be taken to train the
Monuments’ Attendants so that they can take care of the monument more effectively.

30
HORTICULTURAL ACTIVITIES
127. The Committee has been informed that Archaeological garden development works were
started in the year 1974 in a vast area of 14 acres around Sun temple, Martand. The garden
is comprised of lawn, flowerbeds and orchard. Subsequently, five more gardens were developed
in the valley and garden development in Jammu region was taken up in the year 1999 at Ram
Nagar Palace, Ram Nagar. At present there are eleven archaeological gardens in the State of
Jammu and Kashmir covering the area of 28.17 acres. The existing gardens maintain by the ASI
in the monuments are Sun temple, Martand, Avantiswamin temple, Avantipura, Avantiswara
temple, Avantipura, Gauri Shanker temple, Pattan, Shankracharya temple, Srinagar, Pather Masjid,
Srinager, Ramnagar Palace, Ramnagar, Ramnagar Fort and Samadhi, Ramnagar Devi Bhagwati
Temple, Manwal, Ancient temple complex, Kirmichi Kala Dera temple I and II.
128. The Committee appreciates the archaeological garden development works in the
State especially in the Srinagar and Jammu region. The Committee recommends that
more gardens should be developed in the archaeological sites in the State. In Srinagar
world famous Shalimar Bagh and Nishat Bagh have been the main source of tourists
attraction. The Committee recommends that the ‘light and sound’ programme which was
used to be arranged in collaboration with ITDC in Shalimar Bagh be restarted
immediately.

31
OBSERV ATIONS/CONCLUSIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS — AT A GLANCE
Such an impressive growth in tourism notwithstanding, India’s share in the world’s
tourist traffic was a mere 0.55 per cent in 2007. While the number of tourists visiting
India and earnings therefrom may be increasing, its slow growth rate as well as
insignificant share in world’s tourism has always been a cause of concern to this
Committee. (Para 2)
Paradoxically, however, India has not able to exploit this potential. The Committee,
therefore, is of the opinion that much more needs to be done to exploit our tourism
potential significantly, if not fully, and we have a long way to go in this regard.
(Para 3)
Development of Tourism in Jammu and Kashmir
Till 1989, tourism had been the major economic activity of the State. During the
past one decade, however, the tourist arrival received a major set back affecting the
economic activity of the State adversely due to difficult circumstances prevailing in the
State. But, the things appears to have been improving slowly particularly during the last
few years. Development of tourism in the State of Jammu and Kashmir, the Committee
notes has received priority both by the Central Government as well as the State
Government. (Para 5)
The Committee appreciates the efforts made by the State Government of Jammu
and Kashmir for development of Tourism in the State. However, the Committee feels that
the strategy and initiatives taken by the State require a more focused approach for
effective and structured growth. The Committee was informed that there was no ‘‘Tourism
Policy’’ for the State. The Committee is of the opinion that the policy supports would
certainly help achieves goals and targets in this sector more effectively. The Committee,
therefore, emphasizes the need to have a tourism policy in place. It also emphasizes that
the strategy for marketing tourism products of the State needs to be revisited for tapping
the domestic and International tourism markets. The State should endeavour to assess the
market trend and focus on diverse and varied tourism products of Jammu and Kashmir
targeting specially the domestic middle class tourists. (Para 8)
Tourist Arrivals
The Committee after visiting many places in and around Srinagar had a sense of
satisfaction that normalcy was returning to the valley, as a large number of tourists were
seen at different places that included the local people. The Committee views this as a
positive development reflecting the existing mindset of the people about the law and order
situation of the valley was changing. The Committee feels that this has an impact in
increasing the tourist traffic to the valley not only in summer but during the winter
season as well. The Committee is of the view that to keep pace with the increasing
traffic, efforts be made to develop quality tourism infrastructure and tourism products for
providing better services to domestic and international tourist. The Committee desires
that State Government and Central Government need to work together to provide best
facilities at most economical prices. They should also sensitize/educate all the stakeholder
31

32
in tourism industry and the general public about various issues including hygiene,
sanitation and waste disposal system at monuments and tourist places, treatment of
tourist, ensuring safety and security and hassle free comfortable stay for the tourists in
the State. (Para 11)
Isolated cases of harassment of tourists severely undermine tourism. The
Committee is concerned to note the recent happenings in Kashmir valley and Jammu
regions after visit of the Committee and hopes that the things will improve very soon.
The Committee feels that the role of media is very crucial in building public confidence
about a place. It needs to be very careful as a report about a small incident may spread
scare all over. A reporting should not have a gap between impression that it creates and
actual ground reality. (Para 12)
Adventure Tourism
Apart from the areas selected for adventure tourism such as Sonamarg, Gulmarg,
Aru (Pahalgam), Suru valley (Kargil), Stock (Leh), Patnitop, Mansar, there are several
other areas which need to be developed for this purpose, particularly in Ladakh region.
Kargil is now catching the imagination of tourists very fast. (Para 13)
The Committee notes that Adventure Tourism is relatively a new segment and
Ministry of Tourism is providing financial assistance to the State for development of
infrastructure and other facilities required for trekking, rock climbing, mountaineering,
winter sports, skiing etc. The Committee also notes that J and K Tourism Department
was able to acquire good quality equipment of international standard for these activities.
The Committee feels that the Kashmir Valley and the Ladakh region have immense
potential for adventure tourism that largely remains untapped so far, despite Government
efforts made for this purpose. It has been found that foreign tourists are more attracted
to such tourism and, if, the latest equipments and infrastructure supported by the wider
publicity and human resources were provided, the Committee has little doubt that
adventure tourist would not be attracted to Jammu & Kashmir in large numbers. The
Committee recommends the Ministry to prioritize the Adventure Tourism projects in the
Jammu and Kashmir and give adequate publicity in India and abroad. (Para 16)
The Committee also desires the Ministry to identify new/alternate trekking routes
with the help of LAHDC and Jammu & Kashmir Government in the Ladakh region. The
Committee recommends that while going for construction of roads to new villages,
planning may be done in such a way that old and popular trekking route be saved.
Granting a special package to Ladakh region for developing new trekking routes may be
considered and finalized at the earliest. (Para 17)
The Committee notes that the construction of building for IISM at Gulmurg has
been completed and will handed over to the IISM by the ITDC. The Committee feels that
without proper building, the IISM cannot play its role and carry out its activities. The
Committee is of the view that upgradation of the institute will not only result in
increment in the tourist traffic to the valley but also promote adventure and sports
tourism in particular. The Committee, therefore, recommends the Ministry to ensure early
transfer of building to IISM at Gulmarg without further delay. (Para 18)
Pilgrim Tourism
The Committee feels that the pilgrim tourism has great tourist potential in all the
three regions of the State and is one of the major contributors to its economic growth

33
both in terms of employment and other activities. The facilities for pilgrims need to be
further expanded and the Government of Jammu and Kashmir should exploit the potential
of Jammu as a tourist destination and not just as transit point en route to Kashmir or
on a pilgrimage to the Vaishno Devi temple. (Para 22)
The Committee appreciates the efforts of the State Government for encouraging
local residents to supplement the availability of accommodation for the comfortable stay
of tourists in their homes to experience local customs and traditions and relish authentic
cuisine in the natural and affordable manner. This scheme appears to be working well
both for the tourist as well as the local residents. It needs to be further strengthened and
expanded to many more villages and towns. (Para 23)
Since, Ladakh has the best route to Kailash Mansarovar via  Demchok, the
Committee desires that the possibility could be explored for allowing Kailash Mansorover
Pilgrims via Demchok in Ladakh as an alternative route, which is safer dependable and
shorter. A special promotion campaign should be made to attract larger number of
pilgrims to the places of worship in all the region of the State by offering affordable
packages. (Para 24)
Tourism Infrastructure
In view of the position of accommodation explained above, and if it is true, the
Committee feels that there is a need to help them renovate. The Committee desires the
Governments to prepare a plan after mutual consultation for revival of these hotel
properties lying in utter neglect. However, the Committee emphasizes the need for bigger
and organized hotels to attract high end tourists in the State. (Para 25)
The Committee also recommends the Government to provide grant-in-aid to the
Centaur Hotel, Srinagar located just on the bank of Dal Lake for its total renovation and
restoration and providing other facilities. The portion occupied by the security forces also
needs to be vacated by accommodating them elsewhere, except for those needed for its
own security. (Para 26)
The Committee expresses its concern over the fast deterioration of the Dal lake
eco-system. The Committee is of the opinion that conservation and preservation of Dal
lake should be our priority. The Committee, therefore, recommends the Ministry to
pursue the matter with the Ministry of Environment and Forest for formulation of Action
Plan to control and manage pollution, de-silting, and de-weeding for conservation of the
lake eco-system. The Committee also recommends that a proper sewage disposal system
should be in place to reduce the organic discharge into the lake from the cluster of
house-boats. The encroachments also must be removed. (Para 27)
The Committee understands that the Government, through its own limited
resources, has not been able to provide the requisite funds for the development of tourist
infrastructure in the country. The Committee is of the opinion that the participation of
the private sector can go a long way in supplementing the efforts of the Government in
developing the tourist infrastructure in the J and K. The Committee, therefore, strongly
recommends that the Central/State Governments must try to remove the obstacles faced
by the private investors and ensure early implementation of the single window clearance
system for tourism projects. (Para 28)
The Committee feels that these being symbols of Kashmir and keeping in view
large number of people depending on these for livelihood, need adequate support to keep
them running. It, therefore, recommends that suitable assistance and support be given to

34
these Shikarawalas and Houseboat owners in the form of soft loans/subsidy for this
purpose. (Para 29)
The Committee finds that Leh generally is a long haul destination among
adventure tourists who love nature and has variety of accommodation suiting to the
requirement of the tourists. The Committee finds that there is a lack of good quality
hotel with convention facilities in Leh and the hotel staff need to be trained in the
hospitability industry. The share of local people in the hospitality sector in Leh is
negligible. The Committee, therefore, recommends that local people should be encouraged
and educated by training service providers to take part in the hospitality sector.
(Para 31)
Central Financial Assistance Scheme in Jammu and Kashmir
The Committee notes with concern that a large number of tourism projects were
sanctioned by the Union Ministry of Tourism for the State of J and K during the last
three years, but the pace of their progress has been very slow. The Committee
appreciates the constraints faced by the State due to adverse weather, shortage of working
days as well as manpower. The Committee recommends that the Governmeut of India
should consider modifying the norms for release of funds to the State keeping in mind
the topography and difficult terrain of the region and ensure that projects do not lag
behind for want of funds at any time during the financial year. The Committee also
desires that there should be proper co-ordination with the State Government so as to
obtain utilization certificates etc. (Para 37)
The Committee was informed that posts particularly at key positions were lying
vacant for years. The Committee desires that the State Government should be impressed
upon to fill up all the vacant posts specially the key-positions, at the earliest so that the
infrastructure development projects were not unduly delayed. (Para 38)
The Committee also recommends that since infrastructure development holds the
key to sustained growth in tourism sector, there is a need that the tourist sites and
destinations should be carefully selected on the basis of their potential to provide all
essential infrastructural facilities required by the tourists. An aggressive marketing and
publicity of these destinations and circuits should be made to generate tourism markets
across the world. The Committee also recommends that possibility be explored to open
‘‘Leh-Pangong-Spangmik-Hanle-Nyoma-Mahe-Leh as a tourist destinations in Ladakh for
inbound tourists. The Committee also impress upon the Ministry of Tourism to identify
more such circuits and destinations in the three regions to offer new products to tourists.
It would give impetus to the socio-economic development of the people living in the State.
(Para 39)
Rural Tourism
The Committee is of the view that rural tourism has great potential in Jammu and
Kashmir where any village could be developed as a tourist destination. It helps provide
boost to the local arts and conserve the local culture apart from preventing rural - urban
migration. The Committee, therefore, feels that the rural tourism needs to be given
added impetus in the State of Jammu and Kashmir. The Committee notes that out of 9
rural tourism projects sanctioned in the State only 5 projects have since been completed.
The Committee is of the view that more villages should be identified for priority
development involving the local bodies in order to promote tourism in rural areas. All the

35
pending rural tourism projects of the Government of Jammu amd Kashmir should be
examined and expedited by the Ministry of Tourism at the earliest. (Para 41)
Relaxation in Inner Line Restriction
The Committee is also of the view that normally, any restriction on the number
of tourists and the duration, would certainly impede promotion of tourism in a region; it
is true about Ladakh as well. The issue of relaxation in the existing restrictions needs
to be considered in totality by the concerned authorities of the Governments at various
levels. Much water has run into river Sindhu since this decision was taken; this is high
time that it should be reviewed suitability. (Para 43)
Tourist Transport
The Committee desires that the State Government should come forward by way of
providing low-interest loans to the private transporters for creating a fleet of super deluxe
coaches and luxury cars for the tourist's. Till then outside coaches carrying groups of
tourists should be allowed to operate in the State without any hassle. (Para 45)
Gondola
The Committee feels that the installation of more Gondolas would open up new
tourist areas in a sustainable manner without damaging the ecology of the area. The
Committee recommends that the booking of tickets of these Gondolas at Gulmarg should
be de-centralised through J and K tourism offices in the country to avoid huge rush at
the booking counters in Gulmarg and efforts be made to make the visit to Gondolas as
the part of the package tour so that the tourists are not harassed at the booking
windows. The Committee also desires that online bookings of the tickets should also made
permissible and the carriages which are not being used for petty technical repairs should
be made functional without further delay in view of the heavy rush of tourist in Gulmarg.
(Para 47)
Leave Travel Concession
Special offers from the Government and other agencies for their employees have
proved to be successful in the past. The Committee recommends that the LTC packages
for Central Government/Public sector employees to visit Kashmir should be re-introduce
to promote tourism and to revive the domestic tourist traffic to the J and K region by
Air. (Para 48)
Hotel Management Institute at Srinagar
In view of tremendous potential that the tourism industry has for employment
generation for the people of Jammu and Kashmir, need for more such training Institutes
can hardly be over emphasized. The Committee feels that the existing institutions would
not be sufficient for the need of the growing demand of the trained manpower in the
hospitality sector. Therefore, the Committee recommends that there should be atleast two
more such institutes one to be located in Leh. Besides, more Food Craft Institutes should
also be opened up in consultation with the State Government. (Para 50)
Incredible India campaign
The Committee also feels that the outlay earmarked for the media campaign and

36
promotional activities for J and K is not sufficient and should be increased adequately so
that the State got adequate publicity both in India and aboard. 'Incredible India campaign'
should give due prominence to Jammu and Kashmir with increased participation in
international tourism marts for promoting brand Kashmir. (Para 52)
Adverse Travel Advisories
The Committee recommends that the Government of India must put in all possible
efforts to advise all countries to co-operate and not issue negative travel advisory for its
citizens in the wake of some isolated incidents in J and K. The Committee also desires
that the media may be sensitized not to hype the tourist arrivals in the valley and they
should project the objective situation about the Srinagar in order to de-link tourism from
law and order situation. (Para 53)
DEVELOPMENT OF AIRPORTS AND AIR-CONNECTIVITY
The Chairman, Airports Authority of India informed during the meeting at Leh
that the issue of transfer of land that was pending with the IAF for a long time had been
settled and that the IAF had agreed to transfer an alternate land in lieu of the demanded
one and that the work in this regard would start immediately. The Committee expresses
its happiness and hopes that the work would now be started without further delay. The
Committee hopes that the Ministry of Defence will consider the request of Airports
Authority of India for transferring of land for other Airports also so that the process of
their modernization could be expedited. (Para 67)
Air connectivity
The Committee feels concerned about the private airlines not flying in Jammu and
Kashmir region and taking advantages of loopholes in the Route Dispersal Guidelines. The
Committee, therefore, strongly recommends to modify the Route Dispersal Guidelines in
such a way so as to make them mandatory to fly to places like Leh and Kargil also.
(Para 71)
The Committee while appreciating the development works being carried out by the
Airports Authority of India in the State, desires that pending work at Jammu and
Srinagar airports be completed within the scheduled time frame. The Committee
emphasizes the need for increasing the international services from the Srinagar airport to
attract mainly international tourists. (Para 72)
The Committee is of the opinion that the Kargil district has not received due
attention and the Kargil airport is not being used to its potential. It has caught the
imagination of the tourist now. The Committee recommends that till the work of
extension of Kargil Airport is undertaken and completed, the Government should operate
ATR 42 between Leh-Kargil-Srinagar. The Committee is not quite convinced with the
shortage of the ATR pilots as was sought to be made out by the NACIL during the
meeting. To begin with this service may be thrice per week, to be made daily later on.
The Committee feels that this would not only help promote tourism but also increase
economic activity in the region. Kargil is an area with lots of scenic beauty and cultural
heritage. The Committee, therefore, recommends strongly that the NACIL must take the
necessary steps in this direction and start services in this sector as early as possible.
(Para 73)
The Committee is constrained to say that the Leh Airport building did not reflect
the local ethnic architecture. In this connection Committee would like to invite the

37
attention of the Government to its recommendations contained in the 88th report which
is reproduced below:—
‘‘...the Committee emphasized that while constructing-the terminal building local
art and architecture should be kept in mind and building should be designed
accordingly. Civil Aviation and Tourism go hand in hand as airport is the gateway
for the tourists, which should unveil the rich cultural and architectural heritage of
the region. This would also attract more and more tourists and would substantially
take care of the capacity under-utilization problem of the airports. The Committee
also pointed out that adequate care should be taken with the help of the State
Government to open shopping outlets/cafeteria for showcasing local cuisines/
handicrafts ete.”
(Para 74)
The Committee finds that one of the major impediments in development of Leh as
a major tourist destination is the non-availability of direct flight service between Leh and
other major cities. The existing service between Delhi-Leh by the national carrier should
be made daily service. The Committee hopes that development of airports and increased
air connectivity to this region will definitely play a significant role in increasing the
tourist influx to the state. The Committee expresses its dismay over the fact that NACIL
does not have any plan to increase services to/from Jammu, Srinagar and Leh. The
Committee also feels that there is no adequate publicity about the special fares being
offered by NACIL viz. easy fare, apex fares and flight specific fares and link fares as a
result of which most of the tourists are not able to make use of the packages being
offered by the NACIL. The Committee is of the view that if 50 seater ATR aircraft are
used in this region, the cash losses perhaps may go down. The Committee also
recommends that NACIL should ensure due publicity of its special fares. (Para 75)
Sometimes, due to lack of coordination between Airlines, AAI and Air Force
regular commercial flights are cancelled or delayed leading to avoidable inconvenience to
the passengers and loss of revenue. The Committee is of the considered view that under
normal circumstances the regular commercial flights should not be disturbed due to Air
Force sorties. (Para 76)
The Committee has learned that A-320 aircraft flying to Leh have to carry more
load than the allowed. The Committee recommends that instead A-320, A-319 aircrafts
should be operated in this sector that comparatively has more load capacity. (Para 77)
It was also brought to the notice of the Committee that during peak season airfare
from different stations to Srinagar shoots up and no upper limit has been prescribed for
fare. As a result, journey to Kashmir becomes costlier than going to Singapore, Malaysia,
etc. The Committee is of the view that there should be some regulation of fares for this
sector and people of the Jammu and Kashmir may be given relaxation in airfare on the
pattern of North-East region. (Para 78)
DEVELOPMENT AND MAINTENANCE OF NATIONAL HIGHWAYS IN SRINAGAR
The Committee found that all these projects were running far behind the schedule,
delays being from 2 to 4 years and with this pace, the Committee cannot but apprehend
further delays in future. The Committee is of the view that development of National
Highways in Jammu and Kashmir is not only necessary for promotion of Tourism in the
region but also is of strategic importance for the nation. (Para 84)

38
The Committee appreciates the problem encountered in the construction of National
Highways in Jammu and Kashmir particularly on account of climatic conditions,
topography, hilly terrain including shortage of manpower. Such forced stoppage of work
naturally results in under-utilization of funds. It is unfortunate that this in turn leads to
reduction of plan outlay by the Ministry of Finance and Planning Commission. The
Committee expresses its concern about this and is convinced about the need for providing
special guidelines in respect of Jammu and Kashmir in keeping with these peculiar
problems to ensure that funds are available in time for the work relating to National
Highways in the region. In this connection Committee would like to reiterate its earlier
recommendation made in its 84th report on Demands for Grants (2005-06) of the
Department of Road Transport and Highways.
‘‘The Committee appreciates the concern of the Ministry of Finance for ensuring
that the expenditure position in all the Ministries should have an even flow
throughout the year. In order to achieve this, Ministry of Finance have issued a
direction that only 33% of the BE should be spent in the last quarter of the year.
However, so far as Department of Road Transport and Highways is concerned, the
working in different parts of the country is affected due to weather conditions and
the restriction imposed by the Ministry of Finance creates a setback to the physical
activities in the areas of construction of Highways and Bridges by the Department.
The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Finance may
reconsider its decision and taking into account the peculiarity of the pattern of
utilization of funds due to factors which are beyond the control of the Department,
the Department of Road Transport and Highways should be exempted from any
such restriction on expenditure and should be allowed to spend their allocated
budget on various activities which are required to be carried out during that
particular period.”
(Para 85)
The Committee is constrainted to note that the preparation of DPR for remaining
section of Jammu to Srinagar section of NH-1 A is still under process. The Government
is still waiting for execution of work under BOT (Toll) mode, which is not a viable
proposition as no private agency will be interested to take up the work in that section
on commercial grounds. The Committee is of the view that the Highway is of vital
importance not only for the economy of the State but also for the security of the Nation.
The Committee, therefore, recommends the Government should do itself. and allocate
necessary budgetary provisions for four laning of Jammu-Srinagar Section of NH-l(A) and
provide plan outlay. (Para 86)
The Committee feels that some kind of special procedures may be devised for the
State. Funds may be put in non-lapsable category as is being done for other such areas
of the country. Cost-norms of the project also need to be made state specific. For land
acquisition, environmental and other clearances etc. single-window facility be put in place
at the earliest. In view of big contractors not coming forward, BRO need to be
strengthened in a big way both technically and financially. Adequate security, financial and
otherwise needs to be given to the people working on these projects. (Para 87)
The Committee believes that with adequate planning, resources and machinery and
above all with men of strong determination and will, many major projects have been
completed world over even in far more arduous conditions. There is no reason; the
Committee feels that we cannot do it in Kashmir. The need of the hour is to work with
that sprit. (Para 88)

39
The Committee is also of the view that prescribing the fixed period of 5 years for
repair of NH in hilly-terrain like that of Jammu Kashmir are not practicable as the roads
there get regularly damaged due to frequent rainfall, snow-fall, poor drainage system,
land slide, etc. The Committee, therefore, feels that the concerned guidelines need to be
modified so as to ensure that whenever there is damage to the NH, the repair work
should be taken up immediately. As regards the damage to the National Highways passing
through the towns and villages due to poor drainage, the Committee, recommends that
the agencies engaged in planning and development of NH should consult the local bodies
to obviate the possibility of any damage to the National Highways due to poor drainage
system. (Para 91)
The Committee notes the demand submitted by the State Government. The
Committee finds that most of the demand relates to promotion of Tourism. The
Committee recommends that the matter may be looked into in consultation with State
Government with a view to providing necessary assistance as a special case under
intimation to the Committee. (Para 93)
The Committee recommends construction of roads from Tsomoriri in Leh to Spiti
in Himachal Pradesh via Parangla Pass and opening of Kailash Mansarovar pilgrimage via
Demchok in Ladakh as an alternative pilgrimage route. The Committee finds that the
budgetary allocation for road projects in Ladakh is given on the basis of being a district
which is very meager considering the vast area of Ladakh region for road projects. The
Committee recommends that special fund should be provided for road connectivity projects
in Ladakh region from the Central Road Fund. (Para 96)
CONSERV ATION AND MAINTENANCE OF MONUMENTS IN SRINAGAR CIRCLE
The Committee notes that all the regions of Jammu and Kashmir have enormous
archaeological wealth in different forms that need to be preserved and protected. But only
99 monuments/archaeological sites were declared as protected, either by the ASI or the
State Archaeology Department. Amongst the remaining ones the Committee feels most of
them require to be brought under protected category immediately. The Committee,
therefore, recommends that to save the important historical monuments in the State from
extinction their conservation and restoration should be given top priority by the ASI and
the State Government. To enable the ASI to carry out its activities in a better way, the
Ministry of Culture should consider shifting of Circle office from Jammu to Srinagar for
administrative purposes. (Para 103)
It also recommends the Ministry of Culture to examine the proposals submitted by
the State Government for the protection and restoration of Bhimgarh Fort, Hari Parbat
and old Nagar city under Centrally protected monument for expeditious disposal.
Sanctioning a special grant to ASI for maintaining the monuments which were damaged
by the earthquake in the State should be considered and decision be intimated to the
Committee. (Para 104)
Conservation and maintenance of monuments
The Committee notes that conservation, preservation and maintenance of Centrally
protected monuments and sites are the prime task of ASI. In spite of all the adversities,
the Archaeological Survey of India was doing stupendous task of repairs and conservation
of the monuments for maintaining their historical and aesthetic values. The Committee
appreciates the ASI for its work particularly in structural repairs, chemical preservation
and environmental development works around monuments. (Para 106)

40
But at the same time the Committee feels that ASI should conduct preservation,
heritage management and exploration of new destinations of historic importance for
promotion of tourism in the State especially in Ladakh region. Kargil has tremendous
potential for exploring tourism and cultural heritage. The Committee was informed that
three rocks carved statues (Bamyan type) of Avalakateshvara from Ghandhara form of art
situated at Barsoo Nallah, Appatii in Kargil block and Mulbekh in Shargole block are
lying unattended since years and need immediate preservation. The Committee
recommends that the Ministry of Culture and the ASI must undertake for maintenance
and preservation of these historical/religious place, object and buildings on priority basis.
Funds be earmarked for this purpose. (Para 107)
Scientific studies and chemical preservation
The Committee notes that ASI is taking up the scientific study and chemical
preservation in Ladakh region with a view to identify the conservation problem of various
monasteries in the region namely Shey, Alchi, Hemis, Thiksey, Lakir, Phyang etc. The
Committee finds that most of the monasteries are living monasteries and are at present
under religious use and many changes in the original structures and painting are being
effected by the Lamas in the monasteries. The Committee feels that this has caused
heavy damage and posed great challenges in protecting of these monuments. (Para 109)
The Committee is anxious to note that ASI was not allowed to take up
conservation work at Hemis monastery and Lakir monastery by the management
Committee headed by the Lamas. The Committee feels that these monasteries being the
treasure house of the Buddhist architecture and literature must be preserved to retain its
ancient glory. The Committee recommends that ASI in coordination with the local
representatives should make efforts to convince Lamas to persuade them to allow ASI to
take up conservation and preservation work at the monasteries in the region so that the
glory of ancient Buddhist monastic tradition and cultural heritage could be saved. The
Committee saw itself that these monasteries needed urgent help to protect and preserve
their rich cultural heritage that are being damaged in various ways. The Committee
recommends that the schools run by the monasteries were being given some support by
the Ministry of Culture. It was informed that the help was too meagre to have any
impact. The Committee recommends that this cultural support for the schools run by
monasteries be enhanced adequately this financial year itself. (Para 110)
Structural Remains
The Committee wants to put on record its appreciation for ASl’s Srinagar circle for
conducting archeological excavations and exploration in Jammu and Kashmir resulting in
discovery of new sites and structural remains of great cultural and historical importance.
The Committee feels these findings help in understanding sequence of different cultural
assemblage of the by gone era in the State. The Committee desires the need for
increasing the activities of ASI particularly, excavation and exploration to other important
sites in the Jammu and Kashmir. ASI needs to be strengthened adequately for carrying
out such activities. (Para 114)
Publications
The Committee appreciates that the ASI is publishing brochures on the ticketing
monuments in J and K for information of the tourists. The Committee desires that the
brochures should also be published in the regional language besides Hindi and English for
wider coverage. (Para 116)

41
The Committee recommends that the ASI should bring out the field reports and
publish reviews periodically of the activities carried out during each year on time.
(Para 117)
Budget
The Committee is of the considered view that allocation of Rs.2.38 crore under the
plan and Rs.4.10 crore under the non-plan made to the Circle would not be adequate for
carrying out-conservation and maintenance activities during the year 2008-09. The
Committee feels that apart from on-going projects, a large number of conservation works
are yet allocation to the Srinagar Circle for in view of the stupendous task of repairing
and conservation of monuments before them. The Committee also recommends that
the Government should identify the schemes for conservation and maintenance of
monuments for which MPLADS and MLA funds could be utilized, particularly, in Ladakh
region so that the dependence over Government for funds can be reduced to some extent.
(Para 119)
Ticketed Monuments
The Committee notes with concern the decline in number of persons visiting the
monuments. It, however, recommends that more monuments be brought under the
ticketed category but the charges be kept as nominal and the revenue earned should be
given to the ASI for the conservation and maintenance of the monuments. (Para 121)
Tourist Amenities at the Monuments
The Committee notes that besides the conservation and maintenance works, the
ASI, Srinagar Circle was also improving to a great extent the environs of the monuments
by providing roads, electrification, etc. as also amenities to the tourist including toilet and
drinking water facilities at different places. (Para 123)
The Committee however during its visit to Leh noted that Hemis and Thiskey
monasteries did not have basic facilities like drinking water and toilets. The Committee
recommends that these basic facilities should be provided in all the monuments in the
State, especially, the Hemis and Thiskey monasteries in Leh that attract large number of
tourists. (Para 124)
Security of Monuments
The Committee notes with concern that large number of group ‘D’ posts are lying
vacant, as a result, the ASI was facing difficulties in ensuring the security of the
monuments in the State. The Committee considers this as a major obstacle in the process
of maintenance of monuments. The Committee recommends that the Ministry of Culture
should ensure that the vacant posts in the Circle be filled up on priority and new posts
also be created as per the requirements. Steps may also be taken to train the
Monuments’ Attendants so that they can take care of the monument more effectively.
(Para 126)
Horticultural Activities
The Committee appreciates the archeological garden development works in the
State especially in the Srinagar and Jammu region. The Committee recommends that
more gardens should be developed in the archeological sites in the State. In Srinagar

42
world famous Shalimar Bagh and Nishat Bagh have been the main source of tourists
attraction. The Committee recommends that the ‘light and sound’ programme which was
used to be arranged in collaboration with ITDC in Shalimar Bagh be restarted
immediately. (Para 128)

43
ANNEXURE

44

45
ANNEXURE-I
(Vide para 33)
STATEMENT OF INFRASTRUCTURE PROJECTS IMPLEMENTED WITH
CENTRAL FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE IN JAMMU AND KASHMIR SINCE 2005-06
(Rs. in lakh)
Sl. Name of the project Amount Amount Amount
No. sanctioned released Utilized/spent
12 3 4 5
2005-06
1. Organising Kashmir Food Festival 37.00 29.60 29.60
in Dubai and 3 Metros of India
2. Development of Kongdoor as 435.00 358.00 11 1.62
International Ski Destination, Gulmarg
3. Sinddhu Darshan Festival 15.00 12.00 –
4. Development of Lakhanpur- 799.69 639.00 14.86
Basholi-Bani-Sarthal in Jammu
5. Integrated Development of 700.00 560.00 –
Amarnathji Tourist Circuit
6. Integrated Development of 688.00 550.00 89.40
Jammu-Rajouri-Poonch
7. Schemes of Shiv Khori Udhampur 411.51 329.20 114.40
8. Upgradation of golf Course at 200.00 160.00 160.00
Gulmarg
9. Himalayan Motor Rally from 15.00 12.00 12.00
Leh to Srinagar
10. Infrastructure Facilities Ancilliary 461.00 369.00 273.30
to the Proposed Passenger Ropeway
11. Development of Bhaderwah-Kishtwar- 691.13 552.90 80.16
Sinthan-Srinagar Tourist Scheme
12. Development of Tourist Reception 379.46 304.00 98.72
Centre at Sonamarg
13. Tourist Complex at Bachhan 491.00 393.00 –
Depot, Jammu
14. Development Plan on Chenab 142.00 113,60 113.39
River front at Akhnoor
45

46
12 3 4 5
15. Remodelling of Golf Course at 432.00 369.00 256.84
Pahalgam
16. Development of Ladakh as Destination 497.00 397.60 175.00
2006-07
1. Development of Tourist 458.70 366.95 26.23
Facilities in Leh
2. Development of Bungus Valley 231.00 185.00 30.00
3. Development for Kargil 484.00 100.00 69.81
4. Infrastructure Development in 271.86 200.00 43.10
Kishtwar
5. Kashmir Festival 10.00 8.00 8.00
6. Creation of Wayside Amenities 99.98 80.00 65.37
along Srinagar-Leh Highway
7. Adventure Sports at Sonamarg 190.91 152.73 28.30
8. Organizing Kashmir Food Festival in 37.00 29.60 29.60
Three Metros of India and abroad
9. Information Technology Project 49.80 44.82 –
10. Development of Mubarak Mandi 437.00 300.00 –
11. Navratra Festival 2006 at Katra 5.00 4.00 4.00
12. Destination Development Pahalgam 495.75 200.00
13. Development of Betab Wadi 238.00 100.00 80.94
Area at Pahalgam
14. Development of Botapathri 202.61 160.00 95.00
Area, Gulmarg
15. Sindhu Darshan festival 15.00 12.00 12.00
16. Infrastructure Development in Bhaderwah 303.72 200.00 108.41
17. Infrastructure Development in Poonch 243.52 200.00 56.00
18. Infrastructure Development in Kokerhag 287.82 200.00 48.57
19. Gulmarg Festival 5.00 4.00 4.00
20. Procurement of Snow Clearance 447.41 300.00 208.75
Machine for Gulmarg
21. New Year Festival 5.00 4.00 4.00
22. Infrastructure Development in Lakhanpur 264.10 200.00 20.00
23. Infrastructure Development in Rajouri 249.55 200.00 75.00

47
12 3 4 5
24. Development of club park at Upper 178.57 152.80 136.31
Kokernag
25. Development of View Hill Park 108.89 47.20 19.89
at Dandipora
2007-08
1. Development of Leh 458.70 366.95 26.23
2. Development of Bungus Valley 231.28 185.00 30.00
3. Development of Kargil 484.00 100.00 69.81
4. Development of Drass-Panikher 241.70 193.39 46.69
5. Development of Poonch as 450.00 360.00 34.00
tourist destination
6. Development of Yachmarg as 79.22 63.38 –
a satellite tourist spot
7. Development of various 108.40 86.72 24.15
villages at Sonamarg
8. Development of Gurez and 365.69 292.55 10.00
Telail valley
9. Development of Patnitop 283.33 226.66 39.75
10. Development of Dandipora 346.55 277.24 –
11. Development of Achabal, Distt. 210.29 168.23 –
Anantnag
12. Development of Children Park 87.06 69.65 –
at Manasbal
13. Shri Amarnath Yatra 700.00 140.00 –
14. ICE Skating Rink at Gulmarg 197.00 157.00 40.00
15. Destination Development of Rajouri 434.34 371.60 –
16. Development of Rajouri 173.31 138.65 –
17. I.T. and Computerization  50.00 40.00 –
18. Development of Bhaderwah 412.11 329.68 103
19. Development of Kishtwar 280.12 224.00 –
20. Wullar lake, Zainalank Island 206.00 165.42 1.72
21. Development of Lashpathri and 67.10 53.68 5.75
Sutkudi as Base camp
22. Development of Holy Shrine of 283.39 226.71 –
Nav Pindia

48
12 3 4 5
23. Development of Jia Pota River 434.00 347.20 –
Front, Akhnoor
24. Park between Gagan Gir and 24.92 19.94 –
Island Retreat at Hung
25. Development of Durinar 26.01 20.8 –
Glacier at Sarbal
26. Road Shows/Food festival 10.00 8.00 –
27. Sindhu Darshan Festival 15.00 12.00 –
28. Bhaderwah Festival 10.00 5.00 –
29. Water Ski Courses 23.05 23.05 –
30. Kashmir Food Festivals (4) 37.00 29.60 –

49
ANNEXURE-II
(Vide para 40)
STATEMENT OF RURAL TOURISM PROJECTS IMPLEMENTED IN J AND K
SINCE 2005-06
(Rs. in lakh)
Sl. Sites of Rural Schemes Y ear of Amount Amount Amount
No. Tourism sanction Sanctioned Released Utilized
till date
12 3 4 5 6 7
1. Gagangir, Infrastructure 2005-06 50.00 40.00 40.00
Sonamarg Development
2. Pahalgam, Infrastructure 2005-06 50.00 40.00 40.00
Distt. Development
Anantnag
3. Drung, Distt. Infrastructure 2005-06 50.00 40.00 40.00
Baramula Development
4. Jhiri, Distt. Infrastructure 2005-06 50.00 40.00 40.00
Jammu Development
Capacity 2006-07 19.00 15.20 1.50
Building
5. Surinsar, Infrastructure 2005-06 50.00 40.00 40.0
Distt. Ja mmu Development
Capacity 2006-07 19.00 15.20 –
Building
6. Akingman, Infrastructure 2006-07 50.00 40.00 01.50
Distt. Anannag Development
Capacity 2006-07 14.26 1 1.40 –
Building
7. Vasuknag, Infrastructure 2006-07 47.20 37.76 –
Distt. Development
Anantnag
8. Dori Degair, Infrastructure 2006-07 50.00 30.00 30.00
Distt. Ja mmu Development
9. Watlab, Distt. Infrastructure 2007-08 35.89 28.71 –
Baramula Development
Capacity 2007-08 19.50 15.60 –
Building
49

50
12 3 4 5 6 7
10. Chehal and Capacity 2007-08 18.50 14,80 –
Shahkote, Building
Distt.
Baramulla
11. Agarjitto, Capacity 2007-08 20.00 16.00 –
Distt. Udhampur Building
12. Manasbal, Capacity 2007-08 19.50 15.60 –
Distt. Building
Baramula
13. Narayan Capacity 2007-08 20.00 16.00 –
Nag, Distt. Building
Srinagar
T
OTAL: 622.85 488.27 235.00

51
ANNEXURE-III
(Vide para 30)
DETAILS OF WORKS UNDER IMPLEMENTATION BY NHAI ON N-S CORRIDOR IN STATE OF JAMMU AND KASHMIR
Sl. Name of Package Length Date of Stipulated Anticipated Estimated Awarded Progress %
No. in Km. Award date of Cost Project Ach
Completion (in Rs. Cost (in
Date of Date of Cr.) Rs. Cr.) Physical Financial
Start Completion %  in Rs. Cr.
Packages in J and K State on NH-1A (Total length on NS corridor - 453 km, Under Implementation - 113.65 km, DPR Under Preparation - 339.35 km
1 4 laning of km 80.0 17.2 01.01.2002 01.01.2002 31.12.04 31.12.2008 83.88 83.88 81.62 135.43
to km 97.20 of NH-1A
(NS-15/J and K)
2 4 laning of km 286.0 17.8 13.10.2003 13.10.2003 04.12.2006 30.09.2008 75 60.67 89.95 1 19.17
km 303.8 of NH-1A
Road Portion; (NS-30/
J and K)
3 4 laning of km 286.0 02.06.2006 06.02.2006 12.01.2008 31.12.2008 73 62.95 38.21 33.17
to km 303.8 of NH-1A
Bridge Portion; (NS-
30A/J and K)
4 4 laning of km 0.0 to km 15 25.11.2005 25.11.2005 24.05.2008 31.12.2008 85.34 74.875 28.96 46.18
15.0 of NH-1A, Jammu
Bypass; (NS-33/J and K)
5 4 laning of km 16.350 to 33.65 01.09.2005 09.01.2005 31.02.2008 31.12.2008 166.27 158.077 21.86 50.53
km 50.0 of NH-1A (NS-
34/J and K)
6 4 laning of km 50.00 to 30 01.09.2005 09.01.2005 31.02.2008 31.12.2008 193.09 151.36 25.79 73.26
km 80.0 of NH-1A (NS-
35/J and K)

52
ANNEXURE-IV
(Vide para 80)
DETAILS OF WORKS LIKELY TO BE AWARDED UNDER NHDP-II ON N-S CORRIDOR IN JAMMU & KASHMIR
(Rs. in crores)
Sl. Secti on Lenght Stretch of work Status Cost of Civil
No. Works
Projects for Srinagar-Jammu section of NH-1A in the State of Jammu and Kashmir
1 Srinagar to 30 km Km 256.00 to km 286.11 Final DPR received 395.24
Quazigund
2 Srinagar to 36 km Km 220.7000 to km 256.00 Final DPR received 308.17
Quazigund
3 Quazigund to 31 km Km 188.00 to km 220.70 of existing road Draft DPR received 121.08
Banihal including Banihal bypass
4 Quazigund to 15.25 km including two tunnel Km 189.35 to km 204.600 including Draft DPR submitted 1445
Banihal (8.45 km + 0.69 km) 2 tunnels of 0.69 km and 8.45 km length on 22 May, 2007
5 Ramsu to Existing length - 14.40 km Km 172.60 to km 187.00 Draft DPR received 241.89
Banihal Design lengh - 12.90 km
6 Ramban to Existing length - 21.60 km Km 151.00 to km 172.60 (includes 6 short PPR received 608.51
Ramsu Design length - 19.20 km tunnels)
7 Nashri to Existing length - 21 km Km 130.00 to km 151.00 Draft DPR received 365.78
Ramban Design length - 19.31 km
8 Udhampur to Existing length - 22 km Km 67.00 to km 89.00 PPR received 343.81
Chenanni Design length - 20.76 km
9 Chenanni to Existing length - 41.91 km Main Tunnel of 9 km and Escape Tunnel of 9 km PPR received 1,796.99
Nashri Design length - 12.00 km i ncluding approach roads with 2/4-lane carriageway
Main Tunnel - 9 km
Escape Tunnel - 9 km

53
10 Jammu Bypass 17.40 km Km 15.000 to 19.000 of Jammu Bypass, Draft PPR received 396.95
and Nagrota km 9.700 to 9.900 of main Jammu Udhampur Final PPR and Draft
Bypass Road, km 9.900 to 24.400 of Nagrota Bypass and DPR under
km 19.200 to 20.500 of Main Jammu Udhampur preparation
Road
11 Nandani Wild 5.80 km Km 19.000 to 20.300 of Jammu Bypass, Draft PPR received, 298.11
Life Sanctuary km 9.350 to km 9.700 of main Jammu Sanction of
and Ramnagar Udhampur Road and km 20.500 to geotechnical survey
Sanctuary 27.500 of main road accorded by National
Wild Life Board in
October, 07.
12 Khanpur 23.10 km Km 27.50 to km 53.35 Draft PPR received 355.33
Nagrota-
Pllata (Garnai)
13 Udhampur 18.50 km Km 53.350 to km 54.400 (along Draft PPR received 237.42
Bypass realignment of Jammu Udhampur road, and
km 1.500 of Udhampur Bypass to km 18.700
(End Point) of Udhampur Bypass joining at
km 67.000 of main Jammu Udhampur Road

54
ANNEXURE-V
(Vide para 100)
LIST OF CENTRALLY PROTECTED MONUMENTS UNDER
ARCHAEOLOGICAL SURVEY OF INDIA, SRINAGAR CIRCLE
Sl. Name of Monument /Site Locality / Tehsil District
No. Village
12 3 4 5
1. Ancient Site of Chakradhar /Semthan Semthan Anantnag Anantnag
2. Mughal Arcade including Spring together V erinag Anantnag Anantnag
with adjacent land (Verinag)
3. Ancient Temple of Martand together with Ranbirsingpura Anantnag
adjacent land (Rambelpur)
4. Bumzuva Cave and T emple Bumzuva Anantnag Anantnag
5. Detha Mandir Bandi Uri Baramulla
6. Ancient Temple together with adjacent Buniyar Uri Baramulla
land
7. Ancient T emple Fatehgarh Baramulla Baramulla
8. Ancient Stupa (Excavated Remains) Ushkura Baramulla Baramulla
together with adjacent land
9. Pratapswamin Temple with four subsidiary T appar- Baramulla Baramulla
shrines together with adjacent land Waripora
10. Shankergourisvara Temple Pattan Baramulla Baramulla
11. Sugendesha Temple Pattan BaramulIa Baramulla
12. Ancient Stupa, Monastery and Chaitya Dever Baramulla Barmaulla
together with adjacent land Yakhamanporal
Parihaspora
13. Ancient Site Sumbal Sonawari Barmaulla
14. Mosque and other ancient Remains on the Wular Lake Bandipora Baramulla
island
15. Khanpur Sarai Khanpur Chadura Budgam
16. Akhnoor Fort (Akhnoor) Akhnoor Akhnoor Jammu
17. Remains of ancient site (Pambaran) Ambaran Akhnoor Jammu
18. Ancient Temple (Hari Hara) Billawar Billawar Kathua
54

55
12 3 4 5
19. Rock Carving of Devi riding a lion Basholi Basholi Kathua
20. Rock carving of Sitala, Narada, Brahma Bashol Basholi Kathua
and Radha Krishna
21. Visvesvara and other cave Temples Basholi Basholi Kathua
22. Trilochan Nath Temple Mahadera Basholi Kathua
23. Sculptures at Drass Drass Drass Kargil
24. Rock cut sculptures at Mulbeg Mulbeg Kargil Kargil
25. Buddhist Monastery Lamayuru Khalsi Leh
26. Buddhist Monastery Likir Khalsi Leh
27. Buddhist Monasteries Alchi Khalsi Leh
28. Buddhist Gumpha together with adjacent area Phyang Leh Leh
29. Ancient Palace at Leh with adjoining area Leh Leh Leh
30. Ol. Castle (Tsemo Hill) alongwilh Leh Leh Leh
adjoining area
31. Stupa at Tisseru Tisseru Leh Leh
32. Ancient Palace including Shrine together Shey Leh Leh
with adjacent land
33. Hemis Gumpha and adjoining land Hemis Leh Leh
34. Ancient Gumpha alongwith part of land Thiksey Leh Leh
35. Shrine of Four Lords/Gon-Khang Leh Leh Leh
(Tsemo Hill)
36. Aliabad Sarai Aliabad Shopian Pulwama
37. Avantiswarnin T emple A vantipur Pulwama Pulwama
38. Avantisvara T emple A vantipur Pulwama Pulwama
39. Hirpur Sarni Hirpur Shopian Pulwama
40. Ancient Temple Kakpora Pulwama Pulwama
41. Monolithic Shrine Khrew Pulwama Pulwama
42. Remains of An cient T emple Khrew Pulwama Pulwama
43. Ancient T emple Ladhuv Pulwama Pulwama
44. Ancient Stupa Remains alongwith Malangpora Pulwama Pulwama
adjacent area
45. Remains of Ancient Temple Pam pore Pulwama Pulwama
46. Ancient Siva Temple Payer Pulwama Pulwama

56
12 3 4 5
47. Pather Masjid Zaina Kadal Srinagar Srinagar
48. Ancient Temple Bohri Kadal Srinagar Srinagar
49. Tomb  of Zain-ul-Abdin’s Mother together Zaina Kadal Srinagar Srinagar
with adjacent land
50. Khanqah  of Shah Hamdan Shah Hamdan Srinagar Srinagar
51. Mosque  of Akhun Mulla Shah together K athi Darw aza Srinagar Srinagar
with adjacent area
52. Gates in the rampart  of the fort
(a) Kathi Darwaza Kathi Darwaza Srinagar Srinagar
(b) Sangeen Darwaza Sangeen Srinagar Srinagar
Darwaza
53. Ancient Temple Hari Parbat Srinagar Srinagar
54. Group of Ancient Temples Naranag Kangan Srinagar
55. Ancient Site and Remains Burzahom Srinagar Srinagar
56. Ancient Monastery and Stupa together Harwan Srinagar Srinagar
with adjacent land
57. Group of arched terraces/Structural Parimahal Srinagar Srinagar
complex
58. Shankracharya Temple together with Kothi Bagh/ Srinagar Srinagar
adjacent land Durganag
59. Ancient Site Pandrethan Srinagar Srinagar
60. Excavated Remains Pandrethan Srinagar Srinagar
61. Pandrethan Temple together with adjacent Pandrethan Srinagar Srinagar
land
62. Ancient Site Babour Thalora Ramnagar Udhampur
63. Temple  of Devi Bhagwati together with Thalora Ramnagar Udhampur
adjacent land (Babour)
64. Ancient Temple (Dera Babour) together Thalora Rmnagar Udhampur
with adjacent land
65. Ancient Temples Kala Dera I and II Manwal Ramnagar Udhampur
66. Ancient Temple Nand Babour together Thalora Ramnagar Udhampur
with adjacent land
67. Group of Temples Kiramchi Udhampur Udhampur
68. Ancient Fort attributed to Raja Suchet Ramnagar Ramnagar Udhampur
Singh and Samadhi of Queen of Raja
Suchet Singh
69. Ancient Palaces attributed to Raja Suchet Ramnagar Ramnagar Udhampur
Singh

57
ANNEXURE-VI
(Vide para 100)
LIST OF 30-STATE PROTECTED MONUMENTS IN JAMMU AND KASHMIR
Sl. No. Jammu....Total No.15. Srinagar....Total No. 15
1. Bahu Fort, Jammu Hari Parbat Fort, Srinagar
2. Mubarak Mandi, Heritage Mosque and Tomb of Maidan Sahib Hawal Sgr.
Complex
3. Ancient Temple Complex, Ancient Temple, Narasthan Tral, Pulwama
Sakhi Maidan Poonch
4. Fort Complex Jasrota Mamleshwar Temple at Mamal, Pahalgam
5. Moughal Sarai Chingus Ruins of Ancient temple and spring at Kothier,
Rajouri Anantnag
6. Shahi Mughal Masjid Ruins of Temple at Firozpur Drung, Tangmarg
Nowshera, Rajouri
7. Goda Gali Gool, Udhampur Ruins of Mughal Hamam at Achable, Anantnag
8. Mast Garh Shahi Masjid, Chatur-Mukha Linga at Sheeri, Baramulla
Jammu
9. Salal Fort Batal Gale, Ancient Temple, Parihaspora Pattan, Baramulla
Udhampur
10. Bhim Garh Fort, Reasi Old Ceremonial Old Sectt., Srinagar
11. Pirmitha Tomb at Pirmitha, Ancient Temple at village Pararmulla, Mansbal,
Jammu Sonawari
12. Wooden Temple at Assar, Ancient Buddhist site situated in Compartment
Doda No. 30 at Hoi-Nar (Lidroo) Pahalgam
13. Temple/Samadhi Charai Ancient site Hutmura, Pahalgam
Muttal, Udhampur
14. Ancient Temple Chairans Ancient site Ashratnar Yarikhah Gurwait,
Devta Salal, Udhampur Budgam
15. Jalandhra Devi Temple Ancestral house of late poet Ghulam
Laddan Kotli, Udhampur Ahmed Mehjoor, Mitrigam Pulwama
57

58
ANNEXURE-VII
(Vide para 100)
LIST OF MONUMENTS UNDER THE STATE OF EXAMINATION/
DECLARATION AS STATE PROTECTED
1. 5-Km long historic Hari Parbat wall Sgr. built by Moughal Emperor Akbar.
2. Tomb of Sheikh Ibrahim Shah Mohalla Sgr.
3. Miniature Tomb built during the period of Sultan Zan-ul-Abidin Buch Pora Sgr.
4. Ancient site at Kutbal Anantnag
5. Darbar Garh Complex, Sgr. built during Dogra period
6. Jagnoo Fort Udhampur (18th Cent. A.D.)
7. Ladden Kotli Fort Reasi Jammu (17th Cent. A.D.)
8. Haveli at Mansar (18th Cent. A.D.)
9. Bowli Complex at Nandni Jammu (19th Cent. A.D.)
58

59
ANNEXURE-VIII
(Vide para 125)
DETAILS OF V ACANT POSTS IN SRINAGAR CIRCLE
Sl. Name of Cadre Sanction No. of No. of
No. Strength Filled V acant
Posts Posts
1 2 345
1. Superintending Archaeologist One One Nil
2. Deputy Superintending Archaeologist Two One One
3. Deputy Superintending Archaeological Two Nil Two
Engineer
4. Assistant Superintending Archaeological One One Nil
Engineer
5. Assistant Superintending Archaeologist One Nil One
6. Assistant Archaeologist Four Two Two
7. Junior Accounts Officer One One Nil
8. Head Clerk One One Nil
9. Upper Division Clerk Five Four One
10. Stenographer Grade–I One One Nil
11. Works Assistant Grade–I Two Nil Two
12. Works Assistant Grade–II One One Nil
13. Lower Division Clerk Five One Four
14. Junior Hindi Translator One Nil One
15. Library cum Information Assistant One One Nil
16. Draftsman Grade–I Two One One
17. Senior Surveyor One One Nil
18. Surveyor Grade–I One Nil One
19. Senior Photographer One One Nil
20. Photographer Grade–I One Nil One
21. Photographer Grade–II One One Nil
22. Driver Mechanic One One Nil
59

60
1 2 345
23. Sr. Conservation Assistant One One Nil
24. Conservation Assistant Gr.–I Four Four Nil
25. Conservation Assistant Gr.–II Six Five One
26. Caretaker/Foreman merged Ten Nine One
27. Daftri One One Nil
28. Jr. Storekeeper One Nil One
29. Attendants Eleven Six Five
30. Chowkidar Four Four Nil
31. Sweeper One One Nil
32. Sr. Monument Attendant One Nil One
33. Monument Chowkidar Fifteen Eight Seven
34. Monument attendants One Eighty Eighteen
Hundred three
one

61
MINUTES

62

63
I
FIRST MEETING
The Committee met at 11.30 A.M. on Monday, the 11th August, 2008 in Committee Room
‘A’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Sitaram Yechury — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Naresh Gujral
3. Prof. Alka Balram Kshatriya
4. Shrimati Hema Malini
5. Shri Biswajit Daimary
LOK SABHA
6. Shri Anandrao Vithoba Adsul
7. Shri N.S.V . Chitthan
8. Dr. K. Dhanaraju
9. Shri P. Karunakaran
10. Shri Samik Lahiri
11. Shri Alok Kumar Mehta
12. Shri Hemlal Murmu
13. Shri Madanlal Sharma
14. Shri Suraj Singh
15. Shri Prahlad Joshi
SECRETARIAT
Shri N.K. Singh, Joint Secretary
Shri Jagdish Kumar, Joint Director
Shri Swarabji B., Deputy Director
Shrimati Nidhi Chaturvedi, Committee Officer
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the reconstituted Committee.
3. Thereafter, the Committee considered the draft 140th and 141st reports on ‘‘Promotion
of Tourism in Jammu and Kashmir’’ and ‘‘Modernisation of Airports’’ respectively. After some
discussion, the Committee adopted both the Reports with some modifications. Thereafter, the
Committee authorized its Chairman to present the reports to the Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha
and seek the convenience of Hon’ble Chairman for presentation of reports.
63

64
4. * * *
5. * * *
6. The Committee then adjourned at 12.45 
P.M.
*** Relates to matters not included in this report.

Printed at : Bengal Offset Works, 335 Khajoor Road, Karol Bagh, New Delhi-110005.