PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/128-1.htm[28-08-2018 13:26:12]
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
                                                                       
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON
 TRANSPORT, TOURISM & CULTURE
 
 
 
ONE HUNDRED AND TWENTY EIGHTH REPORT
ON
Action Taken By The Government On The Recommendations/Observations Of The Committee Contained
 In Its One Hundred And Seventeenth Report On Demands For Grants (2007-08) Of Department Of
 Shipping
 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 4.3.2008)
 (LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 4.3.2008)
 
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
MARCH, 2008/PHALGUNA, 1929 (SAKA)
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
 
 
 
ONE HUNDRED AND TWENTY EIGHTH REPORT
ON
ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS
 OF THE COMMITTEE CONTAINED IN ITS ONE HUNDRED AND SEVENTEENTH REPORT
 ON DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2007-08) (DEMAND NO.84) OF DEPARTMENT OF SHIPPING
 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON  4.3.2008)
 (LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON  4.3.2008)

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/128-1.htm[28-08-2018 13:26:12]
 
 
 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
MARCH, 2008/PHALGUNA, 1929 (SAKA)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
E-mail:rsc-tt@sansad.nic.in
Website:http://rajyasabha.nic.in
C O N T E N T S
 

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/128-1.htm[28-08-2018 13:26:12]
PAGES
 
1.       COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE                                 (i)     
2.       INTRODUCTION                                                                    (ii)
3.       REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE                                            1-  
4.         OBSERVATIONS/CONCLUSIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS AT A GLANCE                 
5.         ANNEXURE                                                                                      
6.         MINUTES                                                                                                                        
COMPOSITION OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE
(2007-2008)
1.   Shri Sitaram Yechury             - Chairman
 
RAJYA SABHA
2.  Prof. Ram Deo Bhandary
3.   Shri Naresh Gujral
4.   Shri Vedprakash P. Goyal
5.
      Prof. Alka Balram Kshatriya
6.      Shri Janardhana Poojary
7.      Shri M.V. Mysura Reddy
8.      Shri Satish Kumar Sharma
9.      Shri Shahid Siddiqui
10.  Shri Shatrughan Sinha
 
LOK SABHA
11.  Shri Anandrao Vithoba Adsul
12.  Shri Sukhbir Singh Badal
13.  Shri Joachim Baxla
14.  Shri Sartaj Singh Chhatwal
15.  Shri N.S.V. Chitthan
16.  Shri Adhir Chowdhury
17.  Dr. K. Dhanaraju
18.  Smt. Priya Dutt
19.  Shri Dip Gogoi
20.  Shri P. Karunakaran
21.  Dr. P.P. Koya
22.  Dr. Ramkrishna Kusmaria
23.  Shri Samik Lahiri 
24.  Shri Alok Kumar Mehta
25.  Shri Hemlal Murmu
26.  Shri Madan Lal Sharma
27.  Shri Akshay Pratap Singh
28.  Shri Dushyant Singh
29.  Shri Suraj Singh
30.  Shri Prahlad Joshi
31.  Shri Rakesh Singh
 
SECRETARIAT
Shrimati Agnes Momin George, Joint Secretary
            Shri Jagdish Kumar, Joint Director
            Shri Swarabji B., Deputy Director
            Shrimati Nidhi Chaturvedi, Committee Officer
(i)

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/128-1.htm[28-08-2018 13:26:12]
 
INTRODUCTION
       I, the Chairman, Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport, Tourism and
 Culture, having been authorised by the Committee to present on its behalf, do hereby present this One
 Hundred and Twenty Eighth Report of the Committee on Action Taken by the Government on the
 Recommendations/Observations of the Committee contained in its One Hundred and Seventeenth Report
 on Demands for Grants (2007-08) (Demand No.84) of Department of Shipping.
 
2.   The One Hundred and Seventeenth Report on Demand for Grants (2007-08) (Demand No.84) of the
 Department of Shipping was presented to the Parliament on the 14
th May 2007.  The Action Taken
 Replies on the recommendation of the Committee contained in its One Hundred and Seventeenth  Report
 were received from the Department of Shipping on 30th October, 2007.  The Committee considered the
 Action Taken Replies in its meeting held on the 24 th December, 2007 and decided to hear the Secretary,
 Department of Shipping in this regard.   A Questionnaire based on the ATR was also forwarded to the
 Department and replies were obtained from them.
 
3.   Accordingly, a meeting was held on 10
th January, 2008 with the Secretary, and other representatives
 of the Department of Shipping in which clarifications on certain points were sought.
 
4.   The draft report was prepared on the basis of action taken replies and the subsequent feedbacks.  The
 Committee considered and adopted the Report at its meeting held on the 18th January, 2008.
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI ; SITARAM YECHURY
   Chairman
 
January 18, 2008
Pausa 28, 1929 (Saka) 
Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Transport, Tourism & Culture.
                                                 
                                                                       
                                   
 
 
 
 
R E P O R T
           
This Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Government on the
 observations/recommendations as contained in its One Hundred Seventeenth Report on Demands for
 Grants (2007-08) (Demand No.84) of the Department of Shipping, which was presented to the Parliament
 on 14th May 2007.

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/128-1.htm[28-08-2018 13:26:12]
 2.        Action Taken Replies have been received from the Government on                    30 th October, 2007
 in respect of all the observations/recommendations contained in the Report.  These have been categorized
 as follows:-
 (i)               Recommendations/observations that have been accepted by the Government:
            Para Nos. 10,11,17,18,23,24,49, and 73                                                      Total - 8
 (ii)      Recommendations/observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue in
            view of the Government replies:
            Para No. 53 and 79                                                                                              Total - 2
(iii)
            Recommendations/observations in respect of which replies of the
            Government have not been accepted by the Committee:
             Para Nos.31,42,69, and 80                                                                          Total - 4
(iv)            Recommendations/ observations in respect of which final replies of the
Government are still awaited:
                   Para  Nos. 27,28,35,38,44,58,61, and  67                                                      Total – 8
 
 3.         The Committee desires that final replies in respect of the recommendations, which have been
 categorized as interim replies by the Committee should be furnished to it at the earliest.
 4.         On scrutiny of the said Action Taken Replies, the Committee has made observations on each item
 of the action taken/proposed to be taken by the Department of Shipping.  The recommendations of the
 Committee contained in the One Hundred Seventeenth Report, action taken thereon by the Government
 and recommendations/observations of the Committee on each item of action taken have been given in the
 succeeding paragraphs.
 
APPRAISAL OF THE 10
TH PLAN AND THE ANALYSIS OF ANNUAL PLAN 2007-08
(Recommendation at Para 10)
5.       The Committee is distressed to note that during the 10 th Plan, the Department of Shipping was
 allocated Rs.2570.89 crore as budgetary allocation under the plan scheme which was reduced to
 Rs.1700.00 crore at the RE stage. The Committee does not see any merit therein and strongly disapproves
 the idea of reduction of plan outlay because once it is reduced by the Government at the beginning of the
 Five Year Plan itself it will certainly affect and jeopardise many of the plan activities of the Department.
 The Committee is further constrained to note the shortfall in utilization of funds in almost all the major
 activities of Department of Shipping i.e. Inland Water Transport, Shipping, Ports, Lighthouses and
 Lightships, Shipbuilding etc. During 2005-06, the utilization of funds was Rs.346.83 crore against RE
 Rs.405.00 crore, in 2006-07, the utilization of funds was Rs.510.21 crore against RE Rs.575.00 crore and
 Rs.759.00 crore has been allocated for BE 2007-08. The Committee is aware that the main reason for
 effecting reduction in funds at RE stage by the Ministry of Finance is the inability of the Department of
 Shipping to spend their allocated funds during the first two quarters of almost every year.  The Committee
 observes that the major portions of the budgetary outlay had been utilized during the last two quarters of
 the financial year by the Department. The Committee disapproves the practice as the funds crucial for the
 development of Shipping and Port Sectors infrastructure are withheld in the process. The Committee

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/128-1.htm[28-08-2018 13:26:12]
 notes that the reasons advanced by the Department for non-utilization are administrative in nature for
 which corrective action could have been taken in advance. The Committee, therefore, recommends the
 Department to plan and incur their expenditure in a proportionate manner so that it is evenly spread
 throughout the year so that the funds are utilised  appropriately for the purposes and no alibi should be
 provided to the Ministry of Finance to reduce the allocations at the RE stage.
 
Reply of the Government
6.       Utilization of plan outlay primarily depends upon as to how quickly the execution of project has
 been approved by the Competent Authority.  Depending upon the nature and estimated cost of the project,
 the project is required to be appraised by the Appropriate Appraisal Forum before obtaining the approval
 of the Competent Authority.  Sometimes, compliance of this procedural requirement takes time resulting
 delay in execution of the project.  To ensure optimum utilization of funds, token provisions are now being
 kept at the time of preparation of Budget Estimates (BE) in respect of those projects which are yet to be
 approved by the Competent Authority.   In the case of projects which have already been approved by the
 Competent Authority and allocation has been made in the Annual Plan,  the financial & physical progress
 of all such projects are now being regularly monitored   at the highest level in the Department of
 Shipping.  This monitoring has now yielded desired results and during the year 2006-07, the Port Sector
 has utilized Rs.336.16 crores against the allocation of Rs.476.12 crores in Budget Estimates thereby
 achieving a utilization of 70.60% which is the highest in any one year of entire 10 th  five year plan
 period.  In respect of Revised Estimates of Rs.363.83 crores, the utilization percentage was 92.39%. 
 
7.       As regards, the reasons for getting the delayed approval of competent authority, the Department of
 Shipping in response to the question on ATR submitted that the need for obtaining ‘in principle’ approval
 of the Planning Commission before a project is included in the Annual Plan of a Department has been
 dispensed with subject to these projects fulfilling certain prescribed criteria.  Based on these criteria, most
 of the projects in the Shipping, Inland Water Transport and Port Sector would not require ‘in principle’
 approval of the Planning Commission.  This is expected to result in significant saving in time involved in
 the appraisal and approval process by facilitating concurrent processing of project proposals for approval
 alongwith the exercise for firming up the plan allocations.   Further, the threshold limit for obtaining
 approval of the Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs for Plan projects has been increased from
 Rs.100 crore to 150 crores.
 
Further recommendation/observation of the Committee
 
8.       The Committee notes that in order to ensure optimum utilization of funds token provision are being
 kept at the time of preparation of budget estimates for projects/schemes for which approval of the
 competent authority is yet to be received.    The Committee recommends the Department should continue
 to work out strategy for maximum utilization of plan outlays and prioritize the projects in consultation
 with the concerned agencies for better co-ordination and timely execution of the projects.
 
(Recommendation at Para 11)
9.       The Committee also recommends that the Department of Shipping should do away with procedural
 hurdles and maintain close liaison for the purpose of review, monitoring, implementation and co-
ordination of programmes /activities. The Committee hopes that Department of Shipping would take all
 corrective steps in this regard to avoid shifting of focus from the shipping sector in the next plan. 

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/128-1.htm[28-08-2018 13:26:12]
 
Reply of the Government
10.     The procedures to be followed for formulation, appraisal and approval of projects to be funded
 through public investment and also for Public Private Partnership (PPP) projects have been laid down by
 the Ministry of Finance.  All such projects are required to be appraised by the appropriate Appraisal
 Forum [Standing Finance Committee (SFC), Departmental Expenditure Finance Committee
 (Departmental EFC), Main Expenditure Finance Committee (Main EFC), Committee of Secretaries
 (CoS), Public Investment Board (PIB) or Public Private Partnership Appraisal Committee (PPPAC) as the
 case may be], depending upon the nature and estimated cost of the project before obtaining the approval
 of the Competent Authority.  However, the following measures which have/are being taken are expected
 to streamline the procedures, reduce hurdles & expedite the projects.:-
 
(i)
                Major Port Trusts have been delegated powers to incur plan expenditure upto Rs.50 crores in
 case of additions/modifications/new investments and Rs.100 crores in case of
 replacement/renewal of assets. Within these delegated powers, the Major Ports make investment
 decisions.  A proposal to enhance the financial powers to the Port Trusts is under consideration.  
 
(ii)
                   The Department of Shipping has taken up a proposal for waiver of the requirement of
 obtaining ‘in principle’ approval from the Planning Commission for projects included in the
 National Maritime Development Programme and also the projects which appear in the Annual
 Plans. The Planning Commission vide their Note N-11016/4/2006-PC dated 29.08.2006
 informed that “In Principle” approval for existing schemes is not required provided the scheme
 have been evaluated as a part of the Zero Based Budgeting (ZBB) evaluation process. In case of
 new schemes/projects which are proposed to be taken up and have been indicated in the Plan
 documents, “In-Principle” approval of Planning Commission would not be required provided
 financial resources have been fully provided for.
(iii)
            A proposal to permit the Port Trusts to appoint Project Management Consultant in a project in
 anticipation of sanction of the project, is under consideration of the Department of Shipping,
 with a view to saving time.
 
(iv)            A Model Concession Agreement (MCA) for PPP projects in the Major Ports is under
 formulation.  On finalisation, PPP projects in the Major Ports which follow the MCA will be
 exempted from obtaining ‘in principle’ clearance from the PPPAC, which is, otherwise required
 before commencing the bidding process for the project.
 
(v)              The threshold limit for posing PPP projects for clearance by the PPPAC has been raised from
 Rs.100 crores to Rs.250 crores by the Government after considering the delays that would result
 on account of the new PPPAC procedures were persistently highlighted by the Department of
 Shipping.
 
(vi)            The Department of Shipping has set up a Committee for standardization of documents and
 procedures for procurement/replacement of equipment and for award works by the Major Ports. 
 Recommendations submitted by the Committee are under process.
 
(vii)          Review and monitoring of implementation of programmes/ activities are carried out on a regular

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/128-1.htm[28-08-2018 13:26:12]
 basis and coordination is ensured through both institutional mechanism  as also constructive
 instructions at working level both at port as also at the Government level.
 
11.     Regarding review and monitoring of implementation of programmes/activities with the concerned
 agencies, the Department of Shipping informed that the procedure to be followed for formulation, appraisal
 and approval of projects to be funded through public investment and also for Public Private Partnership (PPP)
 projects have been laid down by the Ministry of Finance.  All such projects are required to be appraised by the
 appropriate Appraisal Forum [Standing Finance Committee (SFC), Departmental Expenditure Finance
 Committee (Departmental EFC), Main Expenditure Finance Committee (Main EFC), Committee of
 Secretaries (CoS), Public Investment Board (PIB) or Public Private Partnership Appraisal Committee
 (PPPAC) as the case may be]  depending upon the nature and estimated cost of the project before obtaining the
 approval of the Competent Authority. Review and monitoring of implementation of programmes /activities are
 carried out on a regular basis and coordination is ensured through both institutional mechanism as also
 constructive interaction at working level both at Organisation level as also at the Government level with a
 view to expediting the decision  making process.  In addition, there is another monitoring mechanism in the
 form of half yearly Performance Review meeting by Planning Commission to review the financial and
 physical performance of Central Sector projects/programmes.
 
Further recommendation/observation of the Committee
 
12.     The Committee takes notes of the measures proposed by the Department of Shipping to remove the
 procedural hurdles and administrative delays.  The Committee however observes that there are umpteen
 numbers of agency and procedures to clear a particular project proposal. The existing procedure to be
 followed for formulation, appraisal and approval of projects takes years together for obtaining the
 approval of the Competent Authority.  In the era of communication and information technology, there is a
 greater need to streamline the procedures to save time, the Committee, therefore, recommends that the
 various procedures and practices prevailing at present may be done away with and a single agency may be
 empowered to clear all the proposals of projects within a prescribed time schedule.  The Committee
 further recommends that the matter may be taken up with appropriate agency to create a single high
 powered agency for the purpose.
 
PORT SECTOR
(Recommendation at Para17)
13.     The Committee notes with concern that the budgetary allocation under the Plan scheme for port
 sector of the Department during the entire five years of the 10
th Plan had been slashed down
 consecutively and was subjected to heavy reduction at the RE stage. The Committee is perturbed to note
 that during the 10 th Plan, the Ministry of Finance imposed a cut of Rs.3344.20 crore or 57%  bringing it
 down from Rs.5954.84 crore to Rs.2610.64 or 43% at the RE stage, on the basis of poor utilization pattern
 of the Department of Shipping. In BE 2006-07, an outlay of Rs.1364.25 crore comprising of Rs.476.12
 crore as gross budgetary support was provided to the port sector and Department of Shipping had been
 able to utilize Rs.1024.53 crore or 75% of the budgetary allocation during the year. The Committee is
 constrained to note that the Department has given reasons which are routine in nature for non-utilization
 of funds which do not justify the slow pace and under-utilization by the Department. For example,
 schemes to provide infrastructure facilities at Minicoy, Agatti and Amini Islands could not progress

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/128-1.htm[28-08-2018 13:26:12]
 mainly on account of constraints of transporting materials.   The Committee also notes that in order to
 ensure optimum utilization of funds, token provision have been kept in BE 2007-08 for schemes for
 which approval of the competent authority is yet to be received. The Committee feels that the
 underutilization of funds would have an adverse impact on the ongoing and future capacity building
 projects in the port sector. The Committee, recommends, the Department to adhere to strict fiscal
 discipline and fix the responsibility for persistent underutilization of allocated funds and take remedial
 measures thereon for optimum utilization of allocated funds during the year and inform the Committee
 about the measures taken by the Department in this regard.
 
Reply of the Government
14.     Full utilization of budgetary allocation could not be made in the Tenth Plan Period because
 compliance of procedures for execution of projects takes time leading to delays in execution and
 consequent non-utilization of funds earmarked for that project in that year.  These procedures for
 formulation, appraisal and approval of projects funded through public investment have been laid down by
 Ministry of Finance.   The Department of Shipping is making all efforts to ensure optimum utilization of
 funds.  The progress of all projects is being regularly monitored in the Department at the highest level.  
 This has led to a perceptible improvement in utilization of funds.  In the Port Sector, the total expenditure
 in the first year of the Tenth Plan viz. 2002-03 was Rs. 541.89 crores comprising Rs. 40.13 crores as
 Gross Budgetary Support (GBS) and Rs. 501.76 crores of Internal Resources (IR).  However, in 2006-07,
 the final year of the Tenth Plan, the total funds utilized was Rs. 1001.94 crores comprising a GBS of Rs.
 336.16 crores and IR of Rs. 665.78 crores thereby, almost doubling the expenditure.  The overall
 utilization percentage in 2002-03 was 46.75 % with the utilization percentage in respect of GBS at only
 15.62 %, whereas the overall percentage of utilization in 2006-07 stood at 73.36 % with the percentage
 utilization in respect of GBS at 70.60%. 
 
15.     The constraints explained by the Department for slow progress in providing infrastructural facilities
 at various Islands in Lakshadweep are factual.   These schemes could not progress as per schedule on
 account of constraint of transporting material which in fact is the main problem. 
 
16.     The total area of Lakshadweep Islands is 32 sq Km and these four Islands are very small having area
 of 4.40 sq Km (Minicoy), 2.71 sq Km (Agathi), 2.59 sq Km (Amini) and 3.6 sq Km (Kavaratti ). The
 entire construction material is taken from the main land, sometimes in pre-fabricated condition.  All
 vessels carrying materials are kept at sea and the offloading is synchronized for construction purpose. 
 The ships cannot come alongside the Islands due to low draft and corals.  Another reason is the prolonged
 rainy season from April to October during which construction cannot be carried out as the sea and the
 weather is not conducive for construction or transportation of materials.
 
17.     To compound matters recently, waves of 6-6.5 meters hit the jetties of Kavaratti  and Minicoy on
 16.5.2007 causing damage to the forward section.  The question of raising the height of these jetties under
 construction in all the 4 Islands from present 4.5 to 5 meters from Sea level along with appropriate
 designed breakwater for safety of ships has been mooted by Administration of UT Lakshadweep.   The
 matter is under examination and the target date for completion of jetties is December, 2007.
 
Further recommendation/observation of the Committee
 

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/128-1.htm[28-08-2018 13:26:12]
18.     The Committee notes the efforts made by the Department of Shipping to ensure optimum utilization
 of funds.  The Committee, however, is constrained to note that the full utilisation  of the budgetary
 allocation could not be made by the Department in the 10 th Plan leading to delays in execution and non
 utilization of funds for the projects in the Ports Sector.   The Committee feels that any reduction in
 budgetary allocation will have adverse impact on growth, strengthening of Shipping and Port
 infrastructure projects in the country.  The Committee hopes that the Department will make more demand
 for allocation of funds for the Port Sector during the 11 th Plan and will take remedial measure for
 maximum utilization of the Plan outlays in a time bound manner.
 
(Recommendation at Para 18)
19.     The Committee further recommends that learning from the experience of the 10
th Plan, planning for
 the 11th Plan be done in such a way that there will be maximum utilization of funds allocated during each
 year of the Plan period.
 
Reply of the Government
20.     Noted for compliance.
 
Further recommendation/observation of the Committee
 
21.     The Committee notes the reply and hopes that adequate budgetary allocation will be made to  the
 Department for the entire 11
th Plan period as per the projection for the growth and strengthening of the
 Shipping and Ports sector. 
 
(Recommendation at Para 23)
22.     The Committee notes that during the 10th Plan, the aggregate capacity in the major ports was 508.60
 MTPA and the traffic handled was 463.84 MT. The Committee also notes that the Department of
 Shipping is hopeful of enhancing the traffic and capacity in the major ports from 708.09 MT to 1001.80
 MT respectively by the end of the 11 th Plan. The Committee is of the opinion that to achieve the traffic
 projection targets modernization of the port infrastructure is essential in a big way. However, the
 Committee would like to caution the Government that more than 50% investment i.e. Rs.36868 crore of
 total investment of Rs.68972 crore is projected to be contributed by private sector. The Committee feels
 that hospitable environment, good legislative support, transparent bidding procedure and selection criteria
 and decision making process can give boost to the public- private partnership in the port infrastructure
 sector. The Committee further desires that in order to achieve the projected targets of capacity expansion
 of the port, the Department should standardize the bidding evaluation and selection procedure, remove
 bottlenecks and procedural rigidities  and ensure transparency in selection and implementation process of
 private operators for BOT projects.
Reply of the Government
23.     The Department of Shipping agrees with the recommendation of the Hon’ble Committee.  
 Legislative support for allowing private sector participation in the Major Ports is available under the
 Major Port Trusts Act, 1963.  Also, under the existing Government policy, foreign direct investment upto
 100% under automatic route is permitted in the construction and maintenance of ports and harbours. 

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/128-1.htm[28-08-2018 13:26:12]
 Private sector participation is envisaged mainly in construction and operation of berths and terminals.  
 With a view to providing a facilitative and transparent framework, the Government has laid down
 comprehensive guidelines which, inter-alia , lay down the area, mode and the general terms & conditions
 of private sector participation as also the bidding procedures, the criteria for selection, the appraisal and
 the approval procedures etc. to be followed by the Major Ports in the matter.   Model documents
 containing standard bidding formats/procedures and the Model License Agreement have also been
 circulated to the Major Ports so as to enable them to carve out project specific documents.   The
 documents are being further refined.   The preferred route for selection of the private operator is through
 open competitive bidding wherein the bidder offering the highest revenue share to the Major Ports is
 declared successful.  The mode of participation is mainly on Build, Operate and Transfer basis.
 
Further recommendation/observation of the Committee
 
24.     The Committee notes that the Government has laid down the guidelines for allowing private sector
 participation in the major ports including construction and maintenance of ports and harbours.  The
 Committee hopes that legislative support, hospitable environment and transparent bidding criteria will not
 only provide a facilitative and transparent framework but also enhance the role of public-private
 partnership in the port infrastructure projects. 
 
(Recommendation at Para 24)
25.     The Committee also recommends the Government and in particular to Planning Commission to act
 fast on the proposals of the Department of Shipping for commissioning of new major ports for increasing
 output capacity during the 11
th Plan in the country.
 
Reply of the Government
26.     The recommendations of the Hon’ble Committee have been noted and have also been
 communicated to the Planning Commission.
 
Further recommendation/observation of the Committee
 
27.     The Committee notes the reply of Department of Shipping and desires that the matter should be
 pursued with Planning Commission on regular basis to expedite the proposals, and Committee may be
 apprised about the decision taken in the matter.
 
(Recommendation at Para 27)
28.     The Committee is constrained to note that the insufficient capacity and quality of the existing rail-
road connectivity is affecting the smooth and efficient flow of cargo in and out of the major ports. The
 Committee notes that of late the Government have taken up the matter with some seriousness and thereby
 Committee on Infrastructure had set up a Committee of Secretaries to review the rail-road connectivity
 and suggested that each major port should preferably have minimum four lane road connectivity and
 double line rail connectivity. The Committee agreeing with the suggestions of the Committee of
 Secretaries recommends the Government to provide better rail road connectivity as suggested by the
 Committee of Secretaries and ensure strict monitoring  for timely completion of the projects in all the
 major and other ports. The critical infrastructure gaps can be bridged under viability gap funding scheme

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/128-1.htm[28-08-2018 13:26:12]
 for augmenting larger flow of funds for development of connectivity projects in the major ports.
 
Reply of the Government
29.     Implementation of the rail/road connectivity projects recommended by the Committee of Secretaries
 (CoS) is being monitored by the Committee of Secretaries headed by Member Secretary, Planning
 commission on a quarterly basis.  During the last such review meeting held on 14.3.2007, CoS
 appreciated the timely implementation of the rail connectivity projects and desired that necessary action
 should be taken to ensure completion of road connectivity project as per schedule.  Department of Road
 Transport and Highways has been requested to ensure timely implementation of the projects
 
30.     Funds shall be obtained under the viability gap funding scheme, wherever required, for port
 connectivity projects.
 
31.     As regards, the status of implementation of road connectivity projects of the major ports, the
 Committee has been informed by  the Department of Shipping that the road connectivity projects of
 Haldia, Paradip, Chennai-Ennore, Tuticorin, Cochin, New Mangalore, Mormugao and Jawaharlal  Nehru
 Ports are lagging behind in its schedule for implementation.  
 
Further recommendation/observation of the Committee
 
32.     The Committee notes that the Committee of Secretaries (CoS) is looking after the implementation of
 rail/road connectivity projects of the major ports.   The Committee appreciates the timely implementation
 of the rail connectivity projects with the ports and hopes that the Department of Road Transport and
 Highways will spare no efforts for ensuring timely implementation of road connectivity projects which
 affect the smooth and efficient flow of cargo in the major ports.  The Committee recommends the
 Department to pursue the matter with the Department of Road Transport and Highways for timely
 completion of the projects.  The Committee desires the Department to inform the Committee about the
 progress made in the matter. 
 
(Recommendation at Para 28)
33.     Now, a large number of private ports have also been set up in the country. They should be asked to
 take over the responsibility of building the connectivity requirements and the Government should also
 explore the possibility of creation of a Corpus Fund to take care of the connectivity problems of all ports
 as suggested by the Secretary, Department of Shipping.
 
Reply of the Government
34.     The recommendations of the Hon’ble Committee have been noted and communicated to the
 Planning Commission and the Maritime State Governments for necessary action.
 
Further recommendation/observation of the Committee
 
35.     The Committee notes the reply.
 
TSUNAMI REHABILITATION PROGRAMME

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/128-1.htm[28-08-2018 13:26:12]
(Recommendation at Para 31)
36.     The Committee notes with anguish that the Restoration, Rehabilitation Works as well as creation of
 additional facilities in the Andaman and Nicobar Islands under the Tsunami Rehabilitation Programme
 has not been given much attention by the Department of Shipping although an action plan for
 rehabilitation of port structures and creation of additional facilities has been initiated with an estimated
 cost of Rs.976.19 crore and the Government has already approved an amount of Rs.897.31 crore. The
 Committee, however, is surprised to note the Department of Shipping could utilize only Rs.18.58 crore in
 2005-06 and Rs.24.15 crore in 2006-07. The Committee finds that there has been a large short fall in the
 utilization pattern with the causal pace of the progress of work. The Committee has a doubt whether any
 Action Plan was chalked out by the Government.   The Committee recommends the Department to have
 focused approach for providing the infrastructure facilities for the Andaman and Nicobar islands within
 the stipulated time frame and if need be a task force may be formed for monitoring the pace of
 implementation of the programme and keep the Committee informed about the progress in the matter.
 
Reply of the Government
37.     Department of Shipping had intimated its requirement of funding to the tune of Rs.976.19 crores for
 restoration/rehabilitation works in the A&N Islands for the period 2005-2010 but the Planning
 Commission accorded allocation of Rs.897.31 crores up to 2008-09.  However, funds were made
 available by the Planning Commission from 2006-07 only.  
 
38.     In 2004-05, immediately after Tsunami disaster, the Department of Shipping from its own resources
 mobilized Rs.2.85 crores for immediate restoration works.  Similarly in 2005-06 Rs.18.58 crores was
 mobilized from ALHW funds by diverting this amount from other projects for immediate restoration of
 facilities destroyed by Tsunami.   In 2006-07,  Rs.89.76 crores was allocated for Post Tsunami restoration
 work out of which Rs.20.41 crores was released to other offices under Department of Shipping and
 Rs.24.15 crores was incurred by ALHW on Post-Tsunami works in the A&N Islands.  Hence, a total of
 Rs.44.56 crores was spent on Post-Tsunami works.  The rest of the funds could not be utilized mainly due
 to following reasons:-
 
(i)
                            During 2006-07 a number of pre-construction activities like surveys, EIA studies and
 obtaining environmental clearances (both local and from Ministry of Environment. &
 Forest), preparation of estimates etc. consumed considerable time. 
 
(ii)
                          There is limited working season i.e. from November to March during which construction
 activities can take place.  During rainy season  (April to October),  the Sea and weather is not
 conducive for transportation of material/construction.
 
(iii)                        The allocation of funds for ALHW in the previous year prior to the Tsunami for regular
 development work was on an average about Rs.30 crores.  However, post tsunami, the
 funding has increased by nearly 3 times whereas the staff strength has remained the same. 
 There is also shortage of staff on the basis of the existing staff strength.
 
(iv)                        Non receipt of timely sanction for Reconstruction of Breakwater at Hut Bay (Rs.81
 crores), Office Building of ALHW (Rs.11.76 crores) and Sea Wall at Campbell Bay
 (Rs.48.46 crores) The project of Breakwater at Hut Bay and Office Building  were sanctioned

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/128-1.htm[28-08-2018 13:26:12]
 in March, 2007 and the Campbell Bay Project is presently under process for approval of
 Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC).  Despite delegation of power to the local A&N
 Administration four of the projects posed for 2006-07 could not be sanctioned.
 
39.     In spite of the above constraints, a number of projects have been completed.
 
Further recommendation/observation of the Committee
 
40.     The Committee notes that the Planning Commission has approved an allocation of Rs.897.31 crore
 upto 2008-09 for restoration/rehabilitation works in the A&N Islands and the funds were made available
 by the Planning Commission from 2006-07.  During the year 2006-07 Rs.89.76 crores was allocated out
 of which a total of Rs.44.56 crores was spent on Post-Tsunami works.  The Committee  is distressed to
 note that the Department could not utilize the entire approved amount.  The Committee recommends the
 Department to evolve an institutional mechanism for monitoring and execution of projects in a time
 bound manner.
 
CALCUTTA DOCK LABOUR BOARD
(Recommendation at Para 35)
41.     The Committee notes that a proposal for release of one time grant of Rs.738.71 crore has been
 submitted to the Cabinet for financial assistance on account of payment of arrears of pensions and
 pensionary dues of CDLB and the proposal is under consideration of the Committee of Secretaries. The
 Committee also notes that the Department is working out a scheme for merger of CDLB with KoPT in
 consultation with the Department of Expenditure. The Committee is of the express opinion that liability
 on account of the payment of arrears of pensions and pensionary dues of CDLB solely lies on the
 Government and the problem of payment of pension and pensionary dues can be resolved only if, the
 Government approves self sustaining proposal for an initial corpus with appropriate policy and
 methodology for disbursement of pension and pensionary dues. The Committee welcomes the move of
 the Government for merging of CDLB with KoPT and financial restructuring of the KoPT to counter the
 adverse impact of the merger. The Committee recommends the Department that till the time the financial
 restructuring and merger of CDLB takes place, the Government should act upon releasing enhanced grant
 to CDLB for meeting its pensionary and other statutory liabilities.
Reply of the Government
42.     The Department of Shipping had moved a proposal for the approval of the Competent Authority for
 financial assistance on account of payment of arrears of pension and pensionary dues of CDLB. As
 advised by the Committee of Secretaries, a draft Note for COS has been prepared and circulated to the
 appraising agencies.
 
Further recommendation/observation of the Committee
 
43.     The Committee notes that the Department of Shipping has moved a proposal for approval of the
 Committee of Secretaries for grant of financial assistance on account of payment of arrears of pension
 and pensionary dues of CDLB.  The Committee recommends the Department to impress upon the
 Committee of Secretaries for taking early decision on the proposal of releasing enhanced grant to CDLB
 for meeting its pensionary and other statutory liabilities.   The Committee may also be apprised about the
 decision in the matter.

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/128-1.htm[28-08-2018 13:26:12]
 
TONNAGE TAX REGIME
(Recommendation at Para 38)
44.     The Committee notes that with the introduction of the Tonnage Tax system and other fiscal
 incentives the Indian shipping companies have registered the growth of the Indian tonnage. However, the
 Committee is constrained to note that the vessels registered under the Indian Vessels Act, 1917 and the
 Coastal Vessels Act, 1838 have not been included for the purpose of getting tonnage tax benefits.   The
 Committee feels that Inland Water Transport and Coastal Vessel transport in the country do not have the
 critical mass to complete with the other mode of transport on its own and or its development requires
 fiscal support from the Government.    The Committee, therefore, recommends the Department to impress
 upon the Ministry of Finance for extending the benefits of tonnage tax to these vessels registered under
 the Indian Vessels Act and Coastal vessels Act so as to harness the potential in the country.
Reply of the Government
45.     Department of Shipping has already taken up the matter with Ministry of Finance at various level
 requesting them to include the vessels registered under Inland Vessels Act and Coasting Vessel Act for
 extension of Tonnage tax regime They have been again requested for the same and their attention has
 been drawn to the recommendation of the Committee.
 
Further recommendation/observation of the Committee
 
46.     The Committee is constrained to note the delay in the matter of inclusion of vessels regulated under
 Indian Vessels Act and Coastal Vessels Act for extension of Tonnage Tax system and desires to know the
 reasons therefor.  The Committee is of the view that to develop the Inland Water transport in the country
 Government should provide fiscal support to harness its fullest potential.   The Committee recommends
 the Department to pursue vigorously the matter with the Ministry of Finance and keep informed the
 Committee about the progress.
 
CRUISE SHIPPING
(Recommendation at Para 42)
47.     The Committee is constrained to note that despite the country having a large coastline, no policy for
 cruise shipping has been framed till date.   The Committee notes that the Department of Shipping is
 formulating a cruise shipping policy for popularizing cruise shipping and development of infrastructure
 and other facilities in the country.  The Committee also notes that in order to encourage the cruise
 shipping in the country, the Department has provided incentives to encourage private sector participation
 for development of cruise tourism facilities at ports on Eastern as well Western coasts.  The Committee
 recommends the Department to expedite the process and bring out a comprehensive cruise shipping
 policy for the growth of the cruise shipping in the country within a time frame so that the boom in cruise
 shipping be tapped to the extent possible.
                                                                                       
Reply of the Government
48.     A comprehensive Cruise Shipping Policy is on the anvil. A draft Cruise Shipping policy is under
 formulation. A draft Cabinet Note in this regard is being prepared and will shortly be circulated among
 the concerned Ministries/Departments of the Government of India and Planning Commission. 

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/128-1.htm[28-08-2018 13:26:12]
 
49.     In response to the query  the Department of Shipping informed that the views of the appraisal
 agencies have been received and are under examination.   The Cruise Shipping  Policy is likely to be
 finalized in another two months.
         
Further recommendation/observation of the Committee
50.     The Committee notes with dismay that a draft Cabinet note formulating cruise shipping policy is
 still under preparation.  The Committee disapproves the undue delay in bringing out a comprehensive
 cruise shipping policy for the growth of the cruise shipping in the country.  The Committee is of the
 opinion that in the absence of the policy, the Department will not be able to popularize the cruise shipping
 and development of infrastructure and other facilities at the ports in the country.  The Committee hopes
 that the Department will formulate a comprehensive Cruise Shipping Policy within a period of two
 months as informed by the Department. 
 
MULTIPLICITY OF TAXES
(Recommendation at Para 44)
51.     The Committee notes with concern that there exists a multiplicity taxes in the shipping sector due to
 which Indian tonnage is loosing out a competitive edge.  The Committee is constrained to note that the
 Minimum Alternate Tax, Corporate Income Tax, Withholding Tax, Income tax for Indian Seafarers,
 Custom and Central Excise Duties on Capital Investment and Service Tax etc. have deterring effects and
 area putting extra burden on the Shipowners whereas their foreign counterparts do not have to pay such
 taxes.  This is hampering the growth of this vital sector in the country.  The Committee, therefore,
 recommends the Department to pursue the matter of rationalization and reduction of taxes which have
 adverse impact on the growth of the Shipping Sector, with the Ministry of Finance more vigorously for
 suitable corrective measures to boost the shipping sector of the nation and inform the Committee of the
 outcome therefrom.
 
Reply of the Government
 
52.     Department of Shipping has been taking up the tax proposals for Shipping Industry from time to
 time with Ministry of Finance. A group has also been constituted under the Chairmanship of Joint
 Secretary (Shipping) to review the tax regime for Indian Shipping industry. The report of the Group has
 been finalized and being taken up with Ministry of Finance for their consideration.
 
53.     The Department of Shipping informed that the Group constituted for the purpose has submitted its
 report which was examined in this Ministry and important proposals have been taken up with Ministry of
 Finance for consideration in the Budget 2008-09.  The report was also discussed by Hon’ble Minister of
 Shipping, Road Transport and Highways with Shipowners.  The Shipowners intends to make presentation
 to Finance Minister so as to highlight the various taxation issues.
 
Further recommendation/observation of the Committee
 
54.     The Committee notes that the Department has taken up  the matter for rationalization and reduction

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/128-1.htm[28-08-2018 13:26:12]
 of taxes with the Ministry of Finance and a study group was constituted to review the tax regime affecting
 the Indian shipping industry.  The Committee also notes that the recommendation of the group is under
 consideration of the Ministry of Finance.   The Committee feels that there should not be multiplicity of
 taxes for the shipping sector for obtaining desired growth.  The Committee recommends the Department
 to vigorously pursue the matter of rationalisaton of multiplicity of taxes for the shipping sector which has
 deterring effects and put extra burden on the ship-owners, with the Ministry of Finance for suitable
 action.  The Committee may be informed of the progress made in the matter. 
 
HUMAN RESOURCES DEVELOPMENT
(Recommendation at Para 49)
55.     The Committee is constrained to note that despite knowing fully well about the shortage of trained
 manpower in maritime sector, the Government has not taken adequate steps to meet the shortage.  As per
 the estimates of the Indian National Ship owners Association (INSA) there was shortage of 834 officers
 during 2006-07, which is likely to increase by 20% during 2007-08.  Globally also as per BIMCO/ISF
 manpower Summary Report, there will be shortage of approximately 27000 officers by 2015 which will
 further aggravate the problem of trained manpower in the country.  The Government, however, is
 considering a proposal to allow foreign officers to work on Indian ships besides increasing the training
 facilities to increase the trained manpower.  The Committee notes that there are four maritime training
 institutes being run under the Government sector apart from there are 124 maritime institutes in the
 private sector imparting pre-sea and post-sea training in various disciplines.  The Committee observes that
 since there is sizeable number of private institutes imparting maritime training all over the country, there
 is a need to provide institutional and integrated course in the country’s maritime human resources
 development.  The Committee feels that the shortage of Indian officers can be made good by increasing
 training facilities in the country.  The Committee recommends the Department to formulate the guidelines
 for affiliation of these private institutes and standardize the quality of such education and training through
 affiliation and academic supervision for achieving excellence in the maritime sector.
 
Reply of the Government
56.     The Recommendation of the Committee is accepted by the Government. The proposal regarding
 increasing of training slots in Indian Ships to 15% of the manning requirements is under active
 consideration of the Government. It has been observed that most of the private maritime training
 institutions are concentrated in the three metropolis i.e Mumbai, Chennai and Kolkata . This regional
 disparity will be looked into by encouraging new institutions in other regions.
57.     The Government have introduced an Indian Maritime University Bill, 2007 in Parliament to
 establish Indian Maritime University. Formation of Indian Maritime University will facilitate and
 promote maritime studies and research with focus on emerging areas of studies including marine science
 and technology, marine environment, legal and other related fields, and to achieve excellence in these
 areas of disciplines. It will promote advancement of knowledge by providing institutional and research
 facilities. Integrated course in marine science and other key areas of marine technology and allied
 disciplines will be introduced. The proposed Indian Maritime University will standardize the quality of
 maritime education and training imparted by private institutions. At present, the Bill is being examined by
 the Department related Parliamentary Standing Committee.
Further recommendation/observation of the Committee
 

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/128-1.htm[28-08-2018 13:26:12]
58.     The Committee notes that the Department of Shipping is addressing shortage of trained manpower
 in the maritime sector and a proposal regarding increasing training slots in the Indian Ships to 15% of
 manning requirement is under active consideration of the Government.   The Committee recommends that
 pending the Indian Maritime University Bill with Parliament, the Department should endeavor to
 regulate, standardize the quality of maritime education and training imparted by the private maritime
 institutions in the country besides creating additional bearth for on-sea training.
 
RECOUPMENT OF SEAMEN’S PROVIDENT FUND
(Recommendation at Para 53)
59.     The Committee is happy to note that as per its recommendations, the Government has approved the
 proposal for recoupment  of Rs.92.78 crore in the Seamen’s Provident Fund.  The Committee also notes
 that in order to ensure that such happenings are not repeated in future, a Bill to amend the Seamen’s
 Provident Fund Act, 1966 and to release the grant to Seamen’s Provident Fund is under consideration.  
 However, the Committee disapproves the idea of linking the proposal for recoupment of Rs.92.78 crore
 with the amendment of Seamen’s Provident Fund Act.  Because misappropriation of the amount
 belonging to the seamen was due to faulty rules/policy of the Government due to which the poor seamen
 were the sufferers.  The Committee expects that the decision of the Government to recoup the shortage of
 funds will certainly give relief to the Seamen whose precious savings were locked in the scam.
                                                                               
Reply of the Government
60.     The Government have released an amount of Rs.92.78 crore on 29 .6.2007 to the Seamen’s
 Provident Fund.
 
Further recommendation/observation of the Committee
 
61.     The Committee is happy to note that an amount of Rs.92.78 crore has already been released to the
 Seamen’s Provident Fund.  The Committee recommends that in order to give relief to the Seamen’s their
 due amount of Provident Fund may immediately be deposited in their Account.
 
HINDUSTAN SHIPYARD LTD.
(Recommendation at Para 58)
62.     The Committee notes with dismay that out of the approved 10th Plan outlay of Rs.200 crore for
 HSL, a sum of Rs.137.50 crore has so far been released. The Committee notes that with the boom in the
 shipping industry, the HSL is changing its marketing strategy and utilizing the installed capacity for ship
 repairing turnover. The vigorous marketing efforts have brought the order book position of HSL to
 Rs.2000 crore. However, the Committee feels that at this juncture the Government support will be crucial
 for success of HSL. The Committee notes that a Rehabilitation-cum-Financial Restructuring proposal for
 Rs. 799.61 crore for the yard is under active consideration of the Government and recommends
 expeditious clearance of the proposal for the capital restructuring of the yard. The Committee expects that
 with the financial restructuring the yard would achieve a turn around and make sustainable profitable
 operations.
                                                                                               
Reply of the Government
th

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/128-1.htm[28-08-2018 13:26:12]
63.     The Planning Commission approved an outlay of Rs.200 Crore for the 10    Five Year Plan in
 respect of HSL.  The break-up of Rs.200 Crs. is as follows;
 
Plan Schemes: Rs.  93.00 Crs.
 
Voluntary Retirement Rs.107.00  Crs.
 
Scheme      ------------------
Rs.200.00 Crs.
 
 
 
64.     Out of Rs.107 Cr, Rs.34.00 Crs were released during 2002-03 for implementing VRS in HSL. 
 However, later on, Planning Commission decided that funds for VRS may be given under non-plan head. 
 During the  10
th Plan, a total of Rs.110.50 Crs. has been released as against the earmarked allocation of
 Rs.93.00 Crs 
 
65.     The Department is aware that the shipbuilding industry all over the world is showing an uptrend and
 to enable HSL to cash in on this boom, the Department has proposed a Rehabilitation package.   However,
 presently the proposal after having been considered by CCEA, stands referred to Group of Ministers
 (GOM), which is considering the issue.
 
66.     In response to further query that the Department of Shipping informed that presently the Group of
 Ministers (GoM) headed by the Minister for External Affairs is considering the proposal and the 4 th
 meeting of the GoM is scheduled to be held on 10.01.2008.  After receipt of the final recommendations of
 the GoM, the proposal shall again be placed before the CCEA for approval.
 
Further recommendation/observation of the Committee
 
67.     The Committee notes that the Department of Shipping has submitted a rehabilitation package for
 financial restructuring of Hindustan Shipyard and the proposal is presently being considered by the Group
 of Ministers.  The Committee recommends the Department to impress upon the Government for
 expeditious clearance of the proposal so as to cash the boom in the ship building industry. 
 
(Recommendation at Para 61)
68.                          68.   The Committee notes with distress that the employees of the HSL who have taken
 voluntary retirement have not been paid their statutory dues and arrears and other
 benefits and have been denied of the benefits for long. The Committee is of the
 opinion that inability on account of payment of statutory dues and arrears of salary
 and enhanced pensionary benefits entirely lies on the Government. The Committee is
 constrained to note the inconsiderate attitude of the Government in the matter. The
 Government neither approved the long pending revival package nor allowed HSL to
 raise the loan for payment of statutory dues and other retirement benefits. The
 Committee, therefore, recommends the Government either to release the funds for

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/128-1.htm[28-08-2018 13:26:12]
 payment of arrears to their employee forthwith or allow HSL to raise the loan as
 requested by the Department of Shipping on priority.
                                                                                     
Reply of the Government
69.     As already submitted before the Hon’ble Committee that the Department had earlier proposed to
 Ministry of Finance (MoF) to allow HSL to raise a loan of Rs.5.00 crores for liquidating the VRS dues of
 the retired employees of HSL but Ministry of Finance turned down the proposal stating that MoF is not in
 favour of any such proposal before the Restructuring package of HSL is approved.
 
70.     In the above scenario, this Department had no choice but to incorporate the above VRS dues in the
 Restructuring proposal of HSL.  The Restructuring proposal stands referred to Group of Ministers and is
 likely to take some time before the final decision in respect of Restructuring Proposal is taken by the
 competent authorities.
 
71.     The Department, however, in the light of recommendation/observation of the Hon’ble Committee, is
 requesting MoF once again to re-consider the earlier proposal of this Department to allow HSL to raise a
 loan of Rs.5.00 Crs for settlement of VRS dues of its retired employees.
Further recommendation/observation of the Committee
 
72.     The Committee notes that the Department has mooted a proposal to the Ministry of Finance for
 raising a loan of Rs.5 crore for liquidating the VRS dues of the retired employees of HSL but the Ministry
 of Finance has declined the proposal before the restructuring package is approved.  The Committee
 recommends the Department to pursue the matter with the Ministry of Finance for restructuring of the
 yard and ensure the settlement of VRS dues of its retired employees under intimation to the Committee.
 
HOOGHLY DOCK & PORTS ENGINEERS LTD.
(Recommendation at Para 67)
73.     The Committee notes that during the 10
th Plan an outlay of Rs.41.88 crores for HDPEL had been
 provided and an outlay of Rs.163.00 crores has been proposed during the 11 th Plan period for Renewal
 and Replacement at Salkia  Works and Nazirgunge Works. The Committee also notes that a
 Rehabiliatation-cum-Revival package proposal for Rs.393.61 crores has been prepared and is under active
 consideration of Board for Restructuring Public Sector Enterprises.   The Committee also notes that in
 order to reduce the shortfall a token provision of Rs.1 lakh has been kept for revival package during 2007-
08  The Committee recommends the Government to grant an early approval for revival package of
 HDPEL and write-off the Government loan and interest liability for improving the financial health of the
 company. The Committee hopes that with the approval and implementation package, the company would
 achieve a turn around and earn sustainable profits.
                                                                                               
Reply of the Government
74.     The revised proposal on Rehabilitation-cum-Revival package of Hooghly Dock & Port Engineers
 Limited (HDPEL) was considered by Board for Reconstruction of Public Sector Enterprises (BRPSE) in
 its 48
th meeting held on 23 rd May 2007 and the Board advised the Department of Shipping /HDPEL to
 prepare a further revised comprehensive and realistic revival plan with the help of IL&FS duly addressing
 all the issues discussed in the meeting.

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/128-1.htm[28-08-2018 13:26:12]
 
75.     The re-revised revival proposal of company was considered by the Board for Reconstruction of
 Public Sector Enterprises in its 49 th meeting held on 22 nd June 2007.  As against the earlier proposal of
 Rs.393.63 crore amended upto 31st March 2006, in the re-revised proposal computed upto 31st March
 2007 and finalized by IL&FS. a requirement of funds to the tune of Rs.366.38 crore towards waiver of
 GOI loan/accumulated interest thereon has been projected with the infusion to the tune of Rs.87.99 crore. 
 The Board has recommended the total requirement of funds has been projected to the tune of Rs.449.37
 crore.  However a token provision of Rs.50 lakhs has now been provided under Annual Plan 2007-08. 
 The proposal will be processed further on receipt of  recommendations of BRPSE.
 
76.     Giving the details of the latest development in the matter the Department of Shipping informed that
 a draft note for consideration of Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs (CCEA) has been circulated to
 the concerned appraising Ministries/Departments for the comments/recommendations on 27 th November,
 2007.  The Cabinet note will be placed before the CCEA after receipt of comments/recommendations of
 the concerned Ministries.
 
Further recommendation/observation of the Committee
 
77.     The Committee notes that the proposal of Rehabilitation-cum-Revival package of Hooghly Dock &
 Port Engineers Limited (HDPEL) has been considered by the Board for Reconstruction of Public Sector
 Enterprises (BRPSE) and based upon the recommendations of the BRPSE a draft note has been circulated
 to the concerned appraising Ministries/Department for comments.   The Committee recommends the
 Department to continue its efforts for expediting package.
 
INLAND WATER TRANSPORT
(Recommendation at Para 69)
78.     The Committee expresses its concern for underutilization of the budgeted amount by the
 Department of Shipping during 10
th Plan. Out of the approved outlay of Rs. 864.73 crore, the Department
 of Shipping was allocated Rs. 638.07 crore for development of IWT sector which was revised to Rs.
 560.65 crore and Department could spend only Rs. 387.74 crore by the end of the 10 th Plan. In BE 2007-
08, a sum of Rs. 158.00 crore (including Rs. 75.90 crore for NE Pool) has been earmarked for IWT sector.
 On the one hand IWT required higher investment but on the other hand, the Department failed to utilize
 what meager allocation was made to them. The Committee observed that the actual expenditure incurred
 has always been low as compared to the budgeted estimates for inland water transport sector. The
 Committee recommends the Department to intensify the monitoring mechanism for implementation and
 coordination of programme and activities of the Department besides addressing the procedural delays for
 proper utilization of the budgeted amount allocated at BE stage.
                                                                      
 
 
Reply of the Government
79.     The observation/recommendation of the Hon'ble Committee are noted for compliance. During 2006-
07, many projects of Inland Water Transport (IWT) Sector were delayed  due to procedural delays in

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/128-1.htm[28-08-2018 13:26:12]
 approval of projects, local and contractual / legal issues, delay in execution of project by CPWD and
 delay in construction of vessels by HDPE, resulting in shortfall in utilization of the outlay.
         
80.     As regards monitoring mechanism, the Department further informed the Committee that a task force
 already exists in the Ministry to review the progress of IWT development projects on quarterly basis to
 ensure that there is no time or cost overrun.  In addition, there is another monitoring mechanism in the
 form of half yearly Performance Review meeting by Planning Commission to review the financial and
 physical performance of Central Sector/Centrally Sponsored Schemes/budget programmes.
 
Further recommendation/observation of the Committee]
 
81.     The Committee is not satisfied with the reply that the IWT projects were delayed due to procedural
 requirements causing shortfall in the utilization of outlay.   The Committee recommends the Department
 to do away with the procedural hurdles and maintain close liaison for the purpose of review monitoring,
 implementation and co-ordination of the projects. 
 
 (Recommendation at Para 73)
82.     The Committee notes that the Department has prepared an action Plan with total projected financial
 implication of Rs.751.18 crore for making the existing 3 National Waterways fully operational for
 navigation and shipping purposes within a span of two years. The Committee feels that the inadequate
 interest and investment in the sector is aggravating the problems of inland water transport. The
 Committee is of the strong opinion that the development of the inland water transport sector will
 ultimately depend on the flow of investments, both public and private, primarily public and multi-pronged
 approach in which the Government takes the responsibility by putting in place the necessary
 infrastructure for the inland waterways. Therefore, the Committee recommends the Department to achieve
 a vibrant inland water transport and endeavor should be made to integrate it with National Maritime
 Development Programme for overall development of IWT sector. 
                                     
Reply of the Government
83.     The observation/ recommendation of the Hon'ble Committee are noted for compliance.
 
84.     Further  Department  of Shipping informed that the Action Plan for making the existing three
 National Waterways fully functional originally envisaged completion of all the projects by March, 2008. 
 However, on review of implementation of various development activities being undertaken in the three
 national waterways, it is envisaged that the Action Plan will get completed by March, 2010.
 
Further recommendation/observation of the Committee
 
85.     The Committee recommends that the action should be completed in a time bound manner and the
 Committee may be apprised of the same.
 
CENTRAL INLAND WATER TRANSPORT CORPORATION
(Recommendation at Para 79)
86.     The Committee notes with dismay that though the Cabinet had decided to absorb all 371 employees

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/128-1.htm[28-08-2018 13:26:12]
 of Rajabagan  Dockyard (RBD) with Garden Reach Shipbuilders and Engineers Ltd. (GRSE), however,
 only 314 employees were taken over by GRSE. The Committee is surprised to note that GRSE has not
 only ignored the decision of the Cabinet but also made the 57 employees of the headquarters of the
 merged entity, the worst victim of non-implementation of merger process who had been acting-brain of
 RBD's operation since its nationalization. The Committee recommends the Government to take steps to
 ensure that the remaining 57 employees are also taken into the pay-roll of GRSE as decided by the
 Cabinet.
                  
Reply of the Government
87.     The decision of the Government regarding Rajabagan Dockyard (RBD) is as follows:
                   "Handing over of Rajabagan  Dockyard (RBD) along with its existing manpower (371
 employees), assets and liabilities to Garden Reach Shipbuilders and Engineers (GRSE) or to
 any other PSE an outright purchase/ long terms lease/management contract basis in a
 transparent manner to be overseen by a group of Secretaries." 
 
88.     Accordingly, RBD stands transferred   along with its existing manpower of assets and liabilities to
 Garden Reach Shipbuilders and Engineers (GRSE) w.e.f. 01.07.2006. Out of 371 employees listed  
 proposed for transfer to GRSE, 50 employees opted for Voluntary Retirement Scheme (VRS),  5 
 employees left due to superannuation, death etc. and two employees opted to remain with the
 Corporation. In this way, M/s GRSE Ltd. had finally absorbed 314 employees out of 371 employees.
 
Further recommendation/observation of the Committee
89.     The Committee notes the reply and recommends the Department of Shipping to vigorously pursue the
 matter with the Ministry of Defence  to ensure absorption of the remaining 57 employees of Rajabagan
 Dockyard (RBD) with Garden Reach Shipbuilders and Engineers Ltd. (GRSE) as per the decision of the
 Cabinet.
 
(Recommendation at Para 80)
90.     The Committee is constrained to note that inspite of its recommendation in the past, the Government
 has not come out with a complete blueprint for making full use of the existing assets of River Service
 Division (RSD). The Committee is of the opinion that CIWTC with its infrastructure and expertise can
 play an integral part for development and promotion of inland water transport through NW-1 and NW-2.
 The Committee recommends that possibility may also be explored to physically amalgamate the
 remaining CIWTC with Inland Waterway Authority of India (IWAI) or Kolkata  Port Trust (KoPT) or
 Shipping Corporation of India (SCI), so that the infrastructure and expertise of CIWTC can be utilized for
 development of waterways transport.
                                                                                     
Reply of the Government
 
91.     The Corporation has about 100 IWT vessels out of which 40 are operational. While some of the
 non-operational vessels are awaiting repair some are beyond economic repair. A detail exercise on
 deployment of the vessels of the corporation is underway. A few vessels of CIWTC have been given on
 dry charter as well. CIWTC operated 47 voyages in NW-1 between 2004 and 2006 at the behest of IWAI.

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/128-1.htm[28-08-2018 13:26:12]
 The route is however, non-economical.
 
92.     The possibilities of amalgamation or otherwise of this corporation with various Organizations, such
 as Inland Waterways Authority of India (IWAI), Kolkata Port Trust (KoPT) or Shipping Corporation of
 India (SCI), was examined and not found feasible. The role of IWAI is to regulate development of inland
 waterways for propose of Shipping and navigation and for matter connected therewith or incidental
 thereto. Thus the role of IWAI is not of an inland water operator/commercial organization. Merger with
 KoPT also was not found feasible. SCI operates only ocean going ships and does not operate in inland
 waterway vessels. Hence merger of CIWTC with SCI was also not found feasible. 
 
93.     In response to query  the Department of Shipping informed that there is no such proposal under
 consideration of the Government as on date for revival of CIWTC with existing assets.  The Cabinet vide
 its decision on 1.12.2005 has already decided in favour of disinvestment of CIWTC and the Government
 is bound by the decision. The Department of Shipping further informed that no feasibility study has been
 conducted for the physical amalgamation of the Corporation.
 
Further recommendation/observation of the Committee
 
94.     The Committee is not satisfied with the reply of the Department regarding merger of the CIWTC
 with IWAI or KoPT or Shipping Corporation of India (SCI).  The Committee strongly disapproves the
 fact that till date no report of any study conducted by the Department has been submitted to the
 Committee.  The Committee is constrained to conclude that in the absence of a proper scientific study, the
 matter cannot be resolved.  The Committee, therefore, once again recommends the Government to come
 out with a complete blue-print for revival of CIWTC as the Committee feels that CIWTC can be viable
 and play a greater role for development and promotion of IWT activity through NW-1 and NW-2.
 
OBSERVATIONS/CONCLUSIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS/ -- AT A GLANCE
 
APPRAISAL OF THE 10
TH PLAN AND THE ANALYSIS OF ANNUAL PLAN 2007-08
          The Committee notes that in order to ensure optimum utilization of funds token provision are
 being kept at the time of preparation of budget estimates for projects/schemes for which approval
 of the competent authority is yet to be received.    The Committee recommends the Department
 should continue to work out strategy for maximum utilization of plan outlays and prioritize the
 projects in consultation with the concerned agencies for better co-ordination and timely execution
 of the projects.
(Para 8)
          The Committee takes notes of the measures proposed by the Department of Shipping to
 remove the procedural hurdles and administrative delays.  The Committee however observes that
 there are umpteen numbers of agency and procedures to clear a particular project proposal. The
 existing procedure to be followed for formulation, appraisal and approval of projects takes years
 together for obtaining the approval of the Competent Authority.  In the era of communication and
 information technology, there is a greater need to streamline the procedures to save time, the
 Committee, therefore, recommends that the various procedures and practices prevailing at present

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/128-1.htm[28-08-2018 13:26:12]
 may be done away with and a single agency may be empowered to clear all the proposals of projects
 within a prescribed time schedule.  The Committee further recommends that the matter may be
 taken up with appropriate agency to create a single high powered agency for the purpose.
(Para 12)
PORT SECTOR
          The Committee notes the efforts made by the Department of Shipping to ensure optimum
 utilization of funds.   The Committee, however, is constrained to note that the full utilisation of the
 budgetary allocation could not be made by the Department in the 10 th Plan leading to delays in
 execution and non utilization of funds for the projects in the Ports Sector.   The Committee feels
 that any reduction in budgetary allocation will have adverse impact on growth, strengthening of
 Shipping and Port infrastructure projects in the country.  The Committee hopes that the
 Department will make more demand for allocation of funds for the Port Sector during the 11
th Plan
 and will take remedial measure for maximum utilization of the Plan outlays in a time bound
 manner.
(Para 18)
 
          The Committee notes the reply and hopes that adequate budgetary allocation will be made to 
 the Department for the entire 11
th Plan period as per the projection for the growth and
 strengthening of the Shipping and Ports sector. 
(Para 21)
 
          The Committee notes that the Government has laid down the guidelines for allowing private
 sector participation in the major ports including construction and maintenance of ports and
 harbours.  The Committee hopes that legislative support, hospitable environment and transparent
 bidding criteria will not only provide a facilitative and transparent framework but also enhance the
 role of public-private partnership in the port infrastructure projects. 
(Para 24)
 
          The Committee notes the reply of Department of Shipping and desires that the matter should
 be pursued with Planning Commission on regular basis to expedite the proposals, and Committee
 may be apprised about the decision taken in the matter.
(Para 27)
 
          The Committee notes that the Committee of Secretaries (CoS) is looking after the
 implementation of rail/road connectivity projects of the major ports.   The Committee appreciates
 the timely implementation of the rail connectivity projects with the ports and hopes that the
 Department of Road Transport and Highways will spare no efforts for ensuring timely
 implementation of road connectivity projects which affect the smooth and efficient flow of cargo in
 the major ports.  The Committee recommends the Department to pursue the matter with the
 Department of Road Transport and Highways for timely completion of the projects.  The
 Committee desires the Department to inform the Committee about the progress made in the
 matter. 
(Para 32)
 
          The Committee notes the reply.

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/128-1.htm[28-08-2018 13:26:12]
(Para 35)
 
TSUNAMI REHABILITATION PROGRAMME
          The Committee notes that the Planning Commission has approved an allocation of Rs.897.31
 crore upto 2008-09 for restoration/rehabilitation works in the A&N Islands and the funds were
 made available by the Planning Commission from 2006-07.  During the year 2006-07 Rs.89.76
 crores was allocated out of which a total of Rs.44.56 crores  was spent on Post-Tsunami works.  The
 Committee  is distressed to note that the Department could not utilize the entire approved amount. 
 The Committee recommends the Department to evolve an institutional mechanism for monitoring
 and execution of projects in a time bound manner.
(Para 40)
 
CALCUTTA DOCK LABOUR BOARD
          The Committee notes that the Department of Shipping has moved a proposal for approval of
 the Committee of Secretaries for grant of financial assistance on account of payment of arrears of
 pension and pensionary dues of CDLB.  The Committee recommends the Department to impress
 upon the Committee of Secretaries for taking early decision on the proposal of releasing enhanced
 grant to CDLB for meeting its pensionary and other statutory liabilities.  The Committee may also
 be apprised about the decision in the matter.
(Para 43)
TONNAGE TAX REGIME
 
The Committee is constrained to note the delay in the matter of inclusion of vessels regulated
 under Indian Vessels Act and Coastal Vessels Act for extension of Tonnage Tax system and desires
 to know the reasons therefor.  The Committee is of the view that to develop the Inland Water
 transport in the country Government should provide fiscal support to harness its fullest potential. 
 The Committee recommends the Department to pursue vigorously the matter with the Ministry of
 Finance and keep informed the Committee about the progress.
 (Para 46)
CRUISE SHIPPING
          The Committee notes with dismay that a draft Cabinet note formulating cruise shipping
 policy is still under preparation.  The Committee disapproves the undue delay in bringing out a
 comprehensive cruise shipping policy for the growth of the cruise shipping in the country.  The
 Committee is of the opinion that in the absence of the policy, the Department will not be able to
 popularize the cruise shipping and development of infrastructure and other facilities at the ports in
 the country.  The Committee hopes that the Department will formulate a comprehensive Cruise
 Shipping Policy within a period of two months as informed by the Department. 
(Para 50)
MULTIPLICITY OF TAXES
          The Committee notes that the Department has taken up  the matter for rationalization and
 reduction of taxes with the Ministry of Finance and a study group was constituted to review the tax
 regime affecting the Indian shipping industry.  The Committee also notes that the recommendation
 of the group is under consideration of the Ministry of Finance.  The Committee feels that there
 should not be multiplicity of taxes for the shipping sector for obtaining desired growth.  The
 Committee recommends the Department to vigorously pursue the matter of rationalisaton of

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/128-1.htm[28-08-2018 13:26:12]
 multiplicity of taxes for the shipping sector which has deterring effects and put extra burden on the
 ship-owners, with the Ministry of Finance for suitable action.  The Committee may be informed of
 the progress made in the matter. 
(Para 54)
 
HUMAN RESOURCES DEVELOPMENT
 
          The Committee notes that the Department of Shipping is addressing shortage of trained
 manpower in the maritime sector and a proposal regarding increasing training slots in the Indian
 Ships to 15% of manning requirement is under active consideration of the Government.   The
 Committee recommends that pending the Indian Maritime University Bill with Parliament, the
 Department should endeavor to regulate, standardize the quality of maritime education and
 training imparted by the private maritime institutions in the country besides creating additional
 bearth for on-sea training.
(Para 58)
 
RECOUPMENT OF SEAMEN’S PROVIDENT FUND
 
          The Committee is happy to note that an amount of Rs.92.78 crore has already been released to
 the Seamen’s Provident Fund.  The Committee recommends that in order to give relief to the
 Seamen’s their due amount of Provident Fund may immediately be deposited in their Account.
(Para 61)
 
HINDUSTAN SHIPYARD LTD.
 
          The Committee notes that the Department of Shipping has submitted a rehabilitation package
 for financial restructuring of Hindustan Shipyard and the proposal is presently being considered by
 the Group of Ministers.  The Committee recommends the Department to impress upon the
 Government for expeditious clearance of the proposal so as to cash the boom in the ship building
 industry. 
(Para 67)
 
          The Committee notes that the Department has mooted a proposal to the Ministry of Finance
 for raising a loan of Rs.5 crore  for liquidating the VRS dues of the retired employees of HSL but
 the Ministry of Finance has declined the proposal before the restructuring package is approved. 
 The Committee recommends the Department to pursue the matter with the Ministry of Finance for
 restructuring of the yard and ensure the settlement of VRS dues of its retired employees under
 intimation to the Committee.
(Para 72)
 
HOOGHLY DOCK & PORTS ENGINEERS LTD.
 
          The Committee notes that the proposal of Rehabilitation-cum-Revival package of Hooghly
 Dock & Port Engineers Limited (HDPEL) has been considered by the Board for Reconstruction of
 Public Sector Enterprises (BRPSE) and based upon the recommendations of the BRPSE a draft
 note has been circulated to the concerned appraising Ministries/Department for comments.  The

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/128-1.htm[28-08-2018 13:26:12]
 Committee recommends the Department to continue its efforts for expediting package.
(Para 77)
 
INLAND WATER TRANSPORT
 
          The Committee is not satisfied with the reply that the IWT projects were delayed due to
 procedural requirements causing shortfall in the utilization of outlay.  The Committee recommends
 the Department to do away with the procedural hurdles and maintain close liaison for the purpose
 of review monitoring, implementation and co-ordination of the projects. 
(Para 81)
 
          The Committee recommends that the action should be completed in a time bound manner and
 the Committee may be apprised of the same.
(Para 85)
 
CENTRAL INLAND WATER TRANSPORT CORPORATION
          The Committee notes the reply and recommends the Department of Shipping to vigorously
 pursue the matter with the Ministry of Defence to ensure absorption of the remaining 57 employees
 of Rajabagan Dockyard (RBD) with Garden Reach Shipbuilders and Engineers Ltd. (GRSE) as per
 the decision of the Cabinet.
(Para 89)
 
          The Committee is not satisfied with the reply of the Department regarding merger of the
 CIWTC with IWAI or KoPT or Shipping Corporation of India (SCI).  The Committee strongly
 disapproves the fact that till date no report of any study conducted by the Department has been
 submitted to the Committee.  The Committee is constrained to conclude that in the absence of a
 proper scientific study, the matter cannot be resolved.  The Committee, therefore, once again
 recommends the Government to come out with a complete blue-print for revival of CIWTC as the
 Committee feels that CIWTC can be viable and play a greater role for development and promotion
 of IWT activity 
through NW-1 and NW-2.
(Para 94)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/128-1.htm[28-08-2018 13:26:12]
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINUTES
X
TENTH MEETING

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/128-1.htm[28-08-2018 13:26:12]
            The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Friday, the 18th January 2008 in Committee Room 'A', Ground Floor, Parliament
 House Annexe, New Delhi.
            MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Sitaram Yechury – Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Prof. Ram Deo Bhandary
3. Shri Naresh Gujral
4. Shri Vedprakash P. Goyal
5. Prof. Alka Balram Kshatriya
6. Shri Shahid Siddiqui
7. Shri Shatrughan Sinha
LOK SABHA
8. Shri Anandrao Vithoba Adsul
9. Shri Sartaj Singh Chhatwal
10. Dr. K. Dhanaraju
11. Dr. Ramkrishna Kusmaria
12. Shri Samik Lahiri
13. Shri Alok Kumar Mehta
14. Shri Dushyant Singh
15. Shri Rakesh Singh
SECRETARIAT
            Shrimati Agnes Momin George, Joint Secretary
Shri Jagdish Kumar, Joint Director
            Shri Swarabji B., Deputy Director
            Shrimati Nidhi Chaturvedi, Committee Officer  
 
2.         *                      *                      *.
3.         Thereafter, the Committee considered the following draft Reports:
 
(i)                  Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations of the Committee contained in its
 One Hundred and Seventeenth Report on Demands for Grants (2007-08) of the Department of Shipping;
 
(ii)                Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations of the Committee contained in its
 One Hundred and Eighteenth Report on Demands for Grants (2007-08) of the Department of Road Transport
 and Highways; and
 
(iii)               Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations of the Committee contained in its
 One Hundred and Twentieth Report on Demands for Grants (2007-08) of Ministry of Culture.
 
After some discussion the Committee adopted all the three Reports with minor modifications. The Committee also authorized
 the Chairman to nominate the Members for presentation of the said report to the Parliament during the ensuing Budget
 session.
 
3.         *                      *                      *.
 
4.         The meeting of the Committee then adjourned at 12.30 p.m. to meet again on the 31
st January, 2008.
 
 
 
 

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/128-1.htm[28-08-2018 13:26:12]
 
 
 
      * Relates to other matters
 
 