file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/129threport.htm[28-08-2018 13:28:15]
           
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON
 TRANSPORT, TOURISM & CULTURE
 
ONE HUNDRED AND TWENTY NINTH REPORT
ON
ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE
 RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE CONTAINED IN ITS
 ONE HUNDRED AND TWENTIETH REPORT ON DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2007-08) OF
 MINISTRY OF CULTURE
 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON    4.3.2008)
 (LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON  4.3.2008)
 
 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
 MARCH, 2008/PHALGUNA, 1929 (SAKA)
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
 
 
 
ONE HUNDRED AND TWENTY NINTH REPORT
ON
ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE
 RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE CONTAINED IN ITS
 ONE HUNDRED AND TWENTIETH REPORT ON DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2007-08)
 (DEMAND NO.19) OF MINISTRY OF CULTURE
 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON   4.3.2008)
 (LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON    4.3.2008)

file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/129threport.htm[28-08-2018 13:28:15]
 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
MARCH, 2008/PHALGUNA, 1929 (SAKA)
 
E-mail:rsc-tt@sansad.nic.in
Website:http://rajyasabha.nic.in
C O N T E N T S
 
PAGES
 
1.         COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE                                                      (i)        
2.         INTRODUCTION                                                                                                (ii)
3.         REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE                                                                1 - 15
4.         OBSERVATIONS/CONCLUSIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS AT A GLANCE         16 - 19   
5.         MINUTES                                                                                                                             20 - 21                                                   
                                                                                                                        
COMPOSITION OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE
(2007-2008)
1.   Shri Sitaram Yechury             - Chairman
 
RAJYA SABHA
2.  Prof. Ram Deo Bhandary
3.   Shri Naresh Gujral
4.   Shri Vedprakash P. Goyal
5.
      Prof. Alka Balram Kshatriya
6.      Shri Janardhana Poojary
7.      Shri M.V. Mysura Reddy
8.      Shri Satish Kumar Sharma
9.      Shri Shahid Siddiqui
10.  Shri Shatrughan Sinha
 
LOK SABHA

file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/129threport.htm[28-08-2018 13:28:15]
 
11.  Shri Anandrao Vithoba Adsul
12.  Shri Sukhbir Singh Badal
13.  Shri Joachim Baxla
14.  Shri Sartaj Singh Chhatwal
15.  Shri N.S.V. Chitthan
16.  Shri Adhir Chowdhury
17.  Dr. K. Dhanaraju
18.  Smt. Priya Dutt
19.  Shri Dip Gogoi
20.  Shri P. Karunakaran
21.  *Shri Vijay Kumar Khandelwal
22.  Dr. P.P. Koya
23.  Dr. Ramkrishna Kusmaria
24.  Shri Samik Lahiri 
25.  Shri Alok Kumar Mehta
26.  Shri Hemlal Murmu
27.  Shri Madan Lal Sharma
28.  Shri Akshay Pratap Singh
29.  Shri Dushyant Singh
30.  Shri Suraj Singh
31.  Shri Prahlad Joshi
32.  **Shri Rakesh Singh
 
SECRETARIAT
Shrimati Agnes Momin George, Joint Secretary
            Shri Jagdish Kumar, Joint Director
            Shri Swarabji B., Deputy Director
            Shrimati Nidhi Chaturvedi, Committee Officer
  
* Expired on 13.11.2007
** Nominated on 1.12.2007.                                                  (i)
 
INTRODUCTION
 
         I, the Chairman, Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture,
 having been authorised  by the Committee to present on its behalf, do hereby present this One Hundred and Twenty
 Ninth Report of the Committee on Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations of the
 Committee contained in its One Hundred and Twentieth Report on Demands for Grants (2007-08) of Ministry of
 Culture.
 
2.    The One Hundred and Twentieth Report on Demand for Grants (2007-08) of the Ministry of Culture was presented
 to the Parliament on the 14
th May 2007.  The Action Taken Replies on the recommendation of the Committee contained
 in its One Hundred and Twentieth Report were received from the Ministry of Culture on 3 rd December, 2007.  The
 Committee considered the Action Taken Replies in its meeting held on the 24th December, 2007 and decided to hear the
 Secretary, Ministry of Culture in this regard.   A Questionnaire based on the ATR was also forwarded to the Ministry
 and replies were obtained from them.
 
3.    Accordingly, a meeting was held on 11
th January, 2008 with the Secretary, and other representatives of the Ministry
 of Culture in which clarifications on certain points were sought.
 

file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/129threport.htm[28-08-2018 13:28:15]
4.    The draft report was prepared on the basis of action taken replies and the subsequent feedbacks.   The Committee
 considered and adopted the Report at its meeting held on the 18th January, 2008.
 
 
 
NEW DELHI ;                                                                      SITARAM YECHURY
January 18, 2008                                                                       Chairman
     Pausa 28, 1929 (Saka)                                                         Department-related Parliamentary Standing
                                     Committee on Transport, Tourism & Culture.
 
 
 
 
(ii)
 
R E P O R T
 
 
            The Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Government on the observations/recommendations as
 contained in its One Hundred and Twentieth Report on Demands for Grants (2007-08) (Demand No. 19) of the Department of
 Culture, which was presented to the Parliament on 14th May, 007. 
 
2.         Action Taken Replies were received from the Government on 3 rd December 2007 in respect of all the
 observations/recommendations contained in the Report.  The Replies have been categorized as follows:-
 
(i)                  Recommendations/observations that have been accepted by the Government:
Para Nos. 5, 13, 16, 22, 23, 28, 31, 34, 35, 37, 40, 43, 49,                     Total – 16
      51, 56 and 61
 
(ii)                Recommendations/observations in respect of which replies of the Government have not been accepted by the
 Committee:
Para Nos.   46 and 54                                                                      Total –   2
 
(i)
                  Recommendations/observations in respect of which final replies of the Government are still awaited:
Para Nos.   10                                                                                 Total –   1
 
3.         The Committee desires that final replies in respect of the recommendations, which have been categorized as
 interim replies by the Committee should be furnished to it at the earliest.
 
4.         On scrutiny of the Action Taken Replies, the Committee has made observations on each item of the action
 taken/proposed to be taken by the Ministry.  The recommendations of the Committee contained in the One Hundred and
 Twentieth, action taken thereon by the Government and recommendations/observations of the Committee on each item of action
 taken have been given in the succeeding paragraphs.
 
COMPARISON OF THE 10
TH AND 11 TH FIVE YEAR PLANS AND OVERALL ASSESSMENT OF FINANCIAL
 PERFORMANCE FOR THE YEARS 2006-07 AND 2007-08:
 (Recommendation at Para 5)
5.         The Committee notes that while comparing B.E. 2006-07 and B.E. 2007-08, it is observed that most of the major
 schemes under the Ministry of Culture have got increased allocations. The Committee feels that preservation and protection of
 vast cultural resources of the country is a task gigantic in nature and requires huge investments. But, the Committee is at dismay
 that the Government has always treated it as non productive sector thereby inviting apathy of the Finance Ministry which is
 always reducing the allocations made for the Ministry of Culture at Revised Estimates stage. The Committee strongly feels that
 this sector is catalytic for economic growth and not only that but also preservation of our culture means preserving our national
 identity which should not be compromised at any cost. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the allocations made for the
 year 2007-08 should not be reduced at RE stage by the Finance Ministry and the Ministry of Culture should try to spend the

file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/129threport.htm[28-08-2018 13:28:15]
 allocations to the fullest extent.
 
 
 
(Recommendation at Para 10)
6.         Our culture is the most vibrant and rich culture in the world. The Committee feels that culture has to be harnessed
 together with tourism and showcased to the world. The right modal mix between culture and tourism would yield valuable
 foreign exchange by inviting more and more tourists; promote our artists and artisans many of whom are at the verge of
 starvation; preserve our local regional culture, art and craft ; last but not the least, it will also enthuse private sector to invest
 more and more in these activities. The Committee strongly recommends that the approach of the Ministry of Culture, Ministry
 of Finance and Planning Commission should change during the 11th Five Year Plan and all of them should together take
 adequate care and ensure that none of the Plan activities in respect of Ministry of Culture and its organizations is deferred due to
 reduction in Annual Plan outlay at the stage of Revised Estimates.
 
(Recommendation at Para 13)
7.         The Committee strongly recommends its earlier observations with regard to budgeting pattern of the Ministry of Culture
 and reiterates its recommendations made at para 11 of the 103
rd Report on the Demands for Grants for the year 2006-07 wherein
 it was stated that:
 
"The Committee is of the view that fixing of the Revised Estimates ceiling by the Ministry of Finance on the basis of the
 level of expenditure attained upto the month of September/October creates problem for the Department of Culture. The
 Committee observes that most of the cultural functions and festivals take place in the month of October and November,
 after the monsoon. The Archaeological Survey of India also incurs major expenditure after the monsoon. The
 Committee, therefore, recommends that Government must review the budgeting procedure and evolve some mechanism
 to ensure that the Plan allocation for the Department of Culture is not reduced. The Committee recommends that if the
 review of the budgetary allocation is done in the month of December, instead of the month of September then the cut in
 the budgetary provision could be avoided”.
 
Reply of the Government
 
8.         Recommendations of the Committee have been noted. The recommendation in case of Para 10 of the Report was
 forwarded to Ministry of Finance and to the Planning Commission for appropriate action at their end.
 
Further recommendation/observation of the Committee
9.         The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry.  The Committee further observes that the matter of reduction of
 Annual Plan Outlay at RE stage has been taken up  with the Planning Commission  and Ministry of Finance.  The
 Committee recommends that the Ministry should vigorously pursue the matter and the Committee may be informed of
 the outcome.
 
VACANT POSTS IN VARIOUS PREMIER INSTITUTIONS FUNCTIONING UNDER THE MINISTRY OF
 CULTURE:
(Recommendation at Para 16)
 
10.        The Committee notes the sorry state of affair prevailing in various premier institutions of art, culture and literature and
 several of them are functioning headless.  The Committee takes strong exception to the fact that Screening Committee is not
 meeting regularly.   The Committee is also surprised to notice the lethargic approach of UPSC towards filling up these vacant
 posts which should have been done rather without any loss of time.   The Committee therefore, recommends that the Ministry
 should propose an amendment to the rules and a composite method of recruitment should be followed instead of direct
 recruitment method.   The Committee strongly feels that these key posts should be taken out of the purview of the UPSC and
 appointment should be made out of a panel of persons of the institutions having requisite experience and such other persons
 having eminence in various concerned fields.  As regards the posts of Deputy Superintendent Archaeologist Surveyors in the
 ASI is concerned the Committee expresses its displeasure in advertising the posts in piecemeal instead of in one go and
 recommends that all the vacant posts should be filled up without further loss of time.   The Committee finds that despite the
 earlier recommendations of the Committee to appoint a person who is an expert in archaeology or eminent historian as the
 Director-General of ASI the Ministry of Culture continues to appoint civil servant from IAS as the Director- General of ASI

file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/129threport.htm[28-08-2018 13:28:15]
 which is resulting in the neglect of this premier institution.   The Committee reiterates its earlier recommendation to appoint
 eminent archaeologist or historian as the Director General of ASI.
 
           
Reply of the Government
 
11.        The recommendations of the Committee in above paras have been noted. Following active intervention of the Minister of
 Culture, Government have recently decided to the adoption of Search cum Selection procedure for filling up vacancies of CEO /
 Heads of Attached / Subordinate offices under the Ministry of Culture. This procedure will take the selection process for these
 posts  out of the purview of UPSC, and will expedite the  selection of persons having requisite experience in the concerned field.
 The Recruitment rules for attached / subordinate offices under the Ministry of Culture ( including Archaeological Survey of
 India, National Archives of India, Anthropological Survey of India, Kolkata, National Museum, New Delhi, National Gallery of
 Modern Art, New Delhi, National Library, Kolkata, Central Reference Library, Kolkata, National Research Laboratory for
 Conservation of Cultural Property, Lucknow) are under revision to take into account these changes and the selection process for
 the vacant is expected to commence shortly.
 
 
12.        In response to further query on ATR, the Ministry informed that eight institutions under the Ministry of Culture do not
 have a regular chief executive.   These are 2 attached, 3 subordinate and 3 autonomous institutions under the Ministry. Current
 status of process for regular appointments in these institutions/ organizations are detailed below:
 
 Institution Action taken to fill up the posts Remarks
 
 Attached Offices   
(i) ASI
 
Approval received from PMO for
 adoption of Search cum Selection
 Process for filling up the post.
 Recruitment Rules under
 modification.
Post has been filled up
 for the time being under 
 Central Staffing Scheme
(ii) NAI
 
Approval received from PMO for
 adoption of Search cum Selection
 Process for filling up the post.
 Recruitment Rules under
 modification.
 
Additional Charge of
 DG/NAI given to Shri
 Lov Verma, JS, Ministry
 of Culture
 Subordinate Offices   
(iii) National Museum
 
Approval received from PMO for
 adoption of Search cum Selection
 Process for filling up the post.
 Recruitment Rules under
 modification.
Additional Charge of DG
 National  Museum given
 to Shri Vijay Madan,
 ADG/ASI
(iv) National Library
 
Approval received from PMO for
 adoption of Search cum Selection
 Process for filling up the post.
 Recruitment Rules under
 modification.
Additional Charge  held
 by Shri Ramachandran,
 Principal LIO, National
 Library
(v) Anthropological Survey
 of India
Approval has been received from
 PMO for adoption of Search cum
 Selection Process for filling up the
 post and Recruitment Rules are 
 under modification. However,
 prior to the above approval, the
 selection for a regular
 appointment was made by UPSC
 and the same has been stayed by
 CAT, Kolkata Bench.
Charge is being held by
 Dr. V.N. Rao, Deputy
 Director,
 Anthropological Survey
 of India
 Autonomous Organisations

file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/129threport.htm[28-08-2018 13:28:15]
(vi) Allahabad Museum
 
On a petition filed by one of the
 employees of the Museum, the
 High Court of Allahabad has
 given a Stay order against the
 filling up of the post of the
 Director of the Museum.
Charge held by  Shri
 S.K. Sharma, Curator,
 Allahabad Museum.
(vii) Indian Museum
 
Advertisement to fill up post has
 been issued
Additional charge given
 to  Prof SC Panda,
 Secy.  And Curator,
 Victoria Memorial Hall
(viii)  Rampur Raza Library
 
 
 In 2006, the Rampur Raza  Library
 Board decided that the Scale of
 the pay of Director needs to be
 upgraded. Accordingly the
 proposal is under process in the
 Ministry as per the guidelines of
 the Department of Expenditure on
 the categorization of libraries and
 the corresponding status.
Being looked after by
 Dr.  Siddiqui, OSD.  
 
 
Further recommendation/observation of the Committee
13.       The Committee notes that various organizations are functioning without their CEO/Heads of
 Attached/Subordinate Offices,    and in many cases ad-hoc arrangements have been made to fill up the position.  The
 Committee is of the view that adhocism is not good for the healthy and efficient functioning of the organizations.  Hence,
 in order to achieve better targets some permanent solution is to be found out.  The Committee therefore, recommends
 that vacant posts are filled up without any further delay. The Committee however, appreciates that the Government has
 finally accepted the recommendation of the Committee and taken decision to adopt the search-cum-selection procedure
 for filling up vacancies of the Head of the Institutions under the Ministry of Culture which in turn will take the selection
 process for these posts outside the purview of the UPSC.  The Committee recommends that the process of revision of
 Recruitment Rules be completed expeditiously so that the posts are filled up at the earliest.
 
ARCHAEOLOGICAL SURVEY OF INDIA (ASI)
 
(a)
    Conservation and Preservation of Monuments:
(b)   Excavations & Explorations
 
(Recommendation at Para 22)
 
14.        The Committee recommends that conservation, Preservation work undertaken by ASI including phase II of Ajanta Ellora
 project should be completed within a definite time frame and in a targeted manner.   The details  and outcome of these may be
 provided to the Committee separately.   As regards exploration and excavations, the Committee feels that selection of new sites
 is a welcome step but this should also be done in a systematic and time bound manner.   Moreover, findings of excavations
 should also be recorded simultaneously so that the report is finalized   by the end of the excavation work itself.   The Committee
 strongly recommends that the pending reports on excavation undertaking by ASI should be finalized without any loss of time.
 
Reply of the Government
           
15.        The recommendation of the Committee in the above para has been noted.  The preservation work being undertaken by
 the Archaeological Survey of India in Phase II of Ajanta Ellora  Tourism Development Project is being monitoring closely.   Out
 of the projected outlay of Rs. 37.89 crores ( 901 million yen @  2.45 yen per Rupee and presently revised to Rs. 25.65 crores at
 2.99 yen per rupee), ASI incurred an expenditure of Rs. 9.25 crores upto March 2007 and a provision of Rs. 8 crores has been
 made for the current financial year.  The entire project is likely to be completed by March 2009.
 
16.        In granting approval for excavations and explorations at new sites for the year 2007-08, directions have been given to
 include finalization of the report as part of the excavation / exploration work itself.  Completion of the pending reports in respect

file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/129threport.htm[28-08-2018 13:28:15]
 of excavations undertaken by ASI in the past is being pursued vigorously and continuously.
 
17.       Further the Committee was informed that during the current year 2007-08, a total number of 71 licences  were
 granted for excavation and 37 licences  for exploration at various sites. All explorations pertain to new sites. Of the
 excavation licences, 62 pertain to new sites and have been recently given, 9 pertain to ongoing excavation projects. These
 nine ongoing projects are being undertaken by Archaeological Survey of India (ASI) (3), State Archaeology Departments
 (3) and various Universities (3). All ongoing projects have been licensed for 2007-08 after receipt of interim reports in
 respect of work done in previous field seasons.
 
Further recommendation/observation of the Committee
18.       The Committee notes the initiatives taken by the Ministry to finalize the excavation reports in time.  The
 Committee hopes that after implementation of the decision to include the finalization of the reports as part of the
 excavation/exploration work itself, there will not be delay in bringing out the report in respect of excavations/exploration
 of new sites.  The Committee also recommends to pursue the matter of pending reports in respect of excavations
 undertaken in the past.
 
 
(Recommendation at Para 23)
 
19.        The Committee notes that conservation of our heritage is important, both for encouraging tourism as well as for
 attracting visitors from overseas. The importance of cultural tourism in the context of development of both culture and tourism
 cannot be  overemphasized .  ASI which is a flagship organization of the Ministry of Culture is engaged in conservation,
 preservation and maintenance of monuments ,  Unless and until substantive allocation of funds is made to ASI towards
 undertaking the massive task of maintenance and conservation of heritage, ancient monument and historical sites, the heritage
 preservation  in a sustained manner  and promotion of ancient cultural Heritage could not be achieved. Unfortunately, the aspect
 of heritage preservation/promotion has received very little attention it deserves.  This is due to meagre  Plan budget of the
 Ministry which acts as a constraint to stepup  its activities.   Therefore, the Committee recommends that more funds allocation
 should be made to ASI and number of monuments under its  protection  should also be increased taking into account the total
 number of appropriate monuments in the country which are languishing and dithering due to neglect.
 
Reply of the Government
 
20.        The recommendation of the Committee in the above para has been noted. The Budget allocations to ASI for maintenance
 and conservation works had been increasing over the years.  For the Eleventh Plan period an allocation of Rs. 933 crores has
 been projected, which is almost three times that of the Tenth Plan allocation of Rs. 285 crores. As regards increasing the number
 of monuments under the protection of ASI, it may be stated that such protection is incumbent upon monuments being declared
 as of national importance under the Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Sites and Remains Act, 1958. This is an ongoing
 process.  In addition to ASI, the State Governments also protect and conserve monuments under their respective legislations.
 
Further recommendation/observation of the Committee
21.       The Committee is happy to note that the Archaeological Survey of India has been allocated Rs.933 crore for the
 XIth Plan period and hopes that this plan allocation will be utilized meaningfully by its continuous efforts to conserve,
 preserve and maintain the monuments of the country so that our cultural heritage is showcased before the whole world.
 
(c)  National Mission on Monuments:
(Recommendation at Para 28)
 
22.        The Committee recommends that the National Mission of Monuments and antiquities is an important Mission and has a
 laudable goal to achieve but however, the modalities for the Mission should be clearly planned and targets should be fixed for
 achieving the stated objective so that the allocation made for this  purpose  is not wasted.  The Committee also recommends that
 in addition to the four States chosen initially for the purpose, activities of the Mission should also be extended to the other states
 which are economically backward but culturally very rich.
 
 

file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/129threport.htm[28-08-2018 13:28:15]
Reply of the Government
 
23.        To achieve the mandate   of the National Missions, suitable working modalities have been worked out at Mission level.  
 The Mission will commence work in all States and Union Territories of the country through State Level implementation
 Committees, which will be chaired by Secretary (Culture) of the respective states / UTs.   ASI has written to all the State
 Governments / UTs in this regard. The Mission  also proposed to take up documentation of all antiquities in Government and
 private collections.  For the purpose of documentation of built heritage, the scope of the Mission  has expanded to cover all
 structures belonging to the  pre-Independence period with  1950 A.D. as the cut off date.
 
24.        The first meeting of the Monitoring Committee has been held in November 2007 under the chairmanship of Secretary
 (Culture). The progress made by National Mission for Monuments and Antiquities was reviewed and a number of decisions
 relating to procedural and other matters were taken for time bound Implementation of the Mission’s activities.
 
Further recommendation/observation of the Committee
25.       The Committee recommends that the Ministry of Culture should vigorously pursue the matter with all State
 Governments/UTs so that all antiquities in Government and private collections are also documented.  The status of
 implementation may also be reported to this Committee. 
 
(d) Encroachment of Monuments
 (Recommendation at Para 31)
 
26.        The committee expresses its anxiety over the incidents of encroachments upon the land of Centrally Protected
 Monuments.  The Committee is more concerned about the failure of ASI to get back the land from encroaches.   Therefore, the
 Committee strongly recommends that a complete assessment should be made regarding encroachment of monuments/sites under
 the protection of ASI all over the Country, Prompt action ought to be taken against the encroachers with the help of State
 Governments/Local Administrations and the matter should be purused at the highest level i.e. Chief Minister.  The Committee
 also recommends that number of monuments attendants should be suitably increased by recruiting more personnel on urgent
 basis to check the incidents of encroachments as well as thefts.
 
Reply of the Government
 
27.        The recommendation of the Committee in the above para has been noted. Directions have been issued to all
 Superintending Archaeologists in charge of Circles to vigorously pursue the removal of encroachments with the assistance of
 the State Governments and local administration.   Directions have also been issued to reassess the security needs at the various
 monuments for suitable increase in the number of Monument Attendants at the earliest.
 
28.        The Committee was further informed that there are encroachments at 249 centrally protected monuments under the
 jurisdiction of 20 Circles of Archaeological Survey of India.
 
Further recommendation/observation of the Committee
 
29.        The Committee notes the reply and hopes that the problem of encroachment upon the land of centrally protected
 monuments can be solved by ensuring the active cooperation of the State Governments and local administration. The
 Committee recommends that the Ministry of Culture may direct its concerned officials to maintain close liaison with
 representatives of the State Governments/Local Administration to ensure that the encroachments are vacated with
 minimum resistance.  Wherever required an appropriate rehabilitation policy may also be formulated to ensure that
 encroachment is removed on a permanent basis.
 
(e)  Other issues
(Recommendation at Para 34)
 
30.        The Committee expresses its concerns that Taj  Mahal, the world famous monument at Agra, is becoming yellowish due
 to deposition of Suspended Particulate matter (SPM).  The Committee recommends that while undertaking any conservation
 activity at Taj Mahal abundant caution should be undertaken to retain the original glory of the simmering white marble used in
 this.
 

file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/129threport.htm[28-08-2018 13:28:15]
Reply of the Government
 
31.        The recommendation of the Committee in the above para has been noted. Abundant caution is exercised in removal of
 the accretionary deposits on the marble through clay pack treatment in order to retain the glory of the monument.  The clay pack
 treatment is carried  out once every five to six years.  The last such treatment was carried out in the year 2002-03. The outer
 walls of the main mausoleum are proposed to be treated with clay pack during the current year.  For this purpose, an estimate of
 clay pack treatment of 4947 sq. mtrs. of wall area has been prepared.  The entire work will need about 4 months for completion. 
 This work is likely to start by 1
st February, 2008.   The clay used for this treatment is basically chemically refined aluminium
 silicate which is an inert material and has no adverse effect on the marble surface.
 
32.        It has been observed that the covered areas such as niches and lower portions of the arches have higher depositions of
 SPM as these areas do not  get washed by rain.  Directions have been issued to the Science Branch of the ASI to examine such
 areas for a more frequent claypack treatment.
 
Further recommendation/observation of the Committee
33.       The Committee recommends that the Ministry should explore the possibility of seeking expertise from other
 countries in retaining the glory of Taj Mahal.
 
(Recommendation at Para 35)
 
34.        The Committee takes exception to the fact that ASI without assessing consequences issued no objection certificate
 (NOC) for realigning the railways line passing through Salimgarh Fort, which the Ministry is proposing to be included in the list
 of World Heritage sites in the year 2007 in a routine manner.   This shows the apathy and callousness of the Organization which
 now regrets for issuing NOC and admits the realignment would involve making two deep cuts on the ancient Salimgarh Fort
 wall.  The committee strongly recommends that the NOC issued by ASI should be revoked forthwith and this kind of incident
 should not be repeated in future.
 
Reply of the Government
 
35.        The recommendation of the Committee in the above para has been noted.  The ASI has not issued any No Objection
 Certificate to Northern Railway for the said realignment project. Recommendations of the Committee will be kept in mind while
 considering requests for No Objection Certificates in future.
 
Further recommendation/observation of the Committee
36.       The Committee notes the reply.
 
 
OBSERVING CENTENARIES AND ANNIVERSARIES OF IMPORTANT NATIONAL PERSONALITIES AND
 EVENTS
 (Recommendation at Para 37)
 
37.        The Committee observes that in comparison to the total plan and non-plan outlay i.e. Rs. 932.61 crore of the whole
 Ministry, the allocation made for the purpose of observing centenaries and anniversaries of the important national personalities
 and events is quite a substantial amount i.e. 65.92 crore.  Therefore, the Committee recommends that it should be spent carefully
 and such events and occasions should also be used optimally for the promotion of tourism.
 
Reply of the Government
 
38.        Observations of the Committee have been noted.
 
Further recommendation/observation of the Committee
39.       The Committee hopes that the recommendations of the Committee will be followed in all its earnest and wide
 publicity may be given to such events.

file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/129threport.htm[28-08-2018 13:28:15]
 
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA
(Recommendation at Para 40)
 
40.        The Committee recommends that the allocation for National Archives which has been almost doubled in the BE 2007-08
 in comparison to the RE 2006-07 should be utilized for the purpose of acquiring more and more documents from the States. The
 Committee also recommends that the activities like reference, digitization of rare and precious archival records, conservation of
 archival records of National Importance and translation thereof should be done in committed manner.
 
Reply of the Government
 
41.        The mandate of National Archives of India does not include the acquisition of records / documents from the State
 Govts.  Such records / documents are collected and preserved in the respective State Archives.  Under the Public Record Act
 1993, the National Archives of India is required to collect and preserve permanent records of Ministries / Departments of the
 Union Government of India.
 
42.        In the BE 2007-08 the allocation for activities like Reference (cataloguing, indexing and listing of archival records),
 Digitization (microfilms and CDs of archival records), Conservation (lamination and chemical treatment of archival records),
 and Translation (of rare and previous archival records) has been increased almost three times as compared to the RE 2006-07. 
 National Archives of India has taken all necessary steps to meet the total expenditure of the allocated budget for the above
 mentioned activities during 2007-08.       
                                                                                                                                                  
Further recommendation/observation of the Committee
43.       The Committee notes the reply.
 
SAHITYA AKADEMI
(Recommendation at Para 43)
 
44.        The Committees desires that the allocation to the tune of Rs.1.25 crore made for activities of the Sahitya Akademi  will
 be spent by the Akademi meaningfully.
 
Reply of the Government
 
45.        The work on the schemes viz: National Bibliography of Translation and  Encyclopedia  of Indian Poetics is already in
 process. The Akademi will be able to spend the allocation. The Work of the Scheme of consolidation and expansion of Cultural
 Exchange Programme/Translation of Indian Classics into European language has just started by constituting a High Powered
 Committee.  The financial target is likely to be achieved by the end of the financial year.  The  work on the Great Books of India
 has been also initiated and a High Powered Committee has been constituted. The financial target is likely to be achieved by the
 end of the financial year  Sahitya Akademi has also started efforts regarding construction of Golden Jubilee Multiplex at the
 Meghdoot Open Air Theatre in consultation with other two sister Akademies  i.e. Lalit Kala Akademi  and Sangeet  Natak
 Akademi.
 
Further recommendation/observation of the Committee
46.       The Committee notes the reply and hopes that the Ministry will make all out efforts for the construction of Golden
 Jubilee Multiplex at the Meghdoot Open Air Theatre in a time bound manner.
 
SANGEET NATAK AKADEMI
(Recommendation at Para 46)
 
47.        The Committee notes with unhappiness that out of Rs.9.00 crore allocated in RE 2006-07, the Akademi could spend only
 Rs.6.41 crore.  The Committee recommends that the increased allocation made this year for the Sangeet  Natak Akademi in the
 BE 2007-08 should be used meaningfully for promotion of performing arts.  The Committee also recommends that the works
 relating to Museum of performing arts should be initiated at the earliest.
 
Reply of the Government
 
48.        Sangeet Natak Akademi has informed that they had spent Rs.7.34  crores till 28.2.07.  Regarding the increased allocation

file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/129threport.htm[28-08-2018 13:28:15]
 of funds during the current year, the Akademi has assured that the funds will be utilized meaningfully for promotion of
 performing arts.  The work relating to the setting up of a museum of Performing arts has been included in the XI Plan
 proposals.  The Akademi has initiated efforts towards finding a suitable site for setting up of the proposed Museum.  Meanwhile
 the existing museum in Sangeet  Natak Akademi’s premises in Rabindra  Bhawan is being expanded and collections are being
 acquired.
 
Further recommendation/observation of the Committee
49.        The Committee is unhappy to note that the Sangeet Natak Akademi could utilize only Rs.7.34 crore till 28.2.2007
 out of the allocated amount of Rs. 9.00 crores .  The Committee also notes that even the expenditure upto March, 2007
 has not been provided which would have given a clear picture of the expenditure.  The Sangeet Natak Akademi is the
 apex institution for promotion of performing arts which is an area always neglected as a result of which many
 performing artists are languishing in poverty in this country. Therefore, the Committee recommends that the Ministry
 of Culture should take steps to remove those obstacles for which the allocated amount could not be spent so that the
 budgetary allocation to be made in the coming years would be optimally utilized. 
 
NATIONAL SCHOOL OF DRAMA
(Recommendation at Para 49)
 
50.        The Committee is happy to note that National School of Drama has got Rs.11 crore for undertaking various activities but
 simultaneously cautions that the amount should not remain under spent as it is made clear by the Ministry that out of the
 Rs.11.00 crores available to the School at RE 2006-07, it could spend only Rs.7.42 crores by 28th February, 2007.
 
Reply of the Government
 
51.        The National School of Drama has assured that they will utilize the funds allocated to them in the current financial year
 and their progress of expenditure in this financial year has been satisfactory so far.
 
Further recommendation/observation of the Committee
52.       The Committee notes the reply and hopes that the NSD will be able to fulfill its commitment towards North-East
 Region with the increased allocation.
 
LALIT KALA AKADEMI
(Recommendation at Para 51)
 
53.        The Committee is distressed to point out that this premier institute which is engaged in promotion of visual and plastic
 arts in India like painting, graphic, sculptures and ceramic, etc. is not being able to spend even the meager allocation made it to
 during 2006-07 which is quite clear from the fact that it has spent even less than fifty percent of its allocation.   The Committee
 recommends that functioning of the Akademi  should be strengthened   and non- utilisation  of the allocated funds should be
 viewed seriously  by the Ministry for which corrective   measures should be initiated in a time bound manner.   The Committee
 should be informed of the measures taken in this regard at the earliest.
 
Reply of the Government
 
54.        Lalit  Kala Akademi has informed that the exact figure of the allocated funds and expenditure on 28.2.07 is as given
 below:
                                                                                                Rs.in lakhs
 
RE 2006-07 Grant received up to 28.2.07 Expenditure incurred up to
 28.2.2007
Plan Non-Plan Plan Non-Plan Plan Non-Plan
 
500.00 375.00 205.00 193.50 398.00 306.00
 
55.        The Table clearly illustrates that expenditure position up to 28.2.07 was satisfactory and Lalit Kala Akademi has
 clarified that the funds allocated   to it in 2006-07 were utilized.    The Ministry has issued instructions to all organizations for

file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/129threport.htm[28-08-2018 13:28:15]
 timely utilization of funds and the expenditure progress is reviewed regularly by the Ministry.
 
Further recommendation/observation of the Committee
56.       The Committee notes the reply and hopes that the entire allocation for 2006-2007 was utilized and the Ministry
 would optimally utilize the funds in 2007-2008 also. 
 
RAJA RAMMOHUN ROY LIBRARY FOUNDATION
(Recommendation at Para 54)
 
57.        The Committee recommends that in accordance with the recommendation made by the Knowledge Commission at least
 one library should be opened at the level of District Headquarters and since Raja Rammohun Roy Library Foundation is the
 nodal organization for undertaking such task adequate budgetary provision should be made for the purpose.
 
Reply of the Government
 
58.        As per the latest information available in the Reference there are altogether 567 districts in India Out of these, 100
 districts (newly created or backward) have no District Library at the District Headquarters.  Opening a District Library in these
 districts on a moderate scale will require at least Rs. 50.00 lakh for construction of a building, Rs. 10.00 lakh towards purchase
 of books, Rs. 5.00 lakh towards purchase of furniture & equipment and Rs. 5.00 lakh for supply of computer with accessories.
 
59.        As per existing provision of the schemes of the Foundation, assistance to the tune of Rs. 25.00 lakh could be rendered
 towards construction of building Rs. 3.00 lakh for furniture and equipment and Rs. 10.00 lakh for supply of computer with
 accessories on matching basis. Generally no book assistance is rendered for State Central Library under the matching scheme. 
 However, books under Central Selection Scheme (English and Hindi) to the tune of Rs. 2.00 lakh are supplied every year.
 
60.        The financial involvement for setting up of library at District Headquarters on a moderate Scale is Rs. 70.00 lakh per
 district.  For 100 districts it comes to Rs. 70.00 crore.
 
61.        If this new project is implemented on matching basis with the state governments, the requirement will be Rs. 35.00
 crore.
 
62.        The setting up of new District Library can be taken up subject to the condition that respective state governments take on
 the responsibility for the recurring expenditure like staff component, maintenance etc.
 
Further recommendation/observation of the Committee
63.       The Committee notes the reply and appreciates the problem of the Ministry of Culture in setting up of Library at
 District Headquarters.  However, as recommended by the Knowledge Commission, the Committee desires that at least
 one Library should be opened at the level of District Headquarters, either by the Centre or by the State Government so
 that there is no District Headquarter remains without Library.
 
INDIRA GANDHI NATIONAL CENTRE FOR THE ARTS.
(Recommendation at Para 56)
 
64.        The Committee takes strong note of the fact that planned allocation made for Indira Gandhi National Centre for the Arts
 at the stage of B.E. 2006-07 was just Rs. 50.00 lakh whereas at the RE stage it was increased to Rs.3.00 crore and out of this
 amount the Centre could spend only Rs. 30 lakhs.  The Committee does not find any satisfactory explanation for non-utilization
 of the allocated funds and the reasons for the vast increase at the RE stage during the year 2006-07. The Committee also notes
 that there is a major increase in the allocation for the IGNCA again in the BE 2007-08.  The Committee hopes that this year the
 increased allocation will be utilized by the Centre optimally.   The Committee also notes that there is some adverse report of
 CAG on the functioning of IGNCA and complaint has been lodged in the CBI against some IGNCA Trustees.  The Committee
 therefore, desires that copies of all these reports may be furnished to the Committee for its perusal at the earliest and inform
 about the action taken thereon.
 
Reply of the Government
 
65.        Despite a Plan Provision of Rs.90 crores in the 10
th Five Year Plan, only a budgetary allocation of Rs. 3.00 crores was

file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/129threport.htm[28-08-2018 13:28:15]
 made during the year 2006-07.  Out of this, the Ministry had released Rs. 0.30 crore in the month of September, 2006, Rs. 0.20
 crore and Rs. 2.50 crores, in the month of March, 2007.  The entire Plan allocation  received during the year 2006-07 had been
 utilized for the purpose for which it has been allocated, by 31 st March, 2007.  Major increase in the allocation of Plan funds
 during the year 2007-08 was based on the recommendations of the Rajya Sabha Department–related Parliamentary Standing
 Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture in their one hundred and third Report (para 49 refers).  Detailed Action Plan for
 the utilization of the Plan Grant allotted during the year 2007-08 has been made.
 
66.        The C & AG Report for the period 1995-96 to 1998-99 has made certain adverse observations. Copies of Detailed action
 take note (ATN) on the observations of the C & AG are being submitted.   The IGNCA has informed that they are not aware of
 any complaint lodged in the CBI against any Trustee of the IGNCA.
 
 
Further recommendation/observation of the Committee
67.       The Committee hopes that the IGNCA would meticulously follow the action plan prepared by the Ministry for
 utilization of the fund allocated during the year 2007-2008.  Regarding the objections raised by C&AG, the Ministry of
 Culture has not supplied copies of adverse observations of C&AG and Action Taken thereon.  It appears that Ministry
 has not understood the recommendation of the Committee wherein the Committee has desired to have the objections
 raised by the C&AG and Action Taken thereon.  However, the Committee decides to take up the matter again in future.
 
 
BUDGETARY PROVISION FOR THE NORTH EASTERN STATES.
(Recommendation at Para  61)
 
68.        The Committee notes that the major portion of the Plan allocation of the Ministry is released through various
 autonomous and subordinate organizations under the Ministry of Culture, most of which are scattered all over the country and
 their location is far away from the North-East.  This becomes an inhibiting factor in the implementation of the programmes  in
 the North-East.  Therefore, the Committee recommends that efforts should be made to find suitable local partners such as
 Universities, local academies etc. in the North-Eastern Region itself, which will go a long way in improving utilization of the
 funds earmarked for the North-East.
 
Reply of the Government
 
69.        All Attached / Subordinate and Autonomous Organizations as well as Divisional Heads of the Ministry of Culture
 dealing with central schemes have been requested to implement the above recommendation of the Committee.
 
Further recommendation/observation of the Committee
70.       The Committee notes the reply and desires that Ministry of Culture should pursue the matter with all
 attached/subordinate and autonomous organizations on priority basis so that the programmes are implemented in
 North-Eastern Region without any delay.
 
General Observation
71.       While perusing  the information relating to utilization of Annual Plan Outlay sent by the Ministry, the Committee
 found that the Ministry could not furnish the information about the utilization of Plan Outlay of various organizations
 within its purview as on 31 st March, 2007, though the Action Taken Replies were sent only on 3 rd December, 2007.  It is
 a serious matter.   Either the Ministry is not taking the Parliamentary Committee seriously or the information has not
 been updated so far which is again a serious lapse.  The Committee recommends that the Ministry must review its
 approach and working while dealing with the Parliamentary Committee.
 

file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/129threport.htm[28-08-2018 13:28:15]
OBSERVATIONS/CONCLUSIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS — AT A GLANCE
 
            The Committee desires that final replies in respect of the recommendations, which have been categorized as
 interim replies by the Committee should be furnished to it at the earliest.
(Para 3)
 
COMPARISON OF THE 10 TH AND 11 TH FIVE YEAR PLANS AND OVERALL ASSESSMENT OF FINANCIAL
 PERFORMANCE FOR THE YEARS 2006-07 AND 2007-08:
            The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry.  The Committee further observes that the matter of reduction of
 Annual Plan Outlay at RE stage has been taken up  with the Planning Commission  and Ministry of Finance.  The
 Committee recommends that the Ministry should vigorously pursue the matter and the Committee may be informed of
 the outcome.
(Para 9)
 
VACANT POSTS IN VARIOUS PREMIER INSTITUTIONS FUNCTIONING UNDER THE MINISTRY OF
 CULTURE:
 
The Committee notes that various organizations are functioning without their CEO/Heads of
 Attached/Subordinate Offices,    and in many cases ad-hoc arrangements have been made to fill up the position.  The
 Committee is of the view that adhocism is not good for the healthy and efficient functioning of the organizations.  Hence,
 in order to achieve better targets some permanent solution is to be found out.  The Committee therefore, recommends
 that vacant posts are filled up without any further delay. The Committee however, appreciates that the Government has
 finally accepted the recommendation of the Committee and taken decision to adopt the search-cum-selection procedure
 for filling up vacancies of the Head of the Institutions under the Ministry of Culture which in turn will take the selection
 process for these posts outside the purview of the UPSC.  The Committee recommends that the process of revision of
 Recruitment Rules be completed expeditiously so that the posts are filled up at the earliest.
 
(Para 13)
ARCHAEOLOGICAL SURVEY OF INDIA (ASI)
 
(c)
    Conservation and Preservation of Monuments:
(d)   Excavations & Explorations
 
             The Committee notes the initiatives taken by the Ministry to finalize the excavation reports in time.  The
 Committee hopes that after implementation of the decision to include the finalization of the reports as part of the
 excavation/exploration work itself, there will not be delay in bringing out the report in respect of excavations/exploration
 of new sites.  The Committee also recommends to pursue the matter of pending reports in respect of excavations
 undertaken in the past.
(Para 18)
 
            The Committee is happy to note that the Archaeological Survey of India has been allocated Rs.933 crore for the
 XIth Plan period and hopes that this plan allocation will be utilized meaningfully by its continuous efforts to conserve,
 preserve and maintain the monuments of the country so that our cultural heritage is showcased before the whole world.
(Para 21)
(c)  National Mission on Monuments:
 
            The Committee recommends that the Ministry of Culture should vigorously pursue the matter with all State
 Governments/UTs so that all antiquities in Government and private collections are also documented.  The status of
 implementation may also be reported to this Committee. 
(Para 25)
(d) Encroachment of Monuments
 
            The Committee notes the reply and hopes that the problem of encroachment upon the land of centrally protected
 monuments can be solved by ensuring the active cooperation of the State Governments and local administration. The
 Committee recommends that the Ministry of Culture may direct its concerned officials to maintain close liaison with
 representatives of the State Governments/Local Administration to ensure that the encroachments are vacated with
 minimum resistance.  Wherever required an appropriate rehabilitation policy may also be formulated to ensure that

file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/129threport.htm[28-08-2018 13:28:15]
 encroachment is removed on a permanent basis.
(Para 29)
(e)  Other issues
 
            The Committee recommends that the Ministry should explore the possibility of seeking expertise from other
 countries in retaining the glory of Taj Mahal.
(Para 33)
           
The Committee notes the reply.
(Para 36)
 
OBSERVING CENTENARIES AND ANNIVERSARIES OF IMPORTANT NATIONAL PERSONALITIES AND
 EVENTS
 
The Committee hopes that the recommendations of the Committee will be followed in all its earnest and wide
 publicity may be given to such events.
(Para 39)
 
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA
 
            The Committee notes the reply.
(Para 43)
 
 
SAHITYA AKADEMI
 
            The Committee notes the reply and hopes that the Ministry will make all out efforts for the construction of Golden
 Jubilee Multiplex at the Meghdoot Open Air Theatre in a time bound manner.
(Para 46)
 
 
SANGEET NATAK AKADEMI
 
            The Committee is unhappy to note that the Sangeet Natak Akademi could utilize only Rs.7.34 crore till 28.2.2007
 out of the allocated amount of Rs. 9.00 crores .  The Committee also notes that even the expenditure upto March, 2007
 has not been provided which would have given a clear picture of the expenditure.  The Sangeet Natak Akademi is the
 apex institution for promotion of performing arts which is an area always neglected as a result of which many
 performing artists are languishing in poverty in this country. Therefore, the Committee recommends that the Ministry
 of Culture should take steps to remove those obstacles for which the allocated amount could not be spent so that the
 budgetary allocation to be made in the coming years would be optimally utilized. 
(Para 49)
 
NATIONAL SCHOOL OF DRAMA
 
            The Committee notes the reply and hopes that the NSD will be able to fulfill its commitment towards North-East
 Region with the increased allocation.
(Para 52)
 
LALIT KALA AKADEMI
 
            The Committee notes the reply and hopes that the entire allocation for 2006-2007 was utilized and the Ministry
 would optimally utilize the funds in 2007-2008 also. 
(Para 56)
 
RAJA RAMMOHUN ROY LIBRARY FOUNDATION
 
            The Committee notes the reply and appreciates the problem of the Ministry of Culture in setting up of Library at

file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/129threport.htm[28-08-2018 13:28:15]
 District Headquarters.  However, as recommended by the Knowledge Commission, the Committee desires that at least
 one Library should be opened at the level of District Headquarters, either by the Centre or by the State Government so
 that there is no District Headquarter remains without Library.
(Para 63)
 
INDIRA GANDHI NATIONAL CENTRE FOR THE ARTS.
 
The Committee hopes that the IGNCA would meticulously follow the action plan prepared by the Ministry for
 utilization of the fund allocated during the year 2007-2008.  Regarding the objections raised by C&AG, the Ministry of
 Culture has not supplied copies of adverse observations of C&AG and Action Taken thereon.  It appears that Ministry
 has not understood the recommendation of the Committee wherein the Committee has desired to have the objections
 raised by the C&AG and Action Taken thereon.  However, the Committee decides to take up the matter again in future.
 
(Para 67)
 
BUDGETARY PROVISION FOR THE NORTH EASTERN STATES.
 
            The Committee notes the reply and desires that Ministry of Culture should pursue the matter with all
 attached/subordinate and autonomous organizations on priority basis so that the programmes are implemented in
 North-Eastern Region without any delay.
(Para 70)
 
General Observation
            While perusing  the information relating to utilization of Annual Plan Outlay sent by the Ministry, the Committee
 found that the Ministry could not furnish the information about the utilization of Plan Outlay of various organizations
 within its purview as on 31 st March, 2007, though the Action Taken Replies were sent only on 3 rd December, 2007.  It is
 a serious matter.   Either the Ministry is not taking the Parliamentary Committee seriously or the information has not
 been updated so far which is again a serious lapse.  The Committee recommends that the Ministry must review its
 approach and working while dealing with the Parliamentary Committee.
(Para 71)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/129threport.htm[28-08-2018 13:28:15]
MINUTES
 
X
TENTH MEETING
            The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Friday, the 18 th January 2008 in Committee Room 'A', Ground Floor,
 Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
            MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Sitaram Yechury – Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Prof. Ram Deo Bhandary
3. Shri Naresh Gujral
4. Shri Vedprakash P. Goyal
5. Prof. Alka Balram Kshatriya
6. Shri Shahid Siddiqui
7. Shri Shatrughan Sinha
 
LOK SABHA
8. Shri Anandrao Vithoba Adsul
9. Shri Sartaj Singh Chhatwal
10. Dr. K. Dhanaraju
11. Dr. Ramkrishna Kusmaria
12. Shri Samik Lahiri
13. Shri Alok Kumar Mehta
14. Shri Dushyant Singh
15. Shri Rakesh Singh
SECRETARIAT
            Shrimati Agnes Momin George, Joint Secretary
Shri Jagdish Kumar, Joint Director
            Shri Swarabji B., Deputy Director
            Shrimati Nidhi Chaturvedi, Committee Officer  
 
2.         *                      *                      *.
3.         Thereafter, the Committee considered the following draft Reports:
 
(i)                  Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations of the Committee contained in
 its One Hundred and Seventeenth Report on Demands for Grants (2007-08) of the Department of
 Shipping;
 
(ii)                Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations of the Committee contained in
 its One Hundred and Eighteenth Report on Demands for Grants (2007-08) of the Department of Road
 Transport and Highways; and
 
(iii)               Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations of the Committee contained in
 its One Hundred and Twentieth Report on Demands for Grants (2007-08) of Ministry of Culture.
 

file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/129threport.htm[28-08-2018 13:28:15]
After some discussion the Committee adopted all the three Reports with minor modifications. The Committee also
 authorized the Chairman to nominate the Members for presentation of the said report to the Parliament during the
 ensuing Budget session.
 
3.         *                      *                      *.
 
4.         The meeting of the Committee then adjourned at 12.30 p.m. to meet again on the 31
st January, 2008.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
          * Relates to other matters
 