 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA  
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
March, 2022/ Phalguna, 1943 (Saka) 
 
 
THREE HUNDRED FOURTEENTH REPORT  
Demands for Grants (2022-23) of Ministry of Civil Aviation 
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 14 th March, 2022 ) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 14 th  March, 2022 ) 
REPORT 
NO. 
314  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Website: https://rajyasabha.nic.in  
E-mail: rsc-tt@sansad.nic.in 

 
 
 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, 
TOURISM AND CULTURE 
 
 
THREE HUNDRED FOURTEENTH REPORT  
 
Demands for Grants (2022-23) of Ministry of Civil Aviation 
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 14 th March, 2022 ) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 14 th  March, 2022 ) 
 
 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
March, 2022/ Phalguna, 1943 (Saka) 
Hindi version of this publication is also available 


C O N T E N T S 
 
PA GE S 
 
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE i  
2. INTRODUCTION ii 
3. ACRONYMS iii-v 
4. REPORT 1-51 
5. RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS-AT A GLANCE 52-70 
6. MINUTES 71-76 
7. ANNEXURES 77-78  
   
    
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

i  
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
(2021-22) 
(Constituted on 13 th September, 2021) 
 
1. Shri T.G. Venkatesh - Chairman  
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Prasanna Acharya 
3. Shrimati Priyanka Chaturvedi 
4. Shri Sambhaji Chhatrapati 
5. Shri Shaktisinh Gohil 
6. Shri Md. Nadimul Haque 
7. Shri Jugalsinh Lokhandwala 
8. Dr. Sonal Mansingh 
9. Shri Tiruchi Siva 
10. Shri Vinay Dinu Tendulkar 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
11. Shri Anto Antony 
12. Shri Margani Bharat 
13. Shri Tapir Gao 
14. Shri Rahul Kaswan 
15. Shri Ramesh Chandra Majhi 
16. Shri Sunil Baburao Mendhe 
17. Shri K. Muraleedharan 
18. Shri S. S. Palanimanickam 
19. Shri Chhedi Paswan 
20. Shri Kamlesh Paswan 
21. Shri Sunil Kumar Pintu 
22. Shri Prince Raj 
23. Shri Tirath Singh Rawat 
24. Shrimati Mala Roy 
25. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
26. Shri Dushyant Singh 
27. Shri Rajbahadur Singh 
28. Shri Ramdas C. Tadas 
29. Shri Manoj Tiwari 
30. Shri Krupal Balaji Tumane 
31. Shri Dinesh Chandra Yadav 
 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Puneet Kumar, Joint Secretary 
Shri Swarabji B., Director 
Shri P. Narayanan, Director 
Shri Dinesh Singh, Additional Director 
Shri Rajendra Prasad Shukla, Additional Director 
Shri Ranajit Chakraborty, Under Secretary 

ii   
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairman, Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport, 
Tourism and Culture, having been authorized by the Committee to present on its behalf, do 
hereby present this Three Hundred Fourteenth Report  on Demands for Grants (2022-23) of 
Ministry of Civil Aviation. 
2. The Committee, at its meeting held on 17 th February, 2022 considered the subject and 
heard the Secretary and other officials of Ministry of Civil Aviation. 
 
3. The Committee wishes to express its thanks to the o fficers of Ministry of Civil 
Aviation for placing before the Committee, the mate rial and information desired in  
connection with the subject and for clarifying the points raised by the Members. 
4. The Committee considered and adopted the Report in its meeting held on the 7 th 
March, 2022. 
 
 
(T.G. Venkatesh) 
NEW DELHI; Chairman, 
March 7, 2022 Department-related Parliamentary Standing 
Phalguna 16, 1943 (Saka) Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture, 
Rajya Sabha 

iii   
ACRONYMS  
 
AAI  Airports Authority of India  
AAIB  Aircraft Accident Investigation Bureau 
AAICLAS  AAI Cargo Logistics and Allied Services Company Limited 
AEL  Adani Enterprises Limited 
AERA  Airports Economic Regulatory Authority 
AHU  Air Handling Units 
AI  Air India 
AIAHL  Air India Asset Holding Limited 
AIESL  Air India Engineering Services Limited 
AIL  Air India Limited 
AM  Assistant Manager 
AME  Aircraft Maintenance Engineer 
AMO  Aircraft Maintenance Organization 
ATC  Air Traffic Control 
ATCO  Air Traffic Controller  
ATF  Aviation Turbine Fuel 
ATFC  Air Transport Facilitation Committee 
ATM  Air Traffic Management  
ATR  Avions de transport régional or Regional Transport Airplanes 
BCAS  Bureau of Civil Aviation Security  
BFFC  Basic Fire Fighters Course 
BMS  Bachelor of Management Studies 
BOO  Board of Officers 
CAGR  Compound Annual Growth Rate 
CAR  Civil Aviation Requirements  
CAT  Category 
CFI  Chief Flying Instructor  
COD  Commercial Operation Date 
COVID  Corona Virus Disease 
CPL  Commercial Pilot License 
CRS  Commission of Railway Safety 
CWP  Controller Work Position 
DFG  Demands for Grants 
DGCA  Directorate General of Civil Aviation  
DGM  Deputy General Manager 
DPE  Department of Public Enterprise 
DPIIT  Department for Promotion of Industry and Internal Trade 
DPR  Detailed Project Report 
EASA  European Union Aviation Safety Agency 
ED  Executive Director 
EU  European Union 
EVL  Equal Value Land 

iv   
FAA  Federal Aviation Administration 
FC  Flight Crew 
FDI  Foreign Direct Investment 
FHA  Flight Hour Agreement 
FTO  Flying Training Organisation 
FY  Financial Year 
GDP  Gross Domestic Product 
GE  General Electric 
GIA  Grants-In-Aid 
GM  General Manager 
GST  Goods and Services Tax 
HAL  Hindustan Aeronautics Limited 
HEPA  High Efficiency Particulate Air 
HQ  Headquarters 
HVAC  Heating, Ventilation and Air Conditioning 
IAA  Indian Aviation Academy 
IAF  Indian Air Force 
IFR  Instrument Flight Rules 
IGRUA  Indira Gandhi Rashtriya Uran Akademi 
ILS  Instrument Landing System 
INR  Indian Rupee 
 
ISHARE  
Indian Society of Heating, Refrigeration and Air Conditioning 
Engineers 
IT  Information Technology 
JE  Junior Executive 
KLM  Koninklijke Luchtvaart Maatschappij or Royal Dutch Airlines 
KSIDC  Kerala State Industrial Development Corporation 
MADC  Maharashtra Airport Development Company 
MAFI  Modernisation of Air Field Infrastructure 
MERV  Minimum Efficiency Reporting Values 
MMT  Million Metric Ton 
MoCA  Ministry of Civil Aviation 
MoD  Ministry of Defence 
MoHFW  Ministry of Health and Family Welfare 
MoRTH  Ministry of Road Transport and Highways 
MRO  Maintenance, Repair and Overhaul 
MRP  Maximum Retail Price 
MSME  Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises 
MT  Metric Ton 
NCAP  National Civil Aviation Policy 
NE  North-Eastern 
NER  North-Eastern Region 
NHAI  National Highways Authority of India 
NOC  No-Objection Certificate 
OEM  Original Equipment Manufacturer 
OLODE  Online On Demand’ Examination 

v  
OM  Office Memorandum 
PBB  Passenger Boarding Bridge 
PBH  Power by Hours 
PGDAO  Postgraduate Diploma in Airport Operations 
PHL  Pawan Hans Limited 
PHP  Peak Hour Passengers 
PIB  Public Investment Board 
PLI  Production-Linked Incentive 
PMG  Project Monitoring Group 
PPP  Public Private Partnership  
PW  Pratt & Whitney 
RCS  Regional Connectivity Scheme 
RGNAU  Rajiv Gandhi National Aviation University 
RoFR  Right of First Refusal 
SAO  Selected Airline Operator 
SESF  Special Extra Section Flight 
SM  Senior Manager 
SOU  Statue of Unity 
SPV  Special Purpose Vehicle 
SRF  Sabarmati Riverfront 
STC  Supplemental Type Certificate 
TEFS  Techno-Economic Feasibility Study 
UAS  Unmanned Aircraft System 
UDAN  Ude Desh Ka Aam Nagrik 
UP  Uttar Pradesh 
USA  United States of America 
USD  United States Dollar 
UT  Union Territory 
UTC  United Technologies Corporation 
UTM  Unmanned Aircraft System Traffic Management 
UVGI  Ultra Violet Germicidal Irradiation 
VAT  Value Added Tax 
VIP  Very Important Person 

1  
REPORT  
 
The Indian Civil Aviation sector has seen an unprecedented growth in passenger traffic in 
the recent past and a corresponding increase in the  number of Airports, Aircrafts and Flight 
routes. The launch of Regional Connectivity Scheme- Ude Desh ka Aam Nagrik (RCS-UDAN) 
has further propelled this growth. The growth of India’s civil aviation sector can be gauged from 
the fact that it has consistently clocked double-di git growth in last few years and India’s 
domestic passenger traffic has more than doubled fr om around 61 million in FY 2013-14 to 
around 137 million in 2019-20, a growth of over 14%  per annum. Also, the International 
passenger traffic has grown from 47 million in FY 2 013-14 to around 67 million in FY 2019-20, 
a growth of over 6% per annum. Besides, India’s dom estic air traffic made up 69 percent of total 
airline traffic in South Asia. The World Economic Forum’s Global Competitiveness Report 2018 
ranks India as 53 rd  out of 140 countries worldwide in air transport infrastructure. India is also 
catching up with other leading aviation markets in terms of market penetration. In addition, 
transportation of cargo is also set to grow at a fa st pace in the next few years to keep pace with 
the expected growth in economy of the country. Indi a’s domestic air cargo handled grew by 8% 
Compound Annual Growth Rate (CAGR) between FY 2013- 14 and FY 2019-20, while 
international air cargo grew by 6% per annum. From more than 700 registered aircraft, the figure 
is likely to reach 1,200 in next few years and the freighter aircrafts deployed by Indian airlines 
have increased from 7 (2018) to 28 during the last three years (2021). It has been forecasted that 
India will cross over into the top 10 air freight markets in the near future. 
2. The Niti Aayog has recognised the significant contribution of the Civil Aviation Sector to 
economic development and GDP. In its policy documen t titled ‘Strategy for New India @ 75’  
has envisaged the following strategies/ objectives for the sector:- 
 Enhance the affordability of flying to enable an in crease in domestic ticket sales from  
103.75 million in 2016-17 to 300 million by 2022. 
 
 Double air cargo handled from about 3.3 million tonnes in 2017-18 to about 6.5 million 
tonnes.  
 Expand the maintenance, repair and overhaul (MRO) industry from USD 1.8 billion in 
2017 to USD 2.3 billion.  
 Expand airport capacity more than five times to handle one billion trips a year.  

2  
• Enhance availability and affordability of regional air connectivity and revive/upgrade 56 
unserved airports and 31 unserved helipad through t he Regional Connectivity Scheme — 
Ude Desh Ka Aam Naagrik (RCS-UDAN).  
 Ensure that airport tariffs, taxes on fuel, landing  charges, passenger services, cargo and 
other charges are determined in an efficient, fair and transparent manner.  
3. The Ministry of Civil Aviation is responsible for t he formulation of national policies and 
programmes for the development and regulation of th e Civil Aviation sector in the country. It 
also looks after the administration of the Aircraft  Act, 1934, Aircraft Rules, 1937 and various 
other legislations pertaining to the aviation sector in the country. In addition to primary functions 
of framing of policies, the Ministry provides guidance to the organizations in the implementation 
of policy guidelines, monitors and evaluates their activities and also provides their interface with 
Parliament. It also supervises implementation by th e organizations of special programmes of the 
Government, particularly those intended for the weaker sections of society. 
4. The Ministry of Civil Aviation has the following organizations under its administrative 
control:- 
(i) Attached Offices /Organizations: 
 
• Directorate General of Civil Aviation (DGCA) 
 
• Bureau of Civil Aviation Security (BCAS) 
 
• Commission of Railway Safety (CRS) 
 
• Aircraft Accident Investigation Bureau (AAIB) 
 
(ii) Autonomous Bodies: 
 
• Indira Gandhi Rashtriya Uran Akademi (IGRUA) 
 
• Airports Economic Regulatory Authority (AERA) 
 
• Rajiv Gandhi National Aviation University (RGNAU) 
 
(iii) Public Sector Undertakings 
 
• Airports Authority of India (AAI) 
 
• Air India Limited (AIL) 

3  
• Pawan Hans Limited (PHL) 
 
5. The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Commi ttee on Transport, Tourism and 
Culture considered Demand No.8 containing the detai ls of budget allocations of the Ministry of 
Civil Aviation, for the financial year 2022-23, at its meeting held on the 17 th  February, 2022. 
During the meeting, the Committee heard the views o f the Secretary and other senior officers of 
the Ministry of Civil Aviation, as well as the Head s of the organizations under its purview, on 
budgetary and other aspects. 
 
 
Assessment of Demands for Grants (2022-23) of the Ministry  
 
6. The Committee was apprised of the following details , as regards the projected demand 
and the Budget Estimates (B.E.) both Revenue and Ca pital allocation of the Ministry of Civil 
Aviation for 2022-23: 
(Rs. in crore) 
 
Sl.  
No.  
Scheme  Projection 
2022-23 
B.E. 
2022-23 
A. Revenue Section   
1.  (i) Ministry of  Civil Aviation – Secretariat.  
(ii) Directorate General of Civil Aviation (DGCA) 
(iii) Bureau of Civil Aviation Security (BCAS) 
(iv) Commission of Railway Safety (CRS) 
59.32  
245.08 
90.12 
17.50 
54.56  
208.00 
67.50 
16.50 
2. Air India Engineering Services Limited-SESF 
Operation 
39.32 39.32 
3. Air India Asset Holding Ltd. (AIAHL) Special 
Purpose Vehicle (SPV) 
9602.60 9259.91 
4. Medical Benefits to Retired Employees of erstwhile 
Air India 
165.00 165.00 
5. Airports Economic Regulatory Authority of India 15.49 20.00 
6.  IGRUA  
National Aviation University 
0.01  
16.60 
0.01  
8.00 
7. Airports Authority of India 150.01 150.01 
8. Regional Connectivity Scheme (including RCS-NER 
Rs.203 crore) 
701.99 600.71 

4  
Sl.  
No.  
Scheme  Projection 
2022-23 
B.E. 
2022-23 
9.  Krishi Udaan in NE Region  0.01  0.01  
10.  Skill Development  0.01  0.01  
11.  Skill Development  for Promotion / Development   of 
Aero Sports 
1.00  1.00  
 Total – Revenue  11104.05  10590.54  
 
 
B.  Capital Section  Projection 
2022-23 
B.E. 
2022-23 
Sl.  
No. 
Name of Organization    
1. Directorate General of Civil Aviation 41.33 55.4 5 
2.  Bureau of Civil Aviation Security (BCAS)  33.31  20.00  
3. Aircraft Accident Investigation Bureau (AAIB) 4. 40 1.00 
4.  Rohini Heliport Ltd.  0.01  0.01  
 Total 79.05 76.46 
 
7. The Ministry informed that the Projected Demand of the Ministry for 2022-23 was 
Rs.11,183.10 crore, against which the allocation ma de by the Ministry of Finance (MoF) is 
Rs.10,667.00 crore. The MoF has rationalized the De mand by Rs.516.10 crore mainly in 
allocation to AIAHL and RCS. The MoF while conveyin g the Budget allocation for FY 2022-23 
have also fixed the allocation for the Central Sect or Schemes. The Ministry has adjusted the 
allocated Budget for Projects and Programmes as per  priority for their execution. The Committee 
was also informed that Ministry will however reques t additional funds, if required, at 
Supplementary Grant and R.E. Stage 2022-23. 
8. The Committee notes that while the projected demand  of the Ministry for 2022-23 
was Rs. 11,183.10 crores, an allocation of Rs. 10,6 67.00 [Rs. 10,590.54 (Revenue) + Rs. 76.46 
(Capital)] crores has been made, which indicates a shortfall of Rs. 516.10 crores. It also 
noted that shortfall is mainly on account of decrea sed allocations for AIAHL and RCS, 
while budget for projects and programmes have been adjusted as per priority of execution. 
The Committee is of the opinion that the decreased allocation for AIAHL is justified, in 
view of the fact that the process of disinvestment of Air India is almost complete,   however, 

5  
not agreeing to the projections for the RCS by a st aggering amount of Rs. 101.28 crores is 
cause of concern. The Committee feels that the RCS Scheme, which has given a big boost to 
affordable connectivity, should have been encourage d by the Government, through 
sufficient budgetary support. A curtailment of fund s at this stage may hamper the smooth 
development of this important scheme. The Committee  is aware that the Civil Aviation 
sector is reeling under stress and different player s have also suffered massive losses due to 
COVID-19 pandemic and need a helping hand from the Government at this critical 
juncture, yet the Ministry has not been allocated t he desired projected amount for B.E. 
2022-23. The Committee therefore recommends that th e Ministry /uni201Fs request for additional 
funds for all schemes/ heads, including RCS scheme at the R.E. 2022-23 stage may be 
favourably considered by the Ministry of Finance. 
9. The Committee also notes the decrease in allocation  for B.E. 2022-23 (Revenue) as 
compared  to  projected  amount  for  2022-23  for  DGCA  by  Rs.  37.08  crores,  BCAS   
by Rs. 22.62 crores and National Aviation Universit y by Rs. 8.60 crores. There has also 
been a decrease in B.E. 2022-23 (Capital) for BCAS by Rs. 13.31 crores and AAIB by Rs. 
3.40 crore, where less than one-fourth of the proje cted amount of Rs. 4.40 crores has been 
allocated. The Committee expresses serious concern at the decrease in funds for the 
agencies looking after the security and safety in C ivil Aviation sector such as DGCA; 
BCAS; and AAIB, despite the increased security conc erns in the sector and recommends 
that Ministry should be given additional funds at R.E. 2022-23 stage. 
10. As regards the pattern of overall projected demand (R.E.), budget allocation (R.E.) and 
actual expenditure for the Ministry, the percentage  of the allocated budget as compared to 
projected demand during the last five financial yea rs, the Ministry apprised the Committee of the 
following details:- 
(Rs. in crore) 
 
Year  Projected 
demand 
(R.E.) 
Budget 
Allocation 
(R.E.) 
Actual 
Expenditure 
% of Allocated 
budget on projected 
Demand 
2017 -18  4809.01  2710.31  2663.99  56.36  
2018-19* 16389.01 9700.00 9599.00 59.19 
2019 -20**  10639.47  3700.00  3646.71  34.78  

6  
2020-21 4918.85 4131.63 4088.57 84.00 
2021-22*** #67844.62 72652.00 69194.09 (upto 
Jan. 22) 
 
 
*Higher allocation in 2018-19 was on account of ‘Turnaround Plan of Air India’ for which an 
amount of Rs.3975.00 crore was allocated. 
**Lesser allocation in 2019-20 was due to decision regarding strategic disinvestment of Air 
India under ‘Turnaround Plan’ and allocation for pu rchase of new Aircrafts (SESF) was 
decreased at R.E. stage due to postponement of delivery schedule. 
*** Higher allocation in 2021-22 is on account of ‘Disinvestment of Air India Ltd.’ 
# The B.E. for 2021-22 was Rs. 3224.67 crore. 
11. The Ministry also gave the following broad overview of Head-wise percentage of 
allocation of Budget Estimates (2022-23):- 
(Rs. in crore) 
 
Year 2022-23 % 
Allocation to AIAHL (SPV) 9259.91 86.80 
Allocation to Regional Connectivity Scheme 
(RCS) 600.71 5.63 
Salary & Establishment, DigiSKY etc. (Ministry, 
DGCA, BCAS and CRS) 346.56 3.25 
Medical benefit to Retirees of AI Ltd 165.00 1.54 
Grants-In-Aid (GIA) to AAI for Hollongi 
Airport 150.00 1.40 
Capital Expenditure: DGCA, BCAS & AAIB 76.46 0.72 
Balance : GIA to Autonomous Bodies and Air 
India Engineering Services Limited (AIESL) 68.36 0.64 
Allocation as per Budget Estimates 10667.00 100.00%  
 
 
12. The Committee notes that over the last five years, the percentage of allocated budget at 
R.E. stage, on projected demand has varied from 56.36%, 59.19% and 34.78%. While in 
2020-21,  it  was  substantially  raised  to  84%  of  the  projected  demand.  In  2021-22, the 

7  
Ministry was allocated Rs. 72,652 crores, which was  more than the projected demand of  
Rs. 67,844.62 crores and the higher allocation was on account of „Disinvestment of Air 
India Limited /uni201F. For this year also, 86.80% of the total allocation of Rs. 10,667.00 crores was 
for AIAHL (SPV), leaving only a meager portion of 13.2% amounting to Rs. 1407.09 crores 
for allocation to the rest of the heads. The Commit tee is of the opinion that such a low 
allocation over the years will seriously affect the  growth of the Civil Aviation sector, which 
is already suffering from a downturn caused by COVI D-19 pandemic. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends that the issue of low allocat ion may be taken up with the Ministry  
of Finance at R.E. stage and need for higher allocations may be stressed upon. 
13. The Committee also notes that though the R.E. alloc ations by the Ministry of Finance 
fell far short of the projected R.E. demands, yet t he actual expenditure of the Ministry has 
always been lesser than the R.E. allocations from 2 017-18 to 2020-21. For the year 2021-22 
also, the actual expenditure till January, 2022, wh ich is Rs. 69,194.09 crores falls short of 
the budget allocation (R.E.) of Rs. 72,652.00 crore s by Rs. 3,457.91 crores. This point 
towards the lack of planning on part of the Ministr y to utilize the funds allocated. The 
Committee expresses concern at the unrealistic proj ections of the Ministry and also feels 
that it has not been able to justify its projection s before the Ministry of Finance. The 
Committee also desires to know the actual expenditu re for the year 2021-22 and  the 
reasons for the shortfall in fund utilization, if any. 
 
 
Budget Allocation for Combined Headquarter Building 
 
14. The Committee was apprised that a combined Headquarters Building is being planned for 
DGCA; BCAS; AAIB; and AERA and that the total B.E. (2022-23) Capital allocation was Rs. 
76.46 crores and the details of its breakup are as follows:- 
 
i) Directorate General of Civil Aviation (DGCA) 
 
A provision of Rs.55.45 crore has been made for 202 2-23 in respect of DGCA. The  
major expenditure of DGCA during 2022-23 under Capi tal Head is towards Machinery & 
Equipment, IT (eDGCA) and contribution of DGCA for construction of combined HQ 
building. 
ii ) Bureau of Civil Aviation Security (BCAS) 

8  
The Budget Estimate of Capital Outlay of Bureau of Civil Aviation Security (BCAS) for 
2022-23 is Rs.20.00 crore which includes provision for Installation of Radiological 
Detection Equipment (Phase-II) and for contribution  of BCAS for construction of 
combined HQ building. 
(iii)     Aircraft Accident Investigation Bureau (AAIB) 
 
An allocation of Rs.1.00 crore has been made for AA IB in 2022-23 for contribution of 
AAIB for construction of Combined HQ building. 
15. Besides, the Committee was informed that AERA has b een allocated Rs. 20.00 crores as 
Grants-in-Aid at B.E. 2022-23 (Revenue) stage. 
16. The Committee notes that a Combined Headquarters (H Q) building has been 
planned for DGCA, BCAS, AAIB & AERA and allocation has been made under the B.E. 
(2022-23) Capital Section and all the four aforesai d organizations will be contributing for 
the expenditure of the said building. The Committee  appreciates the fact that all the four 
organizations viz., DGCA, BCAS, AAIB and AERA, which are dealing with t he security  
and safety in Civil Aviation Sector are being house d in the same building which will ensure 
better coordination among them and will ensure best  results in the civil aviation security. 
The Committee, however, notes that no capital allocation has been made for B.E. (2022-23), 
though Rs. 20.00 crores has been given as „Grants-i n-Aid /uni201F to AERA in B. E. 2022-23 
(Revenue) head. The Committee desires to know the r easons for no allocation at AERA 
under Capital Head and how the Ministry proposes to  ensure contribution on the part of 
AERA for timely completion of its HQ building. The Committee also desires to know 
whether there are any expected cost and time overru ns for construction of HQ building. 
The Committee recommends that the HQ building may b e built within a fixed timeline so  
as to avoid cost escalation at a later stage. The C ommittee may be provided with a brief 
Note on the proposed Combined Headquarters. 
 
 
Greenfield Project, Brownfield Project and Defence Brownfield Project  
 
17. The Committee enquired from the Ministry about the Greenfield, Brownfield and  
Defence Brownfield projects in the Civil Aviation s ector; the advantages and disadvantages 
thereof; and whether the Ministry has formulated any guidelines in this regard. The Committee is 

9  
aware that the National Highways Authority of India  (NHAI) under the Ministry of Road 
Transport and Highways (MoRTH) has formulated such a guideline as regards Greenfield and 
Brownfield projects in Highways construction. Minis try of Civil Aviation (MoCA) apprised the 
Committee that the Ministry has already notified a Greenfield Airport Policy in 2008 in reference 
to which 21 Airport Projects have received ‘In-Prin ciple’ approval of MoCA for setting up of 
greenfield airports, out of which 8 airports have a lready been operationalised. The Ministry 
further gave the following details:- 
Greenfield Airport  
 
A Greenfield airport is conventionally referred as an aviation facility being developed on  
empty land or previously undeveloped land and an ai rport whose commissioning, planning & 
construction process is carried out from the scratc h/grassroot level. As stated above, the 
Ministry has formulated a Greenfield Airport Policy , 2008 and guidelines for setting up of 
greenfield airports. The airports which are Greenfi eld in nature are given ‘In-Principle’ 
approval as per criteria, guidelines and procedures formulated in the Greenfield Airport Policy. 
Brownfield Airport  
 
A Brownfield airport is conventionally referred to as an aviation facility, which has existing 
infrastructure for development of airport such as r unway, terminal building etc. Development 
works are carried out further on these facilities a nd additional facilities required to meet the 
increased passenger load and aircraft operations are created in phased manner. 
Advantages of Greenfield Airports 
 
 Airport at Greenfield sites can be planned as per the governing guidelines for 
unrestricted development of airport and aircraft movement upto full potential.  
 Availability of Land for future expansion of Airport.  
 
Disadvantages of Greenfield Airports 
 
 Requirement of more time and money for creation of complete new infrastructure at 
airport as well as Airport connectivity.  
 Green field airports will take more time to operationalize against brownfield airport.  
 
Advantages of Brownfield Airports 

10   
 Brownfield airports already have airport infrastructure.  
 
 As airport infrastructure already exists at Brownfield airports and it only needs to be 
upgraded as per requirement, this will lead to cost effectiveness of airport.  
 Connectivity is already available to places of importance in a city, like offices,  
hospitals, institutions etc.  
Disadvantages of Brownfield Airports 
 
 Limited scope for expansion due to land locked situation.  
 
 High cost for acquisition of land for expansion and rehabilitation.  
 
18. The Ministry also informed that it has not drawn any guidelines or blueprint regarding the 
advantages and disadvantages of the Greenfield Projects over Brownfield Projects. 
19. In reply to a query as to whether a policy and outl ine with reference to Brownfield 
Project, Greenfield Project and Defence Brownfield Project has been drawn out, the Ministry 
informed that a policy on Greenfield airports is in  place since 2008. The policy outlines the 
guidelines for setting up of Greenfield Airports ac ross the country by Government or private 
entities. As per this Policy, the promoter seeking to develop an airport has to submit the proposal to 
the Central Government for consideration by the Steering Committee. Applications for setting up 
of greenfield airport are considered by the Steerin g Committee/ competent authority for grant of 
'in-principle' approval, after they have completed all necessary formalities of obtaining pre- 
feasibility study report, site clearance, clearance s from regulatory agencies, etc. The applicant 
proposing to set up an airport can make an applicat ion to the Steering Committee in the format 
available at the website of Ministry of Civil Aviat ion at www.civilaviation.gov.in . As such 
Government of India has not formulated a Policy for  development/upgradation of Brownfield 
airports in the Country. These airports are operati onal airports and their development/upgradation 
is undertaken from time to time depending on the tr affic demand and land availability etc. by the 
concerned airport operators. 
20. The committee feels that the Ministry is off mark a s regards the understanding on 
creation of white paper for policy makers, as to ho w and why Green Field Projects are the 
future of the nation. The Ministry has had a long e xperience of developing airports which 
were owned by the State Governments or by Airport Authority of India. While a long  time 
vision is always envisaged for an Airport project to grow for next few decades, however the 

11   
Committee feels that the Brown Field Projects are i mportant to enhance the footprint of 
aviation network in the country but given an option of redoing an existing airport to that of 
a Green Field project, there should be a clear and ambitious policy of the Government to 
identify locations for furtherance of New Airports.  India being a country with large 
population, the comparison of number of aircrafts p er person in India is far less than those 
of United States of America and China which have a comparable population figure and 
geographical area. 
21. Committee would like to clarify further this point with the example of the Patna 
Airport in which over thousand crores is being spen t without adding any operational 
advantage and still continuing with all the limitat ions, which existed as far operations is 
concerned, would remain there even after spending a  thousand crores. The reason why the 
Committee has been emphasising the need of having a  distinct plan of action is a case study 
of Patna and proposed Bihta Airport, which is yet t o go for a PIB clearance with an 
estimated investment of around 800 Crores. The comm ittee is fully aware that Bihta 
Airport is going to be another duplication of exist ing facility in Patna, without any 
additional commensurate advantages, as it is a Defe nce Brown Field project. Therefore, it 
requires a fresh thinking to optimally utilize publ ic resources with a view to create world 
class facilities and provide an edge in civil aviat ion infrastructure. The State of Bihar could 
have benefited immensely from a Green Field Project , if this matter was well explained by 
the Central Government to the State Government when  the Central team on its own had 
forwarded a proposal of redeveloping the Bihta Airport. 
22. The Committee notes that it would be far too clear if the Government spells out the 
advantages and how Green Field Projects would compl etely change the face of Aviation in 
this country. Taking another example of Devanahalli  Airport Bangalore, which emerged as 
a Green Field Project, while there were two Airport s existing in the city of Bangalore. One 
was Hindustan Aeronautics Limited (HAL) and other w as Yelahanka Airbase of the Air 
Force. The State Government along with the Central Government chose to ignore both 
these airports to develop an international airport and today there is quantum jump in the 
Air Traffic of Bangalore and also emerging as a Maj or International Hub in the south. 
With these examples, which the Airport Authority an d the Ministry of Civil Aviation 
already  has,  it would be  pertinent  for  the Ministry  of  Civil  Aviation  to  spell out,  why 

12   
prospects of a Green Field Project are far superior  and have distinct advantages in terms  
of economics, passengers movement, increasing passe ngers footprint and future expansion 
possibilities and growth looking at the market size in India. 
23. The Committee notes with concern that the Ministry has so far not conducted any 
study or published any blueprint regarding the adva ntages and disadvantages of  
Greenfield and Brownfield projects. The Committee u nderstands that for Highways 
construction, the NHAI under MoRTH has already draw n out such guidelines. The 
Committee expresses concern that though both Highwa ys and Airports construction are 
infrastructure projects, yet the Ministry of Civil Aviation has lagged behind in this regard. 
The Committee feels that though the MoCA has notifi ed a Greenfield Airport policy since 
2008, yet for hastening the construction of airport s, a proper blueprint or guidelines 
regarding both Greenfield and Brownfield airports i s the need of the hour and therefore 
recommends that it may be formulated at the earlies t. The Committee also expresses its 
concern that though 21 airports had received „in-pr inciple /uni201F approval of the Ministry, since 
notification of Greenfield Airport policy in 2008, yet only 8 airports have been 
operationalized. The Committee recommends that the Ministry needs to focus on the 
operationalization of the remaining airports and fe els that the formulation of a guideline,  
as noted above, will expedite the development of airports. 
24. The Committee noted that in the next two to three y ears, there would be a proposal 
for six to seven new Greenfield airports. From the recent experiences, it has been noticed 
that the Greenfield airports which were developed during the last decade have saturated on 
their existing capacities and need further expansio n and augmentation of facilities, 
however, lack of land availability is limiting the scope of expansion of Greenfield airports. 
The Committee therefore, recommends that every Gree nfield airport must be planned in 
such a way that it should meet the requirements of at least next 40 years. Necessary land  
for the airport may be acquired based on the futuri stic planning; construction; and 
development can be undertaken in the future depending on the requirements. 
Defence Brownfield Projects 
 
25. As regards Defence Brownfield projects, the Committee was informed that AAI develops 
and maintains Civil Enclaves at Defence Airports. T he Committee was also apprised of the 
following details/ major issues related to Civil Enclaves at Jammu; Srinagar; Pune; Bagdogra; 

13   
Darbhanga; Chandigarh; and Gwalior and the issues resolved at Bagdogra; Silchar; Thanjavur; 
Pune; Adampur; and Darbhanga Airports:- 
Major Issues of Some Civil Enclaves 
 
S.No. Airport Issues 
1. Jammu /circle5 AAI had projected a land requirement of 122 acre from the 
Government of UT of J&K for development of Jammu airport. 
/circle5 Till date, 91.7 acre has been handed over to AAI, while the 
handing over of the balance land is still awaited. 
2. Srinagar /circle5 AAI has provided a CAT I ILS system at Srinagar. Mi nistry of 
Defence (MoD) has planned to install CAT II ILS und er MAFI 
Scheme and the work was earlier scheduled to commen ce in 
November, 2022. 
/circle5 Moreover, IAF would undertake resurfacing of the ru nway with 
flexible bitumen with concrete only the ends of the runway. 
/circle5 The work is likely to complete by August, 2022 afte r 
collaboration with MoD with regular follow-ups. 
/circle5 AAI has requested 6 acre land from IAF for expansion of Apron. 
 
/circle5 The proposal for granting working permission for co nstruction 
of link taxi track to AAI by IAF is under examination in MoD. 
3.  Pune /circle5 MoD granted working permission to AAI for construct ion of 
Cargo complex on 2.5 acre Defence land on lease for  5 years 
subject to payment of lease rent of Rs. 1,38,30,787 per annum. 
/circle5 MoD has been requested to waive off the lease amount. 
 
/circle5 During a meeting held between Hon’ble Minister of C ivil 
Aviation and the Hon’ble RakshaMantri on 29.10.2021 , MOD 
agreed to charge a nominal lease amount of Rs.1 onl y till the 
land is transferred on ‘Equal Value Land (EVL)’ basis. 
/circle5 There is a dispute of 0.74 acres of land at Pune Airport  between 

14   
  AAI and MoD.  
 
/circle5 AAI has been requesting IAF to allow additional civ il flights to 
cater the high demand during the Slot Coordination committee 
meetings.AAI on 22.11.2021 had written to Ministry of Defence 
requesting to adjust the hours of exclusive IAF fly ing and 
reducing the runway maintenance to 4 hours from 6 h ours on 
Saturdays so that preferred peak hour slots may be made 
available to the airlines. 
4.  Bagdogra  /circle5 AAI had projected a land requirement of 104.65 acre for 
development of Bagdogra airport. 
/circle5 On request of the State Govt. of West Bengal, AAI has made a 
payment of Rs.23.06 Crore for acquisition of 98.72 acre land. 
/circle5 For balance 5.93 acre land falling in Defense area, barter has 
been agreed in-principle between AAI and IAF. 
5.  Darbhanga  /circle5 Requirement of Defence land on lease for construction of cooling 
pit at Darbhanga Airport: 
Air Headquarters (HQ) informed that they have alrea dy  
convened BOO and the Board proceedings are likely t o be 
finalized shortly. It was decided that Air HQ will forward their 
comments by first week of January, 2022. 
6.  Chandigarh 
and Gwalior 
No major issues are pending there.  
 
 
Issues Resolved at Civil Enclaves: 
 
S.  
No. 
Airport  Subject  Present Status / AAI Comments  
1. Bagdogra Handing   over   of 
5.93  acres  of land 
Working permission granted of defence land 
measuring 5.93 acres was granted by MoD vide letter
 

15   
  for development of 
new civil enclave. 
dated 10.01.2022 and the same has been included in 
the land barter matrix which has been forwarded from 
Chairman AAI to Secretary MoD vide letter dated 
17.01.2022. 
2.  Silchar  Working 
permission        for 
construction of 
new taxi track way 
at  Silchar Airports 
0.87 acres. 
This matter was discussed with Secretary of MoD in 
the meeting held on 19.01.2022 and it has been stat ed 
that 33 acres of land can be transferred to MoD and  
the same has been included in a land barter matrix 
which has been forwarded from Chairman AAI to 
Secretary  MoD vide letter dated 17.01.2022. 
3.  Thanjavur  Mutual  transfer of  
26.5 acres AAI 
land to IAF in lieu 
of 55.7 acres of 
IAF Land to AAI 
for construction of 
Civil Enclave. 
Working permission granted for Defence land 
measuring 56.16 acres in Lieu of AAI land measuring 
26.51 acre granted by MoD vide letter dated 
10.01.2022 and the same has been 
included in the  
land barter matrix barter matrix which has been 
forwarded from Chairman AAI to Secretary MoD 
vide letter dated 17.01.2022. 
4.  Pune  Request for 
exemption from 
payment of lease 
money levied by 
IAF on AAI for 
developing  a 
Cargo Complex on 
2.5 acre IAF land 
given on lease to 
AAI for five years. 
As discussed during the meeting, a proposal for barter 
matrix in respect of 13 acre Defence land has been 
forwarded by Chairman (AAI) to Secretary, Ministry 
of Defence. The said 13 acre land includes the subject 
2.5 acre land at Pune airport also, for which IAF h as 
granted working permission to AAI. 
5.  Adampur  Working 
Permission for 
 
construction of  
Working permission granted for construction of link  
taxi track connecting apron by MoD vide letter date d 
07.01.2022 on lease basis for initial period of 5  years 

16   
  link taxi track to 
AAI by IAF. 
with a provision of renewal for 5 years by MoD.  
6.  Darbhanga  Request   for 
exemption  from 
payment of lease 
money against 
working 
permission on 2.42 
acre IAF land for 
Terminal 
extension. 
Working permission granted for expansion of Civil 
Enclave by MoD vide letter dated 16.11.2021 on  
lease basis for initial Period of 5 years with a 
provision of renewal for 5 years by MoD on payment 
of annual lease rent of Rs. 16,57,656/-. 
7.  Barter 
Matrix for 
Land 
Transfer 
Land Transfer 
issues 
AAI on 17.01.2022 has furnished to MoD the details 
of Land Barter Matrix for examination. 
 
 
26. The Ministry also informed that due to the consiste nt and persistent efforts and the 
recommendations of the Parliamentary Committee for transfer of land to Bagdogra Airport, 
working permission was granted for defence land mea suring 5.93 acres by Ministry of Defence 
(MoD) vide letter dated 10.01.2022 and the same has  been included in the land barter matrix 
which has been forwarded from Chairman AAI to Secre tary, MoD vide letter dated 17.01.2022. 
The Committee notes that expeditious follow-up action is required from Airports Authority 
of India to further develop the Bagdogra airport. 
27. The Committee notes that long pending issues betwee n MoD, MoCA and AAI were 
resolved through continuous efforts by the Ministry  of Civil Aviation to resolve the issues. 
The Committee appreciates the positive development at resolving pending issues at 
Bagdogra and 5 other airports which will benefit th e nation at large. This should act as a 
guiding example and other pending land transfer iss ues should be cleared with MoD to 
develop the airports which will augment the Civil A viation capacity. The Committee 
recommends  that  Land  Barter  Matrix  formula  be tween  AAI  and  MoD  should  be 

17   
thoroughly examined by AAI and taken up with MoD an d a coordinated policy should be 
evolved to solve the pending issues. 
28. In addition to the aforesaid land transfer issues b etween MoD and AAI, another 
issue relates to the restrictions imposed by the Mo D and creation of “no fly zones” over 
defence airfields for over flying by civilian aircr afts. The Committee understands that 
though restrictions are justifiable for civilian ai rcrafts over flying high security defence 
airports, yet it feels that the problems faced by t he civilian aircrafts must be kept in mind. 
The civilian aircrafts in such cases have to traver se a longer route to avoid “no fly zones” 
which results in longer duration of flights and hig her fuel consumption and leads to higher 
passenger fares. The Committee is of the opinion th at wherever possible, the MoD should 
allow domestic airlines to fly over defence airfiel ds in consultation with the  Ministry. 
Hence, the Ministry should take up this issue expeditiously with the MoD. 
 
 
Maintenance, Repair and Overhaul (MRO) services  
 
29. The Committee was informed that annual turnover of Indian MRO industry was 
approximately Rs. 2300 crore pre-Covid, which amoun ts to around 15% of India’s civil MRO 
expense. The balance 85% goes to MROs in Singapore,  Malaysia, Middle East, European Union 
(EU) and United States of America (USA) etc. The de tails of MRO services being availed at 
Indian MRO and MRO abroad are at Annexure-I. The Mi nistry also informed the Committee the 
following reasons for carrying out most of the MRO services abroad:- 
 Tax anomaly with global MROs in terms of GST and various other levies and surcharges;  
 High airport charges in terms of land rentals, airport royalty etc.;  
• Lack of support from global manufacturers – many of  whom hold back key technical 
maintenance manuals from Indian MROs;  
• Lack of counter-operability with global regulators like Federal Aviation Administration 
(FAA) of USA and European Union Aviation Safety Age ncy (EASA) – this means every 
Indian MRO has to be dependent on approvals and clearances by foreign inspectors;  
• Procedural issues – problems with custom clearances  of urgent parts consignments, 
airport entry passes for experts etc;  

18   
• Absence of large corporate houses – given the lack of profitability and attractiveness of 
the sector;  
• Artificial divide between the civil and military MRO industry – both work in silos though 
the key suppliers like Boeing, Airbus, Dassault, Safran, United Technologies Corporation 
(UTC), General Electric (GE), Honeywell, etc. are common to both;  
 The lack of availability of hangar space at key international airports in India;  
 Non-availability of spare parts in the region which  leads to frequent grounding of aircraft 
for lack of spares. This is driven by a lack of OEM  support for the Indian market, though 
it is gradually changing with growth in the market and the custom duty regime which 
discourages MROs from stocking parts on behalf of customers; 
• A large part of the frequently removed parts are co vered under the Flight Hour 
Agreement (FHA) or Power by Hours (PBH) contracts o f the airlines with large MRO’s / 
OEMs;  
 There are very limited components manufacturing capabilities within India;  
 Fleet of all the carriers in India (except Air Indi a to some extent) is leased and all these 
carriers have FHA/ PBH contracts for Line Replaceab le Units (components) primarily 
with Lufthansa Technic, Turkish Technic and Air France / KLM; and  
 April, 2020 was the beginning of the pandemic globa lly, which has adversely impacted 
the airlines financially. Their financial condition  impacts the MROs directly. Besides, 
construction projects were impacted as their effici encies were reduced due to the 
lockdowns that were in place at different times during these past two years.  
30. The Committee was further informed that the Governm ent has, however, taken various 
measures to create a conducive environment for the development of aircraft Maintenance, Repair 
and Overhaul (MRO) services and has announced new M RO Guidelines on 1st September, 2021 
with a view to create a congenial atmosphere in the  country for the development of MRO 
industry for aircraft/helicopter/drones and their e ngines and other parts. The salient features of 
the guidelines are as follows:- 
 Concession fee, in any manifestation including roya lty, shall not be levieable on new/ 
renewal of existing contracts.  

19   
 Selection of agency and procedures for allotment of  land/ space under rationalized land/ 
space rental for new MRO contracts and renewal of e xisting MRO contracts, shall be 
through e-tender by AAI.  
 The renewal of the existing land leases/ space lice nse of MRO service providers/ Aircraft 
Maintenance Organizations (AMOs) shall be on the ba sis of bidding wherein Right of 
First Refusal (RoFR) shall be given to the existing  lessee/ licensee to match the first rank 
bid in terms of the selection criteria provided its  bid is within 15% of the most 
competitive bid received.  
 The quoted/ accepted lease fee shall be escalated @ 15% after every 3rd year.  
 The maximum period of contract, new or renewal, for allotment of land/ space shall be 30 
years from the date of handing over of site.  
31. Other Steps taken by Government of India to encourage MRO services are as follows:- 
 
 Goods and Services Tax (GST) on MRO has been reduce d from 18% to 5% with full 
input tax credit from 1 st April, 2020.  
 Transactions sub-contracted by foreign Original Equ ipment Manufacturers (OEMs)/ 
MROs to domestic MRO are treated as "exports" with zero-rated GST w.e.f. 1 st April, 
2020.  
 Rules have been simplified for export of leased air craft in complete or semi knocked- 
down conditions, opening up new opportunities in re delivery checks and aircraft 
component recycling.  
 Custom duty has been waived on tools, toolkits and spares imported by MROs.  
 100% Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) has been permitted via automatic route for MRO.  
 Simplified clearance processing of parts.  
 Relaxed restrictions on utilization of duty-free parts from one year to three years.  
 The Government is facilitating civil-military MRO c onvergence by fostering greater 
technical and business collaboration.  
32. The Ministry has also highlighted the following reasons as to why MRO services are 
being availed abroad and not availed from Indian MROs: 
 Lack of Infrastructure for EASA Certified Airframe MRO Services  
 OEMs not willing to Partner with Local MROs to protect their Repair Shops Abroad.  

20   
 OEMs/Bouquet Component Service Providers not willin g to sub-contract Local MRO to 
protect their own shops and they provide spares at 10-12% of their cost, to local MROs 
which makes overhaul by local MRO unviable.  
 OEMs support required to develop landing gear shops in India  
 
33. In reply to a query as regards the impact of the in centive given to the MRO industry and 
whether any assessment was done by MoCA in this reg ard, the Ministry stated that the impact of 
incentives taken by the Government to promote MRO i ndustry has led to Original Equipment 
Manufacturers (OEMs) setting up maintenance facilit ies in India. General Electric (GE) has 
established an engine/ overhaul repair facility at Nagpur. The first phase of MRO is operational 
and quick turn repairs of engines have been carried  at Nagpur engine test cell preparatory area. 
Pratt & Whitney (PW) has established a facility at Mumbai for repair of PW 1100 engines with 
the phase-I covering engine module replacement, which is already operational. 
34. The Committee notes with serious concern that out o f the total MRO services 
turnover of Rs. 15,353 crores, the annual turnover of the Indian MRO industry is just Rs. 
2,300 crores, which is just 15% of India /uni201Fs civil MRO expense. The balance 85% MRO 
services amounting to a colossal amount of Rs. 13,0 53 crores are availed from MROs based 
abroad in Singapore, Malaysia, Middle East, EU and USA etc. The massive amount of the 
MRO services availed from abroad can be gauged from  the fact that the amount is more 
than the total B.E. allocation of Rs. 10,667 crores  for 2022-23. The Committee laments the 
huge outgo of avoidable foreign exchange. It is of the opinion that Maintenance, Repair  
and Overhaul (MRO) organizations play a major role in the economy of airline operations. 
Since, 85% of these activities are carried out abro ad, there is a strong case to bring these 
MROs to India as the MRO expenditure is expected to  grow further with the growth in  
civil aviation sector. The issues which come within  the ambit of foreign suppliers can also  
be addressed by giving them incentives to operate i n this country. India with its large 
technical manpower base can easily provide the manp ower for MRO services. The reasons 
for carrying out MRO services abroad, include tax a nomaly with global MROs in terms of 
GST/ levies/ surcharges etc.; high airport charges for land rentals, airport royalty, lack of 
availability of hangar space etc. The Committee rec ommends that the Ministry should take 
up the aforesaid issues with the Ministry of Financ e and other concerned agencies and try 
to address the issues at the earliest. The issues w hich are within the ambit of the Ministry 

21   
itself viz. airport charges, hangar space etc. should be expedi tiously resolved by the 
Ministry and AAI. 
35. The Committee notes from the reply of the Ministry that one of the reasons why 
MRO services are availed abroad is that OEMs based abroad are not willing to partner 
with local MROs to protect their repair shops abroad and they provide spares at 10-12% of 
their cost, to the local MROs which makes overhaul by local MROs unviable. The 
Committee seriously expresses its concerns on this attitude of the OEMs based abroad and 
feels that the Ministry should frame guidelines mak ing it obligatory for OEMs based 
abroad and who are getting business from Indian air lines companies to set up repair shops 
in India itself. Besides, it should also be made ma ndatory for the foreign OEMs to supply 
spare parts at the same rates available abroad or m anufacture their spare parts in India in 
collaboration with local MROs. 
 
 
Airports Authority of India  
 
Development of Airports 
 
36. The Committee was apprised that AAI undertakes deve lopment of its airports from time 
to time depending upon infrastructural and aviation  requirements. However, 
development/construction work at almost all the air ports had slowed down owing to the effect of 
the pandemic. Further, COVID-19 lockdowns have impa cted almost all airport 
construction/expansion projects and construction of  Greenfield airports at Mopa in Goa, Navi 
Mumbai in Maharashtra and expansion of Delhi, Banga lore, Hyderabad airports have got 
delayed. However, the pace is now slowly picking up . Besides, AAI has awarded six airports 
namely, Ahmedabad, Jaipur, Lucknow, Guwahati, Thiru vananthapuram and Mangaluru for 
Operations, Management and Development to the highe st bidder i.e. M/s Adani Enterprises 
Limited (AEL) under Public Private Partnership (PPP) mode for a lease period of 50 years. 
37. The Committee was informed that Concession Agreemen ts for Ahmedabad, Lucknow  
and Mangaluru airports were signed on 14.02.2020 an d for Jaipur, Guwahati and 
Thiruvananthapuram, the agreements were signed on 1 9.01.2021. Concessionaires were required 
to achieve Commercial Operation Date (COD) at the a irports within 180 days of signing of 
concession  agreements.  However,  due  to  COVID-19,  Mangaluru,  Lucknow  and Ahmedabad 

22   
airports were taken by the concessionaires on 31.10 .2020, 02.11.2020, 07.11.2020 respectively 
and Guwahati, Jaipur and Thiruvananthapuram airport s were taken on 08.10.2021, 11.10.2021 
and 14.10.2021 respectively. 
38. The Committee hopes that the construction of airpor ts at Mopa in Goa, Navi 
Mumbai in Maharashtra and expansion of Delhi, Banga lore, Hyderabad airports and the 
construction which has already been delayed due to COVID-19 lockdowns, would be 
expedited and completed as per the revised schedule . The Committee notes that the 
concessionaires are required to take over the comme rcial operations within 180 days of 
signing of agreements. The Committee desires to kno w whether commercial operations has 
been taken over by concessionaires at Mangaluru, Lucknow  and Ahmedabad    airports as 
180 days had lapsed. For the proposed airports at G uwahati, Jaipur and 
Thiruvananthapuram, the Committee would like to kno w the status of COD and whether 
they are likely to take over operations by the targ eted date. The Committee also desires to 
know whether the AAI imposes penalty on concessiona ires in case of a default as regards 
delay in COD. 
39. The Committee is also of the view that security and  safety measures, presently 
available at the airports are generally not upto st andards, due to which there are frequent 
security lapses. The ILS systems are also lacking a t airports, which makes night landing 
and landing during rainy seasons risky. The Committ ee, therefore, recommends that at all 
under construction airports, security and safety eq uipment of world-class level should 
invariably be installed. The latest ILS systems and  night landing facilities should also be 
incorporated at the planning stage of airports, so that the flights can operate smoothly even 
in bad weather conditions, reducing the need for diversion of flights. The Committee is also 
of the view that planning for airport construction should be futuristic, so that there is no 
need for expansion and alterations for installation  of ILS or security/ safety apparatus, at a 
later stage, which inconveniences the passengers an d also disturbs the flight operations at 
airports. 
Construction of new Airports 
 
 
Hollongi Airport 

23   
40. The Ministry apprised the Committee of following as  regards construction of Hollongi 
Airport:- 
 In-Principle approval by Ministry of Civil Aviation for setting up the first Greenfield 
airport in Arunachal Pradesh was accorded on 18.01.2019.  
 The Airport is being constructed at an estimated cost of 645.63 crore.  
 This green field project has been taken up for operation of Airbus-320 type of Aircraft  
for all-weather Instrument Flight Rules (IFR) operations.  
 The proposed area of Terminal Building is 4100 sqm with a capacity of 200 peak hour 
passengers (PHP) (100 PHP on departure + 100 PHP on arrival).  
 The proposed runway is of dimension 2300 m x 45 m for A-320 aircraft operations.  
 Construction of apron including link taxiway for parking of two aircraft of A-320 type 
along with Control Tower-cum-Technical Block has been taken up.  
41. The Ministry informed the Committee that the detail s of physical and financial 
progress of the project package wise at Hollongi airport are as under:- 
Overall Physical Progress- 50.00% 
Overall Financial Progress- 36.00% 
42. The Committee appreciates the fact that the constru ction of Hollongi airport, which 
has time and again been recommended by the Committe e in its earlier Reports, has been 
accorded priority. The Committee is of the opinion that the airport is of prime significance, 
as it will increase faster connectivity and access to the remote North-Eastern region. The 
Committee also notes that the project has achieved 50% physical and 36% financial 
progress. The Committee hopes that all impediments both financial and otherwise get 
resolved, to ensure that the Hollongi airport is operationalized at the earliest. 
Jaipur Airport 
 
43. The Committee was informed that Jaipur Airport has been leased out for Operation, 
Management and Development through Public Private Partnership (PPP) for a period of 50 years 
from Commercial Operation Date (COD)/handing over date. The airport has been handed over to 
the concessionaire on 11.10.2021. As per concession  agreement, the concessionaire is obligated 
to develop and expand the airport in accordance with the traffic growth forecast to meet the  Key 
Performance Indicator. AAI is not required to make any investment at Jaipur Airport. 

24   
44. The Committee notes that for the Jaipur Airport, th e concerned concessionaire is 
obligated to develop and expand the airport though AAI is not required to make any 
investment. The Committee recommends that the Minis try may monitor the work of the 
concessionaire and ensure that the Jaipur airport i s operationalized at the earliest. This  
will also help in boosting tourism as Jaipur is a p rime tourism centre drawing both 
domestic and international tourist traffic. 
Sabarimala Airport 
 
45. The Ministry informed that Kerala State Industrial Development Corporation (KSIDC) 
vide letter dated 30.06.2020 had submitted an appli cation for grant of ‘site clearance’ approval 
for setting up of Greenfield Airport at Kottayam on  land falling in villages Erumeli (South) and 
Manimala under Cheruvally Estate in District Kottay am, close to Sabarimala Temple 
(approximately 48 kms). The proposed airport site i s at an aerial distance of approximately 88 
kms from the Cochin Airport and 110 kms from Thiruvananthapuram airport. 
46. The proposal was sent to AAI, DGCA and MoD for comm ents. MoD vide OM dated 
21.12.2020 had conveyed that Indian Air Force (IAF)  has no objection to grant site clearance for 
setting up of an international airport at Sabarimal a, District Kottayam, Kerala by M/s KSIDC. 
MoD had also stated that after grant of site cleara nce by the Steering Committee of MoCA, the 
applicant needs to seek No-Objection Certificate (N OC) from MoD as per prescribed format 
mentioned in the Greenfield Airports Policy, 2008 of MoCA. 
47. Based on the observations/comments of AAI and DGCA,  State Government of Kerala 
was further requested to furnish pre-feasibility Re port along with supporting documents on 
22.02.2021. The requisite information/documents wer e received from Government of Kerala on 
12.07.2021 and the same were forwarded to AAI and D GCA on 19.07.2021. DGCA and AAI 
have furnished its reply and the same has been forw arded to KSIDC on 13.08.2021 and 
24.08.2021 respectively for compliance/comments. Th ereafter, the proposal submitted by the 
State Government on 05.10.2021 has further been exa mined in consultation with AAI & DGCA 
and State Government of Kerala has been asked on 01 .11.2021 to furnish Techno-Economic 
Feasibility Study (TEFS), which the State Governmen t had informed that it is likely to be 
completed by the end of December, 2021. Reply from KSIDC is however awaited. 

25   
48. The Committee desires to know the status of Techno- Economic feasibility study by 
the State Government of Kerala. The Ministry may pr oactively take up this issue with  
MoD and KSIDC for clearance as Sabarimala is an imp ortant pilgrimage centre and  
visited by lakhs of pilgrims, both domestic and int ernational every year and it will give a 
tremendous boost to pilgrimage tourism. The Committee also notes that this airport is near 
the developed tourist circuits of Cochin and Thiruv ananthapuram and hopes that efforts 
would be made in coordination with Ministry of Tourism to include and link Sabarimala as 
well, to this tourist circuit. 
 
 
Requirement of Air Traffic Controllers (ATCOs)  
 
49. AAI has been able to provide uninterrupted air traf fic services after operationalising of 
unserved/underserved airports through deployment of  manpower as per requirement with the 
available strength of ATCOs. An Air Traffic Managem ent (ATM) Staffing Policy Committee  
has also been constituted in the AAI to prepare a d raft ATM Staffing Policy after rationalizing 
Controller Work Positions (CWPs) of all Airports an d considering future projects and 
RCS/Greenfield airports. 
50. Out of 3871 sanctioned post of Air Traffic Controllers (ATCOs), the available strength of 
ATCOs is 3163 i.e. there are 708 vacancies. AAI has completed the proc ess for filling up of 519 
posts, out of which 264 are to be filled through direct Recruitment and 255 through Departmental 
Examination in different grades of ATCOs. The backg round verification of the candidates 
selected through direct recruitment for 264 posts i s under process and offer of appointment is 
likely to be issued by March, 2022. Moreover, selec tion process for candidates to be selected 
through Departmental Examination is also likely to be completed by March, 2022. The 
Committee was also apprised of the steps taken by A AI to fulfill the manpower requirements of 
ATCOs as below:- 
i ) Selection for 264 nos. of posts of Junior Executive (ATC) through Direct 
Recruitment is in process. 
i i ) Additionally, internal selection for 97 posts of ATCOs through Departmental 
Examination is in process. 
i i i ) A total of 1400 posts of ATCOs at different levels have been created since year 

26   
2013 to cater for the manpower requirements of ATCOs, as below:- 
 
Post 2013 2014 2015 2017 
ED - - - 2 
GM    8 
DGM 70 40 30  
SM 100 50 25  
Manager 100 75 50  
AM 200 150 100  
JE 200 100 100  
Total  670 415 305 10 
Grand total  1400  
 
i v ) Further, proposal for creation of additional 340 po sts of ATCOs at different  
levels, as indicated in table below has been taken up with Department of Public 
Enterprise (DPE): 
 
Posts Nos. 
DGM 40 
SM 100 
Manager 100 
AM 100 
Total 340 
 
51. The Committee notes with serious concern that there  is a huge backlog of 708 
vacancies in the post of ATCOs. Despite this fact, most of the posts of ATCOs at different 
levels were created in 2013, 2014 and 2015 only. Since the year 2017, there has been no post 
creation at any level for ATCOs. The proposal for c reation of 340 additional posts of 

27   
ATCOs has been taken with DPE only recently. The Co mmittee is of the opinion that the 
demand for ATCOs will rise exponentially with the g rowth of the aviation sector in the 
country and feels that the Ministry should have ant icipated the requirement of more 
number of ATCOs well in advance and inducted ATCOs continuously over the years. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends that procedural is sues regarding manpower 
requirements of ATCOs should be addressed immediate ly to ensure operationalization of 
new airports that are being constructed in near future do not suffer due to lack of ATCOs. 
 
 
Flying Training Organisations (FTOs)  
 
52. The Ministry apprised the Committee that there woul d be an estimated requirement of 
1000 pilots per annum. Presently, there are 34 DGCA  approved FTOs in the country to train 
pilots domestically. IGRUA at Amethi, Uttar Pradesh  (UP) is under the administrative control of 
the Central Government. Eight FTOs are under State Governments and 25 are owned by the 
private sector. The Government has taken following steps to increase the number of training 
centres for pilots in the country in view of the expected growth of the civil aviation sector:- 
a) Airports Authority of India (AAI) has, on 25 th September, 2020, brought out a liberalised 
Flying Training Organisations (FTO) policy, wherein  the concept of airport royalty 
(revenue share payment by FTOs to AAI) has been abo lished and land rentals have been 
significantly rationalised. 
b) AAI has issued award letters on 31 st May, 2021 and 29 th October, 2021 for nine FTOs to 
be established at five airports at Belagavi (Karnataka), Jalgaon (Maharashtra), Kalaburagi 
(Karnataka), Khajuraho (Madhya Pradesh) and Lilabar i (Assam). Soft launch of two 
FTOs at Kalabuargi was done on 15 th August, 2021 under the liberalised policy. 
c) Directorate General of Civil Aviation (DGCA) has in troduced new ‘Online On Demand’ 
Examination (OLODE) for the Aircraft Maintenance En gineer (AME) and Flight Crew 
(FC) candidates with effect from November, 2021. Th ese license examinations provide  
an opportunity to the candidates to choose date and  time to appear in the examination as 
per his/her choice from the available slots of the examinations. 
d) DGCA has modified its regulations to empower Flying  Instructors with the right to 
authorise flight operations at FTOs. This will help  increase the flying hours and aircraft 

28   
utilisation at each FTO and lead to faster completi on of the Commercial Pilot License 
(CPL) requirements. Hitherto, this power has been g ranted only to Chief Flying 
Instructors (CFI) and Deputy CFIs. 
e) India's largest flying academy - Indira Gandhi Rash triya Uran Akademi (IGRUA) at 
Amethi, Uttar Pradesh has been permitted to carry o ut pilot training in Gondia 
(Maharashtra) and Kalaburagi (Karnataka) to enhance  its flying hours and aircraft 
utilisation, which gets severely affected during wi nter months due to visibility issues. 
IGRUA has also started operating on all weekends an d holidays in order to enhance its 
flying hours. Other private FTOs are also encouraged to do so. 
53. The Ministry also informed the other key measures undertaken by the Government 
include, inter alia : 
 In January, 2021, agreement between IGRUA and India n Aviation Academy (IAA), New 
Delhi has been made to provide ground classes for various pilot licenses  
 CAR, Section 6, Series A, Part II for regulations on Supplemental Type Certificate (STC) 
has been approved by DGCA on 10 th   September, 2021  
 Rajiv Gandhi National Aviation University (RGNAU) h as been operating 3 courses, viz. 
Basic Fire Fighters Course (BFFC), Bachelor of Mana gement Studies (BMS) Aviation & 
Cargo and Postgraduate Diploma in Airport Operation s (PGDAO) in cooperation with  
the expert private entities as per the international best practice.  
 FTOs have added around 30 new aircraft in their fleet in last 2 years.  
 
 Ministry of Finance is being requested to reduce GST on Aviation Gasoline (AvGas).  
 
 Ministry has requested Ministry of Petroleum & Natu ral Gas to request Indian Oil 
Corporation Limited to start production of AvGas in India by December, 2021.  
 States/UTs have been requested to reduce VAT on ATF.  
 
 Ministry of Finance is being approached for impress ing upon banks to provide funding 
support to FTOs as a priority sector.  

29   
54. During its deliberations for Demands for Grants (DF G) (2022-23), the Ministry also 
informed that based on the aforesaid measures, 9 ne w FTOs are going to be established at 5 
Airports as per the new policy:- 
 
 
 
Airports Lilabari Jalgaon Belagavi Khajuraho Kalabu rgi 
 
 
FTOs 
 
Red 
Bird 
Aviation 
i) Jetserve 
Aviation 
i) Skynex 
Aero 
i) Samvardhane 
Technologies 
ii) Red Bird 
Aviation 
i) Jetserve 
Aviation 
ii) Shaurya 
Flight sim 
Aviation 
i) Red Bird 
Aviation 
i) Asia 
Pacific 
 
55. The Committee notes that there would be a growing r equirement of around 1000 
pilots every year in the near future. The Committee also notes that a liberalized FTO policy 
has also been brought out, wherein new and attractive incentives have been given to private 
entities who want to start an FTO. The Committee su pports the new initiatives of the 
Ministry as it is of the opinion that with the expe cted growth of the Civil Aviation Sector in 
the country, there would be increased demand for tr ained pilots. The Ministry should 
therefore gear up for the requirement of FTOs and s et up FTOs in a time bound manner. 
The Committee also notes that the Ministry has take n up the issue of reduction of GST on 
AvGas and funding support to FTOs as a priority sec tor, with the Ministry of Finance and 
it has also taken up relevant issues with State Gov ernments and Ministry of Petroleum and 
Natural Gas. The Committee recommends that the issu es may be forcefully taken up with 
the concerned stakeholders and the Committee may al so be apprised of the progress in this 
regard. The Committee also recommends that keeping in view of the Atmanirbhar Bharat, 
sufficient Flight Training Organisations (FTOs) may  be established in various parts of the 
country to ensure that our boys and girls are not g oing to foreign countries to get pilot 
training. 
56. The Committee notes the acute shortage of skilled m anpower and proper training 
institutes in the Civil Aviation industry which has  the potential of creation of employment 
opportunities for the youth. The Committee observes  that other than the highly specialized 
jobs  like  commercial  pilots  and  aircraft  engineers,  there  are  non-technical  jobs     like 

30   
airhostess, flight attendants, flight pursers, cabi n crew, ground/ cargo handling staff, 
administrative/ sales staff, where there can be a l ot of job creations. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends that proper training institut es at low cost, may be setup all across 
the country to provide requisite training in the af oresaid airlines services, so that the youth 
of the country may be gainfully employed. 
 
 
Handling of Air Cargo  
 
57. In response to a query of the Committee regarding t he current share of air cargo and the 
steps taken to strengthen the air cargo sector in t he country, the Ministry apprised that the 
aviation sector contributes 1- 2% towards India’s i nter- modal mix by volume. Air cargo traffic  
is unique in the sense that it is typically low vol ume, high cost and often transports low shelf life 
commodity. Presently, domestic air cargo is being h andled through Passenger Terminals at 13 
AAI managed airports namely Adampur, Belagavi, Darb hanga, Dibrugarh, Dimapur, Gwalior, 
Jabalpur, Jalgaon, Lilabari, Prayagraj, Rajkot, Tut icorin, Udaipur and one State Government 
operated Shirdi airport. The Committee was also informed that key enablers for growth of India's 
air cargo are reduction in dwell time, digitization  of air cargo processes, modernization of 
existing air cargo terminals, better connectivity, reduction in Air Freight Charges and 
identification of Trans-shipment Hubs across India. 
58. The following steps have been taken to strengthen the air cargo sector in the country: 
 
 Comprehensive National Civil Aviation Policy (NCAP)  launched in 2016 for promoting rapid 
growth of the sector, ease of doing business and advanced regional connectivity.  
 AAI Cargo Logistics and Allied Services Company Lim ited (AAICLAS) has been set up as a 
wholly-owned subsidiary of Airports Authority of In dia (AAI) in 2016 for business development 
of air cargo, logistics and allied services at AAI managed airports.  
 AAICLAS has operationalised 20 International Cargo Terminal facilities, 33 Domestic Cargo 
Terminal facilities and 02 Courier Terminal facilities.  
 AAICLAS has planned for 33 New Air Cargo Terminals by FY 2024-25 at different Airports 
Pan-India. By adding the new air cargo terminals, t he handling capacity of AAICLAS will 
increase further by around 1.6 MMT in addition to the existing capacity of 3.6 MMT.  
 During the pandemic, Directorate General of Civil Aviation (DGCA) gave special permission   to  

31   
modify the passenger aircraft into freighters known as Passenger to cargo or Passenger to Cargo 
(P2C) aircraft, for efficient freight movement. 
59. Further, during the deliberations with the Committe e, the Ministry gave the following 
information and the initiatives the Ministry has taken for the growth of Air Cargo Sector:- 
• strong resilience shown by India’s air cargo sector despite severe challenges posed by the 
pandemic  
 air freight capacity also added with 150 passenger aircrafts deployed on the basis of 
passenger to cargo conversion  
 focus on medical/pharma cargo; agri-produce since March 2020  
 
 cargo Terminals kept open 24x7 with suitable measures for safety of personnel  
 
 50% waiver of demurrage to incentivize removal of import cargo from airports in Phase-I 
Lockdown  
 non-scheduled cargo operations by foreign carriers restricted to six major airports.  
 
 scheduled cargo services to be operated as per bilateral agreements.  
 
60. Besides, the Committee was also informed that the t otal air cargo in October, 2021 
reached 3.01 lakh MT which surpassed the pre-Covid level of 2.85 lakh MT. However, the 
tonnage came down to 2.58 lakh MT in November, 2021 .The trend of Air Cargo Handled (in 
lakh MT) in last five years, is as follows: 
 
 
Year Domestic Air 
Cargo Handled 
International Air 
Cargo Handled 
Total Air 
Cargo Handled 
Percentage of Air 
Cargo Handled 
Domestically 
2016-17 1.12 1.86 2.98 37.58% 
2017-18 1.21 2.14 3.36 36.01% 
2018-19 1.36 2.20 3.56 38.20% 
2019-20 1.33 2.00 3.33 39.94% 
2020-21 0.95 1.52 2.47 38.46% 

32   
61. The Committee notes with serious concern that over the last five years, the bulk of 
the Air Cargo has been handled by the International  freighters and the Indian freighters 
have handled less than 40% of the total share. The AAICLAS, a company wholly dedicated 
to development of air cargo, logistics and allied s ervices, was set up, as late as 2016, which 
shows the lack of concern on part of the Ministry t o increase the share of Indian cargo 
freighters. The Committee feels that the Indian air  cargo sector has immense potential, 
which is seen from the fact that strong resilience has been shown by the sector, even during 
the COVID-19 pandemic. The Committee notes the init iatives of the Ministry and 
recommends that all out efforts should be made to i ncrease the share of the Indian cargo 
freighters in the near future, so that the outgo of  foreign exchange can be reduced. The 
growth in this sector will also create new avenues of employment and aid the country /uni201Fs 
economic growth. 
62. The Committee during the course of its deliberation s, raised the issue of lack of 
cargo facilities in the North-Eastern Region, espec ially in the States of Nagaland,  
Arunachal Pradesh and Assam. The Committee is of th e opinion that the economy of the 
North-Eastern Region is primarily based on horticul ture, agriculture and tea cultivation, 
which can prosper only if proper markets are create d for the sale of these products. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends that the existing Dibrugarh airport which is a major 
airport in the North-Eastern Region, may be develop ed as a standard airport for transport 
of horticulture, agriculture and tea products to all the regions of the country. 
 
 
Regional Connectivity Scheme (RCS)-UDAN (Ude Desh ka Aam Nagrik)  
 
63. The Committee observed that the allocation for Regi onal Connectivity Scheme (RCS) 
increased from Rs. 600.00 crore (B.E. 2021-22) to R s. 994.03 crore (R.E. 2021-22), thereafter it 
has been substantially reduced to Rs. 600.71 crore at B.E. (2022-23) stage. The Committee 
enquired from the Ministry whether the substantial decrease will affect the RCS Scheme and 
result in delay in the connectivity of different ar eas in the country and whether the proposal for 
new Airports under the scheme will be affected. 
64. In reply, the Ministry has stated that based on the  progress of the various works/ projects, 
proposals  are  submitted  by  the  AAI  for  the  allocation  of  funds.  The  projected  increase or  

33   
decrease shall not affect the RCS scheme since the allocation is based on progress of the work. 
The proposed budget provision in the B.E. 2022-23 h as been made in accordance with the status 
of the projects. The status of the UDAN airports ar e reviewed from time to time and if need 
arises, Ministry will ask for the enhanced budget at R.E. 2022-23 stage. 
65. The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry that the present budgetary allocation 
is sufficient to meet the requirements of the UDAN Scheme in accordance with the status of 
development of the project. The Committee hopes tha t all out efforts would be made to 
make the UDAN Scheme a success and realize the drea m of the common man to avail of 
affordable civil aviation. 
 
 
Delays in operation of some RCS Airports  
 
66. During the course of discussion with the Ministry, the Committee raised issues regarding 
delay in operationalization of some RCS Airports, which are as follows:- 
RCS - Gondia Airport 
 
67. Flight operations under RCS at Gondia airport has b een pending for 12 years. In reply to  
a query, the Ministry stated that under UDAN Scheme , Birsi airport of Gondia has been  
identified for operation of UDAN flights. The UDAN routes viz. ‘Indore-Gondia-Indore’ and 
‘Hyderabad-Gondia-Hyderabad’ have been awarded to S elected Airline Operator (SAO). The 
airport has been given a license in September, 2021 . The SAO is likely to start RCS flight 
operations from Gondia airport in the month of March, 2022. 
RCS - Pant Nagar and Gauchar 
 
68. In reply to a query as to why airport projects in P ant Nagar and Gauchar are not moving 
ahead, the Ministry stated that based on the request from State Government, AAI is working on a 
Detailed Project Report (DPR) for Development of ne w greenfield airport at Pant Nagar in 
Uttarakhand, while at Gauchar, the Airstrip is owne d by the State Government of Uttarakhand. 
The decision to develop an airport depends upon a n umber of factors like traffic potential, site 
suitability, land availability, financial viability etc. for which a feasibility study shall be required. 
However, RCS flights with Fixed Wing have commenced  from Pant Nagar and helicopter 
operations have commenced from Gauchar under UDAN. 

34   
RCS - Pithoragarh 
 
69. Informing the Committee of the reasons as to why the airstrip of Pithoragarh has not been 
operationalized, the Ministry stated that Pithoraga rh airport has been developed and flight 
operations have commenced under RCS-UDAN. However, the routes viz. Hindon-Pithoragarh, 
Dehradun-Pithoragarh and Pant Nagar-Pithoragarh hav e been awarded to Selected Airline 
Operators (SAOs). The Ministry stated that UDAN rou tes connecting Pithoragarh airport were 
cancelled due to the non-compliance of agreement by  the SAOs. In subsequent round of bidding 
under UDAN, the same routes have been awarded. 
RCS - Amravati 
 
70. As regards the reasons for Amravati airport for not  being operationalized, the Committee 
was informed that Amravati airport is owned by the State Government of Maharashtra and for its 
upgradation an amount of Rs. 75.00 crore has been allocated. The development work of airport is 
being done by Maharashtra Airport Development Compa ny (MADC) and is likely to be 
completed by December 2022. In the 3rd round of bid ding under UDAN, RCS route – Mumbai- 
Amravati-Mumbai was awarded to M/s Alliance Air for  operations of RCS flight with ATR-72 
type of aircraft. 
71. The Committee notes that the Government deserves ap preciation for 
operationalizing the long delayed RCS projects. The  Committee also notes that the reasons 
for the delay in operations at the aforesaid RCS ro utes are mostly operational or lack of 
compliance of agreements by the SAOs. At places lik e Gauchar and Amravati, some issues 
are pending with the concerned State Governments. A t RCS Pithoragarh, the SAO has 
defaulted and the operations could not commence. The Committee recommends that before 
allotment of RCS routes, the credentials and past p erformance of the SAO may be 
thoroughly scrutinized, so that difficulties are no t faced at a later stage. The Committee 
further recommends that heavy penalties should be i mposed on SAOs for defaulting and 
also for not meeting deadlines. The Committee also recommends that a close coordination 
may be maintained with the concerned State Governme nts to remove bottlenecks in the 
operationalization of RCS routes. 

35   
Installation of HEPA Filters at Airports  
 
72. The Committee enquired from the Ministry whether it s suggestion regarding installation 
of High Efficiency Particulate Air (HEPA) filters at airports, in view of the COVID-19 about two 
years back, has been examined and whether the techn ical feasibility and report thereof has been 
obtained and if so, whether guidelines of the Ministry in this regard to various airports have been 
issued. 
73. The Ministry in its reply stated that HEPA filters are special type of filters generally 
recommended for use in Pharmaceutical Industries an d Healthcare facilities to treat exhaust air. 
HEPA filters used in Heating, Ventilation and Air C onditioning (HVAC) system can trap 
particles up to 0.3 micron with 99.97% efficiency. However, since COVID-19 particles are as 
small as 0.06 microns, installation of HEPA filter as a barrier against COVID-19 particles is not 
an effective way to fight against spread of the vir us. Further, it is not technically feasible to 
install HEPA filters at airports as for an airport HVAC system, HEPA filters will not work 
efficiently, as addition of these filters will dras tically increase the pressure drop across the filte rs 
and existing HVAC system will not have enough power  to move air through the HEPA filters 
and. It will instead put extra stress on the system  resulting into pressure drop, lower air flow and 
poor efficiency of Air Conditioning system. Moreove r, ISHARE (Indian Society of Heating, 
Refrigeration and Air Conditioning Engineers), a pr emier institute of global level in the  
exclusive field of HVAC, had issued guidelines on o perating of Air conditioning and ventilation 
system to control spread of Corona Virus Disease (C OVID)-19 in Residences, Workspaces and 
Healthcare Facilities and recommended Minimum Effic iency Reporting Values (MERV)-13 
filters and Ultra Violet Germicidal Irradiation (UV GI) system in Offices and Commercial 
buildings and HEPA filters in Healthcare facilities  for treatment of exhaust air from COVID-19 
patients. In accordance with the guidelines issued by ISHARE, AAI has provided UVGI systems 
and replaced existing filters with MERV-13 filters in the existing Air Handling Units (AHUs) 
depending upon feasibility, at its various airports and work is in progress at some of the airports. 
74. The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry that HEPA filters are not effective 
against COVID-19 virus and that it is also not tech nically feasible to install such systems at 
airports. The Committee, therefore, recommends that  as per ISHARE guidelines, UVGI 
systems and MERV-13 filters may be installed at all  the airports in the country, especially 
the ones where there is international arrivals from  countries where COVID-19 cases are 

36   
still prevalent. The Committee desires to know the airport-wise status of installation of 
UVGI systems and MERV-13 filters across the country  and the action plan of the Ministry 
to combat future waves of COVID-19. 
 
 
Passenger Amenities at Airports  
 
Facility of Aerobridges 
 
75. The Committee noted that despite having aerobridges  in some of the airports, the same is 
not being used for de-boarding the passengers inste ad airlines use staircases for the same and 
queried the Ministry as to why aerobridge of the ai rports are not used by the private airlines for 
de-boarding the passengers though charges for the s ame were being levied on the passengers.  
The Ministry apprised the Committee that all Airpor t Directors of AAI managed airports have 
already been directed vide Operational Circular No.  5/2018, that for the convenience of 
passengers, firstly parking stand with Passenger Boarding Bridge (PBB) or aerobridge should 
be used and in case PBBs are not available, then on ly parking stands without PBB should be 
used. Further, the Ministry stated that this is als o a commercial matter between the airport 
operator and airline and sometimes Low Cost Carrier s do not prefer to use aerobridge to reduce 
operational cost. 
76. The Committee expresses its serious concern at the fact that despite charging 
passengers, PBB or aerobridge facilities are not be ing used by private airlines to reduce 
operational cost. Due to this, passengers, especial ly the aged ones have to bear the brunt  
and have to climb the stairs of the parking stand t o board an aircraft. The Committee 
deplores this apathetic and unreasonable attitude o f the private airlines and strongly 
recommends that its circular on the aforesaid subje ct may be strictly enforced. The 
Committee also recommends that regular surprise che cks should also be carried out by the 
Ministry to ensure compliance of the circular and i n case there is a default, the concerned 
private airlines should be penalized. 
Facilities in case of Cancellation of Flights 
 
77. The Committee enquired about the facilities at airp orts for passengers in case of flight 
cancellations. The Ministry informed that in order to reduce inconvenience caused to the 
passengers  as  a  result of the  cancellations/delay of the  flights on  which  they  have booked  to 

37   
travel, airlines inform the passengers of the fligh t disruption as per the provision of Directorate 
General of Civil Aviation (DGCA), Civil Aviation Re quirements (CAR), Section-3, Series-M, 
Part-IV, titled "Facilities to be provided to passe ngers by airlines due to denied boarding, 
cancellation of flights and delays in flights". Und er the provisions of the said CAR, airline has to 
provide:- 
a) Meals and refreshments in relation to waiting time beyond delay of two hours or more, if 
passenger has checked-in on time. 
b) An alternate flight within a period of 6 hours or full refund of ticket to the passenger, if 
the domestic flight is expected to be delayed for more than 6 hours. 
c) Hotel accommodation, including transfers, if expected time of departure is more than 24 
hours. 
78. The Committee notes the provisions of the CAR and r ecommends that all the 
provisions should be strictly enforced so that pass engers are not inconvenienced. It also 
strongly recommends that in the case of cancellatio n or delay of flights, a provision should 
be compulsorily made by airlines to provide a waiti ng hall/ VIP lounge for the passengers 
and food, water and snacks should also be served to  them and the expenses for the same 
should be borne by the concerned airlines. The Comm ittee also directs the Ministry to do a 
ground survey of all the airports and check whether  the DGCA guidelines in this regard 
are being followed. 
High prices of Food and Beverages at the Airports 
 
79. In reply to a query, the Ministry informed that AAI  has already taken measures to control 
the issue of high prices of food/ beverages at airp orts. AAI has issued Commercial Instruction 
No. 12/2017 dated 23.06.2017 and a Circular dated 1 1.12.2018 to ensure that packaged food is 
sold at a rate, not more than the Maximum Retail Pr ice (MRP) and without dual pricing. Also, 
concessionaires have provided number of options to the passengers/visitors/other stakeholders, 
through various outlets/restaurants at airports, wh erein multiple choices are available for food 
and beverages. 
80. The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry but o bserves that food/ beverage 
prices are very expensive at all airport food outle ts. Tea, coffee and refreshments may be 
available at reasonable cost, affordable to a commo n man. In this regard, the Committee 

38   
recommends that the Ministry/ AAI should ensure tha t its Circular on food prices is being 
strictly followed at all the airports and packaged food is not sold at higher than MRP. 
Water and Snacks for Passengers in Airlines 
 
81. The Committee was informed that selling food and be verages on board to passengers is a 
commercial aspect of the airlines business. The gov ernment does not interfere with the 
commercial aspect of the airlines. Due to COVID-19 pandemic, based on the inputs received 
from Ministry of Health & Family Welfare (MoHFW) an d Air Transport Facilitation Committee 
(ATFC), restrictions were imposed on serving of bev erage, food etc. in domestic flights. 
Subsequently, with the improvement in the COVID-19 situation and based on the guidelines of 
MoHFW, water bottles and meal have been allowed in the flight subject to strict adherence to the 
COVID-19 appropriate behavior guidelines. 
82. The Committee feels that atleast a policy may be co nsidered for providing a small 
complimentary water bottle, keeping in view the tra dition of the country to give highest 
regard to guests and offer water on arrival. Beside s, a small packet of biscuits could also be 
provided free of cost to every passenger on demand, in all the flights. 
 
 
Accessibility features at airports for disabled passengers  
 
83. The Ministry apprised the Committee that guidelines  as shared by Ministry of Social 
Justice and Empowerment on 10 features of accessibi lity, have been shared with all AAI airports 
and other Private Airport Operators for making the airports accessible, which include:- 
 Accessible Route/Approach  
 Accessible Parking  
 Accessible Entrance to the building  
 Accessible Reception (Helpdesk)  
 Accessible Corridor/Tactile Flooring  
 Accessible lift  
 Staircase with Handrails(Main passenger movement zone)  
 Accessible toilets  
 Accessible Drinking Water Facility  

39   
 Signage  
84. At present, 79 out of 87 AAI Airports have been pro vided with these 10 accessibility 
features. At remaining 8 AAI Airports, work is on t o provide these 10 accessibility features by 
31.03.2022. 
85. The Committee applauds the sensitivity and care sho wn towards the needs of the 
differently abled persons and also appreciates that  79 out of 87 AAI airports are already 
equipped with the 10 accessibility features as shar ed by Ministry of Social Justice and 
Empowerment. The Committee recommends that the remaining 8 AAI airports should also 
be provided the said features at the earliest. The Committee recommends that while 
constructing new airports, these 10 accessibility f eatures should invariably be included in 
the Master Plan. 
 
 
Rationalisation of Air Fares and Cancellation Charges in Domestic Sectors  
 
86. The Committee during its deliberations expressed co ncern at the fact that in domestic 
sector, private airlines are charging different air fares for same sector, route and same duration of 
flights and desired to know whether Ministry has an y guidelines regarding rationalization of 
fares. The Ministry apprised the Committee that wit h repeal of Air Corporation Act in March, 
1994, the provision of air fare approval was dispen sed with by the Government. At present, air 
fare is neither regulated nor fixed by the Government. Airlines are free to fix the reasonable tariff 
under the provision of Sub-rule (1) of Rule 135, Ai rcraft Rules, 1937, having regard to all 
relevant factors including the cost of operation, c haracteristics of service, reasonable profit and 
the generally prevailing tariff. 
87. Further, Ministry apprised that as per prevailing r egulation, all scheduled domestic 
airlines are required to display route-wise and cat egory-wise fares on their respective websites. 
The airlines remain compliant to the Sub Rule (2) o f Rule 135 of the Aircraft Rules, 1937, as  
long as the fare charged by them is in line with fa re displayed on their website. Under the 
provision of Sub Rule (1) of Rule 135 of the Aircra ft Rules, 1937, every air transport 
undertaking engaged in scheduled air services requi re to establish tariff having regard to all 
relevant factors, including cost of operation, char acteristic of services, reasonable profit   and 

40   
the generally prevailing tariff. Airlines are free to charge reasonable air fares as per their 
operational viability and the airlines remain compliant to the prevailing  regulations. 
88. However, due to the unprecedented circumstances pre vailing due to COVID-19 
pandemic, fare bands with upper and lower limits we re introduced by the Government invoking 
power under Section 8(B) of the Aircraft Act, 1934 as a temporary measure. The fare bands  
serve the dual purpose of protecting the interests of the travelers as well as that of the airlines, 
and have been revised from time to time. Fare cappi ng is presently applicable on a rolling basis 
for a 15 days cycle. 
89. The Committee also enquired about the efforts being  made to rationalize the charges for 
cancellation or rescheduling of flight tickets, in view of the present high charges of cancellation/ 
rescheduling and whether these charges are the same for all airlines and whether the Ministry has 
formulated any guidelines in this regard. In reply,  the Ministry informed that they have released  
a charter of the passenger’s rights, which inter-alia , defines certain rights to passengers in case   
of flight delays, flight cancellations, boarding de nied due to overbooking, flight diversions, 
cancellation charges and lost/ delayed/ damaged bag gage. To make the passenger charter 
enforceable, Directorate General of Civil Aviation (DGCA) has inter-alia amended the Civil 
Aviation Requirements (CAR), Section-3, Series M, P art-II titled "Refund of Airline Tickets to 
Passengers of Public Transport Undertakings", with the following provisions:- 
 Cancellation charges must be indicated prominently at the time of booking.  
 
 Under no circumstances, the airline or its agent shall levy cancellation charges more than 
the basic fare plus fuel surcharge.  
 The airlines shall not levy any additional charges to process the refund.  
 
90. In reply to another query of the Committee regardin g ticket fares in domestic sectors and 
reasons as to why airlines are charging extra fare for selecting the seats while booking of ticket 
and whether there should only be one price for the same flight for all seats, the  Ministry 
informed that travel by air is a contractual matter  between airline and passenger, which is 
commercial in nature. DGCA has issued Air Transport  Circular 01 of 2021 titled "Unbundle of 
services and fees by scheduled airlines". Under the  provision of said circular, service for 
preferential seating is unbundled and charged separ ately on opt-in basis. As per the information 
received from Airlines, they offer some preferentia l seats on opt-in basis. However, passengers 

41   
can always select any free seat available or would be assigned a seat, free of charge at the time of 
check-in at the airport, if they do not wish to purchase a preferred seat. 
91. As regards pricing of the tickets, the Committee no tes the reply of the Ministry that 
at present, air fare is neither regulated nor fixed  by the Government and airlines are free  
to fix the reasonable tariff under the provision of  Sub-rule (1) of Rule 135, Aircraft Rules, 
1937 having regard to all relevant factors includin g the cost of operation, characteristics of 
service, reasonable profit and the generally prevai ling tariff. Also, as regards the concern  
of the Committee regarding extra fare for seat sele ction, the Ministry has stated that travel 
by air is a contractual matter between airline and passenger, which is commercial in  
nature. The Committee is of the opinion that for Ci vil Aviation sector to grow in an open 
market, it is justifiable that the private airline operators should be given a free hand to fix 
the air fares as they are governed by competition. However, the Committee would like to 
draw the attention of the Ministry to the provision  of the Aircraft Rules, 1937, which has 
specifically mentions that the fares should be reas onable and should maintain reasonable 
profit. In the above context, the Committee feels t hat the reply of the Ministry stating that 
air travel is purely a contractual matter between t he airline and the passenger, is not at all 
justified. The Committee is of the opinion that a b alance also must be maintained between 
the commercial interests of the airlines and the in terest of the passengers. The Committee 
feels that the passengers should not be fleeced in the garb of commercialization and 
therefore recommends that the Ministry should maint ain a close watch on the fare pricing 
by the airlines to ensure that it is not exorbitant . It also recommends that at least for the 
same sector, route and duration of flight, in all t he private airlines, the Ministry should 
issue guidelines so as to ensure similar or least v ariation in fares among all airlines. The 
Committee is also of the opinion that fixing of dif ferent fares for selection of seats in the 
same flight is arbitrary and unjustifiable. Hence, Committee on the principle of equity feels 
that all the seats in a same flight should have sam e fare. The Committee also recommends 
that the Ministry should strictly enforce the DGCA Charter and ensure that under no 
circumstances, the airlines levies cancellation cha rges more than the basic fare plus fuel 
surcharge. The Committee may be informed about the mechanism adopted by the Ministry 
to ensure that the Aircraft Rules, 1937 and DGCA Ch arter is being followed in letter and 
spirit by all private airlines. 

42   
Seaplane Policy  
 
92. In reply to the Committee’s query as regards framin g of Seaplane Policy, the Ministry 
informed that it is finalizing draft policy on smal l aircraft including seaplane in consultation with 
stakeholders. The Committee further pointed out to the Ministry that during its recent Study 
Visit, inter-alia , to the Statue of Unity at Kevadia, it observed th at though at some places 
seaplane operations were started viz. Sabarmati, then it was closed due to operational reasons and 
desired to know the details of such water aerodrome s at other places; reasons for stoppage of 
operations; and the plans for their revival. 
93. The Ministry informed the Committee that the Airpor ts Authority of India, the 
implementing agency, has awarded 14 Water Aerodrome s under Regional Connectivity Scheme 
(RCS) – UDAN (Ude Desh ka Aam Nagrik) for seaplane operations. The first ever Seaplane 
Operations under UDAN Scheme commenced from Sabarma ti Riverfront (SRF) to Statue of 
Unity (SOU), Kevadia on Rashtriya Ekta Diwas i.e. 31 st October, 2020. However, the Selected 
Airline Operator (SAO) stopped the operations due t o unavailability of maintenance support for 
seaplanes in India. The Seaplanes have to go outside India for MRO purposes and this  hampered 
regular operations. The AAI, the implementing Agenc y has been making efforts with SAO to 
revive operations. 
94. The Committee expresses serious concern that the seaplane policy is still not in place 
and is still being finalized in consultation with s takeholders. The Committee also laments 
the fact that the first seaplane that was operation alized, was stopped due to technical 
reasons. It expresses concern at the lack of seriou sness of the Ministry, as regards Seaplane 
policy. The Committee has repeatedly pointed out th e need for Seaplane policy in view of 
the fact that our country is endowed with rivers an d lakes. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that a feasibility study may be conducte d in the North-Eastern Region for 
operation of Seaplanes in the big lakes and rivers of the North-Eastern Region. The 
Committee also stresses on the expeditious finaliza tion of Seaplane policy. It also 
recommends that proper planning should be done before start of the operations, so that the 
operations are not halted. 

43   
Connectivity of Airports  
 
95. The Committee during its deliberation with the Mini stry observed that both new and the 
old airports suffered lack of connectivity with the  nearest city and desired to know the action  
plan initiated by the Ministry during the year for connectivity of airports with roads and railways 
in co-ordination with the Ministry of Road Transpor t and Highways and the Ministry of 
Railways. 
96. The Ministry apprised the Committee that the concer ned Airport Operators, in 
consultation with concerned agencies/ departments, make continuous efforts to improve road/ 
rail/ metro connectivity. Further, a Project Monito ring Group (PMG) under the aegis of 
Department for Promotion of Industry and Internal Trade (DPIIT) has been setup which monitors 
all the issues including rail/road connectivity of projects having Capital Expenditure (CaPex) 
above Rs. 500.00 Crore. Ministry regularly reviews the airport projects requiring such 
connectivity with concerned Ministries/State Govern ments/Project Proponent/Airport Operators 
to resolve outstanding issues in a time bound manner. 
97. The Committee is of the opinion that adequate conne ctivity of airports with roads 
and railways is of paramount importance to ensure t he successful and optimum utilization 
of airports. The Committee emphasizes the urgent ne ed to ensure that proper coordination 
is achieved between the concerned Ministries/Depart ments, in order to connect airports 
with all other means of transport such as roads, me tros and railways, so that tourists/flyers 
reach their destinations, from the airports, in a s mooth and safe manner. Further, the 
Committee is also of the firm opinion that Ministry  should collaborate with the State 
Governments and other stakeholders to ensure that l and is allocated within a specific time 
frame for ensuring adequate road and rail connectiv ity to the airports. The Government 
has announced the Gati Shakti programme and to make  the programme successful, every 
airport must be connected through road and rail. Th e Committee also recommends that 
every functional airport should be directly linked with the nearby National Highways. All 
the upcoming airports should be connected to the ne arest metro network and proper 
signage should also be installed indicating the dir ection of metro from the airport terminal 
and vice versa. The Committee specifically recommen ds that the new airport coming up at 
Jewar (UP) should invariably be linked to the Delhi  airport through high speed metro 
connectivity. 

44   
98. Considering the importance of the issue, the Commit tee had earlier taken up the 
issue in its 297 th Report on the subject „Functioning of Airports Auth ority of India /uni201F. The 
Ministry in its action taken notes on the aforesaid  Report informed that the project of 
National Master Plan incorporating the Airports, Ro adways, Railways, Shipping, Gas pipe 
lines, Power (existing and proposed) all have been combined to create a National Master 
Plan, which will be inaugurated by Hon /uni201Fble Prime Minister. Additionally, letters have been 
sent by Chairperson, AAI to Chief Secretaries of va rious State Governments to align and 
relate the City Master Plans also with the Airport Master Plans. 
99. In view of the above reply, the Committee in its 30 8 th Action Taken Report on the 
Recommendations/ Observations contained in its Two Hundred and Ninety Seventh Report 
on the subject „Functioning of Airports Authority of India /uni201F, had noted the proactive action 
taken by the Ministry, to ensure connectivity, and that a letter had been sent by 
Chairperson, AAI to Chief Secretaries of various State Governments to align and relate the 
City Master Plan with the Airport Master Plan. The Committee may also be informed of 
the opinion of the States across the country, espec ially as regards land acquisition, proper 
compensation and rehabilitation of the land owners,  as it is a teething problem in 
infrastructure projects. The Committee may be infor med about the views of the State 
Governments on the proposal of aligning City Master Plan with the Airport Master Plan. 
 
 
Helicopter operations in the country  
 
100. During its deliberations, the Committee enquired as  to whether any policy has been 
framed for helicopter operations in the country and  the details of plans, target set and 
achievement and also the achievement of ‘HeliSewa’ and ‘Heli-Disha’. The Ministry apprised  
the Committee that it has recently released a Policy for promotion of helicopter operations across 
the country. The Policy covers various aspects like  ground handling charges, parking deposit, 
landing charges, service charges, credit facility w ith ATC and training for Air Traffic Control 
with a view of making helicopter operations viable.  The Helicopter Policy encourages  the 
Airport Operators/State Governments/UTs to develop heliports. As per the policy, State 
Governments/ UTs are required to set up an Institut ional Mechanism to facilitate Helicopter 
Operations by obtaining permissions, approvals, clearances,    etc. Ministry of Civil Aviation has 

45   
also requested the State Governments and UTs to con sider setting up helipads in each district for 
promoting helicopter operations. 
101. The Ministry also informed that it has also launche d 'HeliSewa' portal to provide a 
seamless single window digital access between the o perator and authorities to communicate 
information about helicopter operations. The purpos e of 'HeliSewa' portal is to facilitate quicker 
processing of operational approvals for landing at helipads thereby improving the ease of doing 
business, and empowering the public/ helicopter ope rators to have access to information. 
'HeliSewa' is also designed to create and maintain a directory of helipads in the country with the 
requisite data quality and standardization. Helipad  parameters in 'HeliSewa' are recorded in 
sufficient depth and magnitude to meaningfully aid the Government in disaster management 
planning and purposefully helping the helicopter op erators for planning effective air operations. 
State/UT Governments have been requested to populat e, district-wise, the requisite data through 
'HeliSewa' and they have also been requested to sen sitize District Administrations for filling up  
of data regarding helipads within their districts w ith the relevant accuracy through the 'HeliSewa' 
portal. 
102. The Ministry further informed that it has released 'Heli-Disha', a booklet containing the 
administrative guidance material for civil helicopt er operations. The document simplifies and 
deconstructs the regulatory aspects so that the dis trict local administration can proactively 
improve upon the ease of facilitation for helicopte r operations with control measures and 
practices in conformity to Civil Aviation Requireme nts (CARs). 'Heli-Disha' acts as a guidance 
material without replacing the CARs and explains th e requirements of landing sites, thus 
providing clarity about uncomplicated permissions a nd operations of helicopters. Dissemination 
and adoption of 'Heli-Disha' by district authoritie s will enhance the perception of helicopter 
operations and lead to a smoother facilitation process. 
103. The Committee during its deliberations has also not ed that allocation for Rohini Heliport 
Limited has remained nominal and constant throughou t B.E. & R.E. 2021-22 and B.E. 2022-23  
at Rs. 0.01 crore and desired to know the reasons f or the nominal budgetary support in the 
backdrop of proposed plans of the Ministry to incre ase Civilian Helicopter operations. The 
Ministry clarified that as of now, Rohini Heliport is part of Pawan Hans Limited and therefore, It 
will be taken over by Rohini Heliport Ltd. on appro val of Scheme of Demerger of Rohini 
Heliport Ltd. and Pawan Hans Ltd. Presently, Rohini Heliport Ltd. is having minimum   nominal 

46   
capital allocation of Rs.1.00 lakh and the same wil l be considered after approval of the demerger 
scheme. 
104. The Committee is of the opinion that transportation  of both passengers and cargo  
by helicopter holds a great potential in our countr y, especially in hilly areas, where it is 
difficult to construct airports due to land availab ility constraints. Besides, helicopter 
transportation is fast and provides assistance duri ng natural calamities as well. The 
Committee notes that the Ministry has requested the  State/ Union Territories (UT) 
Governments to consider setting up of helipads in e ach district for promoting helicopter 
operations and recommends that the proposal may be proactively taken up by the Ministry 
with State/ UT Governments. The Committee notes tha t only a nominal allocation of Rs. 
0.01 crore has been made in B.E. 2022-23 as the dem erger scheme of Pawan Hans Limited 
and Rohini Heliport Limited is under consideration.  The Committee desires to know the 
status of demerger scheme. 
105. The Committee appreciates the launch of „HeliSewa /uni201F portal to provide a single 
window access to operator and authorities to commun icate information about helicopter 
operations. The Committee also notes that States/ U Ts have been asked to populate 
requisite data on the portal. The Committee would l ike to be apprised of the latest status of 
updation and the response of the States/ UT Governm ents and whether any timeline has 
been set for the process. The Committee also apprec iates the new initiative „Heli-Disha /uni201F 
wherein administrative guidance would be provided f or civil helicopter operations. The 
Committee hopes that this will facilitate and help in the growth of helicopter operations in 
the country. 
 
 
Promotion of Drone Industry  
 
106. The Committee noted that in the Budget 2022-23, the  promotion of Drones have been 
introduced as a new concept and desired to know the  benefits and budgetary allocation for 
promotion of the drone industry. The Ministry appri sed the Committee that drones can be useful 
in many sectors viz. agriculture, mining, infrastructure, surveillance, emergency response, 
transportation, geo-spatial mapping, defence, and law enforcement to name a few sectors.  Given 

47   
its traditional strengths in innovation, information technology, frugal engineering and its huge 
domestic demand, India has the potential of becoming a global drone hub by 2030. 
107. The Central Government has carried out a series of reform measures such as the release 
of: 
• Liberalised Drone Rules, 2021 on 25 th August, 2021, 
• Drone airspace Map on 24 th September, 2021, 
• Production-Linked Incentive (PLI) scheme for drones on 30 th September, 2021, 
• UAS Traffic Management (UTM) Policy Framework on 24th  October, 2021, 
• All application forms on the online single window DigitalSky Platform on 26 th January, 
2022, 
• Certification scheme for drones on 26 th January, 2022 and 
• Drone import policy on 9 th  February, 2022. 
108. These initiatives are intended to provide additiona l fillip to the fast-growing drone sector 
in India. The Ministry also informed the following details of Production Linked Incentive (PLI) 
scheme for drones and drone components wherein all manufacturers of drones and drone 
components whose annual sales turnover is above the  following threshold shall be eligible for 
claiming PLI:- 
 
Indian MSME and startups  Indian Non -MSME  
Drone 
(INR Cr) 
Component 
(INR Cr) 
Drone 
(INR Cr) 
Component 
(INR Cr) 
2 0.5 4 1 
 
109. The total incentive is Rs. 120.00 crore spread over  three financial years which is nearly 
double the combined turnover of all domestic drone manufacturers in FY 2020-21. The PLI rate 
is 20% of the value addition, one of the highest am ong PLI schemes. The rate is kept constant at 
20% for all three years, an exceptional treatment f or drones. The value addition shall be 
calculated as the annual sales revenue from drones and drone components (net of GST) minus  
the purchase cost (net of GST) of drone and drone components. Minimum value addition norm at 
40% of net sales for drones and drone components in stead of 50%, an exceptional treatment for 
drones. In case a manufacturer fails to meet the th reshold for the eligible value addition for a 

48   
particular financial year, he will be allowed to cl aim the lost incentive in the subsequent year if 
he makes up the shortfall in the subsequent year. 
110. The Committee is of the firm opinion that drones of fer significant benefits to almost 
all sectors of the economy. Drones can create emplo yment potential for the youth and can 
aid the economic growth of the country in a big way , if it is given a proper policy direction. 
Besides, due to ease of use and versatility of dron es, it can be used in remote and 
inaccessible areas of the country. The Committee is  also of the opinion that since our 
country is primarily an agricultural country, use o f drones in agriculture can help increase 
the agricultural productivity of any crop. The Comm ittee commends the enactment of 
Liberalised Drone Rules, 2021; Drone Airspace Map; PLI Scheme for Drones; UTM Policy 
Framework; Single Window DigitalSky Platform; Certi fication Scheme for Drones; and 
Drone Import Policy to encourage the growth of Dron e Industry in the country. The 
Committee especially notes the PLI Scheme for drone s & components and recommends 
that all out proactive efforts may be made by the M inistry in coordination with Ministry of 
Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises (MSME) and prop er guidance and follow-up with 
the Drone start-ups to ensure that the scheme succeeds in its objectives. 
 
Development of Aero Sports  
111. The Committee noted that in the Budgetary allocatio n, Grants-in-aid to institutions in 
Civil Aviation for promotion/development of Aero Sp orts has remained constant at Rs.  1.00 
crore in B.E. and R.E. 2021-22 and even in B.E. 2022-23 and while expressing its concern, asked 
for the reasons for the allocation remaining consta nt at Rs. 1.00 crore. In reply, the Ministry 
informed  that  presently  there  is  no  policy  framework  for  Aero  Sports  in  the  country. The 
Government has brought out a Draft National Aero Sp orts Policy 2021, which was placed in 
public domain on 1 st January, 2022 to invite comments from public on the  same and the deadline 
for receipt of suggestions was 31 st January, 2022. The comments are under examination. Once  
the policy is finalized and notified, Aero Sports a ctivities in the country will get a fillip resultin g 
in demand of higher allocations under the Head of A ccount and requiring support from the 
Government. 
112. The Committee notes that a mere token allocation of  Rs. one crore has been made 
for the development of Aero Sports by the Ministry of Finance for the financial year   2021- 

49   
22 and even in B.E. 2022-23. The Committee is of th e opinion that Aero Sports, which is  
one of the adventure sports, has gained popularity among the youth worldwide and in  
India as well. India with its breathtaking views of  the mountains, sea beaches and the 
countryside, has a great potential for Aero Sports.  It can act as a boost for adventure 
tourism in the country, thereby generating employment in the countryside. It also expresses 
its concern at the lack of interest shown by the Mi nistry of Civil Aviation in this promising 
field. The Committee recommends that the Ministry should expedite the process of framing 
National Aero Sports Policy, which would ensure the  organized development of  Aero 
Sports in the country. 
 
 
Leveraging Tourism through Airports  
 
113. The Committee queried whether tourism in the countr y can be leveraged through airports 
and whether there is any coordination between MoCA and Ministry of Tourism (MoT) for 
promoting tourism. The Ministry explained that the Ministry has been working in association 
with the Ministry of Tourism (MoT) and offered tour ist destinations suggested by MoT under 
UDAN for bidding. However, RCS-UDAN is market drive n scheme and interested airlines 
depending upon their assessment of demand on a part icular route, submit proposal at the time of 
bidding under UDAN. To facilitate the allied sector  of tourism, RCS-UDAN introduced the 
concept of Tourism RCS routes in collaboration with Ministry of Tourism. These were the routes 
connecting airports in line with the aspirations of  MoT to boost tourism and connect iconic  
tourist destinations. So far, 48 Tourism RCS routes  have been awarded to Selected Airlines 
Operators (SAOs) and out of these 48 tourism routes , 31 routes have been operationalized. 
Prominent tourist destinations include Dimapur, Agr a, Bhopal, Bengaluru, Mysuru, Amritsar, 
Jaipur, Kolkata, Patna, Bhubaneswar, Varanasi, Raja mundri, Vishakhapatnam, Calicut, Delhi  
etc. and these have been connected under RCS. Repre sentatives of M/o Tourism have also been 
included in the Steering Committee to review the im plementation of the Scheme from time to 
time and issuance of necessary directions on RCS im plementation/course correction. The 
Ministry also stated that provision for promotional  signage to promote tourism and cultural 
heritage can be explored through commercial concessionaires to whom advertisement rights have 
been awarded by AAI, on payment basis as per applic able commercial norms of AAI. Further, 
Government agencies are extended a 50% concession on rentals by AAI to promote tourism. 

50   
114. In reply to a specific query as to whether the them e of Jaipur Airport should depict the 
ethos of Rajasthan, the Ministry informed that Jaip ur Airport has been leased out by AAI in 
October, 2021 for operation, management and development for a period of 50 years under Public 
Private Partnership (PPP). The PPP partner is in th e process of preparing the master plan for 
future development and the plan to have the airport  synchronized with the local theme is under 
consideration. 
115. The Committee feels that airports act as a first ga te of entry for both the domestic 
and international tourists visiting a particular ci ty with iconic destinations. Hence, the 
visuals at the airports leave a lasting impact on t he mind of a tourist and also create  
interest in them to explore the places of tourist i nterest. In view of this, the Committee feels 
that leveraging tourist places through airports ass umes significance. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends that besides offering tourist  destinations suggested by Ministry of 
Tourism for RCS-UDAN bidding for promoting tourism,  MoCA should also design  
airports to portray the local art and culture of th e city at the airports through statues, 
murals, paintings and sculpture displays. The Commi ttee recommends that promotional 
signages for promoting tourism can be explored thro ugh commercial concessionaires. The 
AAI can explore the possibility of completely remov ing rentals for Government agencies 
instead of charging 50% concession on rental for promoting tourism. At the Jaipur airport, 
the Ministry may impress upon the PPP partner for s ynchronising the Master Plan of the 
airport, portraying the local theme, art and cultur e. The Ministry can also explore the 
possibility of engaging marketing personnel at airp orts to provide professional assistance 
and guidance, especially to the international touri sts, which will help in promotion of 
tourism in the country. 
 
 
Evacuation of Stranded Indians in Ukraine  
 
116. The Committee notes that the Government has embarke d upon a massive operation 
namely, „Operation Ganga /uni201F, to evacuate stranded Indian nationals, especially , students, 
from the war torn region of Ukraine. Some private a irlines and Indian Air Force are 
engaged in this effort, through special flights. Th e Committee understands that the 
Government  of  India  is  also  exploring  options  for  evacuating  the  stranded    nationals 
through  corridor/  cross  border roads  to neighbouring  countries and  thereafter bringing 

51   
them back to the country by air. The Committee appl auds this well-coordinated 
humanitarian efforts of the Ministries of Civil Avi ation; Defence; and External Affairs and 
recommends that airlift and all the other possible means of evacuation efforts should 
continue till all the stranded Indian nationals in Ukraine are evacuated safely. Presumably, 
the Ministry would also bear the requisite cost of transport, if required and make 
arrangements for their transport to their native places. 
*** 

52   
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS – AT A GLANCE  
 
Assessment of Demands for Grants (2022-23) of the Ministry  
 
The Committee notes that while the projected demand  of the Ministry for 2022-23 was Rs. 
11,183.10 crores, an allocation of Rs. 10,667.00 [R s. 10,590.54 (Revenue) + Rs. 76.46 
(Capital)] crores has been made, which indicates a shortfall of Rs. 516.10 crores. It also 
noted that shortfall is mainly on account of decrea sed allocations for AIAHL and RCS, 
while budget for projects and programmes have been adjusted as per priority of execution. 
The Committee is of the opinion that the decreased allocation for AIAHL is justified, in 
view of the fact that the process of disinvestment of Air India is almost complete, however, 
not agreeing to the projections for the RCS by a st aggering amount of Rs. 101.28 crores is 
cause of concern. The Committee feels that the RCS Scheme, which has given a big boost to 
affordable connectivity, should have been encourage d by the Government, through 
sufficient budgetary support. A curtailment of fund s at this stage may hamper the smooth 
development of this important scheme. The Committee  is aware that the Civil Aviation 
sector is reeling under stress and different player s have also suffered massive losses due to 
COVID-19 pandemic and need a helping hand from the Government at this critical 
juncture, yet the Ministry has not been allocated t he desired projected amount for B.E. 
2022-23. The Committee therefore recommends that th e Ministry /uni201Fs request for additional 
funds for all schemes/ heads, including RCS scheme at the R.E. 2022-23 stage may be 
favourably considered by the Ministry of Finance. 
(Para 8) 
 
The Committee also notes the decrease in allocation  for B.E. 2022-23 (Revenue) as 
compared  to  projected  amount  for  2022-23  for  DGCA  by  Rs.  37.08  crores,  BCAS   
by Rs. 22.62 crores and National Aviation Universit y by Rs. 8.60 crores. There has also 
been a decrease in B.E. 2022-23 (Capital) for BCAS by Rs. 13.31 crores and AAIB by Rs. 
3.40 crore, where less than one-fourth of the proje cted amount of Rs. 4.40 crores has been 
allocated. The Committee expresses serious concern at the decrease in funds for the 
agencies looking after the security and safety in C ivil Aviation sector such as DGCA; 
BCAS; and AAIB, despite the increased security conc erns in the sector and recommends 
that Ministry should be given additional funds at R.E. 2022-23 stage. 

53   
(Para 9) 
 
The Committee notes that over the last five years, the percentage of allocated budget at 
R.E. stage, on projected demand has varied from 56. 36%, 59.19% and 34.78%. While in 
2020-21, it was substantially raised to 84% of the projected demand. In 2021-22, the 
Ministry was allocated Rs. 72,652 crores, which was  more than the projected demand of  
Rs. 67,844.62 crores and the higher allocation was on account of „Disinvestment of Air 
India Limited /uni201F. For this year also, 86.80% of the total allocation of Rs. 10,667.00 crores was 
for AIAHL (SPV), leaving only a meager portion of 13.2% amounting to Rs. 1407.09 crores 
for allocation to the rest of the heads. The Commit tee is of the opinion that such a low 
allocation over the years will seriously affect the  growth of the Civil Aviation sector, which 
is already suffering from a downturn caused by COVI D-19 pandemic. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends that the issue of low allocat ion may be taken up with the Ministry  
of Finance at R.E. stage and need for higher allocations may be stressed upon. 
(Para 12) 
 
The Committee also notes that though the R.E. alloc ations by the Ministry of Finance fell 
far short of the projected R.E. demands, yet the ac tual expenditure of the Ministry has 
always been lesser than the R.E. allocations from 2 017-18 to 2020-21. For the year 2021-22 
also, the actual expenditure till January, 2022, wh ich is Rs. 69,194.09 crores falls short of 
the budget allocation (R.E.) of Rs. 72,652.00 crore s by Rs. 3,457.91 crores. This point 
towards the lack of planning on part of the Ministr y to utilize the funds allocated. The 
Committee expresses concern at the unrealistic proj ections of the Ministry and also feels 
that it has not been able to justify its projection s before the Ministry of Finance. The 
Committee also desires to know the actual expenditu re for the year 2021-22 and  the 
reasons for the shortfall in fund utilization, if any. 
(Para 13) 
 
Budget Allocation for Combined Headquarter Building 
 
The Committee notes that a Combined Headquarters (H Q) building has been planned for 
DGCA, BCAS, AAIB & AERA and allocation has been mad e under the B.E. (2022-23) 
Capital Section and all the four aforesaid organiza tions will be contributing for the 
expenditure of the said building. The Committee app reciates the fact that all the four 

54   
organizations viz., DGCA, BCAS, AAIB and AERA, which are dealing with t he security  
and safety in Civil Aviation Sector are being house d in the same building which will ensure 
better coordination among them and will ensure best  results in the civil aviation security. 
The Committee, however, notes that no capital allocation has been made for B.E. (2022-23), 
though Rs. 20.00 crores has been given as „Grants-i n-Aid /uni201F to AERA in B. E. 2022-23 
(Revenue) head. The Committee desires to know the r easons for no allocation at AERA 
under Capital Head and how the Ministry proposes to  ensure contribution on the part of 
AERA for timely completion of its HQ building. The Committee also desires to know 
whether there are any expected cost and time overru ns for construction of HQ building. 
The Committee recommends that the HQ building may b e built within a fixed timeline so  
as to avoid cost escalation at a later stage. The C ommittee may be provided with a brief 
Note on the proposed Combined Headquarters. 
(Para 16) 
 
Greenfield Project, Brownfield Project and Defence Brownfield Project  
 
The committee feels that the Ministry is off mark a s regards the understanding on creation 
of white paper for policy makers, as to how and why  Green Field Projects are the future of 
the nation. The Ministry has had a long experience of developing airports which were 
owned by the State Governments or by Airport Authority of India. While a long time vision 
is always envisaged for an Airport project to grow for next few decades, however the 
Committee feels that the Brown Field Projects are i mportant to enhance the footprint of 
aviation network in the country but given an option of redoing an existing airport to that of 
a Green Field project, there should be a clear and ambitious policy of the Government to 
identify locations for furtherance of New Airports.  India being a country with large 
population, the comparison of number of aircrafts p er person in India is far less than those 
of United States of America and China which have a comparable population figure and 
geographical area. 
(Para 20) 
 
Committee would like to clarify further this point with the example of the Patna Airport in 
which over thousand crores is being spent without a dding any operational advantage and 
still continuing with all the limitations, which existed as far operations is concerned,  would 

55   
remain there even after spending a thousand crores.  The reason why the Committee has 
been emphasising the need of having a distinct plan  of action is a case study of Patna and 
proposed Bihta Airport, which is yet to go for a PI B clearance with an estimated 
investment of around 800 Crores. The committee is f ully aware that Bihta Airport is going 
to be another duplication of existing facility in P atna, without any additional  
commensurate advantages, as it is a Defence Brown F ield project. Therefore, it requires a 
fresh thinking to optimally utilize public resource s with a view to create world class 
facilities and provide an edge in civil aviation in frastructure. The State of Bihar could have 
benefited immensely from a Green Field Project, if this matter was well explained by the 
Central Government to the State Government when the  Central team on its own had 
forwarded a proposal of redeveloping the Bihta Airport. 
(Para 21) 
 
The Committee notes that it would be far too clear if the Government spells out the 
advantages and how Green Field Projects would compl etely change the face of Aviation in 
this country. Taking another example of Devanahalli  Airport Bangalore, which emerged as 
a Green Field Project, while there were two Airport s existing in the city of Bangalore. One 
was Hindustan Aeronautics Limited (HAL) and other w as Yelahanka Airbase of the Air 
Force. The State Government along with the Central Government chose to ignore both 
these airports to develop an international airport and today there is quantum jump in the 
Air Traffic of Bangalore and also emerging as a Maj or International Hub in the south. 
With these examples, which the Airport Authority an d the Ministry of Civil Aviation 
already has, it would be pertinent for the Ministry  of Civil Aviation to spell out, why 
prospects of a Green Field Project are far superior  and have distinct advantages in terms  
of economics, passengers movement, increasing passe ngers footprint and future expansion 
possibilities and growth looking at the market size in India. 
(Para 22) 
 
The Committee notes with concern that the Ministry has so far not conducted any study or 
published any blueprint regarding the advantages an d disadvantages of Greenfield and 
Brownfield projects. The Committee understands that  for Highways construction, the 
NHAI under MoRTH  has  already  drawn  out such  guidelines.  The Committee expresses 
concern that though both Highways and Airports construction are infrastructure  projects, 

56   
yet the Ministry of Civil Aviation has lagged behin d in this regard. The Committee feels 
that though the MoCA has notified a Greenfield Airp ort policy since 2008, yet for 
hastening the construction of airports, a proper bl ueprint or guidelines regarding both 
Greenfield and Brownfield airports is the need of t he hour and therefore recommends that 
it may be formulated at the earliest. The Committee also expresses its concern that  though 
21 airports had received „in-principle /uni201F approval of the Ministry, since notification of 
Greenfield Airport policy in 2008, yet only 8 airpo rts have been operationalized. The 
Committee recommends that the Ministry needs to foc us on the operationalization of the 
remaining airports and feels that the formulation o f a guideline, as noted above, will 
expedite the development of airports. 
(Para 23) 
 
The Committee noted that in the next two to three y ears, there would be a proposal for six 
to seven new Greenfield airports. From the recent e xperiences, it has been noticed that the 
Greenfield airports which were developed during the  last decade have saturated on their 
existing capacities and need further expansion and augmentation of facilities, however, lack 
of land availability is limiting the scope of expansion of Greenfield airports. The Committee 
therefore, recommends that every Greenfield airport  must be planned in such a way that it 
should meet the requirements of at least next 40 ye ars. Necessary land for the airport may 
be acquired based on the futuristic planning; const ruction; and development can be 
undertaken in the future depending on the requirements. 
(Para 24) 
 
Defence Brownfield Projects 
 
The Committee notes that expeditious follow-up action is required from Airports Authority 
of India to further develop the Bagdogra airport. 
(Para 26) 
 
The Committee notes that long pending issues betwee n MoD, MoCA and AAI were  
resolved through continuous efforts by the Ministry  of Civil Aviation to resolve the issues. 
The Committee appreciates the positive development at resolving pending issues at 
Bagdogra and 5 other airports which will benefit th e nation at large. This should act as a 
guiding  example and  other pending land transfer issues  should be cleared  with  MoD   to 

57   
develop the airports which will augment the Civil A viation capacity. The Committee 
recommends that Land Barter Matrix formula between AAI and MoD should be 
thoroughly examined by AAI and taken up with MoD an d a coordinated policy should be 
evolved to solve the pending issues. 
(Para 27) 
 
In addition to the aforesaid land transfer issues b etween MoD and AAI, another issue 
relates to the restrictions imposed by the MoD and creation of “no fly zones” over defence 
airfields for over flying by civilian aircrafts. Th e Committee understands that though 
restrictions are justifiable for civilian aircrafts  over flying high security defence airports, 
yet it feels that the problems faced by the civilia n aircrafts must be kept in mind. The 
civilian aircrafts in such cases have to traverse a longer route to avoid “no fly zones” which 
results in longer duration of flights and higher fu el consumption and leads to higher 
passenger fares. The Committee is of the opinion th at wherever possible, the MoD should 
allow domestic airlines to fly over defence airfiel ds in consultation with the Ministry. 
Hence, the Ministry should take up this issue expeditiously with the MoD. 
(Para 28) 
 
Maintenance, Repair and Overhaul (MRO) services  
 
The Committee notes with serious concern that out o f the total MRO services turnover of 
Rs. 15,353 crores, the annual turnover of the India n MRO industry is just Rs. 2,300 crores, 
which is just 15% of India /uni201Fs civil MRO expense. The balance 85% MRO services 
amounting to a colossal amount of Rs. 13,053 crores  are availed from MROs based abroad 
in Singapore, Malaysia, Middle East, EU and USA etc . The massive amount of the MRO 
services availed from abroad can be gauged from the  fact that the amount is more than the 
total B.E. allocation of Rs. 10,667 crores for 2022 -23. The Committee laments the huge 
outgo of avoidable foreign exchange. It is of the o pinion that Maintenance, Repair and 
Overhaul (MRO) organizations play a major role in t he economy of airline operations. 
Since, 85% of these activities are carried out abro ad, there is a strong case to bring these 
MROs to India as the MRO expenditure is expected to  grow further with the growth in  
civil aviation sector. The issues which come within  the ambit of foreign suppliers can also 
be addressed by giving them incentives to operate i n this country. India with its large 

58   
technical manpower base can easily provide the manp ower for MRO services. The reasons 
for carrying out MRO services abroad, include tax a nomaly with global MROs in terms of 
GST/ levies/ surcharges etc.; high airport charges for land rentals, airport royalty, lack of 
availability of hangar space etc. The Committee rec ommends that the Ministry should take 
up the aforesaid issues with the Ministry of Financ e and other concerned agencies and try 
to address the issues at the earliest. The issues w hich are within the ambit of the Ministry 
itself viz. airport charges, hangar space etc. should be expedi tiously resolved by the 
Ministry and AAI. 
(Para 34) 
 
The Committee notes from the reply of the Ministry that one of the reasons why MRO 
services are availed abroad is that OEMs based abroad are not willing to partner with local 
MROs to protect their repair shops abroad and they provide spares at 10-12% of their  
cost, to the local MROs which makes overhaul by loc al MROs unviable. The Committee 
seriously expresses its concerns on this attitude o f the OEMs based abroad and feels that  
the Ministry should frame guidelines making it obli gatory for OEMs based abroad and  
who are getting business from Indian airlines compa nies to set up repair shops in India 
itself. Besides, it should also be made mandatory f or the foreign OEMs to supply spare 
parts at the same rates available abroad or manufac ture their spare parts in India in 
collaboration with local MROs. 
(Para 35) 
 
Airports Authority of India  
 
The Committee hopes that the construction of airpor ts at Mopa in Goa, Navi Mumbai in 
Maharashtra and expansion of Delhi, Bangalore, Hyde rabad airports and the construction 
which has already been delayed due to COVID-19 lock downs, would be expedited and 
completed as per the revised schedule. The Committe e notes that the concessionaires are 
required to take over the commercial operations wit hin 180 days of signing of agreements. 
The Committee desires to know whether commercial op erations has been taken over by 
concessionaires at Mangaluru, Lucknow and Ahmedabad  airports as 180 days had lapsed. 
For the proposed airports at Guwahati, Jaipur and T hiruvananthapuram, the Committee 
would like to know the status of COD and whether they are likely to take over operations 

59   
by the targeted date. The Committee also desires to know whether the AAI imposes penalty 
on concessionaires in case of a default as regards delay in COD. 
(Para 38) 
 
The Committee is also of the view that security and  safety measures, presently available at 
the airports are generally not upto standards, due to which there are frequent security 
lapses. The ILS systems are also lacking at airport s, which makes night landing  and 
landing during rainy seasons risky. The Committee, therefore, recommends that at all 
under construction airports, security and safety eq uipment of world-class level should 
invariably be installed. The latest ILS systems and  night landing facilities should also be 
incorporated at the planning stage of airports, so that the flights can operate smoothly even 
in bad weather conditions, reducing the need for diversion of flights. The Committee is also 
of the view that planning for airport construction should be futuristic, so that there is no 
need for expansion and alterations for installation  of ILS or security/ safety apparatus, at a 
later stage, which inconveniences the passengers an d also disturbs the flight operations at 
airports. 
(Para 39) 
 
Construction of new Airports  
 
Hollongi Airport 
 
The Committee appreciates the fact that the constru ction of Hollongi airport, which has 
time and again been recommended by the Committee in  its earlier Reports, has been 
accorded priority. The Committee is of the opinion that the airport is of prime significance, 
as it will increase faster connectivity and access to the remote North-Eastern region. The 
Committee also notes that the project has achieved 50% physical and 36% financial 
progress. The Committee hopes that all impediments both financial and otherwise get 
resolved, to ensure that the Hollongi airport is operationalized at the earliest. 
(Para 42) 
 
Jaipur Airport 
 
The Committee notes that for the Jaipur Airport, th e concerned concessionaire is obligated 
to develop and expand the airport though AAI is not required to make any investment. The 

60  
Committee recommends that the Ministry may monitor the work of the concessionaire and 
ensure that the Jaipur airport is operationalized a t the earliest. This will also help in 
boosting tourism as Jaipur is a prime tourism centr e drawing both domestic and 
international tourist traffic. 
(Para 44) 
 
Sabarimala Airport 
 
The Committee desires to know the status of Techno- Economic feasibility study by the 
State Government of Kerala. The Ministry may proact ively take up this issue with MoD 
and KSIDC for clearance as Sabarimala is an importa nt pilgrimage centre and visited by 
lakhs of pilgrims, both domestic and international every year and it will give a tremendous 
boost to pilgrimage tourism. The Committee also not es that this airport is near the 
developed tourist circuits of Cochin and Thiruvanan thapuram and hopes that efforts 
would be made in coordination with Ministry of Tourism to include and link Sabarimala as 
well, to this tourist circuit. 
(Para 48) 
 
Requirement of Air Traffic Controllers (ATCOs)  
 
The Committee notes with serious concern that there  is a huge backlog of 708 vacancies in 
the post of ATCOs. Despite this fact, most of the p osts of ATCOs at different levels were 
created in 2013, 2014 and 2015 only. Since the year  2017, there has been no post creation at 
any level for ATCOs. The proposal for creation of 3 40 additional posts of ATCOs has been 
taken with DPE only recently. The Committee is of t he opinion that the demand for  
ATCOs will rise exponentially with the growth of th e aviation sector in the country and 
feels that the Ministry should have anticipated the  requirement of more number of ATCOs 
well in advance and inducted ATCOs continuously ove r the years. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends that procedural issues regard ing manpower requirements of 
ATCOs should be addressed immediately to ensure ope rationalization of new airports that 
are being constructed in near future do not suffer due to lack of ATCOs. 
(Para 51) 
 
Flying Training Organisations (FTOs)  

61   
The Committee notes that there would be a growing r equirement of around 1000 pilots 
every year in the near future. The Committee also n otes that a liberalized FTO policy has 
also been brought out, wherein new and attractive i ncentives have been given to private 
entities who want to start an FTO. The Committee su pports the new initiatives of the 
Ministry as it is of the opinion that with the expe cted growth of the Civil Aviation Sector in 
the country, there would be increased demand for tr ained pilots. The Ministry should 
therefore gear up for the requirement of FTOs and s et up FTOs in a time bound manner. 
The Committee also notes that the Ministry has take n up the issue of reduction of GST on 
AvGas and funding support to FTOs as a priority sec tor, with the Ministry of Finance and 
it has also taken up relevant issues with State Gov ernments and Ministry of Petroleum and 
Natural Gas. The Committee recommends that the issu es may be forcefully taken up with 
the concerned stakeholders and the Committee may al so be apprised of the progress in this 
regard. The Committee also recommends that keeping in view of the Atmanirbhar Bharat, 
sufficient Flight Training Organisations (FTOs) may  be established in various parts of the 
country to ensure that our boys and girls are not g oing to foreign countries to get pilot 
training. 
(Para 55) 
 
The Committee notes the acute shortage of skilled manpower and proper training institutes 
in the Civil Aviation industry which has the potent ial of creation of employment 
opportunities for the youth. The Committee observes  that other than the highly specialized 
jobs like commercial pilots and aircraft engineers,  there are non-technical jobs like 
airhostess, flight attendants, flight pursers, cabi n crew, ground/ cargo handling staff, 
administrative/ sales staff, where there can be a l ot of job creations. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends that proper training institut es at low cost, may be setup all across 
the country to provide requisite training in the af oresaid airlines services, so that the youth 
of the country may be gainfully employed. 
(Para 56) 
 
Handling of Air Cargo  
 
The Committee notes with serious concern that over the last five years, the bulk of the Air 
Cargo has been handled by the International freighters and the Indian freighters have 

62   
handled less than 40% of the total share. The AAICL AS, a company wholly dedicated to 
development of air cargo, logistics and allied serv ices, was set up, as late as 2016, which 
shows the lack of concern on part of the Ministry t o increase the share of Indian cargo 
freighters. The Committee feels that the Indian air  cargo sector has immense potential, 
which is seen from the fact that strong resilience has been shown by the sector, even during 
the COVID-19 pandemic. The Committee notes the init iatives of the Ministry and 
recommends that all out efforts should be made to i ncrease the share of the Indian cargo 
freighters in the near future, so that the outgo of  foreign exchange can be reduced. The 
growth in this sector will also create new avenues of employment and aid the country /uni201Fs 
economic growth. 
(Para 61) 
 
The Committee during the course of its deliberation s, raised the issue of lack of cargo 
facilities in the North-Eastern Region, especially in the States of Nagaland, Arunachal 
Pradesh and Assam. The Committee is of the opinion that the economy of the North- 
Eastern Region is primarily based on horticulture, agriculture and tea cultivation, which 
can prosper only if proper markets are created for the sale of these products. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends that the existing Dibrugarh airport which is a major 
airport in the North-Eastern Region, may be develop ed as a standard airport for transport 
of horticulture, agriculture and tea products to all the regions of the country. 
(Para 62) 
 
Regional Connectivity Scheme (RCS)-UDAN (Ude Desh ka Aam Nagrik)  
 
The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry that the present budgetary allocation is 
sufficient to meet the requirements of the UDAN Sch eme in accordance with the status of 
development of the project. The Committee hopes tha t all out efforts would be made to 
make the UDAN Scheme a success and realize the drea m of the common man to avail of 
affordable civil aviation. 
(Para 65) 
 
Delays in operation of some RCS Airports  

63   
The Committee notes that the Government deserves ap preciation for operationalizing the 
long delayed RCS projects. The Committee also notes  that the reasons for the delay in 
operations at the aforesaid RCS routes are mostly o perational or lack of compliance of 
agreements by the SAOs. At places like Gauchar and Amravati, some issues are pending 
with the concerned State Governments. At RCS Pithor agarh, the SAO has defaulted and 
the operations could not commence. The Committee re commends that before allotment of 
RCS routes, the credentials and past performance of  the SAO may be thoroughly 
scrutinized, so that difficulties are not faced at a later stage. The Committee further 
recommends that heavy penalties should be imposed o n SAOs for defaulting and also for 
not meeting deadlines. The Committee also recommend s that a close coordination may be 
maintained with the concerned State Governments to remove bottlenecks in the 
operationalization of RCS routes. 
(Para 71) 
 
Installation of HEPA Filters at Airports  
 
The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry that HEPA filters are not effective against 
COVID-19 virus and that it is also not technically feasible to install such systems at 
airports. The Committee, therefore, recommends that  as per ISHARE guidelines, UVGI 
systems and MERV-13 filters may be installed at all  the airports in the country, especially 
the ones where there is international arrivals from  countries where COVID-19 cases are 
still prevalent. The Committee desires to know the airport-wise status of installation of 
UVGI systems and MERV-13 filters across the country  and the action plan of the Ministry 
to combat future waves of COVID-19. 
(Para 74) 
 
Passenger Amenities at Airports  
 
Facility of Aerobridges 
 
The Committee expresses its serious concern at the fact that despite charging passengers, 
PBB or aerobridge facilities are not being used by private airlines to reduce operational 
cost. Due to this, passengers, especially the aged ones have to bear the brunt and have to 
climb the stairs of the parking stand to board an a ircraft. The Committee deplores this 
apathetic and unreasonable attitude of the private airlines and strongly recommends that 

64   
its circular on the aforesaid subject may be strict ly enforced. The Committee also 
recommends that regular surprise checks should also  be carried out by the Ministry to 
ensure compliance of the circular and in case there  is a default, the concerned private 
airlines should be penalized. 
(Para 76) 
 
Facilities in case of Cancellation of Flights 
 
The Committee notes the provisions of the CAR and r ecommends that all the provisions 
should be strictly enforced so that passengers are not inconvenienced. It also strongly 
recommends that in the case of cancellation or dela y of flights, a provision should be 
compulsorily made by airlines to provide a waiting hall/ VIP lounge for the passengers and 
food, water and snacks should also be served to the m and the expenses for the same should 
be borne by the concerned airlines. The Committee also directs the Ministry to do a ground 
survey of all the airports and check whether the DG CA guidelines in this regard are being 
followed. 
(Para 78) 
 
High prices of Food and Beverages at the Airports 
 
The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry but o bserves that food/ beverage prices are 
very expensive at all airport food outlets. Tea, co ffee and refreshments may be available at 
reasonable cost, affordable to a common man. In thi s regard, the Committee recommends 
that the Ministry/ AAI should ensure that its Circu lar on food prices is being strictly 
followed at all the airports and packaged food is not sold at higher than MRP. 
(Para 80) 
 
Water and Snacks for Passengers in Airlines 
 
The Committee feels that atleast a policy may be co nsidered for providing a small 
complimentary water bottle, keeping in view the tra dition of the country to give highest 
regard to guests and offer water on arrival. Beside s, a small packet of biscuits could also be 
provided free of cost to every passenger on demand, in all the flights. 
(Para 82) 
 
Accessibility features at airports for disabled passengers  

65   
The Committee applauds the sensitivity and care sho wn towards the needs of the  
differently abled persons and also appreciates that  79 out of 87 AAI airports are already 
equipped with the 10 accessibility features as shar ed by Ministry of Social Justice and 
Empowerment. The Committee recommends that the remaining 8 AAI airports should also 
be provided the said features at the earliest. The Committee recommends that while 
constructing new airports, these 10 accessibility f eatures should invariably be included in 
the Master Plan. 
(Para 85) 
 
Rationalisation of Air Fares and Cancellation Charges in Domestic Sectors  
 
As regards pricing of the tickets, the Committee no tes the reply of the Ministry that at 
present, air fare is neither regulated nor fixed by  the Government and airlines are free to 
fix the reasonable tariff under the provision of Su b-rule (1) of Rule 135, Aircraft Rules, 
1937 having regard to all relevant factors includin g the cost of operation, characteristics of 
service, reasonable profit and the generally prevai ling tariff. Also, as regards the concern  
of the Committee regarding extra fare for seat sele ction, the Ministry has stated that travel 
by air is a contractual matter between airline and passenger, which is commercial in  
nature. The Committee is of the opinion that for Ci vil Aviation sector to grow in an open 
market, it is justifiable that the private airline operators should be given a free hand to fix 
the air fares as they are governed by competition. However, the Committee would like to 
draw the attention of the Ministry to the provision  of the Aircraft Rules, 1937, which has 
specifically mentions that the fares should be reas onable and should maintain reasonable 
profit. In the above context, the Committee feels t hat the reply of the Ministry stating that 
air travel is purely a contractual matter between t he airline and the passenger, is not at all 
justified. The Committee is of the opinion that a b alance also must be maintained between 
the commercial interests of the airlines and the in terest of the passengers. The Committee 
feels that the passengers should not be fleeced in the garb of commercialization and 
therefore recommends that the Ministry should maint ain a close watch on the fare pricing 
by the airlines to ensure that it is not exorbitant . It also recommends that at least for the 
same sector, route and duration of flight, in all t he private airlines, the Ministry should 
issue guidelines so as to ensure similar or least v ariation in fares among all airlines. The 
Committee is also of the opinion that fixing of dif ferent fares for selection of seats in the 

66   
same flight is arbitrary and unjustifiable. Hence, Committee on the principle of equity feels 
that all the seats in a same flight should have sam e fare. The Committee also recommends 
that the Ministry should strictly enforce the DGCA Charter and ensure that under no 
circumstances, the airlines levies cancellation cha rges more than the basic fare plus fuel 
surcharge. The Committee may be informed about the mechanism adopted by the Ministry 
to ensure that the Aircraft Rules, 1937 and DGCA Ch arter is being followed in letter and 
spirit by all private airlines. 
(Para 91) 
 
Seaplane Policy  
 
The Committee expresses serious concern that the se aplane policy is still not in place and is 
still being finalized in consultation with stakehol ders. The Committee also laments the fact 
that the first seaplane that was operationalized, w as stopped due to technical reasons. It 
expresses concern at the lack of seriousness of the  Ministry, as regards Seaplane policy.  
The Committee has repeatedly pointed out the need f or Seaplane policy in view of the fact 
that our country is endowed with rivers and lakes. The Committee, therefore, recommends 
that a feasibility study may be conducted in the No rth-Eastern Region for operation of 
Seaplanes in the big lakes and rivers of the North- Eastern Region. The Committee also 
stresses on the expeditious finalization of Seaplan e policy. It also recommends that proper 
planning should be done before start of the operati ons, so that the operations are not 
halted. 
(Para 94) 
 
Connectivity of Airports  
 
The Committee is of the opinion that adequate conne ctivity of airports with roads and 
railways is of paramount importance to ensure the s uccessful and optimum utilization of 
airports. The Committee emphasizes the urgent need to ensure that proper coordination is 
achieved between the concerned Ministries/Departmen ts, in order to connect airports with 
all other means of transport such as roads, metros and railways, so that tourists/flyers 
reach their destinations, from the airports, in a s mooth and safe manner. Further, the 
Committee is also of the firm opinion that Ministry  should collaborate with the State 
Governments and other stakeholders to ensure that land is allocated within a specific   time 

67   
frame for ensuring adequate road and rail connectiv ity to the airports. The Government 
has announced the Gati Shakti programme and to make  the programme successful, every 
airport must be connected through road and rail. Th e Committee also recommends that 
every functional airport should be directly linked with the nearby National Highways. All 
the upcoming airports should be connected to the ne arest metro network and proper 
signage should also be installed indicating the dir ection of metro from the airport terminal 
and vice versa. The Committee specifically recommen ds that the new airport coming up at 
Jewar (UP) should invariably be linked to the Delhi  airport through high speed metro 
connectivity. 
(Para 97) 
 
Considering the importance of the issue, the Committee had earlier taken up the issue in its 
297 th Report on the subject „Functioning of Airports Auth ority of India /uni201F. The Ministry in 
its action taken notes on the aforesaid Report info rmed that the project of National Master 
Plan incorporating the Airports, Roadways, Railways , Shipping, Gas pipe lines, Power 
(existing and proposed) all have been combined to create a National Master Plan, which 
will be inaugurated by Hon /uni201Fble Prime Minister. Additionally, letters have been  sent by 
Chairperson, AAI to Chief Secretaries of various State Governments to align and relate the 
City Master Plans also with the Airport Master Plans. 
(Para 98) 
In view of the above reply, the Committee in its 30 8 th Action Taken Report on the 
Recommendations/ Observations contained in its Two Hundred and Ninety Seventh Report 
on the subject „Functioning of Airports Authority of India /uni201F, had noted the proactive action 
taken by the Ministry, to ensure connectivity, and that a letter had been sent by 
Chairperson, AAI to Chief Secretaries of various State Governments to align and relate the 
City Master Plan with the Airport Master Plan. The Committee may also be informed of 
the opinion of the States across the country, espec ially as regards land acquisition, proper 
compensation and rehabilitation of the land owners,  as it is a teething problem in 
infrastructure projects. The Committee may be infor med about the views of the State 
Governments on the proposal of aligning City Master Plan with the Airport Master Plan. 
(Para 99) 

68   
Helicopter operations in the country  
 
The Committee is of the opinion that transportation  of both passengers and cargo by 
helicopter holds a great potential in our country, especially in hilly areas, where it is 
difficult to construct airports due to land availab ility constraints. Besides, helicopter 
transportation is fast and provides assistance duri ng natural calamities as well. The 
Committee notes that the Ministry has requested the  State/ Union Territories (UT) 
Governments to consider setting up of helipads in e ach district for promoting helicopter 
operations and recommends that the proposal may be proactively taken up by the Ministry 
with State/ UT Governments. The Committee notes that only a nominal allocation of Rs. 
0.01 crore has been made in B.E. 2022-23 as the dem erger scheme of Pawan Hans Limited 
and Rohini Heliport Limited is under consideration.  The Committee desires to know the 
status of demerger scheme. 
(Para 104) 
 
The Committee appreciates the launch of „HeliSewa /uni201F portal to provide a single window 
access to operator and authorities to communicate i nformation about helicopter  
operations. The Committee also notes that States/ U Ts have been asked to populate 
requisite data on the portal. The Committee would l ike to be apprised of the latest status of 
updation and the response of the States/ UT Governm ents and whether any timeline has 
been set for the process. The Committee also apprec iates the new initiative „Heli-Disha /uni201F 
wherein administrative guidance would be provided f or civil helicopter operations. The 
Committee hopes that this will facilitate and help in the growth of helicopter operations in 
the country. 
(Para 105) 
 
Promotion of Drone Industry  
 
The Committee is of the firm opinion that drones of fer significant benefits to almost all 
sectors of the economy. Drones can create employmen t potential for the youth and can aid 
the economic growth of the country in a big way, if  it is given a proper policy direction. 
Besides, due to ease of use and versatility of dron es, it can be used in remote and 
inaccessible areas of the country. The Committee is  also of the opinion that since our 
country is primarily an agricultural country, use of drones in agriculture can help  increase 

69   
the agricultural productivity of any crop. The Comm ittee commends the enactment of 
Liberalised Drone Rules, 2021; Drone Airspace Map; PLI Scheme for Drones; UTM Policy 
Framework; Single Window DigitalSky Platform; Certi fication Scheme for Drones; and 
Drone Import Policy to encourage the growth of Dron e Industry in the country. The 
Committee especially notes the PLI Scheme for drone s & components and recommends 
that all out proactive efforts may be made by the M inistry in coordination with Ministry of 
Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises (MSME) and prop er guidance and follow-up with 
the Drone start-ups to ensure that the scheme succeeds in its objectives. 
(Para 110) 
 
Development of Aero Sports  
The Committee notes that a mere token allocation of  Rs. one crore has been made for the 
development of Aero Sports by the Ministry of Finan ce for the financial year 2021-22 and 
even in B.E. 2022-23. The Committee is of the opini on that Aero Sports, which is one of the 
adventure sports, has gained popularity among the y outh worldwide and in India as well. 
India with its breathtaking views of the mountains,  sea beaches and the countryside, has a 
great potential for Aero Sports. It can act as a bo ost for adventure tourism in the country, 
thereby generating employment in the countryside. I t also expresses its concern at the lack 
of interest shown by the Ministry of Civil Aviation  in this promising field. The Committee 
recommends that the Ministry should expedite the process of framing National Aero Sports 
Policy, which would ensure the organized development of Aero Sports in the country. 
(Para 112) 
 
Leveraging Tourism through Airports  
 
The Committee feels that airports act as a first ga te of entry for both the domestic and 
international tourists visiting a particular city with iconic destinations. Hence, the visuals at 
the airports leave a lasting impact on the mind of a tourist and also create interest in them 
to explore the places of tourist interest. In view of this, the Committee feels that leveraging 
tourist places through airports assumes significanc e. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that besides offering tourist destinations suggested by Ministry of Tourism for 
RCS-UDAN bidding for promoting tourism, MoCA should  also design airports to portray 
the local art and culture of the city at the airports through statues, murals, paintings and 

70  
sculpture displays. The Committee recommends that p romotional signages for promoting 
tourism can be explored through commercial concessi onaires. The AAI can explore the 
possibility of completely removing rentals for Gove rnment agencies instead of charging 
50% concession on rental for promoting tourism. At the Jaipur airport, the Ministry may 
impress upon the PPP partner for synchronising the Master Plan of the airport, portraying 
the local theme, art and culture. The Ministry can also explore the possibility of engaging 
marketing personnel at airports to provide professi onal assistance and guidance, especially 
to the international tourists, which will help in promotion of tourism in the country. 
(Para 115) 
 
Evacuation of Stranded Indians in Ukraine  
 
The Committee notes that the Government has embarke d upon a massive operation 
namely, „Operation Ganga /uni201F, to evacuate stranded Indian nationals, especially , students, 
from the war torn region of Ukraine. Some private a irlines and Indian Air Force are 
engaged in this effort, through special flights. Th e Committee understands that the 
Government of India is also exploring options for e vacuating the stranded nationals 
through corridor/ cross border roads to neighbourin g countries and thereafter bringing 
them back to the country by air. The Committee appl auds this well-coordinated 
humanitarian efforts of the Ministries of Civil Avi ation; Defence; and External Affairs and 
recommends that airlift and all the other possible means of evacuation efforts should 
continue till all the stranded Indian nationals in Ukraine are evacuated safely. Presumably, 
the Ministry would also bear the requisite cost of transport, if required and make 
arrangements for their transport to their native places. 
(Para 116) 
 
***** 

 
 
 
 
MINUTES 
  

 
XVII 
SIXTEENTH MEETING  
The Committee met at 11:00 A.M. on Thursday, the 17 th  February, 2022 in 
Committee Room ‘A’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
Members present:  
1. Shri T.G. Venkatesh           –  Chairman  
RAJYA SABHA  
2. Shri Prasanna Acharya 
3. Shri Shaktisinh Gohil 
4. Jugalsinh Lokhandwala 
5. Shri Vinay Dinu Tendulkar 
LOK SABHA 
6. Shri Tapir Gao 
7. Rahul Kaswan 
8. Shri Sunil Baburao Mendhe 
9. Shri Chhedi Paswan 
10. Shri Tirath Singh Rawat 
11. Shri Dushyant Singh 
12. Shri Ramdas C. Tadas 
SECRETARIAT  
   Shri Puneet Kumar, Joint Secretary 
Shri P. Narayanan, Director 
Shri Dinesh Singh, Additional Director 
Shri Rajendra Prasad Shukla, Additional Director 
Shri Ranajit Chakraborty, Under Secretary 
  
WITNESSES: – 
 
Ministry of Civil Aviation  
(i) Shri Rajiv Bansal, Secretary; 
(ii) Shri B. S. Bhullar, Chairperson, Airports Economic Regulatory Authority of India 
(AERA); 
(iii) Shri Sanjeev Kumar, Chairman, Airports Authority of India (AAI); 
(iv) Shri Vikram Dev Dutt, Chairman and Managing Director, Airports Authority of India; 
(v) Shri Satyendra Kumar Mishra, Joint Secretary; 
(vi) Shri Piyush Srivastava, Senior Economic Adviser; 
(vii) Smt. Usha Padhee, Joint Secretary; 
(viii) Shri Vimalendra Anand Patwardhan, Joint Secretary & Financial Advisor; 
(ix) Smt. Rubina Ali, Joint Secretary; 
(x) Shri Amber Dubey, Joint Secretary; 
71

 
(xi) Smt. Puja Singh Mandal, Joint Director General, Dir ector General of Civil Aviation 
(DGCA); 
(xii) Shri Jaideep Prasad, Joint Director General, Bureau of Civil Aviation Security (BCAS); 
(xiii) Shri Pramod Kumar Thakur, Deputy Director General; 
(xiv) Shri Deepak Sajwan, Deputy Secretary; 
(xv) Shri J. K. Garg, Commissioner of Metro Railway Safety; and 
(xvi) Capt. Aurobindo Handa, Director General, Aircraft Accident Information Bureau (AAIB). 
 
At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of  the Committee and the 
senior officers of the Ministry of Civil Aviation t o the meeting and informed them of the 
agenda for the meeting i.e. to examine and delibera te on the Demands for Grants (2022–
23) of the Ministry of Civil Aviation. The Chairman  asked the Ministry to provide the 
gist of budgetary allocation for B.E. 2022–23 and t he constraints faced by the Ministry 
due to major cuts inflicted on it. He enquired abou t the adequacy of increased/enhanced 
allocation of B.E. 2022–23 for the requirements of Indian Civil Aviation Sector, reasons 
for decreased B.E. 2022–23 allocation in Regional C onnectivity Scheme (RCS) and 
major initiatives/eco–initiatives taken up/proposed  to be taken up by the Ministry to 
reduce the carbon footprint of Indian Civil Aviatio n Sector. He also enquired whether 
the global best safety and security measures/facili ties have been adopted by the Indian 
Civil Aviation Sector, and modern security equipmen ts have been installed. He also 
asked the Ministry to give details of steps taken t o assess and reduce the overall staff 
expenditure, employ marketing strategists for air–t ravel promotion, provision of night 
landing facility at the airports, linking airports and National Highways to boost 
connectivity, provision of budgetary allocation to Defence–controlled airports, building 
state–of–the–art airports promoting Indian culture, and provision of pilot training centers 
at small airports etc. 
72

 
2. Through his presentation, the Secretary, apprised t he Committee that an 
allocation of /Rupee10,667 Cr. was made to the Ministry in the B.E. 2022–23, out of which /Rupee 
9,259.91 Cr. i.e. 86.80% of the total budget has be en given to Air India Asset Holding 
Company (AIAHL). The Ministry, till January 2022, m ade an expenditure of /Rupee 
69,194.09 Cr. out of the total allocation of /Rupee 72,652 Cr. made to it at the R.E. 2021–22 
stage. The Committee was apprised of the Ministry’s efforts to revive the Indian aviation 
sector from the downturn caused due to pandemic, th rough resumption of international 
and domestic flights/Air Freight/Cargo operations, provisioning of air bubbles in close 
coordination with the Ministry of Health & Family W elfare, to facilitate point–to–point 
passenger movement. He also informed about rational izing taxes/excise duties on 
Aviation Turbine Fuel (ATF) and Maintenance, Repair  and Overhaul (MRO) export 
transactions, and initiation of aviation training c ourses under Indira Gandhi Rashtriya 
Uran Akademi (IGRUA) and Rajiv Gandhi National Avia tion University (RGNAU) for 
aspiring aviators, promotion/incentivization and po licy formulation on traffic 
management for Unmanned Aircraft Systems (UAS)/Dron es under Drone Rules, 2021, 
developing self–financed 403 routes connecting 55 a irports/ two water aerodromes and 
eight heliports under the Regional Connectivity Sch eme (RCS–UDAN), digitizing 
aviation sector through e–DGCA and e–BCAS modules f or Director General of Civil 
Aviation (DGCA) and Bureau of Civil Aviation Security (BCAS), etc.  
3. The Committee was informed that the total Passenger  Traffic of both domestic 
and international flights combined from F.Y. 2020–2 1 to F.Y. 2021–22 has increased by 
14% and the Ministry plans to further boost the pas senger traffic in near future. It has 
formulated regulatory policies and signed Memorandu m of Understanding (MoU) with 
the Ministry of Ports, Shipping & Waterways for sea plane/water aerodrome operations. 
73

 
The Committee was further informed of the challenge s faced by the Ministry in the 
Aviation sector, namely, limited infrastructure, hi gh ticketing and fuel costs, price–
sensitive customers, heavy taxation, financial, eco nomic and environmental pressures, 
insufficient aircraft leasing, low presence of Indi a in global aviation traffic, and the 
obstacles faced in creation of aviation hubs.  
4. Members raised various queries/issues such as lack of regional connectivity at the 
airports, need to develop Advanced Landing Grounds in remote areas of the country, 
drafting a mechanism to enable PPP model at airport s, addressing the shortage of trained 
manpower in aviation sector, enhancing the custom c learance process, upgradation of 
hangars and MROs at airports, development of haats to promote state tourism at airports 
and policymaking for operationalization of ‘Heli–taxi Seva’ under UDAN Scheme,  etc. 
5. The Secretary, MoCA responded to the queries raised  by the Chairman and 
Members of the Committee. The Chairman then directe d the Secretary to furnish written 
replies to other queries/points/issues raised by hi m and the Members of the Committee, 
which could not be replied during the meeting, to the Secretariat.  
(The witnesses then withdrew)  
(The Committee re–assembled after lunch break)  
*  *  * 
 
6. *  *  * 
7. *  *  * 
8. *  *  * 
9. *  *  * 
10. *  *  * 
 The meeting adjourned at 4:54 P.M. 
*Relates to other matters. 
74

 
  
XVIII 
EIGHTEENTH MEETING  
The Committee met at 02:30 P.M. on Monday, the 7 th  March, 2022 in Committee 
Room – 139, First Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 Members present:  
1. Shri T.G. Venkatesh                  –   Chairman  
RAJYA SABHA  
2. Shrimati Priyanka Chaturvedi 
3. Shri Shaktisinh Gohil 
4. Shri Tiruchi Siva 
5. Shri Vinay Dinu Tendulkar 
LOK SABHA  
6. Shri Rahul Kaswan 
7. Shri Sunil Baburao Mendhe 
8. Shri Prince Raj 
9. Shri Ramdas C. Tadas 
10. Shri Krupal Balaji Tumane 
SECRETARIAT  
Shri Puneet Kumar, Joint Secretary 
Shri Swarabji B., Director 
Shri Rajendra Prasad Shukla, Additional Director 
Shrimati Subha Chandrashekar, Deputy Secretary 
Shri Ranajit Chakraborty, Under Secretary 
  
At the outset, the Chairman extended a very warm welcome to the Members of 
the Committee. He informed them that the agenda for the meeting is to consider and 
adopt the following Draft Reports on:- 
 
(i) Three Hundred Fourteenth Report on Demands for Gran ts (2022-23) of 
Ministry of Civil Aviation; 
  
75

 
(ii) * * * 
(iii) * * * 
(iv) * * * 
(v) * * * 
 
2. The Committee suggested some minor changes in the a bovementioned draft 
Reports. The Committee authorized the Secretariat t o carry out the changes. The 
Committee, thereafter, adopted the draft Reports al ongwith some minor 
modifications/additions. 
3. The Committee also authorized the Chairman, and in his absence, Shri Tiruchi 
Siva, M.P., to present the Reports in Rajya Sabha. Shri Sunil Baburao Mendhe, M.P. and 
in his absence, Shri Prince Raj, M.P. was authorize d to lay the abovementioned Reports 
on the Table of Lok Sabha on 14 
th  March, 2022. 
4. The Committee further decided to hear the represent atives of the Ministries of 
Tourism and External Affairs on the Subject ‘Role o f Indian Missions globally for the 
growth of Tourism in India’ in its next meeting.  
5. The meeting adjourned at 03:40 P.M. 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
*Relates to other matters. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
76

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ANNEXURES 

 
 
Annexure-I 
 
DETAILS OF MRO SERVICES BEING AVAILED AT INDIAN MRO AND MRO 
ABROAD  
 
Sl. 
No 
Category  MRO Services  Indian MRO  MRO Abroad  Reason  
1.  Airframe 
MRO 
Base 
Maintenance 
Checks requiring 
EASA 
Certification 
- GMR  Technic  
- Air Works - 
AIESL (Under 
Progress) - 
INDAMER 
-JORAMCO  
-TURKISH TECHNIC 
- IAI 
- ST ENGINEERING 
- KLM 
- LHT 
- SR TECHNICS 
- AAR CORP. 
- SIA ENGINEERING 
Lack of Infrastructure 
for EASA Certified 
Airframe MRO 
Services 
2. Engine 
MRO 
Engine Overhaul / 
Repair Services 
for CFM,  GE, 
PW 
- AIESL - SAFRAN 
- LHT 
- KLM 
- GE 
OEMs not willing to 
Partner with Local 
MROs to protect their 
Repair Shops Abroad. 
3.  Component 
MRO 
Component 
Overhaul 
- AIESL  - THALES  
- HONEYWELL 
- MOOG 
-RAYTHEON 
TECHNOLOGIES 
-LUFTHANSA 
TECHNIK 
-AIRFRANCE/KLM 
-SR TECHNICS 
OEMs/Bouquet 
Component  Service 
Providers not willing  
to sub-contract Local 
MRO to protect their 
own  shops.   They 
provide spares at 10- 
12% of their   cost 
which makes overhaul 
by local  MRO 
unviable. 
4.  Landing 
Gear MRO 
Landing Gear 
Overhaul 
-  AIESL  (  737  
Available 320 
EASA L/G  
facility in 
progress) 
- LHT  
- KLM 
-Flysafe 
-Safran 
OEMs support 
required to develop 
landing gear shops in 
India 
 
  
77

 
 
Annexure-II 
 
LIST OF WITNESSES WHO APPEARED BEFORE THE DEPARTMEN T-RELATED 
PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, TOUR ISM AND 
CULTURE 
 
Dated 17.02.2022  
WITNESSES: – 
 
Ministry of Civil Aviation  
1. Shri Rajiv Bansal, Secretary; 
2. Shri B. S. Bhullar, Chairperson, Airports Economic Regulatory Authority of India (AERA); 
3. Shri Sanjeev Kumar, Chairman, Airports Authority of India (AAI); 
4. Shri Vikram Dev Dutt, Chairman and Managing Director, Airports Authority of India; 
5. Shri Satyendra Kumar Mishra, Joint Secretary; 
6. Shri Piyush Srivastava, Senior Economic Adviser; 
7. Smt. Usha Padhee, Joint Secretary; 
8. Shri Vimalendra Anand Patwardhan, Joint Secretary & Financial Advisor; 
9. Smt. Rubina Ali, Joint Secretary; 
10. Shri Amber Dubey, Joint Secretary; 
11. Smt. Puja Singh Mandal, Joint Director General, Director General of Civil Aviation (DGCA); 
12. Shri Jaideep Prasad, Joint Director General, Bureau of Civil Aviation Security (BCAS); 
13. Shri Pramod Kumar Thakur, Deputy Director General; 
14. Shri Deepak Sajwan, Deputy Secretary; 
15. Shri J. K. Garg, Commissioner of Metro Railway Safety; and 
16. Capt. Aurobindo Handa, Director General, Aircraft Accident Information Bureau (AAIB). 
 
 
78