PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/114.htm[28-08-2018 13:24:01]
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE
 
 
 
 
ONE HUNDRED AND FOURTEENTH REPORT
ON
ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE   
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
CONTAINED IN ITS ONE HUNDRED AND FIFTH REPORT ON
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2006-07) OF DEPARTMENT OF
SHIPPING
 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA  SABHA ON 14TH MAY, 2007)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK  SABHA ON 14TH MAY, 2007)
 
 
 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
MAY, 2007/VAISAKHA, 1929 (SAKA)
 
 
 
 
CONTENTS
PAGES
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (i)

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/114.htm[28-08-2018 13:24:01]
 ............................................................................................
2. INTRODUCTION
 ...........................................................................................................................
(iii)
3. REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE
 ......................................................................................................
1—16
4. OBSERVATIONS/CONCLUSIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS — AT A GLANCE
 ………………..……
17—20
5. MINUTES …………………………………………...................................................................... 21—24
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE
( 2006-2007 )
    1.    Shri Sitaram Yechury  —  Chairman
           RAJYA SABHA
    2.    Prof. Ram Deo Bhandary
    3.    Shri S.S. Chandran
    4.    Shri Vedprakash P. Goyal
    5.    Prof. Alka Balram Kshatriya
    6.    Shri Janardhana Poojary
    7.    Shri M.V. Mysura Reddy
    8.    Shri Satish Kumar Sharma
    9.    Shri Shahid Siddiqui
   10.    Shri Shatrughan Sinha
           LOK SABHA
   11.    Shri Anandrao Vithoba Adsul
   12.    Shri Sukhbir Singh Badal
   13.    Shri Joachim Baxla
   14.    Shri Sartaj Singh Chhatwal
   15.    Shri N.S.V. Chitthan
   16.    Shri Adhir Chowdhury
   17.    Dr. K. Dhanaraju
   18.    Shrimati Priya Dutt
   19.    Shri Dip Gogoi
   20.    Shri P. Karunakaran
   21.    Shri Vijay Kumar Khandelwal
   22.    Dr. P. P. Koya
   23.    Dr. Ramkrishna Kusmaria
   24.    Shri Samik Lahiri
   25.    Shri Alok Kumar Mehta
   26.    Shri Hemlal Murmu
   27.    Shri Madan Lal Sharma
   28.    Shri Akshay Pratap Singh
   29.    Shri Dushyant Singh
   30.    Shri Suraj Singh
 *31.    Shri Prahlad Joshi
           SECRETARIAT
           Shri Shamsher Singh, Joint Secretary

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/114.htm[28-08-2018 13:24:01]
           Shrimati Agnes Momin George, Director
           Shri Jagdish Kumar, Under Secretary
           Shrimati Subhashree Panigrahi, Committee Officer
* Nominated on 20.3.2007 in the vacancy caused due to demise of Shri Manbendra Shah.
       
INTRODUCTION
       I,  the Chairman, Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport, Tourism and
 Culture, having been authorised by the Committee to present on its behalf, do hereby present this One Hundred and
 Fourteenth Report of the Committee on Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations of the
 Committee contained in its One Hundred and Fifth Report on Demands for Grants (2006-07) of Department of
 Shipping.
2.    The One Hundred and Fifth Report of the Department-related  Parliamentary Standing Committee on
 Transport, Tourism and Culture was presented to the Parliament on the 22nd May, 2006.
3.    The Action Taken Replies on the recommendations of the Committee  contained in its One Hundred and
 Fifth Report were received from the Department of Shipping on the 3rd November, 2006.
4.    The Committee  considered and adopted the Report at its meeting held on the 16th April, 2007
.
        
NEW DELHI; SITARAM YECHURY
Chairman,
April 16, 2007
Chaitra 26, 1929 (Saka)
Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture.
        
        
          
                                                                                                                                                                     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/114.htm[28-08-2018 13:24:01]
REPORT
        This Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Government on the .observations
 recommendations as contained in its One Hundred and Fifth Report on Demands for Grants (2006-07) (Demand No.
 84) of the Department of Shipping, which was presented to the Parliament on  22nd May 2006.
2.     Action Taken Replies have been received from the Government on 3rd November, 2006 in respect of all the
 observations/recommendations contained in the Report. These have been categorized as follows:—
            (i)     Recommendations/observations that have been accepted by the Government:
                    Para Nos. 9, 19, 21, 23, 27, 42 and 73                                                                              Total-7
            (ii)    Recommendations/observations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the Government replies:
                    Para Nos. 34 and 39                                                                                                        Total-2
            (iii)   Recommendations/observations in respect of which replies of the Government have not been accepted by the Committee:
                    Para Nos. 15 and 60                                                                                                        Total-2
            (iv)   Recommendations/ observations in respect of which final replies of the Government are still awaited:
                    Para Nos. 46, 50, 55 and 56                                                                                             Total-4
3.     The Committee desires that final replies in respect of the recommendations, which have been categorized as
 interim replies by the Committee should be furnished to it at the earliest.
4.     On scrutiny of the Action Taken Replies, the Committee has made observations on each item of the action
 taken/proposed to be taken by the Department of Shipping. The recommendations of the Committee contained in the
 One Hundred Fifth Report, action taken thereon by the Government and recommendations/observations of the
 Committee on each item of action taken have been given in the succeeding paragraphs.
ANALYSIS OF ANNUAL PLAN 2006-07
(Recommendation at Para 9)
5. The Committee notes that in the annual plan 2005-06, the outlay of Department of Shipping was reduced from
 Rs.2419.66 crore to Rs.2333.71 crore at RE stage. The reduction had been both in the Gross Budgetary Support
 as well as IEBR component. As far as the reasons for under utilization of funds is concerned, the Committee
 finds that inadequate preparedness on the part of executing authorities and procedural rigidity for approval of
 scheme are main culprits for under utilization of funds. Therefore, the Committee recommends that Department
 of Shipping should not only have to do away the procedural hurdles leading to delay in processing and
 approving the scheme but also have to adopt proactive approach while preparing the scheme. In BE 2006-07, an
 outlay of Rs.3263.19 crore  has been provided which consists of a Gross Budgetary Support of Rs.740.88 crore
 and IEBR of Rs.2522.31 crore , which is almost 40 per cent over and above the amount of Rs.2419.66 crore
 allocated in BE 2005-06. The Committee expects that the increase in the plan outlay will have a positive effect of
 the schemes/projects of the Department of Shipping. The Committee is of the view that complete utilization of
 the enhanced allocation will help effective implementation of the schemes/performance undertaken by the
 Department of Shipping. The Committee recommends that the Government should increase the outlay of
 Department of Shipping and if need be, supplement the allocation by increasing the Gross Budgetary Support to
 the Department of Shipping.
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
6.     The views and recommendations of the hon’ble Committee are noted.
PORT SECTOR
(Recommendation at Para 15)
7.     The committee is not satisfied with the reasons given by the Department of Shipping for shortfall in the
 utilization of the approved outlay and feels that the reasons could have been anticipated in advance by the
 Department of Shipping, this clearly shows the lack of pro-active approach on the part of the Department. The
 Committee is perturbed to note that there has been a huge shortfall in the utilization of Funds vis-a­-vis
 approved outlay for the Port Sector. In BE 2005-06, an outlay of Rs. 1163.75 crore comprising of Rs.280.24 crore
 Gross Budgetary Support and Rs.883.21 crore IEBR was provided for the Port Sector. As against this, the actual
 expenditure is anticipated to be Rs.668.33 crore . The Committee feels that while proposing the Plan Outlay, the
 Department of Shipping had not done strategic planning and observes that there is a

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/114.htm[28-08-2018 13:24:01]
 mismatch in the physical and financial projections which is not explicable. The Committee, therefore,
 recommends that Government should evolve a monitoring mechanism to ensure proper utilization of the
 approved outlay, making officials accountable for failure, transparency in implementation process logistical
 coordination and do away with the procedural rigidities to avoid delay and cost overrun so that the budgeted
 outlay is utilized optimally.
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
8.     The Annual Plan proposal are formulated about five to six months in advance before the commencement of the
 Annual Plan period after factoring in the anticipated expenditure during the current year and the assessed requirements
 in the ensuing Annual Plan year for on­ going projects and taking into account the assessed requirement of funds for
 the new projects to be taken up during that year. Requirement of funds at the Revised Estimates stage is projected after
 carrying out a review of the progress in the expenditure during the year till that time and after taking into account the
 anticipated expenditure during the remaining part of the year. This does not necessarily follow a uniform or standard
 pattern every year. In view of the time lag between the formulation  process for Annual Plan and the implementation
 period, there is generally mismatch between the allocations and the actual expenditure. The Port Trusts have been
 advised that there should be realistic approach while proposing the Annual Plan Outlays and that only token provision
 may be kept for projects for which administrative approval is yet to be accorded by the Competent Authority. A
 monitoring mechanism for regular review of plan expenditure on monthly and quarterly basis has been put in place. In
 the event, if a particular Port/organization is found to be lagging in expenditure vis-a-vis outlay, the reason thereof are
 examined threadbare so that the hurdle in achieving the financial target (budgeted outlay) are sorted out and optimum
 utilization of funds is ensured.
9.     Actual expenditure of the budgetary support component was Rs.217.92 crore against an outlay of Rs.280.54 crore
 (including survey vessels, IT for Department of Shipping, etc.) i.e. 77.68 per cent. If the allocation for survey vessels
 meant for Ministry of Defence  are excluded the actual utilization comes to 94.53 per cent. Hence, there is no major
 shortfall in utilization Gross Budgetary Support (BE) during 2005-06. However, efforts will be made to ensure that
 pace of expenditure picks up further in the next fiscal year.
10.   Actual expenditure out of the IEBR component in respect of major ports and DCI was Rs.421.88 crore
 (Provisional) against outlay of Rs.883.21 crore i.e. 47.77 per cent. Main reasons for shortfall in utilization are as
 follows:—
            (i)      Delay in sanction of projects due to procedural requirements.
            (ii)      Deferment of some schemes.
            (iii)      At Chennai Port, an amount of Rs.22 crore could not be utilized since procurement of the land from State
 Government for development of backup area did not materialize.
            (iv)     At Visakhapatnam Port, there was a shortfall of Rs. 13.24 crore in expenditure on dredging in Phase-I of
 deepening of channel project due to delay in mobilization of rock dredging equipment by the contractor.
            (v)     At Mormugao Port there was shortfall in expenditure due to discharge of tender for procurement and
 replacement of bucket wheel shiploaders and stackers as the bidders were not agreeable to the terms and
 conditions of the tender.
            (vi)     At New Mangalore Port, there was shortfall of about Rs.8 crore since this expenditure had already been
 incurred under revised estimates for 2004-05.
            (vii)    In Paradip Port, there was shortfall of Rs.10 crore in expenditure on acquisition of floating craft since one
 of the vessels met with an accident on way to Paradip from Goa in December, 2005 and hence the
 payment has been deferred pending complete repair and modification.
            (viii)    A sum of Rs.62.60 crore could not be utilized by Ennore Port due to delay in grant of environmental
 clearance, allocations for the projects for capital dredging and rail connectivity and less equity
 contribution to Sethusamudram Corporation Limited.
            (ix)     In JNPT, there was shortfall of Rs.31.07 crore due to delay in acquiring two Super Post panamax  size
 RMQCs and replacement of existing three RMQCs, acquisition of another two RMGCs and associated
 works and procurement of high speed launch.
            (x)     In Mumbai Port, Rs.22.00 crore could not be utilized as there was delay in execution of contract for the
 offshore container terminal and procurement of equipment relatred to the scheme. Rs.11.00 crore for
 improvement of port connectivity remained unutilized as the MoU with the Railways did not materialize.

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/114.htm[28-08-2018 13:24:01]
            (xi)     A sum of Rs.30.11 crore has been left unutilized by Tuticorin Port due to change in design of berth No. 9,
 delay in replacement of equipments, delay in tenders which were invited for formation of new roads etc.
            (xii)    In Cochin Port an amount of Rs.9.25 crore was unutilized due to re-tendering for installation of 110 KV
 sub-station at Mattancherry halt. Rs.4.00 crore was unutilized for the Thevara Foreshore Reclamation
 Scheme as the tenders had to be cancelled due to opposition by local residents.
            (xiii)   There has been shortfall of Rs.l90 crore in utilization of Plan allocation of Dredging Corporation of India.
 Of this shortfall of Rs.35 crore was’because of delay in placement of order for replacement of Dredger Dr.
 VII as a result of which only first stage payment of Rs.25 crore could be made during the year as against
 the planned two stage payment totaling Rs.60 crore. Rs.80 crore allocated for procurement of new TSHD
 could not be utilized because the tender for the same had to be discharged. Rs.34 crore allocated for Dumb
 Backhoe Dredger could not be utilized since the specifications for the same had to be changed so as to be
 compatible with the need for dredging of hard material and rock. Floating of tenders had to be deferred to
 2006-07 pending finalization of the technical specifications. Rs.29 crore allocated for Self propelled
 Barges (2 Nos.) could not be utilized due to change in technical specifications and consequent deferment
 of the scheme for 2006-07.
11.   In some of the cases, the reasons for non-utilization of allocation were beyond the control of Port Management.
 The Port Management have been advised to ensure a more realistic budget and strict implementation and monitoring.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION OF THE COMMITTEE
12.   The Committee notes that there has been a time lag between formulation process for different schemes
 under annual plan and implementation period, due to which, there was a mismatch between the allocation and
 the actual expenditure. The Committee further notes that in order to fill the gap, the Port Trusts have been
 advised to be realistic in approach while proposing the annual plan outlay and only token provision are to be
 kept for projects for which administrative approval is yet to be accorded by the Competent Authority. The
 Department of Shipping has also put into place a monitoring mechanism for regular review of plan expenditure
 on monthly and quarterly basis. The Committee however, does not agree with the contention of the Department
 of Shipping that there is no major shortfall in the utilization of Gross Budgetary Support (BE) during 2005-06,
 and the reasons put forth by the Department are not such which can not be anticipated in advance. The
 Committee, therefore, recommends the Department of Shipping to ensure a more realistic budget and strict
 implementation and monitoring so as to speed up the pace of expenditure during the next fiscal year.
CAPACITY ENHANCEMENT IN MAJOR PORTS
(Recommendation at Para 19)
13.   The Committee notes that the Department of Shipping is implementing the schemes for enhancing the
 capacity and productivity of all major ports and to encourage the private sector participation for the
 development of ports infrastructure and accordingly, comprehensive policy guidelines have been issued. The
 Committee also notes that the Government has allowed cent percent FDI for construction and maintenance of
 ports in order to mobilize substantial resources as well as to improve efficiency, productivity and quality of
 services of Ports. The Committee, however, observed that as against the capacity of 408.60 million TPA, the
 major ports handled a total traffic of 310.80 mt. upto December, 2005. This way, the aggregate capacity of major
 ports exceeds the traffic target marginally. Therefore, there is need to increase capacity of ports on urgent basis.
 The Committee, therefore, recommends the Department of Shipping to take action for development of
 infrastructure in major ports so as to face global competition of sea-borne trade and enhance private sector
 investment including FDI in the sector by addressing the procedural rigidity expediting well integrated and
 coordinated policy framework and approach.
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
14.   The aggregate cargo handling capacity of the 12 major ports as on 31.3.2006 is 456.20 MT which takes into
 account the addition of berths and improvement in productivity. In 2005-06, the major ports handled traffic of 423.42
 MT. The traffic target in 2006-07 is 465.70 MT. In 2006-07, it is anticipated that three new berths would be
 commissioned which would add a capacity of 26.40 MT thereby taking the capacity of 482.60 MT at the end of 10th
 Plan against the 10th Plan target of 470 MT. Under the National Maritime Development Programme (NMDP)
 formulated by the Department of Shipping, it is planned to augment the aggregate capacity of the major ports to 800.41
 MTPA by 2011-2012. Under the programme , a total 276 projects covering the entire gamut of activities in the major
 ports including berths development, deepening of channels, equipment upgradation, rail/road connectivity and other
 associated activities have been identified which are to be implemented in two phases through Public Private
 Participation (PPP). Out of the total estimated investment of Rs.55,803.73 crore under the scheme, an amount of
 34,505.34 crore is envisaged through private investment including foreign direct investment.

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/114.htm[28-08-2018 13:24:01]
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION OF THE COMMITTEE
15.   The Committee notes that the Department of Shipping has been taking measures for enhancing capacity of
 major ports due to which the aggregate cargo handling capacity at major ports as on March 31, 2006 was 456.20
 Mt. and the major ports handled traffic of 423.42 Mt. as against traffic target of 465.70 Mt. The Committee also
 notes that the Department of Shipping has been planning to augment the aggregate capacity of the major ports
 to 800.41MTPA by  2011-12 under the National Maritime Development Programme  with the total estimated
 investment of Rs.55, 830.73 crore  under the scheme out of which Rs.34,505.34 crore has been envisaged through
 private sector investment including FDI. The Committee recommends the Department to identify the host of
 activities in the major ports for capacity enhancement and remove the procedural hurdles, if any, by adhering to
 a coordinated policy framework and approach in their future plan.
PORT LABOUR REFORMS
(Recommendation at Para 21)
16.   The Committee notes that in the changed fiscal regime the Government is committed for labour reforms and
 desires to allow private sector investment for creation and augmentation of capacity building in the port
 infrastructure. The Committee also notes with concern that enhancement of private sector investment for
 development of port infrastructure may deter the interest of employees unions/federations. Therefore, the
 Committee feels that the port labour reforms are necessary before exposing the labour sector to open market
 mechanism. In view of this, the Committee recommends the Department of Shipping to de-regulate and
 decentralize the commercial environment for collective bargaining to improve the productivity levels at ports
 while taking adequate care of labour interests.
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
17.   The existing guidelines on private sector participation in port projects provide that while handing over the existing
 facilities to the private operator, the labour, which has necessarily to be taken over by the private operator, should be
 included in the tender document. This takes care of the concern expressed by the Committee. However, in respect of
 BOT projects, which are developed by private operator, there obviously cannot be any pre­ condition like that because
 the project is being developed by the operator in green field site. The Government is committed to safeguard the
 interests of the labour in Port sector and the following institutional arrangements are in operation in major ports for
 addressing theconcerns of labour:—
            (i)      Port labour reforms are a continuing process and various demands of the Major Federations of Port and
 dock Workers are discussed and considered from time to time and all possible measures are taken to meet
 their demands.
            (ii)      The wages structure of Portand Dock employees (Class III and IV) was revised after every 5 years
 through a Bi-partite Wage Negotiations Committee (BWNC). The Committee consists of representatives
 of Port Management and Federations of Workers. From 1.1.1997, the duration of wage structure is
 extended to 10 years, at par with Central Government employees. Various demands/grievances of workers
 relating to wage structure are considered by the BWNC.
            (iii)      For improving the productivity levels, it is very essential to rationalize the manning scales. This matter
 had been referred by this Ministry to M/O Labour for adjudication by National Tribunal. The award of the
 National Tribunal has now been received from M/O Labour and further action for rationalizing manning
 scales and datums for the purpose of improving productivity will be taken in the light of the award of the
 National Tribunal in consultation with Major Port Trusts.
            (iv)     On the Boards of each Major Port Trust two seats have been earmarked for trustees representing labour
 and in this way the interests of labour are properly safeguarded at Board level. Similarly, the
 representatives of labour are also appointed on the existing Dock Labour Boards.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION OF THE COMMITTEE
18.   The Committee notes that the Department of Shipping has been taking adequate care to safeguard the
 interest of the labour engaged in Port Sector by making institutional arrangements in major ports for
 addressing the concerns of the port labour. The Committee further notes that the guidelines on private sector
 participation in port projects provides that while handing over the existing facilities to the private operator, the
 labour, which has necessarily to be taken over by the private operator, should be included in the tender
 document. However, in respect of BOT projects, which are developed by private operator, there obviously
 cannot be any pre-condition like that because the project is being developed by the operator in green field site.
 The Committee while agreeing to the replies of the Department of Shipping, recommends that Government
 should explore the possibility of having some effective mechanism in place so as to ensure that there is no
 exploitation of labour engaged in the BOT projects.

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/114.htm[28-08-2018 13:24:01]
PORT CONNECTIVITY
(Recommendation at Para 23)
19.   The Committee observes that the lack of proper port connectivity has hampered the development of ports.
 The Committee also notes that projects involving 117.73 km. for improving road accessibility to Ports have been
 completed and projects involving 313.85 kms. of road length are under implementation. The Committee is of the
 view that development of other modes of transport viz. railways, highways and inland water transport is also
 essential for improving the accessibility to ports and to keep pace with the growing requirements of overseas
 trade. The Committee feels that the availability of such modal mix will result in considerable saving in cost and
 time for cargo containers assessing these ports. The Committee, therefore, recommends the Department of
 Shipping to take steps for better road and rail connectivity infrastructure in all the major ports for the growth
 of the container cargo. The cost of connectivity could be
 shared in public sector by the strategic partners or alternatively, the private public partnership (PPP) or joint
 venture partnership (JVP) could also be explored.
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
20.   Government recognizes the importance of providing adequate connectivity to the Ports and augmentation of Port
 connectivity infrastructure is undertaken on a continuous basis depending upon traffic requirements. The Committee on
 Infrastructure (CoI) held by Hon’ble Prime Minister, had set up a Committee of Secretaries (CoS) to review the rail-
road connectivity in Major Ports. The CoS submitted its report in February 2006 to CoI which accepted the
 recommendations made by CoS. Briefly, major recommendations made by CoS are:—
            (i)      Each Major Port should preferably have minimum four lane road and double line rail connectivity. The
 connectivity should be established in fixed time-frame.
            (ii)      All projects with less than the minimum prescribed IRR, would be considered on case to case basis.
            (iii)      COS recommended that budgetary assistance under the Viability Gap Funding Scheme could be
 considered on case to case basis.
            (iv)     Road connectivity projects may be broadly divided into two categories:-
                            (a)    Port Connectivity - projects where the length of the road is not very long (less than 50 Km.); and
                            (b)   Hinterland Connectivity - projects where connectivity to source of cargo such as iron ore
 mines/coal mines is to be provided.
            (v)     Schemes for undertaking Port Connectivity would be undertaken by NHAI on BOT basis. The National
 Highways for Port connectivity may be categorized as National Highways (Port Connectivity).
            (vi)     State Highways with a traffic intensity of 10,000 PCUs or more should be declared as National Highways
 as per extant procedure.
            (vii)    All National Highways (Port Connectivity) where the traffic count reaches 12,000 PCUs should be taken
 up for four laning on priority.
            (viii)    All NH (PC) projects would be taken up by NHAI as per normal parameters. However, separate tolling
 policy for NH(PC) could be proposed jointly by the NHAI and the Shipping Department where necessary.
            (ix)     All proposals for roads falling in the category of hinterland connectivity would be taken up by NHAI on
 BOT basis, as far as possible.
            (x)     CoS recommended completion of the nine ongoing projects for augmentation of road connectivity as per
 schedule and recommended four projects for sanction.
            (xi)     CoS recommended timely completion of eight sanctioned/ongoing projects and recommended five
 projects for which the Railways have carried out or are currently carrying out surveys with a view to
 determining the viability of these projects. Action is being taken for implementation of the
 recommendations which would improve the existing connectivity of all major ports.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION OF THE COMMITTEE
21.   The Committee notes that the Department of Shipping has taken steps for providing adequate connectivity
 to the port and augmentation of port connectivity infrastructure on continuous basis depending upon the traffic
 requirement The Committee further notes that the Committee of Secretaries (CoS) has been set up to review the
 rail-road connectivity in major ports and has submitted its report to the Government. The Committee
 recommends that the Department of Shipping should take action for implementation of the recommendations of

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/114.htm[28-08-2018 13:24:01]
 Committee of Secretaries, which would definitely improve the existing rail-road connectivity of all major ports.
CONTAINERIZATION IN MAJOR PORTS
(Recommendation at Para 27)
22.   The Committee observes that the international trade is witnessing an increasing trend towards
 containerization. However, the Committee is constrained to note that the major ports did not-significantly
 contribute to export-import trade and about 70 percent of containers are trans-shipped at neighborhood
 international Ports such as, Colombo, Dubai and Singapore Ports, making thereby India’s export costlier and
 imports less competitive. The Committee, therefore, recommends that Government should establish hub ports in
 the country preferably, in East and West Coast for trans-shipment of containerized cargo for the growth of sea-
borne overseas trade and economic development.
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
23.   Dedicated capacities for handling containerized cargo is available in seven major ports, namely, Kolkata Port (both
 at Kolkata Dock Systems and Haldia Dock Complex), Visakhapatnam Port, Chennai Port, Tuticorin Port, Cochin Port,
 Mumbai Port and Jawaharlal Nehru Port. The total capacity available at these seven ports is 5.18 million Twenty Feet
 Equivalent Units (TEUs).
24.   A hub port is required to fulfil certain requirements such as required volume of traffic, proximity to international
 routes and markets, long waterfront, deep draught, good road/rail connectivity, large backup area and supporting
 hinterland. In India, Jawaharlal Nehru Port on the west coast with the northern and north-western regions of India and
 Chennai Port on the east coast with the southern and south-east regions of India as their main hinterland are operating
 as regional hub ports. About 92 per cent of container cargo at Jawaharlal  Nehru Port and about 44 per cent of container
 cargo at Chennai Port during 2005-06 were ‘direct to destination’ cargoes without involving transhipment in any port
 abroad. About 65 per cent of container cargo at Tuticorin Port was also direct to destination. Overall, about 66 per cent
 of container cargo handled in the major ports during 2005-06 were direct to destination.
25.   Chennai  Port has adequate draft to handle majority of modern large size container vessels visiting India. One
 container terminal at Chennai Port with a capacity for handling one million Twenty Feet Equivalent Units (TEUs) per
 annum is already operational. Selection of a bidder for development, operation and management of a second container
 terminal at the port on Build, Operate and Transfer (BOT) basis is under finalization. After completion of the second
 container terminal, Chennai Port will have capacity for handling 1.8 million TEUs per annum. Projects for improving
 connectivity from the port to its hinterland have also been planned.
26.   At Jawaharlal Nehru Port, Two container terminals and one shallow water berth with a capacity for handling 2.55
 million TEUs per annum are already operational in the port. The third container terminal at the port is currently under
 construction and is expected to be fully operational in October, 2006. Additional container handling capacity on
 account of the third container terminal in the port will be 1.3 million TEUs. Thus, on operationalisation  of the third
 container terminal, Jawaharlal Nehru Port will have a capacity for handling 3.85 million TEUs A proposal to deepen
 the entrance channel at an estimated cost of Rs.800 crore with a view to enhancing its draft has been approved by the
 Government. On completion of this project, the port will be able to receive large size vessels with carrying capacity
 upto 6000 TEUs using tidal window. Projects for improving rail and road connectivity from the port to its hinterland
 including construction of a dedicated rail freight corridor to Delhi have also been planned.
27.   Apart from the above, the Government has also approved the development of International Container
 Transshipment Terminal (ICTT) at Cochin Port on BOT basis. A Concession Agreement for the purpose has already
 been signed between the Cochin Port Trust and India Gateway Terminal Private Limited, a special purpose company
 formed by a consortium of Dubai Ports World and CONCOR. The project will be implemented in phases. On
 completion, the terminal will have capacity for handling 3 million TEUs. Under the agreement, the Port Trust will
 ensure provision of adequate draft in the channel so as to enable the ICTT to receive large size vessels with a carrying
 capacity upto 8000 TEUs and also appropriate rail and road connectivity to the terminal.
28. In addition, following measures have been taken to augment the capacities for handling containers in the major
 ports:—
            (i)      A Concession Agreement for development of a container terminal at Kandla Port on Build, Operate and
 Transfer (BOT) basis at an estimated cost of Rs.33O crore has been signed. The terminal will have
 capacity for handling 6,25,000 TEUs per annum.
            (ii)      Bidding process is in progress for development of two offshore container berths at Mumbai Port on Build,
 Operate and Transfer (BOT) basis at an estimated cost of Rs.l 165 crore, with capacity for handling 1.1
 million TEUs per annum.

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/114.htm[28-08-2018 13:24:01]
            (iii)      Bidding process in progress for development of a second container berth at Tuticorin  Port on BOT basis
 at an estimated cost of Rs.l50 crore. On completion, the terminal will have capacity for handling 4,00,000
 TEUs per annum.
            (iv)     A container terminal is planned at Ennore Port at an estimated cost of Rs.1000 crore.
            (v)     Expression of Interest have been received for development of a fourth container terminal at Jawaharlal
 Nehru Port.
29.   Development of regional hub ports and the ICTT and measures taken by the Government to develop container
 handling facilities in other major ports as brought out above, coupled with development of container handling facilities
 at some non major ports is expected to result in gradual decline in transshipment of Indian cargo at ports outside India.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION OF THE COMMITTEE
30.   The Committee notes that Jawaharlal Nehru Port on the west coast with the northern and north-western
 regions of the country and Chennai Port on the east coast with the southern and south-east regions of the
 country as their main hinterland are operating as regional hub ports. The forthcoming Valarpadam Port must
 be developed as a regional hub port as well. The Committee also notes that during 2005-06, about 66 per cent of
 container cargo handled in the major ports including Jawaharlal Nehru Port, Chennai Port and Tuticorin Port
 were direct to destination cargoes without involving transshipment in any port abroad. The Committee
 appreciates the Department of Shipping for taking measures for augmenting the capacities for handling
 containers in the major ports for the growth of sea-borne overseas trade. The Committee expects that
 Development of regional hub ports and the International Container Transshipment Terminals and measures
 taken by the Government to develop container handling facilities in other major ports coupled with development
 of container handling facilities at some non-major ports will result in decline of transshipment of Indian cargo at
 ports outside India and bring economic development.
SETHUSAMUDRAM SHIP CHANNEL PROJECT
(Recommendation at Para 34)
31.   The Committee notes that the Sethusamudram  Ship Channel Project envisage dredging of ship channel to
 connect Gulf of Mannar and Bay of Bengal to Palk Bay and will save upto 422 nautical miles of distance and 30
 hours of sailing time for ships between East and West Coast. The Committee also notes that the project has a
 host of benefits for the Coastal District of Southern States and is of great economic and strategic importance.
 The Committee also notes that there are protests from many corners regarding the environmental repercussions
 of the Sethusamudram  Ship Channel Project whereas, the Committee feels that the project would generate
 employment opportunity by developing three fishing harbours in the project area for the benefits of the
 fishermen. The Committee expects that the Department of Shipping will also give due consideration for
 environmental related issues as a part of the implementation of the Sethusamudram Ship Channel Project.
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
32.   While formulating the project, adequate care has been taken to ensure that adverse impact on environment is
 minimal. A comprehensive Environmental Impact Assessment Study has been carried out by the National Environment
 Engineeringand Research Institute (NEERI). The NEERI studied all the environment issues including ecological study,
 in depth, over a period of two years. Keeping in view the ecologically sensitive nature of the project, an elaborate
 Environment Management Plan has been drawn up to safeguard the bio-diversity of the region during project
 implementation and operation period.
33.   While granting environmental clearance, Ministry of Environmentand Forests has imposed a number of conditions,
 inter-alia, including strict monitoring at a 4 hourly interval to monitor the movement of sediments of dredged materials
 in the dredging area and daily on the coast and other sensitive areas of Gulf of Mannar Biosphere/National Marine
 Park.
34.   A Monitoring Committee has been set up under the Chairmanship of Dr. S. Kannaiyan , Chairman of National Bio-
diversity Authority to assess the impact of dredging work on environment and to advise the project authorities. The
 monitoring being carried out will cover marine water quality, sediment quality, ambient air quality and the noise level.
 The parameters covered would be physical properties, chemical properties, heavy metals, bacteriological parameters,
 marine biology etc. It would thus be seen that the environmental concerns have been adequately addressed.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION OF THE COMMITTEE
35.   The Committee notes that while formulating the Sethusamudram  Ship Channel Project adequate care has
 been taken by the Department of Shipping to ensure that adverse impact on environment is minimal. An
 elaborate Environment Management Plan has been drawn up to safeguard the Bio-diversity of the region during
 project implementation and operation period. The Committee also notes that a monitoring committee has been

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/114.htm[28-08-2018 13:24:01]
 set up to assess the impact of dredging work on environment including assessment of marine water quality,
 sediment quality, ambient air quality and the noise level and other protests that have arisen with regard to the
 project. The Committee recommends that the measures being observed by the Department of Shipping should
 adequately address the environment concerns as a part of the implementation of the Project and Committee
 should be apprised of net result achieved therefrom.
NATIONAL MARITIME DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMME
(Recommendation at Para 39)
36.   The Committee notes that the Government has formulated an ambitious National Maritime Development
 Programme with the aim to cover the entire gamut of activities in the maritime transport sector including major
 ports, shipping and inland waters transport. The Committee also notes that a total number of 387 projects (276
 for major ports and 111 for shipping and IWT Sector) has been identified for implementation with the total
 investment of Rs.1,00,339 crore, out of which Rs.55,804 crore  has been earmarked for major ports and the
 balance Rs.44,535 crore  has been reserved for shipping and IWT sector. The Committee feels that the
 formulation of the programme will not only add to the creation and up gradation of the infrastructural facilities
 but also helps in augmenting the capacity expansion of the port network, inland water transport sector as well as
 the growth of the tonnage. The committee, therefore, recommends that for the successful implementation of the
 programme activities, the Department of Shipping should develop and add the infrastructure for capacity
 building both in terms of human resources, technology up-gradation as well as research and development. The
 Committee also recommends that the Department should take action for setting up of National Maritime
 Development Authority on the pattern of National Highways Authority of India.
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
37.   The Department of Shipping agrees with the need to develop and add the infrastructure for capacity building. This
 is an ongoing process and will be followed up.
38.   The port projects identified under the National Maritime Development Programme (NMDP) are under
 implementation/proposed to be taken up for implementation by the respective Major Ports, which are autonomous
 entities. The non-major ports are under the overall jurisdiction of the respective State Governments. Directorate
 General of Shipping, Directorate General of Lighthousesand  Lightships and Inland Waterways Authority of India are
 entrusted with the task of implementing the projects pertaining to shipping and inland water transport under NMDP.
 The functioning of these organizations is overseen by the Department of Shipping. The existing institutional structure is
 thus considered adequate for implementation of the NMDP. The Hon’ble Committee may accordingly like to
 reconsider their recommendation on the setting up of the National Maritime Development Authority.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION OF THE COMMITTEE
39.   The Committee notes that the Department of Shipping is in agreement with the need for implementation of
 the National Maritime Development Programme  activities besides developing and adding to the infrastructure
 for capacity building both in terms of human resources, technology up-gradation as well as research and
 development. The Committee also notes that there already exist institutional arrangements within the
 Department of Shipping for implementation of different projects identified under National Maritime
 Programme and desires not to pursue the recommendation further.
EXTENDING TONNAGE TAX BENEFIT TO INLAND VESSELS AND COASTAL VESSELS
(Recommendation at Para 42)
40.   The Committee observes that the Inland Water Transport and Coastal Vessel Transport in our country
 have not been optimally developed to compete with other modes of transport in the country and require fiscal
 support. However, the Committee is constrained to note that the Vessels registered under the Inland Vessels and
 Coasting Vessels Acts have not yet been extended the benefit of Tonnage Tax. To aggravate the situation the
 benefit of Section 33AC of Income Tax Act has also been withdrawn in the Finance Bill 2004-05. However the
 extension of Tonnage Tax benefit to these Vessels would only result in revenue loss of Rs. 1.5 crore  per annum to
 the exchequer, as these Vessels have tonnage on only 0.03 million GRT. The Committee, therefore, recommends
 the Department of Shipping to vigorously pursue the matter with the Ministry of Finance for inclusion of the
 Vessels registered under Inland Vesselsand Coastal Vessels Acts under the tonnage tax regime so as to unfold
 the infrastructure potential of IWT sector with the growth of the Indian economy.
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
41.   Department of Shipping has taken up the matter with Ministry of Finance at various level  requesting them to
 include the vessels registered under Inland Vessels Act and Coasting Vessel Act for extension of Tonnage tax regime
 They have been again requested for the same and their attention has been drawn to the recommendation of the
 Committee.

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/114.htm[28-08-2018 13:24:01]
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION OF THE COMMITTEE
42.   The Committee notes that the Department of Shipping is taking up the matter with the Ministry of Finance
 for extending tonnage tax benefits to the vessels registered under Inland Vessels Act and Coasting Vessel Act.
 The Committee is unable to comprehend the reasons for delay in extending the benefits of tonnage tax to the
 vessels registered under Inland Vessels Act and Coasting Vessel Act. The Committee feels that the Government
 would not be able to develop the inland water transport and coastal vessel transport in the country, unless the
 benefit of tonnage tax and Section 33 AC of Income Tax Act were not granted to these vessels. In this regard, the
 Committee reiterates its earlier recommendations contained in 105th Report of the Committee, which is
 reproduced below:
“The Committee, therefore, recommends the Department of Shipping to vigorously pursue the matter
 with the Ministry of Finance for inclusion of the Vessels registered under Inland Vessels and Coastal
 Vessels Acts under the tonnage tax regime so as to unfold the infrastructure potential of IWT sector
 with the growth of the Indian economy.”
CALCUTTA DOCK LABOUR BOARD
(Recommendation at Para 46)
43.   The Committee notes with anguish that a proposal for release of one time grant of Rs.733.28 crore  to
 Calcutta Dock Labour Board is pending for a long time but has not yet been approved. The Committee is of the
 view that it is the liability of the Government to pay the pension and the pensionary dues in time and it will be
 solely discriminatory on the part of the Government to withhold the pension and pensionary benefits of the
 employees of the Calcutta Dock Labour Board. The Committee is unable to comprehend as to how these
 pensioners will sustain in the absence of any financial support. The Committee feels that the injustice is being
 meted out to the pensioners of the Calcutta Dock Labour Board in the disbursement of pension and pensionary
 benefits, although the Board has been created by an Act of Parliament. The committee feels that in spite of the
 recommendations in earlier Reports also nothing has been done in the matter. The Committee, therefore, once
 again recommends that every effort should be made by the Department of Shipping for release of one time grant
 to meet the pensionary liabilities of employees of the Calcutta Dock Labour Board.
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
44.   For building a Pension Fund to meet the future pensionary liability of the Board, the Department had circulated a
 Cabinet Note seeking one time grant of Rs.734.93 crore from the Government of India. This amount was proposed to
 be used for the payment pf unpaid arrears of Rs.89.17 crore to CDLB pensioners and workers/employees, Rs.457.04
 crore towards Superannuation Fund Contribution and Rs. 188.72 crore for Fringe Benefit Tax. Subsequently,
 Department of Revenue made observations with regard to calculation of Fringe Benefit Tax. Accordingly, the Fringe
 Benefit Tax was increased to Rs. 192.50 crore and a revised Cabinet Note is under finalization for seeking a one time
 grant of Rs.738.71 crore from the Government of India.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION OF THE COMMITTEE
45.   The Committee is constrained to note that the Government is dilly-dallying the matter which has aggravated
 the problem of employees of Calcutta Dock Labour Board in getting the pension and pensionary benefits. The
 Committee feels that every delay in release of grant to Calcutta Dock Labour Board for payment of unpaid
 arrears and meeting the future superannuation liabilities of employees will burden the Government heavily, if
 not tackled now. The Committee is of the strong view that injustice.is being meted to the employees of Calcutta
 Dock Labour Board in the matter of payment of the pension and pensionary dues on time after retirement and
 recommends that the Government should come out with one time concrete proposal which would adequately
 address the total revenue requirement of employees of Calcutta Dock Labour Board instead of doing it in a
 piecemeal manner.
MISAPPROPRIATION OF SEAMEN’S PROVIDENT FUND
(Recommendation at Para 50)
46.   The Committee had taken up the matter of misappropriation of Seamen’s Provident Fund in its earlier
 reports also. The Committee however, is not happy with the lethargic approach of the Government in the
 matter. The Committee notes that the matter to recoup the shortage of Rs.92.78 crore  in Seamen’s Provident
 Fund is being looked into by the Group of Ministers. The Group of Ministers has sought certain clarifications
 from the Department of Shipping. The Committee recommends the Department of Shipping to provide the
 requisite information to Group of Ministers to enable them to take an early decision. The Committee would like
 to be apprised of the action taken in this regard.

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/114.htm[28-08-2018 13:24:01]
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
47.   The matter has been referred to a Group of Ministers which has already held two meetings with the last meeting
 being held on 8.8.2006. A final Government decision is expected to be taken shortly.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION OF THE COMMITTEE
48.   The Committee notes with dismay that the Government had not yet taken a final decision in the matter of
 recouping the shortage of Rs.92.78 crore  in Seamen’s’ Provident Fund so far. The Committee urges upon the
 Government that the hard earned money of Seamen’s which was being pilferaged in the scam because of faulty
 Government policy should be recouped in the fund by releasing one time grant of Rs.92.78 crore in the Seamen’s
 Provident Fund so that the hardships being faced by the Seamen’s could be eased to some extent.
INDIAN INSTITUTE OF MARITIME STUDIES
(Recommendation at Para 55 and 56)
49.   The Committee feels that the university once created will not only augment the training facilities but also
 provide boost to the quality education in the field of Marine Training. The Committee notes that the draft
 Cabinet Note on the formation of Indian Maritime University has been circulated for inter-Ministerial
 consideration and after their comments, the proposal will be sent for consideration of the Cabinet. The
 Committee expects that the Cabinet will soon take a decision on the formation of the Maritime  University in the
 country to facilitate the Department of Shipping to introduce a Bill in the Parliament.
50.   The Committee, however, expresses its concern over the delay for establishment of Indian Maritime
 University. The Committee recommends the Department of Shipping to take steps to establish the Maritime
 University under Central Act in a time bound manner and adequate provisions for creation of pension fund and
 finalization of terms and conditions for the absorption of employees of Indian Institute of Maritime Studies
 should also be made.
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
51.   The Cabinet Note was sent for consideration of Cabinet on 24.6.2006. However, Cabinet Sectt. has returned the
 proposal to get the Bill vetted by Ministry of Law and also to obtain the recommendations of Expenditure Finance
 Committee, which are being attended to. Ministry of Law has prepared a draft IMU Bill and sought comments of this
 Department as to whether it meets our requirement. It is being examined. Accordingly the DPR and EFC Note have
 been circulated on 14.8.2006 to seek comments of appraising agencies. Further the EFC meeting was held on 27.10.06,
 wherein the project has been appraised and in principle approval has been recommended. The IMU bill will also be
 placed before the Cabinet shortly.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION OF THE COMMITTEE
52.   The Committee notes that the draft Indian Maritime University Bill has been prepared and is being
 examined in the Department of Shipping. The Committee further notes that the IMU Bill alongwith the
 recommendations of the Expenditure Finance Committee will be placed before the Cabinet shortly for
 consideration. The Committee therefore, urges upon the Government to take an early decision on the formation
 of the Indian Maritime University under the Central Act in consultation with all stakeholders.
CENTRAL INLAND WATER TRANSPORT CORPORATION
(Recommendation at Para 60)
53.   The Committee expresses its displeasure over the manner in which the matter of CIWTC is being handled
 by the Government. The Committee feels that CIWTC can play an important role in development of the Inland
 Water Transport. The Committee observes that although substantial investment has been made for the
 infrastructure development in Inland Water Transport Sector but, still it is not a viable option and therefore,
 participation of private sector in utilization of the infrastructure is insignificant. The situation demands the
 bigger role of CIWTC as a lone-operator in the longer stretch of waterways. The Committee desires that till
 such time the infrastructure of IWT be fully ready for operation, the CIWTC with its existing infrastructure,
 capacity and manpower may be allowed to function for bridging the gap of development of IWT sector.
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
54.   The decision of the Government to disinvest CIWTC (minus RBD) is not likely to affect the role/activities of
 CIWTC. The disinvestment will result in change of shareholding pattern and in the nomenclature of the Corporation.
 The activities of transportation of cargo is likely to continue to be carried out by utilizing the existing fleet of vessels of
 the corporation. Hence, the Inland Water Transport activities are not likely to be affected by the disinvestment.

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/114.htm[28-08-2018 13:24:01]
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION OF THE COMMITTEE
55.   The Committee does not see any merit in the decision of the Government for disinvestment of Central
 Inland Water Transport Corporation. The Committee is of the view that Inland Water Transport Sector cannot
 survive without Government investment in the infrastructure and CIWTC has to play the role of catalyst for
 that sector. The Committee recommends the Government to reconsider the decision for disinvestment of the
 Central Inland Water Transport Corporation for want of exploiting opportunity in the IWT Sector in the
 Country. The Committee further recommends that CIWTC be either merged with Kolkata Port Trust or be
 taken over by IWTA in order to further augment the infrastructure in the eastern and north eastern regions.
INLAND WATER TRANSPORT
(Recommendation at Para 73)
56.   The committee observes that the Government is giving step-motherly treatment to the Inland Water
 Transport Sector and this approach is reflected in the pattern of budgeting as well as utilization of funds in the
 IWT Sector. The Committee is dismayed to note that an outlay of Rs. 150.00 cr was allocated in BE 2005-06 for
 the IWT sector but it was reduced to Rs. 101.25 cr at RE stage and an expenditure of Rs. 47.87 cr was made only
 upto Feb. 2006. The Committee notes that Inland Water Transport is one of the oldest, economically,
 environmentally sustainable mode of transport but the potential of Inland Water Transport remains largely
 unexploited due to the detrimental policies of the Government. The Committee observes that although the
 Department of Shipping is committed to step up the share of IWT in the country’s total trade still this sector
 remains under developed at present for want of requisite infrastructure and therefore, is not viable for
 commercial operations. The Committee feels that inadequate policy support, interest and investments are some
 of the factors which are aggravating the problems of the Inland Water Transport and this sector is loosing a
 competitive edge with other modal mix in the country. The Committee is of the view that growth of the Inland
 Water Transport sector will entirely depend upon the quantum of investments, made through public-private
 partnership and a multi-dimensional approach for creating the required infrastructure primarily through
 Government support. The Committee, therefore, recommends the Department of Shipping to provide some
 institutional framework for creating a vibrant Inland Water Transport sector in the country and IWT should be
 included under the National Maritime Development Programme for augmentation of IWT fleet, creating of
 inter-modal linkages and up gradation of cargo handling technologies etc.
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
57.   The budget provision and expenditure on IWT sector has been meagre  as compared to rail and road. Till Eighth
 five year plan the expenditure was insignificant and it started gaining importance from Ninth Plan as is evident from the
 details given below:-
(Rs. in crore)
 IWT Sector* Road Sector* Railways**
 Outlay Exp. Outlay Outlay
    (including road transport)
First Five Year Plan (1951-56) - 0.33 147 267
Second Five Year Plan (1956-61) 1.43 0.72 263 900
Third Five Year Plan (1961-66) 7.60 2.52 297 890
Annual Plans (1966 to 69) 5.53 5.39 N.A N.A
Fourth Five Year Plan (1969-74) 9.00 6.74 963 1050
Fifth Five Year Plan (1974-79) 24.92 11.94 1814 2202
Annual Plan (1979-80) 9.57 2.14 N.A N.A
Sixth Five Year Plan (1980-85) 45.00 39.05 4635 5100
Seventh Five Year Plan (1985-90) 155.00 131.85 7190 12334
Annual Plans (1990-92) 107.00 24.75 N.A N.A
Eighth Five Year Plan (1992-97) 240.00 63.94 16952 27202
Ninth Five Year Plan (1997-2002) 292.60 225.26 N.A 49590
Tenth Five Year Plan (2002-05) 903.00 254.62 59700 60600
(First three years) BE for 2005-06 150.00 N.A N.A N.A
BE for 2006-07 150.00 N.A N.A N.A

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/114.htm[28-08-2018 13:24:01]
*SOURCE:   Statistics of Inland Water Transport 2003-04, published by Transport Research Wing, Ministry of Shipping, Road Transport and
 Highways.
**SOURCE: NCAER Reports on Study on Economic Gains of Cargo Movement through IWT mode in National Waterways No. 1 and 2. (Feb.,
 2006).
58.   Although IWAI has not been able to uitlise  all the budget allocated to it, the utilization has increased substantially.
 While IWAI expenditure was only Rs. 35 crores in eighth Plan, it has increased to about Rs. 151 crores in Ninth plan
 and to about 275 crores in the first four years of Tenth Plan.
59.   For 2006-07 there is an allocation of Rs. 150 crores for IWAI. IWAI has prepared detailed action plan for making
 three national waterways fully functional by March, 08 under which an investment of about Rs. 630 crores is estimated.
 Specific projects have been identified and IWAI is hopeful that the budget allocation would be fully utilized. The
 Department of Shipping has assured IWAI availability of fund will not be a constraint and more funds can be allocated
 based on need.
60.   It is also expected that after the three National waterways are made fully functional, commercial viability of IWT
 operations on these waterways will improve and then private sector will come forward to invest in ownership and
 operation of inland vessels and later on in development of infrastructure as well.
61.   Steps for encouraging private investment in IWT sector have nevertheless been initiated. Under these initiatives,
 three projects for construction of floating terminals for transportation of fly ash for Bangladesh  from Bandel, Budge-
Budge and Kolaghat in West Bengal have already been received from the prospective promoters. IWAI has also
 received bids from private sector for ownership and operation of cargo vessels on NW-1and 2 for identified O-D pairs
 of Kolkata-Mongla, Dhubri-Kolkata, Pandu-Kolkata and Dibrugarh-Kolkata. These are in process of approval from the
 Competent Authority.
62.   As far as institutional frame work is concerned, the-4WAI has already awarded a consultancy to National
 Productivity Council (NPC) for developing a better institutional frame work for development of IWT sector. Report
 from the National Productivity Council is expected to be submitted by Oct. 06. Government will be accordingly
 requested to take suitable action to strengthen IWAI for ensuring rapid development of the sector.
63.   As far as National Maritime Development Programme (NMDP) is concerned the development of inland water
 transport is already included as an important part of this programme under which projects related to IWT at an
 estimated cost of Rs. 10,500 crores have been proposed.
64.   The Hon’ble Prime Minister has also identified development of IWT as a thrust area under which it is envisaged to
 encourage gradual shift of domestic cargo from the rail and road modes to IWT, increasing its share from the present
 level of less than 1 per cent to atleast 2 per cent. Accordingly, IWAI has made following priorities for development of
 IWT. sector in the country:—
            (i)      Make three National Waterways fully functional
            (ii)      Promote cargo transportation by IWT mode - Modal shift of existing cargo and attracting new cargo.
            (iii)     Enable development of IWT fleet under private ownership.
            (iv)     Involve private sector in development, operation and management of IWT infrastructure.
            (v)     A Policy package for IWT Sector - Funds, Taxation, Incentives, positive discrimination.
            (vi)     Declaration and development of three new National Waterways.
            (vii)    Encourage States to develop their potential waterways through Centrally Sponsored Scheme (CSS).
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION OF THE COMMITTEE
65.   The Committee notes that Government have decided to develop the existing three National Waterways fully
 functional by March, 2008 with an estimated investment of about Rs.630 crore . The Committee also notes that
 the Department of Shipping has adopted several measures for encouraging private investment and developing
 institutional framework for IWT Sector in the country and Development of IWT has already been included
 under the National Maritime Development Programme. The Committee expects that after the three National
 waterways are made fully functional, commercial viability of IWT operations on these waterways will improve
 and then private sector will come forward to invest in ownership and operation of inland vessels and later on in
 development of infrastructure as well for the overall development and viability of this sector.

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/114.htm[28-08-2018 13:24:01]
OBSERVATIONS/CONCLUSIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS — AT A GLANCE
        The Committee desires that final replies in respect of the recommendations, which have been categorized as
 interim replies by the Committee should be furnished to it at the earliest.                                (Para 3)
PORT SECTOR
        The Committee notes that there has been a time lag between formulation process for different schemes
 under annual plan and implementation period, due to which, there was a mismatch between the allocation and
 the actual expenditure. The Committee further notes that in order to fill the gap, the Port Trusts have been
 advised to be realistic in approach while proposing the annual plan outlay and only token provision are to be
 kept for projects for which administrative approval is yet to be accorded by the Competent Authority. The
 Department of Shipping has also put into place a monitoring mechanism for regular review of plan expenditure
 on monthly and quarterly basis. The Committee however, does not agree with the contention of the Department
 of Shipping that there is no major shortfall in the utilization of Gross Budgetary Support (BE) during 2005-06,
 and the reasons put forth by the Department are not such which can not be anticipated in advance. The
 Committee therefore, recommends the Department of Shipping to ensure a more realistic budget and strict
 implementation and monitoring so as to speed up the pace of expenditure during the next fiscal year.                 
 (Para 12)
CAPACITY ENHANCEMENT IN MAJOR PORTS
        The Committee notes that the Department of Shipping has been taking measures for enhancing capacity of
 major ports due to which the aggregate cargo handling capacity at major ports as on March 31, 2006 was 456.20
 Mt. and the major ports handled traffic of 423.42 Mt. as against traffic target of 465.70 Mt. The Committee also
 notes that the Department of Shipping has been planning to augment the aggregate capacity of the major ports
 to 800.41MTPA by  2011-12 under the National Maritime Development Programme  with the total estimated
 investment of Rs.55, 830.73 crore  under the scheme out of which Rs.34,505.34 crore has been envisaged through
 private sector investment including FDI. The Committee recommends the Department to identify the host of
 activities in the major ports for capacity enhancement and remove the procedural hurdles, if any, by adhering to
 a coordinated policy framework and approach in their future plan.                                                        
                                                                                                                                                       (Para 15)
PORT LABOUR REFORMS
        The Committee notes that the Department of Shipping has been taking adequate care to safeguard the
 interest of the labour engaged in Port Sector by making institutional arrangements in major ports for
 addressing the concerns of the port labour. The Committee further notes that the guidelines on private sector
 participation in port projects provides that while handing over the existing facilities to the private operator, the
 labour, which has necessarily to be taken over by the private operator, should be included in the tender
 document. However, in respect of BOT projects, which are developed by private operator, there obviously
 cannot be any pre-condition like that because the project is being developed by the operator in green field site.
 The Committee while agreeing to the replies of the Department of Shipping, recommends that Government
 should explore the possibility of having some effective mechanism in place so as to ensure that there is no
 exploitation of labour engaged in the BOT projects.                                                                                                     
 (Para 18)
PORT CONNECTIVITY
        The Committee notes that the Department of Shipping has taken steps for providing adequate connectivity
 to the port and augmentation of port connectivity infrastructure on continuous basis depending upon the traffic
 requirement The Committee further notes that the Committee of Secretaries (COS) has been set up to review
 the rail-road connectivity in major ports and has submitted its report to the Government. The Committee
 recommends that the Department of Shipping should take action for implementation of the recommendations of
 Committee of Secretaries, which would definitely improve the existing rail-road connectivity of all major
 ports.        (Para 21)
CONTAINERIZATION IN MAJOR PORTS
        The Committee notes that Jawaharlal Nehru Port on the west coast with the northern and north-western
 regions of the country and Chennai Port on the east coast with the southern and south-east regions of the
 country as their main hinterland are operating as regional hub ports. The forthcoming Valarpadam Port must
 be developed as a regional hub port as well. The Committee also notes that during 2005-06, about 66 per cent of
 container cargo handled in the major ports including Jawaharlal Nehru Port, Chennai Port and Tuticorin Port
 were direct to destination cargoes without involving transshipment in any port abroad. The Committee

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/114.htm[28-08-2018 13:24:01]
 appreciates the Department of Shipping for taking measures for augmenting the capacities for handling
 containers in the major ports for the growth of sea-borne overseas trade. The Committee expects that
 Development of regional hub ports and the International Container Transshipment Terminals and measures
 taken by the Government to develop container handling facilities in other major ports coupled with development
 of container handling facilities at some non-major ports will result in decline of transshipment of Indian cargo at
 ports outside India and bring economic development.                                                               (Para 30)
SETHUSAMUDRAM SHIP CHANNEL PROJECT
        The Committee notes that while formulating the Sethusamudram Ship Channel Project adequate care has
 been taken by the Department of Shipping to ensure that adverse impact on environment is minimal. An
 elaborate Environment Management Plan has been drawn up to safeguard the Bio-diversity of the region during
 project implementation and operation period. The Committee also notes that a monitoring committee has been
 set up to assess the impact of dredging work on environment including assessment of marine water quality,
 sediment quality, ambient air quality and the noise level and other protests that have arisen with regard to the
 project. The Committee recommends that the measures being observed by the Department of Shipping should
 adequately address the environment concerns as a part of the implementation of the Project and Committee
 should be apprised of net result achieved therefrom.                                                                (Para 35)
NATIONAL MARITIME DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMME
        The Committee notes that the Department of Shipping is in agreement with the need for implementation of
 the National Maritime Development Programme  activities besides developing and adding to the infrastructure
 for capacity building both in terms of human resources, technology up-gradation as well as research and
 development. The Committee also notes that there already exist institutional arrangements within the
 Department of Shipping for implementation of different projects identified under National Maritime
 Programme and desires not to pursue the recommendation further.                                                             (Para 39)
EXTENDING TONNAGE TAX BENEFIT TO INLAND VESSELS AND COASTAL VESSELS
        The Committee notes that the Department of Shipping is taking up the matter with the Ministry of Finance
 for extending tonnage tax benefits to the vessels registered under Inland Vessels Act and Coasting Vessel Act.
 The Committee is unable to comprehend the reasons for delay in extending the benefits of tonnage tax to the
 vessels registered under Inland Vessels Act and Coasting Vessel Act. The Committee feels that the Government
 would not be able to develop the inland water transport and coastal vessel transport in the country, unless the
 benefit of tonnage tax and Section 33 AC of Income Tax Act were not granted to these vessels. In this regard, the
 Committee reiterates its earlier recommendations contained in 105th Report of the Committee, which is
 reproduced below:
“The Committee, therefore, recommends the Department of Shipping to vigorously pursue the matter
 with the Ministry of Finance for inclusion of the Vessels registered under Inland Vesselsand Coastal
 Vessels Acts under the tonnage tax regime so as to unfold the infrastructure potential of IWT sector
 with the growth of the Indian economy.”
                                                                                                                                        (Para 42)
CALCUTTA DOCK LABOUR BOARD
        The Committee is constrained to note that the Government is dilly-dallying the matter which has aggravated
 the problem of employees of Calcutta Dock Labour Board in getting the pension and pensionary benefits. The
 Committee feels that every delay in release of grant to Calcutta Dock Labour Board for payment of unpaid
 arrears and meeting the future superannuation liabilities of employees will burden the Government heavily, if
 not tackled now. The Committee is of the strong view that injustice is being meted to the employees of Calcutta
 Dock Labour Board in the matter of payment of the pension and pensionary dues on time after retirement and
 recommends that the Government should come out with one time concrete proposal which would adequately
 address the total revenue requirement of employees of Calcutta Dock Labour Board instead of doing it in a
 piecemeal manner.                                                                                                                       (Para 45)
MISAPPROPRIATION OF SEAMEN’S PROVIDENT FUND
        The Committee notes with dismay that the Government had not yet taken a final decision in the matter of
 recouping the shortage of Rs.92.78 crore  in Seamen’s Provident Fund so far. The Committee urges upon the
 Government that the hard earned money of Seamen’s which was being pilferaged in the scam because of faulty
 Government policy should be recouped in the fund by releasing one time grant of Rs.92.78 crore in the Seamen’s
 Provident Fund so that the hardships being faced by the Seamen’s could be eased to some extent.   
                                                                                                                                                       (Para 48)
INDIAN INSTITUTE OF MARITIME STUDIES

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/114.htm[28-08-2018 13:24:01]
        The Committee notes that the draft Indian Maritime University Bill has been prepared and is being
 examined in the Department of Shipping. The Committee further notes that the IMU Bill alongwith the
 recommendations of the Expenditure Finance Committee will be placed before the Cabinet shortly for
 consideration. The Committee therefore, urges upon the Government to take an early decision on the formation
 of the Indian Maritime University under the Central Act in consultation with all stakeholders.          
                                                                                                                                                       (Para 52)
CENTRAL INLAND WATER TRANSPORT CORPORATION
        The Committee does not see any merit in the decision of the Government for disinvestment of Central
 Inland Water Transport Corporation. The Committee is of the view that Inland Water Transport Sector cannot
 survive without Government investment in the infrastructure and CIWTC has to play the role of catalyst for
 that sector. The Committee recommends the Government to reconsider the decision for disinvestment of the
 Central Inland Water Transport Corporation for want of exploiting opportunity in the IWT Sector in the
 Country. The Committee further recommends that CIWTC be either merged with Kolkata Port Trust or be
 taken over by IWTA in order to further augment the infrastructure in the eastern and north eastern regions.
 (Para 55)
INLAND WATER TRANSPORT
        The Committee notes that Government have decided to develop the existing three National Waterways fully
 functional by March 2008 with an estimated investment of about Rs.630 crore . The Committee also notes that
 the Department of Shipping has adopted several measures for encouraging private investment and developing
 institutional framework for IWT Sector in the country and Development of IWT has already been included
 under the National Maritime Development Programme. The Committee expects that after the three National
 waterways are made fully functional, commercial viability of IWT operations on these waterways will improve
 and then private sector will come forward to invest in ownership and operation of inland vessels and later on in
 development of infrastructure as well for the overall development and viability of this sector.                
                                                                                                                                                     (Para 65)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/114.htm[28-08-2018 13:24:01]
 
 
 
 
 
XIV
FOURTEENTH MEETING
        The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Tuesday, the 16th April, 2007 in Committee Room ‘A’, Ground Floor,
 Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
        MEMBERS PRESENT
   1.  Shri Sitaram Yechury — Chairman
        RAJYA SABHA
   2.  Prof. Ram Deo Bhandary
   3.  Shri S. S. Chandran
   4.  Shri Vedprakash P. Goyal
   5.  Shri M.V. Mysura Reddy
   6.  Shri Shatrughan Sinha
        LOK SABHA
   7.  Shri Anandrao Vithoba Adsul
   8.  Shri Joachim Baxla
   9.  Shri Sartaj Singh Chhatwal
 10.  Shri N.S. V. Chitthan
 11.  Dr. K. Dhanaraju
 12.  Shri P. Karunakaran
 13.  Dr. P.P. Koya
 14.  Shri Samik Lahiri
 15.  Shri Alok Kumar Mehta
 16.  Shri Dushyant Singh
 17.  Shri Suraj Singh
 18.  Shri Prahlad Joshi
        SECRETARIAT
        Shri Shamsher Singh, Joint Secretary
        Shrimati Agnes Momin George, Director
        Shri Jagdish Kumar, Under Secretary
        Shrimati Subhashree Panigrahi, Committee Officer
2.     The Committee considered the following six draft Reports:
             (i)     Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations of the Committee contained in
 its One Hundred and Second Report on Demands for Grants (2006-07) of Department of Road Transport
 and Highways;
             (ii)    Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations of the Committee contained in
 its One Hundred and Third Report on Demands for Grants (2006-07) of Ministry of Culture;
             (iii)   Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations of the Committee contained in
 its One Hundred and Fourth Report on Demands for Grants (2006-07) of Ministry of Tourism;
             (iv)   Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations of the Committee contained in
 its One Hundred and Fifth Report on Demands for Grants (2006-07) of Department of Shipping; and
             (v)    Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations of the Committee contained in
 its One Hundred and Sixth Report on Demands for Grants (2006-07) of Ministry of Civil Aviation.
        After some discussion the Committee adopted all the six Reports with minor modifications. The Committee also
 authorized the Chairman to nominate the Members for presentation of the said report to the Parliament during the
 current session.

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/114.htm[28-08-2018 13:24:01]
3.     The Committee then adjourned at 4.15 P.M. to meet again on 17th April, 2007 at 3.00 P.M.