 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
December, 2015/ Agrahayana, 1937 (Saka) 
 
REPORT NO.  
227 
 
TWO HUNDRED TWENTY SEVENTH REPORT  
Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in 
its Two Hundred and Twentieth Report on the  
Demands for Grants (2015-16) of Ministry of Road Transport 
& Highways 
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 02.12.2015) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 02.12.2015) 
 

  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
E-mail:rsc-tt@sansad.nic.in 
Website:http://rajyasabha.nic.in 
 
 
 
 
 

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT,  
TOURISM AND CULTURE 
 
 
 
 
TWO HUNDRED TWENTY SEVENTH REPORT  
ON 
Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained 
in its Two Hundred and Twentieth Report on the  
Demands for Grants (2015-16) of Ministry of Road Transport 
& Highways 
 
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 02.12.2015) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 02.12.2015) 
 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
December, 2015/ Agrahayana, 1937 (Saka)  

C O N T E N T S 
 
       P A G E S  
 
1.  COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE      (i) 
2. INTRODUCTION        (ii) 
3. ACRONYMS                
4. REPORT                                 1-              
5. OBSERVATIONS/CONCLUSIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS AT A GL ANCE   
 6. ANNEXURE 
7. *MINUTES          
        
        
      
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
*To be appended at printing stage. 
 

 
COMPOSITION OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE 
(2015-2016) 
 
1. Dr. Kanwar Deep Singh  - Chairman 
 
Rajya Sabha 
RAJYA SABHA 
1. Shri Ritabrata Banerjee 
2. Dr. K. Chiranjeevi 
3. Shri Narendra Kumar Kashyap 
4. Shri Avinash Rai Khanna 
5. Dr. Prabhakar Kore 
6. Shri Kiranmay Nanda 
7. Kumari Selja 
8. Shri Rajeev Shukla 
9. Vacant 
LOK SABHA  
10. Shri Ram Charitra Nishad 
11. Shri Vinod Chavda 
12. Shri Rajeshbhai Naranbhai Chudasama 
13. Km. Arpita Ghosh 
14. Shri Rahul Kaswan 
15. Shri P. Kumar 
16. Faizal P.P. Mohammed 
17. Yogi Aditya Nath 
18. Shri  Kristappa Nimmala 
19. Shri Rajesh Pandey 
20. Shri Rajesh Ranjan 
21. Shri P. Srinivasa Reddy  
22. Shri Ram Kumar Sharma 
23. Shri Prathap Simha 
24. Shri Dushyant Singh  
25. Shri Kunwar Haribansh Singh 
26. Shri Rakesh Singh 
27. Shri Shatrughan Sinha 
28. Shri Dasrath Tirkey 
29. Shri Manoj Tiwari 
30. Shri K.C. Venugopal 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 Shri J.G. Negi, Joint Secretary 
 Shri Swarabji B., Joint Director 
Smt. Catherine John L., Assistant Director 
Shri T. Kennedy Jesudossan, Committee Officer 
 Shri P.P. Raumon, Committee Officer 
 
(i) 

INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairman, Department-related Parliamentary S tanding Committee 
on Transport, Tourism and Culture, having been auth orised by the Committee to 
present on its behalf, do hereby present this Two H undred and Twenty Seventh 
Report on “Action Taken Replies by the Ministry of Road Transport & Highways on 
the observations/recommendations as contained in it s Two Hundred and Twentieth 
Report on Demands for Grants (2015-16) of the Minis try of Road Transport & 
Highways”. 
2.  The Two Hundred and Twentieth Report  of the Department-related 
Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport, Tour ism and Culture was presented 
on the 28 
th  April, 2015 to the Parliament. 
3.  The Action Taken Replies on the recommendations  of the Committee contained 
in its Two Hundred and Twentieth Report was receive d from the Ministry of Road 
Transport & Highways on 19th August, 2015. 
4. The Committee considered and adopted the Report in its meeting held on the 
16 
th  November, 2015.   
 
 
KANWAR DEEP SINGH  
NEW DELHI;                      Chairman,  
November, 16,  2015                                  Department-related  Parliamentary Standing  
Kartika 25, 1937 (Saka)               Committee on  Transport, Touri sm and Culture. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(ii) 

ACRONYMS  
 
ABS Additional Budgetary Support 
ADB Asian Development Bank 
B.E. Budget Estimates 
BoT Build-operate-Transfer 
BRDB Border Roads Development Board 
BRO Border Roads Organization  
CCI Cabinet Committee on Infrastructure 
CMVR Central Motor Vehicles Rules 
CoI Committee on Infrastructure  
CoS Committee of Secretaries 
CRF Central Road Fund 
DBFOT Design Build Finance Operate and Transfer 
DPR Detailed Project Report 
DTO District Transport Office  
EAP Externally Aided Projects 
EI & ISC Economic Importance and Inter-State Connectivity 
EPC Engineering, Procurement and Construction 
ETC Electronic Toll Collection 
FDR Fixed Deposit Receipt 
GBS Gross Budgetay Support 
GDP Gross Domestic Product 
GQ Golden Quadrilateral 
HSD High Speed Diesel 
I & C Inspection and Certification 
ICTT International Container Transshipment Terminal 
IEBR Internal and Extra Budgetary Resources  
IDTR Institute of Driving Training and Research 
IRR Internal Rate of Return 
IWT Inland Water Transport 
JBIC Japan Bank for International Cooperation 
LWE Left Wing Extremism 
MCA Model Concession Agreement 
MoRT&H Ministry of Road Transport and Highways 
MR Maintenance and Repair 
NHs National highways 
NHAI National Highways Authority of India 
NHARSS National Highways Accident Relief Service Scheme 
NH(O) National Highways (Original) 
NHDP National Highways Development Programme 
NSEW North-South East-West Corridors  
(iii) 

PBFF Permanent Bridges Fee Fund 
PPP Public-Private Partnership 
PUC Pollution Under Control 
PWD Public Works Department 
RBI Reserve Bank of India 
RDTC Regional Driving Training Centre 
R.E. Revised Estimates 
RFID Radio Frequency Identification  
RT&H Road Transport and Highways 
RTO Regional Transport Office 
SARDP-
NE 
Special Accelerated  Road Development Programme (North-East) 
SLAU Special Land Acquisition Units 
SRTC State Road Transport Corporations 
SSA State Support Agreements 
TRW Transport Research Wing 
TSP Tribal Sub Plan 
UTs Union Territories 
VGF Viability Gap Funding 
WB World Bank 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iv) 
 
 
 
 
 

REPORT  
The Report of the Committee deals with the Action T aken by the Ministry of Road Transport 
and Highways on the observations/recommendations as  contained in its Two Hundred and Twentieth 
Report on Demands for Grants 2015-16 of the Road Transport and Highways which was presented to both 
the Houses of Parliament on 28 th  April, 2015. 
2.  Action Taken Replies were received from the Min istry in respect of all the 
observations/recommendations contained in the Report have been categorized as follows:– 
(i) Recommendations/observations that have been accepted by the Government: 
Paragraph Nos. 8,18,49,52,96,110,157        
(ii)  Recommendations/Observations which the Commit tee does not desire to pursue in view of the 
Government replies:– 
Paragraph Nos.19,31,43,47,48,50,53,54,55,56,61,65,7 0,79,84,89,107,116,121,133,136,139,141,142, 143, 
      
(iii) Recommendations/observations in respect of which replies of the Government have not been accepted 
by the Committee: 
       
(iv) Recommendations/observations in respect of which final replies of the Government are still awaited. 
      
3. The Committee desires that final replies in respect  of those recommendations/observations which 
have been categorized as interim replies by the Committee should be furnished at the earliest. 
4.     On scrutiny of the Action Taken Replies, the  Committee has made Observations on each item of 
Action taken/proposed to be taken by the Ministry. The recommendations of the Committee contained in 
the Two Hundred Twentieth Report, action taken ther eon by the Ministry and 
recommendations/Observations of the Committee on ea ch item of action taken has been given in the 
succeeding paragraphs: 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS   OF THE COMMITTEE 
5.     The Committee finds that the allocations for  the Ministry were reduced at RE stage for its 
programmes and projects as in the past. But while t he Ministry was able to spend 96.82% allocations 
during the year 2014-15, it could spend only 91.25%  during 2013-14. The Committee feels that the 
reduction of allocation of funds for this important  infrastructure sector at RE stage should be avoide d 
particularly when the expenditure percentage has be en very good. The Committee strongly recommends 
that the Ministry should take up this issue with the Ministry of Finance.                    
      (Recommendation at Para 5  of the 220 th  Report) 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
6.     Noted for compliance.  The issue will be tak en up with Ministry of Finance at appropriate time.  
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE 
7.     The Committee notes the reply of the Ministr y and further requests them to apprise the 
response to be received from the Ministry of Finance on this issue to the Committee. 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS   OF THE COMMITTEE 
8.     The reasons submitted by the Ministry for un der-utilization of funds under some 
schemes/programmes are of routine nature. The Commi ttee feels that proper planning, timely monitoring 
and taking preventing steps anticipating the routin e bottlenecks would ensure timely completion of 
schemes/projects and programmes. The Committee desi res that shortcomings with regard to 
implementation of projects may be identified in con sultation with the stakeholders involved in road 
Paragraph Nos. : 51
144,145, 146,147,148,149,150,151,152,153,154,155,156
Paragraph Nos: 5,9,11,20,71,86,90,95,97,103,112,128

projects so that such things are not repeated in fu ture. The Committee hopes that the spending pattern  of 
the Ministry will see an improvement in the coming years. 
 (Para 8  of ibid ) 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
9.     The Observations of the Committee noted for compliance.  However, due emphasis is being given i n 
the quality of project preparation ensuring that th ey reflect ground realities and considering previou s 
experiences.  Further, periodic review meetings are  held at various levels to monitor the progress of 
project, identify bottlenecks and take up necessary  corrective action for expediting progress of proje cts.   
In this regard, consultations are also held with va rious stakeholders during project preparation, 
implementation, and for identification of major bottlenecks resolving them, etc.  
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE 
10.    The Committee notes the reply and hopes that  with the existing co-ordination mechanism and 
consultations with the stakeholders, the Ministry will be able to improve its spending pattern during 
the current fiscal.  
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS   OF THE COMMITTEE 
11.    The Committee finds that the Ministry was no t able to utilize Rs.22.20 crore provided from the 
Central Road Fund for State roads in Delhi for the year 2014-15. Though this fund is non-lapsable, the  
reasons submitted by the Ministry for non-utilizati on due to less number of proposals received from th e 
Delhi Government are not impressive. The Committee hopes that the Ministry should impress upon the 
State Governments in such cases to send their propo sals in time so that the allocated funds could be s pent 
fully. 
 (Para 9 
 of ibid ) 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
12.        All the State Governments have been advi sed to submit their proposal for development of Sta te 
roads under Central Road Fund timely.  
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE 
13.      The Committee notes the reply of the Minis try; but the Committee wants to know further as 
to the reasons why the State Governments fail to send their proposals in time. 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS   OF THE COMMITTEE 
14.      The Committee appreciates the Ministry’s c oncern in this regard. However, the Committee notes  
that the Ministry did not actively pursue the matte r with the Ministry of Finance as could be understo od 
from the reply furnished by the Ministry to the rec ommendations made by the Committee in its 193rd 
Report in this regard. The Committee recommends that the Ministry should pursue the issue of removal of 
ceiling of expenditure for the last quarter with th e Ministry of Finance vigorously. The Committee urg es 
upon the Ministry of Finance to consider the remova l on ceiling of expenditure for road projects durin g 
the last quarter. It will help the Ministry of Road  Transport and Highways to spend the allocation ful ly 
and also to complete the projects in time without cost overrun. 
 (Para 11 
 of ibid ) 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
15.     This Ministry has been consistently taking up the need for relaxation of Scheme-wise restricti on of 
33% of total expenditure for the last quarter and 1 5% in the last month considering the less working 
season for road works in the country due to long du ration of monsoon and snow fall in hilly areas.   

However, matter will be taken up with Ministry of F inance during the last quarter of the financial yea r 
after reviewing the expenditure.  
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE 
16. The Committee feels that unless the ceiling on spending of funds during the last quarter is 
not removed, the Ministry will not be able to spend  much of the allocated funds.  The Committee, 
therefore, reiterates its recommendation that the M inistry should pursue this issue with the 
Ministry of Finance vigorously.  
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS   OF THE COMMITTEE 
17. The Committee is pleasantly surprised to find t hat the Ministry was able to get Rs. 82,697.15 
crore (including IEBR) as against its projected dem and of Rs. 54,692.49 crore (including IEBR) for the  
year 2015-16. The Committee also finds that the GBS  component for the Ministry has seen an increase 
from Rs. 26,288.00 crore in 2014-15 (BE) to Rs. 40, 655.65 crore (BE) in 2015-16 which is a good 
54.65% increase. But this increase, Committee notes  is more apparent than real because the IEBR 
component has been calculated by the Ministry of Finance to be Rs 42,694.50 crore against this Ministry’s 
projection of Rs 20,980 crore. In other words, the financial burden on the NHAI would tend to increase . 
The Committee wishes all the best to NHAI and hopes  that it would be able to mobilize IEBR amount as 
is expected. 
 (Para 18 
 of ibid ) 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
18. Comments of Committee have been noted. 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE 
19. The Committee notes the reply with greater expe ctations. 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS   OF THE COMMITTEE 
20. However, the Committee finds that as against th e projected demand of Rs. 6,004.00 crores, the 
Ministry was able to get Rs. 4,211.56 crore only fo r NH (O) which is a cause of concern. The Committee  
feels that this reduction may result in diversion o f funds from NHAI meant for development of National  
Highways under NHDP to undertake projects under NH (O). The Committee desires that additional funds 
be allocated to the Ministry for projects of NH (O)  at RE stage to avoid diversion of cash flow from 
NHAI. 
 (Para 19 
 of ibid ) 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
21. The additional demand would be projected at RE stage appropriately as per assessed estimated 
requirements.  
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE 
22. The Committee hopes that additional funds will be a llocated for NH (O) projects at RE 
stage.  
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS   OF THE COMMITTEE 
23. The Committee finds that although there has bee n an increase in allocation of funds for Road 
Transport Sector from Rs.200 crore in 2014-15 (BE) to Rs.803.00 crore for 2015-16, major chunk of this  
allocation has been made for ‘Safety for women on p ublic transport’ (Rs.653.00 crores). This would mean 
that Rs.150 crore only is left for the Road Transpo rt Sector. The Committee is constrained to observe that 
the transport sector has not received the required attention during all these years. The Committee fee ls 
concern about Nirbhaya Fund being non-starter till date. It hopes that operationalisation of scheme un der 

‘Nirbhaya Fund’ for security for women and girl chi ld in public road transport in the country would be  
done in a time-bound manner and the funds allocated under this head will be spent judiciously. 
 (Para 20  of ibid ) 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
24. The Scheme-“Security for Women in Public Road Trans port in the country”, envisages setting 
up a National Level Vehicle security & Tracking sys tem and City Command & Control Centre with 
installation of GPS/CCTV/panic buttons in public ro ad transport in the country in 32 cities out of 53 
million plus population cities. This scheme is fina nced from ‘Nirbhaya Fund’ set up by Ministry of 
Finance. Under this scheme, Concept Report, Technol ogy Analysis Report and detailed specification of 
GPS & CCTV devices for setting up of National Level  vehicle Security & Tracking System has been 
finalized and uploaded on MoRTH website. Detailed P roject Report & Request for Proposal document is 
being examined. Now, as per directives from PMO, fu nds may be utilized only after the report from 
Secretary, Department of Electronics and Informatio n Technology on integration of schemes of Ministry 
of Home Affairs, Women and Child Development and this Ministry is received and deliberated upon. 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE 
25. The Committee may be apprised of the further de velopment of the implementation of the 
Scheme -“Security for Women in Public Road Transport in the country”.  
National Highways Authority of India 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS   OF THE COMMITTEE 
26. The Committee hopes that the performance of the  Ministry in achieving the fixed targets under 
various categories will continue in the current fiscal also as in the last year. 
 (Para 31 
 of ibid ) 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
27. All efforts are being made to achieve the set t argets.   
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE 
28. The Committee notes the reply. 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS   OF THE COMMITTEE 
29. The Committee observes that though there is a b etter performance in achieving the target of 
award of works during 2014-15 as compared to 2013-1 4, the performance in completion of projects has 
not seen any remarkable improvement. The Committee hopes that the Ministry will strive hard to achieve  
the targets under NHDP during the current fiscal. 
 (Para 43 
 of ibid ) 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
30. All efforts are being made and various measures  are being taken to achieve the targets.   
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS   OF THE COMMITTEE 
31. The Committee after scrutinizing the informatio n provided by the Ministry expresses its deep 
concern over the functioning of NHAI and the unsati sfactory progress of development of National 
Highways in the country. NHAI was able to spend Rs.  6,208 crore only out of Rs. 23691.8 crore allocate d 
during 2014-15 at RE stage. The Committee is dismay ed to note that when the private players are 
withdrawing from National Highways projects due to non-availability of equity and loan to carry forwar d 
the projects, NHAI was able to spend just 26% of th e allocated fund. The Committee feels that with thi s 
spending trend, NHAI would not be in a position to achieve its targets in the coming years. 
 (Para 47 
 of ibid ) 

REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
32. The factual position is that during 2014-15 NHA I recorded total cash outflow/expenditure of 
amounting to Rs. 23,696.19 crore.   NHAI has used b orrowings amounting to Rs. 2,876.40 crore to bridge  
the gap between resources from the Government and its cash outflows. 
33. As on date, NHAI has 195 projects under executi on. 77 of these are under EPC and 118 under 
BOT. As regards projects being executed under BOT m ode, part of the capital expenditure is met by the 
private sector. As per information compiled the private sector has invested Rs. 17,293.12 crore in highway 
projects during 2014-15. Hence, during 2014-15, the  actual expenditure over seen by NHAI, public as 
well as private is Rs. 40,989.31 crore. 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE 
34. The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry w ith respect to paras 43 & 47 of 220 
th  
Report and hopes that the spending pattern of the NHAI will remain the same during the current 
fiscal also. 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS   OF THE COMMITTEE 
35. The Committee finds that the performance of dev elopment of National Highways under NHDP 
has not seen any remarkable improvement during the last year. Projects under NHDP III to VII are 
progressing at a snail pace and there are no takers  for projects under NHDP VI. The Committee feels th at 
the Ministry should address the bottlenecks causing  the delay at various stages of NHDP which was once  
considered as an ambitious project for providing ro ad connectivity even to the remote places of the 
country. 
 (Para 48 
 of ibid ) 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
36. During the last 3 years, the highways sector is  going through a difficult phase. Public Private 
Partnership (PPP) projects through Build Operate Tr ansfer (BOT) (Toll) mode are not able to attract bi ds. 
Major highway developers in the country which are l imited in number have capacity constraints includin g 
over-leveraged financials due to excessive exposure  to infrastructure projects including highways. 
Another inherent issue for the sector is lack of av ailability of debt products aligned with revenue st ream 
profile of highway projects resulting in financial stress in projects during the initial construction years. In 
addition, there have been issues like some banks re aching the ceiling as per sectoral exposure norms. 
Quite a few projects have got stalled in the construction stage due to these reasons. These are discouraging 
prospective bidders to participate in new project bids.  
37. In order to revive the Highways Sector and to e xpedite the implementation of road projects, this 
Ministry has taken following steps: 
(a) With the constant interaction with Ministry of Environment, Forests and Climate Change, a number o f 
specific bottlenecks for speedy execution of National Highways Projects have been resolved.  
(b) Three meetings of the Group of Infrastructure h eaded by Hon’ble Minister (RT&H,S) have 
been held and a number of inter-Ministerial issues have been resolved. 
(c)  Government on 13.05.2015 has approved the poli cy which permits 100 % equity divestment 
after two years of construction completion for all BOT projects irrespective of year of award. This wo uld 
facilitate infusion of liquidity in the sector by e nabling existing developers to release their locked -in 
equity in completed projects. Out of the 115 Conces sion Agreements signed up to 30 
th  September, 2009 
on BOT (Toll) and BOT (Annuity), 80 such projects h ave been completed, and the locked in equity of 
such completed projects works out to approximately Rs.4500 crores. This amount of equity by itself 
would be able to support construction of an estimat ed length of around 1500 kms of projects on PPP 
mode. 

(d) Government on 13.05.2015 has also approved the policy for one time fund infusion to revive 
and physically complete languishing BOT projects. F or any languishing highway project in BOT (Toll) 
mode that has achieved at least 50% physical comple tion and it is also established that infusion of 
moderate funding can quickly bring this project to completion, NHAI will provide financial assistance to 
such a project from the overall budget corpus of NH AI on loan basis for a short tenure and with a pre-
determined return.  This assistance (say bridge fun d) will be provided on a loan basis at Bank Rate +2 % 
drawing a parallel with the provisions of the Model  Concession Agreement. This proposal would help 
physical completion of languishing projects bringin g relief thereby, to the citizens /highway users in  the 
area. 
(e)  This Ministry has also adopted a new Hybrid An nuity model for implementation of highway 
projects in order to encourage private sector parti cipation through adequate incentives. The objective  is to 
maximize the quantum of implemented highway project s within available financial resources of the 
Government. As per this model, 40% the Project Cost  is to be provided by the Government as 
‘Construction Support’ to the private developer dur ing the construction period and the balance 60% as 
annuity payments over  the concession period along with interest on outstanding amount to the 
concessionaire. There is separate provision for O&M  payments by the Government to the concessionaire. 
The private party does not have to bear the traffic  risk. All the payments have been inflation indexed  by a 
Price Multiple Index which is a weighted average of WPI and CPI (IW) on 70:30 bases. This mitigates the 
inflation risk for the developer.  
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE 
38. The Committee notes that the Government has tak en various steps to rejuvenate the road 
construction activities to achieve the full potenti al. The Committee hopes that the above steps taken 
to expedite the highways projects will yield the desired results in the years to come. 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS   OF THE COMMITTEE 
39. The Committee finds that due to difficulties fa ced in the award and implementation of project 
stretches, the Government had to resort to Engineer ing, Procurement and Construction (EPC) mode also 
for the construction of National Highways apart fro m Public Private Partnership (PPP) mode. The 
Committee notes that out of 7980 Km length of Natio nal Highways awarded during the last year, 700 km 
had gone on PPP mode and the rest were Government-f unded EPC projects. The Committee hopes that 
NHAI will complete all the ongoing projects within the scheduled time for better National Highways 
connectivity across the length and breadth of the c ountry. The Ministry is requested to submit the Whi te 
Paper prepared on the performance of PPP in road projects for Committee’s consideration. 
 (Para 49 
 of ibid ) 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
40. All efforts are being made by NHAI to complete all its ongoing road infrastructure projects in 
time.  As desired by the Committee, a copy of the “ White Paper on NHAI” is placed at Annexure for its 
consideration. 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE 
41. The Committee notes the reply.   
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS   OF THE COMMITTEE 
42. The Committee was informed about the delay in c ompletion of developmental works on NH 1 
and the development of NH 73, NH 73 A and NH 65. Th e issue of development of NH 12 and NH76 was 
also brought before the Committee. Poor condition o f NH 29-Varanasi-Ghazipur-Gorakhpur, NH24B Rae 
Bareli-Allahabad, NH232-Tanda-Lalganj-Fatehpur-Band a, NH 91-Aligarh- Kanpur, NH 87-Rampur-
Rudrapur, NH 24- Bareilly-Sitapur was raised during  the meeting. The Committee would also like to 

know the reasons for the inordinate delay in develo ping Kanpur-Lucknow National Highway. Non 
completion of the small stretch between Phulbari and Salsalabari in Siliguri was also brought to the n otice 
of the Committee. Four laning of NH-17 and NH-47 pa ssing through Kerala was also raised during the 
deliberations of the Committee. The Committee was a lso informed about the delay in the development of 
NH 65 in Churu in Rajasthan and in the commencement of development works in NH 709. 
 (Para 50   of ibid ) 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
43. There have been delays in some of the projects under NHDP due to various reasons like 
problems in Land Acquisition,  Utility shifting, No n availability of Soil/Aggregates, Poor performance  of 
contractors, Environment/ Forest/Wildlife Clearance , ROB&RUB issue with Railways, Public agitation 
for additional facilities,  Arbitration/contractual  disputes with contractors etc.  To speed up timely  
execution of national highway projects and provide the much needed momentum to the road sector, 
Government has recently taken several corrective st eps. These include streamlining the process of land  
acquisition and other statutory clearances, permitt ing securitizing road project cash flows, revamping  the 
dispute resolution mechanism and improving coordination with other ministries, etc. 
44. Regarding poor condition of NH 29 Varanasi-Ghaz ipur-Gorakhpur, 24B, Raebareli-Allahabad, 
NH 232 Tanda-Lalganj-Fatehpur-Banda, NH 91 Aligarh- Kanpur, NH 87 Rampur-Rudrapur, NH 24 
Bareilly-Sitapur , the status of stretches pertaining to NHAI is as under: 
Sl. 
No. 
NH Section / Length Status 
 
Condition of Road/ Remarks 
1 29 Varanasi-Mau-
Gorakhpur 
(206 km) 
The stretch is 
proposed for 4-
laning. 
Varanasi-Gorakhpur section of NH-29, vide 
Gazette Notification No. S.O. 671 (E) dated 
05.03.2014 has been re-entrusted to State 
Government. However, State Government is 
not ready to take over this stretch. Therefore, 
NHAI has to maintain the stretch. 
NH-29 was transferred from the State PWD 
to NHAI in Sept, 2010. The condition of 
existing 2-lane highway was extremely poor 
when it was taken over from State PWD. The 
highway was badly damaged due to heavy 
rains and plying of heavy vehicles loaded 
with grits and boulders. The road crust of 
NH-29 is insufficient to bear the heavy loads. 
 
The special repair and overlays have been 
completed in required stretches of about 100 
km length.  Remaining reaches are being 
maintained in traffic worthy condition.  Since 
year 2010 till date, amount Rs 130 crore have 
been spent towards Maintenance, out of 
Rs.145crore sanctioned amount. The stretch 
is being maintained in traffic worthy 
condition.  
2 87 Rampur-
Kathogodam, 
 NH-87 (Distt  
Rampur 
43.2Km), 
Stretch is being 
upgraded to 4-lane. 
Four laning of Rampur-Kathgodam Section 
of NH-87 was awarded to M/s ERA-
SIBMOST Consortium on 30/11/2011. As 
per provision of concession Agreement, 
maintenance of the existing road was to be 

Sl. 
No. 
NH Section / Length Status 
 
Condition of Road/ Remarks 
Total length: 
93.22 
carried out by the Concessionaire. The 
Concessionaire could not achieve financial 
close and thus the project could not start and 
Concessionaire did not take up maintenance 
work. Therefore, Concession Agreement was 
terminated in April, 2014. 
However, NHAI has sanctioned an amount of 
Rs. 8.75 crore in April, 2013 and Rs. 20.06 
crore in December, 2013 for maintenance 
and repair including renewal/resurfacing. 
The repair and maintenance of 42 km stretch 
from km. 0.00 to km. 43.00 (except km 14-
15), for a length of 42 km in District Rampur, 
UP and from km 43.00 to km 88.00 (except 
km 45.00 to km 46.50, from km 51.00 to km 
52 and from km 64.00 to km 75.00) for 
length of 31.50 km in District Udham Singh 
Nagar and Nainital in Uttarakhand, has 
already been completed and balance 14.50 
km. length is being repaired from time to 
time. NHAI has further sanctioned an amount 
of Rs. 2.33 crore in May, 2015 for renewal of 
6.50 km damaged stretch from km 14.00 to 
km 15.0, km 45.00 to km 46.50, km 51.00 to 
km 52.00 and km 64.00 to km 75.00. 
The process of re-awarding of 4-laning of 
Rampur Kathgodam section of NH-87 on 
hybrid annuity mode is in progress and the 
project is likely to be re-awarded by 
December, 2015. 
3 91 Aligarh-Kanpur 
(270 km) 
Stretch is proposed 
to be upgraded for 
2-lane + Paved 
shoulder.  
The work was awarded to Concessionaire on 
BOT (Toll) basis. Concessionaire could not 
start the work. The Agreement was 
terminated in Sept., 2014.  
The stretch was entrusted to NHAI from 
PWD in June, 2010 in poor condition. The 
road crust is poor and susceptible to frequent 
damages due to heavy traffic and poor 
drainage. In urban areas due to built-up 
sections, the condition of road deteriorates 
faster.  
The special repair and overlays have been 
completed in the required stretches in about 
110 km length over last couple of years. 
Maintenance work in balance reaches has 
also been completed. Till date, amount Rs 
93.36 crore have been spent towards 
maintenance, out of 93.36 crore sanctioned 

Sl. 
No. 
NH Section / Length Status 
 
Condition of Road/ Remarks 
amount. Presently, work of Rs 5.47 crore 
awarded for taking up the maintenance in 
required reaches. The stretch is in traffic 
worthy condition. 
4 232 Tanda- 
Raebareli-Banda 
(290) 
Road is being 
upgraded to 
 
2- lane with paved 
shoulder. Work is 
in progress. 12% 
Progress achieved. 
The stretch is being maintained in traffic 
worthy condition by the EPC Contractor.  
Amount Rs 13.55 crore have been spent 
towards maintenance.  
5 24B Raebareilly-
Allahabad 
Road is being 
upgraded to 2 Lane 
with paved 
shoulder. Work is 
in progress. 37% 
progress is 
achieved.  
The work has been awarded to M/s VIL Ltd 
for development to 2-Lane + PS. 30% 
progress achieved. Recently, work of Rs 
19.0crore, awarded for maintenance of the 
stretch at the risk and cost of the 
Concessionaire. The maintenance work has 
started and is likely to be completed by Sep, 
2015.  
6 24 Bareilly-Sitapur Road is being 
upgraded to 4-Lane 
with paved 
shoulder. Work is 
in progress. 38% 
progress is 
achieved.  
The work has been awarded to M/s Bareilly 
Sitapur Highways Ltd for development to 4-
Lane. 37% progress achieved. The 
Concessionaire is maintaining the Stretch as 
per Concession Agreement.  
7 25 Unnao ROB The work awarded 
to M/s Niraj 
Cement Structural 
Ltd.  
Commencement 
Feb, 2010. 
 
 Reasons like untimely and excessive rains 
fall, delay in removal of encroachments by 
the District Administration, mining earth 
permission & slow progress due to 
mismanagement, financial difficulty of the 
Contractor delayed the project initially. 
 The work has been completed and the ROB 
has been opened for traffic in June, 2015. 
Four laning of NH 17 and 47 passing through Kerala State Starting from Kerala/Karnataka Border 
to Edappally & Cherthalai-Ochira –Thiruvananthapuram  
45. The above stretches have been entrusted back fr om NHAI to State Government of Kerala for 
the development and maintenance vide SO No. 2060(E) , 2061(E ) and 2062(E ) dated 14.08.2014 and SO 
No. SO 675(E) dated 05.03.2014, on account of inord inate delay in land acquisition and lack of 
cooperation from the State Government.  Accordingly , at the moment these stretches shall have to be 
maintained by State PWD in traffic worthy condition  within the available budget outlay for development  
and maintenance of National Highways.   

46. Delay in the development of NH 65 in Churu in R ajasthan: The details are as under: 
1. Name of project :  Two Lane with Paved Shoulder with provision of Capacity Augmentation of 
Rajasthan Border-Fatehpur-Salasar section of NH-65 in the State of Rajasthan under NHDP Phase-IV on 
Design, Build, Finance, Operate and Transfer (DBFOT) Basis:- 
2. Total Project Cost   -  Rs. 604.73 crore 
3. Total Project Length   -  154.141 Km. 
4. Bid Grant    -  Rs. 142 crore 
5. Equity Amount   -  Rs. 102.73 crore 
6. Loan Amount    -  Rs. 360 crore 
7. Name of Concessionaire  -  Salasar Highways Pvt.  Ltd 
8. Name of IE    -  Getinsa Ingenieria S.L. in  
Association with SCIA Pvt.   Ltd. 
9. Date of Award of Project  -  26.11.2012 
10. Appointed Date  -  06.02.2014 
11. Concession Period  -  30 Years 
12. Project Milestone:  
S.  
No. 
Project Mile Stones Date of 
Occurrence 
Target Achieved 
1 Project Mile Stone 1 st  
On 180 th  Day from Appointed 
date (06 -02-2014) 
4th  August 
2014 
(10% of 
Project Cost) 
Rs. 60.47 
croreore 
(15.30% of 
Project Cost) 
Rs. 92.54 
croreore 
2 Project Mile Stone 2 nd  
On 400 th  Day from Appointed 
date (06 -02-2014) 
12 th  March 
2015 
(35% of 
Project Cost) 
Rs. 211.66 
croreore 
(31.90% of 
Project Cost) of 
192.80 croreore 
3 Project Mile Stone 3 rd  
On 650 th  Day from Appointed 
date (06 -02-2014) 
17 th  
November 
2015 
(70% of 
Project Cost) 
Rs. 423.31 
croreore 
 
4 Completion of the Project  3 rd  August 
2016 
(100% of 
project cost) 
Rs. 604.73 
croreore 
 
13. Physical Progress : 
Summary C & G Earthwork GSB WMM DBM BC 
Total 154.141 154.141 154.141 154.141 154.141 154.1 41 
Achievement 70.250 66.180 54.370 23.100 11.370 0.00  
14. Reason of Slow Progress:  The progress of the work is mainly being delayed du e to non 
sanction of loan to the Concessionaire by its lende rs. A meeting has been taken by the Member (Finance ), 

NHAI HQ, New Delhi on 16.06.2015, in which the lend ers (Lead Bank-Union Bank of India) were 
requested to expedite the sanction of loan amount t o the Concessionaire so that the program can be 
expedited. Notices are being issued by IE to the Concessionaire to expedite the progress of work. 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE 
47. The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry w ith dismay and urges that the above 
incomplete projects are completed as per their schedule and open for traffic soon. 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS   OF THE COMMITTEE 
48. The Committee would like to have the opinion of  the Ministry on providing connectivity 
between ‘Kalpeni Island’, a tourist island and ‘Che riyam Island’, an uninhabited island in Lakshadweep  
will bring the latter also on the tourism map of the country. 
 (Para 51 
  of ibid ) 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
49. The feasibility for connectivity between ‘Kalpe ni Island’, a tourist island and ‘Cheriyam 
Island’, an uninhabited island in Lakshadweep is being examined in the Ministry.  
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE 
50. The Committee desires that it may be informed of the progress made in this regard. 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS   OF THE COMMITTEE 
51. Another important issue brought before the Comm ittee was the poor design and planning of 
National Highways. It was informed that many habita tions in the country have been divided by the 
National Highways and in the absence of underpasses  and subways, people residing on one side of the 
National Highway are not able to move to the other side freely. Such bad planning results in high numb er 
of accidents in such places. Some Members of the Co mmittee raised the issue of ‘blind spots’ and lack of 
proper designing of the National Highways. The Comm ittee recommends that all the black spots be 
identified and road designing be given due importance in construction of National Highways in future. 
 (Para 52 
 of ibid ) 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
52. Number of steps has been initiated by the Minis try to improve road safety scenario particularly 
engineering measures. This inter-alia included prov ision in the Contract document and Concession 
agreement. Present contract documents both for BOT projects as well as EPC projects road safety 
provisions such as road safety audit prior to openi ng a stretch for traffic have been made. Similarly,  
documents such as road safety during construction h ave been published and made part of the contract 
document.  
53. Further, it is being considered to earmark abou t Rs. 500 crore for sanctioning of Road Safety 
Works under Annual Plan for NH(O) Works during 2015 -16.  It is being considered for sanctioning of 
only those works of permanent nature under Road Saf ety during 2015-16 for improvement of identified 
Black Spots. All States have been requested to take  up urgent necessary action to identify the nature of 
permanent works required to be taken up for identif ied Accident Black Spots and prepare necessary 
estimates at the earliest for enabling taking up of necessary timely actions.    
54. Chairman (NHAI) and MD (NHIDCL) also have been requested to take up necessary actions 
for the relevant NH stretches entrusted with them w hile formulating action plans and take up 
implementation of projects being awarded by them.  

FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE 
55. The Committee recommends that the Ministry shou ld monitor and evaluate, the steps 
taken to improve road safety on timely basis. NHAI may compile the estimates of identified 
Accident Black Spots sent by the States/UTs along w ith the relevant National Highways stretches 
and formulate action plans for implementation of these projects. 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS   OF THE COMMITTEE 
56. The Committee also notes that during rainy seas ons, underpasses and subways constructed on 
National Highways are flooded with rain water resulting in disturbance of traffic movement in the absence 
of proper drainage system. The Committee is of the view that while designing a national highway, 
drainage system on national highways should not be ignored in the name of cost cutting. The Committee 
recommends that the Ministry as well as NHAI should  ensure that in all the projects for development of  
national highways, provision of drainage system should be made part of the concessionaire agreement. 
 (Para 53 
 of ibid ) 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
57. Adequate arrangements for drainage system are u sually made in the projects being undertaken 
for development of National Highways primarily foll owing corridor development approach, including all 
the projects being taken up by NHAI, Further, provi sion of drainage system is included in the concessi on 
agreement.   
58. However, in smaller projects under NH (O), some times on account of limited availability of 
funds and need to spread available limited resource s on more number of projects, it is not possible to  
make adequate provisions for effective drainage.  E fforts are, however, made to address these limitati ons 
within available fund constraints.   
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE 
59. The Committee desires that issues related to fu nds constraints for NH (O) projects should 
be addressed on priority basis. 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS   OF THE COMMITTEE 
60. When the issue of traffic congestion at Toll pl azas was raised, the Secretary informed the 
Committee that with the implementation of Electroni c Toll Collection System in the country, toll 
collection at toll plazas will be streamlined and t he traffic will be regulated. The Committee strongl y feels 
that persons who are manning the toll gates through out the country should be imparted training on how to 
behave, and general etiquette and civic sense, to d eal with the public, as clashes between toll operat ors 
and users on petty issues has been rising. 
 (Para 54 
 of ibid ) 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
61. Necessary provisions have been made in the fee collection agreement that the personnel 
deployed by the Contractor shall not misconduct/misbehave with the members of public and shall observe  
strict discipline and decency in their behaviour.   
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE 
62. The Committee notes the reply. 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS   OF THE COMMITTEE 
63. The issue of non-availability of wayside amenit ies and carriageways for light vehicles was also 
brought to the attention of the Committee. Non-avai lability of neon signs on the National Highways is 
another cause of concern. Absence of proper directi ons and signage on the national highways do not hel p 

the user of NHs to reach his destination in time. T he Committee hopes that an exclusive lane will be 
earmarked on the tolled national highways for Passi ve Radio Frequency Identification card users. Also,  
there should be a separate lane for emergency opera tions on the national highways in the country. If i t is 
not possible to do so on the existing national high ways, necessary provision may be incorporated in th e 
Concessionaire Agreement for future projects. The C ommittee feels that adequate number of Nitrogen 
Filling Stations may be provided on national highwa ys for those who prefer Nitrogen gas filling rather  
than the regular air for their vehicles. 
 (Para 55 
 of ibid ) 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
64. The Ministry has decided to setup user friendly  way-side amenities to meet the aspirations of 
the road users along the National Highways (NHs).  Wayside amenities will have telephone booth/Wi-Fi, 
ATM, Fuel station, Minor repair shop, Rest rooms fo r short stay.  Toilets for ladies and gents, Kiosks  for 
sale of sundry items, Medical aid and chemist shop,  Helipad facilities etc.    Issue regarding provisi on of 
adequate number of Nitrogen Filling Stations on nat ional highways is being taken up with Ministry of 
Petroleum and Natural Gas. 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS   OF THE COMMITTEE 
65. The Committee desires that NHAI would look into  these issues seriously and make the travel on 
National Highways a comfortable one and that the ap prehensions expressed by the Members on the 
achievement of targets during the current fiscal wi ll be duly taken care of by proper planning and 
execution of road projects. 
 (Para 56 
 of ibid ) 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
66. NHAI strives to maintain all the National Highw ays under its jurisdiction in traffic worthy 
conditions at all times.  All efforts are being mad e to achieve the targets by taking numerous correct ive 
measures. 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE 
67. The Committee notes the reply in respect of par as 55 and 56 of the 220 
th  Report. 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS   OF THE COMMITTEE 
68. The Committee finds that Rs.4,211.56 crore has been allocated for 2015-16 as against 
Rs.4,881.59 crore for 2014-15(RE) showing a 13.73% decline in the allocation for NH(O) projects. The 
shortfall in allocation for completing the projects  under this scheme are normally filled by the funds  
diverted from cash flow of NHAI. The Committee find s that this trend is being repeated for the last th ree 
years and the Ministry of Finance is not allocating  additional funds at RE stage, citing one reason or  the 
other. The Committee also finds that the achievemen t of targets under Improvement of riding quality an d 
construction of Bridges/ROBs/RUBs are not encouragi ng. The Committee recommends that the Ministry 
should take up the issue of additional allocation o f funds at RE stage at least to the level of projec ted 
demand (Rs. 6,004.00 crore) so that funds meant for  NHDP are not diverted during the current financial  
year. The Committee also hopes that constructive st eps would be taken to achieve the targets fixed for  
2015-16. 
 (Para 61 
 of ibid ) 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
69. The additional demand under NH (O) will be proj ected at RE stage appropriately as per 
assessed estimated requirements.  

FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE 
70. The Committee notes the reply and hopes that ad equate fund allocation at RE stage will 
ensure timely completion of NH (O) projects. 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS   OF THE COMMITTEE 
71.  The Committee finds that though there is no de arth of funds for this programme, achievement 
of targets fixed for development of roads in LWE ar eas is a major issue. Out of the target of awarding  of 
works for 500 kms, only 82 kms were awarded during the last year; 611 km were completed as against the 
target of 1000 kms in 2014-15. The Committee hopes that the targets for the current year will be achie ved 
with the active involvement of all the stakeholders  especially the security agencies, who provide secu rity 
for implementing road projects in this region. 
 (Para 65 
 of ibid ) 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
72. Due to various constraints viz  security related issues with contractors and PWD staff engaged in 
execution of work at site, inaccessible work zones,  difficulty in supply of manpower and material and 
clearance from State authorities, the target was not achieved, but all out efforts are being made to fulfil the 
set targets and continuous monitoring is being carried out by the Ministry and Ministry of Home Affairs.   
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE 
73. The Committee notes the reply and hopes that ta rgets under this programme will be 
achieved with the active participation of all the implementing agencies. 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS   OF THE COMMITTEE 
74. The Committee feels that currently the proper m aintenance and repair of our National 
Highways needs lot to be desired; it is very poor. The Committee finds that out of the requirement of Rs. 
4,000 crore for maintenance and repair of National Highways during 2014-15, the Ministry was able to 
get Rs. 2099 crore at BE stage. It was however, mar ginally increased to Rs. 2599.47 crore at RE stage.  
The amount is far lesser than what actually is need ed for this purpose. The Committee feels that the 
Ministry should revisit its norms for allocation of  funds for maintenance and repair of National Highw ays 
as heavy amount of investment is required for this sector. The Committee also feels that the funds 
allocated for this purpose should go up with the in creasing number of vehicles using the National 
Highways network in the country. The Committee, the refore, recommends that allocation of additional 
funds for maintenance and repair of national highwa ys at RE stage should be ensured, as timely repair 
prevents further damage to the National Highways. 
(Para 70 
 of ibid ) 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
75. Additional demand for maintenance and repairs o f NHs will be taken at RE stage appropriately 
as per assessed estimated requirements.  
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE 
76. The Committee notes the reply. 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS   OF THE COMMITTEE 
77. The Committee also recommends that an effective  monitoring mechanism for repair and 
maintenance may also be put in place. Wherever ther e are poor quality repair, maintenance and 
construction, the contractors and the engineers who  certified the quality may be suitably punished. Po or 
quality roads can be constructed only with the nexus of engineers and contractors. 
 (Para 71 
 of ibid ) 

REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
78. The development and maintenance works are perio dically reviewed and monitored at various 
levels in the executing organizations (i.e. state P WD, NHAI, BRO etc.,) and also at various levels in the 
Ministry including quality monitoring. Accordingly,  necessary corrective actions and rectification of 
deficiencies noticed, are got carried out as per Contract provisions. 
79. However, management of NH network of more than about 1,00,000 km at present spread all 
over the Country is challenging task and to streaml ine this, Ministry has initiated a process for sett ing up 
Road Asset Management System (RAMS), Bridge Managem ent System(BMS).These systems shall be 
web based and shall assist the Ministry in allocati ng the meager financial resources on the 
repair/development of NHs by setting priorities in an objective way, and will also be helpful in monitoring 
the effectiveness of the execution. 
80. Further, it is being considered to appoint Nati onal Level Project Monitors by the Ministry to 
give their feedback on projects being implemented directly, to the Ministry including furnishing of reports 
on the quality of implementation so as to enable taking up of necessary corrective/penal actions. 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE 
81. The Committee notes the reply and hopes that the qu ality in repair, construction and 
maintenance of roads will improve with the implemen tation of RAMS and BMS. The Committee 
may be apprised of the status of appointment of National Level Project Monitors.  
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS   OF THE COMMITTEE 
82. The Committee finds that achievement of targets  fixed under the SARDP-NE are not 
encouraging though implementation of projects had t o overcome many constraints in the NE Region. The 
Committee feels that as preparatory work in term of  land acquisition has picked up in the NE Region fo r 
the road projects, Ministry should ask for more fun ds at RE stage so that sanctioned projects under Ph ase-
A and entire Arunachal Package are completed by Mar ch 2017, as scheduled. The Committee hopes that 
development of National Highways in NE Region would  be given special attention as National Highways 
play an important role in the promotion of trade and tourism in the NE Region. 
 (Para 79 
 of ibid ) 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
83. Apart from the delay in land acquisition in NER , the achievement of target fixed is hampered 
by the short working season available in the region , which is generally from mid October to March as t he 
rains in the region normally start from April and c ontinue till October.  Accordingly, the agencies 
involved in construction start re-mobilizing from October and the pace of execution starts picking up from 
the November and continue till   March.  Further, m ost of the balance work under SARDP-NE is to be 
executed under Engineering, Procurement and Constru ction (EPC) mode of execution, in which the 
contracting agencies are required to complete the w orks within the stipulated time and no extra paymen t 
will be made on account of delays attributable to t he Contractor and it is, thus, expected that the pa ce of 
execution will picked up under EPC mode of executio n.  The requirement of funds vis-a-vis expenditure 
incurred will be reviewed at appropriate stage and additional fund if required will be sought at RE st age.  
In addition, a new company, National Highway and In frastructure Development Corporation Limited 
(NHIDCL) has been set up under the Ministry to unde rtake road construction in NER and border areas of 
the country.  The new company will augment the capa city of the State Government agencies and will help  
in expediting road construction in the region.  
84. The Ministry had formulated the SARDP-NE progra mme with a view of improving the road 
connectivity as a whole for the NE region and accor dingly in addition to National Highways, important 
State roads have also been included in the programme including roads of strategic importance.    

FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE 
85. The Committee notes the reply. 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS   OF THE COMMITTEE 
Roads of Inter-State connectivity and economic importance 
 
86. The Committee is disappointed to note that only  1/4th of the allocated funds were spent during 
the last year for this scheme. The Committee desire s that the Ministry should impress upon the States to 
utilize the allocation and complete the projects in  time. The States may also be requested to submit t he 
Utilization Certificates in time so that the furthe r release of funds earmarked for the projects are n ot 
stalled. The Committee hopes that Direct Payment Pr ocedure to be followed during the current fiscal 
result in increase in expenditure of projects under this scheme. 
 (Para 84  of ibid ) 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
87. A new Head has been opened for Direct Payment P rocedure under the Scheme.  The scheme 
has been implemented from the financial year 2015-1 6 and efforts will be made to utilize the maximum 
fund.  All the States have been advised to furnish the bills directly to concerned Regional Offices of  the 
Ministry for admitting payment directly through concerned Regional Pay and Accounts Office.  
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE 
88. The Committee hopes that the utilization of fun ds under this scheme will register an 
increase, with the implementation of the new payment scheme. 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS   OF THE COMMITTEE 
89. The Committee finds that though allocation of f unds under CRF to States has seen an increase 
over the years, the spending of allocated funds by State Governments needs to be stepped up. The issue  of 
diversion of cess meant for development of National  Highways under NHDP to NH (O) projects was also 
raised during the meeting. The Committee hopes that  the Ministry will take up the issue with the Minis try 
of Finance to stop the diversion of cess earmarked for National Highways under NHDP to works under 
NH (O). The Committee hopes that the Ministry will co-ordinate with the State Governments to utilize the 
funds allocated from CRF fully and complete the mar ked projects in time. The Committee also desires 
that issues of payment of unspent component under C RF and enhancement of CRF for State Roads from 
the existing allocation are addressed during the current fiscal. 
 (Para 86 
 of ibid ) 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
90. All the State Governments are being requested f rom time to time for timely submission of 
Utilization certificates for works under Central Ro ad Fund so that the necessary funds may be released  to 
State Governments in time and the fund may be spent  fully.  Matter has been taken up with Ministry of 
Finance to release the unspent balance under CRF back to non-lapsable fund and to enhance the allocation 
of fund for State Roads due to enhancement of cess on petrol and HSD.  
91. During the year 2015-16, no fund from NHDP has been diverted to NH(O) so far.  However, 
under CRF Act, 2000 there is no such provision that  the fund meant for development of National 
Highways is to be spent on the works under NHDP.  F und is to be spent on development on National 
Highways.  As work of development of NHs is being e xecuted by NHAI, State PWDs, directly by the 
Ministry and other agencies, the fund meant for dev elopment of National Highways may be allocated to 
any of these agencies for the above work.   Also, w hile earmarking of part funds under CRF for NHs to 
NH(O), due consideration are made to ensure that pr ojects under NHDP would not suffer any delay on 

account of fund  constraints.   However, the matter  will be taken with Ministry of Finance to allocate  
additional fund for NH(O) works at RE stage as per assessed estimated requirements.  
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE 
92. The Committee notes the reply.  The Committee m ay be apprised of the response of the 
Ministry of Finance in this regard.  
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS   OF THE COMMITTEE 
93. The Committee is happy to find that the allocat ion for major scheme “Nirbhaya Fund’ for 
Safety of Women on Public Transport has been increa sed from Rs. 50 crores to Rs. 653 crore in 2015-16.  
But nothing could be done last year which is a seri ous cause for Committee’s concerns as the fund main ly 
had to be spent on procurement of equipment for the State Governments. 
 (Para 89 
  of ibid ) 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
94. The Scheme, Security for Women in Public Road T ransport in the country was approved by 
Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs on 02.01.2014 . Last year      Department of Economic Affairs 
was intimated that the fund requirement for implementing the scheme during the period 2014-15 would be 
Rs. 30.50 crore only. Efforts in the last financial  year were primarily devoted to designing of scheme  in 
proper way. Further in cabinet note only outline of scheme was approved, no detailing of components was 
done at that time. Concept Report, Technology Analy sis Report and detailed specification of GPS & 
CCTV devices for setting up of National Level vehic le Security & Tracking System has been finalized 
and uploaded on Ministry of Road Transport and High ways website. Detailed Project Report & Request 
for Proposal document is being examined. Funding is  mainly for setting up of National Level Backend 
centre, its hardware & software component, establis hment of City Level Command & Control centre and 
operational expenditure for whole set up for two years. 
95. Projected expenditure doesn’t include purchase of devices i.e. GPS/CCTV/Panic Buttons 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE 
96. The Committee notes the reply for speedy implem entation of the security system at the 
National Level. 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS   OF THE COMMITTEE 
97. The Committee notes that out of the projected r equirement of Rs. 962.50 crore for the road 
transport sector, an amount of Rs. 150 crore only was allocated for 2015-16. Even the allocation for 2014-
15 was reduced at RE stage. The spending pattern of the Ministry on various schemes under road transport 
shows the lack of importance, the sector is getting  from the Ministry. The Committee also notes that t he 
Ministry was able to spend Rs. 130.27 crore only ag ainst the RE allocation of Rs. 180.50 crore. The 
Committee desires that funds under various schemes should be utilized fully in the current fiscal, as the 
road transport sector plays an important role in providing road safety and other related matters. 
 (Para 90 
 of ibid ) 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
98. During 2014-15, the Ministry could not spend th e entire fund allotted to it. Maximum funds 
were surrendered under following schemes of RT Wing:  
a. Road Safety, 
b. Setting up of Inspection and Maintenance Centre,  

c. Strengthening public transport system including int roduction of IT features like GPS/GSM 
based VTS, computerized reservation system, AFCS, ETMs, intermodal fare integration, PIS etc.,  
d. croreeation of National Road Safety Board and  
e. Scheme for Safety of Women on Public Road Transport.  
99. During 2015-16, Rs. 150 crore has been allotted  to Transport Wing for its various schemes. 
Transport Wing realizes that it plays a crucial rol e in providing road safety and would try its best t o 
optimally utilize the fund allotted to it for the intended purpose.  
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS   OF THE COMMITTEE 
100. The Committee is at a loss to see the allocati on and expenditure pattern in respect of several 
core activities of the Ministry i.e. strengthening/ improving road transport and road safety in a count ry of 
continental dimension; just Rs. 200 crores for the entire country and that too is not utilized fully. Further, 
the component wise allocations under transport sect or appear to be just notional. In other words, tran sport 
and safety on roads in our country it appears is tr eated as notional and that is why we are one of tho se 
countries having highest number of road accidents a nd deaths etc. Highway accident relief got just Rs.  25 
crores and only about Rs. 15 crores could be utiliz ed; Road safety and pollution testing just Rs. 5 cr ores 
for entire country but only about Rs. 15 Lakh was s pent; Data collection, Research & Development- just  
Rs. 2.00 crores, even that could not be spent at al l based on which our policies/programmes for improving 
road safety are formulated. We do not, therefore, s till have an authentic/dependable data on critical issue 
of road transport. Our existing data is highly unau thentic which shows ‘driver’s fault’ as the main re ason 
for road accidents in more than 77% cases. The Comm ittee finds it highly unbelievable as it indicates that 
poor Drivers are out to die on road and not for ear ning their livelihood. It also raises doubt if this is not an 
attempt to cover up the real reason as most of these drivers die and therefore, not available to tell the truth. 
The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends to st rengthen and expand its Road Safety Department 
with adequate resources and manpower with a view to  create a visible impact in this area. The Committe e 
would like to have a White Paper on the condition o f road safety in India and steps proposed in this 
regard. 
 (Para 95 
 of ibid ) 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
101. The schemes of Transport Sector are implemente d by the State Government or agencies 
authorized by them and the Ministry has to rely on the submission of audited utilization statement fro m 
the State Government for release of fund. The views  of the Committee regarding authenticity of road 
accident data have been noted. As regards strengthening and expanding road safety department, it is stated 
that a Bill to create the National Road Safety and Traffic Management Board (NRSTMB) was introduced 
in  Lok Sabha on 4.5.2010 which was referred to Dep artment related Parliamentary Standing Committee 
for examination.  However, this Bill has lapsed con sequent upon dissolution of 15 
th  Lok Sabha.  Now the 
Ministry has drafted a new Road Transport & Safety Bill.  National Road Safety & Traffic Management 
Authority (NRSTMA) has been made part of this Bill.   In the meanwhile, Ministry is processing a 
proposal for creation of NRSTMA through an executiv e order, pending its creation through an Act of 
Parliament.  
102. The Authority will have its own Secretariat.  The Central Government will appoint a Member 
Secretary, who shall be a Government employee of th e rank of Additional/ Joint Secretary to the 
Government of India.  The Authority will also have other personnel, as specified by the Central 
Government, to assist in discharge of its functions.  NRSTMA will have the power to do all things that are 
necessary or convenient to be done for or in connec tion with, or as incidental to, the achievement of the 
objects of the National Transport Authority.  

103. NRSTMA would act as a regulatory agency to ove rsee road safety activities in the country to 
improve road safety scenario in line with the Natio nal Road Safety Policy.   The policy will provide a  
broad framework for the Government both at the Cent ral and the State level, to take measures for 
improvement of road safety scenario in the country.  
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE 
104. The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry with regard to paras 90 and 95 of 220 th  
Report and hopes that the Road Transport Sector wil l get adequate attention from the Government 
and funds allocated will be spent to the maximum ex tent. The Committee is at a loss to understand 
why the Road Transport and Safety Bill is not broug ht before the Parliament. The Committee 
recommends that the proposed legislation may be brought before the Parliament at the earliest. 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS   OF THE COMMITTEE 
105. The Committee feels that another major impedim ent for road safety in the country is the non-
enforcement of road safety Rules/Regulations. Union  Ministry of Road Transport and Highways appears 
to be helpless because it has no enforcement powers . Multiplicity of agencies under Central Government  
as well as State Governments is another problem in this regard. The Committee feels that successful 
implementation of road safety rules/regulations can  be achieved only with a close co-ordination with t he 
State Governments as they are the implementing agen cies. Central Motor Vehicle Rules, Carriage by 
Road Rules remain till today merely on paper withou t being enforced actually. Pulls and pressures from  
obvious quarters having vested interest in not enfo rcing these rules/regulations and nexus with the 
enforcement agencies are mainly responsible for thi s state of affairs. The dynamics behind is very wel l 
known but nothing could be done so far in breaking this deep entrenched nexus. 
 (Para 96 
 of ibid ) 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
106. The recommendations of the Committee have been  noted for consideration of the Government.  
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE 
107. The Committee notes the reply. 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS   OF THE COMMITTEE 
108. Two important legislations for strengthening r oad safety viz., amendments to Central Motor 
Vehicles Act for enhancement of penalties for viola tions of road safety rules and a Bill to create Nat ional 
Road Safety and Traffic Management Board, have not been introduced in the Houses of Parliament till 
date for reasons better known to the Ministry. The Committee feels that in addition to educating schoo l 
children on road safety, proper displays and notice s should be installed on the National Highways wher e 
violation of road safety rules have become a common  phenomenon. The Committee may be apprised on 
the delay in the introduction of mandatory fitment of Auto Dipper as required by Rule 106 of Central 
Motor Vehicles Rules 1989 and Section 110(1)(j). Th e Committee also feels that installation of divider s 
on national highways with proper design and height will play an important role in reducing road accidents 
in the country. 
 (Para 97 
 of ibid ) 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
109. The recommendations of the Committee have been  noted for consideration of the Government.  
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE 
110. The Committee notes the reply and hopes that b oth the legislations will see the light of the 
day at the earliest so that the Rules relating to road safety in the country are strengthened. 

RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS   OF THE COMMITTEE 
Refresher Training of Drivers in Un-organized Sector and Human Resource Development 
Refresher Training to Drivers 
  
111. The Committee finds that the revised scheme fo r setting up of Institute of Driving Training and 
Research Centre has not really taken off even after  the halfway mark of the 12th Plan period has been 
crossed. There is a dire need for providing refresh er training courses for drivers and creating awaren ess in 
them about the dangers of over speeding and the imp ortance of lane driving as these are the main cause s 
for accidents on National Highways. The target of imparting refresher training to 30,000 HMV drivers is a 
smaller one compared to the ever increasing commerc ial vehicle population. The Committee hopes that 
this target can be relooked into once all the IDTRs  start functioning. The Committee hopes that settin g up 
of new IDTRs will be expedited during the current f iscal in discussion with the concerned State 
Governments. The Committee also desires that period ic audit and accreditation of RDTCs should be 
carried out without fail. 
 (Para 103   of ibid ) 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
112. The Ministry has scheme for setting up of Inst itute of Driving Training and Research (IDTR). 
Before its implementation in 12 th  plan, the scheme has been appraised by Expenditure  Finance 
Committee.  The proposals were invited under the re vised scheme from the States/UTs. In principle 
approval has already been given for setting up of I DTR at Naya Raipur, Chattisgarh. The proposal of 
other States is under consideration of the Ministry . The recommendation of the Committee to expedite  
the setting up of new IDTRs and relook into the tar get of imparting refresher training once all the ID TRs 
start functioning has been noted for consideration.  
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE 
113. The Committee would like to have the informati on on the details of proposals received 
from States /UTs for setting up of IDTRs. 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS   OF THE COMMITTEE 
National Highways Accident Relief Service Scheme 
 
114. The Committee notes that Rs. 14.69 crore was u tilized out of Rs. 18.01 crore at RE stage in 
2014-15 for purchase of ambulances and cranes. Even the allocation of Rs. 25 crore for National Highway 
Accident Relief Service Scheme will not be sufficie nt to meet the need of providing ambulances and 
cranes to the extended National Highway network of the country. The Committee desires to know the 
available mechanism to check the provision of ambul ances and cranes by concessionaires on tolled 
National Highways. The Committee hopes that the cas hless treatment schemes will be extended to other 
parts of the country in a phased manner. 
 (Para 107 of ibid ) 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
115. The available mechanism to check the provision  of ambulances and cranes is being obtained 
and will be furnished shortly.  
116. The recommendation of the Committee for extens ion of cashless treatment scheme in other part 
of the country has been noted. It is stated that pi lot projects have been launched by the Ministry of Road 
Transport & Highways for three stretches viz.,  Gur gaon - Jaipur section of NH-8, Vadodara - Mumbai 
section of  NH – 8 and Ranchi –Mahulia section of N H-33 under which free cashless treatment upto an 
limit of Rs. 30,000/- are provided to the road acci dent victims for the first 48 hours. Ministry has a sked 
World Health Organization (WHO) for appraisal of ca shless scheme. WHO has agreed to conduct the 
appraisal. Based on the experience gained during pi lot phase of cashless treatment and appraisal to be  

done with the assistance of WHO, the cashless treat ment scheme may be extended in other parts of the 
country.  
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE 
117. The Committee notes the reply and hopes that o n the basis of the appraisal of pilot 
projects, the cashless treatment of accident victim s will be extended to important stretches of 
National Highways during the current fiscal. 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS   OF THE COMMITTEE 
Road Safety and Pollution Testing and Control Equipments 
  
118. The Committee finds that Rs. 0.15 crore only w as utilized for purchase of road safety and 
pollution testing equipment as against the allocati on of Rs. 5 crore both at BE and RE levels for 2014 -15. 
The Committee hopes that the Ministry will take up the issue of finalization of supplier for these 
equipments with DGS&D at the earliest so that funds allocated under this Head is spent fully during 2015-
16. 
 (Para 110  of ibid ) 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
119. Recommendation of the Committee has been noted  for consideration.  
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE 
120. The Committee finds the reply of the Ministry very casual and evasive since it does not 
contain any specific action proposed to be taken by  the Ministry on the recommendations of the 
Committee.  The Committee desires that the Ministry should furnish a detailed reply in this regard. 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS   OF THE COMMITTEE 
Pollution Testing Equipment 
 
121. The Committee feels that provision of pollutio n testing equipments play an important role in 
containing the pollution level. The Committee would like to know the criteria on the basis of which smoke 
meters and gas analyzers are provided to the States . The Committee may also be apprised on the feedbac k 
given by the States on the effective use of these equipments. 
 (Para 112   of ibid ) 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
122. The Ministry has been procuring pollution test ing equipments from various firms since 2007. 
These equipments are supplied to the States/UTs free of cost for enforcement of the PUC norms envisaged 
in the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988.  
123. The Ministry requests States/UTs to furnish th eir requirement of smoke meters and gas 
analyzers in the proforma placed at Annexure I. Bas ed on the requirement received from various 
States/UTs, pollution testing equipments are provid ed. During 2014-15, the Ministry received request f or 
275 gas analyzers and 275 smoke meters from nineteen States.  
124. The Ministry has from time to time requested S tates/UTs to send their feedback on 
utility/working condition as well as the after sale s service provided by the supplier for these pollut ion 
testing equipments. However, despite repeated remin ders, the Ministry has not received any feedback 
from States/UTs.  
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE 
125. The Committee notes the reply.  The Committee urges the Ministry to persuade the 
States/UTs to furnish their feedback regarding the utility of the pollution testing equipments. 

RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS   OF THE COMMITTEE 
Computer System and National Database 
 
126. The Committee is happy to note that the Minist ry was able to spend the entire allocation of Rs. 
25.16 core (RE) during 2014-15 for national databas e, which reflects its commitment towards 
computerization of RTOs in the country. The Committ ee feels that this as a welcome measure to counter 
the multiple license issue menace in the country. T he Committee also hopes that introduction of passiv e 
Radio Frequency Identification based toll collectio n will minimize the long queues on toll plazas in t he 
country. The Committee would also like to have the feedback received from the users of National 
Highways on the Electronic Toll Collection (ETC) sy stem being implemented by NHAI on fifty-one toll 
plazas on public funded projects. 
 (Para 116   of ibid ) 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
127. User response is very encouraging.  Bankers ar e opening Point of Sale at plazas and other 
convenient location to meet the users aspirations.   
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE 
128. The Committee notes the reply and hopes that ETC will be installed in all the toll plazas in 
the country so that the users can have a hassle-free ride on toll roads. 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS   OF THE COMMITTEE 
129. The Committee finds that uniform design and te chnology for National Highways is not possible 
in the country due to its topography and varying cl imatic conditions. The Committee would like to know  
whether any study has been conducted to assess the cost-benefit analysis of concrete and bitumen roads . 
The Committee also feels that the time has come to introduce international technologies in the Indian road 
construction sector. 
 (Para 121 
 of ibid ) 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
130. The cost-benefit analysis is dependent upon se veral factors such as type of soil, class of roads,  
traffic, design life, size of project, price of the  constituent materials, availability of materials like bitumen, 
cement, aggregates and requisite equipment, etc. As  these factors vary from site to site, the cost of 
construction of cement concrete & bituminous paveme nt cannot be quantified. However, the difference in  
the initial cost of construction of cement concrete & bituminous pavement shall reduce as the Ministry has 
standardized the rates (ex-factory) of various grad es of cement from the cement manufacturers in the 
country, which are below the current market rates. Considering these rates of cement and lower 
maintenance cost of cement concrete pavement, the c ost of construction of cement concrete pavement is 
envisaged to be almost similar to that of bituminou s pavement at the time of construction and lower in  
terms of life cycle cost. 
131. As regards the use of international technologi es, the Ministry has issued instructions to the 
implementing agencies in February, 2015 that the ne w/alternative materials/technologies proven in Indi a 
or abroad shall be deemed to be accredited for adoption in the highway sector. 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE 
132. The Committee notes the reply. 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS   OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
133. The Committee finds that the number of propose d Inspection and Maintenance Centers are 
inadequate compared to ever increasing vehicular po pulation in the country. One center in a State cann ot 

cater to the requirement of used vehicle population . As such, the Committee feels that active involvem ent 
of State Governments in this project will ease the pressure on the Union Government. The Committee 
hopes that the Ministry will chalk out plans to ope n more number of such centres in the country evolvi ng 
a co-ordinated mechanism with the State Governments. 
 (Para 128 of the 220 th  Report) 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
134. The Ministry has a scheme for setting up of Mo del Inspection and Certification Centre.  During 
11 
th  Plan, the Ministry sanctioned 10 centres i.e. one each in 10 States. During 12th plan, the Ministry h as 
also set a target to setup 10 centres i.e. one each  in other 10 States. Ministry is aware that one cen tre in a 
State cannot cater to the requirement of used vehic le population. As such the States would need to 
replicate the model centres in other parts of the S tates/UTs.  It is the objective of the Ministry to present 
these model test centres as a viable business model  for replication through investment by the private 
sector.  
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE 
135. The Committee notes the reply and desires to be app rised of the details of Model 
Inspection Centres already set up and likely to be set up in the country. 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS   OF THE COMMITTEE 
136. The Committee finds that the Ministry was able  to spend 65% of the allocated funds during 
2014-15. The Committee feels that by strengthening the public transport system in the country, traffic  
congestion and pollution can be minimized to some e xtent. The Committee hopes that the Ministry will 
persuade the State Governments to utilize this sche me to a great extent to give a face-lift to their p ublic 
transport systems. The Committee also hopes that th e funds allocated for the current fiscal will be ut ilized 
better than the previous year. 
 (Para 133 
 of ibid ) 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
137. The Ministry has developed a scheme to provide  financial assistance to the States/UTs under 
the Scheme namely ‘Central Assistance to States / U Ts for Strengthening Public Transport System’ from 
the Financial Year 2010-11 through implementation o f IT related projects. The scheme has been made 
effective from 15.3.2010.  
138. Under the above Scheme, one time Central assis tance to the extent of 50% the project cost for 
Information Technology (IT) related projects such a s introduction of GPS / GPRS / GSM based vehicle 
tracking system, computerized reservation system, e lectronic ticket vending machines etc. is being 
provided to States / State Road Transport Undertakings (SRTUs). 
139. Response of the State Governments has been mor e than satisfactory. 19 States have benefited 
from this scheme till 12.03.2015.  
140. Further, views of the Committee has been noted . Ministry has always taken up the matters of 
public transport and seamless movement of vehicles with the State Governments/UTs on all occasions of 
interaction. 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE 
141. The Committee notes the reply. 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS   OF THE COMMITTEE 
142. The Committee feels that the new scheme will h elp the State Governments/SRTUs to develop 
the bus terminals which otherwise look neglected an d unkempt. The Committee would like to have the 

details of cities where the scheme will be implemen ted during the current fiscal. The Committee also 
hopes that the Ministry will expand the scheme to o ther cities in a phased manner depending upon the 
response to its one more PPP based scheme. 
 (Para 136  of ibid ) 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
143. The scheme for development of Bus Terminals an d Multi-Modal Transport Terminal on BOT 
basis was approved by Union Minister, RT&H and lett er from Union Minister, RT&H were written on 
29 
th  January, 2015 to Chief Ministers of all States req uesting them to send a proposal for their State for  
development of Bus Terminals under this Scheme. 
144. However, Ministry of Finance has stated that t here is a moratorium on creation of new Central 
Sponsored Scheme.  For assisting State Governments,  Finance Minister has announced to increase State’s  
share from 32% to 42%. As the fund has already been  increased to State Governments, they are 
independent to use it to develop the infrastructure  in their State autonomously as per their requireme nt.  
Further it is also stated that no fund has been all ocated to this Ministry for the above scheme. Hence  it 
seems that it is not viable to run this scheme without fund.   
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE 
145. The Committee notes the reply.  
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS   OF THE COMMITTEE 
Operationalization of scheme under ‘Nirbhaya Fund’ 
 
146. The Committee hopes that with the allocation o f Rs.653 crore, the scheme will be implemented 
in the selected cities as per the time frame fixed. The Committee hopes that the successful implementation 
of this scheme will enhance the safety of passengers, especially women using the public transport system. 
 (Para 139  of ibid ) 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
147. Concept Report, Technology Analysis Report and  detailed specification of GPS & CCTV 
devices for setting up of National Level vehicle Se curity & Tracking System has been finalized and 
uploaded on the website of the Ministry.  Detailed Project Report & Request for Proposal document is 
being examined. 
148. A National Level Vehicle Security & Tracking S ystem is required to monitor and ensure that all 
public transport vehicles in 32 cities have panic b uttons and other devices, installed and in working 
condition so that the system is in a state of readiness to capture emergency situations and provide inputs to 
MHA/others in responding to those in need. State Go vernments/UTs can monitor permit violations and 
renew/cancel permits based on inputs from this web based system. This system will create safer 
environment for mobility of women in public road transport in the selected cities. 
149. Now, as per directives from PMO, funds may be utilized only after the report from Secretary, 
Department of Electronics and Information Technolog y on integration of schemes of Ministry of Home 
Affairs, Women and Child Development & the Ministry is received and deliberated upon. 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE 
150. The Committee notes the reply. 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS   OF THE COMMITTEE 
151. The Committee finds that NHAI, the premier age ncy of Government in construction of national 
highways is functioning without proper human resour ces support, despite Department of Personnel and 
Training (DOPT)’s directions way back in 2009. The Committee finds this as a lapse on the part of the 

National Highways Authority of India and the Minist ry of Road Transport and Highways. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends the Ministry to lo ok into the issues for creation of own independent 
cadre for National Highways Authority of India and the action taken in this regard may be intimated to the 
Committee. 
 (Para 141  of ibid ) 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
152. Efforts have been made to increase the permane nt cadre strength   of NHAI.   In this connection 
absorption has been done in the grades of Manager ( Tech), Dy Gen Manager (Tech)   and Manager (Fin).  
A new cadre of Dy Manager (Tech) has been created and officers in this grade have been selected through 
direct recruitment method.  Direct Recruitment has also been done in the grade of Manager (Tech).  
Present permanent manpower strength and strength on  deputation in NHAI is 278 and 314 respectively.  
NHAI has taken the following steps during the years 2013, 2014, 2015 for creating independent cadre: 
Year :2013 
 
(i) Advertised 20 vacancies for the post of Dy. Man ager (Tech) on direct recruitment with last date of  
receipt of application as 11.11.2013.  31 candidates were selected for appointment, out of which 9 joined. 
(ii) Absorption to the post of DGM (T) was undertak en vide circulars dated 01.11.2012 and 
18.04.2013. Offers of appointment on absorption bas is were issued to 14 and 7 officers, out of which 1 1 
and 2 officers joined respectively. 
(iii) Absorption to the post of Manager (Finance) w as undertaken vide circular dated 28.02.2013 and 
6 officers joined on absorption. 
(iv) One officer joined to the post of Hindi Office r on regular basis on promotion. 
Year :2014 
 
(i) Advertised 50 vacancies for the post of Manager  (Tech) for filling up on direct recruitment with l ast 
date of receipt of applications as 19.05.2014. 37 c andidates were selected for appointment, out of whi ch 
23 joined. 
(ii) Absorption to the post of Manager (Tech.) has also been undertaken with last date of receipt of 
applications as 19.12.2014. The absorption of suitable officers is under process. 
(iii) Advertised 30 vacancies for the post of DGM ( Tech.) for filling on Direct Recruitment with last 
date of receipt of application as 19.05.2014. The matter is sub-judice. 
(iv) One officer joined to the post of Manager (Fin ance) on absorption. 
Year: 2015 
 
(i) Advertised 30 vacancies for the post of Dy. Man ager (Tech) to be filled on direct recruitment with  last 
date of receipt of application as 10.04.2015. Suita ble candidates shall be selected after completing t he 
recruitment process. 
153. NHAI has mentioned that the present permanent manpower strength and strength on deputation 
in 278 and 314 respectively. 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE 
154. The Committee notes the reply . 

RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS   OF THE COMMITTEE 
Pending issues taken up with other Ministries 
 
155. When the Committee asked about the pending iss ues taken up with other Ministries which are 
affecting the pace of development of national highw ays projects, the Ministry replied that there were 
number of issue affecting pace of implementation of  highway projects and that the matter has been take n 
up with the concerned Ministries and quite a number  of issues got resolved. Details of the issues got 
resolved have been covered in the Outcome Budget 20 15-16. However, issues brought out below are still 
pending: 
 (Para 142  of ibid ) 
Ministry of Finance 
Relaxation of Scheme-wise restriction of 33% of tot al expenditure for the last quarter and 15% in 
the last month for the year 2014-15 
156. Ministry of Finance every year reiterates its instructions of the need for adhering to the 33% 
ceiling on expenditure for the last quarter and the  15% ceiling for the last month of the financial ye ar. 
Since the effective working season for road sector commences from October onwards till the end of the 
financial year, both for new construction & mainten ance and hence the bulk of the budget allocated to the 
Ministry of Road Transport and Highways is spent in these months. The payment to contractor engaged in 
the activities of road development and maintenance is made on completion of the project/work or at 
different stages of the work as per the agreement. Besides, for a portion of payment to the State we f ollow 
system of adjustment which takes time in reflecting  the expenditure. In view of these circumstances 
Ministry of Finance has been requested to relax the above limit in respect of this Ministry. 
 (Para 143 
 of ibid ) 
Non- payment of unspent balance of CRF 
157. The Central Road Fund is created by the CRF Ac t 2000 and the Act provides that proceeds of 
cess levied on petrol and Diesel shall be first credited to the consolidated fund of India. The Parliament by 
appropriation credit such proceeds to the fund from  time to time, after deducting the expenses of 
collection, for being utilized exclusively for the purpose of this Act. Fund is non-lapsable and unuti lized 
portion remains as unspent which can be used in the subsequent years for the same purpose. Large amount 
of money unspent has been accumulated.  
158. Ministry of Finance has instructed Controller General of Accounts for writing back the sums 
from specific Funds in Public Accounts to consolida ted fund as non-tax receipts as assumed in BE 2014-
15. Accordingly CGA has written to CCAs/CAs concern ed for carrying out the transaction immediately. 
The principal Chief Controller of Accounts, MORTH h as transferred an amount of Rs. 4479.33 the 
unspent balance of CRF to CFI. 
159. The matter has been taken up with the MOF for reimbursing the amount. 
 (Para 144, 145 and 146 
   of ibid ) 
No enhancement in amount of CRF for development of State road in the budget 2015-16 on increase 
in Cess w.e.f.2nd January, 2015 
160. Ministry of Finance vide notification no. 1/20 15/Central Excise dated 1/1/2015 has increased 
the basic excise duty on petrol and diesel by Rs. 2  per litre and informed that additional revenue gai n on 
this account will be transferred to Central Road Fu nd. Central Road Fund earmarked to this Ministry is  
utilized for the purpose of development of NHs as w ell as State Roads. Though there has been increase in 
the allocation for the development of NH during the  year 2015-16, but there is no increase in the 
provisions made towards development of State road. 

161. The matter has been taken up with the M/o Fina nce requesting to inform the mechanism for 
transfer of funds as well as the reasons for non enhancement in CRF for development of State roads. 
(Para 147 and 148  of ibid ) 
Ministry of Environment and Forest 
Problems with respect to compliance of Forest Rights Act, 2006 
162. It was informed that vide circular dated 28.10.2014, MoEF&CC facilitated line ar projects by 
dispensing with the requirement of submission of co pies of resolutions of Gram Sabhas (and other 
committees) where diversion of forest land is invol ved from plantations notified as forest, provided s uch 
land is located in villages having no recorded popu lation of Scheduled Tribes, as per the census 2001 and 
2011. On face of it, this dispensation appears fine . However, MoEF&CC mandated a certificate in the 
prescribed format to be issued by the Collector alo ng with submission of records of meetings of Gram 
Sabhas and other Committees. In many cases certificate by the collector, that there are no tribal in the area 
and hence there is no question of any rights gettin g affected, has not been accepted by MoEF&CC, and 
they insist on submission of certificate in exactly in their format. This defeats the purpose of exemption. 
 (Para 149 
 of ibid ) 
Ministry of Defence 
Transfer of Defence land to NHAI 
163. In some of the projects NHAI requires transfer  of Defence land for the purpose of widening. 
Ministry of Defence is insisting for land in lieu of the transferred land. This has caused major delays in the 
projects in the past. NHAI has taken up the issue w ith the Ministry of Defence to frame a policy on 
dispensing with this policy of land for land with p ayment of compensation in lieu of the transferred l and. 
Ministry of Defence may be requested to consider the proposal of NHAI. 
(Para 150 
 of ibid ) 
164. The Committee hopes that the above issues will  be settled adequately by having regular 
interactions with all the stakeholders concerned. T he Committee hopes that all these will not become a  
major road block in completing the national highway s projects which normally involve huge cost. The 
Committee calls upon the concerned Ministries to co nsider respective issues seriously to implement for  
faster and efficient development of our national highways. 
 (Para 151  of ibid ) 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT  
165. Issues regarding relaxation of Scheme-wise res triction of 33% of total expenditure for the last 
quarter and 15% in the last month, non- payment of unspent balance of CRF, enhancement in amount of 
CRF for development of State road in the budget 201 5-16 on increase in Cess w.e.f.2nd January, 2015 ar e 
being taken up regularly with the Ministry of Finance. 
166. At the behest of Hon’ble Prime Minister, a hig h level Group of Infrastructure has been 
constituted recently under the Chairmanship of Hon’ ble Minister of Road Transport and Highways with 
Hon’ble Ministers of Railways, Civil Aviation, Mini ster of State (IC) of Environment, Forest and Clima te 
Change, Principal Secretary to Prime Minister, Cabi net Secretary, Secretary (RT&H), Chairman(Railway 
Board), Secretary (Environment & Forests), Secretar y(Shipping) and Secretary (Civil Aviation) as 
Members.  The Group would meet as often required to  review and resolve all pending Inter-Ministerial 
matters.     
167. A real time on line monitoring system, “e Sami ksha” has been set up by the Cabinet Secretariat 
for monitoring of follow up action on the decisions  taken during the presentations made by different 
Ministries/Departments to the Hon’ble Prime Minister periodically.   

168. Also, the portal “PRAGATI” (pragati.nic.in), i .e. Pro-Active Governance And Timely 
Implementation, has been set up by the Prime Minist er’s Office.  The portal is aimed at addressing the  
Common man’s grievances and monitoring important pr ogrammes and projects.  The Hon’ble Prime 
Minister, himself, reviews the progress of importan t infrastructure projects periodically with inputs from 
the nodal Ministries/Departments and State Governme nts, etc., hosted on the Portal.   Both these porta ls, 
also, discuss the Centre-Sate Coordination issues w ithin the platform for facilitating better cohesive  
approach of resolving the outstanding bottlenecks.   
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE 
169. The Committee notes the reply and hopes that i n addition to the above measures, a well 
structured co-ordination mechanism for implementing  national highways projects between all the 
concerned Ministries will yield desired results in achieving targets. 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS   OF THE COMMITTEE 
GENERAL OBSERVATIONS 
 
170. The Committee after examining the demands of t he Ministry of Road Transport and Highways 
finds that the Ministry is able to get more allocat ion than it demanded. The Committee feels that the 
Ministry should do its homework to identify the pro jects under various heads before going for Budget 
Estimates. During the last year Rs. 200 crores was estimated for Road Transport sector but was reduced to 
Rs. 180.50 crores at RE level. Such drastic cut in funds will not benefit the Ministry in the long run  for 
carrying out major programmes under research and de velopment, road safety and other related issues 
concerning road transport. The Ministry should also  improve in spending the allocated funds for road 
transport sector during the current fiscal. 
 (Para 152  of ibid ) 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
171. During 2014-15, Rs. 200 crore were allotted to  Transport Wing for its various schemes 
including the scheme ‘Safety of Women on Public Roa d Transport’ which is being financed by Ministry 
of Finance. At R.E. stage, as against the requireme nt of Rs. 254.55 crore, funds amounting to Rs. 180. 50 
crore were allotted to Transport Wing. Rs. 19.50 cr ore were surrendered under the scheme ‘Security for  
Women in Public Road Transport’. As regards this sc heme is concerned, it may be stated that efforts in  
the last financial year were primarily devoted to d esigning of scheme in proper way. Further in cabine t 
note only outline of scheme was approved, no detail ing of components was done at that time. Concept 
Report, Technology Analysis Report and detailed spe cification of GPS & CCTV devices for setting up of 
National Level vehicle Security & Tracking System h as been finalized and uploaded on Ministry of Road 
Transport and Highways’ website. Detailed Project R eport & Request for Proposal document is being 
examined. 
172.  Transport Wing realizes that it plays a cruci al role in providing road safety and would try its 
best to optimally utilize the fund allotted to it for the intended purpose. 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE 
173. The Committee notes the reply. 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS   OF THE COMMITTEE 
174. The Committee hopes that an effective co-ordin ation mechanism at the Central level with the 
Ministries of Finance, Environment and Forest and D efence will help the Ministry to address the grey 
areas in construction and development of national h ighways in the country in timely manner and also to  
ensure hassle free clearances for road projects and  achievement of targets within the prescribed time.  The 
Committee feels that the Ministry will impress the State Governments to give necessary clearances for the 
road projects in time so that projects are completed without cost overrun. 
 (Para 153 
 of ibid ) 

REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
175. A real time on line monitoring system, “e Sami ksha” has been set up by the Cabinet Secretariat 
for monitoring of follow up action on the decisions  taken during the presentations made by different 
Ministries/ Departments to the Hon’ble Prime Minister periodically.  
176. Also, the portal “PRAGATI” (pragati.nic.in) i. e. Pro-Active Governance and Timely 
Implementation, has been set up by the Prime Minist er’s Office.  The portal is aimed at addressing the  
Common man’s grievances and monitoring important pr ogrammes and projects.  The Hon’ble Prime 
Minister, himself, reviews the progress of importan t infrastructure projects periodically with inputs from 
the nodal Ministries/ Departments and State Governm ents, etc., hosted on the Portal.  Both these porta ls, 
also, discuss the Centre-State Coordination issues within the platform for facilitating better cohesiv e 
approach of resolving the outstanding bottlenecks.   
177. Further, at the behest of Hon’ble Prime Minist er, a high level Group of Infrastructure has been 
constituted recently under the Chairmanship of Hon’ ble Minister of Road Transport and Highways with 
Hon’ble Minister of Railways, Civil Aviation, Minis ter of State (IC) of Environment, Forest and Climat e 
Change, Principal Secretary to Prime Minister, Cabi net Secretary, Secretary(RT&H), Chairman (Railway 
Board), Secretary(Environment & Forest), Secretary( Shipping) and Secretary (Civil Aviation) as 
Members.  The Group would meet as often required to  review and resolve all pending Inter-Ministerial 
matter.     
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE 
178. The Committee notes the reply. 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS   OF THE COMMITTEE 
179. The Committee also notes that the Ministry of Road Transport and Highways is presently 
functioning with 225 employees against the sanctioned strength of 315 employees in technical side. As far 
as Non-Technical side is concerned, their strength is 519 against the sanctioned strength of 682 
employees. The Committee hopes that the Ministry wi ll take necessary action to fill the vacancies duri ng 
the current fiscal. The Committee may also be apprised on the action taken in this regard. 
 (Para 154 
 of ibid ) 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
180. All vacancies in Central Secretariat Clerical Service (CSCS), Central Secretariat Service (CSS) 
and Central Secretariat Stenographer Service (CSSS)  have been reported to Department of Personnel and 
Training (DoPT) and vacancies for Multi Task Staff (erstwhile Group ‘D’) have been reported to Staff 
Selection Commission (SSC).  The posts of Assistant  Executive Engineers (Group ‘A’) are filled up 
directly through Union Public Service Commission (U PSC).  The vacancies have been reported to UPSC.  
Some posts of Head Clerks, Upper Division Clerks, L ower Division Clerks, Stenographer Gr.  ‘D’ in 
Regional Offices of the Ministry are filled through  SSC.  Vacancies in these cadres have been reported  to 
SSC.   In case of promotion of Superintending Engin eer to the Post of Chief Engineers and above, the 
proposals are being sent to ACC for consideration.   
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE 
181. The Committee notes the reply and desires that  the Ministry should pursue the filling up 
of vacancies in various cadre with the SSC and UPSC vigorously.  
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS   OF THE COMMITTEE 
182. The Committee also feels that the Ministry sho uld give adequate importance to road safety as 
well as development of national highways. The Commi ttee finds that the Indian roads are deficient in 
providing way side amenities to users. The Committe e feels that the Ministry should give ample 

consideration to this aspect by providing underpass es, subways, parking facilities, cafeterias and tra uma 
care centers along national highways and strategica lly important roads. The Committee hopes that the 
Ministry would utilize the allocated funds diligently. 
 (Para 155  of ibid ) 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
183. Facilities such as restaurant/food court, low cost dhaba, telephone booth/ Automated Teller 
Machine (ATM), fuel station & minor repair shop, to ilets, rest rooms for short-stay, kiosk for sale of  
miscellaneous sundry items etc. are available for commuters on National Highways (NHs).   
184. Ministry of Health & Family Welfare has a sche me namely “Capacity Building for Developing 
Trauma Care Facilities in Government Hospitals on N H”.  This Scheme was considered by EFC on 
10/07/2013.  The Ministry of Road Transport and Hig hways supported the said proposal of Ministry of 
H&FW to extend the Trauma Care Scheme initiated during 11 th  Plan for the remaining period of 12 th  Plan.  
During the 11 th  Five Year Plan, the outlay of the scheme was Rs.73 2.75 crore to develop a network of 
Trauma Centers along the Golden Quadrilateral, Nort h-South and East West Corridors of the National 
Highways to help the accident victims.  Further, under National Highway Accident Relief Service Scheme 
(NHARSS), the Ministry of Road Transport and Highwa ys has also provided 140 ALS ambulances to 
Trauma Care Centers set up by M/o Health and Family Welfare during the year 2008-09 and 2012-13.     
185. Provision for underpasses, subways, etc are ge nerally being made in projects being undertaken 
on corridor development approach, i.e. primarily un der NHDP as per actual requirements, local demands,  
etc.   However,  in smaller projects under NH(O), s ometimes on account of limited availability of fund s 
and need to spread available limited resources on m ore number of projects , it is not possible  to mak e 
adequate provisions for underpasses, subways, etc.   Efforts are, however, made to address these 
limitations within available fund constraints.    
186. The Ministry grant access permission to the re tail outlets located along with the National 
Highways. There are more than 3,000 such retail out lets. As per the licence agreement signed as part o f 
access permission, it is mandatory for retail outle ts to provide toilet and drinking water facilities.  Oil 
companies are expected to ensure that these facilit ies are available to the road users at all the outl ets.  In 
order to ensure that these facilities are made avai lable to the road users the Ministry has already re quested 
the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas to evolve  a mechanism to ensure compliance to the right of 
road users regarding availability of drinking water and toilet facilities on retail outlet. 
187. Ministry and National Highways Authority of In dia (NHAI) entrusted Indian Highways 
Management Company Limited (IHMCL) with the project  of Development and Management of Wayside 
Amenities along National Highways in India. 
188. This project intends to provide standardized a nd hygienic facilities along all National Highways 
at regular intervals. These facilities shall have h ygienic food courts/dhabas, clean and usable 
toilets/washrooms, facility for short stay, facilit ies for minor vehicle maintenance, fuel pumps and k iosks 
for sundry items. It is proposed to develop distinct facilities for car & bus passengers, and for truck drivers 
& transporters to cater to their diverse requirements, expectations and their spending capabilities. 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE 
189. The Committee notes the reply. 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS   OF THE COMMITTEE 
190. The Committee in its 198th Report on the ‘Mana gement of Road Transport in National Capital 
Region: Issues and Challenges’ had recommended to c reate an unified machinery for tackling the 
problems related to Road Safety in which there is m ultiplicity of authorities involved. In the Nationa l 
Capital Region itself, the Committee found that mor e than 27 authorities/agencies involved in managing  

Road Transport and its related activities; with no proper and regular coordination and consultations 
between them. As a result, less said is better abou t problem relating to transport/road safety in the NCR. 
The Committee, therefore, reiterates to create an a uthority to fill the gap so that road safety relate d 
problem can be tackled in well coordinated/integrated manner. 
 (Para 156  of ibid ) 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
191. The schemes of Transport Sector are implemente d by the State Government or agencies 
authorized by them and the Ministry has to rely on the submission of audited utilization statement fro m 
the State Government for release of fund. The views  of the committee regarding authenticity of road 
accident data have been noted. As regards, strength ening and expanding road safety department, it is 
stated that a Bill to create the National Road Safe ty and Traffic Management Board (NRSTMB) was 
introduced in  Lok Sabha on 4.5.2010 which was refe rred to Department related Parliamentary Standing 
Committee for examination.  However, this Bill has lapsed consequent upon dissolution of 15 
th  Lok 
Sabha.  Now the Ministry has drafted a new Road Tra nsport & Safety Bill.  National Road Safety & 
Traffic Management Authority (NRSTMA) has been made part of this Bill.  In the meanwhile, Ministry is 
processing a proposal for creation of NRSTMA throug h an executive order, pending its creation through 
an act of parliament.  
192. The Authority will have its own Secretariat.  The Central Government will appoint a Member 
Secretary, who shall be a Government employee of th e rank of Additional/ Joint Secretary to the 
Government of India.  The Authority will  also have  other personnel, as specified by the Central 
Government, to assist in discharge of its functions.  NRSTMA will have the power to do all things that are 
necessary or convenient to be done for or in connec tion with, or as incidental to, the achievement of the 
objects of the National Transport Authority.  
193. NRSTMA would act as a regulatory agency to ove rsee road safety activities in the country to 
improve road safety scenario in line with the Natio nal Road Safety Policy.   The policy will provide a  
broad framework for the Government both at the Cent ral and the State level, to take measures for 
improvement of road safety scenario in the country.  
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE 
194. The Committee notes the reply. 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS   OF THE COMMITTEE 
195. The Committee after having examined the workin g and performance of the Ministry of Road 
Transport & Highways for several years has observed  that while Highway construction has become its 
main thrust area, its attention to Road Transport a nd Safety remains woefully inadequate. The Committe e 
understands the practical constraints in this regar d and emphasizes the need for keeping all kinds of 
extraneous forces/lobbies at bay in implementing an d enforcing transport and road safety laws in the 
Country. 
 (Para 157 
 of ibid ) 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
196. Recommendation of the Committee has been noted  for consideration. 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE 
197. The Committee notes the reply and hopes that t he Road Transport sector and safety will 
be given greater importance by the Ministry in the coming years by way of adequate allocation of 
funds as well as utilization of allocated funds to the maximum extent. 
***** 

 
Annexure  
Proforma for sending proposals for sanction of  Pollution Testing Equipments  
 
To 
  
            The Director(Transport), 
            Ministry of Road Transport & Highways, 
            Transport Bhavan, 
            1, Parliament Street, New Delhi-110001. 
  
  
Subject: Scheme for pollution testing equipment. 
  
Sir, 
  
            On behalf of the State Government/UT Ad ministration of 
________________________, I request that _______ nu mber of Smoke meters and 
________ number of  Gas Analysers may be sanctioned  under the scheme of Road 
Safety Equipment and Pollution Testing and Control of Ministry of Road Transport & 
Highways.  These equipments will be owned and used by Transport Department.  There 
are________ number of RTOs in the State / UT. 
  
2.         Further the following will be ensured: 
         i)  Pollution testing equipments will be u sed for mandatory periodical testing 
as    well as   for surprise checking of motor vehicles on the roads. 
         ii)  The State Government/ UT Administrati on would sign MOU with the 
Ministry of Road Transport & Highways for proper  utilization and maintenance 
of these equipments. 
         iii) The State Government/UT Administratio n will give an undertaking that 
State taxes such as     octroi, entry tax etc. will  not be levied on these 
equipments or exemption   will be given to the     pollution testing equipments 
else, State Government/UT Administration will bear such expenses.  
         iv) Adequate training will be imparted to the State Transport Department 
personnel to handle such equipments. 
  
Name & Designation of the Nodal Officer 
Address 
  
Signature 
 Secretary (Transport)/Commissioner (Transport) with seal 
                                                                          Date: 
                                                                                      Telephone No:        
 
 
 