 
 
       
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
December, 2022/ Pausha 1944 (Saka) 
REPORT NO. 
337
_ 
THREE HUNDRED THIRTY SEVENTH REPORT  
Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/ 
Observations of the Committee contained in its Three Hundred 
Seventeenth Report on Demands for Grants (2022-23) of 
Ministry of Road Transport and Highways 
 
 ( rd December, 2022) 
  
 
Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 23
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 2nd February, 2023)

 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Website:     https://rajyasabha.nic.in  
 E-mail:     rsc-tt@sansad.nic.in 

 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT,  
TOURISM AND CULTURE 
 
 
THREE HUNDRED THIRTY SEVENTH REPORT  
Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/ 
Observations of the Committee contained in its Three Hundred 
Seventeenth Report on Demands for Grants (2022-23) of Ministry 
of Road Transport and Highways 
 
 
 (Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 23rd ) 
  
 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
December, 2022/ Pausha 1944 (Saka) 
Hindi version of this publication is also available 
December, 2022
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 2nd February, 2023)

 
 
 
C O N T E N T S 
 
P A G E S 
 
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE     i 
2. INTRODUCTION       ii 
3. ACRONYMS               iii-v 
4. REPORT                                1-64 
5. RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS-AT A GLANCE   65-70 
6. ANNEXURES        71-75 
    7. *MINUTES   
 
         
        
        
      
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
______________________________________ 
 
*To be appended  
76-78


i 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE  
 (2022-23) 
 
 (Constituted on 13th September, 2022) 
 
1. Shri V. Vijayasai Reddy   - Chairman 
 
Rajya Sabha 
s 
2. Shri Mohammed Nadimul Haque 
3. Shrimati S. Phangnon Konyak 
4. Shri Jugalsinh Lokhandwala 
5. Shri Manas Ranjan Mangaraj 
6. Dr. Sonal Mansingh 
7. Shrimati Rajani Ashokrao Patil 
8. Shri A. A. Rahim 
9. Dr. C. M. Ramesh 
10. Shri Vinay Dinu Tendulkar 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
11.  Shri Anto Antony 
12.  Shri Ram Margani Bharat 
13.  Shri Tapir Gao  
14.  Shri Rahul Kaswan 
15.  Shri Ramesh Chandra Majhi 
16.  Shri Sunil Baburao Mendhe 
17.  Shri K. Muraleedharan 
18.  Shri S. S.Palanimanickam  
19.  Shri Chhedi Paswan   
20.  Shri Kamlesh Paswan  
21.  Shri Sunil Kumar Pintu 
22.  Shri Prince Raj 
23.  Shri Tirath Singh Rawat 
24.  Shrimati Mala Roy 
25.  Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
26.  Shri Dushyant Singh 
27.  Shri Rajbahadur Singh 
28.  Shri Ramdas Chandrabhanji Tadas 
29.  Shri Manoj Kumar Tiwari 
30.  Shri Krupal Balaji Tumane 
31. Shri Dinesh Lal Yadav "Nirahua"  
 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Arun Sharma, Joint Secretary 
Shri Swarabji B., Director 
Smt. Monica Baa, Additional Director 
Smt. Subha Chandrashekar, Deputy Secretary  
Shri Ranajit Chakraborty, Under Secretary 
Shri Gaurav Singh Gahlain, Assistant Committee Officer 

ii 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairman, Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport, 
Tourism and Culture, having been authorized by the Committee to present on its behalf, do 
hereby present this  Three Hundred Thirty Seventh Report on the Action Taken by the 
Government on the recommendations/ observations of the Committee  contained in its Three 
Hundred Seventeenth Report on Demands for Grants (2022 -23) of Ministry of Road 
Transport and Highways. 
2. The Three Hundred  Seventeenth Report of the Department -related Parliamentary 
Standing Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture was presented on the  14th March, 
2022 to the Parliament. 
3.  The Action Taken Replies on the recommendations of the Committee contained in its 
Three Hundred Seventeenth Report were received from the Ministry of Road Transport and 
Highways on 13th and 21st October, 2022. 
4. The Committee considered and adopted the Report in its meeting held on the  22nd 
December, 2022.   
 
 
(V. Vijayasai Reddy) 
NEW DELHI;                                                           Chairman, 
December 22, 2022                                                  Department-related Parliamentary Standing            
Pausha 1, 1944 (Saka)                                      Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture, 
                                                                                                                                 Rajya Sabha 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

iii 
 
 
ACRONYMS 
API Application Programming Interface 
ATN Action Taken Note 
BE Budget Estimates 
BG Bank Guarantee 
BMP Bharatmala Pariyojana 
BOT Build-Operate-Transfer 
BRO Border Roads Organisation 
CA Chartered Accountant 
CAG Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
CALA Competent Authority for Land Acquisition 
CC Completion Certificate 
CCEA Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs 
CCIE Conciliation Committee of Independent Experts 
CGM Chief General Manager 
CIRT Central Institute of Road Transport 
COS Change of Scope 
COVID Corona Virus Disease 
CRRI Central Road Research Institute 
CVC Central Vigilance Commission 
C-DAC Centre for Development of Advanced Computing 
eDAR Electronic Detailed Accident Report 
DGCA Directorate General of Civil Aviation 
DGM Deputy General Manager 
DHI Department of Heavy Industries 
DISCOM Distribution Company 
DM Deputy Manager 
DPR Detailed Project Report 
DR Direct Recruitment 
DTC Driving Training Centre 
EESL Energy Efficiency Services Limited 
EPC Engineering, Procurement and Construction 
CoERS Centre of Excellence for Road Safety 
EV Electric Vehicle 
FAME Faster Adoption and Manufacturing of (Hybrid &) Electric 
Vehicles 
FHWA Federal Highway Administration 
FY Financial Year 
GAIL Gas Authority of India Limited 
GATE Graduate Aptitude Test in Engineering 
GM General Manager 
HAM Hybrid Annuity Mode 
HFL High Flood Level 
HQ Headquarter 
HRB Highway Research Board 

iv 
 
IAHE Indian Academy of Highway Engineers 
ICWA Institute of Cost and Works Accountants 
IDC Institute for Development and Communication 
IDTR Institute of Driver Training and Research 
IEBR Internal and External Budget Resources 
IHMCL Indian Highway Management Company Limited 
IMRA Identification, Monitoring and Research Application 
INR Indian Rupee 
IRC Indian Roads Congress 
IRQP Improvement of Riding Quality Programme 
IRTE Institute of Road Traffic Education 
IT Information Technology 
PM-JAY Pradhan Mantri Jan Arogya Yojana 
LA Land Acquisition 
MBA Master of Business Administration 
MCA Model Concession Agreement 
MDR Major District Roads 
MORTH Ministry of Road Transport and Highways 
MOU Memorandum of Understanding 
MQCV Mobile Quality Control Van 
MP Madhya Pradesh 
MQCV Mobile Quality Control Van 
MV Motor Vehicles 
NCLT National Company Law Tribunal 
NCT National Capital Territory 
NDT Non-Destructive Testing 
NE North-Eastern 
NGO Non-Governmental Organization 
NH National Highway 
NHAI National Highways Authority of India 
NHDP National Highways Development Project 
NHIDCL National Highway and Infrastructure Development Corporation 
Limited 
NHLML National Highways Logistics Management Limited 
NIT National Institute of Technology 
NLU National Law University 
NSV Network Survey Vehicle 
NTA National Testing Agency 
ODR Other District Roads 
OFC Optical Fiber Cable 
OM Office Memorandum 
ONGC Oil and Natural Gas Corporation 
OPD Out Patient Department 
OS Operating System 
OTFIS One Time Fund Infusion Scheme 
PCC Provisional Completion Certificate 
PFC Power Finance Corporation 

v 
 
PIARC World Road Association (formerly Permanent International 
Association of Road Congresses) 
PM-JAY Pradhan Mantri Jan Arogya Yojana 
PMIS Project Monitoring and Information System 
PMU Project Management Unit 
PR Periodic Renewal 
PSU Public Sector Undertaking 
PWD Public Works Department 
QC Quality Control 
iRAD Integrated Road Accident Database 
RAMS Road Asset and Management System 
RCD Road Construction Department 
RDTC Regional Driving Training Centre 
RE Revised Estimates 
RFP Request for Proposal 
RO Regional Officer 
ROB Road Over Bridge 
ROW Right of Way 
RR Recruitment Rules 
RSCE Road Safety Chief Engineer 
RW Roads Wing 
SAIL Steel Authority of India Limited 
SARDP Special Accelerated Road Development Programme 
SOP Standard Operating Procedure 
SPM Special Project Monitors 
SPV Special Purpose Vehicle 
SRD Standards, Research and Development 
SSA State Support Agreement 
SWB Static Weigh Bridge 
TOT Toll-Operate-Transfer 
TRAI Telecom Regulatory Authority of India 
TRW Transport Research Wing 
UI User Interface 
UP Uttar Pradesh 
UT Union Territory 
VR Village Roads 
WIM Weigh-in-Motion 
WSAs Wayside Amenities 
YP Young Professionals 
ZFC Zero Fatality Corridors 
 

1 
 
REPORT 
The Report of the Department -related Parliamentary Standing Committee on 
Transport, Tourism and Culture deals with the Action Taken by the Ministry of Road 
Transport and Highways on the recommendations/observations as contained in its Three 
Hundred Seventeenth Report on ‘Demands for Grants (2022 -23) of Ministry of Road 
Transport and Highways’ which was presented to both the Houses of Parliament on 14 th 
March, 2022.   
2.      The Action Taken Replies were received from the Ministry on 13 th October and 21st 
October, 2022 in respect of all the observations/ recommendations contained in the Report. 
The replies have been categorized as follows:- 
Chapter-I: 
Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the Ministry: 
Paragraph Nos.: 24, 35, 51, 57, 77, 81, 88, 91, 95, 102, 125, 129 
Total: 12 
  
Chapter-II: 
Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue in 
view of the replies of the Ministry: 
Paragraph Nos.: 13, 17, 18, 19, 20, 29, 30, 36, 37, 38, 39, 40, 41, 42, 44, 46, 56, 58, 
………………………….87, 106, 107, 109, 111, 113, 115, 116, 120, 127, 128, 131, 137, 139, 
………………………… 141 
Total: 33 
Chapter-III: 
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Ministry have not 
been accepted by the Committee: 
Paragraph Nos.: 6, 7, 14, 21, 43, 61, 65, 68, 73, 74, 75, 76, 89, 92, 100, 108, 117, 
…………………. 118, 134 
Total: 19 
  
Chapter-IV: 
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which the final replies of the Ministry 
are still awaited: 
Paragraph Nos.: 27 
Total: 1 
 
3. The Committee desires that final reply in respect of the recommendation/observation 
which has been categorized as interim reply by the Committee should be furnished at 
the earliest. 
  

2 
 
CHAPTER-I 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY 
THE MINISTRY 
ANNUAL PLAN 2022-23 
Recommendation/Observation 
1. The Committee is pleased to note the trend of increasing allocation to the Ministry, 
which underscores the importance being given to expanding and improving the National 
Highways network across the country. The Committee, however, notes that the Ministry has 
not been able to attract private investment at a similar pace. This is partly the reason for the 
high IEBR component in the last few years which is mainly why the huge debt burden is 
currently being faced by NHAI. The Committee appreciates that the IEBR co mponent has 
been kept to a nominal Rs. 0.01 crore for FY 2022 -23, with the Budgetary support made to 
the Ministry covering for the shortfall in the IEBR component. The Committee, however, feels 
that neither high budgetary support alone, nor high IEBR compo nent will be able to suffice 
the investment requirements for the rapid pace of NH development across the country in the 
long run. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that the Ministry may work upon 
resolving the apprehensions of the private secto r which are limiting their participation in the 
road infrastructure sector in the last few years, by working in close coordination with the 
concessionaires and financial institutions. 
(Para 24) 
Reply of the Ministry 
1.1 The position with regard to high IEBR component in the last few years and the 
budgetary support made for the shortfall in the IEBR in the current FY has been noted. The 
Committee’s recommendation is to resolve the apprehensions of the private sector which are 
limiting their participation in the road infrastructure sector in the last few years, by working 
in close coordination with the concessionaires and financial institutions. 
1.2 The Ministry has come out with several innovative funding mechanisms to increase 
private investments after 20 14. During 2007 -14, private investments were confined to only 
BOT projects. Now, apart from BOT, HAM projects, we are also getting private investments 
through monetization of National Highways under TOT, InvIT (Infrastructure Investment 
Trust) and through SPVs (Special Purpose Vehicles). The private investments during 2007-14 
were about Rs. 1,08,481 crores, which came only from BOT projects. The private 
investments has increased to Rs. 1,69,214 crores during 2014 -21 from BOT, HAM, TOT and 
SPV. 
1.3 Further a dditional steps have been taken to resolve apprehensions of the private 
sector, including but not limited to: 
   Resolving Stuck projects  – NHAI has implemented a Stuck Projects policy 
and is trying to resolve pending disputes through one -time settlement process. Through 
this process, NHAI hopes to recycle money in the infrastructure space and promote 
investment in new projects. NHAI has also introduced a Termination Projects guideline 

3 
 
to standardize the implementation of complex MCA (Model Concession Agreem ent) 
clauses. 
   Encouraging new industry categories – NHAI is encouraging new investor 
classes, like institutional investors, specialized O&M (Operation & Maintenance) 
contractors, specialized tolling agencies etc. in the roads sector to diversify the investor 
base and encourage traditional investors to focus on their core competencies. 
   Amendment in Model Concession Agreements  – NHAI has introduced 
various amendments in the MCAs for BOT (Toll), and Hybrid Annuity to encourage 
private participation and  these amendments have received positive feedback from the 
market. Innovations such as Dispute Resolution Board, sharing of traffic risk etc. have 
been appreciated. Further, NHAI is now committing 90% of Construction Zone in BOT 
Toll projects at Appointed Date. This, when added with the removal of the requirement 
of Capacity Augmentation by the Concessionaire, removes a lot of chances of disputes 
in the Contracts. 
 
 
Vacancies in NHAI 
Recommendation/Observation 
2. The Committee is highly distressed to note that despite the recommendations to the 
Ministry year after year, NHAI, with a budgetary allocation of Rs. 134,015 crores, is still 
operating with only 61.2 percent of its sanctioned strength. The Committee fails to 
understand how NHAI will be able to do justice to its mandate with more than a third of its 
sanctioned strength being vacant. The Committee strongly recommends that the Ministry 
should take immediate measures to fill the vacancies in NHAI in shortest possible time. 
(Para 35) 
Reply of the Ministry 
2.1 With regard to the observation of the Committee, it is stated that continuous efforts 
for filling up the vacant posts have been made and after analysing the hindrances in filling up 
of the vacancies, various re medial measures have been undertaken from time to time. The 
following are the few important measures undertaken to fill up the vacant posts and meet the 
manpower requirements arisen from time to time: -  
 During the last two years, recruitment of 499 posts on promotion / Direct Recruitment 
(DR) / Deputation has been undertaken. 
 To overcome shortage of technical manpower and to meet the temporary requirement 
of manpower due to increased workload on account of Bharatmala projects, 449 
Technical personnel in th e category of Site Engineers / Young Professionals have 
been engaged on contract basis. Further action for recruitment of 200 Young 
Professional (Technical) based on GATE Scores is also underway. 
 To keep NHAI as a lean and thin organisation, technical manp ower was being 
engaged on deputation from other organisations and simultaneously, regular intake of 
officers is being undertaken in a phased manner at Deputy Manager level through 
GATE/Engineering Services Examination. 

4 
 
 80 posts of Deputy Manager (Technical ) based on GATE, 2020/2021 scores on DR 
mode completed. 
 69 Deputy Manager (Tech.) in 2022 based on ESE -2020 marks have been selected, 
out of which 31 have already joined. 
 The remaining unfilled vacancies would be filled -up next year based on GATE 
Score/ESE, 2021 marks. 
 Recruitment action for filling up of 193 posts is already underway. 
 In Finance Cadre, recruitment action for filling up 62 posts is underway. However, 
due to stay by the Hon’ble High Court of Odisha, the recruitment for most of these 
posts is held up. 
 The Recruitment Rules (RRs) of Technical and Finance Cadre have been revised and 
fresh recruitment based on the revised RRs has been undertaken. 
 135 vacancies will be filled in 2022 -2023, 2023 -2024 under promotion quota in 
Finance and Technical Cadre. 
 17 posts of Deputy Manager (Fin.) and 02 posts of Jr. Hindi Translator have been 
taken-up for recruitment through National Testing Agency on DR basis. Further, 13 
posts of Asst. Manager (Legal) are proposed to be filled on DR through 
NTA/NLU/BESIL. 
 RRs of Technical Cadre has been revised by the Ministry recently to attract more 
officers of State PWDs having core experience in road sector. 
2.2 Further, after analysing the reasons for non-filling up of the vacancies, comprehensive 
review of the RRs has been undertaken and the RRs are at advanced stage of finalisation. 
After the revision of the RRs, it is expected to meet the shortfall of the manpower 
requirement. 
 
Sukhad Yatra Smartphone Application 
Recommendation/Observation 
3. The Committee is concerned to note that the number of complaints received via the 
Sukhad Yatra application has not shown any uptick since 2018. The Committee is of the 
considered view that wide adoption of the application can help NHAI gain free actionable  
information regarding the issues being faced by NH users across the country, which can be 
quickly acted upon, thus ensuring a well -maintained and safe driving experience on the NHs. 
The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry may work upon impr oving the 
usability of the Sukhad Yatra smartphone application at the earliest and come up with 
innovative means to promote the application to NH users across the country. An option to 
seek feedback from the person posting a complaint using the app, may al so be added so as to 
gain insight into whether the problem pointed out by the complainant has actually been 
resolved or not. 
(Para 51) 
Reply of the Ministry 

5 
 
3.1 In last one -year, various initiatives have been undertaken to improve the user 
experience of Sukhad Yatra App as below: - 
 The usage of Google Map APIs (Application Programming Interface) extended to 
pay-as-you-use basis in a month to allow unhindered usage by road users. 
 Updated version of the App available in both iOS and Android platform with 
improved User Interface (UI). 
 Additional new options under “Report an Issue” section such as Report an accident 
(automatically dials to NH Helpline 1033 on clicking the Option), Report  non-
availability/non-cleaning of Toilets at Toll Plaza, Others, etc. 
 Regular update of all NH fee plazas, toll rates etc. 
3.2 After discussions with IIT Madras and NHAI/IHMCL, a detailed requirement has 
been prepared to upgrade / revamp Sukhad Yatra mobile App (or as rechristened) as a world -
class unified mobile App for hig hway users in India for road related information/services 
with a strong in-built highway complaint/grievance redressal & escalation mechanism. 
3.3 Further, MoRTH has also constituted a committee to suggest improvements in the 
existing App. Based on deliber ation of the Committee a draft  SOP with the detailed 
requirement and escalation matrix has been prepared and inputs requested from stockholders. 
3.4 The new features of the revamped mobile App to be developed are proposed under 
broad heads as below:- 
 Highway Information & Services 
 Compliant/Grievance Redressal mechanism 
 FASTag related services 
 Feedback/Suggestions 
 Others 
3.5 Pursuant to internal discussion and deliberation in the Committee constituted by 
MoRTH, a   techno-commercial proposal has also been received from C -DAC (Centre for 
Development of Advanced Computing), a  premier R&D organization of the Ministry of 
Electronics and Information Technology (MeitY),  for development of upgraded mobile App 
on behalf of NHAI/IHMCL and ongoing O&M. It is expected  that the revamped new mobile 
app with all envisaged features shall be developed in 5 months’ time. 
 
 
DELAYED ROAD PROJECTS 
Recommendation/Observation 
4. The Committee notes that a Corridor Rating Methodology 1 for project management 
and accountability has been devised by NHAI. The Committee reiterates the recommendation 
it has previously made in para 22 of its 296 th Report on ‘Role of Highways in Nation 
Building’ regarding creation of a central database of Nati onal Highways rating scores, 
including the ones executed by State PWDs, and further recommends that those parameters 
                                                           
1 Source: https://nhai.gov.in/nhai/sites/default/files/policy_circular/Highway_Rating_Report_NHAI.pdf 

6 
 
in the Corridor Rating Methodology which pertain to the performance of road contractors, 
may be utilized to adjudge their overall performance based on all the road projects they have 
worked on across the country. The Committee feels that a lot of projects get delayed because 
of poor performance of contractors and recommends that some weightage may be given to 
the past performance of road cont ractors, in terms of timely completion and quality 
construction, during the process of awarding of road projects. 
(Para 57) 
Reply of the Ministry 
4.1  To assess various parameters such as efficiency, safety and user services of completed 
4/6 laned  National Highways (NHs), NHAI has initiated the exercise of Highway Rating 
twice a year. The first iteration of this exercise has been completed and was launched on 
public domain on 1st March 2021.  The NHs are managed at toll plaza level for the influenc e 
length under them which is termed as a ‘cell’. Therefore, the 'cell' is judged based on three 
major criteria i.e. Efficiency (45 marks), Safety (35 marks) & User Services (20 Marks) on a 
scale of 100 marks. These criteria are further divided into a total  of 39 parameters which 
include average speed, delay at toll plaza, accidents, incident response time, wayside 
amenities, general cleanliness etc. 
4.2 Using this rating mechanism, one can understand where and how much each ‘cell’ is 
inefficient, unsafe and  lacks in user services. Then interventions, proposals and remedial 
measures can be suggested to improve the ratings of NH. This initiative will help in setting 
standards for benchmarking and assessment of highway corridors in India. Further, this 
exercise will also help in increasing the accountability of the stakeholders involved in the 
development and maintenance of NHs. 
4.3 The use of this highway rating exercise along with other project implementation 
aspects to assess the past performance of contracto rs is being planned by NHAI for 
incorporation in assessment of the technical proposals of various firms accordingly. 
4.4 The Ministry has issued SOP for rating of 2 laning projects.  
4.5 The Ministry, vide letter dt 22.09.2022, has requested State/UT PWDs to carry out 
rating of NHs and provide details to enable performance appraisal of deployed 
Concessionaire / Contractor / Maintenance Agency. 
 
MAINTENANCE AND REPAIR OF NATIONAL HIGHWAYS 
Recommendation/Observation 
5. The Committee recommends that the Ministry may look into the issue of waterlogging 
on National Highways in areas with heavy rainfall or flood -prone areas, since the same not 
only slows the movement of passengers and goods but also poses significant road safety risks. 
Necessary corrective measures may immediately be taken on the NHs facing waterlogging 
issues and research may be conducted to look into tackling the issue from the initial design 
and construction stage of new NH projects.  
(Para 77) 
Reply of the Ministry 

7 
 
5.1  The construction of National Highways (NHs) in such areas are being executed, 
following the guidelines issued vide IRC:34 -2011 – “Recommendations for Road 
Construction in Areas affected by Water Logging, Flooding and/or Salts Infestation”. 
5.2  The Ministry directed IRC on 02.06.2022 to urgently review relevant codes and 
publications related to the design criteria for embankments for the highways to ensure 
mandatorily conducting intensive hydrological studies as per of design provisions to  prevent 
flooding on one side of embankment for lack of adequate waterway and also for taking up of 
necessary mitigation measures to obviate rise in water table or HFL, etc., on account of 
highway construction. 
5.3 The Ministry also requested all its field  officers as well as State Governments / UTs, 
vide letter dt 02.06.2022, to ensure adequate advance preparedness before monsoon, timely 
actions during monsoon and floods and post monsoon rectification of damaged National 
Highways (NHs) sections and structu res for ensuring resumption of traffic movement and 
restoration of damaged highway sections of highways on priority.  
5.4 NHAI on 02.06.2022 issued directions to all its field offices: - 
a) to have a re-look on design study of all new NHs and Expressways/ acc ess controlled 
NHs with high embankments being constructed so that it does not lead to blockage of 
water flow on one side; 
b) to take data from field engineers where such issues came up in the last two years and 
provide sufficient cross drainage; 
c) to ensure pr oper drainage measures & protection works for NHs / Expressways 
projects (including in 22 Greenfield corridors under Bharatmala Pariyojana) 
conforming to design guidelines laid down in IRC Codes; 
d) use of rain water harvesting as an additional drainage and groundwater recharge 
measure; 
e) to capture drainage pattern, HFL (High Flood Level) and other hydrology aspects 
during construction period to provide additional mitigation measures (if required) 
considering usually 3 monsoon seasons are observed during construction of 
Greenfield projects; 
f) to have pre -monsoon and post -monsoon inspections carried out through project units 
and to review the same on a monthly basis at their level. 
 
5.5 NHAI is capturing the status of project highway through drone and the captured video 
is being examined at the project site level to ensure smooth flow of water during the rainy 
season.  This is also being utilized to provide additional cross drainage structures in the form 
of culvert/ minor bridge/ drain etc., wherever necessary. 
5.6 About 5 km stretch has been identified on Delhi - Vadodara Expressway, where 
ponding/ overtopping of water took place during monsoon; suitable mitigation measures for 
natural drainage is being finalized for implementation. 
 

8 
 
SPECIAL ACCELERATED ROAD DEVELOPMENT PROGRAM (SARDP) FOR 
NORTH EASTERN AREAS 
Recommendation/Observation 
6. The Committee is anguished to note that the SARDP -NE Phase -A and Arunachal 
Pradesh Package was initially targeted to be completed by March, 2014 but has faced severe 
delays, with the current target for completion in 2023 -24. The Committee recommends that 
the Ministry may urgently look into the issues that led to such huge delays in the 
implementation of these projects and use the insights gained from this analysis into ensuring 
that the revised target of completion of SARDP -NE Phase-A by 2023 -24 is achieved as well  
as to mitigate delays in the execution of SARDP Phase-B once it is initiated. 
(Para 81) 
Reply of the Ministry 
6.1 Main reasons for delay in implementation of projects under SARDP-NE (Phase A and 
Arunachal package) were delay in LA, utility shifting, clearance etc. Now, projects are 
awarded after having at least 90 % LA, all clearance in hand and utility shifting done or made 
part of scope of the contractor so that works are not delayed. Further, these reasons of delay 
and measures taken to mitigate will be utilised while implementation of SARDP-phase B. 
6.2 Out of 5,998 Km identified under SARDP-NE (Phase A & Arunachal Package), 5,721 
Km has been awarded and 4,830 km has been completed as on 31.03.2022. Various measures 
have been taken to expedite the progress to ensure timely completion of works. Government 
has set up two regional offices of MoRTH (at Guwahati and Itan agar) and Eight regional 
offices of NHIDCL headed by Executive Director level officer in each state of North Eastern 
region along with many PMUs and site offices, with a view of having a better coordination 
with the Concerned Departments of the State Gover nment, to expedite all the clearances, 
effective project monitoring and execution. Further, action against the delay caused on the 
part of Contractor/Concessionaire is taken from time to time as per contractual provisions on 
case-to-case basis, if required. 
RESEARCH, TRAINING, STUDIES AND OTHER ROAD SAFETY SCHEMES  
Recommendation/Observation 
7. The Committee is anguished to note the poor expenditure pattern under the crucial 
head ‘Research, Training, Studies and Other Road Safety Schemes’ since the past several 
years. The various activities under this heads viz., Training of drivers, Publicity an d 
awareness, National Highways Accident Relief Service Scheme, Road Safety & Pollution 
Testing Equipment, etc. are crucial for improving the scenario of road safety on National 
Highways across the country and to offset the huge death toll faced by the coun try each year 
due to road accidents. The Committee is not satisfied with the reasons furnished by the 
Ministry for the poor expenditure pattern under this head and feels remedial measures should 
be taken to make maximum utilization of the limited funds ava ilable under this head. This 

9 
 
pattern questions the commitment of the Ministry to make earnest efforts to minimize the 
deaths caused due to road accidents each year.  The Committee recommends that the 
Ministry may cull out all the issues causing under-utilization under this important head at the 
earliest so that due focus is laid on road safety in the coming years. 
(Para 88) 
Reply of the Ministry 
7.1 Observations of the Committee are noted for compliance. The Ministry has worked 
out detailed Action Plan to e nsure optimal utilization of the funds towards ensuring Road 
Safety for FY 2022-23. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
8. The Committee recommends that the Ministry may analyze the State -wise/UT-wise 
trends of road accidents and deaths and work closely with the State Governments where an 
increasing trend is observed. Effective implementation of road safety initiatives by States 
where there is noticeable decrease in the number of road accidents/deaths, may be shown as 
a blueprint to States failing to do well in terms of road safety on NHs as well as other roads. 
(Para 91) 
Reply of the Ministry 
8.1 Observations of the Committee are noted for compliance. The best practices adopted 
by the States for effective implementation of Road Safety initiatives will be shown to other 
States for emulation and to act upon. 
8.2 The Ministry has developed Electronic Detailed Accident Report (eDAR) [erstwhile 
Integrated Road Accident Database (iRAD)], which is a central database collation and 
management system for accident data collection across the country and a data -driven systems 
approach to road safety. eDAR (erstwhile iRAD) is a comprehensive system involving 
stakeholders like Ambulance, Blood Banks, VAHAN, SARATHI, NHAI, PWD, Courts, 
Insurance Companies, for assimilation of information on a single platform and geo-tagging of 
the same. 
8.3 The system enables a spectrum of back -end analytics to determine the root cause of 
accidents and adopting strategic remedial measures towards enhancement of Road safety.  
8.4 A success model for a similar data -driven systems approach was successfully 
implemented by State Govt. of Tamil Nadu earlier which reduced the road crash fatalities in 
the State. 
8.5 eDAR (erstwhile iRAD) project has been rolled out in 34 States/UTs and process has 
been initiated for live accident data entries by the stakeholders. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
9. The Committee is deeply anguished to note that against RE 2021 -22 allocation of Rs. 
229 crore for Road Safety measures, the Ministry has managed to spend only Rs. 81 crore 
i.e., just 35% of the allocated sum, till January, 2022. As noted by the Committee i n para 85 
above, this pattern of low expenditure makes it evident that a sense of urgency and zeal is 

10 
 
thoroughly lacking in the steps taken by the Ministry to minimize the huge toll of deaths 
happening on National Highways due to road accidents. The Committee recommends that the 
Ministry may pay more attention to its road safety activities since the Ministry shoulders the 
responsibility of making the NH network safer across the country. Remedial measures may be 
taken at the earliest in order to ensure optim al utilization of the allocation made under this 
during FY 22-23. 
(Para 95) 
Reply of the Ministry 
9.1 Observations of the Committee are noted for compliance. The Ministry has prepared a 
detailed Action Plan to ensure optimal utilization of the funds towards ensuring Road Safety 
for FY 2022-23. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
9. The Committee feels that the steadily increasing volume of calls being received on the 
NH Helpline Number 1033 speaks for the increasing awareness about the same among 
general public. The Committee recommends that the Ministry may strive to further increase 
awareness about the helpline numbers through various means, both offline and online. 
(Para 102) 
Reply of the Ministry 
10.1 NHAI being the nodal for operating 1033, has acknowledged t he recommendation of 
the committee and has issued directions to its Regional Officers/Project Directors to put 
additional effort to popularize the existing 1033 helpline number through posters/hoardings 
near the toll plazas and also ensure adequate number of 1033 signboards along National 
Highways vide O.M. No. 528262 dated 30.09.2022 (attached as Annexure-I). Installation of 
1033 Helpline signboards covered under short-term measure for which field officers of NHAI 
have been delegated appropriate powers for putting signboards. 
 
10.2 Further, media division of NHAI has been advised for incorporating the suggestion of 
the committee while finalizing publicity material (on safety/public awareness) for print/ 
electronic media and IT Division has been directed to provide the information on 1033 
helpline number on the homepage of NHAI website. 
 
MISCELLANEOUS 
Awarding of road projects 
Recommendation/Observation 
11. The Committee recommends that the Ministry may start maintaining a score of 
performance of road concessionaires across the country based on the construction quality, 
timely completion etc. of the road projects worked upon by them. This database based on 
work history of road concessionaires may be used as one of the criterias based on which new 
road projects are awarded, giving priority to concessionaires with excellent project history 
as long as their financial capacities allow the same. 
(Para 125) 

11 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
11.1 A corridor rating assessment was designed to improve the service levels of important 
corridors of the country. Six parameters with varying weights viz. Safety & Ride Comfort 
(40%), Mobility & Reliability (25%), Incident Management (12%),  Customer Satisfaction 
(8%), Environment (7%) and miscellaneous parameters (8%) were chosen for the study. 
11.2 Each corridor was rated on multiple sub-parameters under the above 6 parameters. 
11.3 Interventions were identified and prioritized based on their impact in ramping up the 
quality of the roads and their associated costs. 
11.4 The annual rating exercise was completed for Apr -May’21 covering a corridor length 
of 18,688 km.  
11.5 In addition, a specific weighted average contractor rating system is  being followed by 
the Ministry in evaluating the performance of contractors.  
11.6 The Ministry is currently in the process of developing a more robust mechanism of 
rating contractors which would be used as a lever to incentivize good work and deter 
contractors from sub -standard work. The key levers being explored include increasing and 
reducing financial and bid capacity, waiving bid security etc. The rating mechanism is being 
benchmarked against international standards like US, Canada, France, Taiwan to create a 
global and world class rating and reward mechanism. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
12. The Committee recommends that the Ministry may examine the feasibility of 
prescribing upper/lower limits for submission of bids for road projects. Till the time th at is 
done, or if the same is not found to be a feasible alternative, the Ministry may establish a 
specialized mechanism for closer scrutiny of the road projects that are awarded at 
substantially lower bids than the official estimates of the Ministry/NHAI. 
(Para 129) 
Reply of the Ministry 
12.1 To address the issue of projects being awarded at substantially lower costs compared 
to estimates of the Ministry or its implementing Agencies, following initiatives have been 
taken:- 
i. MoRTH vide letters dated 18.05.2022 and 26.08.2022 has issued amended 
provision in Standard RFP (Request for Proposal) for EPC (Engineering, 
Procurement and Construction) projects for identification of abnormally low 
bids, which stipulates that in case bid price offered by bidder is less than 20% 
of the estimated project cost (as mentioned in RFP), then the bidder shall 
furnish an irrevocable and unconditional guarantee from a Bank towards an 
Additional Performance Security. 
ii. NHAI vide policy circular no 15.10/2021 dated 02.07.2021 has issued 
directions that quality inspection teams constituted by NHAI would visit 
projects awarded at substantially lower costs regularly and submit report for 
taking required action against defaults, if any. Such projects would also be 
identified separa tely on Data Lake and details uploaded regularly to enable 
effective monitoring of progress of work.  

12 
 
CHAPTER-II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES OF THE MINISTRY 
 
ANNUAL PLAN 2021-22 
Recommendation/Observation 
1. The Committee is happy to note that the Ministry has made significant strides in terms 
of road length awarded and constructed each year, between the Financial Year 2014 -15 and 
Financial Year 2020-21. The Committee hopes that t he Ministry will strive to ensure that the 
pace of award and construction further increases in the coming years. However, in the 
ongoing Financial Year 2021 -22, despite having spent about 77.8 percent of the allocation 
made to it at the RE Stage (till Janu ary, 2022), the Ministry has managed to achieve only 
about 56 percent of its targeted award and construction length. The Committee feels that the 
Ministry’s targets regarding the award of projects and completion of construction length for 
the current Finan cial Year appear to be ambitious. The Committee recommends that the 
Ministry may look into the reasons behind falling short of achieving the targeted physical 
output for the ongoing Financial Year and resolve the issues thus identified so as to ensure 
that the targeted outputs are achieved in the FY 2022-23. 
(Para 13) 
Reply of the Ministry 
1.1 Total of 12,731 km length of NHs was awarded during the year 2021 -22 against the 
target of 12,000 km and 10,457 km length of NHs constructed against the target of 12, 000 
km. The Ministry has achieved more than the targeted award length; however, in construction 
the Ministry has achieved about 87.1% of the target construction length. Slight shortfall in 
achieving the construction target is mainly on account of the following reasons:- 
i. Delay due to COVID-19 Pandemic 
ii. Cash flow problems with the contractor/concessionaire despite relaxation granted 
by the Government of India during COVID-19 
iii. Delay due to land acquisition  
iv. Delay in ROB clearance  
v. Delay in handing over of irrigation land 
vi. Delay in shifting of utilities, addition / deletion / relocation of various structures 
etc. 
vii. Delay in getting permission for construction machinery.  
 
 
ANNUAL PLAN 2022-23   
Recommendation/Observation 
2. The Committee is happy to note that a gainst the projected demand of Rs. 1,57,384.55 
crore made by the Ministry and Rs. 60,000 crore as IEBR, the Ministry has been allocated 

13 
 
Rs. 1,19,107.71 crore, thus nullifying the need for raising funds through IEBR. Excluding 
allocation made under NHAI (Investment), however, the projected demand of the Ministry for 
the FY 22-23 was Rs. 74,504.55 crores, against which an allocation of Rs. 65292.71 has been 
made at B.E. 2022-23 stage, owing to substantial shortfall between the projected demand and 
allocation received for heads such as ‘Externally Aided Projects’, ‘NH(O)’, ‘Bharatmala 
Pariyojana – work under State PWDs and NHIDCL’, ‘Capital Outlay for N -E States’, 
‘Capital Outlay for development of road connectivity in LWE affected areas and other tribal 
areas’, and ‘Maintenance of NHs including Swachhta Action Plan,  PIARC’. 
(Para 17) 
3. The Committee is surprised to note that although the overall demand of the Ministry 
was Rs. 2,17,384.55 crores (including IEBR) and the actual allocation made is Rs. 
1,99,107.72 crores (including the nominal proposed IEBR amount of Rs. 0.01 crores), the 
Ministry has stated that there is no shortfall of fund and accordingly, no adverse effects 
thereof on any programme/scheme are expected. The Committee desires to know how the 
Ministry plans to tackle the shortfall between projected demand and allocation received 
under various heads. The Committee strongly recommends that the Ministry may request the 
Ministry of Finance to allocate more funds under the heads such as Externally Aide d 
Projects, wherein there is a significant gap between the projected demand of the Ministry and 
the allocation received at B.E. 2022-23 stage. 
(Para 18) 
Reply of the Ministry 
3.1 Although the budgetary allocation of the Ministry of Rs. 1,99,107.72 crore wa s less 
than the demand of Rs. 2,17,384.55 crore, it was 91.6% of the total demand. Shortfall is 
being estimated considering the progress of projects and additional fund requirements are 
accordingly being proposed for the specific heads at RE 2022 -23 stage. The estimated fund 
requirements for externally aided projects under EAP were reasonable at BE 2022 -23 stage 
considering the progress of projects and hence no shortfall is envisaged. 
Recommendation/Observation 
4. The Committee may be apprised about the rea sons for an allocation of only ₹200 
crores under ‘Bharatmala Pariyojana – work under State PWDs and NHIDCL’ in B.E. 2022-
23, as against the projected requirement of ₹500 crores. 
(Para 19) 
Reply of the Ministry 
4.1 Fund of Rs. 200 crores under ‘Bharatmala P ariyojana – work under State PWDs and 
NHIDCL’ head during FY 2022-23 were allocated keeping in view the projected expenditure 
for  FY 2022 -23 against NH works being executed in non -tribal districts by State PWDs, 
BROs and NHIDCL only (excluding NHAI) under  Bharatmala Pariyojana. Shortfall is being 
estimated considering the progress of projects now and additional fund requirements are 
accordingly being proposed for the specific heads at RE 2022-23 stage. 
  

14 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
5. Though the Committee welcomes the allocation of ₹60 crores in B.E. 2022 -23 against 
the projected requirement of ₹30 crores under the head ‘Training, Quality Assurance’, the 
Committee desires to know how the Ministry plans to utilize the excess allocation. 
(Para 20) 
Reply of the Ministry 
5.1 Allocation of Rs. 60 crores in B.E. 2022 -23 under the head ‘Training, Quality 
Assurance’ has been made in view of the projected expenditure to be incurred during the FY 
2022-23 on research projects being carried out by Ministry / NHAI in c ollaboration with 
various IITs / NITs / Research Institutes as well as setting up of a Centre of Excellence in 
IAHE namely Centre for Advanced Transportation Technology and Systems (CATTS), based 
on MoU signed between IAHE and University of New South Wales  (UNSW), for capacity 
building, technology transfer and creation of enabling environment for development of an 
India specific Computable General Equilibrium (CGE) Model for entire NH network in the 
country. 
 
NHAI Debt Servicing 
Recommendation/Observation 
6. The Committee notes that the debt servicing cost of NHAI has been consistently 
increasing since FY 2021 -22 and is expected to fall from the FY 2022 -23 onwards, 
presumably because NHAI is proposed to raise just Rs. 1 lakh as IEBR component in the FY 
2022-23. The Committee may be apprised of the reason for increase in the amount that is 
estimated by the Ministry to be spent on servicing NHAI debts during FY 25-26.   
 (Para 29) 
Reply of the Ministry 
6.1 Total sum required for debt servicing i.e. repayment/re demption by NHAI during FY 
25-26 shall be Rs. 15,563 crores, which shall be needed for the following purpose: - 
 
(i) Repayment of bank loan: Rs. 9,500 crore. 
(ii) Maturity of 54 EC capital gain bonds raised in FY 2020-21: Rs. 3,427 crores.  
(iii) Redemption of tax free bonds raised in FY 2015-16: Rs. 2,636 crores.  
 
6.2 Further, Rs. 23,118 crores shall be required for interest payment during the FY 2025 -
26. The interest payable to the bank is based on the prevailing interest rate. If the bank 
interest is reduced, the debt liability shall also be getting reduced. 
 
6.3 Thus, the total amount required for debt servicing during FY 2025 -26 shall be Rs. 
38,681 crores.  
 
Recommendation/Observation 

15 
 
7. The Committee recommends that the Ministry/NHAI may take financial decisions with 
due long -term planning and ensure that NHAI debt levels stay within sustainable levels, 
aided in part by innovative financing and monetization of NH assets.   
(Para 30) 
Reply of the Ministry 
7.1 In order to restrict further surge in the NHAI debt, the  Government has not given any 
mandate to NHAI for raising funds from the market under IEBR in FY 2022-23. Hence, there 
shall be no further increase in the debt outstanding as on 31st March 2022.  
7.2 Further, the Government has permitted NHAI to utilize the funds raised through InvIT 
for debt servicing. The target for monetization of NH assets during FY 2022 -23 has been set 
for Rs. 20,000 crores. 
 
Vacancies in NHAI 
Recommendation/Observation 
8. It has come to the notice of the Committee that the first Recru itment Rules (RR) of NHAI 
had provisions for direct recruitment of officials up to General Manager (GM) level, both in 
Technical and Finance division. However, over time, these seats were commuted into 
promotion and deputation seats by removing the provisi on of direct recruitment from GM to 
Manager levels, which might be because of increased influence of officials on deputation in 
NHAI. 
(Para 36) 
Reply of the Ministry 
8.1 Although in the Recruitment Rules 1996, there was a provision for direct recruitment 
upto the level of GM (which was changed in 2016), NHAI has not exercised the option of 
Direct Recruitment (DR) and has rather enhanced the regular cadre by way of absorpti on of 
deputationists and in some cases lateral entry especially at the level of Manager. Keeping in 
view the dynamic nature of requirements of the organisation, the direct recruitment has been 
prescribed at the feeder grades only. Analysing the requirement  of the manpower from time 
to time, more than 20 amendments have been carried out in the Recruitment Rules since 2010 
to facilitate infusion of manpower, particularly the technical manpower. As a result of the 
effort, the technical manpower, which was 367 in 2010, has been increased to 716 as on date.  
For fresh infusion of technical competence, direct recruitment at the level of Dy. Manager 
(Technical), based on GATE scores has been undertaken since 2017, which ensured quality 
of technical manpower. More t han 200 Dy. Managers (Tech.) have been recruited, while 
recruitment for another 73 Dy.Managers based on Engineering Service Exam, 2020   has been 
concluded recently. 
Recommendation/Observation 

16 
 
9. The Committee is of the view that commuting the Direct Recrui tment posts to only 
promotion and deputation posts has caused a lot of difficulty in the efficient functioning of 
NHAI, especially in finance wing, as there is a dearth of candidates eligible for deputation 
because of various reasons, such as: 
a. NHAI follows Double Entry Accounting pattern whereas Government agencies follow 
Single Entry Accounting 
b. Disparity in pay scale as NHAI and PSUs follow different pay pattern 
c. Non-willingness of Central/State PSUs to spare their officials as they themselves face  
shortage of officials 
d. Ineligibility of internal candidates for promotion 
(Para 37) 
Reply of the Ministry 
9.1 To obviate the difficulties in filling up the Finance Cadre posts after studying the 
reasons for ineligibility of the applicants, the Recruitment Rules of Finance Division upto the 
post of DGM were amended in consultation with the Finance Division of NHAI in 2021 and 
simultaneously the sanctioned strength in the various posts of the cadre were also revised. As 
per the new RRs of Finance division, DR has been kept at Accountant (88 posts) and Dy. 
Manager (21 posts) level.   To ensure that the direct recruited  officers have at least two 
promotions, DR has not been proposed in the next hierarchal posts. This is essential to attract 
fresh talent and to retain the manpower so recruited on DR basis. These RRs have been 
framed in such a way so as to protect the inte rest of regular employees of NHAI on one hand 
and getting the experienced / trained manpower from other organisations at higher posts on 
the other in order to have harmonious mix and keeping the needs of the organisation. Besides, 
to ensure filling -up the posts at all times, an element of flexibility by provision of adjusting 
quotas in recruitment methods has been provided in the revised RRs of the Finance Cadre. 
 
9.2 Based on the revised RRs, recruitments for filling up of 42 posts on deputation basis 
(12-DM, 24-Mgr & 06-DGM) in finance cadre is under way. The screening of the applicants 
has already been completed wherein 11 candidates for the post of DGM (Fin.), 12 candidates 
for the post of Dy. Mgr (F&A) & 15 candidates for the post Manager (F&A) have been found 
eligible. However, the selection process could not be completed as the Hon’ble High Court of 
Odisha has stayed operation of the advertisement for deputation basis and in spite of best 
efforts, the case is not coming for hearing. For 17 posts of Dy.  Manager (F&A) on DR basis, 
recruitment through National Testing Agency (NTA) has been undertaken and the process is 
at advanced stage of completion. 
Recommendation/Observation 
10. The Committee observes that because of these issues, an Expert Committee was formed to 
redress the issue and Draft Recruitment Rules, 2017 were formulated re -introducing the 
provision for Direct Recruitment upto DGM level in Finance cadre, by reducing quota for 
deputation and promotion for three years until equilibrium was reache d in the hierarchy. It 
has come to the notice of the Committee that lobbies of deputation officials working in NHAI 

17 
 
got the provisions changed before the draft RR could be placed for board approval and in the 
end, only changes made in the new RR were lingu istic and a reduction of promotion time 
period from 5 years to 4 years. In this regard, the Committee recommends that the Ministry 
may furnish details regarding the exact changes made in the existing RR by the Expert 
Committee in 2017. 
(Para 38) 
Reply of the Ministry 
 
10.1 It is agreed that in the draft Recruitment Rules 2017, DR upto DGM level in Finance 
Cadre was provided for, but the said Recruitment rules did not attain finality.   In the revised 
rules of Finance Cadre of 2021, which were finalised in co nsultation with Finance Division 
of NHAI, the DR mode of recruitment has been kept at the level of Dy. Manager and 
Accountant. These RRs have been framed in such a way so as to protect the interest of 
regular employees of NHAI on one hand and getting the e xperienced / trained manpower 
from other organisations at higher posts on the other hand in order to have harmonious mix 
and keeping the needs of the organisation. 
 
10.2 As desired, a comparative statement indicating the provisions/changes made in the 
RRs of Finance Cadre from 1996 till date including the provisions proposed in the draft RRs 
of 2017 is attached herewith as Annexure-II for perusal. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
11. The Committee took up this issue in its 296 th Report on ‘Role of Highways in Na tion 
Building’. In the Action Taken Replies furnished by the Ministry on the 296 th Report of the 
Committee, it has been observed that a large number of vacancies exist in NHAI from Deputy 
Manager level to GM level in Finance cadre, which implies that NHAI is mostly functioning 
with Junior Accountants and Young Professionals (YP) who nei ther have appropriate 
educational qualifications nor experience, but are handling thousands of crores of public 
money possibly serving the vested interests of the contractors. The Committee further notes 
that despite several advertisements for deputation i n Finance wing, no applications were 
received for eligible candidates and NHAI kept rolling on the advertisement. 
(Para 39) 
Reply of the Ministry 
11.1 To obviate the difficulties in filling up the Finance Cadre posts after studying the 
reasons for ineligibility of the applicants, the Recruitment Rules of finance division upto the 
post of DGM were amended in consultation with the Finance Division of NHAI in 2021 and 
simultaneously the sanctioned strength in the various posts of the cadre were also revised. 
These RRs have been framed in such a way so as to protect the interest of regular employees 
of NHAI on one hand and getting the experienced / trained manpower from other 
organisations at higher posts on the other in order to have harmonious mix and keeping the 
needs of the organisation. Besides, to ensure filling -up the posts at all times, an element of 

18 
 
flexibility by provision of adjusting quotas in recruitment methods has been provided in the 
revised RRs of the Finance Cadre. 
 
11.2 Based on the revised RRs , recruitments for filling up of 42 posts on deputation basis 
(12-DM, 24-Mgr & 06-DGM) in finance cadre is under way. The screening of the applicants 
has already been completed wherein 11 candidates for the post of DGM (Fin.), 12 candidates 
for the post of Dy. Mgr (F&A) & 15 candidates for the post Manager (F&A) have been found 
eligible. However, the selection process could not be completed as the Hon’ble High Court of 
Odisha has stayed operation of the advertisement for deputation basis and in spite of bes t 
efforts, the case is not coming for hearing. For 17 posts of Dy. Manager (F&A) on DR basis, 
recruitment through National Testing Agency (NTA) has been undertaken and the process is 
at an advanced stage of completion. 
 
11.3 All the vacancies in Finance Cadre have been taken up for recruitment and in some 
cases even by diverting the vacancies under promotion quota to deputation quota. However, 
the processes are delayed pending litigations/stay orders from Courts. 
 
11.4 From the above, it is apparent that all out efforts are being made to fill the vacancies 
in the Finance Cadre and if not due to the hindrances owing to pending litigations/stay orders 
from Courts, a substantial number of vacancies would have been filled up by this time. It 
would not be prude nt to contend that NHAI is over dependent on Junior Accountants and 
Young Professionals as a very few Young Professionals in the Finance Cadre (at present 04) 
have been   engaged and also most of the existing Finance Personnel, are professionally 
qualified and gained professional competence by virtue of their experience in the 
organisation.  
 
Recommendation/Observation 
12.  The Committee is surprised to note that in para 5.1 of Chapter III of the 307 th Report 
of the Committee, NHAI has clearly indicated vari ous problems in recruiting officials under 
deputation quota, but still NHAI frames policy for recruitment under deputation only. It may 
also be noted that under para 5.2 of Chapter III of that Report, NHAI has replied that review 
of Finance cadre RR was re cently done and accordingly, new advertisement has been made. 
The Committee may be apprised of the various changes made in the RR after this review. 
(Para 40) 
Reply of the Ministry 
12.1 Keeping in view the dynamic nature of requirements of the organization  where 
manpower requirements keep changing with the projects being implemented, a certain 
percentage of posts are required to be manned through deputation quota to ensure that there is 
adequate temporary workforce available to meet the increased workforce requirement when 
awards and construction are at peak and the permanent cadre is not over -sized once NHAI 
moves into a predominantly Operations & Maintenance role. 
Recommendation/Observation 

19 
 
13. In para 6.1 of Chapter III of the 307 th Report of the Committee, NHAI has mentioned 
that while vacancies from CGM to Deputy Manager in Finance cadre range from 50 percent 
to 90 percent, the employee strength is maximum at Junior Accountant level. The Committee 
fails to understand how an organization managing public money to the tune of lakhs of crores 
rupees can be run through Junior Accountants, with huge vacancies existing at higher levels. 
In para 9.1 and para 9.2 of the abovementioned Report, it has been stated that direct 
recruitment above Deputy Manager level will lead to loss of promotion avenues to the Junior 
Accountants. In this regard, the Committee feels that since at present, promotion seats are 50 
percent whereas deputation seats are 50 percent as well, for which NHAI is not able to 
receive any eligible ap plications, NHAI may fill the deputation seats through direct 
recruitment, for which eligible and efficient officials at lower level can apply as well, further 
improving their promotion prospects. 
(Para 41) 
Reply of the Ministry 
13.1 All the vacancies in F inance Cadre have been taken up for recruitment and in some 
cases even by diverting the vacancies under promotion quota to deputation quota. However, 
the processes are delayed pending litigations/stay orders from Courts. 
13.2 In Finance Cadre, recruitment action for filling-up about 62 posts is underway. Based 
on the revised RRs, recruitments for filling up of 42 posts on deputation basis (12 -DM, 24-
Mgr & 06-DGM) in finance cadre is under way. The screening of the applicants has already 
been completed wherein 11 candidates for the post of DGM (Fin.), 12 candidates for the post 
of Dy. Mgr (F&A) & 15 candidates for the post Manager (F&A) have been found eligible. 
However, the selection process could not be completed as the Hon’ble High Court of Odisha 
has stayed operation of the advertisement for deputation basis and in spite of best efforts, the 
case is not coming for hearing For 17 posts of Dy. Manager (F&A) on DR basis, recruitment 
through National Testing Agency (NTA) has been undertaken and the process is at an 
advanced stage of completion. 
13.3 From the above, it is apparent that all out efforts are being made to fill the vacancies 
in the Finance Cadre and if not due to the hindrances owing to pending litigations/stay orders 
from Courts, a substantial number of vacancies would have been filled up by this time.  
 
Recommendation/Observation 
14. In this regard, it is further observed that Railways has its own cadre because huge funds 
are involved, so a responsible cadre is required and outsiders at such lower level who will 
come for few years and go, cannot be relied upon with huge financial stake, in view of 
accountability issues. It may also be noted that all Central PSUs, whether ONGC, PFC, 
GAIL, SAIL etc., recruit around 35 percent of their officials on dir ect basis at all levels, to 
have experienced candidates from the market and bring equilibrium in the system, also 
helping eligible internal candidates to rise to higher ranks. 
(Para 42) 
Reply of the Ministry 

20 
 
14.1 Normally, direct recruitment at higher posts is not undertaken keeping in view the 
limitation that it not only affects the promotional avenues of the existing employees, but also 
the promotional avenues of the employees so recruited at higher posts, who may get 
stagnated with limited promotional avenues and thus, lose motivation to perform better over a 
period. Unlike NHAI, where the salaries and other facilities are purely based on Govt. 
structure, the PSUs offer lucrative pay packages and many other monetary benefits, and thus 
are able to recr uit and retain officers at higher positions despite lack of promotional avenues 
for them.  Moreover, the need for providing direct recruitment at higher posts in NHAI was   
not felt to ensure the right mix of permanent workforce and workforce on deputation,  so that 
once NHAI moves into a predominantly Operations & Maintenance role, the permanent cadre 
is not oversized. 
Recommendation/Observation 
15. The Committee feels that NHAI can resolve a lot of issues with these amendments and 
bring transparency and efficiency in its system. 
(Para 44) 
Reply of the Ministry 
15.1 By way of comprehensive review of the existing RRs undertaken by NHAI, it is 
expected that all the vacant posts may be filled-up. 
 
Standards, Research and Development & Quality (SRD&Q) Division, NHAI 
Recommendation/Observation 
16.    The Committee feels that the SRD&Q Division should be more active in the field of 
research in the road sector and utilize the vast troves of data available with NHAI to come up 
with solutions presently stifling the usability and effectiveness of the NH network in the 
country. Research activities to be undertaken should be planned in advance with inputs from 
both within and outside NHAI regarding the bottlenecks/difficulties that need to be addressed 
in the road secto r in India, taking cues from international best standards. Special budgetary 
provisions should be made to fund such researches/studies which will try to address the 
aforesaid pain -points. The Committee recommends that the Ministry/NHAI may recruit an 
eminent researcher in the field as the head of the SRD&Q Division so that overall R&D 
activities carried out can be monitored well in the road infrastructure sector by the Ministry.  
(Para 46) 
Reply of the Ministry 
16.1 27 research projects have been assigned b y NHAI to various IITs/NITs/Research 
Institutes. Further, in order to boost the research in Highway Sector, the services of Retd. IIT 
Delhi Professor (Sh. A.K. Nagpal) was engaged as Advisor (Research) from 11.01.2021 to 
31.01.2022. 
 
DELAYED ROAD PROJECTS 

21 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
17. The Committee is concerned to note that a lot of road projects across the country are 
delayed at present. The Committee notes the various reasons enumerated by the Ministry 
behind the delays in the projects, and the steps being taken by the Ministry for completing the 
delayed projects. Road infrastructure project delays are always accompanied by cost 
overruns, besides causing a lot of trouble and loss of time to NH commuters. The Committee, 
therefore, strongly recommends th at the Ministry/NHAI may review the road project 
monitoring mechanism and strengthen the same in order to keep a track on the progress of 
road projects at every stage and remedial measures may be taken wherever delays are 
apparently noticed at the earliest. 
(Para 56) 
Reply of the Ministry 
17.1 Several critically delayed projects have been completed during the last 7 years. Out of 
total 110 NHs languishing projects in about 9,250 km length entailing estimated investments 
of more than Rs. 1,77,000 crore, 54 p rojects have been completed in about 3,680 km length 
costing about Rs. 49,000 crore with policy interventions such as One Time Fund Infusion 
Scheme (OTFIS), substitution, suspension, regular monitoring, review and corrective action, 
etc.; 49 projects in ab out 4,970 km costing about Rs. 1,13,000 crore are in various stages of 
progress and are targeted for completion by FY 2023-24.  
17.2 At present, 878 ongoing projects are delayed in a length of 27,326 Km amounting to 
Rs. 3,11,810 Crore. Of these 878 project s, 478 number of projects in length of 13,013 Km 
amounting to Rs. 1,32,379 Crore are completed / operational (CC/PCC issued) or nearing 
completion (progress more than 99%). Further, 20 projects in length of 337 Km costing Rs. 
7,408 Crore are foreclosed/ de -sanctioned/ terminated. Balance 380 number of delayed 
projects in length of 13,976 Km amounting to Rs. 1,72,023 Crore are in progress, out of 
which 11,541 km length (83%)  is already constructed. These 380 projects are likely to be 
completed as per following schedule:- 
Year No. of delayed projects targeted for 
completion 
2022-23 304 
2023-24 76 
 
17.3 The Government has taken several initiatives for completing the delayed projects, 
such as streamlining LA, expediting fulfilment  of Government obligations for condition 
precedents, one -time fund infusion, premium re -scheduling, securitization of road sector 
loans, rationalized exit for equity investors, termination/foreclosure and re -bidding, 
revamping the dispute resolution system , rationalized compensation for delays attributed to 
Authority, regular meetings and reviews at various levels with all stakeholders including the 
State Governments, project developers, Contractors/Concessionaires, notification of Guiding 
Principles for Resolution of Stuck Projects aiming at foreclosure of projects which are stuck 
on account of the concessionaire/contractor in NCLT (National Company Law Tribunal) or 
mutual default of both Authority and Contractor/Concessionaire, providing various COVID -
19 relief measures under Atmanirbhar Bharat, etc.     

22 
 
17.4 Details pertaining to NHs Projects being implemented through State & UT PWDs / 
RCDs, etc. and NHIDCL are being uploaded on PMIS (Project Monitoring and Information 
System) module and NHs Projects perta ining to NHAI on Data Lake platform, for online 
monitoring of status of NH works being executed through these agencies. PMIS portal is 
being upgraded to provide comprehensive output of project wise details for enabling effective 
monitoring. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
18. The Committee recommends that the Ministry may conduct regular meetings with 
concerned State Government officials in order to ensure that the land acquisition process for 
all road projects stays on track. The Committee desires to be apprised of the steps t aken by 
the Ministry to minimize the delays sometimes caused in road projects on account of State 
Governments’ lethargic approach to land acquisition for the project.  
(Para 58) 
Reply of the Ministry 
18.1 Following steps are taken with the State Government s to minimize the delays caused 
in land acquisition: - 
 Constitution of High Powered Committees under Chief Secretaries: State   
Governments have been requested to nominate Chief Secretaries as Nodal Officers for 
monitoring the NHAI projects. Most of the St ate Governments have constituted the 
committees under Chief Secretary. 
 Appointment of State Level Coordinator for land acquisition/pre -construction; NHAI 
HQ has nominated a Project Director located in the State to function as State Level 
Coordinator for Land Acquisition/Pre-construction, whose functions are as follows:- 
 Coordination with State Government officers on regular basis for all matters 
pertaining to land acquisition. 
 Ensuring timely coordination meetings at the State level to resolve pending issues. 
 Decentralization and setting up of Regional Offices; NHAI has recently appointed 
Regional Officers (ROs) to manage/implement NHDP Projects in States. These 
officers are responsible for coordinating land acquisition/pre -construction issues 
(pertinent to stretches within the State) between concerned Technical Division/Land 
Acquisition Division/State Level Coordinator/State Government Authorities. 
 Ministry has shared Umbrella State Support Agreement (SSA) with various States to 
promote infrastructure develo pment and expedite construction activities in various 
parts of the country. SSA undertakes State’s support in providing continued access to 
the RoW (Right of Way) to the Concessionaire along with obtaining required 
clearances / Permits from State Governmen t / local bodies. It also advises States to 
ensure that no local taxes are collected from Concessionaire by municipal and local 
authorities including Panchayat and no barrier is put on the Highway Projects. 
Additionally, State Governments were requested in  SSA to provide preferential 
mining rights to Concessionaire / Contractor to reduce the cost due to mitigated risk in 

23 
 
quarrying. It also advises State Government to extend support in sharing the 25% land 
acquisition cost for unviable stretches. 
 
RESEARCH, TRAINING, STUDIES AND OTHER ROAD SAFETY SCHEMES  
Recommendation/Observation 
19.  The Ministry has stated the reason for reduction of funds for several schemes under 
this head at RE 2021 -22 stage is due to the fact that they are under third party evaluation. 
The Committee feels that the Ministry should conduct this third party evaluatio n before the 
activities under the existing approved scheme have been completed so that schemes working 
to improve road safety through various means, are not totally stalled because of such 
evaluations. 
(Para 87) 
Reply of the Ministry 
19.1 Actions were initiated well in advance. The proposal from CIRT, Pune for third party 
evaluation was received on 04.09.2019, based on which work order was issued to CIRT, Pune 
for third party evaluation of Inspection & Certification (I&C) Centres, Institute of Driving 
Training & Research (IDTR), Regional Driving Training Centres (RDTC) and Driving 
Training Centres (DTC), Non -Government Organisations (NGO) on 29.01.2020. However, 
Covid-19 Pandemic affected the evaluation works due to which CIRT, Pune could submit the 
draft report only in March, 2021. 
 
SCHEME ON WOMEN SAFETY  
Recommendation/Observation 
20.  The Committee notes that seven States/UTs (Haryana, NCT of Delhi, Andhra 
Pradesh, Telangana, Gujarat, Tamil Nadu, Lakshadweep) have not opted for the scheme 
despite several reminders. It is difficult to understand the lethargic response of so many 
States towards such a scheme, which, if implemented, will definitely help improve the state of 
women’s safety. The Committee recommends that the Ministry may try to raise this issue  with 
these States’/UTs’ Governments/Administration at the highest level and try to understand the 
reasons behind their disinterest in the implementation of the scheme in their respective 
State/UT.  
(Para 106) 
Reply of the Ministry 
20.1 Efforts are being m ade to bring the remaining States/UTs on -board. It is confirmed 
that Andhra Pradesh has applied in the scheme and, accordingly, funds have been sanctioned 
and transferred to the State. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
21.  The Committee further notes that the M inistry has stated that no separate proposal 
has been received from States for the public transport scheme under the Nirbhaya 

24 
 
Framework, as the reason behind the drastic reduction of 80 percent in the BE 2022 -23 
allocation of Rs. 20 crores under the head ‘ Scheme on Women Safety on Public Road 
Transport’, against BE 2021 -22 allocation of Rs. 100 crores. The Committee recommends 
that the Ministry may come up with more effective schemes to improve the state of safety of 
women on National Highways and in public transportation. 
(Para 107) 
Reply of the Ministry 
21.1 Noted for compliance. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
22.  The Committee also points out the total lack of mobile network connectivity for large 
stretches of National Highways. The Committee feels that having no mobile network 
connectivity for extended stretches of NHs is a serious cause of concern since the same would 
mean issues would be faced in connecting to emergency services as well. Besides the safety 
aspect, the Committee feels that having basic mobile connectivity while travelling is getting 
more and more important in the modern times, with navigational services and several other 
forms of important communications rely on on -the-go mobile connectivity. While it is 
understood that the installation of cell towers is carried out by telecommunication companies 
on the basis of the number of users in the area, the Committee feels that given the high 
volume of traffic plying on National Highways across the country, many such stretches might 
be having suff icient demand from users for good internet connectivity. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends that the Ministry may look into this matter and if feasible, suitable 
measures may be taken to ensure good mobile connectivity for NH users, in coordination 
with the Department of Telecommunications and other organizations concerned. 
(Para 109) 
Reply of the Ministry 
22.1 The Ministry is primarily responsible for development and maintenance of National 
Highways. The Ministry has already taken up providing integrated  utility corridor which will 
allow laying of OFC cables also in its greenfield expressways of Delhi Mumbai and Delhi – 
Amritsar Katra. However, observations of the Committee have been apprised to Department 
of Telecommunications for further necessary action on the matter. 
22.2 Further, to realize India’s National Broadband Mission vision to develop 50 lakh 
kilometers of Optical Fibre Cable (OFC) infrastructure by 2024 in India, as part of PM Gati 
Shakti Initiative, the Ministry of Road Transport and Highway s is closely working with 
Telecom Regulatory Authority of India (TRAI) to create smart and digital highways by 
providing dark-fibre connectivity along the national highways allowing for a direct plug -and-
play model for users. This initiative will empower t he Government to provide internet 
connectivity to remote locations and far -flung areas all across the country where users like 
private players, village panchayats, can get connectivity from the tapping point from the 
nearest highway section. The OFC infras tructure has been designed to cater to increased data 
volumes till 2050. This initiative will significantly boost 5G roll -out across the nation and 

25 
 
improve the ease of doing business in India since the private players shall no longer wait for 
acquiring clearances for Right of Way, environmental clearances, etc. 
 
 
SCHEMES OF STATES AND UTs FINANCED FROM CRIF 
Recommendation/Observation 
23. The Committee is surprised to note that road projects pertaining to only 10 
States/UTs have been approved under the heads ‘Schemes of States financed from CRIF’ and 
‘Schemes of UTs financed from CRIF’ during the ongoing FY 2021 -22. The Committee 
desires to be apprised of the reasons behind the same. The Committee has submitted a 
detailed report on CRIF. The recommendation ma de in that report may be followed 
scrupulously. 
(Para 111) 
Reply of the Ministry 
23.1 As per the extant policy, the list of works proposed to be taken up on State roads 
under CRIF scheme are forwarded by State Govt./ UT to the Ministry for finalisation. Th e 
Ministry finalises the list of works recommended by State Govt./ UT and communicates the 
finalised list of works to States/ UTs and the concerned State Govt./ UT has to do the 
technical approval, financial sanction and accord administrative approval of these projects. 
23.2 Accordingly, during FY 2021 -22, the Ministry has finalised the list of works 
pertaining to 16 States/UTs under the heads ‘Schemes of States financed from CRIF’ and 
‘Schemes of UTs financed from CRIF’ based upon submissions from these St ates/UTs. Other 
than such new road works finalised by the Ministry during FY 2021 -22, expenditure against 
ongoing road works finalised in previous year(s) and sanctioned by the concerned State Govt. 
/ UT is also met from fund under CRIF Scheme for State Ro ads during FY 2021 -22 based 
upon Utilisation Certificate submitted for such works by the concerned State Govt. / UT and 
accrual of the concerned State/UT as per the extant policy for State Roads under CRIF. 
 
MISCELLANEOUS 
Indian Roads Congress and Central Road Research Institute 
Recommendation/Observation 
24. The Committee observes that the construction of National Highways is carried out as 
per the standards and specifications laid down in various IRC standards. It is evident that the 
codes and standards p ublished by IRC are of extreme significance, with the quality of 
construction of NHs across the country directly dependent on the same. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends that the Ministry may submit information regarding the various issues 
being faced at present in construction of NHs in the country to the committee set up by IRC to 
aid in its exercise for identification of important pilot research projects and ensure that 

26 
 
sufficient allocation is made available to IRC in order to carry out such projects  through 
eminent research organizations and academic institutions of repute.  
(Para 113) 
Reply of the Ministry  
24.1 In the area of road research, Indian Roads Congress (IRC) has been playing an active 
role in the promotion of research and development activities. Under the aegis of IRC, 
Highway Research Board (HRB), Identification, Monitoring and Research Application 
(IMRA) Committee, Pilot Project Committee, Committee on Accreditation of New Materials 
and Techniques", etc. have been set up. Highway Res earch Board (HRB) of IRC operates 
scheme of Accreditation of new material/ technology developed / invented abroad & India for 
recommending/ promoting their trial usage in the road and bridge projects since 2007. 
Further, the IRC Council in its 197 th meeting held at Kohima (Nagaland) on 1 June, 2012 has 
approved the formation of the new committee "Pilot Project Committee", comprising of 
members from Centre & State Government Departments, academic institutions, international 
organizations and private sector, to look into the usage of newly accredited materials and 
techniques. This Committee oversees the implementation as well as monitoring of the pilot 
R&D projects in the field with help of all the stakeholders associated with highway 
development.  
24.2 Generally IRC does not directly award, sponsor, monitor any kind of pilot research 
project. Such projects are being awarded and monitored by S&R division of Ministry / NHAI. 
24.3 The Ministry collaborates with CRRI and other research institutes like IITs  and NITs 
etc for carrying our research projects. The research findings are shared with IRC to 
enable them to amend/upgrade/develop guidelines and standards. 
 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
25. The Committee observes that the activities carried out by CRRI are of gre at 
significance for the effective development and maintenance of an intricate road network in 
India through its activities pertaining to Research and Development in the road sector as 
well as its national and international training programmes for capacity building of human 
resources in the area of highway engineering. The Committee expresses its apprehensions 
that since CRRI is a constituent of CSIR, which is an autonomous body under the 
administrative supervision of the Ministry of Science and Technology, there might be a lack 
of cohesive and concerted efforts between CRRI and the R&D and HR training institutes of 
the Ministry of Road Transport and Highways viz., IAHE, IRC and NHAI’s SRD&Q Division. 
The Committee recommends that the Ministry may ensure that sufficient budgetary allocation 
is made available to fund the activities carried out by CRRI, IRC, SRD&Q Division and 
IAHE so as to bolster the R&D and HR training aspects of the Indian road sector. Efforts 
may also be made to ensure that there is strong coordination between all these agencies to 
complement each other’s efforts for the overall improvement of the road sector in the 

27 
 
country. The knowledge gained by these research and training agencies may be freely shared 
with the various road construction agencies in the country, including State PWDs. 
(Para 115) 
Reply of the Ministry 
25.1 The Ministry generally collaborates with all renowned Research Institutes for carrying 
out research projects. CRRI is one of such institutes. The Ministry is also actively 
coordinating with prestigious Academic Institutes like IITs /NITs for carrying out studies, 
Research and investigations also. 
25.2 The outcome of all the research institutes are circulated to all state governments / 
NHAI / NHIDCL / BRO  for the improvement  in the Planning, Design, Construction and 
Maintenance of roads. Further Indian Road Congress also comes out with fresh codes / 
guidelines / manuals or amendments based on the outcome of these studies from time to time. 
25.3 IAHE (Indian Academy of Highway Engineers) has been mandated to impart training 
to Highway professionals / Engineers of the Central and State Governments, local bodies and 
private Consultants & Contractors in various aspects of highway engineering such as 
planning, project preparation, pre-construction activities, design, construction, operation and 
maintenance etc. IAHE organizes various kinds of training programmes for highway 
professionals so as to meet the specific needs. Duration of such training programmes varies 
from part of a week to 10 months’ duration. 
25.4 During FY 2021 -2022, IAHE has organized 53 training programmes, wherein 2867 
no. of Highway professionals / Engineers have participated, including 366 from NHAI, 181 
from NHIDCL & 97 from private sector. 
25.5 An MoU has been signed between IAHE and University of New South Wales 
(UNSW) for setting up of a Centre of Excellence in IAHE namely Centre for Advanced 
Transportation Technology and Systems (CATTS), for capacity building, technology transfer 
and creation of enabling envi ronment for development of an India specific Computable 
General Equilibrium (CGE) Model for entire NH network in the country. 
25.6 The Ministry has set up Centre of Excellence for Road Safety (CoERS) at IIT Madras. 
Following 05 nos. research proposals on r oad safety engineering have been assigned to 
CoERS during the current financial year:- 
i) Development of software/mobile application for road safety audit 
ii) Comparative performance of road hump, rumble strips, transverse bar marking and 
tabletop for traffic calming 
iii) Impact of speed limits on road safety and capacity, recommendations on protocol for 
speed limits 
iv) Optimal design of roundabouts of different sizes and recommendations for review of 
existing guidelines 
v) Comparative analysis of 2.5m wide paved shoulder vis-à-vis 1.5m paved shoulder on 2/4/6 
lane roads 

28 
 
25.7 Also the Ministry has sanctioned 7 Nos  of Research schemes amounting to Rs.17.89 
crores during the last 3 financial years (2019 -20 to 2021-22). Ministry has approved 6 Chair 
Professor in nos. reputed academic institutes of the country during the last 3 financial years.  
16 nos. research projects have been identified during the current financial year 2022-23. 
25.8 Additionally, NHAI has assigned 27 research projects to various IITs/ NITs/ Research 
Institutes for a cost of 23.7 crores. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
26.  The Committee recommends that IRC may collaborate with CRRI and conduct 
research on usage of innovative materials for road construction and strengthening road 
safety through improved design and construction techniques, particularly looking into road 
accidents that take place at entry and exit points of highways. 
(Para 116) 
Reply of the Ministry  
26.1 The Ministry collaborates with CRRI and other research institutes like IITs and NITs 
etc. The research findings are shared with IRC to enable them to amend/upgrad e/develop 
guidelines and standards. All the research schemes under progress/planned to be approved 
during current financial year are intended to frame new standards/guidelines by IRC or 
amend existing standards/guidelines. 
26.2 Further, under the aegis of IRC, Highway Research Board (HRB) has been formed, 
which acts as dedicated mechanism for attention to research and development activities. The 
mandates of the HRB are: - 
i. to ascertain the nature and extent of research required; 
ii. to correlate research informa tion from various organizations in  India and abroad with 
a view to exchange publications on roads: 
iii. to coordinate and conduct correlation services; 
iv. to sponsor basic research through universities and research organizations; 
v. to collect and disseminate results of research; and  
vi. any other matter related to road research. 
There are three committees under HRB, namely:- 
i. Committee for Identification, Monitoring and Research Application (IMRA)  
ii. Committee for Accreditation of New Materials/ Techniques/Technology/Instruments, 
etc. 
iii. Committee on Pilot Projects to introduce innovations and support innovative ideas in 
the road sector. 
26.3 About 65 New Materials / Techniques / Technology / Instruments, etc. have been 
accredited by the IRC for being used on trial basis, list of which is available on IRC website. 
 
 
CAG Audit Paras 

29 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
27.  The Committee is distressed to note that the reply is awaited from NHAI and matter is 
pending with the Ministry relating to CAG Audit Paras  dating back to as far back as 2017. 
The Committee strongly recommends that the Ministry and NHAI may take immediate action 
based on observations made by CAG in its Reports since time lost in such matters can cause 
loss of valuable information which could otherwise pinpoint culprits involved in giving undue 
benefits to concessionaires or causing loss of revenue to NHAI. 
(Para 120) 
Reply of the Ministry 
27.1 The Chronology of submission of Action Taken Notes to MoRTH/CAG is as under:- 
Sl. 
No. 
Details Date 
1 The Contract was terminated due to default of the 
concessionaire. Concessionaire had also raised various 
claims and dispute was referred to 3 CGM Committee 
for amicable settlement. However, Amicable settlement 
process failed and the dispute was referred t o 
Arbitration as per the provisions of the concession 
agreement. 
27.05.2019 
2 Revised ATN sent by NHAI to MoRTH 23/9/2019 
3 ATN sent by MoRTH to C&AG 14/01/2020 
4 CAG had returned the ATN with further Remarks 15/07/2020 
5 Revised ATN was sent by NHAI to Ministry 15/10/2020 
6 CAG has further returned the ATN with further vetting 
remarks 
13/01/2021 
7 CAG Remarks were replied through MoRTH 01/02/2021 
8 CAG further returned the ATN with the remarks that 
“As the Arbitration/ Legal Proceedings are yet to be 
finalized, it is proposed to retain the para”. 
08/04/2021 
9 Updated ATN duly furnishing the status of Arbitration/ 
Legal proceedings, was submitted to MoRTH. 
5/7/2021. 
 
27.2  The  Summary of Action Taken by NHAI for settlement of the matter regarding 
recovery from the concessionaire are submitted as under:- 
 
i.  The suspension notice on account of concessionaire’s default was issued by 
NHAI on 20.09.2018 to the concessionaire. The deemed termination notice 
w.e.f. 18.01.2019 (120 days after suspension notice) was issued by NHAI vide 
letter dated 27.05.2019. Thus the contract stands terminated and all toll 
collection activities have been taken over by NHAI. 
 
ii.  In addition to the cl aims of NHAI, there are claims of concessionaire also on 
account of force majeure due to Seemandhra bandh, suspension of tolling due 

30 
 
to demonetization and delay in fulfilment of condition precedent etc. on the 
part of NHAI. 
 
iii.  These Claims of both the parties were referred to 3 CGM Committee as a part 
of Amicable Settlement Process. However, the process of amicable settlement 
failed considering the huge defaults of the Concessionaire under the Contract 
and also its failure to meet various commitments ma de by them during the 
settlement proceedings. Thus dispute was referred to Arbitration Tribunal. 
 
iv.  NHAI had initiated action for forfeiture of the Performance BG Rs. 48.60 
Crore and entire performance BG of Rs. 48.60 crore has eventually been 
forfeited and amount credit in NHAI Account. 
 
v.  Arbitral Tribunal has already been constituted on 03.03.2020 for adjudication 
of the disputes. Composition of AT is: 
 
a. Justice Shri A.K. Sikri, Former Judge of Supreme Court of India, as       
Presiding Arbitrator 
 
b.   Shri Y.S. Malik, IAS ( Retd.) Former, Secretary, MoRTH/ Chairman 
NHAI as Arbitrator (NHAI Nominee) and 
 
c.  Justice Shri Navaniti Prasad Singh, Former Chief Justice, Hon'ble High 
Court of Kerala as Arbitrator (Concessionaire’s Arbitrator). 
 
vi.  NHAI has already submitted the detailed Statements of Claims of total Rs. 
1229.68 crore before the Hon'ble Arbitration Tribunal (AT) on 31/08/2020 as 
per the schedule prescribed by the Hon’ble AT. The claims of the 
Concessionaire against NHAI are for Rs. 186.70  Crore. The matter is still 
pending for final Award of the Hon’ble Arbitration Tribunal. NHAI is 
pursuing the case in Hon’ble AT to safeguard the interest of NHAI. 
 
Awarding of road projects 
Recommendation/Observation 
28. The Committee takes serious view of the issues pointed out by one of its Members 
regarding the possible connivance of the officials, concessionaires and consultants etc. which 
leads to poor quality NHs being constructed across the country. The Committee re commends 
that the Ministry may set up an enquiry committee to look into the above mentioned issues 
and to devise a mechanism to plug the loopholes present in the existing system which may be 
leading to the possibility of such corrupt practices. The Committ ee further recommends that 
the Ministry may review the requirements presently in place to effectuate a change of scope 
in a road project and ensure that change of scope is permitted only in rare cases where 
alternative solutions are not possible.  
(Para 127) 

31 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
28.1 In order to have the continuous assessment of the quality of roads in country 
following steps / initiatives have been taken: -  
a. Mobile Quality Control Van (MQCV) equipped with using Non -Destructive 
Testing (NDT) equipment have  been proposed for deployment in 4 states - 
Gujarat, Rajasthan, Odisha and Karnataka on pilot basis. These are likely to 
be commissioned by December, 2022 in all the 4 States. 
b. A Web portal for Quality Control is being developed to enable the online 
uploading of the field test data generated by MQCV and its test results after 
processing, to monitor the quality status on real time basis. 
c. NHAI has engaged 40 officers retired from Central/ State government 
departments as Team leaders for Inspection of Quality o f Construction of 
National Highway projects. Each team leader is assisted by an officer from 
NHAI.  
d. Since, August-2020, the Quality inspection of 112 projects have been carried 
out by the teams. At present, out of the 40 Team leaders, 28 team leaders are 
available for quality inspections as the reports of some team leaders were 
found to be unsatisfactory. 
e. NHIDCL has also empanelled retired officers of the rank of Superintending 
Engineer (SE) and above as Special Project Monitors (SPMs) to inspect the 
QA (Qu ality Assurance) & QC (Quality Control) system of NH projects 
under NHIDCL. The services of empanelled SPMs are availed by NHIDCL 
on ‘as and when required’ basis. 
f. Quality and Road Safety Audit of Char Dham Pariyojana – Ministry has 
engaged six Independent Experts/ Retired Chief Engineers of Central/State 
Governments / PSUs for Quality & Road Safety Audit of National Highway 
projects under Char Dham Mahamarg Pariyojana in the State of Uttarakhand. 
The scope of the assignment covers about 646 Km of NHs includ ing about 
578 km of completed length implemented through Uttarakhand State PWD, 
NHIDCL and Border Roads Organisation (BRO).  The site inspections have 
mostly been completed as on date and reports are awaited.  Based on the 
reports obtained from these Independent Auditors, the implementing agencies 
shall be directed to comply with the observations raised by the auditors in 
order to augment the general quality and safety of NH works. 
28.2 Change of Scope (CoS) in a road project, wherever necessary, is done in  accordance 
with the requirements / guidelines / restrictions specified in the Contract documents and 
earlier delegation to field officers in this regard has been appropriately regulated. Further 
with effective quality DPR, No. of projects involving COS in  NHAI has been reduced from 
36 in 2019-20 to 8 in 2021-22. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
29. The Committee desires to know the number of road projects awarded in which a 
‘Change of Scope’ has happened during the last 5 years and the total number of road 

32 
 
projects awarded during this period. Similarly, the Committee may be apprised of the number 
of road projects which have been awarded for more than 20 percent below the official 
estimated cost and underwent a ‘Change of Scope’ during the last 5 years; and the t otal 
number of road projects which have been awarded for more than 20 percent below the 
official estimated during this period. 
(Para 128) 
Reply of the Ministry 
29.1 Details of NH Projects awarded by the Ministry from FY 2017 -18 to 2021 -22 are as 
under:- 
 
Sr. Description Nos. 
1 Projects awarded in Last 5 Years 2,288 
2 Projects awarded in Last 5 Years and underwent a 
CoS (Change of Scope) 496 
3 Projects with bids lower than 20% of the estimated 
cost in last 5 years 561 
4 
Projects with bids lower than 20% of the estimated 
cost in last 5 years and underwent a CoS (Change of 
Scope) 
81 
 
 
Promotion of Electric Vehicles 
Recommendation/Observation 
30.  The Committee notes the steps taken by the Ministry for promotion of electric  vehicles in 
the country and feels that a lot still needs to be done in order to speed up the shift of vehicle -
owners towards electric vehicles since EVs come with a huge set of benefits, especially in light of 
the dire air pollution issues faced in a larg e number of Indian cities. The shift to electric vehicles 
will also reduce the dependency of our country on petroleum product imports. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends that the Ministry may take more steps to promote the usage of electric 
vehicles in t he country and work on creation of charging infrastructure for the same alongside 
National Highways, in coordination with concerned Ministries/organizations. The Ministry may 
also consider exempting electric vehicles from road tax, offering some discount at toll plazas. The 
Ministry should work towards undertaking initiatives to boost and promote the production of 
electric vehicles in the country, in close cooperation with concerned Ministries/Departments as 
well as vehicle manufacturers. 
(Para 131) 
Reply of the Ministry 
30.1 As per the extant policy in National Highways Authority of India (NHAI), Electric 
Charging Stations are to be provided by the developer as part of the Wayside Amenities (WSAs). 
NHAI has already awarded 88 such facilities and the propos als for 56 such sites are in bidding 

33 
 
stage. Further, additional WSA sites as and when identified by the Authority would also be put up 
for bidding.  
30.2 Department of Heavy Industries (DHI) had invited proposals from any Govt. 
Organization/Public Sector U ndertaking (PSU) (State/Central)/Govt DISCOM/ Oil Public Sector 
Undertaking and similar other Public/Private entities to build and operate Public EV charging 
infrastructure on Expressways and National Highways under FAME India Scheme Phase -II for 
Highways & Expressways, wherein PSUs Energy Efficiency Services Limited (EESL) consortium 
with Convergence Energy Services Ltd. (subsidiary of EESL) has been awarded the work for 
setting up of EV charging stations along 16 NH/Expressways. 
30.3 In order to facilitat e EESL in the above prospect, NHAI has signed an Memorandum of 
Understanding (MOU) with EESL. As per this MoU, NHAI shall provide space/land near the toll 
plazas and its buildings for installation of Electric Vehicle Charging Stations, based on revenue 
sharing model subject to an agreeable amount to NHAI and EESL. The space/land for the same 
shall be provided to EESL at no cost basis for duration as decided by NHAI. This would not only 
assist in promoting clean/green energy and  environmental protection but could also be a source of 
revenue for NHAI. As regards sourcing electricity for the same, NHAI aims at using solar energy 
for such charging stations, if feasible.  
30.4 The other suggestions of the Committee have been noted by the Ministry for further action. 
 
 
Laying of integrated utility corridors along greenfield National Highways 
Recommendation/Observation 
31. The Committee is glad to note that bids have been invited for laying OFC ducts for a 
total length of about 1350 km. The Committee hopes that the Ministry will utilize the 
experience gained from this exercise to make provisions for utility ducts alongside more 
upcoming Greenfield Highways/ Expressways. 
(Para 137) 
Reply of the Ministry 
31.1 To realize India’s National Broadband Mission vision to develop 50 lakh kilometers 
of Optical Fibre Cable (OFC) infrastructure by 2024 in India, as part of PM Gati Shakti 
Initiative, the Ministry of Road Transport and Highways is closely working with Telec om 
Regulatory Authority of India (TRAI) to create smart and digital highways by providing 
dark-fibre connectivity along the national highways allowing for a direct plug -and-play 
model for users. This initiative will empower the Government to provide intern et 
connectivity to remote locations and far -flung areas all across the country where users like 
private players, village panchayats, can get connectivity from the tapping point from the 
nearest highway section. The OFC infrastructure has been designed to c ater to increased data 
volumes till 2050. This initiative will significantly boost 5G roll -out across the nation and 
improve the ease of doing business in India since the private players shall no longer wait for 
acquiring clearances for Right of Way, envir onmental clearances, etc. Along with 5G, 
developing OFC infrastructure along the highways shall also aid in providing various value -
added services like booth-less toll collection, surveillance, speed limiting radars and controls, 
smart highway lighting, connectivity on demand, etc.  

34 
 
31.2 In this regard, tenders have been released for development of OFC Infrastructure 
along one brownfield and one greenfield pilot projects, namely, Hyderabad -Bangalore 
National Highway & Delhi -Mumbai Expressway, having a total  length of ~2000 kms at a 
total cost of ~Rs. 500 crores. Delhi -Mumbai Expressway passes through 23 districts 
impacting population of approximately 6.58 crores, and Hyderabad -Bangalore National 
Highway impacts population of approximately 3.6 crores. 
31.3 Given the financial sustainability of the OFC model through initial investment from 
the Government, the Government plans to scale up the leased OFC infrastructure from ~2000 
kms to 25,000 kms in the next 3 years. 
 
Weigh-in-Motion Systems at Toll Plazas 
Recommendation/Observation 
32. The Committee recommends that a timeline may be devised to equip the remaining 
toll plazas on NHs with Weigh -in-Motion systems as well and the details of the timeline may 
be shared with the Committee, since the system can help c urb the practice of overloaded 
vehicles which not only cause damage to NHs, but also pose great safety risks to other 
vehicles. 
(Para 139) 
Reply of the Ministry 
32.1 For new projects / fee plaza medium speed WIM infrastructure are implemented in 
the execut ion stage only. WIM / SWB have been installed at 467 out of 692 toll plazas. 
Installation of WIM at the remaining fee plazas is likely to be done by March, 2023. 
Flyovers over Highways 
Recommendation/Observation 
33. The Committee would like to know from th e Ministry the reasons for lifting the 
existing MDR/ODR/VR over National Highways instead of lifting the multi-lane NHs over the 
MDR/ODR/VR.  
(Para 141) 
Reply of the Ministry 
33.1 Generally raising the NHs or the cross roads in a grade separated intersection depends 
on the site condition, carriageway configuration, extent of land availability, vertical profiles, 
etc. Decisions in this context are taken on a case to case basis. 
  

35 
 
 
CHAPTER-III 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH 
REPLIES OF  THE MINISTRY HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
COMMITTEE 
 
 
ANNUAL PLAN 2021-22 
Recommendation/Observation 
1. The Committee observes that by January, 2022, the Ministry has managed to spend 
about 77.8 percent of the funds allocated to it at the Revised Estimates (2021 -22) stage, 
which was about 11 percent more than the amount allocated to the Ministry at the Budge t 
Estimates (2021 -22) stage. While the Committee is pleased to note the overall pace of 
utilization of funds by the Ministry, a closer inspection shows that the utilization figures for 
several important heads viz., ‘Externally Aided Projects’, ‘Development  of IT’, ‘R&D 
Planning Studies’, ‘Bharatmala Pariyojana - work under State PWDs/NHIDCL/BRO etc.’, 
‘Maintenance of NHs including Swachhta Action Plan and PIARC’, ‘Tribal Sub -Plan - NH 
works in NE States,  Rajasthan,  MP, Chhattisgarh, Jharkhand, etc.’, and ‘Road Transport’ 
has been very low. All these heads are already receiving comparatively lower amount of 
funds, especially keeping in mind the vastness of the National Highways network in the 
country coupled with the discernible pattern of underutilization of funds under these heads, 
the Committee feels that the Ministry’s focus has been only on increasing the pace of 
construction of Highways and not so much on the other areas, which are equally important, if 
not more. Given the crucial role played by the ac tivities carried out under these heads, for 
having a safe and pliable National Highways network across the country, the Committee is of 
the strong view that the Ministry should look into the reasons behind the underutilization of 
funds under these various key heads and resolve the bottlenecks, if any, in order to ensure 
optimal utilization of the limited budgetary resources available. 
(Para 6) 
Reply of the Ministry 
1.1 Final Budget provisions for the Ministry at RE Stage and expenditure under 
‘Externally Ai ded Projects’, ‘Development of IT’, ‘R&D Planning Studies’, ‘Bharatmala 
Pariyojana - work under State PWDs/NHIDCL/BRO etc.’, ‘Maintenance of NHs including 
Swachhta Action Plan and PIARC’, ‘Tribal Sub -Plan - NH works in NE States,  Rajasthan,  
MP, Chhattisg arh, Jharkhand, etc.’, and ‘Road Transport’ during FY 2021 -22 are given 
below:- 
(Amount Rs. In crore) 
Sl.No. Name of the 
Scheme 
BE 
Provision 
RE Provision 
2021-22 
Expenditure 
during the 
% of 
expenditure 

36 
 
2021-22 year 2021-22 w.r.t. RE 
Provision 
1 Total Budget of 
the Ministry  
1,18,101.00 1,31,149.07 1,22.830.03 93.66 
2 External Aided 
Projects 
3750.00 4296.00 4256.74 99.09 
3 Development of IT 7.00 7.00 5.74 82 
4 R&D Planning 
Studies 
48.96 48.96 41.43 84.62 
5 Bharatmala 
Pariyojana – works 
under PWDs/ 
NHIDCL/BRO etc 
200.00 200.00 195.20 97.60 
6 Maintenance and 
Repair of NHs, 
Swachhata Action 
Plan and PIARC 
2660.08 2817.67 2799.50 99.36 
7 Tribal Sub-plan – 
NH works in  
Tribal Area in 
Country 
3130.00 3530.00 3506.79 99.34 
8 Road Transport 336.00 163.41 147.53 90.28 
1.2 From the above, it may be seen that underutilization of funds is very limited w.r.t to 
Budget provision at RE stage. However, the Ministry will ensure further reducing the 
underutilization.  
Further Recommendation/Observation 
1.3 The Committee appreciates that the Ministry has utilized 93.66 percent of its 
overall Revised Estimates (R.E.) 2021 -22 allocation. However, the expenditure of 82 
percent and 84.62 percent of the R.E. 2021 -22 allocation under the important heads 
‘Development of IT’ and ‘R&D Planning Studies’, leaves much to be desired in terms of 
utilization of allocated funds. The underutilization of funds under these heads, along 
with the fact that the allocations made under these heads are already low figures given 
the vastness of the National Highway (NH) network in the country, point to the lack of 
attention given by the Ministry / National Highways Authority of India (NHAI) to these 
ancillary but important budgetary heads. The Committee, therefore, recommends that 
the Ministry may lay due focus on improving the expenditure figures under these heads 
in the future so as to ensure high -quality maintenance and expansion of the National 
Highway network in the country. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 

37 
 
2. The Committee is especially  concerned to note the extremely low expenditure made 
under the head Road Transport which has important sub -heads like ‘Research, Training, 
Studies and Other Road Safety Schemes’ and ‘Scheme on Women Safety on Public Road 
Transport’. As against BE allocati on of Rs. 336 crores, the RE allocation got reduced 
drastically to Rs. 228.50, a reduction of about 32 percent. The Committee believes that this 
huge reduction at RE 2021 -22 stage points to poor expenditure incurred under this head 
during the initial quarters by the Ministry. The fact that the Ministry has been able to spend a 
mere 28.7 percent of the funds allocated under this scheme till January, 2022 means that it 
did not take any remedial measures to rectify the issue of sub -optimal expenditure under this 
head. The Committee is of the firm view that the Ministry should introspectively look into the 
reasons behind this and take all necessary measures to ensure that the same does not repeat 
in the FY 2022-23. 
(Para 7) 
Reply of the Ministry 
2.1 A total amount of Rs. 192.95 Crores has been released till date (Rs. 27.91 Crores 
during FY 2021 -22) to the States/UTs under the Scheme for State -wise Vehicle Tracking 
Platform under Nirbhaya Fund.  Release of Funds to the States/UTs for the Vehicle Trackin g 
Platform is milestone-based, as per the scheme guidelines issued by the Ministry. The funds 
are being demanded and spent as per the requirement in the existing schemes. The scheme for 
State Wise Vehicle Tracking Platform under Nirbhaya Scheme is under ex ecution with funds 
sanctioned and disbursed for Thirty (30) States/UTs. Six States/UTs (Haryana, NCT of Delhi, 
Telangana, Gujarat, Tamil Nadu, Lakshadweep) have, till date, not opted for the scheme even 
after several reminders. The execution of projects by States/UTs has also been affected due to 
COVID-19 pandemic. During FY 2021 -22, no separate proposal for women safety in Public 
Transport from the States/UTs has been received and approved under the Nirbhaya 
Framework. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
2.2 The Committee is concerned to note that during the Financial Year 2021 -22, no 
separate proposal for Women Safety in Public Transport from the States/UTs has been 
received and approved under the Nirbhaya Framework. Bolstering the safety of women 
in public transport is a prerequisite to promote the use of public transport across the 
country as well as to enable women to move more freely, which also helps fuel the 
economic growth of the nation. The Committee feels that the non -receipt of proposals 
for projects under the Scheme on Women Safety on Public Road Transport cannot be 
entirely attributed to the Covid -19 pandemic. The Committee recommends that urgent 
steps may be taken to encourage better participation from the State Governments under 
this scheme and  to ensure that funds under this head are optimally utilized in the 
ongoing Financial Year. The Committee further recommends that the Ministry may 
come up with other possible innovative schemes that utilize the funds under Nirbhaya 
Framework to bolster the safety of women on public road transport, besides the existing 
scheme for Vehicle Tracking Platform under this head. 

38 
 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
3. The Committee further feels that the Ministry needs to lay commensurate emphasis on 
road safety on NHs, pro active maintenance and repair of NHs and carrying out researches 
and studies since doing so would make the rapidly expanding NH network across the country 
to be more cost -effective and safe and will also provide for speedy movement of the 
passengers as well as goods.  
(Para 14) 
Reply of the Ministry 
 
3.1 Road Safety on NHs 
The Ministry has defined a Protocol for identification of Blackspots  as per the 
circular dated 28.10.2015. As per  this circular, Road Accident Black -spot is a stretch of 
National Highway of about 500m in length in which either 5 road accidents  (in all   three 
years put together involving fatalities/ grievous injuries) too k place during the last 3 
calendar years or 10 fatalities (in all three  years put together) took place during the last 3 
calendar years. Based on Road accidents data collected by police departments of State 
Governments and compiled by the Transport Researc h Wing (TRW) of this Ministry, 
Blackspots are identified for undertaking immediate short term measures for mitigation and 
long term measures for permanent rectification. 
3.2 The Ministry vide letter dated 9th September, 2021 has written to Chief Secretaries of 
all the States,  Principal Secretaries/ Secretaries/ All Engineers-In Chief and Chief Engineers 
(Public Works Department) of all the States, Director General (Border Roads), Chairman 
(NHAI), Managing Director (NHIDCL), all Regional Officers of the Min istry and all 
Project Directors of the Ministry to take advance action for removal of accident spots on 
National Highways as per police reports without waiting for converting them into black 
spots after accidents/fatalities. 
3.3 Maintenance & Repair of NHs 
The maintenance liabilities under EPC, HAM and BOT projects are entirely borne by 
Contractors and Concessionaires. 
3.4 The actual expenditure for Maintenance & Repair (M&R) of National Highways 
during 2021 -22 was Rs. 2,754 crores against budgetary allocat ion of Rs. 2,778 crores in 
2021-22.  
3.5 The budgetary allocation of the Ministry under M&R head during 2022 -23 is Rs. 
2,480 crores.  
3.6 A major amount of the fund for M&R of NHs was earlier being spent for PR / IRQP 
works. Considering limited availabilit y of funds annually for M&R of NHs under Revenue 

39 
 
head, the Ministry is now earmarking allocation of funds for PR / IRQP works under Capital 
head under NH(O) from financial year 2021 -22 onwards. The estimated annual expenditure 
on these works are about Rs. 1,500 crores. 
3.7 NHAI and NHIDCL have incurred expenditure of Rs. 2,793 crores and Rs. 369 crores 
respectively on M&R of NHs during 2021 -22, which is more than the funds of Rs. 1,873 
crores and Rs. 325 crores allocated / released to them respectively for M&R of NHs during 
2021-22. 
3.8 Therefore, effectively about Rs. 5,000 crores are being spent annually on Maintenance 
& Repair of National Highways from budget head of the Ministry.  
3.9 Field officers at site identify the regular maintenance requirement ba sed on their 
inspections and take up the necessary action for filling of pot -holes and other maintenance 
activities as per the site requirement.  
3.10 The use of Network Survey Vehicle (NSV) has been mandated to capture road 
conditions before start of work , before issue of provisional / final completion certificate and 
thereafter at regular intervals of 6 months after completion of the work. 
3.11 Broad policy is to complete maximum quantum of maintenance & repair works to 
rectify defects before onset of monsoon so that damages during monsoon are minimized.    
3.12 The Ministry has decided to take up maintenance of NH stretches entrusted with State 
Governments/UTs, that may require only minor repairs (such as pothole and patch repairs, 
etc.) and on which improvement/PR/IRQP works are not targeted for award in the immediate 
future. Maintenance of such NH stretches are to be taken up on single percentage rate for 
duration of 1 year (short term contract) or 3 years (medium term contract), as applicable. 
Stretches under contract maintenance are to be implemented through State PWDs. 
3.13 Research & Development Initiatives 
The Ministry has set up Centre of Excellence for Road Safety (CoERS) at IIT Madras. 
Following 05 nos. research proposals on road safety engineering have been assigned to 
CoERS during the current financial year:- 
i) Development of software/mobile application for road safety audit 
ii) Comparative performance of road hump, r umble strips, transverse bar marking and 
tabletop for traffic calming  
iii) Impact of speed limits on road safety and capacity, recommendations on protocol for 
speed limits 
iv) Optimal design of roundabouts of different sizes and recommendations for review  of 
existing guidelines 
v) Comparative analysis of 2.5m wide paved shoulder vis-à-vis 1.5m paved shoulder on 2/4/6 
lane roads 

40 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
3.14 The Committee appreciates the various initiatives being taken by the Ministry to 
improve road safety, maintenance & repair of NHs, and research & development in the 
road sector. The Committee lauds the setting up of Centre of Excellence for Road Safety 
(CoERS) at IIT Madras and hopes that sufficient budgetary provisions are made to 
CoERS to permit it to fulfill its mandate of R&D in the road sector in earnest. Research 
may be carried out into assessing the feasibility of mandating installation of advanced 
technologies such as Automatic Emergency Braking (AEC), Electronic Stability Control 
(ESC), Traction Control etc. in vehicles sold across the country. The Committee further 
recommends that the Ministry may seek higher budgetary allocation under all these 
crucial heads in future so as to enable enhanced focus on the important activities 
carried out under these heads. This would significantly enhance the safety and pace of 
the transportation on the National Highway network across the country.  
 
ANNUAL PLAN 2022-23   
Recommendation/Observation 
4. The Committee strongly recommends that the Ministry may seriously consider 
upgrading and reviewing its road maintenance and road safety measures and schemes. 
Going by the paltry allocations made under the heads for road maintenance and road safety, 
the present focus of the Ministry seems to be only on the c onstruction of new National 
Highways while the maintenance and safety aspects of the existing NH network in the country 
seems to get sidelined, as evident by the allocation of a mere 1.24 percent and 0.18 percent of 
the overall allocation respectively, for  maintenance of NHs and road safety respectively. The 
Committee is of the considered view that the Ministry should come up with a robust long -
term vision for improving the state of the existing NH network in the country by bolstering the 
allocation under t hese heads significantly in the coming years, as the present state of NHs 
across the country leave much to be desired. 
(Para 21) 
Reply of the Ministry 
4.1 Maintenance & Repair of NHs 
Although the expenditure for Maintenance & Repair (M&R) of National Highw ays 
during 2021 -22 was Rs. 2,754 crores against budgetary allocation of Rs. 2,778 crores in 
2021-22 however effectively about Rs. 5,000 crores are being spent annually on Maintenance 
& Repair of National Highways from budget head of the Ministry on account  of one portion 
of M&R being paid out of the Capital head and additional expenditure by NHAI on M&R. 
4.2 The Ministry is giving full attention to M&R of NHs and for that the use of Network 
Survey Vehicle (NSV) has been mandated to capture road conditions b efore start of work, 
before issue of provisional / final completion certificate and thereafter at regular intervals of 6 
months after completion of the work. 
4.3 The Ministry is taking up maintenance of completed works of National Highways 
(NHs), which are  out of the Defect Liability Period (DLP), through long term contract 

41 
 
maintenance. Long term contract maintenance also includes stretches bid out on Toll, Operate 
and Transfer (TOT) and Investment Trust (InvIT) model under monetization of NHs, in 
which funds are raised by securitizing the toll and Concessionaire maintains the road also. 
There is no budget requirement for maintenance of such stretches under monetization of NHs. 
4.4 It is pertinent to mention in this context that most of the developed countri es have a 
network of developed Highways and Expressways and have almost reached saturation stage; 
they are presently focusing on maintenance of these developed assets; hence expenditure is 
incurred primarily on maintenance of Highways. In India, the Govern ment is presently laying 
emphasis on development of National Highways including Expressways besides maintenance 
of assets being developed; therefore, expenditure on maintenance appears on lower side in 
percentage terms. Maintenance requirement also remains  lower on account of large number 
of completed projects being bid out on TOT and InvIT modes through monetization of NHs. 
4.5 Road Safety on NHs 
The Ministry has set up Centre of Excellence for Road Safety (CoERS) at IIT Madras. 
Following 05 nos. research proposals on road safety engineering have been assigned to 
CoERS during the current financial year:- 
i) Development of software/mobile application for road safety audit 
ii) Comparative performance of road hump, rumble strips, transverse bar marking and 
tabletop for traffic calming 
iii) Impact of speed limits on road safety and capacity, recommendations on protocol for 
speed limits 
iv) Optimal design of roundabouts of different sizes and recommendations for review of 
existing guidelines 
v) Comparative analysis of 2.5m wide paved shoulder vis-à-vis 1.5m paved shoulder on 2/4/6 
lane roads 
4.6 Also the Ministry has formulated a multi-pronged strategy to address the issue of road 
safety based on Education, Engineering (both of roads and vehicles), Enforcement and 
Emergency Care. Accordingly, various initiatives have been taken by the Ministry as detailed 
below:- 
                                i.            EDUCATION:  
·         The Ministry implements a scheme for undertaking publicity measures 
and awareness campaigns on road safety to create awareness among road 
users through the electronic media, print media, NGOs etc. 
·         Observance of National Road Safety Month every year for spreading 
awareness and strengthening road safety. 
·         A Certification Course for Road Safety Auditors has been commenced in 
Indian Academy of Highway Engineers (IAHE). 
                              ii.            ENGINEERING (BOTH OF ROADS AND VEHICLES) 
Ø  Road Engineering: 

42 
 
·         Road safety has been made an integral p art of road design at planning 
stage. 
·         Roads are designed   and constructed as per relevant IRC 
codes/Manuals, which prescribes Design & Construction with Zero 
Accidents. 
·         Guidelines for pedestrian facilities on National Highways for pers ons 
with disabilities have also been issued to all States / UTs. 
·         High priority to identification and rectification of black spots (accident 
prone spots) on National Highways. 
·         The threshold for four laning of National Highway has been re duced 
from 15,000 Passenger Car Units (PCUs) to 10,000 PCUs. 
·         Ministry has delegated powers to Regional Officers of MORTH for 
technical approval to the detailed estimates for rectification of 
identified Road Accident black spots. 
Ø  Vehicle Engineering: 
·         Safety standards for automobiles have been improved. 
·         Mandatory Airbags for Front Co-passengers. 
·         Scheme for setting up one model Inspection & Certification Centre in 
each State/UT with Central assistance for testing the fitness of vehicles 
through an automated system. 
                            iii.            ENFORCEMENT: 
·         The Motor Vehicles (Amendment) Act, 2019 provides for strict 
enforcement through use of technology and further provides for strict 
penalties for ensuring strict compliance and enhancing deterrence for 
violation of traffic rules. 
·         Issue of Guidelines for protection of Good Samaritans and draft rules as 
per Motor Vehicle(amendment) Act, 2019 have been published. Launching 
of scheme for award to Good Samaritans. 
·         Rules for accreditation of Driving Training Centres in the country has 
been notified to make the driving training scientific and systematic, vest 
the accredited Driving Training Center with certain functions like testing  
of aspirants for issue of driving license and to make accredited driving 
Training Centre a commercially viable business proposition 
                            iv.            EMERGENCY CARE: 
·         The Motor Vehicles (Amendment) Act, 2019 provides for a scheme for 
the cashless treatment of victims of the accident during the golden hour. 
·         The NHAI has made provisions for ambulances at all toll plazas on the 
completed corridor of National Highways.   

43 
 
·         Further, out of this, 310 ambulances  have been upgraded to Basic Life 
Support as per AIS-125. 
4.7 The Ministry has issued several guidelines/circulars for rectification of black 
spots so that the road accidents could be minimized and precious lives of the road 
users are saved. The Ministry h as taken up identification and rectification of Black 
Spots on a war footing basis. 
4.8 Various Measures taken by MoRTH for rectification of blackspots are as 
below: 
                                            i.         MoRTH has made it mandatory to carr y out all stage (Design, 
construction, and operation) road safety audits for all National Highways 
and rectification of accident/black spots accordingly. 
                                          ii.         Provision of Rumble strips or bar markings at th e approaches of 
junctions on NHs. 
                                        iii.         Provision of Speed Limit signs at desired locations of NHs network. 
                                        iv.         As per IRC -67 -2012, Sign Boards are provided in regional/local 
language and English to alert the drivers. 
                                          v.         Provision of speed breakers and associated signage on side roads. 
                                        vi.         Provision of amber beacons for traffic approaching a junction. 
                                      vii.         Encouraging Engineers for certificate course in Road Safety Audit for 
which MOUs (Memorandum of Understanding) are signed with IITs and 
other leading technical education/research institutions. 
                                    viii.         Developed a Blackspot MIS portal where details of all blackspots, ids, 
photographs, and rectification status and post rectification feedback is 
collected and monitored. 
4.9 The Ministry has defined Protocol for identification and Rectification of Blackspot 
on NHs vide the policy letters dated 28.10.2015, dated 07.12.2015 and dated 26.08.2019. 
4.10 The Ministry also issued a letter dated 20.09.2019 regarding Road Safety Measures 
on stretches of National Highways. 
4.11 As per Ministry’s circular dated 28.10.2015, Road Accident Black -spot is a stretch 
of National Highway of about 500 m in length in which either 5 road accidents (in all   three 
years put together involving f atalities /grievous injuries) took place   during the last 3 
calendar years or 10 fatalities (in all three years put together) took place during the last 3 
calendar years. Based on Road accidents data collected by police departments of State 
Governments an d compiled by the Transport Research Wing (TRW) of this Ministry, 
Blackspots are identified for undertaking immediate short term measures for mitigation and 
long term measures for permanent rectification. 
4.12 Ministry vide letter dated 9 th September 2021 has written to Chief Secretaries of all 
the States,  Principal Secretaries/Secretaries/ All Engineers -In Chief and Chief Engineers 
(Public Works Department) of all the States, Director General (Border Roads), Chairman 

44 
 
(NHAI), Managing Director (NHIDCL), Al l Regional Officers of the Ministry and all 
Project Directors of the Ministry to take advance action for removal of accident spots on 
National highways as per police reports without waiting for converting them into black 
spots after accidents/fatalities. 
4.13 Out of 5,803 nos. of accident black spots identified on NHs network, temporary 
rectifications measures have been completed for almost all black spots and permanent 
rectifications have been completed in 4,057 nos. of accident black spot locations. 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
4.14 The Committee notes that effectively about Rs. 5,000 crores are being spent 
annually on Maintenance & Repair of National Highways from the budget head of the 
Ministry on account of one portion of M&R being paid out of the  Capital head and 
additional expenditure by NHAI on M&R. It may be noted that Rs. 5,000 crores is still 
effectively just about 2.5 percent of the overall BE 2022 -23 allocation of Rs. 199,107.71 
crores, which is a far cry from the way forward suggested by NITI Aayog to begin with 
earmarking 10 percent of its annual budget for road and highways for maintenance to 
move towards the developed country norm of earmarking 40 per cent to 50 per cent of 
the budget for roads and highways for maintenance. The Committee  understands that 
the requirements of the Indian road sector are different from that of the developed 
countries but this does not mean that maintenance of the NH network of the country 
can be accorded a lower priority than the expansion of the NH network. High quality 
maintenance and repair of the existing network - including frequent monitoring of the 
road quality as well as carrying out preemptive repair works, where needed - will give 
a direct boost to the efforts of the Ministry to minimize the number o f road accidents 
happening on the NH network across the country. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that the Ministry may spend higher amounts on regular maintenance 
checks of the NH network across the country. 
4.15 The Committee takes note of the variou s measures taken by the Ministry to 
minimize the number of road accidents on National Highways in the country. Given 
the extremely high number of road accidents happening in the country, a large 
percentage of which takes place on National Highways, there i s a pressing need for 
taking remedial measures on a war footing. The Committee recommends that the 
Ministry may evolve a robust mechanism to ensure that ample safety provisions are in 
place on the NH network across the country and that periodic checks are made 
without fail, to ensure continued compliance of the required safety provisions 
throughout the NH network. Further, the Committee recommends that once it has 
been ascertained that sufficient progress has been made in the rectification of black 
spots th at have been identified at present, the Ministry / NHAI may review the 
definition of black spots on National Highways to include accident -prone stretches 
where, say, more than 5 fatalities have taken place during the last three years, as 
compared to the pr esent definition of black spots wherein only stretches where more 
than 10 fatalities have taken place during the last three years are considered to be 
black spots. This would allow the Ministry / NHAI to work on the rectification of more 
accident-prone stretches across the country. 

45 
 
NATIONAL HIGHWAYS AUTHORITY OF INDIA 
Vacancies in NHAI 
Recommendation/Observation 
4A. In view of the above, the Committee recommends that the following suggestion may be 
considered with the permissible framework of NHAI: 
a.       NHAI needs to amend and improve the way it is being run at present. It 
should take appropriate steps to ensure that it is not managing its huge 
budgetary allocation through Junior Accountants alone, with a drastic 
number of vacancies existing at higher levels. 
b.   RRs for Technical and Financial cadres were amended together in the past 
but now NHAI is revisiting amendment in technical cadre alone but not in 
Finance cadre, giving the reason that the amendment in Finance cadre RRs 
was recently done, which i s contradictory. NHAI should bring transparency 
in its policy formulation. 
c.  A committee may be set up comprising senior officials of relevant discipline, 
to formulate new RRs for filling up all posts presently under deputation 
mode, via Direct Recruitme nt, taking provision of three years which will 
generate equilibrium in the hierarchy of the cadre by filling all such posts. 
d.    NHAI should correct the blunder it has made by correlating B.Com. 
with higher qualifications like CA/ICWA/MBA(F) in its eligi bility for 
Deputation Mode, since it was unable to get enough applications for highly 
qualified candidates under the Deputation Mode earlier. Having a workforce 
with higher qualifications and experience will help NHAI utilize its 
budgetary allocation in a more efficient manner. 
e.     With Direct Recruitment, the stay of Orissa High Court for not 
recruiting on Deputation mode can be got vacated and eligible internal 
candidates can also apply for these DR posts. 
f.  Since the education qualification of alrea dy recruited candidates in Finance 
is only B.Com. with no requisite qualification and experience, their higher 
promotions should not be done blindly, rather it should be as per their 
efficiency and acquiring higher qualifications. 
g.      Till new Recruitm ent Rules are framed to resolve these issues, all present 
advertisements may be put into abeyance. 
(Para 43) 
Reply of the Ministry 

46 
 
4A.1 Part (a) - To obviate the difficulties in filling up the Finance Cadre posts after 
studying the reasons for ineligibility of the applicants, the Recruitment Rules of finance 
division upto the post of DGM were amended in consultation with the Finance Division of 
NHAI in 2021. Although, the response based on the revised RRs has been encouraging, 
however, the proce ss of recruitment on deputation and DR modes are yet to attain finality 
pending litigations/stay orders from Courts. 
 
4A.2 Parts (b) to (c) - At present, no amendments to the existing RRs of any particular 
Cadre is being contemplated, but a comprehensive review of the existing RRs of NHAI has 
been undertaken. The Draft of the Comprehensive RRs were circulated among all 
Stakeholders seeking their comments/suggestions. The comments/suggestions received were 
examined and the suggestions which were considered rational/valid and the suggestions 
which cannot be considered, have   been worked-out. Further, the draft RRs were deliberat ed 
among the senior officials and same are being firmed up by incorporating the changes/ new 
issues emerged after the deliberations. 
4A.3 The draft Regulations have been prepared in such a way to align NHAI’s evolving 
role, aim at attracting and retaining talent, ensure a transparent selection process for direct 
recruitment and deputation, provide adequate workforce strength to cater to the increased 
requirement over future and also address any shortcomings that have been observed in the 
existing Regulation s or subsequent amendments. The proposed Regulations have been 
prepared on the basis of Gap Analysis and has been subsequently refined based on 
consultations with NHAI officers and feedback received. 
 
4A.4 Parts (d) to (f) - Though the qualification of B.C om cannot be equated with 
professional qualifications such as CA/ICWA/MBA, however, keeping in view the 
difficulties experienced during the past recruitments in getting officers having both 
professional qualifications as well as experience and by extending  priority to experience over 
qualifications, such qualifications in the revised RRs were prescribed. Further, it is pertinent 
to mention that majority of the existing Finance Personnel, besides the Graduation, are also 
possessing either of professional qualifications of CA/ICWA/MBA or having qualification of 
M.Com, as is evident from the attached details at  Annexure-III of qualifications of the 
existing personnel. 
 
4A.5 Part (g) - The suggestion may not be f easible to implement as it may hamper the 
continuous efforts being made by NHAI in filling up the vacant posts. Further, the 
notification of the RRs may take time as it has to go through the various processes of 
approval by the Authority, vetting by the Mi nistry and final clearance from the Ministry of 
Law and Justice. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
4A.6 The Committee is concerned to note that 114 posts out of the 317 ( i.e., 35.96 
percent) sanctioned strength of the Finance Cadre posts of NHAI are lyin g vacant at 
present. Given the fact that NHAI implements road projects worth thousands of crores, 
it is crucial to have close financial scrutiny of the ongoing projects of NHAI as well as its 

47 
 
disputes with third parties. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that NHAI 
may take urgent steps to ensure that the vacancies existing in the Finance cadre are 
filled at the earliest. 
 
 
PENDING ARBITRATION CASES 
5. The Committee takes note of the present mechanism available to settle arbitration 
cases in NHAI  and feels that the same needs to be further strengthened since the amount of 
claims pending under arbitration has risen to Rs. 88,100 crores, which is a worrisome figure. 
The Committee feels that the process of arbitration should be sufficiently quick so as to 
ensure that road projects do not get stuck. NHAI may consider constituting a higher number 
of CCIEs if it is felt that doing so would allow faster, parallel processing of the pending 
arbitration cases. 
(Para 61) 
Reply of the Ministry 
5.1 A. In the quest for speedy resolution of disputes between the parties (NHAI & the 
Concessionaire/Contractor/Consultant), NHAI constituted Conciliation Committees of 
Independent Experts comprising of Independent Eminent Personalities from various relevant 
fields such as Bureaucracy, Judiciary, Technical and others in Industries as below: 
 
Sr. 
No. 
Conciliation 
Committee of 
Independent 
Experts (CCIE) 
Names of Experts Brief particulars of the Expert 
1 
CCIE-1 
Sh. Pradeep Kumar, IAS 
(Retd.) 
Former Chief Vigilance 
Commissioner (CVC), Ex -
Secretary to Government of 
India 
2 Sh. A.V. Sinha, Ex DG (RD) 
& SS, MoRT&H 
Technical/Engineering Expert 
3 Sh. Y. S. Malik, IAS (Retd.) 
  
Former Secretary to the 
Government of India 
4 
CCIE-2 
Justice I.P. Vasishth (Retd.) Former Judge Allahabad High 
Court and Lokayukta, 
Haryana-as Legal Expert 
5 Sh. A.K. Upadhyay, IAS 
(Retd.) 
Former Secretary to 
Government of India 
6 Sh. V.V Ranganathan Formerly, a Senior Partner 
with one of the big four 
accounting firms, as Industry 
representative. 
7 CCIE-3 Sh. Vijay Chhibber, IAS Former Secretary to 

48 
 
(Retd.) Government of India 
8 Sh. B.N. Singh, Ex DG (RD) 
& SS, MoRT&H 
Technical Engineering Expert 
9 Sh. N.R. Dash, Ex Addl. 
Controller General, Ministry 
of Defence 
Former Addl. Controller 
General, Ministry of Defence 
  
5.2 Summary of Conciliation Cases taken up by CCIEs (status as on 19.04.2022) 
Particulars CCIE-1 CCIE-2 CCIE-3 Total 
Nos. of Cases referred 66 128 61 255 
Nos. of cases ongoing 18 25 15 58 
Nos. of cases succeeded 37 91 32 160 
Nos. of cases failed 11 12 14 37 
  
5.3 Year-wise Summary of Successful Cases 
S. No. Particulars Overall Till 
date 
(19.04.22) 
2022-23 2021-22 2020-21 2019-20 2018-19 2017-18 
(i) No. of Cases 
Resolved 
160 04 61 60 27 8 Nil 
(ii) Amount 
Claimed by 
Concessionaire/ 
Contractor 
41225.042 Cr. 2472.32 Cr 14596.062 Cr. 14206.60 Cr. 6931.39 
Cr. 
3018.67 
Cr. 
  
(iii) Amount 
Counter 
Claimed by 
NHAI  
9223.274 Cr. 1072.62 Cr 1890.034 Cr. 3430.70 Cr. 1819.00 
Cr. 
1010.92 
Cr. 
  
(iv) Settlement 
Amount 
14032.249 Cr. 965.58 Cr 4075.758 Cr. 5312.541 Cr. 2433.50 
Cr. 
1244.87 
Cr. 
  
 
5.4  A conciliation drive had been started to bring maximum ongoing Arbitration/Court  
matters under the ambit of conciliation. 
5.5 The legislature introduced under Section 29A to the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 
1996 (“the Act”) vide the Amendment Act 3 of 2016. The aforesaid amendment came into 
force with effect from 23.10.2015. Section 29A of the Act further amended in the year 
2019. The net effect of th e above referred two amendments is that in the matter of 
arbitrations, other than International Commercial Arbitration, a time limit for conclusion of 
arbitration proceedings was introduced. Section 29A of the Act, as it stands today, provides 
that an arbi tral tribunal has to publish the award within a period of twelve months  from 
the date of completion of pleadings under Section 29A. 

49 
 
5.6    As per Section 23(4), the pleading which comprises of statement of claim and 
defence are mandated to be completed wit hin a period of six months from the date the 
arbitrator, or all the arbitrators received notice, in writing, of their appointments. It is also 
provided under Section 29A(3) that parties by their consent, can extend the period of 
making the award for a furt her period not exceeding six months. If the award is not made 
within the period of one and half years, the mandate of the tribunal shall terminate. 
However, power has been vested in the “Court” to extend the period. 
 5.7 NHAI is following the law as laid down in the Arbitration & Conciliation Act 1996 as 
 amended from time to time.   The time limits as laid down as per are being followed to 
pursue Arbitration matters. 
  
Further Recommendation/Observation 
5.8 The Committee notes that almost the same number of  cases have been referred 
to CCIE-2 as compared to cases referred to CCIE -1 and CCIE -3 combined, while the 
number of cases resolved by CCIE -2 is much more than the combined number of cases 
resolved by CCIE -1 and CCIE -3. Speedy disposal of disputes between the parties 
(NHAI & the Concessionaire/ Contractor/ Consultant) directly enables speedier 
completion of road projects stuck due to disputes with the concessionaires. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry may look into difficulties, if any,  
being faced by certain CCIEs in timely resolution of cases and if needed, consider the 
constitution of more CCIEs to enable faster parallel processing of disputes. Further, the 
Committee desires to be apprised of the number of cases wherein arbitration co uld not 
be completed within the time limit of 12 months, as stipulated by Section 29A of the 
Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996, and the number of cases wherein the "Court" 
has extended the period of mandate of the tribunal. 
 
 
BHARATMALA PARIYOJANA PHASE-I 
Recommendation/Observation 
6. The Committee is deeply concerned to note that though the original timeline for 
Bharatmala Phase-I targeted its completion by 2021 -22, only 20,632 km (59.28% of total) 
has been awarded while only 7,375 km (21.19% of total ) has been constructed by December, 
2022 out of the overall target of 34,800 km. This has led to the targeted timeline for 
completion now being estimated at FY27 while the estimated cost of BMP Phase -I has almost 
doubled from Rs. 5.35 lakh crores to Rs. 10.63 lakh crores. Considering that the Ministry has 
managed to construct only about 21.19% of the Phase -I length during more than four years 
since the inception of the scheme, the Committee is of the view that the targeted completion 
estimate of FY27 will p rove to be a great challenge to the Ministry. Given the direct 
correlation between delays on project cost and the positive ripple effects that the timely 
completion of BMP Phase -I will have on several inter -linked economic sectors, it is 
necessary that the Ministry undertakes all-out measures to ensure that the revised target for 
completion of BMP Phase -I is met and the bottlenecks being faced by the Ministry in the 
execution of Phase-I so far may be proactively ironed out. 

50 
 
(Para 65) 
Reply of the Ministry 
6.1 The Phase I of Bharatmala Pariyojana was approved by the CCEA in October 2017 
for development of 34,800 km of National Highway Corridors. Immediately after the 
approval, consultants were appointed to prepare detailed project report (DPRs) for ~20,000 
km in 2017 and 2018. Preparation of a high quality Detailed Project Report requires 12 – 18 
months and completing land acquisition and obtaining all statutory clearances takes another 
12 – 15 months. Accordingly, it could be seen that the implementation of P hase I has been 
proceeding at a rapid pace with 22,352 km awarded (out of 34,800 km) as of April 2022. 
Further, 521 km have been approved by the Competent Authority and are being awarded. In 
addition, preparation of Detailed Project Report is at an advance d stage for all the remaining 
length to be awarded in Phase I of Bharatmala Pariyojana wherein the Land acquisition and 
other pre -construction activity have been taken up and It has been targeted to award the 
balance length in the next two financial years, viz. by FY 2023-24.  
 
6.2 As far as implementation is concerned, Ministry of Road Transport and Highways and 
its implementing agencies constructed ~24,000 km of National Highways (including 
Bharatmala Pariyojana) in FY 2020 -21 & FY 2021-22 at an average pace of ~12,000 km per 
year (33 km per day), which is unprecedented in the history of the country and is significantly 
higher than the annual highway construction in other countries. Further, the program has 
witnessed construction of works of ~9,115 km, with a majority of these works completed are 
4 Lane + National Highway corridors. It is to be noted that the flagship Delhi – Mumbai 
corridor conceptualized in 2018 is targeted to be completed and opened for traffic from June, 
2022 onwards in various stretches. In comparison, some of the world’s largest road 
infrastructure projects like 1,167 Km long Trans-Java road in Indonesia, commenced in 1995, 
took more than 2 decades to get completed in 2019. Similarly, the 217 km long Shin Tom ei 
Expressway in Japan, commissioned in the early 2000s took almost a decade for completion.  
6.3 Further, multiple agencies/steps are required to complete the project and Ministry and 
its implementing agency took multiple steps to expedite award and construction:    
 
a. Revision in scope of DPR consultants to enable deployment of retired revenue 
department officials to support the State Governments in expediting land 
acquisition 
b. Frequent reviews with the State Governments to resolve issues with land 
acquisition and other clearances 
c. Compensation to State Governments for setting up Special Land Acq uisition 
Units with dedicated staff for acquiring land for National Highway projects 
d. Launch of Bhoomi -Rashi portal to digitize the Land Acquisition notification 
process and avoid parking of public funds with the Competent Authority for 
Land Acquisition (CALA). This has led to 50% reduction in overall time for 
approval and publication of Land Acquisition notifications. Further, issues 
pertaining to delays in CALA performance are comprehensively tracked in 

51 
 
review meetings at all levels including at the lev els of Secretary (MoRTH), 
Chairman (NHAI), DG (MoRTH) and Members (NHAI). 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
6.4 The Committee is glad to note that the Ministry of Road Transport and 
Highways and its implementing agencies have constructed about 24,000 km of National 
Highways (including Bharatmala Pariyojana) in FY 2020 -21 & FY 2021 -22 at an 
average pace of about 12,000 km per year (33 km per day), which is unprecedented in 
the history of the country and is significantly higher than the annual highway 
construction in other countries. The Committee takes note of the various steps taken   
by the implementing agency to expedite award and construction of road projects in the 
country. The Committee, however, still feels that having more reasonable targeted 
timeline of completion of road projects would help the Ministry in having more clarity 
in its long -term road infrastructure planning as well as capital allocation. The 
Committee therefore recommends that the Ministry may review the procedure it 
presently follows to estimate the projected completion date of its road projects and give 
some consideration to the various hurdles expected to take place in projects.  
 
Recommendation/Observation 
7.  The Committee is not satisfied with the response of the Ministry with re gard to delays 
in Port Connectivity Projects under BMP Phase -I wherein it has stated that there has been 
no delay on its part for implementation of the same. The Committee understands that these 
projects require coordination with State Governments, Port Au thorities etc. but it is still 
disappointing to note that the length of port connectivity projects awarded and approved so 
far is just 174 kms out of the 643 kms (i.e., 27.06%) planned under BMP Phase -I. It is 
pertinent to note that this is considerably be hind the overall progress of 59.28% of BMP 
Phase-I, which in itself is running way behind schedule. The Committee strongly recommends 
that the Ministry may undertake a review of the coordination mechanism presently in place 
for execution of the port connec tivity projects, identify the bottlenecks and take immediate 
measures to resolve the issues thus identified, since poor connectivity to ports is a significant 
bottleneck in itself, to the growth of the Indian Shipping sector. 
(Para 68) 
Reply of the Ministry 
7.1 The Ministry  is developing 68 Port connectivity projects of about 2,860 km length 
based on prioritization by Ministry of Shipping. 
7.2 46 out of the 68 projects are being taken up under Bharatmala Pariyojana.  Out of this, 
10 Port Connectivity project s of length about 600 km have been awarded  and additional 36 
projects of length 657 km are under development.  
7.3 The remaining 22 projects are being undertaken by  the Ministry  under other 
schemes such as NH(O). Out of this, 7 projects of length 293 km ha ve been completed and 5 
projects of length 1,028 km have been awarded. Other 10 projects of length 281 km are under 
development. 
7.4 There has been no delay on part of the Ministry for implementation of the Port 
Connectivity Projects under Bharatmala Pariy ojana. The Ministry and NHAI have been 

52 
 
persistently interacting with concerned State Governments, Port Authorities, etc., for 
finalizing modalities of implementation of Projects. NHAI has set up a Special Purpose 
Vehicle (SPV) named National Highways Logis tics Management Limited (NHLML) for this 
purpose. Further dedicated funding under Bharatmala Pariyojana has also been made for Port 
connectivity projects. 
7.5 There are several issues concerning availability of ROW (Right of Way) for these 
projects (which are not NHs), habitations along the alignments & encroachments, land 
acquisition, signing of MOUs (Memorandum of Understanding) by Port Authorities, 
finalization of mechanism for recovery of costs, etc. However, the concerted efforts are being 
made for time bound implementation of the projects. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
7.6 The Committee feels that the Port Connectivity Projects envisaged under the 
Bharatmala Pariyojana will have significant positive impact on the growth of the 
shipping sector in the country. The Committee notes the submission of the Ministry that 
there has been no delay on part of the Ministry for implementation of the Port 
Connectivity Projects under Bharatmala Pariyojana. However, it is evident that the 
Port Connectivity Project s are drastically delayed, even more so than the overall 
delayed progress of the Bharatmala Pariyojana Phase -I. While the Committee 
appreciates the increased pace of road construction per day in the country and the 
optimistic targeted timelines for ambitio us projects, the Committee feels that the 
Ministry should try to be more realistic while coming up with targeted timelines for 
completion of projects during the planning stage. The Committee, therefore, reiterates 
its ‘Further Recommendation/Observation’ m ade under para 6.4 of Chapter III of this 
Report. 
 
MAINTENANCE AND REPAIR OF NATIONAL HIGHWAYS 
Recommendation/Observation 
8. The Committee notes from the reply of the Ministry that about 9,300 km length of NHs 
is yet to be entrusted to agencies for undertaking development and maintenance works, 
whereas the tentative length of NHs under maintenance and repair are about 27,000 km and 
these are not under the liability of other Contractors. The Committee understand s that for the 
time being, about 36,300 km of NHs is being maintained and repaired using the funds 
available under the head ‘Maintenance and Repair (M&R) of NHs’, which is about 25.71 
percent of the overall 1,41,190 km NH network of the country. The Commit tee further notes 
that the budget allocated under this head is a paltry Rs. 2,480 crore for the FY 22 -23, which 
is only about 1.24 percent of the overall BE 2022-23 allocation of Rs. 199,107.71 crores. 
(Para 73) 
9. In this regard, the Committee observes th at in ‘Strategy for New India @ 75, NITI 
Aayog has enlisted the following point as one of the ways forward for improvement of road 
maintenance and safety: 

53 
 
Maintain NH assets by adopting a maintenance management system (MMS). Earmark 
funds from the Central Road Fund (CRF) for maintenance activities. India should 
begin with earmarking 10 percent of its annual budget for road and highways for 
maintenance to move towards the developed country norm of earmarking 40 per cent 
to 50 per cent of the budget for roads and highways for maintenance. 
(Para 74) 
10. The Committee is of the considered view that in order to lay such concentrated focus 
on the conditions of NHs across the country, the Ministry needs to earmark a much higher 
amount of allocation of funds for the  Maintenance and Repair of National Highways. The 
Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that the Ministry may re -evaluate its budgetary 
requirements under this head in order to materialize the enhanced focus on maintaining the 
existing NH network in th e country in excellent condition, as suggested by the Committee in 
its recommendation at para 73 above. 
(Para 76) 
Reply of the Ministry 
10.1 In line with recommendations of NITI Aayog, Ministry is taking up maintenance of 
completed works of National Highwa ys (NHs), which are out of the Defect Liability Period 
(DLP), through long term contract maintenance. Long term contract maintenance also 
includes stretches bid out on Toll Operate and Transfer (TOT) and Investment Trust ((InvIT) 
model under monetization o f NHs, in which funds are raised by securitizing the toll and 
Concessionaire maintains the road also. There is no budget requirement for maintenance of 
such stretches under monetization of NHs. 
10.2 The maintenance liabilities under EPC, HAM and BOT projec ts are entirely borne by 
Contractors and Concessionaires during the construction and maintenance phase. 
10.3 Although the expenditure for Maintenance & Repair (M&R) of National Highways 
during 2021 -22 was Rs. 2,754 crores against budgetary allocation of Rs . 2,778 crores in 
2021-22 however effectively about Rs. 5,000 crores are being spent annually on Maintenance 
& Repair of National Highways from budget head of the Ministry on account of one portion 
of M&R being paid out of the Capital head and Additional expenditure by NHAI on M&R. 
10.4 Ministry is giving full attention to M & R of NHs and for that the use of Network 
Survey Vehicle (NSV) has been mandated to capture road conditions before start of work, 
before issue of provisional / final completion certificate and thereafter at regular intervals of 6 
months after completion of the work. 
10.5 The Ministry has decided to take up maintenance of NH stretches entrusted with State 
Governments/UTs, that may require only minor repairs (such as pothole and patch rep airs, 
etc.) and on which improvement/PR/IRQP works are not targeted for award in the immediate 
future. Maintenance of such NH stretches are to be taken up on single percentage rate for 
duration of 1 year (short term contract) or 3 years (medium term contra ct), as applicable. 
Stretches under contract maintenance are to be implemented through State PWDs. 
Further Recommendation/Observation 

54 
 
10.6 The Committee reiterates its ‘Further Recommendation/Observation’ made 
under para 4.14 of Chapter III of this Report.  The Committee further reiterates its 
original recommendation that the Ministry may act upon the way forward suggested by 
NITI Aayog and allocate much higher budgetary allocation than presently done for 
Maintenance & Repair (M&R) of NHs across the country. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
11. Further, the Committee notes that allocation made for maintenance of Highways 
pales in comparison with that in developed countries like United States, where the allocation 
made for maintenance of Federal Highways is more th an 50 percent of the overall budget of 
the Federal Highway Administration 2. While the Committee appreciates the fact that 
budgetary allocation for the highway network of a developed economy like United States 
cannot directly be compared with that of India,  which needs to expand its National Highway 
network at a rapid pace, the concentration on expansion of the NH network alone cannot be 
permitted to sideline the need for high -quality maintenance of the existing NH network in the 
country. The Committee, ther efore, recommends that the Ministry should carry out an 
overhaul of the existing mechanism for inspection and monitoring of maintenance & repair 
requirements on National Highways across the country. Given the poor state of National 
Highways often observed around the country and the direct adversary effect of the same on 
road safety as well as average speed of the traffic, it is imperative that the Ministry/NHAI 
may put in efforts to ensure that routine M&R activities are carried out on National 
Highways in a proactive manner, without waiting for the NHs to reach conditions that would 
require immediate intervention. The Committee, with a view to effectuate the same, 
recommends that a mechanism may be developed to quantify the condition of all NH stretches 
in an objective manner, using international standards as a benchmark for such 
quantification. 
(Para 75) 
Reply of the Ministry 
11.1 Developed countries have almost completed their required development work and 
accordingly their expenditure is mostly on maintenance of Highways. This results in higher 
percentage of the budget towards maintenance activities in developed countries. Whereas  in 
India, we are presently focusing on both development and maintenance activities. National 
Highways are now in a much better condition except for newly declared NHs. Also there are 
some maintenance issues on the NH stretches where works are ongoing. 
11.2 Year-wise details of Allocation under budget head of Maintenance and Repair (M&R) 
as compared to total budgetary support of the Ministry during the last 5 years are given as 
under: - 
(Amount Rs. in crore) 
Year RE Allocation under Total Budgetary Support of Ministry at 
                                                           
2 https://www.fhwa.dot.gov/cfo/fhwa-fy-2021_budget_508.pdf 

55 
 
M&R RE Stage 
2017-18 2,876 61,062 
2018-19 2,531 78,625 
2019-20 2,000 83,016 
2020-21 2,654 1,01,823 
2021-22  2,778 1,28,149 
11.3 Effectively about Rs. 5,000 crores is being spent annually on Maintenance & Repair 
(M&R) of National Highways, including funds being spent for PR / IRQP works from NH(O) 
under Capital head and actual expenditure being incurred by NHAI and NHIDCL for M&R 
of NHs. 
11.4 The use of Network Survey Vehicle (NSV) has been mandated to capture road 
conditions before start of work, before issue of provisional / final completion certificate and 
thereafter at regular intervals. 
11.5 RAMS (Road Asset and Management System) software is being 
developed for prioritizing the NHs stretches for M&R activities, depending upon their 
condition, estimated fund requirement and available resources. The system is expected to be 
made functional based on the road condition data received through NSVs. 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
11.6 The Committee reiterates its ‘F urther Recommendation/Observation’ made 
under para 4.14 of Chapter III of this Report. 
 
RESEARCH, TRAINING, STUDIES AND OTHER ROAD SAFETY SCHEMES  
Recommendation/Observation 
12.  The Committee is surprised to note that the Ministry has sanctioned just 5 R& D 
schemes worth merely Rs. 2.04 crores during the last 3 financial years. For comparison, 
United States’ Federal Highway Administration (FHWA) had an annual budget of about 
US$47 billion for the FY 2020 (compared to MoRTH’s R.E. 2021 -22 allocation of Rs. 
131,149 crores i.e. roughly US$ 17.33 billion) and the fund allocated for ‘Research, 
Technology, and Education Program’ is $420 million (i.e., about Rs. 3177 crores). While the 
Committee appreciates that such comparisons cannot be directly made between such  
differing economies owing to differences in requirements and present focus, the magnitude of 
difference in the importance being given to R&D and related activities points to the need for 
the Ministry to have a major rethink about its missing focus on R&D in the road sector. The 
Committee strongly recommends that the Ministry may strive to sanction more and more 
R&D schemes and work with best global institutions in this field in order to carve out niche 
solutions for the varied problems plaguing the Indian road sector at present. The Committee 
feels that the same would also help the Ministry to have a better, clearer long -term vision in 

56 
 
creating a safe, robust, well -maintained NH network across the diverse geographies of the 
country. 
(Para 89) 
Reply of the Ministry 
12.1 The Ministry has sanctioned 7 Nos of Research schemes amounting to Rs.17.89 
crores during the last 3 financial  years (2019-20 to 2021 -22). Ministry has approved Chair 
Professor in 4 nos. reputed academic institutes of the country during the last 3 financial years. 
Ministry is carrying out research projects through MoRTH Chair Professors, Centre of 
Excellence in Road Safety in IIT Madras and standalone research projects through reputed 
academic/research institutes of the country.   16 nos. resea rch projects have been identified 
during the current financial year 2022-23. 
12.2 Additionally, NHAI has assigned 27 research projects to various IITs/ NITs/ Research 
Institutes for a cost of 23.7 crores. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
12.3 The Committee is dismayed to note that research schemes amounting to only Rs. 
17.89 crores have been sanctioned by the Ministry during the last 3 financial years. The 
Committee feels that given the multifaceted, diverse range of issues faced by the Indian 
road secto r, a much higher focus needs to be laid on carrying out quality scientific 
research into coming up with possible solutions to the same. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that the Ministry may undertake a holistic review of the research 
requirements of the Indian road sector and ensure that sufficient budgetary allocations 
are made to carry out the same in the upcoming financial years. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
13. The Committee further recommends that urgent steps may be taken in coordination with 
concerned local authorities to tackle the problem of stray cattle and other animals 
trespassing National Highways posing tremendous security risk to the passengers, especially 
women, seniors and children, besides causing hindrance on the smooth flow of traffi c on 
NHs. Barriers may be erected to prevent stray cattle and other animals from coming onto 
NHs in stretches where this problem is faced frequently. Other possible solutions may be 
looked into to minimize such incidents across the entire NH network in the  country so as to 
make NH travel safer and free-flowing for all passengers. 
(Para 92) 
Reply of the Ministry 
13.1 Generally, Greenfield Expressways / access -controlled Highways are provided with 
barriers on either side of carriage way, which helps prevent s tray cattle and other animals 
from coming onto the NHs. However, with respect to other NHs, the matter of trespassing by 
stray animals is under examination.    
Further Recommendation/Observation 

57 
 
13.2 The Committee is surprised to note that the issue of tre spassing by stray cattle 
and other animals is still under examination by the Ministry. The issue of stray cattle is 
a long -standing one and the Ministry/ NHAI must ensure that suitable measures are 
undertaken to minimize such incidents, in close cooperatio n with local authorities. 
Issues of negligence on the part of local authorities may be taken up with the State 
Government concerned. Further, the Committee desires to know whether incidents of 
trespassing by stray animals have also been witnessed on access -controlled highways in 
the country, despite having barriers on either side of the carriage-way. 
 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
14.  The Committee notes the various measures taken by the Ministry to bolster road 
safety on NHs across the country. A huge numbe r of road accident deaths and the resultant 
negative effect of the same on the economic growth potential of the country is immense. 
Keeping this in mind, a lot more still needs to be done in order to minimize the number of 
road accidents and deaths happeni ng in the country. The Committee feels that besides high -
quality maintenance of National Highways and implementation of safety measures therein, 
having well-trained and educated drivers on our NHs holds the key to improving the driving 
habits of the average Indian driver and making them more aware of traffic rules and the need 
for adhering to them. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry may request 
the Ministry of Education to seriously consider the inclusion of lessons to spread awareness 
about good driving habits, traffic laws, good samaritan law etc., at the school level itself. The 
Committee further recommends that the scheme for cashless treatment of road accident 
victims may be finalized at the earliest.                
 (Para 100) 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
14.1 The Ministry already has requested the Ministry of Education to seriously consider 
the inclusion of lessons to spread awareness about good driving habits, traffic laws, Good 
Samaritan Law, etc. at the school level itself.  
14.2 Provision of emergency treatment after an accident is a critical component of 
Ministry’s efforts in reducing fatalities. Accordingly, following statutory provisions have 
been made through Motor Vehicles (Amendment) Act, 2019:- 
i. Section 162(2) provides for a scheme for the cashless treatment of road accident 
victims, including during the golden hour. 
ii. Section 164(B) provides for creation of Fund for Road Accident Victims – “Motor 
Vehicle Accident Fund”. 
14.3 Scheme Features for Cashless Treatment of Road Accident Victims: - 
i. Golden Hour Plus Scheme  – Cashless treatment for victims of road traffic accident, 
including during the ‘golden hour’ 
ii. Stabilization and Treatment  – Provision of stabilization (i.e. essential trauma care 
or service to patient to prevent death or disability till the stage for final discharge from 
the hospital as decided by the treating doctor. This would include provision of 

58 
 
essential care on OPD basis and shall be applicable till the final discharge from the 
last hospital in case of referral.). 
iii. Beneficiary Eligibility – All road accident victims of Indian or foreign nationality 
iv. Benefit Cover –  
 Hit-and-Run & Uninsured cases - INR 1.5 Lakh/person/episode 
 Insured & third -party Insurance – Full cover (Note: Treatment shall be 
seamlessly transferred to respective Insurance provider, after the exhaustion of 
limit of 1.5lakhs) 
v. Scheme will ride on robust IT platform developed for PM -JAY (Pradhan Mantri Jan 
Arogya Yojana). 
 
14.4 Motor Vehicle Accident Fund –  
 
i. In accordance with Section 164(B)(1) of MV A ct, 1988, MORTH has set up Motor 
Vehicle Accident Fund under Central Motor Vehicles (Motor Vehicle Accident Fund) 
Rules, 2022 for providing compensations to road accident victims:  
 Compensation to persons grievously hurt in a Hit -and-Run Accident – 
Rs 50,000/- (Increased from 12,500/-) 
 Compensation to dependents of a person in case of death in a Hit -and-
Run Accident – Rs. 2 lakh/person in case of death (Increased from 
25,000/-) 
ii. Components of Motor Vehicle Accident Fund: 
 Account for Insured Vehicles – For treatment in case accident is 
of/by insured vehicles, to be funded by Insurance Companies. 
 Account for Uninsured vehicles / Hit and Run Accident - For 
treatment in case accident is of/by uninsured vehicles or hit & run 
accident 
 Hit-and-Run Compensation Ac count – For providing compensation 
to Hit-and-Run accident victims 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
14.5 The Committee desires to be apprised of the response furnished by the Ministry 
of Education to the request made by the Ministry of Road Transport and  Highways for 
inclusion of lessons to spread awareness about good driving habits, traffic laws, Good 
Samaritan Law, etc. at the school level itself.  The Committee also notes that the reply 
furnished by the Ministry does not make any mention of the estimat ed date of 
finalization of the Scheme for Cashless Treatment of Road Accident Victims and desires 
to be apprised of the same. 
 
SCHEME ON WOMEN SAFETY  
Recommendation/Observation 
 

59 
 
15. The Committee adds that basic safety measures such as proper signages, st reetlights, 
highway patrol at frequent distances etc. are often found to be lacking on National Highways. 
The Committee is of the view that ensuring such measures is not budget -intensive and feels 
that there is an urgent, pressing need to ensure that these  very basic measures are enforced 
across the entire NH stretch in the country. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends 
that the Ministry may conduct road safety audits across the entire stretch of NHs and ensure 
proper signages, streetlights and high way patrol. This would not only help women travelling 
on NHs feel safer, especially at night, but also boost the overall safety of the road passengers 
at large. Signages may prominently display helpline numbers for different emergencies in 
English, Hindi as well as local language.  
(Para 108) 
Reply of the Ministry 
15.1 Proper signboards / highway lighting in all the development projects are being 
invariably provided. Further NHAI has also deployed Highways Patrol vehicle in all 
completed projects.  
15.2 Ministry has taken Road safety on Top Priority.   In order to take precautionary 
measures for road safety, the Ministry has issued guidelines to ensure Road Safety Audits at 
all stages (Design, construction, and operation). 
15.3 Detailed guidelines for taking up road safety audits on National Highways have been 
prepared and notified. Road Safety Audits have been made part and parcel of all National 
Highways development projects on EPC/BOT modes. Ministry has issued circular which 
makes it mandatory to carry out road safety audit for all new road projects having length of 
5 km or more at the stage of Detail Project Report (PR)/Engineering Design. 
15.4 Road safety audit has been conducted so far for about 61,086 km length of NHs, 
thereby accounting for about 43% of total NH network at present. 
15.5 All the executing agencies have been directed to ensure safety provisions for 
highways during construction. Necessary action is to be taken to ensure provision of road 
signages, construction of diversion roads and o ther requisite provisions as per NH guidelines 
and IRC standards. IRC has already issued IRC: SP:55 -2014 regarding “Guidelines on 
Traffic Management in Work Zones”. Safety of Road users is to be ensured to avoid any 
unwanted incident where construction works are going on. 
15.6 There is a provision in IRC 67-2012 – “Code of Practice for Road Signs” that the legend 
on all signboards for expressways, Urban and City roads shall be bilingual -regional/local 
language and English. 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
15.7 The Committee notes the various steps being taken by the Ministry to bolster 
road safety on the NH network in India by means of provision of proper signboards, 
street lights, road safety audit etc. The Committee however desires to be apprised of the 
mechanism in place to ensure that such safety provisions are well -maintained and that 

60 
 
their implementation is checked from time to time, not just at the construction stage of 
projects. The Committee further recommends that suitable steps may be taken to 
enable citizens to report the lack of safety provisions on certain stretches of National 
Highways, through both online and offline mediums. 
 
MISCELLANEOUS 
Provisions for service roads 
Recommendation/Observation 
16. The Committee observes that the lack of service roads alongside National Highways 
causes inconvenience to local residents and is, at times, the cause of road accidents. The land 
required for development of National Highways is acquired from the local people and they 
should be given the benefits of service roads along National Highways. The Committee feels 
that service roads are an integral part of National Highways and therefore, recommends that 
the Ministry may make it mandatory to have service roads along NHs to the extent possible 
and provisions for the same may be included in the tender document for NH projects. 
(Para 117)  
Reply of the Ministry 
16.1 Service roads are generally provided at the locations wherever inter -mixing of local 
traffic with through traffic is very high resulting in conge stion. Accordingly, provision of 
service roads is made in national highway projects wherever found necessary.  
16.2 With reference to greenfield corridors developed, development of service roads would 
not stay in line with the concept of access -controlled corridors and would diminish the 
benefits of these flagship corridors. However, the Ministry takes up development of 
underpasses along the corridor to ensure un -encumbered movement of local residents with 
additional provisions made as per site requirements. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
16.3  The Committee observes that having service roads directly helps in reducing the 
number of accidents taking place on National Highways. The Ministry, therefore, 
should carry out thorough analysis of the positive i mpact of service roads in terms of 
road safety and thereafter come upon the decision of whether or not to have provisions 
for service roads in a given National Highways project. The Committee further 
recommends that cost should not be the deciding factor w hen considering the 
practicality of having service roads in a NH project and ensuring top-notch level of road 
safety should be the top priority of the Ministry / NHAI. 
 
 
Five Year Vision Plan for Infrastructure Sector 
Recommendation/Observation 
17. The Committee recommends that the Ministry may take undertake concerted measures 
to achieve the ambitious goals laid out in the Five Year Vision Plan (2019 -24) for 

61 
 
Infrastructure Sector, prepared by the Sectoral Group of Secretaries, which include targetin g 
reduction of accident fatalities by at least 25%, strengthening public transport and shared 
mobility through regulatory reforms, strengthening connectivity to top 100 tourist 
destinations, development of helipads near Highways for victim evacuation and c ommercial 
purposes, development of contractors database to identify underperformers and habitual 
litigants, etc. A robust monitoring mechanism may be put in place in order to assess the 
progress being made in regard of all the goals and targets laid out un der the Five Year 
Vision Plan. 
(Para 118) 
Reply of the Ministry 
17.1 The Ministry and IRC have issued various codes and guidelines, from time to time, to 
implement various road safety measures so as to minimize accidents on National Highways. 
Also, Supreme  Court Committee on Road Safety, during various meetings, has issued 
direction to various State Governments for implementation of Road safety measures 
including Engineering measures. 
17.2 The Ministry has issued instructions vide circular dated 09.11.2020 to carry out All 
Stages Road safety Audit for all road projects. It is further advised that Road Safety Audit of 
all the National Highways may be carried out and follow up action may also be taken up for 
implementation of the Road Safety Audit recommendations appropriately. 
17.3 The Ministry vide OM dated 14 th September 2016 has issued directives on 
“Immediate cautionary measures for alerting road users at identified black spots”. 
17.4 The Ministry vide OM no. RW/NH-29011/2/2015/P&M (RSCE) dated 7th Decembe r 
2015 has issued directives on “Preparation and submission of proposals for rectification of 
identified road accident black spots on National Highways”. 
17.5 The Ministry, through IAHE, has signed an MoU with SaveLIFE foundation for 
implementation of “Zer o Fatality Corridors (ZFC)” on National Highways. Study on two 
stretches in UP and Maharashtra has been conducted & the action plan for implementation of 
their recommendation are under progress with respective Field Offices. Further, additional 14 
stretches in 13 States have been identified recently in December, 2021 and study on the same 
is under progress. Lately, study in Telangana has also been undertaken. 
17.6 NHAI has signed a Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) with the Institute for Road 
Traffic Educat ion (IRTE) and Institute for Development and Communication, Chandigarh 
(IDC) to promote road safety and collaborate in the areas of traffic management through a 
programme titled “Capacity building of Road Safety Management through the Safe Systems 
Approach Programme”. The study is being implemented, examined & monitored under 
Regional Office-Chandigarh of NHAI. 
17.7 Traffic calming measures such as traffic warning signs, delineators, road studs, bar 
markings, humps at approach roads, etc. are taken at vulne rable sections of National 
Highways to reduce road accident fatalities. 

62 
 
17.8 One of the cornerstones for the development of Bharatmala Pariyojana is to 
streamline movement of freight across the country. In this pursuit, initiatives are planned to 
ensure connectivity to multiple economic nodes identified under National Master Plan as part 
of Bharatmala Pariyojana. In addition to development of greenfield corridors across the 
country. This will eventually lead to reduction in accidents as freight traffic will  be largely 
separated with passenger traffic after completion of Economic Corridors and Greenfield 
corridors. 
17.9 The Ministry is also developing 600+ wayside amenities (WSA) across the National 
Highway network to provide world class amenities like food c ourts, hotels, garages, dhabas 
and hospitals.  
17.10 One key feature of these wayside amenities (WSA) is the development of helipads to 
support in both emergency evacuation purposes and also increase aviation -based connectivity 
across the nation. Discussio ns have been held with stakeholders from DGCA to integrate 
such helipad facilities with the overall civil aviation network. Infrastructure for helicopter 
landing facility is being provided on large WSA sites (wherever feasible) along upcoming 
Greenfield Expressways. 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
17.11 The Committee notes that the reply furnished by the Ministry does not make any 
mention about the steps taken by the Ministry to strengthen public transport and 
shared mobility through regulatory reforms, and to strengthen connectivity to top 
hundred tourist destinations. Given the rapidly increasing number of vehicles in the 
country as well as to tackle the issue of air pollution, promoting public transportation is 
the need of the hour. On the other hand, strong road connectivity to top tourist 
destinations in the country has a direct positive effect on the footfall attracted at these 
destinations, thereby increasing economic opportunities. The Committee, therefore, 
desires to be apprised of the action taken by the Ministry to strengthen public transport 
and to improve NH connectivity to top tourist destinations. 
 
 
Driving Training Centres 
Recommendation/Observation 
18. The Committee desires to be apprised of the number of districts in the country where 
Driving Training Centres are functional and the number of applications received and 
approved by the Ministry so far for the one -time assistance scheme for setting up of model 
DTCs in the country. 
(Para 134) 
Reply of the Ministry 
18.1 The scheme for setting  up of Driving Training Centres (DTCs) in the country was 
launched in the 14 th Finance Commission Cycle Period. However, no project was sanctioned 
under the scheme during this period due to stay on the scheme by the Hon’ble Madras High 
Court. The stay has been vacated on 23.03.2021. The Ministry has continued the scheme for 
15th Finance Commission Cycle Period to set up Driving Training Centres (DTCs) in 

63 
 
Aspirational Districts and other rural areas in the country.  
18.2 Currently, 213 proposals have been re ceived from different States under the scheme. 
The same are under process.  
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
18.3 The Committee is glad to note that 213 proposals have been received from 
different States under the one -time assistance scheme for setting up of model Driving 
Training Centres (DTCs) in the country. The Committee, however, notes that the 
Ministry has not furnished information regarding the number of districts in the country 
wherein Driving Training Centres are functional at present and desires to be apprised 
of the same, alongwith plans, if any, to encourage setting up of DTCs in the districts 
wherein DTCs do not exist at present.  

64 
 
CHAPTER-IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE FINAL 
REPLIES OF THE MINISTRY ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
NATIONAL HIGHWAYS AUTHORITY OF INDIA 
Recommendation/Observation 
1. The Committee notes that the amount of funds rele ased to NHAI has almost tripled 
since FY 2016 -17, while the length constructed by NHAI has increased by only about 63 
percent during the same time period. This points to the rising cost of NH construction in the 
country, a major contribution is that of the steep rise in land acquisition costs. In this regard, 
the Committee desires to know the impact of the Value Capture Finance policy issued by 
NHAI, in partly financing the cost of highway construction and the response of the State 
Governments to the same. The Committee also recommends that the Ministry/NHAI may, as 
far as possible, try to factor in the rising costs of land acquisition in calculating the cost 
estimates for its future projects so as to enable accurate budgetary planning for the same. 
Further, the Ministry/NHAI may come up with ways to monetize the land assets which have 
been acquired but not been put to use for any possible reason. 
(Para 27) 
Reply of the Ministry 
1.1 Information under compilation. To be submitted separately.  
 
***** 

65 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS – AT A GLANCE 
CHAPTER-III 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH 
REPLIES OF THE MINISTRY HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
COMMITTEE 
ANNUAL PLAN 2021-22 
 The Committee appreciates that the Ministry has utilized 93.66 percent of its 
overall Revised Estimates (R.E.) 2021 -22 allocation. However, the expenditure of 82 
percent and 84.62 percent of the R.E. 2021 -22 allocation under the important heads 
‘Development of IT’ and ‘R&D Planning Studies’, leaves much to be desired in terms of 
utilization of allocated funds. The underutilization of funds under these heads, along 
with the fact that the allocations made under these heads are already low figures given 
the vastness of the National Highway (NH) network in the country, point to the lack of 
attention given by the Ministry / National Highways Authority of India (NHAI) to these 
ancillary but important budgetary heads. The Committee, therefore, recommends that 
the Ministry may lay due focus on improving the expenditure figures under these heads 
in the future so as to ensure high -quality maintenance and expansion of the National 
Highway network in the country. 
(Para 1.3) 
 The Committee is concerned to note that during  the Financial Year 2021 -22, no 
separate proposal for Women Safety in Public Transport from the States/UTs has been 
received and approved under the Nirbhaya Framework. Bolstering the safety of women 
in public transport is a prerequisite to promote the use of public transport across the 
country as well as to enable women to move more freely, which also helps fuel the 
economic growth of the nation. The Committee feels that the non -receipt of proposals 
for projects under the Scheme on Women Safety on Public Ro ad Transport cannot be 
entirely attributed to the Covid -19 pandemic. The Committee recommends that urgent 
steps may be taken to encourage better participation from the State Governments under 
this scheme and to ensure that funds under this head are optimal ly utilized in the 
ongoing Financial Year. The Committee further recommends that the Ministry may 
come up with other possible innovative schemes that utilize the funds under Nirbhaya 
Framework to bolster the safety of women on public road transport, besides the existing 
scheme for Vehicle Tracking Platform under this head.  
(Para 2.2) 
 
The Committee appreciates the various initiatives being taken by the Ministry to 
improve road safety, maintenance & repair of NHs, and research & development in the 
road sector. The Committee lauds the setting up of Centre of Excellence for Road Safety 
(CoERS) at IIT Madras and hopes that sufficient budgetary provisions are made to 

66 
 
CoERS to permit it to fulfill its mandate of R&D in the road sector in earnest. Research 
may be carried out into assessing the feasibility of mandating installation of advanced 
technologies such as Automatic Emergency Braking (AEC), Electronic Stability Control 
(ESC), Traction Control etc. in vehicles sold across the country. The Committee furthe r 
recommends that the Ministry may seek higher budgetary allocation under all these 
crucial heads in future so as to enable enhanced focus on the important activities 
carried out under these heads. This would significantly enhance the safety and pace of 
the transportation on the National Highway network across the country.  
(Para 3.14) 
 
 
ANNUAL PLAN 2022-23   
 The Committee notes that effectively about Rs. 5,000 crores are being 
spent annually on Maintenance & Repair of National Highways from the budget head 
of the Ministry on account of one portion of M&R being paid out of the Capital head 
and additional expenditure by NHAI on M&R. It may be noted that Rs. 5,000 crores is 
still effectively just about 2.5 percent of the overall BE 2022 -23 allocation of Rs . 
199,107.71 crores, which is a far cry from the way forward suggested by NITI Aayog to 
begin with earmarking 10 percent of its annual budget for road and highways for 
maintenance to move towards the developed country norm of earmarking 40 per cent to 
50 p er cent of the budget for roads and highways for maintenance. The Committee 
understands that the requirements of the Indian road sector are different from that of 
the developed countries but this does not mean that maintenance of the NH network of 
the coun try can be accorded a lower priority than the expansion of the NH network. 
High quality maintenance and repair of the existing network - including frequent 
monitoring of the road quality as well as carrying out preemptive repair works, where 
needed - will give a direct boost to the efforts of the Ministry to minimize the number of 
road accidents happening on the NH network across the country. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends that the Ministry may spend higher amounts on regular 
maintenance checks of the NH network across the country.  
(Para 4.14) 
 The Committee takes note of the various measures taken by the Ministry 
to minimize the number of road accidents on National Highways in the country. Given 
the extremely high number of road accidents happening i n the country, a large 
percentage of which takes place on National Highways, there is a pressing need for 
taking remedial measures on a war footing. The Committee recommends that the 
Ministry may evolve a robust mechanism to ensure that ample safety provis ions are in 
place on the NH network across the country and that periodic checks are made without 
fail, to ensure continued compliance of the required safety provisions throughout the 
NH network. Further, the Committee recommends that once it has been ascer tained 
that sufficient progress has been made in the rectification of black spots that have been 
identified at present, the Ministry / NHAI may review the definition of black spots on 

67 
 
National Highways to include accident-prone stretches where, say, more than 5 fatalities 
have taken place during the last three years, as compared to the present definition of 
black spots wherein only stretches where more than 10 fatalities have taken place 
during the last three years are considered to be black spots. This wou ld allow the 
Ministry / NHAI to work on the rectification of more accident -prone stretches across 
the country.  
(Para 4.15) 
 
NATIONAL HIGHWAYS AUTHORITY OF INDIA 
Vacancies in NHAI 
The Committee is concerned to note that 114 posts out of the 317 ( i.e., 35.96 
percent) sanctioned strength of the Finance Cadre posts of NHAI are lying vacant at 
present. Given the fact that NHAI implements road projects worth thousands of crores, 
it is crucial to have close financial scrutiny of the ongoing projects of NHAI as well as its 
disputes with third parties. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that NHAI 
may take urgent steps to ensure that the vacancies existing in the Finance cadre are 
filled at the earliest.  
(Para 4A.6) 
 
PENDING ARBITRATION CASES 
The Committee notes that almost the same number of cases have been referred 
to CCIE-2 as compared to cases referred to CCIE -1 and CCIE -3 combined, while the 
number of cases resolved by CCIE -2 is much more than the combined number of cases 
resolved by CCIE -1 and C CIE-3. Speedy disposal of disputes between the parties 
(NHAI & the Concessionaire/ Contractor/ Consultant) directly enables speedier 
completion of road projects stuck due to disputes with the concessionaires. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends that the M inistry may look into difficulties, if any, 
being faced by certain CCIEs in timely resolution of cases and if needed, consider the 
constitution of more CCIEs to enable faster parallel processing of disputes. Further, the 
Committee desires to be apprised of  the number of cases wherein arbitration could not 
be completed within the time limit of 12 months, as stipulated by Section 29A of the 
Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996, and the number of cases wherein the "Court" 
has extended the period of mandate of the tribunal.  
(Para 5.8) 
 
 
 
BHARATMALA PARIYOJANA PHASE-I 

68 
 
 The Committee is glad to note that the Ministry of Road Transport and 
Highways and its implementing agencies have constructed about 24,000 km of National 
Highways (including Bharatmala Pariyojana) in FY 2020 -21 & FY 2021 -22 at an 
average pace of about 12,0 00 km per year (33 km per day), which is unprecedented in 
the history of the country and is significantly higher than the annual highway 
construction in other countries. The Committee takes note of the various steps taken   
by the implementing agency to ex pedite award and construction of road projects in the 
country. The Committee, however, still feels that having more reasonable targeted 
timeline of completion of road projects would help the Ministry in having more clarity 
in its long -term road infrastruct ure planning as well as capital allocation. The 
Committee therefore recommends that the Ministry may review the procedure it 
presently follows to estimate the projected completion date of its road projects and give 
some consideration to the various hurdles expected to take place in projects.  
(Para 6.4) 
The Committee feels that the Port Connectivity Projects envisaged under the 
Bharatmala Pariyojana will have significant positive impact on the growth of the 
shipping sector in the country. The Committee notes the submission of the Ministry that 
there has been no delay on part of the Ministry for implementation of the Port 
Connectivity Projects under Bharatmala Pariyojana. However, it is evident that the 
Port Connectivity Projects are drastically delayed, even  more so than the overall 
delayed progress of the Bharatmala Pariyojana Phase -I. While the Committee 
appreciates the increased pace of road construction per day in the country and the 
optimistic targeted timelines for ambitious projects, the Committee feel s that the 
Ministry should try to be more realistic while coming up with targeted timelines for 
completion of projects during the planning stage. The Committee, therefore, reiterates 
its ‘Further Recommendation/Observation’ made under para 6.4 of Chapter I II of this 
Report.  
(Para 7.6) 
 
MAINTENANCE AND REPAIR OF NATIONAL HIGHWAYS 
The Committee reiterates its ‘Further Recommendation/Observation’ made 
under para 4.14 of Chapter III of this Report. The Committee further reiterates its 
original recommendation that the Ministry may act upon the way forward suggested by 
NITI Aayog and allocate much higher budgetary allocation than presently done for 
Maintenance & Repair (M&R) of NHs across the country.  
(Para 10.6) 
The Committee reiterates its ‘Further Recommendat ion/Observation’ made 
under para 4.14 of Chapter III of this Report.  
(Para 11.6) 
 

69 
 
RESEARCH, TRAINING, STUDIES AND OTHER ROAD SAFETY SCHEMES  
The Committee is dismayed to note that research schemes amounting to only Rs. 
17.89 crores have been sanctioned by  the Ministry during the last 3 financial years. The 
Committee feels that given the multifaceted, diverse range of issues faced by the Indian 
road sector, a much higher focus needs to be laid on carrying out quality scientific 
research into coming up with possible solutions to the same. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that the Ministry may undertake a holistic review of the research 
requirements of the Indian road sector and ensure that sufficient budgetary allocations 
are made to carry out the same in the upcoming financial years.  
(Para 12.3) 
The Committee is surprised to note that the issue of trespassing by stray cattle 
and other animals is still under examination by the Ministry. The issue of stray cattle is 
a long -standing one and the Ministry/ NHAI must ensure that suitable measures are 
undertaken to minimize such incidents, in close cooperation with local authorities. 
Issues of negligence on the part of local authorities may be taken up with the State 
Government concerned. Further, the Committe e desires to know whether incidents of 
trespassing by stray animals have also been witnessed on access -controlled highways in 
the country, despite having barriers on either side of the carriage-way.  
(Para 13.2) 
The Committee desires to be apprised of the response furnished by the Ministry 
of Education to the request made by the Ministry of Road Transport and Highways for 
inclusion of lessons to spread awareness about good driving habits, traffic laws, Good 
Samaritan Law, etc. at the school level itself.  T he Committee also notes that the reply 
furnished by the Ministry does not make any mention of the estimated date of 
finalization of the Scheme for Cashless Treatment of Road Accident Victims and desires 
to be apprised of the same.  
(Para 14.5) 
 
SCHEME ON WOMEN SAFETY  
The Committee notes the various steps being taken by the Ministry to bolster 
road safety on the NH network in India by means of provision of proper signboards, 
street lights, road safety audit etc. The Committee however desires to be apprised  of the 
mechanism in place to ensure that such safety provisions are well -maintained and that 
their implementation is checked from time to time, not just at the construction stage of 
projects. The Committee further recommends that suitable steps may be tak en to 
enable citizens to report the lack of safety provisions on certain stretches of National 
Highways, through both online and offline mediums.  
(Para 15.7) 
 

70 
 
 
MISCELLANEOUS 
Provisions for service roads 
 The Committee observes that having service roads directly helps in reducing the 
number of accidents taking place on National Highways. The Ministry, therefore, 
should carry out thorough analysis of the positive impact of service roads in terms of 
road safety and thereafter come upon the decision of wheth er or not to have provisions 
for service roads in a given National Highways project. The Committee further 
recommends that cost should not be the deciding factor when considering the 
practicality of having service roads in a NH project and ensuring top-notch level of road 
safety should be the top priority of the Ministry / NHAI.  
(Para 16.3) 
Five Year Vision Plan for Infrastructure Sector 
The Committee notes that the reply furnished by the Ministry does not make any 
mention about the steps taken by the Ministry to strengthen public transport and 
shared mobility through regulatory reforms, and to strengthen connectivity to top 
hundred tourist destinations. Given the rapidly increasing number of vehicles in the 
country as well as to tackle the issue of air  pollution, promoting public transportation is 
the need of the hour. On the other hand, strong road connectivity to top tourist 
destinations in the country has a direct positive effect on the footfall attracted at these 
destinations, thereby increasing eco nomic opportunities. The Committee, therefore, 
desires to be apprised of the action taken by the Ministry to strengthen public transport 
and to improve NH connectivity to top tourist destinations.  
(Para 17.11) 
Driving Training Centres 
The Committee is gla d to note that 213 proposals have been received from 
different States under the one -time assistance scheme for setting up of model Driving 
Training Centres (DTCs) in the country. The Committee, however, notes that the 
Ministry has not furnished information regarding the number of districts in the country 
wherein Driving Training Centres are functional at present and desires to be apprised 
of the same, alongwith plans, if any, to encourage setting up of DTCs in the districts 
wherein DTCs do not exist at present.  
(Para 18.3) 
***** 
 
 

 
 
ANNEXURES 

ANNEXURE-I
71

432201/2022/DGM(HRIADMIN)-I RRs CRITERIA FOllOWED FOR RECRUITMENT OF FINANCE PERSONNEL IN NHAI
National Highways Authority of India (Recruitment, Seniority and Promotion) Regulationa Amended from time to time
Crlter .. propOMd In Drllft: NHAI RRs 2017 clrculatMl for
eommllnts amona stlk."oIde,..
SI.
No. Pool 23.10.2001/21.12.2001 16.06.2016 04.03.202130.11.201111.03.1111
No Change By promotion: DGM (F&A) wit'l5 (five) yN~' regular service i'l that
post and po.. euing euentlal edu:atlonel qualfication and
experience.
No Change No. of poat 15
lIea10d of RecNltlMnt Promotion! Oeputati':ln -100% Onte
transfefllble)
(i) For Promotion: OGM (F&A) wlh five years' regular .. rvce in the
post and nd posaeuing educational I professional quaMfication •• In CA
ICWA/MBA
(Fnance) from 8 IeOOgnized Universitt I InatiMe .,d 14 ye.....·
experience. out of which et least 7 Y881'$' experience r. Fi1ancial
Accountingl 8udget1rg1lntomal AudiCiContract Managementl Fund
M.n~bulMlfTlent. in an organization of repute.
OM(Fin) Promotion: 00""' wi1h 2 (two) ye.,..
(L.....I-i31 regular "Nice.
NoChlinge
Deputlltlon: '" (four) years regular
Hrvice In the ps..3 of leval·12 Of'
equivalent.
By deputation: (i) hoIdnga.. logous post on regular basis in level-
13; Of
(ii) wtt'I" (four) years' servloe on regular basis InpoItsln level-12
and possessing essential quailication and experience,DlNet Recl'1.lftnMnt-12 years service In
Responsible postion in mancel
accountsdepartment
Age lim. 418rean;.
Euentlal EducatioMiI Qualftcatlon: (I) Degree in
Commarce/Accounts from a recognized unive,..ty
ICAl/lCWAltMeA (FINlnce)1rom a re<:og1ized l.I1ive,..ity/lnstitute:
0,
Member 0( any organized Group-A FnanceiAccounts related
SeMce0( the Central Government orof the State Government;
(2)ey ct.putation: <I)holding analogous post In parent cadre in 11'\8pay
.""Ieof leval13 01pay m8trix orequivalant
Or (i)with fiva years' service in the post n parent cadre in the pay sca.. 01
lavel12 ofpay mabix or equivalent
And
al Ia.. t 7 yearIi' experience n Financial AccounthglBudgeti"IgI Internal
AudirContract M8I'l8gfJmentJ Fund Management! Disbursement n an
organlultlon of repute and pouessing educational I protnsional
qu.l~ as in (A)CA I CWAI MBA
(Fnanoe) froma recognized University Iinstiute .Or
(e) Member ofany organized Gfoup-'A' FinancelAccOlJntS related Service
01 the c.ntraI Gf:).oemment or of the S1BteGovernment However ttlis
condition wil not apply toSr,
No, (8).
Qualfk.ation: (I) Degree of a
racorgnised Uriversity,
(i) Professional qual&ation such as:­
(a) Final exam of the tnatitUW! of
Chartered Accountlwlta of India or
(b) FIlaI exam of the JnstitlN of Coat
and Wortts Accountant of nella
0,
(e) Degree n BUUleSS Management
>MthAnence as he major subject.
0,
(d) Memeber or any orgariaed
Accounts Service r:I the Central
Government
e.a.ntlal Exparienc.: 141yeaf1' experience in the PB-3 ~ GP·
541001·or equivalent or higher out of which 7 rears' experience in
Financial AccountilglBudgeti'lgl internal AudItI Contract
Managemenflf'und ManagemenVOiabursement nan organization of
repute
No Change Promotion: Manager (F&A) w1th3 (ttlree) years of regularselVlce By promotion: Manager (F&A) of NHAI with 5 (five) years' reguar i) SOper oent by Promooon, No. ofpH;t 17
service tn that post and possessing essential qualficatlon and lij 50 per cent by Deputation, MeI10d of RecNttmant: Promotlon-5O%
o.putation: hokiing analogous post or with 3 years regular service in experience, (Quota can be ad~ a_ ~r tt.. DI.-.cttDeputatlon-6O"Jl. (Short faU1ran_.r;ab.,
the PB-3 with level-11 and posseung essential Quallicaoon and amdlniatratiw "",ulI"efl-.nQ (1) For PYornotIon: Manager(F&A) wtil five years' regular aervice n the
elq)8rience, By ct.putation Promotion: Manager (F&A) in levet-11 poetand and poa .. _si'lg educational I professional quaification as n (A)
(i) hOIdnganalogous post Oflreguar baM Inlevel-12; or of NHAI with 5 (five) years. CA /ICWA I MBA (Finance) from a recognlZad University /lnstlu1e Or (B)
Dnct Recruitment Candidates empaneiled for Deputy Secretary, (iQ with4 (four) yea,.' MlVice on regut8r basil n level-11 and o.putatton : Member of any otganized Group-'A' Financ&i Accounts related Servlce-oihoiding analogous post Of ~ 3 yea,. of regular service in PB-3 with possessing essential qualfication and experience. (i) hoIdnganalogous post n level- 12: theeen ... Goverrmanl or of f'Ie State Govemment
LeveI-11 and poaaeasng euential qualfication and elC'perienca, or and
Age limit 45 years, ea.. ntlal Educational Quallftcatlon: (i) Degree in'(ii) wi1h 41(four) years' service in Levei~ possessing Ten yea...' experience, out ot which at least 5 years'
CommeroeiAccounts from a recognized university or 11; or experience in Financial Accountilgl Budgeting! Internal AUdttl Contrao
QualftClltion: (QDegree of 8 reoorgnisad University, ICAJ/lCWAlIMBA (Finance) from a recogliz.ed Uliversitynnstlu1e; (iii) wIh 9 (nne) yean;' aeMca in Level- Managemen1I'Fund Management!
(i) Master Degree inCommerce Or 10, Disbursement, Inan organization of reputs.
Or Member of any organized Group-A Finance/Accounts related And
Final edmination of the Instlute of O'IIIrtered Acoountants of india service of theCentral Government or of ttle State Government; Pone_sing essential educational (2)By da;putatIon: 0)holding analogous post In parent cadre n the pay
Or QUaIIicdYt and experience. acaIe of 1eva112of pey m.trixOf equivalent
Filal examination of the 1fl$1ituteof Cosl and Worh Accountant 01EMentlaI E~: 9 years' experience In the PB-3 wIh GP· Or (i)with five years' MI'V1C8 In the post 1'1 patent cadre In the pay -=-..of
India 5400/- or equivalent or higher out of which 6 yea,..' 8ICperielce in Eaaenttal Educ.tionat Qu.IHkation: level 11 of pay matrix or equivalent
Or Finanellli Aoc:ountnglBudgeti'lgIlntemal AdUditContract (i) BachelOr degree in Commerce 0 And
Master of Bualneu Administration (two years course) 1MthManagementlFund ManagemenVOiaburaement in an organizationo f Chartertld Accountant Or at .... t 5 .,..,..' experief10e inFinancial AccountnglBudgetngl Jntamal
_pecialization in Fnanc:e repute. Certfied Management Accounlllnt 01' Audit' Contract MenagernantIf'und Management! Disbursement. in an
Or Master in Buanesa Admr.istraton erganation of repute and possessing educalional / profeulonaf
Member of organized Group 'A' Cos\lAccountsIFi"lance Setvioe of the (Finance) from a recognised Unlvetsity quaificatiort a. in (AlGA I ICWA I MBA (Finance) from a recogniZllld
Cennl Govemmentwtlh 09 years ofelCpafieoce. or In.ttute; Unlversty nnatitute Or(B) Member of any organized Group-'A' FinflnceJ
Or Accounts related Servk:e of the Central Govemment or of the State
Ex~:- A mintnum 9 (Nne) year experience In Member of any orvenlled Fhance 0 Goverrwnenl Ho.vever 1t* condilixl willnot appty t>Sr. No, (8),
FinanacelAccounta related WOt1I;s, Accounts related Service of the
Central Government State
Government:
2 DGM (Fin) Promotion: Manager IMth4 (four) years
(Lavat-12) regular service
o.putatlon: 4 )lee" regular service n
the PB~3of Levei-11 orequivaient
Dr.ct RKNttmenl-12 yea~ HfVCe In
Responsble position in finance/
accounts department.
Age IImil45 yea,.
Qualftcatlon: (i) Degree of a
recorgnised University,
(i) Professional qualfication such n:·
(a) Final exam of the tnstiMa of
Chartered Accoum.ma of India or
(b) Final &I(am of the Institute of Cost
and Wol1l.sAccountant of India
0,
(e) Deg," n 8usNaS Management
with Anenoe as"" major subject.
0,
(d) Memeber or any organised
Accounts Service r:I ttle Central
Government
 
ANNEXURE-II
72

432201/2022/DGM (HRIADMIN)-I RRs CRITERIA FOUOWED FOR RECRUITMENT OF FINANCE PERSONNEL IN NHAI
National Highways Authority of India (Recruitment. Seniority and Promotion) Regulations Amended from time to time
Crtt.rbl propOMd In Draft NHAIRRs 2017clrcu..... for
comments .mona _keholders
SI.
No. .oot 23.10.2001'29.12.2001 30.11.2011 16.06.2011 04.03.202111.03.1896
No Change Promotion: By promotion from suitable officers who has rendered 5 By promotion: Accounts Officers of NiAI wih 5 (five) yeal'l' reg~8r i) 50 per cent by Promotion. No. of pcMt: ..
(five) yea,. of regular service in the Grade neld: below witl Level-10 or aervico Inthat POlt II)50 per cent by Deputation. Ikthod of Recrultmlnt: Promotlon-8O%
abcyears of aeMce in Level-a [Quota een be adjuabld •• per the Dlrec1tOeputldon-50% (Short hllI ....n.,.rab .. '
By cMputdon: Q)holding analogous poet on regular basia in Level- amdln.u.tiYe r.quINfMnt] (1) For Promotion: Deputy Manaoer (F&A) IAccourta 0f'Icer with five
Deputlltion: hokting analogous pott or with 5 ye.r. regular MrVk::e in 11: or Promotion: yaars' regular service In that post .-ld POSaes&ng euotial educational
the PB-3., t.evei-to orflQuivalent: or . (ii) .",;ttl 5 (five) years' service i'I the grade rendered after Deputy Manager (F&A) i'I Level-10 0 qualification as CA f I~WAlMBA (Finance) froma recognized Untversly
with 6 yearl of regular "Nice in the PB-.2 In Leve-e or equivalent and apPOintment therelo on regular basia in poste in Level-10 and NHAI with 4 (four) yearl' regular service Instlute and POSseSSingfive years' experience, out of which al least 3
poasessng essential quaification and experience, possessing essential qualification and ellp8rienoe. in that post years' experience in Financial Accounting( BudgetingJintemal
DepUtllUon : Auditlcontract managemenVFunds Managementf Disbursement inan
Direct Recruitment: Candidates empaneled for Under Secretary in e••• ntial Educational Qu,"flcatkln: (I) Degree in (i) holding anabgou. post on l8guia organization of repute.
the Government of India. holding anabgous post in the CantraVState Commerce/Accounts from a recognized university or basis n tevei-t'r: or
Government Oepartnert, Autonomous Body, Public Sector ICAlflCWAIIMBA (Finance) from a recog'lized lIIiveraityllnltiute; (iI) with 4 (four) years' MNIce on regula (2)By dapu .. tion: (i) hOlding analogous poston Atgular ba.ls i'I the pay
Undeltaldng. or wlh 5 years of regular service FI the PB-3 withGP- Or baais n Level-10 OR Level--9:or scale of Level-11 of Pay Matrix or equivalent
54001-or wth 6 years ofregular service In the PB-2 withGP_'800/ and Member of any organized GrouP-/'. Finance/Accounts related (ii) wlh 6 (six) ye.... ' MlVice in the inthe parent cadre.' departnent Or
posseulng the essential educational qualfication and experience. service of the Central Govemment or of the State Govemment; grade rendered after appointmen (i) wih (roleyears' seNIce inthe grtde rendered after appointment thereto
Age limit 40 years thereto on regular basia InLevel-a. on regular basis In the posts in the pay scale of Level 10 of Pay Main)' 0
Expftrlance: 4 years' e~rience In the PB-3 win GP-54OO1-or And equivalent in the parent cadrel deparwnent:;Or
QUillftcation: (i) Degree ofa recorgniled Unill8l1lity, equivalent or higher and have .. years' eJCperience in Financial possessing 8Iaerliel educnonal (Ii) wth eight years' service i'I the grade lpoets in the po.ts in 1he pay
(i) Master Degree InCommerce Accounting.Budgetingnntemal AudIIContract ManagemenVFund qualification and e~. acale of Le\fel 8 of Pay Matr'oI: or equivalent in the paren
Or Filal ellamnaticn of the Institute of Char1arad Accountants d India ManagementlOisburaement in an organization of repute. cadre/department,
Or Anal exam nation d the InstiiJte of Cost and Wonts AccCIJntant of £SHnti.1 Educ.aon Qualification: (I) And
India Bachelor n Commerce or Chart8l'8d at teast 3 years' experlenoe in Financial Accounting( BudgetiOW Internal
Or Mastel' of Buai"lMl Administration (two years course) >Mth Accountant or CertIied Auditfcontract managementf Fundi Management/ Disbursement in an
speciallzatlon in Fnance Management Aooountant or Master in organizlltiorl of repute and poMeUing I1e essential educational
Or Member of organized Group 'A' CostfAccountsIFinance Service of Business Admnl.tnJtion (FInance) qualifications as (A) CA J ICWAA1BA(Finance) from a recognized
theCentral Govemment with 09 years of experience. (through regular COUfIa) from a Universly f Institute. Or (B) Member of any organized GItlU!>"'A' or Group
recognised Univer'liy or InatitlAe; - '8' Financef Accounts related Service of the Central Government a 01
OR the State Government. However thiscondtion wi.not appty
Member of any organized Finance 0 to Sr. No. (8).
Accounts related Service of the Central
Manager Promotton: Suitate officials
(Fin' pos.e.ang the requlsle qualifications
(L~.11' with stleaat 5 yearl eervce In the grade
next below.
Dep .....tion; holding ,"alogous post; or
a post next below or equillalent thereto
de'.ng with Accounts worll:for at least 5
years.
Direct Recnlltn .. nt - 08 years service
in an Accounta Department
Age limll40 yea,..
Qualftcatlon: (i) Degree of a
recorgnlaed University,
(i) Intermediate Chartered Accountant
...(iQ Intermediate Cost Accountant or
(ill) SAS Exam of the indian Audit and
Accounts sef\l1c:e
Expertnc.: 7 yea" experience in FnancefAcc:ounta Department of
Government of tndia or 8 Government Undertaking or an Autonomous
Body or a Commercial Organization of repute.
or State Government;
No Change By promotion from amongst Junior Accounte OfIcerl of NHAI ~ i) 50 per cent by Promotion. No. of poet: 40
4 (four) years' regular service i'I that post ii) 30 per cent by Direct Recruitment Method of Racrultmant: Promotlon-5O%
ii) 20 per cent by Deputation. DIrK1tDepUtllUon-5O% (Short fIIlllransfenb .. )
By deputation: Q)hoIdnganalogous post on regutar basis in level- (Quot. can t. adJust.d .. pet' tt. (1, For PromotIOn: Assistant Manager (Finance & Accounts) f Junio
10; or amdln ..trattw fltqulrement) Accounts Officerand possessing euntiaI educational qualticaliorl as CA
(H) wkh 4 (fou") years' service In the grade rendered after Promotion: JAOfAM (F&A) FI Level-8 of ICWAIMBA (Finance) from a recognized Unillersity f Ins!lute and
appointment therekJ on regu.r basis i'I posts n Level-8 and NHAI with 4 (four) years' regutar service poasessing foJr yea,,' experience, out of which at least 3 years'
possessing easential quallication and elCPl!lrience. in thai post experience in Financial A.ccounthgl Budgetingllntemal Audit/contract
managementlFunds Managemem' OiaburHment inan organization of
OI,..ct RecruHrnent through open advertiHment and withave DepUtlitlon: (i) holding .nalogous poa repute.
writen testa and inarview withappicable reMrVation cri1eria a$ per on regular basie in Level-10: or
GOI rUes and wli have probatin for one year. (Ii) with .. (four) yealB' service In the (2~)' deputation: (i) hOlding analogous post on lGgulif balls In the pay
004yeats experience in FinancefAccoU"lta and poaaeaaing essential grade rerdered after appointtnen1 acaleof Level-9 a 10 of Pay Matrix or equivalent
qualification and ellP8rienoe. thereto on regular ba.is n Level-9 OR in the parent cadreldepartment Or
Age Lime 35 years. Levfi.8: or (i) with four years' 58I'Vice Inthe grade rendenKI after appontment thereto
(ii) wlh 6 (six) yurs' service In the on regul. basis ... the posta in the pay acaIe of Level 8 ofPay Mabix 0
QUilIIflcation: Degree in Commerce/Accounts t-om a recognlzttd grade rendered after appointmern equivalent in the parent cadref depari'nert.
university or K:AJ/lCWAIIMBA (Ftnance) from a recognizedtheretoonregulllrbasiain~7And And
unlversityflnatitute: possessing eteenti4l1 educatonal at lent 3 years' experience in Financial Accounting( Budgetingi' Internal
Or qualification and e:llp8rience. AudWconlr&Ct managemenV Funds Management( Disbursement in an
Member 01 any organized GrouP-A Fi'lancelAccounts related organization of repute and po..... lng !he e.. ential educational
-w:eoftheCentraIGovernmentfYoftheStntGovemment Direct RecNlbNnt through openqualficationa as (A) CA / CWAIMBA (Anance) from a recognizad
advertisement and writIen exarnNt60n Unfveraly /lnsti\Jte. Or (B) MefTi)er of any organized Group-'A' or Group
Experience: At least .. years' e)lJ)tlrience in FIfl8ncia1and posMHing euerm.t educ:donal - 'S' Finanoel Accounta related SatvIoIof the GenITal Government 0'" of
Accounllng.09udgetingllntemal AudlIContract MlnagementlFund qualification and "ellPlllrience. the StatIJGovernment. However thiscondllon wi.not apply
Managementl Disbursement In CMtraI GoYemment or State Age Limite 35 yean. to Sr. No. (8).
Government or Union Territ)riea or Pubic Seccor UndertaU'lgs or
SemI Government or Stalltofy or Aubnomous Orgtinilati;)n and EMentiIII EducatIofNIl QUilIfIcation:
other GovernmentBodies. (i) Bachelor in Commerce or ChartenKI
Accountant or Certfled Managemen1
A<xx>untont
No ChangeAccounts
OIftcorl
Oy.
Promotion
Deput.tion:
Manager with 2 years Mr\Ii::een1he acIae of next
(Fin, below.
(Leve4-10)
Dnet Recruttment-05 years service In
the lower 0'" equNalent post iwot.tlng
handing of financel accounts work•.
Age limit 30 yean!
QU8I1f1cat1on: (i) Degree of a
recotgniaed Uriveraity,
(i) Professional Qualilcation auch aa;­
Intermediate exam of f1e lnalute of
Chartered .A.ccounlllnt of India or the
Insttute of Coat& Works Acoountant oj
India or SAS EQm of the Indian Audit &
Accounts aervi:Ia or equivalent exam of
other orgenised Accountsservice in the
Central Government
73

432201/2022/DGM (HRIADMIN)-I
23.10.2001/29.12.2001 30.11.2011
RR. CRITERIA FOLLOWED FOR RECRUITMENT OF FINANCE PERSONNEL IN NHAI
National Highways Authority of India (Recruttment, Seniority and Promotion) ReguiadOOl Amended from time to time
16.05.2016 04.03.2021 Cr ....... propoMd In Draft NHAI RRs 2017 clrcu ..... for
eommenta amana mkeholcMra11.03.1986
SI.
No.
AM (Flnll
J•.
""......0IIIce.
I..........)
Noisvailable
Sen""
Accountant
(L.ev"-6)
Not available
7 Accountant
(........~ Nolavailable
Promotion: Accountant Mth 5
yNrs regullilr service
No Change
Deputation I DR:
0)Holding analogouspost or
Of)wilh :2 years of regular
service in PB-2r, level-7 or
(IiI)wth 5 (five years) of regular
servicein PB-2 n L-6
DlNet Recruitment 07 years
e~ nFnancelAccounta.
Age linit 35 years
Byconu.et:
Accourtant in NHAI on l TCEs
with 5 (five) years contract
service.
Not available Not available
No Change Direct recruitment
POSMSaing euentiItIeducation qUIIlfication Age Umi 35 Years
e...mlal EdUCIIllon QUliIIlc.tIon: Qi)Bachelors Degree i1
Commen::e Or Intermedllte Chartered Accountant Or irtermedlalB
Cost Accountant OrI~ eomp.ny Secret.ry from Institule of
Company Secretary of India.
By promotion; Senior Accountants! ClIshier with 5 (five) years' i) 70 per cent by Promotion. No. of post 38
regu.. r HlVice inthat post. II)30 per cent by DeputatIon. Me1hod of Recruhmotnt: Promotlon...e;O%
[Quob eIIn bel adju •• d •• per the DI~putadon~% (Short falllnlns"l1Ible)
By deputation: (i) holding analogous post onregular basis in Level- amdln.trative MqUI,.. ... ntJ (1) For Promotion: Accountant/Cashier with S yea... regu.r &eNIce and
8: or Promotion: Acoounwnt in Level-S 0 poueUing essntial educational qualiticatbn • Degree in Commerce
(iQ >Mth2 (two) years' sevee in the grade rendered after NHAI wlh S (five) years' regular service Accounts I Finance from a recognimd University nnsttute end possessing
appointment thereto on regular b.sls in Lavel-7: or Inthai:pest. 03 ye.... ' experience In Fr.ancial Accountlngl Budgetingllntemal
(ii) IMth 5 (five) ye..... service in the grade ntndered lifter Deputation: (i) holding analogous pos Audlttcontract managementlfunds Management/ Disbursement inan
.ppoIntment thereto on regula' basis in Leve~ and possessing on reguar basis in Level-8: or organization of repute.
essential qualfcation and experience. (ii) wth 2 (two) yaaB' urvlce in the
grade rendered after appointmen (2)By deputation: (il holding analogous post on regular basis in the pay
QuaIHlc:.tkm: Degree from recogniz$d uni.....rsity in Commerce: thereto on regular basis in Lavel·7; or scala of laval-8 d Pay Matrix or equivalent
Or (ii) wlh S (five) years' service in the inthe parentc.drel depalTr'lent Or
Intermediate from I(;AIIICWAI grade rendered after appointment (i) wth 02yea,..' service In the grade rendered after appointment thereto
Or thereto on regular basis n level-6. on regula' basis n the posts in !he payscale of level 7of Pay Matrill:0
A pus in the SAS or equivalant examination conducted by any of And equivalent in the parent cadrel oepar1men:.
the Organized AcCOU'ltant Depar1ment of the Central Govt. Possessing essential educational And
Or qualification and experience at ieaat 3 yea~' experience in Financial Accounting! 8udgetl"iJI Intemal
MBA(Finance) from a recognized !nstitue{lJniversly. Auditfcontract management! Funds MIInagementi Oisbursement in an
Enentlal Educadonal Qualt1leation: organizltion of ~ and possessing: fle essential educational
Experience: At least 4 yeal'1l' I!!lCPEIrience in Financial (i) BaChelor In Commerce or Chartered qualifications as Degree in Commerce I Accounts f Fr.anee from a
Aocounting/13,udgetingllntemal Audit/Contract MllnagementlFund Accountant or CertifIed recognized Unive,..ity nnstilute.
Management! OiabuJMment in Central Government Of" State Man.gement Accountant Of Master in
GO'o'e1TIffientOf UnIon Terrtt:Mies or Pubic Sector Undertakngs or Business Administration (Finance)
Semi Govemment or Stalutory or A.ualnomous Organlzatbn and (through regular course) from a
other Govemment Bodies. recognIsed University or InstitlAe;
OR
POIItAbolished No schedule presctbedBy promotion: Accountants with 4 (four) yeers' reguar service in
that post.
By deputation: 0)hoking analogous post on regular ~.ia in Lavel-
6;or
(II) wIh 4 (b6) years' service in the grade ntndered after
appointment thereto on a regular basis in posta in LeVM-S and
posMSSlng euential qualification and experience.
Qu.IHIcatIon: Degree from recognized unive,..iIy in Cornmeroe;
0.
Intermediate from tCAlIICWA
D.
A pass nthe SAS or equivalent examinaton conducted by any 01
the Organized AcCOl.llts Department of the Central Govt
D.
MBA (Finanoe) from a recognized lnstitu.runi\l8fdy
Expwtenc.: At least 3 years' experience in Finaneal
AccountillglSudgetinglinteffial Audit/Contract ManagemenUFund
Management! Oiaburwement in Central Govamment Of State
Government or Union Tenibries or Pubic Sector Undertaknga or
Semi Govemment Of Statutory or Aui:lnomous Organization and
other Government Bod'".
DINCt recruitment: through open adVertIsement and wII have Direct -.cn.lltment through an open No. afpMt: 160
wrtten..... nd inwviltw >Mthapplicable reservationaIeria of GOI advertisement and writen axamination. Ih1hod of Recruitment 100% DirectRecruitment
;;:- ~tl~ ha~::::.:" .:s=::::,eaaennal quallication and Age Uml30 VA,... Academic I Pror.uional Quallftcatlons and Experienu, If any, for
eXperience. EaHntiall Ed~onal Quallfication:- DiNCt R.crultment
(;) _ " Comme<oe GO..-.Qualttlcatton: Oegraa from a ntOOgnizeduniveraly h Commeroa: Intermedillte in Degree nCommerce I Accounts IFi1ance from a recognized Univltl'dy
or Chartered Accountant or Intermediate in Insttute.Or
InIIIrmediIta from ICAJIICWA Certfied Management Aocountant 01 Intennediate from ICAJ/IONA Or
Or Muter in A peu in the SAS Of equivalent exami'lation conductlld by any of the
A pan i'I the SAS Of equivalent examindon conducted by any of Bualneaa Actnnistration (Finance Organized Accounts Departmentd the Cennl Govt Or
the Oganized Accounll Departmentof the Central Govt (through MBA (Finance) from a IKOgnized lnathutel University
Or regular c:ourae) from a moognized
MBA (Finance) from a rec:ogrU.edhstiutBlUniversity UrWerdy or ,.. LimIt Notexceeding 30 ,.....
insft.rte;
OR
P..... " !he Su_ AccounIa
-(SAS) or equlVlllent axaminatlon
oonductod by
any of .... org.nized Accounts
Ooponmentol
theC.ntral Government or of theS.ta
""'-
74

364669/2022/DGM (HRIADMIN)-1
.'~. 'iii
I~~rade Pay! ~
l1h.ftlr~:lr:ririi '" II , ~'.I.'Sr,:}
1~2,'D~sign.ation· ' :' I'~vaca".#~ MBA C~!~ ICWk
!L~vel'(as,~~:Group B.Com M.Com l~lr(Fin) CA I;~~WA;, (Inter) i~tRGDBA OtJlers
N~~ I. per ~"' t Strengt !" (Inter) ..
.,' i\ ··v.
1 CGM(Finance) Level-141 A 2 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 3
GP:10000 1 1
2 CGM(Financial Analyst) Level-141 A 1 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
GP:10000
3 GM(F&A) Level-131 A 5 3 2 3 1 1 1 2 1 0 1 3
GP:8700
4 DGM(F&A) Level-12I A 16 9 7 9 4 6 0 1 1 3 0 2
GP:7600
5 Manager(F&A) Level-11 I A 35 4 31 4 1 3 0 0 0 0 0 2
GP:6600
6 Dy.Manager(F&A) Level-101 A 70 5 65 4 2 0 1 1 0 1 0 0
GP:5400
7 Assistant Manager(F&A) Level-81 B 100 97 3 97 41 32 2 6 35 2 7 3
GP:4800
8 Accountant Level-51 C 88 84 4 84 30 21 1 0 4 3 8 2
GP:2800
G. Total 317 203 114 201 79 63 5 11 41 9 17 15
EDUCATIONAL QUALIFICATION OF FINANCEPERSONNELOF NHAI - STATUSAS ON 28 01 2022
          ANNEXURE-III
75

1 
 
 
_________ 
 
MINUTES 
_________ 
  
76

2 
 
MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED 
PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM & 
CULTURE (2022-23) 
VI 
SIXTH MEETING 
  
The Committee met at  3:00 P.M.  on Thursday, the 22nd December, 2022 in 
Committee Room A, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe Building, New Delhi. 
  
Members present: 
1. Shri V. Vijayasai Reddy             -             Chairman  
 Rajya Sabha 
2. Shri Mohammed Nadimul Haque 
3. Shrimati S. Phangnon Konyak 
4. Shri Jugalsinh Lokhandwala 
5. Shri Manas Ranjan Mangaraj 
6. Shrimati Rajani Ashokrao Patil 
7. Shri A. A. Rahim 
8. Dr. C. M. Ramesh 
9. Shri Vinay Dinu Tendulkar 
  
Lok Sabha 
10.  Shri Anto Antony 
11.  Shri Tapir Gao 
12.  Shri Sunil Baburao Mendhe 
13.  Shri K. Muraleedharan 
14.  Shri S. S. Palanimanickam 
15.  Shri Kamlesh Paswan 
16.  Shri Sunil Kumar Pintu 
17.  Shri Prince Raj 
18.  Shri Tirath Singh Rawat 
19.  Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
20.  Shri Dushyant Singh 
21.  Shri Rajbahadur Singh 
22.  Shri Ramdas Chandrabhanji Tadas 
23.  Shri Manoj Kumar Tiwari 
24.  Shri Krupal Balaji Tumane 
25. Shri Dinesh Lal Yadav "Nirahua" 
  
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Arun Sharma, Joint Secretary  
Shri Swarabji B., Director 
Shrimati Monica Baa, Additional Director  
Shrimati Subha Chandrashekar, Deputy Secretary  
Shri Ranajit Chakraborty, Under Secretary 
  
77

3 
 
WITNESSES 
  
 xxx xxx xxx                         
2.         At the outset, the Chairman extended a warm welcome to the Members of the 
Committee.  He informed them of the agenda for the meeting i.e. (i) to consider and adopt the 
draft Reports on Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations of 
the Committee contained in its 317th and xxx ; and (ii) xxx 
3.         The Committee, thereafter, took up the first agenda of the meeting i.e., consideration 
of the two draft Action Taken Reports on the following Reports of the Committee: 
 
(i) 317th Report on Demands for Grants (2022 -23) of Ministry of Road Transport and 
Highways; and 
(ii)  xxx xxx xxx  
4.         The Committee considered the said draft Reports and after a brief discussion, adopted 
both the draft Action Taken Reports and authorized the Chairman to carry out minor 
modifications of typographical and factual errors.   
5.         The Committee also authorized Shri Jugalsinh Lokhandwala, M.P. and in his absence, 
Shri Mohammed Nadimul Haque, M.P., to present the abovementioned Reports in Rajya 
Sabha on 23 rd December, 2022 and Shri Prince Raj, M.P. and in his absence, Shri Ramdas 
Chandrabhanji Tadas, M.P. to lay the Reports on the Table of Lok Sabha on the same date. 
6 to 15.         xxx xxx xxx 
 (The witnesses then withdrew) 
16.     xxx xxx xxx 
17.    A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept. 
18.     The meeting adjourned at 4:47 PM. 
  
New Delhi,                                                                                                        Swarabji B. 
22nd December, 2022                                                                                            Director 
 
____________________ 
xxx Relates to other matters.  
78