       
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
August, 2021/ Sravana, 1943 (Saka) 
 
  
 
 
REPORT NO. 
300
_ 
THREE HUNDREDTH REPORT  
Promotion of Infrastructure in India's Maritime Sector  
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 4th August, 2021) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 4th August, 2021) 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Website :     https://rajyasabha.nic.in   
 E-mail :     rsc-tt@sansad.nic.in 
 

 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT,  
TOURISM AND CULTURE  
 
 
THREE HUNDREDTH REPORT  
 
Promotion of Infrastructure in India's Maritime Sector 
 
 (Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 4th August, 2021) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 4th August, 2021) 
 
 
 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 August, 2021/ Sravana, 1943 (Saka) 
 
  
Hindi version of this publication is also available 

 
C O N T E N T S 
 
P A G E S 
 
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE     (i)-(iii) 
2. INTRODUCTION       (iv) 
3. ACRONYMS                (v)-(vii) 
4. REPORT                                 1-58 
5. RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS-AT A GLANCE   59-71 
    6. MINUTES         72-83 
 7. ANNEXURE        84-85 
 
         
        
        
      
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE  
(2019-20) 
 (Constituted on 13th September, 201 9) 
 
 
1. Shri T.G. Venkatesh   - Chairman 
 
Rajya Sabha 
s 
2. Shri Prasanna Acharya 
3. Shri Raj Babbar 
4. Shri Sambhaji Chhatrapati  
5. Dr. Sonal Mansingh 
6. Shri Derek O’Brien 
7. *Kumari Selja 
8. **Shri Tiruchi Siva 
9. ***Shri K.C.Venugopal  
9. Shri Dharmapuri Srinivas 
 10. Shri Vinay Dinu Tendulkar  
 
Lok Sabha 
 
11.  Shrimati Sumalatha Ambareesh  
12.  Shri Anto Antony 
13.  Shrimati Veena Devi 
14.  Shri Tapir Gao  
15.  Shri Rahul Kaswan 
16.  Shri Saumitra Khan  
17.  Ms. Goddeti Madhavi  
18.  Shri Ramesh Chandra Majhi  
19.  Shri Sunil Baburao Mendhe 
20.  Shri K. Muraleedharan 
21.  Shri S.S. Palanimanickam  
22.  Shri Chhedi Paswan   
23.  Shri Kamlesh Paswan  
24.  Shri Tirath Singh Rawat 
25.  Shrimati Mala Roy 
26.  Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
27.  Shri Rajbahadur Singh 
28.  Shri Dushyant Singh 
29.  Shri Ramdas Chandrabhanji Tadas  
30.  Shri Krupal Balaji Tumane 
31.  Shri Dinesh Chandra Yadav  
 
_________________________________________________________ 
*Kumari Selja ceased to be Member w.e.f. 10th April, 2020  
**Shri Tiruchi Siva ceased to be Member w.e.f. 3rd April, 2020 and re-nominated as Member w.e.f. 22nd  
July, 2020  
***Shri K.C. Venugopal nominated as Member w.e.f. 22nd July, 2020 
 (i) 

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE  
 (2020-21) 
 (Constituted on 13th September, 2020) 
 
1. Shri T.G. Venkatesh                          - Chairman 
 
    Rajya Sabha 
 
2. Shri Prasanna Acharya 
3. *Shri Raj Babbar 
4. Shri Sambhaji Chhatrapati 
5. Dr. Sonal Mansingh 
6. Shri Derek O’Brien 
7. Shri Tiruchi Siva 
8. Shri Dharmapuri Srinivas 
9. Shri Vinay Dinu Tendulkar  
10. Shri K.C.Venugopal 
11. **Shri Sushil Kumar Modi  
 
Lok Sabha 
12. Shri Anto Antony 
13. Shri Margani Bharat   
14. Shri Tapir Gao 
15. Shri Rahul Kaswan 
16. Shri Ramesh Chandra Majhi 
17. Shri Sunil Baburao Mendhe 
18. Shri K. Muraleedharan 
19. Shri S.S. Palanimanickam 
20. Shri Chhedi Paswan 
21. Shri Kamlesh Paswan 
22. Shri Sunil Kumar Pintu 
23. Shri Prince Raj 
24. Shri Tirath Singh Rawat 
25. Shrimati Mala Roy 
26. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
27. Shri Dushyant Singh 
28. Shri Rajbahadur Singh 
29. Shri Ramdas Chandrabhanji Tadas  
30. Shri Manoj Tiwari 
31. Shri Krupal Balaji Tumane 
32. Shri Dinesh Chandra Yadav 
 
________________________________________________________  
*Shri Raj Babbar ceased to be a Member w.e.f. 25th November, 2020  
**Shri Sushil Kumar Modi was nominated to be a Member w.e.f. 23rd December, 2020 
(ii) 
  

SECRETARIAT 
 Dr. Shikha Darbari, Joint Secretary & Financial Advisor 
 Shri P. Narayanan, Director 
 Shri Dinesh Singh, Additional Director 
 Shri Rajendra Prasad Shukla, Additional Director 
Ms. Catherine John L., Under Secretary  
Shri Agam Mittal, Assistant Committee Officer  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iii) 

 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairman, Department -related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport, 
Tourism and Culture, having been authorized by the Committee to present on its behalf, do 
hereby present this Three Hundredth Report on ‘Promotion of Infrastructure  in India's 
Maritime Sector’.  
2. The Committee heard the views of the Secretary, Ministry of Ports, Shipping and 
Waterways; and Director General, Directorate General of Lighthouses and Lightships on the 
subject on 23rd December, 2019. The Committee heard the views of the officials of Ministry 
of Ports, Shipping and Waterways ; Visakhapatnam Port Trust ; and State Government of 
Andhra Pradesh on the subject at Visakhapatnam on 8 th January, 2020. The Committee heard 
the views of the officials of Ministry of Po rts, Shipping and Waterways on the subject 
onboard Cruise Ship from Mumbai to Goa on 10 th January, 2020. The Committee heard the 
views of the officials of Ministry of Ports, Shipping and Waterways; Mormugao Port Trust ; 
and State Government of Goa on the su bject at Goa on 12 th January, 2020. The Committee 
heard the views of the officials of Ministry of Ports, Shipping and Waterways; Chennai Port 
Trust; V. O. Chidambaranar Port Trust; Kamarajar Port Limited ; and the State Government 
of Tamil Nadu on ‘ Connectivity of Roads to Ports ’; ‘Handling of Cargo during Corona  
Pandemic’; and ‘Private Ports – Tariff fixation ’ at Chennai on 1 3th July, 2021. The 
Committee heard the views of the officials of Ministry of Ports, Shipping and Waterways; 
Cochin Port Trust ; and State Government of Kerala on the subject at Kochi on 1 5th July, 
2021. The Committee heard the views of the Secretary, Ministry of  Ports, Shipping and 
Waterways on the subject on 26th July, 20 21. The Committee heard the views of Director 
General of S hipping; Managing Director, Sagarm ala Development Company Limited;  
Chairman, Shipping Corporation of India;  Managing Director, Andaman Lakshadweep 
Harbour Works; CEO, Adani Ports and Special Economic Zone Ltd.; CEO, DP World Free 
Trade Zone; CMD, CONCOR Lt d.; Managing Director, J.M. Baxi Group; and President, 
Indian Private Ports and Terminals Association on the subject on 2nd August, 2021.  
3.  The Committee wishes to express its thanks to the officers of the Ministry of Ports, 
Shipping and Waterways; Director General of Shipping, Directorate General of Lighthouses 
and Lightships; Visakhapatnam Port Trust ;  Mormugao Port Trust ; Chennai Port Trust; V.O. 
Chidambaranar Port Trust; Kamarajar Port Limited; Cochin Port Trust; Shipping Corporation 
of India; and other stakeholders for placing before the Committee, the material and 
information desired in connection with the subject and for clarifying the points raised by the 
Members. 
4. The Committee considered and adopted the Report in its meeting held on the  3rd 
August, 2021.   
 
(T.G. Venkatesh) 
NEW DELHI;                                                           Chairman, 
August 3, 2021                                                          Department-related Parliamentary Standing             
Sravana 12, 1943 (Saka)                                   Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture,  
                                                                                                                                 Rajya Sabha 
(iv) 
 

ACRONYMS 
 
A&N : Andaman and Nicobar Andaman and Nicobar 
ADB                   Asian Development Bank 
ALHW Andaman and Lakshadweep Harbour Work   
BIWTC Bangladesh Inland Water Transport Corporation  
BOT Build-Operator-Transfer 
CCEA Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs 
CEU Coastal Employment Unit 
ChPT Chennai Port Trust 
CoPT Cochin Port Trust 
COVID Coronavirus Disease 
CRIF Central Road Infrastructure Fund 
CSL Cochin Shipyard Limited 
CSR Corporate Social Responsibility  
DFC Dedicated Freight Corridor 
DGPS Differential Global Positioning System 
DGS Directorate General of Shipping 
DoPT Department of Personnel and Training 
DPR Detailed Project Report 
DPT Deendayal Port Trust 
ECB External Commercial Borrowings 
E-DO Electronic Delivery Order 
EIA Environmental Impact Assessment  
EXIM Export Import 
FRM Fertilizer Related Material 
FSRU Floating Storage Regasification Unit  
FY Financial Year 
GRT Gross Registered Tonnage 
ICTT International Container Transshipment Terminal 
IIT Indian Institute of Technology 
IMG Inter Ministerial Group 
IMT Inter-Modal Terminal 
IMU Indian Maritime University 
INR Indian Rupee 
 
            (v) 

IPA Indian Ports Association 
IPDS Integrated Power Distribution System  
IPPTA Indian Private Ports & Terminals Association 
IPRCL Indian Port Rail Corporation Limited 
IT Information Technology 
IWAI Inland Waterways Authority of India 
IWT Inland Water Transport 
JMVP Jal Marg Vikas Project 
JNPT JawaharLal Nehru Port Trust  
KoPT Kolkata Port Trust 
KPT Kamarajar Port Trust 
LNG               Liquefied Natural Gas 
MCA Model Concession Agreement 
MDF Maritime Development Fund 
MHA Ministry of Home Affairs 
MIS Management Information System  
MIV Maritime India Vision 
MM3 Million Cubic Meters 
MMT Multi-Modal Terminal 
MoEF&CC               Ministry of Environvent, Forest and Climate Change  
MoPT Mormugao Port Trust 
MoRTH Ministry of Road Transport and Highways  
MoPS&W Ministry of Ports, Shipping and Waterways  
MSDC Maritime State Development Council  
MoU Memorandum of Understanding 
MPT Mumbai Port Trust 
MT Metric Tonnes 
MTPA Million Tonnes Per Annum 
NCLT National Company Law Tribunal  
NER North East Region 
NHAI National Highways Authority of India  
NMHC National Maritime Heritage Complex  
NIC National Informatics Centre 
NLP National Logistics Portal 
NMPT New Mormugao Port Trust 
NSICT Nhava Sheva International Container Terminal  
NWs               National Waterways 
                (vi) 

OTSS One Time Settlement Scheme  
PCS                Port Community System 
PGLM Policy Guidelines for Land Management 
POL Petroleum, Oil and Lubricants 
PPP Public Private Partnership 
PSU Public Sector Undertaking 
RBI               Reserve Bank of India 
RFID Radio Frequency Identification Document 
RFP Request for Proposal 
RIS River Information System 
RoFR Right of First Refusal 
SCI Shipping Corporation of India 
SDCL Sagarmala Development Company  Limited 
SIPC Smart Industrial Port City 
SOP Standard Operating Procedure 
SPV Special Purpose Vehicle 
TRT Turn Around Time 
USA United States of America 
VOCPT V.O.  Chidambaranar Port Trust 
VPRCL Vizag Port Road Company Limited  
VPT Visakhapatnam Port Trust 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(vii) 

1 
 
REPORT 
India has a long coastline of about 7517 km, spread on the western and eastern shelves of the 
mainland and also along the islands. Hence, Shipping plays a pivotal role in the economic 
development of the country. India has 13 Major Ports and about 200 Minor Ports. Approximately 
95% of the country‟s trade by volume and 68% by value is moved through maritime transport. 
Therefore, development of Major & Minor Ports and harbours, human resource and finance, 
maritime safety issues, training and skill dev elopment need to be strengthened. The Ministry of 
Ports, Shipping and Waterways has been entrusted with the responsibility to formulate various 
policies and programmes on these issues and implement them in an effective and efficient 
manner. 
2. The followin g subordinate/attached offices, autonomous organizations, 
societies/associations and Public Sector U ndertakings are functioning under the administrative 
control of the Ministry of Ports, Shipping and Waterways:- 
 Directorate   General   of   Shipping,   Mum bai   (including   Minor   Ports   Survey 
Organization, Mumbai). 
 Andaman & Lakshadweep Harbour Works, Port Blair.  
 Directorate General of Lighthouses & Lightships, Noida.  
 Port Trusts at Kolkata, Kochi (Cochin Port Trust), Kandla, Chennai, Mormugao, 
Mumbai, Nhava Sheva (Jawaharlal Nehru Port Trust), Paradip, Tuticorin(V.O. 
Chidambaranar Port Trust), Visakhapatnam and New Mangalore.  
 Dock Labour Boards at Kolkata and Visakhapatnam.  
 Inland Waterways Authority of India, Noida.  
 Tariff Authority for Major Ports, Mumbai.  
 Seafarer‟s Provident Fund Organization, Mumbai.  
 Indian Maritime University. 
 Seafarer‟s Welfare Fund Society. 
 National Shipping Board. 
 Indian Ports Association. 

2 
 
 Shipping Corporation of India Limited. 
 Cochin Shipyard Limited. 
 Central Inland Water Transport Corporation Limited. 
 Dredging Corporation of India Limited. 
 Hooghly Dock and Ports Engineers Limited. 
 Kamarajar Port Ltd, Ennore. 
 Sethusamudram Corporation Limited. 
 Sagarmala Development Company Limited. 
 Indian Port and Rail Company Limited. 
 Indian Port Global Private Limited. 
3.  Keeping in view the importance of Maritime infrastructure in the economic development 
of the country, the Committee decided to take up this subject for detailed examination and 
Report. During the course of examinatio n of the subject „Promotion of Infrastructure in India‟s 
Maritime Sector‟, the Committee heard the views of the Secretary, Ministry of Ports, Shipping 
and Waterways; and Director General, Directorate General of Lighthouses and Lightships on 
23rd December, 2019. The Committee also undertook a study visit to Visakhapatnam, Mumbai 
and Goa from 7 th to 12th January, 2020; and a study visit to Chennai and Kochi from 12 th to 16th 
July, 2021  and interacted with the Secretary, Ministry of Ports, Shipping &  Waterways, 
representatives of State Governments and various stakeholders of the tourism industry on 
different aspects of maritime infrastructure . The Committee  further heard the views of the 
Secretary, Ministry of Ports, Shipping and Waterways on 26 th July, 2021. The Committee also 
heard the views of the Director General of Shipping; Managing Director, Sagarmala 
Development Company Limited; Chairman, Shipping Corporation of India; Managing Director, 
Andaman Lakshadweep Harbour Works; CEO, Adani Ports and S pecial Economic Zone Ltd.; 
CEO, DP World Free Trade Zone; CMD, CONCOR Ltd.; and President, Indian Private Ports and 
Terminals Association on 2 nd August, 2021. A questionnaire on the subject was forwarded to 
Ministry of Ports, Shipping & Waterways and written replies were obtained on various aspects of 
the Port infrastructure  and the progress made towards promoting infrastructure in India‟s 
Maritime sector.  

3 
 
4.  Some of the major points discussed during the deliberations of the Committee are:  
a) Sagarmala Programme 
b) Port Modernization & Development of New Ports 
c) Performance of Ports In India 
d) Connectivity to Ports 
e) Shipbuilding Industry 
f) Ship-Repair Industry 
g) Public Private Partnership Projects 
h) Promotion of Coastal Shipping 
i) Development of Inland Waterways  
j) Infrastructure Development at the Ports for Cruise Shipping 
k) Cochin Shipyard  
l) Model Concession Agreement 
m) Maritime Training in India 
n) Tariffs / Port Related Charges at Indian Ports  
o) Marine Safety Issues 
p) Impact of Covid-19 Pandemic on Shipping Sector 
SAGARMALA PROGRAMME 
5. The concept of Sagarmala was approv ed by the Union Cabinet on 25 th March, 2015. As 
part of the programme, a National Perspective Plan (NPP) for comprehensive development of 
India‟s coastline and maritime sector has been prepared which was released by the Hon‟ble 
Prime Minister on 14th April, 2016 at the Maritime India Summit, 2016. 
 
6. The Ministry in its Background Note has stated that the v ision of the Sagarmala 
Programme is to reduce logistics cost for EXIM and domestic trade with minimal infrastructure 
investment which includes: 
 Reducing the cost of transporting domestic cargo through optimizing modal mix. 
 Lowering logistics cost of bulk commodities by locating future industrial capacities near 
the coast. 

4 
 
 Improving export competitiveness by developing Port proximate discrete manufacturing 
clusters. 
 Optimizing time/cost of EXIM container movement. 
 
7. It was further informed by the Ministry that there are currently 802 projects worth 
investment of Rs. 5.52 lakh crore for implementation under the Sagarmala Programme by 2035. 
Out of which, 172 projects worth Rs. 88,235  crore have been completed and 235 projects worth 
Rs. 2.16 lakh crore are under implementation. Further, 395 projects worth Rs. 2.48 Lakh crore 
are under various stages of development. These projects are categorized into five pillars – Port 
modernization & new Port development, Port connectivity enhancement, Port-led 
industrialization, coastal community development and Coastal Shipping & Inland Water 
Transport. The detailed elaboration of these pillars is provided in the table below (Table 1). 
 
Table 1: Summary of projects under Sagarmala 
S. 
No 
Project Theme 
Total Completed 
Under 
Implementation 
# 
Cost 
(Rs. Cr) 
# 
Cost 
(Rs. Cr) 
# 
Cost 
(Rs. Cr) 
1 
Port Modernization & 
New Port Development 
242 2,59,817 76 25,529 59 36,917 
2 
Port Connectivity 
Enhancement 
208 1,36,224 49 14,9991 78 88,865 
3 
Port Led 
Industrialization 
33 1,19,845 8 45,300 22 73,270 
4 
Coastal Community 
Development 
88 8,109 18 1,423 28 1,389 
5 
Coastal Shipping & 
IWT 
231 28,356 21 973 48 15,701 
Total 802 5,52,351 172 88,235 235 2,16,142 
 

5 
 
8. These projects are being implemented by relevant Central Ministries, State Governments, 
Ports and other agencies primarily through the private or PPP mode. So far 51 projects at Major 
Ports costing Rs. 20,997 crore have been awarded on PPP mode. MoPS&W agen cies such as 
Major Ports and other allied offices are implementing 433 projects worth Rs. 2.2 lakh crore. Of 
which, 116 projects have been completed, 89 projects are under implementation and 228 projects 
are under the DPR and approval stage.  Estimated inve stment made in  433 MoPS&W projects 
(Major Ports, Allied Offices) till June, 2021 is Rs. 44,074 crore. 
  
9. The Ministry also informed the Committee that under the budget head of Sagarmala, 111 
projects (worth Rs. 6,302 Crore) have been sanctioned under Sag armala with a contribution of 
Rs. 2,219 Crore under Sagarmala budget, of which Rs. 1,312 crores have already been released. 
In F.Y. 2020-21, amount of Rs. 147 crores have been released under budget head of Sagarmala. 
Out of total 111 projects sanctioned un der Sagarmala, 40 projects worth Rs. 2,800 Crore have 
been completed and 42 projects worth Rs. 1,982 Crore are under implementation. Projects 
having high social impact but with no return or low Internal Rate of Return  (IRR) (e.g., fishing 
harbour projects, coastal community skill development projects, coastal tourism &  infrastructure 
projects, etc.) are being financially supported through budget of MoPS&W or in convergence 
with the schemes of other Central Line Ministries, for implementation under EPC mode. 
10. The Committee is constrained to note the reply of the Ministry that despite the 
Sagarmala Programme being launched way back in the year 2015, only 172 projects out of 
the 802 sanctioned projects under the Sagarmala Programme have  been completed and the 
remaining 632 projects are under the implementation stage, which is far from being 
satisfactory. The Committee recommends the Ministry that Sagarmala Programme being a 
crucial step in the progress of India‟s Shipping sector needs to  be speeded up . The 
Committee, therefore, desires to know whether the projects under implementation have 
witnessed any time overrun and cost escalation as compared to the original cost and 
timeline of the projects. The Ministry should also mention the prec ise reasons for delay, if 
any, Port-wise and steps being taken to address such delays.  
 
11. The Committee would like to bring to the notice of the Ministry that the cost of 
projects which are categorized into five pillars under the Sagarmala Scheme is qui te large 

6 
 
as compared to the project cost of any other scheme/ programme under the Ministry of 
Ports, Shipping and Waterways. But only a small fraction of funds has been utilized so far, 
which speaks of very poor planning and fiscal indiscipline. The Committee would, 
therefore, like to be apprised of the measures taken for effective and efficient utilization of 
sanctioned funds.    
12. To a query regarding the establishment of various Coasta l Employment Units (CEUs) 
alongwith the creation of social inf rastructure within these CEUs as part of Sagarmala Project, 
the Ministry has informed that the industrialization plays a significant role in the process of 
economic development of a Nation. The Government of India, under its Sagarmala program, 
intends to a ddress both these objectives by developing Coastal Employment Units in proximity 
to Major Ports. Further, feasibility Report for Coastal Employment Unit (CEU) was prepared by 
V.O.Chidambaranar Port Trust (VOCPT) in 2018. At present, VOCPT has identified 96 5 acres 
for promoting industries under CEU, effective leasable land is 745 acres. Port has invited Phase-I 
tender for 285 acres and Phase -II tender for 334 acres and allotted land to extent of 12.34 acres 
and 36.72 acres respectively. Further, tendering for Phase –III is under process. 
 
13. The Ministry in its written reply stated that 30 potential Port -linked industrial clusters 
across three sectors, namely – Energy, Materials and Discrete Manufacturing, have already been 
identified. These include 9 bulk c lusters for basic input industries such as power, r efineries, 
petrochemicals and c ement and 21 discrete manufacturing clusters, in the labour intensive 
sectors of electronics, apparel, leather products, furniture and food -processing etc. The Master 
Plans for the proposed Maritime Clusters in Gujarat and Tamil Nadu have been prepared. It was 
further informed that based on availability of land with the Major Ports, Ministry of Ports, 
Shipping and Waterways is developing a SEZ at JNPT, Free Trade Warehousing Z one (FTWZ) 
at Ennore and has also identified Kandla and Paradip for development of Smart Port Industrial 
Cities (SPICs). Development of a SEZ at JNPT (investments: Rs. 12,554 Cr) and Smart 
Industrial Port City (SIPC) at Paradip (investments: Rs. 7,600 Cr) is in progress. SIPC at Kandla 
(investments:Rs. 11,147 Cr) and Coastal Employment Units (CEUs) at V OCPT and KPL are 
also under development. 
14. The Ministry in its Background Note informed the Committee that coastal community 
development is an important ob jective of the Sagarmala Programme. In this regard, Ministry of 

7 
 
Ports, Shipping and Waterways is taking up number of initiatives/ projects in the areas of coastal 
community skill development and development of fishermen community. On the skill 
development front, the skill gap studies of 21 coastal districts have been undertaken and the same 
is being implemented. Ministry of Ports, Shipping and Waterways is also funding the skill 
development initiatives under DDU -GKY to train 10,000 persons annually for next 3 years and 
has currently started training in Andhra Pra desh, Kerala and Tamil Nadu. To ensure technology 
based skill development, Ministry of Ports, Shipping and Waterways have set  up Centre of 
Excellence in Maritime & Shipbuilding (CEMS) with two campuses at Vizag and Mumbai that  
are operational since February, 2019. Ministry of Ports, Shipping and Waterways (MoPS&W) in 
partnership with the Ministry of Skill Development and Entrepreneurship (MSDE) is setting up 
Multi Skill Development Centres (MSDC) in Maritime Logistics under the Pradhan Mantri  
Kaushal Kendra (PMKK) programme of MSDE at Major Ports. The first such MSDC has been 
setup at Jawaharlal  Nehru Port Trust (JNPT) on 8 th March, 2019 and more such MSDCs have  
been planned at Ch ennai Port Trust, Co chin Port Trust, Visakhapatnam Port Trust and N ew 
Managalore Port Trust.  
 
14.1. During the meeting of the Committee held on 2 nd August, 2021, the representatives of 
Adani Ports and Special Economic Zone Limited emphasized upon the need for establishment of 
Port based industries and industrial townships in  coastal regulation zones under the Sagarmala 
Programme. 
15. The Committee takes note of the submission of the Ministry that Coastal 
Employment Units are planned to be developed to promote industrialization and to create 
social infrastructure within these CEUs and that VOCPT has identified 965 acres of land 
for promoting industries under CEUs. 
 
16. The Committee would like the Ministry to elaborate upon  how the establishment of 
various Coastal Employment Units (CEUs) creation of Port -linked industrial clusters have 
resulted in reduced logistics cost for EXIM and domestic trade. The Committee would also 
like the Ministry to formulate policies for generation of employment opportunities with 
involvement of personnel in various activities of construction, operations and maintenance 
of projects in regard to creation of Coastal Economic Zones (CEZs), Coastal Economic 

8 
 
Units (CEUs), Port -Linked Industrial & Maritime Clusters and Smart Industrial Port 
Cities. 
PORT MODERNIZATION & DEVELOPMENT OF NEW PORTS 
 
17. The Ministry in its Background Note informed the Committee that a s per the studies 
conducted under the Sagarmala Programme, it is expected that by the year 2025, cargo traffic at 
Indian Ports will be approximately 2500 MMTPA while the current car go handling capacity of 
Indian Ports is only  2406 MMTPA. Therefore, a roadmap has been prep ared for increasing the 
cargo handling capacity of Indian P ort to more than 3300  MMTPA by the year 2025 in order to 
cater to the requirements of growing traffic. This includes P ort operational efficiency 
improvement, capacity expansion of existing Ports and development of new Ports. 
 
18. The Ministry in its written reply also stated that f or all the Major Ports , Master Plans 
have been finalized. From the Port Master Plans, 92 P ort capacity expansion projects (cost: Rs. 
58,884 Cr) have been identified for implementation over next 20 years which are expected to add 
712 MTPA to the capacities at Major Ports (Table 2 ). Greenfield Ports are also proposed to be 
developed at Vadhavan (Maharashtra) and Paradip Outer Harbour (Odhisha). 
 
Table 2: Master Plan Projects of Major Ports  
Major Port No. of Projects 
Project Cost 
(Rs. Cr) 
Capacity 
Addition (MTPA) 
Chennai 3 377 1 
Cochin 3 418 4.1 
KPL 16 12412 108 
JNPT 9 17627 126 
Kandla 12 6069 99.7 
Kolkata 1 25 4 
Haldia 5 1125 15.3 
Mormugao 5 2359 23.2 
Mumbai 8 5472 33 
NMPT 4 843 18 

9 
 
Paradip 8 5224 78 
Tuticorin 12 4,999 150 
Vizag 6 1935 52 
Total 92 58,884 712 
 
 19. The Committee has also been informed that the Government introduced a Bill „Major 
Port Authorities Bill, 2016‟ in the Winter Session Parliament in Lok Sabha on 16 th December, 
2016, to modernize the institutional structure of the Major Ports so that they are in a position to 
perform efficiently in the competitive P ort sector. This Bill was intended to replace the Major 
Port Trust Act, 1963, which governs the Major Ports and provide greater autonomy to Ports.  
20. The Secretary, Ministry of Ports, Shipping & Waterways, while deposing before the 
Committee stated the following:- 
“The overall handling capacity that we have for our Ports today is 2500 million metric 
tonnes, whereas the traffic last year in 2020 was about 1248 million metric tonnes. So, 
we have substantial capacity in terms of handling equipment and other things that  are 
there. But, the problem with our Ports is that some of the Ports are pretty old, dating 
back to more than 150 years, where the draft is less, the berths are old, the big ships 
cannot come in, the way the cargo is carried has changed over the years.” 
21. While replying to a question regarding M inistry‟s future plan to develop more Private 
Port Terminals in order to boost cruise tourism and cargo transportation for increased revenue 
and employment growth, the Ministry in its written reply stated that fo r Mumbai Port, the PPP 
operator for operation & maintenance of t erminal has been shortlisted and the security clearance 
is awaited from Ministry of Home Affairs. In the past decade, private investment into Major Port 
sector was invited and several projects were awarded on PPP basis for the capacity augmentation 
across the Major Ports in the country.  Many P ort projects such as construction of berths, 
installation of state of the art equipment, mechanization of cargo hand ling system, dredging 
projects to accommodate large size vessels, etc., are being continuously undertaken, which help 
in increasing the capacity at Major Ports. There are currently 59 Public Private Partnership (PPP) 
Projects, 34 under operation and 21 PPP Projects under implementation and 4 stressed projects at 

10 
 
Major Ports. There are 23 captive projects (19 operational and 4 under implementation). Also, 
there are 31 projects which have been identified for monetisation by private sector participation 
from fiscal 2022 to 2025 for improved operational efficiency and capacity utilization of existing 
port assets and in order to boost cruise tourism and cargo transportation for increased revenue 
and employment growth. 
22. The Committee notes that a roadmap has be en prepared for increasing operational 
efficiency and capacity expansion of existing Ports and development of new Ports. The 
Committee observes that world -wide commercialization, liberalization and privatization 
have been used as strategies to deal with mo dernization of Ports. The Committee would, 
therefore like the Ministry to adopt an innovative approach and take radical measures to 
deal with the issues of modernization of existing Ports and development of new Ports as the 
Committee feels that a mere tink ering with procedures and occasional d ues in structural  
rigidities will not suffice.  The Committee also recommends that private stakeholders of 
shipping industry should have the liberty to identify the new Ports in the country and 
approach the Government of India with the proposal for their development. 
23. The Committee also recommends that the Ministry should assess the progress of  its 
policies and strategies in order to keep pace with the growing EXIM Trade demand. The 
Ministry should equip  the Ports with adequate capacity to handle various types of cargo.  
Port infrastructure developme nt projects and introduction of modern technolog y should 
also be paid attention for creation of additional capacity at Major Ports and modern cargo 
handling techniques should be introduced to improve Port performance in the Major 
Ports. Policies and schemes must be formulated aiming at mechanization of operations and 
introduction of modern technique s particularly in dry bulk cargo to improve performance 
of the Major Ports and upcoming Ports.  
24. The Committee would also like to recommend to the Ministry that a dedicated 
mechanism should be put in place for effective coordination and monitoring of PPP 
projects undertaken for development of Private Ports in the country. Further, ways should 
be chalked out to link Private Ports with the Major  and Minor Ports of the country in 

11 
 
order to cater to the growing requirement for import/ export of manufactured goods/ raw 
materials, immediately after the phase of Covid-19 pandemic is over. 
25. As per the written reply furnished by the Ministry of Ports,  Shipping and Waterways, the 
details of the land available at Major Port for industrial development is as follows: 
Sl. No. Name of the Port Type of industries likely to be set 
up 
Land Area 
Available 
(Acres) 
1. KoPT Light Industries, Chemical 
Industries, readymade Garments, 
Hosiery industries   
829 
2. PPT Steel, Food processing industries, 
Oil Refineries, Fertilizer plants. 
Coal  based Industries 
100 
3. VPT Food processing industries, Auto 
industries, Electronic goods, Free 
Trade Warehousing Zone (FTWZ) 
103 
4. ChPT Port and cargo industries like 
warehouse, cold storage ICD etc.  
121 
5. VOCPT Hosiery industries, Engineering 
goods, Auto parts 
2901 
6. CoPT Warehouse/Logistic Parks 100 
7. NMPT Tank farms/CFS, LPG/CNG 
bottling plants/storage industries 
30 
8. JNPT 
 
Liquid Storage, Bio -diesel, agro 
based product, propane storage and 
processing, warehouses, cold 
storage etc. 
810 
9. DPT 
 
Wooden based industries, edible 
oil refineries, mineral industries, 
rice mill, Electronic industries, 
1566 

12 
 
 
  
 
26.
 To a question regarding the status of utilization of unused lands at various Ports of the 
country, t he Ministry in its written reply informed the Committee that  a large extent of land 
belonging to Major Ports is under lease with Departments of Government of Ind ia and the State 
Governments on which interest and penal interest have been levied in cases of unpaid lease 
rentals. These interests and penal interests over a period of time have increased quite 
substantially which is coming in the way of settlement of le ase rent. In order to facilitate and 
expedite the recovery of these huge pending dues of Major Ports, Ministry of Ports, Shipping and 
Waterways has issued 'One Time Settlement Scheme (OTSS)' for settlement of dues with 
Government of India/ State Governments / Departments on 13th August, 2019. 
 27. It was further informed by the Ministry that the Policy Guidelines for Land Management 
(PGLM), 2014 were issued to all Major Ports for implementation w.e.f. 02.01.2014. Later, some 
of the provisions of the Land Policy Guidelines, 2014 were further clarified to ease the 
implementation of the Policy Guidelines by the Major Ports on 17 th July, 2015. Further, many 
Major Ports had, however, raised various difficul ties in implementing some of the provisions of 
PGLM, 2015 and requested for further clarifications on the same. In order to address the various 
difficulties arising with regard to implementation of these guidelines so as to meet the practical 
exigencies and requirements, clarifications on these guidelines were issued by the Ministry from 
time to time and all the clarifications issued have been compiled and have been issued afresh on 
29.04.2019. Since the  demand for Liquefied Natural Gas (LNG) in the country  has been 
increasing and it is the stated policy of the Government of India to double the share of LNG in 
the energy mix of the economy in the near future, the Ministry under Para 12 (i) of Policy 
Guidelines for Land Management by Major Ports, 2015, issued  clarificatory guidelines for 
establishing Floating Storage Regasification Units (FSRU) at Major Ports on 7th March, 2019. 
 
fertilizer industries, engineering 
goods, Auto industries and 
Chemical 
10. MbPT,MGPT& 
KPL - Nil 
  Total Available Port Land 6560 

13 
 
28. The Committee notes from the reply of the Ministry that a large extent of land 
belonging to Major Ports is under lease with Depa rtments of Government of India and the 
State Governments on which interest and penal interest have been levied in cases of unpaid 
lease rentals. The Committee also takes note of the fact that “One Time Settlement 
Scheme” on 13th August, 2019 and desires to be apprised of the outcome of this Scheme. 
29. The Ministry of Ports, Shipping and Waterways in coordination with the Ministry 
of Renewable Energy should also work towards establishment of solar power plants and 
wind power generation units on the unutilized land  rather than on sea , wherever possible 
near the harbors to reduce the burden on non -renewable resources of energy and to 
increase the employment opportunities. 
30. The Committee would also like to be apprised of the bottlenecks being faced in the 
implementation of some of the provisions of Policy Guidelines for Land Management. 
Further, what is the current status of establishment of Floating Storage Regasification 
Units (FSRU) at Major Ports in order to meet the increasing demand for Liquefied Natural 
Gas (LNG) in the country.  
PERFORMANCE OF PORTS IN INDIA 
Indicators 2012- 
13 
2013- 
14 
2014- 
15 
2015- 
16 
2016- 
17 
2017- 
18 
2018- 
19 
 
2019- 
20 
2020- 
21 
 
Traffic Handled  
(in MMT) 
545.79 555.49 581.34 606.47 648.40 679.37 699.10 704.93 672.61 
Average Turn 
Around Time (in 
Hrs) 
101.76 93.60 96.00 87.36 82.32 64.43 59.51 62.11 55.67 
Average Output 
per-ship per 
berthday (in 
tonnes) 
11800 12468 12458 13156 14576 15333 16541 16419 15373 

14 
 
Operating 
surplus  
Rs. in Cr.) 
1807.43 2518.90 3599.40 4296.56 4979.58 5856.33 6412.79 6772.34 6557.89 
 
31. The Committee was informed by the Ministry that t he achievement of Major Ports in 
terms of capacity augmentation, improved operational efficiency and higher operating surplus 
has been made possible due to certain pro-active policy initiatives taken by the Ministry of Ports, 
Shipping and Waterways  (MoPS&W). Some of the important initi atives/achievements in the 
recent past are: 
   (a)     Revision of the Captive Policy 
In July, 2016 Cabinet approved a policy for facilitating a more transparent process of 
allotment of waterfront and associated land for development and operation of Port 
facilities/services by any industry substantially dependent on a Major Port for import and/or 
export of cargo for carrying out their legitimate business operations within the larger PPP 
framework. This policy will replace the existing guidelines for allotm ent of land and waterfront 
for Port based industries. 
(b)       New Stevedoring and Shore Handling Policy 
This policy has been made effective from 31st July, 2016.  This policy will increase 
competitiveness by creating value for the trade through reduced lo gistics cost. Policy will also 
apply to Mumbai Port and Haldia Port where stevedoring is carried out by the Ports and will 
enable a revenue share for Ports from the operations which was lacking earlier.  
(c)       New Berthing Policy for Dry Bulk 
This poli cy has been made effective from 20th August, 2016.  This will provide a 
standardized framework for calculation of norms, specific to the commodity handled and the 
infrastructure available on the berth. This will help to standardize anchorage charges to redu ce 

15 
 
berthing time and  overall turn around time of ships and help to drive higher cargo throughput 
using the available infrastructure in the Major Ports.  
 (d)       Deep draft berth at Major Ports  
            With a view to enable Major Ports to handle lar ger vessels the Ministry had prepared an 
action plan for increasing the draft in Major Ports. Most of the Ports now already have a 
minimum draft of 14 meters and the other Ports are striving to achieve this level. Some of the 
ports like Paradip, Kamarajar,  Mormugao and JNPT have plans in hand to increase their drafts 
well beyond their existing drafts. 
(e)         The Model Concession Agreement has been revised with a view to obviate the problems 
being faced in execution of PPP Projects on account of certain  provisions of the present MCA. 
The revised MCA is expected to enhance  the confidence of investors and make the investments 
in the Port Sector attractive. 
(f)         Revised guid elines have been issued on 31 st January, 2018 for enhancing  the validity 
period of security clearance of bidders/ companies participating in Public Private Partnership 
(PPP) projects and dredging projects in Major Ports from  three years to  five years  so as to 
harmonise it with the validity period followed by Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA). 
(g)        As per the instructions issued by Mo PS&W in February, 2009, surplus funds were being 
invested by the Major Ports in the Public Sector Banks (PSBs). The practice of the Ports parking 
their surplus funds, solely in the fixed deposits with the PSBs, has been reviewed in the current 
economic scenario in the light of the guidelines on investment of Provident fund/pension 
fund/surplus funds issued by the Ministry of Labour  & Employment and Department of Public 
Enterprises. In supercession of the earlier instructions, revised guidelines have been issued by 
this Ministry to all the Major Ports on 27.07.2018  regarding invest ment of their pension 
/provident/gratuity fund and surplus funds. 
 (h)       Some of the PPP Projects at Major Ports came  under stress due to high storage 
charges. A Committee under Chairman, Indian Ports Association (IPA) considered the issues 
including the storage charges which had resulted in some of the PPP Projects getting stressed. 

16 
 
Based on the recommendations made by the said Committee, a methodology has been worked 
out for dealing with such abnormal storage charges and  to bring the stressed project s on track. 
Guidelines in this regard have been issued to the Major Ports on 11.07.2018. 
32. The achievement of Major Ports in terms of capacity augmentation, improved operational 
efficiency and higher operating surplus has been made possible due to certain pro -active policy 
initiatives taken by the Ministry of Port, Shipping and Waterways (MoPS&W). Some of the 
important initiatives/achievements in the recent past are: 
(a) Major Ports Authorities Bill, 2021 was proposed to provide for regulation, operation and 
planning of Major Ports in India and to vest the administration, control and management of such 
Ports upon the Boards of Major Port Authorities and for matters connect ed therewith or 
incidental thereto. The Bill intended to repeal the Major Port Trusts Act, 1963 so as to revamp 
the administration, control and management of Major Ports in India. The Major Port Authorities 
Bill was passed by the Lok Sabha on 23.9.2020 and  subsequently by the Rajya Sabha on 
10.2.2021 with amendments. The Bill along with amendments passed by the Rajya Sabha was 
again passed by the Lok Sabha on 12.2.2021. After assent by the President, the Major Port 
Authorities Act, 2021 was notified by the Legislative Department, Ministry of Law & Justice on 
18.2.2021. However, the Act has not yet come into force as a separate notification has to be 
made to that effect by the Government. Rules under the Act are being framed in consultation 
with IPA and the Major Ports.   
(b) A new Captive Policy for port dependent i ndustries has been prepared to address the 
challenges of renewal of concession period, scope of expansion, and dynamic business 
environment. 
(c ) Revised Guidelines on Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR) for Major Ports issued on 
4.3.2020. 
(d) The Union Cabinet has accorded its  'in-principle' approval on 5 th February, 2020 for 
setting up a Major Port at  Vadhavan near Dahanu in Maharashtra. The total estimated cost of the 
project is Rs. 65,544.54 crore. Vadhavan Port will be developed on the "Landlord model". A 
Special Purpose Vehicle (SPV) will be formed with Jawaharlal Nehru Port Trust (JNPT) as the 

17 
 
lead partner with equity participation equal to or more than 50% to implement the projec t. The 
SPV will develop the Port infrastructure including reclamation, construction of breakwater, 
besides establishing connectivity to the hinterland. All business activities would be undertaken 
under PPP mode by private developers. 
(e)  A new dispute red ressal institutional mechanism in the form of SAROD -Ports has 
been constituted jointly  by Indian Private Ports & Terminals Association (IPPTA) and Indian 
Ports Association (IPA). 
(f)  India improved its ranking under the Trading Across Border (T AB) parameter of Ease of 
Doing Business (EoDB) from 77 to 63 among 190 countries. This impressive record has been 
facilitated due to various measures like Direct Port Delivery (DPD), Direct Port Entry (DPE), 
Introduction of RFID, Installation of scanners/container sc anners, simplification of  procedures 
etc., taken by the Major Ports.  
(g) Logistics Data Bank Service under Delhi Mumbai Industrial Corridor Development 
Corporation Ltd. (DMICDC), for enabling track & trace movement of EXIM container has been 
implemented in all the container handling Major Ports. 
(h) An Enterprise Business System (EBS) is being implemented at 5 Major Ports (Mumbai, 
Chennai, Deendayal, Paradip, Kolkata (including Haldia) Port with project cost of approx.₹  320 
crores) to provide a digital por t ecosystem that will adopt leading International Practices without 
losing its alignment to existing local needs. 
(i) A centralized web-based Port Community System (PCS) has been operationalized across 
all Major Ports which enables seamless data flow betwe en the various stakeholders through 
common interface. To move towards complete paperless regime, E -DO (Electronic Delivery 
Order) through PCS made mandatory along with e -invoicing and e -payment. An upgraded 
version of PCS1x has been launched in December, 2018. 
(j) Several new functionalities, focused on ease of doing business, like e -Delivery Order, e-
Invoicing and e -Payment have been added in PCS 1x. e-DO through PCS 1x was implemented 

18 
 
only for DPD containers but now has been extended to deliveries made by  all custodians like 
Terminals, CFS/ ICDs and other Non-Major Ports using PCS 1x. 
(k) Further the process to bootstrap PCS 1x in to National Logistics Portal -Marine (NLP -
Marine) is already underway which will act as a Unified Digital Platform all ma ritime 
stakeholders. NLP Marine + PCS 1x platform is envisaged as the central hub for all interactions 
with various stakeholders viz. Port, Terminals Shipping Lines/ Agents, CFS and Customs 
Brokers, Importer / Exporter etc. 
(l) Maritime India Summit was inaugurate d in March, 2021.  It was one of the biggest 
virtual summits in the world, with the participation of more than 1.7 lakh registered participants 
from more than 100 nations.  Maritime India Vision 2030 has iden tified 150+ initiatives across 
Ports, Shipping & Waterways sub-sectors which will propel Indian maritime sector to its next 
level of growth in the new decade. 
 
(m)   Existing Model Concession Agreement, 2018 is being revised considering the change in 
policy environment due to enactment of Major Ports Aut horities Act, 2021 and exploring 
provision of further flexibility to respond to dynamic market and regulatory conditions, many 
provisions have been provided or modified to cater to changing environment and develop a 
conducive atmosphere around PPP to boost investment. 
33. The Ministry in its Background Note has stated that continuing with the initiatives and 
policy measures taken in the past as enumerated above, the focus of the Ministry would be on 
capacity augmentation, modernization of the P orts, growth in traffic, improvement in efficiency 
parameters safety and security of the Ports etc. Ministry of Ports, Shipping and Waterways, with 
the objective of propelling India to the forefront of the Global Maritime Sector, has recently 
released Maritime India Vi sion 2030 (MIV 2030), a blueprint to ensure coordinated and 
accelerated growth of India‟s maritime sector in the next deca de. To develop global standard 
Ports in India, Maritime India Vision (MIV) 2030 has identified initiatives such as developing 
world-class Mega Ports, transhipment hubs and infrastructure modernization of Ports. These 
initiatives would help in lowering overall operational costs of Ports, reducing turnaround time for 
vessels, increasing efficiency and throughput, providing ability to handle larger ships and 

19 
 
developing Indian Port‟s strategic importance in the South Asian region. MIV 2030 estimates the 
development of Indian Ports to drive  cost savings to the tune of Rs.  6,000-7,000 Cr per annum 
for EXIM clients and help unlock Rs.  70,000 – 75,000 Cr worth of potential revenue. Further, 
the augmented operations are estimated to create an additional ~700,000 -1,000,000 jobs in the 
sector. MIV 20 30 estimates the investments to the tune of Rs. 1, 00,000 – 1, 25,000 Crores for 
capacity augmentation and development of world class infrastructure at Indian Ports.    
34. While replying to a query regarding the Master Plan for the Ports, widening of thei r play 
on global level including coastal areas for improvement in services sector, creation of institutes 
for job expansion, tapping of cargo potential etc. the Ministry in its written reply informed the 
Committee that w ith the objective of propelling Indi a to the forefront of the Global Maritime 
Sector, Ministry of Ports, Shipping & Waterways has recently formulated Maritime India Vision 
2030 (MIV 2030), a blueprint to ensure coordinated and accelerated growth of India‟s Maritime 
sector in the next decade.  MIV 2030 has been formulated in consultation with over 350+ public 
and private sector stakeholders, comprising Ports, shipyards, inland waterways, trade bodies and 
associations, National and International industry and legal experts. The following key guid ing 
principles were incorporated to define the MIV 2030:  
1. Analyze current and future challenges to define initiatives 
2. Drive innovation by utilizing latest technology  
3. Create time-bound action plan  
4. Benchmark to understand current standing and adopt best-in-class practices  
5. Address capability building and human resources  
6. Explore ideas to achieve “Waste to Wealth 
 
35. Further, MIV 2030 identifies over 150 initiatives across 10 themes covering all the 
facets of the Indian maritime sector and is a comprehensive effort to define and meet national 
maritime objectives. MIV 2030 envisions an overall investment of Rs. 3,00,000 – 3,50,000 Cr 
across Ports, shipping and inland waterways categories. This vision roadma p is estimated to help 
unlock Rs. 20,000+ Cr worth of potential annual revenue for Indian Ports. Further, it is expected 
to create an additional ~20, 00,000+ jobs (direct and non-direct) in the Indian Maritime Sector. 

20 
 
36. The Committee takes note of the fact that the Ministry has prepared an Action Plan 
for increasing the depth of the Major Ports and most of the Major Ports now have a 
minimum draft of 14 meters. The Committee observes that in order to meet the challenges 
emanating from intense global competition, Ports in India are required to gear themselves 
up by modernizing the Port infrastructure and enhancing their drafts so that their 
operational efficiency is at p ar with the global standards. Increased competition and 
economy of scale have fuelled the development of even bigger ships and in order to 
accommodate such vessels, our Ports must have access channels of sufficient depth. 
Therefore, promotion of huge facil ities capable of handling bigger ships is the need of the 
hour. Since the investments requirements for the purpose would be huge, the Committee 
recommends that investments may be made in capital dredging in the form of Government 
Budgetary Support, equity participation and debt financing to Ports so that the existing 
drafts of 14 meters could be increased to receive bigger vessels and trans -shipment  traffic 
from and to India could be improved  
 
37. The Committee would urge the Ministry to develop an efficient system which can 
support seamless movement of cargo across all modes. The Ministry should emphasize all 
the Major and Minor Ports to enhance the productivity and infrastructure to the level of 
best Ports in the world which will enable them to com pete globally. In this regard, t he 
Committee would like the Ministry to appoint consultants to suggest solutions to the 
logistical and infrastructural bottlenecks . The Committee, therefore, recommends the 
Ministry to take both statutory as well as administ rative measures, to ensure that the 
consultants of proven track record are appointed who should be mandated to furnish their 
Report within a defined timeframe by assessing all the infrastructure/ performance 
parameters related to the Major and Minor Ports of the country.    
38. The Committee notes from the reply of the Ministry that in order to  develop Ports 
of global standard in India, the Ministry of Ports, Shipping and Waterways has identified 
Maritime India Vision (MIV) 2030 .  The Ministry should apprise the Committee of the 
implementation strategy that has been envisaged for the same . The Committee should also 
be apprised whether the Ministry has issued guidelines for its implementation to various 

21 
 
Port Authorities/ Major Ports or has given autonomy to them for formulation of the 
strategy regarding the Maritime India Vision (MIV) 2030. 
CONNECTIVITY TO PORTS 
39. While replying to a que stion regarding the updated status of implementation of 57 rail 
connectivity projects being executed under the Sagarmala Programme , the Ministry in its written 
reply stated that t here are 83 rail connectivity projects worth Rs 56 ,416 crores under Sagarmala 
Programme. Out of which, 54 projects are being implemented by Indian Railways, 26 projects 
are being implemented by Major Ports and 3 projects are being implemented by state maritime 
boards.  
40. Better rail connectivity to the Major Ports is very crucial for improving the efficiency of 
the Major Ports by creating a better Maritime infrastructure. In this regard, the Ministry of Ports, 
Shipping and Waterways in formed the Committee that it is continuously coordinating / 
interacting with Ministry of Railways  for timely completi on of rail projects connecting Major 
Ports through various modes of communication like meetings, letters, official memos, etc.  
 
41. The Ministry in its Background Note informed the Committee that for improving la st-
mile connectivity issues at P orts, the Indian Port Rail Corporation Ltd. (IPRCL) was 
incorporated in July, 2015. IPRCL has completed 20 projects worth Rs 522 crore and 12 projects 
costing Rs. 1351 crore are under implementation. Further, for improving hinterland and last mile 
connectivity of Ports, 98 road and 91 rail connectivity projects have been identified for 
implementation under Sagarmala. Out of 98 road projects, 13 projects worth Rs. 1788 crore have 
been completed and 85 projects are in various stages of development and implementation. These 
projects are mainly being implemented by MoRTH/ NHAI and Major Ports. Out of 91 rail 
connectivity projects, 28 projects worth Rs. 7,376 Crore have been completed and 63 projects are 
in various stages of development and implementation. 
 
42. It was further informed by the Ministry that in order to expedite implementation of road 
and rail connectivity projects undertaken by MoRTH and MoR, MoPS&W has identified 68 road 
and 14 rail connectivity projects which need to be prioritized and same ha s been communicated 

22 
 
to respective M inistries. MoPS&W, in the 18 th Maritime State Development Council (MSDC) 
meeting held on 24th June, 2021, chaired by Hon‟ble Minister of Ports, Shipping, and Waterways 
in presence of representatives from State as well as Central Ministries carried out discussion on 
expediting implementation of rail and road connectivity of Ports. 
43. During the study visit of the Committee to Chennai and Kochi, the representatives of the 
V.O. Chidambaranar Port Trust (VOCPT) apprised the Committee that the Port is well connected 
to major cities such as Madurai via NH-38, Thirunelveli via NH-138 and to Kanyakumari via 
SH-176. It was further informed that under the Bharatmala Project, the East Coast Road (ECR) 
four-lane Project from Chennai to Kanyakumari is under progress in order to facilitate the cargo 
movement from VOCPT to East - Coast hinterlands. Fu rther, the representatives of Kamarajar 
Port Limited dwelt upon the fact that the Kamarajar Port is well connected through road with 
National Highways (NH-4, NH-5 and NH-45) through the TPP and is also connected through rail 
with Indian Railways network. 
43.1. During the meeting of the Committee held on 2 nd August, 2021, the representatives of 
Container Corporation of India Limited informed the Committee that a t JNPT there are 5 
terminals and there is no common aggregation point for rail loading. Because of  intra movement 
of containers by road from these terminals, rake loading is taking 8 -9 Hrs. It was further 
informed that the Port Terminal Handling Charge is higher for rail moved containers as 
compared to the road moved containers, which is dissuading the  Port users to patronise for rail 
movement.  
44. The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry. The Committee feels that lack of rail 
and road networks has emerged as a major constraint for most of the Major/ Minor Ports 
of the country. Since most Port C onnectivity projects are highly capital intensive, the 
Committee, would therefore, like to know the details of the funding pattern which has been 
adopted for implementation of the rail -road connectivity projects.  The Committee 
recommends that a common rail yard should be developed at JNPT for faster evacuation of 
containers and for reducing the rake loading time in order to increase the efficiency of Port 
operations. The Committee desires to be kept apprised of the progress made in this regard.  
 

23 
 
45. The Committee is dismayed to note that out of 98 road connectivity projects, only 13 
projects have been completed. Similarly, out of 91 rail connectivity projects, only 28 
projects have been completed so far. This speaks of poor coordination between the 
Ministry of Ports, Shipping & Waterways and the implementing agencies. T he Ministry is 
extending timelines for execution of these projects instead of emphasizing upon their timely 
and speedy completion. The Committee , therefore,  recommends that a dedicated 
monitoring mechanism be put in place to ensure completion of these projects within the 
approved cost and designated timeline. Further, a Master Plan for completion of Port-road 
connectivity projects must be formulated by the Mi nistry and work relating to Port -road 
connectivity projects should be assigned to NHAI/ MoRTH who are specialist in their fields 
of operation . The Committee desires to be kept apprised of the measures taken in this 
regard.  
46. The Committee observes that environment is no longer a negotiable topic and it 
should therefore be ensured that economic development through the development of Ports 
is achieved through the cleaner and greener environment. The Committee , therefore,  
recommends that the Ministry should formulate proper guidelines and conduct an 
environmental impact assessment before releasing funds for any sanctioned/ stalled/ 
ongoing connectivity project. The Ministry of Ports, Shipping & Waterways should also 
work in close coordination with Ministry of Road Transport and Highways, NHAI and 
MoEF&CC to address the delay in projects due to land acquisition and environmental 
clearances.   
 
SHIPBUILDING INDUSTRY 
47. While replying to a query regarding  policy measures required to be formulated to 
promote Indian shipbuilding and ship repair industry in order to make it more vibrant and robust, 
the Ministry in its written reply stated that the Government of India has taken the following steps 
to encourage shipbuilding and ship repair industry: 
a. To promote Indian shipyards, the  Union Cabinet has on  9th December, 2015 approved 
Shipbuilding Financial Assistance P olicy for Indian shipyards for contracts signed during a ten 
year period, viz. 2016-2026. Ministry of Ports, Shipping and Waterways has released an amount 

24 
 
of financial assistance on shipbuilding of Rs. 29.02 Cr in FY 2018 -19 for 12 vessels and about 
Rs. 28 Cr for 7 vessels in 2019-20. 
b. The Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs  (CCEA) in its meeting held on 09.10.2019 , has 
approved this Ministry‟s proposal regarding settlement of subsidy claims for executed 
shipbuilding contracts under the old shipbuilding subsidy scheme - 2002-2007, wherein CCEA 
has approved extension of timeline and budgetary support beyond 31.03.2014  for release of 
committed liability of shipbuilding subsidy through budgetary support of approx. Rs.153 crores 
for a total number of 51 vessels, including retained subsidy for 47 vessels and full subsidy for 4 
vessels. This subsidy is to be released in fin ancial years  2019-20, 2020 -21 and 2021 -22. 
Guidelines have been formulated for release of this subsidy and about Rs. 15 crore of retained 
subsidy has been released in FY 2019-20 for 11 vessels. 
c. The Union Cabi net has also approved that all G overnment departments or agencies including 
CPSUs have to provide Right of First Refusal to Indian shipyards while procuring or repairing 
vessels meant for G overnmental or own use till 2025, after which all such vessels will be 
procured only from Indian shipyards. 
d. Government of India has vide Gazette Notification No. 112 dated  13th April, 2016 notified an 
updated Harmonized Master List of Infrastructure Sub -Sectors while including a new sub -sector 
“shipyards” under the category of “Transport”. A “Shipyard” has been defined therein as a 
floating or land -based facility having requisite facilities for carrying on 
shipbuilding/repair/breaking activities. Infrastructure status would enable Indian shipyards to 
avail cheaper long -term source of capital and would enable the shipyards to reduce their cost 
disadvantage and invest in capacity expansion, thereby giving a boost to the Indian shipbuilding 
industry. 
e. Notification N o.1 of Make in India regarding Minimum Local content in shipbuilding was 
issued in August, 2018 in consultation with stakeholders. The N otification aims to support local 
manufacturers of shipbuilding parts.  
48. The Committee finds that the shipbuilding industry is facing certain financial and 
infrastructural bottlenecks.  The Committee notes from the reply of the Ministry that the  
Union Cabinet has on  9th December, 2015 approved Shipbuilding Financial Assistance 

25 
 
Policy for Indian shipyards for the period 2016 -26,  CCEA has approved this Ministry‟s 
proposal regarding settlement of subsidy claims,  providing of Right of First Refusal to 
Indian shipyards while procuring or repairing vessels meant for Governmental or own use 
till 2025 and grant of infrastructure status to Indian shipbuilding industry  are some key 
initiatives taken by the Government of India to provide a boost to the shipbuilding industry 
of India . The Committee, therefore,  recommends that the Ministry must revisit its 
strategies and revamp its policies in order to support the indigenous manufacturers of 
shipbuilding parts under the Make in India campaign.         
49. The Committee would like the Ministry to assess the current financial status of the 
Financial Assistance Policy  for Shipbuilding  and would recommend the Ministry to take 
effective steps to resolve the frequent occurring of NPAs within a specified time -frame in 
order to maintain revenues from the shipbuilding in the profitable column of the balance 
sheet of the shipping industry.           
SHIP-REPAIR INDUSTRY 
50. While replying to a query regarding the steps to be taken  to bridge the capacity gaps of 
Indian yards in repairing sophisticated kinds of vessels and to tap the huge potential of Indian 
ship repair market , the Ministry in its written reply , informed the Committee that t echnology 
driven Ship repair shall be the key mantra to be followed by Ship repairing yards.   Indian yards, 
barring a few, are lacking in capacity as well as technology and know -how in handling repairs of 
niche and sophisticated vessels. Some of the steps that can be taken in this regard include:  
1. Setting up of Ship repair c entres of excellence, which shall support the Indian yards on 
updating/ providing the necessary technical support for handling sophisticated ship 
repairs. As individual yards may not have the resources for getting these technologies and 
support system on their own, by having a common centres of excellence such gaps can be 
bridged. 
2. Tie up of major Indian yards with global ship repair industry leaders in the areas for 
technology transfers, etc. A J oint Venture (JV) model with Korean/ European s/ Japanese 
yards with select Indian yards can impart such technology transfers. 

26 
 
3. Setting up a funding entity for maritime industry, like the Maritime Development Fund, 
so that many of these initiatives, including requirement for reviving the industry can b e 
supported. 
4. Creating two major Clusters for Ship repairs, one each on either coast, with certain 
benefits in these clusters, will help the ship repair industry in India to tap the potential 
available. 
5. Policy initiatives like ROFR, declaring certain zones where Ship repair clusters functions 
as free trade zones, etc. are few policy initiatives which will support the industry. 
6. Support of ancillary industries specific to Ship repair and Ship building will help to 
channelize the industry requirements into rationalizing the supply and demand within the 
Maritime Sector. 
7. Tie ups can be made with renowned shipyards in order to better utilize  the dry docks at 
various Ports. 
51. The Committee takes note of the steps envisaged to be taken to tap the huge 
potential of Indian Ship repair market and observes that the Ministry of Finance should be 
approached to grant deemed export status to ship repair industry, keeping in view saving 
of foreign exchange. 
52. The Committee is of the view that ship repair capacity essentially reflects capability 
in terms of the number of ships repaired and maximum size of ship that can be repaired in 
terms of DWT. According to a Report „Statistics of India‟s Shipbuilding and Ship 
repairing Industry‟ by the Ministry of Ports, Shippin g and Waterways, in 2018 -19, a total 
of 706 ships were repaired out of which 341 ships were repaired by the private sector 
shipyards and 365 ships were repaired by the public sector shipyards against 528 ships 
repaired in 2017 -18. However, t he COVID -19 pan demic affected ship building and ship 
repair facilities globally to a great extent. The pandemic has disrupted almost every area of 
the shipping industry, after a promising 2019. All levels of operations were affected by yard 
closures, logistical challenge s and delay in surveys . The Committee would, therefore, 
recommend to the Ministry to revamp and revisit its policies/ strategies to give a boost to 
the ship repairing industry of India. Programmes should be implemented aiming towards 
the revenue and employment generation. 

27 
 
53. The Ministry should apprise the Committee of the Port -wise details of the ship 
repairing facilities. Further, what are the reasons for no ship repairing facilities at many 
Major Ports of the country and the steps taken / being taken  by the Ministry  to address 
such issues.  
PUBLIC PRIVATE PARTNERSHIP PROJECTS 
 
54. The Ministry in its Background Note informed the Committee that  Public Private 
Partnership (PPP) mode of development was introduced in the Port sector in mid 1990s along 
with other infrastructure sectors. The Nhava  Sheva International Container Terminal (NSICT) in 
JN Port was the first Port Terminal to be developed on PPP basis in July, 1997.   Since then, PPP 
mode has become the preferred mode of infrastructure development in  Major Ports accounting 
for nearly 90% of the new investment in Berth/Terminal infrastructure. The Indian Port sector is 
the third largest share holder (8% by value of contracts) of PPP projects in the country after 
roads and urban d evelopment sectors.  This has been facilitated by the Government putting in 
place an enabling framework for promoting PPP projects in Port sector.   This includes 
standardized bidding documents like RFQ, RFP & Model Concession Agreement, Upfront 
Fixation of Tariff and frequent Review of Tariff Regulations to attract private investors.   Apart 
from being the primary source of investment for developing infrastructure in Major Ports, PPP 
projects have brought in new technologies, best governance practices and co nsequentially 
significant efficiency gains in operations of Major Ports.   
 
55. Presently, there are 59 PPP projects involving 34 projects under operational, 21 projects 
under implementation and 4 stress projects in Major Ports.   This apart there are 23 Ca ptive 
projects in the M ajor Ports. The enabling legal framework for allowing PPPs in P ort services is 
available under the Major Port Trusts  Act, 1963. Further, on 17 th February, 2021, the Major Port 
Authorities Act received the assent of the President whic h will replace the previous Major Port 
Trusts Act, 1963, once notified.   Significant steps have been taken by the Government to ensure 
uniformity of approach and standardization of processes for facilitating PPPs in Major Ports over 
the years since 1996, such as issue of guidelines for private sector participation in Major Ports in 
1996 and for formation of joint ventures by Major Ports with private parties and f oreign entities 
in 1998. Several top companies in the world have invested in India like D.P. Wor ld, Port 

28 
 
Authority of Singapore, P&O Ports, APM Terminal, Maersk, Noble Group.  The achievement of 
Major Ports in terms of capacity augmentation, improved operational efficiency and higher 
operating surplus has been made possible due to certain pro -active policy initiatives taken by the 
Ministry of Ports, Shipping & Waterways (MoPS&W). Some of the important 
initiatives/achievements in the recent past are: 
 (a)     Revision of the Captive Policy : In July, 2016 Cabinet approved a policy for 
facilitating a more transparent process of allotment of waterfront and associated land for 
development and operation of port facilities/services by any industry substantially 
dependent on a Major Port for import and/or ex port of cargo for carrying out their 
legitimate business operations within the larger PPP framework.  
(b)         Model Concession Agreement (MCA) gives the various parameters for the 
implementation and maintenance of PPP projects. Model Concession Agreeme nt (MCA) 
was revised last in 2018. 
(c)       Some of the PPP Projects at Major Ports came under stress due to high storage 
charges. A Committee under Chairman, Indian Ports Association (IPA) considered the 
issues including the storage charges which had res ulted in some of the PPP Projects 
getting stressed. Based on the recommendations made by the said Committee, a 
methodology has been worked out for dealing with such abnormal storage charges and  to 
bring the stressed project s on track. Guidelines in this re gard have been issued to all the 
Major Ports on 11.07.2018. 
(e)         Floating Storage Re -gasification Unit (FSRU) at Major Ports : The demand for 
Liquefied Natural Gas (LNG) in the country has been increasing and it is the stated 
policy of the Government  of India to double the share of LNG in the energy mix of the 
economy in the near future. LNG imports are substantial since domestic supply of LNG 
is not sufficient to meet the demand for which supporting infrastructure requires to be 
developed. Floating S torage Regasification Units (FSRU) within Port limits offer a low 
cost, fast track and flexible option even compared with traditional onshore terminals.  
Some entities have shown interest to set up FSRU in P ort limits. However, there were no 
specific guidelines on how FSRU will be permitted to be set up and operate. Hence, after 
examination of the issues, it was decided to bring uniformity in setting up and operation 

29 
 
of FSRU for LNG cargo in different Ports, which fundamentally entails giving license of 
water area. Accordingly, under Para 12 (i) of Policy Guidelines for Land Management by 
Major Ports, 2015, clarification through guidelines for establishing Floating Storage 
Regasification Units (FSRU) at Major Ports have been issued on 7th March, 2019. 
56. The Secretary, Ministry of Ports, Shipping & Waterways, while deposing before the 
Committee on the subject stated:- 
“We are transitioning to a land -lord model for our P orts where these older berths are 
going to be offered on PPP with the hope that these berths would be modernized. 31 such 
berths have already been identified and we have a pipeline of projects under asset 
monetization which will be offered to private sector to develop these berths into bigger 
berths with a higher draft with container handli ng capacity so that the containers 
volumes which are increasing at a much faster pace can be handled.” 
57. It was further informed that t he Ministry of Ports, Shipping and Waterways has 
introduced various policy initiatives to attract investment in the Por t sector, including revised 
Captive Policy for Port Dependent Industries, New Land Policy for Major Ports, MPA Bill 2020 
etc. The Major Port Authorities Bill, 2020 is expected to usher in a new era for administration of 
Major Ports in India in which the Ma jor Ports will contribute significantly to the economic 
growth and provide world-class Port infrastructure by adopting Landlord Model of development. 
The Major Ports shall gain autonomy on many key matters including tariffs, development of Port 
assets, master planning of infrastructure within P ort limits and powers to make regulations for 
operations of the Major Ports. Further Indian Ports Bill is also under the anvil.  India can further 
adopt policies which helps build investor ‟s confidence and liberalize the sector. Some of the key 
policy initiatives could be as follows: 
 Leverage digital tools in court automation: Electronic case management, electronic filing 
 Introduce high tech fast track courts for foreign investors with a minimum threshold 
value of Rs 10 crores 
 Promote sustainable manufacturing by establish ing EMS quality standards and 
certification 

30 
 
 To reduce manual intervention in company name registration, bank application, GST 
registration  
 Combine steps of firm name, bank account, employee insurance under a single online 
portal 
 Reduce setup time by increasing Government funding for common infrastructure 
facilities in Industrial parks – CETP, power and water supply 
58. Further, as far as S hipping is concerned, it has had 100% FDI for over two decades b ut 
this is yet to translate in to major investment. As stated above, one of the rea son being multiple 
taxation on S hipping industry in India a s compared to leading maritime N ations, due to which 
shipping companies are not attracted to invest in India. Henc e, the existing companies may be 
encouraged and given assured business/ cargo support, primarily to sustain competition from the 
foreign biggies and tonnage augmentation of Indian fleet.   Other important issues are higher cost 
of capital and inadequate credit facilities in India; Government may address these issues towards 
sustainability of Indian Shipping companies and its growth. 
58.1. During the meeting of the Committee held on 2 nd August, 2021, the representatives of 
J.M. Baxi Group of Companies threw light upon the need for enhancing PPP in shipping sector. 
They emphasized upon the need for policy formulation in order to facilitate Port/ terminal 
operators by not levying GST on th e works contract services received for the construction 
activities for both original as well as subsequent repairs and maintenance works. They also 
highlighted the need for creation of integrated logistics parks across all Major/ non - Major Ports 
and extension of tariff freedom to PPP operators. In order to attract private sector participation in 
Port sector, the representatives emphasized upon the long term financing of PPP projects.  
59. The Committee note sthat Shipping industry in India is subjected to multiple taxes 
as compared to leading maritime nations due to which shipping companies are not 
attracted to invest in India. The Committee observes that it is critical for the growth of 
Shipping in India that a level playing field is created as comapred to  other maritime 
nations in respect of taxes. The Committee, accordingly, recommends that the Ministry 
should take effective steps to modify relevant policies with a view to formulate a new tax 
regime in line with other tax regimes of leading maritime nations. 
 

31 
 
60. The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry and appreciates the initiatives taken 
by it to encourage private sector participation in India‟s Maritime sector.   The Committee 
also takes note of the fact that t here are about 200 non-Major Ports along India‟s coastline 
which are under the overall jurisdiction of the respective State Governments.   The 
Committee would, therefore, desire that the Ministry should make more efforts to make 
financing available to private sector for development and modernization of non -Major 
Ports and investing in the maritime sector in the country.  
 
61. The Committee also desires that a specialized maritime fund for supporting PPP 
must be developed to enable raising long term funds in the domestic and international 
markets at competitive rates. The fund can be utilized for financing Inland Waterways 
operations & vessel financing; setting up and modernizing shipyards; setting up ship 
repair/ shipbuilding facilities; promoting cruise tourism; and setting up new Ports a nd 
jetties through PPP . The fund can further be utilized to promote innovation and support 
start-ups and technology companies in the shipping sector. 
 
62. The Committee observes that currently the private sector is facing challenges 
related to vessel financing and this has restricted the supply side of vessels in shipping 
sector. Therefore, it is crucial that the benefits under the tonnage tax scheme should be 
extended to vessels registered under the Inland Vessels Act, 1917 which would serve as a 
strong incentive for the PPP. The Ministry should also normalize the tariff rates in order to 
attract private investment and to provide a level playing field for the Ports, whether Major, 
Minor or Private Ports of the country. 
 
PROMOTION OF COASTAL SHIPPING 
 
63. The Committee was informed by the Ministry that India has witnessed a steady growth of 
11.3% of cargo movement on coastal routes from 2015 -16 to 2018 -19. In 2018 -19, it had 
handled 120 MTPA of coastal cargo and is expected to reach 250 MTPA by 2025. Further, 
adoption of coastal shipping has been beneficial to the environment as it is less polluting, for 
instance Gogha-Dahej Ro-Ro ferry service is expected to save logistic cost with projected fuel 

32 
 
saving of 15,202 KL per year. It would help in environment al sustainability by reducing CO2 
emissions of about 48,800 MT per annum. 
 
64. In order t o boost trade wit h up -gradation of P ort facilities to global standards and for 
making coastal shipping viable at many instances, the Ministry has taken following steps: 
(a) Licensing relaxation for coastal shipping trade (cabotage) 
 MoPS&W has notified licensing relaxation to foreign flag vessels for carrying trans -
shipment containers, empty containers, fertilizers and agricultural, fisheries, animal 
husbandry and horticultural commodities on coastal routes. 
 The licensing Relaxation for coastal shipping to special vessels such as Ro -Ro, Hybrid 
Ro-Ro, Ro Pure Car Carriers, Pure Car and Truck Carriers, LNG Vessels and Over -
dimensional or Project Cargo is extended till 2020. 
 
(b) Coastal Berth Scheme 
 Financial assistance up -to 50% of total project cost or maximum funding limit can be 
provided to the implementing agency for creation of infrastructure to promote movement 
of cargo/ passengers by sea/National Waterways. 
 The scheme is extended up-to March, 2020 and its scope has been expanded to cover the 
cost of preparation of DPR and capital dredging at Major Ports.  
 39 projects (cost: Rs. 1,569 Cr) have been sanctioned under the Coastal Berth Scheme for 
total financial assistance of Rs. 636.76 Cr to Major Ports/State Maritime Boards/ State 
Governments. 
(c) Other initiatives 
 Minimum 40% discount is offered by Major Ports on vessel and cargo related charges to 
coastal vessels. 
 Priority berthing policy for coastal vessels has been notified t o reduce turnaround time 
for coastal vessels and improve their utilization. 
 GST Reduced on Bunker Fuel from 18% to 5%. 
 
(d) Going further in direction, Mo PS&W with the help of Asian Develo pment Bank (ADB) 
carried out a study on p romotion of coastal shipping in India. The core objective of  this 

33 
 
Study is to identify key issues impacting coastal shipping and developing solutions to 
address these issues in order to make coastal shipping a more prominent mode of 
transport in India‟s domestic logistics.  The Study reported significant growth in coastal 
shipping for various commodities and projects around 340 MTPA by 2025 including 
short sea shipping with neighbouring countries basis incorporating recommendations and 
necessary interventions suggested in Report. MoPS&W is taking necessary steps/actions 
on possible resolutions in coordination with respective Ministries, State Governments and 
Authorities of Major & Minor Ports. 
 
64.1. During the meeting of the Committee held on 2 nd August, 2021, the representatives of 
Directorate General of Shipping emphasized upon the need for policy formulation for reducing 
cost of shipping in order to increase the number of Indian cargo handling vessels. Further, to 
promote coastal shipping in In dia, initiatives such as reduction of GST on marine diesel fuel, 
dedicated coastal berth, relaxation from emigration and differential tax treatment of seafarers 
working on domestic/ foreign vessels were proposed to be undertaken. 
65. The Committee is of th e considered view that c oastal shipping is a fuel efficient and 
an environment friendly mode that can ease traffic congestion. Despite having an extensive 
network of inland waterways in the form of rivers, canals, backwaters and creeks , freight 
transportation by waterways is highly under -utilized. Waterways currently contribute 
around 6% to India's transportation modal mix, which is significantly less than that in 
developed economies and some of the developing economies as well. The Comm ittee, 
therefore, recommends that a vailability of dedicated infrastructure will go a long way in 
promoting coastal shipping as a mode of freight transportation. Hence infrastructure at 
Ports and supporting infrastructure using rail/road and waterways to fa cilitate coastal 
movement should be created which includes development of dedicated coastal berths, 
bunkering and storage at Ports and creation of supporting hinterland transport 
infrastructure with last mile connectivity. 
 
66. According to a study by Glob al Consultants McKinsey & Co and AECOM for the 
Union Ministry of Ports, Shipping & Waterways, optimizing the logistics flow for key 

34 
 
commodities by 2025 could save Rs 30,000 -40,000 crore. It further recommended for 
creation of more capacity at Major Ports and a logistics aggregator company to consolidate 
the Shipping supply chain.  The Report further stated that coastal shipping capacity can 
handle 150 -250 million tonnes annually of cargo comprising coal, cement, iron and steel, 
food grain and fertilizer. The Committee would, therefore, recommend to the Ministry to 
study the Report and formulate appropriate policies/ schemes based on it to promote 
coastal shipping. 
 
DEVELOPMENT OF INLAND WATERWAYS  
  
67. Five (05) NWs were declared between 1986 and 2008.   To promote Inland Water 
Transport (IWT) in the country as an economical, environment friendly supplementary mode of 
transport to rail and road, 111 inland waterways (including 5 NWs declared earlier) were  
declared on 12.04.2016 as NWs spread over in 24 States in the country, thus, increasing the total 
length of NWs in India from 4,382 km to 20,275 km by The National Waterways Act, 2016.  The 
details of projects initiated on these NWs are as under:    
  
(i)  National Waterway -1 (Ganga-Bhagirathi-Hooghly river system from Allahabad to Haldia), 
National Waterway-2 (River Brahmaputra from Dhubri to Sadiya), National Waterway -3 (West 
Coast Canal from Kottapuram to Kollam along with Udyogmandal and Champakara C anals) 
have already been developed with fairway navigational aids, jetties and terminals with 
mechanized equipment handling facilities for loading and unloading of cargo. These waterways 
are operational and vessels are plying on these National Waterways.      
 The existing infrastructure on NW -1 includes permanent terminals at GR Jetty -2 
(Kolkata), Pakur, Farakka (owned by Farakka Barrage Project) and   Patna (low level and 
high level), 20 floating terminals at Haldia, Kolkata (BISN/ GR Jetty -1, Botanical 
Garden), Triveni, Shantipur, Swaroopganj, Katwa, Hazardwari, Downstream Farakka, 
Upstream Farakka, Rajmahal, Sahibganj, Bateshwarsthan, Bhagalpur, Munger, Sema ria, 
Buxar, Ghazipur, Varanasi and Allahabad and navigational aids.  

35 
 
 Differential Global Positioning System (DGPS) station setup at Swaroopganj, Bhagalpur 
and Patna providing DGPS connectivity between Sagar and Buxar (1195 km) 
 River Information System (RIS) between Haldia – Farakka (Phase-I) and Farakka -Patna 
(Phase-II) have completed and in operation.  
68. While replying to a query regarding the status of implementation of the Jal Marg Vikas 
Project (JMVP) for capacity augmentation of navigation on NW-1, it was informed that: 
 Government is implementing the Jal Marg Vikas Project (JMVP) at an estimated cost of 
Rs. 5369.18 crore for capacity augmentation of navigation on NW -1 on the Haldia -
Varanasi stretch of Ganga -Bhagirathi-Hooghly River System with the technical and 
financial assistance of the World Bank.  The project is scheduled to be completed in 
2022-23.  Projects worth Rs. 1800 crore (approx.) have commenced on ground in a time 
period of three years after statutory clearances. 
Major sub-projects of JMVP under implementation are: 
 Multimodal terminal at Varanasi, Uttar Pradesh - Cost –Rs. 169.70 crore  - Phase-I 
completed and inaugurated by Hon‟ble PM on 12.11.2018. 
 Multi modal terminal at Sahibganj - Cost–Rs 280.90 crore - Ph-I completed and 
inaugurated by Hon‟ble PM on 12.09.2019. 
 Multimodal terminal at Haldia, West Bengal - Cost – Rs 517.36 crore, physical progress:  
72.5 %, Financial progress:  Rs. 338.17 crore as on 31.10.2019. 
 Construction of New Navigational Lock at Farakka -Cost- Rs 359.19 crore, Physical 
progress: 44.30 % and Financial progress:  Rs. 157.7 crore as on 31.10.2019. 
 Fairway development with Least Assured Depth in NW-1. 
 Farakka-Kahalgaon stretch (146 Kms), Sultanganj -Mahendrapur stretch (74 kms) an d 
Mahendrapur-Barh stretch (71 K ms) through performance based assured depth dredging  
contracts.  The contracts were awarded on 09.04.2018, 12.04.2019 and 12.04.2019 at 
costs of Rs.150.00 crore, Rs. 159.30 crore and Rs. 182.9 crore respectively. 
69. The Committee was also informed of the role of Multi -Modal Terminals (MMTs) in 
enhancing traffic. According to the Ministry, as per the NITI Aayog Report on „Strategy for New 

36 
 
India @ 75', to enhance last mile connectivity to inland waterways, Inland Water Transport 
(IWT) should be integrated with multimodal/ intermodal terminals. Inland terminals with proper 
road and/or rail connectivity and seamless transfer of goods from one mode to the other are 
important for an efficient logistics supply chain.  Accordingly, MMTs will provide rail/ road 
connectivity along with waterway and give a modal  choice to logistics operators to transport 
their cargo through most feasible and economical mode which would reduce the overall logistics 
cost of transportation.    
(ii) National Waterway (NW)-2 
 The river Brahmaputra having a length of 891 Km between Bang ladesh Border and 
Sadiya was declared as NW-2 in 1988.  
 The existing infrastructure includes high & low level jetties at Pandu with railway 
connectivity, Ro-Ro terminal at Dhubri, 11 floating terminals and Navigational aids. 
 Development has been undertaken  with renewed works which include –Cargo/Ro-Ro 
terminals at Dhubri & Hatsinghimari, Slipway at Pandu (fulfilling the repair & 
maintenance requirement of vessels plying on NW -2, which currently have to ply to 
Kolkata for dry-docking). 
 Least Available Depth ( LAD) of 2.5 m, 2.0 m & 1.5 m is being maintained on the 
stretches of Dhubri-Neamati, Neamati-Dibrugarh & Dibrugarh-Sadiya, respectively. 
 Differential Global Positioning System (DGPS) stations are provided at four locations 
viz. Dhubri, Jogighopa, Biswanthghat and Dibrugarh for safe navigation of vessels with 
electronic charts. 
(iii) National Waterway (NW) - 3 
o West Coast Canal from Kottapuram to Kollam (168 KM) together with Champakara 
canal (14 Km) and Udyogmandal canal (23 KM) was declared as NW -3 in 1993.  The 
National Waterways Act 2016 included stretch of West Coast Canal from Kottapuram to 
Kozhikode for a length of 160 km, thereby extending the total length of NW-3 to 365 km. 
IWAI is conducting channel developmental works th at includes dredging for providing 

37 
 
fairway of 2.20  meter LAD, channel width of 38/32m, 24 hours navigational facilities 
and terminal facilities equipped with mechanical cargo handling equipment. 
o IWAI has constructed nine permanent terminals at Kottapuram, Aluva, Maradu, 
Vaikkom, Thanneermukkom (Cherthala), Alappuzha, Kayamkulam, Thrikkunnapuzha 
and Kollam.  In addition, two terminals with Ro -Ro facilities have been constructed by 
IWAI at Bolghatty and Willingdon Island. 
o NW-3 is provided with 24 hours naviga tional aids in the entire route.   An average 
tonnage of 10 lakh tonnes of cargo moved on NW-3 per annum in the last five years. 
o IWAI has sanctioned Rs.38 crore for reconstruction of lock gate at Trikkunnapzha across 
NW-3 for utilization of full capacity of NW-3.  The NW-3 is fully navigable. 
(iv) National Waterway – 4: 
 Fairway development works in Vijayawada – Muktyala stretch of river Krishna (p art of 
NW-4) under phase-I has commenced at a cost of Rs. 96 crore including following main 
activities:- 
 Dredging to develop and maintain fairway is in progress and to be completed in March, 
2020. 
 Floating terminals (4 nos.) at DurgaGhat, Bhavani Island, Amaravati and Vedadri are at 
the final stage of completion. 
 Land acquisition for fixed Ro -Ro terminals (4 nos.) a t Ibr ahimpatnam, 
Harischandrapuram, Madipadu and Muktryala is in progress. 
 Ro-Ro services from Ibrahimpatnam to Lingayapalem are under operation since April, 
2018 by private operators with a total cargo movement of approx. 5 lakh tonnes till May, 
2019 and thereafter suspended due to local issues. 
(v) National Waterway – 5: 
Development of National Waterway-5 (NW-5) from Pankapal-Dhamra Port – Mangalgadi-
Paradip Port  covering 212 km with the following activities :  
a. Monthly Longitudinal Thalweg Survey for assessing depth and horizontal/ 
vertical clearance for cross structures/bridges. 

38 
 
           b. Consultancy/ Work have been awarded for:  
 Preparation of Detailed Project Report (DPR) followed by Front End Engineering Design 
(FEED) for hydraulic interventions, rectification of cross struct ures for navigational 
clearance. 
 Environmental clearance (EIA & EMP) including CRZ and Wildlife Clearance. 
 Navigational Clearance below existing power lines from Dhamra/ Paradip to Pankapal on 
deposit basis through State Government of Odisha. 
 (vi) Traffic on Inland Waterways: 
Total traffic on National Waterways in  2017-18 was approx. 55 Million Tonne (MT) and 
increased to 72 MT in  2018-19, registering an increase of  31%. The key commodities being 
transported on waterways are coal, iron ore, fly ash, construction material etc. It is targeted to 
enhance present level annual inland water cargo from 72 to 120 MTPA through completion of 
JMVP in 2023 on NW -1 and development of I ndo-Bangladesh Protocol (IBP) route for 
establishing seamless connectivity with NW -2. Historic container transp ortation on National 
Waterways commenced on NW -1 when Hon‟ble Prime Minister received the ship at Varanasi 
carrying 16 containers from Kolkata on  12th November, 2018 while inaugurating Phase -I of 
Multi Modal Terminal (MMT ), Varanasi built under JMVP. The first ever container movement 
of cargo on National Waterway -2 (Brahmaputra) with Pandu in Assam as its destination, 
originating on National Waterway-1 (Ganga) and moving through the Indo -Bangladesh Protocol 
Route commenced on 04.11.2019 from Haldia Dock Complex. 48 containers of edible oil, petro -
chemical and beverages of Adani Wilmar were transported on cargo vessel MV Maheshwari. In 
addition, two vessels loaded with imported coal of M/s. Star Cement moved alongwith the 
container cargo.  The three vessels eventually reached Pandu Port on 05.12.2019.  
(vii) International Co-operation in IWT: 
 (a)  Indo Bangladesh Protocol on Inland Water Transit & Tr ade: A Protocol on Inland Water 
Transit and Trade (PIWTT) agreement exists between India and Bangladesh under which the two 
Governments have made mutually beneficial arrangements for the use of their waterways for 
movement of cargo between the two countries for  passage of goods between two places in one 

39 
 
country through the territory of the other, in accordance with the laws of the country through the 
territory of which goods are moving. The existing protocol routes are: 
(i) Kolkata -Silghat-Kolkata, (ii) Kolkata -Karimganj-Kolkata, (iii) Rajshahi -Dhulian-Rajshahi, 
(iv) Silghat-Karimganj-Silghat.  For inter-country trade, six Ports of call have been designated in 
each country.   [Haldia, Kolkata, Pandu, Silghat, Karimganj and Dhubri in India and 
Narayanganj, Khulna, Mongla, Sirajganj, Ashuganj and Pangaon in Bangladesh].  
   
(b)   Coastal Shipping Agreement:  In order to have an alternative route for the transportation of 
EXIM cargo as well cargo to the north eastern part of the country using RSV or equivalent class 
vessels, coastal shipping Agreement between India and Bangladesh was signed at Dhaka on 
06.06.2015. Thereafter, SOP for coastal shipping was finalized and signed on 15.11.2015 and the 
same is operational.  
(c)  Passenger and Cruise services on the Coastal and Protocol routes between India and 
Bangladesh: The MoU on the above subject was signed on 08.04.2017 at New Delhi.   For its 
operationalization, an SOP was signed  on 25.10.2018 during the SSLT between India and 
Bangladesh at New Delhi. Both the country started their inaugural cruise services Dhaka -
Kolkata-Dhaka and Kolkata -Pandu-Kolkata via Indo Bangladesh Protocol (IBP) Route during 
March-April, 2019. 
 (d) Kaladan Multimodal Transit Transport Project:  Inland Waterways Authority of India is also 
the Project Development Consultant for implementing the Kaladan Multi Modal Transit Project 
in Myanmar on behalf of the Ministry of External Affairs, Government of India. The IWT 
component of the project comprising of construction of Sittwe Port and IWT terminal at Paletwa; 
fairway development of Kaladan river (Sittwe - Paletwa stretch) and construction of 06 IWT 
vessels (300 tonnes each) is completed. The objective of the project is to provide an alternate 
route to Mizoram from Kolkata / Haldia Ports through Kaladan River in Myanmar.  
(e)  New initiative to strengthen Indian links with Nepal : - Amendment in Treaty on Transit with 
Nepal to include waterway as mode of transpo rtation alongwith rail and road and the list of 
„mutually agreed routes‟ has been agreed by the two countries.  Inland waterway connectivity to 

40 
 
the land locked country of Nepal is to be provided through Sabhibganj, Kalughat and Varanasi 
Terminals on National Waterway-1 and Kolkata Port Trust for international sea trade. 
70. The Committee was also informed of the challenges being faced  in development of 
Inland waterways in India  such as t he varying and limited depths during lean season due to the 
excessive upstream withdrawal/ utilization resulting in meandering and braiding of alluvial 
rivers, erosion of their banks causing excessive siltation, lack of cargo earmarked   for IWT, non 
mechanized navigation lock systems, insufficient unloading facilities  at terminals hinder the use 
of IWT by shippers, horizontal and vertical clearance issues due to cross structures, first & last   
mile connectivity, lack of vessel financing options and apprehen sion of logistics and shipping 
market to shift in absence of policy support are the main challenges in development of IWT in 
India.  
71. Inland Waterways is widely recognized as a fuel efficient, environment friendly and 
cost effective mode, especially for bulk goods but has largely remained underdeveloped. 
The Committee is of the view that the  Indian Ports are facing proble m of connectivity 
through rail/ road and it is therefore necessary that Inland Waterways should be developed 
at an increased pace. The Committee appreciates the efforts of Ministry of Ports, Shipping 
& Waterways in  implementing JMVP for capacity aug mentation of navigation on NW -1. 
The Co mmittee recommends that a n effective, efficient and a dedicated monitoring 
mechanism must be developed by the Ministry to address the bottlenecks being faced in the 
implementation of Inland Waterway projects.  
 
72. The Committee would like the Ministry to share the details of the upcoming projects 
in this regard . The Committee desires to know whether the ongoing projects have 
witnessed any time escalation and cost overruns.  
  
INFRASTRUCTURE DEVELOPMENT AT THE PORTS FOR CRUISE SHIPPING 
 
73. The Ministry in its Background Note stated that Cruise vessels visits five Major Ports in 
India namely Mumbai Port, Mormugao Port, New Mangalore Port, Cochin Port and Chennai 
Port.  The status of construction of terminals at these Ports is given below: 

41 
 
 
a) Chennai Port Trust has developed Cruise Tourism Facilitation Centre at the existing 
Passenger Terminal in WQ 4 on 31.07.2017 with the state-of-the-art of technologies on par 
with facilities at International Airports. The cruise passenger Terminal in WQ4 co mmenced 
on 12.10.2018. 
b) Mormugao Port has constructed state -of-the-art; three storied new cruise terminal building 
having the facility for custom, immigration, duty free shop for the passengers and it was 
inaugurated on 22.12.2016. 
c) Mumbai Port ha s also taken initiative to build  a new Cruise Terminal by demolishing the 
existing terminal to match the International standard and work has started which will cost Rs. 
300 crores approximately and is likely to be operational by April, 2020.   
 
d) Construction of a new cruise terminal of International standards at a cost of Rs.25.72 crores 
is under progress at Ernakulam Wharf. The terminal is expected to be in operation by 
February, 2020.  Also, a Cruise passenger Facilitation Centre, „Samudrika‟ is operational 
since August, 2012. Upgradation work for the development of infrastructure of this 
Facilitation Centre at Cochin Port Cruise Terminal at an estimated cost of Rs.120.79 lakhs 
with the amount funded as grant -in-aid by Ministry of Tourism, Government of India is i n 
progress.   Scheduled date of completion is December, 2020. 
e) Foreseeing the growth in cruise traffic, NMPT has constructed a modern cruise passenger 
lounge near the berth with an area of 2150 sq. meter . And put it into operation with facilities 
like money exchange, locker room, medical officer room duty free shops, cafeteria, 
conference hall etc. 
f) MoPS&W has provided 65 counters at five P orts i n the immigration halls of the P orts to 
facilitate e -visa (15 each for Mumbai, Cochin and Goa and 10 each for Manga lore and 
Chennai).  
74. It was further informed that t he Ministry has taken various steps to promote cruise 
shipping in India and cruise terminals have been developed at Cochin Port, Mumbai Port, New 
Mangalore Port, Mormugao Port and Chennai Port.   

42 
 
 75. In regard to the above, Mumbai Port has created a domestic Cruise terminal, wh ich is 
operational from  October, 2018 and since then domestic Cruise ship Angriya has made about 
157 calls carrying 62739 pax till 18.03.2020 before the lockdown. Additionally, t his investment 
is also useful as a  facility for holding various events, conferences, parties with working 
restaurants and a huge lawn for weddings, etc. A bigger investment has also been made in a new 
International cruise terminal which is under constructi on at Mumbai Port and lik ely to be 
completed in December, 2021 due to delay on account of C ovid-19 pandemic. In Mumbai Port, 
revenue generated from cruise business is approx Rs 25.25 Cr during 2019 -20 and Rs 9.20 Cr 
during 2018-19.   
76. According to the Cochin Port Trust, the Ports are offering concessional/ rationalised tariff 
for handling cruise ships and the cruise business is heavily subsidized. As such, the return from 
cruise business is not commensurate with the investment. However, the various cruis e friendly 
policy initiatives, seamless inter agency co -ordination and spruced up infrastructure at Major 
Ports have helped in establishing Indian Ports as a major cruise friendly destination. At Cochin 
Port, revenue generated from cruise business is appro x Rs 10.25 Cr during 2019 -20 and Rs 7.85 
Cr during 2018 -19. At Mormugao Port, the investments have yielded an increase in traffic. 
Cruise calls have increased by 9% since 2013 -14. The New Mangalore Port Trust (NMPT) has 
also reported that investments in cr eating cruise infrastructure have enabled facilities that have 
benefited the passengers. Also, the P ort‟s financial return from the above investment is positive. 
However, there is a decrease in the revenue for the year 2019 -20 as 5 vessels had to cancel the 
calls at NMPT due to C ovid-19 pandemic. At New Mangalore Port , revenue generated from 
cruise business is approx Rs 3.05 Cr during 2019 -20 as compared to Rs 3.70 Cr during 2018 -19.  
The following table shows the growth in cruise ships/passengers at the five Major Ports in the 
last three years.  From 138 ship calls in 2017-18, the cruise ship calls increased to 285.  
Name 
of the 
Port 
Year 
2017-18 
Year 
2018-19 
Year  
2019-20 
    
Ships 
  
Passengers 
  
    Ships  
  
Passengers 
  
Ships 
  
Passengers 

43 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
77.
 In one of the meetings held during the study visit of the Department -related 
Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture to Visakhapatnam, 
Mumbai and Goa, the representatives of the Ministry elaborated upon the First International 
Cruise Ship Home in India, First Domestic Cruise Liner with Indian Flag and about the arrival of 
the First Domestic Luxury Cruise Liner in India. The Committee was also apprised of the 
initiatives taken to promote coastal shipping such as relaxation in licen sing, discounts of 
minimum 40% on vessel and cargo related charges and reimbursement of fertilizer freight.  
 
78. It was further informed by the Ministry that a t the N ational level, to have a coordinated 
and synchronized promotion &  developments of cruise industry, a Task Force is formed by the 
Government of  India, Secretary (PSW), Government of India and Secretary (Tourism), 
Government of India for overall country-wide promotion of Cruise Shipping with Members from 
Ministry of Home Affairs, Customs, Cruise Lines, CISF, Bureau of Immigration, IWAI, Indian 
Ports Association, Ports, Tour  operators etc. Cruise & Tourism Committee is in place in each 
Port and discusses issues related to development of various tourist spots such as Forts, Beaches, 
Temples etc as a cruise destination. Representative of State Tourism Board, State Maritime 
Boards, Cruise Lines, Tour Operators, etc are also members of the Committee. 
 
79. Cruise tourism in India is still a nascent industry, though we have a huge 
(in 
numbers) 
(In 
Numbers) 
(in 
numbers) 
ChPT 2 1245 5 3685 -- -- 
CoPT 42 47727 49 62753 44 67907 
MoPT 32 44662 35 47778 38 -- 
MbPT 40 56601 42 58858 44 76489 
NMPT 22 24258 26 29372 21 24080 
Total 138 1,74,493 157 2,02,446 147 1,68,476 

44 
 
opportunity to capture the market because geographically, India is strategically located 
between Western Europe and Asia and every ship to Europe has to pass through it. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends that in order to enable the cruise sector to reshape the 
Indian travel i ndustry, the Government must revamp the country‟s current Port 
infrastructure, set up dedicated terminals to cater to the needs of tourists and undertake 
riverfront development on a massive scale. The Ministry of Ports, Shipping and Waterways 
should coordi nate with the Ministry of Tourism in order to propose and develop more 
cruise tourism terminals in the country. 
 
80. The Committee would  like the Ministry to explore the possibility of following  the 
Maldivian model in places in the Andaman and Nicobar Islands and Lakshadweep Islands 
and facilitating leasing of islands to local  and foreign resort developers for tourism      
purposes. The Ministry should also take steps to set up tourist terminals for both domestic 
and foreign tourists at all the commerci al Ports of the country. The Ministry should also 
chalk out plans/ policies to promote river cruise tourism also especially in the non - Coastal 
States of the country. The Committee should be apprised of the progress made in this 
regard. 
 
COCHIN SHIPYARD  
81. To a question regarding whether the size of the ships to be built at this New Dry Dock of 
Cochin Shipyard Limited will be comparable to that of the leading shipyards in the world, the 
Ministry in its written reply informed the Committee that Cochin Shipyard is constructing a New 
Dry Dock at an estimated cost of Rs 1799 crores which will enable the company to build and 
repair specialized and techno logically advanced long vessels. The dry dock is a stepped 310 
meters long, with 75 meters of width at the m outh and 60 meters in the back, with overhead 
crane capacity of 600 tons and a provision for one more 600 ton crane. This dock is a state -of-
the-art facility with all modern features and can accommodate very large ships and offshore 
platforms, thus enabling both new construction and repair services. This facility can cater to wide 
range of products comparable with other yards in the world. Internationally there are some 
segments which need bigger facility and are also available with leading yards. 

45 
 
82. While replying to a query regarding the maximum size of the vessels which can be built 
in the public sector and private sector shipyards respectively in India, the Ministry in its written 
reply informed the Committee that w ithin the public sector, the dry -dock at Cochin Shipyard 
currently possesses maximum ship -building capacity of approximately 1,10,000 DWT. This will 
be enhanced to approximately 2,00,000 DWT when the new dry -dock at CSL is commissioned. 
The Private  sector  shipyards  can  build  vessels  upto   cape   size   vessels   comparable   to   
some  of  the  leading  shipyards  in  the  world.   Reliance  Naval  Engg.  Ltd.  has the  capacity  
to build vessels upto 400,000 DWT and L&T Shipbuilding -Kattupalli 300,000 DWT, which 
includes  large  LNG  Carriers. Smaller size LNG Carriers, Dredgers and other specialized 
vessels can be built by other shipyards also in the Private sector, such as Shoft Shipyard, 
Chowgule   &   Co.,   Vijai   Marine   Shipyard,   Mandovi  Dry  Docks,  A.C.  Roy  &  Co.,  
Dempo Shipbuilding, etc. 
83. The Ministry while replying  to a question regarding the timeline for completion of New 
Dry Dock at Coc hin Shipyard, informed the Committee that the contractual completion date of 
the new dry dock project is 14th June, 2021. However, the site works were stopped from 22nd 
March, 2020 to 22nd April, 2020 due to the lock down measures imposed to counter the spread of 
Covid-19 pandemic. The site works have partially resumed from 26th April, 2020 with restricted 
workforce in view of the social distancing norms. CSL is facing other issues relating to return of 
migrant labour force, blockage of supply chains of construction materials like TMT bars, 
cements, machineries and equipment from other S tates. Moreover, the project is r ight inside the 
city due to which the day time logistics are banned. Hence for the time being, with rough 
estimation considering all the issues mentioned above including COVID -19, a delay of 18 
months in project completion is expected. As such the revised expected date of completion is 31st 
December, 2022. 
84. The Committee was also informed by the Ministry that the Cochin Shipyard Limited has 
invested substantially in terms of technology and skill development.   International Ship Repair 
Facility (ISRF) is being developed to meet the ship repair demand in the region to supplement 
the main ship repair yard.  ISRF with its 6 stations and capacity to take up vessels upto 130 mtrs 
length and 6000 DWT shall take care of repairs of the smaller and medium sized vessels, thereby 
increasing the volumes of repairs (expected to repair around 80 + vessel per year) carried out in 

46 
 
the region. This will also free up the captive dock in the main facility to take up bigger ships for 
repair and vessel conversion projects.  Considering that the new facility a t ISRF is provided with 
a state-of-the-art ship lift facility and also that major service providers including many OEMs 
will be available in the Maritime Park set up along with this facility, CSL will be able to attract 
Ship owners looking for quality and timely repairs with necessary resources available at one 
stop. Hence, CSL is hopeful that with the availability of its highly skilled work force and the 
latest technology in the facility, ISRF will be a favoured destination for repairs to various owners 
and shall be able to attract demand considerably from other low cost locations. CSL will also 
recruit manpower and train them adequately by the time the ISRF is commissioned. 
85. During the study visit of the Committee to C hennai and Kochi, the representatives of the 
Cochin Port Trust (CPT) highlighted the significance of Cochin Port for accounting 97% of the 
total traffic volume by the State of Kerala as the Port is a natural gateway to the vast industrial 
and agricultural produce markets of the South –West India. The representatives then stated the 
features of CPT and informed the Committee of the berthing facilities available at the Port.  They 
threw light upon the cargo handling equipments such as wharf cranes, fork lift tr ucks etc; and 
floating crafts such as dredgers, tugs and barges. They also apprised the Committee of the 
completed project of „New Cruise Terminal - Sagarika‟, an International Cruise Terminal 
building for promotion of cruise tourism. They also apprised the  Committee of the ongoing 
projects such as reconstruction of South Coal Berth (SCB), International Ship Repair Facility by 
Cochin Shipyard, up -gradation/  modernization of Cochin Fisheries Harbour, Deposit Work - 
Berth for Indian Coast Guard and Grid Connec ted Floating Solar Power Plant at CPT. While 
elaborating upon the Port Led Industrialization, the representatives informed the Comm ittee that 
120 acres of land in Willingdon Island (Kerala) has been earmarked for long term lease for 
establishment of Logistics Parks, Port -based Industrial Parks, Business District, etc. and would 
also act as a hub for freight movement enabling aggregation and distribution of goods inc luding 
coffee, tea, fishery products, plastic products, etc.  
 
86. The Committee appreciates the efforts of the Ministry for the construction of the 
New Dry Dock and „New Cruise Terminal- Sagarika‟ at Cochin Shipyard under the “Make 
in India” campaign. The  Committee, therefore, recommends that Ministry should 

47 
 
effectively monitor the progress of such projects so that bottlenecks being faced  can be 
addressed before implementation of more such projects at other Ports of the country. 
 
87. The Committee notes from the reply of  the Ministry that CSL is facing issues 
relating to return of migrant labour force, blockage of supply chains of construction 
materials like TMT bars, cements, machineries and equipment from other States. The 
Committee would, therefore, recommend to the Ministry that CSL should launch adequate 
training programmes to address the shortage of manpower. The Ministry should further 
hire employees with quality industrial tra ining and depute them at Major P orts of the 
country to tackle issues arising out of blockage of industrial supply chains. 
 MODEL CONCESSION AGREEMENT 
88. While replying to a question on the salient features of the revised guidelines in the Model 
Concession Agreement (MCA) in order to obviate the problems being faced in execution of PPP 
Projects on account of certain provisions of the present MCA , the Ministry in its written reply 
stated that the Model Concession Agreement (MCA) is formulated considering the business 
requirements as well as requirements for the implementation and maintenance of PPP projects. 
Several PPP projects have since been awarded by Major Ports based on the MCA of 2008 as well 
as MCA of 2018.  MCA, 2008 giving various parameters for the implementation and 
maintenance of PPP projects, was brought with the following broad objectives: 
 
(i) The Concession Agreement envisaged an exclusive license to the Concessionaire for 
designing, engineering, financing, constructing, equipping, operating,  and maintaining/replacing 
the project/project facilities and services. 
(ii) The Concession Period was for a maximum period of 30 years. 
(iii) Concession Period begins only after 'Conditions Preced ent' prescribed in the Concession 
Agreement are met by the Parties within stipulated time limits after signing of the Concession 
Agreement. Two important 'Conditions Precedent' to be met by the Concessionaire are 
furnishing of „Performance Guarantee ‟ for i mplementing the project and achievement of 
financial closure. 
(iv)  Independent Engineer to be appointed by the Concessioning Authority in consultation with 

48 
 
the Concessionaire for approving and monitoring design, engineering and construction standards 
for the p roject and to issue Completion Certificate. Change of Scope of the project, if initiated 
by the Port, is allowed at the cost of the Concessioning Authority during the construction phase. 
(v) Rights and Obligations and risk allocation of both the Concessionaire  and Concessioning 
Authority towards operations and maintenance of the project facilities and providing supporting 
infrastructure have been spelt out. Commercial operation commences on issue of Completion 
Certificate. 
(vi) User charges, collected by the Concessionaire are regulated by the Tariff Authority for 
Major Ports (TAMP) or such other Competent Authority under the applicable laws. 
(vii) As consideration for the Concession awarded, the Concessionaire pays to the 
Concessioning Authority License fee towards Project site, equipments and other assets /utilities 
taken over from the Concessioning Authority and a share of gross revenue earned from the 
operation of the Project as 'Royalty'. 
(viii) Provisions have been made for remedial measures to be put in place in case of any material 
adverse effect on account of change in Law. 
(ix) Provisions made for (a) premature termination of the Concession Agreement in the event of 
a default in mee ting the obligations by either p arty, after following due consultation process & 
issue of termination Notice; and (b) for payment of compensation on such premature termination 
arrived as per prescribed basis. 
(x) Dispute Resolution Mechanism under the Arbitration Act, 1996 was prescribed. 
(xi) Procedure to be followed for transfer of project site and assets and equipment back to the 
Concessioning Authority by the Concessionaire on expiry of the Concession Period, either by 
premature termination or by efflux of time was laid down. 
 
89. It was fur ther informed by the Ministry that t hough Public Private Partnership (PPP) 
mode had been largely successful in the Port Sector, some PPP projects experienced difficulties 
during operations, which necessitated a review of the MCA, 2008.  Keeping in view the 
recommendations of the Committee, constituted in February, 2010 and headed by Shri B.K. 
Chaturvedi, Member, Planning Commission ; with Secretary (Shipping); Finance Secretary; 
Secretary (Expenditure); and Joint Secretary, PMO as members; Working Group  Committee on 
revising and revitalizing Public Private Partnership; Model of Infrastructure (Kelkar 

49 
 
Committee); and the experiences gained in  managing PPP projects, the MCA, 2008 was 
amended with a view to obviate the problems being faced in execution of PPP Pro jects on 
account of certain provisions of the present MCA, in order to enhance confidence of investors 
and make the investments in the Port Sector attractive. The salient features of the revised MCA, 
2018 are as under: 
(i) Change in equity holding requirements to provide Exit Route to Developers. 
(ii) Payment of Royalty by private operators to Port on "per MT of cargo handled" basis 
instead of "% of Gross Revenue". 
(iii) Provision for additional land. 
(iv) Improved utilization of Project Assets and higher Productivity. 
(v) Amendment in Definition of "Change in Law". 
(vi) Provision for Commercial Operation before COD. 
(vii) Provision for Mitigation Measures - Constitution of a Board. 
 
90. The Committee observes that the resources required to build the necessary Port 
infrastructure are h uge and therefore, supplementation of public investment by private 
sector investment through PPP mode is inevitable. It is in this context that successful 
working of PPP model assumes added significance in realizing the targeted Port capacity 
augmentation. The Committee, therefore, welcomes the changes ushered in by the MCA, 
2018. While endorsing the revised MCA, 2018, t he Committee desires to know as to what 
extent the Model Concession Agreement, 2018 (amended) has succeeded in obviating the 
problems faced in execution of PPP projects and make the investment in Port sector 
attractive. Further, the Ministry should apprise the Committee of the provisions in MCA, 
2018 which are proving to be impediments in  the implementation and maintenance of PPP 
projects. 
91. Since the order of private investment required to achieve the Port capacity 
augmentation and the number of PPP projects awarded are high, the Committee 
recommends that a “Single Window” approval system should be put in place so that the 
possibility of delays and cost escalation could be obviated. Though the Committee 
welcomes capacity augmentation in the Port sector  by private sector investment, it would 

50 
 
exhort the Ministry to ensure that such an arrangement does not lead to creation of private 
monopolies in the Port sector. The Committee desires to know whether the Port sector gets 
treatment on par with other infrastructure sector like roads and whether any propos al to 
treat the entire industry and ancillary activities for the purpose of tax concession is under 
consideration of the Government. 
MARITIME TRAINING IN INDIA 
92. While replying to a query regarding the types of vocational training programmes, safety 
workshops etc. which are being conducted by the Indian Maritime University for development, 
safety and modernization of coastal community, fishermen and sea surfers, th e Ministry of Ports, 
Shipping and Waterways in its written reply informed the Committee that IMU has been 
entrusted to implement the Sagar mala IMO Foundation course for  providing comprehensive 
National Skills Qualification Framework curriculum combining th e five basic Standards of 
Training, Certification and Watch -keeping (STCW) modular courses, which   is a requirement to 
get Continuous Discharge Certificate (CDC) from DG Shipping, enabling anyone to work at sea. 
93. It was further stated that IMU has also been associated in setting up the Centre of 
Excellence in Maritime and Shipbuilding (CEMS) at its Vizag campus to provide Industry 4.0 
courses for the maritime sector. CEMS provides 50 courses across 18 specializatio ns; covering 
770 modules out of which 270 will be tools and algorithm based courses while 500 are process 
and sector based. IMU's role in CEMS is being gradually realized by sharing of faculty members, 
certification and a closer integration of CEMS with IM U courses. Due to the prevailing COVID 
l9 pandemic, IMU Campuses are closed for conducting physical training programmes . Hence, 
the courses could not be commenced. However, the courses will be started in due course of time 
once the situation improves. IMU has also been authorized to conduct the following Sagarmala 
IMO Maritime Foundation Courses (SIMFC), which will commence once normalcy returns after 
the lock-down period due to the Covid-19 pandemic: 
 (i) Elementary First Aid 
 (ii)      Fire Prevention & Fire Course 
(iii)    Personal safety & Social responsibility 

51 
 
(iv)    Personal Survival Techniques 
(v)    Security Training for Seafarers with Designated Security Duties 
(vi)   Maritime English & English in Global Context 
(vii)  Soft & Intercultural Skills to improve productivity, behaviour, hygiene, attitude etc. 
 
94. The Ministry in its Background Note informed the Committee that on the skill 
development front, the skill gap studies of 21 coastal districts has been undertaken and the same 
is being implemented. MoPS&W is funding the skill development initiatives under DDU -GKY. 
Phase I was carried out cove ring 17 districts of 5 coastal S tates and 1,937 trainees have been 
trained in the sectors of hospitality and logistics. Phase II is under implementa tion and covers 22 
districts of 9 Coastal States  and 3 Union Territories . While ensuring technology -based skill 
development, MoPS&W have set  up Centre of Excellence in Maritime & Shipbuilding (CEMS) 
with two campuses at Vizag and Mumbai that are operationa l since February,2019. MoPS&W in 
partnership with the Ministry of Skill Development and Entrepreneurship (MSDE) is setting up 
Multi Skill Development Centres (MSDC s) in Maritime Logistics under the Pradhan Mantri 
Kaushal Kendra (PMKK) Programme of MSDE at Major Ports. The first such MSDC has been 
setup at Jawaharlal Nehru Port Trust (JNPT) on 8 th March, 2019 and has been planned at ChPT 
and VPT. 
95. The Ministry of Ports, Shipping and Waterways stated that National Technology Centre 
for Ports, Waterways and  Coasts (NTCPWC) has been setup at  IIT Madras to be a centre for 
technological innovations and evolution of new i deas and breakthroughs for the P ort and 
Maritime Sector. NTCPWC provides effective solutions to an extensive range of problems being 
faced in t he industry through scientific support and carry out education, applied research and 
technology transfer in maritime field.  Centre for Coastal and Inland Maritime Technology 
(CICMT) is also being set up at IIT Kharagpur to provide applied research and development for 
the inland and coastal waterways sector to double the share in inter -modal transport for domestic 
waterways freight carrying capacity. 
95.1. During the meeting of the Committee held on 2 nd August, 2021, the representatives of 
Directorate General of Shipping informed the Committee of the 154 Maritime Training Institutes 
and 415 DGS approved maritime placement services for providing quality training and 

52 
 
employment opportunities in shipping sector. They apprised the Committee of the various onl ine 
maritime training programmes launched and guidelines issued to seafarers/ ships during the 
Covid-19 pandemic. They further highlighted the digital initiative undertaken for promotion of 
maritime infrastructure such as facial biometric attendance system , exit exams and automatic 
generation of Watch keeping Certificates. 
96. The Committee observes that the Indian Port sector has undergone substantial 
technological developments during the last 10 years to match with world class standards. 
With the changes in the Port scenario and introduction of high capacity Port equipment, 
there is a need to redefine job description for each level as the strength of manpower has 
not changed much. The Committee, therefore, recommends tha t IMU should collaborate 
with International Institute s to carry out a training need analysis for such segment of 
employees.   
97. The Committee would also recommend that the Ministry should conduct studies to 
work out annual manpower requirement and supply in the Indian Port sector and 
formulate suitable approach to augment the supply of required manpower to cater to 
India‟s needs being the 16 th largest Maritime country. The Ministry should assess the 
performance of the maritime  training institutes and take strict actions if any of the 
stipulated norms are being violated. The Committee would further recommend setting up 
of more CICMT in collaboration with IITs/ NITs/ IIMs to provide opportunities relating to 
applied research and development for the inland and coastal waterways sector alongwith 
the knowledge of business management especially in the fi eld of industrial block chain 
supply technology. 
TARIFFS / PORT RELATED CHARGES AT INDIAN PORTS  
98. While relying to a question regarding the formulation of a policy/ guideline for cargo 
movement and tariff regularization for Private Ports, the Ministry i n its written reply stated that 
all Private & non -Major Ports come  under the administrative control of State Maritime Boards 
and State Governments. Tariff at Non -Major/ Private Ports are not regulated and they fix tariff 
for their services as per the marke t condition. Any policy related to these Ports is formulated by 
the respective State Governments. 

53 
 
99. The Ministry informed the Committee that following types of charges are collected at 
Major Ports: 
(A) Vessel Related Charges (By Port Authority): 
1. Port Dues 
2. Pilotage Charges 
3. Berth Hire Charges (for terminals constructed by PPP operator berth hire charges are also 
collected by the PPP operator) 
4. Ports also charge other miscellaneous Vessel Related Charges like cold move charges, 
cancellation charges and det ention charges for Pilots, pilotage fee for vessels not requiring tug 
assistance, fresh water supply charges, garbage collection charges and hatch cover charges etc., 
varying from port to port and situation to situation. 
 
(B) Cargo Related Charges (By Port Terminals): 
1. Wharfage 
2. Container/Cargo Handling Charges ( includes  shifting to and from yards/CFS/ICD) 
3. Dwell Time Charges for cargo stored at Port Premises ( Usually charged after 3 days for 
EXIM cargo and 7 days for transshipment cargo, but varies across Ports and have different slabs 
for different type of cargos) 
100. It was further informed by the Ministry that Major Port Authority (MPA) Act 2021, 
enacted by the Parliament in February, 2021, will provide more autonomy to Major Ports. Once 
it comes in to force, the new MPA Act 2021would repeal the Major Port Trusts Act, 1963 so as 
to revamp the administration, control and management of Major Ports in India. The role of Tariff 
Authority for Major Ports (TAMP) for fixation of the tariff has been done away in  the new MPA 
Act as a tariff regulator and ports would be free to set their tariff based on market forces. PPP 
operators will be free to fix tariffs based on market conditions and notified by the Port Authority. 
The Board of the Port Authority has been del egated the power to fix the scale of rates for other 
port services and assets. The impact of the these changes in Tariff fixation will be enormous as it 
will create inter Port competition and once the Ports are empowered for tariff fixation, they will 
be in better position to take on markets with nearby non Major/ Private Ports handling similar 
cargo. 

54 
 
101. The Committee was also informed by the Ministry that in order t o remove intermediaries 
and brokers involved in loading, unloading and transport by lorrie s from inside the Port to 
outside and vice versa for reducing the lorry transportation charges, MoPS&W has been working 
on various initiatives to d igitize the processes and make P ort operations faceless. These include 
elimination of manual forms, facilitat ion of Direct Port Delivery  & Entry, e -delivery orders, 
invoices, payments, RFID based gate -automation system, enterprise business solutions (EBS) 
etc. Additionally, the Ministry has requisitioned the development of the National Logistics Portal 
(NLP) Marine which will serve as a platform to enable end -to-end paperless EXIM activities. It 
will serve as a Single window platform for all stakeholders (P orts, shipping lines, regulatory 
bodies, service providers, etc.). This will be developed as the next phase of the Port Community 
System (PCS) 1X system that is currently operational at Major Ports. 
102. On a question regarding the regulation of Port fuel charges in order to provide a level 
playing field for all existing Ports in the country, the Ministry in its written reply stated that 
bunkering services at Major Ports are offered by the Oil Companies such as IOCL, BPCL etc.  
Fuel prices are thus charged or regulated as per the policies and guidelines of the Ministry of 
Petroleum and Natural Gas. Infrastructure for offering bunkering services are provided or created 
as per the agreement between the Port and the Oil companies. 
103. It was also informed that  the storing charges are common for both coastal and foreign 
vessels. SoR are at ceiling level charges, Ports can give concessions based on government orders 
on war like situations. 
103.1. During the meeting of the Committee held on 2 nd August, 2021, the r epresentatives of 
Adani Ports and Special Economic Zone Limited highlighted the need for additional cargo 
handling capacity based on berth occupancy. They also apprised the Committee of the need for 
formulation of policies in order to encourage Indian ship s for bunker trade, relaxation in 
cabotage restrictions for bulk vessels, extension of benefits of Tonnage Tax for Cutter Section 
Dredgers/ Indian Flag Vessels and introduction of promotional tariffs on electric vehicles/ 
Special Economic Zones.  
104. The Committee recommends that the Ministry of Ports, Shipping and Waterways 
in coordination with the Ministry of Finance should formulate a „One Tariff Policy for all 
Ports‟ in order to provide a level playing field to all the Major and non -Major Ports of the 

55 
 
country. The Ministry should also apprise the Committee of the initiatives being taken/ 
taken to control Port-related charges of Private Ports. 
105. The Ministry of Ports, Shipping and Waterways should carry out financial 
assessments of the Port - fuel related policies of India and  also draw conclusions from the 
policies being implemented in different countries such as United Kingdom, U.S.A., 
Singapore and Japan. A detailed Report must be prepared in this regard. 
MARINE SAFETY ISSUES 
106. The Committee was informed that eight (8) marine oil spill incidents have been reported 
to DG Centre in the last 5 years. All spills, including the moderate sized spill at Ennore, were 
reportedly dealt with by the responsible authorities with minimal impacts.  While, there i s a 
distribution of roles and responsibilities between Ministry of Defence (through ICG) and 
MoPS&W (through DGS and Ports) in oil spill prevention and response , the following actions 
are being carried out by DGS. 
 Towards prevention of occurrence of oil sp ills through Flag State and Port State 
Inspection of ships and NSPC audits of Ports and Terminals. 
 Receiving alert of a probable or an actual oil spill incident, dissemination of the 
information and overseeing response from the combat agencies, including t he ship 
owner, vessel's P& I Club, Insurers, R.O, salvor, P ort facility, etc. and intervening if 
felt necessary. 
 Coordinating between various Governmental and non Governmental agencies, both 
national and international towards oil spill response. 
 Overseeing compensation distribution to those affected in an oil spill. 
 Representing India's interests on International forum and participating in India's policy 
making in matters related to marine oil spill prevention and response.  
107. In order  to ensure marine safety for seafarers, cargo ships, special mission voyagers, etc. 
the International Maritime Organization (IMO) adopted various instruments, viz. International 
Convention for Safety of Life at Sea, 1974,   as amended   (SOLAS Convention); International 
Convention on Standards of Training, Certification and Watch -keeping for Seafarers, 1974 as 
amended  (STCW Convention) and the International Convention for Prevention of Pollution 

56 
 
from Ships 1973, as amended (MARPOL); International Safety Management Code. Etc. 
Complementing the above key instruments of IMO, the International Labour Organizaton (ILO) 
has also adopted Maritime Labour Convention, 2006, as amended (MLC, 2006).   The MLC, 
2006 reflects the right of seafarers, to descent, safe and healthy working and l iving conditions.  
The said Convention contains a number of provisions that address safety and security of 
seafarers such as Regulation 4.3 ensure s seafarers‟ work environment on board ships promotes 
occupational safety and  health; Regulation 3.1 ensures  safety and health in connection with son 
board accommodation.    India has ratified all the above conventions and promulgated various 
Rules under Merchant Shipping Act, 1958 (as amended) incorporating all provisions of the 
above Conventions.   Merchant Shipping (Maritime Labour) Rules, 2016 and Merchant Shipping 
(Recruitment and Placement of Seafarers) Rules 2016 mainly address the safety and security of 
seafarers. The aspect of seafarer‟s safety and security has already been covered under Merchant 
Shipping Act, 1958 and the aforesaid Rules promulgated there under. 
108. The Committee recommend s that in order to ensure a comprehensive safety and 
security regime at Ports,  the Ministry should find out the best practices being followed by 
the international Ports in developed countries and incorporate them  while formulating any 
policy for improvement of safety measures in India‟s maritime sector.  Management of 
leadership, effective training, measurement of safety performances, continuous 
improvement in safety tech niques, focus on learning and a visible commitment towards 
safety are some of the guidelines that must be incorporated by the Ministry in its future 
policy formulation. 
109. The Ministry should adopt technologies from the foreign nations to address the 
incidents of oil spills. The Ministry should also take steps to ensure safety and security of 
seafarers. 
IMPACT OF COVID-19 PANDEMIC ON SHIPPING SECTOR 
110. The Committee has been informed by the Ministry that there was no job loss in the Major 
Ports due to the Covid -19 crisis.  However, there was marginal  decline in the total traffic. 
Ministry of Ports, Shipping and Waterways has issued necessary directions from time to time t o 
Ports to put in place a screening, detection and quarantine system of disembarking seafarers or 

57 
 
cruise passengers, to obtain self -declaration from arriving crews/ passengers to install thermal 
scanners. 
111. Further, many e -Governance and Digitization pr ojects, which were already going on, 
were accelerated during COVID -19 pandemic period. Many technological/ digital inductions 
were done during COVID-19 pandemic, some of which are as follows; 
 E-office for internal use 
 E-invoice, E-payment, E-DO and E-BoL at PCS 1x 
 Utility for Sign-on & sign-off (E-pass module) 
 Utility for data verification of seafarers from chartered flights 
 Maritime Training: E-learning, virtual classes, online exit exams 
 Online ship Registrations & online charter licensing 
112. It was als o stated that the Shipping sector being essential service, continues to operate 
amid Covid -19 pandemic. As far as Sagarmala Programme is concerned, impact of Covid -19 
pandemic was mainly on implementation of projects. Many under implementation projects 
suffered delays due to precautionary measures taken to control the spread of virus (i.e., 
implementing SOP of Covid -19, migration of labours, etc.). Later it was settled at much extent 
and implementation resumed at most of the places.  Due to lock down and other travel 
restrictions, there was  a major shortfall in the manpower which has direct impact in the work 
progress. The shipbuilding industry is basically an assembly and integration work. Thus this 
industry needs various equipment and products for the fi nal product. Thus any disruption in 
supply chain severely impacts the progress of the work and has severely impacted the work 
progress. As many of the commi ssioning technicians of OEMs have  to come from various parts 
of the world, due to travel restriction s  work of many completed projects could not be 
commissioned and handed over to the end customer till date. 
113. The Committee observes that the Shipping industry is emerging out from the impact 
of Covid -19 pandemic. With business coming almost to a stands till, the unprecedented 
crisis had impacted each and every segment of the shipping industry especially the EXIM 
trade, ship building, ship repairing and cruise shipping sector. The Shipping sector has the 
potential to stimulate other economy through its ba ckward and forward linkages and 

58 
 
contributes significantly towards generation of revenues as well as the creation of jobs in 
the country. The Committee would, therefore, recommend that the Ministry must monitor 
the status of implementation of the ongoing/ s talled projects which got impacted due the 
pandemic and should issue fresh deadlines for their timely completion in order to avoid 
cost overruns. 
Statutory provisions/ guidelines 
114. The Committee impresses upon the Ministry, the imperative need to ensure  that the 
recommendations made by the Committee are given serious thought and deliberation; and 
due consideration should be given to the facts and the issues involved therein. Therefore, it 
is necessary that all possible steps are taken to ensure that they  are implemented in letter 
and spirit, within a designated time frame. Further, the Committee recommends that the 
statutory provisions/ guidelines, wherever needed and necessary for the implementation of 
the recommendations, should be formulated by the Min istry without any delay. The 
Committee desires that in case of any difficulty/ problems faced by the Ministry in the 
implementation of the recommendations, the Committee may be apprised thereof. 
 
*** 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

59 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS — AT A GLANCE 
 
SAGARMALA PROGRAMME 
The Committee is constrained to note the reply of the Ministry that despite the 
Sagarmala Programme being launched way back in the year 2015, only 172 projects out of 
the 802 sanctioned projects under the Sagarmala Programme have been c ompleted and the 
remaining 632 projects are under the implementation stage, which is far from being 
satisfactory. The Committee recommends the Ministry that Sagarmala Programme being a 
crucial step in the progress of India‟s Shipping sector needs to be spe eded up. The 
Committee, therefore, desires to know whether the projects under implementation have 
witnessed any time overrun and cost escalation as compared to the original cost and 
timeline of the projects. The Ministry should also mention the precise rea sons for delay, if 
any, Port-wise and steps being taken to address such delays.          (Para: 10) 
The Committee would like to bring to the notice of the Ministry that the cost of 
projects which are categorized into five pillars under the Sagarmala Scheme  is quite large 
as compared to the project cost of any other scheme/ programme under the Ministry of 
Ports, Shipping and Waterways. But only a small fraction of funds has been utilized so far, 
which speaks of very poor planning and fiscal indiscipline. The  Committee would, 
therefore, like to be apprised of the measures taken for effective and efficient utilization of 
sanctioned funds.                     
(Para: 11) 
The Committee takes note of the submission of the Ministry that Coastal 
Employment Units are planned to be developed to promote industrialization and to create 
social infrastructure within these CEUs and that VOCPT has identified 965 acres of land 
for promoting industries under CEUs.             (Para: 15) 
The Committee would like the Ministry to elaborate upon how the establishment of 
various Coastal Employment Units (CEUs) creation of Port -linked industrial clusters have 
resulted in reduced logistics cost for EXIM and domestic trade. The Committee would al so 
like the Ministry to formulate policies for generation of employment opportunities with 

60 
 
involvement of personnel in various activities of construction, operations and maintenance 
of projects in regard to creation of Coastal Economic Zones (CEZs), Coasta l Economic 
Units (CEUs), Port -Linked Industrial & Maritime Clusters and Smart Industrial  Port 
Cities.                 (Para: 16) 
 
PORT MODERNIZATION & DEVELOPMENT OF NEW PORTS 
  The Committee notes that a roadmap has been prepared for increasing operationa l 
efficiency and capacity expansion of existing Ports and development of new Ports. The 
Committee observes that world -wide commercialization, liberalization and privatization 
have been used as strategies to deal with modernization of Ports. The Committee w ould, 
therefore like the Ministry to adopt an innovative approach and take radical measures to 
deal with the issues of modernization of existing Ports and development of new Ports as the 
Committee feels that a mere tinkering wit h procedures and occasional dues in structural  
rigidities will not suffice.  Further, a Master Plan for completion of Port -road connectivity 
projects must be formulated by the Ministry and work relating to Port -road connectivity 
projects should be assigned to NHAI/ MoRTH who are specialist in their fields of 
operation. The Committee desires to be kept apprised of the measures taken in this regard.  
                       (Para: 22) 
The Committee also recommends that the Ministry should assess the progress of its 
policies and strategies in order to keep pace with the growing EXIM Tr ade demand. The 
Ministry should equip the Ports with adequate capacity to handle various types of cargo.  
Port infrastructure development projects and introduction of modern technology should 
also be paid attention for creation of additional capacity at Ma jor Ports and modern cargo 
handling techniques should be introduced to improve Port performance in the Major 
Ports. Policies and schemes must be formulated aiming at mechanization of operations and 
introduction of modern techniques particularly in dry bulk  cargo to improve performance 
of the Major Ports and upcoming Ports.             (Para: 23) 
 

61 
 
The Committee would also like to recommend to the Ministry that a dedicated 
mechanism should be put in place for effective coordination and monitoring of PPP 
projects undertaken for development of Private Ports in the country. Further, ways should 
be chalked out to link Private Ports with the Major and Minor Ports of the country in 
order to cater to the growing requirement for import/ export of manufactured goods/ r aw 
materials, immediately after the phase of Covid-19 pandemic is over.           (Para: 24) 
The Committee notes from the reply of the Ministry that a large extent of land 
belonging to Major Ports is under lease with Departments of Government of India and the 
State Governments on which interest and penal interest have been levied in cases of unpaid 
lease rentals. The Committee also takes note of the fact that “One Time Settlement 
Scheme” on 13th August, 2019 and desires to be apprised of the outcome of this Scheme.  
                 (Para: 28) 
The Ministry of Ports, Shipping and Waterways in coordination with the Ministry 
of Renewable Energy should also work towards establishment of solar power plants and 
wind power generation units on the unutilized land ra ther than on sea , wherever possible 
near the harbors to reduce the burden on non -renewable resources of energy and to 
increase the employment opportunities.             (Para: 29) 
The Committee would also like to be apprised of the bottlenecks being faced in the 
implementation of some of the provisions of Policy Guidelines for Land Management. 
Further, what is the current status of establishment of Floating Storage Regasification 
Units (FSRU) at Major Ports in order to meet the increasing demand for Liquefied Natural 
Gas (LNG) in the country.               (Para: 30) 
PERFORMANCE OF PORTS IN INDIA 
  The Committee takes note of the fact that the Ministry has prepared an Action Plan 
for increasing the depth of the Major Ports and most of the Major Ports now hav e a 
minimum draft of 14 meters. The Committee observes that in order to meet the challenges 
emanating from intense global competition, Ports in India are required to gear themselves 
up by modernizing the Port infrastructure and enhancing their drafts so th at their 
operational efficiency is at par with the global standards. Increased competition and 

62 
 
economy of scale have fuelled the development of even bigger ships and in order to 
accommodate such vessels, our Ports must have access channels of sufficient de pth. 
Therefore, promotion of huge facilities capable of handling bigger ships is the need of the 
hour. Since the investments requirements for the purpose would be huge, the Committee 
recommends that investments may be made in capital dredging in the form o f Government 
Budgetary Support, equity participation and debt financing to Ports so that the existing 
drafts of 14 meters could be increased to receive bigger vessels and trans -shipment  traffic 
from and to India could be improved .            (Para: 36) 
The Committee would urge the Ministry to develop an efficient system which can 
support seamless movement of cargo across all modes. The Ministry should emphasize all 
the Major and Minor Ports to enhance the productivity and infrastructure to the level of 
best Ports in the world which will enable them to compete globally. In this regard, t he 
Committee would like the Ministry to appoint consultants to suggest solutions to the 
logistical and infrastructural bottlenecks. The Committee, therefore, recommends the 
Ministry to take both statutory as well as administrative measures, to ensure that the 
consultants of proven track record are appointed who should be mandated to furnish their 
Report within a defined timeframe by assessing all the infrastructure/ performan ce 
parameters related to the Major and Minor Ports of the country.        (Para: 37) 
The Committee notes from the reply of the Ministry that in order to  develop Ports 
of global standard in India, the Ministry of Ports, Shipping and Waterways has identified 
Maritime India Vision (MIV) 2030 .  The Ministry should apprise the Committee of the 
implementation strategy that has been envisaged for the same. The C ommittee should also 
be apprised whether the Ministry has issued guidelines for its implementation to various 
Port Authorities/ Major Ports or has given autonomy to them for formulation of the 
strategy regarding the Maritime India Vision (MIV) 2030.          (Para: 38) 
CONNECTIVITY TO PORTS 
 The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry. The Committee feels that lack of 
rail and road networks has emerged as a majo r constraint for most of the  Major/ Minor 
Ports of the country. Since most Port Connectivity projects are highly capital intensive, the 

63 
 
Committee, would therefore, like to know the details of the funding pattern which has been 
adopted for implementation of the rail -road connectivity projects. The Committee 
recommends that a common rail yard should be developed at JNPT for faster evacuation of 
containers and for reducing the rake loading time in order to increase the efficiency of Port 
operations. The Committee desires to be kept apprised of the progress made in this regard.         
                         (Para: 44) 
The Committee is dismayed to note that out of 98 road connectivity projects, only 13 
projects have been completed. Similarly, out of 91 rail connectivity projects, only 28 
projects have been completed so far. This speaks of poor coordination between the 
Ministry of Ports, Shipping & Waterways and the implementing agencies. The Ministry is 
extending timelines for execution of these projects instead of emphasizing upon their timely 
and speedy completion. The Committee, therefore, recommends that a dedicated 
monitoring mechanism be put in place to ensure completion of these projects within the 
approved cost and designated timeline. Further, a Master Plan for completion of Port -road 
connectivity projects must be formulated by the Ministry and work relating to Po rt-road 
connectivity projects should be assigned to NHAI/ MoRTH who are specialist in their fields 
of operation. The Committee desires to be kept apprised of the measures tak en in this 
regard.                (Para: 45) 
The Committee observes that environme nt is no longer a negotiable topic and it 
should therefore be ensured that economic development through the development of Ports 
is achieved through the cleaner and greener environment. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that the Ministry should formulat e proper guidelines and conduct an 
environmental impact assessment before releasing funds for any sanctioned/ stalled/ 
ongoing connectivity project. The Ministry of Ports, Shipping & Waterways should also 
work in close coordination with Ministry of Road Tr ansport and Highways, NHAI and 
MoEF&CC to address the delay in projects due to land acquisition and environmental 
clearances.                   (Para: 46 
SHIPBUILDING INDUSTRY 
The Committee finds that the shipbuilding industry is facing certain financial a nd 
infrastructural bottlenecks.  The Committee notes from the reply of the Ministry that the 

64 
 
Union Cabinet has on  9th December, 2015 approved Shipbuilding Financial Assistance 
Policy for Indian shipyards for the period 2016 -26,  CCEA has approved this Ministry‟s 
proposal regarding settlement of subsidy claims,  providing of Right of First Refusal to 
Indian shipyards while procuring or repairing vessels meant for Governmental or own use 
till 2025 and grant of infrastructure status to In dian shipbuilding industry are some key 
initiatives taken by the Government of India to provide a boost to the shipbuilding industry 
of India. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry must revisit its 
strategies and revamp its policies in ord er to support the indigenous manufacturers of 
shipbuilding parts under the Make in India campaign.           (Para: 48) 
The Committee would like the Ministry to assess the current financial status of the 
Financial Assistance Policy for Shipbuilding and wou ld recommend the Ministry to take 
effective steps to resolve the frequent occurring of NPAs within a specified time -frame in 
order to maintain revenues from the shipbuild ing in the profitable column of the balance 
sheet of the shipping industry.              (Para: 49) 
SHIP-REPAIR INDUSTRY 
 The Committee takes note of the steps envisaged to be taken to tap the huge 
potential of Indian Ship repair market and observes that the Ministry of Finance should be 
approached to grant deemed export status to ship repa ir industry, keeping in view saving 
of foreign exchange.                (Para: 51) 
The Committee is of the view that ship repair capacity essentially reflects capability 
in terms of the number of ships repaired and maximum size of ship that can be repaired  in 
terms of DWT. According to a Report „Statistics of India‟s Shipbuilding and Ship 
repairing Industry‟ by the Ministry of Ports, Shipping and Waterways, in 2018 -19, a total 
of 706 ships were repaired out of which 341 ships were repaired by the private se ctor 
shipyards and 365 ships were repaired by the public sector shipyards against 528 ships 
repaired in 2017 -18. However, t he COVID -19 pandemic affected ship building and ship 
repair facilities globally to a great extent. The pandemic has disrupted almost every area of 
the shipping industry, after a promising 2019. All levels of operations were affected by yard 
closures, logistical challenges and delay in surveys. The Committee would, therefore, 

65 
 
recommend to the Ministry to revamp and revisit its policies/ strategies to give a boost to 
the ship repairing industry of India. Programmes should be implemented aiming towards 
the revenue and employment generation.             (Para: 52) 
The Ministry should apprise the Committee of the Port -wise details of the ship  
repairing facilities. Further, what are the reasons for no ship repairing facilities at many 
Major Ports of the country and the steps taken/ being taken by the Ministry to addre ss 
such issues.                 (Para: 53) 
PUBLIC PRIVATE PARTNERSHIP PROJECTS 
The Committee note sthat Shipping industry in India is subjected to multiple taxes 
as compared to leading maritime nations due to which shipping companies are not 
attracted to invest in India. The Committee observes that it is critical for the growth of 
Shipping in India that a level playing field is created as comapred to other maritime 
nations in respect of taxes. The Committee , accordingly, recommends that the Ministry 
should take effective steps to modify relevant policies with a view to formulate a ne w tax 
regime in line with other tax regimes of leading maritime nations.         (Para: 59) 
The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry and appreciates the initiatives taken 
by it to encourage private sector participation in India‟s Maritime sector.   The Committee 
also takes note of the fact that there are about 200 non -Major Ports along India‟s coastline 
which are under the overall jurisdiction of the respective State Governments.   The 
Committee would, therefore, desire that the Ministry should make more  efforts to make 
financing available to private sector for development and modernization of non -Major 
Ports and  investing in the maritime sector in the country.          (Para: 60) 
The Committee also desires that a specialized maritime fund for supporting  PPP 
must be developed to enable raising long term funds in the domestic and international 
markets at competitive rates. The fund can be utilized for financing Inland Waterways 
operations & vessel financing; setting up and modernizing shipyards; setting up  ship 
repair/ shipbuilding facilities; promoting cruise tourism; and setting up new Ports and 
jetties through PPP. The fund can further be utilized to promote innovation and support 
start-ups and technology companies in the shipping sector.          (Para: 61) 

66 
 
The Committee observes that currently the private sector is facing challenges 
related to vessel financing and this has restricted the supply side of vessels in shipping 
sector. Therefore, it is crucial that the benefits under the tonnage tax scheme sh ould be 
extended to vessels registered under the Inland Vessels Act, 1917 which would serve as a 
strong incentive for the PPP. The Ministry should also normalize the tariff rates in order to 
attract private investment and to provide a level playing field for the Ports, whether Major, 
Minor or Private Ports of the country.             (Para: 62) 
PROMOTION OF COASTAL SHIPPING 
  The Committee is of the considered view that coastal shipping is a fuel efficient and 
an environment friendly mode that can ease traffic congestion. Despite having an extensive 
network of inland waterways in the form of rivers, canals, backwaters and creek s, freight 
transportation by waterways is highly under -utilized. Waterways currently contribute 
around 6% to India's transportation modal mix, which is significantly less than that in 
developed economies and some of the developing economies as well. The Co mmittee, 
therefore, recommends that availability of dedicated infrastructure will go a long way in 
promoting coastal shipping as a mode of freight transportation. Hence infrastructure at 
Ports and supporting infrastructure using rail/road and waterways to facilitate coastal 
movement should be created which includes development of dedicated coastal berths, 
bunkering and storage at Ports and creation of supporting hinterland transport 
infrastructure with last mile connectivity.            (Para: 65) 
According to a study by Global Consultants McKinsey & Co and AECOM for the 
Union Ministry of Ports, Shipping & Waterways, optimizing the logistics flow for key 
commodities by 2025 could save Rs 30,000 -40,000 crore. It further recommended for 
creation of more capacity at Major Ports and a logistics aggregator company to consolidate 
the Shipping supply chain. The Report further stated that coastal shipping capacity can 
handle 150 -250 million tonnes annually of cargo comprising coal, cement, iron and steel, 
food grain and fertilizer. The Committee would, therefore, recommend to the Ministry to 
study the Report and formulate appropriate policies/ schemes based on it to promote 
coastal shipping.                (Para: 66) 
DEVELOPMENT OF INLAND WATERWAYS  

67 
 
  Inland Waterways is widely recognized as a fuel efficient, environment friendly and 
cost effective mode, especially for bulk goods but has largely remained underdeveloped. 
The Committee is of the view that the Indian Ports are facing problem of connectivity 
through rail/ road and it is therefore necessary that Inland Waterways should be developed 
at an increased pace. The Committee appreciates the efforts of Ministry of Ports, Shipping 
& Waterways in implementing JMVP for capacity augmentation of navigation on NW -1. 
The Co mmittee recommends that an effective, efficient and a dedicated monitoring 
mechanism must be developed by the Ministry to address the bottlenecks being faced in the 
implementation of Inland Waterway projects.            (Para: 71) 
The Committee would like the Ministry to share the details of the upcoming projects 
in this regard. The Committee desires to know whether the ongoing projects have 
witnessed any time escalation and cost overruns.            (Para: 72) 
 
INFRASTRUCTURE DEVELOPMENT AT THE PORTS FOR CRUISE SHIPPING 
  
Cruise tourism in India is still a nascent industry, though we have a huge 
opportunity to capture the market because geographically, India is strategically located 
between Western Europe and Asia and every ship to Europe has to pass through it. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends that in order to enable the cruise sector to reshape the 
Indian travel industry, the Government must revamp the country‟s current Port 
infrastructure, set up dedicated terminals to cater to the needs of tour ists and undertake 
riverfront development on a massive scale. The Ministry of Ports, Shipping and Waterways 
should coordinate with the Ministry of Tourism in order to propose and develop more 
cruise tourism terminals in the country.             (Para: 79) 
The Committee would  like the Ministry to explore the possibility of following  the 
Maldivian model in places in the Andaman and Nicobar Islands and Lakshadweep Islands 
and facilitating leasing of islands to local  and foreign resort developers for tourism      
purposes. The Ministry should also take steps to set up tourist terminals for both domestic 
and foreign tourists at all the commercial Ports of the country. The Ministry should also 

68 
 
chalk out plans/ policies to promote river cruise tourism also espec ially in the non - Coastal 
States of the country. The Committee should be apprised of the progress made in this 
regard.                         (Para: 80) 
COCHIN SHIPYARD  
  The Committee appreciates the efforts of the Ministry for the construction of the 
New Dry Dock and „New Cruise Terminal- Sagarika‟ at Cochin Shipyard under the “Make 
in India” campaign. The Committee, therefore, recommends that Ministry should 
effectively monitor the progress of such projects so that bottlenecks being faced can be 
addressed before implementation of more such projects at other Ports of the country. 
      (Para: 86) 
The Committee notes from the reply of  the Ministry that CSL is facing issues 
relating to return of migrant labour force, blockage of supply chains of construc tion 
materials like TMT bars, cements, machineries and equipment from other States. The 
Committee would, therefore, recommend to the Ministry that CSL should launch adequate 
training programmes to address the shortage of manpower. The Ministry should furth er 
hire employees with quality industrial training and depute them at Major Ports of the 
country to tackle issues arising out of blockage of industrial supply chains.            (Para: 87) 
MODEL CONCESSION AGREEMENT  
The Committee observes that the resourc es required to build the necessary Port 
infrastructure are huge and therefore, supplementation of public investment by private 
sector investment through PPP mode is inevitable. It is in this context that successful 
working of PPP model assumes added signif icance in realizing the targeted Port capacity 
augmentation. The Committee, therefore, welcomes the changes ushered in by the MCA, 
2018. While endorsing the revised MCA, 2018, the Committee desires to know as to what 
extent the Model Concession Agreement, 2018 (amended) has succeeded in obviating the 
problems faced in execution of PPP projects and make the investment in Port sector 
attractive. Further, the Ministry should apprise the Committee of the provisions in MCA, 

69 
 
2018 which are proving to be impedimen ts in the implementation and maintenance of PPP 
projects.                (Para: 90) 
Since the order of private investment required to achieve the Port capacity augmentation 
and the number of PPP projects awarded are high, the Committee recommends that a 
“Single Window” approval system should be put in place so that the possibility of delays 
and cost escalation could be obviated. Though the Committee welcomes capacity 
augmentation in the Port sector by private sector investment, it would exhort the Ministry 
to ensure that such an arrangement does not lead to creation of private monopolies in the 
Port sector. The Committee desires to know whether the Port sector gets treatment on par 
with other infrastructure sector like roads and whether any proposal to treat  the entire 
industry and ancillary activities for the purpose of tax concession is under considerat ion of 
the Government.                
 (Para: 91) 
MARITIME TRAINING IN INDIA 
 The Committee observes that the Indian Port sector has undergone substantial 
technological developments during the last 10 years to match with world class standards. 
With the changes in the Port scenario and introduction of high capacity Port equipment, 
there is a need to redefine job description for each level as the strength of man power has 
not changed much. The Committee, therefore, recommends that IMU should collaborate 
with International Institutes to carry out a training need analysis for such segment  of 
employees.                 (Para: 96) 
The Committee would also recommend th at the Ministry should conduct studies to 
work out annual manpower requirement and supply in the Indian Port sector and 
formulate suitable approach to augment the supply of required manpower to cater to 
India‟s needs being the 16 th largest Maritime country. The Ministry should assess the 
performance of the maritime training institutes and take strict actions if any of the 
stipulated norms are being violated. The Committee would further recommend setting up 
of more CICMT in collaboration with IITs/ NITs/ IIMs to provide opportunities relating to 
applied research and development for the inland and coastal waterways sector alongwith 

70 
 
the knowledge of business management especially in the field of industrial block chain 
supply technology.               (Para: 97) 
TARIFFS / PORT RELATED CHARGES AT INDIAN PORTS  
  The Committee recommends that the Ministry of Ports, Shipping and Waterways in 
coordination with the Ministry of Finance should formulate a „One Tariff Policy for all 
Ports‟ in order to provide a level playing field to all the Major and non -Major Ports of the 
country. The Ministry should also apprise the Committee of the initiatives being taken/ 
taken to control Port-related charges of Private Ports.         (Para: 104) 
The Ministry of Ports, Shipping and Waterways should carry out financial 
assessments of the Port- fuel related policies of India and  also draw conclusions from the 
policies being implemented in different countries such as United Kingdom, U.S.A., 
Singapore and Japan. A detailed Report must be prepared in this regard.     (Para: 105) 
MARINE SAFETY ISSUES 
  The Committee recommends that in order to ensure a comprehensive safety and 
security regime at Ports, the Ministry should find out the best practices being followed by 
the international Ports in developed countries and incorporate them while formulating any 
policy for improvement of safety measures in India‟s maritime sector.  Management of 
leadership, effective training, measurement of safety performances, continuous 
improvement in safety techniques, focus on learning and a visible commitment  towards 
safety are some of the guidelines that must be incorporated by the Ministry in its future 
policy formulation.              (Para: 108) 
The Ministry should adopt technologies from the foreign nations to address the 
incidents of oil spills. The Mini stry should also take steps to ensure safety and security of 
seafarers.               (Para: 109) 
IMPACT OF COVID-19 PANDEMIC ON SHIPPING SECTOR 
 The Committee observes that the Shipping industry is emerging out from the 
impact of Covid -19 pandemic. With b usiness coming almost to a standstill, the 

71 
 
unprecedented crisis had impacted each and every segment of the shipping industry 
especially the EXIM trade, ship building, ship repairing and cruise shipping sector. The 
Shipping sector has the potential to stimu late other economy through its backward and 
forward linkages and contributes significantly towards generation of revenues as well as 
the creation of jobs in the country. The Committee would, therefore, recommend that the 
Ministry must monitor the status of  implementation of the ongoing/ stalled projects which 
got impacted due the pandemic and should issue fresh deadlines for their timely completion 
in order to avoid cost overruns.            (Para: 113) 
STATUTORY PROVISIONS/ GUIDELINES 
The Committee impresses upon the Ministry, the imperative need to ensure that the 
recommendations made by the Committee are given serious thought and deliberation; and 
due consideration should be given to the facts and the issues involved therein. Therefore, it 
is necessary th at all possible steps are taken to ensure that they are implemented in letter 
and spirit, within a designated time frame. Further, the Committee recommends that the 
statutory provisions/ guidelines, wherever needed and necessary for the implementation of 
the recommendations, should be formulated by the Ministry without any delay. The 
Committee desires that in case of any difficulty/ problems faced by the Ministry in the 
implementation of the recommendations, the Committee may be apprised thereof.  
                              (Para: 114) 
***  
  

 
 
 
 
 
MINUTES 
 
 

 
72 
 
 
V 
FIFTH MEETING 
The Committee met at 2:30 P.M. on Monday, the 23 rd December, 2019 in Committee 
Room Number E, Basement, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
Members present: 
1. Shri T.G. Venkatesh                   - Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Prasanna Acharya 
3. Shri Sambhaji Chhatrapati 
4. Shri Vinay Dinu Tendulkar 
LOK SABHA 
5. Shrimati Veena Devi 
      6.   Shri Rahul Kaswan 
      7.   Ms. Goddeti Madhavi 
      8.   Shri Ramesh Chandra Majhi 
      9.   Shri Sunil Baburao Mendhe 
    10.   Shri Tirath Singh Rawat 
    11.   Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
    12.   Shri Dushyant Singh 
    13.   Shri Ramdas Chandrabhanji Tadas 
    14.   Shri Krupal Balaji Tumane 
    15.   Shri Dinesh Chandra Yadav 
SECRETARIAT 
      
Shri J. Sundriyal, Joint Secretary 
Shri P. Narayanan, Director 
Ms. Catherine John L., Under Secretary 
Shri K.V. Ramana Rao, Committee Officer 
 
Witnesses  
            I. *                *                      * 
         II. MINISTRY OF SHIPPING 
1. Shri Gopal Krishna Secretary  
2. 
 
Shri Rajat Sachar  
 
 
* Relates to other matters 
Sr. Economic Adviser 
 

 
73 
 
3. Shri Rabindra Kumar Agarwal Joint Secretary (Ports) 
4. Shri Satinder Pal Singh Joint Secretary (Shipping) 
5. Shri Kailash Aggarwal Joint Secretary (SM) 
6. Shri Bhushan Kumar Joint Secretary (PPP) 
7. Shri Lucas L. Kamsuan Joint Secretary (Parl.) 
DIRECTORATE GENERAL OF LIGHTHOUSES AND LIGHTSHIPS 
8. Shri Ellappan Murthy Director General  
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the meeting of the Committee and 
informed the Members that the Secretary, * * * and Secretary, Ministry of Shipping have  been 
invited to apprise the Committee on the  subjects viz., „* * *‟ and „Promotion of Infrastructure in 
India‟s Maritime sector‟, since  the Committee had  selected the se subjects for detailed 
examination.  
I.  *  *  * 
3. *  *  *. 
4.     *  *  *. 
5. *  *  *. 
6. *  *  *. 
(The witnesses then withdrew) 
II. Oral Evidence of the Secretary, Ministry of Shipping  
7. The Chairman welcomed the Secretary, Ministry of Shipping and other senior officials 
from the Ministry to the meeting. He specifically mentioned about the vital role of Shipping 
industry in strengthening country‟s export and import trade. He highlighted various issues related 
to shipbuilding, containerization and marine safety. He further underlined the importance of  
* Relates to other matters 

 
74 
 
Cruise tourism in today‟s economy and sought to know the future action plans of the Ministry. 
The Chairman then requested the Secretary to make a presentation on the subject. 
8. In his presentation, the Secretary, Ministry of Shipping apprised the Committee about the 
attached offices, autonomous bodies and Public Sector Undertakings under the domain of the 
Ministry of Shipping. He elaborated upon the capacity and traffic handled at major Indian Ports 
during the last five years. He also dwelt upon the importance of Public Private Partnership (PPP) 
model in Shipping sector by providing statistics of projects under operation and its 
implementation at major Indian Ports. He also shared the significant features of the Sagarmala 
Programme and provided an overview of the p rojects under the said programme . He also 
apprised the Committee about  the current status of  ship-building, ship-repair and ship -breaking 
industry.  
9. While referring to Cruise tourism, the Secretary informed the Committee that a number 
of domestic and in ternational cruise ships and passengers  are being  handled now-a-days in 
Indian ports.  He also mentioned about the current and proposed domestic and international 
routes, with new destinations being developed in Maharashtra, Kerala, Gujarat and Lakshadweep 
islands. He elaborated upon the First International Cruise Ship Home in India, First Domestic 
Cruise Liner with Indian Flag and about the arrival of the First Domestic Luxury Cruise Liner in 
India. He concluded his deposition by mentioning about  the initiatives taken by the Government 
of India in improving ease in Maritime business such as e -invoice, e-delivery order and creation 
of centralized web based port community system. 
10. Members of the Committee raised various queries  some of which were replied  to by the 
Secretary. The Chairman  then directed that written replies to the  queries which remain ed 
unanswered may be sent to the Secretariat within a week. 
(The witnesses then withdrew) 
11. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept. 
12.    The meeting adjourned at 5:21 P.M. 
 
 

 
75 
 
XXII 
TWENTY SECOND MEETING 
The Committee met at 3:00 P.M. on Monday, the 26 th July, 2021 in Main Committee 
Room, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
Members present: 
1.    Shri T.G. Venkatesh                   - Chairman 
  
RAJYA SABHA 
  
2.    Shri Vinay Dinu Tendulkar   
3.    Shri Sushil Kumar Modi  
  
LOK SABHA 
  
4.    Shri Anto Antony 
5.    Shri Margani Bharat 
6.    Shri Tapir Gao 
7.    Shri Ramesh Chandra Majhi 
8.    Shri Sunil Baburao Mendhe 
9.    Shri S. S. Palanimanickam 
10.  Shri Sunil Kumar Pintu 
11.  Shri Prince Raj 
12.  Shri Dushyant Singh 
13.  Shri Ramdas Chandrabhanji Tadas 
14.  Shri Manoj Kumar Tiwari 
15.  Shri Krupal Balaji Tumane 
  
SECRETARIAT 
      Dr. Shikha Darbari, JS&FA 
      Shri P. Narayanan, Director 
      Shri Rajendra Prasad Shukla, Additional Director 
      Ms. Catherine John L., Under Secretary 
  
Witnesses:- 
MINISTRY OF PORTS, SHIPPING AND WATERWAYS 
 
1.   Dr. Sanjeev Ranjan Secretary 
2.   Shri Sanjay Bandopadhyaya Additional Secretary 
3.   Shri Vikram Singh Joint Secretary (P) 
4.   Shri Bhushan Kumar Joint Secretary (SM) 

 
76 
 
5.   Shri Sunil Kumar Singh Adviser (Stats) 
6.   Shri Lucas L. Kamsuan Joint Secretary (Parl.) 
7.   Shri H.N. Aswath Joint Adviser (Ports) 
8.   Shri Arvind Choudhary Economic Adviser 
  
At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the meeting of the Committee. The 
Chairman then informed the Members that the  agenda of today‟s meeting is  to hear the 
Secretary, Ministry of Ports, Shipping and Waterways  on the subject „Promotion of 
Infrastructure in India‟s Maritime Sector‟. 
Oral Evidence of Secretary, Ministry of Ports, Shipping and Waterways 
2.   The Chairman welcomed the Secretary, Ministry of Ports, Shipping and Waterways and other 
senior officials from the Ministry to the meeting. The Secretary informed the Committee of the 
attached/ subordinate offices such as Dire ctorate General of Shipping and Andaman 
Lakshadweep Harbour Works. He further informed the Committee that 95% of the EXIM trade 
by volume and 70% trade by value is handled by the Indian Ports. 
3.    The Secretary then apprised the Committee of the capacity of cargo handled/ traffic at Major 
and non-Major Ports of the country. He informed the Committee of the challenges being faced in 
implementation of Ease of Doing Programme such as duplication of paper work because of 
absence of unified online platform. He  then apprised the Committee of the proposed initiatives 
such as Unified IT Logistics Programme, Enterprise Business System (EBS), e -Gatepass 
automation and e- Delivery order for ease of doing business. He also threw light upon the current 
status of PPP pr ojects in the Port sector alongwith the details of projects which are under 
operation/ implementation stage. 
4.   He also stated the objectives of Sagarmala Programme which includes reduction of logistics 
cost for EXIM and domestic trade; creation of emplo yment opportunities and development of 
domestic waterways in the country. The Secretary then elaborated upon the current status of 
road/ rail connectivity projects under the Sagarmala Programme. He also apprised the Committee 
of the Port -Led Industrialization projects such as Smart Industrial Port City at Deendayal Port 
and Paradip Port; and Special Economic Zone at JNPT. He then threw light upon the guidelines 
to promote the use of floating jetties and RoRo & RoPax jetties.  He also apprised the Committee 

 
77 
 
of the first seaplane service started between Statue of Unity (Kevadia) and Sabarmati river front 
on 31st October, 2020. 
5.   The Secretary then threw light upon the current status of shipbuilding and ship repairing 
industry in India. He also made a mentio n of some of the features of the Shipbuilding Financial 
Assistance Scheme in this regard. He further stated that in order to promote cruise shipping in 
India, a joint task force with officials from Ministry of Ports, Shipping and Waterways and 
Ministry of Tourism has been constituted. 
6.   Members of the Committee raised various queries, some of which were replied to by the 
Secretary. The Chairman then directed that written replies to the queries which remained 
unanswered may be sent to the Secretariat within a week. 
7.   A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept. 
8.   The meeting adjourned at 6:00 P.M. 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
78 
 
XXV 
TWENTY FIFTH MEETING 
The Committee met at 3:00 P.M. on Monday, the 2 nd August, 2021 in Main Committee 
Room, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
Members present: 
1.     Shri T.G. Venkatesh                   - Chairman 
  
RAJYA SABHA 
  
2.    Shri Prasanna Acharya 
3.    Shri Sambhaji Chhatrapati 
4.    Shri Vinay Dinu Tendulkar   
5.    Shri Sushil Kumar Modi  
  
LOK SABHA 
  
6.     Shri Rahul Kaswan 
7.     Shri Sunil Baburao Mendhe 
8.     Shri Sunil Kumar Pintu 
9.     Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
10.   Shri Dushyant Singh 
11.   Shri Manoj Tiwari 
12.   Shri Krupal Balaji Tumane 
  
SECRETARIAT 
      Shri P. Narayanan, Director 
      Shri Dinesh Singh, Additional Director 
      Shri Rajendra Prasad Shukla, Additional Director 
      Ms. Catherine John L., Under Secretary 
  
Witnesses:- 
  
MINISTRY OF PORTS, SHIPPING AND WATERWAYS 
1.   Shri Lucas L. Kamsuan Joint Secretary (Parl.) 
DIRECTORATE GENERAL OF SHIPPING 
2. Shri Amitabh Kumar                                  Director General 
3. Shri Kumar Sanjay Bariar                          Additional Director General 
 
 

 
79 
 
SHIPPING CORPORATION OF INDIA 
4. Mrs. H.K. Joshi                                          Chairman 
SAGARMALA DEVELOPMENT COMPANY LIMITED 
5. Shri Dilip Kumar Gupta                            Managing Director 
CONTAINER CORPORATION OF INDIA LTD. 
6. Shri V. Kalyana Rama                               CMD 
7. Shri Sanjay Swarup                                    Director 
ANDAMAN LAKSHADWEEP HARBOUR WORKS 
8. Shri T.N. Krishnamoorthy                          Chief Engineer 
INDIAN PRIVATE PORTS AND TERMINALS ASSOCIATION 
9.   Shri Devki Nandan                                 Sr. Vice President 
10.  Shri Gajendra P. Singh                           Vice President 
J.M. BAXI GROUP 
11.  Shri Sandeep Wadhwa                           Regional Director 
ADANI PORTS AND SPECIAL ECONOMIC ZONE LTD. 
12.  Shri Subrat Tripathy                               CEO (Ports) 
At the outset, the Chairman extended a very warm welcome to the Members of the 
Committee. *** The Chairman then informed the Members that the  second agenda of today‟s 
meeting is to hear the stakeholders of Shipping industry on the subject „Promotion of 
Infrastructure in India‟s Maritime Sector‟. 
2.   *  *  *. 
Oral Evidence of stakeholders of Shipping sector 
3.   The Chairman welcomed  Shri Amitabh Kumar, Director  General of Shipping;  Mrs. H. K. 
Joshi, Chairman, Shipping Corporation of India; Shri D. K. Gupta, Managing Director, 
Sagarmala Developemnt Company Limited;  Shri V.K. Rama, CMD, Container Corporation of 
India; Shri T.N. Krishnamoorthy, Chief Engineer, Andaman Lakshadweep Harbour Works; Shri 
* Relates to other matters 

 
80 
 
Devki Nandan, Sr.Vice President, Indian Private Ports and Terminals Association; Shri Sandeep 
Wadhwa, Regional Director, JM Baxi Group; and Shri Subrat Tripathy, CEO,   Adani Ports and 
Special Economic Zone Ltd; to the meeting of the Committee. 
4.    The DG Shipping apprised the Committee of the functions of Directorate General of 
Shipping (DGS) such as registration and survey of ships; organizing skill development 
examination and certification programmes for seafarers; implementation of International 
Conventions of Safety and Pollution; and ratification of International Maritime Organization 
conventions. He then informed the Committee of the important statistics relating to the Indian 
seafarers and DGS approved Maritime Training Institutes. He then threw light upon the 
achievements of DGS such as deployment of emergency towing vessels, launch of Swacch Sagar 
Portal and ratification of Hong Kong Ship Recycling Convention, 2009. 
5.   He also appris ed the Committee of the measures undertaken   to deal with the Covid -19 
pandemic such as e -learning, online exit examinations, e -pass facility for travel and issuance of 
guidelines/ SOPs to ships. He also threw light upon the proposed initiatives such as re duction of 
GST on marine diesel fuel, relaxation in emigration processes and financing of ships. The 
Chairman, Shipping Corporation of India (SCI) informed the Committee of the current status of 
the number of vessels and the deadweight of SCI. 
6.   The Man aging Director, Sagarmala Development Company Limited (SDCL) apprised the 
Committee of the fact that SDCL was formed with a specific mandate and objective to develop 
and formulate projects emanating from National Perspective Plan (NPP), providing funding 
window to residual projects and for assisting Projects Special Purpose Vehicles set up by the 
Central Ministries /State Governments /Ports /State Maritime Boards etc. with the underlying 
objective of promoting Port -led development in the country. He then th rew light upon the 
achievements of SDCL such as development of Port -rail connectivity projects and    support 
provided  to Ministry of Ports, Shipping & Waterways by way of undertaking the procurement 
process for selection of maritime consultants. 
7.  The CMD, Container Corporation of India Limited informed the Committee of the fact 
that the current share of railways in total containerized cargo movement in India is between 25% 
to 27%. He then shared details of the  cargo handled at the Major/ Minor Ports of India. He 
further emphasized upon the fact that the  Ports should implement automated terminal 
management system to interchange the cargo details with the container train operators, on the 
similar lines like customs. He informed the Committee of the future projects at Dholera, Nargol 
etc. for development of Port infrastructure alongwith the establishment of rail linkages to Minor 
Ports such as Hazira, Rozi, Bedi, Porbandar. 

 
81 
 
8.   The Chief Engineer, Andaman Lakshadweep Harbour Works (ALHW) briefed the 
Committee about the activities of ALHW regarding development of tourism based Port 
infrastructure. The representatives of Indian Private Ports and Terminals Association threw light 
upon the significance of implementation of PPP projects in the shipping sector. Th ey also stated 
some features of the Maritime India Vision- 2030 and Model Concession Agreement, 2018. 
9.  The CEO (Ports), Adani Ports and Special Economic Zone Ltd. informed the Committee 
of the cargo distribution at all Indian Major Ports. He also shared  some initiatives for 
modernization of Port sector, Ease of Doing Business, development of Inland Waterways in 
North-Eastern region, reduction in carbon footprint and development of Port based industries in 
the country. He also apprised the Committee of th e Port -road connectivity projects which are 
being implemented in coordination with NHAI. 
10.   Members of the Committee raised various queries, some of which were replied to by the 
Secretary. The Chairman then directed that written replies to the queries w hich remained 
unanswered may be sent to the Secretariat within a week. 
11. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept. 
12. The meeting adjourned at 5:13 P.M. 
   
  

 
82 
 
XXVI 
TWENTY SIXTH MEETING 
The Committee met at 3:00 P.M. on Tuesday, the 3rd August, 2021 in Committee Room - 
D, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
Members present: 
1. Shri T.G. Venkatesh                   - Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Sushil Kumar Modi 
3. Dr. Sonal Mansingh 
4. Shri Tiruchi Siva 
5. Shri Vinay Dinu Tendulkar 
  
LOK SABHA 
6. Shri Anto Antony 
7. Shri Margani Bharat 
8. Shri Ramesh Chandra Majhi 
9. Shri K. Muraleedharan 
10. Shri S.S. Palanimanickam 
11. Shri Sunil Kumar Pintu 
12. Shri Prince Raj 
13. Shri Tirath Singh Rawat 
14. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
15. Shri Dushyant Singh 
16. Shri Ramdas Chandrabhanji Tadas 
 
SECRETARIAT   
Shri P. Narayanan, Director 
Shri Dinesh Singh, Additional Director 
Shri Rajendra Prasad Shukla, Additional Director 
Ms. Catherine John L., Under Secretary 
 

 
83 
 
2.        At the outset, the Chairman extended a very warm welcome to the Members of the 
Committee. He informed the Members that the agenda of the meeting was to adopt and consider 
the draft Report s of the Committee on * * * and on the subject „Promotion of Infrastructure in 
India's Maritime Sector‟ and sought their views on these draft Reports. 
3.      The Committee, thereafter, considered the draft Report s and after a brief deliberation, 
adopted the same with some changes. 
4.       The Committee then decided to present/lay the Report s of the Committee on  * * * and on 
the subject „Promotion of Infrastructure in India's Maritime Sector ‟ to bo th the Houses of 
Parliament on 4 th August, 2021. The Committee, accordingly, authorized Shri T.G. Venkatesh, 
Chairman and in his absence, Shri Derek O‟Brien, M.P. to present the Report s in Rajya Sabha. 
 Shri Tapir Gao, M.P. and in his absence, Shri Margani Bharat, M.P. was authorized to lay the 
above mentioned Reports on the Table of Lok Sabha. 
5.         The meeting adjourned at 3:45 P.M. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
________________________ 
*Relates to other matters  
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
ANNEXURE 
  

 
84 
 
              
List of witnesses who appeared before the Department- related Parliamentary Standing 
Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture 
23rd December, 2019 
I. MINISTRY OF SHIPPING 
1. Shri Gopal Krishna Secretary  
2. 
 
Shri Rajat Sachar  Sr. Economic Adviser 
3. Shri Rabindra Kumar Agarwal Joint Secretary (Ports) 
4. Shri Satinder Pal Singh Joint Secretary (Shipping) 
5. Shri Kailash Aggarwal Joint Secretary (SM) 
6. Shri Bhushan Kumar Joint Secretary (PPP) 
7. Shri Lucas L. Kamsuan Joint Secretary (Parl.) 
II. DIRECTORATE GENERAL OF LIGHTHOUSES AND LIGHTSHIPS 
8. 
 
 
 
Shri Ellappan Murthy Director General  
 
26th July, 2021 
MINISTRY OF PORTS, SHIPPING AND WATERWAYS 
2.   Dr. Sanjeev Ranjan Secretary 
3.   Shri Sanjay Bandopadhyaya Additional Secretary 
4.   Shri Vikram Singh Joint Secretary (P) 
5.   Shri Bhushan Kumar Joint Secretary (SM) 
6.   Shri Sunil Kumar Singh Adviser (Stats) 
7.   Shri Lucas L. Kamsuan Joint Secretary (Parl.) 
8.   Shri H.N. Aswath Joint Adviser (Ports) 
9.   Shri Arvind Choudhary Economic Adviser 
 

 
85 
 
2nd August, 2021 
       MINISTRY OF PORTS, SHIPPING AND WATERWAYS 
2.   Shri Lucas L. Kamsuan Joint Secretary (Parl.) 
DIRECTORATE GENERAL OF SHIPPING 
4. Shri Amitabh Kumar                                  Director General 
5. Shri Kumar Sanjay Bariar                          Additional Director General 
SHIPPING CORPORATION OF INDIA 
5. Mrs. H.K. Joshi                                          Chairman 
SAGARMALA DEVELOPMENT COMPANY LIMITED 
6. Shri Dilip Kumar Gupta                            Managing Director 
CONTAINER CORPORATION OF INDIA LTD. 
8. Shri V. Kalyana Rama                               CMD 
9. Shri Sanjay Swarup                                    Director 
ANDAMAN LAKSHADWEEP HARBOUR WORKS 
9. Shri T.N. Krishnamoorthy                          Chief Engineer 
INDIAN PRIVATE PORTS AND TERMINALS ASSOCIATION 
9.   Shri Devki Nandan                                 Sr. Vice President 
10.  Shri Gajendra P. Singh                           Vice President 
J.M. BAXI GROUP 
11.  Shri Sandeep Wadhwa                           Regional Director 
ADANI PORTS AND SPECIAL ECONOMIC ZONE LTD. 
12.  Shri Subrat Tripathy                               CEO (Ports) 
 
*** 
 