PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA 146
DEPARTMENT -RELA TED PARLIAMENT ARY STANDING
COMMITTEE  ON TRANSPOR T, TOURISM  AND CULTURE
ONE HUNDRED AND FORTY-SIXTH REPORT
ON
ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE 
COMMITTEE CONTAINED IN ITS ONE HUNDRED
AND THIRTY SEVENTH REPORT ON DEMANDS FOR 
GRANTS 2008-09 OF THE MINISTRY OF CULTURE
TH 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 19 DECEMBER, 2008)
TH 
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 19 DECEMBER, 2008)
TH 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 19 DECEMBER, 2008)
TH 
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 19 DECEMBER, 2008)
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
DECEMBER, 2008/AGRAHAYANA, 1930 (SAKA)DECEMBER, 2008/AGRAHAYANA, 1930 (SAKA)

Website:http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail:rsc-tt@sansad.nic.in

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA  SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE
ONE HUNDRED FORTY-SIXTH REPORT
ON
ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV A TIONS OF THE
COMMITTEE CONTAINED IN ITS ONE HUNDRED
AND THIRTY SEVENTH REPORT ON DEMANDS FOR
GRANTS 2008-09 OF THE MINISTRY OF CULTURE
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 19 TH DECEMBER, 2008)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 19 TH DECEMBER, 2008)
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
DECEMBER, 2008/AGRAHAYANA, 1930 (SAKA)


CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ......................................................................................... (i)-(ii)
2. I NTRODUCTION ........................................................................................................................ (iii)
3. R EPORT OF THE C OMMITTEE .................................................................................................. 1—26
4. O BSERV A TIONS/CONCLUSIONS /RECOMMENDATIONS — A T A G LANCE .................................... 27—31
5. A NNEXURE ............................................................................................................................... 33—47
6. M INUTES ................................................................................................................................. 49—52

(i)
COMPOSITION OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE
(2008-09)
1. Shri Sitaram Yechury – Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Satish Kumar Sharma
3. Shrimati Jayanthi Natarajan
4. Prof. Alka Balram Kshatriya
5. Shri Shanta Kumar
6. Shrimati Hema Malini
*7. Shri Shahid Siddiqui
8. Shri Naresh Gujral
9. Shri Birendra Prasad Baishya
10. Shri Biswajit Daimary
LOK SABHA
11. Shri Anandrao Vithoba Adsul
12. Shri Sukhbir Singh Badal
13. Shri Joachim Baxla
14. Shri Sartaj Singh Chhatwal
15. Shri N.S.V. Chitthan
16. Shri Adhir Chowdhury
17. Dr. K. Dhanaraju
18. Shrimati Priya Dutt
19. Shri Dip Gogoi
20. Shri Prahlad Joshi
21. Shri P. Karunakaran
22. Dr. P.P. Koya
23. Dr. Ramkrishna Kusmaria
24. Shri Samik Lahiri
25. Shri Alok Kumar Mehta
26. Shri Hemlal Murmu
27. Shri Madan Lal Sharma
28. Shri Akshay Pratap Singh
29. Shri Dushyant Singh
30. Shri Rakesh Singh
31. Shri Suraj Singh
* Ceased to be a member of the Committee w.e.f.  26.11.2008.

(ii)
SECRETARIAT
Shri N.K. Singh, Joint Secretary
Shri Jagdish Kumar, Joint Director
Shri Swarabji B., Deputy Director
Shrimati Nidhi Chaturvedi, Committee Officer
(ii)

(iii)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman, Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport,
Tourism and Culture, having been authorised by the Committee to present on its behalf, do hereby
present this One Hundred and Forty Sixth Report on “Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee contained in its One Hundred and Thirty Seventh
Report on Demands for Grants 2008-09 of the Ministry of Culture”.
2. The One Hundred and Thirty Seventh Report of the Department-related Parliamentary
Standing Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture was presented to the Parliament on the
28th April, 2008.
3. The Action Taken Replies on the recommendations of the Committee contained on its
One Hundred and Thirty Seventh Report were received from the Ministry of Culture on the
5th September, 2008.
6. The Committee considered and adopted the Report at its meeting held on the
18th December, 2008.
SITARAM YECHURY
N
EW D ELHI; Chairman,
December 18, 2008 Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Agrahayana 27, 1930  (Saka) Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture.

1
REPORT
The Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Government on the
observations/recommendations as contained in its One Hundred and Thirty-seventh Report on
Demands for Grants (2008-09) of the Department of Culture, which was presented to the
Parliament on 28th April, 2008.
2. Action Taken Replies were received from the Government on 5th September, 2008 in
respect of all the observations/recommendations contained in the Report. The Replies have been
categorized as follows:—
Recommendations/observations that have been accepted by the Government:
Para Nos. 13, 14, 16, 19, 24, 26, 27, 29, 30, 34, 37, 40, 43, 49,
51, 54, 58, 61, 62, 65, 67, 70, 76, 80, 83, 86, 89, 91, 94, 95,
101, 105, 108, 113, 115, 119, 125, 126, 127, 129
Total–40
Recommendations/observations in respect of which replies of the Government have not been
accepted by the Committee:
Para Nos. T otal–Nil
Recommendations/observations in respect of which final replies of the Government are still
awaited:
Para Nos. 8, 12, 21, 32, 46, 73, 111 Total–7
3. The Committee desires that final replies in respect of the recommendations, which
have been categorized as interim replies by the Committee should be furnished to it at the
earliest.
4. On scrutiny of the Action Taken Replies, the Committee has made observations on each
item of the action taken/proposed to be taken by the Ministry. The recommendations of the
Committee contained in the One Hundred and Twentieth, action taken thereon by the Government
and recommendations/observations of the Committee on each item of action taken have been given
in the succeeding paragraphs.
Budget allocation and overall assessment of the financial performance for the year 2007-08
(Recommendation at Para 8)
5. The Committee notes that the expenditure trend during 2007-08 is not very satisfactory.
For the plan allocation, expenditure of Rs.370.39 crore has been incurred out of the RE of
Rs.520.00 crore. In the non-plan also, expenditure of Rs.298.00 crore has been incurred out of
Rs.460.00 crore upto 29th February, 2008. Thus, Rs.149.61 crore in plan and Rs.161.28 crore in
non-plan remained to be utilized in the month of March, 2008.
Reply of the Government
6. As against Rs.520.00 crore of RE, under Plan an expenditure of Rs.470.46 crore was incurred
upto 31st March, 2008 which constitutes 90.47% of RE. Under Non-Plan, an expenditure of
Rs.394.03 crore was incurred upto 31st March, 2008 which constitutes 85.66% of RE-2007-08.

2
Statements indicating organization/scheme-wise break up of actual expenditure under Plan and Non-
Plan Heads for 2007-08 are attached at Annexure ‘A’ and ‘B’.
Further recommendation/observation of the Committee
7. The Committee notes that the total expenditure incurred was 90.47% in plan and
85.66% in non-plan of RE allocation in the year 2007-08. It, however, emphasises the need
for achieving total utilization of funds every year.
(Recommendation at Para 12)
8. The Committee is unhappy to note that despite its concern and considered recommendation,
the Ministry of Finance has refused to review the budgetary allocations in the month of December
instead of in the month of September thereby subjecting the Ministry of Culture to financial cuts
at RE stage. The Committee observes that there is a greater need and scope for scrutiny of entire
exercise of budgetary process beginning from budgetary proposals in September by the Ministry
of Finance in respect of Ministry of Culture because of its special needs. The Committee feel that
the entire budgetary process and procedure involving about eight months has actually given both
to the evil of mis-utilisation of funds in a hurried manner and apprehension of losing valuable but
scarce financial resources made available to them by Ministry of Finance at the fag end of the
financial year. It appears that given the rigidity in budgetary exercise the Ministry of Finance has
failed to assess actual requirements of the Ministry of Culture for funds to be utilized for various
developmental purposes. The Committee is of the firm belief that the under utilization to a great
extent in the Ministry of Culture is the result of rigid financial practices and procedures. The
Committee therefore, recommends the Planning commission and Ministry of Finance for giving an
active consideration through a rigorous and rational scrutiny for reforming and rescheduling of the
present Budgetary procedures and practice as far the Ministry of Culture is concerned, so that the
final plan and non-plan allocations are conveyed to the Ministry and to respective institutions/
organizations by the month of December every year for effective and fruitful utilization of scarce
financial resources. Alternatively, the Committee recommends that the possibility may be explored
for provision of budget allocations for various activities may be converted as non-lapsable fund
taking into account the seasonal nature of work and activities undertaken by various institutions
under the Ministry of Culture.
Reply of the Government
9. The above recommendation was sent to Ministry of Finance (MoF) and Planning
Commission for their consideration. Planning Commission held a meeting on 9.07.2008 with
Ministry of Culture to discuss the above issue and decided that they would take up the matter with
MoF for a more empathetic view while reviewing the budget of the MoC at RE stage. A response
has also been received from MoF but they have expressed their inability to agree to the proposal.
The matter will be once again taken up with them during pre-budget discussions.
Further recommendation/observation of the Committee
10. The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry and wishes to know the reasons
Ministry of Finance has given for not agreeing to its proposal. The Committee further
recommends that the Ministry of Culture may pursue the matter with the Ministry of
Finance again and present the case of the Ministry of Culture in an effective way indicating
special nature of requirements and seasonal activities undertaken by various organizations
of Ministry of Culture.

3
(Recommendation at Para 13)
11. The Committee is happy to note that for the first time, allocation for the Ministry of Culture
has reached to four figures. The Committee feels that it is a good beginning for this vital sector
which has huge potential but yet to be explored. The Committee hopes that all the new schemes
and projects taken up by the Ministry during the financial year 2008-09 will be completed in a time
bound manner.
Reply of the Government
12. All Divisional Heads have been instructed for taking necessary action to follow up the
implementation of new schemes. Two new plan schemes have been launched and other schemes
are under various stages of approval. All efforts are being made to streamline the process, so as
to hasten the pace of various approvals. Regular reviews have been initiated which are expected
to yield the desired results.
Further recommendation/observation of the Committee
13. The Committee notes the initiatives taken by the Ministry and desires to know that
new plan schemes launched by the Ministry of Culture. The Ministry should also endeavour
to launch all the schemes as soon as they are approved.
(Recommendation at Para 14)
14. The Committee also recommends that possibility of organizing off-season festivals and
organizing Dance/Cultural Programmes throughout the year may be explored. The Ministry should
also explore for decentralization of some of the schemes which can help the Zonal Centres in
expediting their work. This will certainly help in providing much needed relief to the Ministry. The
Committee also recommends that in spite of the constraints faced by the Ministry, there is need
to spread the expenditure evenly and making efforts for full utilization of the allocated amount
through proper planning and monitoring. Only then the desired result for Eleventh Five year Plan
can be achieved.
Reply of the Government
15. Recommendation of the Committee has been noted for guidance. Efforts are being made to
convene the meeting of Expert Committees for selection of beneficiaries under various schemes of
the Ministry more often rather than once a year to ensure even spread of expenditure and to
encourage organizations to hold off-season festivals/dance/cultural programmes. A decision has also
been taken to decentralize schemes relating to Performing Arts and seminars/workshops on culture
and to implement them through Zonal Cultural Centres. Further necessary action is being taken for
seeking EFC/SFC approval etc.
Further recommendation/observation of the Committee
16. The Committee notes the initiatives taken by the Ministry and hopes that the
intended objectives could be achieved only by proper planning, effective and close
monitoring and judicious utilization of resources.
(Recommendation at Para 16)
17. The Committee notes the efforts made by the Ministry to improve its performance. The
Committee may be apprised of the findings of the three members Committee and the steps

4
proposed to be taken to improve the performance of various schemes being implemented by the
Ministry of Culture.
Reply of the Government
18. A Committee comprising Shri Bhaskar Ghose (Former Secretary, Culture), Shrimati Shovana
Narayan and Shri R. C. Mishra, Joint Secretary, Ministry of Culture was set up by the Ministry
of Culture to examine and review various schemes of the Ministry and make recommendations for
their modification and changes in the mode of their implementation. The Committee after detailed
deliberation has submitted its report which inter alia proposes higher awards/grants to beneficiaries
and greater decentralization in the process of selection. Steps are being taken to take SFC/EFC
approvals to carry out necessary changes in the relevant schemes.
Further recommendation/observation of the Committee
19. The Committee appreciates the efforts made by the Ministry to get its schemes
examined and reviewed by an expert Committee. It hopes that the Ministry will take all the
approvals etc. well in time so that the recommendation of the Ghose Committee are
implemented without losing time.
Archaeological Survey of India (ASI)
(Recommendation at Para 19)
20. The Committee notes that the cases of vanishing of our monuments is a dangerous process
which if not controlled in time, may lead to a situation where we will be left with only a few
monuments as symbols of our culture and tradition. The vanishing of monuments should be
stopped with all the resources at our disposal. The Committee notes that the Ministry has already
taken appropriate measures to prevent it. The Committee may be apprised about the findings of the
internal Committee to study the problems and the steps taken to implement the findings with the
result it achieved.
Reply of the Government
21. Directions have been issued to all the Circles of the Archaeological Survey of India to
arrange inspection of the monuments under their jurisdiction at ‘least three times a year’ by the
officers including the Head of the Circle i.e. Superintending Archaeologist to assess the status of
the monument, state of conservation, maintenance, encroachments and misuse (if any), available
tourist amenities, further upgradation, status of watch and ward arrangements, etc.
22. The Chairman of the in-house Committee of officers in the ASI has sought the old records,
photographs and drawings, copies of the protection notifications, details on the last inspection
done, ASI officials posted last, land revenue details, possible reasons for disappearance, published
data, since when not traceable and other relevant data from the Circles in respect of the
untraceable monuments for detailed examination by the Committee at the end of July, 2008. A
search of the old records pertaining to untraceable monuments is also being carried out in the
archives of the Directorate General.
Further recommendation/observation of the Committee
23. The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry. It would like to have inspection
reports submitted by Delhi Circle made during 2007 and 2008. However, it is not satisfied
with the efforts made for controlling the cases of vanishing of monuments. Everyday more

5
news about the vanishing of monuments appears. The Ministry has to take stern action
against the culprits and sensitize the police Department also so that the things may be
taken care at the initial stage itself. The Ministry should also make more documentaries/
Ads and make common man aware of our heritage. A centralized Cell should also be created
where people can make complaints in case they see any encroachment. The Committee
further recommends that the Government should undertake a survey and enlist all the
existing monuments in the country which are not in the list of ASI and State Government
but need protection as heritage.
(Recommendation at Para 21)
24. The Committee hopes that ASI will learn from its past experience on the reasons for under-
utilizations of allocated funds and take appropriate steps to utilize the allocated resources. The
Committee recommends that the Ministry should take immediate steps to operationalise National
Mission on Monuments and Antiquities and expedite formation of State level implementation
committees so that funds are utilized within the financial year. The Committee may be apprised
about the steps taken to operationalise NMMA and the status of its implementation.
Reply of the Government
25. With a view to operationalise National Mission on Monuments and Antiquities, State
Level Implementation Committees comprising ex-officio  members and experts (including those
suggested by the State Governments) have already been constituted in 15 States. These are:
Assam, Bihar, Delhi, Gujarat, Haryana, Himachal Pradesh, Jammu and Kashmir, Karnataka,
Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Meghalaya, Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu, Tripura and West Bengal. The
National Mission will soon initiate action to take up various activities in these States as per its
mandate.
26. In the Second Meeting of the Monitoring Committee for the National Mission on
Monuments and Antiquities held on 13th June, 2008 it has been decided to form a Sub-Committee
under the chairmanship of DG, ASI, to consider and recommend changes in the structure of the
National Mission to streamline its functioning and ease the distribution/allocation of funds to the
States for undertaking various projects/programmes of the Mission in the States/UTs.
27. The work of compilation of village-wise data on unprotected built heritage and sites from
secondary sources is already in progress. Data pertaining to more than 15000 villages has been
compiled in the prescribed template so far. The National Mission on Monuments and Antiquities has
initiated planning for conduct of training workshops on capacity building, awareness generation,
and heritage outreach programmes.
Further recommendation/observation of the Committee
28. The Committee also desires that the work of the sub-Committee should be completed
in a time bound manner so that the problem of non-utilization of funds does not arise. The
Committee notes that State Level Implementation Committees have been constituted in 15
States, where the National Mission can take up its activities. The Committee hopes that
implementation Committee will soon be constituted in the remaining States also. The
Committee notes there is substantial progress in compilation of village-wise data on
unprotected built heritage. However, the Committee feels that vigorous efforts are required
to cover the entire nation. The National Mission on Monuments and Antiquities is a long
awaited mission and the Ministry should make all out efforts to attain the objectives of
mission, in time.

6
(Recommendation at Para 24)
29. The Committee notes that more than 56 excavation reports are pending with ASI since
2002. The Committee is of the view that this is a serious matter since there is inordinate delay
in the preparation of reports. The Committee hopes that with the new system in place, there will
be no delay in preparation of reports on excavation in future.
Reply of the Government
30. Out of the 56 pending reports with ASI, 19 excavation reports have been received. These
are: (i) Udaigiri, (ii) Lal Kot, (iii) Hathab, (iv) Thakurani Tila, (v) Shyam Sundar Tila,
(vi) Mahabalipuram, (vii) Lachchura, (viii) Ojiyana, (ix) Kanaganahalli, (x) Besnagar, (xi) Bhita
(xii) Chandor, (xiii) Bekal Fort, (xiv) Boxanagar, (xv) Golbai Sasan, (xvi) Satdhara, (xvii) Birchhabili
Tila, (xviii) Tamluk, and (xix) Khajuraho. Besides 2 part reports on (i) Dholavira and (ii) Sravasti
excavations, have been submitted.
31. The Archaeological Survey of India has taken necessary steps to clear the pendency in the
excavation reports of ASI as well as other research institutions like Universities, State Departments
of Archaeology etc. The revised format for inviting proposals in this regard clearly specifies that
unless reports on previous excavations are submitted, further approvals shall not be granted. The
ASI has also requested all agencies undertaking excavations to clear all the pending reports on the
excavations carried out in the past and is monitoring the progress in this regard.
Further recommendation/observation of the Committee
32. The Committee feels that efforts made by ASI in expediting the reports need further
impetus. ASI should continue to make vigorous monitoring in proactive manner to get the
reports in time bound manner.
(Recommendation at Paras 26 and 27)
33. The Committee notes the steps taken by the Ministry to prevent encroachments. The
Committee desires that possibility of making financial provision to pay for the rehabilitation of the
encroachers who are removed from monuments may also be explored in consultation with Ministry
of Finance so that the Ministry is not dependent on respective State Government for rehabilitation
of encroachers.
34. The Committee also notes that more than 249 centrally protected monuments have been
encroached upon by various elements due to multifarious reasons. Some of the reasons are
historical whereas some others are socio-economic in nature. The Committee observes that the
problem needs to be addressed on a permanent basis with a lasting solution wherever possible.
Appropriate mechanisms may be evolved to rehabilitate the encroachers and the Government should
ensure the retrieved monuments are not illegally occupied again. The Committee notes that an
appropriate Committee may be constituted to look into the various aspects of the encroachments
with the mandate to recommend appropriate mechanism for finding a solution. This may be done
on a time bound basis.
Reply of the Government
35. In accordance with the recommendations of the Committee, the Circles of the
Archaeological Survey of India have been issued directions to closely liaise with the State
Governments and local administrations to remove the encroachments. In fact, in some States, a
Committee has also been constituted for encroachment removal from the monuments. To cite an

7
example, in Delhi, a Committee under the Chairmanship of the Divisional Commissioner of the
Government of NCT, Delhi with Superintending Archaeologist as Member Secretary and NDMC,
MCD, Delhi Cantonment Board, DDA, Revenue, Police and Delhi Wakf Board as members is in
place.
36. The Archaeological Survey of India is in the process of formulating a policy for
rehabilitation of the encroachers. The concerned Circles have been asked to procure details of the
rehabilitation policies of the respective State Governments and work out the details for the
rehabilitation of encroachers at each monument including the total amount the Archaeological
Survey of India will have to pay to the State Government/encroachers.
37. Even without a formal rehabilitation policy in place, a few monuments in Delhi, like Nila
Gumbad (behind Humayun’s Tomb), Red Fort, Bade Khan and Chhotey Khan Tombs have been
freed of encroachments. Similarly, Bangalore Circle in collaboration with the Government of
Karnataka has finalized a proposal to rehabilitate 35 encroachers from the protected area of
Chitradurga Fort by agreeing to pay 50% of the amount likely to be spent.
38. Archaeological Survey of India has also taken a decision to adequately fence and properly
guard all centrally protected monuments in a phased manner. The Circles have also been directed
to fence and landscape the protected area immediately after the encroachments are removed so that
recurrence of encroachments is ruled out. The Circles have also been directed to strengthen the
watch and ward arrangements at the monuments that are prone to encroachment.
39. Although State level and District level Committees do exist in some States, the Circles have
been asked to approach the concerned State Government authorities to get a Committee of officers
of the concerned Government Departments constituted to deal with the problem of encroachments
in protected monuments/sites.
40. The Superintending Archaeologists of Circles are vested with the powers of Estate Officer
to issue eviction notices/orders to the encroachers under the Public Premises (Eviction of
Unauthorized occupants) Act, 1971. They are also authorized to issue show cause notices under
the provisions of the Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Sites and Remains Act, 1958 and
Rules, 1959.
41. As and when encroachment is noticed/reported in the protected area, the Superintending
Archaeologist issues notice to the encroacher under section 19 of the Ancient Monuments,
Archaeological Sites and Remains Act, 1958 for removal of unauthorized buildings. Simultaneously
help from the local police is sought by lodging a complaint and by registering FIR.
42. On receipt of a report from the field office, the Director General, Archaeological Survey
of India, issues demolition orders to the offender in pursuance of Section 19 (1) of the Ancient
Monuments and Archaeological Sites and Remains Act, 1958 for removal of such encroachments/
unauthorized construction within a specified period. A copy of the order issued by the Director
General is also sent to the District Collector. In case the person to whom demolition order has been
issued refuses or fails to comply, the Director General directs the District Collector to cause the
unauthorized building removed as per Section 19 (2). The help and assistance in removal of
encroachments is also sought from the respective State Government where there are no fruitful
results, action is initiated against the encroachers by filing cases in the courts of law.
Further recommendation/observation of the Committee
43. The Committee after going through the reply furnished by the Ministry of
Culture, reaches to conclusion that the Ministry/ASI have enough power not only to
present encroachments but also to get them removed. Now the question arises, why

8
then we have such a large number of encroachments on our protected sites? The
Committee would like to be apprised about this aspect to understand exact problem faced
in the regard.
(Recommendation at Paras 29 and 30)
44. The Committee recommends that to preserve the national heritage from defacement, penal
punishment under the Act should be suitably revised to deter the culprits along with other positive
steps like generating awareness towards protection and maintenance of beauty of the Monuments
as valuable national heritage.
45. The Committee notes that the advertisements in the print and electronic media to create
awareness among the population about bad effects of defacement of monuments is giving an
impetus to the tourism sector. The Committee feels, the propaganda mechanism needs to be more
strengthened by introducing appropriate curriculum in the school syllabus on the bad effects of
defacement of our monuments. Moreover, the Committee notes that a special campaign may be
launched to educate the school children for the preservation of our monuments. In addition to this,
the media campaigns should also focus the legal punishments involved in defacement of our
national heritages.
Reply of the Government
46. Section 30 of the Ancient Monuments, Archaeological Sites and Remains Act, 1958 and
Rules 7, 8 and 9 of the AMASR Rules, 1959 do contain provisions on prohibition of certain acts
within the protected monuments and also the penalty which could be imposed on the offenders.
However, as these provisions are outdated and ineffective, it has become essential to amend the
AMASR Act, 1958. Meanwhile, awareness generation and outreach efforts have been stepped up,
especially among school and college students.
47. The ASI uses certain important occasions like World Heritage Day (18th April), World
Heritage Week (19th—25th November), World Museum Day (18 May) etc. to organise special
awareness programmes at the protected monuments. These programmes include organisation of
special exhibitions, multi-media publicity, heritage talks at the monuments and museums, heritage
walks, film shows, nukkad plays, catchy literature on heritage issues and monuments in simple
language, participation of school students in management of monuments and their preservation,
debates, drawing and painting competitions, heritage related quiz, cultural programmes, essay
competitions, games, clay-modeling, etc., all based on various issues relating to heritage and its
protection. In addition, it is also decided that school children may be asked to take oath for
preservation of country’s culture and heritage. All these initiatives are decentralized, and the
concerned Archeological Circles are free to decide on the initiatives they would like to take
depending upon local circumstances.
Further recommendation/observation of the Committee
48. The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry. The Committee further recommends
that the necessary formalities for amending the Ancient Monuments, Archaeological Sites
and Remains Rules, 1959 may be completed at the earliest.
(Recommendation at Para 32)
49. The Committee appreciates the efforts of ASI for putting India on the world map by
undertaking conservation work in Cambodia and hopes that similar projects may be taken up in
other countries also.

9
Reply of the Government
50. In addition to conservation work of Ta Prohm Temple in Cambodia there are some other
projects under consideration to be taken up in other countries. These include conservation of Wat
Phou Temple in Lao PDR. This is a World heritage Site. The project proposal for conservation of
various structures at the temple site has been submitted to the Ministry of External Affairs. A team
of Archaeological Survey of India (ASI) experts will visit Sri Lanka in the near future to finalize
the conservation of the Mulkirigala Raya Maha Vihara with Sri Lankan authorities.
51. A request has been received for Indian assistance for the restoration of the Baron Palace
in Heliopolis Cairo, Egypt. Accordingly, a three member team is being deputed shortly to Cairo for
undertaking an on-site study and developing a restoration project for Baron Palace in consultation
with Egyptian authorities.
Further recommendation/observation of the Committee
52. The Committee wishes all success to Archaeological Survey of India in its endeavour
to put India on the world map in the field of conservation of monuments.
Anthropological Survey of India
(Recommendation at Para 34)
53. The Committee notes the plan allocation of Rs.6.50 crores was reduced to Rs.6.00 crore
at RE stage and enhanced allocation of Rs.8.50 crore has been made for BE 2008-09. However,
the expenditure incurred upto 29th Feb, 08 is Rs.4.79 crore only. The Committee recommends that
the Ministry should take corrective steps to utilize the funds for the Anthropology which is very
vital sector in today’s world.
Reply of the Government
54. The final grant for Anthropological Survey of India for the year 2007-08 was
Rs.773.65 lakhs under Plan, which included Rs.600 lakhs under R.E. and Rs.173.65 lakhs received
under the North-East component. The final expenditure was Rs.721.32 lakhs.
Further recommendation/observation of the Committee
55. The Committee finds the expenditure pattern of Anthr opological Survey of India
skewed at the end of the financial year.
National Archives of India
(Recommendation at Para 37)
56. The Committee is not satisfied with the reply of the Ministry for reduction of allocation at
RE stage to the tune of Rs.2.00 crore. The Committee is further distress to note that out of RE
of Rs.2.00 crore only an amount of Rs.1.44 crore could be utilized upto February, 2008. It seems
the Ministry had not properly planned for the utilization of Rs.4.00 crore in the initial stage. The
Committee is of the view that the Ministry should restrain from reducing allocation at RE stage
and NAI as the premier organization safeguarding documents of archival value should complete all
its schemes and programme within the time specified. The Committee recommends that the
Ministry should monitor the progress of ongoing Plan/Scheme of National Archives of India so that
it should not suffer for reduction in allocation.

10
Reply of the Government
57. A meeting of the senior officers of the National Archives of India was held under the
Chairmanship of the DGA on 7th May, 2008 to review the Plan Expenditure-2008-09 and other
important issues wherein it has been unanimously decided that all sections would ensure the
progressive expenditure of the plan funds, right from the start of the financial year and efforts
would be made to incur an expenditure of at least 60% of the allocated funds by the end of 2nd
quarter of the current financial year ( i.e. upto 30th September, 2008), so as to avoid any major
cut in the plan budget at the R.E. stage. National Archives of India have drawn up a time-bound
Action Plan for utilization of funds, which is being closely monitored both by the Director General,
National Archives and officials of the Ministry of Culture.
Further recommendation/observation of the Committee
58. The Committee notes the reply. The Committee hopes that the efforts by NAI to
plan the expenditure to avoid reduction of allocation of funds at RE stage will yield fruitful
result in 2008-09.
Indira Gandhi National Centre for the Arts
(Recommendation at Para 40)
59. The Committee notes that IGNCA was allocated Rs. 45.00 crore in BE 2007-08 that was
reduced to Rs. 37.00 crore at RE stage. Out of this the IGNCA could utilize only Rs. 33.00 crore.
The Committee has time and again expressed its displeasure on non-utilization of funds even at the
reduced RE level. Some initiative is needed on the part of the Ministry to take corrective action
and utilize the resources. The Committee may be apprised about the steps taken to utilize the entire
budget allocation.
Reply of the Government
60. As a result of the Ministry of Finance cutting the BE. (Plan) 07-08 of the Ministry of Culture
from Rs. 557 crores to Rs. 520 crores, an across the board cut was imposed and IGNCA’s Plan
Budget reduced from Rs. 45 crores to Rs. 37 crores. The entire budget allocation of Rs. 37.00 crore
made to IGNCA under Plan Grant 2007-08 was released to IGNCA by 31st March, 2008.
Further recommendation/observation of the Committee
61. The Committee hopes that keeping in view the 100% expenditure by the IGNCA, the
Ministry of Finance will allot more funds in the year 2008-09.
Museums
(Recommendation at Para 43)
62. The Committee expresses its displeasure to note that the National Museum could not utilize
the plan allocation in time resulting in reduction of RE. Provision for critical items such as
installation of security gadgets could also not be utilized thus keeping at stake its valuable treasure
stored in Museum. The Committee recommends that review of the planning should be done to
undertake all the unfinished task in the next financial year and Ministry should try to utilize the
maximum amount upto September, 2008 so that in case more funds are required the same may be
asked at RE stage.

11
Reply of the Government
63. The recommendation of the Committee has been noted for guidance. All efforts will be
made to complete the unfinished tasks during the current financial year by utilizing the funds
provided for the National Museum, New Delhi in the Budget Estimates (2008-2009).
Further recommendation/observation of the Committee
64. The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry and reiterates its recommendation to
install security gadgets at the earliest.
Indian Museum, Kolkata
(Recommendation at Para 46)
65. The Committee is distressed to note plan outlay of Rs. 8.50 crore was reduced to
Rs. 3.98 crore at RE stage because of non-implementation of some schemes like modernization and
reorganization of gallery; restoration and maintenance of museum building; strengthening &
modernization of security; and programme of education and mass communication. The Committee
recommends that corrective measures should be taken by the Ministry for utilization of allocated
amount in BE 2008-09 with proper planning and putting monitoring mechanism in place. The
Committee may be apprised of the efforts made in this regard.
Reply of the Government
66. Corrective measures initiated by the Ministry for utilization of allocated amount by Indian
Museum in BE 2008-09 are briefly enumerated below:—
(i) The proposal for appointment to the post of Director, Indian Museum has been
forwarded to DOP&T for approval of ACC.
(ii) Internal Auditors have been appointed for auditing the accounts for the financial year
2006-07 and financial year 2007-08 of the Museum.
(iii) Modernization and Re-organization of galleries and up-gradation of Indian Museum to
international standards has been proposed.
(iv) Upgradation of the CCTV surveillance system, gadgets along with other electronic
safety measures is envisaged/proposed.
(v) The proposal for induction of CISF in peripheral security is under process in
consultation with MHA/DG, CISF.
(vi) Indian Museum Bicentenary Vision, Concept and Development Committee have been
constituted to look into the modernization plan of the Museum.
Further recommendation/observation of the Committee
67. The Committee desires that the Ministry should vigorously pursue follow-up action
so that the goals are achieved.
Victoria Memorial Hall, Kolkata
(Recommendation at Para 49)
68. The Committee is perturbed to note that Victoria Memorial Hall could incur expenditure of
only Rs. 4.90 crore upto February, 2008. Victoria Memorial Hall which is a landmark in Kolkata

12
deserves more efforts to, keep its glory. The Committee, therefore, recommends that all out efforts
should be made to utilize the funds so that Victoria Memorial Hall can retain its grandeur status
in Kolkata.
Reply of the Government
69. Victoria Memorial Hall could incur expenditure of only Rs. 4.90 crore upto February, 2008
as the following Schemes could not be implemented and the funds could not be utilized:—
(i) Modernization and Re-organization of galleries.
(ii) Restoration and Maintenance of memorial building.
(iii) Acquisition of Art objects.
Efforts initiated by the Ministry to utilize the funds allocated to Victoria Memorial Hall in financial
year 2008-09 are briefly enumerated below:—
(i) Modernization of galleries and storage for installation of lighting climate control.
(ii) Repairs and Renovation works of Victoria Memorial Hall.
(iii) Acquisition of Art objects and Artifacts.
(iv) A proposal for induction of 131 CISF personnel for security of Victoria Memorial Hall
has been approved by the Board of Trustees.
(v) A physical verification committee has been constituted to examine and supervise
digitization of all artifacts.
Further recommendation/observation of the Committee
70. The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry and hopes that with the works
initiated in the year 2008-09, utilization of the allocation would improve.
Security of Important Art Items
(Recommendation at Para 51)
71. The Committee notes that drawing any conclusion that no regular smuggling activity of
antiquities is taking place on the basis of available data with regard to cases registered, is
misleading. The Committee feels that smuggling activities are taking place systematically in
connivance of the local people. Therefore, the Committee recommends that the Ministry should
take measures to generate sufficient awareness amongst the public as well as the custodians of law
to strengthen the mechanism available in the public domain to punish the culprits of smuggling
activities. The Committee recommends that Museum security is an important area and it should be
given adequate attention. Moreover, stealing and pilferage of important items kept in the museum
should also be taken care of by installing latest gadgets and by framing suitable policies in this
regard as museums are the treasure of our culture.
Reply of the Government
72. Ministry of Culture has instructed all the protected monuments and site museums under ASI
and museums directly under the Ministry of Culture and its autonomous bodies for appropriate
security measures. They have adopted measures for adequate protection by way of deploying CISF
and Private Security Agencies, installation of CCTV, Metal detector, fire smoker etc. wherever
necessary.

13
73. In order to ensure the safety of cultural heritage under its protection, the ASI uses private
security guards, State police and home guard personnel and also the CISF at selected monuments.
Constant interaction takes place between ASI, CBI and Custom authorities to share information on
smuggling of art objects and to contain these activities.
74. There exist suitable provisions in the Antiquities and Art Treasures Act, 1972 for regulation
of export in antiquities and art treasures and for prevention of their illicit trafficking, such as
registration of dealers, registration of specified categories of antiquities, prosecution of offenders
etc. The ASI deploys officers at the various international exit channels to assist the Custom
authorities in identifying the objects of antique nature and art treasures so that the smuggling
activities could be curbed.
75. ASI has initiated action for preparation of data base on antiquities that are available in the site
museums, sculpture sheds, loose sculptures available within the premises of protected monuments,
stores and those kept at temporary shelters. A consolidated data base will be helpful in containing the
smuggling of antiquities and retrieval of stolen objects. In order to ensure the security of museums
and important objects kept therein, ASI has provided gadgets such as CCTV, metal detectors, security
and fire alarm systems in many of its site museums and will soon cover the remaining ones as well.
Proposals are being formulated for increasing security staff at all monuments.
Further recommendation/observation of the Committee
76. The Committee notes the efforts of the Ministry in strengthening the security aspect
of the Museums and recommend that security need to be updated on regular basis to be a
step ahead of the culprits.
Scheme of Promotion and Strengthening of Regional and Local Museums
(Recommendation at Para 54)
77. The Committee observes that it is a welcome step and the scheme of promotion and
strengthening of regional and local museums need to be implemented with right earnest. The
Committee hopes that all the necessary steps for running the scheme should be planned in advance
and the allocation should be utilized judiciously.
Reply of the Government
78. The financial assistance under the scheme is given with the approval of an Expert
Committee. Spot inspections are also carried out wherever considered necessary to ensure judicious
utilizations of funds.
79. In the current year, the scheme has been suitably amended to include setting up of new
museums and advertisement for inviting applications for the same is being issued shortly. It is also
envisaged to hold frequent meetings of the Expert Committee for the Scheme, in order to utilize
the allocated funds judiciously and spread the expenditure evenly over the financial year.
Further recommendation/observation of the Committee
80. The Ministry should make all out efforts to complete the targets in a time bound
manner to help in reaching the noble scheme for all.
National Gallery of Modern Art, New Delhi.
(Recommendation at Para 58)
81. The Committee appreciates the decision of the Ministry to open National Gallery at

14
Bangalore and hope that this will help in spreading the modern art culture of our country. However,
the Committee is concerned over the tendency of reduction of the allocation at RE stage and even
that allocation remains unutilized as the expenditure upto 29.2.2008 is Rs.1.66 crore only. This
shows the lackadaisical approach of the Ministry. The Committee recommends that the allocated
amount should be fully utilized by NGMA so that the Government may not impose cuts in outlays
at RE stage.
Reply of the Government
82. The Extension wing of NGMA at New Delhi and a new branch of NGMA at Bangalore will
be opened and made fully operational during the current financial year establishing additional gallery
space and better visitor facilities. The recommendations of the Committee have been noted for
compliance. The funds allocated will be fully utilized inter-alia, for organizing special exhibitions at
various locations, providing state of the art display of art objects, documentation of art works,
conducting educational programmes, production of souvenir and catalogues, strengthening security
and access system, augmenting the reserve collection and modernizing the restoration laboratory
etc., during the year 2008-2009.
Further recommendation/observation of the Committee
83. The Committee notes the reply and hopes the National Gallery of Modern Art
branch at Bangalore will be functional in time and the utilization of funds is as per
schedule.
National Council of Science Museums, Kolkata
(Recommendation at Para 61)
84. The Committee notes that out of the total plan allocation of Rs.17.00 crore, National
Council of Science Museums could spend only Rs.13.60 crore by February 2008. The Committee
is of the view that proper planning for utilization of resources and monitoring of the expenditure
is the need of hour. The Ministry should take remedial steps accordingly.
Reply of the Government
85. Observation of the Committee has been noted. National Council of Science Museum
(NCSM) was released grant of Rs. 13.60 crore by February, 2008 out of the total plan allocation
of Rs. 17.00 crore. Subsequently, the balance amount of Rs. 3.40 crore was also sanctioned to
NCSM on receipt of Audit Report/Certificate for the financial year 2006-07. Thus the entire B.E.
allocation of Rs. 17 crores was released and some additional funds were also provided to NCSM
at R.E. stage.
Further recommendation/observation of the Committee
86. The Ministry of Culture should strive to incur the expenditure as per the target so that the
rush for year end expenditure is avoided.
(Recommendation at Para 62)
87. The Committee appreciates the efforts of the Ministry for popularizing science and
technology and the course being run on science communication. The Committee may be apprised
of the success of the two-years Post Graduate course on Science Communication.

15
Reply to the Government
88. With Science Centres fast becoming popular players in enhancing public engagement with
Science in today’s Indian societies, the Post Graduate course in Science Communication is
expected to meet the requirement of human resource development in the field. Although it is too
early to make any substantial observation on the success of the course, since only one batch of
students has passed out so far and the third batch is to join in July, 2008, it is expected that the
2-year Post Graduate Course in science communication will play an increasingly significant role in
training professionals in science communication. With the skill and knowledge acquired during the
course on modem methods of science communication, the graduates will turn out as professional
science communicators in the service of people in India.
Further recommendation/observation of the Committee
89. The Committee hopes that the first batch of successful candidates must have got
placement. The Ministry should keep a database of the placement and get feedback about
the course from the passing out students so that it may be modified to meet the actual
requirements. The Committee may be apprised about the placement and other feedback.
Managing Treasure at Lalit Kala Academy and National Gallery of Modern Art
(Recommendation at Para 65)
90. The Committee is of the view that the art works valuing hundreds of crore should be
preserved in an effective manner. Hence it recommends that there is more scope for managing the
treasures since a large number of paintings are still to be preserved/restored. State of the art facility
may be used for this job and expert guidance from other countries can be sought and if need arises
voluntary organizations may also be engaged to preserve the art works.
Reply to the Government
91. The recommendation has been accepted. The Lalit Kala Akademi has entrusted the work of
its storage for the works of art and the restoration lab to NBCC Ltd., New Delhi and they have
already taken up the work at the Bahawalpur House Complex. Paramount importance is assigned
to conservation and preservation of art works in NGMA. The in-house technical experts constantly
inspect the art works and initiate immediate curative and preventive measures to preserve the art
works in good condition. In order to preserve the collections in an effective manner, state of the
art facilities for restoration and conservation at par with international norms is being established
with the opening of the new extension wing of NGMA at New Delhi.
Further recommendation/observation of the Committee
92. The Committee hopes that NGMA will achieve excellence in the field.
Inter Ministerial Coordination
(Recommendation at Para 67)
93. The Committee is surprised to know that there is no inter-ministerial coordination between
the Ministry of Culture and Tourism. For the promotion of tourism in India, Culture is an important
component and for the development of cultural sites and for spreading our cultural values, tourism
is an important component. The Committee is of the view that our Missions abroad have an
important role to play in spreading our culture and its Values. The Committee recommends that the
three Ministries should work together in coordination for better development of culture and tourism

16
sector. The Committee recommends that the Government may constitute an inter-Ministerial
mechanism for regular interaction with the Ministries of Tourism, Culture and External Affairs.
Reply to the Government
94. Inter Ministerial Coordination Committee of the Ministry of Tourism and Ministry of Culture
has already been constituted with a view to expedite the implementation of tourism projects at
heritage and cultural sites and for resolving other issues related to tourism and culture. A separate
Inter Ministerial Committee under the Chairmanship of Secretary (Culture) has been constituted to
examine the proposals for sending Exhibitions abroad. This Committee includes a representative of
the Ministry of External Affairs (MEA). Director General, ICCR is also invited to the meetings of
this Committee. Secretary (Culture) is a member on the Board of ICCR. The ICCR and MEA are
also consulted by the Ministry of Culture whenever necessary for organizing Festivals of India
abroad and Festivals of foreign countries in India.
Further recommendation/observation of the Committee
95. The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry.
Promotion and Dissemination of Cultural Activities : Zonal Cultural Centres (ZCCs)
(Recommendation at Para 70)
96. The Committee is of the view that protection and promotion of vanishing folk art tradition
is a very important mandate and in order to implement the mandate Zonal Cultural Centre should
enroll artists associated with different folk art tradition and provide them adequate remuneration.
For this purpose the amount allocated for the year 2008-09 may be fully utilized and if possible
allocation may be enhanced next year for the purpose. The Committee also recommends that the
Zonal Cultural Centres should expand their activity to include the use of culture as an effective tool
of national integration.
Reply to the Government
97. The mandate to protect and promote vanishing art tradition is one of the main objectives
of Zonal Cultural Centre (ZCCs). ZCCs are making earnest efforts in order to achieve this goal.
They have already identified and prepared the list of folk artistes in the member States. These
artistes are given opportunities under National Cultural Exchange Programme, Shilpagram Utsav,
National Folk Dance Festival—Lok Tarang, etc. National Cultural Exchange Programme has seen
large-scale movement of artistes from one region to another bringing about national integration and
communal harmony through art and culture, overcoming the linguistic barriers. ZCCs are
participating in various fairs and festivals of the country, which serve as a very effective tool of
national integration. The funds allocated for ZCCs for the year 2008-09 would be fully utilized.
Further recommendation/observation of the Committee
98. The Committee appreciates the efforts made by the Ministry. However, it feels more
measures need to be undertaken to popularize folk art tradition through schools and
colleges at the grass root level which will help in popularizing the folk art.
Setting up of Multi Purpose Cultural Complexes including those for Children
(Recommendation at Para 73)
99. The Committee notes that ceiling of the project cost fixed for single cultural complex of

17
Category-I is Rs. 5.00 crore and for Category-II smaller version cultural complex is Rs. 2.00 crore.
Whereas, the total allocation made for MPCC in the BE 2008-09 is only Rs. 2.00 crore. The
Committee is at a loss to understand the rationality behind this less allocations as even for a
Category-II MPCC an amount of Rs. 2.00 crore is required. The Committee feels that this kind of
approach will promote only adhocism. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the modalities for
running the scheme may be worked out and the scheme may be widely publicized for utilization of
allocated resources. The Committee may be apprised about the details of the number of MPCCs
already established till the last financial year and the details of the proposed MPCCs. The Committee
would also like to know the benefits of converting it into a Central Sector Scheme.
Reply to the Government
100. The MPCC Scheme has been discontinued by the Planning Commission in Eleventh Five
Year Plan, taking it to be a centrally sponsored scheme of an unviable/small size. Since no fresh
cases can, therefore, be sanctioned, only token allocation is made in each year’s budget to keep
the head alive for meeting the committed liabilities of the 2nd installment. Subsequently during the
financial year the required amount is provided in RE depending on the demands received for 2nd
installment for the projects sanctioned during the Tenth Five Year Plan.
101. Regarding publicizing the Scheme, the action will be taken and Scheme will be widely
published in case Planning Commission agrees to revive the Scheme in future, although it was
already very popular as can be seen from the fact that number of proposals could not be
sanctioned due to discontinuance of the Scheme.
102. There are 22 MPCCs for which full grant has been released by the Central Government and
there are 27 MPCCs for which first installment of grant has been released. (List is at Annexure
‘C’). MPCC scheme is already a Central Sector Scheme. It may be mentioned here that Planning
Commission has been treating this scheme as a Centrally Sponsored Scheme while this Ministry has
several times requested Planning Commission to treat it as a Central Sector Scheme. Under this
Scheme grants are provided direct to the autonomous bodies set up by State or UT Government
and progress is monitored by this Ministry by calling for UCs, expenditure statements, latest
photographs of the site and sometime by inspection done by its officers. As such this Scheme is
and should be treated as a Central Sector Scheme. If Planning Commission agrees with this view,
it will become possible to continue this scheme.
Further recommendation/observation of the Committee
103. The Ministry of Culture may further take up the matter with the Planning
Commission with convincing arguments to continue the scheme as central sector scheme
that helps in setting up of cultural complexes for children.
Kalakshetra Foundation, Chennai
(Recommendation at Para 76)
104. The Committee recommends that the Ministry should monitor the utilization of funds more
closely for Kalakshetra and help the organization in planning/executing the allocated fund judiciously
and evenly throughout the year. The Committee observes that with the increased budgetary
allocation the Kalakshetra Foundation and its constituent units will be able to strengthen their
activities. The details of fund utilizations for each of the activity may please be furnished to the
Committee.

18
Reply to the Government
105. The recommendation has been noted. Annual Action Plan 2008-09 in respect of Kalakshetra
Foundation indicating the amount proposed to be spent on various activities is enclosed at
Annexure ‘D’.
Further recommendation/observation of the Committee
106. The Committee notes the details of Annual Action Plan of expenditure for
Kalakshetra and anticipates that the Foundation will be able to spend the amount in
judicious manner.
National Mission for Manuscript
(Recommendation at Para 80)
107. The Committee notes that the pace of the Mission is very slow. The Committee
recommends that the Mission should augment its target to conduct post survey documentation in
all the States. The survey and documentation process should be completed in a time-bound
schedule. The Committee further recommends that the exhibition of Indian Manuscript at various
premier national and international fora should also be given thrust and the mission should initiate
proactive measures in this regard.
Reply to the Government
108. Survey work has already been done in Himachal Pradesh, West Bengal, Haryana, Delhi,
Assam, Tripura, Manipur, Rajasthan, Gujarat, Chhattisgarh, Tamil Nadu, Kerala, Karnataka, Andhra
Pradesh, Arunachal Pradesh, Orissa and some districts of Uttar Pradesh and Bihar. Post survey
documentation has started in Orissa, Bihar, Manipur, Karnataka, Uttar Pradesh, Tamil Nadu, Kerala
and Himachal Pradesh and about 5.50 lakhs data has been documented. Survey in remaining 8
States and 6 Union Territories will be completed in 2008-09. Post survey will be completed in the
coming 3 years. As regards exhibiting Indian manuscripts in India, the Mission has planned two
National level exhibitions in the year 2008-09.
Further recommendation/observation of the Committee
109. The Committee notes the efforts made by the Ministry of Culture for documentation
of manuscripts. However, it still feels that the Ministry should make all out efforts to
expedite the mission in a time bound manner.
National Mission on Monuments and Antiquities
(Recommendation at Para 83)
110. The Committee recommends that since National Mission of Monuments and Antiquities has
been earmarked budgetary allocation of Rs.10.00 crore during the year 2008-09, the Mission should
come up with a detailed proposal immediately while maintaining its confidentiality and further
proceed in its implementation. The Committee would like to know the latest status of the
implementation of the decisions taken by the Finance Committee on National Mission on
Monuments and Antiquities.
Reply to the Government
111. The budgetary allocation in respect of National Mission on Monuments and Antiquities during

19
the year 2008-09 is Rs.11.00 crore. A proposal on documentation of antiquities that are lodged in
various site museums and sculpture sheds of the Archaeological Survey of India, various State
controlled museums, University museums, digitization of archival drawings, outreach programmes etc.
was considered by the Finance Committee in its second meeting held on 22nd April, 2008, and it was
decided to pursue the formation of the State Level Implementation Committee in all States/UTs, so
that implementation of proposals at State/UT level could be properly pursued.
112. Accordingly State Secretaries of Culture were requested to suggest names of experts for
inclusion in the State Level Implementation Committee (SLIC). SLICs have now been constituted
in respect of 15 States that responded. These are: Assam, Bihar, Delhi, Gujarat, Haryana, Himachal
Pradesh, Jammu and Kashmir, Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Meghalaya, Rajasthan,
Tamil Nadu, Tripura and West Bengal.
113. The work of compilation of village wise data on unprotected built heritage and sites from
secondary sources is already in progress at the level of National Mission headquarters. Data
pertaining to more than 15000 villages has so far been compiled in the prescribed template.
Further recommendation/observation of the Committee
114. The Committee notes the steps taken by the Ministry and hopes that the State Level
Implementation Committee (SLIC) which have been constituted for the purpose would start
functioning at the earliest and remaining States may be persuaded to form the SLICs.
Sahitya Akademi
(Recommendation at Para 86)
115. The Committee recommends that steps may be taken to popularize the activities of Sahitya
Akademi among the population and particularly the students of Universities and premier institutions
throughout India. At present its existence is known only to the literary circles. More emphasis may
be given to national integration and secularism through literature. It has also a role to popularize
our democratic values and rids cultural heritage.
Reply to the Government
116. The recommendation has been noted. The Sahitya Akademi is already in the process of
opening its book shops in all the Universities through out India. The publications of the Akademi
are being made available to the younger generation by participating in city book exhibitions at
school and University levels. State Governments of Rajasthan, Haryana, Bihar, Chhattisgarh, and
Madhya Pradesh have utilized the funds allocated by the Central Government under SARV
SHIKSHA ABHIYAN in purchasing Akademi’s books for their primary school students. The prices
of Akademi publications are kept low to meet the cost only, which makes these reader-friendly.
Further recommendation/observation of the Committee
117. The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry. The Committee further observes that
there is need to create awareness by holding mobile exhibitions at various places/outside
offices which are frequented by people. If the books are readily available people will be
more than happy to purchase at their doorsteps. Mailing list should also be updated and
literature be mailed to them on regular basis. The Committee, however, observes only a few
States have utilized the fund allocated under SARV A  SHIKSHA ABHIYAN for purchasing the
Akademi books. The remaining States may be encouraged in this regard.

20
Sangeet Natak Akademi
(Recommendation at Para 89)
118. The Committee notes that Sangeet Natak Akademi has been able to spent more than the
allocated amount. The Committee recommends that the Sangeet Natak Akademi should endeavor to
establish national institutes and centres for each of our dance forms and performing arts, it need
in association with the State Governments.
Reply to the Government
119. As recommended by the Committee, the Sangeet Natak Akademi would endeavour to
establish national institutes and centers for our major dance forms and performing arts. Akademi
presently has Jawaharlal Nehru Manipur Dance Academy, Imphal for Manipuri dances; Kathak
Kendra, New Delhi for Kathak dance; Kutiyattam Kendra, Thiruvanthapuram established in 2007 for
the ancient Sanskrit theatre tradition ‘Kutiyattam’ of Kerala; Sattriya Kendra, Guwahati for Sattriya
dance, music and theatre traditions of Assam; and the Chhau Centre, whose activities are going on
in Baripada and Seraikella and formal establishment is being set up in Jamshedpur. Akademi has also
set up the office for a national Centre for Puppetry (Putul Kala Kendra) in Delhi which will look
after all the forms of Puppetry in India. Besides, Akademi is in touch with the Government of
Orissa regarding their proposal for developing Odissi Research Centre, Bhubaneswar into a national
level institution of Odissi Dance under joint collaboration of the State Government and Sangeet
Natak Akademi.
Further recommendation/observation of the Committee
120. The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry and recommends that more State
Governments should be involved to open such Kendra’s.
(Recommendation at Para 91)
121. The Committee hopes that efforts for securing land will be taken up with Delhi
Development Authority in a time bound manner and if need be the issue may be taken up at
Ministerial level. The Committee recommends to the DDA that they should speed up the process
of land allotment to the Sangeet Natak Akademi at the earliest. The Committee may be apprised
about the any procedural or administrative delay in the allotment of land and construction of the
building.
Reply to the Government
122. Ef forts for securing land from Delhi Development Authority for setting up of National
Museum of Performing Arts in Delhi are being made. Akademi’s Secretary had a meeting with Vice
Chairman of DDA in this regard and the latter has ensured due support and action on the part of
DDA. Necessary formalities regarding filing of application including sponsorship of the project by
the Government of India have been completed. The Ministry of Culture has written to DDA
recommending allotment of five acres of land to SNA at appropriate location in Delhi on
concessional rates.
Further recommendation/observation of the Committee
123. The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry and recommends that through regular
interaction and constant persuasion, DDA may be requested to provide the land at the
earliest.

21
Lalit Kala Akademi
(Recommendation at Para 94)
124. The Committee hopes that with the enhanced allocation in BE 2008-09, the Lalit Kala
Akademi will be able to spread its activities in more effective manner and will utilize all its available
resources.
Reply to the Government
125. The recommendation of the Committee has been noted and the Akademi will be spending
the entire allocated amount in the financial year 2008-09. Out of a BE of Rs.6.00 crore under Plan,
an amount of Rs.4.20 crore has already been released to the Akademi during the current financial
year.
Further reco mmendation/observation of the Committee
126. The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry and hope that the budget allocation
will help in spreading the activities in an effective manner.
National School of Drama
(Recommendation at Para 95)
127. The Committee is pleased to note that National School of Drama is planning to undertake
lot of activities in the year 2008-2009. The Committee hopes that National School of Drama will
be able to fulfil its commitment in 2008-09 by planning its activities in phased manner.
Reply to the Government
128. A Plan allocation of Rs.13.00 crores has been made for the School for the financial year
2008-2009. The School has prepared an Action Plan to phase out the expenditure so as to utilize
the allocated fund.
Further recommendation/observation of the Committee
129. National School of Drama is playing a very important role in the field of
performing art (Drama). The Committee is optimistic that the allocation will be incurred
on making the Institute a better place.
Nehru Memorial Museum and Library (NMML)
(Recommendation at Para 101)
130. The Committee appreciates the initiatives taken by the Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library for modernization and digitization. The Committee however, recommends that the award
of fellowships by the NMML must be transparent and beyond any criticism as the fellows who
apply for the fellowships are eminent scholars who never compromise any type of nepotism or
favoritism or procedural irregularities.
Reply to the Government
131. NMML has taken note of the observations of the Committee regarding the award of

22
fellowships and has taken necessary steps to ensure that the award of fellowships is “transparent
and beyond criticism”. The observations of the Committee were brought to the notice of the
NMML Executive Council and based on their recommendations, the NMML has suitably modified
the terms and conditions of the fellowship programme as well as procedures for selection to
ensure complete transparency. The NMML is issuing an advertisement incorporating the above
mentioned changes.
Further recommendation/observation of the Committee
132. The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry and desires that a copy of the
modified terms and conditions may be sent to it for perusal.
Science Cities
(Recommendation at Para 105)
133. The Committee recommends that adequate plan outlay should be provided in the Budget to
ensure that science cities are set up in all the state capitals of the country and while fixing priority
every year parity should be drawn amongst the regions.
Reply to the Government
134. Recommendation of the Committee has been noted. During the operation of the ‘Science
Cities’ scheme certain bottlenecks were experienced. Under the existing norms, for setting up of
the Science City the total financial cost is between Rs. 65-70 crore to be shared by the State
Government, Central Government and Private Entrepreneurs in the ratio of 13:13:74. However, it
was found that 74% share to be raised through private entrepreneurs or any other agency by the
State Government was not forthcoming. This necessitated changes in the existing norms and
accordingly the Ministry is in the process of revising the ‘Science Cities’ Scheme. Under the
revised norms, the total cost of setting up of a Science City has been reduced to Rs. 50.00 crore
out of which State Government’s contribution will be of Rs. 20.00 crore to be raised either
by themselves or by a private/co-operative agency or a combination of both. A provision of
Rs. 90.00 crores for Science Cities scheme has been made in the Eleventh Five Year Plan.
Further recommendation/observation of the Committee
135. The Committee hopes that the modification in the existing norms will be taken up
at the earliest so that the allocated amount is spent and Science Cities reaches all the
States in a time bound manner.
Spreading Indian Culture Abroad
(Recommendation at Para 108)
136. The Committee appreciates the efforts in spreading Indian culture abroad by holding seminars,
fairs and festivals. The Committee recommends that the festivals should be highly focused and
highlights every region of the country so as to promote tourism and culture of all the States. The
Committee also recommends that some countries should be selected where these festivals should be
held continuously for some years so as to make an impact on the population there.
Reply to the Government
137. Recommendations of Committee have been noted, and shall be implemented suitably subject
to availability of funds.

23
Further recommendation/observation of the Committee
138. The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry and recommends that additional
requirement of funds should be communicated to Ministry of Finance well in time so that
the scheme does not suffer.
Vacant Posts in various Premier Institutions functioning under the Ministry of Culture
(Recommendation at Para 111)
139. The Committee notes that in spite of Ministry’s attention being drawn to the fact of delay
in appointing administrative heads, no significant achievement has been made in most of the
organizations under the control of the Ministry. And in many cases some of the officials of the
Ministry had been given additional charge. The Committee is constrained to note that the reply
furnished relating to filling up post vacant in various organization by the Ministry is similar to one
which was sent to the Committee at the time of consideration of Action Taken Report which
indicates that there is no progress in the matter. The Committee again recommend that process of
revision of Recruitment Rules may be completed at the earliest so that the Search-cum-Selection
Committee is constituted and vacant post are filled up.
Reply to the Government
140. Draft Recruitment Rules for the posts of Head/CEO of eight attached and subordinate
offices under the Ministry of Culture were prepared and submitted in the prescribed format to the
UPSC. UPSC has recently approved the said Recruitment Rules. Now Recruitment Rules are being
sent to the Ministry of Law for vetting before these are notified.
Further recommendation/observation of the Committee
141. The Committee expresses its satisfaction that its recommendation for revision of
Recruitment Rules has been accepted. The Committee hopes that the Ministry will take
immediate steps to start the recruitment process.
National Culture Policy
(Recommendation at Para 113)
142. The Committee suggested that the framing of the National Culture Policy should not be an
unending process. The policy may be framed within the stipulated time frame. The 18 Member
Committee may be asked to meet frequently to finalize the policy. The Committee recommends that
the Ministry should ensure the formulation of National Culture Policy by April, 2008.
Reply to the Government
143. Six meetings of the Committee to draft a National Culture Policy have been held to date.
A draft report is being finalized.
Further recommendation/observation of the Committee
144. The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry and recommends that the policy
should be finalized in a stipulated time frame.
Heritage Sites Commission Bill
(Recommendation at Para 115)
145. The Committee welcomes the steps initiated by the Ministry for setting up the Heritage Site

24
Commission. The Committee recommends that the Ministry should expedite the setting up of the
Heritage Site Commission as more and more such sites are being encroached or unauthorizedly
occupied. Since the country is having a large number of heritage sites which require immediate
attention for conservation. The Commission is an overdue measure.
Reply to the Government
146. A Cabinet Note for setting up the Heritage Sites Commission has since been prepared and
submitted for consideration.
Further recommendation/observation of the Committee
147. The Committee desires the Ministry to speed up the process of setting up of the
Heritage Site Commission. The Committee may be apprised of the development taking place.
National Culture Fund
(Recommendation at Para 119)
148. The Committee suggests that the PSUs and private Industries which are directly or
indirectly using the monuments and sites of culture for their commercial motives have an obligation
to contribute to the National Culture Fund. The Committee recommends that the Ministry should
identify and enumerate those PSUs and private Industries which are using the Monuments and
Cultural Sites and may be cajoled to contribute to the NCF. The Committee further recommends
that more PSUs/Organisations Corporate Houses should be approached to donate for NCF. The
Committee also recommends that the utilization details of the NCF may be submitted to it.
Reply to the Government
149. Secretary (Culture) had written in August, 2007 to the Heads/Chairmen of all the Public
Sector Undertakings/Chambers of Commerce & Industries etc. and the Ministry has received a
good response. The efforts are being further intensified on the lines suggested by the Committee
by writing letters to each member of the following organizations to get their cooperation and
donation for development of tangible and intangible cultural heritage of the country:
1. Federation of Indian Chamber of Commerce and Industry (FICCI)
2. Confederation of Indian Industries.
3. Associated Chamber of Commerce and Industry of India
4. PHD Chamber of Commerce and Industry
5. Federation of Hotel & Restaurant Association of India
Further, as recommended, the National Culture Fund would be submitting utilization details of the
Fund.
Further recommendation/observation of the Committee
150. The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry.
North East Region
(Recommendation at Para 125)
151. The Committee is anguished to note that despite its earlier recommendations, Rs.20.00 crore

25
of the allocation remained unspent for the North-East region. This shows the neglected attitude
towards the North Eastern region where even the reduced RE allocation remained unutilized. The
Ministry should make concerted efforts to utilize the funds by proper implementation of schemes
so that the North Eastern region which is still unexplored gets its due share.
Reply to the Government
152. Out of the amount of Rs.47.00 crore allocated for NE region at RE stage, during 2007-08,
an amount of Rs.34.44 crore was utilized upto 31.3.2008, by the Ministry and its various
organizations. An amount of Rs.12.56 crore only was surrendered to Non Lapsable Central Pool
of Resources (NLCPR) during 2007-08. Instructions have been issued to all concerned
organizations and Divisions to augment the expenditure in North East area from the very beginning
of the financial year 2008-09. Most of the organizations under the MoC, barring a few of them,
do not have their physical base in North East States. In order to overcome this problem, as was
recommended by the Committee earlier, some organizations have already started undertaking their
activities by collaborating with local partners. The Ministry has also made certain procedural
improvements in the system of release of funds for the North East activities and it is hoped that
most of the funds earmarked for North East region during the year 2008-09 will get utilized.
Further recommendation/observation of the Committee
153. The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry and hopes that the fund allocated to
the North East region during the year 2008-09 will be fully utilized.
(Recommendation at Para 126)
154. The Committee notes that the Excavation Branch for the North East States remains
unrealized in the Tenth Five Year Plan. The Committee recommends that the Excavation Branch
may be included as one of the items in the Eleventh Five year Plan and implemented within the
presumed time frame. If required this matter may be taken up at the highest level to sort out the
issues involved in establishing the Excavation Branch in the North East.
Reply to the Government
155. To ex pand the archaeological excavation programmes in the north-eastern region of the
country, it is proposed to open an Excavation Branch in North East in Eleventh Plan period. As
a preliminary step one Dy. Superintending Archaeologist has been posted in the office of the SA,
ASI, Guwahati Circle, Guwahati exclusively for archeological exploration in the N.E. region.
Further recommendation/observation of the Committee
156. The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry and recommends that full-fledged
Excavation Branch should be set up in the North-East to give more concentration in the
North-East States.
(Recommendation at Para 127)
157. The Committee notes that lot of initiatives had been taken with huge fund allocation by the
Ministry to implement various activities in the North East. It is not clear what are the benefits
accrued to the North East due to such enhanced allocations and whether the allocated money is
really spent for the purposes it was allocated. The Committee therefore recommends that a study
or an inquiry may be conducted to see what are the actual benefits of the enhanced allocation and
whether the fund allocated are utilized for the purposes for which these were allocated The feed
back of the study may be furnished to the Committee.

26
Reply to the Government
158. The recommendation of the Committee has been noted. An appropriate agency is being
identified for carrying out the proposed study.
Further recommendation/observation of the Committee
159. The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry and desired that the process of
appointing such agency for carrying out the study should be expedited for the proper fund
utilization.
General Recommendation
(Recommendation at Para 129)
160. The Committee however noted that last year almost in all the heads the allocated funds even
at RE stage remained under utilized because of one reason or the other. The Committee therefore,
strongly recommends that the Ministry of Culture should try to spend the allocated fund to the
maximum extent possible so that additional funds may be asked at RE stage.
Reply to the Government
161. The Ministry has noted the recommendation. All efforts will be made to achieve better
utilization of funds in the current financial year.
Further recommendation/observation of the Committee
162. The Committee is concerned over the under-utilization of funds and recommends
that steps should be taken to ensure better/optimum utilization of funds in the current
year.

27
OBSERV ATIONS/CONCLUSIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS — AT A GLANCE
BUDGET ALLOCATION AND OVERALL ASSESSMENT OF THE FINANCIAL
PERFORMANCE FOR THE YEAR 2007-08.
The Committee notes that the total expenditure incurred was 90.47% in plan and
85.66% in non-plan of RE allocation in the year 2007-08. It, however, emphasises the
need for achieving total utilization of funds every year. (Para 7)
The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry and wishes to know the reasons
Ministry of Finance has given for not agreeing to its proposal. The Committee further
recommends that the Ministry of Culture may pursue the matter with the Ministry of
Finance again and present the case of the Ministry of Culture in an effective way
indicating special nature of requirements and seasonal activities undertaken by various
organizations of Ministry of Culture. (Para 10)
The Committee notes the initiatives taken by the Ministry and desires to know
that new plan schemes launched by the Ministry of Culture. The Ministry should also
endeavour to launch all the schemes as soon as they are approved. (Para 13)
The Committee notes the initiatives taken by the Ministry and hopes that the
intended objectives could be achieved only by proper planning, effective and close
monitoring and judicious utilization of resources. (Para 16)
The Committee appreciates the efforts made by the Ministry to get its schemes
examined and reviewed by an expert Committee. It hopes that the Ministry will take all
the approvals etc. well in time so that the recommendation of the Ghose Committee are
implemented without losing time. (Para 19)
ARCHAEOLOGICAL SURVEY OF INDIA (ASI)
The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry. It would like to have inspection
reports submitted by Delhi Circle made during 2007 and 2008. However, it is not satisfied
with the efforts made for controlling the cases of vanishing of monuments. Everyday more
news about the vanishing of monuments appears. The Ministry has to take stern action
against the culprits and sensitize the police Department also so that the things may be
taken care at the initial stage itself. The Ministry should also make more documentaries/
Ads and make common man aware of our heritage. A centralized Cell should also be
created where people can make complaints in case they see any encroachment. The
Committee further recommends that the Government should undertake a survey and
enlist all the existing monuments in the country which are not in the list of ASI and
State Government but need protection as heritage. (Para 23)
The Committee also desires that the work of the sub-Committee should be
completed in a time bound manner so that the problem of non-utilization of funds does
not arise. The Committee notes that State Level Implementation Committees have been
constituted in 15 States, where the National Mission can take up its activities. The
Committee hopes that implementation Committee will soon be constituted in the
remaining States also. The Committee notes there is substantial progress in compilation
27

28
of village-wise data on unprotected built heritage. However, the Committee feels that
vigorous efforts are required to cover the entire nation. The National Mission on
Monuments and Antiquities is a long awaited mission and the Ministry should make all
out efforts to attain the objectives of mission, in time. (Para 28)
The Committee feels that efforts made by ASI in expediting the reports need
further impetus. ASI should continue to make vigorous monitoring in proactive manner
to get the reports in time bound manner. (Para 32)
The Committee after going through the reply furnished by the Ministry of Culture,
reaches to conclusion that the Ministry/ASI have enough power not only to present
encroachments but also to get them removed. Now the question arises, why then we have
such a large number of encroachments on our protected sites? The Committee would like
to be apprised about this aspect to understand exact problem faced in the regard.
(Para 43)
The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry. The Committee further
recommends that the necessary formalities for amending the Ancient Monuments,
Archaeological Sites and Remains Rules, 1959 may be completed at the earliest. (Para 48)
The Committee wishes all success to Archaeological Survey of India in its
endeavour to put India on the world map in the field of conservation of monuments.
(Para 52)
ANTHROPOLOGICAL SURVEY OF INDIA
The Committee finds the expenditure pattern of Anthropological Survey of India
skewed at the end of the financial year. (Para 55)
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA
The Committee notes the reply. The Committee hopes that the efforts by NAI to
plan the expenditure to avoid reduction of allocation of funds at RE stage will yield
fruitful result in 2008-09. (Para 58)
INDIRA GANDHI NATIONAL CENTRE FOR THE ARTS
The Committee hopes that keeping in view the 100% expenditure by the IGNCA,
the Ministry of Finance will allot more funds in the year 2008-09. (Para 61)
MUSEUMS
The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry and reiterates its recommendation
to install security gadgets at the earliest. (Para 64)
INDIAN MUSEUM, KOLKATA
The Committee desires that the Ministry should vigorously pursue follow-up action
so that the goals are achieved. (Para 67)
VICTORIA MEMORIAL HALL, KOLKATA
The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry and hopes that with the works
initiated in the year 2008-09, utilization of the allocation would improve. (Para 70)

29
SECURITY OF IMPORTANT ART ITEMS
The Committee notes the efforts of the Ministry in strengthening the security
aspect of the Museums and recommend that security need to be updated on regular basis
to be a step ahead of the culprits. (Para 76)
SCHEME OF PROMOTION AND STRENGTHENING OF REGIONAL AND LOCAL MUSEUMS
The Ministry should make all out efforts to complete the targets in a time bound
manner to help in reaching the noble scheme for all. (Para 80)
NATIONAL GALLERY OF MODERN ART, NEW DELHI
The Committee notes the reply and hopes the National Gallery of Modern Art
branch at Bangalore will be functional in time and the utilization of funds is as per
schedule. (Para 83)
NATIONAL COUNCIL OF SCIENCE MUSEUMS, KOLKATA
The Ministry of Culture should strive to incur the expenditure as per the target
so that the rush for year end expenditure is avoided. (Para 86)
The Committee hopes that the first batch of successful candidates must have got
placement. The Ministry should keep a database of the placement and get feedback about
the course from the passing out students so that it may be modified to meet the actual
requirements. The Committee may be apprised about the placement and other feedback.
(Para 89)
MANAGING TREASURE AT LALIT KALA ACADEMY AND NATIONAL GALLERY OF
MODERN ART
The Committee hopes that NGMA will achieve excellence in the field.
(Para 92)
INTER MINISTERIAL COORDINATION
The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry.
(Para 95)
PROMOTION AND DISSEMINATION OF CULTURAL ACTIVITIES
The Committee appreciates the efforts made by the Ministry. However, it feels
more measures need to be undertaken to popularize folk art tradition through schools and
colleges at the grass root level which will help in popularizing the folk art. (Para 98)
SETTING UP OF MULTI PURPOSE CULTURAL COMPLEXES INCLUDING THOSE FOR
CHILDREN
The Ministry of Culture may further take up the matter with the Planning
Commission with convincing arguments to continue the scheme as central sector scheme
that helps in setting up of cultural complexes for children. (Para 103)
KALAKSHETRA FOUNDATION, CHENNAI
The Committee notes the details of Annual Action Plan of expenditure for

30
Kalakshetra and anticipates that the Foundation will be able to spend the amount in
judicious manner. (Para 106)
NATIONAL MISSION FOR MANUSCRIPT
The Committee notes the efforts made by the Ministry of Culture for
documentation of manuscripts. However, it still feels that the Ministry should make all
out efforts to expedite the mission in a time bound manner. (Para 109)
NATIONAL MISSION ON MONUMENTS AND ANTIQUITIES
The Committee notes the steps taken by the Ministry and hopes that the State
Level Implementation Committee (SLIC) which have been constituted for the purpose
would start functioning at the earliest and remaining States may be persuaded to form
the SLICs. (Para 114)
SAHITYA AKADEMI
The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry. The Committee further observes
that there is need to create awareness by holding mobile exhibitions at various places/
outside offices which are frequented by people. If the books are readily available people
will be more than happy to purchase at their doorsteps. Mailing list should also be
updated and literature be mailed to them on regular basis. The Committee, however,
observes only a few States have utilized the fund allocated under SARV A SHIKSHA
ABHIYAN for pur chasing the Akademi books. The remaining States may be encouraged in
this regard. (Para 117)
SANGEET NATAK AKADEMI
The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry and recommends that more State
Governments should be involved to open such Kendra’s. (Para 120)
The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry and recommends that through
regular interaction and constant persuasion, DDA may be requested to provide the land
at the earliest. (Para 123)
LALIT KALA AKADEMI
The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry and hope that the budget allocation
will help in spreading the activities in an effective manner. (Para 126)
NATIONAL SCHOOL OF DRAMA
National School of Drama is playing a very important role in the field of
performing art (Drama). The Committee is optimistic that the allocation will be incurred
on making the Institute a better place. (Para 129)
NEHRU MEMORIAL MUSEUM AND LIBRARY (NMML)
The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry and desires that a copy of the
modified terms and conditions may be sent to it for perusal. (Para 132)
SCIENCE CITIES
The Committee hopes that the modification in the existing norms will be taken up

31
at the earliest so that the allocated amount is spent and Science Cities reaches all the
States in a time bound manner. (Para 135)
SPREADING INDIAN CULTURE ABROAD
The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry and recommends that additional
requirement of funds should be communicated to Ministry of Finance well in time so that
the scheme does not suffer. (Para 138)
V ACANT POSTS IN V ARIOUS PREMIER INSTITUTIONS FUNCTIONING UNDER THE
MINISTRY OF CULTURE
The Committee expresses its satisfaction that its recommendation for revision of
Recruitment Rules has been accepted. The Committee hopes that the Ministry will take
immediate steps to start the recruitment process. (Para 141)
NATIONAL CULTURE POLICY
The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry and recommends that the policy
should be finalized in a stipulated time frame. (Para 144)
HERITAGE SITE COMMISSION BILL
The Committee desires the Ministry to speed up the process of setting up of the
Heritage Site Commission. The Committee may be apprised of the development taking
place. (Para 147)
NATIONAL CULTURE FUND
The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry. (Para 150)
NORTH EAST REGION
The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry and hopes that the fund allocated
to the North East region during the year 2008-09 will be fully utilized. (Para 153)
The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry and recommends that full-fledged
Excavation Branch should be set up in the North-East to give more concentration in the
North-East States. (Para 156)
The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry and desired that the process of
appointing such agency for carrying out the study should be expedited for the proper fund
utilization. (Para 159)
GENERAL RECOMMENDATION
The Committee is concerned over the under-utilization of funds and recommends
that steps should be taken to ensure better/optimum utilization of funds in the current
year. (Para 162)

ANNEXURE

ANNEXURE-A
(Vide Para 6 of the Report)
MINISTRY OF CULTURE
APPROVED PLAN OUTLAY FOR THE ANNUAL PLAN 2007-08 AND EXPENDITURE
(Rs. in lakhs)
Sl. Organization/Scheme B E RE Funds re- Total Expenditure*
No. 2007-08 2007-08 appropriated Grant
from Non- (Col.
Functional 4+Col.5)
Head
1 2 3 4 567
1 Archaelogical Survey 9800.00 8900.00 238.52 9138.52 9088.05
of India
2 Archives and Archival
Libraries
National Archives of 400.00 200.00 9.50 209.50 190.58
India
Asiatic Society, Kolkata 300.00 325.00 325.00 325.00
Asiatic Society, Mumbai 35.00 35.00 35.00 35.00
Khuda Baksh Oriental 250.00 121.00 121.00 21.36
Public Library
Thanjavur Maharaja 50.00 40.00 40.00 28.97
Serfoji’s Saraswati Mahal
Library (TMSSML)
Rampur Raza Library, 200.00 180.00 180.00 180.00
Rampur
National Mission for 850.00 637.00 26.22 663.22 637.00
Manuscripts
T
OTAL (Archives and Archival 2085.00 1538.00 35.72 1573.72 1417.91
Libraries)
3 Museums
National Museum 1000.00 700.00 0.75 700.75 596.18
Science Cities 1300.00 1089.00 1089.00 1039.00
35

36
1 2 3 4 567
Victoria Memorial Hall, 700.00 670.00 670.00 490.00
Kolkata
Promotion and 900.00 700.00 21.45 721.45 699.16
Strengthening of Regional
and Local Museums
National Council of 1700.00 1919.00 128.00 2047.00 2003.00
Science Museum
National Research 120.00 120.00 120.00 117.31
Laboratory for
Conservation of Cultural
Property, Lucknow
Allahabad Museum 144.00 100.00 14.42 1 14.42 112.47
National Museum 350.00 300.00 300.00 237.52
Institute of History of
Art, Conservation and
Museology, New Delhi
Salar Jung Museum 750.00 711.00 711.00 695.94
National Gallery of 450.00 400.00 400.00 233.91
Modern Art
Indian Museum 850.00 398.00 0.00 398.00 397.07
Other Items (Nehru
Centre)
New Schemes 0.00
Modernization of 50.00 0.00 0.00 0.01
Museums in Metro Cities
T
OTAL (Museums) 8314.00 7107.00 164.62 7271.62 6621.57
4 Public Libraries
Raja Rammohun Roy 2500.00 2200.00 219.12 2419.12 2419.12
Library Foundation,
Kolkata
National Library, Kolkata 700.00 497.00 497.00 470.84
Delhi Public Library 250.00 100.00 100.00 100.00
Central Reference 40.00 35.00 6.00 41.00 20.14
Library, Kolkata .
Central Library, Mumbai 20.00 0.00 0.00
Connemera Public 60.00 60.00 60.00 60.00
Library, Chennai

37
1 2 3 4 567
Central Secretariat 200.00 150.00 150.00 119.22
Library
NAPLIS
New Schemes 0.00
National Mission on 50.00 0.00 0.00
Libraries, Leading to the
Formation of a
Commission
T
OTAL (Libraries) 3820.00 3042.00 225.12 3267.12 3189.32
5 Anthropology and
Ethnology
Indira Gandhi Rashtriya 500.00 460.00 60.00 520.00 520.00
Manav Sangrahalaya,
Bhopal
Anthropological Survey 650.00 600.00 173.65 773.65 721.3 2
of India
T
OTAL (Anthropology and 1 150.00 1060.00 233.65 1293.65 1241.32
Ethno.)
6 Promotion and Dissemination of Art
and Culture
6A Akademies
Sangeet Natak Akademi 1050.00 1050.00 394.25 1444.25 1444.25
National School of Drama 1 100.00 1350.00 300.00 1650.00 1649.98
Sahitya Akademi 975.00 960.00 109.69 1069.69 1055.17
Lalit Kala Akademi 550.00 500.00 20.98 520.98 570.98
TOTAL (Akademies) 3675.00 3860.00 824.92 4684.92 4720.38
6B Promotion and
Dissemination
Centre for Cultural 850.00 998.00 140.00 1 138.00 1135.08
Resources and Training
(C.C.R.T.)
Scheme for Award of 450.00 450.00 450.00 450.00
Scholarship/Fellowship to
outstanding artists in the
field of Performing,
Literary and Plastic Arts
Zonal Cultural Centres 1300.00 1100.00 531.14 1631.14 1674.13

38
1 2 3 4 567
Financial assistance for 1 100.00 1100.00 1100.00 1084.57
professional groups and
individual for specific
performing art projects
Building grants to voluntary 700.00 509.00 509.00 339.06
cultural organizations
Assistance to persons 300.00 300.00 300.00 252.17
distinguished in letters, art
and such other walks of
life and their dependents
who may be in indigent
circumstances.
Setting up of Multi- 360.00 416.50 776.50 776.50
Purpose Cultural
Complexes
National Culture Fund 300.00 300.00 300.00 300.00
Assistance to cultural 380.00 171.00 171.00 150.62
organisations with
national presence.
Assistance for promotion 200.00 190.00 190.00 102.47
and dissemination of Tribal/
Folk Art and Culture
Kalakshetra Foundation, 250.00 205.00 1.20 206.20 206.20
Chennai
Financial assistance for 160.00 140.00 140.00 117.69
research support to
voluntary organisation
engaged in cultural activities
Financial assistance for 100.00 75.00 75.00 73.79
the promotion of
Himalyan Art and Culture
Assistance for 400.00 194.00 194.00 153.38
preservation and
promotion of intangible
heritage of humanity
NEW SCHEMES 0.00
Safeguarding and other 10.00 0.00 0.00
protective measures in the
area of intangible heritage
and cultural diversity
(arising out of UNESCO
convention)

39
1 2 3 4 567
National IPR Cell for 10.00 0.00 0.00
Creative Artists and Artisans
Promotion and Dissemination 50.00 0.00 0.00
of Awareness about Indian
Culture and Heritage
Cultural Heritage 20.00 0.00 0.00
V olunteers (CHV) Schemes
Pilot Scheme for Cultural 50.00 0.00 0.00
Industries
engagaging scholars from 0.00 0.00
Indian and Foreign
Institutes to work on
specific projects (FM’s
Budget Announcements)
New Schemes 0.00
Center for Management of 5.00 0.00 0.00
Cultural Resources
Total (Promotion and 6635.00 6092.00 1088.84 7180.84 6815.66
Dissemination of Art
and Culture)
7 Buddhist and Tibetan
Studies
Central Institute of 750.00 600.00 600.00 593.61
Buddhist Studies
Central Institute of 300.00 300.00 300.00 300.00
Higher Tibetan Studies
Assistance for Development 370.00 250.00 145.00 395.00 389.74
of Buddhist/Tibetan
Institutes
Tibet House 30.00 30.00 30.00 30.00
Tawang Monastery 1.00 1.00 40.00 41.00 40.50
T
OTAL (Buddhist and 1451.00 1181.00 185.00 1366.00 1353.85
Tibetan Studies)
8 Other Expenditure
(Memorials)
Nav Nalanda Mahavihara 300.00 200.00 5.50 205.50 204.83
and Huen T Sang
Memorial Hall

40
1 2 3 4 567
Gandhi Smriti and 600.00 600.00 80.00 680.00 680.00
Darshan Samiti
Nehru Memorial Museum 350.00 2350.00 2350.00 2244.96
and Library
Financial Assitance for 1900.00 750.00 750.00 493.00
Khalsa Heritage Project)
Maulana Abul Kalam 400.00 400.00 46.56 446.56 446.56
Azad Institute of Asian
Studies (MAKAI),
Kolkata
New Scheme 0.00
Development of 50.00 50.00 50.00 48.00
Jallianwala Bagh
Memorial
Grants to Sabarmati 3000.00 3000.00 3000.00
Ashram Trust,
Bhandarkar Oriental
Research Institute, Gandhi
Peace Foundation and
Rajendra Smriti
Sangralaya (FM’s Budget
Announcements)
T
OTAL (Other 3600.00 7350.00 132.06 7482.06 7117.35
Expenditure)
9 Indira Gandhi National 4500.00 3700.00 315.38 4015.38 4015.38
Centre for the Arts
10 Direction and Admn. 100.00 70.00 0.00 70.00 68.07
11 Activities for the North 5570.00 4700.00 (-)3443.83 1256.17
East Region @
Total (Revenue) 50700.00 48600.00 48600.00 45648.86
12 Building Projects of 5000.00 3400.00 0.00 3400.00 1397.10
Attached/Subordinate
Offices
Grand Total 55700.00 52000.00 52000.00 47045.96
* including NE
Expenditure
@ provisional
Source: Principal Accounts Office, HRD

41
ANNEXURE-B
(Vide Para 6 of the Report)
MINISTRY OF CULTURE
NON-PLAN ALLOCATION AND EXPENDITURE FOR THE YEAR 2007-08
(Rs. in Lakhs)
Sl. Organization/Scheme B E RE Expenditure
No. 2007-08 2007-08
12 3 4 5
1 Archaeological Survey of India 18550.00 18550.00 18587.14
2 Secretariat and Administration 1 170.00 1170.00 953.21
3 Promotion and Dissemination
3A Akademies
Sangeet Natak Akademi 590.00 620.00 619.46
National School of Drama 445.00 460.00 459.94
Sahitya Akademi 400.00 420.00 419.94
Lalit Kala Akademi 410.00 388.00 365.45
T
OTAL (Akademies) 1845.00 1888.00 1864.79
3B Promotion and Dissemination of Art
and Culture
Centre for Cultural Resources and 230.00 216.00 215.66
Training
Scheme for Award of 110.00 110.00 78.65
Scholarship/Fellowships to
outstanding artists in the field of
Performing, Literary and Plastic Arts
Financial assistance to professional 135.00 134.00 76.81
groups and individual for specified
performing art projects
Assistance to persons distinguised in 155.00 155.00 3.60
letters, art and such other walks of
life and their dependents who may be
in indigent circumstances
Assistance to cultural organizations 195.00 195.00 195.00
(R. K. Mission)
41

42
12 3 4 5
Kalakshetra Foundation, Chennai 290.00 290.00 290.00
Shanker International Children 3.00 3.00 3.00
Competition
Scholarships to young workers in 70.00 70.00 44.06
different cultural fields
Presentation of Books and Art Objects 3.00 0.00
Institutions and individuals 17.00 7.00 7.00
engagaged in literary activities
Gandhi Peace Prize 130.00 130.00 0.43
TOTAL: (promotion and 1338.00 1310.00 914.21
Dissemination)
4 Anthropology and Ethnology
Indira Gandhi Rashtriya Manav 190.00 200.00 200.00
Sangrahalaya, Bhopal
Anthropological Survey of India 1 120.00 1 120.00 1071.63
Total (Anthropology and Ethnology) 1310.00 1320.00 1271.63
5 Archives
National Archives of India 1224.00 1202.00 1065.17
Asiatic Society, Kolkata 500.00 488.00 475.87
Khuda Baksh Oriental Public Library 160.00 147.00 133.98
Rampur Raza Library 115.00 81.00 96.00
TOTAL: (Archives) 1999.00 1918.00 1771.02
6 Buddhist and Tibetan Studies
Central Institute of Higher Tibetan 490.00 452.00 452.00
Studies
Central Institute of Buddhist Studies 300.00 320.00 320.00
Namgyal Research Institute of 40.00 40.00 40.00
Tibetology
TOTAL (Buddhist and T ibetan 830.00 812.00 812.00
Studies)
7 Indira Gandhi National Centre for 0.00 0.00
the Arts
8 Museums
National Museum 804.00 760.00 505.82

43
12 3 4 5
National Council of Science 1640.00 1640.00 1640.00
Museums
Indian Museum 440.00 440.00 248.61
Victoria Memorial Hall 230.00 230.00 230.00
Salar Jung Museum 470.00 485.00 474.40
National Research Laboratory for 185.00 185.00 173.89
Conservation of Cultural Property
National Gallery of Modern Art 175.00 175.00 161.51
Allahabad Museum 120.00 120.00 112.33
National Museum Institute of 17.00 17.00 11.17
History of Arts Conservation and
Museology
Vrindavan Research Institute 17.00 13.00 13.00
T
OTAL (Museums) 4098.00 4065.00 3570.73
9 Public Libraries
National Library 1540.00 1520.00 1414.03
Delhi Public Library 690.00 668.00 645.63
Raja Rammohun Roy Library 210.00 210.00 210.00
Foundation
Central Reference Library 110.00 110.00 106.17
Central Library 30.00 30.00 15.00
Central Secretariat Library 190.00 190.00 75.08
Connemera Public Library 30.00 30.00 30.00
Central Tibetan Library 55.00 55.00 55.00
TOTAL (Public Libraries) 2855.00 2813.00 2550.91
10 International Cultural Relations
Festival of India 400.00 240.00 330.00
Delegation under Cultural Exchange 80.00 50.00 0.82
Programme
TA/DA Hospitality to Non-official 13.00 5.00 1.76
Members
Contribution to International Centre 10.00 10.00 8.72
for Conservation, Rome
International Cultural Activities and 50.00 41.00 46.44
Grant to Indo-friendship Society

44
12 3 4 5
Contribution to World Heritage Fund 7.00 7.00 5.50
Contribution to UNESCO 14.00 14.00
TOTAL (ICR) 574.00 367.00 393.24
11 Other Schemes/Memorials and
Centenaries and Anniversaries
Celebrations
Nehru Memorial Museum and Library 590.00 670.00 669.98
Maintenance of National Memorials 200.00 120.00 1.25
Gandhi Smriti and Darshan Samiti 300.00 279.00 278.86
Scheme for Centenaries and 200.00 200.00 63.36
Anniversaries Celebrations
Nav Nalanda Mahavihara and Huen 130.00 127.00 126.98
T Sang Memorial Hall
Maulana Abul Kalam Azad Institute 65.00 65.00 45.50
of Asian Studies, Kolkata
T
OTAL (Other Expenditure) 1485.00 1461.00 1185.93
12 Celebrations
2550th Anniversary of 500.00 500.00 246.47
Mahaparinirvan of Lord Buddhaa
Celebration of Birth Centenary of 7.00 607.00
Lal Bahadur Shastri
Celebration of 150th Anniversary of 1000.00 7394.00 3557.97
1st War of Independence, 1857
Development of Dandi Heritage 1000.00 1000.00
corridor
Kuka Martyrs Memorial at 100.00 100.00
Mallerkotla, Punjab
Ter-Centenary of Guru-ta-Gaddi 725.00 624.19
TOTAL (Celebrations) 1507.00 10326.00 5528.63
GRAND T OTAL: 37561.00 46000.00 39403.44

45
45
ANNEXURE-C
(Vide para 104 of the Report)
1. MPCC Projects in States(Completed/Full grant Released)
Sl. No. State Location
1 J&K Jammu
2 Karnataka Bellary
3 Karnataka Hassan
4 Kerala Trivandrum
5 Madhya Pradesh Rewa
6 Mizoram Bewarlang
7 Nagaland Mokochung
8 – do – Kohima
9 Pondicherry Pondicherry
10 Punjab Chandigarh
11 Rajasthan Bhilwara
12 Uttar Pradesh V aranasi
13 West Bengal Kolkata (Salt-lake)
14 Himachal Pradesh Gaiety Shimla
15 Orissa Bhubaneshwar
16 Sikkim Gangtok
17 Tripura Agartala
18 Arunachal Pradesh Singchung
19 Meghalaya Williamnagar
20 Assam Zonaki
21 Bihar C hhajubagh, Patna
22 Chhattisgarh Raipur

46
2. MPCC Projects in States (On going)
Sl. No. State Location
1 Andhra Pradesh Kavuri Hills, Hyderabad
2 Arunachal Pradesh Naharlagun
3 Gujarat Gandhinagar
4 Haryana Kurukshetra
5 J&K Leh
6 Maharashtra Nanded
7 Manipur Imphal
8 West Bengal Rodon Squair, Kolkata
9 Andhra Pradesh Hyderabad
10 Andhra Pradesh Miryalguda
11 Andhra Pradesh Suryapet
12 Andhra Pradesh Karimnagar
13 Arunachal Pradesh Shally
14 Arunachal Pradesh Kimim
15 Assam Sisuban,  Gauhati
16 Assam Nazira
17 Jharkhand Hazaribag
18 Kerala Kozhikode
19 Madhya Pradesh Ujjain
20 Madhya Pradesh Jabalpur
21. Madhya Pradesh Gwalior
22 Mizoram Lunglei
23 Nagaland Zuneboto
24 Nagaland Dimapur
25 Uttar Pradesh Gautam-Budh Nagar
26 West Bengal Paschimbanga Bangla Akademy
27 West Bengal Folk and Tribal Cultural Centre

47
47
ANNEXURE-D
(Vide para 107 of the Report)
KALAKSHETRA FOUNDATION
Annual Action Plan 2008-09
(Rs. in lakhs)
Sl. No. Name of the Scheme/Programme Estimated Rs. in
lakhs
(1) (2) (3)
WORKS
I. APRIL – JUNE
1. Museum 5.00
2. Water and Sewage connection 5.00
3. Website and Publicity 10.00
4. Renovation of Class Rooms 15.00
5. Construction of Painting Section 20.00
TOTAL: 55.00
II. JULY – SEPTEMBER
1. Landscaping 5.00
2. Reception and Information Centre 15.00
3. Research and Development 10.00
4. Theatre Upgradation 80.00
5. Toilet Blocks 15.00
TOTAL: 125.00
III. OCTOBER-DECEMBER
1. Renovation of Seshammal and Rukmini Vihar 20.00
2. Furniture and Equipment 10.00
TOTAL: 30.00
IV. JANUARY – MARCH
1. Documentation of Dance Dramas 90.00
TOTAL: 90.00
GRAND T OTAL: 300.00

MINUTES

50

51
VIII
EIGHTH MEETING
The Committee met at 3:00 P.M. on Thursday the 18th December, 2008 in Committee
Room ‘E’, Basement, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Sitaram Yechury — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Naresh Gujral
3. Shri Birendra Prasad Baishya
LOK SABHA
4. Shri Anandrao Vithoba Adsul
5. Shri Joachim Baxla
6. Shri Sartaj Singh Chhatwal
7. Shri N.S.V . Chitthan
8. Shri Adhir Chowdhury
9. Dr. K. Dhanaraju
10. Shrimati Priya Dutt
11. Dr. Ramkrishna Kusmaria
12. Shri Rakesh Singh
SECRETARIAT
Shri N.K. Singh, Joint Secretary
Shri Jagdish Kumar, Joint Director
Shri Swarabji B., Deputy Director
Shrimati Nidhi Chaturvedi, Committee Officer
2. The Committee considered the draft 143rd, 144th, 145th, 146th and 147th Reports on the
Action Taken by the Government on the recommondations/observations of the Committee
contained in its (i) One Hundred and Thirty Fourth Report on Demands for Grants 2008-09 of
the Department of Shipping; (ii) One Hundred and Thirty Fifth Report on Demands for Grants
2008-09 of the Department of Road, Transport and Highways; (iii) One Hundred and Thirty
Sixth Report on Demands for Grants 2008-09 of the Ministry of Tourism; (iv) One Hundred and
Thirty Seventh Report on Demands for Grants 2008-09 of the Ministry of Culture; and (v) One
Hundred and Thirty Eighth Report on Demands for Grants 2008-09 of the Ministry of Civil
Aviation respectively. After some discussion, the Committee adopted all the reports without any
modifications.
51

52
3. Thereafter, the Committee authorized its Chairman and in his absence Shri Birendra Prasad
Baishya to present the reports to the Rajya Sabha and Shri Adhir Chowdhury and Shrimati Priya
Dutt to lay the reports on the Table of the Lok Sabha on 19th December, 2008.
4. * * *
5. The Committee then adjourned at 3:30 
P.M.
*** Relates to other matters.

Printed at : Bengal Offset Works, 335 Khajoor Road, Karol Bagh, New Delhi-110005.