 
 
       
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
March, 2023/ Phalguna, 1944 (Saka) 
 
REPORT NO. 
340 
THREE HUNDRED FORTIETH REPORT  
Demands for Grants (2023-24) of Ministry of Culture  
 
 (Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 13th March, 2023) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 13th March, 2023) 
 

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Website:     https://rajyasabha.nic.in  
 E-mail:     rsc-tt@sansad.nic.in 
 

 
 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT,  
TOURISM AND CULTURE 
 
 
THREE HUNDRED FORTIETH REPORT  
Demands for Grants (2023-24) of Ministry of Culture  
 
 (Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 13th March, 2023) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 13th March, 2023) 
 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
March, 2023/ Phalguna, 1944 (Saka) 
 
 
 
 
Hindi version of this publication is also available 

 
 
 
C O N T E N T S 
 
P A G E S 
 
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE     i 
2. INTRODUCTION       ii 
3. ACRONYMS               iii-v 
 4. REPORT                                1-62 
5. RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS-AT A GLANCE   63-91 
6. ANNEXURES        92-142   
    7. *MINUTES   
 
         
        
        
      
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
______________________________________ 
 
*To be appended  
143-150


i 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE  
 (2022-23) 
 (Constituted on 13th September, 2022) 
 
1. Shri V. Vijayasai Reddy                          - Chairman 
 
    RAJYA SABHA 
 
2. Shri Mohammed Nadimul Haque 
3. Shrimati S. Phangnon Konyak 
4. Shri Jugalsinh Lokhandwala 
5. Shri Manas Ranjan Mangaraj 
6. Dr. Sonal Mansingh 
7. Shrimati Rajani Ashokrao Patil 
8. Shri A. A. Rahim 
9. Dr. C. M. Ramesh 
10. Shri Vinay Dinu Tendulkar 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
11. Shri Anto Antony 
12.  Shri Margani Bharat 
13.  Shri Tapir Gao  
14.  Shri Rahul Kaswan 
15.  Shri Ramesh Chandra Majhi 
16.  Shri Sunil Baburao Mendhe 
17.  Shri K. Muraleedharan 
18.  Shri S. S. Palanimanickam 
19.  Shri Chhedi Paswan   
20.  Shri Kamlesh Paswan  
21.  Shri Sunil Kumar Pintu 
22.  Shri Prince Raj 
23.  Shri Tirath Singh Rawat 
24.  Shrimati Mala Roy 
25.  Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
26.  Shri Dushyant Singh 
27.  Shri Rajbahadur Singh 
28.  Shri Ramdas C. Tadas 
29.  Shri Manoj Tiwari 
30.  Shri Krupal Balaji Tumane 
31.  Shri Dinesh Lal Yadav “Nirahua” 
 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Sumant Narain, Joint Secretary 
Shri Swarabji B., Director 
Shrimati Monica Baa, Additional Director 
Shrimati Subha Chandrashekar, Deputy Secretary 
Shri Ranajit Chakraborty, Under Secretary 
Shri Gaurav Singh Gahlain, Assistant Committee Officer  

ii 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairman, Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport, 
Tourism and Culture, having been authorized by the Committee to present on its behalf, do 
hereby present this Three Hundred Fortieth Report on  Demands for Grants (2023 -24) o f 
Ministry of Culture.  
2. The Committee, at its meeting held on 1 5th February, 2023 considered the subject and 
heard the Secretary and other officials of Ministry of Culture.  
3.  The Committee wishes to express its thanks to the officers of Ministry of Culture for 
placing before the Committee , the material and information desired in connection with the 
subject and for clarifying the points raised by the Members. 
4. The Committee considered and adopted the Report in its meeting held on the  6th 
March, 2023.   
 
 
(V. Vijayasai Reddy) 
NEW DELHI;                                                           Chairman, 
March 6, 2023                                                          Department-related Parliamentary Standing            
Phalguna 15, 1944 (Saka)                                Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture, 
                                                                                                                                 Rajya Sabha 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

iii 
 
 
ACRONYMS 
AAH Adopt a Heritage 
ACP Annual Conservation Plan  
AES Advanced Encryption System 
AKAM Azadi Ka Amrit Mahotsav 
AMASR Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Sites and Remains 
AMC Annual Maintenance Contract 
ASI Archaeological Survey of India 
BE Budget Estimates 
BISAG Bhaskaracharya Institute for Space Applications and Geo-informatics 
BTI Buddhist Tibetan Institutions 
CAG Comptroller and Auditor General  
CCRT Centre for Cultural Resources and Training 
CCTV Closed Circuit Television 
CFI Consolidated Fund of India 
CFY Current Financial Year 
CISF Central Industrial Security Force 
CNA Central Nodal Agency 
COVID Coronavirus Disease 
CPM Centrally Protected Monument 
CPWD Central Public Works Department 
CS Central Sector 
CSR Corporate Social Responsibility 
CSV Somma-Separated Values 
DA Dearness Allowance 
DOD Digital on Demand 
DPC Departmental Promotion Committees 
DPI Dots Per Inch 
DPR Detailed Project Report 
DR Direct Recruitment 
DRC Documentation Resource Centre 
EFC Expenditure Finance Committee 
FY Financial Year 
GDP Gross Domestic Product 
GIA Grants-in-Aid 
GOI Government of India 
GST Goods and Services Tax 
HBL Heritage By-Law 
IBC International Buddhist Confederation 
ICT Information, Computer, Telecommunications  
IGNCA Indira Gandhi National Centre for the Arts 
IGRMS Indira Gandhi Rashtriya Manav Sangrahalaya 
IIT Indian Institute of Technology 

iv 
 
INTACH Indian National Trust for Arts and Cultural Heritage 
IT Information Technology 
LDC Lower Division Clerk 
LiDAR Light Detection and Ranging 
LTC Leave Travel Concession 
LZW Lempel-Ziv-Welch 
MG Mahatma Gandhi 
MGMD Mera Gaon Meri Darohar 
MOC Ministry of Culture 
MOU Memorandum of Understanding  
MTS Multi-Tasking Staff 
NAI National Archives of India 
NCEP National Cultural Exchange Programme 
NCF National Culture Fund  
NE North East 
NER North Eastern Region 
NGMA National Gallery of Modern Art 
NGO Non-Governmental Organisation 
NIC National Informatics Centre 
NMA National Monuments Authority 
NMCM National Mission on Cultural Mapping 
NMMA National Mission on Monuments and Antiquities  
NRLC National Research Laboratory for Conservation of Cultural Property 
OC Object Head 
OCR Optical Recognition process 
PM Prime Minister 
POD Page on Demand 
PPP Public Private Partnership  
RCP Revised Conservation Plan  
RE Revised Estimate 
RR Recruitment Rules 
RSM Rashtriya Sanskriti Mahotsav  
SCO Shanghai Cooperation Organsiation 
SFC Standing Finance Committee 
SOP Standard Operating Procedure 
SSC Staff Selection Commission 
TA Travelling Allowance 
TIFF Tag Image File Format 
UK United Kingdom 
UNESCO United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization 
UP Uttar Pradesh 
UPSC Union Public Service Commission 
USA United States of America 
UT Union Territory 
VLE Village Level Entrepreneur  

v 
 
VMH Victoria Memorial Hall 
WTM Whole Time Members  
XRD X-ray Diffraction  
XRF X-ray Fluorescence  
ZCC Zonal Cultural Centre 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Page 1 of 142 
 
 
REPORT 
 
BRIEF BACKGROUND 
Indian culture and heritage is one of the oldest and richest in the world, dating back to 
several millennia. It is a diverse blend of various customs, beliefs, traditions, and values that 
have evolved over time and have been shaped by different religions, languages, and historical 
events. India's cultural and spiritual heritage is reflected in its architecture, literature, music, 
dance, cuisine, and festivals, which continue to fascinate and inspire people from all over the 
world. From the ancient Indus Valley civilization to the present day, Indian culture has 
witnessed numerous influences and transformations. This makes it a unique and dynamic 
tapestry of humanity's collective experience. 
2. Broadly, this Ministry is working on the protection, development and promotion of all 
types of Heritage and Culture namely, Tangible Heritage, Intangible Heritage and 
Knowledge Heritage. In addition, the Ministry also harbour s the responsibility of Gandhian 
Heritage and Commemoration of important historical events and centenaries of great 
personalities. 
3. Major programmes/activities of the Ministry of Culture relating to promotion, 
dissemination, preservation and conservation of the cultural heritage of the country are being 
implemented through a network of two attached offices, six subordinate offices, one statutory 
body, thirty-three Autonomous organisations and one charitable trust under its control. The 
Ministry also implements schemes for promotion and dissemination of Art and Culture under 
umbrella(s) namely; Centenaries & Anniver saries Scheme, Kala Sanskriti Vi kas Yojna, 
Development of Museum, Development of Libraries & Archives, Global Engagement & 
International Coopera tion and National Mission on Cultural Mapping and Roadmap. 
Activities of National Gandhi Heritage Site Mission are undertaken through Kala Sanskriti 
Vikas Yojna. The Ministry has no Centrally Sponsored Schemes.  
 

Page 2 of 142 
 
 
ANALYSIS OF DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2023 -24) and PAST PERFORMANCE OF 
THE MINISTRY  
B.E. 2023-24: Salient features and Projected Demand vs Allocation 
4. The budget for 2023 -24 for the Ministry of Culture has been pegged at Rs. 3399.65 
crore, consisting of Rs. 3114.25 crore under Revenue and Rs. 285.40 crore under Capital 
heads for undertaking various prioritized programmes/activities/projects. This budgetary 
allocation is about 12.98% more than the budgetary provisions at BE 2022-23. The projected 
demand of the Ministry for 2023-24 was 3989.18 crore.  
5. The salient features of the new rationalized structure under Revenue and Capital 
allocation for 2023 -24 along with allocation made by the Ministry of Culture under each 
Umbrella Scheme/ Group vis-à-vis projected demand, are placed at Annexure-I: 
 
6. The below figures depict the breakup of the BE (2023 -24) allocation and projected 
demand versus allocation under the various heads. 
 
 
 


Page 3 of 142 
 
 
 
7. The Ministry stated that considering the shortfall in the approved allocation of BE 
2023-24, and  upon analysing the expenditure trend of FY 2022 -23, it has ensured an optimal 
distribution of funds across various sectors in FY 2023 -24. It furnished the follow ing 
information with regard to the shortfall in allocation: 
  


Page 4 of 142 
 
8. The Ministry stated that it would have to reorient its activities in such a way that 
important activities would not suffer for want of funds in the Year 2023 -24. However, it is 
expected that deficiency in funds ,if any, would be adequately addressed by the Ministry of 
Finance through an advance from the contingency fund of India/at  the supplementary stage/ 
at the Revised Estimate stage of FY 2023-24. 
 
9. The Committee noted that the allocation  for the Ministry of Culture is just 0.075% of 
the total budget this year. This is in sharp contrast to countries such as China, the UK, the 
USA, Singapore and Australia, which spend roughly 2 – 5% of their budget on the promotion 
of arts and culture.  
 
10. In response, the Ministry stated that it may not be tenable for a developing nation like 
India to allocate a considerable proportion of its public fund in the area of promotion of art 
and culture given the high disparity it experiences in elementary ru ral infrastructures like 
health, education and transportation etc. as against the countries in comparison. However, 
this Ministry has been consistently able to increase its budgetary outlays over the years 
except in the Covid pandemic period where priority  was given to other social sector 
ministries.  Though the approved budget outlay for the Ministry is a relative increase with 
respect to the previous financial year, the Ministry had projected around Rs. 3989 crore as a 
result of an overwhelming increase i n the number of activities by all organisations/offices 
under the ambit of Ministry of Culture. This is an achievable budget at RE 2023 -24 stage 
provided a good pace of expenditure is maintained in the next FY as well.  It may also be 
noted that apart from the union government spending on the promotion of arts and culture, a 
considerable part of the public spending is also made by the state governments in the field of 
art and culture which is not captured in the overall spent. 
11. The Ministry further menti oned that while a majority of the amount spent on art and 
culture is from the non -government sources for the counties in comparison, this may not be 
true for our county. Hence, the Ministry is trying and evolving innovative methods to 
maximise the particip ation of non -government organisations in the field of promotion and 
conservation of art and culture. Monument Mitra, NCF etc. are examples of such initiatives. 
This Ministry believes that Culture should be an area where a large part of expenditure needs 
to be sourced from non -government sources. Moreover, the Ministry of culture is taking a 
phenomenal role in supporting non -governmental organisations/voluntary organisations 
through its schemes/ organisations for participating in overall propagation, preserv ation and 
promotion of all forms of art and culture. This can be considered to have a ripple effect on 
the budget utilised by the Ministry. 
12. An year-on-year increase of BE is depicted in the table below: 
 

Page 5 of 142 
 
(Rs. in crore) 
Year Allocation % change w.r.t. last allocation 
2015-16 2169.00 - 
2016-17 2500.00 15.26% 
2017-18 2738.47 9.54% 
2018-19 2843.32 3.83% 
2019-20 3042.35 7.00% 
2020-21 3149.86 3.53% 
2021-22 2687.99 -14.66% 
2022-23 3009.05 11.94% 
2023-24 3399.65 12.98% 
 
13. The Committee notes that the Ministry has been awarded 85 percent of its 
projected demand for BE 2023 -24. The shortfall in demand versus allocation has 
increased from 11 percent at BE stage in 2022 -23 to 15 percent in 2023 -24. Moreover, 
the allocation made  to various Central Sector Schemes is much lower vis -à-vis the 
demand of the Ministry. This includes allocations under Support to Akademies (63.9% 
of demand), Support to Museums (76.1%), Support to Libraries (70%) and Buddhist 
Tibetan Institutions and Memo rials (62.8%). These heads support the expenditure of 
various autonomous bodies such as Sangeet Natak Akademi, Indian Museum (Kolkata), 
Delhi Public Library, Central Institute of Buddhist Studies. The Committee desires to 
be apprised of the broad impact of  the shortfall on the activities of the various 
autonomous bodies under these heads.  
14. The Ministry of Culture shoulders the crucial responsibility of the preservation, 
development and promotion of the country's tangible as well as intangible heritage. 
Keeping this in mind, the Committee is convinced that the BE allocation of 3399.65 
crores for 2022-23 does not suffice the fund requirements of the Ministry. This is likely 
to adversely affect the vital projects, activities and schemes planned by the Minis try for 
2023-24.  
15. The allocation of Rs. 3399 crores for BE 2023 -24 is ~13 percent higher than BE 
2022-23 and ~1 percent higher than RE 2022 -23. However, the Committee notes that 
the increase of 1 percent as compared to RE 2022 -23 is not sufficient to c over the 
impact of inflation. The spending power of the Ministry will actually decrease in 2023 -
24.  
16. The Committee also takes note of the year -on-year change in the budgetary 
allocation of the Ministry. The budget of the Ministry has increased from ₹2169 crores 
in 2015-16 to ~ ₹3400 crores in 2023 -24, an increase of 57 percent. In comparison, the 

Page 6 of 142 
 
total budget of the Government in this period has risen from ₹17.77 lakh crores to 
₹45.03 lakh crore, an increase of 153 percent. 
17. In view of these observations, the Committee recommends that the Ministry may 
underscore the importance of its mandated duties to the Ministry of Finance for higher 
allocation at R.E. stage. Ministry of Finance may be requested to minimise the shortfall 
in allocation vis-à-vis the projected demand. The Ministry may also ensure that the 
funds allocated to it are fully utilised to permit higher allocations at future stages. 
18. The Committee agrees with the submission that a majority of the amount spent 
on art and culture in many countries is from non -government sources. The Committee 
suggests that the Ministry should increase its focus on encouraging private 
participation in the art and culture sector.  
19. The Ministry should try to attract investment from private organisati ons under 
Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR) funds, besides seeking investments through 
Public Private Partnership (PPP) route. Private sector's active participation will help 
the Ministry reach the desired level of investment in India's Culture and Her itage 
sector. This would enable much better preservation and development of monuments 
and museums in the country. It would also help India become a more attractive tourist 
destination. 
20. As regards new projects/ schemes planned by the Ministry for the ye ar 2023-24, the 
Ministry stated that its  six Central Sector Schemes would be continued in FY 2023 -24 and 
sufficient funds have been allocated in this sector. An additional Rs. 11 crore for G20 related 
expenses are allocated for the Ministry. Sufficient fun ds are also allocated to the project “Art 
work in the new Parliament Building” which commenced in the FY 2022 -23 and is planned 
to be completed by FY 2023 -24. New projects like “Gokhale hall”, “Kedarnath 
redevelopment” etc . are planned for FY 2023 -24. It i s reiterated that all efforts would be 
made so that deficiency in funds would be adequately addressed through an advance from 
CFI/ at supplementary stage/ at Revised Estimate stage of FY 2023-24. 
21. The Committee appreciates the assurance given by the Min istry that no activity 
will be compromised for want of funds. 
22. From the year 2023 -24 onwards, the Ministry of Finance has further classified the 
budget heads under Revenue and Capital section. This classification has further rationalised 
the expenditure under both sections of expenditure. For e.g. the ‘Head -01 Salary, Sumptuary 
allowances’ has been segregated and the components like LTC, Dearness allowances etc. 
which were part of the salary have been put under new budget heads.  Similarly, ‘Office 
expenses -13’ under revenue has been further rationalised and new heads have been created 
for a number of items of expenditure which are components of this head at present. With the 

Page 7 of 142 
 
expansion and use of IT/digitization in the day to day life and official activ ities, the head 
which is being used to gather information on IT is presently under Revenue section only. In 
the new classification the same has been bifurcated in both the section of expenditure 
depending on the cost and longevity of the equipment purchase d under machinery & 
equipment head and under ICT. Under the Capital section ‘Major works -53’, the expenditure 
presently captures the expenditure as codified in CPWD code. In the revised classification, 
this head has been done away w.e.f. 2023 -24 and seven separate heads have been created 
under the Capital section of Expenditure. Several other new budgetary heads have been 
created in the revenue section from 2023 -24. Classification of the new Budget heads would 
capture a crystallised picture of expenditure in both sections from 2023-24. 
 
23. In its meeting held on 15 th February, 2023, the Committee noted that in BE 2023 -24, 
₹3114 crores  has been allocated towards revenue while only ₹285 crores is towards capital 
expenditure. As regards the adequacy of the ca pital allocation, the Secretary, MoC informed 
that allocation made to autonomous bodies is given under revenue head even though part of 
the funds is spent for capital works. The total amount spent on capital purposes was Rs. 750 
crores out of Rs. 3,400 crores in 2022-23. The Ministry expects capital expenditure for 2023-
24 to be around Rs. 1,000 crores in 2023 -24.He highlighted that this is an accounting 
anomaly and assured that the Ministry will try to have it corrected. 
 
24. The Committee notes that Capital investments generate future cash flows for the 
national economy. Capital figures are factored into macroeconomic indicators such as 
Capex-to-GDP. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the expenditure made for 
capital purposes should be correctly ref lected in the budget figures. The Ministry may 
ensure that this accounting anomaly is corrected as soon as possible.  
 
Expenditure under various heads in the ongoing Financial Year 2022-23 
25. The approved outlay of the Ministry for 2022 -23 was Rs.3009.05 crore. At RE 2022 -
23 stage the outlay has been increased to Rs.3363.07 crore. Against the approved outlay, the 
Ministry has incurred an expenditure of Rs. 2302.74 crore by 31 January 2023. Sect or-wise 
/programme–wise / scheme-wise allocation and expenditure has been tabulated at Annexure-
II.  
  
26. The Ministry highlighted the peculiar nature of the expenditure pattern made by the 
offices/ organisations working under MoC through the following points: 
  
27. The budget of the Ministry of Culture is essentially an institution-based one. From the 
table above, it is clear that a major portion of the budgetary allocation of the Ministry is 
distributed to its 2 Attached Offices,  6 Subordinate offices and 34 Autonomous 
Organizations. The institutions like Archaeological Survey of India (ASI) consume about 

Page 8 of 142 
 
one-third of the total Revenue allocation of the Ministry. Archaeological Survey of India 
spends a substantial portion of its f unds regularly on Conservation and Preservation of 
Monuments, as also on new excavation projects. Archaeological Survey of India is in a 
position to incur large sums of expenditure only after the monsoon season is over every year. 
As the Centrally Protected Monuments are spread all over the country, the work relating to 
their upkeep, conservation, preservation and peripheral development get affected in an 
adverse manner during the monsoon season, resulting in slow progress of budgetary 
expenditure during this period (first two quarters). 
28. The Ministry of Culture extends financial assistance under various schemes in the 
form of Grant -in-aid to institutions / voluntary cultural organizations and individuals 
including fellowships to Artists Pension regularly . These beneficiaries are extended financial 
assistance on the basis of recommendations / approval of the Expert Committees / Finance 
Committees constituted for the purpose under each scheme. The time gap of procedural 
formalities such as constitution of t hese Expert Committees, meetings of the Committees, 
finalization of eligible beneficiary institutions/individuals on the recommendations of these 
Committees and release of grants to the eligible institutions / individuals could be very well 
appreciated. Th e procedural formalities which take time, lead to slow pace of expenditure 
normally during the initial quarters of FY. 
29. Exhibitions / Festivals are organized by the Ministry of Culture during the last two 
quarters of the financial year leading to higher  expenditure during this period under the 
budget sub-heads as compared to the previous two quarters. 
30. Moreover, this year four out of the six CS schemes of the Ministry had to be migrated 
to the CNA model for release of funds. The Ministry faced a lot o f technical constraints 
which affected the smooth flow of funds under these schemes and thereby expenditure was 
not booked as anticipated. 
31. The Ministry stated that it had nonetheless made its best effort to allocate and incur 
expenditure in such a mann er that it adhered to the cash management guidelines issued by 
Ministry of Finance for better fiscal discipline. Till 3 rd quarter of FY 2022 -23, the Ministry 
had incurred an expenditure of Rs. 2006.9 crs as against the allocation of Rs.3009.05 crore. 
Moreover, an amount of Rs. 107.37 crore was utilised by this time from Contingency Fund of 
India, which had resulted in a total expenditure of Rs. 2114.28 crore  (70.26% of BE 2022 -
23). 
  
32. However, at the RE stage of FY 2022 -23, the budget of the Ministry was  revised and 
an additional Rs. 354.02 crore was approved. Hence, there would be a higher expenditure in 
the last quarter mostly due to the upward revision of funds in RE 2022-23. 
  

Page 9 of 142 
 
33. The Committee observes that the Ministry has managed to spend just above two-
third of its R.E. 2022 -23 allocation in the first ten months of the FY 2022 -23. The 
Committee recommends that the Ministry may make concerted efforts to ensure 
maximum permitted utilisation of available funds. This is crucially important in order 
to meet the various targets set for the ongoing financial year. The Committee notes the 
issues that have affected the quality of utilisation by the Ministry. Constrained fund 
utilisation of the available budgets in any sector may be avoided through coordinate d 
policy measures to ensure improved fund flow and utilisation. The Committee hopes 
that the Ministry fully spends the balance 31.5% of its RE 2022-23 allocation in the next 
2 months of FY 2022 -23. The Committee recommends that the Ministry may take 
suitable measures to avoid expenditure rush in the last quarter in FY 2023-24. 
 
Optimal Utilisation of Funds 
34. The Ministry furnished the below details with regard to its expenditure vis-à-vis since 
2017-18. 

Page 10 of 142 
 
 
35. The Ministry of Culture has been steadily enhancing its expenditure profile which 
saw a dip in the pandemic affected periods.  Various initiatives have been brought in place in 
order to optimise the utilisation of the approved outlay. Beginning with timely and systematic 
review of the activities an d related expenditure by the Bureau Heads and detailed 
examination of expenditure profile of the Ministry by the Secretary and Financial Adviser in 
Senior Officers meeting, there have been quite a number of preventive measures undertaken 
by the Ministry. 
36. Autonomous Bodies under the Ministry of Culture as per their mandate are organising 
programs and schemes on the pre-planned schedules.  Hence the funds released are utilised in 
a timely manner and successive releases are processed promptly. Suitable cla use are also 
invariably inserted in the Memorandum of Understandings (MoUs) being signed between the 
Ministry of Culture and the Autonomous bodies to emphasise the requirement on the part of 
the Autonomous bodies to furnish Utilisation Certificates to the Ministry before releasing 
further grant. Re-appropriations of funds to the required sectors are also ensured for a smooth 


Page 11 of 142 
 
and timely utilisation of funds. As far as the schemes are concerned, in an aim to give wide 
publicity of various schemes, updated inf ormation, guidelines, etc. of the schemes are 
uploaded on the website of the Ministry from time to time. This is in addition to the 
publication of advertisements seeking applications from organisations/individuals under 
various schemes in newspapers across  the country and uploading on the Website of the 
Ministry/Nodal organisations. Further, in order to remove the backlog in execution of 
schemes and bring it at par with the current financial year, the meetings of Expert Committee 
for two grants years were h eld in the current financial year in respect of Financial Assistance 
for promotion of Guru-Shishya Parampara (Repertory Grant) and Scheme of Scholarship and 
Fellowship for Promotion of Art and Culture. Similarly , the meetings which include NIC 
meeting unde r chairmanship of Hon’ble Home Minister, Grant Examination &  Appraisal 
meetings in Ministry under the C&M Schemes, were held on a regular basis.  
37. The Committee is glad to note that the Ministry has held Expert C ommittee 
meetings, NIC meetings and  Appraisal meetings etc. on a regular basis to remove the 
backlog in the execution of schemes.  
38. It is evident that the Ministry has consistently utilised more than 90 percent of 
its B.E. allocation in the last few years, except for the COVID-impacted FY 2019-20 and 
2020-21. The Committee recommends that the Ministry may continue to ensure optimal 
utilisation of the funds available at its disposal in the upcoming years.  
39. The Committee hopes that the Ministry of Finance may also factor in the 
consistent pattern of fund utilisation by the Ministry of Culture while deciding upon 
allocations to MoC in the future. 
 
Targets and Achievements of the Ministry vis-à-vis Output Outcome Framework 
for the year 2022-23  
40. The Committee sought to know about the ne w activities/projects initiated by the 
Ministry during the year 2022-23 and what is their current status. Apart from the ongoing CS 
schemes of the Ministry, two major projects have been initiated by the Ministry in the current 
FY viz. 1) Art work in New pa rliament Building and 2) National Experimental Site Museum 
at Vadnagar. These projects would be continued in FY 2023 -24 and sufficient funds are 
made available in BE 2023 -24.Other projects in pipeline are 1) Gokhle hall 2) Kedarnath 
redevelopment 3) Scienc e City at Hyderabad etc. These projects are at the initial stage of 
appraisal and approval and hence, requisite funds were not approved at BE 2023 -24 stage. 
The Ministry is hopeful that deficiency in funds would be adequately addressed by the 
Ministry of F inance through an advance from Contingency Fund of India/at supplementary 
stage/ at Revised Estimate stage of FY 2023-24. 

Page 12 of 142 
 
41. The Committee notes the various new projects planned by the Ministry for the 
FY 2023-24. The Committee desires to be apprised of t he expected completion date for 
the National Experimental Site Museum at Vadnagar. The Ministry may ensure that a 
strict timeline is formulated for all the new projects to be taken up in the upcoming 
Financial Year. 
  
42. Targets identified and achievement s made as committed in SFC/EFC of the CS 
schemes administered by the Ministry are reflected in the Output & Outcome Framework 
document prepared under the guidelines of NITI Aayog every year. The document depicts 
the financial allocations to the schemes and  physical targets achieved during the year. The 
physical targets are reconciled on an annual basis against the measurable indicators which 
are captured by NITI Aayog through the DEMO dashboard. Further, the major achievements 
of the Ministry of culture hav e been compiled for the year till December 2022, and are 
placed at Annexure-III.   
 
43. The Committee appreciates the good progress made by the Ministry in meeting a 
majority of the targets set under the Output Outcome Framework. The Committee 
notes that in many cases such as the number of gurus and artists financially supported, 
the Ministry has comfortably exceeded the set targets. The Committee recommends 
that the Ministry may duly factor in the achievements of the previous year and set 
higher targets for the next year, as may be permitted by the available allocations. 
44. The Committee notes that the pace of progress under some important output 
and outcome indicators has been slow in the ongoing FY 2022 -23. These include the 
number of new museums setup with financial assistance under the Museum Grant 
Scheme, number of Museum and Library professionals trained, number of 
programmes conducted for promotion of culture of science, and so on . The Committee 
recommends that the Ministry may look into the reasons  for under -achievement of 
targets in each such case. The bottlenecks being faced in achieving the targets may be 
effectively addressed to ensure higher pace of progress in the FY 2023-24. 
 
Issues related to Human Resources 
45. The Ministry has been taking initiatives for filling up the vacancies existing in its 
organisations. This subject has been made as a main agenda point in the SOMs chaired by the 
Secretary and periodical review on the progress made by the divisions are made. Instructions 
have been issu ed to take necessary actions so that all roadblocks in respect of filling up of 
vacancies are cleared at the earliest.   
46. Sanctioned Strength and Employees In -Position in respect of Ministry Of Culture & 
its Attached &  Subordinate Offices for the year 2023 -24 are placed at Annexure-IV. The 

Page 13 of 142 
 
percentage of Group A, B, C and Total Vacancies existing under each organisation is shown 
below. 
 
47. Special initiatives taken by different organisations under Ministry of Culture i s 
attached at Annexure-V. 
48. The Committee notes that most of the organisations under the Ministry of 
Culture are functioning with a very high level of vacancies across Group A, B as well as 
C. Barring the Ministry of Culture (Establishment), all organisa tions have more than 
35% vacancies in Group A posts. The Committee recommends that the Ministry may 
analyse the impact of the high number of vacancies presently existing in all its 
organisations. The Ministry should take urgent action to ensure that adequa te staff is 
recruited to enable these organisations to fulfil their mandate in letter and spirit. 
49. The Committee takes note of the initiatives being taken by various organisations 
to fill the vacancies. The Committee hopes that all concerned agencies in cluding UPSC 
and SSC may ensure that the targeted recruitment schedule stays on track and the 
advertised vacancies get filled at the earliest. 


Page 14 of 142 
 
50. The Committee takes special note of the fact that all 5 posts of Whole Time 
Members (WTMs) of National Monume nts Authority are vacant at present. It may be 
difficult for the NMA to work to its full potential without any in -position WTMs. The 
Committee recommends that the appointment of the WTMs may be expedited so as to 
enable NMA to effectively work on the important functions under its purview. 
 
ARCHAEOLOGICAL SURVEY OF INDIA 
51. The Archaeological Survey of India (ASI), under the Ministry of Culture, is the 
premier organization for the archaeological researches and protection of the cultural heritage 
of the nation. Maintenance of ancient monuments and archaeological sites and remains of 
national importance is the prime concern of the ASI. Besides it regulate all archaeological 
activities in the country as per the provisions of the Ancient Monuments and Archae ological 
Sites and Remains Act, 1958. It also regulates Antiquities and Art Treasure Act, 1972. 
52. For the maintenance of ancient monuments and archaeological sites and remains of 
national importance the entire country is divided into 37 Circles. The organization has a large 
work force of trained archaeologists, conservators, epigraphist, architects and scientists for 
conducting archaeological research projects through its Circles, Museums, Excavation 
Branches, Prehistory Branch, Epigraphy Branches, Scienc e Branch, Horticulture Branch, 
Building Survey Project, Temple Survey Projects and Underwater Archaeology Wing. 
Allocation and Expenditure Pattern 
53. The relevant details pertaining to projected demand, actual allocation and expenditure 
details of ASI are tabulated below. It may be reasonably inferred from the tabulated data that 
ASI has been consistent in utilization of the ASI R.E. budget allocation over the years. 
54. Below is a pictorial representation of the B.E. allocation vs  expenditure pattern of 
ASI since 2017-18. 

Page 15 of 142 
 
 
55. The Committee is pleased to note that there has been a consistent pattern of 
utilisation of funds available with ASI in the recent years, barring the years impacted 
by the Coronavirus pandemic. The Committee , however, observes that the allocation 
made to ASI at the B.E. stage has failed to reach the levels of the allocation made in 
2020-21. ASI has been allocated Rs. 1102.83 crores at B.E. 2023 -24 stage, which is 
91.8% of its projected demand.  
56. The Committee notes the submission of the Ministry that it is trying to evolve 
innovative methods to maximise the participation of non -government organisations in 
the field of promotion and conservation of art and culture. The Committee feels that till 
the time a sa tisfactory level of investment is made by the private sector, the Ministry 
should ensure that adequate funds are available with ASI to perform its crucial duty of 
preservation of monuments. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry 
may seek additional funds to ensure that ASI’s projected demands are met at the R.E. 
2023-24 stage. 


Page 16 of 142 
 
57. The head-wise B.E. 2023 -24 allocation figures of ASI along with projected demand 
and justification is enclosed as Annexure-VI. 
58. The Committee notes that under t he head ‘Restoration of Unprotected 
Monuments - Minor Works’, the Ministry has been allocated an amount of Rs. 2.50 
crores at BE 2023-24 against its projected demand of Rs. 5.00 crores to meet anticipated 
expenditure for restoration of unprotected monuments such as Badrinath.  
59. In its 294 th Report on the subject ‘Development and Conservation of Museums 
and Archaeological sites - Challenges and Opportunities’, the Committee had noted 
that in 2007, National Mission on Monuments &  Antiquities aimed to list 500,000 
heritage buildings. The Committee notes that about 3,693 monuments fall under the 
protection of the Central Government while around 4,500 monuments are protected by 
the State/UT Governments. It is evident that a large num ber of valuable historical 
monuments are presently not under any sort of protection by the Government.  
60. The amount of Rs. 5 crores sought by ASI for restoration of unprotected 
monuments is in itself a minor amount given the huge number of such monuments.  
61. The Committee recommends that the Ministry may request the Ministry of 
Finance to allocate sufficient funds under this head to enable ASI to carry out its 
planned activities for restoration of unprotected monuments. 
Vacancies in ASI 
62. The total s anctioned strength of ASI is 8,778 and in -position staff strength is 5,488. 
Hence, there are a total of 3,290 vacant posts in ASI. The following steps have been taken for 
filling the vacancies:- 
● Steps have been taken to amend the RRs expeditiously. 
● Requisitions for filling up posts through UPSC and SSC have been submitted. 
● Steps have been taken to fill up promotion quota vacancies by holding DPCs. 
● In the category of MTS, where a large number of vacancies exists, the process 
of reporting vacancies to SSC hav e been initiated and some vacancies will 
also be filled up on a compassionate ground basis as well.  
63. The Ministry submitted that B.E. 2023 -24 allocations are expected to suffice funding 
of filling up of these vacancies. Additional budget, if required, will be projected during R.E. 
2023-24. 
64. The Committee notes that 37.5% of the total number of posts in ASI is presently 
vacant. The Committee recommends that the ASI may undertake urgent measures to 

Page 17 of 142 
 
ensure that it has adequate level of staff working tow ards the conservation and 
development of the Centrally Protected Monuments across the country.  
  
65. The Committee enquired whether ASI’s recruitment plan preempts the vacancies that 
would be created by the time the ongoing iteration of the recruitment cycle gets completed.  
66. The Ministry informed that the vacancies are filled up according to the Recruitment 
Rules prescribed for the respective posts. It is either through promotion or direct recruitment 
or through both in fixed ratio as stated in the RRS . The vacancies likely to be created by 
retirement can be anticipated whereas the vacancies occurring as a result of promotion are 
hard to anticipate.  
67. Moreover, the posts which are filled 100% through direct recruitment are entry level 
posts where vac ancies occurring due to retirement are rare. This means that vacancies 
occurring due to retirement in future, falling under DR quota are miniscule.  
68. In the current scenario, vacancies in ASI reported to SSC/UPSC for direct recruitment 
pertains to those vacancies that exist as on date. 
69. The Committee recommends that the Ministry may take steps to assess the 
number of vacancies that would exist on account of senior employees retiring and 
junior ones getting promoted. The Committee, further, recommends that ASI may 
factor in the time it takes for a recruitment cycle to complete and start the process to fill 
at least some portion of its projected vacancies in advance. 
Security Policy for Centrally Protected Monuments (CPMs) 
70. The Ministry informed the C ommittee that ASI has signed a Memorandum of 
Understanding with Indian Institute of Technology, New Delhi for drafting a comprehensive 
security policy to combat various issues faced at the centrally protected monuments including 
manpower. 
71. The expenditu re for security personnel deployed at various centrally protected 
monuments through private agencies and CISF (Red Fort, Delhi and Taj Mahal, Agra, UP) is 
estimated around Rs. 170.40 cr per annum. However, the actual financial implication shall be 
ascertained based on the assessment by the Indian Institute of Technology, New Delhi and 
other additional requirements. 
72. The Committee recommends that the Ministry may finalise the comprehensive 
security policy for all CPMs at the earliest, since ensuring their  security cannot be 
postponed to a later date. The security policy should cover the requirements for 
physical security of monuments, in terms of requirements for boundary walls/fences, 
security personnel, CCTV cameras, and so on.  

Page 18 of 142 
 
73. The Committee is of the view that increasing public participation and awareness 
may be made a part of the Security Policy for CPMs. The policy should include 
measures to raise public awareness about the importance of historical monuments and 
the need for their protection and p reservation. This may include educational programs 
for students, creative public outreach campaigns, and partnerships with local 
community organisations.  
Excavation and Exploration Activities 
74. Budget Details under Other Charges (Exploration & Excavatio n) of ASI for last 7 
years are tabulated below:  
                                                                                        (Rs. in Crore) 
F.Y B.E R.E Actual 
2015-16 (Plan) 5.20 5.70 5.35 
2015-16 (Non- 
Plan) 0.25 0.25 0.13 
2016-17 (Plan) 5.55 5.05 3.45 
2016-17 (Non-Plan) 0.30 0.30 0.16 
2017-18 6.20 5.30 5.29 
2018-19 6.25 6.25 6.18 
2019-20 5.75 3.60 3.56 
2020-21 5.10 2.50 2.48 
2021-22 2.00 6.09 6.08 
2022-23 5.00 10.00 6.52* 
   * Actuals as on 01.02.2023 
  
75. The Ministry  submitted that ASI especially for the last three years ha s been 
demanding budget over and above the B.E. allocation and has been able to fully utilise the 
R.E. budget allocation in this specific budget sub head OC (Exploration and Excavation). 
76. The Ministry furth er informed that the final draft of the “National Policy for 
Excavation in India” is under examination in the Ministry for final approval of the 
Competent Authority. 
77. The Committee feels that having a National Policy on Archaeological Excavation 
and Exploration will give a major fillip to archeological excavation and exploration in 
the country. The Committee hopes that the Ministry has made exhaustive consultations 

Page 19 of 142 
 
with various stakeholders for drafting this policy.  The Committee recommends that the 
policy may include provisions to permit/ licence more educational institutions and 
professionals to excavate and also involve local communities and civil society groups. 
78. India has a large number of archaeological sites in the country and thus, a high 
potential for archaeological excavation and exploration. In this light, the Committee 
feels that the present allocations being made for excavations is rather inadequate. The 
Committee recommends that the Ministry may make a fresh reassessment of the 
budgetary r equirements for excavation and exploration once the policy thereon is 
finalised. 
Need for renovation, promotion and better tourist facilities at various ASI 
monuments, temples and forts 
79. Tourist reviews available on online platforms and tourist websites  highlight the lack 
of maintenance of basic amenities such as clean washrooms, even at UNESCO World 
Heritage Sites.  
80. A Member of the Committee highlighted that basic facilities to service the tourists at 
various Monuments in Kerala including the ones w hich are frequented by tourists need to be 
developed. The Member also stated that repair work should be started immediately to protect 
the Kannur Fort. 
81. The Committee recommends that ASI may undertake a special drive to ensure 
that basic tourist ameniti es are available at all the ticketed Centrally Protected 
Monuments. ASI may also explore the feasibility of providing well -maintained basic 
amenities at non -ticketed CPMs. ASI may devise a mechanism to ensure clean and 
hygienic washroom facilities at all t he CPMs. The contact number of the regional ASI 
officials may be displayed to permit tourists to complain in case of lack of maintenance.  
82. ASI may also develop a mechanism to permit tourists to post complaints on its 
mobile app. The option to provide s uch feedback may be suitably promoted for visitors 
who visit ASI monuments. ASI may ensure that strict action is taken against the 
accountable officials in case lapses are frequently reported.  
83. ASI should start with strict implementation of these measu res at UNESCO 
World Heritage Sites, extending the same to all other ticketed CPMs across the country 
afterwards within a set timeline. 
84. The Committee notes the need for renovation and restoration work at various 
monuments across the country. These inter alia include various Monuments/ protected 
sites of Kerala such as Bekal Fort, Palakkad Fort, Thalassery Fort, Kannur Fort, 

Page 20 of 142 
 
Anchuthengu Fort, Vadakkunnathan temple,  Kadavallur temple, Thriprayar temple, 
Thiruvarattukavu temple, Gopeshwar Temple (Chamoli) and Adi Badri Temple.  
 
85. The Committee recommends that the ASI may seek the active involvement of the 
local communities in the upkeep and maintenance of monuments.  
 
Preparation of monument-specific conservation plan for all CPMs 
86. The Ministry informed that Circles of ASI, keeping in view National Conservation 
Policy, 2014 guidelines, prepare Annual Conservation Plan (ACP) in respect of the Centrally 
Protected Monuments (CPMs) including UNESCO heritage sites under their respective 
jurisdiction. These ACPs including the Revised Conservation Plans (RCPs) are duly 
approved by delegated Competent Authority of ASI. 
 
87. The Committee recommends that ASI may come up with monument -specific 
conservation plans for each of the CPM under its protection. The  conservation plan 
should outline the steps and strategies needed to preserve, restore, and maintain the 
particular monument.  
88. It should include an assessment of the monument's current condition, an 
analysis of the potential threats and risks to the mo nument, and a set of specific actions 
that need to be taken to preserve and protect the monument.  
89. It should involve a comprehensive assessment of the environmental and physical 
factors that impact the monument's structural stability and longevity. 
 

Page 21 of 142 
 
Footfall at Centrally Protected Monuments 
90. The details of visitor footfall received at ASI monuments across the country, during 
the last 7 years are as given below:-  
 
91. The Committee notes that the number of visitors to ASI Monuments has 
significantly decreased since the onset of the Coronavirus pandemic. Although there has 
been a reversing trend since then the present footfall i s much below the pre -COVID 
footfall. Further, it can be seen that the footfall at ASI monuments has actually 
decreased from FY 2015-16 onwards. The Committee recommends that ASI may make 
a detailed examination of the reasons for the decrease in footfall since FY 2015 -16 and 
take suitable remedial action.  
92. The Committee recommends that ASI may take a multi -pronged approach to  
increasing the footfall at its monuments. ASI may use social media platforms to 
showcase historical monuments to potential visitors. It may develop an interactive 
mobile app that provides visitors with information on the historical significance of the 
monument, its architectural features, and the local culture. It should work on 
improving the overall visitor experience by offering services such as audio guides, free 
Wi-Fi, comfortable seating areas, clean washrooms and drinking water and so on.  
93. The Co mmittee further recommends that organising cultural events such as 
music concerts, dance performances, and traditional festivals in and around the 


Page 22 of 142 
 
monument would also help ASI to attract visitors. In all the activities related to the 
promotion of Monuments , the Ministry of Culture may closely coordinate and interact 
with the Ministry of Tourism. ASI may ensure that the Centrally Protected Monuments 
are easily accessible by providing adequate parkin g spaces, public transportation  and 
signages. The Committee feels that proper implementation of these steps would 
definitely help increase footfall at the CPMs. 
94. ASI submitted that there is no mechanism currently for the collection of statistics 
regarding footfall at non-ticketed monuments under the Archaeological Survey of India. 
95. The Committee recommends that ASI may make use of social media check -ins/ 
mentions and survey exercises to determine approximate visitors who visit non -ticketed 
CPMs in the country. The Committee feels that having data p ertaining to footfall is a 
must in order to enable ASI to decide whether to introduce ticketing to more CPMs or 
not. The Committee, therefore, recommends that ASI may undertake suitable measures 
to gather approximate statistics regarding footfall received at its non -ticketed 
monuments. 
 
Encroachment in and around Monuments and Archaeological Sites 
96. The Ministry informed the Committee that the number of Total monuments 
encroached upon till date is 531 and encroachments have been removed from 9 monuments 
since 2015. As per the provisions of Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Sites and 
Remains (AMASR) Act 1958, Archaeological Survey of India has issued 39 numbers of 
demolition notices under Section 19(1) and 7 demolition orders under Section 19(2) during 
2022-23 for removal of encroachments from the protected area of centrally protected 
monuments. 
97. The Committee noted that reports indicated that ASI has not been able to bring under 
its "complete care" about 20 centrally protected sites in Bihar as the district authorities, "have 
not taken requisite measures" to facilitate the upkeep and maintenance of these sites. The 
Committee, therefore, sought the views of the Ministry/ASI on the powers available with 
ASI to tackle encroachment when there is inactivity on part of State Government authorities. 
98. The Ministry informed the Committee that as per the provisions of AMASR Act, 
1958 and the Rules, 1959 therein, the ASI after due process issues dem olition orders and 
there after it is the responsibility of th e District Collector of the relevant district to cause the 
demolition of encroachments within the protected area and unauthorized constructions within 
prohibited and regulated areas. ASI thereafter can only issue reminders for the proper action 
to the relevant authority of the concerned district. 

Page 23 of 142 
 
99. The Committee notes that 531 monuments i.e. about 14.4% of ASI’s total 3693 
CPMs, have been encroached till date. Encroachment s from only 9 monuments have  
been removed since 2015. The Committee believes that pa rt of the reason behind this 
situation is that after ASI issues demolition orders to tackle encroachments, it can only 
issue reminders to the relevant authority for appropriate action. This reflects the 
inadequacy of the powers that ASI has at present in o rder to deal with the 
encroachment of CPMs. Removing encroachments is one of the foremost steps to 
ascertain the state of preservation and protection of the monument.  
100. The Committee recommends that the Ministry may ensure that ASI is granted 
effective powers to help it deal with encroachment of CPMs in a firm and speedy 
manner. 
Capacity building in modern digital techniques  
101. The Committee enquired from the Ministry about the digital techniques inducted for 
cultural preservation, antiquities manage ment and monument protection and the major 
challenges faced in implementation of such digital techniques. 
102. Various divisions under MOC like ASI, Anthropological Survey of India, National 
Library & o ther libraries, National Museum , National Gallery of Modern Art and other 
museums and National Archives of India etc . have been using different kinds of digital 
techniques for better cultural preservation, antiquities management and monument 
protection. The details in this regard are placed at Annexure-VII. 
103. The Committee welcomes the initiatives being taken by the various different 
organisations under the Ministry of Culture to employ digital techniques to aid and 
assist in the activities that they perform. The Committee is of the view that more needs 
to be done, however, to ensure the best outputs with the latest available technology in 
their respective fields of work. The Committee recommends that the Ministry may 
organise training and workshops from time to time to educate the staff working in 
different organisations such as  ASI, National Museum  and the National Archives of 
India. This will allow the staff to keep themselves abreast of the latest technological 
advancements in digital techniques.  
104. The Ministry should focus on the maintenance and use r-friendliness of its digital 
platforms like the Indian Heritage Atlas and Abhilekh Patal portal since these platforms 
help in showcasing the rich depository of cultural wealth, collating important 
information under a single roof. User feedback may be coll ected and acted upon to 
make these digital platforms more useful over time.  

Page 24 of 142 
 
105. The Ministry may also encourage research and development in the field of 
digital techniques for cultural preservation. This will lead to the development of new 
and innovative  techniques that can help in better preservation and management of 
cultural heritage sites. 
 
Enhancing research capacity and infrastructure 
106. There is a need to develop state -of-the-art infrastructure (such as scientific 
laboratories) for facilitating research in archaeological conservation and cultural 
preservation. In this regard, the Ministry stated that a state -of-art scientific laboratory at ASI, 
Greater Noida is established with modern facilities at par with the international standards to 
facilitate research in archaeological conservation & cultural preservation.  The research & 
preservation facilities for art objects & excavated materials o f different nature such as stone, 
metal, paper, textile, ivory, wood, terracotta & paintings , are being developed in first phase 
with modern equipment & will be completed in financial year 2023-24 with estimated cost of 
Rs. 5 Cr., while in second phase, a well-equipped dating lab will be established in financial 
year 2024 -25 with estimated cost of Rs. 15 Cr. Some other field laboratories are already 
functioning in ASI, like Air pollution monitoring Lab, Taj Mahal, Agra, Stone conservation 
lab, Agra, laborat ory at Dehradun, Conservation Research Lab -Aurangabad & Air quality 
monitoring lab at Aurangabad. These labs are also upgrading time to time for better results. 
107. The funds allocated and utilised for Archaeological conservation and cultural 
preservation by ASI, Science Branch in the last five year is as follows: 
                                                                                                (Rs in Lakhs) 
SI. No. F.Y. Allocation Expenditure 
1. 2017-18 540.00 539.00 
2. 2018-19 589.00 560.00 
3. 2019-20 408.00 385.00 
4. 2020-21 448.00 408.00 
5. 2021-22 719.00 716.92 
108. The Ministry highlighted that the National Research Laboratory for Conservation of 
Cultural Property, Lucknow (NRLC) was established in 1976. Further, National Archives of 
India (NAI) has one Conservation Research Laboratory (started in 1941) for conservation of 
records in New Delhi. Out of the budget allotted to NAI, a sum of Rs.6.70 crores (approx.) 
has been spent for conservation of records in the last 5 years. 

Page 25 of 142 
 
109. The Committee appreciates the measures that the Ministry and its organisations 
are taking to facilitate research in archaeological conservation and cultural 
preservation. The Committee feels that it is important to establish scientific laboratories 
similar to ASI’s Greater Noida scientific laboratory in other parts of the country to 
facilitate research in archaeological conservation and cultural preservation. This will 
enable researchers to study the  art objects and excavated materials of different nature 
in their specific contexts and help in preserving them.  
110. The Ministry should allocate sufficient funds for establishing such facilities and 
upgrading the existing ones. ASI should collaborate wi th academic institutions, 
research organisations, and experts from different fields , to facilitate research in 
archaeological conservation and cultural preservation. This will help bring in new ideas 
and expertise and provide a platform for interdisciplinary research. The Ministry 
should provide incentives for collaborations and partnersh ips and encourage 
knowledge exchange.  
111. The Committee appreciates the healthy expenditure pattern of ASI Science 
Branch in the last 5 years. The Committee recommends that the Ministry should 
allocate more funds for research in archaeological conservati on and cultural 
preservation. This will enable researchers to carry out long -term studies and develop 
new methods and technologies for preserving historical monuments and artefacts. The 
funds should be utilised efficiently and effectively, and the research  outcomes should be 
disseminated widely to benefit society.  
112. The Committee is of the opinion that the structures which are being constructed 
today have no comparison to the ancient Monuments/ Forts/ Palaces/ Temples/ 
Structures which used to be constr ucted, which are still sturdy and intact even today. 
The Committee recommends the Ministry carry  out a comprehensive research on  such 
structures and their composition. The research can aid in better conservation and 
restoration.  
 
Impact of Climate Change and Tracing Missing Monuments 
113. India is a disaster -prone country that is vulnerable to adverse climate change events. 
As many as 50 ASI -protected monuments have gone missing due to rapid urbanisation, 
constructions of reservoirs and dams, and so on.  
114. In this regard, the Ministry informed the Committee that the impact of climate change 
has a direct impact on the health of the ancient monument in the rate of decay/ degradation of 
ASI-protected Monuments also changes with change in climate. To protect  the Monuments 
from deterioration proper conservation and preservation are carried out as per requirements at 

Page 26 of 142 
 
CPMs. Conditions of Monuments are regularly monitored and maintained as per annual plan 
of ASI. 
115. The Ministry noted that CAG Performance Audit Report No. 18 of 2013 refers to 92 
monuments as missing. However, the Archaeological Survey of India has identified 68 
monuments/sites reportedly untraceable monuments based on verification of old records, 
revenue maps, published books, and so on . The sta tus of these 92 monuments/sites is given 
below: - 
i) Monuments/ sites which physically exist – 42 
ii) Monuments/ sites affected due to rapid urbanisation – 14 
iii) Monuments/ sites exists submerged under reservoir/dam – 12 
iv) Monuments/ sites which are untraceable – 24 
116. The Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Sites and Remains Act, 1958 provides 
provision for prohibited area (100 m from protection limit) and regulated area (200 m from 
protection limit) around all monuments and sites to regulate construction related activities. In 
prohibited areas new constructions are not allowed. However, in regulated area construction 
related activities are allowed only with prior permission from Competent Authority/ National 
Monuments Authority. The major chal lenge being faced by ASI is the removal of illegal/ 
unauthorised construction which is being done by State Government/ District Administration 
and many times such type matters also go into litigations thereby further delaying the 
removal of these constructions. 
117. Historical monuments are an essential part of our cultural heritage, and climate 
change can have a devastating impact on them. The Committee may be apprised as to 
whether the conservation plans which are presen tly in force, factor in the ill effects of 
climate change on the monuments. It is essential to regularly monitor historical 
monuments for signs of damage or degradation that may have been caused by climate 
change. Monitoring can help identify potential issues early on, and appropriate actio n 
can be taken to mitigate any adverse impact. The Committee feels that using climate -
resilient materials during restoration or conservation work can help protect 
monuments from the effects of climate change.  
118. The Committee further notes that the CAG had declared 92 Centrally Protected 
Monuments as "missing". ASI has located 42 of these monuments. The remaining 50 
monuments are either affected by rapid urbanisation, submerged under 
reservoirs/dams or are untraceable. The Committee observes that monuments once lost 
cannot ever be retrieved. The Centrally Protected Monuments (CPMs) are a vital piece 
of our historical heritage. ASI should, therefore, give  the highest priority to ensuring 

Page 27 of 142 
 
the physical security of all  CPMs across the country. The Committee recommends that 
the Ministry may conduct a survey of all remaining monuments to ensure their physical 
existence. 
119. The Committee further recommends that regular physical surveys of all CPMs 
should be carried out f rom time to time. ASI should maintain digital log books that 
include textual and photographic/ video records of the monument’s physical state and 
location coordinates. This would also allow ASI to check encroachment, if any, of these 
CPMs at an early stage. 
Recovery of stolen/ illegally exported antiquities 
120. In the meeting of the Committee held on 15th February, 2023, the Secretary, Ministry 
informed that 229 antiquities have been brought since 2014 and that another 300 antiquities 
will be brought back from New York. 
 
121. The Committee commends the efforts being made by the Ministry for the 
retrieval of stolen and illegally exported antiquities back to India. The Committee, 
however, feels that the Ministry needs to make more efforts towards using diplom atic 
channels to seek the repatriation of India’s priceless antiquities which were taken away 
by force during colonial times. It is the right of Indian citizens to be able to see their 
rich historical antiquities without having to visit a foreign nation an d to feel proud of 
their cultural heritage. 
122. The Ministry may also use the G20 Summit as a platform to initiate discussions 
on the repatriation of the valuable artefacts looted from India during the colonial 
period by various European countries. 
Enhancing connectivity through PM Gati Shakti National Master Plan 
123. The Ministry stated that the data for mapping all Centrally Protected Monuments 
(CPMs) of ASI on PM - Gati Shakti portal has been made available to the executing agency 
i.e. BISAG-N, Ministry of Information & technology. The relevant data can be utilized by 
concerned Ministries/ Departments to envisage proper connectivity to the monuments and 
sites. 
124. The Committee desires to know whether the data uploaded regarding CPMs 
includes information regarding the prohibited and protected limits of each monument. 
The Committee feels that such information would permit other Ministries and 
Departments to ensure that their projects factor in the protected/prohibited areas of 
CPMs from the DPR stage itself. 

Page 28 of 142 
 
125. The Committee recommends that the Ministry may coordinate with the Ministry 
of Road Transport & Highways, Ministry of Railways, State Government Public Works 
Departments and any other Department concerned, to improve the connectivity to the 
various CPMs across the country. 
 
Progress made under National Mission on Monuments and Antiquities 
126. The Government launched a National Mission on Monuments and Antiquities 
(NMMA) in 2007 to document monuments and antiquities in India to create a comprehensive 
database. The NMMA was initially launched for a period of 5 years from 2007 to 2012. It 
was extended for a further period of 5 years and was later merged with ASI. Among its other 
users, this database can be referred to readily in case of any thef t/fraud. As of yet, only 16.8 
lakh antiquities have been documented under NMMA out of an estimated total of 58 lakh 
antiquities. 
127. In view of this, the Committee enquired from the Ministry about the steps taken to 
expedite the documentation of monuments  and antiquities under NMMA. The Ministry 
informed that the NMMA has published a rolling advertisement at its website and also at the 
website of the Ministry of Culture for submission of proposals from interested Departments 
of State Archaeology and Museums, Universities, Non-Governmental Heritage bodies and all 
associated bodies to get themselves recognized as Documentation Resource Centres (DRC) 
since 2019. Despite the Covid years, the NMMA has signed MoUs with the State 
Archaeology Department, Government  of Assam and Assumption College, MG University, 
Kottayam, Kerala. This is how Documentation Resource Centres are being revived for 
engaging multiple owners of antiquities and to engage trained professionals in the 
documentation of Built Heritage and Sites . Young Archaeologists have been engaged on a 
contractual basis and are posted in the ASI field offices for documentation of in -house 
antiquities. Regular webinars were arranged during the Covid days and 6 regional workshops 
have been conducted in the curr ent financial year 2022 -23 to address the shortage of trained 
man-power. 
128. Antiquities have multiple ownerships and are ever increasing in volume. Therefore, it 
is not possible to provide an estimated timeline for documentation of all antiquities in the  
country.  Similarly, documentation of unprotected Built Heritage and Sites is also a time 
consuming and research -oriented subject requiring a dedicated team of professionals. 
NMMA requires a small group of dedicated staff who will be engaged in documentat ion 
work and needs to run in true mission mode. It is envisaged that NMMA will be able to 
accomplish the targets as and when the vacancies are filled. A total utilisation of Rs 35.3 Cr 
has been made against total actual allocation of Rs 57.79 Cr for the period 2007 to 2023. 

Page 29 of 142 
 
129. The Committee takes cognisance of the various challenges faced by NMMA in 
the documentation of antiquities and built heritage sites. The Committee, however, 
observes that the Ministry has been able to spend only about 61% of the allocation of 
Rs. 57.79 crore for NMMA from 2007 to 2023. The Committee therefore recommends 
that the Ministry may look into the reasons preventing the optimal utilisation of funds 
allocated to NMMA. The bottlenecks may be addressed at the earliest so as t o make 
faster progress in the documentation of antiquities and built heritage sites in the 
country. 
130. The Committee observes that the progress under NMMA has been slow. Only 
about 16.8 lakh antiquities out of a total estimated 58 lakh antiquities have b een 
documented till date. The Committee recommends that the NMMA may encourage and 
engage more Departments of State Archaeology and Museums, Universities  and Non-
Governmental Heritage bodies to get themselves recognized as Documentation 
Resource Centres ( DRCs) to help expedite the documentation process. The use of 
advanced technology such as 3D imaging and virtual reality should be explored to 
create a comprehensive database of monuments and antiquities.  
131. NMMA should invest in capacity-building initiatives, such as training and hiring 
more young archaeologists and professionals, to increase the speed and accuracy of the 
documentation process. 
132. It should explore options to increase funding to expedite the documentation 
process and accomplish the targ ets in a timely manner. The Committee is of the view 
that by implementing these recommendations, the documentation process of 
monuments and antiquities under NMMA can be expedited, which will enable better 
preservation and protection of India's cultural heritage. 
 
ANTHROPOLOGICAL SURVEY OF INDIA 
133. The provision is for expenditure of the Anthropological Survey of India, which was 
established in 1945. It conducts bio -cultural investigation/ research on Indian population, 
collects and preserves documents of  scientific interest about the people of India. The Survey 
through its anthropological research contributes in respect of the biological, social and 
cultural heritage of the country. 
134. The Anthropological Survey of India has been allocated Rs. 54.33 crores at B.E. 
2023-24 stage. Below are the details regarding the allocation and expenditure under the head 
‘Anthropological Survey of India’ since 2017-18.  

Page 30 of 142 
 
 
135. The Committee takes note of the upward trend in the budgetary allocation made 
to the Anthropological Survey of India. The Committee, however, notes that the 
Ministry has been able to utilise only 61.9 percent of its allocation in the ongoing year 
2022-23, with only two months remai ning. The Committee feels that it is unlikely that 
AnSI would be able to make full use of the available allocation by the end of this FY. It 
may look into the reasons behind this underutilisation and to rectify the same to ensure 
better performance in the upcoming FY 2023-24.  
  
 
 


Page 31 of 142 
 
GLOBAL ENGAGEMENT AND INTERNATIONAL COOPERATION 
136. The provision is for expenditure on the activities relating to Global Engagement 
Scheme, Project Mausam and Contribution to International organisations. The B.E. allocation 
and expenditure details under the head ‘Global Engagement and International Cooperation’ 
since 2017-18 are as given below. 
 
137. The Committee noted the enhanced allocation of Rs. 25.55 crores at B.E. 2023 -24 
stage under the head ‘Global Engagement and International Cooperation’, as compared to Rs. 
16.25 crores allocation at R.E. 2022 -23 stage. The Ministry stated that the additional fund is 
mainly required for the activities related to G20 and SCO presidency of India.  The Ministry 
has to release funds for 
●       arrangement of G20 cultural track meetings to be hosted by India during its 
ongoing G20 presidency. 
●      releasing fund for arrangement of SCO Culture track meetings to be hosted 
by India during its ongoing SCO presidency 
138. The Committee ap preciates the allocation of an increased amount under the 
head ‘Global Engagement and International Cooperation’ in view of the G20 Summit 


Page 32 of 142 
 
to be hosted in India this year. The Committee desires to be apprised of its roadmap for 
using the G20 Summit as a pl atform for the promotion of Indian Culture and Heritage 
across the world.  
139. The Committee observes that there is a clear pattern of underutilisation under 
this head, year after year. In the ongoing FY 2022 -23 as well, the Ministry has managed 
to spend only about 40% of the BE 2022 -23 allocation. The Committee opines that 
global engagement and international cooperation can help foster a sense of cultural 
diplomacy and goodwill between India and other countries. It can also have economic 
benefits for Indi a. By showcasing its cultural heritage on the world stage, India can 
attract more tourists and generate greater demand for its cultural products and 
services. It is therefore important to ensure optimal utilisation of funds under this head, 
especially in view of the upcoming G20 Summit during FY 2023-24. 
 
NORTH-EASTERN AREAS 
Allocation and Expenditure Pattern 
140. As mandated by NITI Aayog, this Ministry has been allocating the mandatory 10% of 
the total CS scheme allocation under NER head for expenditure. Allocation is made in five 
relevant schemes of the Ministry. Expenditure on all the Projects and Programs undertaken in 
the North-Eastern Region of the country is being strictly made through the NER funds. In so 
far as Schemes being administered by Perform ing Arts Bureau, it is informed that there has 
been a constant endeavour to ensure effective utilisation of grants under all the allocated 
budget heads including North East. It has been made a practice to separately identify NER 
beneficiaries and book expe nditure accordingly. For the last 7 years funds allocated under 
NER have been met to the maximum extent i.e. over 70% towards selected beneficiaries of 
NER Region. Shortfall , if any, is due to less number of organisations / individuals applying 
from the NE region under various Schemes.  
                                                                                            (Rs. in crore) 
Years Allocation Expenditure Percentage 
Expenditure 
2014-15 183.50 131.73 71.8% 
2015-16 145.50 105.43 72.5% 
2016-17 175.50 127.12 72.4% 
2017-18 175.50 103.96 59.2% 
2018-19 175.50 122.61 69.9% 
2019-20 175.50 116.74 66.5% 
2020-21 57.80 22.16 38.3% 

Page 33 of 142 
 
2021-22 45.52 38.86 85.4% 
2022-23 53.25 37.43* 70.3% 
*Actual as on 02.02.2023 
141. The Ministry has achieved an overall expenditure of 70% w.r.t BE 2022 -23 and 
around 45% w.r.t RE 2022 -23. The Ministry mentioned that allocation under NER was 
revised at RE stage to Rs. 83.69 crore from BE of Rs. 53.25 crore in FY 2022 -23. After 
official commu nication of RE 2022 -23 in Jan 2023 from MoF, this revised figure was 
effective within the schemes for further utilisation/fund releases by the beginning of Feb. 
2023 onwards. 
142. The Committee notes that the average expenditure under North -Eastern Areas 
in the last few years has been lower than the overall expenditure of the Ministry. The 
Committee is not convinced with the reasons furnished by the Ministry for this pattern 
of underutilisation. The Committee recommends that the Ministry may allocate a 
portion of the funds under this head for promotion and awareness of the Ministry's 
schemes in North -Eastern Areas. This would allow more organisations / individuals to 
benefit from the scheme of the Ministry.  
143. The Ministry has made better progress as regards the pace of expenditure under 
North-Eastern Areas vis-à-vis B.E. allocation in the ongoing FY 2022 -23. This head has 
received enhanced allocation at R.E. stage. The Committee hopes that the Ministry will 
be able to make optimal utilisation of the incre ased funds for North -Eastern Areas in 
the last quarter of FY 2022-23. 
144. The Committee notes that there has been considerable decrease in the allocation 
made for North-Eastern Areas since 2020 -21. The Committee desires to be apprised of 
the reasons behin d this, along with the activities/schemes impacted because of the 
decreased allocation. 
NATIONAL MONUMENTS AUTHORITY 
145. The National Monuments Authority (NMA) came into existence on November 23, 
2011 as a statutory body constituted under the provisions o f Ancient Monuments and 
Archaeological Sites and Remains (Amendment & Validation) Act, 2010. The basic 
objective for setting up of NMA is implementation of the statutory provisions of prohibited 
and regulated areas of centrally protected monuments and prot ected areas for the purpose of 
construction, re -construction, repair & renovation of buildings and public projects. In 
addition, NMA has been mandated to approve monument specific heritage bye -laws to 
regulate construction related activities around central ly protected monuments and protected 
areas. The heritage bye-laws shall inter-alia include matters relating to heritage controls such 

Page 34 of 142 
 
as elevation, façade, drainage systems, roads and service infrastructure. The heritage bye -
laws are required to be laid in both houses of Parliament.  
146. The NMA has also been given the responsibility of categorization and classification 
of ancient monuments or archaeological sites and remains declared as of national importance 
in consultation with ASI having regard to the historical, archaeological, architectural and 
other such relevant factors.  
147. The Ministry stated that till January 2023, 7 heritage bye -laws (HBLs) covering 33 
Centrally Protected Monuments (CPMs) have been laid in Parliament. Further, NMA has 
received another 130 draft HBLs covering 202 CPMs from ASI, Regional Directors notified 
as Competent Authority under Section 20E of AMASR Act, 1958. These 130 draft HBLs 
are in the process of heritage consultations by notified expert heritage bodies. Taking into 
account the 7 HBLs covering 33 CPMs already notified, the total number of CPMs covered 
in the process are 235. 
148. NMA came into existence w.e.f. 23.11.2011. The first batch of HBLs was laid in 
Parliament during the financial year 2019 -20. The year -wise details in terms of number of 
CPMs covered are given in the following table: 
S. No. Financial Year No. of HBLs notified No. of CPMs covered 
1 2019-20 5 31 
2 2021-22 2 2 
 Total 07 33 
149. ASI is in the process of conducting a survey in respect of all prohibited areas, 
regulated areas of each protected monument and protected area in the country for the 
purpose of preparing detailed site plans as per the parameters prescribed in First Schedul e to 
Rule 21(1) of AMASR (Competent Authority) Rules, 2011. Vide G.S.R 3 (E) dated 
27.12.2018, these detailed site plans are to be completed within 5 years w.e.f. 02.01.2019. 
The HBLs are framed on the basis of these site plans. In terms of sub clause (5) of Rule 22 
of AMASR (Competent Authority) Rules, 2011, ASI Regional Directors notified as 
Competent Authority under Section 20E of AMASR Act, 1958, shall ensure that HBLs in 
respect of each CPM is taken up as a time bound programme and completed within a p eriod 
of sixty days from the date of preparation of the detailed site plans. NMA monitors the 
preparation of the HBLs as per the procedure in Section 20E of AMASR Act, 1958 and 
approves the same for laying in both houses of Parliament. 
150. The Committee n otes that as per AMASR (Competent Authority) Rules, ASI 
Regional Directors shall ensure that Heritage Bye -Laws (HBLs) are completed within 
60 days of preparation of detailed site plans. These site plans are to be completed 
within 5 years w.e.f. 02.01.2019. The Committee desires to be apprised of the progress 

Page 35 of 142 
 
made by ASI so far in this regard. The Committee recommends that ASI may ensure 
that the detailed site plans are completed on time so as to enable NMA to draft HBLs 
for the same. 
151. During the ongoing  year, National Monuments Authority (NMA) has received 
another 130 draft heritage bye -laws (HBLs) covering 102 CPMs from ASI, Regional 
Directors notified as Competent Authority under Section 20E of AMASR Act, 1958. These 
130 draft HBLs are in the process o f heritage consultations by notified expert heritage 
bodies. Taking into account the 7 HBLs covering 33 CPMs already notified, the total number 
of CPMs covered in the process are 235. 
152. With a view to completing  the statutory requirement of heritage con sultations of 
HBLs by expert heritage bodies, NMA has taken the following two major steps during the 
ongoing year:- 
●      Finalization of a negotiated rate for Heritage Consultations of HBLs.  A 
negotiated rate of Rs. 77,000/ - plus GST per HBL, has been fi nalized by NMA with the 
approval of MoC for heritage consultations of HBLs by notified expert heritage bodies for 
compliance of the requirements of sub section (1) of Section 20E of AMASR Act, 1958. 
●       Notification of additional Expert Heritage Bodies . As per sub section (1) of 
Section 20E of AMASR Act, 1958 INTACH is notified as an expert heritage body for the 
purpose of heritage consultations of HBLs. Additional 47 expert heritage bodies have been 
notified. 
  
153. NMA is in the process of notificatio n of another set of 24 expert heritage bodies for 
the purpose of heritage consultations of HBLs. Taking this into account, the total number of 
notified expert heritage bodies for heritage consultations of HBLs shall become 72. 
 
154. The Committee notes tha t NMA has covered 235 Centrally Protected  
Monuments through Heritage Bye -Laws (HBLs) so far. This means that since its 
inception in 2011, NMA has covered about 6.3% of the 3693 Centrally Protected 
Monuments in the country. With the present pace, it might take several decades to draft 
HBLs for all CPMs. The Committee notes that to expedite the process, the number of 
notified expert heritage bodies for consultation of HBLs is 47 as of now and would soon 
increase to 72. The Committee recommends that NMA may un dertake a thorough 
assessment of additional steps required to ensure the timely drafting of HBLs for all the 
CPMs in India. NMA may target a fixed timeline for the completion of this process and 
apprise the Committee of the same. 
155. NMA is empowered to make recommendations to the Central government for grading 
and classifying protected monuments and protected areas which may be declared after the 
commencement of the Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Sites and Remains 
(Amendment and Validation) Act, 201 0, as of national importance under section 4. As per 

Page 36 of 142 
 
the NMA website, it has processed categorisation of 915 centrally protected monuments of 
Bhopal, Chandigarh, Delhi, Kolkata and Vadodara circle after obtaining information from 
concerned circles of ASI a nd a series of meetings and deliberations and the same are under 
consideration for issue of notification. 
156. The Committee is of the view that categorization of the CPMs would enable ASI 
to come up with more suited monument conservation and development plans for all the 
CPMs. NMA has categorised about 25 percent of the CPMs so far. The Committee 
recommends that NMA utilises the experience gained so far in this process to speed up 
the categorisation of the remaining CPMs. A strict timeline may be fixed in this regard.  
157. The Committee notes that the NMA website has the option to view the details 
regarding the categorisation of monuments covered so far. However, the details are not 
actually accessible at the time of writing. The Committee recommends that NMA may 
ensure timely updation and review of its website to enable wide dissemination of 
information in the public domain. 
158. The Committee may also be informed of the broad factors that NMA considers 
during the categorisation process.  
 
LIBRARIES AND ARCHIVES 
159. The provision under the head ‘Libraries and Archives’ is for the expenditure of the 
National Archives of India, National Library and Central Reference Library. The Ministry 
furnished the following details regarding the B.E. allocation and expenditure incurred under 
the head ‘Libraries and Archives’. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Page 37 of 142 
 
160. Allocation under the head ‘Libraries and Archives’ has been significantly enhanced 
from Rs. 124.65 crores at R.E. 2022 -23 stage, to Rs. 338.75 crores in BE 2023 -24. The 
Ministry explained that the substantial increase under ‘Libraries and Archives’ for F Y 2023-
24 is due to the allo cation of Rs.200 crore for construction of new building of NAI as part of 
re-development of Central Vista as demanded by Chief Engineer, Central Vista project Zone, 
CPWD. 
161. The Committee notes that the reason for the substantial increase under the head 
‘Libraries and Archives’ is the provision for a new building of the National Archives of 
India (NAI). The NAI is the custodian of the records of the enduring value of the 
Government of India . The Committee recommends that the Ministry may ensure that 
the new building has provisions for state -of-the-art preservation and storage facilities 
for the safekeeping of records. 
 
Mechanism for preservation of books/ manuscripts at National Library, Kolkata 
162. The Ministry furnished the following details regarding  the mechanism presently in 
place for preservation of books/manuscripts in the National Library, Kolkata.  
● Reprography and Computer Centre of the National Library:  Reprography 
Division is a specialized division, equipped with sophisticated Cameras, Scanners, 
Duplicating Machine, Archive Writers and splicers and three qualified and technically 
skilled manpower to make all possible methods to preserve old and brittle d ocuments, 
newspapers, documents, manuscripts in the form of digitization and microfilm.  
● Laboratory Division of the National Library:  The Laboratory division of the 
National Library performs the works of chemical treatment of books that are more brittle and 
not in a condition of use. These books will be applied to a chemical treatment known as de -
acidification (Aqueous and Non- aqueous process). Thereafter, these books will be laminated 
(solvent and tissue process). 
● Preservation (Binding)  Division of the National Library: The Preservation 
(Binding) division of the National Library performs the works of binding, mending and other 
related works for the preservation of the books and newspapers. The process is a continuous 
process. The binding , mending and other related works for the old, brittle and rare books, 
journals and periodicals is being taken as a continuous process both in -house as well as 
outsourcing of services. 
● Rare Book Division of the National Library: The general rare books are 
placed in compactor alcoves with rubber linings that are placed on tracks for better utilisation 
of the space and giving books a sealed and compact environment when closed. The over -
sized books are kept in almirahs with larger space to better adjust the bo oks in the shelves 
maintaining relative humidity. Temperature of the Rare Books stack area is maintained 
below 21 degrees Celsius. The relative humidity of the Rare Books stack area is maintained 
around 40%. 

Page 38 of 142 
 
163. The Committee appreciates the various mecha nisms being employed for the 
preservation of books/ manuscripts at the National Library, Kolkata. The Committee 
notes that this library is a permanent depository of all reading and printed materials 
produced in India, or written by any foreigner, wherever published and in whatever 
language. In view of this, the Committee feels that more steps can be taken to further 
improve the existing mechanisms.  
164. The Committee recommends that the Library should ensure regular 
maintenance of all preservation faciliti es, including the Reprography Division, 
Preservation (Binding) Division, and Rare Book Division. This will help in ensuring 
that the equipment and facilities are in good working condition and can help in 
preserving the documents for a longer period of time. 
165. The Preservation (Binding) Division is responsible for binding, mending, and 
other related works for the preservation of books and newspapers. It is recommended 
to upgrade the division with modern equipment and techniques that can help in 
preserving the documents for a longer period of time. This will also help in reducing the 
workload on the division and increase the speed of the preservation process. 
166. The Committee notes that the Rare Book Division of the National Library is 
responsible for sto ring the general rare books in compactor alcoves and over -sized 
books in almirahs. It is recommended to increase the storage capacity for rare books to 
accommodate the growing collection of old and rare documents and manuscripts. This 
will also help in mai ntaining the relative humidity and temperature of the Rare Books 
stack area. 
Development of Libraries and Archives 
167. The provision under Development of Libraries is for expenditure of the activities 
relating to National Mission on Libraries, Scheme of F inancial Assistance to state/UT 
Archival Repositories, Government libraries and Museums, Scheme of Financial Assistance 
for Preservation and Conservation of Manuscripts, rare, books, old and rare documents and 
history of records to registered voluntary organisations. The Ministry furnished the following 
details regarding the B.E. allocation and expenditure incurred under the head ‘Development 
of Libraries and Archives’. 

Page 39 of 142 
 
 
168. The Committee observes that even excluding the C OVID impacted FY 2019 -20 
and FY 2020-21, the utilisation of funds under ‘Development of Libraries and Archives’ 
has been consistently low. This head bears the expenditure for extending financial 
assistance to State/UT Government  archival repositories, Government libraries and 
museums. Th e state of affairs of State Government’s libraries and museums often 
leaves a lot to be desired.  The financial assistance provided under this head acts as a 
nudge to the State Government to focus on the development of libraries and museums 
under their pur view. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry may 
look into the reasons behind the lack of utilisation under this head. The Ministry should 
seek feedback from State Governments and voluntary organisations to gauge  the 
reasons behind their apparent lack of interest in the schemes. 
 
MUSEUMS 
169. The provision is for expenditure of the National Museum, National Research 
Laboratory for Conservation of Cultural Property, National Gallery of Modern Art and 
National Monument Authority/Competent Authority. 


Page 40 of 142 
 
170. Allocation under the head ‘Museum’ was Rs. 136.93 crore in BE 2022 -23, which was 
enhanced to Rs. 145.99 crore for the construction of the Statue of Netaji Subash Chandra 
Boss at India Gate by NGMA, a subordinate office under MoC. Since the project was 
completed in FY 2022 -23 and no other new projects are planned for FY 2023 -24, allocation 
of “Museum” has been reinstated. 
171. The Ministry furnished the following details regarding the B.E. allocation and 
expenditure incurred under the head ‘Museums’. 
 
 172. The Committee observes that the allocation under the ‘Museums’ head has 
increased consistently over the years. The Committee appreciates the good level of 
utilisation under this head, even during the pandemic years. The Ministry may ensure 
optimal utilisation of funds during FY 2023-24 as well. 
 
173. The Ministry informed the Committee that it inaugurated the PM Sangrahalaya last 
year which has become a major tourist spot in the city. The PM Sangrahalaya is attracting 
visitors not only from all parts of India but also from abroad.  
174. The Ministry created a Gallery at the Victoria Memorial Museum last year which is 
dedicated to the revolutionaries of the Indian freedom movement.  It is called the Biplobi 
Bharat Gallery. 
175. The Ministry is also working on a museum on time in Nagpur, a museum on temple 
architecture in Tirupati Science Centre and a museum on rivers in Bhubaneswar.  The 
Ministry is also working on experiential museums and leveraging technology to make 
museum visits immersive. 
176. The Committee is pleased to note that the PM Sangrahalaya has been 
inaugurated and is receiving footfall from both domestic and foreign visitors. The 
Committee recommends that the Ministry may analyse the long -term viability of 
replicating the develop ment of similar unique, state -of-the-art museums in other parts 
of the country. Opportunities may be explored to implement the development of such 
museums on a Public Private Partnership (PPP) basis.  
 
177. The Ministry highlighted that in an attempt to sh owcase the museums in India along 
with their hero objects & other artefacts, it is organising an International Museum Expo, 
coinciding with International Museum Day, from 18 th to 20 th May, 2023. Through this 
initiative, the Ministry aims to educate & sensi tise the audiences on Museology, 
Conservation, Heritage etc., as well as curate a learning experience for those who wish to 
develop new museums or upgrade existing ones. As part of this upcoming expo, the Ministry 
is identifying museums across the country to bring out a directory of museums.  It would 

Page 41 of 142 
 
cover each and every museum, whether it belongs to the Government or private 
individuals/organisations. 
178. The Committee welcomes the efforts being taken by the Ministry to organise an 
International Museum E xpo and to create a comprehensive directory of Museums in 
the country. The Committee recommends that the Ministry may make efforts to collect 
relevant meta -information about the museums as well, such as location  and contact 
details. 
179. The Ministry may l ist the museums along with location details on its website. 
The directory may also be shared with the Ministry of Tourism for promotion thereof. 
This would help increase footfall to museums across the country.. 
 
Development of Museums 
180. This provision is for expenditure of the activities relating to Museum Grant Scheme, 
Scheme for Promotion of Culture of Science and National Experiential Site Museum at 
Vadnagar.  
181. The B.E. 2023 -24 allocation under the head ‘Development of Museums’ has  
decreased to Rs. 183.86 crores, from R.E. 2022 -23 allocation of Rs. 214.23 crores.  The 
Ministry informed that under this scheme, allocation for two standalone projects viz. a) 
Pradhanmantri Sangrahalaya and b) National Experimental Site Museum at Vadnaga r were 
also provisioned in FY 2022 -23. Among these, Pradhanmantri Sangrahalaya has been 
completed in CFY and funds have been provisioned only for the National Experimental Site 
Museum at Vadnagar in FY 2023 -24. Accordingly  the outlay under BE 2023 -24 has been 
decreased. 
182. The below figure depicts the trend of B.E. allocation and expenditure incurred under 
‘Development of Museums’ in the last few years. 

Page 42 of 142 
 
 
183. The Committee notes that there has been a general trend of low utilisation of 
funds under ‘Development of Museums’ in recent years. The Committee recommends 
that the Ministry may analyse the reasons for this underutilisation and rectify the same.  
184. The Committee recommends that under the Museum Grant Scheme, the 
Ministry should consider extending both financial and technical assistance to all 
States/UT Governments for the development of a model Museum. This model Museum 
may incorporate the experience of the best Central Museums in the country in terms of 
curation, architecture, and visitor amenities. The State Governments can then be 
pursued to utilise the Museum Grant Scheme to emulate the model Museum in other 
parts of the States. 
 
Attracting higher footfall at museums and improving facilities thereat 
185. The Committee feels that it is important to ignite the interest of Indian citizens 
towards museums. Increased footfall at museums would make it viable for the Government 
to come up with more museums across the country. This, in turn, would give a strong push to 
the tourism sector in the country. 


Page 43 of 142 
 
186. The Committee recommends that the Ministry may undertake a case study of the best 
international museums with the highest footfalls.  The best practices observed from such case 
studies may be fine-tuned in light of Indian context.   
187. The Committee suggests that the Ministry may come up with an effective, 
creative strategy for promotion of these museums through both online and offline 
channels. The Committ ee recommends that the Ministry may allocate specific 
allocation for the purpose of promoting museums across the country. 
188. The Museums should conduct outreach programs to engage with schools and 
colleges to attract students. They should organise worksh ops, interactive sessions, and 
events to encourage students to visit and learn.  
189. All Museums under the Ministry of Culture may come up with programs to 
arrange free visits to museums for local school children, with a special focus on 
Government school s. State Governments may also be requested to carry out similar 
exercises. The Committee feels that such visits would leave a lasting impression on the 
students from a young age and help increase interest in museums in the long term. 
CENTENARIES AND ANNIVERSARIES, CELEBRATIONS AND SCHEMES 
190. Provision for Centenaries and Anniversaries celebrations during  the year 2023 -2024, 
including residual activities of past celebrations would be undertaken. Activities of Azadi ka 
Amrit Mahotsava i.e. 75th Anniversary of India’s Independence, activities to celebrate 150 th 
Birth Anniversary of Sri Aurobindo Ghosh and 250 th Birth Anniversary of Raja Ram Mohan 
Roy would also be  undertaken. The Ministry furnished the below details regarding the 
allocation and expenditure incurred under this head in the last few years. 
 

Page 44 of 142 
 
 
 
191. The EFC approved outlay for the scheme ‘Centenaries and Anniversaries 
Celebrations’ in CFY is Rs. 390 cr ore which was approved after finalisation of BE 2022 -23 
and thereby sufficient funds could not be  provisioned at the BE stage of CFY. Hence the 
allocation under this scheme has seen a significant increase in RE 2022 -23. Under C&A 
Scheme, this Ministry has  been organising a significant number of programs all around the 
country under AKAM and other approved commemorations for which the funds are allocated 
from the scheme. 
  
192. The allocation of Rs. 185 Cr in FY 2023-24 has been made as per the approved outlay 
of the scheme “Centenaries and Anniversaries Celebrations'' which is in consonance with the 
demand of this Ministry. Funds will be utilised for the activities under AKAM till August 
2023 and other activities as per the mandate of the scheme for FY 2023-24. 
 
193. The Committee applauds the various initiatives undertaken by the Ministry 
under the Azadi Ka Amrit Mahotsav celebrations. Many initiatives focused on the 
participation of the common citizen, truly making them a part of the 75th independence 
year celebrations. The Committee recommends that the Ministry may come up with 


Page 45 of 142 
 
more innovative initiatives under AKAM till August 2023 to make full utilisation of the 
funds allocated for this purpose. 
 
Need for increased focus on commemoration and celebration of female freedom 
fighters and historical figures 
194. The Committee observes that Indian female freedom fighters contributed 
immensely to the Indian freedom struggle. The Committee recommends that the 
priceless contribution of female freedom fighters in the Indian freedom struggle may be 
celebrated and commemorated in a grand manner, on equal footing with the male 
freedom fighters. This would serve as an inspiration to all young girls and women 
across the country. 
 
KALA SANSKRITI VIKAS YOJANA   
195. Kala Sanskriti Vik as Yojana, this umbrella scheme  includes Missions and Schemes 
namely; Dandi related projects and Gandhi Heritage Sites Mission, Scheme of Financial 
Assistance for Promotion of Art and Culture, Scholarship and Fellowship for promotion of 
Art and Culture, Scheme of Financial Assistance for Creation of Cultural Infrastructure, 
Scheme for Financial Assistance to Veteran Artists, Financial Assistance for promotion of 
Guru Shishyas Parampara and National Award scheme and Sewa Bhoj Yojana. The Minis try 
furnished the below details as regards the B.E. allocation and expenditure pattern under Kala 
Sanskriti Vikas Yojana in the last few years. 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Page 46 of 142 
 
196. Under the head Kala Sanskriti Vikas Yojana, B.E. 2022 -23 allocation of Rs. 186.85 
crores was inc reased to Rs. 214.36 crores in RE 2022 -23. The Ministry informed that an 
enhancement was made at RE 2022-23 for reinstating the EFC approved outlay for FY 2023 -
24 since the BE 2022-23 was finalised before the EFC approvals were made for the scheme. 
197. The Committee notes that the Kala Sanskriti Yojana has provisions for various 
important schemes of financial assistance for veteran artists, gurus and shishyas, the 
creation of cultural infrastructure, and so on . The BE 2023 -24 allocation, though, is 
higher than the previous year B.E. allocation of Rs. 186.85 crores. However, the 
Committee observes that the B.E. allocation made under this important head has 
decreased from Rs. 310.48 crores in 2017 -18 to Rs. 210.49 crores in 2023 -24. The 
Committee recommends  that the Ministry may target increasing the number of 
individuals/ organisations receiving assistance through the various schemes under this 
head. A reassessment of the budgetary requirements should be made to achieve this 
target at the R.E. 2023-24 stage. 
 
SCHEME FOR FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE TO VETERAN ARTISTS (ERSTWHILE 
ARTISTS PENSION SCHEME) 
198. The details of the amount released along with the number of beneficiaries in the last 7 
years under the Scheme for Financial Assistance to Veteran Artists (erstwhile Artists Pension 
Scheme) are given below. 
 


Page 47 of 142 
 
199. Release of pension to the recommended artists is subject to fulfilling of certain 
mandatory conditions like submission of requisite documents, i.e. Life and Income 
Certificates by the beneficiaries . These pre -requisite conditions are many times not 
completed by the beneficiaries in time, which results in non -disbursal of financial assistance 
despite best efforts by the Ministry. 
200. Keeping in view the difficulty in submission of documents by the b eneficiaries for 
release of artist pension, the guidelines of the scheme have been modified and the selected 
beneficiaries are required to submit an annual income certificate once in five years instead 
of every year with effect from June, 2022. 
201. The Co mmittee desires to be apprised of the reasons for the decrease (since 
2018-19) in the number of veteran artists who are being supported under the Scheme 
for Financial Assistance to Veteran Artists. The Committee feels that India is a vast 
country with a lo t of veteran artists who must be in need of this scheme but either are  
not aware of the scheme or cannot get someone to apply it for them. The Committee 
recommends that the Ministry may put sincere efforts towards increasing the number 
of deserving beneficiaries under this Scheme. 
 
SUPPORT TO ACADEMIES 
202. The provision includes the expenditure of autonomous bodies namely Sangeet Natak 
Akademi, Sahitya Akademi, Lalit Kala Akademi, National School of Drama, Centre for 
Cultural Resources and Training, Indira  Gandhi National Centre for the Arts, Kalakshetra 
Foundation and Seven Zonal Cultural Centers. 
 
203. The details regarding the allocation and expenditure pattern under the head ‘Support 
to Akademies’ are given below. 

Page 48 of 142 
 
 
204. Under Support to Akademies , funds were being provisioned for IGNCA, an 
Autonomous Body of MoC which is the implementing agency of the project “Art work in 
new parliament building”. This project commenced in FY 2022 -23 and would be completed 
in FY 2023-24 and thereby a major augmentation had to be made for both the financial years. 
 
205. The Committee notes a satisfactory pattern of expenditure under this head in the 
last few years, except for COVID -struck FY 2019 -20 and FY 2020 -21. The Committee 
recommends that the Ministry may ensu re optimal utilisation of funds under this head 
during FY 2023 -24. The Committee also desires to be apprised of the projected date 
and cost of completion of the project ‘Art work in new Parliament Building’.  The 
Committee suggests that the Ministry may con sider setting up regional centres of the 
various Akademies to enhance their reach among artists of all regions.  
 
GRANTEE BODIES 
206. Apart from the grants released to the 11 grantee bodies under MoC  through this head 
of Accounts, a standalone project of IBC at Lumbini, Nepal is also booked under this section. 
The allocation has been made as per the revised demand raised by IBC for the project in FY 


Page 49 of 142 
 
2022-23. Since the project would be continued in FY 2023-24, allocation is made in next FY 
as per the proposal submitted from IBC.  
 
207. The allocation to the grantee bodies has been reduced by Rs.70.3 Cr due to low pace 
of expenditure in the Lumbini Project being implemented by IBC.  
208. The Committee o bserves that the expenditure under ‘Grantee Bodies’ in the 
ongoing FY 2022 -23 has been quite low. The Ministry had been allocated Rs. 120.49 
crores at BE 2022-23 under this head, which has been reduced to Rs. 50.19 crores at BE 
2023-24 due to  the low pace of expenditure in the Lumbini project. The Committee 
desires to be apprised of the reasons for the low pace of expenditure and the steps being 
taken to ensure better progress in the project. 
 
NATIONAL MISSION ON CULTURAL MAPPING 
209. National Mission on Cu ltural Mapping was set up under the Umbrella Scheme of 
Kala Sanskriti Vikas Yojana from March, 2017 to March, 2021 for building a comprehensive 
database of artists and other resources gathered from cultural organisations of Centre and 
States to bring them on a robust IT -enabled platform. So far, around 14.53 lakh artists and 
artisans' data has been collected from secondary sources. The tenure of the Mission has been 


Page 50 of 142 
 
extended till 31.03.2026 with ‘Mera Gaon Meri Darohar (MGMD)’ as a component.  The 
project aims to map 6.5 lakh villages along with their geographical and demographic profiles, 
and creative capitals. Under this scheme a portal named  https://mgmd.gov.in/ has been 
created to showcase the cultural heritage and traditions of these villages. 
210. The details regarding the B.E. allocation and expenditure incurred for NMCM since 
2017-18 are given below. 
 
211. The Committee observes that the Ministry has not been able to make optimal 
utilisation of the funds allocated for the National Mission on Cultural Mapping since its 
inception. The expenditure incurred for NMCM in the ongoing FY 2022 -23 has been 
satisfactory. The Committee recommends that the Ministry should ensure that the 
previous pattern of underutilisation of funds under NMCM does not continue in the 
future. 
212. Regarding the ‘ Mera Gaon, Meri Dharohar ’ initiative, the Secretary, Ministry of 
Culture info rmed that there are six lakh  plus villages in the country. The scheme was not 
progressing because the Ministry did not have any agency which had an outreach to all of 
these villages, which could go and collect data.  He apprised the Committee about the 
Common Service Center Corporation of India, a fifty -fifty partnership between the 
Government of India and some private entities.  The work of this Common Service 
Corporation Center is to create what is known as Village Level Entrepreneurs (VLEs).  There 


Page 51 of 142 
 
is four lakh of these VLEs across the country, and among them, they cover the six lakh 
villages. The VLEs have mapped about 3,20,000 villages so far and given the raw data to the 
Ministry.  The Ministry has an agency that cleans the data, and after cleaning the  data and 
making it legible and intelligible, the Ministry loads the data on its website.  Out of the data 
for 3,20,000 villages that has been collected, data for 1,20,000 villages has already been 
uploaded into our website.  This entire work is being done in IGNCA.  The website will soon 
be made public after a grand launch. 
213. The Committee believes that the ‘Mera Gaon, Meri Dharohar’ initiative will 
empower rural communities and promote rural tourism. It would also help disseminate 
information about the rich variety of our rich cultural heritage to the masses.  
214. The Committee is glad to note that the Ministry has made significant progress in 
collection and updation of village -level data as part of this initiative. Data for about 
20% of all the villages in India have been covered. The Committee recommends that the 
Ministry may continue to work with the same vigour to process the data for the rest of 
the villages.  
215. The Ministry has furnished the below information regarding the targeted outputs 
under National Mission on Cultural Mapping under the Output Outcome Monitoring 
Framework for 2022-23 and 2023-24 respectively. 
OUTPUTS 2022-23 OUTPUTS 2023-
24 
Output Indicators Targets 
2022-23 
Achievements Targets 2023-24 
1.      Repository of 
comprehensive 
database of 
cultural assets 
and resources 
including various 
art forms and 
artists 
1.1   Number of 
Artists to be 
enrolled on the 
National Portal 
for Cultural 
Mapping project 
7.5 
lakhs 14.53 lakhs 
 Remarks: The data related to 
14.53 lakhs artists has been 
collected by the NMCM from 
secondary sources for this 
purpose 
1400000  
216. The Committee observes that even though the NMCM has already collected data 
related to 14.53 lakh artists, the Ministry has set a target of only 14 lakh for the next FY 
2023-24. The Committee desires to be apprised of the reasons for not setting higher 
targeted output under this head. 
 
 

Page 52 of 142 
 
MISCELLANEOUS 
Global Perspective for Better Preservation of Monuments 
217. The Committee enquired about the global learnings that have been incorporated by 
the Ministry/ ASI in its plans for better preservation and development of tangible and 
intangible cultural heritage in the country.  The Ministry replied that the Archaeologic al 
Survey of India (ASI) deals with the conservation of protected monuments, including 24 
World Heritage Sites, under its jurisdiction. All monuments are preserved as per the National 
Policy for Conservation, 2014, which has been prepared to keep in mind various international 
norms for Conservation. All the Conservation works are undertaken by ASI as per the 
provision of the Policy. 
 
218. The Committee notes that the National Policy for Conservation was brought out 
by ASI in 2014. The Committee recommends t hat the Ministry/ASI may review the 
policy from time to time in view of the latest developments in the cultural and heritage 
sector around the world. The Committee believes that there are several global cues that 
can be incorporated into the policy for better preservation and development of tangible 
cultural heritage in India. These include enhanced community involvement, use of the 
latest technology (such as LiDAR scans and 3D mapping), sustainable tourism and 
adaptive reuse of heritage buildings. 
 
Employment generation in the Cultural Heritage sector 
219. The Committee desired to know if any assessment has been made by the Ministry/ 
ASI regarding employment generation in the Cultural Heritage sector. In reply, the Ministry 
informed that there is no such as sessment made by the ASI for employment generation. 
However, during conservation/preservation work of monuments, maintenance, housekeeping, 
watch & ward and security -related works, large number of manpower are deployed at 
centrally protected monuments acro ss the country. Besides, during the excavations carried 
out by the Archaeological Survey of India, a good number of local workers are deployed and 
getting dir ect employment through monument -related activities.  Further, it is pertinent to 
mention that in ad dition to above works, many other ways generating indirect employment 
for locals where a huge number of people’s livelihood or activities such as travel & tourism, 
hospitality, guides, photographers, vendors/hawkers, manufacturers and sellers of souvenirs,  
handicrafts etc revolve around the monuments. 
 
220. The Committee notes that a large number of manpower is deployed at CPMs for 
various activities such as conservation, maintenance and  housekeeping. However, the 
Committee feels that there is a pressing ne ed for a systematic assessment of the 

Page 53 of 142 
 
opportunities available for employment generation in the overall cultural heritage 
sector. Following such an assessment, the Ministry should set targets for creating 
employment opportunities in the cultural heritage sector.  
221. The Committee recommends that the Ministry may encourage the creation of 
cultural businesses and startups, providing funding, mentoring, and other resources to 
support the growth of creative industries. The Ministry should offer training and 
education programs in cultural fields, developing a skilled workforce and creating 
employment opportunities in areas such as arts administration, event management, and 
cultural tourism. The Ministry may apprise the Committee regarding its plans to be 
part of the Pradhan Mantri Kaushal Vikas Yojana 4.0 to impart skill development to 
the youth in the culture and heritage sector.  
222. Strategic efforts to promote intangible cultural heritage could directly empower 
women and other disadvantaged groups. This could help establish a competitive 
handicraft sector by helping develop rural craft hubs, enhancing productivity and 
building sustainable market linkages. 
223. The Committee further recommends that the Ministry may promote and 
showcase handicrafts and othe r products made by local artists under the Unity Malls 
which will be set up under the ‘One District, One Product’ initiative of the 
Government. 
224. By implementing such measures, the Committee believes that the Ministry can 
tap the potential of the cultur al sector to generate employment, promoting economic 
growth and cultural vitality at the same time. 
225. The Committee recommends that the Ministry and ASI should prioritise hiring 
locals for conservation, preservation, maintenance, and security -related wo rks. This 
will not only provide employment opportunities but also create a sense of ownership 
and pride in the local community toward the historical sites.  
226. The Ministry should coordinate with departments concerned to provide training 
programs to loca ls for culture -related skills. This may include skills related to 
conservation, preservation, and tourism. This will not only enhance their employability 
but also increase the quality of services provided to tourists.  
227. The Ministry should encourage en trepreneurship in the local community by 
providing support for setting up souvenir shops, handicraft stores, and other local 
businesses that cater to tourists. 

Page 54 of 142 
 
228. The Committee suggests that the Ministry of Culture and ASI should collaborate 
with the Ministry of Tourism to promote heritage tourism in the region. This will 
increase the footfall of tourists, which in turn will create job opportunities for locals in 
the travel and hospitality industry. 
 
Review and reorganisation of the Centre for Cultural Resources and Training 
229. The Centre for Cultural Resources and Training (CCRT) was set up in 1979 as an 
autonomous organization for cultural integration in education. The Centre organizes various 
training programmes for administrators, teacher educator s, in -service teachers of all levels 
and students. The aim is to strengthen the foundation of  the nation by promoting Indian 
values, knowledge systems, traditions and  incredible heritage be it in the form of Living 
Traditions, Built Heritage, Literary Trad itions or Performing Arts, Visual Arts, etc by 
integrating these with school subjects in classroom teaching to make it more meaningful and 
interesting.  
230. The Training Programmes for in -service teachers are designed to promote active and 
experiential learning and to inculcate an appreciation of the vast diversity in the Indian art 
forms. CCRT organised 10 Orientation (Basic Foundation) Courses and 01 Refresh er Course 
from January to December 2022 in which 704 teachers from all over the country were 
trained. The proposed and on going online/on -campus 06 Training Programmes (Basic 
foundation /Refresher Course) are to be under taken and are being organized by th e CCRT 
from January 2023 to March 2023.   
231. In its meeting held on 15 th February, 2023, the Committee observed the need for a 
relook regarding the activities performed by CCRT. 
232. The Committee notes that the CCRT is an important institution as it tra ins 
teachers for cultural integration in education. The Committee recommends that the 
Ministry may undertake a thorough review and reorganisation of the activities 
performed by CCRT. Corresponding changes may be brought out in order to ensure 
that CCRT performs to the best of its abilities and helps strengthen the cultural values 
of the nation among its young generation. 
  
Need for National Culture Policy 
233. India still does not have a National Culture Policy for managing, promoting, 
preserving and showcasing its rich and vibrant culture and handling the economics of culture 
through innovative initiatives, governmental incentives, funding and public private 
partnership (PPP) models. In this regard, the Ministry briefed that it has been in the process 
of cr eating a national Cultural Policy. As a primary step, a vision for culture for 2047 is 

Page 55 of 142 
 
being developed. This vision has been translated into five ambitions. A detailed action plan is 
being developed for each of these ambitions. It is a time consuming and c omplex process 
since the policy needs to be carefully curated taking care of numerous aspects of Indian art 
and culture. This Ministry would be delighted to share with the Hon’ble Committee the 
National cultural policy once it is finalised. 
234. The Commit tee recommends that the National Cultural Policy should be 
inclusive and based on India’s multicultural and multi -ethnic values. It should aim to 
preserve and promote the diverse cultural heritage of the country, including the 
cultural practices, traditions of marginalised communities and all regional languages.  
235. The policy should promote cultural exchange and collaborations between 
different regions of the country as well as with other countries, to foster understanding 
and appreciation of different c ultures.  It should provide incentives and support for 
artists and cultural practitioners to innovate and experiment with new forms of 
expression and creativity. The policy should explore innovative public -private 
partnership models to support cultural ini tiatives and leverage private sector funding 
and expertise.  
236. The policy should address the economic sustainability of cultural practices and 
provide support for the development of sustainable cultural tourism initiatives that 
benefit local communities.  
237. The Committee further recommends that the Ministry may ensure that it takes 
the views of all concerned stakeholders in order to come up with a robust, 
comprehensive policy. Such a policy will help guide the Indian Cultural and Heritage 
Sector in the right direction for many years to come. 
238. The Committee recommends that as a part of the policy, the Ministry may 
examine the possibility for ASI to extend help in the restoration of temples and other 
historical buildings built by Indian ancestors, which are in other countries such as 
Cambodia. 
 
Establishment of a National Culture University with headquarters in Delhi and 
affiliated Colleges in each State 
239. The Committee observes that India is a highly diverse and multi -cultural 
country. Each State and each village has its own distinct and unique identity. The 
Committee feels that in order to protect the unique culture of each village in each State, 
it is imp erative and necessary to have one national university, with all States having 
affiliated colleges of national importance. Such educational institutions may also 
perform research work on Vedas, Upanishads and other historical texts and languages. 

Page 56 of 142 
 
The Commit tee recommends that the Ministry may carry out a feasibility study for 
establishing a National Culture University with affiliated colleges in each of the States 
and UTs. 
Exploring the viability of replication of the State of Unity model in other States 
240. The Committee recommends that the Ministry may assess the number of people 
who have visited the Statue of Unity in Kevadia, Gujarat. The Ministry may make joint 
efforts along with the Ministry of Tourism to analyse the viability of the construction of 
statues of important regional historical figures in other States. The Committee feels that 
if found viable,  the development of tourist hubs around such statues would serve the 
dual purpose of boosting tourism as well as educating the visitors about the signi ficant 
role played by important historical figures in shaping India’s destiny. 
Status of the Monument Mitra – Adopt a Heritage Scheme 
241. Under the Monument Mitra - Adopt a Heritage scheme, the Ministry proposes to hand 
over 1,000 monuments under ASI cont rol to the private sector for their upkeep and 
revamping as part of their Corporate Social Responsibility.  
242. The Ministry informed that the Adopt A Heritage (AAH)  scheme was launched in 
September, 2017 by the Ministry of Tourism in collaboration with the Ministry of Culture 
and Archaeological Survey of India. Pursuant to decision taken at highest level, in 
consonance with section 15 of AMASR Act 1958 rules therein,  Ministry of Culture has 
decided to revamp the earlier scheme as Adopt A Heritage 2.0 aiming to provide, de velop 
and maintain amenities and infrastructure to enhance visitors experience at Centrally 
Protected Monuments/Sites (CPMs).To implement the infrast ructure envisaged by the 
Corporate Body/ Sector, a detailed gap analysis of amenities at the CPMs has been conducted 
and is available through an online portal for adoption. Further, a detailed guideline of the 
scheme is also drafted to safeguard the upkeep  and revamping of CPMs. A Memorandum of 
Understanding (MoU) delineating the activities shall be signed between ASI, MoC and 
corporate body designated as Smarak Sarthi / Smarak Saathi for a specific period on an 
extendable basis.The cost of providing amenit ies at the CPMs will be borne by the CSR 
partner which will vary from monument to monument. Apart from AAH, National Culture 
Fund under the aegis of MOC is another scheme wherein any corporate sector, bodies, 
individuals can contribute under corporate fund s. Project cost savings through this 
programme cannot be assessed at this juncture. Once adoption of monuments is done and the 
quantum of works are finalised, only then the savings can be ascertained.   
243. The Committee feels that the selection criteria for choosing the monuments for 
adoption should be robust and transparent. The Ministry should identify those 
monuments that are not being adequately maintained and are in need of attention.  

Page 57 of 142 
 
244. Experts from the fields of archaeology, heritage conservatio n, and tourism 
should be involved in the process of selecting and maintaining the monuments. This 
would ensure that the monuments are being maintained in line with established 
standards.  
245. The Committee recommends that the Ministry should ensure that S tandard 
Operating Procedures (SOPs) are in place to ensure that the maintenance and 
revamping of the monuments are in line with the standards set by ASI and other 
professional bodies. The procedures should include regular inspections, monitoring and 
reporting mechanisms. It must be ensured that any new structures that might be set up 
by the private partners in or near the monuments, complement the architecture and 
design of the particular monument. 
246. The performance of the private sector entities should be regularly reviewed to 
ensure that they are fulfilling their obligations as per the agreement. This would ensure 
that the adopted monuments are being maintained properly and are providing a good 
experience to visitors. 
 
Measures taken towards cultural diplomacy 
247. The International Cultural Relations Division under the Ministry of Culture  promotes 
Indian cultural activities on an international scale by signing of Cultural Agreements & 
Cultural Exchange Programme with different countries and their imple mentation by 
concerned agencies with mutual discussions through diplomatic channels. The Ministry of 
Culture also promotes Indian Cultural activities abroad through the Global Engagement 
Scheme under which Festivals of India are organised showcasing folk a rt and other cultural 
events. Under the scheme, Grant -in-aid is also given to Indo -Foreign Friendship Cultural 
Societies for organising programmes & activities including folk art & other cultural activities 
for their promotion abroad. The total funds of Rs . 85.69 crore (approx.) has been spent  for 
activities under the Global Engagement Umbrella scheme during the last five years. 
248. The Ministry informed that ‘Project Mausam’, is a transnational project on maritime 
routes and cultural landscapes across the Indian Ocean rim, launched by the MoC, GOI at the 
38th Session of the World Heritage Committee, UNESCO at Doha, Qatar on 20th June 2014. 
The Archaeological Survey of India h as also successfully organised a National Conference 
on Project Mausam titled Jaladhipurayatra on 7th and 8th October 2022. The conference was 
participated by many renowned scholars and academicians as well as Ambassadors and High 
Commissioners of many nations identified for Project Mausam. 
249. In the Museum field, an MoU was signed on 27th June, 2013 between Metropolitan 
Museum of Art(NMA) and Ministry of Culture  in order to enhance exchange between the 

Page 58 of 142 
 
Ministry of culture and the United States of America and NMA express  their willingness to 
establish a long-term cooperative relationship. MoC and NMA also agree to cooperate in the 
area of conservation, exhibition, academic research, information sharing, public education, 
promotion and publicity, publications, museum management and so on . The Museum 
Division is planning to re -sign a new MoU between the Ministry of Culture and NMA, New 
York, USA as the validity of the old MOU is over. 
250. The Committee obs erves that India is well -known across the world for its rich, 
diverse and vibrant culture and heritage. It is important to build soft power and good 
will through cultural diplomacy, which can help further India’s larger political, 
economic and foreign poli cy goals. The Committee is, therefore, pleased to note the 
steps being taken towards enhancing India's cultural diplomacy efforts.  
251. The Committee recommends that the Ministry should focus on signing more 
Cultural Agreements & Cultural Exchange Program s with different countries to 
increase people -to-people contact and foster better understanding of each other's 
cultures. The Global Engagement Scheme should be expanded to showcase not only folk 
art but also contemporary art, music, dance, literature, and  cuisine to showcase the 
diversity of Indian culture. India should leverage digital platforms to reach wider 
audiences and engage with people around the world by creating more virtual events, 
online exhibitions, and webinars to promote Indian culture. The Ministry should 
establish more collaborations and partnerships with international museums to promote 
the exchange of knowledge, resources, and expertise.  
252. The major challenges faced in cultural diplomacy efforts are language barriers, 
lack of awarenes s and understanding of Indian culture, and limited resources. India 
needs to address these challenges by investing in language training programs, cultural 
awareness campaigns, and increasing funding for cultural diplomacy initiatives.  
253. The Committee n otes that in the past five years, Rs. 85.69 crore has been spent 
on activities under the Global Engagement Umbrella scheme. However, the Ministry 
can allocate more funds for more cultural diplomacy initiatives to achieve better results 
and e xpand its soft power and good will across the world. Doing so would promote 
Indian culture abroad, strengthen international relations and create opportunities for 
increased overseas trade and investment. 
 
Fostering community participation and public awareness 
254. New mod els for cultural preservation such as ‘crowd funding’ and ‘community 
funding’ are emerging. These models allow local communities to provide solutions both in 
terms of visitor interest and financial support as well as assist in managing the encroachment 

Page 59 of 142 
 
issue more effectively. In this light, the Committee sought to know the steps taken to 
promote more community participation and public awareness towards cultural preservation.  
255. The Ministry informed that the Government has set up the National Culture Fun d 
(NCF) as a Trust on 28 th November, 1996 under the Charitable Endowment Act, 1890 with a 
view to mobilise extra resources through Public Private Partnerships (PPP) towards 
promoting, protecting and preserving India’s cultural heritage. A donor/sponsor while 
making contributions to  the NCF may indicate a project along with any specific 
location/aspect and also an agency for execution of the project. Besides, the interests accrued 
from the Primary and Secondary Corpus are also utilised for activities associated with the 
field of culture. In this regard continuous efforts are being exercised for approaching various 
donors; for this communication from the competent authorit y, NCF is regularly being sent -
indicating ways to partner with NCF and its benefit. As such till now no challenges have 
been faced in this regard.  
256. The details of the funds raised and utilised under the National Culture Fund during 
the last 7 years is as follows: 
FINANCIAL 
YEAR 
FUNDS RAISED 
In Rs. (Approx.) 
AMOUNT UTILISED 
In Rs. (Approx.) 
2015-16 07.23 Cr. 03.77 Cr. 
2016-17 03.25 Cr. 01.31 Cr. 
2017-18 02.82 Cr. 04.45 Cr. 
2018-19 37.41 Cr. 08.12 Cr. 
2019-20 0.55 Cr. 40.61 Cr. 
2020-21 0.20 Cr. 01.02 Cr. 
2021-22 11.00 Cr. 02.14 Cr. 
257. The Committee recommends that the Ministry should encourage local 
communities to come forward and participate in cultural preservation projects by 
providing them with information about NCF's mission and objectives. It should develop 
targeted campaigns and outreach programs that engage local communities and raise 
public awareness about the importance of cultural heritage preservation. These 
campaigns can be run on various media platforms and social media to reach a broader 
audience. This is crucial to enable  more potential donor individuals and institutions to 
know more about the NCF platform.  
258. The Committee further recommends that the Ministry/ ASI should involve local 
communities in decision -making processes related to cultural preservation projects. 
This will help build trust and foster a sense of ownership among local communities, 
thereby pro moting long -term sustainability. It should create opportunities for local 
communities to participate in the preservation process through workshops, training 

Page 60 of 142 
 
programs, and hands -on activities. This will help build capacity among local 
communities and enable them to take a more active role in cultural preservation efforts. 
259. The Ministry should focus on developing partnerships with local community 
organisations, NGOs, and other stakeholders to promote community participation and 
public awareness for cultur al heritage preservation. This will help to leverage local 
resources and expertise to achieve better outcomes. 
260.  The Ministry should also consider allocating a portion of the National Culture 
Fund towards promoting community participation and public aw areness for cultural 
preservation. This will provide a dedicated budget for these activities and help to ensure 
their sustainability over the long term. 
 
Special measures to protect rural and tribal culture 
261. The Committee noted that over 70% of India’s  population resides in rural and tribal 
areas, having their distinct cultures and traditions, mostly in an unwritten form. Given the 
limited resources available in rural and tribal areas, special efforts are needed to protect their 
rich and diverse culture. 
262. The reply furnished by the Ministry in this regard is placed at Annexure-VIII.  
263. The Committee appreciates the various initiatives being undertaken by the 
various organisations under the Ministry to protect rural and tribal culture. The 
Committee notes that the Anthropological Survey of India (AnSI) has been working on 
several projects related to the protection of rural and tribal culture, such as study on 
community health, study on de -notified, nomadic and semi -nomadic communities. 
Encouraging more research in these areas can help in understanding the culture and 
customs of these communities better, allowing  the development of effective strategies 
for their preservation. IGRMS has been collecting ethnographic objects and 
documenting the tradition al knowledge systems of rural and triba l communities 
through fieldwork , demonstrative workshops, and cultural performances.  Promoting 
these knowledge systems can help in preserving the cultural heritage of these 
communities and generate awareness about their customs and practices. 
264. Rural and tribal youth are often forced to move away from their cultural roots 
due to the la ck of financial security. The Ministry should focus on organising cultural 
events showcasing their unique culture which will empower them and give them a sense 
of pride in their cultural heritage. This can help in preserving the cultural traditions of 
these communities. 

Page 61 of 142 
 
265. The Committee notes that VMH has organised various events such as Chhau 
dance theatre and interactive sessions on empowering regenerative livelihood in Santal 
tribal communities. These events can be replicated in other parts of the coun try to 
create awareness about rural and tribal culture and customs. IGNCA has been 
organising webinars and documentaries on various aspects of rural and tribal culture. 
Using technology to document and showcase the cultural heritage of these communities 
can help in preserving their traditions and reaching out to a wider audience. 
 
Creation of a mobile platform for classical dancers 
266. A Member of the Committee noted that the various classical dances have a 
glorious history of bei ng performed in temples an d courts . In light of this, the 
Committee recommends that the Ministry may consider the creation of mobile 
platforms on which the classical dancers can showcase their rich heritage gracefully 
during the Republic Day programme and other similar events. 
 
Financial Assistance to Artisans who manufacture Aranmula Kannadi (Mirror) 
267. The Committee notes that Aranmula Kannadi is a unique and precious type of mirror  
which are handmade with utmost care and dedication. The mirror -making part has been kept 
secret by a few families in the Aranmula village. These mirrors come with Geographical 
Indication (GI) patent tags recognised by the Government of India. The Aranmula Kannadi 
metal mirrors are said to last for thousands of years. 
268. A Member of the Committee highlighted that Aranmula village in Kerala is declared 
by the Government of India as a heritage village. Aranmula is popular for its Aranmula 
Kannadi (Mirror). He added that due to various reasons, the members of the families 
involved in making the Aranmula mirrors are finding it difficult to make a living out of the 
manufacture and sale of these mirrors. He stressed the need to take some steps to help the 
handful of families in the village who are engaged in making the Aranmula mirror.  
269. The Committee recommends that the Ministry may extend financial assistance 
to the families which have been keeping the traditional art of making Aranmula 
Mirrors alive for centuries. The Committee also recommends that the Ministry should 
take initiative to popularise the Aranmula Mirrors through various publicity measures. 
 
Delay in providing salary to staff in Uttarakhand 
270. The Committee notes that some persons employed by ASI who take care of 
many temples in the State of Uttarakhand have n ot received wages for more than a 
year. The Committee recommends that ASI may urgently look into the issue and ensure 
timely payment of the salary dues to its personnel. 

Page 62 of 142 
 
 
Grant of permission for worshipping at temples under ASI 
271. A Member of the Committ ee informed that ASI objects to the celebration of Shiv 
Ratri festival at the Mahadev Temple, Tambdi Surla  (Maharashtra), which is a monument 
under its protection.  
272. The Committee desires to be apprised of the policy regarding permitting 
religious activities at religious historical monuments under the protection of ASI. 
 
***** 
  

Page 63 of 142 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS - AT A GLANCE  
ANALYSIS OF DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2023 -24) and PAST PERFORMANCE OF 
THE MINISTRY  
B.E. 2023-24: Salient features and Projected Demand vs Allocation 
The Committee notes that the Ministry has been awarded 85 percent of its 
projected demand for BE 2023 -24. The shortfall in demand versus allocation has 
increased from 11 percent at BE stage in 2022 -23 to 15 percent in 2023 -24. Moreover, 
the allocation made  to various Central Sector Schemes is much lower vis -à-vis the 
demand of the Ministry. This includes allocations under Support to Akademies (63.9% 
of demand), Support to Museums (76.1%), Support to Libraries (70%) and Buddhist 
Tibetan Institutions and Memo rials (62.8%). These heads support the expenditure of 
various autonomous bodies such as Sangeet Natak Akademi, Indian Museum (Kolkata), 
Delhi Public Library, Central Institute of Buddhist Studies. The Committee desires to 
be apprised of the broad impact of  the shortfall on the activities of the various 
autonomous bodies under these heads.  
(Para 13) 
The Ministry of Culture shoulders the crucial responsibility of the preservation, 
development and promotion of the country's tangible as well as intangible heri tage. 
Keeping this in mind, the Committee is convinced that the BE allocation of 3399.65 
crores for 2022-23 does not suffice the fund requirements of the Ministry. This is likely 
to adversely affect the vital projects, activities and schemes planned by the  Ministry for 
2023-24.  
(Para 14) 
 The allocation of Rs. 3399 crores for BE 2023 -24 is ~13 percent higher than BE 
2022-23 and ~1 percent higher than RE 2022 -23. However, the Committee notes that 
the increase of 1 percent as compared to RE 2022 -23 is not su fficient to cover the 
impact of inflation. The spending power of the Ministry will actually decrease in 2023 -
24.  
(Para 15) 
 The Committee also takes note of the year -on-year change in the budgetary 
allocation of the Ministry. The budget of the Ministry ha s increased from ₹2169 crores 
in 2015-16 to ~ ₹3400 crores in 2023 -24, an increase of 57 percent. In comparison, the 
total budget of the Government in this period has risen from ₹17.77 lakh crores to 
₹45.03 lakh crore, an increase of 153 percent.  

Page 64 of 142 
 
(Para 16) 
 In view of these observations, the Committee recommends that the Ministry may 
underscore the importance of its mandated duties to the Ministry of Finance for higher 
allocation at R.E. stage. Ministry of Finance may be requested to minimise the shortfall 
in allocation vis-à-vis the projected demand. The Ministry may also ensure that the 
funds allocated to it are fully utilised to permit higher allocations at future stages.  
(Para 17) 
 The Committee agrees with the submission that a majority of the amount s pent 
on art and culture in many countries is from non -government sources. The Committee 
suggests that the Ministry should increase its focus on encouraging private 
participation in the art and culture sector.  
(Para 18) 
 The Ministry should try to attract investment from private organisations under 
Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR) funds, besides seeking investments through 
Public Private Partnership (PPP) route. Private sector's active participation will help 
the Ministry reach the desired level of inv estment in India's Culture and Heritage 
sector. This would enable much better preservation and development of monuments 
and museums in the country. It would also help India become a more attractive tourist 
destination.  
(Para 19) 
 The Committee appreciates the assurance given by the Ministry that no activity 
will be compromised for want of funds.  
(Para 21) 
 
 The Committee notes that Capital investments generate future cash flows for the 
national economy. Capital figures are factored into macroeconomic indicators such as 
Capex-to-GDP. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the expenditure made for 
capital purposes should be correctly reflected in the budget figures. The Ministry may 
ensure that this accounting anomaly is corrected as soon as possible.  
(Para 24) 
 
Expenditure under various heads in the ongoing Financial Year 2022-23 
33. The Committee observes that the Ministry has managed to spend just above two-
third of its R.E. 2022 -23 allocation in the first ten months of the FY 2022 -23. The 
Committee recommends that the Ministry may make concerted efforts to ensure 
maximum permitted u tilisation of available funds. This is crucially important in order 

Page 65 of 142 
 
to meet the various targets set for the ongoing financial year. The Committee notes the 
issues that have affected the quality of utilisation by the Ministry. Constrained fund 
utilisation of the available budgets in any sector may be avoided through coordinated 
policy measures to ensure improved fund flow and utilisation. The Committee hopes 
that the Ministry fully spends the balance 31.5% of its RE 2022-23 allocation in the next 
2 months of  FY 2022 -23. The Committee recommends that the Ministry may take 
suitable measures to avoid expenditure rush in the last quarter in FY 2023-24.  
(Para 33) 
 
Optimal Utilisation of Funds 
 The Committee is glad to note that the Ministry has held Expert Commit tee 
meetings, NIC meetings and Appraisal meetings etc. on a regular basis to remove the 
backlog in the execution of schemes.  
(Para 37) 
 It is evident that the Ministry has consistently utilised more than 90 percent of 
its B.E. allocation in the last few years, except for the COVID-impacted FY 2019-20 and 
2020-21. The Committee recommends that the Ministry may continue to ensure optimal 
utilisation of the funds available at its disposal in the upcoming years.  
(Para 38) 
 The Committee hopes that the Ministr y of Finance may also factor in the 
consistent pattern of fund utilisation by the Ministry of Culture while deciding upon 
allocations to MoC in the future.  
(Para 39) 
 
Targets and Achievements of the Ministry vis-a-vis Output Outcome Framework 
for the year 2022-23  
 The Committee notes the various new projects planned by the Ministry for the 
FY 2023-24. The Committee desires to be apprised of the expected completion date for 
the National Experimental Site Museum at Vadnagar. The Ministry may ensure that a 
strict timeline is formulated for all the new projects to be taken up in the upcoming 
Financial Year.  
(Para 41) 
 
 The Committee appreciates the good progress made by the Ministry in meeting a 
majority of the targets set under the Output Outcome Framework. The Committee 

Page 66 of 142 
 
notes that in many cases such as the number of gurus and artists financially supported, 
the Ministry  has comfortably exceeded the set targets. The Committee recommends 
that the Ministry may duly factor in the achievements of the previous year and set 
higher targets for the next year, as may be permitted by the available allocations.  
(Para 43) 
 The Commi ttee notes that the pace of progress under some important output 
and outcome indicators has been slow in the ongoing FY 2022 -23. These include the 
number of new museums setup with financial assistance under the Museum Grant 
Scheme, number of Museum and Lib rary professionals trained, number of 
programmes conducted for promotion of culture of science, and so on. The Committee 
recommends that the Ministry may look into the reasons for under -achievement of 
targets in each such case. The bottlenecks being faced in achieving the targets may be 
effectively addressed to ensure higher pace of progress in the FY 2023-24.  
(Para 44) 
 
Issues related to Human Resources 
 The Committee notes that most of the organisations under the Ministry of 
Culture are functioning with a very high level of vacancies across Group A, B as well as 
C. Barring the Ministry of Culture (Establishment), all organisations have more than 
35% vacancies in Group A posts. The Committee recommends that the Ministry may 
analyse the impact of the high n umber of vacancies presently existing in all its 
organisations. The Ministry should take urgent action to ensure that adequate staff is 
recruited to enable these organisations to fulfil their mandate in letter and spirit.  
(Para 48) 
 The Committee takes note of the initiatives being taken by various organisations 
to fill the vacancies. The Committee hopes that all concerned agencies including UPSC 
and SSC may ensure that the targeted recruitment schedule stays on track and the 
advertised vacancies get filled at the earliest.  
(Para 49) 
 The Committee takes special note of the fact that all 5 posts of Whole Time 
Members (WTMs) of National Monuments Authority are vacant at present. It may be 
difficult for the NMA to work to its full potential without any in -position WTMs. The 
Committee recommends that the appointment of the WTMs may be expedited so as to 
enable NMA to effectively work on the important functions under its purview.  
(Para 50) 
 

Page 67 of 142 
 
ARCHAEOLOGICAL SURVEY OF INDIA 
Allocation and Expenditure Pattern 
 The Committee is pleased to note that there has been a consistent pattern of 
utilisation of funds available with ASI in the recent years, barring the years impacted 
by the Coronavirus pandemic. The Committee, however, observes that the allocation 
made to A SI at the B.E. stage has failed to reach the levels of the allocation made in 
2020-21. ASI has been allocated Rs. 1102.83 crores at B.E. 2023 -24 stage, which is 
91.8% of its projected demand.  
(Para 55) 
 The Committee notes the submission of the Ministry t hat it is trying to evolve 
innovative methods to maximise the participation of non -government organisations in 
the field of promotion and conservation of art and culture. The Committee feels that till 
the time a satisfactory level of investment is made by the private sector, the Ministry 
should ensure that adequate funds are available with ASI to perform its crucial duty of 
preservation of monuments. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry 
may seek additional funds to ensure that ASI’s projec ted demands are met at the R.E. 
2023-24 stage.  
(Para 56) 
 The Committee notes that under the head ‘Restoration of Unprotected 
Monuments - Minor Works’, the Ministry has been allocated an amount of Rs. 2.50 
crores at BE 2023-24 against its projected demand of Rs. 5.00 crores to meet anticipated 
expenditure for restoration of unprotected monuments such as  Badrinath.  
(Para 58) 
 In its 294 th Report on the subject ‘Development and Conservation of Museums 
and Archaeological sites - Challenges and Opportunities’, the Committee had noted 
that in 2007, National Mission o n Monuments & Antiquities aimed to list 500,000 
heritage buildings. The Committee  notes that about 3,693 monuments fall under the 
protection of the Central Government while around 4,500 monuments are protected by 
the State/UT Governments. It is evident th at a large number of valuable historical 
monuments are presently not under any sort of protection by the Government.  
(Para 59) 
The amount of Rs. 5 crores sought by ASI for restoration of unprotected 
monuments is in itself a minor amount given the huge number of such monuments.  
(Para 60) 

Page 68 of 142 
 
 The Committee recommends that the Ministry may request the Ministry of 
Finance to allocate sufficient funds under this head to enable ASI to carry out its 
planned activities for restoration of unprotected monuments.  
(Para 61) 
Vacancies in ASI 
 The Committee notes that 37.5% of the total number of posts in ASI is presently 
vacant. The Committee recommends that the ASI may undertake urgent measures to 
ensure that it has adequate level of staff working towards the conservati on and 
development of the Centrally Protected Monuments across the country.  
(Para 64) 
 The Committee recommends that the Ministry may take steps to assess the 
number of vacancies that would exist on account of senior employees retiring and 
junior ones get ting promoted. The Committee, further, recommends that ASI may 
factor in the time it takes for a recruitment cycle to complete and start the process to fill 
at least some portion of its projected vacancies in advance.  
(Para 69) 
Security Policy for Centrally Protected Monuments (CPMs) 
 The Committee recommends that the Ministry may finalise the comprehensive 
security policy for all CPMs at the earliest, since ensuring their security cannot be 
postponed to a later date. The security policy should cover the r equirements for 
physical security of monuments, in terms of requirements for boundary walls/fences, 
security personnel, CCTV cameras, and so on.  
(Para 72) 
 The Committee is of the view that increasing public participation and awareness 
may be made a part of the Security Policy for CPMs. The policy should include 
measures to raise public awareness about the importance of historical monuments and 
the need for their protection and preservation. This may include educational programs 
for students, creative publ ic outreach campaigns, and partnerships with local 
community organisations.  
(Para 73) 
Excavation and Exploration Activities 
 The Committee feels that having a National Policy on Archaeological Excavation 
and Exploration will give a major fillip to arch aeological excavation and exploration in 
the country. The Committee hopes that the Ministry has made exhaustive consultations 

Page 69 of 142 
 
with various stakeholders for drafting this policy. The Committee recommends that the 
policy may include provisions to permit/ licenc e more educational institutions and 
professionals to excavate and also involve local communities and civil society groups.  
(Para 77) 
 India has a large number of archaeological sites in the country and thus, a high 
potential for archaeological excavation and exploration. In this light, the Committee 
feels that the present allocations being made for excavations is rather inadequate. The 
Committee recommends that the Ministry may make a fresh reassessment of the 
budgetary requirements for excavation and exploration once the policy thereon is 
finalised.  
(Para 78) 
Need for renovation, promotion and better tourist facilities at various ASI 
monuments, temples and forts 
 The Committee recommends that ASI may undertake a special drive to ensure 
that basic tourist amenities are available at all the ticketed Centrally Protected 
Monuments. ASI may also explore the feasibility of providing well -maintained basic 
amenities at non -ticketed CPMs. ASI may devise a mechanism to ensure clean and 
hygienic washroom facilities at all the CPMs. The contact number of the regional ASI 
officials may be displayed to permit tourists to complain in case of lack of maintenance.  
(Para 81) 
 ASI may also develop a mechanism to permit tourists to post complaints on its 
mobile app. The option to provide such feedback may be suitably promoted for visitors 
who visit ASI monuments. ASI may ensure that strict action is taken ag ainst the 
accountable officials in case lapses are frequently reported.  
(Para 82) 
 ASI should start with strict implementation of these measures at UNESCO 
World Heritage Sites, extending the same to all other ticketed CPMs across the country 
afterwards within a set timeline.  
(Para 83) 
 The Committee notes the need for renovation and restoration work at various 
monuments across the country. These inter alia include various Monuments/ protected 
sites of Kerala such as Bekal Fort, Palakkad Fort, Thalassery F ort, Kannur Fort, 
Anchuthengu Fort, Vadakkunnathan temple,  Kadavallur temple, Thriprayar temple, 
Thiruvarattukavu temple, Gopeshwar Temple (Chamoli) and Adi Badri Temple.  
(Para 84) 

Page 70 of 142 
 
 The Committee recommends that the ASI may seek the active involvement of the 
local communities in the upkeep and maintenance of monuments.  
(Para 85) 
Preparation of monument-specific conservation plan for all CPMs 
 The Committee recommends that ASI may come up with monument -specific 
conservation plans for each of the CPM under  its protection. The conservation plan 
should outline the steps and strategies needed to preserve, restore, and maintain the 
particular monument.  
(Para 87) 
 It should include an assessment of the monument's current condition, an 
analysis of the potential threats and risks to the monument, and a set of specific actions 
that need to be taken to preserve and protect the monument.  
(Para 88) 
 It should involve a comprehensive assessment of the environmental and physical 
factors that impact the monument's structural stability and longevity.  
(Para 89) 
 
Footfall at Centrally Protected Monuments 
 The Committee notes that the number of visitors to ASI Monuments has 
significantly decreased since the onset of the Coronavirus pandemic. Although there has 
been a revers ing trend since then the present footfall is much below the pre -COVID 
footfall. Further, it can be seen that the footfall at ASI monuments has actually 
decreased from FY 2015 -16 onwards. The Committee recommends that ASI may make 
a detailed examination of the reasons for the decrease in footfall since FY 2015 -16 and 
take suitable remedial action.  
(Para 91) 
 The Committee recommends that ASI may take a multi -pronged approach to 
increasing the footfall at its monuments. ASI may use social media platforms to 
showcase historical monuments to potential visitors. It may develop an interactive 
mobile app that provid es visitors with information on the historical significance of the 
monument, its architectural features, and the local culture. It should work on 
improving the overall visitor experience by offering services such as audio guides, free 
Wi-Fi, comfortable seating areas, clean washrooms and drinking water and so on.  
(Para 92) 

Page 71 of 142 
 
 The Committee further recommends that organising cultural events such as 
music concerts, dance performances, and traditional festivals in and around the 
monument would also help ASI to attract visitors. In all the activities related to the 
promotion of Monuments, the Ministry of Culture may closely coordinate and interact 
with the Ministry of Tourism. ASI may ensure that the Centrally Protected Monuments 
are easily accessible by providin g adequate parking spaces, public transportation and 
signages. The Committee feels that proper implementation of these steps would 
definitely help increase footfall at the CPMs.  
(Para 93) 
 The Committee recommends that ASI may make use of social media che ck-
ins/mentions and survey exercises to determine approximate visitors who visit non -
ticketed CPMs in the country. The Committee feels that having data pertaining to 
footfall is a must in order to enable ASI to decide whether to introduce ticketing to 
more CPMs or not. The Committee, therefore, recommends that ASI may undertake 
suitable measures to gather approximate statistics regarding footfall received at its non-
ticketed monuments.  
(Para 95) 
 
Encroachment in and around Monuments and Archaeological Sites 
 The Committee notes that 531 monuments i.e. about 14.4% of ASI’s total 3693 
CPMs, have been encroached till date. Encroachments from only 9 monuments have 
been removed since 2015. The Committee believes that part of the reason behind this 
situation is that after ASI issues demolition orders to tackle encroachments, it can only 
issue reminders to the relevant authority for appropriate action. This reflects the 
inadequacy of the powers that ASI has at present in order to deal with the 
encroachment of CPMs.  Removing encroachments is one of the foremost steps to 
ascertain the state of preservation and protection of the monument.  
(Para 99) 
 The Committee recommends that the Ministry may ensure that ASI is granted 
effective powers to help it deal with encroachment of CPMs in a firm and speedy 
manner.  
(Para 100) 
Capacity building in modern digital techniques  
 The Committee welcomes the initia tives being taken by the various different 
organisations under the Ministry of Culture to employ digital techniques to aid and 
assist in the activities that they perform. The Committee is of the view that more needs 

Page 72 of 142 
 
to be done, however, to ensure the best outputs with the latest available technology in 
their respective fields of work. The Committee recommends that the Ministry may 
organise training and workshops from time to time to educate the staff working in 
different organisations such as ASI, National Museum and the National Archives of 
India. This will allow the staff to keep themselves abreast of the latest technological 
advancements in digital techniques.  
(Para 103) 
 The Ministry should focus on the maintenance and user -friendliness of its digital 
platforms like the Indian Heritage Atlas and Abhilekh Patal portal since these platforms 
help in showcasing the rich depository of cultural wealth, collating important 
information under a single roof. User feedback may be collected and acted upon to 
make these digital platforms more useful over time.  
(Para 104) 
 The Ministry may also encourage research and development in the field of 
digital techniques for cultural preservation. This will lead to the development of new 
and innovative techniques that can hel p in better preservation and management of 
cultural heritage sites.  
(Para 105) 
Enhancing research capacity and infrastructure 
 The Committee appreciates the measures that the Ministry and its organisations 
are taking to facilitate research in archaeologic al conservation and cultural 
preservation. The Committee feels that it is important to establish scientific laboratories 
similar to ASI’s Greater Noida scientific laboratory in other parts of the country to 
facilitate research in archaeological conservatio n and cultural preservation. This will 
enable researchers to study the art objects and excavated materials of different nature 
in their specific contexts and help in preserving them.  
(Para 109) 
 The Ministry should allocate sufficient funds for establishing such facilities and 
upgrading the existing ones. ASI should collaborate with academic institutions, 
research organisations, and experts from different fields to facilitate research in 
archaeological conservation and cultural preservation. This will help bring in new ideas 
and expertise and provide a platform for interdisciplinary research. The Ministry 
should provide incentives for collaborations and partnerships and encourage 
knowledge exchange.  
(Para 110) 

Page 73 of 142 
 
 The Committee appreciates the healthy expenditure pattern of ASI Science 
Branch in the last 5 years. The Committee recommends that the Ministry should 
allocate more funds for research in archaeological conservation and cultural 
preservation. This will enable researchers to carry out long -term studies and develop 
new methods and technologies for preserving historical monuments and artefacts. The 
funds should be utilised efficiently and effectively, and the research outcomes should be 
disseminated widely to benefit society.  
(Para 111) 
 The Committee is of the opinion that the structures which are being constructed 
today have no comparison to the ancient Monuments/ Forts/ Palaces/ Temples/ 
Structures which used to be constructed, which are still  sturdy and intact even today. 
The Committee recommends the Ministry carry out a comprehensive research on such 
structures and their composition. The research can aid in better conservation and 
restoration.  
(Para 112) 
Impact of Climate Change and Tracing Missing Monuments 
 Historical monuments are an essential part of our cultural heritage, and climate 
change can have a devastating impact on them. The Committee may be apprised as to 
whether the conservation plans which are presently in force, factor in the  ill effects of 
climate change on the monuments. It is essential to regularly monitor historical 
monuments for signs of damage or degradation that may have been caused by climate 
change. Monitoring can help identify potential issues early on, and appropria te action 
can be taken to mitigate any adverse impact. The Committee feels that using climate -
resilient materials during restoration or conservation work can help protect 
monuments from the effects of climate change.  
(Para 117) 
 The Committee further notes that the CAG had declared 92 Centrally Protected 
Monuments as "missing". ASI has located 42 of these monuments. The remaining 50 
monuments are either affected by rapid urbanisation, submerged under 
reservoirs/dams or are untraceable. The Committee observ es that monuments once lost 
cannot ever be retrieved. The Centrally Protected Monuments (CPMs) are a vital piece 
of our historical heritage. ASI should, therefore, give the highest priority to ensuring 
the physical security of all CPMs across the country. The Committee recommends that 
the Ministry may conduct a survey of all remaining monuments to ensure their physical 
existence.  
(Para 118) 

Page 74 of 142 
 
 The Committee further recommends that regular physical surveys of all CPMs 
should be carried out from time to time. ASI should maintain digital log books that 
include textual and photographic/ video records of the monument’s physical state and 
location coordinates. This would also allow ASI to check encroachment, if any, of these 
CPMs at an early stage.  
(Para 119) 
Recovery of stolen/ illegally exported antiquities 
 The Committee commends the efforts being made by the Ministry for the 
retrieval of stolen and illegally exported antiquities back to India. The Committee, 
however, feels that the Ministry needs to make more efforts towards using diplomatic 
channels to seek the repatriation of India’s priceless antiquities which were taken away 
by force during colonial times. It is the right of Indian citizens to be able to see their 
rich historical antiquities without having to visit a foreign nation and to feel proud of 
their cultural heritage.  
(Para 121) 
 The Ministry may also use the G20 Summit as a platform to initiate discussions 
on the repatriation of the valuable artefacts looted from India during the colonial 
period by various European countries.  
(Para 122) 
Enhancing connectivity through PM Gati Shakti National Master Plan 
 The Committee desires to know whether the data uploaded regarding CPMs 
includes information regarding the prohibited and protected limits of each monument. 
The Committee feels that such informati on would permit other Ministries and 
Departments to ensure that their projects factor in the protected/prohibited areas of 
CPMs from the DPR stage itself.  
(Para 124) 
 The Committee recommends that the Ministry may coordinate with the Ministry 
of Road Transport & Highways, Ministry of Railways, State Government Public Works 
Departments and any other Department concerned, to improve the connectivity to the 
various CPMs across the country.  
(Para 125) 
 

Page 75 of 142 
 
Progress made under National Mission on Monuments and Antiquities 
 The Committee takes cognisance of the various challenges faced by NMMA in 
the documentation of antiquities and built heritage sites. The Committee, however, 
observes that the Ministry has been able to spend only about 61% of the allocation of 
Rs. 57.79 crore for NMMA from 2007 to 2023. The Committee therefore recommends 
that the Ministry may look into the reasons preventing the optimal utilisation of funds 
allocated to NMMA. The bottlenecks may be addressed at the earliest so as to make 
faster progress in the documentation of antiquities and built heritage sites in the 
country.  
(Para 129) 
 The Committee observes that the progress under NMMA has been slow. Only 
about 16.8 lakh antiquities out of a total estimated 58 lakh antiquities have been 
documented till date. The Committee recommends that the NMMA may encourage and 
engage more Departments of State Archaeology and Museums, Universities and Non -
Governmental Heritage bodies to get themselves recognized as Documentation 
Resource Centres (DRCs) t o help expedite the documentation process. The use of 
advanced technology such as 3D imaging and virtual reality should be explored to 
create a comprehensive database of monuments and antiquities.  
(Para 130) 
 NMMA should invest in capacity-building initiatives, such as training and hiring 
more young archaeologists and professionals, to increase the speed and accuracy of the 
documentation process.  
(Para 131) 
 It should explore options to increase funding to expedite the documentation 
process and accomplish  the targets in a timely manner. The Committee is of the view 
that by implementing these recommendations, the documentation process of 
monuments and antiquities under NMMA can be expedited, which will enable better 
preservation and protection of India's cultural heritage.  
(Para 132) 
 
ANTHROPOLOGICAL SURVEY OF INDIA 
 The Committee takes note of the upward trend in the budgetary allocation made 
to the Anthropological Survey of India. The Committee, however, notes that the 
Ministry has been able to utilise on ly 61.9 percent of its allocation in the ongoing year 
2022-23, with only two months remaining. The Committee feels that it is unlikely that 
AnSI would be able to make full use of the available allocation by the end of this FY. It 

Page 76 of 142 
 
may look into the reasons behind this underutilisation and to rectify the same to ensure 
better performance in the upcoming FY 2023-24.  
(Para 135) 
  
 
GLOBAL ENGAGEMENT AND INTERNATIONAL COOPERATION  
 The Committee appreciates the allocation of an increased amount under the 
head ‘Global Engagement and International Cooperation’ in view of the G20 Summit 
to be hosted in India this year. The Committee desires to be apprised of its roadmap for 
using the G20 Summit as a platform for the promotion of Indian Culture and Heritage 
across the world.  
(Para 138) 
 The Committee observes that there is a clear pattern of underutilisation under 
this head, year after year. In the ongoing FY 2022 -23 as well, the Ministry has managed 
to spend only about 40% of the BE 2022 -23 allocation. The Committee opines that 
global en gagement and international cooperation can help foster a sense of cultural 
diplomacy and goodwill between India and other countries. It can also have economic 
benefits for India. By showcasing its cultural heritage on the world stage, India can 
attract mor e tourists and generate greater demand for its cultural products and 
services. It is therefore important to ensure optimal utilisation of funds under this head, 
especially in view of the upcoming G20 Summit during FY 2023-24.  
(Para 139) 
NORTH-EASTERN AREAS 
Allocation and Expenditure Pattern 
 The Committee notes that the average expenditure under North -Eastern Areas 
in the last few years has been lower than the overall expenditure of the Ministry. The 
Committee is not convinced with the reasons furnished by  the Ministry for this pattern 
of underutilisation. The Committee recommends that the Ministry may allocate a 
portion of the funds under this head for promotion and awareness of the Ministry's 
schemes in North -Eastern Areas. This would allow more organisat ions / individuals to 
benefit from the scheme of the Ministry.  
(Para 142) 
 The Ministry has made better progress as regards the pace of expenditure under 
North-Eastern Areas vis-à-vis B.E. allocation in the ongoing FY 2022 -23. This head has 

Page 77 of 142 
 
received enhanced allocation at R.E. stage. The Committee hopes that the Ministry will 
be able to make optimal utilisation of the increased funds for North -Eastern Areas in 
the last quarter of FY 2022-23.  
(Para 143) 
 The Committee notes that there has been considerable  decrease in the allocation 
made for North-Eastern Areas since 2020 -21. The Committee desires to be apprised of 
the reasons behind this, along with the activities/schemes impacted because of the 
decreased allocation.  
(Para 144) 
NATIONAL MONUMENTS AUTHORITY 
 The Committee notes that as per AMASR (Competent Authority) Rules, ASI 
Regional Directors shall ensure that Heritage Bye -Laws (HBLs) are completed within 
60 days of preparation of detailed site plans. These site plans are to be completed within 
5 years w.e.f. 02.01.2019. The Committee desires to be apprised of the progress made by 
ASI so far in this regard. The Committee recommends that ASI may ensure that the 
detailed site plans are completed on time so as to enable NMA to draft HBLs for the 
same.  
(Para 150) 
 The Committee notes that NMA has covered 235 Centrally Protected 
Monuments through Heritage Bye -Laws (HBLs) so far. This means that since its 
inception in 2011, NMA has covered about 6.3% of the 3693 Centrally Protected 
Monuments in the country. With the present pace, it might take several decades to draft 
HBLs for all CPMs. The Committee notes that to expedite the process, the number of 
notified expert heritage bodies for consultation of HBLs is 47 as of now and would soon 
increase to 72. The Commi ttee recommends that NMA may undertake a thorough 
assessment of additional steps required to ensure the timely drafting of HBLs for all the 
CPMs in India. NMA may target a fixed timeline for the completion of this process and 
apprise the Committee of the same.  
(Para 154) 
 The Committee is of the view that categorization of the CPMs would enable ASI 
to come up with more suited monument conservation and development plans for all the 
CPMs. NMA has categorised about 25 percent of the CPMs so far. The Committee  
recommends that NMA utilises the experience gained so far in this process to speed up 
the categorisation of the remaining CPMs. A strict timeline may be fixed in this regard.  
(Para 156) 

Page 78 of 142 
 
 The Committee notes that the NMA website has the option to view the  details 
regarding the categorisation of monuments covered so far. However, the details are not 
actually accessible at the time of writing. The Committee recommends that NMA may 
ensure timely updation and review of its website to enable wide dissemination of 
information in the public domain.  
(Para 157) 
 The Committee may also be informed of the broad factors that NMA considers 
during the categorisation process.  
(Para 158) 
 
LIBRARIES AND ARCHIVES 
 The Committee notes that the reason for the substantial increase under the head 
‘Libraries and Archives’ is the provision for a new building of the National Archives of 
India (NAI). The NAI is the custodian of the records of the enduring value of the 
Government of India. The Committee recommends that the Ministry may ensure that 
the new building has provisions for state -of-the-art preservation and storage facilities 
for the safekeeping of records.  
(Para 161) 
 
Mechanism for preservation of books/ manuscripts at National Library, Kolkata 
 The Committee appreciates the various mechanisms being employed for the 
preservation of books/ manuscripts at the National Library, Kolkata. The Committee 
notes that this library is a permanent depository of all reading and printed materials 
produced in India, or written by any foreigner, wherever published and in whatever 
language. In view of this, the Committee feels that more steps can be taken to further 
improve the existing mechanisms.  
(Para 163) 
 The Committee recommen ds that the Library should ensure regular 
maintenance of all preservation facilities, including the Reprography Division, 
Preservation (Binding) Division, and Rare Book Division. This will help in ensuring 
that the equipment and facilities are in good work ing condition and can help in 
preserving the documents for a longer period of time.  
(Para 164) 
 The Preservation (Binding) Division is responsible for binding, mending, and 
other related works for the preservation of books and newspapers. It is recommende d 

Page 79 of 142 
 
to upgrade the division with modern equipment and techniques that can help in 
preserving the documents for a longer period of time. This will also help in reducing the 
workload on the division and increase the speed of the preservation process.  
(Para 165) 
 The Committee notes that the Rare Book Division of the National Library is 
responsible for storing the general rare books in compactor alcoves and over -sized 
books in almirahs. It is recommended to increase the storage capacity for rare books to 
accommodate the growing collection of old and rare documents and manuscripts. This 
will also help in maintaining the relative humidity and temperature of the Rare Books 
stack area.  
(Para 166) 
Development of Libraries and Archives 
 The Committee observes that ev en excluding the COVID impacted FY 2019 -20 
and FY 2020-21, the utilisation of funds under ‘Development of Libraries and Archives’ 
has been consistently low. This head bears the expenditure for extending financial 
assistance to State/UT Government archival repositories, Government libraries and 
museums. The state of affairs of State Government’s libraries and museums often 
leaves a lot to be desired.  The financial assistance provided under this head acts as a 
nudge to the State Government to focus on the de velopment of libraries and museums 
under their purview. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry may 
look into the reasons behind the lack of utilisation under this head. The Ministry should 
seek feedback from State Governments and voluntary organisations to gauge the 
reasons behind their apparent lack of interest in the schemes.  
(Para 168) 
 
MUSEUMS 
 The Committee observes that the allocation under the ‘Museums’ head has 
increased consistently over the years. The Committee appreciates the good level of 
utilisation under this head, even during the pandemic years. The Ministry may ensure 
optimal utilisation of funds during FY 2023-24 as well.  
(Para 172) 
 
 
 The Committee is pleased to note that the PM Sangrahalaya has been 
inaugurated and is receiving footfall from both domestic and foreign visitors. The 
Committee recommends that the Ministry may analyse the long -term viability of 

Page 80 of 142 
 
replicating the development of similar unique, state -of-the-art museums in other parts 
of the country. Opportunities may be explored to implement the development of such 
museums on a Public Private Partnership (PPP) basis.  
(Para 176) 
 
 The Committee welcomes the efforts being taken by the Ministry to organise an 
International Museum Expo and to create a comprehensive directory of Museums in 
the country. The Committee recommends that the Ministry may make efforts to collect 
relevant meta -information about the museums as well, such as location and contact 
details.  
(Para 178) 
 The Ministry may list the museums along with location details on its website. 
The directory may also be shared with the Ministry of Tourism for promotion ther eof. 
This would help increase footfall to museums across the country.  
(Para 179) 
 
Development of Museums 
 The Committee notes that there has been a general trend of low utilisation of 
funds under ‘Development of Museums’ in recent years. The Committee recommends 
that the Ministry may analyse the reasons for this underutilisation and rectify the same.  
184. The Committee recommends that under the Museum Grant Scheme, the 
Ministry should consider extending both financial and technical assistance to all 
States/UT Governments for the development of a model Museum. This model Museum 
may incorporate the experience of the best Central Museums in the country in terms of 
curation, architecture, and visitor amenities. The State Governments can then be 
pursued to utilise the Museum Grant Scheme to emulate the model Museum in other 
parts of the States.  
(Para 183) 
Attracting higher footfall at museums and improving facilities thereat 
 The Committee suggests that the Ministry may come up with an effective, 
creative strategy for promotion of these museums through both online and offline 
channels. The Committee recomme nds that the Ministry may allocate specific 
allocation for the purpose of promoting museums across the country.  
(Para 187) 

Page 81 of 142 
 
 The Museums should conduct outreach programs to engage with schools and 
colleges to attract students. They should organise workshop s, interactive sessions, and 
events to encourage students to visit and learn.  
(Para 188) 
 All Museums under the Ministry of Culture may come up with programs to 
arrange free visits to museums for local school children, with a special focus on 
Government s chools. State Governments may also be requested to carry out similar 
exercises. The Committee feels that such visits would leave a lasting impression on the 
students from a young age and help increase interest in museums in the long term.  
(Para 189) 
 
CENTENARIES AND ANNIVERSARIES, CELEBRATIONS AND SCHEMES 
 The Committee applauds the various initiatives undertaken by the Ministry 
under the Azadi Ka Amrit Mahotsav celebrations. Many initiatives focused on the 
participation of the common citizen, truly making them a part of the 75th independence 
year celebrations. The Committee recommends that the Ministry may come up with 
more innovative initiatives under AKAM till August 2023 to make full utilisation of the 
funds allocated for this purpose.  
(Para 193) 
 
Need for increased focus on commemoration and celebration of female freedom 
fighters and historical figures 
 The Committee observes that Indian female freedom fighters contributed 
immensely to the Indian freedom struggle. The Committee recommends that the 
priceless contribution of female freedom fighters in the Indian freedom struggle may be 
celebrated and commemorated in a grand manner, on equal footing with the male 
freedom fighters. This would serve as an inspiration to all young girls and women 
across the country.  
(Para 194) 
KALA SANSKRITI VIKAS YOJANA   
 The Committee notes that the Kala Sanskriti Yojana has provisions for various 
important schemes of financial assistance for veteran artists, gurus and shishyas, the 
creation of cultural infrastructure, and  so on. The BE 2023 -24 allocation, though, is 
higher than the previous year B.E. allocation of Rs. 186.85 crores. However, the 

Page 82 of 142 
 
Committee observes that the B.E. allocation made under this important head has 
decreased from Rs. 310.48 crores in 2017 -18 to Rs.  210.49 crores in 2023 -24. The 
Committee recommends that the Ministry may target increasing the number of 
individuals/ organisations receiving assistance through the various schemes under this 
head. A reassessment of the budgetary requirements should be ma de to achieve this 
target at the R.E. 2023-24 stage.  
(Para 197) 
 
SCHEME FOR FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE TO VETERAN ARTISTS (ERSTWHILE 
ARTISTS PENSION SCHEME) 
 The Committee desires to be apprised of the reasons for the decrease (since 
2018-19) in the number of veteran artists who are being supported under the Scheme 
for Financial Assistance to Veteran Artists. The Committee feels that India is a vast 
country wit h a lot of veteran artists who must be in need of this scheme but either 
aren’t aware of the scheme or cannot get someone to apply it for them. The Committee 
recommends that the Ministry may put sincere efforts towards increasing the number 
of deserving beneficiaries under this Scheme.  
(Para 201) 
 
SUPPORT TO ACADEMIES 
 The Committee notes a satisfactory pattern of expenditure under this head in the 
last few years, except for COVID -struck FY 2019 -20 and FY 2020 -21. The Committee 
recommends that the Ministry  may ensure optimal utilisation of funds under this head 
during FY 2023 -24. The Committee also desires to be apprised of the projected date 
and cost of completion of the project ‘Art work in new Parliament Building’.  The 
Committee suggests that the Ministr y may consider setting up regional centres of the 
various Akademis to enhance their reach among artists of all regions.  
(Para 205) 
 
GRANTEE BODIES 
 The Committee observes that the expenditure under ‘Grantee Bodies’ in the 
ongoing FY 2022 -23 has been quite low. The Ministry had been allocated Rs. 120.49 
crores at BE 2022-23 under this head, which has been reduced to Rs. 50.19 crores at BE 
2023-24 due t o the low pace of expenditure in the Lumbini project. The Committee 

Page 83 of 142 
 
desires to be apprised of the reasons for the low pace of expenditure and the steps being 
taken to ensure better progress in the project.  
(Para 208) 
 
NATIONAL MISSION ON CULTURAL MAPPING 
 The Committee observes that the Ministry has not been able to make optimal 
utilisation of the funds allocated for the National Mission on Cultural Mapping since its 
inception. The expenditure incurred for NMCM in the ongoing FY 2022 -23 has been 
satisfactory. The Committee recommends that the Ministry should ensure that the 
previous pattern of underutilisation of funds under NMCM does not continue in the 
future.  
(Para 211) 
 The Committee believes that the ‘Mera Gaon, Meri Dharohar’ initiative will 
empower rural communities and promote rural tourism. It would also help disseminate 
information about the rich variety of our rich cultural heritage to the masses.  
(Para 213) 
 The Committee is glad to note that the Ministry has made significant progress in 
collection and updation of village -level data as part of this initiative. Data for about 
20% of all the villages in India have been covered. The Committee recommends that the 
Ministry may continue to work with the same vigour to process the data for the rest of 
the villages.  
(Para 214) 
 The Committee observes that even though the NMCM has already collected data 
related to 14.53 lakh artists, the Ministry has set a target of only 14 lakh for the next FY 
2023-24. The Committee desires to be apprised of the reasons  for not setting higher 
targeted output under this head.  
(Para 216) 
 
MISCELLANEOUS 
Global Perspective for Better Preservation of Monuments 
 The Committee notes that the National Policy for Conservation was brought out 
by ASI in 2014. The Committee recommends that the Ministry/ASI may review the 
policy from time to time in view of the latest developments in the cultural and heritage 
sector around the world. The Committee believes that there are several global cues that 

Page 84 of 142 
 
can be incorporated into the policy for better preservation and development of tangible 
cultural heritage in India. These include enhanced community involvement, use of the 
latest technology (such as LiDAR scans and 3D mapping), sustainable tourism and 
adaptive reuse of heritage buildings.  
(Para 218) 
 
Employment generation in the Cultural Heritage sector 
 The Committee notes that a large number of manpower is deployed at CPMs for 
various activities such as conservation, maintenance and housekeeping. However, the 
Committee feels that there is a pressing need for a systematic assessment of the 
opportunities available for employment generation in the overall cultural heritage 
sector. Following such an assessment, the Ministry should set targets for creating 
employment opportunities in the cultural heritage sector.  
(Para 220) 
 The Committee recommends that the Ministry may encourage the creation of 
cultural businesses and startups, pro viding funding, mentoring, and other resources to 
support the growth of creative industries. The Ministry should offer training and 
education programs in cultural fields, developing a skilled workforce and creating 
employment opportunities in areas such as arts administration, event management, and 
cultural tourism. The Ministry may apprise the Committee regarding its plans to be 
part of the Pradhan Mantri Kaushal Vikas Yojana 4.0 to impart skill development to 
the youth in the culture and heritage sector.  
(Para 221) 
 Strategic efforts to promote intangible cultural heritage could directly empower 
women and other disadvantaged groups. This could help establish a competitive 
handicraft sector by helping develop rural craft hubs, enhancing productivity and 
building sustainable market linkages.  
(Para 222) 
 The Committee further recommends that the Ministry may promote and 
showcase handicrafts and other products made by local artists under the Unity Malls 
which will be set up under the ‘One District, One Product’ initiative of the Government.  
(Para 223) 
 By implementing such measures, the Committee believes that the Ministry can 
tap the potential of the cultural sector to generate employment, promoting economic 
growth and cultural vitality at the same time.  
(Para 224) 

Page 85 of 142 
 
 The Committee recommends that the Ministry and ASI should prioritise hiring 
locals for conservation, preservation, maintenance, and security -related works. This 
will not only provide employment opportunities but also create a sense of ownership 
and pride in the local community toward the historical sites.  
(Para 225) 
 The Ministry should coordinate with departments concerned to provide training 
programs to locals for culture -related skills. This may include skills related to 
conservation, preservation, and tou rism. This will not only enhance their employability 
but also increase the quality of services provided to tourists.  
(Para 226) 
 The Ministry should encourage entrepreneurship in the local community by 
providing support for setting up souvenir shops, handicraft stores, and other local 
businesses that cater to tourists.  
(Para 227) 
 The Committee suggests that the Ministry of Culture and ASI should collaborate 
with the Ministry of Tourism to promote heritage tourism in the region. This will 
increase the footfall of tourists, which in turn will create job opportunities for locals in 
the travel and hospitality industry.  
(Para 228) 
Review and reorganisation of the Centre For Cultural Resources And Training 
 The Committee notes that the CCRT is an important institution as it trains 
teachers for cultural integration in education. The Committee recommends that the 
Ministry may undertake a t horough review and reorganisation of the activities 
performed by CCRT. Corresponding changes may be brought out in order to ensure 
that CCRT performs to the best of its abilities and helps strengthen the cultural values 
of the nation among its young generation.  
(Para 232) 
  
Need for National Culture Policy 
 The Committee recommends that the National Cultural Policy should be 
inclusive and based on India’s multicultural and multi -ethnic values. It should aim to 
preserve and promote the diverse cultural heri tage of the country, including the 
cultural practices, traditions of marginalised communities and all regional languages.  
(Para 234) 

Page 86 of 142 
 
 The policy should promote cultural exchange and collaborations between 
different regions of the country as well as with o ther countries, to foster understanding 
and appreciation of different cultures.  It should provide incentives and support for 
artists and cultural practitioners to innovate and experiment with new forms of 
expression and creativity. The policy should explo re innovative public -private 
partnership models to support cultural initiatives and leverage private sector funding 
and expertise.  
(Para 235) 
 The policy should address the economic sustainability of cultural practices and 
provide support for the developm ent of sustainable cultural tourism initiatives that 
benefit local communities.  
(Para 236) 
 The Committee further recommends that the Ministry may ensure that it takes 
the views of all concerned stakeholders in order to come up with a robust, 
comprehensive policy. Such a policy will help guide the Indian Cultural and Heritage 
Sector in the right direction for many years to come.  
(Para 237) 
 The Committee recommends that as a part of the policy, the Ministry may 
examine the possibility for ASI to extend he lp in the restoration of temples and other 
historical buildings built by Indian ancestors, which are in other countries such as 
Cambodia.  
(Para 238) 
 
Establishment of a National Culture University with headquarters in Delhi and 
affiliated Colleges in each State 
 The Committee observes that India is a highly diverse and multi -cultural 
country. Each State and each village has its own distinct and unique identity. The 
Committee feels that in order to protect the unique culture of each village in each State, 
it is imperative and necessary to have one national university, with all States having 
affiliated colleges of national importance. Such educational institutions may also 
perform research work on Vedas, Upanishads and other historical texts and languages. 
The Committee recommends that the Ministry may carry out a feasibility study for 
establishing a National Culture University with affiliated colleges in each of the States 
and UTs.  
(Para 239) 

Page 87 of 142 
 
Exploring the viability of replication of the State of Unity model in other States 
 The Committee recommends that the Ministry may assess the number of people 
who have visited the Statue of Unity in Kevadia, Gujarat. The Ministry may make joint 
efforts along with the Ministry of Tourism to analyse the viability of the co nstruction of 
statues of important regional historical figures in other States. The Committee feels that 
if found viable, the development of tourist hubs around such statues would serve the 
dual purpose of boosting tourism as well as educating the visitors  about the significant 
role played by important historical figures in shaping India’s destiny.  
(Para 240) 
Status of the Monument Mitra – Adopt a Heritage Scheme 
 The Committee feels that the selection criteria for choosing the monuments for 
adoption should be robust and transparent. The Ministry should identify those 
monuments that are not being adequately maintained and are in need of attention.  
(Para 243) 
 Experts from the fields of archaeology, heritage conservation, and tourism 
should be involved in the process of selecting and maintaining the monuments. This 
would ensure that the monuments are being maintained in line with established 
standards.  
(Para 244) 
 The Committee recommends that the Ministry should ensure that Standard 
Operating Procedures (SOPs) are in place to ensure that the maintenance and 
revamping of the monuments are in line with the standards set by ASI and other 
professional bodies. The procedures should include regular inspections, monitoring and 
reporting mechanisms. It must be ensured that any new structures that might be set up 
by the private partners in or near the monuments, complement the architecture and 
design of the particular monument.  
(Para 245) 
 The performance of the private sector entities should be regularly reviewed to 
ensure that they are fulfilling their obligations as per the agreement. This would ensure 
that the adopted monuments are being maintained properly and are provid ing a good 
experience to visitors.  
(Para 246) 

Page 88 of 142 
 
Measures taken towards cultural diplomacy 
 The Committee observes that India is well -known across the world for its rich, 
diverse and vibrant culture and heritage. It is important to build soft power and good 
will through cultural diplomacy, which can help further India’s larger political, 
economic and foreign policy goals. The Committee is, therefore, pleased to note the 
steps being taken towards enhancing India's cultural diplomacy efforts.  
(Para 250) 
 The C ommittee recommends that the Ministry should focus on signing more 
Cultural Agreements & Cultural Exchange Programs with different countries to 
increase people -to-people contact and foster better understanding of each other's 
cultures. The Global Engagement Scheme should be expanded to showcase not only folk 
art but also contemporary art, music, dance, literature, and cuisine to showcase the 
diversity of Indian culture. India should leverage digital platforms to reach wider 
audiences and engage with people around the world by creating more virtual events, 
online exhibitions, and webinars to promote Indian culture. The Ministry should 
establish more collaborations and partnerships with international museums to promote 
the exchange of knowledge, resources, and expertise.  
(Para 251) 
 The major challenges faced in cultural diplomacy efforts are language barriers, 
lack of awareness and understanding of Indian culture, and limited resources. India 
needs to address these challenges by investing in language training  programs, cultural 
awareness campaigns, and increasing funding for cultural diplomacy initiatives.  
(Para 252) 
 The Committee notes that in the past five years, Rs. 85.69 crore has been spent 
on activities under the Global Engagement Umbrella scheme. However, the Ministry 
can allocate more funds for more cultural diplomacy initiatives to achieve better results 
and e xpand its soft power and goodwill across the world. Doing so would promote 
Indian culture abroad, strengthen international relations and create opportunities for 
increased overseas trade and investment.  
(Para 253) 
Fostering community participation and public awareness 
 The Committee recommends that the Ministry should encourage local 
communities to come forward and participate in cultural preservation projects by 
providing them with information about NCF's mission and objectives. It should develop 
targeted campaigns and outreach programs that engage local communities and raise 
public awareness about the importance of cultural heritage preservation. These 

Page 89 of 142 
 
campaigns can be run on various media platforms and social media to reach a broader 
audience. This is cr ucial to enable more potential donor individuals and institutions to 
know more about the NCF platform.  
(Para 257) 
 The Committee further recommends that the Ministry/ ASI should involve local 
communities in decision -making processes related to cultural pr eservation projects. 
This will help build trust and foster a sense of ownership among local communities, 
thereby promoting long -term sustainability. It should create opportunities for local 
communities to participate in the preservation process through wor kshops, training 
programs, and hands -on activities. This will help build capacity among local 
communities and enable them to take a more active role in cultural preservation efforts.  
(Para 258) 
 The Ministry should focus on developing partnerships with lo cal community 
organisations, NGOs, and other stakeholders to promote community participation and 
public awareness for cultural heritage preservation. This will help to leverage local 
resources and expertise to achieve better outcomes.  
(Para 259) 
  The Ministry should also consider allocating a portion of the National Culture 
Fund towards promoting community participation and public awareness for cultural 
preservation. This will provide a dedicated budget for these activities and help to ensure 
their sustainability over the long term.  
(Para 260) 
Special measures to protect rural and tribal culture 
 The Committee appreciates the various initiatives being undertaken by the 
various organisations under the Ministry to protect rural and tribal culture. The 
Committee notes that the Anthropological Survey of India (AnSI) has been working on 
several projects related to the protection of rural and tribal culture, such as study on 
community health, study on de -notified, nomadic and semi -nomadic communities. 
Encouraging more research in these areas can help in understanding the culture and 
customs of these communities better, allowing the development of effective strategies 
for their preservation. IGRMS has been collecting ethnographic objects and 
documenting the tradit ional knowledge systems of rural and tribal communities 
through fieldwork, demonstrative workshops, and cultural performances. Promoting 
these knowledge systems can help in preserving the cultural heritage of these 
communities and generate awareness about their customs and practices.  
(Para 263) 

Page 90 of 142 
 
 Rural and tribal youth are often forced to move away from their cultural roots 
due to the lack of financial security. The Ministry should focus on organising cultural 
events showcasing their unique culture which wi ll empower them and give them a sense 
of pride in their cultural heritage. This can help in preserving the cultural traditions of 
these communities.  
(Para 264) 
 The Committee notes that VMH has organised various events such as Chhau 
dance theatre and inte ractive sessions on empowering regenerative livelihood in Santal 
tribal communities. These events can be replicated in other parts of the country to 
create awareness about rural and tribal culture and customs. IGNCA has been 
organising webinars and documen taries on various aspects of rural and tribal culture. 
Using technology to document and showcase the cultural heritage of these communities 
can help in preserving their traditions and reaching out to a wider audience.  
(Para 265) 
 
Creation of a mobile platform for classical dancers 
 A Member of the Committee noted that the various classical dances have a 
glorious history of being performed in temples and courts. In light of this, the 
Committee recommends that the Ministry may consider the creation of mobile  
platforms on which the classical dancers can showcase their rich heritage gracefully 
during the Republic Day programme and other similar events. 
(Para 266) 
 
Financial Assistance to Artisans who manufacture Aranmula Kannadi (Mirror) 
 The Committee recommen ds that the Ministry may extend financial assistance 
to the families which have been keeping the traditional art of making Aranmula 
Mirrors alive for centuries. The Committee also recommends that the Ministry should 
take initiative to popularise the Aranmula Mirrors through various publicity measures.  
(Para 269) 
 
Delay in providing salary to staff in Uttarakhand 
 The Committee notes that some persons employed by ASI who take care of 
many temples in the State of Uttarakhand have not received wages for more than a 

Page 91 of 142 
 
year. The Committee recommends that ASI may urgently look into the issue and ensure 
timely payment of the salary dues to its personnel.  
(Para 270) 
 
Grant of permission for worshipping at temples under ASI 
 The Committee desires to be apprised of th e policy regarding permitting 
religious activities at religious historical monuments under the protection of ASI.  
(Para 272) 
***** 
 
 
 

 
 
 
ANNEXURES  

Page 93 of 142 
 
Annexure-I 
(Rs. in crore) 
S. No. Umbrella Schemes 
(rationalized Budget 
Heads) 
Budgetary Allocation 2023-24 Projection 
BE 2023-24 
% Demand 
met in BE 
2023-24 
    Revenue Capital Total Total  
I Establishment          
1. Secretariat including 
Central Secretariat Library 
64.98 5.00 69.98 64.94 92.8% 
2. Archaeological Survey of 
India 
1072.83 30.00 1102.83 1201.57 91.8% 
3. Libraries and Archives 118.35 220.40 338.75 370.39 91.5% 
4. Museums 119.81 17.00 136.81 158.88 86.1% 
5. Anthropological Survey of 
India 
41.33 13.00 54.33 51.33 105.8% 
II Central Sector Schemes/ 
Projects 
         
6. Centenary and Anniversary 
Celebrations 
185.00 - 185.00 185.00 100% 
7. Kala Sanskriti Vikas Yojana 210.49 - 210.49 217.04 97.0% 
8. Development of Museums 183.86 - 183.86 183.60 100.1% 
9. Development of Libraries 
and Archives 
26.02 - 26.02 28.88 90.1% 
10. Global Engagement and 
International Cooperation 
25.55 - 25.55 25.53 100.1% 
11. National Mission on 
Cultural Mapping & 
Roadmap 
19.82 - 19.82 20.09 98.6% 
III Other Central Sector 
Schemes/ Projects 
         
12. Support to Akademies 401.27 - 401.27 627.90 63.9% 
13. Support to Museums 357.39 - 357.39 469.44 76.1% 
14. Support to Libraries 106.46 - 106.46 152.10 70.0% 
15. Buddhist Tibetan 
Institutions and Memorials 
130.90 - 130.90 208.40 62.8% 
  Others          
16. Grantee Bodies 50.19 - 50.19 24.09 208.3% 
  Total 3114.25 285.40 3399.65 3989.18 85.2% 

Page 94 of 142 
 
Annexure-II 
 
Sectors BE 2022-
23 
RE 2022-
23 
Actual Exp. 
Up to 
31.01.2023 
Expenditure 
Percentage in 
terms of BE 
2022-23  (till 
31.01.2023) 
Expenditure 
Percentage in 
terms of RE 
2022-23 (till 
31.01.2023) 
Secretariat- Social 
Services 
57.84 61.90 50.15 86.7% 81.0% 
Archaeological Survey 1080.34 1040.46 824.76 76.3% 79.3% 
Libraries and Archives 127.76 124.65 88.11 69.0% 70.7% 
Museums 136.93 145.99 91.89 67.1% 62.9% 
Anthropological Survey 
of India 
50.30 50.30 31.14 61.9% 61.9% 
Centenaries and 
Anniversaries Scheme 
110.00 353.82 233.14 211.9% 65.9% 
Kala Sans. Vikas 
Yojana 
186.85 214.36 158.34 84.7% 73.9% 
Development of 
Museum 
180.00 214.23 96.02 53.3% 44.8% 
Development of 
Libraries 
23.00 19.10 7.62 33.1% 39.9% 
Global Engagement 13.57 16.25 5.42 39.9% 33.4% 
National Mission on 
Manuscripts 
19.13 19.13 14.51 75.8% 75.8% 
Support to Akademies 365.35 487.28 270.36 74.0% 55.5% 
Support to Museum 315.32 315.12 245.45 77.8% 77.9% 
Support to Libraries 99.13 100.80 69.91 70.5% 69.4% 
BTI and Memorials 123.04 127.56 77.02 62.6% 60.4% 
Grantee Bodies 120.49 72.12 38.91 32.3% 54.0% 
Total 3009.05 3363.07 2302.74 76.5% 68.5% 
  
 

Page 95 of 142 
 
Annexure-III 
Ministry of Culture                                                   Demand No. 18 
 
1. Centenary and Anniversary Celebration Scheme (CS) 
 
Financi
al 
Outlay 
(Rs in 
Cr) 
OUTPUTS 2022-23 OUTCOMES 2022-23 
2022-23 Output Indicators Targets 
2022-23 
Achiev
ements 
Outcome Indicators Target
s 2022-
23 
Achievements 
 
110.00 
cr 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1. To provide 
financial 
assistance to 
various 
organizations for 
celebration of   
centenaries and 
anniversaries of 
important 
personalities and 
events  
1.1 Number of 
Organization 
received 
financial support 
10 80 1. To generate 
awareness 
among the 
masses about 
the 
contributions 
of the icons 
whose 
anniversaries 
are being 
commemorated 
1.1 Number of 
participants 
attended 
events/ 
celebrations 
(footfall) 
 
 
100000 10000000 
 1.2.  Number of 
programs and 
cultural 
activities 
organized for 
celebration of 
centenaries and 
anniversaries of 
eminent 
personalities 
50 160000     
 1.3. Number of 
followers on 
Twitter 
100000 134000     

Page 96 of 142 
 
Financi
al 
Outlay 
(Rs in 
Cr) 
OUTPUTS 2022-23 OUTCOMES 2022-23 
2022-23 Output Indicators Targets 
2022-23 
Achiev
ements 
Outcome Indicators Target
s 2022-
23 
Achievements 
 1.4. Number of 
completed 
infrastructure 
projects in the 
memory of 
eminent 
personalities 
10 2     
 
2. Kala Sanskriti Vikas Yojana 
 
FINANCI
AL 
OUTLAY 
(Rs in Cr) 
OUTPUTS 2022-23 OUTCOMES 2022-23 
2022-23 Output Indicators Targe
ts 
2022-
23 
Achievements Outcome Indicators Targets 
2022-23 
Achievements 
186.85 a.Scheme of Financial Assistance for Promotion of Art and Culture 
1.To provide 
financial 
assistance to 
Gurus and 
Artists of 
recommended 
grantee 
organizations 
under Repertory 
Grant to 
disseminate and 
propagate art & 
1.1 Number of 
gurus 
financially 
supported 
 
600 725 1.Promote Guru - 
Shishya 
Parampara 
through 
supporting 
organizations 
working in the 
field of 
performing arts 
and generating 
employment for 
Guru and Artistes 
1.1 Number of 
gurus 
employed 
 
600 725 
1.2 Number of 
artists 
financially 
supported 
4800 5500 1.2 Number of 
artists 
employed 
 
4800 5500 

Page 97 of 142 
 
FINANCI
AL 
OUTLAY 
(Rs in Cr) 
OUTPUTS 2022-23 OUTCOMES 2022-23 
2022-23 Output Indicators Targe
ts 
2022-
23 
Achievements Outcome Indicators Targets 
2022-23 
Achievements 
culture 
throughout the 
country 
as well as 
disseminate and 
propagate art & 
culture throughout 
the country 
2.To provide 
financial 
assistance to 
Cultural 
organizations 
with national 
presence during 
the FY to 
disseminate and 
propagate art 
& culture 
throughout the 
country 
including 
Grants provided 
to Ramakrishna 
Mission 
Institute of 
Culture, 
Kolkata 
2.1. Number of 
approved 
not- for-
profit 
Cultural 
organization
s supported 
financially 
under the 
component of 
Financial 
Assistance to 
Cultural 
Organization
s with 
National 
Presence 
including 
Grants 
provided to 
Ramakrishna 
Mission 
Institute of 
Culture, 
Kolkata 
 
6 5 2.Enhancing 
cultural 
awareness 
among masses  
through 
performances an d 
exhibitions and 
encouraging 
young people to 
actively 
participate in art 
and cultural 
activities as well 
as disseminate 
and propagate art 
& culture 
throughout the  
country 
2.1 Number of 
cultural 
programs/ 
exhibitions/ 
performances 
organized by 
the recipients 
organizations 
100 80 
    2.2 Number of 20 15 

Page 98 of 142 
 
FINANCI
AL 
OUTLAY 
(Rs in Cr) 
OUTPUTS 2022-23 OUTCOMES 2022-23 
2022-23 Output Indicators Targe
ts 
2022-
23 
Achievements Outcome Indicators Targets 
2022-23 
Achievements 
activities organized 
for dissemination 
and teachings and 
ideas of Swami 
Vivekananda and 
Promotion of 
thoughts, 
Knowledge, 
Education and 
Cultural Activities 
at National and 
International Level 
3.To provide 
financial 
assistance to 
organizations 
under Cultural 
Function and 
Production 
Grant (CFPG) 
during FY to 
disseminate and 
propagate art & 
culture 
throughout the 
country 
3.1 Number of 
organization
s supported 
financially 
under the 
component of 
CFPG 
800 1434 3.Promote and 
preserve the 
Indian Culture 
through 
supporting 
organizations for 
working in the 
field of culture on 
different aspects 
of Indian Culture 
3.1 Number of 
organizations 
provided social 
media links like 
YouTube/ Face 
book/Twitter etc. of 
the programs 
conducted during 
the FY 
1500 1000 
 3.2 Total 
Number of 
(cultural Events 
) Conference, 
Seminars, 
Workshops, 
800 452     

Page 99 of 142 
 
FINANCI
AL 
OUTLAY 
(Rs in Cr) 
OUTPUTS 2022-23 OUTCOMES 2022-23 
2022-23 Output Indicators Targe
ts 
2022-
23 
Achievements Outcome Indicators Targets 
2022-23 
Achievements 
Symposia, 
Festivals, 
Exhibitions, 
Production of 
Dance, Drama-
Theatre, Music 
etc. held during 
the FY 
 3.3 Number of 
research 
projected 
sanctioned 
5 3     
4. To provide 
financial 
assistance to 
recommended 
Cultural 
Organizations 
working in the 
field of 
Preservation & 
Development 
of Cultural 
Heritage of 
Himalayas 
4.1 Number of 
autonomous 
institutions 
supported 
financially to 
promote, 
protect and 
preserve the 
cultural 
heritage of 
the 
Himalayan 
region 
250 222 4. Promote, 
preserve and 
development of 
cultural heritage 
of Himalayas 
4.1 Number of old 
manuscripts/lite
rature/art & 
crafts 
preserved 
during the year 
60 90 
  4.2. Amount of 
financial 
assistance 
given to 
autonomous 
institutions 
under the 
component of 
500 463.75     

Page 100 of 142 
 
FINANCI
AL 
OUTLAY 
(Rs in Cr) 
OUTPUTS 2022-23 OUTCOMES 2022-23 
2022-23 Output Indicators Targe
ts 
2022-
23 
Achievements Outcome Indicators Targets 
2022-23 
Achievements 
Preservation 
& 
Development 
of Cultural 
Heritage of 
Himalayas. 
(Rs. In lakh) 
5. To provide 
financial 
assistance 
to 
recommend
ed Cultural 
Organizati
ons 
working in 
the field of 
developme
nt of 
Buddhist/T
ibetan Art 
& Culture. 
5.1  Number of 
autonomous 
institutions 
supported 
financially 
under the 
component of 
Buddhist/Tib
et an Art & 
Culture 
 
655 344 5. Promote 
and preserve 
Buddhist/Tib
etan art and 
culture and 
support 
Monasteries 
engaged in 
the 
propagation 
and scientific 
development 
of 
Buddhist/Tib
etan culture, 
tradition and 
research in 
related fields 
5.1 Number of 
Buddhist/Tibeta
n art & culture 
preserved 
during the year 
 
355 355 
 5.2 Amount of 
financial 
assistance 
given to 
autonomous 
institutions 
under the 
component of 
Buddhist/Tib
1500 2143  5.2 Number of 
research paper 
published related 
Buddhist/Tibetan 
Culture 
10 10 

Page 101 of 142 
 
FINANCI
AL 
OUTLAY 
(Rs in Cr) 
OUTPUTS 2022-23 OUTCOMES 2022-23 
2022-23 Output Indicators Targe
ts 
2022-
23 
Achievements Outcome Indicators Targets 
2022-23 
Achievements 
et an Art & 
Culture (Rs. 
In lakh) 
 
b. Scholarship and Fellowship for promotion of Art and Culture 
1. Senior and 
junior 
fellowships 
to be 
awarded; 
scholarship 
awarded; 
Tagore 
National 
Fellows 
awarded;  
1.1 Number of 
fellowship/ 
scholarships 
awarded 
840 32 
 
(This figure is for 
fellowship/schola
rship awarded 
under Tagore 
National 
Fellowship for 
Cultural 
Research. It is 
further informed 
that the meeting 
of Sr/Jr 
Fellowship / 
Scholarship to 
young artists is 
currently 
undergoing 
through virtual 
mode by CCRT, 
New Delhi) 
1. To Provide 
financial 
assistance for 
advanced 
training 
/research in 
various 
cultural fields 
1.1  Cumulative 
total of 
scholars/fellow 
awarded 
scholarships/fel
lowship  
2000 32 
 
(This figure is for 
fellowship/schola
rship awarded 
under Tagore 
National 
Fellowship for 
Cultural 
Research. It is 
further informed 
that the meeting 
of Sr/Jr 
Fellowship / 
Scholarship to 
young artists is 
currently 
undergoing 
through virtual 
mode by CCRT, 
New Delhi) 
c. Scheme for Pension and Medical Aid to Artists 
1. Financial 
assistance 
in the form 
of monthly 
pension 
and 
1.1 No. of 
existing 
beneficiaries 
7832 10083 1.  1.1  2. Finan
cial 
suppo
rt 
leadin
g to a 
1.2 No. of artists 
that are 
living a life 
of dignity 
and well- 
being on the 

Page 102 of 142 
 
FINANCI
AL 
OUTLAY 
(Rs in Cr) 
OUTPUTS 2022-23 OUTCOMES 2022-23 
2022-23 Output Indicators Targe
ts 
2022-
23 
Achievements Outcome Indicators Targets 
2022-23 
Achievements 
medical 
aid to old 
& indigent 
artists who 
have made 
significant 
contributio
ns in the 
field of art 
and culture 
dignifi
ed life 
of 
artists 
throug
h the 
pensio
n 
schem
e 
pension and 
medical aid.  
1.3 No. of new 
beneficiaries  
 
 
 
700 NIL 
 
(Meeting for 
selection of new 
beneficiaries is 
likely to be held 
in Feb./ March, 
2023) 
    
d. Scheme on Intangible Cultural Heritage (ICH) 
1. Individuals
/ 
organizatio
ns/ 
universitie
s/ State 
Governmen
ts involved 
in 
preservatio
n and 
propagation 
of 
Intangible 
1.1 No. of 
proposals to 
be received 
from 
individuals/in
stitutions  
400 0 
 
 
1. Promote and 
support 
organizations/ 
individuals/ 
institutions in 
the field of 
preservation 
and 
propagation 
of Intangible 
Cultural 
Heritage. 
1.1 number of art 
forms 
documented 
120 0 
 1.2 No. of 
individuals/ 120 0     

Page 103 of 142 
 
FINANCI
AL 
OUTLAY 
(Rs in Cr) 
OUTPUTS 2022-23 OUTCOMES 2022-23 
2022-23 Output Indicators Targe
ts 
2022-
23 
Achievements Outcome Indicators Targets 
2022-23 
Achievements 
Cultural 
Heritage 
will be 
assisted on 
the basis of 
proposals 
received 
and 
recommend
ed by the 
expert 
committee 
institutions 
to whom 
funds to be 
released 
e. National Gandhi Heritage Sites Mission and Dandi related Projects  
1. Project as 
decided by 
the mission 
to be taken 
up and 
executed 
1.1 No. of 
projects as 
decided by 
the Mission 
to be taken 
up and 
executed 
7 7 1. To create 
awareness 
about 
Gandhi 
Heritage 
Sites  
1.1 Percentage 
change in 
number of 
visitors to 
Gandhi 
Heritage sites 
10 10%(+) 
f. National Award Scheme 
1. On the 
150th Birth 
Anniversar
y 
celebration 
of 
Rabindrana
th Tagore, 
Governmen
t of India 
1.1 No. of 
nomination 
recommende
d by the 
Expert 
Committee 
20 NIL 
 
(Meeting of the 
Jury has not been 
held) 
1. Promotion of 
Cultural 
Harmony 
1.1 No. of 
recipients of 
Tagore Award 
1 NIL 
 
(Meeting of the 
Jury has not been 
held) 

Page 104 of 142 
 
FINANCI
AL 
OUTLAY 
(Rs in Cr) 
OUTPUTS 2022-23 OUTCOMES 2022-23 
2022-23 Output Indicators Targe
ts 
2022-
23 
Achievements Outcome Indicators Targets 
2022-23 
Achievements 
instituted 
the award 
for 
promoting 
Cultural 
Harmony. 
The Award 
is given 
annually to 
a person (s) 
or 
institution(s
) – Tagore 
Award For 
Cultural 
Harmony 
 
 
 
 
 
 2. On 125th 
Birth 
Anniversar
y 
celebration 
2.1 Selection of 
an awardee 
(s) by the 
Jury of 
Gandhi Peace 
20 NIL 
 
(Meeting of the 
Jury has not been 
held) 
2. Promoting of 
Gandhian 
Values like 
Non-Violence 
and Peace. 
2.1 No. of 
recipients of 
Gandhi Peace 
Prize 
1 NIL 
 
(Meeting of the 
Jury has not been 
held) 

Page 105 of 142 
 
FINANCI
AL 
OUTLAY 
(Rs in Cr) 
OUTPUTS 2022-23 OUTCOMES 2022-23 
2022-23 Output Indicators Targe
ts 
2022-
23 
Achievements Outcome Indicators Targets 
2022-23 
Achievements 
of 
Mahatma 
Gandhi, 
Governmen
t of India 
instituted 
the award 
for 
promoting 
Gandhian 
Values like 
Non-
Violence & 
Peace. The 
Award is 
given 
annually to 
a person (s) 
or 
institution 
(s) – 
Gandhi 
Peace 
Price 
Prize 
 
 
 
 g. Seva Bhoj Yojana 
 1. Central 
Goods and 
Services 
Tax 
1.1 Number of 
eligible 
charitable/reli
gious 
10 4 1. Relieve the 
burden of 
charitable/ 
religious 
1.1 Number 
of 
organizati
ons 
10 4 

Page 106 of 142 
 
FINANCI
AL 
OUTLAY 
(Rs in Cr) 
OUTPUTS 2022-23 OUTCOMES 2022-23 
2022-23 Output Indicators Targe
ts 
2022-
23 
Achievements Outcome Indicators Targets 
2022-23 
Achievements 
(CGST) 
and Central 
Governmen
t’s share of 
Integrated 
Goods and 
Services 
Tax (IGST) 
paid on 
purchase of 
specific 
raw food 
items by 
Charitable/
Religious 
Institutions 
for 
distributing 
free food to 
public shall 
be 
reimburse
d as 
Financial 
Assistance 
by the 
Governme
nt of India. 
institutions 
getting 
financial 
assistance in 
the form of 
reimburseme
nt on 
purchase of 
specific raw 
food items 
institutions, 
which is 
affecting their 
welfare 
capacity, and 
sustain health 
of 
charitable/reli
gious 
institutions 
provided 
CGST/Ce
ntral 
governme
nt share 
of IGST 
reimburse
d during 
the FY for 
providing 
free food 
 h. Scheme of Financial Assistance for Creation of Cultural Infrastructure   
 h.1 Financial assistance for cultural activities in performing arts for building grants, including studio theatres 
 1. Extend 1.1 Number of 
cultural 
50 16 1. Artists impart 
cultural 
1.1 Number of 
performances 
 
100 
32 

Page 107 of 142 
 
FINANCI
AL 
OUTLAY 
(Rs in Cr) 
OUTPUTS 2022-23 OUTCOMES 2022-23 
2022-23 Output Indicators Targe
ts 
2022-
23 
Achievements Outcome Indicators Targets 
2022-23 
Achievements 
support to 
organizatio
ns to 
create 
appropriatel
y equipped 
cultural 
spaces 
organization
s supported 
including 
Voluntary 
and 
government 
agencies/aide
d 
education and 
boost 
cultural 
tourism 
through 
creative 
expression 
 
per year 
(including 
repetitions) by 
different 
organizations 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 h.2 Financial assistance for allied cultural activities 
 1. Extend 
support to 
organizatio
ns to create 
assets for 
performing/ 
displaying 
allied 
cultural 
activities 
1.1 Number of 
cultural 
organization
s supported 
 
15 0 1. Tourists/ 
visitors 
experience 
live 
performances 
first-hand on 
regular basis 
 
1.1 Number of 
performances 
per year  
 
500 0 
 1.2 Number of 
assets 
created to 
enhance 
Audio Visual 
(AV) 
spectacle for 
cultural 
activities 
 
 
 
15 
 
 
0     
 h.3 Financial assistance for Tagore Cultural Complexes 
 1. Extend 1.1 Number of 23 0 1. Display and 1.1 Total Number  0 

Page 108 of 142 
 
FINANCI
AL 
OUTLAY 
(Rs in Cr) 
OUTPUTS 2022-23 OUTCOMES 2022-23 
2022-23 Output Indicators Targe
ts 
2022-
23 
Achievements Outcome Indicators Targets 
2022-23 
Achievements 
support to 
organizatio
ns to 
create 
centers of 
excellence 
in all forms 
of art and 
culture 
organization
s supported 
 
 
 
 
 
promote art 
and cultural 
activities to 
promote 
cultural unity, 
provide 
avenues for 
creative 
of stage 
performances, 
exhibitions, 
seminars, 
literary 
activities in 
different 
cultural fields 
in Tagore 
Cultural 
Complexes 
(TCCs) 
156 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3. Development of Museums (CS) 
 
FINANCIAL 
OUTLAY 
(Rs in Cr) 
OUTPUTS 2022-23 OUTCOMES 2022-23 
2022-23 Output Indicators Targets 
2022-23 
Achievements Outcome Indicators Targets 
2022-23 
Achievements 
 a. Museum Grant Scheme 
180.00 1. New museums 
and up gradation 
/ Modernization 
of existing 
museums 
1.1 Number of new 
museums setup 
with financial 
assistance under 
Museum Grant 
Scheme  
5 1 1. Generate 
awareness 
and 
interest 
in visitors 
across the 
country 
about the 
rich 
1.1 % Change in 
visitors to   
museums 
(Indian/foreig
n) 
 
20 Data not 
reported 
1.2. Number of 
existing 
5 1  

Page 109 of 142 
 
FINANCIAL 
OUTLAY 
(Rs in Cr) 
OUTPUTS 2022-23 OUTCOMES 2022-23 
2022-23 Output Indicators Targets 
2022-23 
Achievements Outcome Indicators Targets 
2022-23 
Achievements 
museums 
modernized/ up 
graded with 
financial 
assistance under 
Museum Grant 
Scheme  
cultural 
heritage 
of our 
country 
2. Museums of 
State 
Governments/N
GOs assisted for 
digitization of 
art objects and 
for making their 
images/catalogue
s available over 
the 
Website 
 
2.1 Number of 
museums where 
art objects 
completely 
digitized 
3 0 2. To create 
awarenes
s among 
lakhs of 
people all 
over the 
world 
about rich 
cultural 
heritage 
of the 
country 
3.  
2.1 Percentage 
change in 
number of 
visitors in the 
website 
www.museu
msofi 
ndia.gov.in. 
20 Data not 
reported 
 3. Museum 
Professionals 
trained at 
various levels i.e. 
national level, 
state level, 
regional and 
local level across 
the country 
3.1 Number of 
Museum 
Professionals 
trained during the 
current FY 
3 0 
 
No proposals 
received 
    
b. Scheme for Promotion of Culture of Science (SPOCS) 
1. To set up new 
Science 
Cities/Science 
Centers in the 
1.1 Number of 
Science 
Centers/Science 
cities set up. 
4 3 1. To 
populariz
e science 
and to 
1.1 Total 
number of 
visitors 
footfall 
 
500000 
111617 

Page 110 of 142 
 
FINANCIAL 
OUTLAY 
(Rs in Cr) 
OUTPUTS 2022-23 OUTCOMES 2022-23 
2022-23 Output Indicators Targets 
2022-23 
Achievements Outcome Indicators Targets 
2022-23 
Achievements 
state of 
Uttarakhand, 
Odisha, Tripura, 
Andhra Pradesh, 
Kerala, Himachal 
Pradesh, Assam, 
Andaman & 
Nicobar Islands, 
Madhya Pradesh, 
Rajasthan, Bihar 
and Karnataka 
1.2. Number of 
programme 
organized/condu
cted for student 
in existing 
science center 
550 145 spread 
scientific 
attitude 
and 
creation 
of a 
scientific 
temper 
and 
awareness 
among the 
people 
specially 
the young 
students 
of the 
region 
 
 2. To set up 
Innovation 
Hubs in 
different 
Science 
Centres 
2.1 Number of 
Innovation 
Hubs to be 
completed 
5 4 2. To 
promote 
culture of 
Innovatio
n amongst 
the Youth 
of the 
region 
3.1. Number of 
students 
exposed to 
these 
Innovation 
Hubs 
400000 33437 
2.2. Number of 
activities 
conducted in the 
existing 
innovation hubs 
480 515  
3. Up gradation of 
Science Cities/ 
Science Centers/ 
Innovation Hubs 
in the country 
3.1 Number of 
Science Centers/ 
Science 
cities/Innovation 
Hubs upgraded 
1 2 3. To 
popularize 
science 
and to 
spread 
scientific 
attitude 
and 
creation 
3.1. % Change in 
number of 
visitors to 
science 
centers/ 
science 
cities/innovati
on Hubs 
4  

Page 111 of 142 
 
FINANCIAL 
OUTLAY 
(Rs in Cr) 
OUTPUTS 2022-23 OUTCOMES 2022-23 
2022-23 Output Indicators Targets 
2022-23 
Achievements Outcome Indicators Targets 
2022-23 
Achievements 
of a 
scientific 
temper 
and 
awareness 
among the 
people 
specially 
the 
young 
students 
of the 
region 
 c. Museum on PMs of India 
1. Special 
exhibition on 
Prime Ministers 
to validate 
technologies for 
Museum on 
Prime Ministers.  
1.1. Percentage of 
work completed 
on Museum on 
Prime Minister 
of India 
100 100 1. To have a 
Centre for 
Excellenc
e to 
highlight 
the life 
and 
works, 
charisma 
and 
contributi
ons by all 
the Prime 
Ministers. 
1.1 footfall of 
general 
visitors and 
research 
scholars (per 
day average) 
500 830 visitors 
per day 
 
4. Development of Libraries and Archives (CS) 
 

Page 112 of 142 
 
FINANCIAL 
OUTLAY (Rs 
in Cr) 
OUTPUTS 2022-23 OUTCOMES 2022-23 
2022-23 Output Indicators Targets 2022-
23 
Achievements Outcome Indicators Targets 
2022-23 
Achievements 
 National Mission on Libraries (NML) 
23.00 1. Setting up 
of NML 
model 
libraries.  
  
1.1 Number 
of NML 
model 
Libraries 
set up 
 
8 6 1. To 
enhance 
access to 
Libraries 
1.1 Percentage 
increase in no. 
of individuals 
accessing 
libraries 
5% 5 
2   Capacity 
building for 
Library 
professionals 
2.1 Number 
of Online 
trainings 
organized 
12 1 2   To provide 
training to 
library 
professional
s 
preservation 
of records for 
research 
scholars. 
 
2.1 Number 
of 
Professio
nals 
trained 
480 41 
3. 
Maintenance 
of National 
Virtual 
Library of 
India  
3.1 addition 
of Biblio 
content 
 
 
3 Lakh 
 
 
 
1,03,502 
 
3 Enhanced 
knowledge 
of Indian 
History, 
Culture and 
Heritage 
3.1 Increase 
in viewership 
 
 
1.2         
15% 
 
 
 
30 
3 Enhanced 
knowledge of 
Indian 
History, 
Culture and 
Heritage 
1 Lakh 25,405 
 
3.2 Increase in 
App 
downloads 
 
10% 
 
12 
5. Global Engagement and International Co-operation (CS) 
 

Page 113 of 142 
 
FINANCIAL 
OUTLAY (Rs 
in Cr) 
OUTPUTS 2022-23 OUTCOMES 2022-23 
2022-23 Output Indicators Targets 
2022-23 
Achievements Outcome Indicators Targets 
2022-23 
Achievements 
13.57 a. Scheme for Promotion of International Cultural Relations 
1. Festival of 
India to be held 
abroad 
1.1 Number of 
countries 
where 
Festival of 
India is to 
be held 
4 0 1. To 
promote 
Indian 
culture 
abroad, 
fostering 
closer 
friendship 
and 
cultural 
contacts 
between 
Indian and 
foreign 
country 
1.1 Number 
of 
persons 
attended 
to these 
events 
4800 
 
 
 
 
2.5 lakhs 
1.2 Number of 
cultural 
events 
organized 
in abroad 
20 0  
2. Strengthening 
Indian culture 
abroad by 
sanctioning 
grant-in- aid to 
Indo-Foreign 
Friendship 
Cultural 
Societies 
 
 
2.1. Number of 
Missions to 
whom grant 
will be 
given 
50 39  
2.2. Number of 
Societies to 
whom 
grants 
disbursed 
by mission 
400 229  
b.Project Mausam 
1 To explore 
the multi-
faceted 
Indian 
ocean 
‘world’ – 
collating 
archeologi
cal and 
historical 
1.1 Number 
countries 
identified under 
Project Mausam 
 
39 39 1. Reviving 
lost linkages 
with nations 
that are part 
of project 
Mausam and 
creating links 
to existing 
1.1 Number 
of lost 
linkages 
revived along 
the Indian 
Ocean world 
20 14 
 1.2 Number of 
Conferences 
2 2 1.2 Number 
of links 
2 22 

Page 114 of 142 
 
FINANCIAL 
OUTLAY (Rs 
in Cr) 
OUTPUTS 2022-23 OUTCOMES 2022-23 
2022-23 Output Indicators Targets 
2022-23 
Achievements Outcome Indicators Targets 
2022-23 
Achievements 
research organized with 
representatives 
identified 
countries on 
various 
dimensions of 
Project Mausam 
World 
Heritage 
Sites 
identified 
between 
UNESCO 
world 
heritage sites 
across 
Mausam 
countries 
2.Transnational 
nomination of 
Maritime 
Cultural Routes 
2.1 Number of 
proposals 
prepared for the 
transnational 
nomination of 
Maritime 
Cultural Routes     
1 1 2.Submitting 
transnational 
nomination 
under World 
Heritage  
2.1 Number 
of 
transnational 
nominations 
inscribed 
under World 
Heritage 
1 0  
 
Remarks: 
Preparation of 
Transnational 
Tentative List is 
under 
consideration. 
3.To promote 
research on themes 
related to the study 
of Maritime Routes 
3.1Number of 
research work 
conducted 
pertaining to 
Maritime 
Routes, culture 
and historical 
aspects of 
Project Mausam 
2 2 3.Research 
and 
Publication on 
themes related 
to the study of 
Maritime 
Routes 
3.1 Number 
of research 
paper 
published  
2 0 
 
Published 
brochure on 
Project 
Mausam. 
Publication of 
proceedings of 
the National 
Conference is 
under process. 
 
4.Capacity 
Building 
4.1 Number of 
Lecture series 
organized on 
various themes 
related to 
Project Mausam 
3 3     
 

Page 115 of 142 
 
6. National Mission on Cultural Mapping (CS) 
 
FINANCIA
L OUTLAY 
(Rs in Cr) 
OUTPUTS 2022-23 OUTCOMES 2022-23 
2022-23 Output Indicators Target
s 2022-
23 
Achievement
s 
Outcome Indicators Target
s 
2022-
23 
Achievements 
19.13 cr. 1. Repositor
y of 
comprehe
nsive 
database 
of 
cultural 
assets 
and 
resources 
including 
various 
art forms 
and 
artists 
1.1 Numbe
r of 
Artists 
to be 
enrolle
d on the 
Nationa
l Portal 
for 
Cultura
l 
Mappin
g 
project 
7.5 
lakhs 
14.53 lakhs 
  
Remarks: 
The data 
related to 
14.53 lakhs 
artists has 
been collected 
by the 
NMCM from 
secondary 
sources for 
this purpose 
1. Availabilit
y of 
comprehen
sive 
database of 
artists 
throughout 
the country 
which 
could also 
be used for 
policy 
decisions 
1.1 Number of 
Scholarship 
applications/Fello
wship received 
from the registered 
Artists. 
25 0 
 
Remarks: 
 
There is no provision 
for  
scholarship/fellowshi
p in NMCM at 
present 
 
 

Page 116 of 142 
 
Annexure-IV 
    Group-A Group-B Group-C A+B+C 
 S N. 
Name of 
Organisations 
Sanctioned 
strength 
   In 
position 
Sanctioned 
strength 
In 
position 
Sanctioned 
strength 
   In 
position 
Sanctioned 
strength 
 In 
position 
1. Ministry of 
Culture, 
Establishment 
including PAO 
(Culture) 
60 52 153 111 99 62 312 225 
2. 
Archaeological 
Survey of India 284 98 970 633 8011 5085 9265 5816 
3. 
National 
Archives of India 23 15 155 65 334 179 512 259 
4. 
Anthropological 
Survey of India 32 15 166 94 200 127 398 236 
5. 
Central 
Reference 
Library 
1 0 30 16 32 25 63 41 
6. National Library 7 2 138 96 311 190 456 288 
7. 
National Museum 
33 4 55 29 113 67 201 99 
8. 
N.R.L.C., 
Lucknow 13 7 18 15 19 10 50 32 
9. 
National Gallery 
of Modern Art 26 14 43 11 70 34 139 51 
  Total 477 207 1728 1071 9185 5779 11390 7057 
  

Page 117 of 142 
 
        Annexure-V 
 
ASI 
ASI has been reviewing the RRs expeditiously. Further, ASI has submitted the requisitions for filling up posts through 
UPSC and SSC. ( relevant details enclosed as separately ).Steps have been taken to fill up promotion quota vacancies 
by holding DPCs. More than 400 promotions have been made during the last 1 ½ years by ASI. and in the category of 
MTS, 2000 vacancies have been reported to SSC. 
UPSC 
Sl.No Name of Post Number of 
vacancies 
Status 
1. Superintending 
Epigraphist 
01 NOC       from       Director       General 
(Resettlement), MoD and Central (Surplus Cell), DOPT has not 
been received yet. Letter was sent vide letter F.No. A-12025/2/2022-
ADMN.I dated 
08/07/2022 and reminder letter was also sent vide D.O. No. A -
12025/7/2022- ADMN.I dated 07/09/2022. A query was raised by 
DOPT vide email dated 08/09/2022 and the reply to this query was       
sent       vide       our       letter 
F.No.12025/5/2022- ADMN.I dated 12/09/2022 
2. Deputy Superintending 
Archaeological Engineer 
13 UPSC has returned the proposal. It is to 
be submitted by next week. 
3. Deputy Superintending 
Horticulturist 
02 Proposal was processed in UPSC vide 
F.No. A -12/13/2021-Adm.I dated 02/01/2023. The proposal was 
returned citing to constitute a committee for defining suitability of 
PWDs of the said 
post. 
4. Deputy Superintending 
Epigraphist 
02 Proposal has been processed in UPSC 
vide F.No. A-1/13/2021-Adm.I dated 18/01/2023. 
5. Superintending 
Archaeologist 
03 Proposal is to be submitted as the final 
result of court case on recruitment of Deputy Superintending 
Archaeologist is awaited. 
6. Deputy Superintending 
Archaeologist 
50 Proposal is to be submitted as the final 
result of court case on recruitment of Deputy Superintending 
Archaeologist is awaited. 
7. Deputy Superintending 
Archaeological Chemist 
03 NOC      from       Director       General 
(Resettlement), MoD has not been received yet. Letter was sent vide 
letter F.No. A-12025/4/2022-ADMN.I dated 07/07/2022 
 Total: 74  
 
 
SSC 

Page 118 of 142 
 
SI.No. Name of Post Number of 
vacancies 
Status 
1. Senior Conservation 
Assistant 
88 Vacancies reported to SSC vide F.No. A- 
12025/5/2021-Adm.I dated 02/06/2022 
2. Conservation Assistant 342 Vacancies reported to SSC vide F.No. A- 
12026/3/2021-Adm.I dated 02/06/2022 
3. Multi Tasking Staff 2000 Vacancies reported to SSC vide 
F.No. D-42/3/2022-General dated 14/03/2022 
4. Assistant Archaeologist 50 Letter sent for NOC from DOPT is still awaited. Letter was sent 
vide F.No. A- 12026/4/2022-ADMN.I dated 
15/02/2022. A query was raised by DOPT vide email dated 
08/09/2022 and the reply to this query was sent vide our letter 
F.No.12025/5/2022-ADMN.I dated 
12/09/2022 
5. Assistant Archaeological Chemist 33 NOC from MoD has not been received yet. Letter was sent for 
NOC vide F.No. 12011/1/2021-ADMN.I dated 09/09/2021 
and reminder D.O. letter No. A- 12025/7/2022-ADMN.I dated 
07/09/2022 
6. Senior Photographer 03 Letter for NOC from DOPT and MoD has been sent vide F.No. 
A-12026/2/2022- ADMN.I dated 27/12/2022 
7. Lower Division Clerk 40 Vacancies reported to SSC 
8. Horticulture Assistant 06 Letter for NOC to DOPT and MoD has 
been sent vide A-12011/1/2023ADMN.I dated 17/01/2023 Grade-I 
Total: 2559  
 
National Monument Authority  
 
 Consequent upon Ministry of Culture Order dated 04.11.2022, Professor Kishor Kumar Basa , has assumed the 
regular Charge of Chairman, NMA w.e.f. 23.11.2022 (F/N).  
 NMA has a sanctioned strength of 5 posts of Whole Time Members (WTMs). Against 3 post advertised in 
2020, the ACC had approved the appointment of Prof. P. P. Joglekar  as WTM vide order dated 04.01.2022. 
However, Prof. P. P. Joglekar declined this offer of appointment. Therefore, these 03 posts of WTMs 
continue to remain vacant.  
 02 posts of WTMs were advertised on 24.09.2021 and the applications received in response to  the 
advertisement were processed in the Ministry of Culture for preliminary screening. Interview with shortlisted 
candidates was conducted in MoC. The meeting of the Selection Committee under the Chairmanship of Cabinet 
Secretary for Selection of 02 WTMs in NMA was held on 30.09.2022 in the Cabinet Secretariat. The decision 
of the ACC in this regard is awaited. Therefore, as on date, all 05 posts of WTMs are vacant in NMA. 
 NMA has sanctioned strength of 05 posts of Part Time Members (PTMs). Against 4 post advertised in 2020, the 
ACC had approved the appointment of 02 PTMs namely Shri Hemraj R. Kamdar and Prof. M. Kailasa Rao vide 
order dated 08.01.2022. Both the PTMs have assumed the charge. Therefore, 02 posts of PTMs continue to 
remain vacant. The 01 vaca nt post of Part Time Member was advertised on 18.04.2022 and 61 applications 
received in response are under consideration in MoC for filling up all the 03 posts.  
 Cabinet Secretariat order dated 18.01.2011, 13 posts were created including one post of Member  Secretary in 
NMA Headquarters. The remaining 12 post could not be filled up and therefore were deemed to be have lapsed. 
Subsequently, Department of Expenditure vide its communication dated 07.01.2021 revived 05 posts namely  
Director (Level-13), Under Secretary (Level-11), Administrative Officer (Level-08), System Analyst (Level-10) 
& Photo Officer (Level-06).  

Page 119 of 142 
 
 Chairman, NMA had requested Secretary (Culture) to take up the matter for revival of the balance 07 posts on 
functional justification and in the i nterest of institutional memory. Secretary, Culture has written a D.O. letter 
dated 17.10.2022 to Finance Secretary & Secretary (Expenditure) for consideration of the same. 
Simultaneously, NMA has processed the proposal for revival of these 7 posts in the prescribed format of DoE 
along with draft Recruitment Rules, to MoC for onward submission to DoE.  
 The process of filling up of the above 05 revived posts at the NMA headquarters on deputation basis was 
initiated and an advertisement inviting applications was issued on 18.04.2022. The applications received have 
been processed by the duly constituted Selection Committee and 01 candidate was found suitable for the post of 
Director (Level -13). The offer of appointment was issued with the approval of HCM and t he selected officer 
Colonel Savyasachi Marwaha has joined on 03.10.2022(F/N).  
 None of the applicants for the remaining 04 advertised posts were found suitable and these posts were re -
advertised with revised eligibility criteria on 09.12.2022. The last date for submission of applications was 
31.01.2023.    
 Simultaneously, the matter regarding framing of enabling rules and the recruitment rule for the five revived 
posts was taken up with Ministry of Law & Justice. The M/o Law & Justice has done one round of vetting and 
the process of resolution of their queries is under way.  
 In additi onal the above, MoC O.M. No. 33 -71/2009-M (Vol. II) dated 06.09.2010, 24 post of Competent 
Authority (CA) (Level -14/ JS equivalent)  were created at field level. The Department of Expenditure vide its 
communication dated 07.01.2022 however, has advised NM A to submit a separate proposal for creation of 24 
posts of Competent Authority at Level -12 instead of Level -14. Further, DoE has advised NMA to also submit 
proposals for creation of posts of supporting staff at NMA Hqs and offices of Competent Authoriti es.  
 Accordingly, a proposal for creation of 24 posts of Competent Authority at Level -12, 12 post of supporting 
staff in NMA Hqs and 120 post of supporting staff in offices of Competent Authority is under consideration for 
submission to Department of Expenditure. 
 
Museums 
 
Name of organization  Sanctioned 
strength  
No. of 
Filled 
posts  
No. of Vacant 
post 
Remarks (please mentioned efforts done to 
fill the post)  
National Museum 201 99 102 Steps are being taken to fill the vacant 
posts in the said organizations. UPSC/SSC 
have been contacted for filling the vacant 
posts in Subordinate offices. In respect of 
Autonomous bodies, advertisements for 
filling up some of the vacant posts have 
already been issued and further action is 
being taken in respect of remaining vacant 
posts. 
National Gallery of 
Modern Arts 
139 51 88 
Salar Jung Museum 140 83 57 
Allahabad Museum  82 38 44 
National Museum 
Institute  
19 16 3 
Vitoria Memorial 
Hall 
175 70 105 
Indian Museum 276 74 202 
National Council of 
Science Museums  
894 805 89 
National Research 
Laboratory for 
Conservation 
52 13 39 
 
Rampur Raza Library 

Page 120 of 142 
 
 
Group Sanctioned 
Strength 
Persons In 
Position 
Vacancies Remarks 
A 02 01 01 The post of Director, RRL is 
advertised. 
B  
(Non 
Gazetted) 
06 02 04 The selection process of these posts has been 
completed which is approved by RRL Board. 
The matter is under consideration of Hon’ble 
High Court Allahabad. The appointments will 
be made after consideration of the Hon’ble 
Court. 
Group 
‘C’ 
23 20 03 The two posts of LDC were advertised on 
old Recruitment Rules with the approval of 
RRL Board. But, the revised RRs are 
published in the Gazette of India during the 
recruitment process. Now, the guidance has 
been sought from Ministry of Culture that 
these posts may be filled on old RRs or the 
fresh procedure may be adopted according 
to the new RRs. After receiving the 
guidance, further action may be taken. 
The post of Library Attendant vacated due  to 
the retirement of employee. 
Total 31 23 08 -- 
 
Central Secretariat Library 
 
S.No. Name of the 
post 
Sanctione
d Strength 
Fill
ed 
up 
Vacant Action taken 

Page 121 of 142 
 
1. Group 
A 
Director 
1 0       1 
(Additional 
charge is 
held by Sh. 
Manoj 
Dehury, 
DS) 
The post of Director, CSL is 
currently being held by Sh. 
Manoj Dehury, DS as 
additional charge. In regard to 
filling up the post on regular 
basis, this Ministry had 
submitted a proposal to UPSC 
after receiving applications 
through re - advertisement. 
UPSC v ide letter dated 
29.03.2022 had 
informed that none of the 
candidates found suitable. This 
Ministry had sent proposal to 
DAVP for re - advertisement. 
The post was advertised on 18 th- 
24th June, 2022. 03 applications 
were received which have been 
processed on file and is pending 
for submission to UPSC due to 
vacancy at position of 
US (Lib.) (Requisitioning 
authority from Library Section) 
2. Library & 
Information 
Officer (LIO) 
2 1 1 This vacancy falls on 01.03.2022 
due to the retirement of Sh. M.C. 
S Bisht. Since the said vacancy 
falls in SC category, no eligible 
candidate belonging to this 
category is available. The matter 
was taken up with DoPT and 
NCSC for de- reservation. 
However, DoPT did not agreed 
for dereservation. 
Currently, the matter was 
considered for ad- hoc 
promotion which was not 
agreed to. Now, the proposal is 
submitted for additional charge. 

Page 122 of 142 
 
3. Group B 
Assistant 
Library & 
Information 
Officer 
(General) 
9 9 0 - 
4. Assistant 
Library & 
Information 
Officer 
(Language) 
2 1 1 This vacancy arised  due to 
promotion of Sh. Y. A Rao to 
the post of LIO vide Office 
Order dated 07.04.2021. The 
requisition proposal has been 
submitted to UPSC. 
5. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Library & 
Information 
Assistant 
11*     5          6 03 LIA - Earlier, the proposal for filling 
up 05 posts of LIA was sent to SSC 
during 2017. In 2020, SSC had sent 
the name of 04 candidates 
nominated for the said post. For one 
vacancy, SSC had stated that this 
has been kept on hold and subject to 
the outcome of O.A No.3703/2019. 
Out of the 04 candidates nominated 
by SSC, only 02 had joined the post 
and other 02 had shown 
unwillingness. The candidature of 
these 02 candidates has been 
cancelled and the same have been 
conveyed to SSC with a request to 
sent name of eligible candidate from 
the reserved list. Thus, the 03 
vacancies are lying with SSC. 
04 LIA - In the meantime, other 04 
posts of LIA undergone deemed 
abolition 
category. The proposalwas sent to 
MoF. However, only 02 posts has been 
revived. 
*For other 02 posts, the matter was 
taken up again with MoF for which 
MoF has not agreed to vide ID Note 
12(5)/Culture/2019/E.C.I dated 
23.08.2022 (300410590). 
Accordingly, sanctioned strength 
for the post is revised to 11 and 
vacancy to 6. 

Page 123 of 142 
 
01 LIA – This vacancy arised due to 
the promotion of incumbent namely 
Ms. Pooja Sharma to the post of 
ALIO. 
Currently, the requisition proposal 
for 03 vacancies has been 
submitted to SSC. 
6 Group C 
Senio
r 
Libra
ry 
2 0 2 Proposal for revival/ creation 
of 02 vacancies was sent to 
DoE. Out of that, 01 vacancy 
was 
revived by DoE by ID 
      7 Attendant    Note dtd. 12.09.2022. 
8 Janitor 1 1 0  
 Total 28 17 11  
 
Apart from this, the proposal for creation of one post of Library Clerk has been sent to DoE for 
consideration. 
 
 
Central Reference Library 
 
Cadre/Designation Initiatives 
Librarian RRs of the post are under amendment. 
Assistant Library & 
Information Officer ALIO (Telugu) is returned  from UPSC (revision of RR) 
Library & 
Information 
Assistant 
5 vacancies reported to SSC. 
6 posts are under revival. 
Requisition to be sent for 1 post. 
LDC 3 Vacancies reported to SSC. 2 posts just vacant. 
MTS Requisition to be sent for 1 post. 
 
 

Page 124 of 142 
 
Khuda Bakhsh Oriental Public Library 
 
Category of Post (Group 
A/B/C) 
Sanctioned Posts Staff in 
Position 
Vacant 
Posts 
Total 56 30 26 
 
Steps have been taken for filling up the vacant posts. Recruitment process is going on and it is 
expected that vacant posts will be filled soon. 
 
National Library 
 
 
Name of the 
Posts/Grades 
Action taken to fill up vacancies 
Director General The Ministry   of   Culture   already 
Advertised the post in the Employment News on 29.01.2022. Presently the post is 
filled up on 
additional charge basis. 
Library & 
Information Officer 
(General) 
01 vacancy occurred on 30.09.2022 due to retirement will be filled up by 
Promotion. 
Due to interim Order passed by Hon’ble CAT Kolkata Bench, the two posts have 
not been filled up. 
 
Library& 
Information Officer 
(Science 
& Technology) 
Requisition is placed to UPSC to fill the post under Direct Recruitment quota and is 
under process. 
AssistantLibrary 
and 
Information Officer 
Requisition for 01 post placed to UPSC and for 01 
post placed to DGRR, for receiving nomination. 
 
01 post of ALIO (Gujarati Language) to be placed to UPSC shortly. 
Superintendent One vacancy occurred on 30.09.2022 
due to retirement will be filled after convening the meeting of DPC. 
Library&Informatio
n 
Assistant(General 
AndLanguage) 
● Requisition for 02 posts already placed to Staff Selection Commission.  
● 04 Nominated candidates are yet to join the office. 
● 01 post under PR quota not filled up due to unavailability of eligible candidate.  
● Proposal for revival of 02 deemed abolished posts of LIA has been placed to 
MoC. 
● Requisition for 01 vacant post under Direct Recruitment quota is under process.  
02 vacancies occurred due to retirement will be placed to the recruitment agency.  

Page 125 of 142 
 
Library&Information  
Assistant 
(MachineOperator) 
 01 vacancy occurred under PR quota 
will be filled up after convening ameeting of DPC. 
Senior Assistant #  02 Vacancy will be filled up after convening a meeting of DPC. 
● 03 posts under deemed to be abolished category, due to non- availability of 
eligible candidates,proposal for revival of the posts placed to Ministry of Culture.  
Assistant  06 promotional posts will be filled up  after convening a meeting of DPC. 
Lower Division Clerk ● 01 Nomination of PwBD candidate not received from MoC 
● 09 Dossiers returned to MoC for substitute nominations but no nomination 
received till date. 
● Requisition for   11   posts   sent   to   MoC   for  for forwarding to SSC. 
• 01 post under Promotional quota to be filled up through Departmental 
Competitive Examination is under process. 
 
Raja Rammohun Roy Library Foundation 
 
 
Sl. No. Group Name of the Post Name of the 
Post 
Sanctioned 
Strength 
Vacant 
Position 
Men in 
position 
1  
 
A 
Director General 1 0 1 
2 System Manager 1 1 0 
3 Deputy Director (A&A) 1 0 1 
4 Deputy Director (II&M) 1 1 0 
5 Assistant Director 2 0 2 
6  
 
 
 
 
B 
 
Section Officer 3 2 1 
7 Field Officer 5 0 5 
8 Statistical Officer 1 0 1 
9 Programmer 1 1 0 
10 ALIO 1 0 1 
11 Data Processing Assistant 1 1 0 
12 Field Assistant 9 3 6 
13 Accountant 2 1 1 
14 Assistant 6 2 4 
15 Sr.Stenographer 2 2 0 
16 Hindi Translater 1 0 1 
17  
 
 
C 
Statistical Assistant 2 1 1 
18 Upper Division Clerk 8 1 7 
19 Junior Stenographer 2 1 1 
20 Lower Division Clerk 11 10 1 
21 Kitchen Clerk  1 0 1 
22 Staff Car Driver 2 1 1 
23 MTS 9 3 6 
  Total 73 31 42 
 
It may be noted that the total sanctioned strength of RRRLF is 76, out of which 12 posts are 
recently revived by Department of Expenditure and 03 posts have been abolished and 05 posts deemed 

Page 126 of 142 
 
to have been abolished. For recruitment of all the vacant position, action has already been initiated to 
fill up the posts on Promotion/Deputation/Direct Recruitment basis. 
 
 
 
 
 


Page 127 of 142 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 


Page 128 of 142 
 


Page 129 of 142 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 


Page 130 of 142 
 
 
  


Page 131 of 142 
 
Annexure-VI 
HEAD WISE APPROVED ALLOCATION AND PROJECTED DEMANDS OF 
ARCHAEOLOGICAL SURVEY OF INDIA 
(Rs. in lakh) 
Heads Archaeological Survey Proposed 
BE 23-24 
Approved 
BE 23-24 
  
2205.00.106.13.01 Directorate 
(Establishment) 
      
01 Salaries 37000.00 23500.00 To cater for Pay and 
allowance of filling up of 
anticipated vacancies of 
LDC, MTS etc. 
02 Wages 3400.00 3200.00 To meet the obligation in R/o 
wages in R/o casual labor 
04 Pensionary Charges 0.00 0.00   
05 Rewards 0.00 250.00   
06 Medical Treatment 650.00 550.00 To meet the anticipated 
expenditure from ASI field 
offices and ASI Hqrs 
07 Allowances 0.00 11743.00   
08 Leave Travel 
Concession 
0.00 300.00   
09 Training Expenses 0.00 200.00   
11 Domestic Travel 
Expenses 
1800.00 1300.00 To meet expenditure related 
to transfer/posting and 
official tours by ASI 
Officials. 
12 Foreign Travel 
Expenses 
60.00 60.00 To meet anticipated 
expenditure on likely foreign 
tours 
13 Office Expenses 3000.00 2000.00 Day-to-day maintenance of 
offices of ASI viz. payment 
of electricity bills/water 
charges /telephone 
bills/furniture, livery and 
other mandatory payments 
which requires to run an 
office. 

Page 132 of 142 
 
14 Rent, Rates and Taxes 
for Land and Buildings 
750.00 600.00  Payment of rented building 
hired for offices and payment 
of service charges/ license 
fees to CPWD under General 
Pool Office 
Accommodation/Complex 
16 Printing and Publication 26.00 26.00   
18 Rent for others 0.00 150.00   
19 Digital Equipment 0.00 1510.00  The enhancement is due to 
committed liabilities towards 
payments pertaining to 
provision of lease line 
connectivity for ASI Hqrs 
and field offices of ASI, 
Heritage App, provision of 
IT hardware and software 
related to e -ticketing 
arrangements at C PMs of 
ASI, AMC of Computers 
etc..     
20 Other Administrative 
Expenses 
400.00 0.00   
24 Fuels and Lubricants 0.00 200.00   
26 Advertising and 
Publicity 
1000.00 700.00 For incurring expenditure for 
misc. activities under 
AKAM, World Heritage etc. 
34 Scholarship/Stipends 70.00 70.00   
49 Other Revenue 
Expenditure 
0.00 23.00   
Total Establishment 48156.00 46382.00   
96-13 SAP-OE 30.00 30.00   
99-13 Information Tech.-
Office Expenses 
2250.00 0.00   
Total Directorate 50436.00 46412.00   
14 Conservation of 
Ancient Monuments 
(Establishment) 
      
22 Arms and 
Ammunition 
0.00 100.00   
27 Minor civil and electric 40000.00 37000.00 To meet anticipated 

Page 133 of 142 
 
works expenditure for conservation, 
restoration and provision of 
tourist visitors amenties etc 
28 Professional Services 20000.00 15000.00 For making payment to 
private Security Personnel at 
the protected 
monuments/sites,  
enhancement of salaries & 
allowances of CISF 
Personnel, posted at Red 
Fort, Delhi and Taj Mahal, 
Agra, payment of consultants 
hired by ASI, pending 
liabilities of ASI 
29 Repair and 
Maintenance 
0.00 3000.00   
Total Conservation of 
Ancient Monuments 
60000.00 55100.00   
15 Financial Assistance for 
Preservation of 
Monuments 
      
15.01 Financial Assistance for 
Preservation of 
Monuments Less than 
100 year old 
      
31 Grants in aid-General 5.00 5.00   
Total F.A. for Preservation  
of monuments less 
than 100 years old 
5.00 5.00   
16 Archaeological 
Exploration and 
Excavation 
      
16.01 Exploration and 
Excavation 
      
49 Other Revenue 
Expenditure 
0.00 2000.00 For anticipated Exploration 
and excavation 
activities/works by offices of 
ASI including at Iconic sites 
50 Other Charges 2000.00 0.00   
Total 2205.00.106.16.01.50 2000.00 2000.00   

Page 134 of 142 
 
17 Development and 
Repair of Buildings 
      
17.01 Works       
27 Minor civil and electric 
works 
1500.00 1000.00 To meet anticipated 
expenditure for annual 
maintenance and repairs of 
modern buildings, of ASI 
29 Repair and 
Maintenance 
0.00 500.00   
Total 2205.00.106.17.01.27 1500.00 1500.00   
18 Archaeological 
Museum 
      
18.01 Central Archaeological 
Museum 
      
27 Minor civil and electric 
works 
2000.00 1200.00 To meet anticipated 
expenditure for 
Maintenances/development 
of 50 Archaeological Site 
Museums and organizing 
National /International 
Exhibitions and development 
of children museum 
29 Repair and 
Maintenance 
0.00 300.00   
Total 2205.00.106.18.01.27 2000.00 1500.00   
19 Operation of Ancient of 
Treasure Act 
      
19.2 Antiquities of Treasure 
Act, 1972 
      
19.02.31 GIA General 1.00 1.00   
Total 2205.00.106.19.02.31 1.00 1.00   
20.01 ASI- National Mission 
on Monuments and 
Antiquities 
      
49 Other Revenue 
Expenditure 
0.00 65.00   
50 Other Charges 65.00 0.00   
Total 2205.00.106.20.01.50 65.00 65.00   
21 Operation of Ancient 
Monuments and 
      

Page 135 of 142 
 
Archaeological Sites 
and Remains 
21.01 Setting up of Comp. 
Auth. for Operation of 
Ancient Monuments 
and Archae. Sites & 
Remains (Amendment 
and Validation Act-
2010 
      
49 Other Revenue 
Expenditure 
0.00 250.00   
50 Other Charges 400.00 0.00   
Total 2205.00.106.21.01.50 400.00 250.00   
22 Restoration of 
Unprotected 
Monuments 
      
22.01 Unprotected 
Monuments 
      
27 Minor Works 500.00 250.00 To meet anticipated 
expenditure for Restoration 
of Un -protected Monuments 
eg. Badrinath etc. 
29 Repair and 
Maintenance 
0.00 50.00   
Total 2205.00.106.22.01.27 500.00 300.00   
23 Archaeological 
Science Centre 
      
23.01 Establishment of 
Archaeological 
Science Centre and 
Archaeological Chair 
at IIT, Gandhinagar 
      
23.01.31 Grants in aid General 50.00 50.00   
23.01.35 Grants for Creation of 
Capital Assets 
200.00 100.00   
Total 2205 117157.00 107283.00   
4202 Capital Section       
4202.04.107 Archaeological Survey 
of India 
      
03.01 Buildings       

Page 136 of 142 
 
53 Major Works 3000.00 0.00   
51 Motor Vehicles 0.00 100.00   
52 Machinery and 
Equipment 
0.00 148.00   
71 Information, Computer, 
Telecommunications 
(ICT) equipment 
0.00 200.00   
72 Building and Structures 0.00 300.00   
74 Furniture & Fixtures 0.00 150.00   
76 Up gradation 
procurement of 
Heritage Assets and 
n.e.c. 
0.00 1.00   
77 Other fixed Assets 0.00 100.00   
78 Land 0.00 2000.00   
80 Intangible Assets 0.00 1.00   
Total Capital Section 3302.00 3000.00   
Grand Total Total- ASI 120157.00 110283.00   
  
  

Page 137 of 142 
 
Annexure-VII 
In ASI, a user -friendly mobile application is being developed in collaboration with 
Bhaskaracharya National Institute for Space Application and Geo -Informatics (BISAG-N) as 
a single access platform for Indian heritage and cultural edifices known as Indian Heritage 
Atlas to showcase the rich depository of our cultural wealth. Beta version of the same ha s 
already been launched for official purposes. In addition to above, a comprehensive database 
for all Centrally Protected Monuments on various aspects has also been created in the 
heritage atlas portal for internal purpose. It is believed to be highly usef ul for better 
management of centrally protected monuments/sites, conservation issues and enabling policy 
level decisions. The financial implication of the project is around Rs. 2.72 cr. 
In the  Anthropological Survey of India, the documentation and dissemin ation 
activities are supported by different units, such as, Visual Anthropology, Photography and 
Sound Sections. The Survey has an excellent collection of rare and rich national and 
international books and journals, which enrich the library section, making  it of national 
significance. Many documentary films have been made for cultural preservation, viz., Visual 
Documentation Project: a) Short documentary on the weaving Community of Bishnupur, 
West Bengal (2017 -18), b) Documentary film on the Nabakalebara ce remony of lord 
Jaganath, Odisha, (2017 -18), c) Bediya: A snake charmer from the De -notified Community 
of India (2018 -19).Benefits derived from the use of such digital techniques are immense 
beginning with Collating important information under a single roof  and thereby helping for 
future reference, social connectivity etc. Digitations of about 20,000 photographic negatives 
have been done and approximately Rs.27.00 lakhs have been utilised for making digital 
projects 
National Archives of India started the mas s digitization of 4.5 crores pages through 
outsourcing and uploading the same on the department search portal  www.abhilekh-patal.in  
in Jan, 2021. 
The following techniques have been implemented in the said project :  
Image Capturing/enhancement/OCR - Records have been scanned with 300 -600 DPI 
as RAW tiff format with LZW compression along with Records should be scanned 
with 24 bit color/8 bit grayscal e in order to maintain original information; 
specifically, text documents are scanned at minimum 300 DPI (in case of legibility 
issues it has been scanned with 400 dpi).Treaties and manuscripts have been scanned 
with minimum at 600 DPI.Original scanned rec ords have captured in TIFF v 6.0 
format with LZW compression (ISO 12234 -2:2001).The Optical Image enhancement 
activities have carried out to remove bleed through, removal of black border, 
curvature correction, light equalisation, brightness and contrast en hancement, de -

Page 138 of 142 
 
noising, de -skew and de -speckling, cropping, cleaning, sharpness, focus 
enhancement, background removal for text areas  have without violating content in 
picture zones and without altering the original capture DPI  .Resizing of every image 
have with de-skew, rotate, height-width, margin, etc. to make every image perfect and 
uniform in size.The enhanced images have been delivered in the JPEG v1.02 Format 
(ISO DIS 10918-1/IS0/IEC10918-5:2013)).  
The Searchable PDF contains a watermark on all pag es, secured from 
modification and extraction of the text layer and 256 bit AES encrypted.The 
searchable PDF has been prepared from conversion from JPEG after Optical 
Recognition process (OCR). 
Subject metadata and captioning - Metadata have provided in .CSV file and XML file 
format with Dublin Core Standard for online interoperability. The firm has to read 
documents from start to end, by experts with History and Archival background to 
derive the right context of the document an extract relevant “Keywords” f or the 
record which would aid the users in efficient retrieval. 
A Computerization and Digitization programme for an “Automated Retrieval 
System” with department search portal i.e.. Abhilekh Patal Portal (www.abhilekh -
patal.in) for Accessing Archives and Le arning is an Initiative of NAI to make its rich 
treasure of Indian Archival Records available to one and all at the click of a button. 
Abhilekh Patal has a service of DOD (Digital on Demand), POD (Page on Demand) 
through payment gateway for its worldwide u sers. It contains 149487 Unique 
Visitors, 270772 Website Hits, 21761 Registered Users 7753213 Reference Media 
139926 Digitized Records 6269020 Digitized Pages.The Major challenges faced are 
in the quality of different digital techniques used. However, NAI is trying to address 
the issues and striving continuously on improvising them.NAI has spent Rs.6.90 
Crores (approx) on the said project till December, 2022. Initially the Images were dull 
and hazy. In the Quality of pdf document, the images were asymmetric al and tilted. 
Some of the signatures on the handwritten manuscripts were turned yellow and 
double shaded in scanned images. The marks of aging, stitching and other irrelevant 
marks still persist and have not been cleaned properly. Further the edge marks w ere 
not removed properly. Water mark seems to be little dull.  The project management 
unit has been set up with a professionally qualified team with four Supervisors and 
one Network Engineer for executing and monitoring the project smoothly. The firm 
has al so deployed twelve menders to attend to any minor repair, straightening, 
unstitching of records before digitizing and re-stitching, etc. 
In NRLC mainly X -ray Diffraction (XRD) for compound analysis of inorganic art 
objects/antiquities, X -ray fluorescence ( XRF) for elemental analysis of inorganic art 

Page 139 of 142 
 
objects/antiquities, FT -IR for compound analysis of organic and inorganic art 
objects/antiquities are being used.   From the above digital equipment, composition of art 
objects/antiquities, making techniques of art objects/antiquities are determined.  On the basis 
of the findings derived from the above digital techniques, causes of deterioration and solution 
for deterioration of art objects/antiquities are searched.  The expenses of digital techniques 
are met from the annual budget of NRLC. 
At Victoria Memorial Hall, the system of library collections has been digitised in 
KOHA Software. 38 books out of 258 books of George Lyell collection have been digitised 
in VMH Library. Rs. 4,35,892/ - has been spent for the di gitization works. Digitization of the 
entire collection of VMH is in progress under the flagship project named JATAN and the 
digitized artefacts with relevant information are available in the public domain with the help 
of the website “ museumsofindia.gov.in”. Since the website is accessible on 24x7 basis from 
anywhere, anybody can have an access to the collection of the museum and can gather 
requisite information without visiting the museum. Digitization helpe d in restricting the 
physical handling of rare artefacts by scholars/ researchers thereby minimising the risk of 
damage.Modern instrumental advancement and software have been used during the 
digitization and preservation of digital data.  

Page 140 of 142 
 
Annexure-VIII 
Anthropological Survey of India has taken the following steps for the protection of rural and 
tribal culture:- 
●       Anthropological Study on De-Notified, Nomadic and Semi Nomadic Communities 
●       Study on Community Health, Disease and Genetic Structure of Indian Population 
●       DNA Polymorphism of the Contemporary Indian Populations 
●   Ethnographic Study of De -notified Nomadic, Semi –Nomadic Communities entrusted by 
NITI Aayog. 
●    Publication of ‘People of India’ volumes. 
●   Many other projects su ch as Development & Sustainability, Man & Environment, 
Community Genetics and Health: Bio - Cultural Adaptation, Siwalik Excavation, Physical Growth & 
Development of the Children of North–East India 
●       Besides these, in a first of its kind bid to showc ase the heritage of tribal communities, 
especially those of Particularly Vulnerable Tribal Groups, AnSI has recreated the huts of several 
communities at its different regional centres. 
Approximately Rs.127.11 lakhs have been utilised for anthropological re search and 
protection of rural and tribal culture in the last five years. 
Indira Gandhi Rashtriya Manav Sangrahlya (IGRMS) is an ethnographic museum which 
documents, collects, conserves and displays various facets of cultures of India. Major challenges 
faced are as follows :- 
1. Deviation of rural and tribal youth from their cultural roots as they don’t get financial 
security to cater their daily requirements. 
2. Culture is dynamic in itself and keeps changing due to impact of modern technology 
and various develo pment measures. Not only the cultural elements, which were significant, are 
disappearing or vanishing rapidly, even the bearers of those traditions are also migrating. 
IGRMS has been making systematic efforts to meet such challenges by generating and 
spreading awareness via its various programmes and activities to ensure participation of rural youth 
including tribals. Such steps include development of open air exhibitions and acquiring of raw 
material from the  respective areas, collection of ethnographic o bjects, organisation of cultural events 
to create awareness about the traditional culture, giving due recognition by addressing them ‘artists’ 
so that they should have a proud feeling. 

Page 141 of 142 
 
Victoria Memorial Hall (VMH) has organised following events for protect ion of Rural and 
Tribal Culture:- 
●       Abhimanyu Badh-The Slaying of Abhimanyu, Chhau Dance theatre with live music by 
Dharmendra Sutradhar and his troupe Agamoni Chhau Nritya Dal from Baghymundi, Purulia was 
organised on22 November 2018. 
●       An open air Chhau performance with live music of The Slaying of Ravana byDharmendra 
Sutradhar and his troupe - Agomani Chhau Nritya Dal from Baghmundi, Purulia was held in the 
south lawns of the VMH gardens. 
●       An interactive session - Empowering regene rative Livelihood in Santal Tribal 
Communities - The Unique Journey of Dularia was organised by VMH in the month of International 
Women’s Day. Dularia’s core team members SaraswatiMurmuBaski, JithuBaski, Sona MurmuandIti 
Malo shared their journey of self -reliance through empowerment, environment, education and 
enterprise exclusively using nature-friendly materials. 
Indira Gandhi National Centre for the Arts (IGNCA) - Regional Centre (North East), 
Guwahati looks after 8 states of North East India. Some of the  specific programmes /projects 
undertaken for the protection of rural and tribal culture are given below: 
●       10 days workshop and exhibition on Naga Ornaments during Hornbill Festival 2018. 
●       Exhibition during LOKMANTHAN 2022 - display of basket ry and textile representing 
various ethnicities including rural and tribal culture. 
●       National Seminar on Kelhou Zho – Cultural Heritage among the Tribes of Nagaland: 
Balancing Tradition with Modernity. 
●       Webinar on Folklore of the Lepcha Community of Sikkim. 
●       Webinar on Folklore of Mizoram: An Overview of Past, Present and Future. 
●       Webinar on Socio-Cultural Aspect of Tai-Khamyang of Assam. 
●       Documentary film entitled, “Colours of Meghalaya”, showing the festivals, marr iage 
traditions and lifestyle of the three major tribes of Meghalaya - Khasi, Garo & Jaintia. 
●       Documentary film entitled, “Thank You Khangchendzonga'' showcasing the Phang -
Labsol festival of Sikkim. 
●       Documentary film entitled, “Barechahariya Bhaona”. 
●       Documentary film entitled, “Mukha Shilpa - Mask Art of Majuli”. 
Centre for Cultural Resources and Training (CCRT) has been working as an autonomous 
organisation under the aegis of Ministry of Culture, Govt. of India, since 1979. CCRT organ ises 
Orientation Courses and Thematic Workshops at National Level for In -service Government and 
Government-aided School Teachers and Teacher Educators throughout the year, for preservation and 
promotion of Indian Culture by training them for incorporating the cultural component in classroom 
teaching. These programmes help in preservation and development of diverse culture, tradition 
thereby creating awareness of rich heritage in all parts of the country. These Training Programmes 
introduce the participating  teachers/students to the rich fabric of our artistic and cultural 
heritage.CCRT Regional Centres are also established in Tribal dominated areas i.e. Regional Centre 

Page 142 of 142 
 
Guwahati, Assam, Regional Centre Udaipur, Rajasthan,  Regional Centre Hyderabad, Telangana  and 
Regional Centre  Damoh, Madhya Pradesh. The CCRT organise various educational activities for 
college students and children belonging to government and non -government schools/organisation 
under its Community and Extension Feedback Programme which incl udes, Educational tours to 
Monuments, Museums, Art Galleries, Craft Centre, State Emporia, Zoological Parks, Nature Gardens, 
Camps on Conversation of the Natural and Cultural Heritage, Camps on Learning Crafts using low 
cost locally available resources, Le ctures and demonstration by artists and crafts person in schools, 
Slide-lectures supplementing classroom teaching . CCRT is  also implementing scholarship and 
fellowship schemes for preservation and promotion of diverse, varied and rich Indian cultural heritage 
which is being manifested through various performing literary and visual art forms.  There were 
certain difficulties which were faced during COVID – 19 w.r.t. the training programmes /workshops 
and other physical cultural activities . But  CCRT has de veloped online virtually interactive digital 
training programmes during the pandemic period to mitigate all the major challenges & hurdles in 
switching over from On Campus to Online programmes . 
IGRMS, VMH, IGNCA and CCRT being the autonomous organisations of the Ministry of 
Culture, receives annual grants for its regular activities. 
Seven Zonal Cultural Centers are set up by the Ministry of Culture to organise various 
cultural programmes/activities throughout the year on a regular basis in their member States for 
protection of various folk arts and culture including rural and tribal culture. Artists from all over India 
which also comprises rural and tribal artists are engaged by these ZCCs to showcase their talents 
during these cultural programmes. These artists are paid honorarium, TA/DA, boarding & lodging 
and local transportation which help them to earn their livelihood. All the seven ZCCs implement a 
number of schemes viz. Award to Young Talented Artistes, Guru Shishya Parampara Scheme, 
Theatre Rejuvenation Scheme, Research & Documentation Scheme, Shilpgram Scheme, OCTAVE, 
J&K Festivals and National Cultural Exchange Programme (NCEP) for promotion of rural and tribal 
culture. Besides this, Ministry of Culture also organi ses Rashtriya Sanskriti Mahotsav (RSMs) 
through these ZCCs where a large number of folk, rural and tribal artists from all over India are 
engaged to showcase their talents. From 2015 onwards, thirteen (13) RSMs have been organised by 
the Ministry of Cultur e across the country. These ZCCs also organise a minimum number of 42 
Regional Festivals every year for protection of various folk arts and culture including rural and tribal 
culture. 
The major challenge faced by these artists is that they have to come fro m far flung areas to reach the 
programme venues at a very short notice as they are not able to get transportation easily. To overcome these 
challenges, from time to time these ZCCs have been asked to inform these artists well in advance to enable 
them to reach the venues before time. 
***** 

143 
 
 
MINUTES 

144 
MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF THE DEPARTMENT–RELATED 
PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM & 
CULTURE (2022–23) 
X 
TENTH MEETING 
The Committee met at 11 :00 A.M. on Wednesday, the 1 5th February, 202 3 in 
Committee Room ‘2 ’, First Floor, Parliament House Annexe  Extension Building , New 
Delhi. 
 
Members present: 
1. Shri V. Vijayasai Reddy             -             Chairman   
 
Rajya Sabha 
2. Dr. Sonal Mansingh  
3. Shri A. A. Rahim 
4. Dr. C. M. Ramesh 
5. Shri Vinay Dinu Tendulkar 
 
Lok Sabha 
6. Shri Anto Antony  
7. Shri Rahul Kaswan 
8. Shri Chhedi Paswan 
9. Shri Tirath Singh Rawat 
10. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
11. Shri Manoj Kumar Tiwari 
12. Shri Krupal Balaji Tumane 
 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Sumant Narain, Joint Secretary & Financial Advisor 
Shri Swarabji B., Director 
Shrimati Monica Baa, Additional Director 
Shrimati Subha Chandrashekar, Deputy Secretary  
Shri Ranajit Chakraborty, Under Secretary  
  
WITNESSES 
 
xxxx  xxxx  xxxx   
(The witnesses then withdrew) 
(The Committee re-assembled after lunch break) 
______________________ 
*Relates to other matters 

145 
 
WITNESSES 
Ministry of Culture (MoC) 
 Shri Govind Mohan, Secretary 
 Ms. V. Vidyavathi, Director General, Archaeological Survey of India 
     (Complete list of witnesses who attended the meeting is attached as Annexure)  
  
15.         The Chairman welcomed the Secretary, Ministry of Culture, Di rector General, ASI, and 
other senior officers of the Ministry to the meeting to deliberate on the Demands for Grants of 
the Ministry of Culture for the year 2023 -24. He asked the Ministry to apprise the Committee 
about the performance of its various schemes in financial and physical terms. Noting the nominal 
increase in the budgetary allocations for B.E. 2023 -24 in comparison to the previous year, 
he inter alia sought to know: 
 plans to achieve targets under the focus areas; 
 progress made in finalization of security policy for all Centrally Protected Monuments; 
 roadmap for using the G20 Summit as a platform for promotion of Indian Culture; and 
 utilization of available allocation in the ongoing Financial Year. 
16. The Secretary highlighted the vision of the M inistry for the Amrit Kaal period  i.e., the 
next 25 years. The roadmap to achieve this vision is to leverage technology to broaden access to 
arts and culture.  He apprised the Committee about the major achievements of various divisions 
of his Ministry. Unde r the ‘Azadi Ka Amrit Mahotsav’ (AKAM) celebrations, more than 1.25 
lakh programmes have been done in India and abroad. The Museum Division completed the 
work on PM Sangrahalaya last year. The Akademis Division conducted various 
programmes. These include I nternational Literary Festival ‘ Unmesha’, International Dance 
Festival ‘Amritam Gamaya’ and Festival of unsung performers ‘Jyotirgamaya’. 
17. The Secretary informed the Committee that the Ministry has brought back 229 antiquities 
to India since 2014. The Ministry will bring 300 more antiquities from New York. UNESCO has 
added three new Indian sites to its World Heritage Tentative List in the last year. These are 
Lepakshi Temple, Living Bridges of Meghalaya and rock paintings found along Konkan Coast. 
Under the Har Ghar Tiranga program, citizens hoisted about 23 crore flags across India. 
18. The Ministry highlighted that as part of the G20 Summit, it will conduct four theme -
based exhibitions at the four venues of Cultural Working Group meetings across India. The 
Ministry will curate a G20 Digital Museum by creating a digital walkway of artefacts from all 
the G20 countries.  

146 
19. The Secretary highlighted that the Ministry has been allocated Rs. 3,400 crores at the 
B.E. 2023 -24 stage. The budget expenditure of t he Ministry is about 95 -97 percent of the 
allocation in the last two years. It has spent about 75 percent of the allocation till mid -February 
this year. On a query regarding lack of allocation under the Head 'Capital', the Secretary 
informed that expenditure done by autonomous bodies is classified as revenue expenditure even 
though many of these bodies spend money for capital works. The total amount spent on capital 
purposes is around Rs. 750 crores during 2022-23. 
20. Members raised various queries regarding:- 
 high level of vacancies in various organizations; 
 absence of CCTV cameras and adequate staff for protection of monuments and 
artefacts; 
 objections by ASI in celebration of festivals at Tambdi Surla Mahadev Temple, Goa; 
 need for renovation, promotion and better tourist facilities at various ASI monuments, 
temples and forts in Kerala; 
 need for review and reorganization of Centre For Cultural Resources And Training; 
 lack of focus on commemoration and celebration of female freedom fighters; 
 creation of mobile platforms for classical dancers for Republic Day Parade; 
 status of various programmes such as National Mission on Cultural Mapping, Project 
Mausam, Mera Gaon Meri Dharohar, etc.; 
 need for increased focus on restoration of temples, forts, etc.; 
 seeking participation of local communities for maintenance of historical sites, temples 
etc. in Uttarakhand such as Mahasu Temple, Hanol; Gopeshwar Temple, Chamoli; 
Lakha Mandal Shiv Temple and so on; 
 delays in disbursal of salary to workers in Uttarakhand; 
 attracting higher footfall at museums and improving facilities thereat; 
 need for financial assistance to the families of heritage village Aranmula, Kerala; 
 slow pace of documentation of antiquities under National Mission on Monuments and 
Antiquities; 
 need for National Culture Policy; 
 examining the viability of replicating the Statue of Unity model in other States; and 
 establishment of a National Culture University with headquarters at Delhi and each 
State having one Culture College affiliated to it. 
21. The repre sentatives of the Ministry and its organizations responded to some of the 
queries raised by the Members and took note of the suggestions made by the Members. 

147 
22. The Chairman directed that written replies to the points which had not been answered 
may be sent within a week. 
(The witnesses then withdrew) 
 
23. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept. 
24. The meeting adjourned at 5:57 P.M. 
 
New Delhi,                                                    Swarabji B. 
15th February, 2023                                                                                                Director 
*** 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

148 
Annexure 
LIST OF WITNESSES WHO APPEARED BEFORE THE DEPARTMENT-
RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, 
TOURISM AND CULTURE 
 
3:00 P.M. 
Ministry of Culture 
S. No. Name of the Officer Designation 
1.  Shri Govind Mohan Secretary 
2.  Ms. Ranjana Chopra Additional Secretary & Financial Advisor 
3.  Ms. V. Vidyavathi Director General, ASI 
4.  Ms. Mugda Sinha Joint Secretary 
5.  Ms. Amita Prasad Sarbhai Joint Secretary 
6.  Ms. Sanjukta Mudgal Joint Secretary 
7.  Ms. Lily Pandeya Joint Secretary 
8.  Shri Gurmeet Singh Chawla Joint Secretary 
9.  Shri Bhaskar Verma Member Secretary, National Monuments Authority 
10.  Shri Harish Kumar Director 
11.  Ms. Priyanka Chandra Director 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

149 
MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED 
PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM & 
CULTURE (2022-23) 
XIII 
THIRTEENTH MEETING 
  
The Committee met at 2:30 P.M. on Monday, the 6th March, 2023 in Committee Room 
A, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe Building, New Delhi. 
  
Members present: 
1. Shri V. Vijayasai Reddy             -             Chairman  
 Rajya Sabha 
2. Shri A. A. Rahim 
3. Shri Vinay Dinu Tendulkar 
  
Lok Sabha 
4.  Shri Anto Antony 
5.  Shri Ram Margani Bharat 
6.  Shri Rahul Kaswan 
7.  Shri Ramesh Chandra Majhi 
8.  Shri Sunil Baburao Mendhe 
9.  Shri Chhedi Paswan 
10.  Shri Prince Raj 
11.  Shri Tirath Singh Rawat 
12.  Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
13.  Shri Manoj Kumar Tiwari 
  
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Sumant Narain, Joint Secretary  
Shri Swarabji B., Director 
Shrimati Monica Baa, Additional Director  
Shrimati Subha Chandrashekar, Deputy Secretary  
Shri Ranajit Chakraborty, Under Secretary 
                         
2. At the outset, the Chairman extended a warm welcome to the Members of the 
Committee. He informed the Members that the Commi ttee has been conferred the Sansad 
Ratna Award, 2023. He stated that the award belongs to all the Members of the Committee 
and its Chairpersons, both former and present. He also appreciated the contribution made by 
the officers and staff of the Secretariat  in facilitating the Committee in conducting its 
meetings and preparing its Reports.   
3. The Chairman further informed that the Demands for Grants of the Ministries of 
Tourism and Culture have been selected for discussion and voting in Lok Sabha during the 
second part of the current Budget Session.  

150 
4. The Committee, thereafter, took up the agenda for the meeting i.e. consideration  and 
adoption of the following draft Reports: 
i. xxx    xxx    xxx; 
ii. Draft Report on Demands for Grants (2023-24) of Ministry of Culture; 
iii. xxx    xxx    xxx; 
iv. xxx    xxx    xxx; and 
v. xxx    xxx    xxx. 
5.         The Committee considered the aforesaid draft Reports. The Committee discussed each 
report in detail and adopted all the reports with minor  modifications. The 
Committee authorized the Chairman to carry out the changes suggested by the Members and 
minor errors of typographical and factual nature and formatting in all the Reports.   
6.         The Committee authorized the Chairman, Shri V. Vijayasai Reddy and in his absence, 
Shri A. A. R ahim, M.P., to present the abovementioned Reports in Rajya Sabha on 13 th 
March, 2023. The Committee also authorized Shri Rahul Kaswan, M.P. and in his absence, 
Shri Ram Margani Bharat, M.P. to lay the Reports on the Table of Lok Sabha on the same 
date. 
7.         The meeting adjourned at 4:25 PM. 
                                                                                                                                       
New Delhi,                            Swarabji B. 
 6th March, 2023           Director 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
______________________ 
*Relates to other matters 