 
 
       
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
December, 2023 / Agrahayana, 1945 (Saka) 
 
  
REPORT NO. 
361
_ 
THREE HUNDRED SIXTY FIRST REPORT  
Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/ 
Observations of the Committee contained in its Three Hundred 
Twenty-Fifth Report on the subject “Issues relating to Road 
Sector”  
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on         08th December, 2023) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on       08th December, 2023) 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Website:     https://rajyasabha.nic.in  
 E-mail:     rsc-tt@sansad.nic.in 
 

 
 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT,  
TOURISM AND CULTURE 
 
 
THREE HUNDRED SIXTY FIRST REPORT  
Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/ 
Observations of the Committee contained in its Three Hundred 
Twenty-Fifth Report on the subject “Issues relating to Road 
Sector”  
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on        08th December, 2023) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on       08th December, 2023) 
 
 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
December, 2023 / Agrahayana, 1945 (Saka) 
 
Hindi version of this publication is also available 

 
 
 
C O N T E N T S 
 
P A G E S 
 
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE      i 
2. INTRODUCTION        ii 
3. ACRONYMS                iii-iv 
 4. REPORT                                1-46 
5. RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS-AT A GLANCE   47-50   
    6. *MINUTES   
 
         
        
        
      
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
______________________________________ 
 
*To be appended
51-53

i 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE  
 (2023-24) 
 
 (Constituted on 13th September, 2023) 
 
1. Shri V. Vijayasai Reddy  - Chairman 
 
 Rajya Sabha 
2. Shri Mohammed Nadimul Haque 
3. Shrimati S. Phangnon Konyak 
4. Shri Manas Ranjan Mangaraj 
5. Dr. Sonal Mansingh 
6. Shrimati Rajani Ashokrao Patil 
7. Shri A. A. Rahim 
8. Dr. C. M. Ramesh 
9. Shri Zala Kesridevsinhji* 
10. Shri Surendra Singh Nagar* 
 
  Lok Sabha 
11.  Shri Anto Antony 
12.  Shri Ram Margani Bharat 
13.  Shri Tapir Gao  
14.  Shri Rahul Kaswan 
15.  Shri Ramesh Chandra Majhi 
16.  Shri Sunil Baburao Mendhe 
17.  Shri K. Muraleedharan 
18.  Shri S. S.Palanimanickam  
19.  Shri Chhedi Paswan   
20.  Shri Kamlesh Paswan  
21.  Shri Sunil Kumar Pintu 
22.  Shri Prince Raj 
23.  Shri Tirath Singh Rawat 
24.  Shrimati Mala Roy 
25.  Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
26.  Shri Dushyant Singh 
27.  Shri Rajbahadur Singh 
28.  Shri Ramdas Chandrabhanji Tadas 
29.  Shri Manoj Kumar Tiwari 
30.  Shri Krupal Balaji Tumane 
31. Shri Dinesh Lal Yadav "Nirahua"  
 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri D. S. Prasanna Kumar, Joint Secretary 
Shrimati Monica Baa, Director 
Shrimati Subha Chandrashekar, Deputy Secretary  
Shri Ranajit Chakraborty, Deputy Secretary 
Shri Raj Kamal Singh, Committee Officer 
 
_____________________________________________________________________ 
*Nominated as Member w.e.f. 26th September, 2023 

ii 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairman, Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport, 
Tourism and Culture, having been authorized by the Committee to present on its behalf, do 
hereby present this  Three Hundred Sixty First Report on the Action Taken by the 
Government on the recommendations/ observations of the Committee contained in its Three 
Hundred Twenty-Fifth Report on the subject “Issues relating to Road Sector”. 
2. The Three Hundred Twenty -Fifth Report of the Department -related Parliamentary 
Standing Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture was presented to the Hon’ble 
Chairman, Rajya Sabha on 15 th June, 2022 and thereafter was presented to the Parliament on 
the 8th December, 2022. 
3.  The Action Taken Replies on the recommendations of the Committee contained in its 
Three Hundred Twenty-Fifth Report were received from the Ministry of Road Transport and 
Highways on 11th August, 2023. 
4. The Committee considered and adopted the Report in i ts meeting held on the  6th 
December, 2023.   
 
 
(V. Vijayasai Reddy) 
NEW DELHI;                                                           Chairman, 
December 06, 2023                                                 Department-related Parliamentary Standing            
Agrahayana 15, 1945 (Saka)                            Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture, 
                                                                                                                                 Rajya Sabha 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

iii 
 
 
ACRONYMS 
ABS Anti-Lock Braking System 
ANPR Automatic Number Plate Recognition 
APUIAML  Andhra Pradesh Urban Infrastructure Asset Management Limited 
ATSs Automatic Transfer Switch 
BIS Bureau of Indian Standards 
BOT Build-Operate-Transfer 
CCIE Conciliation Committee of Independent Experts 
CD Cross - Drainage 
CRRI Central Road Research Institute 
DLP Defect Liability Period 
DPR Detailed Project Report 
DTCs Driving Training Centres 
e-DAR electronic Detailed Accident Report 
EPC Engineering, Procurement and Construction 
ETC Electronic Toll Collection 
FoB Foot Over Bridges 
GQ Golden Quadrilateral 
HAM Hybrid Annuity Model 
IAHE Indian Academy of Highway Engineers 
ICT Information, Communication and Technology 
IDTRs Institute of Driving Training & Research 
IMS Incident Management Services 
IRC Indian Roads Congress 
KPIs Key Performance Indicators 
M&R Maintenance and Repair 
MCA Ministry of Corporate Affairs 
MDR Master Document Register 
MIS Management Information System 
MIVs Mobile Inspection Vans 
MoRTH Ministry of Road Transport and Highways 
MoU Memorandum of understanding 
MQCVs Mobile Quality Control Vans 
MSA Million Standard Axle 
NDT Non-Destructive Testing 
NEP New Education Policy 
NGOs Non Government Organisations 
NH National Highway 

iv 
 
NHAI National Highways Authority of India 
NHIDCL National Highways Infrastructure Development Corporation Ltd. 
NHLML National Highways Logistics Management Limited 
NSV Network Survey Vehicle 
O&M Operations and Maintenance 
ODR Online Dispute Resolution 
PBMC Performance based Maintenance Contract 
PMG Project Monitoring Group 
PSW Pedestrian Subways 
PUP Pedestrian underpasses 
PWD Public Works Department 
R&D Research and Development 
RAMS Road Asset and Management System 
RDTCs Regional Driving Training Centres 
RFP Request for Proposal 
RSA Road Safety Audit 
RSO Road Safety Officer 
RVSF Registered Vehicles Scrapping Facility 
SBR Seat Belt Reminder 
SRD&Q Standards, Research and Development & Quality 
TEC Telecommunication Engineering Centre 
TSRTC Telangana State Road Transport Corporation 
VLT Vehicle Location Tracking 
WIM Weigh In Machine 
WSA Work Scope Agreement 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

1 
 
  REPORT  
The Report of the Department -related Parliamentary Standing Committee on 
Transport, Tourism and Culture deals with the Action Taken by the Ministry of Road, 
Transport and Highways  on the recommendations/observations as contained in its Three 
Hundred Twenty Fifth Report on „Issues Relating to Road Sector‟ which was presented to 
both the Houses of Parliament on 8th December, 2022.   
2.      The Action Taken Replies were received from  the Ministry on 11 th August, 2023 in 
respect of all the observations/ recommendations contained in the Report. The replies have 
been categorized as follows:- 
Chapter-I: 
Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the Ministry: 
Paragraph Nos.: 9, 10, 28, 32, 35, 37, 41, 46, 48, 52, 54, 56, 58, 62, 63, 68, 84, 86, 
89 and 90. 
Total: 20 
  
Chapter-II: 
Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue in 
view of the replies of the Ministry: 
Paragraph Nos.: 11, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 26, 31, 33, 34, 59, 64, 67, 72, 73, 74, 77, 79, 
82, 85 and 88. 
Total: 21 
 
Chapter-III: 
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Ministry have not 
been accepted by the Committee: 
Paragraph Nos.: 12, 23, 25, 36, 38, 39, 40, 44, 45, 53, 55, 80 and 92. 
Total: 13 
  
Chapter-IV: 
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which the final replies of the Ministry 
are still awaited: 
Paragraph Nos.: Nil 
Total: 0 
 
3. The Committee desires that final reply in  respect of the recommendation/observation 
which has been categorized as interim reply by the Committee should be furnished at 
the earliest. 
 

2 
 
CHAPTER-I 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY 
THE MINISTRY 
Review of awarded/ongoing projects 
Recommendation/Observation 
1. The Committee takes note of the ongoing NH projects in the States of Andhra 
Pradesh, Telangana, Bihar and Maharashtra and the various steps being taken by the 
Ministry to minimize delays in execution of the ongoing projects. The Committee 
recommends that all the ongoing NH projects may be monitored closely, the onset of any 
sort of deviation from the scheduled timeline for a NH project may immediately be looked 
into and necessary remedial action may be taken at the e arliest so as to avoid significant 
time and cost overruns. 
(Para 9) 
Reply of the Ministry 
1.1 All ongoing NH projects are monitored at different levels of Central and State 
Government apart from regular monitoring and supervision by executing agencies. Del ayed 
Projects are reviewed by Ministry with the executing agencies. Necessary actions as 
appropriate are taken to address the deviation from the scheduled completion period due to 
various site related issues. Moreover, the executing agencies of the Ministr y are directed to 
monitor the progress of the work closely and take urgent necessary action to resolve the issues 
hampering the progress of the projects. Further, the issues hampering the progress of the 
projects are also uploaded on PMG Portal  & these iss ues are reviewed by Secretary 
(Coordination), Cabinet Secretariat from time to time. The recommendation of the committee 
is noted for scrupulous compliance. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
2. The Committee recommends that due provisions for underpasses or flyover should 
be included at the DPR stage itself for all NH projects, for uninterrupted flow of both 
pedestrian and vehicular traffic for every village/town near the highway as well as on 
accident-prone junctions, to minimize accidents. 
   (Para 10) 
Reply of the Ministry 
2.1 The requirements of underpasses/flyovers are duly assessed during the preparation of 
DPR as per IRC guidelines/site requirements in consultation with stakeholders such as 
villagers/locals/public representatives/ local authorities etc. Further, additional crossing 
facilities, wherever required as per relevant IRC standards and site conditions are also 
provided even during the construction, Operation & Maintenance phase. Moreover, provisions 

3 
 
for grade separated structures such as flyovers / under passes/ over passes are invariably made 
as per IRC guidelines while preparing DPR for improvement and up-gradation of NHs. 
2.2 Steps are taken to conduct Pedestrian movement counts along/across the Highways 
invariably during preparation of DP Rs and based on the pedestrian volume count, required 
facilities are mentioned both in the DPRs and Technical Schedules. Accordingly, Foot Over 
Bridges (FoB), Pedestrian underpasses (PUP) and Pedestrian Subways (PSW) are constructed 
to ensure reduction in accidents involving pedestrians.  
2.3 The recommendations of the committee have been noted. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
3. The Committee notes that bituminous roads (flexible pavements) are common in use 
in India since it is relatively cheaper as compared to concrete roads. It is possible to 
construct relatively thin bituminous layers over existing pavements therefore the road can 
be strengthened by constructing bituminous pavement layers one after the other in stages in 
a certain period of time unlike the cement concrete or rigid pavement construction. Cement 
concrete pavement has a high initial investment but has excellent riding surface and longer 
life of 20 or so years in contrast with bitumen roads which have an average lifespan of 4 -5 
years. Cement con crete roads are prevalent in most developed nations. In India, Mumbai 
has switched to concrete roads. Flexible pavement failures are characterised by formation 
of potholes, ruts, cracks and localised depressions while the main defect developed in rigid 
pavements is structural cracks. Very little maintenance like maintenance of joints only is 
required in cement concrete roads. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the 
Ministry may carefully analyze the cost -benefit analysis of the bituminous roads and 
cement concrete roads. The Committee feels that the road condition often witnessed on 
National Highways points to the need for a holistic review of the policy for evaluation of 
materials to be used in order to ensure that best possible materials are being us ed and the 
National Highways being constructed are of best possible quality. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends that the Ministry may take necessary steps to ensure that the choice 
of construction material used is made by factoring into account all long-term pros and cons 
of choosing one material over the other, given the specific needs of the particular NH 
project. 
(Para 28) 
Reply of the Ministry 
3.1 Type of pavement (flexible/rigid) is decided during DPR preparation based on the life 
cycle cost analysis of both flexible and rigid pavement options. 
3.2 The recommendation of the committee has been noted. 
 
 
 

4 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
4. The Committee further recommends that a robust database may be maintained 
recording important details relating to all fatal accidents taking place on National 
Highways across the country and the information obtained may be analyzed to identify 
patterns pointing to possible faults in road and vehicle engineering. Provisions may be 
made for a third -party survey of the stret ch of NH where a fatal accident takes place, that 
may be carried out immediately after such an accident, to assess the state of 
implementation of road safety provisions such as signages, street light, road quality etc. 
prescribed for that particular stretc h. The survey would help find the reasons behind the 
lapse in road safety provisions, if any, on the NH stretch and accountability may be placed 
on the concerned officials and/or road contractors for any lapses. Inferences derived from 
such surveys can be utilized to find gaps in the existing road safety provisions on NHs 
which can be plugged to ensure that upcoming National Highways across the country are 
as safe as possible, with special focus on road safety from the DPR stage itself. 
(Para 32) 
Reply of the Ministry 
4.1 The electronic Detailed Accident Report (e -DAR) Project has been initiated to 
establish a central repository for reporting, management and analysis of road accidents data 
across the Country. Road safety has been made an integral part of roa d design at planning 
stage. RSA of all National Highways (NHs) has been made mandatory through third party 
auditors/ experts at all stages i.e. design, construction, operation and maintenance etc. 
Measures such as lighting/illumination at vulnerable locati ons/intersections of NHs with 
SH/MDR/ODR/Village roads have been taken for improving road safety and avoiding 
accidents during the night, in addition to locations mentioned in IRC Manual. Also Pedestrian 
Markings at median openings and junctions, Footpaths /Walkways constructed in 
Urban/inhabited areas, and Street lighting in inhabited section of NHs have been 
made. Physical Traffic Calming measures are being undertaken by State police at 
vulnerable/critical locations (including NHs) through barricading.  However, the 
recommendation of the committee has been noted for compliance. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
5. Moreover, MoRTH has requested Ministry of Education, which is formulating and 
implementing New Education Policy (NEP), 2020 to incorporate the aspects of road safety 
in the curriculum for students of both primary and secondary standards. The Committee 
recommends that the Ministry may analyze the road safety provisions on highways in 
developed countries where the accident rates are much lower than that of  India‟s National 
Highways. A foolproof inspection and monitoring mechanism may be set in place to ensure 
that road safety provisions prescribed for the National Highways are strictly implemented 
as per the guidelines and rules in this regard. 
(Para 35) 

5 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
5.1 Ministry has initiated electronic Detailed Accident Report (e -DAR) Project to 
establish a central repository for reporting, management and analysis of road accidents data 
across the Country. Road Safety Officer (RSO) has been desi gnated at each Regional Office 
of road owning agencies under the Ministry to look after RSA, black spot rectification and 
other road safety related works. Moreover, Ministry has issued several guidelines through the 
following circulars towards ensuring implementation of road safety provisions for NHs:- 
(i) Ministry vide letter No.  RW/NH-29012/01/2022-RSCE dated 13.02.2023 issued 
guidelines for Road Safety Action Plan for Road Engineering interventions on 
National Highways and submission of Monthly ATR.  
(ii) Ministry vide letter No.  RW/NH-29011/01/2021-S&R (P&B) RSCE dated 9 th Sept 
2021 has also issued guidelines for Taking advance action for removal of accident 
spots on NHs as per Police reports without waiting for converting them into black 
spots after accidents/fatalities. 
(iii)Ministry vide letter No.  RW/NH•29011/01/2020•S&R(P&B)-RSCE (pt) dated 11.12. 
2020 has issued guidelines for Identification of Road Safety issues during inspection, 
travelling of on NH and State Highways. 
(iv) Ministry vide letter No. RW/NH-29011 /01/2020-S&R(P&B) dated 09.11. 2020 has 
issued guidelines for all stage Road Safety Audit through Independent Road Safety 
Expert of Independent Engineer/Authority Engineer and/or Road Safety Experts 
engaged by Authority (Ministry/NHAI/PWD). 
(v) Ministry vide letter No.  RW-NH-29011 /08/2019 -S&R(P&B) dated 26.08.2019 has 
issued guidelines for Rectification of Accident Black Spot Preparation of proposal 
and sanction approval regarding on 26.08.2019. 
(vi) Ministry vide OM no. RW/NH-29011/2/2015/P&M (RSCE) dated 07.12.2015 issued 
on “Preparation and submission of proposals for rectification of identified road 
accident black spots on National Highways”. 
5.2 The recommendation of the committee has been noted. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
6. The Committee also strongly recommends that the Ministry may thoroughly assess 
the requirements for ambulances on the NH network across the country and arrange for 
the same in coordination with the concerned agencies so as to enable quality care to 
accident victims during the golden hour. Availability of ambulances may especially be 
ensured near accident -prone sites and black spots. The Ministry/NHAI may spread 
awareness regarding the helpline number to avail urgent medical assistance in case of 
road accidents, through suitable means. 
(Para 37) 
 

6 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
6.1 NHAI is in the process of finalizing bids for providing Ambulances at public funded 
toll plazas across the country.   Till date 300 Ambulances have been deployed.    On the basis 
of further assessment, more Ambulances shall be provided.   The recommendation of the 
committee has been noted. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
7. The Committee recommends that helicopter landing facilities should be developed 
at toll plazas across the country at a certain defined distance, so as to enable urgent 
medical assistance to accident victims. 
(Para 41) 
Reply of the Ministry 
7.1 NHAI/NHLML is developing Wayside Amenities across National Highways & 
Expressways wherein few WSA sites in Delhi -Mumbai Expressway, Trans Rajasthan & 
Trans Haryana has the infrastructure provision for Helicopter landing facilities. The 
recommendation of the committee has been noted for implementation as per feasibility. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
8. The Committee further r ecommends that the Ministry may onboard the State 
Government Departments concerned, to utilize the Blackspot MIS   portal as well   so that 
the State Departments can develop a similar system of identification, data collection and 
rectification of black spots on NHs maintained by PWDs, State Highways and other district 
roads. 
(Para 46) 
Reply of the Ministry 
8.1 The recommendation of the committee is Noted.  
 
Recommendation/Observation 
9. The Committee hopes that the road safety audit training programme being taken up 
by NHAI suffices to meet the requirement of road safety auditors in the country. The 
Committee recommends that NHAI may outsource any interim requirements for road 
safety auditors as road safety audits play a crucial role in ensuring safety provis ions on 
NHs across the country and dearth of human resources cannot be an excuse to delay the 
audits. 
(Para 48) 
 

7 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
9.1 Ministry has recently initiated mandatory 15 days Road Safety Audit (RSA) training 
program for all officers of the Mi nistry and its executing agencies upto the level of 
Superintending Engineers or equivalent. Also, NHAI has empanelled 94 teams of Road 
Safety Auditors (RSA) for carrying out 3 rd party Road Safety Audit of National Highways. 
IAHE has trained 324 Road Safety Auditors and certified them (through six weeks course + 2 
weeks course put together). The recommendation of the committee has been noted for 
compliance. 
 
Encroachment of NHs and the issue of stray cattle/wildlife 
Recommendation/Observation 
10. The Committee feels that the issue of stray cattle and animals on National 
Highways is very serious and often causes fatal road accidents. The Committee notes that 
special corridors for the movement of wildlife/cattle, if required, is envisioned by the 
Ministry at the DPR stage itself and in case certain specific locations develop into black 
spots due to repeated incidents, fencing/boundary wall is planned for rectification of the 
black spots. The Committee is dismayed to note that provisions for fencing/bounda ry wall 
to prevent wildlife/cattle is planned after several incidents of fatal accidents on a particular 
stretch cause it to become a black spot. There should be some mechanism to monitor the 
frequency of incidents of wildlife/ cattle straying on roads eve n when the same has not 
caused any fatal accident yet, and proactive steps may be taken to curb the same. Necessary 
action may be taken to coordinate with local law enforcement or concerned agencies to 
impose a penalty on cattle/animal -rearers for letting out their animals on National 
Highways. 
(Para 52)   
Reply of the Ministry 
10.1 IRC guidelines provide for construction of pedestrian /cattle under passes as grade 
separated structure for movement of cattles/animals. As regards, construction of underpass/ 
overpass for movement of wildlife, grade separated structure are constructed as per size 
specified by State forest department. Crash barriers are also provided at selected sections on 
both sides of median to prevent entry of cattle to median for grazing.  However, the 
recommendation of the committee has been noted for compliance. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
11. The Committee recommends that the Ministry/NHAI may take a serious look into 
the issue of encroachment of service roads by local markets and create an effective policy 
in order to curb the same, which may be implemented in coordination with concerned 
agencies. 
(Para 54) 

8 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
11.1 Ministry has issued guidelines designating officers of Ministry/NHAI/NHIDCL as 
Highway Administrator for dealing with the issue of encroachments of NHs. The Highway 
Administrator shall take necessary action in coordination with State Government for 
preventing and curbing the issues of encroachments of NHs.  
 
Recommendation/Observation 
12. The Committee feels that the Ministry/NHAI should work on controlling access to 
National Highways to the extent possible, since doing so allows vehicles to travel at faster 
speeds, with lesser chances of accidents as merging traffic is controlled at entry points. 
The Committee recommends that the Ministry may examine the feasibility of raising the 
height of National Highways to generally control uncontrolled free access to the NHs. 
The Committee feels that this could lower the incidents of stray cattle/wildlife roaming on 
the NHs as well. 
(Para 56) 
Reply of the Ministry 
12.1 Expressway and 6 -lane NHs are fully access controlled and partially access 
controlled. On 4 -lane and 2-lane NH Stretches with paved shoulders, access from cross 
roads/abutting properties is provided with the help of grade separated structure/at grade 
junction/acceleration lane depending upon the traffic considerations. Raising the height of 
National Highw ays to make NH access control will have huge financial implication and 
may not be sustainable in the long run. However, the recommendation of the committee has 
been noted. 
 
Speed Breakers 
Recommendation/Observation 
13. The Committee notes that the standards for construction of speed breakers are 
contained in IRC Code No. IRC:  99-1988 “Tentative guidelines on the provision of speed 
breakers for control of vehicular speeds on minor roads”. Since the aforementioned 
tentative guidelines had been publish ed decades ago, the Committee would like to know 
whether any steps have been taken by the Ministry/IRC to frame new guidelines for the 
provision of speed breakers on National Highways in light of new construction 
technologies and relevant data/studies in t his regard. The Committee is of the strong view 
that all codes/guidelines prescribed for the construction of National Highways and 
provisions relating thereto, should be periodically reviewed and necessary revisions must 
be made from time to time to make t he most of modern technologies and developments in 
the road sector.            
                                                                                                                           (Para 58)          
 

9 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
13.1 IRC: 99  “Guidelines for traffic claiming measures in urban and rural areas”   has been 
revised in 2018 which has provisions of different types of speed breakers/humps, rumble 
strip, transverse bar marking, speed table, raised intersection as traffic claiming me asures. 
However, the recommendation of the committee has been noted for compliance. 
 
Service Roads 
Recommendation/Observation 
14. Given the crucial role of service roads in improving road safety on the NH network, 
the Committee reiterates its following recommendation made in para 117 of its 317th 
Report on DFG (2022-23) of the Ministry of Road Transport and Highways: 
The Committee observes that the lack of service roads alongside National Highways 
causes inconvenience to local residents and is, at times,  the cause of road accidents. The 
land required for development of National Highways is acquired from the local people 
and they should be given the benefits of service roads along National Highways. The 
Committee feels that service roads are an integral pa rt of National Highways and 
therefore, recommends that the Ministry may make it mandatory to have service roads 
along NHs to the extent possible and provisions for the same may be included in the 
tender document for NH projects. 
(Para 62) 
Reply of the Ministry  
14.1 The requirement of Service Road along National Highways is broadly specified in 
IRC:SP:15 "Ribbon Development along Highways and its Prevention”. The concept of 
service roads is to limit the access to the main highway while simultaneously me eting the 
demands of the abutting land owners for ingress and egress. Thus, service roads are 
provided in urban/inhabitated sections along National Highways where ribbon development 
have already taken place to segregate the local traffic from long distance  traffic. Such 
service roads also prevent the congestion caused on the main highway due to purely local 
traffic and at the same time reduce the number of intersections which cause traffic hazards 
and reduce the capacity. Accordingly, the requirements of se rvice roads are assessed at 
DPR stage. Additional service roads are also provided on demand of villagers/locals/public 
representatives/ local authorities during construction and Operation & Maintenance phase 
of National Highways as per feasibility and viability. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
15. The Committee further recommends that the Ministry/NHAI may ensure that the 
quality of service roads is as good as the main National Highway especially in terms of 
load capacity as heavy vehicles plying on the NHs also use the service roads at times. 

10 
 
Special budgetary allocation may be made to ensure the provision of service roads 
alongside NHs, to the extent possible, at the DPR stage itself. 
(Para 63) 
Reply of the Ministry  
15.1 Service roads are designed for a minimum 10 MSA traffic as per IRC guidelines . 
However, wherever the actual traffic is higher, the pavement is designed for higher MSA 
and the crust composition is provided accordingly. Requirements of service roads are 
assessed as per IRC guidelines as well as site conditions during preparation of D PR and 
provisions for the same are allowed in the sanctioned estimate. However, the 
recommendation of the committee has been noted for compliance. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
16. The Committee notes that the majority of Indian roads face the most damage 
during the monsoon season.    Water logging in bitumen roads leads to potholes due to 
the eroding of the asphalt layer. To prevent water damage, most Indian roads do have a 
Camber which is the slope provided to the road surface to drain off water but lack s torm 
water drains which take the water which is drained to the side by a Camber and carry it 
off to a water body. Without drainage, a road will suffer during a monsoon even if it is 
well-constructed. In Tamil Nadu, rainwater harvesting was made compulsory some years 
back and since then there is less damage to the roads. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that drainage provisions should be made mandatory at the DPR stage itself, 
especially for NH projects in high -rainfall regions. The Committee further rec ommends 
that the Ministry may carry out thorough research in this regard in collaboration with 
expert research bodies and review its existing codes/guidelines, if any, for drainage 
provisions on NHs, based on the outcomes of the research. 
(Para 68) 
Reply of the Ministry  
16.1 Drainage study is included in the scope of DPR consultancy services and provisions 
for surface and subsurface drainages are taken in the scope of project as road side drains 
and CD works at DPR stage. NHAI has recently included draina ge expert as part of 
personnel of the consultant in the RFP for DPR Consultancy services so that drainage 
requirements are well addressed. Further, NHAI vide circular no. 18.48 dated 08.07.2020 
issued guidelines on drainage system adequacy & effectiveness which is already under 
implementation. However, the recommendation of the committee has been noted for 
compliance. 
 
 
 

11 
 
Overloaded Trucks 
Recommendation/Observation 
17. The Committee recommends that the Ministry may undertake a systematic study of 
the damage caused by overloaded trucks on National Highways and the negative impact of 
the same on the longevity and safety of the highways. 
(Para 84)  
Reply of the Ministry  
17.1 Ministry is aware of the adverse impact on the NH network on account of 
overloading. However, effect of overloading is considered in pavement design by a factor 
called vehicle damage factor which is determined based on axle l oad survey. However, the 
recommendation of the committee has been noted for compliance. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
18. The Committee recommends that the Ministry may explore the possibilities of 
reforming the provisions to charge toll on the basis of weight of the vehicles, instead of 
axle-based toll collection. The Committee feels that the implementation of weigh -in motion 
system to issue automated challans/ penalty would eliminate the possible collusion of 
corrupt officials with the heavy vehicle owners and help curb the menace of overloading. 
(Para 86) 
Reply of the Ministry  
18.1 Noted. 
 
Miscellaneous Recommendations 
Road Connectivity to Tourist Destinations  
Recommendation/Observation 
19. The Committee feels that robust road connectivity to tourist destinations is one of 
the prerequisites to developing the country as a tourism hub. In view of this, the Committee 
strongly recommends that the Ministry may allocate special budgetary provisions for the 
purpose of improving National Highway connectivity to important tourist places across the 
country, seeking requirements for such projects from the Union Ministry of Tou rism as 
well as State Tourism Departments. 
(Para 89)     
Reply of the Ministry  
19.1 MoRT&H is responsible for development and maintenance of National Highways 
(NHs). In many cases, identified State Roads are declared as NHs based on 11 point criteria 
which includes connectivity to important tourist destinations as one of the parameters.   

12 
 
19.2 Important tourist destinations are identified in different States and connectivity of 
those with NHs for identifying connectivity of these through NHs.   Other facilities like Way 
Side Amenities, Road side/median plantations/beautification, adequate signage s etc., are 
being provided on the NHs especially of those connecting the important tourist destinations.   
19.3 The Ministry has received a proposal from Ministry of Tourism in December, 2019 to 
improve road connectivity to 100 important tourist destinatio ns, including UNESCO World 
Heritage Sites, identified iconic sites and destinations with high footfall of tourists. 
Subsequently, Ministry of Tourism requested for prioritizing the road connectivity to 50 of 
these 100 tourist destinations under Phase I.  
19.4 Accordingly, the Ministry is implementing 97 projects of length 3,111 km at a total 
capital cost of Rs. 74,353 Crore to improve connectivity to these prioritized 50 tourist 
destinations under Phase I. These include: 
 35 projects of length 1,209 km have been completed at a total cost of Rs. 15,447 
Crore 
 36 projects of length 980 km are under construction at a total cost of Rs. 35,447 Crore 
 26 projects of length 922 km are yet to be awarded at a total cost of Rs. 23,459 Crore 
Additionally, the Ministry is implementing 98 projects of length 3,727 km at a total 
capital cost of Rs. 63,853 Crore to improve connectivity to remaining 50 tourist 
destinations under Phase II. These include: 
 29 projects of length 1,118 km have been completed at a total cost of Rs. 8,163 Crore 
 46 projects of length 1,677 km are under construction at a total cost of Rs. 36,129 
Crore 
 23 projects of length 931 km are yet to be awarded at a total cost of Rs. 19,561 Crore. 
 
Implementation of Recommendations made by the Committee 
Recommendation/Observation 
20. The Committee recommends that the Ministry may analyze the recommendations/ 
observations made in this Report and executive orders, where possible, may be issued in 
order to implement the same on an urgent basis since doing so  will help improve the state 
of maintenance and quality of NHs and improve road safety. In case implementing some of 
the recommendations made by the Committee requires legislative amendment, 
consultations may be made with the concerned departments and if  necessary, amendment 
of the Acts administered upon by the Ministry may be introduced in the Parliament. 
(Para 90)    
Reply of the Ministry  
20.1 Noted  
 

13 
 
CHAPTER-II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES OF THE MINISTRY 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
1. The Committee further recommends that CCTV cameras may be installed every 
few kilometers at the construction stage of road projects for close monitoring by NHAI 
officers/ engineers and other stakeholders including public representatives (MPs/MLAs). 
Doing so would permit round -the-clock ground -level monitoring of the progress being 
made in ongoing road projects and also inculcate fear amongst wrongdoers. If required, 
the CCTV project may be imp lemented with funds available under the Nirbhaya Scheme. 
The CCTV cameras thus installed can be made a part of the fully constructed road once 
the road project gets completed and can be used to monitor traffic 
movements/accidents/thefts etc. 
(Para 11) 
Reply of the Ministry  
1.1 Noted. There is a provision in the EPC/HAM/BOT contract agreement for video 
recording of project activities during the construction period, covering the status and progress 
of works to be submitted by the contractor/concessionaire to  the authority on quarterly basis.  
Videography of the project activities are to be submitted by the contractor to the supervision 
consultant/Authority‟s Engineer as required under the contract. Also NHAI has empanelled 
10 (ten) drone agencies to carry out  drone videography of under -construction and O&M 
highway projects on periodic basis. As per present policy guidelines, the drone video data are 
collected from projects on monthly basis for under construction projects and bi -annually for 
operations & maintenance projects.  The abridged version of these drone videos captured by 
agencies after due verification are uploaded on Data Lake portal and are made available for 
public view in citizen charter.  
1.2 Regarding CCTV camera on NHs & Expressways, provisions are made for 
instatallation  of Traffic monitoring Camera system in the median or shoulder approximately 
at 1 km intervals such that monitoring of entire route ensured. Nirbhaya scheme is meant for 
development of the vehicle tracking platform for female pa ssenger safety in States / UTs 
which is different from traffic monitoring NHs. 
 
Maintenance & Quality of Road 
Maintenance and Repair (M&R) of Road 
Recommendation/Observation 
2. The Committee takes note of the present mechanism for Maintenance and Repair 
(M&R) of National Highways in India. However, the Committee is deeply concerned to 

14 
 
note that the Ministry/NHAI is managing the maintenance and repair of NHs across the 
country with an allocation of just about 40% of the actual requirements estimated by the 
Ministry. The Committee feels that the shortfall of sufficient budgetary allocation is 
reflected in the sub -par quality of National Highways that is often witnessed across the 
country, especially in Andhra Pradesh, Telangana, Bihar and Maharashtra. Maintena nce 
and Repair of the existing National Highways is of utmost importance in order to keep 
them in a safe, pliable condition and to permit good average traffic speeds. This should be 
given higher priority than construction of new National Highways. In this regard, the 
Committee notes that it has repeatedly recommended a much higher budgetary allocation 
for Maintenance and Repair of National Highways in its previous Reports viz., para 75 of 
317th Report on Demands for Grants (2022 -23) of the Ministry, para 12  of 296th Report on 
„Role of Highways in Nation Building‟, para 45 of 287 th Report on DFG (2021 -22) of the 
Ministry, para 55 of 278 th Report on DFG (2020 -21) of the Ministry, etc. The Committee 
has repeatedly observed that in the „Strategy for New India @ 75‟, NITI Aayog advocates 
that India should begin with earmarking 10 percent of its annual budget for Road and 
Highways for maintenance, to move towards the developed country norm of earmarking 40 
percent to 50 percent of the budget for roads and highways for maintenance. However, 
year-after-year, the actual budgetary allocation made for Maintenance and Repair of 
National Highways remains less than even 4 percent of the annual budget. The Committee, 
therefore, strongly recommends that the Ministry must give  much more priority to M&R of 
NHs across the country, allocate substantially higher budgetary allocation for M&R and 
utilize the same to implement a robust monitoring mechanism to identify and meet the 
M&R requirements on NHs across the country. The Minist ry should be proactive in its 
approach towards M&R of NHs, carrying out well -defined maintenance checks and 
periodic M&R activities on NHs. 
 (Para 17) 
Reply of the Ministry  
2.1 Developed countries have almost completed their required development works and  
accordingly their expenditure is mostly on maintenance of Highways. This results in higher 
percentage of budget allocation towards maintenance activities in developed countries. 
Whereas in India, we are presently focusing on both development and maintenan ce activities. 
National Highways (NHs) are now in a much better condition except for newly declared 
NHs. Also, there are certain maintenance issues on NH stretches where works are in 
progress.  
2.2 Year-wise details of Allocation under budget head of Maintenance and Repair (M&R) 
as compared to effective budgetary demand under M&R and total budgetary support of the 
Ministry as well as actual expenditure incurred by the Ministry on M&R of NHs (including 
actual expenditure incurred by NHAI and NHIDCL) during t he last 5 years are given as 
under: - 
 
  

15 
 
(Amount Rs. in crore) 
Year Total Budgetary 
Support of 
Ministry at RE 
Stage 
RE 
Allocation 
under M&R 
Demand 
under 
M&R 
Actual Expenditure 
under M&R (including 
NHAI and NHIDCL) 
2018-19 78,625 2,531 8,500 4,360 
2019-20 83,016 2,000 6,500 3,446 
2020-21 1,01,823 2,654 5,000 5,941 
2021-22 1,28,149 2,778 5,000 5,158 
2022-23 2,17,027 2,480 2,680 5,600 
  
2.3 Therefore, actual annual expenditure on M&R of NHs since 2020-21 is in the range of 
Rs. 5,000 – 6,000 Crore, including funds being spent for PR / IRQP works from NH(O) under 
Capital head and actual expenditure being incurred by NHAI and NHIDCL for M&R of NHs. 
Thus, there is no under-allocation under M&R head of the Ministry. 
2.4 Further, the Ministry has decided  that from 2023-24 onwards, all maintenance works 
on NHs shall be carried out through Performance based Maintenance Contract (PBMC) / 
Short Term (1 year) Maintenance Contract only. Consequently, all NHs stretches are to be 
invariably covered under ongoing works of development or maintenance or Defect Liability 
Period (DLP), with the responsibility of maintenance of such NH stretches lying with the 
concerned Contractor /Concessionaire. 
2.5 The use of Network Survey Vehicle (NSV) has been mandated to capture road 
condition before start of work, before issue of provisional / final completion certificate and 
thereafter at regular intervals. 
2.6 RAMS (Road Asset and Management System) software is under development phase 
for prioritizing the NH stretches for M&R a ctivities, depending upon their condition, 
estimated fund requirement and available resources. The system is expected to be made 
functional based on the road condition data received through NSVs. 
  
Recommendation/Observation 
3. The Committee recommends that 100% requirement for Maintenance and Repair 
projected by the Ministry of Road Transport and Highways should be allocated in the 
budget. Any reduction in the budget for M&R may result in deterioration of the roads 
constructed with hundreds of crores of National Budget which will be national wastage. 
(Para 18) 
Reply of the Ministry  
3.1 As per Para 17 above 
 
 

16 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
4. The Committee feels that NHAI‟s „Sukhad Yatra‟ smartphone application can be 
utilized to gain insights into requirements for M&R on NHs by making the general public 
a source of information for such requirements. In this regard, the Committee reiterates 
the following recommendation made in para 51 of its 317 th Report on DFG (2022 -23) of 
the Ministry: 
The Committee is of the considered view that wide adoption of the application can help 
NHAI gain free actionable information regarding the issues being faced by NH users 
across the country, which can be quickly acted upon, thus ensuring a well -maintained 
and safe driving experience on the NHs. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the 
Ministry may work upon improving the usability of the Sukhad Yatra smartphone 
application at the earliest and come up with innovative means to promote the application 
to NH users acro ss the country. An option to seek feedback from the person posting a 
complaint using the app, may also be added so as to gain insight into whether the 
problem pointed out by the complainant has actually been resolved or not. 
(Para 19) 
Reply of the Ministry  
4.1 Ministry has recently upgraded and launched a new unified mobile application, 
namely, Rajmarg Yatra App on 30 th May, 2023 in place of Sukhad Yatra App.    Through 
this bi-lingual Mobile App, a registered highway user, while traveling on National Highw ay 
can highlight an issue/ grievance as well as upload the geo -tagged picture/ video. The web -
portal based complaint redressal system is also developed for internal stakeholders with 
multiple levels of escalation (manual/ automatic) based on the category o f complaint with 
pre-defined timelines. The highway users can track the status of registered grievance and then 
can provide further feedback.  
 
Recommendation/Observation 
5. The Committee recommends that using the data collected through the Electronic 
Toll Collection (ETC) and other suitable means, the Ministry may analyze the average 
traffic speed of various stretches of National Highways. The Committee feels that the 
stretches with low average traffic speeds can then be monitored on a closer level to 
understand the issues throttling the traffic speed, which should lead to identification of 
M&R requirements on different stretches of NHs across the country. 
 (Para 20) 
Reply of the Ministry  
5.1 In order to identify the perennially congested segments on National Highways, NHAI 
has initiated a pilot exercise, wherein hourly average duration of travel (Time) between two 
given locations (Distance) was fetched using the hourly average traffic speeds ( Speed) were 
calculated.  

17 
 
5.2 The derived hourly average speeds were used to identify perennially congested 
segments on National Highways within the city limits of two cities viz. Kanpur and Chennai. 
To further validate, these congested segments were then v isually observed using satellite 
imagery to identify probable causes of congestion such as, roadblocks due to construction 
activities; railway line crossings; encroachments along carriageway; toll plazas within city 
limits; dense habitation etc.  
5.3 The aforementioned study was conducted to demonstrate the applicability of multi -
source data analyses and their congruence with near real -time ground situations which may 
aid in decision making. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
6. The Committee desires to know the mechanism existing at present to identify M&R 
requirements on NHs across the country. The Committee further recommends that the 
Ministry may collaborate with leading research institutions to devise mechanisms to 
efficiently identify and execute the M&R requirements of the extensive NH network in the 
country. 
 (Para 21) 
Reply of the Ministry  
6.1 As per Para 17 above. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
7. The Committee recommends that provisions may be introduced to assess the 
condition of new NHs at a defined time  period after their operationalization, especially in 
terms of issues such as gaps in construction, rutting and high number of potholes on the 
highway etc. Strict penal action may be taken against the road contractor as well as the 
approving authorities in case substantial degradation of the NH is observed within a short 
period of operationalization of a newly constructed NH. 
(Para 26) 
Reply of the Ministry  
7.1 There are provisions in the contract / concession agreement for projects on EPC / 
HAM/BOT mode of execution to assess the defects and deficiencies of newly constructed 
roads and repair/rectification of these defects and deficiencies by the contractor 
/concessionaire during the Defects Liability Period/Operation Period as per 
contract/concession agreement. Performance parameters, level of services, frequency of 
inspection, tools/equipment for inspections, standards and references for inspection and data 
analysis, time limit for rectification/repair have been prescribed for various types of assets, 
such as rigid pavement, flexible pavements, structures etc. As regards, strict penal action 
against the contractor/concessionaire, Ministry vide letter no. RW/NH -33044/76/2021-S&R 
(P&B) dated 6th October, 2021 issued SOPs to debar/penalize/declare the 

18 
 
contractor/concessionaire found to be deficient in their services as non -performer in NH and 
other centrally sponsored road projects. Further, Ministry vide circular No . RW/NH -
33066/01/2020-QCZ dated 14.06.2021 issued guidelines regarding enforcement of quality 
assurance and quality control measures in construction of Road & Bridges work on NHs   by 
Authority‟s representatives.  
7.2 The recommendation of the committee has been noted for compliance. 
 
Road Safety  
Recommendation/Observation 
8. The Committee appreciates the Ministry‟s efforts in terms of various activities 
undertaken by it to bolster road safety in the country viz., spreading awareness about road 
safety, road  and vehicle engineering, enforcement of the existing legal/legislative 
provisions for road safety and emergency care. However, India ranks number 1 in the 
world in terms of road accident deaths as per a 2021 World Bank Report 2 and this 
highlights the need  for much stronger, well -coordinated efforts to be put into minimizing 
the large number of road accidents taking place on Indian roads and highways. The loss of 
so many lives in road accidents every year has a severe detrimental effect on the lives of a 
large number of families as well as the overall Indian economy. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that  the Ministry may formulate a holistic multi -pronged strategy in 
coordination with State Governments and Union Ministries concerned in order to minimize 
the number of road accidents and resulting deaths on Indian roads.                                                                                       
                                                       (Para 31)    
Reply of the Ministry  
8.1 Ministry has formulated a multi -pronged strategy to address the issue of road safety 
based on Education, Engineering (both of roads and vehicles), Enforcement and Emergency 
Care. Accordingly, various initiatives have been taken by the Ministry as detailed below: -   
1.   Education:  
(i) To create effective public awareness about road safety, Ministry undertakes various 
publicity measures and awareness campaigns through social media, electronic media 
and print media. Further, Ministry has implemented a scheme to provide financial 
assistance to various agencies for administering Road Safety Advocacy.  
(ii) Observance of National Road Safety Month/Week every year for spreading awareness 
and strengthening road safety.  
(iii) A Certification Course for Road Safety Auditor has been mandated for technical 
officers of all road owning agencies under the Ministry up to the level of 
Superintending Engineer or equivalent.  
(iv) To impart driving training, Ministry has been implementing a scheme for setting up 
of Institute of Driving Training & Rese arch (IDTRs), Regional Driving Training 

19 
 
Centres (RDTCs) and Driving Training Centres (DTCs) at state/district level across 
the Country.  
2.   Engineering (both of Roads and vehicles)  
2.1          Road engineering:  
(i) Road safety has been made an integral part of road design at planning stage. Road 
Safety Audit (RSA) of all highway projects has been made mandatory at all stages.  
(ii) RSA of all National Highways (NHs) has been made mandatory through third party 
auditors/ experts at all stages i.e. design, construction, operation and maintenance etc.  
(iii) High priority to identification and rectification of black spots /accident spots on NHs.  
(iv) Road Safety Officer (RSO) has been designated at each Regional Offi ce of road 
owning agencies under the Ministry to look after RSA, black spot rectification and 
other road safety related works.  
(v) Five stretches of NH having higher number of accidents/black spots are being 
developed as Model Safe Roads under each region al office of all road owning 
agencies under the Ministry.  
(vi) Five project stretches under construction are being developed as Model Safe 
Construction Zones under each regional office of all road owning agencies under the 
Ministry.  
(vii) The electronic Detailed Accident Report (e -DAR) Project has been initiated to 
establish a central repository for reporting, management and analysis of road 
accidents data across the Country.  
(viii) Ministry and IRC has issued various codes and guidelines, from time to t ime, to 
implement various road safety measures so as to minimize accidents on National 
Highways.  
2.2  Vehicle engineering:  
(i)  The Ministry has notified the mandatory provision of an airbag for the passenger 
seated on the front seat of a vehicle, next to the driver.  
(ii) This Ministry, vide notification dated 15th February, 2022 has prescribed norms 
related to safety measures for children below four years of age, riding or being carried 
on a motor cycle. Further, it specifies use of a safety harness, cr ash helmet and 
restricts speed to 40kmph.  
(iii) Ministry has notified the mandatory fitment of following listed safety technologies 
from 01st July 2019.  
For M1 category vehicles:  
a.   Seat Belt Reminder (SBR) for driver and co-driver.  
b.   Manual Override for central locking system  
c.   Over speed warning system.  

20 
 
For all M and N category vehicles:  
a.   Reverse Parking Alert System  
(iv) Ministry has mandated Anti -Lock Braking System (ABS) for certain classes of L 
[Motor vehicle with less than four wheels and includes a Quadricycle], M [Motor 
vehicles with at least four wheels used for carrying passengers] and N [Motor vehicles 
with a t least four wheels used for carrying goods which may also carry persons in 
addition to goods, subject to conditions stipulated in BIS standards] categories.  
(v) This Ministry has mandated approval of vehicles for protection of occupants in the 
event of an Offset Frontal Collision, for requirements for behaviour of steering 
mechanism of the vehicle in a Head-on collision, Protection of Occupants in the event 
of Lateral Collision and for approval of vehicles with regard to protection of 
pedestrians and other vulnerable road users in the event of a collision with a motor 
vehicle.  
(vi)  The Ministry has mandated speed limiting function/speed limiting device in all  
transport vehicles, except for two wheelers, three wheelers, quadricycles, fire tenders, 
ambulances and police vehicles.  
(vii) This Ministry has mandated compliance of the fully built buses (with a seating 
capacity of 22 passengers or above, excluding dr iver), manufactured on and after 1st 
April 2019, with the requirements of Fire Detection, Alarm and Suppression system. 
Further, compliance of type III buses of category M3 and school buses with fire alarm 
and protection system in occupant compartment has also been mandated, on and after 
26th January 2023.  
(viii) The Ministry has prescribed the format in which vehicle manufacturers issue the 
Road Worthiness Certification for registering motor vehicles.  
(ix) Scheme for setting up one model Inspection & Cer tification Centre in each State/UT 
with Central assistance for testing the fitness of vehicles through an automated 
system.  
(x) Ministry vide Notification GSR 653 (E) dt 23rd September 2021 and its amendment 
vide GSR 695 (E) dt 13th September 2022 published the Motor Vehicles (Registration 
and Functions of Vehicle Scrapping Facility) Rules, 2021 for establishment of 
Registered Vehicles Scrapping Facility (RVSF). These rules for RVSF prescribe the 
procedure for setting up and operations of such facilities.  
(xi) Ministry vide Notification GSR 652 (E) dt 23rd September 2021 and its amendment 
vide GSR 797 (E) dt 31st October 2022 published the rules for recognition, 
regulation, and control of Automated Testing Stations. These rules define the 
procedure for fit ness testing of vehicles through automated equipment and the 
procedure for grant of fitness certificate by ATSs. These rules came into effect on 
25th September 2021.  
(xii) Ministry has formulated the Vehicle Scrapping Policy based on incentives/dis -
incentives and for creating an ecosystem to phase out older, unfit polluting vehicles.  

21 
 
3.   Enforcement:  
(i) The Motor Vehicles (Amendment) Act, 2019 as stands implemented provides for strict 
penalties for ensuring compliance and enhancing deterrence for viola tion of traffic 
rules and strict enforcement through use of technology.  
(ii) Ministry has issued notification G.S.R. 575(E) dated 11th August, 2021 for Electronic 
Monitoring and Enforcement of Road Safety. The rules specify the detailed provisions 
for pla cement of electronic enforcement devices (speed camera, closed -circuit 
television camera, speed gun, body wearable camera, dashboard camera, Automatic 
Number Plate Recognition (ANPR), weigh in machine (WIM) and any such other 
technology specified by the State Government).  
4.   Emergency care:  
(i)  Ministry has published rules vide GSR 594(E) dated 29.09.2020 for the protection of 
Good Samaritan, who in good faith, voluntarily and without expectation of any 
reward or compensation renders emergency medical or nonmedical care or assistance 
at the scene of an accident to the victim or transports such victim to the hospital.  
(ii) Ministry vide notification dated 25th February, 2022 has enhanced compensation of 
victims of Hit and Run motor accidents (from Rs.12 ,500 to Rs.50,000 for grievous 
hurt and from Rs. 25,000 to Rs. 2,00,000 for death).  
(iii) The National Highways Authority of India has made provisions for ambulances with 
paramedical staff/Emergency Medical Technician/Nurse at toll plazas on the 
completed corridor of National Highways. 
5.   Also, Supreme  Court committee on Road safety, during various meetings, has issued 
direction to various state governments for implementation of Road safety measures including 
Engineering measures. Accordingly, Ministry has taken the following steps:- 
(i)  Ministry vide letter No.  RW/NH-29012/01/2022-RSCE dated 13.02.2023 has issued 
guidelines for Road Safety Action Plan for Road Engineering interventions on 
National Highways; Monthly ATR regarding. 
(ii) Ministry vide lett er No.  RW/NH-29011/01/2021-S&R (P&B) RSCE dated 9 th Sept 
2021 has also issued guidelines for Taking advance action for removal of accident 
spots on NHs as per Police reports without waiting for converting them into black 
spots after accidents/fatalities. 
(iii) Ministry vide letter No. RW/NH•29011/01/2020•S&R(P&B)-RSCE (pt) dated 11.12. 
2020 has issued guidelines for Identification of Road Safety issues during inspection, 
travelling of on NH and State Highways. 
(iv) Ministry vide letter No.  RW/NH-29011 /01/2020-S&R(P&B) dated 09.11. 2020 has 
issued guidelines for all stage Road Safety Audit through Independent Road Safety 
Expert of Independent Engineer/Authority Engineer and/or Road Safety Experts 
engaged by Authority (Ministry/NHAI/PWD). 

22 
 
(v) Ministry vi de letter No.  RW-NH-29011 /08/2019 -S&R(P&B) dated 26.08.2019 has 
issued guidelines for Rectification of Accident Black Spot Preparation of proposal 
and sanction approval regarding on 26.08.2019. 
(vi) Ministry vide OM no. RW/NH -29011/2/2015/P&M (RSCE) dated 07.12.2015 issued 
on “Preparation and submission of proposals for rectification of identified road 
accident black spots on National Highways”. 
8.2 Also IRC has published various codes related to Road safety: -   
 IRC SP 088: Manual on Road Safety Audit,  
 IRC SP 55 -The Guidelines on Safety in Road Construction Zones, 
 IRC:67-2012-Code of practice for Road Signs, 
 IRC:103-2012-Guidelines for Pedestrian Facilities. 
 IRC:99-2018-Guidelines for Traffic Calming Measures in Urban and Rural 
Areas 
 IRC:119-2015-Guidelines for Traffic Safety Barriers. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
9. The Committee may be apprised of the present status of implementation of the 
scheme for the cashless treatment of victims of the accident during the golden hour, as 
provided by the Motor Vehicles (Amendment) Act, 2019 along with reasons for delay in 
implementation, if any. 
(Para 33) 
Reply of the Ministry 
9.1 Ministry has published rules vide G.S.R. 162(E) on 25.2.2022 regarding creation, 
operation, sources of fund etc. of the Motor Vehicle s Accident Fund. This fund among other 
purposes shall be used f o r p r o v i d i n g c a s h l e s s t r e a t m e n t to  victims of road 
accident in accordance with Section 162 of MV Act, 1 9 8 8.  Draft of umbrella scheme for 
trauma care cases including, cashless treatment f o r  r o a d accident victims has been 
formulated under Ministry of Health & Family Welfare, in consultation with NITI Aayog. 
The said scheme was circulated for inter -Ministerial consultation on 11.11.2022, which is 
supported by this Ministry and the scheme is yet to be finalised. 
9.2 The Cashless treatment scheme is implemented by NHAI for Golden Quadrilateral 
(GQ) for which the works in Delhi – Mumbai section, Mumbai – Chennai section, Chennai - 
Kolkata section and Kolkata – Delhi section have been awarded on 30.06.2023.  
 
Recommendation/Observation 
10. The Committee reiterates its recommendation made in Para 277 of its 296 th Report 
on 

23 
 
“Role of Highways in Nation Building”, which is as follows: 
The Committee feels that the Ministry should lay much more emphasis on its road safety 
awareness initiatives. Social media may be utilized for this purpose. The Committee desires 
that the Ministry may, in coordination with Ministry of Education, introduce information 
pertaining to roa d safety, basic road etiquettes, action to be taken in case of an accident, 
etc. in school curriculum across the country. 
(Para 34) 
Reply of the Ministry 
10.1 To create effective public awareness about road safety, Ministry undertakes various 
publicity measures and awareness campaigns through social media, electronic media and 
print media. Ministry and its executing agencies celebrate Road Safety week to spread 
awareness about the importance of road safety. During the week, special drives have been 
organised to stop overloading of vehicles along with checking of over-speeding, unauthorized 
parking, drunken driving, etc. with the help of State police. Activities like awareness drives 
for Road Safety through Flex banners, Workshop and Discussion, checking f atigue of truck 
drivers and educating them about road safety, distribution of pamphlets, and the display of 
safety banners, distribution of pamphlets etc. to road users at Toll plazas, wayside amenities, 
food stall points are performed during the Road Safe ty Week. Further, Ministry has 
implemented a scheme to provide financial assistance to various agencies including NGOs 
for administering Road Safety Advocacy. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
11. The Committee further recommends that the Ministry may strongly t ake up the 
matter of removal of unauthorized speed breakers from National Highways with State 
Governments, since such speed breakers not only slows down the speed of the traffic on the 
NHs, but could also lead to accidents in absence of proper markings. Th e Ministry may 
implement a mechanism to periodically survey the National Highways for presence of 
unauthorized speed breakers, poor quality of roads, potholes, absence of signages etc. so 
that requirements of maintenance and remedial action can be identified and met. 
(Para 59) 
Reply of the Ministry 
11.1 As per extant guidelines of Ministry, Speed breakers are not allowed on National 
Highways. However, provision of rumble strips are allowed in certain locations such as 
educational institutions, accident prone locations to reduce the speed of the approachin g 
vehicles.  The NH Stretches are routinely inspected by field units/IEs/AEs. These activities 
are also being monitoring through NHAI One App/ TATPAR App and   appropriate actions 
are being taken accordingly. However, the recommendation of the committee has  been noted 
for compliance. 
 

24 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
12. The Committee notes that the development of service roads along Greenfield 
corridors is not in line with the concept of access-controlled corridors and that the Ministry 
has ensured the development of underpasses along the corridor to ensure un -hindered 
movement of local population. In this regard, the Committee recommends that drainage 
provisions may be made a core part of such underpasses, keeping in mind the rainfall 
statistics of the region. 
(Para 64) 
Reply of the Ministry 
12.1 The provision of service road and drainage arrangement along Greenfield corridors 
are made in accordance with IRC guidelines. To ensure that there is no water logging in 
underpass locations, care is taken to design invert level at the underpasses. 
 
Research and Development 
Recommendation/Observation 
13. The Committee notes that adequate research is required for construction and 
development of roads. Specifications/guidelines/codes prescribed by the Ministry/NHAI for 
construction of roads directly determine the quality of NHs and their longevity. It is crucial 
that due import ance is given to research activities in the road sector. The Committee, 
therefore, strongly recommends that more budget should be allocated for this purpose. 
Given the crucial role played by Indian Roads Congress (IRC) in conducting research and 
preparing and publishing technical specifications for road construction across the country, 
the Committee recommends that the Ministry should ensure that IRC is granted adequate 
budgetary allocation so that it can carry out its mandate effectively. It should also be  
ensured that the budgetary requirements of other road research agencies like Central Road 
Research Institute (CRRI), Indian Academy of Highway Engineers (IAHE), NHAI‟s 
Standards, Research and Development & Quality (SRD&Q) Division, are properly met. 
The M inistry may facilitate coordination between these agencies through a suitable 
mechanism and encourage them to collaborate with leading road research institutions in 
the world so that global best road construction and safety standards can be implemented in 
the Indian road sector. 
(Para 67)    
Reply of the Ministry 
13.1 Ministry has sanctioned 10 Nos. of Research schemes amounting to Rs.2396.21 lakh 
during the last 7 financial years (2016 -17 to 2022 -23). Ministry has also approved 4 nos. of 
MoRTH Chair Professor in reputed academic institutes of the country during the las t two 
financial years i.e. 2021 -22 and 2022 -23. An amount of Rs.15 Crore has been released as a 
Corpus fund to 3 IITs to carry out research as per the requirement of Highway sector as 
identified by Ministry and meet out the expenditure from the interest of  the deposited corpus 

25 
 
fund. Outcome of the R&D schemes are submitted to IRC for formulating new 
standards/updating existing standards by IRC. 
13.2 Ministry has signed Memorandum of understanding (MoU) with Jawaharlal 
Technological University (JNTU) in 2022-23 for creation of Chair Professor and establishing 
an M.Tech. programme in Bridge & Tunnel Engineering.  Apart from the above, NHAI has 
awarded 27 research schemes to various IITs, NITs and other eminent research institutes.  
13.3 Ministry takes up mo re practical application -oriented R&D schemes with focus on 
new materials and technology as and when necessary and there are experts available for the 
purpose.   
13.4 Allocation and expenditure under budget head of “Research and Development” by the 
Ministry during the last 7 years are as under:- 
Amount in Rs. Crore 
Year RE Allocation Expenditure 
2016-17 40.80 8.71 
2017-18 78.32 8.05 
2018-19 40.88 8.71 
2019-20 39.28 29.52 
2020-21 79.00 34.36 
2021-22 48.96 41.43 
2022-23 78.98 58.51 
  
13.5 Apart from the above, the year -wise details of the expenditure incurred by NHAI for 
R&D Schemes are as under: - 
Year No. of Schemes Amount (in Rs crore) 
2016-2017 3 3.88 
2019-2020 6 3.07 
2020-2021 6 5.02 
2021-2022 2 1.32 
2022-2023 1 10.41 
 
13.6 Indian Roads Congress (IRC) is a registered society. IRC generally does not carry out 
any research activity. IRC is basically engaged in bringing out the new IRC Codes and 
guidelines and revamping / upgrading existing codes and guidelines based on the 
recommendations of the expert committee constituted by IRC. All codes related to Highways 
/ Bridges / Tunnels published by IRC are being adopted by all the agencies of Central 
Government and State Government uniformly across the country.   
13.7 Recently, IRC has set up a committee for identifying important pilot research projects 
which may be taken up through eminent research organizations and academic institutions of 

26 
 
repute. Ministry shall duly consider recommendations of the Committee in taking up new 
R&D Schemes.    
13.8 Ministry has been supporting IRC from time to time in various ways such as one -time 
assistance like construction of IRC building, development of software etc., besides providing 
assistance for organizing seminars and membership fee on regular  basis. The Ministry has 
been providing possible financial supports to IRC from time to time. 
 
Arbitration between the Ministry/NHAI and the Contractors 
Recommendation/Observation 
14. The Committee takes note of the mechanism presently in place for arbitration and 
resolution of disputes between the authority and road contractors. The Committee 
observes that disputes between the concessionaire and the authority is one of the core 
reasons behind delays in road projects. Therefore, having an effective m echanism in 
place to minimize the delay resolution time to the extent possible is very important to 
avoid cost and time overruns in execution of NH projects. The Committee desires the 
Ministry to holistically examine the efficacy of the existing arbitratio n and dispute 
resolution mechanism in settling disputes between the involved parties and streamline the 
same so as to avoid litigations as far as possible. Further, it has come to the notice of the 
Committee that a significant portion of the amount of clai ms presently under arbitration 
pertain to a select few big concessionaires (details are placed at Annexure -III). The 
Committee notes that the Ministry of Road Transport and Highways has supplied the 
reasons for pending arbitration cases. The concessionaire s raised the claims on ground 
of delay in declaration of appointed date, delay in obtaining environment clearance, 
prolongation of project due to various reasons, termination payment, loss of toll revenue, 
delay in commencement of toll operation, loss of p roductivity of machinery, loss of 
revenue to the concessionaires envisaged in the financial model before accepting the 
project, etc.. The Committee recommends that the Ministry should study the reasons 
thoroughly to identify the veracity of the reasons and  ensure that such reasons should 
not become a reason in future for delay of projects or arbitrations. 
(Para 72)  
Reply of the Ministry 
14.1 The settlement of disputes is being done through  Conciliation Committee of 
Independent Experts (CCIE)  constituted vide policy circular dated 01 -6-2017. It is an 
endeavor for faster settlement of claims through conciliation and reduce liabilities. National 
Highways Authority of India (NHAI)    has rigorously started the process of conciliation by 
constituting three Conciliation Committees of Independent Experts (CCIE) of three members 
each.  These Conciliation Committees are being headed by retired officials from the 
judiciary, senior experts from public administration, finance and from private sector. It is a 
measure to avoid litigations and is proving to be an effective system. Since the introduction 
of CCIE about 192 matters have been settled by NHAI through conciliation. 

27 
 
14.2 With respect to delay in arbitrations, it is submitted that vide Amendment Act 3 of 
2016, the  legislature has introduced Section 29A to the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 
1996 (“the Act”). The aforesaid amendment came into force with effect from 23.10.2015. 
Section 29A of the Act was further amended in the year 2019. The effect of the above 
referred two amendments is that in the matter of arbitrations, other than International 
Commercial Arbitration, a time limit for conclusion of arbitration proceedings was 
introduced. Section 29A of the Act, as it stands today, provides that an arbitral tribun al has to 
publish the award within a period of twelve months from the date of completion of pleadings 
under Section 29A. 
14.3 As per Section 23(4), the pleading which comprises of statements of claim and 
defense are mandated to be completed within a period  of six months from the date the 
arbitrator, or all the arbitrators received notice, in writing, of their appointments. It is also 
provided under Section 29A(3) that parties by their consent, can extend the period of making 
the award for a further period not exceeding six months. 
14.4 To avoid arbitration cases for various reasons, NHAI vide Policy Circular No. 18.26 
dated 13.09.2017 issued with the following timelines/ conditions:- 
A.  Conditions for invitation of bids for award of projects 
a.  Land Acquisition status for EPC Projects  
i. 3 (A) proposal has been processed and sent for approval / publication  
ii. 3 (D) is confirmed for achievement within 45 days.  
b.  Utilities:  
Utilities to be shifted are to be identified and estimates to be prepared.  
c.  Statutory Clearance:  
i. Stage-I Forest Clearance proposal, wherever applicable, should have been applied 
(uploaded) :  
ii. Environment Clearance obtained, if required.  
 
B. Conditions for Receipt of Bid  
i. Sanction of Competent Authority for the project has been obtained.  
ii.  60% 3 (D) has been achieved  
iii.  3 (G) commenced and completed at least up to 10%. 
 
C. Conditions for Award of Projects:  
a.  Land Acquisition Status:  
 Condition precedent as prescribed in the ag reement are fulfilled/commitment for 
fulfillment by field officers so as to achieve Appointed Date as per the 

28 
 
Concession/Contract Agreement or MoRTH extant circular applicable for Appointed 
Date. 
      b.   Statutory Clearance:  
i. Environment Clearance is obtained, if required.  
ii. Forest stage-1 clearance has been obtained.  
iii. GAD approval for ROBs/RUBs are in advanced stage which are confirmed for 
achievement within timeline specified in RFP. 
c.  Bid for IE/AE to be initiated along with the civil work bid. 
D.For declaration of appointed date, land in 90% of the project length shall be made available. 
Further, utility shifting has been made part of the contract agreement, making the contractor 
directly responsible for shifting of obstructing utilities. 
14.5 However, the recommendation of the committee has been noted for compliance. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
15. The Committee may be apprised of the steps being taken by the Ministry to 
penalize road contractors who habitually take road projects to litigation without solid 
basis for the same, causing undue delays in completion of road projects. 
(Para 73) 
Reply of the Ministry 
15.1 Ministry vide circular No. RW/NH -33044/76/2021-S&R(P&B) dated 06.10.2021 
issued SOP to debar/penalize/declare as Non -Performer the Contractor/Concessionaire in 
National Highways and other centrally sponsored road projects . The circular contains the 
actions to be taken against the Contractor/ Concessionaire for different type of deficiencies. 
The circular also contains provision for requisite amendments to be made in the Model RFP 
and MCA documents for EPC, HAM and BOT (Toll) projects. Executing agencies have 
already initiated necessary actions as per the abo ve circular. However, the recommendation 
of the committee has been noted for compliance. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
16. The Committee further desires to be apprised about whether any mechanism is in 
place to ensure that road contractors, if blacklisted, do not start bidding for new projects by 
registering under a new name. 
(Para 74) 
Reply of the Ministry 
16.1 The bids for NH projects are evaluated as per the eligibility criteria prescribed in the 
RFP documents. Bidders have to declare the requisite eligibility criteria/experiences 

29 
 
prescribed in the RFP documents to qualify for the bids. Hence, if   a blacklisted  bidder 
register under a new name and participate in the bids, he may not be able to fulfil the 
requisite qualifying criteria. However, the recommendation of the committee has been noted 
for compliance. 
  
Setting up Dedicated Underground Utility Corridors 
Recommendation/Observation 
17. The Committee notes that the feasibility report submitted by Andhra Pradesh Urban 
Infrastructure Asset Management Limited (APUIAML) has found the combined utility 
corridor to be capital intensive and not viable. The Committee  hopes that APUIAML has 
considered the lifecycle cost of the utility corridor and looked into the operationalization 
and monetization of underground utility corridors in developed countries. The Committee 
desires to know from the Ministry whether APUIAML o r the Ministry factored in the cost 
borne by the public/private organizations in frequent trenching/digging of NHs for laying 
different types of cables/lines and repair thereof, while examining the feasibility of 
underground utility corridors. The Committe e recommends that the Ministry may take 
steps to figure out how the underground utility corridors are being viably implemented in 
other countries and analyze whether a similar approach could help make the underground 
utility corridors viable in India. 
(Para 77)   
Reply of the Ministry 
17.1 Multiple meetings were being held by Department of Telecommunication (DoT) for 
“Common Duct and Post Infrastructure along Highways and public pathways” with various 
stakeholders including MoRT&H. A policy document was issued by the Telecommunication 
Engineering Centre (TEC) of DoT on 1st March 2023. 
17.2 It outlines the design and standards for the development of common duct and post 
infrastructure along highways and public paths. 
17.3 In addition to it, MoRT&H has cond ucted a study to explore the potential options for 
the development of utility corridors along the Highways. As per the study, Ministry is 
developing Optical Fiber Cable Infrastructure in the utility corridors along the Highways. 
Works have already been initiated on two pilot projects along Delhi-Mumbai Expressway and 
Hyderabad-Bangalore. Based on the success of the pilot projects, nation-wide roll out shall be 
taken up. However, the recommendation of the committee has been noted for compliance. 
 
Women Safety  
Recommendation/Observation 
18. The Committee feels that a lot needs to be done to improve the state of safety of 
women on public road transport like installing proper signages, cell phone networks, street 
lights, highway patrol etc. The Committee is dismayed to note the declining trend of 

30 
 
budgetary allocation under the „Scheme on Women Safety‟ in the last 5 years and desires 
to be apprised of the reasons behind the underutilization of the funds. 
(Para 79)      
Reply of the Ministry 
18.1 The allocation details of Scheme for Women Safety on Public Road Transport in the 
last five financial years are as under: 
Financial Year BE (Rs in crore) RE (Rs in crore) 
2022-23 20 23.28 (actual 
expenditure) 
2021-22 100 33 
2020-21 174.36 140 
2019-20 174.36 174.36 
2018-19 174.36 174.36 
 
18.2 Despite multiple waves of COVID -19 pandemic in the years 2020 -21 and 2021 -22, 
this Ministry followed up with States to utilise funds under the Nirbhaya scheme. First 
instalments to States under the Scheme for implementation of development, customization, 
deployment and management of State -wise vehicle tracking platform for safety & 
enforcement as per AIS 140 Specifications were released mostly in the financial years 2020 -
21 and 2021 -22. Only three States have applied for second instalment till date. States are 
being pursued to implement the Scheme to expedite disbursal of second instalment to States. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
19. The Committee desires to be apprised of the reasons, if any, furnished by the 
Government of Telangana for not applying for funds for setting up the monitoring centre. 
The Committee recommends that the issue may be taken up at higher levels with the State 
Government in order to permit the implementation of the scheme in Telangana. 
(Para 82) 
Reply of the Ministry 
19.1 Several follow -ups have been done with the State of Telangana in the form of 
meetings and DO Letters. After a lot of persuasion and follow -up, State of Telangana has 
applied for a project for the fitment of Vehicle Location Tracking (VLT) devices and panic  
buttons in the buses of Telangana State Road Transport Corporation (TSRTC). A project for 
installation of Vehicle Tracking Devices with SOS buttons in TSRTC buses with monitoring 
from Central Command Control Centre to enhance women safety in TSRTC for Rs 19.21 
crores has already been approved by this Ministry. Funds have also been disbursed to the 
State. Efforts are being made to persuade the State of Telangana to also apply for the Scheme 

31 
 
for implementation of development, customization, deployment and ma nagement of State -
wise vehicle tracking platform for safety & enforcement as per AIS 140 Specifications. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
20. The Committee strongly recommends that the Ministry may take immediate 
measures to curb the menace of overloaded vehicles on National Highways such as 
rectifying weighing machines which are non -functional for a long time. Hefty fines 
should be imposed on vehicles not abiding by the limits. The Ministry may coordinate 
with the concerned Ministries and State Department s to introduce provisions for penalty 
on the consignor and consignee as well, besides the truck owners. The Committee feels 
that doing so would deter the loading of excess load from the source itself and prevent 
damage to NHs while also improving road safety. 
(Para 85) 
Reply of the Ministry 
20.1 As per  Rule 10 of NH Fee Rules, 2008, a mechanical vehicle which is loaded in 
excess of permissible maximum gross vehicle weight in respect of such vehicles, shall not be 
permitted to use the National Highway or crossing the fee plaza until the excess load has been 
removed from such mechanical vehicle.  Further Fee Rules, 2008 provides for penalty from 
overloaded vehicles in order to curb overloading on NHs.   These rules have been amended 
from time to time as under: 
(i)  Rule 10 of NH Fee Rules, 2008 prescribes rate of fee for overloading, whereby 
overloaded vehicles are liable to pay applicable fees  of next higher category of 
vehicle. 
(ii) The fee for overloading has been amended  by MoRTH vide Gazette GSR 778(E) 
dated 16.12.2013, whereby the „rate of fee for overloading‟ was enhanced to 10 times 
the applicable fee.  
(iii) The above rule was again amended by MoRTH vide GSR 920(E) dated 25.09.2018 
having provision of graded penalty for overloaded vehicles as under:   
Percentage of excess 
load over Maximum 
permissible gross 
vehicular weight 
Multiplying factor to 
base rate of fees 
 
 
Fees 
 
 
 
(1) (2) (3) 
0% to 20% Two [(Fees applicable for such category 
of mechanical vehicle under sub-rule 
(2) of rule 4) x (multiplying factor)] 
 
>20% to 40% Four 
>40% to 60% Six 
>60% to 80% Eight 
>80% and above Ten 
 

32 
 
20.2 As on date, on public funded fee plazas, the overload fee is collected as per above 
table prescribed under GSR 920(E) dated 25.09.2018. 
20.3 Moreover, as per the  BOT Concession Agreements, the penalty for overloaded 
vehicles is being charged by the Concessionaire as provided in their respective Concession 
Agreements. Mostly for any overloaded vehicles the user fee is charged equally to the user 
fee prescribed for the next higher category of vehicle.  
 
Poor quality of construction by Sub-Contractors 
Recommendation/Observation 
21. The Committee recommends that the Ministry may look into the issue and, if 
possible, consider making direct payments to approved sub-contractors to mitigate the 
delays caused by the main contractors. The Committee also desires to be apprised of the 
reasons for which the Ministry/NHAI prefers allowing contractors to hire sub -
contractors as compared to breaking down the project into smaller stretches on its own so 
that smaller contractors could also bid for the same. 
(Para 88)     
Reply of the Ministry 
21.1 Regarding making direct payments to approved sub -contractors, MoRTH vide Policy 
Circulars dated 03.06.2020, 06.10.2020, 03.08.2021, 08.10.2021, 11.04.2022, 01.12.2022 and 
04.05.2023 approved relief measures under Covid -19 pandemic regarding direct payment to 
approved sub-contractor through Escrow Account till 31.03.2024 or completion of the work 
by the Sub-Contractor, whichever is earlier. Also, provisions for direct payments to approved 
sub-contractors are being allowed on case to case basis after assessing the cash flow issues of 
the projects. However, the recommendation of the committee has been noted for compliance. 
21.2 Regarding allowing contractors to hire sub-contractors as compared to breaking down 
the project into smaller stretches, it is felt that Main contractors often have the expertise, 
experience, and resources required to handle complex infrastructure projects . They possess 
the necessary technical knowledge, management skills, and access to specialized equipment 
and manpower to efficiently execute large -scale projects. By allowing main contractors to 
hire sub -contractors, the Ministry/NHAI can leverage their ex pertise and ensure that the 
project is executed with the highest level of professionalism and quality. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

33 
 
CHAPTER-III 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
THE MINISTRY HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
1. The Committee desires to be apprised of the present status of important road 
projects such as the Hajipur -Chhapra Highway (NH -19), Nagpur Outer Ring Road 
Package-I and II, six-lane road sanctioned from Diwancheruvu to Anakapalle, Greenfield 
NH 516E between Rajahmundry -Rampachodavaram, bridge across the Kanhan river, 
repair works at Nagpur -Bhandara Road, Patna -Gaya NH etc., alongwith reasons for 
delay, if any, in execution of the same. 
(Para 12) 
1.1 Reply of the Ministry 
 (i)  Chhapra- Hajipur Section of NH-19 
The Work has been delayed  mainly due to cash flow problem of the Concessionaire, slow 
progress and delay in land acquisition etc. M/S CHEL is the Concessionaire of this work.  
  
(ii) Nagpur Outer Ring Road Package I and II 
a. Outer Ring Road Package-I:-  
The work of Four lane Stand Alone Ring Road / Bypasses for Nagpur City ( Package-I) from 
Km 0+500 to Km 34+000 (Total length - 33+500 Km) in the State of Maharashtra on BOT 
(Hybrid Annuity Mode) basis was awarded to the Concessionaire, M/s. MEP Nagpur Ring 
Road 1 Pvt. Ltd. on 31/03/2016 and the work commenced on 09/01/2017. The 
Concessionaire completely stopped the work at site from June 2021 and M/s. Bansal 
Pathways (NRR1) Pvt. Ltd. has been substituted as Concessionaire as per Endorsement 
Agreement dated 05/01/2022. Subsequently, M/s. Bansal Pathways (NRR1) Pvt. Ltd. has 
mobilized at site in the month of January, 2022 and taken up the work. Presently, the work is 
in full swing. Physical Progress of the work as on 15/06/2023 is 85% and the project is 
targetted for completion by October, 2023. 
b. Outer Ring Road Package-II:-  
The work of Four  lane Stand Alone Ring Road / Bypasses for Nagpur City ( Package-II) 
from Km 34+000 to Km 62+035 (Total length – 28+035 Km) in the State of Maharashtra on 
BOT (Hybrid Annuity Mode) basis was awarded to the Concessionaire, M/s. MEP Sanjose 
Nagpur Ring Road 2  Pvt. Ltd. on 31/03/2016 and work commenced on 20/01/2017. The 
Concessionaire completely stopped the work at site from June, 2021 and M/s. Bansal 
Pathways (NRR2) Pvt. Ltd. has been substituted as Concessionaire as per Endorsement 
Agreement dated 05/01/2022 . Subsequently, M/s. Bansal Pathways (NRR2) Pvt. Ltd. has 
mobilized at site in the month of January, 2022 and taken up the work. Presently, the work is 

34 
 
in full swing. Physical Progress of the work as on 15/06/2023 is 65% and the project is 
scheduled for completion by March, 2024. 
 
(iii) Six-lane Road sanctioned from Diwancheruvu to Anakapalle 
The Detailed Project Report (DPR) for augmentation of 4 -laning of Anakapalli – Annavaram 
– Diwancherurvu section from Km 741+255 to 903+000 of NH -16 (Package 3 &4 of T OT 
bundle-1) to partial access controlled highway standard in the State of Andhra Pradesh has 
been awarded to M/s. Arkitechno Consultant(I) Pvt Ltd and agreement signed on 
02.11.2022.  DPR is in progress and is scheduled to be completed by December, 2023. After 
completion of pre -construction activities including land acquisition the augmentation would 
be taken up.  
  
(iv) Greenfield NH 516E between Rajahmundry-Rampachodavaram 
Rajahmundry to Rampachodavaram section of NH -516E has a length of 43.7 km, out of 
which 8.83 km is 4 lane and remaining 34.87 km is 2 -lane.  The work of up -gradation of the 
existing 2-lane road to 2 -lane with paved shoulder configuration in a length of 9.75 km was 
sanctioned during 2021 at a cost of Rs. 65.97 crore.   The said work comme nced on 
05.02.2022 and completed on 15.05.2023.   In the remaining 33.95km stretch, strengthening 
work has been completed during 2021-22 and is currently under Defects Liability Period. 
  
(v) Bridge across the Kanhan River 
Bridge across Kanhan river at km 7 09/500 of NH-44 (Old NH-7) has been completed during 
August, 2022 and opened for traffic w.e.f 01.09.2022. 
  
(vi) Repair works at Nagpur-Bhandara Road, Patna-Gaya NH etc 
(a) Nagpur – Wainganga Section of NH-53  
The work of Nagpur -Wainganga Bridge Section o f NH -6 from Km 498+000 to Km 
544+200 (Total length – 45+43 Km) in the State of Maharashtra on BOT (Toll) basis was 
awarded to the Concessionaire, M/s. Wainganga Expressway Pvt. Ltd. on 09/05/2011. The 
work was commenced on 09/04/2012 and completed on 09/01 /2015. Presently the stretch 
is under Operation & Maintenance by the Concessionaire. About 60% of the riding surface 
of road has been renewed with BC in the time span from March, 2020   till date. Regular 
maintenance work is being carried out by the Concess ionaire and the stretch is in good 
condition. 
(b) Patna-Gaya-Dobhi section of NH-83 
The stretch of Patna -Gaya-Dobhi section of NH -83 is being constructed to four lane. The 
present status of NH-83 as under:-  
  

35 
 
Package Length 
in km 
Length 
completed 
in km 
Awarded 
Cost (Rs. 
in 
Crore) 
Date of 
Commencement 
Scheduled 
date of 
completion 
Likely 
date of 
completion 
Physical 
Progress 
(%) 
PKG-I 
from Km. 
0.00 to Km. 
39.00 
 
39 30.20 
(77.43%) 649.90 14.12.2020 13.12.2022 31.12.2023 73.6 
PKG-II 
from Km. 
39.00 to 
Km. 83.00 
44 39.70 
(90.22%) 496.48 09.11.2020 08.11.2022 31.12.2023 79 
PKG-III 
from Km. 
83.00 to 
Km. 
127.217 
44.22 38.67 
(87.44%) 464.09 24.11.2020 23.11.2022 31.12.2023 81 
  
Reasons for Delay 
 Inadequate Mobilization of Manpower and Machinery by Contractors in all 3 
packages. 
 Limited Working Season – (Oct/Nov – May) 
 Pre-Monsoon Rains, Extended Monsoon, Unseasonal Rains affected limited working 
season in 2021. 
 COVID-19 2nd wave – Work affected in Apr-May 2021 during peak working season. 
 Irregular and inadequate supply of Fly ash from NTPC. 
 Delay in approval of Design & Drawing of ROBs. 
 
Further recommendation 
1.2 The Committee notes the cause of delay in the above -mentioned projects. The 
Committee recommends the Ministry to take measures to eliminate such delays for 
timely completion of projects. All stakeholders involved must be approached for better 
coordination and resolution of these issues. 
  
Quality of Roads  
Recommendation/Observation 
2. The Committee notes the existing mechanism to ensure that the road works are 
executed as per prescribed specifications and standards. However, in light of the sub -par 
quality of road construction often witnessed on NHs across the country, the Committee 

36 
 
recommends that the Ministry may undertake a thorough review of the existing 
monitoring mechanism for road construction quality and come up with ways to plug the 
gaps in the same so as to ensure higher quality NHs in the future. The Committee further 
recommends that the Ministry may enact provisions for imposing severe financial penalty 
on the ind ividuals appointed as Authority‟ s Engineer/Supervision Consultants in cases 
where gross negligence of the prescribed specifications and standards is observed in roads  
approved by them. 
(Para 23)  
Reply of the Ministry 
2.1 Ministry is continuously making efforts  to strengthen the system of objective 
assessment of Quality of NH projects of all agencies (NHAI/NHIDCL/State PWDs/BRO).  
2.2 Mobile Quality Control Vans (MQCVs) have been engaged in 4 States, namely, 
Gujarat, Rajasthan, Odisha and Karnataka on a pilot basis. MQCVs are responsible for 
conducting Non -Destructive Testing (NDT) in 2000 Km of NH project length per quarter 
(about 670 Km per month). The NDT test results from MQCVs are being  shared with all 
Executing Agencies for taking up necessary follow -up actions through a Web Portal 
“National Highways Quality Monitoring Portal” under development by the Ministry. 
2.3 Retired Chief Engineers from Central and Sta te Government have been empanelled 
by NHAI and NHIDCL for conducting Third Party Quality Inspections of NH works in 
NHAI and NHIDCL respectively. The existing panels of NHAI & NHIDCL are utilized to 
conduct Third party quality inspections of projects under Roads Wing and BRO.  
2.4 As regards, imposition of severe financial penalty on the individuals appointed as 
Authority‟s Engineer/Supervision consultants in cases of their gross negligence is concerned, 
Ministry vide letter no. RW/NH -33044/76/2021-S&R (P&B) dated 6th October, 2021 issued 
SOPs to debar/penalize/declare as non -performer the   Authority‟s Engineer/Supervision 
consultants engaged in NH and other centrally sponsored road projects who are found to be 
providing deficient services. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
3. The Committee appreciates the recent initiative of the Ministry to strengthen the 
Quality Control set up of NH projects by engaging the services of Mobile Inspection Vans 
(MIVs) for Inspection and Quality assessment of NH projects. The Committee hopes that 
the pilot project for engaging the services of MIVs turns out to be a success so that the 
MIVs can be utilized across the country for better quality control of ongoing and future 
NH projects in the country. 
(Para 25) 
 
 
 

37 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
3.1 Mobile Inspection Vans (MIVs) (renamed to Mobile Quality Control Vans (MQCVs) 
for clarity) have been engaged in 4 States, namely, Gujarat, Rajasthan, Odisha and Karnataka 
on a pilot basis. Operations of MQCVs have already begun.  
3.2 Based on the efficacy of MQCV engaged, deployment of more MQCVs in other 
States of the country shall be taken up in phases.   
 
Further recommendation 
3.3 The Committee recommends that the Ministry should take necessary steps for 
the deployment of MQCVs in the remaining States for better inspection and quality 
assessment of NH projects all over the country. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
4. This Ministry and IRC have issued various codes and guidelines, from time to time, 
to implement various road safety measures so as to minimize accidents on National 
Highways. The Committee further recommends that the Ministry may come up with 
provisions to make it mandatory to inst all street lights on the entire National Highways 
network in the country since poor lighting conditions lead to severe accidents. The regular 
maintenance of these street lights may also be suitably ensured in coordination with the 
concerned agencies. 
(Para 36) 
Reply of the Ministry 
4.1 There is provision in the contract agreement for providing lighting at specified 
locations of the project highway, using appropriate system and source of electric power as per 
the requirements of this Section. Such locations shall be specified in Schedule „C‟ of the 
contract agreement.   Provisions of lighting/illumination are also made at vulnerable 
locations/intersections of NH with SH/MDR/ODR/Village roads for improving road safety 
and avoiding accidents during night in addition to locations mentioned in IRC Manual 
4.2 The Concessionaire of the project shall make suitable arrangements for procuring 
power supply to ensure uninterrupted lighting during night and when visibility is low, 
including provision of DG sets as stand by arrangements. 
4.3 The Concessionaire shall bear the costs of procurement, installation, running and 
operation cost of all lighting, including cost of energy consumption specified in this Section.  
4.4 The recommendation of the committee has been noted. 
 
 
 

38 
 
Further recommendation 
4.5 The Committee notes that the Concessionaire is responsible for the provisions of 
lighting on the entire National Highways network. However, the contact details of these 
Concessionaires are not available readily. 
4.6 The Committee also feels that the Ministry needs to come up with a better policy 
for illumination. In this regard, the Ministry must implement smart lighting systems 
that can adjust the intensity of lights based on real -time traffic conditions and weather. 
This can help save energy and improve safety. 
4.7 Further, measures should be taken to reduce light pollution, such as using 
shields and directing light downward to minimize glare and prevent unnecessary light 
spillage into the night sky. 
4.8 In addition to it, the Ministry should consider integrating emergency 
communication devices, such as emergency call boxes, into the lighting infrastructure 
for the safety and assistance of motorists. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
5. The Committee is of the view that having  provisions for food joints, restrooms, toilets 
and other amenities alongside National Highways can reduce the menace of illegal parking 
of vehicles on NHs and help avoid accidents, since the drivers would be able to relax and 
refresh themselves without pa rking outside the designated areas. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that the Ministry may chalk out a plan to have provisions for such spaces at 
regular intervals on NHs, possibly in partnership with the original landowners, on the entire 
NH network. Doing so would provide NH passengers with a more comfortable experience 
while providing a regular source of revenue to the landowners whose land was acquired for 
the construction of the NH. 
 (Para 38) 
Reply of the Ministry 
5.1 Ministry has undertaken development of 34,800 Kms of NHs and Expressways as a part 
of Bharatmala Pariyojana. As a part of this program, MoRTH has proposed to establish Wayside 
Amenities at approximately every 50 kms along the Highways and Expressways, to provide safe 
travels and rest opportunities for highway commuters during their journey. WSAs are being 
developed for public use, with state -of-the-art infrastructure, to provide convenience to highway 
users and aid in smooth flow of traffic on National Highways. Multiple facilitie s such as 
restaurants, food courts, dhabas, fuel station, minor repair shops, 24X7 pharmacies, first aid 
centres, clean & hygienic rest rooms for passengers, dormitories for drivers etc., are planned for 
development. 
 
 
 

39 
 
Further recommendation 
5.2 The Committee notes that the prices of items at restaurants, food courts, dhabas 
are exorbitantly high which should be kept in check for all sections of the society. The 
Committee also noted that there is a need for implementation of strict cleanliness and  
maintenance standards to keep amenities in good condition. Regular cleaning, pest 
control, and repairs are essential. 
5.3 Further, the Ministry must establish a feedback mechanism for travellers to 
report issues or provide suggestions for improvement. The  Ministry must act on this 
feedback promptly. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
6. The Committee feels that awareness of traffic rules would go a long way in 
improving the driving habits of drivers in the country, making the roads safer for 
everyone. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry may partner with 
NGOs and educational institutions in order to raise awareness of traffic rules and road 
safety. 
(Para 39) 
Reply of the Ministry 
6.1 To create effective public awareness about road safety, Ministry undertakes various 
publicity measures and awareness campaigns through social media, electronic media and 
print media. Further, Ministry implements a scheme to provide financial assistance to various 
agencies including NGOs for administering Road S afety Advocacy. Ministry and its 
executing agencies celebrate Road Safety week to spread awareness about the importance of 
road safety. During the week, special drives have been organised to stop overloading of 
vehicles along with checking of over -speeding, unauthorized parking, drunken driving, etc. 
with the help of State police. Activities like awareness drives for Road Safety through Flex 
banners, Workshop and Discussion, checking fatigue of truck drivers and educating them 
about road safety, distribution of pamphlets, and the display of safety banners, distribution of 
pamphlets etc. to road users at Toll plazas, wayside amenities, food stall points are performed 
during the Road Safety Week. 
6.2 To impart driving training, Ministry has been implementing a scheme for setting up of 
Institute of Driving Training & Research (IDTRs), Regional Driving Training Centers 
(RDTCs) and Driving Training Centers (DTCs) at state/district level across the Country. 
 
Further recommendation 
6.3 The Committee appreciates the measures taken by the Ministry in respect of 
road safety. However, the Committee still notes that there is a need for community 
training programmes for learning better road safety practices like lane changing, 
helmets usage, etc. 

40 
 
6.4 The Committee also suggests the introduction of anti-sleep devices in automobiles 
that helps prevent accidents caused by drivers who fall asleep while driving. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
7. The Committee recommends that the Ministry may issue guidelines to limit the number 
of hours commercial drivers can drive in a day to a reasonable limit, say, 10 hours a day. If a 
suitable mechanism can be devised to implement this in earnest, this would ensure that 
commercial drivers are well rested, making the roads safer for all travellers. 
(Para 40) 
Reply of the Ministry 
7.1 Section 91(1) of Motor Vehicles Act, 1988 states that “The hours of work of any 
person engaged for operating a transport vehicle shall be such as provided in the Motor 
Transport Workers Act, 1961 (27 of 1961).” 
7.2 Section 13 of Motor Transport Workers Act, 1961 (administered by Ministry of 
Labour and Employment) states that:- 
“No adult motor transport worker shall be required or allowed to work for more than eight 
hours in any day and forty-eight hours in any week: 
7.3 Provided that where any such motor transport worker is engaged in the running of any 
motor transport service on such long distance routes, or on such festive and other occasions 
as may be notified in the prescribed manner  by the prescribed authority, the employer may, 
with the approval of such authority, require or allow such motor transport worker to work for 
more than eight hours in any day or forty -eight hours in any week but in no case for more 
than ten hours in a day and fifty-four in hours in a week, as the case may be : 
7.4 Provided further that in the case of a breakdown or dislocation of a motor transport 
service or interruption of traffic or act of God, the employer may, subject to such conditions 
and limitations as may be prescribed, require or allow any such motor transport worker to 
work for more than eight hours in any day or more than forty-eight hours in any week” 
7.5 The recommendation of the Committee has been noted for compliance. 
 
Further recommendation 
7.6 The Committee notes the provision given in Section 13 of Motor Transport 
Workers Act, 1961. However, the Committee feels that there is laxity in implementation 
of this provision. It is therefore recommended that the Ministry of Road Transport and 
Highways and other stakeholders must come together to formulate a system for its 
proper implementation. Further, the Ministries must work in spreading awareness to 
common masses about this provision. 
 

41 
 
Rectification of Black Spots  
Recommendation/Observation 
8. The Committee recommends that the Ministry may take immediate steps to ensure 
that the black spots on National Highways across the country are rectified on a war 
footing. Data pertaining to black spots may be analyzed to ascertain why the particular 
spots ended up causing so many road accidents and what steps could have been taken at 
the road design and construction stage to avoid the same from becoming black spots. The 
inferences drawn may be utilized in future NH projects across the country in order to 
minimize the development of black spots therein. 
             (Para 44)              
Reply of the Ministry 
8.1 The Ministry vide OM no. RW/NH-29011/2/2015/P&M (RSCE) dated 7th December, 
2015 issued guidelines on “Preparation and submission of proposals for rectification of 
identified road accident black spots on National Highways”. Ministry vide letter No.  RW-
NH-29011 /08/2019 -S&R(P&B) dated 26.08.2019 also is sued guidelines regarding 
preparation of proposal and sanction & approval for rectification of Accident Black Spot. 
8.2 Regular review meetings are being conducted by senior officers of Ministry with the 
field officers of Ministry, NHAI and NHIDCL to formulate action plans for identification and 
rectification of Black Spots with a targeted Timeline. 
8.3 Road Safety Officer (RSO) has been designated at each Regional Office of road 
owning agencies under the Ministry to look after RSA, black spot rectification  and other road 
safety related works. Recommendation of the committee has been noted for compliance. 
 
Further recommendation 
8.4 The Committee further recommends that the contact information of Road Safety 
Officers must be kept in public domain for better information regarding black spots. 
8.5 Further, there is a need to prioritize black spots based on the severity of 
accidents, traffic volume, and other relevant factors and the focus must be on the most 
critical locations first. 
8.6 The local administration must consider lowering speed limits in black spot areas, 
especially in residential or densely populated zones. 
8.7 Further, the Ministry must involve local communities in identifying and 
addressing black spots, as they often have valuable insights into local road safety issues. 
The Ministry should also establish key performance indicators (KPIs) to measure the 
success of black spot eradication efforts, such as accident rate reduction and traffic flow 
improvements. 
 
 

42 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
9. The Committee recommends that CCTV cameras may be installed at accident 
prone sites, black spots which are yet to be rectified, and other important locations on the 
NHs to monitor road accidents and arrange urgent medical help. Drone services may 
also be utili zed for watching and regulating vehicle movements on NHs and adequate 
budgetary provisions for the same may be ensured. 
(Para 45) 
Reply of the Ministry 
9.1 The Provision of installation of CCTV / other cameras on the Highways already exist 
in the recent EP C/BOT/HAM projects contract clause for ATMS - Highway Traffic 
Management System as per Schedule C and MORTH specifications clause 816. NHAI has 
empanelled 10 (ten) drone agencies to carry out drone videography of under -construction and 
O&M Highway projects on periodic basis. As per present policy guidelines, the drone video 
data are being collected on monthly basis for under construction projects and bi -annually for 
operations & maintenance projects.  Further, NHAI is also considering procurement of VIDS 
for National Highways at certain locations which includes installation of CCTV cameras.   
The documents for procurement of the same have  been prepared in consultation with various 
stakeholders and approval of RFP is under consideration.  
 
Further recommendation 
9.2 The Committee appreciates the measures taken by the Ministry and directs the 
Ministry to approve the request regarding procurement of VIDS. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
10. The Committee notes that provisions already exist for imposing fines for parking 
outside the designated areas on National Highways but the ground reality points to the 
lack of proper implementation of the same. Trucks and vehicles parked on ill -lit 
highways at night time cause severe accidents and as such, tackling th is problem should 
be a matter of high priority. The Committee notes that this issue may be looked into and 
possible solutions may be devised and implemented in earnest, in coordination with the 
concerned agencies. 
(Para 53) 
Reply of the Ministry 
10.1 The enforcement of traffic & imposition of fines for parking outside the designated 
areas on National Highways and such other defaults of vehicle drivers fall under the 
jurisdiction of Regional Transport Office / Traffic Police Department of the respective  State 
Government.  Field offices of Ministry/NHAI are responsible for other routine Highway 
operational parameters like Route Petrol Vehicles who have been specifically directed to take 
necessary action against such unwarranted & wrong vehicle parking on Highways.  

43 
 
10.2 Further, Ministry currently provides Incident Management Services (IMS) on 
completed tolled sections of NHs. Incident Management System on the National Highways is 
coordinated through 1033 Nationwide helpline, which entails a set of co -ordinated activities 
to minimise the effects of the incident and restore normal capacity and safety levels to all 
affected road facilities as efficiently as possible. The operator runs 24x7 Route Patrols, 
Cranes & Ambulances on the said stretches. 
10.3 The scheme of Incident Management Service is planned to be extended to all the 
National Highways in the country with initial emphasis on high traffic corridors and the 
States with difficult terrains. 
 
Further recommendation 
10.4 The Committee further recommends that the implementation of Incident 
Management Service should be expedited and extended to all the National highways 
in the country with immediate effect. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
11. The Committee further recommends that provisi ons may be included in t he 
NHAI‟s Sukhad Yatra app to allow highway users to post complaints about 
encroachment and stray cattles/animals on NHs. 
(Para 55) 
Reply of the Ministry 
11.1 Ministry has recently upgraded and launched a new unified mobile application, 
namely, Rajmarg Yatra App on 30 th May 2023 in place of Sukhad Yatra App.    Through 
this bi-lingual Mobile App, a registered highway user, while traveling on National Highway 
can highlight an issue/ grievance as well as upload the geo -tagged picture/ video. The web -
portal based complaint redressal system is also developed for internal stakeholders with 
multiple levels of escalation (manual/ automatic) based on the category of complaint with 
pre-defined timelines. The highway users can track the status of registered grievanc e and can 
then provide further feedback. However, the recommendation of the committee has been 
noted for compliance. 
 
Further recommendation 
11.2 The Committee recommends that the Rajmarg Yatra App should be promoted 
on wider scale for the optimum utilization of Information, Communication and 
Technology (ICT) and for better dissemination of information regarding grievances of 
common public. 
 
 

44 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
12. From the expenditure details furnished by the Ministry, the Committee notes that 
only three States have been provided funds under this scheme, besides the expenditure 
incurred under „Development, customization, deployment and management of State-wise 
vehicle tracking platform‟. The Committee recommends that the Ministry may come up 
with new schemes to improve safety of women on National Highways in coordination 
with State Government Departments concerned with public transportat ion. Suitable 
provisions may be made to prominently display helpline numbers for women on the NH 
network across the country using well-illuminated signages in multiple languages. 
(Para 80) 
Reply of the Ministry 
12.1 The Scheme “Development, customization, deployment and management of State -
wise vehicle tracking p latform” includes setting up of Monitoring Centres to implement the 
vehicle tracking system and ensure safe commute to the women and children in public 
passenger transport vehicles. This monitoring is also applicable to public service vehicles 
operating on National Highways. 
 
Further recommendation 
12.2 The Committee reiterates that the funds should be allocated to each State and 
Union Territory under the Scheme “Development, customization, deployment and 
management of State-wise vehicle tracking platform”.  
12.3 Further, in order to ensure safety of women, police patrols must be incr eased on 
highways, especially during night-time hours. It must also be ensured that female police 
officers are part of these patrols to make women travellers feel more secure. 
12.4 The Ministry should also encourage community policing initiatives, where lo cal 
residents and volunteers work together with law enforcement agencies to ensure the 
safety of women travellers. 
12.5 The Ministry should promote and support women -centric transport services, 
such as women-only buses or taxi services, especially during night-time hours. 
12.6 The Committee also recommends that the Ministry should design and maintain 
highways with gender -sensitive infrastructure, including safe pedestrian crossings and 
waiting areas for women. 
 
Spur Road for linking Samastipur with NH-119D 
Recommendation/Observation 
13. The Committee desires to be apprised of the reasons for removing the provisions for 
the 2.1 km spur for linking the city of Samastipur with Package -3 of NH -119D Amas -
Darbhanga Expressway and recommends that the Ministry may consider including the 

45 
 
provisions for the spur road to connect the city with the NH that is passing at a distance of 
just 2.1 km from it. 
(Para 92)   
Reply of the Ministry 
13.1 The spur road for linking Samastipur with NH -119D was not considered at DPR 
stage. After receiving public demand, the provision of spur for a length of 1.86 km to connect 
Samastipur town with NH -119D was considered and approved by Land Acquisition 
Committee of NHAI, HQ.  The land acquisition for the same is under progress. 
 
Further recommendation 
13.2 The Committee notes about the progress made in the spur road for linking 
Samastipur with NH -119D. However, the Committee is of the view that the land 
acquisition process must be expedited and the project must be completed as early as 
possible. 
 
 
  

46 
 
CHAPTER-IV 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE FINAL 
REPLIES OF THE MINISTRY ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
-Nil- 
 
**** 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

47 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/ OBSERVATIONS – AT A GLANCE 
CHAPTER-III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
THE MINISTRY HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
The Committee notes the cause of delay in the above -mentioned projects. The 
Committee recommends the Ministry to take measures to eliminate such delays for 
timely completion of projects. All stakeholders involved must be  approached for better 
coordination and resolution of these issues. 
(Para 1.2)  
Quality of Roads  
The Committee recommends that the Ministry should take necessary steps for the 
deployment of MQCVs in the remaining States for better inspection and quality 
assessment of NH projects all over the country. 
(Para 3.3)  
The Committee notes that the Concessionaire is responsible for the provisions of 
lighting on the entire National Highways network. However, the contact details of these 
Concessionaires are not available readily. 
(Para 4.5)  
The Committee also feels that the Ministry needs to come up with a better policy for 
illumination. In this regard, the Ministry must implement smart lighting systems that 
can adjust the intensity of lights based on real -time traffic conditions and weather. This 
can help save energy and improve safety. 
(Para 4.6)  
Further, measures should be taken to reduce light pollution, such as using shields and 
directing light downward to minimize glare and prevent unnecessary light spilla ge into 
the night sky. 
(Para 4.7)  
In addition to it, the Ministry should consider integrating emergency communication 
devices, such as emergency call boxes, into the lighting infrastructure for the safety and 
assistance of motorists. 
(Para 4.8)  
The Committee notes that the prices of items at restaurants, food courts, dhabas are 
exorbitantly high which should be kept in check for all sections of the society. The 
Committee also noted that there is a need for implementation of strict cleanliness and  

48 
 
maintenance standards to keep amenities in good condition. Regular cleaning, pest 
control, and repairs are essential. 
(Para 5.2)  
Further, the Ministry must establish a feedback mechanism for travellers to report 
issues or provide suggestions for improvem ent. The Ministry must act on this feedback 
promptly. 
 (Para 5.3)  
The Committee appreciates the measures taken by the Ministry in respect of road 
safety. However, the Committee still notes that there is a need for community training 
programmes for learning better road safety practices like lane changing, helmets usage, 
etc. 
(Para 6.3)  
The Committee also suggests the introduction of anti -sleep devices in automobiles that 
helps prevent accidents caused by drivers who fall asleep while driving. 
(Para 6.4)  
The Committee notes the provision given in Section 13 of Motor Transport Workers 
Act, 1961. However, the Committee feels that there is laxity in implementation of this 
provision. It is therefore recommended that the Ministry of Road Transport and 
Highways and other stakeholders must come together to formulate a system for its 
proper implementation. Further, the Ministries must work in spreading awareness to 
common masses about this provision. 
(Para 7.6)  
Rectification of Black Spots  
The Committee further recommends that the contact information of Road Safety 
Officers must be kept in public domain for better information regarding black spots. 
(Para 8.4)  
Further, there is a need to prioritize black spots based on the severity of accidents, 
traffic v olume, and other relevant factors and the focus must be on the most critical 
locations first. 
(Para 8.5)  
The local administration must consider lowering speed limits in black spot areas, 
especially in residential or densely populated zones. 
(Para 8.6)  
Further, the Ministry must involve local communities in identifying and addressing 
black spots, as they often have valuable insights into local road safety issues. The 
Ministry should also establish key performance indicators (KPIs) to measure the 

49 
 
success of black spot eradication efforts, such as accident rate reduction and traffic flow 
improvements. 
(Para 8.7)  
The Committee appreciates the measures taken by the Ministry and directs the 
Ministry to approve the request regarding procurement of VIDS. 
(Para 9.2)  
The Committee further recommends that the implementation of Incident Management 
Service should be expedited and extended to all the National highways in the country 
with immediate effect. 
(Para 10.4)  
The Committee recommends that the Rajmarg Yatra App should be promoted on wider 
scale for the optimum utilization of Information, Communication and Technology (ICT) 
and for better dissemination of information regarding grievances of common public. 
(Para 11.2)  
The Committee reiterates that the funds shou ld be allocated to each State and Union 
Territory under the Scheme “Development, customization, deployment and 
management of State-wise vehicle tracking platform”.  
(Para 12.2)  
Further, in order to ensure safety of women, police patrols must be increased on 
highways, especially during night-time hours. It must also be ensured that female police 
officers are part of these patrols to make women travellers feel more secure. 
(Para 12.3)  
The Ministry should also encourage community policing initiatives, where local 
residents and volunteers work together with law enforcement agencies to ensure the 
safety of women travellers. 
(Para 12.4)  
The Ministry should promote and support women -centric transport services, such as 
women-only buses or taxi services, especially during night-time hours. 
(Para 12.5)  
The Committee also recommends that the Ministry should design and maintain 
highways with gender -sensitive infrastructure, including safe pedestrian crossings and 
waiting areas for women. 
(Para 12.6)  

50 
 
Spur Road for linking Samastipur with NH-119D 
The Committee notes about the progress made in the spur road for linking Samastipur 
with NH-119D. However, the Committee is of the view that the land acquisition process 
must be expedited and the project must be completed as early as possible. 
(Para 13.2) 
**** 
 

51 
 
 
 
MINUTES 
  

52 
 
 
 
V 
FIFTH MEETING 
  
The Committee met at  10:00 A.M. on Wednesday, the 6th December, 2023 in Committee 
Room-D, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe Building, New Delhi. 
  
 
Members present: 
1. Shri V. Vijayasai Reddy           - Chairman  
 Rajya Sabha 
 
2. Shrimati S. Phangnon Konyak  
3. Dr. Sonal Mansingh 
4. Shrimati Rajani Ashokrao Patil  
5. Shri A. A. Rahim 
6. Shri Zala Kesridevsinhji 
 
 Lok Sabha 
 
7. Shri Tapir Gao 
8. Shri Sunil Baburao Mendhe 
9. Shri K. Muraleedharan 
10. Shri Chhedi Paswan 
11. Shri Sunil Kumar Pintu  
12. Shri Tirath Singh Rawat 
13. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
14. Shri  Dushyant Singh 
  
SECRETARIAT 
Shri D. S. Prasanna Kumar, Joint Secretary  
Shrimati Monica Baa, Director 
Shrimati Vishwarupa Bhattacharya, Additional Director  
Shrimati Subha Chandrashekar, Deputy Secretary  
Shri Ranajit Chakraborty, Deputy Secretary 
 
 

53 
 
At the outset, the Chairman extended a warm welcome to the Members of the Committee  
and informed that the agenda for the meeting is to consider and adopt the  following Reports of 
the Committee:- 
(i) 1*** 
(ii) Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/ Observations of the 
Committee contained in its Three Hundred Twenty Fifth Report on “ Issues relating to 
Road Sector”;  
(iii) *** 
(iv) *** 
 
2.        The Committee took up for consideration the draft Reports, one by one.  After a brief 
discussion, the Committee adopted the aforesaid four draft Reports and authorized the Chairman 
to carry out minor modifications of typographical and factual errors and formatting, if needed in 
all the Reports. 
3.       The Committee authoriz ed Shri Zala Kesridevsinhji, M.P., and in his absence, Shrimati 
Rajani Ashokrao Patil, M.P., to present the aforesaid Reports in Rajya Sabha on 8 th December, 
2023. The Committee also authorized Shri K. Muraleedharan, M.P. and in his absence, Shri 
Tirath Singh Rawat, M.P. to lay the Reports on the Table of Lok Sabha on the same date. 
4.        ***   
5.       The Meeting adjourned at 10:50 A.M. 
                                                                                                                                       
New Delhi,                                                                                                    Monica Baa 
6th December, 2023                                                                                              Director  
                                                                                                                                                            
                                                                                                                                                             
  
                                                           
1 Relates to other matter 