Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
February, 2014/Magha, 1935 (Saka)
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
RAJYA SABHA 
ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE
TWO HUNDRED THIRTEENTH REPORT
 
REPORT NO. 
213
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 19th February, 2014)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 19th February, 2014)
Action Taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations of the Committee contained in its 
Two Hundredth Report on Development of Tourism, 
National Highways and Water Transport in Kerala 
and Cochin Shipyard Limited
Observations/

Website: http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail: rsc-tt@sansad.nic.in

59
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE
TWO HUNDRED THIRTEENTH REPORT
Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/
Recommendations of the Committee contained in its
Two Hundredth Report on Development of Tourism,
National Highways and Water Transport in Kerala
and Cochin Shipyard Limited
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 19th February, 2014)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 19th February, 2014)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
February, 2014/Magha, 1935 (Saka)
Hindi version of this publication is also available

CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ..................................................................................... (i)-(ii)
2. I NTRODUCTION ..................................................................................................................... (iii)
3. L IST OF A BBREVIATIONS ..................................................................................................... (iv)-(vi)
4. R EPORT ................................................................................................................................ 1—31
5. O BSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS/CONCLUSION — A T A G LANCE ................................... 32—35
6. M INUTES .............................................................................................................................. 3 7—39
7. L IST OF R EPORTS ............................................................................................................... 40—58

COMPOSITION OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE
(2013-14)
1. Shri Sitaram Yechury — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Shashi Bhusan Behera
3. Shri Kunal Kumar Ghosh
4. Shri Narendra Kumar Kashyap
5. Prof. Alka Balram Kshatriya
6. Shri Aayanur Manjunatha
7. Shri V . Hanumantha Rao
8. Shri Satish Sharma
9. Shrimati Bimla Kashyap Sood
10. Shrimati Vasanthi Stanley
LOK SABHA
11. Yogi Adityanath
12. Shri Sisir Kumar Adhikari
13. Shri Ghanshyam Anuragi
14. Shri Subrata Bakshi
15. Shri Haribhai Parthibhai Chaudhary
16. Shrimati Tabassum Hasan
17. Dr. Mahesh Joshi
18. Shri M. Krishnaswamy
19. Shri G.V . Harsha Kumar
20. Shri S. Pakkirappa
21. Shri Prabodh Panda
22. Shri Deoraj Singh Patel
23. Shri Adhalrao Shivaji Patil
24. Shri Nilesh N. Rane
25. Shri Modugula Venugopala Reddy
26. Shri Madan Lal Sharma
27. Shri Dushyant Singh
28. Shri Rakesh Singh
29. Shri Shatrughan Sinha
30. Shri K. Sudhakaran
31. Shri Dinesh Trivedi
(i)

(ii)
SECRETARIAT
Shri N.K. Singh, Joint Secretary
Shri Swarabji B., Joint Director
Dr. (Shrimati) Subhashree Panigrahi, Joint Director
Shrimati Catherine John L., Assistant Director
Shri T. Kennedy Jesudossan, Committee Officer
Shri P.P. Raumon, Committee Officer

(iii)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman, Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport,
Tourism and Culture, having been authorised by the Committee to present on its behalf, do hereby
present this Two Hundred and Thirteenth Report on “Action taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee contained in its two Hundredth Report on
Development of Tourism, National Highways and Water Transport in Kerala and Cochin Shipyard
Limited.
2. The Two Hundredth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on
Transport, Tourism and Culture was presented on the 27
th August, 2013 to the Parliament.
3. Action Taken Replies on the recommendations of the Committee contained in its Two
Hundredth Report were received from the Ministry of Tourism on the 6 th February, 2014. The
Ministries of Shipping, Road Transport and Highways have furnished the replies on the
5
th November, 2013 and the 6 th December, 2013 respectively. The Government of Kerala has
furnished their replies on the 15 th February, 2014.
4. The Committee considered and adopted the Report in its meeting held on the 18 th February, 2014.
SITARAM YECHURY
NEW D ELHI; Chairman,
February 18, 2014 Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Magha 29, 1935 (Saka) Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture.

LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS
AD – Amphibian Dredger
ASI – Archaeological Survey of India
AYUSH – Department of Ayurveda, Yoga and Naturopathy, Unani, Siddha and Homoeopathy
BOT – Build, Operate and Transfer
BPCL – Bharat Petroleum Corporation Limited
CAD – Computer-aided Design
CALA – Central Authority of Land Acquisition
CAM – Computer-aided Manufacturing
CDs – Compact Disks
CFA – Central Financial Assistance
CIFNET – Central Institute of Fisheries, Nautical and Engineering Training
CISF – Central Industrial Security Force
CSEZ – Cochin Special Economic Zone
CSL – Cochin Shipyard Limited
DCI – Dredging Corporation of India
DPP – Defence Procurement Policy
DTVs – Domestic Tourist Visits
EDC – Eco-Development Committees
EXIM – Export-Import
FACT – The Fertilizer and Chemicals Travancore Limited
FAM – Familiarization Tours
FSI – Fisheries Survey of India
FTVs – Foreign Tourist Visits
GRSE – Garden Reach Shipbuilders and Engineers Limited
GSI – Geological Survey of India
GSL – Goa Shipyard Limited, Goa
HPCL – Hindustan Petroleum Corporation Limited
HSL – Hindustan Shipyard Limited
(iv)

(v)
IAC – Indigenous Aircraft Carrier
ICTT – International Container Transshipment Terminal
IOC – Indian Oil Corporation
IRE – Indian Rare Earths Limited
IWAI – Inland Waterways Authority of India
IWT – Inland Waterways Transport
KDHP – Kannan Devan Hills Plantations Company Private Limited
KITTS – Kerala Institute of Tourism and Travel Studies
KMML – The Kerala Minerals and Metals Limited
L A – Land Acquisition
LAD – Least Available Depth
LDCL – Lakshadweep Development Corporation Limited
LOA – Length Overall
LO-LO – Lift On-Lift Off
LPG – Liquefied Petroleum Gas
MDA – Market Development Assistance
MDL – Mazagon Dock Limited, Mumbai
MGNREGS – Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme
MICE – Meetings, Incentives, Conferences and Events
MORTH – Ministry of Road Transport and Highways
NBHP – National Board for Accreditation of Hospitals and Healthcare Providers
NHAI – National Highways Authority of India
NHDP – National Highway Development Project
NLC – National Level Consultant
NW – National Waterways
OBE – Open Book Estimates
OEMs – Original Equipment Manufacturers
P A – Protected Area
PAP – Project Affected Persons
PA TA – Pacific Asia Travel Association India Chapter
PSU – Public Sector Undertaking
PTR – Periyar Tiger Reserve
R&R – Rehabilitation and Resettlement

ROW – Right of Way
SCI – Shipping Corporation of India
TEUs – Twenty Feet Equivalent Units
TVOA – T ourism Visa on Arrival
UNESCO – United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization
UNWTO – United Nations World Tourism Organization
USP – Unique Selling Point
V A T – Value Added Tax
V oA – Visa-on-Arrival
(vi)

1
REPORT
The Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Government on the
observations/recommendations as contained in its Two Hundredth Report on Development of
Tourism, National Highways and Water Transport in Kerala and Cochin Shipyard Limited which
was presented on the 27
th February, 2013 to the Parliament.
2. Action Taken Replies were received from the Ministry of Tourism on the 6 th February, 2014.
The Ministries of Shipping, Road Transport and Highways have furnished the replies on the
5
th November, 2013 and the 6 th December, 2013 respectively. The Government of Kerala has
furnished the replies on 15 th February, 2014.
3. On scrutiny of the Action Taken Replies, the Committee has made observations on each
item of Action taken/proposed to be taken by the Government. The recommendations of the
Committee contained in the Two Hundredth Report, action taken thereon by the Ministry and
further recommendations/observations of the Committee on each item of action taken have been
given in the succeeding paragraph.
Chapter–I : Tourism in Kerala
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
4. The Committee visited the dedicated Cruise Terminal ‘Samudrika’ built at the Cochin Port.
Though non-operational during the time of Committee’s visit, it was built for providing all the
amenities for cruise passengers viz., Immigration, Customs, waiting lounge, rest rooms, facilitation
cell, security, dedicated boat terminal, Marina for luxury yachts etc. The Committee feels that this
is the potential area of tourism development for Cochin as well as other ports. The Committee
recommends that the cruise potential of Cochin Port may be included in the ‘Incredible India
Campaign’ to give maximum publicity to attract cruise tourists. Further, the Committee emphasizes
that more training/workshops should be organised by concerned ports to train the employees/agents
in cruise tourism so that the ports are equipped to deal in this new opportunity. Further,
Government can contemplate to extend this new avenue to other major ports as well.
(Para 14)
Reply of the Government
5. The Ministry of Tourism accepts the recommendation of the Committee. The Ministry of
Tourism organized a training workshop for port officials/agencies directly involved in cruise tourism
at Goa from 2
nd to 4 th July, 2012. The workshop had 52 participants from Departments like Customs,
Immigration, CISF, Ports, State Governments and stakeholders from the Cruise Tourism industry.
6. The Steering Committee on Cruise Tourism has identified the ports of Chennai, Cochin,
New Mangalore, Mormugao and Mumbai for development of Cruise Tourism.
7. Under its Scheme for ‘Assistance to Central agencies for Tourism Infrastructure
Development’, the Ministry of Tourism provides financial assistance to the ports for development
of Cruise Tourism related infrastructure. During 2012-13, Central Financial Assistance of
Rs.2243.32 lakh was sanctioned for development of dedicated cruise berthing facilities at Cochin
Port. During 2012-13, the Ministry of Tourism has sanctioned an amount of Rs.1724.66 lakh to
Chennai Port Trust for developing Cruise Passenger Facility Centre in the existing passenger
terminal at Chennai Port.

2
Name Year Amount Amount Status
Sanction Released
(Rs. in
lakhs)
CFA for Tourism 2008-09 1450.00 1274.94 Completed
Infrastructure in
Willingdon Island,
Cochin Port under
Assistance to Central
Agencies Scheme
Development of 201 1-12 491.53 245.77 Ongoing
Cruise Passenger
Facilities centre at
Cochin Port under the
Scheme of
Assistance to Central
Agencies Scheme for
Tourist Infrastructure
Development
Development of 2012-13 2243.32 1121.66 Ongoing
dedicated cruise
berthing facilities at
Cochin Port
8. Development and promotion of tourism is primarily the responsibility of the State
Governments/Union Territory Administration. The Ministry also provides financial assistance to
State Governments and Union Territory Governments for tourism projects based on proposals,
received from them which are complete in all respects as per the Scheme Guidelines, inter-se-
priority and subject to availability of funds.
9. Further, Ministry of Tourism has printed promotional material on Kerala especially a tourist
guide on Kochi which includes information on all the facilities available at that destination, in
collaboration with M/s Eicher India Limited. Tourist sites in Kerala have been promoted through the
media campaigns of Ministry of Tourism. In addition, information on Kerala and Kochi in particular
is also available on the website of Ministry of Tourism.
10. Government of Tamil Nadu vide  their communication No.14015/TI/2013-14 dated
20
th December, 2013 has conveyed that Cruise Tourism will be promoted in association with
Chennai Port Trust and Tuticorin Port Trust. Many luxury cruise like P&O, Royal Caribbean, Royal
Norwegian luxury liners are frequently coming to our ports. Action is being taken to establish
Chennai Maina to promote Water Sports and Water Taxis.
11. The Union Territory Administration of Daman and Diu vide their communication No.1/52/
JDT/2013-14/400 dated 22 nd January, 2014 has conveyed that the Tourism Department, Diu is in
the process to purchase Luxury Cruise Ferry Boat for accommodating 40 passengers. The
Department had invited bids twice and since the bidder could not comply the set proceeding they
have been rejected. The Department is again releasing the tender for the third time.
12. Ministry of Shipping vide  their communication No.SY-16014/3/2013-CSL dated
22
nd January, 2014 has conveyed that they have requested the Ministries, concerned Department,

3
Shipping Corporation of India and Dredging Corporation of India for taking necessary action on
the recommendation made by the Committee.
Reply of the Government of Kerala
13. Kerala Tourism earnestly supports the suggestion. The Government of India can make the
cruise terminal in Cochin one of the elements in the Incredible India campaign. Kerala Tourism
strongly supports the idea of training/workshop and will take a proactive role in organizing them.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
14. The Committee takes note of the reply. The Committee is of the opinion that the
steps taken by the Ministry of Tourism need to be monitored regularly to achieve the
targets. The Committee recommends that water sports and water taxis proposed in Chennai
also can be included in the other viable ports. The Committee expresses its concern over
the past accidents involving cruise boats/houseboats etc. where many tourists lost their lives
and to remind that the luxury boats need to be procured without any compromise to the
safety norms prescribed for it. The Committee notes that the Ministry of Tourism is silent
about giving publicity to the cruise tourism potential of Kochi Port in their Incredible India
Campaign. The Committee reiterates its recommendations that cruise terminal in Kochi
may be included as one of the elements in Incredible India Campaign.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
15. The Committee notes that Alappuzha and the adjoining regions have great potential in
backwater cruise tourism. The Committee recommends that the Ministry of Tourism, Government
of India should give all out efforts to provide adequate infrastructure for backwater tourism and
provide the necessary finances for the purpose.
(Para 16)
Reply of the Government
16. Information sought from the State Government of Kerala, which is yet to be received.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
17. The Committee finds the reply evasive. The delay in securing the reply in time must
have been dealt with seriously. The Committee further recommends that Ministry of
Tourism should make all out efforts to provide adequate infrastructure for backwater
tourism in Alappuzha and provide the necessary finances for the purpose.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
18. The Committee appreciates the initiatives taken by the Central/State Government for
providing wellness tourism and accreditation of wellness centres. The responsibility of the
Government and stakeholders adhering to the conditionalities speaks volumes about the importance
being accorded to tourists’ safety and clean business ethics by the tourism fraternity in Kerala.
Further, the drive undertaken for providing financial assistance under the Market Development
Assistance Scheme (MDA) and giving exposure to Wellness Tourism Service Providers shows the
pro-local people and pro-entrepreneurial approach. The Committee would like the State/Central
Government and all concerned to come up with such solution providing ideas so that the wellness
tourism in Kerala is developed as brand of its own to attract tourists from world over.
(Para 20)

4
Reply of the Government
19. The Ministry of Tourism accepts the recommendation of the Committee. Under the MDA
scheme, the following Wellness Tourism Service Providers from Kerala have availed support:
● Amala Ayurvedic Hospital and Research Centre, Thrissur has participated in FITUR,
International Tourism Trade Fair, Madrid held from 30 th January – 3 rd February, 2013.
● Rajah Beach Ayurveda Hospital, Thrissur has participated in PATA India Chapter Road
Show-2012 at Auckland, Sydney and Melbourne held from October 1-5, 2012.
20. The Ministry of Tourism organized a sensitization workshop in August, 2011 in Cochin to
encourage wellness centres to adopt the accreditation of wellness centres developed by National
Board for Accreditation of Hospitals and Healthcare Providers (NABH) in consultation with the
Department of Ayurveda, Yoga and Naturopathy, Unani, Siddha and Homoeopathy (AYUSH). The
Government of Kerala also has a system of approving wellness centres.
21. Wellness tourism has also been specifically promoted at various international platforms such
as World Travel Mart, London, ITB Berlin, ITB Asia and Arabian Travel Mart, Dubai. Wellness
Tourism is also promoted by the Ministry through its centralised print, electronic, internet and
outdoor campaigns and also Road Shows and Know India seminars.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
22. The Committee notes the reply. These were the information available with the
Committee at the time of preparation of the Report in July, 2013. It seems that Ministry
has not taken any further action on the recommendation of the Committee. The Committee
recommends that the Government may take further necessary steps to promote wellness-
tourism.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
23. One of the emerging tourism products in the State of Kerala is Medical Tourism. But large
scale support from the Union Government is required to develop this potential. There have to be
efforts from the Ministry of Tourism to promote Medical Tourism including Ayurveda, Siddha,
Unani etc., in association with Kerala Tourism. The issues relating to issuing Medical Visa also need
to be addressed.
(Para 22)
Reply of the Government
24. The Ministry of Tourism provides Market Development Assistance (MDA) to Medical Tourism
Service Providers i.e., Representatives of Hospitals accredited by Joint Commission for International
Accredited Hospitals (JCI) and National Accreditation Board of Hospitals (NABH) and Medical
Tourism facilitators (Travel Agents/Tour Operators) approved by the Ministry of Tourism,
Government of India and engaged in Medical Tourism; for participation in approved Medical/Tourism
Fairs/Medical Conferences/Wellness conferences/Wellness Fairs and its allied Road Shows (PMT).
Hospitals and Wellness Centres from the State of Kerala have availed MDA scheme over the years.
25. The Ministry of Tourism organized a sensitization workshop in August, 2011 in Cochin to
encourage wellness centres to adopt the accreditation of wellness centres developed by National
Board for Accreditation of Hospitals and Healthcare Providers (NABH) in consultation with the
Department of Ayurveda, Yoga and Naturopathy, Unani, Siddha and Homoeopathy (AYUSH). The
Government of Kerala also has a system of approving wellness centres.

5
Reply of the Government of Kerala (Para 20 and 22)
26. The steps taken by the Government to promote Medical/Health Tourism include promotion
in overseas markets through Road Shows, Know India seminars, participation in Travel Marts, and
production of brochures, CDs, films and other publicity material.
27. The Ministry of Tourism has raised issues relating to grant of Medical Visa/Medical
Attendant Visa to foreign nationals, in the Inter-Ministerial meetings held with the Ministry of Home
Affairs, Ministry of External Affairs and other concerned Ministries.
28. Kerala Tourism welcomes the suggestion of the Committee. Government of India may
extend suitable financial assistance under MDA scheme (Market Development Assistance Scheme)
to promote “Wellness Tourism” as significant sub brand the world over. Department of Tourism,
Government of Kerala has already launched a global campaign called “Kerala the Home of
Ayurveda” and we seek suitable assistance from Government of India for such focused campaigns
in wellness tourism sector.
29. The Government of India may launch a scheme for the promotion of medical tourism.
Kerala Tourism will support and co-operate in this initiative by charting clear plans and specific
budgetary outlays in consultation with the private players.
30. Ministry of Tourism may also take action to have medical visas issued on an expeditious
basis, which will remove the pain element in the process.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
31. The Committee may be apprised of the outcome of the meetings held with the
concerned agencies in the matter of granting medical visa to tourists. The Committee
recommends that the Government of India and Government of Kerala should coordinate
with each other in promoting wellness tourism at global level and effort be made for
expeditious issuance of medical visa/medical attendance visa.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
32. The cardinal principles for development of eco-tourism are really laudable. The Committee
appreciates the efforts of Kerala Government in maintenance of environmental integrity and
development of tourism in an ecologically sustainable manner. During its visit to Eravikulam
National Park, Munnar, Periyar Wild Life Sanctuary and Gavi National Park, Thekkady, the
Committee got a first-hand experience of the functioning module as to how the pristine beauty of
the locations were maintained and development of eco-tourism’s way was paved.
(Para 27)
Reply of the Government of Kerala
33. Eco-tourism is an agenda that needs to be brought on to the national centre-stage and
proposes that the Government of India should commit special financial packages for developing
eco-tourism centres like Gavi, Eravikulam, Munnar belt of destinations and other major destinations
in the State into world class destinations.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
34. The Committee recommends that the Ministry of Tourism, Government of India may
take necessary steps to provide special financial packages for developing eco-tourism
centres like Gavi, Eravikulam, Munnar and other major destinations.

6
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
35. On the basis of interaction with various stakeholders and its first-hand experience, the
Committee feels that various satellite towns adjoining Thekkady have immense tourism potential. In
view of the fact that Thekkady and the adjoining Kumily towns are already saturated, the
Committee emphasises the need to develop the satellite towns/villages as tourist destinations. The
Committee further recommends that the Union Ministry of Tourism and Government of Kerala
should cooperate with each other to ensure that satellite villages of Thekkady are provided with
adequate infrastructure to develop as tourist destinations.
(Para 40)
Reply of the Government of Kerala
36. As recommended by the Committee, Kerala Tourism is committed to promote satellite
villages of Thekkady and other similar destinations with the assistance of Government of India. A
master plan in this regard is already under preparation.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
37. The Committee desires that details of the master plan may be communicated to it. The
Committee recommends that Ministry of Tourism, Government of India may support the
initiative to promote satellite villages of Thekkady as tourist destinations.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
38. The Committee feels that there is an urgent need to establish a full-fledged museum in Thekkady
to have first hand experience to the tourists about the social, cultural, traditional and historical aspects
of the region. This will give authentic information on the people and culture of the area. The Committee
also recommends that museums should be established at all the tourist destinations.
(Para 41)
39. The Committee was told that there is a State-owned vegetable farm near Kumily. The
Committee recommends that a Botanical Garden may be established in Kumily, if need be, the State
owned farm may be converted into a Botanical Garden.
(Para 42)
40. The Committee further recommends that vehicular traffic may be restricted inside Periyar
Wild Life sanctuary. The present parking area which is inside the forest area may be shifted out
of the sanctuary. Only the battery operated vehicles may be permitted from the parking lot to the
sanctuary/boat landing area. At Eravikulam National Park, Munnar, the Committee observed that
battery operated vehicles are used for transporting tourists to the National Park. The same model
can be adopted in Periyar Sanctuary also.
(Para 43)
Reply of the Government of Kerala
41. Department of Tourism, Government of Kerala agree with the recommendations and will
take all possible measures to bring them to fruition. We will also approach the Government of India
with specific proposals for financial support in this regard.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
42. The Committee takes note of the reply. The Committee notes with dismay that even
after a year since the recommendation of the Committee submitted to Parliament, the

7
Governments of India and Kerala State have not taken any steps to implement it. The
Committee does not know the reasons for this. The Committee reiterates its
recommendations and expects to have a response in this regard of the steps taken.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
43. The Committee also recommends that comprehensive waste management system may be
introduced in Kumily and Thekkady. At no stage the sewage may be allowed to be dumped in the
Periyar Tiger Reserve (Periyar lake). The Government of Kerala and the Ministry of Tourism,
Government of India should take initiative in this regard.
(Para 44)
44. The Committee was informed that the tourists were being charged exorbitantly and the
authorities of Periyar Tiger Reserve were permitting the tourists arbitrarily. In case of boat-tickets
also, there are great variations in price between those bought from the counter and the online
bookings. The representations received in this regard have been forwarded to the Ministry of
Tourism, Government of India and Kerala Tourism for appropriate remedial measures. The
Committee hopes that the appropriate authorities will look into these complaints and take remedial
measures.
(Para 46)
Reply of the Government
45. The development and promotion of tourism destinations and products is primarily the
responsibility of the respective State Government and Union Territory Administration. However, the
Ministry of Tourism provides Central Financial Assistance (CFA) to various State Governments and
Union Territory Administrations for tourism projects, identified in consultation with them, subject
to inter-se priority, availability of funds and scheme guidelines.
46. The Ministry of Tourism accepts the recommendation of the Committee. The Ministry has
conveyed the directions of the Committee to the State Government of Kerala for taking necessary
action.
47. Further, the Ministry of Tourism has finalized the Sustainable Tourism Criteria for India for
Beach/Backwater/Lake/River Tourism on 11.12.2013. The Criteria addresses the need for a
comprehensive waste management system.
Reply of the Government of Kerala
48. Department of Tourism, Government of Kerala agree with the recommendations and will
take all possible measures to bring them to fruition. We will also approach the Government of India
with specific proposals for financial support in this regard.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
49. Regarding waste management at Periyar Tiger Reserve and exorbitant charges of
boat tickets, no concrete and specific step has been taken to resolve it. The Committee
reiterates its recommendations. The Committee desires that the Ministry of Tourism may
furnish a proper response to it after obtaining feedback from the Government of Kerala.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
50. The Committee also recommends that adequate number of modern boats which are pollution
free and less noisy may be provided at the Periyar sanctuary so that the wildlife is not disturbed.

8
This will also avoid the mad rush for boat tickets. Ministry of Tourism should cooperate in this
regard.
(Para 45)
51. The Committee recommends that necessary efforts may also be made for training of a team
of naturalists recruited from the local Eco-Development Committee; setting up of training facilities
for forest dependent communities in responsible tourism initiatives; setting up of eco-shops for
marketing of value added products developed by local communities; developing nature trails as an
integral part of jungle camping linking spices gardens and hamlets, etc.
(Para 47)
Reply of the Government
52. The development and promotion of tourism destinations and products including Eco-Tourism
is primarily the responsibility of the respective State Government and Union Territory
Administration. However, the Ministry of Tourism provides Central Financial Assistance (CFA) to
various State Governments and Union Territory Administrations for tourism projects including Eco-
Tourism, identified in consultation with them, subject to inter-se priority, availability of funds and
scheme guidelines. The Ministry of Tourism sanctions projects for training of naturalists under the
Hunar Se Rozgar  programme of this Ministry. However, the Ministry has not received any proposal
from the State Government of Kerala for training of naturalists.
Reply of the Government of Kerala
53. Department of Tourism, Government of Kerala agree with the recommendations and will
take all possible measures to bring them to fruition. We will also approach the Government of India
with specific proposals for financial support in this regard.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
54. The Committee feels that the reply given by the Ministry of Tourism is too general
in nature and the recommendations of the Committee could not get the desired attention. The
Committee desired to know the follow up action in this regard. The Committee reiterates its
recommendation. The Ministry of Tourism, Government of India may please supply the
Committee the specific initiatives taken to implement the recommendation of the Committee.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
55. The Committee feels that there is a need for establishment of Tribal Culture and Art
Museum at Kumily and developing the existing Rajiv Gandhi Museum of Flora and Fauna at Kumily
into a full-fledged museum. The Committee found that the Forest Department has tried its best to
preserve the folk culture of the area by providing a platform to the folk artists of the region and
encouraged the musicians and dancers to carry on the precious legacy. This gesture is appreciated
by the Committee as this initiative enabled them to retain their talents without disturbing their
livelihood. The Committee feels that this initiative could be further encouraged and many more
artists would be benefited if it is taken up in a large scale. The Government is not only bound for
development of tourism but also for preservation and transfer of the knowledge of wild, natural
and cultural heritage to the future generation. The Committee wants them to take a considerate
view on the problems being faced by the stakeholders in these Park/Sanctuaries. The Committee
directs the Ministry of Tourism to offer patronage and extend necessary financial support to the
proposals. It also recommends that they should study the feasibility of introducing ropeways
without hindering the ecology at Thekkady and Munnar.
(Para 48)

9
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
56. The Committee visited the Tea plantations, Tea Museum and Tea Factory of Kanan Devan
Hills Plantation Company Private Limited (KHDP) at Munnar. The Committee felt that the spread
of tea plantations from top to bottom of the hillocks really offered a special experience to tourists,
which instantly makes it as its Unique Selling Proposition. The tea estates and bungalows just add
another tweak to this perfect serenity. The Committee observes that this experiential tourism would
certainly carve a niche for itself, the State/Central Government have to make concerted efforts to
coordinate with each other in maintaining the pristine beauty of the area and campaign hard at
every level to promote Munnar as one of the prime tourists destination of India.
(Para 52)
Reply of the Government
57. The development and promotion of tourism destinations and products including niche
tourism is primarily the responsibility of the respective State Government and Union Territory
Administration. However, the Ministry of Tourism provides Central Financial Assistance (CFA) to
various State Governments and Union Territory Administrations for tourism projects, identified in
consultation with them, subject to inter-se priority, availability of funds and scheme guidelines.
58. The Ministry of Tourism accepts the recommendation of the Committee. The Ministry has
conveyed the directions of the Committee to the State Government of Kerala for taking necessary
action. The Ministry of Tourism promotes tea and plantation tourism globally through its Incredible
India campaign.
Reply of the Government of Kerala
59. Department of Tourism, Government of Kerala agrees with the recommendations and will
take all possible measures to bring them to fruition. We will also approach the Government of India
with specific proposals for financial support in this regard.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
60. The Committee is not satisfied with the reply. The Committee notes that Ministry of
Tourism, Government of Kerala being the principal stakeholders had the major role to take
initiatives to implement the recommendation of the Committee. However, no such
information has been furnished to the Committee. The Committee reiterates its
recommendation above and instructs the Ministry of Tourism, Government of India to
further take up the matter with the Government of Kerala.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
61. This Committee fully supports this global Spice Route Tourism initiative proposed by Kerala
Tourism which not only revives India’s glorious heritage as a destination for travellers and traders
but would give a larger foothold for garnering world tourism revenue. The Committee further calls
upon all the related Ministries of the Government of India to fully support this initiative. Especially,
Ministry of Tourism is recommended to endorse the project by taking a leeway.
(Para 56)
Reply of the Government
62. The development and promotion of various tourism destinations and products is primarily
the responsibility of the respective State Government/Union Territory (UT) Administration. The

10
Ministry of Tourism, however, provides Central Financial Assistance (CFA) to the State Governments
and Union Territory Administrations for tourism projects identified in consultation with them, subject
to the availability of funds, inter-se priority and adherence to Scheme Guidelines.
63. The project proposal for the development of the Spice Route Circuit, Malabar Zone has not
been received in the Ministry.
Reply of the Government of Kerala
64. Department of Tourism, Government of Kerala agree with the recommendations and will
take all possible measures to bring them to fruition. We will also approach the Government of India
with specific proposals for financial support in this regard.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
65. The Committee is happy that Government of Kerala is in agreement with
Committee’s recommendation. The Committee however, feels that there is a need to have
a closer and regular coordination between Ministry of Tourism, Government of India and
Ministry of Tourism, Government of Kerala to augment and promote tourism and its allied
activities. The Committee would like to know the steps taken by the Government of Kerala
on the recommendation of the Committee.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
66. Muziris (the present day Kodungalloor and the adjoining areas) is reputed to be the ancient
world’s greatest trading centre in the East. As the focal point of commerce for over 2500 years,
this bustling sea port traded in everything from spices to precious stones with the Greeks, Romans
and the rest of the world. It was also the doorway to India for varied cultures and races:
Buddhists, Arabs, Chinese, Jews, Romans, Portuguese, Dutch and even the British.
(Para 57)
67. The representatives of Kerala Tourism informed the Committee that the Muziris Heritage
project is in the active stage of implementation and they are planning to link it with the spice route
project. The Committee is fully in agreement with the Kerala Tourism initiative to club it with the
Muziris Heritage project, one of the biggest conservation projects in India showcasing a culture of
3000 years or more, which is already partnered by various departments of State Government of
Kerala, Central Government and the UNESCO. This would make Kochi, Muziris and Malabar the
Heritage Circuit of Kerala. The Committee recommends that Ministry of Tourism, Government of
India should give all the support required for promoting spice route and Muziris Heritage Project.
(Para 58)
Reply of the Government
68. Ministry of Tourism has sanctioned an amount of Rs.4052.83 lakh towards the project
Development of Muziris Heritage Circuit connecting historically and archaeologically important
places of Kodungalloor in Kerala as a Mega Project. Out of the sanctioned amount of Rs.4052.83
lakh, an amount of Rs.2836.99 lakh has been released. Some of the important components of
the project are conservation of archaeological monuments such as Holycross Church,
Chennamangalam, Kottayikovilakam, Vypeekota Seminary, Paravur Jewish Synagogue, Kottapuram
Fort, Cheramanparamubu, Kizthali Siva and Pallipuram Fort.
Reply of the Government of Kerala
69. The Spice route and the Muziris Heritage Projects have the potential to place India on the

11
Global Heritage Tourism Map. Even though the UNWTO and UNESCO have supported the project,
support of the Government of India is critical for mounting this project. The Ministry of tourism
may therefore take a leadership position to set up what would perhaps India’s most significant
heritage tourism project in recent times in association with the Ministries of External Affairs and
the Ministry of Culture.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
70. The Committee recommends that the Ministry of Tourism should take up the matter
with the Ministry of External Affairs and Ministry of Culture to ensure the success of spice
route project and Muziris Heritage Project. It needs to be taken up with utmost priority and
seriousness.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
71. The Committee recommends that the Ropeway and the Railway System can be revived by
the Government on its own or with the help of KDHPL which is the owner of most of the land
in Munnar. The Ropeway can offer a unique experience to the tourists without interfering with the
environment.
(Para 60)
72. The Committee was apprised of the tea plantation history by Kanan Devan Hills Plantations
Company Private Limited (KHDP) which was the pioneer of tea plantation in Munnar. The Tea
Museum showcased the traversity of the Company from materialisation of the streak idea of an
enterprenuer to full-fledged company of today. It was brought before the Committee that the
Kanan Devan Hills Plantations Company Private Limited (KDHP) succeeded Tata Tea Limited on
1
st April, 2005, when the latter exited most of its plantations in Munnar to focus on the growth
of its branded tea business. The Committee recommends the Ministry of Tourism to consider the
proposal of the Ropeway connecting from Munnar to Eravikulam, suitably. This can be constructed
by the Government agencies or in collaborations with KDHPL. The Ropeway will be an added
attraction in Munnar. It may also reduce human intervention inside the Eravikulam National Park.
(Para 65)
Reply of the Government of Kerala
73. This recommendation would decongest Munnar of vehicular traffic and create a novel
experience to visitors of Munnar. Since Govt. of India may endorse the project and help with some
of the clearances that would be required from other Ministries of the Government of India.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
74. The Committee notes the reply. The Committee feels that the Government of Kerala
needs to place concrete proposals and clearances required before the Ministry of Tourism,
Government of India. It expects the latter to pursue the matter on urgent basis.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
75. This is a serious issue having larger connotations in the promotion of tourism. Ministry of
Tourism is requested to convene an urgent inter-State discussion on the subject. The Committee
feels that tourism is not a high end product only for the rich domestic and foreign tourists; it could
be made easily affordable to the rising upper and lower middle classes of the neighbouring States.
Resolution of these smaller issues will lead to tourism development.
(Para 70)

12
Reply of the Government
76. The Ministry of Tourism has taken up with State Governments/Union Territories and
Ministry of Road Transport and Highways, Government of India regarding issue of rationalization
of Motor Vehicle Taxes. On 27.02.2012, as per an order of Ministry of Road Transport and
Highways has constituted an Empowered Group of State Transport Ministers for considering the
issue of rationalization of Motor Vehicle Taxes. The terms and reference of this Empowered Group
are as follows:
(i) To levy life time tax at floor rate of 6% of the sale price before V AT on two-wheelers,
cars/LMVs and taxis/maxis in all the States.
(ii) Not to charge any tax on temporary inter-State movement of two-wheelers, car/LMVs
and taxis/maxis for a period up to 3 months.
(iii) To charge full tax in the new State if the two-wheelers, cars/LMVs and taxis/maxis
are less than two years old, with refund from the original State if the vehicles are
moved inter-State permanently. However, in respect of cars/LMVs and taxis maxis
having sale price of more than Rs.10 lakhs, the tax in the new State would be
required to be paid with applicable refund from the original State.
(iv) Not to charge any tax in the new State if the two-wheelers, cars/LMVs and taxis/
maxis are more than two years old and not to give any refund by the original Sate
in such cases.
77. The matter is being studied by the Empowered Group of State Transport Ministers wherein
the Union Ministry of Tourism is also represented.
Reply of the Government of Kerala
78. Department of Tourism, Government of Kerala supports the recommendation and urges the
Govt. of India to take up an advocacy/coordinating position.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
79. The Committee notes that considerable time has elapsed since the constitution of the
Empowered Group of State Transport Minister for the rationalization of Motor Vehicle Taxes.
The Committee, therefore, desires to know the recommendations of the Empowered Group
on the terms and references prescribed for the purpose. The Committee further
recommends that the matter may be pursued with the Ministry of Road Transport and
Highways and other concerned State Government authorities.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
80. The Committee further emphasizes that all the Southern States should join hands to promote
tourism. The “Golden Triangle Module” as existing in north India for promotion of Tourism can
be replicated as a “Golden Quadrangle” in southern region. Further, Ministry of Tourism should
strive to replicate the successful tourism modules of Kerala in other Southern States as well. The
matter may be taken up with the Chief Secretaries of all the Southern States.
(Para 71)
Reply of the Government
81. Government of Tamil Nadu vide their letter No.14015/T1/2013-14 dated 20
th December,
2013 has conveyed that to showcase the tourism destination in South India in the form of an

13
integrated circuit it has been decided to run the Southern Splendor Tourism Train on the pattern
of “The Palace on Wheels” covering the State of Andhra Pradesh, Tamil Nadu, Kerala, Karnataka
and Pondicherry. This tourist train will take guests on tour across hills and valleys along with
beaches and mountains to temples and forests, over a period of two weeks.
● Andhra Pradesh Tourism Development Corporation has submitted a detailed feasibility
report for which, in principle, acceptance from the Government of India has been
accorded under the scheme of large revenue generating projects.
● The project cost was around Rs.40.00 crores to be met by Government of India in
the ratio of 25% under the scheme-Large Revenue generating projects, 25% from
Railways and the rest is to be raised from participating States.
● The investment work out to Rs.5.00 crores for each State. Apart from Ministry of
Tourism and Railways grant of Rs.10 crore each, Department of Tourism, Government
of Andhra Pradesh has decided to contribute Rs.5.00 crores.
● In this regard, TTDC cannot afford financial risks and does not have the required
trained manpower to handle luxury train.
● However, TTDC can make ground arrangements at tourist places in Tamil Nadu for
sight seeing and co-ordinations through Department Officers and TTDC Hotels.
82. To work out the cost of operation, marketing and other aspects with an external Agency/
IRCTC the Director, Department of Tourism, Government of Karnataka has requested the Principal
Secretary/Commissioner of Tourism to attend the meeting to discuss the modalities of train
reaching the concerned States and other operational issues under the Chairmanship of Additional
Chief Secretary, Department of Tourism, Government of Karnataka. The meeting was not
conducted on the dates fixed. However, the Additional Director, Tourism Department held a
discussion on 2.9.2013 with the Director of Tourism, Government of Karnataka and informed her
that Trichy Srirangam Temple and other important tourist places of Tamil Nadu-Madurai,
Rameswaram and Kanyakumari may be suitably incorporated in the tour itinerary. Karnataka
Tourism was requested to send the communication regarding the inclusion of above places in tour
itinerary of Peninsular Tourism Train.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
83. The Committee appreciates the new imitative of running ‘South Splendor Tourism
Train’ on the pattern of ‘The Palace on Wheels”. The Committee hopes that the increased
inflow of tourists due to this train will have cascading effects on tourism and allied
activities specially hotels, guest houses, restaurants, gift shoppe etc.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
84. The Committee found that presently the Central and State Governments are levying different
taxes on hotel industry. This disincentive of high expense of stay compared to other States may
hinder the tourism prospects. The cost accounting to visit to Sri Lanka, Malaysia, Singapore, etc.
works out less as it comes to Kerala. The Committee requests the State and the Central
Governments to make an effort to re-workout their respective taxation structures so that the
tourism of State of Kerala is not a causality.
(Para 77)
Reply of the Government
85. The Ministry of Tourism, Government of India and State Governments has taken up the

14
following proposals from time to time with the Ministry of Finance, Government of India to boost
development of tourism infrastructure in the hospitality sector in the country.
(i) The imposition of Service Tax by the Central Government has led to an anomalous
double-taxation of the same revenue which is already subject to levy of V AT and
Luxury Tax by the State Government. Pending introduction of the Goods and Services
Tax (GST) regime, hotel accommodation and restaurants should be included in the
negative list of Service Tax.
(ii) The rate of Value Added Tax (VAT) levied on food served in restaurants, which
typically ranges from 12.5%-14.5% across States, should be lowered to 4%.
(iii) All State Governments should adopt a uniform system of Luxury Tax, wherein the tax
is charged at a rate not exceeding 4% and is applicable only on actual room tariff.
Reply of the Government of Kerala
86. Kerala Tourism welcomes the initiative. Government of Kerala has already slashed luxury tax
on the MICE segment from the existing 20% to 10%. Luxury tax on accommodation has been
reduced from 12.5% to 5% in the off season months of June, July and August. Government of India
may also take a proactive approach in relation to the rationalization of the Service Tax imposed.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
87. The Committee takes note of the reply. The Committee recommends that the
taxation need to be reviewed to help tourism industry grow further. The Ministry of Tourism
may pursue the matter with the Ministry of Finance.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
88. On the issue of bundling of service tax, the Committee observed that a customer is taxed
3 times for a single product. Since this tour product is taxed on the first part, the Committee feels
that the second part i.e., tax paid by the tour operator may be exempted to avoid the product being
taxed three times. Kerala Tourism should take initiative to ensure that multiple taxes are not acting
as a stumbling block for growth of Tourism in Kerala.
(Para 78)
Reply of the Government
89. A meeting was held with Secretary, Department of Economic Affairs on 7
th February, 2013
and this matter was discussed. It was suggested that when the main service provider subcontracts
its activity to a similar sub-service provider, service tax paid by sub-service provider should be
allowed as CENVAT credit to the main service provider to avoid multiplicity of service tax on the
same transaction. Alternately exemption from charging service tax within the same category of
service providers be allowed. This proposal was not accepted in the Annual Budget 2013-14.
90. As recommended by the Committee, the Department of Tourism, Government of Kerala has
been requested to address this issue.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
91. The Committee takes note of the reply. The Committee would like to know the
action taken by the Government of Kerala in this regard. The Ministry of Tourism,
Government of India may facilitate the matter with the Government of Kerala.

15
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
92. Regarding granting of bar license to eligible three star hotels and above, the Committee
observes that the matter has already been heard by the Supreme Court and directions have been
issued, State Government is bound by these directions.
(Para 79)
Reply of the Government
93. The Ministry of Tourism’s guidelines for Classification/Re-classification of Hotels under 1
to 5 Star Deluxe Categories and Heritage categories clearly state that “wherever bar license is
prohibited for a hotel as per local laws, the bar will not be mandatory and wherever bar is allowed
as per local laws, then the hotel will have to obtain bar license first (where ever mandatory as per
category guidelines) and then apply for classification to the Ministry of Tourism.
Reply of the Government of Kerala
94. State Government shall take appropriate steps on this issue.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
95. The Committee notes the reply and is of the opinion that if an owner can run a star
hotel without serving liquor there, what is the harm in it? However, serving of liquor
without a license should be dealt with seriously.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
96. The Committee recommends that the Ministry of Tourism, Government of India may come
out with a special scheme to support the waste management projects of the States at the tourist
destinations. Waste management collection, disposal and management may also be included in the
works to be taken under Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme
(MGNREGS).
(Para 82)
97. Representatives of Kerala tourism informed the Committee that they have a proposal to supply
empty bags to collect wastes generated by the tourist vehicles once they enter a particular tourist
location on payment of a security deposit. The security deposit will be returned to the vehicle on their
return journey after the vehicle return the bag containing the waste generated by them.
(Para 83)
98. The Committee notes that it is a novel idea which can be implemented with cooperation of
the stakeholders. The Ministry of Tourism, Government of India may promote such initiatives
whole heartedly through advertisements which may add to their efforts of “Clean India Campaign”.
(Para 84)
Reply of the Government
99. The Campaign Clean India is based on adoption of monuments and tourist destinations by
corporate sector. It is a voluntary scheme and no budget has been allocated by the Government
for this campaign. The suggestions/recommendations of the Hon’ble Members made in para 84
have been forwarded to M/s Oil and Natural Gas Corporation Ltd. (ONGC) and the Bharat Heavy
Electricals Limited (BHEL) with the request that these suggestions/recommendations may kindly be
taken into account while carrying out various activities at the adopted monuments/tourist
destinations under the Campaign Clean India.

16
Reply of the Government of Kerala
100. Kerala Tourism strongly supports the recommendation. Government of Kerala is in the
advanced stages of launching the scheme and urges the Govt of India to help with the advocacy
campaign.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
101. The Committee takes note of the reply.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
102. The Committee evidently observed that the present Visa-on-Arrival (VOA) provides only a
limited advantage to the State. The Committee, therefore, recommends that a second list of countries
needs to be considered for inclusion in the VOA facility extending it to the said European countries
USA, UK, France, Germany, Australia, Malaysia, Canada, Netherland, UAE and Italy which are in the
top list of international tourist arrivals to the State of Kerala. The Ministry of Tourism and the
Government of Kerala may take up the matter with Ministry of External Affairs to initiate suitable
action in this regard. The Committee also recommends that the Ministry of External Affairs and
Ministry of Home Affairs should take appropriate favourable action on the relaxation of visa norms
suggested by the Government of Kerala for the sake of development of tourism.
(Para 88)
Reply of the Government
103. W ith a view to encourage foreign tourist arrivals, the Government has decided to provide
Collective Landing Permits. The Ministry of Home Affairs launched the facility of Collective Land
Permits for the group of four and more tourists vide MHA circular No. 423 dated 1
st April, 2013.
104. According to the revised procedure, foreign tourists in groups of four or more arriving by
air or sea and sponsored by Indian Travel Agencies approved by the Ministry of Tourism with a
pre-drawn itinerary, can be granted Collective Landing Permit for a period not exceeding 60 days,
with multiple entry facility to enable them visit India and neighboring country.
105. The facility of Collective Landing Permit for the groups of four more tourists is available
at the following airports and seaports:
Airports: Delhi, Mumbai, Chennai, Kolkata, Bangalore, Hyderabad, Kochi, Thiruvananthapuram and
Goa.
Seaports: Marmagoa (Goa), Kochi, Calicut, Thiruvananthapuram, Mumbai, Nhava Sheva, Chennai
and Kolkata.
106. On the recommendation of this Ministry, Government of India has extended Tourist Visa on
Arrival Facility or Electronic Travel Authorisation Facility for the national of all countries except the
prior reference countries. The issue is under discussion with the Ministry of Home and External Affairs.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
107. The Committee take note of the reply.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
108. On the issue of reducing the time required for procuring Indian Visa, Ministry of Tourism
may take up the matter with the Ministries of Home and External Affairs. If necessary, the present

17
procedure of issuing visa may be reviewed to reduce time and the embassy officials may be
sensitized to the requirements of foreign tourists.
(Para 89)
Reply of the Government
109. To address the issues of difficulty in getting visas, a Coordination Mechanism has been set
up. A Committee consisting of Joint Secretary (Counselor, Passport Visa), Joint Secretary
(Foreigners), Ministry of Home Affairs and Additional Director General (Tourism) looks into all
complaints received regarding the issues of delay in getting visas etc.
110. On the recommendation of this Ministry, Government of India has extended Tourist Visa on
Arrival facility for the nationals of 11 countries namely Finland, Japan, Luxembourg, New Zealand,
Singapore, Cambodia, Vietnam, the Philippines, Laos, Myanmar and Indonesia.
111. With a view to encourage foreign tourist arrivals, the Government has decided to provide
Collective Landing Permits. The Ministry of Home Affairs launched the facility of Collective Land
Permits for the group of four and more tourists vide MHA circular No.423 dated 1
st April, 2013.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
112. The Committee takes note of the reply.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
113. The Committee observes that in the scenario of acute shortage of trained guides, this is a
serious omission on the part of ASI. The Director General, Archaeological Survey of India may be
directed to intervene in the issue to enable the approved State level guides by the State Department
of Tourism to undertake guiding activities in all ASI monuments as in the case of Government of
India approved guides.
(Para 92)
Reply of the Government
114. Archaeological Survey of India submitted that as per the Ancient Monuments and
Archaeological Sites and Remains (Amendment) Rule 2010 vide Gazette Notification GSR 429(E)
dated 20
th May, 2010 issued by the Government of India (Archaeological Survey of India), the
Additional Director General, Department of Tourism, Ministry of Tourism, Government of India has
to issue the Guide licence for tourist guides.
115. As per the guidelines issued by the Ministry of Tourism vide their letter No.7-TT.II(07)/
200-GD-V ol.II dated 22nd September, 2011, the relevant para of the guidelines related State level
guides, are as under:
“the State level Gudies under guidelines approved by any of the States/Union Territory
Administrations would also be eligible to apply for licenses to work as Regional level Guides
provided they qualify, (a) the common selection process based on merit as detailed in the
guidelines for the selection of various categories of Regional Legal Guides and (b) the
examination and viva voce after the training.”
116. In addition to the above, the contents of order dated 5
th December, 2012, issued by the
Hon’ble Apex Court of India in a relevant matter are as under:
“in our view, after the issuance of 2011 guidelines it is not necessary for this Court to
adjudicate upon the correctness or otherwise of the impugned order and the entitlement of

18
the State Level Guides to operate in the areas to which the 1958 Act is applicable, more
so because legality of the authorization given to the State Level guides to operate at Agra
and Varanasi has not been decided by the High Court.
In the result, the special leave petitions are disposed of as infructuous with liberty to the
petitioners to challenge the authorization of the State Level Guides to operate in the areas
governed by the 1958 Act and the Rules framed thereunder by availing appropriate remedy.”
117. Pursuant to the above Apex Court order, the Ministry of Tourism requested Archaeological
Survey of India to stop immediately the endorsing/re-endorsing/renewal of the licenses of State
Level Guides within States.
118. The Archaeological Survey of India, however, not agreeing with the Ministry of Tourism,
intimated them that observations of the Apex Court that the issue of the authorization of State
Level Guides in the areas governed by the 1958 Act, has not been adjudicated upon the Hon’ble
Court and this issue has been advised to be challenged by the petitioners before the appropriate
forum.
119. Ministry of Tourism was also intimated that since there is no clarity on the issue of the
operation of State Level Guides in the Centrally protected monuments and also as aforesaid there
are interim orders from the High Courts to allow the State Level Guides to operate in these
monuments, an application needs to be made to the Apex court for transfer of all these writ petition
to avoid conflicting judgments/orders. The Ministry of Tourism may, therefore, take immediate
steps to move an application before the Apex Court for transfer of all these pending writ petitions
in various High Courts to itself, in view of the fact that the powers to issue the guidelines and
also issue of license stands delegated to the Ministry of Tourism.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
120. The Committee notes the reply which has come from the ASI through the Ministry
of Tourism. The Committee feels that the issue has not been addressed by the Ministry of
Tourism with the seriousness it deserved. It appears that its contents have not been gone
through seriously except copy-pasting the reply given by ASI otherwise the information
could have been furnished correctly. The current reply does not contain the action taken by
the Ministry of Tourism on the issues pointed out by the ASI. The Committee desires to
know the opinion of Ministry on it.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
121. The Committee recommends that the State should come out with a directory of potential
locations for film shooting. The State should also hold workshops/FAM tours to film production
executives. There should be a single window clearance for film shooting.
(Para 94)
Reply of the Government
122. The Hon’ble Minister of Tourism has written to the Chief Ministers of all State
Governments/Administrators of all Union Territory Administrations to recognize the potential of Film
Tourism and constitute special bodies/cells to facilitate filming in the States/Union Territories, in
January, 2012. The State Government of Kerala has acknowledged this letter.
Reply of the Government of Kerala
123. Kerala Tourism will implement the suggestion in right earnest.

19
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
124. The Committee would like to know the steps taken by the Government of Kerala in
this regard.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
125. The Committee further recommends that the Ministry of Tourism, Government of India
should support film shooting as a special scheme.
(Para 95)
Reply of the Government
126. The Ministry of Tourism has issued guidelines (dated 25 th July, 2012), for extending
financial support to State Governments/Union Territory Administrations, for supporting promotion
of ‘Film tourism’. As a preliminary step for promoting Film Tourism, the Ministry extends Central
Financial Assistance (CFA) of Rs.2.00 lakh per film to State Governments and UT Administrations
for a maximum of Five Films, during each financial year. The films will be chosen/selected by
taking inputs from their Film Development Corporations, based on the potential exposure that can
be provided by them to the tourism destinations and locations in the respective States/UTs. CFA
would cover Feature Films, Documentaries, Tele-films and Television Serials including Reality
Television. The components of CFA may comprise Space Hiring/Filming charges, Facilitation Fee
etc.. payable by the Filming Unit to various State Governments, Government agencies etc.
Additional support may be considered for an additional Two (2) Films based on justification for
enhanced support. The guidelines have been circulated to all State Governments/Union Territory
Administrations and have been uploaded on the website of the Ministry of Tourism.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
127. The Committee notes the reply.
Chapter–II : National Highways in Kerala
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
128. The Committee would like to know whether the CALA staff is deliberately delaying the
process to cling on to the posts. They should be terminated immediately if no activity is
undertaken. This will avoid wastage of resources.
(Para 104)
Reply of the Government
129. Land acquisition process for implementation of Phase III of NHDP was commenced under
provisions of NH Act during September to December, 2009. However, there were protests and
agitations by the general public against 45.0m ROW who demanded reduction to 30.0m (against
norm of 60.0m ROW). As per a decision taken in all Party Meeting held on 20.04.2010 under the
Chairmanship of the Hon’ble Chief Minister of Kerala, LA activities were suspended by the
Government of Kerala. The LA activities were started afresh after Government of Kerala lifted the
ban on land acquisition on 4.11.2011. Even after lifting of ban and 4 laning of NH 17 and NH 47
having been included in the Fast Track Projects by Government of Kerala in 2009, obstructions
and agitations are continuing and land acquisition process is still very slow. NHAI is incurring the
entire establishment expenditure towards the CALA and its staff (the CALA staff is functioning
under the control of the State Government, i.e. Revenue Department and the concerned District

20
Administration) even through the LA process is done under the provisions of National Highways
Act, 1956. As per existing procedure CALA adopts land price as determined by the District Level
Purchase Committee (DLPC) and approved by an Empowered Committee headed by the Chief
Secretary, Government of Kerala.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
130. The Committee acknowledges the problems faced in the land acquisition. The
Committee recommends that the Government agencies should chalk out a via media to sort
out the problems.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
131. After going through the submissions made to the Committee especially on the topics of
‘Land Acquisition status from 2004-12’ by the NHAI and the ‘Land Acquisition for widening of
National Highways’ and ‘Funding of road projects through PPP model vis-à-vis undertaking NHDP
by Government of Kerala with the help from NHAI’ by the State Government of Kerala, the
Committee feels that the Kerala Government is neither interested in funding of road projects
through PPP model nor wants to take up the projects themselves. It further implies that the State
Government does not want to fully gear up to the prevailing situation. It should understand that
with half-hearted efforts full results cannot be achieved. If the State Government wants highways
(which is on ‘Union’ list) for holistic development of the State in general and tourism development
in particular, it has to evolve a middle-path between appeasing the general public, bearing burden
on the exchequer in terms of R & R Package and working with NHAI and MORTH under NHAI
Act. A clear intent of reaching at a workable proposition to the problem is the only solution
available here. National Highways Authority of India has already incurred an expenditure of Rs.9.50
crores for establishing the paraphernalia and it also has to bear the burnt of escalations in land
acquisition and civil costs. This cannot go on perpetually. Ministry of RTH is recommended to take
up the issue with the State Government of Kerala accordingly.
(Para 114)
Reply of the Government
132. In spite of taking all possible pro-active steps, there has been no progress in the LA process
in the State, mainly due to wide spread protest from Public especially in view of the fact that
people in Kerala are generally hostile to toll collection. LA process in the State of Kerala can be
expedited only with the active cooperation and support of Government of Kerala. In this context,
several high level meetings including that of at the level of Hon’ble Minister (RTH) with Hon’ble
Chief Minister of Kerala was held on 15.7.2013 at Thiruvananthapuram. Besides, a meeting was
also convened by Hon’ble Minister (RTH) on 30.8.2013 with Hon’ble Union Ministers from Kerala
and Hon’ble MPs of Kerala at New Delhi to resolve the matter amicably.
Reply of the Government of Kerala
133. The major stumbling block in the development of National Highways in the State is the
issues related to Land Acquisition. The Government have already decided that the State will go
ahead with 45 metres development of National Highways. However there are some genuine
complaints in the alignment proposed by NHAI, as this falls in the premises of religious structures
like temples, mosques, churches etc. and some serious complaints regarding fixing of alignment to
save some affluent persons/institutions at the cost of poor house owners. State Government have
made arrangements to look into the land value fixed by DLPC comparing the value with the current
market value and to examine the award of competent authority for LA. Further State Government

21
have constituted a Committee with Chief Secretary as Chairman and Secretary, Public Works
Department, Secretary, Revenue, Secretary, Local Self Government Department, Chief Engineer
(National Highways), District Collectors concerned, Project Directors of NHAI concerned as
members for rectifying the mistake in the alignment fixed, if any, at places where there is serious
problems and for protecting the places of worship from demolition. NHAI may be directed to
resolve the problems in the Land Acquisition in consultation with the State Government.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
134. The Committee appreciated the steps taken by the Ministry of Road Transport and
Highways solving the bottlenecks on the land acquisition related issues in Kerala. The
Committee, in view of the reply of Government of Kerala on the issue of land Acquisition
for National Highways, recommends that the complaints with respect to alignment of various
stretches in view of the local sentiments should be taken care of by the NHAI. However,
the Committee also suggests that the State Government of Kerala may take up the
challenge of land acquisition appropriately in view of the importance of the National
Highways for the economic development of the State.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
135. The Committee notes that the condition of roads in Kerala is very poor. The Committee also
notes that the State of Kerala is 10 year behind the schedule compared to other States as regards
construction of roads are concerned. This has happened mainly because of the problems related
to land acquisition for widening and construction of roads. Initially there were problems with the
width of the roads. Now it has been settled at 45m. Then, there are problems of alignment and
design of roads. NHAI needs to do their work on a professional way rather can coming under
pressure from the rich and powerful as far as alignment and design are concerned. The issue need
to be settled in close coordination with the Government of Kerala.
(Para 115)
Reply of the Government
136. The alignment are finalized after conducting detailed study of the site and based on several
factors, viz. existing geometry of the road, standards required for 4 lane road as per IRC norms
optimum utilization of existing ROW and minimum disturbance to the public/land owners. However
due to the development taken place all along the existing National Highways, acquisition of
structures becomes inevitable. There was no instance where the alignment has been changed to
save affluent persons/institutions at the cost of poor house owners. As regards some religious
structures are affected due to the proposed widening of the road, it is to state that though all
possible efforts are made to avoid acquisition of such structures, however, due to the geographical
condition of the existing road, as some locations it is inevitable to acquire the land and structures
belonging to religious institutions.
137. Such cases are being reviewed afresh by the officials of Government of Kerala and the
DPR Consultants to explore the feasibility of modifying the alignment and wherever it is found
feasible to modify the alignment without compromising the geometry and standards required for the
four-laning of National Highways, NHAI will have no objection to adopt the same. Government of
Kerala has been informed of the same but the exercise is yet to be commenced.
138. Requirement of minimum 45m for the ROW is a policy uniformly adopted by the
Government for 4 laning of all NHs and a 4 lane road within 30m ROW was not possible without
seriously compromising the standards and safety requirements as also other facilities like service
roads, utility corridors etc. As per Typical cross section of a 4 lane the width required at road top

22
is 24.0m, whereas additional width will be required at the base to accommodate the embankment
@ additional 4.0m/every one metre hight of embankment). It is not possible to construct the entire
corridor with low embankment height. The service road (which) are essential in urban/built up
areas and utilities like water supply, electric/telephone cable etc. cannot be accommodated with any
restriction in ROW.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
139. The Committee hopes that a closer and regular coordination with the State
Government will help improve the condition of roads in Kerala.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
140. The Committee observes that Kerala has a peculiar pattern of demographic settlement and
most of the land is heavily cultivated and both sides of the roads are heavily constructed and
inhabited by the people. Therefore, any road widening project has to be supported by adequate
compensation and resettlement package. The principles adopted at the National level for
compensation and resettlement should not be applied to Kerala due to the very peculiarities
available in Kerala. Government of Kerala should be the best authority to decide on such matters
and the NHAI and the Ministry of RTH should liberally cooperate with the State in finding
solutions.
(Para 116)
Reply of the Government
141. Land required for construction and widening of National Highways throughout the country
is acquired under the provisions of the National Highways Act, 1956 and compensation as fixed
by the Competent Authority for Land Acquisition (CALA) as per the procedure laid down in the
Act, is being paid to the land owners. However, in October, 2010, Government of Kerala has
announced a Rehabilitation and Resettlement Package for the affected people due to acquisition of
land for NH widening and requested the Government of India to bear the cost towards
implementation of the same, Resettlement package has been proposed by Government of Kerala
only and hence should be responsible for shouldering the responsibility. Compensation to property
owners is decided by CALAs and NHAI steps in only when the same is not in line with NH
Act, 1956. Adoption of a separate R&R package for Kerala will invite demands for similar Packages
from other States, which will in turn jeopardize the existing procedure laid down under the
provision of NH Act, 1956.
Reply of the Government of Kerala
142. Details of Rehabilitation and Resettlement (R&R) packages contemplated and expectations
from Central Government in this regard State Government have taken decision to make applicable
the new comprehensive Rehabilitation and Resettlement (R&R) package of the State for LA in the
case of NH widening also. Government have also decided that the State would bear the expenses
for the items which NHAI/MORTH would not meet. As per the D.O. letter dated 19.12.2011 from
the then Chief Secretary, State Government have requested MORTH to examine the R&R policy of
Government to determine what item of R&R policy could be met by NHAI/MORTH. Further
Government of Kerala requested the NHAI to commission a social impact study to determine the
number of project affected persons in accordance with R&R Policy so as to enable to determine
how much alternate land needs to be required for rehabilitation and also to determine the financial
burden of the State due to R&R package. But there is no response in this regard from NHAI/
MORTH so far.

23
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
143. The Committee notes the reply and feels that the MORTH has not properly
addressed the issue of rehabilitation and resettlement as per the reply furnished by the
Government of Kerala. The Committee notes that the MORTH is not ready to address the
Kerala specific conditions on the plea that this might invite demands for similar packages
from other States. The Committee feels that the MORTH should factor in the peculiarities
of Kerala in views of its outstanding record in promotion of tourism; such States need to
be rewarded for good work. The Committee, therefore, reiterates its recommendation that
a special package may be given to Kerala as far as land acquisition is concerned.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
144. Another aspect brought to the notice of the Committee was that NHAI is not maintaining
the NH-47 and NH-17 properly. The climatic condition of Kerala is that throughout the year there
will be rain and during Monsoon it will be heavily raining for months together. Therefore, the
Committee feels that it is the duty of the NHAI to make the life line of Kerala - NH-47 and
NH-17 - traffic worthy throughout the year. The Committee recommends that NHAI should allocate
adequate funds for the repair and maintenance of NH-47 and NH-17.
(Para 117)
Reply of the Government
145. The development of two major NHs in Kerala i.e. NH-17 and NH-47 to 4 lane standards
is included under NHDP Phase III/II to be executed by NHAI, but the projects are not taking up
due to land acquisition problem in Kerala. However, NH-17 and NH-47 in Kerala are maintained
reasonably in traffic worthy condition. 137km. of NH-17 and 68 km. of NH-47 were taken up
under improvement to riding quality programme (IRQP)/periodical renewal (PR) work for
improvement during 2012-13. Besides, 132 km. NH stretches including bad reaches of NH-47 and
NH-17 have been identified for carrying out periodical renewal work under non-plan during
2013-14. Rs.57 crore has been allocated under sub-head ‘Non Plan” and Rs.3.13 crore for ordinary
repairs.
146. The stretch of NH-47 from Tamil Nadu/Kerala border to Edappally and Edappally to Aroor
is being maintained by NHAI/BOT Concessionaire appointed by NHAI while the 4 lane stretch of
NH-47 from Thrissur to Edappally is being maintained by the BOT concessionaire in good condition
as per the provisions of the Concession Agreement. Work of repair of potholes and other damages
in the other stretches of NH-47 has already commenced and it is more or less complete as on date.
Reply of the Government of Kerala
147. It has been observed that those National Highways which have been transferred to NHAI
for development are not maintained properly by them. This invites large public criticism and much
inconvenience to the commuters. During the past years, Ministry was allotting meager fund for
maintaining these road assuming that NHAI will start development work in NH-47 and NH-17 in
the near future. Even though these roads are very heavily loaded and continuous maintenance is
very warranted, the MORTH allocation for these roads in the current year is negligible.
148. Urgent action is warranted for attending timely repairs for making the roads trafficable. It
may be noted that in Mannuthy-Vadakanchery stretch of NH-47 Government of Kerala was forced
to allot Rs.5.19 crores for attending urgent pothole filling works at “Kuthiran” to make the road
trafficable, even though this stretch has already been transferred to NHAI concessionaire for
development. Further the torrential rain during the last three to four weeks created heavy damage

24
to National Highways making the situation vulnerable. NHAI may be directed to attend routine
maintenance work in these roads for making them trafficworthy.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
149. The Committee notes the reply. The Committee recommends that the concerns of
the Government of Kerala in the matter should be addressed properly by the NHAI.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
150. Y et another aspect brought to the notice of the Committee is that public is refusing to pay
toll fee wherever there are poor maintenance and repair of the roads or the toll fee is high. The
Committee, therefore, opines that NHAI has to blame themselves for the refusal of toll payment
by the public.
(Para 118)
Reply of the Government
151. It is not a fact. People are resisting paying toll otherwise also. The stretch where condition
of road is not good, is not under tolling. Tolling is in operation in completed stretch only, where
road condition is good. 4 laned National Highways stretches are being maintained as per standards,
except the damages caused due to continuous rains during the monsoon season of 2013. This is
also being attended to immediately.
152. In the State of Kerala, right from day one when collection of user-fee was commenced
after completion of the 4-laning and strengthening work, there was stiff resistance from the public
against payment of user-fee. In fact, collection of user-fee could be commenced only after several
rounds of meetings with the public, including the one at the level of Hon’ble Chief Minister of
Kerala. Due to demand from the public, several concessions which are otherwise not provided
under the provisions of NH Fee Rules are being extended to the local public on the request of
Government of Kerala, though the cost towards such exemptions is yet to be reimbursed by
Government of Kerala, as assured. Even the buses belonging to KSRTC are not paying the user-
fee in the Paliyekkara Toll Plaza in Thrissur-Edappally section of NH-47 in spite of repeated
requests to reimburse the same.
Reply of the Government of Kerala
153. NHAI has completed their development works in certain stretches of the National Highways
and started collecting toll from two toll plazas, namely Paliyekkara and Kumbalam. The pot holes
developed in these reaches are not being attended timely. This invited huge public criticism from
different corners of the life. Reluctance in paying toll is observed only where the toll rates are very
high and the roads are not maintained properly. NHAI may be directed to take timely action to keep
these stretches of the road in good trafficable condition with all agreed facilities before the
commencement of toll collection.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
154. The Committee feels that instead of blaming a whole State of not paying the Toll,
the NHAI should look into the real issues and reasons for such a situation, if the people
are reluctant to pay Toll. The Committee also feels that people’s protest to tolls is not
specific to Kerala only, but also in other parts of the country. Therefore, the Committee
recommends that Government may revisit their Toll Policy throughout the country
especially in Kerala and formulate an acceptable solution to the real issue.

25
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
155. Y et another aspect noticed by the Committee is that the Ministry of Road Transport and
Highways is giving only meagre allocations for maintenance of National Highways in Kerala. The
Committee feels this is highly inappropriate and it is the duty of Ministry of Road Transport and
Highways to maintain the National Highways traffic-worthy. The Committee recommends that
adequate allocation may be made for maintenance of National Highways in Kerala.
(Para 119)
Reply of the Government
156. The total outlay made available to this Ministry for Maintenance and Repair (M&R) of
National Highways (NHs) is about 40-60% of the requirement based on the Ministry’s norms. This
has lead to thin spreading of resources over the entire NH network leading to pre-mature failure
of pavements. Accordingly, the available allocation under M&R is distributed among the States
based on the lane-length distribution of NHs. The total expenditure incurred by the State of Kerala
was Rs.17.77 crore as against the allocation of Rs.38.77 crore during the 2012-13. Keeping in view
availability of resources, total allocation of Rs.68.74 crore has been made to the State of Kerala
under M&R during 2013-14.
157. The issue of inadequate allocation of funds under M&R has been taken up with the Ministry
of Finance. Accordingly, the allocation under M&R has been enhanced to about Rs.2,000 crore
during 2013-14.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
158. The Committee notes the reply.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
159. The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport, Tourism and
Culture had earlier raised the issue of delay in acquisition of land for national highways projects
and release of share of central funds to Kerala in its 193
rd Report for which Action Taken Replies
from Ministry of Road Transport and Highways are still awaited.
(Para 120)
Reply of the Government
160. The land acquisition in Kerala is extremely slow despite taking up the issue at highest level,
repeatedly. No appreciable progress has been made in this regard due to inadequate administrative support.
161. Accrual under Central Road Fund (CRF) in Kerala in 2012-13 is Rs.46.47 crore and the
amount released is Rs.124.86 crore. Similarly the Accrual under Central Road Fund (CRF) in Kerala
in 2013-14 is Rs.46.70 crore and the amount released is Rs.70.40 crore so far.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
162. The Committee notes the reply and feels that the Ministry of Road Transport and
Highways will take up the issue with the State Government of Kerala to resolve all the
issues concerning land acquisitions.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
163. The Committee recommends that in order to solve traffic congestions in the road

26
connectivity to the Port, these four flyovers are essential to be constructed. For a better port
connectivity, the Committee also recommends the followings:–
● To provide last mile connectivity to the Cochin Port with NHDP Grid from
Kundannoor to Willingdon Island, Committee recommends that the length of about
5.9 km. is required to be widened to 4 lane.
● The Committee feels that it may also facilitate to establish good land link between State
ports like Beypore, Azhikal etc. NH-17 meets the NH-47 at Edappally.
● The Committee observes that such upgradations will facilitate industrial developments
in the adjoining areas of highway and generate cargo to the Port.
● The Committee came to know that the Government of Kerala has initiated action in
this regard. Ministry of Road Transport and Highways and NHAI may provide active
financial support for the development of these projects before further proceeding in the
matter.
(Para 126)
Reply of the Government
164. Implementation of four Flyovers in Cochin city:- As there is heavy traffic congestion at
Edappally, Kundannoor, Palarivatom and Vytila junctions in Edappaly-Aroor section of NH-47,
especially during peak hours, Grade Separators are proposed to be constructed at these junctions
for which NHAI has engaged a consultant for preparation of Detailed Project Report (DPR). The
Consultant has submitted the DPR for construction of Grade Separators at the estimated cost of
Rs.1450 crore, which is under scrutiny. In the meanwhile, the Flyover at Edappally junction is
proposed to be constructed as part of the Kochi Metro Rail Project through Delhi Metro Rail
Corporation (DMRC)
165. To provide last mile connectivity to Cochin Port with NHDP Grid from Kundannoor to
Willington Island by 4 laning the existing road of 5.9 km.: At present this road is of two lane
standard. Feasibility study for ascertaining the viability of 4 laning may be considered as and when
warranted.
166. Providing good land link between State Ports like Beypore, Azhikal, etc. from NH-17:–
(i) Beypore Port is located at a distance of 9.30 km. from NH-17 for which a road link
exists at present branching at km. 260/0 of Calicut Bypass. Out of 9.30 km. of road
stretch, 7.0 km. is old NH-17 and balance 2.3 km. is MDR.
(ii) Azhikal Port is located at a distance of 7.90 km. from NH-17 for which a road link
exists at present branching at km. 140/0 of Valapattinam-Chala Bypass. Out of
7.90 km. of road stretch, 5.40 km. is old NH-17 and balance 2.50 km. is MDR.
Reply from the Government of Kerala
167. Kerala Government is undertaking certain transport development projects viz. construction
of Metro rail and Mono rail in certain cities. The alignment for these projects falls along/intersects
with that of NHDP schemes. Therefore, NHAI may be directed to provide necessary sanction/
approval for undertaking the construction of these projects along the NHAI alignment.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
168. The Committee desires to know the details of the Grade Separators at a cost of

27
Rs.1450 crore. As regards 4 laning of the 5-9 km. road connecting Cochin Port, the reply
of the NHAI is evasive. The Committee recommends that feasibility study may be conducted
at the earliest.
Chapter-III : National Waterways in Kerala
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
169. Backwater experience is one the most sought after tourism products in Kerala. The southern
side of Alappuzha has been not tapped fully linking it with the mainstream tourism destinations and
circuits. It is essential to expedite the development of NW-3 and is also necessary to connect this
stretch to the nearest tourist attractions. Especially the Kodungalloor–Muziris area needs to be well
connected by the waterway and necessary development work needs to be taken up. The Committee
notes that the entire NW-3 is not fully navigable as per IWAI standards. It is a fact that Kerala
is facing acute road connectivity problem and construction of national highways is not coming up
to appreciable levels, in this context, if the waterways is cleared for substantial chunk of traffic
then it could considerably reduce the pressure on the roads.
(Para 141)
Reply of the Government
170. A navigable channel with 32m/38m bottom width and 2m depth for movement of 350 tonne
capacity vessels for a continuous length of 155 km. from Kottapuram to Thakazhy (118),
Udyogmandal Canal (23 kms.) and Champakkara Canal (14 kms.) has been developed. The capital
dredging work for providing navigable channel in the remaining stretch of 50 km. between
Thakazhy jetty and Kollam is in progress and only 12 km. shoal length remains to be dredged to
the required width and depth.
171. The remaining dredging and widening works are being executed by deploying 5 departmental
dredgers (3 cutter suction and 2 Amphibian dredgers) and three contract dredgers. Balance capital
dredging is also expected to be completed by June 2014 subject to the continuous and smooth co-
operation from the local residents and the District Admin. in these stretches.
172. The progress of work was reviewed by the Hon’ble Chief Minister of Kerala on 21.3.2013
and 9.10.2013, when directions were issued to the concerned State Government officials to co-
operate and assist in carrying out un-interrupted dredging work. But it has been observed that the
interruption by local people is still continuing.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
173. The Committee notes the reply. The Committee observes that the NW-3 is fully
operational, even though the works started many years back. The Committee hopes that the
entire stretch of the NW-3 with the dredging of the remaining 12 km. between Thakazhy
to Kollam will be completed without further delay. The interruptions by local people may be
addressed at State level.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
174. The Committee recommends that IWAI and Ministry of Shipping may look into connecting
Kodungalloor, the Centre of Muziris Heritage project with NW-3, assistance of State Government
on this issue could be sought.
(Para 142)

28
Reply of the Government
175. Old Kodungalloor Port is situated on the northern bank of declared stretch of NW-3,
opposite to Munambam Fishing Harbour in Kochi-Kottapuram Stretch. However, Kodungalloor town
is situated towards north-west of Kottapuram and is away from NW-3. The nearest point of
Kodungallur that can be connected by waterway from Kottapuram IWT terminal is at a distance
of 6.5 km. (along the proposed extension of NW-3 route) and Kodungallur town is situated 1.2 km.
by road from this point. M/s NATPAC, which has been engaged by IWAI for preparation of
techno-economic study for extension of NW-3 has been advised to examine this aspect and give
comments in their final report.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
176. The Committee takes note of the reply. The Committee desires that the feasibility
report of the NATPAC may be furnished to the Committee.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
177. The Committee also recommends that with regard to IWT interlinkage with ports, the
linkages from port side and waterway side should have a synchronized development, so as to have
the effective interlinkage.
(Para 143)
Reply of the Government
178. M/s RITES has been engaged to study road and rail connectivity to 4 identified terminals
of NW-3 and also port linkage of NW-3. The study is in progress.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
179. The Committee notes the reply.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
180. The Committee feels that IWAI is actively undertaking the dredging work and it has also
done a commendable work in installation of navigational aids and fairway development. National
Waterway No. 3 has an excellent potential in cruise tourism, cargo shipment, linking ports,
international steamer route, etc. Ministry of Shipping should strive to reap all the potential revenue
sources anticipated with the Waterway No. 3. The Committee recommends that M/o. Shipping
should take proper measures to depute adequate staff for IWAI.
(Para 148)
Reply of the Government
181. A proposal for restructuring of IWAI manpower is in process.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
182. The Committee notes the reply.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
183. Further, Ministry of Shipping should also look into the aspect of dredging and widening
work being hampered due to resistance by local fishermen by placing their fishing nets in the

29
fairway. Also, the problem pertaining to the disposal of dredged material on the banks of canal
without raising the local sentiments also needs an apt solution. The Committee recommends the
Ministry of Shipping to give impetus to the progress of dredging work as it is essential for the
development of NW-3.
(Para 149)
Reply of the Government
184. Out of an estimated dredging of 40.33 lakh cum over a shoal length of 87.16 km., 33.49
lakh cum over a shoal length of 75.31 km. has been completed till August, 2013. The dredging
work is in progress for the remaining portion. However, the progress of dredging work is seriously
affected due to the following:
(i) Frequent stoppage of dredging work by local people due to infighting over sharing of
dredged soil. The District Administration is finding it difficult to resolve this issue.
(ii) Objections frequently raised by local people demanding disposal of dredged soil in their
small country-yards causing frequent interruption to the dredging process thereby
reducing the efficiency of the dredgers.
(iii) Objections by local people demanding bank protection even in wider stretches of
WCC.
(iv) Objections by fishermen against dredging and non-removal of fishing nets from the
navigation channel. Co-ordination committees headed by District Collectors have been
constituted who in turn have formed sub committees headed by Tehsildars, Panchayat
President, Panchayat members and Village Officers to resolve these problems. Efforts
are being made to resolve the local problems with the help of these sub-committees
so as to complete the balance dredging by June, 2014.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
185. The Committee notes the reply. The Committee, however, would like to know the
normal procedure followed by IWAI in other waterways while disposing the dredged soil.
186. The Committee recommends that in disposing of the dredged soil, the local body of
the area may be involved if the interference of locals are hampering the work. The
Committee further recommends that bank protection is to be ensured by the IWAI not only
to protect the land along the shores, but it may reduce the siltation in the channels. So the
initial spending on bund can be recovered later on in the form of saving the maintenance
dredging costs.
187. The Committee appreciates the efforts made to form a co-ordination committee to
resolve the issues.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
188. The Committee notes that the development of terminals along the National Waterways is
progressing well. There is a need to give adequate publicity to the advantages of moving containers
through NW so that it can regain the container volumes. The terminals also need to be equipped
to handle all types of cargos. Committee hopes that the Government of India and Government of
Kerala will coordinate together to ensure that the entire NW-3 is navigable.
(Para 157)

30
Reply of the Government
189. During seminar, conferences and road shows IWAI attempts to create public awareness
among the public and private operators highlighting the advantages of inland water transport.
However, as advised by the Committee, more conferences/road shows would be organized by
IWAI.
190. All the IWT terminals already constructed at Kottapuram, Aluva, Maradu, Vaikom,
Thanneermukkom, Trikunnapuzha, Kayamkulam and Kollam on NW-3 have been provided with
400 sq.m and 200 sq.m covered storage and mechanical handling equipment (one 18 ton Mobile
Hydraulic Crane and 3 ton Forklift) for loading/uploading of cargo. The cooperation of the State
Government of Kerala is very important to complete the balance capital dredging work. IWAI and
Ministry of Shipping are in constant touch with Government of Kerala to seek their assistance for
early completion of capital dredging work.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
191. The Committee notes the reply.
Chapter–IV : Cochin Shipyard Limited
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
192. Shipbuilding: The Committee recommends that PSUs and Government entities viz. SCI, DCI
Ports, Ministry of Earth Sciences, DRDO, Fisheries Survey of India (FSI), Geological Survey of
India (GSI), etc., be encouraged and advised to place order with CSL on nomination basis, if the
yard meets experience, infrastructure and technical requirements. CSL should be included for
invoking 30% offset clause as part of DPP, applicable to other Defence PSUs. Long-term loans are
another issue where Government intervention is required and necessary directions is issued to
EXIM/commercial banks.
(Para 163)
193. In view of the various problems faced by the Cochin Ship Yard Ltd., (CSL), the Committee
recommends the following:
(i) Consideration of an amendment to Central Excise Tariff to make the rate of duty as
“Nil” as per Tariff for ships and other vessels.
(ii) Excise duty exemption on all materials procured for shipbuilding, from indigenous
sources.
(iii) T otal exemption from levy of V AT on sale of ships.
(iv) Recommend issuance of a notification clarifying exemption of Customs duty and
additional duty on the items imported for manufacturing of the vessels sold to owners
within India.
(v) Consideration of Customs duty exemption for the capital goods imported for
shipbuilding activities.
(vi) Invoking ‘shipbuilding subsidy’ as prevalent earlier to foster shipbuilding activities in
the country.
(Para 166)
194. The extant procedures related to customs clearance for release of cargo either for
shipbuilding or for ship repair also need to be analyzed and fine-tuned for early release of

31
the same and thus provide an impetus to both shipbuilding and ship repair activities in the
country.
(Para 167)
195. The Committee observed that ship repair market is highly competitive and in order to secure
orders against stiff international competition, the prevailing tax provisions negatively impacts the
competitiveness of CSL. The Committee recommends that work contracts related to ship repair
may be exempted from V AT and ship repair activities may be exempted from Service Tax, if
otherwise it is not hampering the economy. The Government of India and Government of Kerala
should re-evaluate the various taxes imposed on the ship repair industry to enable the Cochin
Shipyard Limited to compete with other major ship repair dockyards.
(Para 172)
Reply of the Government
196. Ministry of Shipping vide their communication No.SY-16014/3/2013-CSL dated 22
nd January,
2014 has conveyed that they have requested the Ministries, concerned Departments, Shipping
Corporation of India and Dredging Corporation of India for taking necessary action on the
recommendation made by the Committee.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
197. The Committee is not satisfied with the reply given to para nos. 163/166/167 and
172 by the Ministry of Shipping. It expects the Ministry to be serious towards its
responsibility of addressing the real issues. The Committee reiterates its recommendation
and desires the Ministry of Shipping to take up the issues contained in the
recommendations with the concerned Ministries/Government agencies under intimation to
the Committee.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
198. The Committee would like to know from the Ministry of Shipping why such cluster
concept could not take off in India. The Government should create a business environment for the
growth of Original Equipment Manufacturers (OEMS) and raw material suppliers in nearby
localities of the shipyards. The Committee sincerely feels that it would go a long way in
strengthening our ship building and ship repair industry.
(Para 174)
Reply of the Government
199. Ministry of Shipping vide their communication No.SY-16014/3/2013-CSL dated 22
nd January,
2014 has conveyed that Cluster Concept could not take off in India as the most OEMs (original
Equipment Manufacturers) and raw material suppliers are not located in and around Indian
shipyards, which gives the yard logistical advantage and competitive strength. Most of the
equipment and raw materials have to be imported as per requirement of ship owners. The
indigenous ship ancillary industry is not well developed and shipbuilding industry in India is at
present passing through a downturn. Policy measures for promotion of India shipyards are being
formulated by the Ministry in consultation with National Manufacturing Competitiveness Council
(NMCC) and other concerned Government Department.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
200. The Committee takes note of the reply.

32
32
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS/CONCLUSION — AT A GLANCE
Chapter–I : Tourism in Kerala
The Committee takes note of the reply. The Committee is of the opinion that the
steps taken by the Ministry of Tourism need to be monitored regularly to achieve the
targets. The Committee recommends that water sports and water taxis proposed in Chennai
also can be included in the other viable ports. The Committee expresses its concern over
the past accidents involving cruise boats/houseboats etc. where many tourists lost their lives
and to remind that the luxury boats need to be procured without any compromise to the
safety norms prescribed for it. The Committee notes that the Ministry of Tourism is silent
about giving publicity to the cruise tourism potential of Kochi Port in their Incredible India
Campaign. The Committee reiterates its recommendations that cruise terminal in Kochi
may be included as one of the elements in Incredible India Campaign. (Para 14)
The Committee finds the reply evasive. The delay in securing the reply in time must
have been dealt with seriously. The Committee further recommends that Ministry of
Tourism should make all out efforts to provide adequate infrastructure for backwater
tourism in Alappuzha and provide the necessary finances for the purpose. (Para 17)
The Committee notes the reply. These were the information available with the
Committee at the time of preparation of the Report in July, 2013. It seems that Ministry
has not taken any further action on the recommendation of the Committee. The Committee
recommends that the Government may take further necessary steps to promote wellness
tourism. (Para 22)
The Committee may be apprised of the outcome of the meetings held with the
concerned agencies in the matter of granting medical visa to tourists. The Committee
recommends that the Government of India and Government of Kerala should coordinate
with each other in promoting wellness tourism at global level and effort be made for
expeditious issuance of medical visa/medical attendance visa. (Para 31)
The Committee recommends that the Ministry of Tourism, Government of India may
take necessary steps to provide special financial packages for developing eco-tourism
centres like Gavi, Eravikulam, Munnar and other major destinations. (Para 34)
The Committee desires that details of the masterplan may be communicated to it.
The Committee recommends that Ministry of Tourism, Government of India may support
the initiative to promote satellite villages of Thekkady as tourist destinations. (Para 37)
The Committee takes note of the reply. The Committee notes with dismay that even
after a year since the recommendation of the Committee submitted to Parliament, the
Governments of India and Kerala State have not taken any steps to implement it. The
Committee does not know the reasons for this. The Committee reiterates its
recommendations and expects to have a response in this regard of the steps taken.
(Para 42)
Regarding waste management at Periyar Tiger Reserve and exorbitant charges of
boat tickets, no concrete and specific step has been taken to resolve it. The Committee
reiterates its recommendations. The Committee desires that the Ministry of Tourism

33
may furnish a proper response to it after obtaining feedback from the Government of
Kerala. (Para 49)
The Committee feels that the reply given by the Ministry of Tourism is too general
in nature and the recommendations of the Committee could not get the desired attention.
The Committee desired to know the follow up action in this regard. The Committee
reiterates its recommendation. The Ministry of Tourism Government of India may please
supply the Committee the specific initiatives taken to implement the recommendation of
the Committee. (Para 54)
The Committee is not satisfied with the reply. The Committee notes that Ministry of
Tourism, Government of Kerala being the principal stakeholders had the major role to take
initiatives to implement the recommendation of the Committee. However, no such
information has been furnished to the Committee. The Committee reiterates its
recommendation above and instructs the Ministry of Tourism Government of India to
further take up the matter with the Government of Kerala. (Para 60)
The Committee is happy that Government of Kerala is in agreement with
Committee’s recommendation. The Committee however, feels that there is a need to have
a closer and regular coordination between Ministry of Tourism, Government of India and
Ministry of Tourism, Government of Kerala to augment and promote tourism and its allied
activities. The Committee would like to know the steps taken by the Government of Kerala
on the recommendation of the Committee. (Para 65)
The Committee recommends that the Ministry of Tourism should take up the matter
with the Ministry of External Affairs and Ministry of Culture to ensure the success of spice
route project and Muziris Heritage Project. It needs to be taken up with utmost priority and
seriousness. (Para 70)
The Committee notes the reply. The Committee feels that the Government of Kerala
needs to place concrete proposals and clearances required before the Ministry of Tourism,
Government of India. It expects the latter to pursue the matter on urgent basis. (Para 74)
The Committee notes that considerable time has elapsed since the constitution of the
Empowered Group of State Transport Minister for the rationalization of Motor Vehicle Taxes.
The Committee, therefore, desires to know the recommendations of the Empowered Group
on the terms and references prescribed for the purpose. The Committee further
recommends that the matter may be pursued with the Ministry of Road Transport and
Highways and other concerned State Government authorities. (Para 79)
The Committee appreciates the new imitative of running ‘South Splendor Tourism
Train’ on the pattern of ‘The Palace on Wheels”. The Committee hopes that the increased
inflow of tourists due to this train will have cascading effects on tourism and allied
activities specially hotels, guest houses, restaurants, gift Shoppe etc. (Para 83)
The Committee takes note of the reply. The Committee recommends that the
taxation need to be reviewed to help tourism industry grow further. The Ministry of Tourism
may pursue the matter with the Ministry of Finance. (Para 87)
The Committee takes note of the reply. The Committee would like to know the
action taken by the Government of Kerala in this regard. The Ministry of Tourism,
Government of India may facilitate the matter with the Government of Kerala. (Para 91)
The Committee notes the reply and is of the opinion that if an owner can run a star
hotel without serving liquor there, what is the harm in it? However, serving of liquor
without a license should be dealt with seriously. (Para 95)

34
The Committee takes note of the reply. (Para l0l)
The Committee takes note of the reply. (Para 107)
The Committee takes note of the reply. (Para 112)
The Committee notes the reply which has come from the ASI through the  Ministry
of Tourism. The Committee feels that the issue has not been addressed by the Ministry of
Tourism with the seriousness it deserved. It appears that its contents have not been gone
through seriously except copy-pasting the reply given by ASI otherwise the information
could have been furnished correctly. The current reply does not contain the action taken by
the Ministry of Tourism on the issues pointed out by the ASI. The Committee desires to
know the opinion of Ministry on it. (Para 120)
The Committee would like to know the steps taken by the Government of  Kerala
in this regard. (Para 124)
The Committee notes the reply. (Para 127)
Chapter–II : National Highways in Kerala
The Committee acknowledges the problems faced in the land acquisition. The
Committee recommends that the Government agencies should chalk out a via media to sort
out the problems. (Para 130)
The Committee appreciated the steps taken by the Ministry of Road Transport and
Highways solving the bottlenecks on the land acquisition related issues in Kerala. The
Committee, in view of the reply of Government of Kerala on the issue of land Acquisition
for National Highways, recommends that the complaints with respect to alignment of various
stretches in view of the local sentiments should be taken care of by the NHAI. However,
the Committee also suggests that the State Government of Kerala may take up the
challenge of land acquisition appropriately in view of the importance of the National
Highways for the economic development of the State. (Para 134)
The Committee hopes that a closer and regular coordination with the State
Government will help improve the condition of roads in Kerala. (Para 139)
The Committee notes the reply and feels that the MORTH has not properly addressed
the issue of rehabilitation and resettlement as per the reply furnished by the Government of
Kerala. The Committee notes that the MORTH is not ready to  address the Kerala specific
conditions on the plea that this might invite demands for similar packages from other States.
The Committee feels that the MORTH should factor in the peculiarities of Kerala in views
of its outstanding record in promotion of tourism; such States need to be rewarded for good
work. The Committee, therefore, reiterates its recommendation that a special package may
be given to Kerala as far as land acquisition is concerned. (Para 143)
The Committee notes the reply. The Committee recommends that the concerns of
the Government of Kerala in the matter should be addressed properly by the NHAI.
(Para 149)
The Committee feels that instead of blaming a whole State of not paying the Toll,
the NHAI should look into the real issues and reasons for such a situation, if the people
are reluctant to pay Toll. The Committee also feels that people’s protest to tolls is not
specific to Kerala only, but also in other parts of the country. Therefore, the Committee
recommends that Government may revisit their Toll Policy throughout the country
especially in Kerala and formulate an acceptable solution to the real issue. (Para 154)

35
The Committee notes the reply. (Para 158)
The Committee notes the reply and feels that the Ministry of Road Transport and
Highways will take up the issue with the State Government of Kerala to resolve all the
issues concerning land acquisitions. (Para 162)
The Committee desires to know the details of the Grade Separators at a cost of
Rs.1450 crore. As regards 4 laning of the 5-9 km. road connecting Cochin Port, the reply
of the NHAI is evasive. The Committee recommends that feasibility study may be conducted
at the earliest. (Para 168)
Chapter–III : National Waterways in Kerala
The Committee notes the reply. The Committee observes that the NW-3 is fully
operational, even though the works started many years back. The Committee hopes that the
entire stretch of the NW-3 with the dredging of the remaining 12 km. between Thakazhy
to Kollam will be completed without further delay. The interruptions by local people may be
addressed at State level. (Para 173)
The Committee takes note of the reply. The Committee desires that the feasibility
report of the NATPAC may be furnished to the Committee. (Para 176)
The Committee notes the reply. (Para 179)
The Committee notes the reply. (Para 182)
The Committee notes the reply. The Committee, however, would like to know the
normal procedure followed by IWAI in other waterways while disposing the dredged soil.
(Para 185)
The Committee recommends that in disposing of the dredged soil, the local body of
the area may be involved if the interference of locals are hampering the work. The
Committee further recommends that bank protection is to be ensured by the IWAI not only
to protect the land along the shores, but it may reduce the siltation in the channels. So the
initial spending on bund can be recovered later on in the form of saving the maintenance
dredging costs. (Para 186)
The Committee appreciates the efforts made to form a co-ordination committee to
resolve the issues. (Para 187)
The Committee notes the reply. (Para 191)
Chapter–IV : Cochin Shipyard Limited
The Committee is not satisfied with the reply given to para nos. 163, 166, 167 and
172 by the Ministry of Shipping. It expects the Ministry to be serious towards its
responsibility of addressing the real issues. The Committee reiterates its recommendation
and desires the Ministry of Shipping to take up the issues contained in the
recommendations with the concerned Ministries/Government agencies under intimation to
the Committee. (Para 197)
The Committee takes note of the reply. (Para 200)

MINUTES

38

39
XI
ELEVENTH MEETING
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Tuesday, the 18 th February, 2014 in Room No. 63, First
Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Sitaram Yechury — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Shashi Bhusan Behera
3. Shri Narendra Kumar Kashyap
4. Prof. Alka Balram Kshatriya
5. Shri Aayanur Manjunatha
6. Shri V . Hanumantha Rao
7. Shri Satish Sharma
8. Shrimati Bimla Kashyap Sood
9. Shrimati Vasanthi Stanley
LOK SABHA
10. Shri Madan Lal Sharma
11. Shri Shatrughan Sinha
SECRETARIAT
Shri N.K. Singh, Joint Secretary
Shri Swarabji B., Joint Director
Dr. (Shrimati) Subhashree Panigrahi, Joint Director
Shrimati Catherine John L., Assistant Direrctor
Shri T. Kennedy Jesudossan, Committee Officer
Shri P.P. Raumon, Committee Officer
2. The Chairman welcomed the Members to the meeting. Thereafter, the Committee considered
the following draft Reports:
(i) * * *
(ii) * * *
(iii) * * *
(iv) 213
th Report on the Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations
of the Committee contained in its Two Hundredth Report on Development of Tourism,
National Highways and Water Transport in Kerala and Cochin Shipyard Limited.
3. The Committee adopted the said reports without any modifications after some discussion
and decided to present/lay the Reports to Parliament on 19
th February, 2014.
4. The meeting adjourned at 4.00 P.M.
39
*** Relate to other matters.

40
40
LIST OF REPORTS
Report
No.
1
1st
2nd
3rd
4th
5th
6th
7th
8th
9th
10th
11th
l2th
13th
Title of the Report
2
Demands for Grants (1993-94) of
Department of Tourism
Government Policy on Private Air Taxi
Operation and Matters connected
therewith
Inland Waterways Authority of India
(Amendment), Bill, 1992
Air Corporations (Transfer of
Undertakings and  Repeal) Bill, 1992 (with
evidence)
The Airports Authority of India Bill, 1993
(with evidence)
The Anti-Hijacking (Amendment) Bill, 1993
The Suppression of Unlawful Acts Against
Safety of Civil Aviation (Amendment)
Bill, 1993
Demands for Grants (1994-95) of
Department of Tourism
Demands for Grants (1994-95) of
Ministry of Civil Aviation
Demands for Grants (1994-95) of
Ministry of  Surface Transport
Merger of Vayudoot with Indian Airlines
Development of Tourism and Transport in
North-East
National Highway System
Date of
Presentation
4
30.04.1993
17.08.1993
08.12.1993 (RS)
09.12.1993 (LS)
08.12.1993 (RS)
09.12.1993 (LS)
16.03.1994
19.04.1994
19.04.1994
21.04.1994
22.04.1994
25.04.1994
24.08.1994
20.03.1995
25.04.1995
Date of
Adoption
3
29.04.1993
21.07.1993
08.09.1993
20.10.1993
14.02.1994
29.03.1994
29.03.1994
05.04.1994
12.04.1994
19.04.1994
28.06.1994
29.12.1994
21.02.1995
1993-94 (5 Reports)
1994-95 (8 Reports)

41
1
14th
15th
16th
17th
18th
19th
*20th
21st
22nd
23rd
24th
25th
26th
27th
28th
2
Demands for Grants (1995-96) of
Department of Tourism
Demands for Grants (1995-96) of
Department of Civil Aviation
Demands for Grants (1995-96) of
Ministry of Surface Transport
National Highways (Amendment) Bill,
1995 (with evidence)
Inland Waterways
Dock Workers (Regulation of Employment)
(Inapplicability to Major Ports) Bill, 1995
(with evidence)
Privatisation Policy in regard to Major
Ports
Seamen’s Provident Fund (Amendment)
Bill, 1995
Civil Enclaves in Defence Airfields
Demands for Grants (1996-97) of
Department of Tourism
Demands for Grants (1996-97) of
Ministry of Civil Aviation
Demands for Grants (1996-97) of
Ministry of Surface Transport
Demands for Grants (1997-98)
Department of Tourism
Demands for Grants (1997-98) of
Ministry of Civil Aviation
Demands for Grants (1997-98) of
Ministry of Surface Transport
4
26.04.1995
26.04.1995
10.05.1995
26.05.1995
25.08.1995
04.12.1995
27.02.1996 (LS)
28.02.1996 (RS)
28.02.1996 (RS)
29.02.1996 (LS)
07.03.1996
27.08.1996
04.09.1996 (RS)
06.09.1996 (LS)
09.09.1996
15.05.1997
15.05.1997
15.05.1997
3
18.04.1995
18.04.1995
04.05.1995
24.05.1995
22.08.1995
11.10.1995
04.01.1996
07.02.1996
29.02.1996
21.08.1996
29.08.1996
04.09.1996
08.05.1997
08.05.1997
08.05.1997
1995-96 (8 Reports)
1996-97 (8 Reports)
*Presented to Hon’ble Chairman on the 25 th January, 1996.

42
1
29th
30th
31st
32nd
33rd
34th
35th
36th
37th
38th
39th
40th
41st
42nd
43rd
2
Ship-building and Ship-repair Industry in
India
Functioning of Indian Airlines and Alliance
Air
Demands for Grants (1998-99) of
Department of Tourism
Demands for Grants (1998-99) of
Ministry of Civil Aviation
Demands for Grants (1998-99) of
Ministry of Surface Transport
Merchant Shipping Second (Amendment)
Bill, 1998 (with evidence)
Functioning of Air India
Major Port Trusts (Amendment) Bill, 1998
(with evidence)
Demands for Grants (1999-2000) of
Ministry of Tourism
Demands for Grants (1999-2000) of
Ministry of Civil Aviation
Demands for Grants (1999-2000) of
Ministry of Surface Transport
Problems faced by Tourists/Passengers at
the Airport in the country
Demands for Grants (2000-2001) of
Ministry of Tourism
Demands for Grants (2000-2001) of
Ministry of Civil Aviation
Demands for Grants (2000-2001) of the
Ministry of Surface Transport
4
24.07.1997
14.08.1997
03.07.1998 (RS)
06.07.1998 (LS)
06.07.1998
06.07.1998
04.12.1998
04.03.1999 (LS)
08.03.1999 (RS)
04.03.1999 (LS)
08.03.1999 (RS)
19.04.1999 (RS)
22.04.1999 (LS)
19.04.1999 (RS)
22.04.1999 (LS)
19.04.1999 (RS)
22.04.1999 (LS)
07.03.2000 (RS)
08.03.2000 (LS)
19.04.2000
19.04.2000
19.04.2000
3
08.07.1997
11.08.1997
29.06.1998
01.07.1998
01.07.1998
02.12.1998
01.02.1999
26.02.1999
07.04.1999
07.04.1999
08.04.1999
01.03.2000
03.04.2000
03.04.2000
13.04.2000
1997-98 (1 Report)
1998-99 (9 Reports)
1999-2000 (7 Reports)

43
1
44th
45th
46th
47th
48th
49th
50th
51st
52nd
53rd
54th
55th
56th
57th
58th
59th
2
Disinvestment of Air India
Functioning and Revival of Central Inland
Water Transport Corporation Ltd. (CIWTC)
Chartering and Management of flights for
Haj Pilgrims
Functioning of the Department of
Lighthouses and Lightships
Demands for Grants (2001-2002) of the
Department of Tourism
Demands for Grants (2001-2002) of
Department of Culture
Demands for Grants (2001-2002) of
Ministry of Civil Aviation
Demands for Grants (2001-2002) of the
Ministry of Road Transport and Highways
Demands for Grants (2001-2002) of the
Ministry of Shipping
The Aircraft (Exemption from Taxes and
Duties on Fuel and Lubricants) Bill, 2000
(with evidence)
Functioning of Border Roads Organisation
Demands for Grants (2002-2003) of the
Department of Tourism
Demands for Grants (2002-2003) of
Department of Culture
Demands for Grants (2002-2003) of the
Ministry of Shipping
Demands for Grants (2002-2003) of
Ministry of Civil Aviation
Demands for Grants (2002-2003) of the
Ministry of Road Transport and Highways
4
22.8.2000
13.12.2000 (LS)
15.12.2000 (RS)
14.12.2000 (LS)
15.12.2000 (RS)
21.03.2001 (LS)
23.03.2001 (RS)
26.04.2001
26.04.2001
26.04.2001
26.04.2001 (RS)
27.04.2001 (LS)
26.04.2001 (RS)
27.04.2001 (LS)
27.11.2001 (RS)
28.11.2001 (LS)
12.12.2001
23.04.2002 (LS)
24.04.2002 (RS)
23.04.2002 (LS)
24.04.2002 (RS)
23.04.2002 (LS)
24.04.2002 (RS)
23.04.2002 (LS)
24.04.2002 (RS)
23.04.2002 (LS)
24.04.2002 (RS)
3
17.08.2000
06.12.2000
06.12.2000
14.03.2001
11.04.2001
11.04.2001
11.04.2001
11.04.2001
11.04.2001
29.10.2001
28.11.2001
16.04.2002
16.04.2002
16.04.2002
18.04.2002
18.04.2002
2001 (8 Reports)
2002 (7 Reports)

44
1
60th
61st
62nd
63rd
64th
65th
66th
67th
68th
69th
70th
*71st
72nd
2
Development of Tourism in the Country
The Airports Authority of India
(Amendment) Bill, 2000 (with evidence)
The Major Port Trusts (Amendment)
Bill, 2001 (with evidence)
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its Fifty-eighth
Report on Demands for Grants 2002-03
of Ministry of Civil Aviation
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its Fifty-seventh
Report on Demands for Grants 2002-03
of Ministry of Shipping
Sale of Centaur Hotel Mumbai Airport
Demands for Grants (2003-04) of the
Department of Tourism
Demands for Grants (2003-04) of the
Ministry of Road Transport and Highways
Demands for Grants (2003-04) of
Department of Culture
Demands for Grants (2003-04) of
Ministry of Civil Aviation
Demands for Grants (2003-04) of the
Ministry of Shipping
Jallianwala Bagh National Memorial
(Amendment) Bill, 2003 (with evidence)
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its Sixtieth Report
on Development of Tourism in the
country
4
21.11.2002
21.11.2002
19.02.2003
25.02.2003
25.02.2003
10.03.2003
10.04.2003
10.04.2003
25.04.2003
25.04.2003
25.04.2003
11.11.2003
03.12.2003
3
06.08.2002
11.11.2002
03.02.2003
10.01.2003
20.02.2003
05.03.2003
08.04.2003
08.04.2003
23.04.2003
23.04.2003
23.04.2003
16.10.2003
29.10.2003
2003 (12 Reports)
*Presented to Hon’ble Chairman on the 11 th November, 2003.

45
1
73rd
74th
75th
76th
77th
78th
79th
80th
81st
82nd
2
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its Sixty-sixth
Report on Demands for Grants (2003-04)
(Demand No. 91) of Department of
Tourism
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its 67
th Report on
Demands for Grants (2003-04) of
Ministry of Road Transport and Highways
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its Seventieth
Report on Demands for Grants (2003-04)
of Ministry of Shipping
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its 68
th Report on
Demands for Grants (2003-04) of
Department of Culture
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its 69
th Report on
Demands for Grants (2003-04) of
Ministry of Civil Aviation
Demands for Grants (2004-05) of
Ministry of Civil Aviation
Demands for Grants (2004-05) of
Ministry of Tourism
Demands for Grants (2004-05) of
Ministry of Culture
Demands for Grants (2004-05) of
Ministry of Shipping
Demands for Grants (2004-05) of
Ministry of Road Transport and Highways
4
03.12.2003
03.02.2004
03.02.2004
03.02.2004
03.02.2004
18.08.2004
26.08.2004
26.08.2004
26.08.2004
26.08.2004
3
29.10.2003
09.01.04
09.01.04
22.01.04
22.01.04
14.08.2004
23.08.2004
23.08.2004
25.08.2004
25.08.2004
2004 (4 Reports)
2004-05 (12 Reports)

46
1
83rd
84th
85th
86th
87th
88th
89th
90th
91st
92nd
93rd
94th
2
Functioning of the Commission of
Railway Safety
Demands for Grants (2005-06) of
Department of Road Transport and
Highways
Demands for Grants (2005-06) of
Ministry of Culture
Demands for Grants (2005-06) of
Department of Shipping
Demands for Grants (2005-06) of
Ministry of Tourism
Demands for Grants (2005-06) of
Ministry of Civil Aviation
The Merchant Shipping (Amendment)
Bill, 2004 (with evidence)
Development of Airport Sector with Special
Emphasis on New Modern Airports
Functioning on Archaeological Survey of
India
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its Eighty-fourth
Report on Demands for Grants (2005-06)
of Department of Road Transport and
Highways
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its Eighty-fifth
Report on Demands for Grants (2005-06)
of Ministry of Culture
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its Eighty-sixth
Report on Demands for Grants (2005-06)
of Department of Shipping
4
6.12.2004 (RS)
3.12.2004 (LS)
29.04.2005
29.04.2005
29.04.2005
29.04.2005
29.04.2005
27.07.2005
23.08.2005
25.11.2005
27.02.2006
27.02.2006
27.02.2006
3
17.11.2004
15.04.2005
15.04.2005
21.04.2005
21.04.2005
27.04.2005
06.06.2005
17.08.2005
19.09.2005
22.02.2006
22.02.2006
22.02.2006
2005-06 (18 Report)

47
1
95th
96th
97th
98th
99th
100th
101st
102nd
103rd
104th
105th
106th
2
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its Eighty-seventh
Report on Demands for Grants (2005-06)
of Ministry of Tourism
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its Eighty-eighth
Report on Demands for Grants (2005-06)
of Ministry of Civil Aviation
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its Ninetieth
Report on the ‘Development of Airport
Sector with special emphasis on new
modern airports’
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its Eighty-third
Report on the ‘Functioning of the
Commission of Railway Safety’
The Admiralty Bill, 2005
The Inland Vessels (Amendment) Bill, 2005
The Carriage by Road Bill, 2005
Demands for Grants (2006-07) of the
Department of Road Transport and
Highways
Demands for Grants (2006-07) of the
Department of Culture
Demands for Grants (2006-07) of the
Department of Tourism
Demands for Grants (2006-07) of the
Department of Shipping
Demands for Grants (2006-07) of the
Ministry of Civil Aviation
4
27.02.2006
27.02.2006
27.02.2006
21.03.2006
21.03.2006
21.03.2006
21.03.2006
22.05.2006
22.05.2006
22.05.2006
22.05.2006
22.05.2006
3
22.02.2006
22.02.2006
22.02.2006
17.03.2006
17.03.2006
17.03.2006
17.03.2006
19.05.2006
19.05.2006
19.05.2006
19.05.2006
19.05.2006

48
1
107th
108th
109th
110th
111th
112th
113th
114th
115th
2
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its Ninety-first
Report on ‘Functioning of the
Archaeological Survey of India’
Functioning and Performance of India
Tourism Development Corporation Limited
(ITDC)
The Aircraft (Amendment) Bill, 2006
The Central Road Fund (Amendment)
Bill, 2006
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
and Second Report on Demands for
Grants (2006-07) of Department of Road
Transport and Highways
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
and Third Report on Demands for Grants
(2006-07) of Department of Culture
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
and Fourth Report on Demands for Grants
(2006-07) of Ministry of Tourism
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred and
Fifth Report on Demands for Grants
(2006-07) of Department of Shipping
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred and
Sixth Report on Demands for Grants
(2006-07) of Ministry of Civil Aviation
4
22.05.2006
15.12.2006
13.03.2007
20.03.2007
14.05.2007
14.05.2007
14.05.2007
14.05.2007
14.05.2007
3
19.05.2006
12.12.2006
09.03.2007
19.03.2007
16.04.2007
16.04.2007
16.04.2007
16.04.2007
16.04.2007
2006-07 (13 Reports)

49
1
116th
117th
118th
119th
120th
121st
122nd
123rd
124th
125th
126th
2
Demands for Grants (2007-08) of the
Ministry of Civil Aviation
Demands for Grants (2007-08) of the
Department of Shipping
Demands for Grants (2007-08) of the
Department of Road Transport and Highways
Demands for Grants (2007-08) of the
Ministry of Tourism
Demands for Grants (2007-08) of the
Ministry of Culture
The National Waterway (Talcher-Dhamra
Stretch of Rivers Geonkhali-Charbatia
Stretch of East Coast Canal, Charbatia-
Dhamra Stretch of Matai River and
Mahanadi Delta Rivers) Bill, 2006
The National Waterway (Kakinada-
Pondicherry Stretch of Canals and the
Kaluvelly Tank, Bhadrachalam –
Rajahmundry Stretch of River Godavari
and Wazirabad-Vijayawada Stretch of
River Krishna) Bill, 2006
The Seamen’s Provident Fund
(Amendment) Bill, 2007
The Carriage by Air (Amendment) Bill, 2007
presented to Hon'ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha
on 17.10.2007
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred and
Sixteenth Report on Demands for Grants
(2007-08) of Ministry of Civil Aviation
The Action Taken by the Government on
the Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
Nineteenth Report on Demands for Grants
(2007-08) of the Ministry of Tourism
4
14.05.2007
14.05.2007
14.05.2007
14.05.2007
14.05.2007
16.8.2007
16.8.2007
05.09.2007
17.10.2007
(Presented to Chairman)
20.11.2007
(Presented to House)
20.11.2007
20.11.2007
3
9.05.2007
9.05.2007
9.05.2007
9.05.2007
9.05.2007
18.07.2007
18.07.2007
31.08.2007
25.09.2007
02.11.2007
02.11.2007
2007-08 (19 Reports)

50
1
127th
128th
129th
130th
131st
132nd
133rd
134th
135th
136th
137th
138th
139th
2
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
and Eighteenth Report on Demands for
Grants (2007-08) of the Department of
Road Transport and Highways
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
and Seventeenth Report on Demands for
Grants (2007-08) of Department of
Shipping
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
and Twentieth Report on Demands for
Grants (2007-08) of Ministry of Culture
The National Waterway (Lakhipur-Bhanga
Stretch of the Barak River) Bill, 2007
Closure of Bangalore and Hyderabad
Airports and matters related thereto
The Indian Maritime University Bill, 2007
The Airports Economic Regulatory
Authority of India Bill, 2007
Demands for Grants (2007-08) of the
Department of Shipping
Demands for Grants (2008-09) of the
Department of Road Transport and Highways
Demands for Grants (2008-09) of
Ministry of Tourism
Demands for Grants (2008-09) of
Ministry of Culture
Demands for Grants (2008-09) of
Ministry of Civil Aviation
The Motor Vehicle (Amendment) Bill, 2007
4
04.03.2008
04.03.2008
04.03.2008
04.03.2008
05.03.2008
17
.04.2008
17.04.2008
17.04.2008
28.04.2008
28.04.2008
28.04.2008
28.04.2008
28.04.2008
3
18.01.2008
18.01.2008
18.01.2008
31.01.2008
04.03.2008
15.04.2008
15.04.2008
15.04.2008
24.04.2008
24.04.2008
24.04.2008
24.04.2008
24.04.2008

51
1
140th
141st
142nd
143rd
144th
145th
146th
2
Promotion of tourism in Jammu and
Kashmir
Modernization of Airports
Functioning of Private Airports and the
related issues
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
and Thirty-fourth Report on Demands for
Grants 2008-2009 of the Department of
Shipping
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
and Thirty-fifth Report on Demands for
Grants 2008-2009 of the Department of
Road, Transport and Highways
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
and Thirty-sixth Report on Demands for
Grants 2008-2009 of the Ministry of
Tourism
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
and Thirty-seventh Report on Demands
for Grants 2008-2009 of the Ministry of
Culture
4
20.08.2008
(Presented to Hon’ble
Chairman and Hon’ble
Speaker)
23.10.2008
(Presented to Parliament)
20.08.2008
(Presented to Hon’ble
Chairman and Hon’ble
Speaker)
23.10.2008
(Presented to Parliament)
23.10.2008
19.12.2008
19.12.2008
19.12.2008
19.12.2008
3
11.08.2008
11.08.2008
20.10.2008
18.12.2008
18.12.2008
18.12.2008
18.12.2008
2008-09 (l0 Reports)

52
1
147th
148th
149th
150th
151st
152nd
153rd
154th
155th
156th
157th
2
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
and Thirty-eighth Report on Demands for
Grants 2008-2009 of the Ministry of Civil
Aviation
The National Highways Authority of India
(Amendment) Bill, 2008
Development of Tourism Infrastructure
and Amenities for the Commonwealth
Games 2010
The National Commission for Heritage
Sites Bill, 2009
Merger of Indian Airlines and Air India: Its
Impact on The Civil Aviation Sector
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
and Fortieth Report on promotion of
Tourism in Jammu and Kashmir
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
and Forty-ninth Report on Development of
Tourism Infrastructure and Amenities for
the Commonwealth Games, 2010
Demands for Grants (2010-11) of
Ministry of Tourism
Demands for Grants (2010-11) of
Ministry of Road Transport and Highways
Demands for Grants (2010-11) of
Ministry of Shipping
Demands for Grants (2010-11) of
Ministry of Culture
4
19.12.2008
17.02.2009
24.02.2009
23.11.2009
21.01.2010
(Presented to Hon’ble
Chairman and Hon’ble
Speaker)
03.03.2010
(Presented to Parliament)
03.03.2010
03.03.2010
20.04.2010
20.04.2010
22.04.2010
22.04.2010
3
18.12.2008
13.02.2009
19.02.2009
13.11.2009
08.01.2010
09.02.2010
09.02.2010
07.04.2010
07.04.2010
20.04.2010
20.04.2010
2009-10 (11 Reports)

53
1
158th
159th
160th
161st
162nd
163rd
164th
2
Demands for Grants (2010-11) of
Ministry of Civil Aviation
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
and Thirty-first Report on Closure of
Bangalore and Hyderabad Airports; One
Hundred and Forty First Report on
Modernisation of Airports; and One
Hundred and Forty Second Report on
Functioning of Private Airports
The National Road Safety and Traffic
Management Board Bill, 2010
The Anti-Hijacking (Amendment)
Bill, 2010
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
Fifty-fourth Report on Demands for
Grants (2010-11) of the Ministry of
Tourism
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One hundred
Fifty-fifth Report on Demands for Grants
(2010-11) of the Ministry of Road
Transport and Highways
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
Fifty-sixth Report on Demands for
Grants (2010-11) of the Ministry of
Shipping
4
22.04.2010
06.05.2010
28.07.2010
(Rajya Sabha)
27.07.2010
(Lok Sabha)
18.10.2010
(Presented to Hon’ble
Chairman and Hon’ble
Speaker)
01.03.2011
(Presented to the
Parliament)
04.03.2011
04.03.2011
04.03.2011
3
20.04.2010
05.05.2010
14.07.2010
08.10.2010
20.12.2010
20.12.2010
20.12.2010
2010-11 (12 Reports)

54
1
165th
166th
167th
168th
169th
170th
171st
172nd
173rd
174th
175th
176th
2
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
Fifty Seventh Report on Demands for
Grants (2010-11) of the Ministry of Culture
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
Fifty Eighth Report on Demands for Grants
(2010-11) of the Ministry of Civil Aviation
Functioning of National Museum
Directorate General of Civil Aviation
(DGCA) – Issues and Challenges
Helicopter operations in India
Modernization of Major Port
Functioning of Sahitya Akademi, Lalit Kala
Akademi, Sangeet Natak Akademi and
National School of Drama
Development of Tourism in North-Eastern
Region
The National Highways Authority of India
(Amendment) Bill, 2011
Demands for Grants (2012-13) of Ministry
of Civil Aviation
Demands for Grants (2012-13) of Ministry
of Culture
Demands for Grants (2012-13) of Ministry
of Tourism
4
04.03.2011
04.03.2011
10.03.2011 (RS)
11.03.2011 (LS)
04.05.2011 (Presented to
Hon’ble Chairman and
Hon’ble Speaker)
11.08.2011
(Presented to the
Parliament)
04.05.2011 (Presented to
Hon’ble Chairman and
Hon’ble Speaker)
11.08.2011
(Presented to the
Parliament)
11.08.2011
17.08.2011
17.08.2011
15.03.2012
02.04.2012
07.05.2012
07.05.2012
3
20.12.2010
20.12.2010
25.01.2011
13.04.2011
13.04.2011
27.05.2011
11.08.2011
11.08.2011
13.03.2012
26.04.2012
03.05.2012
03.05.2012
2011-12 (8 Reports)

55
1
177th
178th
179th
180th
181st
182nd
183rd
184th
185th
2
Demands for Grants (2012-13) of Ministry
of Shipping
Demands for Grants (2012-13) of Ministry
of Road Transport and Highways
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
Sixty Seventh Report on ‘Functioning of
National Museum’
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
and Seventy Second Report on Development
of Tourism in North-Eastern Region
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
Sixty-eighth Report on Directorate General
of Civil Aviation (DGCA) – Issues and
Challenges
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
Sixty-ninth Report on Helicopter Operations
in India
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
Seventy-seventh Report on the Demands for
Grants of Ministry of Shipping (2012-13)
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
Seventy-sixth Report on the Demands for
Grants of Ministry of Tourism (2012-13)
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
Seventy-fourth Report on the Demands for
Grants of Ministry of Civil Aviation (2012-13)
4
07.05.2012
07.05.2012
21.05.2012
21.05.2012
04.12.2012
04.12.2012
04.12.2012
04.12.2012
04.12.2012
3
03.05.2012
03.05.2012
17.05.2012
17.05.2012
18.10.2012
18.10.2012
05.11. 2012
05.11.2012
18.10.2012
2012-13 (20 Reports)

56
1
186th
187th
188th
189th
190th
191st
192nd
193rd
194th
195th
2
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One
Hundred Seventy-fifth Report on the
Demands for Grants of Ministry of
Culture (2012-13)
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
Seventy-eighth Report on the Demands
for Grants of Ministry of Road Transport
and Highways (2012-13)
Functioning of Commission of Railway
Safety
Development of National Waterways—
Potential and Challenges
Development of Tourism in Darjeeling and
Sikkim
Demands for Grants (2013-14) of
Ministry of Civil Aviation
Demands for Grants (2013-14) of
Ministry of Culture
Demands for Grants (2013-14) of
Ministry of Road Transport and Highways
Demands for Grants (2013-14) of
Ministry of Shipping
Demands for Grants (2013-14) of
Ministry of Tourism
4
04.12.2012
04.12.2012
06.02.2013 (Presented to
Hon’ble Chairman)
27.02.2013
(Presented to the
Parliament)
06.02.2013 (Presented to
Hon’ble Chairman)
27.02.2013
(Presented to the
Parliament)
06.02.2013 (Presented to
Hon’ble Chairman)
27.02.2013
(Presented to the
Parliament)
03.05.2013
03.05.2013
03.05.2013
03.05.2013
03.05.2013
3
05.11. 2012
18.10.2012
03.01.2013
03.01.2013
03.01.2013
02.05.2013
02.05.2013
02.05.2013
02.05.2013
02.05.2013

57
1
196th
197th
198th
199th
200th
201st
202nd
203rd
204th
2
The National Waterway (Lakhipur-Bhanga
Stretch of the Barak River) Bill, 2013
The Merchant Shipping (Amendment)
Bill, 2013
Management of Road Transport in National
Capital Region: Issues and Challenges
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
and Eighty-ninth Report on the
Development of National Waterways-
Potentials and Challenges
Development of Tourism, National
Highways and Water Transport in Kerala
and Cochin Shipyard Limited
Functioning of National Akademis and
other Cultural Institutions: Issues and
Challenges
The Merchant Shipping (Second
Amendment) Bill, 2013
Privatization of Services at Airports
The Civil Aviation Authority of India
Bill, 2013
4
26.06.2013 (Presented to
Hon’ble Chairman)
07.08.2013
(Presented to the Parliament)
26.06.2013 (Presented
to Hon’ble Chairman)
07.08.2013
(Presented to the Parliament)
27.08.2013
27.08.2013
27.08.2013
l7.10.2013 (Presented to
Hon’ble Chairman)
17.12.2013
(Presented to the Parliament)
20.11.2013
(Presented to Hon’ble
Chairman)
17.12.2013
(Presented to the Parliament)
20.11.2013
(Presented to Hon'ble
Chairman)
17.12.2013
(Presented to the Parliament)
24.01.2014
(Presented to Hon'ble
Chairman)
06.02.2014
(Presented to the Parliament)
3
20.05.2013
17.06.2013
23.08.2013
23.08.2013
23.08.2013
01.10.2013
31.10.2013
31.10.2013
13.01.2014
2013-14 (12 Reports)

58
1
205th
206th
207th
208th
209th
210th
211th
212th
2
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
and Ninety -second Report on the Demands
for Grants (2013-14) of the Ministry of
Culture
Action Taken by the Government on the
Observations/Recommendations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
and Ninety-third Report on Demands for
Grants (2013-14) of Ministry of Road
Transport and Highways
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
Ninety-fourth Report on the Demands for
Grants (2013-14) of the Ministry of Shipping
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred  and
Ninety-fifth Report on the Demands for
Grants (2013-14) of the Ministry of Tourism
Action Taken by the Government on the
Observations/Recommendations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred  and
Ninety-first Report on the Demands for Grants
(2013-14) of the Ministry of Civil Aviation
Action Taken by the Government on the
Observations/Recommendations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
and Eighty-eighth Report on Functioning
of Commission of Railways Safety
Upkeep of various Monuments in Delhi,
National Museum and other important
issues pertaining to the Ministry of Culture
Action Taken by the Government on the
Observations/Recommendations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
Ninetieth Report on Development of
Tourism in Darjeeling and Sikkim
4
06.02.2014
06.02.2014
06.02.2014
06.02.2014
06.02.2014
19.02.2014
19.02.2014
19.02.2014
3
17.12.2013
17.12.2013
17.12.2013
17.12.2013
17.12.2013
18.02.2014
18.02.2014
18.02.2014
(The above mentioned reports are available on the website of Rajya Sabha
http://rajyasabha.nic.in ➝Committees➝Department related RS-committee on Transport, Tourism and
Culture ➝Reports)

Printed at : Bengal Offset Works, 335 Khajoor Road, Karol Bagh, New Delhi-110005.