 
       
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTAR 
ON TRANSPORT, TOURIS 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
September 
  
THREE HUNDRED 
‘Functioning of Archaeological Survey of India’ 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 21 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 21 
 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA  
RAJYA SABHA 
 
RELATED PARLIAMENTAR Y STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON TRANSPORT, TOURIS M AND CULTURE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi  
September , 2023 / Bhadra, 1945 (Saka) 
 
 
 
THREE HUNDRED FIFTY NINTH REPORT  
‘Functioning of Archaeological Survey of India’ 
 
resented to the Rajya Sabha on 21 st  September, 2023 ) 
Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 21 st  September, 2023 ) 
 
Y STANDING COMMITTEE  
REPORT NO.  
359 
 
‘Functioning of Archaeological Survey of India’  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Website:      https://rajyasabha.nic.in   
 E-mail:     rsc-tt@sansad.nic.in  
 

 
 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA  
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT,  
TOURISM AND CULTURE  
 
 
THREE HUNDRED FIFTY NINTH REPORT  
‘Functioning of Archaeological Survey of India’ 
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 21 st  September, 2023 ) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 21 st  September, 2023 ) 
 
 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
September, 2023 / Bhadra, 1945 (Saka) 
 
Hindi version of this publication is also available 

 
 
 
 
C O N T E N T S 
 
P A G E S  
 
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE      i 
2. INTRODUCTION        ii 
3. ACRONYMS                iii 
 4. REPORT                                1-29 
5. RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS-AT A GLANCE   30-40  
6. ANNEXURES         41-47 
    7. *MINUTES   
 
         
        
        
      
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
______________________________________ 
 
*To be appended 
48-67

i 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE  
 (2023-24) 
 
 (Constituted on 13 th  September, 2023) 
 
1. Shri V. Vijayasai Reddy   - Chairman 
 
Rajya Sabha  
2. Shri Mohammed Nadimul Haque 
3. Shrimati S. Phangnon Konyak 
4. Shri Manas Ranjan Mangaraj 
5. Dr. Sonal Mansingh 
6. Shrimati Rajani Ashokrao Patil 
7. Shri A. A. Rahim 
8. Dr. C. M. Ramesh 
9. (vacant ) 
10. (vacant ) 
 
Lok Sabha 
11.  Shri Anto Antony 
12.  Shri Ram Margani Bharat 
13.  Shri Tapir Gao  
14.  Shri Rahul Kaswan 
15.  Shri Ramesh Chandra Majhi 
16.  Shri Sunil Baburao Mendhe 
17.  Shri K. Muraleedharan 
18.  Shri S. S.Palanimanickam  
19.  Shri Chhedi Paswan   
20.  Shri Kamlesh Paswan  
21.  Shri Sunil Kumar Pintu 
22.  Shri Prince Raj 
23.  Shri Tirath Singh Rawat 
24.  Shrimati Mala Roy 
25.  Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
26.  Shri Dushyant Singh 
27.  Shri Rajbahadur Singh 
28.  Shri Ramdas Chandrabhanji Tadas 
29.  Shri Manoj Kumar Tiwari 
30.  Shri Krupal Balaji Tumane 
31. Shri Dinesh Lal Yadav "Nirahua"  
 
SECRETARIAT 
Dr. Raghab Prasad Dash, Joint Secretary 
Shrimati Monica Baa, Additional Director 
Shrimati Subha Chandrashekar, Deputy Secretary  
Shri Ranajit Chakraborty, Under Secretary 
Shri Raj Kamal Singh, Assistant Committee Officer  
 
 

ii 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairman, Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport, 
Tourism and Culture, having been authorized by the Committee to present on its behalf, do 
hereby present this Three Hundred Fifty Ninth Repor t on ‘Functioning of Archaeological 
Survey of India’ . 
2. The Committee heard the views of the representat ives of the Ministry of Culture and 
Archaeological Survey of India (ASI), on the subjec t, in its meeting held on 27 th  June, 2023. 
The Committee also heard the views of the represent atives of the Indian National Trust for 
Art and Cultural Heritage (INTACH) & Aga Khan Trust  for Culture, in its meeting on the 
subject, held on 21 st  August, 2023. The Committee also took up the issue  during its Study 
Visit to Mumbai on 5 th  July, 2023 and held discussions with the Ministry of Culture; ASI; 
and State Government of Maharashtra.  
3.  The Committee wishes to express its thanks to t he officers of the Ministry of Culture; 
Archaeological Survey of India; State Government of  Maharashtra; INTACH; and Aga Khan 
Trust for Culture, for placing before the Committee , the material and information desired in 
connection with the subject and for clarifying the points raised by the Members. 
4. The Committee considered and adopted the Report in its meeting held on the 19
th  
September, 2023.   
 
 
(V. Vijayasai Reddy) 
NEW DELHI;                                                           Chairman,  
September 19, 2023                                                 Department-related Parliamentary Standing             
Bhadra 28, 1945 (Saka)                                     Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture,  
                                                                                                                                 Rajya Sabha 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

iii 
 
 
ACRONYMS  
3D Three Dimensional 
AMASR Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Sites an d Remains 
APAR Annual Performance Appraisal Report 
ASI Archaeological Survey of India 
BE Budget Estimates 
BISAG-N Bhaskaracharya National Institute for Space  Applications and Geo-
informatics 
CABA Central Advisory Board of Archaeology  
CAG Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
CBRI Central Building Research Institute 
CISF Central Industrial Security Force 
CPCB Central pollution control Board 
CPM Centrally Protected Monument 
CPMS Centrally Protected Monuments and Sites 
CSR Corporate Social Responsibility 
DRC Documentation Resource Centre 
E-HRMS e-Human Resource Management System 
FY Financial Year 
GPR Ground-Penetrating Radar 
GSI Geological Survey of India 
ICFRI-FRI Indian Council for Forest Research Instit ute 
ICOMOS International Council on Monuments and Sites  
IHDC India Heritage Development Corporation  
IIT Indian Institute of Technology 
INR Indian Rupees 
INTACH Indian National Trust for Arts and Cultural Heritage  
INTERPOL International Criminal Police Organisation  
LiDAR Light Detection and Ranging 
MoU Memorandum of Understanding 
MTS Multi-Tasking Staff 
NCF National Culture Funds  
NEERI National Environmental  Engineering  Research  Institute  
NGO Non-Governmental Organization 
NMMA National Mission of Monument & Antiquities  
PPP Public Private Partnership 
RE Revised Estimate 
SLCC State Level Coordination Committee  
SSC Staff Selection Commission 
UNESCO United Nations Educational, Scientific and C ultural Organization 
UPSC Union Public Service Commission 
UT Union Territory 
YOY Year-over-year  
 

1 
 
REPORT 
 
Introduction 
The Archaeological Survey of India (ASI) distinguishes itself as an eminent institution in the 
realm of archaeology, preservation, and promotion of India's rich cultural heritage  and 
historical sites. The ASI since its inception in 1861  has evolved into a premier organis ation 
devoted to exploring, excavating, and conserving the country’s diverse historical treasures. 
With a history spanning over a century and a half, the ASI has earned a formidable reputation 
of being one of the oldest and most esteemed archaeological departments globally. Studying 
ancient civilizations, deciphering historical narratives, and safeguarding invaluable artifacts, 
structures, and sites of India's glorious past  have been the traditi onal areas of expertise and 
responsibilities of ASI. 
Over the years, the activities of ASI have  grown in scope and significance, adapting to the 
changing landscape of archaeological research and conservation.  From preserving and 
maintaining monumental architectural marvels to intricate artifacts and ancient inscriptions, 
the ASI's endeavours encapsulate the essence of India's cultural tapestry, ensuring that it 
continues to inspire the present as well as the future generations to appreciate and learn from 
while contributing to the nation’s cultural identity. Its mission remains deeply rooted in 
preserving India's cultural heritage and disseminating knowledge about the country's historic 
past to both its people and the global community. 
Keeping this significant and overarching role of the Archaeological Survey of India  in mind, 
the Committee took up the subject “Functioning of Archaeological Survey of India”, in order 
to have the nuanced understanding of the role of ASI for suggesting areas of improvements in 
its functioning. Through the report, the Committee aims to explore ASI’s key responsibilities, 
achievements, challenges, and endeavours in shaping the understanding and appreciation of 
India's diverse historical past.  Based on the di scussions with the various stakeholders, both 
Government and private, for a wholesome understanding of the role and functions of the ASI, 
the report incorporates the Committee’s recommendations and suggestions for improving the 
working of the ASI in the rapidly evolving times. 
The Committee held a total of 04 meetings.  The Committee held a meeting  each with the 
Ministry of Culture an d the Administrative H ead of ASI on 27 th June, 2023; and with the 
NGOs, namely, Indian National  Trust for Art and Cultur al Heritage (INTACH) and Aga 

2 
 
Khan Trust for Culture (AKTC) on 21st August, 2023. The Committee also undertook on-the 
spot study visits to Mumbai  and Bekal  and held meeting s with the representatives of the 
Ministry of Culture, ASI, and the State Government s of Maharashtra and Kerala on 5th July, 
2023 and 8th September, 2023, respectively. 
  

3 
 
I 
Responsibilities and Functions of the Archaeological Survey of India 
 
 Categorisation of Monuments  
 
1.      The Committee notes that t he ASI is a paramount body which oversees approximately 
3691 monuments notified by the Government of India and which are purported to be of 
national significance. The Central Government through the Ancient Monuments and 
Archaeological Sites and Remains (AMASR ) Act, 1958  empowered the A SI to regulate 
archaeological excavations in the country.  
 
2.      The Committee was informed that the monuments and archaeological sites and remains, 
which are of national importance, are in the Union List and are under the charge of the ASI.  
These are referred to as ‘protected monuments’. The State List contains all other monuments, 
which are referred to as 'unprotected monuments'. The third category is of archaeological 
sites and remains which are included in the Concurren t List and as such, are not of national 
importance, where the State and the Centre, both have jurisdiction.  
 
3.    The Committee notes that there are several problems with the list of Centrally 
Protected Monuments (CPMs).   The list includes a large number of minor monuments 
with no national significance. It is estimated that this applies to at least a quarter of the 
current list of 3691 monuments. The list, for instance, includes 75 graves of colonial  era 
soldiers or officials of no  notable importance. For a n example , a small brick wall 
enclosure containing two graves located in Kumta, Karnataka  is a centrally protected 
monument under the supervision of the ASI . The graves are those of public works 
department engineer John Albert Cop e (died in 1880) and Henry Gassen (died 1877) 
who worked for a cotton ginning company. The structure ha d no architectural value, 
and the individuals were of no historical significance. Yet, they are supposed to get the 
same level of protection as the country’s most cherished monuments. 
 
4.        The Committee also observed that the provision of 100 metre prohibited area and 
300 metre regulated area around all ASI protected monuments and archaeological sites 
and remains  generally invites  public criticism and inconvenience . This provision was 
introduced in 2010  through an amendment in the AMASR Act, 1958 . It prohibits and 
regulates all activities like mining and construction around 100 metres  and 300 metres 

4 
 
respectively, of all the protected monuments, whi ch causes problem for the local 
community, living around it.   In some cases, the entire villa ge is within a radius of 300 
metres which makes it difficult for the entire village to carry out the necessary repair 
work of their  residential houses. Such a situation , at many places , creates a hostile 
scenario, pitching the local community against the monuments. In this light , the 
relevant Rules need to be reviewed and made realistic to meet the demands of the time. 
 
5.      The Ministry informed the Committee that the Government  is working to bring  an 
Amendment of this rules so as to make it relevant and contemporaneous. 
 
6.     The Committee recommends that the list of monuments with ASI should be 
rationalised and categorised on the basis of their national significance, unique 
architectural value and specific heritage content. 
 
7.       As far as the restrictive provisions  are concerned, the Committee recommends 
that the present system of 100 m etres and 300 metres around the protected monuments 
area as ‘Prohibited’ and ‘Regulated’, respectively  should be rationalis ed as presently 
the same rule applies equally to both significant and insignificant monuments . For 
instance, the rules above apply identically to the iconic Ajanta and Ellora monuments as 
much as to Kosminars, unknown cemeteries and tombs etc. Rationalisation of the list of 
National Monuments by way of  deletion of some of the kosminars may also be 
considered. 
 
Exploration and Excavation 
 
8.          Excavation of archaeological remains is one of the primary responsibilities of ASI 
and exploration forms part of excavation activities. The ASI informed that the archaeological 
research comprises exploration and excavation along with allied studies such as  geo-
archaeology, palaeo -environment, paleontology, palaeo -botany, ancient metallurgy as. For 
every excavation, careful objective oriented exploration is a pre-requisite.  
 
9.        It was also apprised that the proposals for excavation by universities and learned 
institutions are required to be routed through the concerned State Governments while  the  
ASI officers require only permission from the ASI Headquarters. 

5 
 
10.         The ASI submitted that exploration comprises the discovery and recording of ancient 
sites and remains still visible on t he surface of the ground while e xcavation unearths the 
archaeological remains embedded below the surface of the earth. The explorations include 
village-to-village exploration, problem oriented exploration, salvag e exploration, under water 
exploration and occasional exploration on the information received from the public, media 
and other sources.  On the other hand, e xcavation comprises debris clearance, salvage 
operation, problem oriented excavations - trial excavation, small scale excavation, and large 
scale excavation.  
   
11.      The Committee observes that preservation of a monument or a site is a core 
mandate of the ASI and recommends the ASI to develop preservation plans for all its 
work, especially before commencing excavations. This includes establishing clear 
strategies for documenting findings, conserving artifacts, and restoring structures to 
ensure minimal impact on the site's integrity. 
 
12.       The Committee also feels that there is a need to p rioritise excavation sites based 
on a comprehensive assessment of historical significance, research potential, and 
preservation needs. The ASI should focus on areas that have the potential to answer 
crucial historical questions and contribute to a deeper under standing of India's  rich 
past. 
 
13.        Further, advanced technologies such as LiDAR, ground -penetrating radar, and 
3D scanning should be used for enhanced accuracy and efficiency of excavations. These 
tools can aid in non-invasive site analysis and data collection. 
 
14.       The Committee is of the view tha t the ASI must also adhere to ethical guidelines 
in managing recovered artifacts. It must respect cultural sensitivities, repatriate objects 
when appropriate, and ensure that artifacts are preserved, studied, and displayed with 
responsibility. 
 
15.       The Committee also draws attention to the CAG Report No 10 of 2022 which 
stated that issues connected with exploration and excavation activities i.e. non –
existence of action plan, absence of centralized information and monitoring mechanism 
for excavation activities, delay in Report writing work, insufficient budget allocation , 
etc. as pointed out in previous Reports have not been resolved.  

6 
 
 
Conservation and Restoration 
 
16.      The conservation and restoration endeavours of the ASI stand as a testament to its 
commitment to nurturing India's historical legacy. The Committee notes the following 
conservation and restoration projects of ASI and their impact as highlighted in the succeeding 
paragraphs:  
 
17.       The ASI informed that the conservation and preservation projects of ASI are taken up 
in accordance with the National Conservation Policy, 2014.  The Central Advisory Board of 
Archaeology (CABA) advises the Government of India on matters relating to Archaeology in 
India and may also make suggestions on such matters for the consideration of the 
Government. The Board may set up Sub-Committees, as and when necessary, to examine and 
report on specific issues before it. 
 
18.      The Committee was apprised that the ASI has undertaken the major conservation 
works at various locations  i.e., Kedarnath Temple in Uttarakhand, Ajanta -Ellora Caves in 
Maharashtra, Sun Temple, Konark in Odisha, Dholavira in Gujarat, Shree Jagannath Temple 
in Puri, Rani ki Vav in Gujarat, Hampi Group of monuments in Karnataka, Red Fort in Delhi, 
Taj Mahal in Agra, Raigard Fort in Maharashtra, Rudreshwara Ramappa Temple in 
Telangana, Ho yasala Temples or Helebidu in Belur and Somnathpur, Vernacular School 
Building in Vadnagar, Gujarat and Shantiniketan in West Bengal. 
 
19.         The ASI informed that it also undertakes conservation measures in foreign countries. 
These include Bamiyan Buddhas in Afghanistan; Angkor Wat, Ta Prohm and Preah Vihear 
temples in Cambodia; My Son Group of Temples in Vietnam; Ananda Temple and other 
monuments in Bagan, Myanmar, Friday Mosque in Male, Maldives. It was informed that the 
works outside Ind ia have been widely appreciated by the International community and the  
authorities in  Fayaztepa and Karatepa Buddhist Sites in Uzbekistan are interested to give 
their conservation work to ASI. 
 
20.         Further, under the international provisions for co nservation and restoration of 
cultural heritage, United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization 
(UNESCO) Convention, 1970 urged each country to protect its own cultural patrimony as 
well as join an international effort to carry out concre te measures. In pursuance of this 

7 
 
Convention, the Government of India promulgated the Antiquities and Art Treasures Act, 
1972 which came into force w.e.f 5 th April, 1976. This is an Act to regulate the export trade 
in antiquities and art treasures, to prov ide for the prevention of smuggling of and fraudulent 
dealings in antiquities . Its objective is to prevent the illegal export of antiquities and art 
objects outside the country and to make all efforts to bring back antiquities or art objects 
illegally exported out of the country. 
 
21.       The ASI informed that it monitors the trade of antiquities within the country through 
licensing officers working in the length and breadth of the country. To combat the illegal 
trafficking of antiquities, various law  enforcing agencies are supporting the ASI as per the 
provisions in the concerned Act and as per the legal mandate. These agencies are also 
supporting INTERPOL for prevention of illegal trafficking and tracing of the illegally 
exported antiquities. 
 
22.         The Committee was apprised that as far as conservation work  of ASI is concerned, 
there is an issue of shortage of human resource. The Ministry is finding ways and means to 
acquire human resource by outsourcing some works. However, the ASI expressed that this 
has its own limitations as such expertise is not available even outside. 
 
23.      The INTACH informed the Committee  that in India, there are at least two clearly 
defined approaches to conserving architectural heritage, each with its compelling ideological 
underpinnings. The first is the Eurocentric approach introduced on account of colonization, 
which is followed by the ASI. This approach is now legitimis ed by the Charters promulgated 
by the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (U NESCO) and the 
International Council on Monuments and Sites ( ICOMOS).  The second consists of several 
indigenous a pproaches rooted in the centuries old regional building and maintenance 
traditions, which are still practised by R aj Mistris, the master builders in several parts of 
India, the Sompuras of Western India, the Sthapatis of Eastern and Southern India, the asharis 
of Kerala, among others.  
 
24.        The Committee notes that there are certain places where restoration is being 
done without taking cognizance of the original design/beauty of the Monument.  The 
restoration works at many sites do not gel with the original design. The Committee in 
this regard, recommends that the ASI must undertake restoration work keeping the 
original structure, its relevance and aesthetics in mind.  Restoration work must include 

8 
 
maintaining the building’s origi nal structure/ character and form.  The Committee 
recommends that the ASI must draw from its vast expertise in the field and 
scrupulously adhere to the cardinal tenets of restoration that seeks to repair retaining 
the structural originality rather than replacing it. 
25.       The Committee feels that indigenous systems and traditional practices  are not 
being emphasized as much as they deserve. The indigenous system believes that 
buildings live, die and are rebuilt in an organic cycle, described in the concept of 
jeernodharanam. Authenticity, in this perspective, is embedded  in the continuously 
evolving integrity of the life of the building and its intended use. In this view, the site is 
more venerated than the fungible nature of the building built over it.  It reflects the 
putative “cyclical” concept of time.  
 
26.       The Committee recommends that the ASI should integrate sustainable practices 
in conservation and restoration projects. This includes using eco -friendly mat erials, 
energy efficient techniques, and taking into consideration  the long-term environmental 
impact of interventions. 
 
27.      The ASI should put in place  a comprehensive monitoring system to assess the 
condition of monuments and sites regularly. Timely identification of issues will allow for 
proactive maintenance, preventing small problems from escalating into major concerns. 
 
 28.      The ASI must recogn ise the uniqueness of each historical site and devise its  
restoration approaches accordingly. What works for one monument might not be 
suitable for another due to variations in built-in materials, architectural style, and 
historical significance of the monument. 
 
29.         The Committee also recommends ASI to recognize the impact of climate change 
on heritage sites and integrate adaptive strategies into restoration plans. This might 
involve modifying conservation methods to withstand rapidly changing envi ronmental 
requirements. The ASI should also develop contingency plans to address natural 
disasters that might threaten historical sites. These plans should outline immediate 
response measures to minimize damage and facilitate swift restoration. 
 
 

9 
 
Documentation and Research 
 
30.       With the objective of archaeological research, the ASI lays down archaeological 
policy in the country and issues licenses for conducting archaeological excavations by 
various state universities and research institutes.  In order t o promote and strengthen 
archaeological research , the ASI formulates policy, signs Memoranda of Understanding 
(MOUs) with the universities and research institutes, and organizes conferences, seminars, 
and meetings of the CABA. 
 31.      During t he financial year 2022 -23, 33 sites  were approved  for conducting the 
archaeological exploration and excavations by the Circles/Branches of ASI and 45 sites were 
approved for the same to the State Government/ Universities/Research Institution.  No formal 
meeting of the CABA has been  held since 2014.  A meeting was held on 14 th June, 2022 
under the Chairmanship of Hon’ble Minister for Culture formulating the same. The old policy 
for the supply of photographs has been revised and approved ; and has been uploaded on the 
website of the Archaeological Survey of India.  
32.      While t he Committee appreciates the successful documentation of 16.80 lakhs 
antiquities which has beco me a part of National Database, it also notes that the Central 
Antiquity Collection houses approximately 3.25 lakh artefacts.   
33.         The E & E section received 11 excavation/exploration reports from Circles/Branches 
of ASI, with respect to the following sites:  
1) Maner (Bihar)  
2) Sitagraha (Bihar)  
3) Halebidu (Karnataka)  
4) Langudi Hills (Odisha)  
5) Sisupalgarh (Odisha)  
6) Parabhadi (Odisha)  
7) Masol (Punjab) 
8) Keeladi (Tamil Nadu)  
9) Sengalur (Tamil Nadu) 
10) Sanauli (Uttar Pradesh)  
11) Ultakhera, Hastinapur (Uttar Pradesh)  
 
However, it was informed that the vetting of these reports is under process. 
 

10 
 
34. The Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) was signed between the ASI  and the 
Indian Institute of Technology , Gandhinagar on 10 th August, 2015. The ASI has been 
financially supporting to strengthen the Archaeological Sciences Centre and establishment of 
an Archaeology Chair at IIT, Gandhinagar. The ASI hired the services of IIT , Guwahati for 
conducting a detailed GPR survey of Bhismaknagar situated in district Lower Dibang valley 
with high resolution elev ation data using LiDAR sensor at Centrally Protected Monuments 
Arunachal Pradesh. The IIT has submitted a detailed report to the ASI. 
 
35. The Publication Section of the ASI deals with the publishing of books and supply of 
those books to 115 sale counters in various parts of the ASI.  It also supp lies books to all 
circles. The S ection is the nodal agency for giving permissions for reproduction of 
photographs and texts. It is alleged that excavation reports have not been published for a long 
time.  
36. The ASI informed that immediate steps have been taken and a committee meeting of 
experts was held recently.  It was assured that more number of excavation reports is going to 
be published in the coming year.   
37.     With reference to research laboratories, the Committee was informed that the Science 
Branch of the ASI has many laboratories which work on preservation of excavated materials, 
sampling of various components of buildings/monuments/ antiquities, etc., which help in 
study of the archaeological properties. Apart from this, the ASI takes help from expert 
agencies and laboratories in dating of the excavated materials as and when required.  
 
38.     In addition to it,  the ASI has  established its own three laboratories for analysis and 
preservation of excavated ob jects and other artifacts.  Also,  a new state -of-the-art science 
laboratory has been developed at Pt. Deendayal Upadhyaya Institute of Archaeology, Greater 
Noida to provide more facilities for analysis, preservation and research including skill 
development in the field of archaeological science.  
 
39.     The Committee notes that these laboratories have limited resources for analysis 
and research, and are facing challenges in infrastructure upgradation and expertise. 
Such resource s hortages may affect the timely analysis and preservation of excavated 
materials as well as research works. To overcome these limitations, collaboration with 
specialized institutions, museums and independent research institutions are imperative.  

11 
 
40.      The Committee  recommends that the ASI should forge collaborations with 
foreign academic and research institutions , as well as laboratories specializing in 
conservation and archaeology. These partnerships can help ASI access to the latest  
domain specific  research fin dings and innovative techniques , thereby enriching 
manifold the ASI's restoration practices. 
 
41.        The Committee observes that the ASI should  leverage digital technologies for 
comprehensive documentation. A database of  detailed records, including 3D scans, 
high-resolution imagery, and archival data , must be created to ensure that requisite 
information in retrievable format is available for the benefit of posterity. 
 
42.       The Committee further recommends that the vetting process of the 11 
excavation/ exploration reports must be expedited and the reports should also be 
published timely and kept in public domain. 
Museums 
 
43.    The creation, upgradation and maintenance of site museums are  an important 
component of the activities of ASI. 
44.      It was informed that t he concept of site museum was developed by Lord Curzon so 
that visitors and scholars have an authentic experience of an archaeological site. Site museum 
is set up near a site to showcase the excavated material.  The first archaeological site museum 
came up in Sarnath in 1910.   
45.      The ASI informed the Committee that presently there are  52 such archaeological site 
museums in various parts of this country containing more than 1.36 lakh antiquities. The ASI 
has also  started Bharat Shared Repository of Inscriptions and digitization of one lakh e -
stampages of inscriptions has been done.   
46.      As far as the road map for museums is concerned, the following has been done:   
 Creation/upgradation of interpretation centres at Dholavira, Nalanda and Thanjavur;  
 Technical support for Vadnagar Experiential Museum and for National Maritime 
Heritage Complex Museum, Lothal;  
 Museum for Epigraphy, Hyderabad; 
 Museum of ASI in Red Fort, Delhi;  
 Up-gradation of Children's Museum at Siri Fort, Delhi;  

12 
 
 Up-gradation of three museums under Buddhist Circuit - Sarnath, Bodh Gaya and 
Nalanda. 
47.      The Committee appreciates the efforts made by the ASI regarding expansion and 
upgradation of site Museums. However, the Committee finds that the promotion and 
outreach of these museums is very limited. The Committee, therefore, recommends that 
the ASI should develop a comprehensive strategic plan for m useum expansion and 
upgradation, considering factors like target audiences, thematic focuses, accessibility, 
and sustainable practices. 
48.   The ASI should prioritize visito rs’ experience in museum design and create 
interactive and immersive exhibits that engage diverse audiences and facilitate a deeper 
understanding of historical contexts.  
Adopt a Heritage  
 
49. The Committee was apprised that t he 'Adopt a Heritage: Apni D harohar, Apni 
Pehchan' programme was launched on 27th September, 2017 by the Ministry of Tourism, in 
collaboration with Ministry of Culture a nd ASI and various States/UTs Government with the 
main objective to develop amenities at heritage sites, monuments and tourist sites . The 
objective of the programme  is to make them tourist friendly and increase the site’s tourism 
potential by enhancing the tourist experience in a planned and phased manner. The 
conservation works under Corporate Social Responsibility ( CSR) scheme are carried out by 
the ASI while illum ination / d evelopment works at some of the monuments are carried out 
through CSR scheme under National Culture Funds  (NCF) either by the donor or ASI itself. 
The details of the ongoing works under NCF are attached at Annexure-I. 
50. The entities so engaged  are permitted to work in non-conservational aspects like 
cleaning of monument premises, besides provid ing and maintain ing basic tourist amenities 
like washroom, drinking water, child care room, benches, pathways, garbage bins, signage , 
etc. under the guidance of ASI. However, the archaeological conservation of Centrally 
Protected Monuments and Sites (CPMS)  is attended by the experts of ASI only under their 
allotted budget. 
51. A revamped version of the program me exclusively for CPMS is envisioned wherein 
the ASI envisages creating a framework for engaging with the private/ public sector 
companies/ Trusts/ NGOs/Societies, etc. to develop/ pr ovide group of amenities at CPMs  

13 
 
through CSR funds to maximise visitors’ experience with a view to make the monument truly 
visitor friendly. This revamped version is titled as “Adopt a Heritage Programme 2.0”. 
52. Since it is a contributory program me cost saving has not been of any priority . 
However, the provision of separate budget allocation for the progra m was neither part of it 
during the erstwhile version nor is provisioned for the said revamped version. 
53. The Committee notes that under the said module with respect of Centrally 
Protected Monuments and Sites (CPM S) a total of twenty four MoUs were signed with 
various Monument Mitra (MMs). However, effective engagement had taken place only 
under 4 MoUs (Annexure-II). 
54. The Committee notes that  concerns have been raised  about the lack of prior 
experience of  the private firms involved in restoration and conservation.  There have 
been instances when companies without any expertise in the requisite domain are 
permitted to undertake those works, it has resulted in avoidable damage or destruction.  
55. The Committee, therefore, recommends that only active and experienced 
Monument Mitras may be hired for the purpose of restoration of Monuments. Further, 
the Committee would like to know the criteria adopted for selecting a particular 
company for undertaking the restoration work of a Monument . In addition, the 
Committee may also be apprised of the measures taken to ensure transparency and 
fairness in the process of selection of Monument Mitras. 
National Mission on Monuments and Antiquities 
 
56. The ASI is responsible for implementing the National Mission on Monuments and 
Antiquities (NMMA), which is aimed at the creation of a national database on built 
heritage/sites and on antiquities. 
57. With reference to the progress made under NMMA,  the ASI informed that the 
proposed budget for the la st 10 years is Rs.189 Crore; Actual Allocation Rs.53.39 Crore  
(actual Utilization = Rs.29.04Crore  only); Total staff proposed = 16 permanent+38 
contractual. Actual allocation  = 11 persons including contractual and MTS; Total 
documentation of antiquities so  far =16.84 lakh; Total documentation of BHS= 1.8 lakh 
(approx). 

14 
 
58. The ASI informed that the antiquities have multiple ownerships and are ever 
increasing in volume. Therefore , it is not possible to  provide an estimated timeline for the 
completion of documentation. 
59. In order  to expedi te the process of documentation, y oung a rchaeologists have been 
engaged on contractual basis and are posted in the ASI field offices. Also, regular webinars 
were arranged during the period of Covid-19 and 06 regional workshops are being conducted 
in the last financial year 2022-23.  
60. The Committee observes that the progress under  the NMMA has been sl uggish. 
Only about 16.8 lakh antiquities out of a total estimated 58 lakh antiquities have been 
documented till date. The Committee recommends that the NMMA may encourage and 
engage more Departments of State Archaeology and Museums, Universities and Non -
Governmental Heritage bodies to get themselves recognized as Documentation Resource 
Centres (DRCs) to help expedite the documentation process. The advanced technology 
such as 3D imaging and virtual reality should be used fully to create a comprehensive 
database of monuments and antiquities.  
61. The NMMA should invest in capacity -building initiatives, such as training and 
hiring more young archaeologists and professionals, to increase the speed and accuracy 
of the documentation process.  
62. The ASI should explore options to increase funding to expedite the 
documentation process and accomplish the t argets in a time -bound manner. The 
Committee is of the view that by implementing these recommendations, the 
documentation process of monuments and antiquities under NMMA can be expedited, 
which will enable better preservation and protection of the country’s cultural heritage. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

15 
 
 II 
Challenges Faced by ASI 
 
Encroachment of ASI land  
 
63.          The Committee observes that till date, 531 monuments, that is, about 14.4  per cent 
of ASI's total 3693 Centrally P rotected Monuments have been encroached.   However, 
encroachments from only 9 monuments have been removed since 2015.   There is a lack of 
clarity in guidelines for preservation and delay in the classification of Centrally Protected 
Monuments (CPMs). 
64. The Ministry submitted that the e ncroachment in the premises of the protected 
monuments and protected areas of CPMs are removed as p er the provisions contained in the 
AMASR Act, 1958 and Rules framed thereunder: 
65. In order to arrest the encroachments and remove  them, the Superintending 
Archaeologists in charge of the Circles have been vested with the powers of an Estate Officer 
to issue eviction notices/orders to the encroachers under public premises (Eviction of 
Unauthorized Occupants) Act , 1971 . They are also authorized to issue show cause notices 
under the provisions of AMASR Act,1958 and Rules 1959 followed by a direction to the 
District Collector /Magistrate by Central Government to remove such encroachment under 
section 19 of the AMASR Act, 1958 and Rule 38 of the AMASR Rules 1959. Assistance in 
containing and removing encroachments is also sought from the respective State 
Governments/Police force. Further, in addition to the regular watch and ward staff, private 
security personnel, State police guards and CISF have also been provided for the safe ty and 
security of selected monuments.” 
66. The Committee recommends that the ASI should conduct a comprehensive 
survey of encroachmen ts around all monuments under its jurisdiction and document 
the nature, extent and impact  of encroachments on each site to create a database for 
informed decision-making in this regard. 
67. The ASI should strive to involve local communities in the process of identifying 
encroachments and finding solutions, e ngage them as stakeholders in pres erving their 
cultural heritage and seek their cooperation in the encroachment eviction efforts. 
Further, public awareness campaigns should be launched to inform and educate local 
communities and the public about the importance of preserving historical monuments 

16 
 
and the deleterious impact of encroachments on tourism and other developments of the 
historical monuments and sites.  
68. The Committee recommends that the ASI should also provide support and 
assistance to individuals or families a ffected in the process of  encroachment removal 
and help them transition to alternative livelihoods. This  has the potential to  reduce the 
likelihood of public resistance and create a much cooperative atmosphere. 
 
Climate Change and Missing Monuments 
69. Historical monuments are an integral part of the country’s cultural heritage, and 
climate change can have a devastating impact on them. The Committee may be apprised 
as to whether the conservation plans which are presently in force, factor in the adverse 
effects of climate change on the monuments. There is an imperative need for  regular 
monitoring of historical monuments to ascertain as to whether  any signs of damage or 
degradation have been caused by climate change. Monitoring can help identify potential 
problems early on, so that  appropriate action can be taken to mitigate any adverse 
impact. The Committee feels that using climate  resilient materials during restoration or 
conservation work can help protect monuments from the damaging effects of climate 
change.  
70. The Committee further notes that the CAG had declared 92 Centrally Protected 
Monuments as "missing". The ASI has located  only 42 of these monuments. The 
remaining 50 monuments are either affected by rapid urbanisation, submerged under 
reservoirs/dams or are untraceable. The Committee observes that monuments once lost 
cannot ever be retrieved. The CPMS are central to  our historical heritage. The ASI 
should, therefore, give the highest priority to ensuring the physical security of all CPMs 
across the country. The Committee recommends that the Ministry may conduct a 
survey of all remaining monuments to ensure their physical existence and safety.  
71. The Committee further recommends that regular physical surveys of all CPMs 
should be carried out from time to time. The ASI should maintain digital log books that 
include textual and photographic/ video records of the monument’s physical state and 
location coordinates. This would also allow the ASI to check encroachment, if any, of 
these CPMs at an early stage. 

17 
 
Expenditure and Receipts of ASI  
 
72. The Committee notes that though the Ministry was allotted budget of Rs. 5,000 crore 
for 2023-24, yet, the expenditure is only 50 per cent . Further, allocation to ASI for FY 2023 -
24(BE) is Rs.1102.83 Cr ore of which expenditure till date is Rs 348.63 Cr ore which is only 
31.61%. 
 
Expenditure and Receipts of ASI (in crore) 
73. It may be suitably inferred from the above  Table that the ASI’s overall 
expenditure on Year  on Year (YoY) basis has  increased except during 2020 -21 and 
2021-22 due to Covid-19 pandemic induced lockdown, impacting the overall work being 
carried out by the ASI. 
74. The Ministry submitted that the budget requirement is worked out keeping in view the 
previous years’ allocation, projects in hand and anticipated expenses and utilization capacity. 
The Ministry further submitted that the ASI’s projected demand for the F.Y. 2023-24 was Rs. 
1201.57 Crore and Rs 1102.83 Crore is the allocation to ASI for 2023-24 F.Y (BE). 
75. It was informed that the budget requirement in different budget heads is periodically 
reviewed and the ASI projects the increased allocation in budget sub heads on requirement 
basis for issue of re- appropriation orders by the Ministry of Culture. 
 
2014-
15 
2015-
16  
2016-
17 
2017-
18 
2018-
19  
2019-
20 
2020-
21  
2021-
22 
2022-
23 
Budget estimates 680.05 712.28 680.63 924.37 974.56 1036.4 1246.75 1042.63 1080.34 
ASI's overall expenditure 629.27 686.96 768.7 939.94 962.17 1003.4 849.94 880.81 1021.63 
(% increase in YoY basis)   9.2 11.9 22.3 2.4 4.3 -15.3 3.6 15.9 
-200 
0 
200 
400 
600 
800 
1000 
1200 
1400 
Rupees (in crore) 
Expenditure and Receipts of ASI (in crore) 

18 
 
76. The Committee notes that as per estimates, India spends a little amount on the 
protection and upkeep of monuments. It approximately amounts to INR 11 lakhs per 
monument of national imp ortance (INR 428 crores for 3693  monuments in 2019 -20).  
The Committee feels that this is precious little for a culturally rich country like India.  
 
77. The Committee recommends that the ASI should evolve innovative methods like 
CSR and  Public-Private Partnership (PPP) to maximiz e the participation of non -
government organizations in the field of promotion and conservation of art and culture. 
The Committee feels that till the time a satisfactory level of investment is made by the 
private sector, the Ministry should ensure that adequate funds are available with the 
ASI to perf orm its crucial role of preservation of monuments. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends that the Ministry may seek additional funds to ensure that the 
ASI’s projected demands are met at the 2023-24 R.E. stage.  
 
78. The Committee recommends that the Minist ry should request the Ministry of 
Finance to allocate sufficient funds to enable the ASI to carry out its planned activities 
for restoration of unprotected monuments as well. 
 
Vacancies and staff expertise in ASI  
 
79. The Committee notes that a huge number of vacancies are lying vacant in the 
ASI and its circles, which hamper the working of the organisation ; and the excavation, 
conservation, documentation and research works also immensely suffer due to it. 
80. The ASI informed that the vacancies are filled up by Promotion, Deputation and 
Direct Recruitment. The Departmental Promotion Committee meetings for filling up the 
vacant posts are held at regular intervals. Posts falling under Direct Recruitment quota are 
promptly reported to the Recruitment agencies i.e. UPSC and SSC. Posts to be filled up by 
deputation are advertised as per the laid down procedure s. The v acant posts under Direct 
Recruitment quota will be filled up as and when candidates are made available by the  
respective Recruitment agencies (UPSC and SSC). A detail of vacancies in ASI is as under: 
 
Group Sanctioned Strength Person in Position Total Vacancies 
 
`A' 313 144 169* 
'B' 979 702 277 
‘C’ 1334 779 555 

19 
 
‘C’ 
(MTS)’ 
6152 4452 1700 
Total 8778 6077 2701 
 
*116 posts vacant for more than two years have been reported to Department of Expenditure 
for revival. 
 
81. The Ministry further informed that 758 additional posts, which included technical 
posts, were created in 2021. These posts are part of the sanctioned strength of 8778. The 
vacancies in ASI are mostly in the grade of MTS. The attrition rate in this grade is very high 
and the people are leaving the job for better career prospects. 
   
82. The Ministry also informed that 259 compassionate appointm ents hav e been made . 
The ASI is also chalking out a plan for restructuring like merger of horticulture divisions with 
circles to create synergy and establishment of new science branches and circles at Rajkot, 
Jabalpur, Trichy, Meerut, Jhansi, Raiganj and P uri.  The ASI has also  planned to recruit 
young talent and under an Interns Scheme  of the organisation, 53 interns have completed 
their assignment recently, 22 young archaeologists on rolls were engaged in work related to 
antiquities and excavation, six Archival Associates and 12 Archival Assistants were engaged 
and 15 young legal professionals are being rec ruited.  The Committee was also informed that 
ASI has also reframed policies regarding E -HRMS, Sparrow APAR and Recruitment Rules 
for all cadres and comments are being sought. Further, for refresher courses, engagement 
with Capacity Building Commission is under process.   
 
83. The ASI has accepted the fact that t here are a la rge number of unfilled posts and it is 
taking recourse to five R's, depicted below in the image. 
 
 

20 
 
 
 
 
84.     The Committee  notes that  with the passage of time and new developments, 
requirements and demands, the ASI has not evolved or re -structured itself  with 
reference to the expertise in this field . Therefore, the restructu ring and rationalization 
of ASI would be useful in the larger i nterest of the country.  The Committee observes 
that the ASI requires the following three functional verticals:-  
a) The expert archaeologists, who are involved in excavation, documentation and 
interpretation of the historical finds. 
 
b) Well skilled conservationists, who will be required to conserve and preserve th e 
monuments on a regular basis, f ollowing the latest technologies in  the field of  
conservation and continuously upgrading their technological skill sets.  
 
c) ASI should consider developing a m anagement cadre for the management of 
centrally protected monuments with a mandate to manage the monuments and 
sites on a daily basis to ensure their safety and protection; manage ticketing  and 
circulation of visitors; ensure ease of access to monuments by  providing battery 
operated vehicles, signages, interpretation centres, audio visual gu ides, souvenirs 
shops, cafe,  site museums , etc .  Alternatively, to make the ASI an effective 
agency, it would be advisable to divide the organization into two wings  - the 
Archaeological Survey of India (ASI) and India Heritage Development 
Corporation (IHDC). While the former can look after the core mandate of ASI 
i.e. exploration, excavation and conservation  aspects, the latter can deal with the 
ASI"s entire revenue, su ch as ticket collection, conducting auctions, issuing 
licences, running cafeterias, selling mementos and running Sound and Light 
systems, etc. This bifurcation will be functionally desirable to enhance greater 
Revive or 
create posts 
Restructure the 
organization to 
bring in 
efficiency  
Recruit young 
talent  
Reframe 
policy/processes  
Refresh minds by 
giving interim 
professional training 
and also to revive and 
create posts.   
   5R 

21 
 
professionalism of the ASI in handling both th e cerebral and the managerial 
aspects of its functioning. 
 
85.   The Committee recommends that the m useologists should be associated whi le 
setting up and curating site  museums which are required to be of international 
standard, especially for the World Heritage Sites.  
 
86.     The Committee also recommends that ASI should invest in training programs for 
ASI staff and artisans involved in restoration work. Enhancing their skills in traditional 
craftsmanship, modern conservation methods, and the use of advanced technologies will 
eventually contribute to the quality of restoration projects. 
 
Coordination with States 
87. The Ministry informed that a lmost every State has its own ‘Department of 
Heritage/Archaeology’ responsible for monuments of local importance. However, at present, 
there is minimum dialogue between the ASI region al circles and the Archaeology 
Departments in the States with respect to improving and enhancing the conservation efforts at 
the State/local level. 
 
88. The Committee was apprised that the State Level Coordination Committee  (SLCC) 
has already been constituted in the State of Kerala, Maharashtra, Chattisgarh, Bihar, 
Rajasthan, Odisha, Puducherry, Assam, Punjab, Meghalaya, Jammu &  Kashmir and Sikkim. 
The States which  have not set up a State Level C oordination Committee as yet, have been 
requested to form their respective  SLCCs. ASI is continuously corresponding with theses 
States to constitute SLCCs. However, few states had held th e meeting to address the issues 
flagged by ASI. The Heads of the Departments of Archaeology of each State Government are 
ex - officio member of the CABA wherein they keep their views on the various matters 
pertaining to the Archaeology.  
89. Apart from thi s, every year the ASI invites proposals from the State Departments of 
Archaeology, Universities and Research Institutions for conducting archaeological ac tivities 
like explorations and excavations wherein the recommendations of the S tate Government are 
one of the essential conditions for finalizing these proposals. The ASI is providing full 
support to the State Archaeology Department in respect to improving and enhancing 

22 
 
conservation efforts at the State/local level except in those area s/States where State 
Government did not approach/accept ASI intervention. 
90. The Committee notes that certain S tates have not yet constituted SLCC. The 
Ministry and the ASI should persuade these States to constitute the same as early as 
possible in the larger int erest of building greater interface and co -ordination between 
the ASI and the State’s Archaeology Department. 
91. The Committee recommends that the Ministry should also form joint committees 
comprising representatives from ASI and state archaeologic al departments. These 
committees can facilitate regular communication, information exchange, and decision -
making related to heritage sites. 
92. The ASI should implement systems for data sharing a nd integration between 
ASI and S tate Archaeological Departments. A centralized database can provide a 
comprehensive overview of heritage sites, their condition, and ongoing activities. 
93. The Committee also recommends  organizing workshops and training programs 
for state officials to enhance their understanding of heri tage preservation techniques, 
legal frameworks, and conservation best practices. 
94. The ASI must establish mechanisms for resolving conflicts that may arise 
between ASI and State authorities. Open dialogue and mediation processes can prevent 
issues from e scalating. Further, a two - way medium of communication should be 
developed to facilitate the sharing of best practices and success stories between ASI and 
State Archaeological Departments. Learning from each other's experiences can enhance 
preservation approaches manifold. 
Security issues at sites 
 
95. The Committee notes that t he security of th e monuments is a big challenge. The 
Monuments in India lack proper security and safety provisions. The security of 
monuments is being managed by monument attendants;  private security and CISF at 
select monuments. T here are , however,  many challenges including lack of adequate 
number of personnel  to ensure round the clock security of centrally protected 
monuments.   

23 
 
96. In this regard, the ASI has informed that a MoU has been signed with IIT Delhi in  
June 2022 for two years and an interim report is expected in August 2023.  Based on an in -
house assessment, hiring of additional 5,340 security personnel has been proposed. 
97. The Committee recommends that the hiring proc ess of the  security personnel 
must be expedited without any further delay. Time bound action regarding deployment 
of security personnel in the historical monuments and sites will also act as a deterrent to 
the potential threats of encroachment of ASI premises. 
98. The Committee recommends ASI to conduct regular and comprehensive security 
audits of all heritage sites under its purview. These audits should identify 
vulnerabilities, assess risks, and inform the development of tailored security plans. 
99. Further, the ASI should leverage advanced technologies such as surveillance 
cameras, motion sensors, and intrusion detection systems to monitor and secure 
monument premises effectively. 
100. The ASI should assure that regular training and mock drill sessio ns on security 
protocols, emergency response, and crowd management are held from time to time. 
101. The Committee also recommends ensuring proper lighting and surveillance 
coverage, particularly during night -time hours. Well -lit areas deter vandalism and 
illegal activities, while surveillance helps in monitoring suspicious behaviour. Further, 
implementation of controlled access and visitor management protocols including 
limiting the number of visitors, conducting bag checks, and ensuring guided tours to 
prevent unauthorized activities can also be helpful. 
102. During its Study Visit to Kerala from 4 th September to 8 th September, 2023, the 
ASI has apprised the Committee that visitor’s access is regulated during a fixed time 
across all monuments, barring a few exceptions in case of prominent monuments. Both 
the Departments of Tourism and Archaeology, the Government of Kerala have drawn 
the attention of the Committee to the need for opening the Bekal Fort, District 
Kasargod, Kerala till 21:00 hours from its existing closure time of 17:00 hours as the 
visiting tourists prefer to spend the evening time at the Fort to enjoy its tranquil and 
scenic surrounding including the sunset. The Committee has found merit in the 
submissions and recommends that the ASI should actively consider extending the 
closure timing of the Bekal Fort and any other such monument in the country by way of 

24 
 
relaxation of  rules in the interest of enhancing the tourist footfalls and improving 
tourism dependent local economy. 
  

25 
 
III 
Way Forward 
 
 Integration of Modern Technologies 
 
103. The Committee notes that technology plays a significant role in preservation of 
monuments, enhancing various aspects of archaeological research, site management, 
documentation, and conservation. It aids in efficient research, conservation, and public 
engagement while minimizing the impact on fragile archaeological sites and artifacts. 
104. The ASI informed that during excavation, it uses  different technologies i.e. GPR 
Survey, LiDAR Survey, Total Station Machine for surveying whereas various dating methods 
i.e. C -14, Thermo luminescence , potassium -argon, fission track, etc. are used during the 
course of excavation for dating  of antiquities and other archaeological remains.  
105. The ASI incorporates modern tools and nondestructive techniques for scientific 
investigations to improve efficiency, accuracy, and our understanding of cultural heritag e. 
Remote sensing techniques help to identify potential archaeological sites, map landscapes and 
detect subtle features not easily visible on the ground. These technologies aid in initial site 
selection and overall landscape analysis. Modern 3D scanning technologies enable detailed 
and accurate documen tation of artifacts, structures  and sites. Th is digital representation 
allows for virtual reconstructions, analysis, and preservation of fragile items. LiDAR is used 
to create high -resolution 3D maps of terrain and vegetation as well as excavated site. In 
archaeology, LiDAR can reveal hidden or overg rown structures beneath the surface, 
providing insights into the layout of ancient settlements and landscapes. 
106. The Committee welcomes the initiatives being taken by the ASI and the Ministry 
of Culture to employ digital techniques to aid and assist in the varied activities that they 
perform. However, the Committee feels that there are more scopes to use cutting edge 
technology by ASI  to ensure the best outputs using the latest available technology in 
their respective fields of work. The Committee recommends that the ASI may organise 
training and workshops from time to time to educate its  staff working in the different 
departments of the organiz ation. This will allow the staff to keep th emselves abreast of 
the latest advancements, in the field of digital technology. 

26 
 
107. The Ministry may encourage research and development in the field of digital 
techniques for technology- induced cultural preservation. This will lead t o the 
development of new and innovative techniques that can help in better preservation and 
management of cultural heritage sites. 
   
 Involvement of Local Communities 
 
108. The Committee notes that the ASI organises many awareness programmes on the 
occasion of World Heritage Day/Week, Museum Day, Yoga Day etc. at the monuments/sites 
across the country. 
  
109. As far as the public relations are concerned, the ASI informed that  in the process of 
rolling out a scheme called 'Jan Bhagidari' the stakehold ers are involved  at the State/local 
level to protect the unprotected monuments, as well as the protected monuments, which are 
under the ambit of CPMs of the ASI. Similarly, emphasis is laid  on the capacity building 
through the Capacity Building Commission.  Here, ASI sensitizes various officers and the 
staff working in the ASI towards having a cordial relationship with the visitors. Further, 
under the 'Adopt a Heritage' scheme, through feedback mechanism, the visitors can share 
their feedback and suggest the ways to improve our facilities and that will be taken care of. 
 
110. The Committee is of the view that ‘Adopt a Heritage’ Scheme, being innovative 
and visible, ASI should take maxim um advantage of it.  The Committee recommends 
organizing regular workshops, town hall meetings, and focus group discussions to 
provide a platform for communities to voice their opinions, concerns, and ideas 
regarding monument preservation. 
 
111. The ASI should involve community members in small -scale conservation 
projects, such as cleaning, landscaping, or restoration under  the guidance of domain 
expert. This fosters a sense of ownership and responsibility. Further, local youths can be 
engaged in heritage  preservation activities through workshops, internships, and 
volunteer programmes. This  will go a long way in encouraging  the new generation to 
value and protect their cultural legacy. 
 
112. The Committee also recommends  ASI to acknowledge and celebrate community 
contributions through conferring awards, certificates, or public recognition. This  will 

27 
 
have positive spin -off effect on others  to join the community engagement activities for 
better preservation of monuments. 
Collaboration with National and International Organisations 
 
113. It was apprised that ASI is taki ng technical assistance from  other national and 
international organizations, research institutions like IITs and CBRI, NGOs and universities 
as and when required. 
  
114. Science Branch, ASI undertakes scientific conservation, restoration & preservation 
for evaluation of methods and materials, processes to be adopted in the field and 
archaeological questions to be answered. To achieve these objectives interdisciplinary 
approach is adopted and  collaborations with national and international institutions and their 
expertise integrated to achieve scientific objectives.  
 
115. The ASI has collaborated with prestigious national Institutes   like NEERI (National 
Environmental  Engineering  Research Institute ), CBRI (Central Building Research Institute) 
Roorkee, CPCB (Central Pollution C ontrol Board), GSI (Geological Survey of India), ISRO 
Bangalore, IIT Kanpur, IIT Gandhinagar and ICFRI-FRI (Indian Council for Forest Research 
Institute). These Insti tutes have worked with ASI on various issues related with cultural 
heritage conservation and have contributed in develop ment of methodology and  strategy for 
better preservation of the National heritage. 
  
116. Further, since the last five years, the ASI has collaborated with the following national 
institutions/agencies: 
  
 Indian Institute of Technology, Gandhinagar  
 Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur 
 Indian Institute of Technology, Guwahati  
 Birbal Sahani Institute of Palaeo-Sciences, Lucknow  
 Institute of Sesmiological Research, Gandhinagar  
 Indian Institute of Geo Magnetism, Mumbai 
 National Forensic Science University, Gandhinagar  
 Department of Space, Physical Research Laboratory,  Ahmedabad  
 Bhaskaracharya Institute for Space Applicatio ns and Ge oinformatics (BISAG -N) 
Gandhinagar 
 

28 
 
117. The ASI is also providing technical support for restoration of monuments in foreign 
countries and has brought back to life the historical and civilizational links that India holds 
with other natio ns. A MoU was  signed with the University of Foscari Venezia,  Italy for 
creating a network and sharing skills for conservation, restoration and  protection of 
monuments. MoU s between Indian Institute of Technology, Ka npur, Gandhinagar and  
Geological Survey of India also been signed. 
 
118. The Committee recommends that extensive col laborations with national level 
premier research institutions and, in particular, the foreign organizations should be  
made a priority for better learning of best practices as also the and knowledge sharing.  
Need for new/updated policies 
 
119. The Committee notes that t he implementation of the National Policy for 
Conservation, 2014 by ASI has been far from satisfactory. Being largely outdated, it does not 
consider new and modern techniques for protection and preservation. At the same time, there 
is a glaring absence of national policies on archaeological exploration and antiquities 
preservation. 
 
120. The Ministry informed that t he conservation of monuments throughout the country is 
carried out as per  the National Policy for Conservation, 2014 as the conservation of 
monuments is a process to maintain the original fabric and architecture of the monuments and 
needs least intervention.  H owever, documentation and modern techniques lik e LiDAR 
Survey, drone photography is adopted . The P olicy on Exploration and Excavation exists, 
however process of revising this policy is under way. Various modern scientific equipments, 
techniques and met hodologies are applied  in the field of scientific conservat ion and 
preservation to identify and  compare the building materials with ancient and available 
materials to achieve better results of scientific conservation. Science branch of ASI regularly 
help in preserving heritage with analysis of antiquities, art/excavated objects and monitoring 
of environmental factors by using modern scientific techniques. Air pollution monitoring  lab- 
Taj Mahal Agra and Bibi ka M aqbara, Aurangabad; Stone Conservation lab , Agr a; 
Conservation Research lab, Ajanta; and Science Lab, Dehradun are functioning while a state-
of-art science laboratory has been developing at Greater Noida. 
121. The Committee recommends that archaic and colonial era related laws  which 
have lost their relevance  must be dispense with. Further, the Ministry of Culture/ ASI 

29 
 
should conduct a comprehensive comparative study of the excavation, conservation and 
restoration laws of foreign countries to come up with the best practices being f ollowed 
globally and bring out the requisite course corrections in the present policy accordingly. 
*** 
  

30 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS - AT A GLANCE 
 
The Committee notes that there are several problems with the list of Centrally 
Protected Monuments (CPMs).  The list includes a large number of minor monuments 
with no national significance. It is estimated that this applies to at least a quarter of the 
current list of 3691 monuments. The list, for instance, includes 75 graves of colonial era 
soldiers or officials of no notable importance. For an example, a small brick wall 
enclosure containing two graves located in Kumta, Karnataka is a centrally protected 
monument under the supervision of the ASI. The graves are those of public works 
department engineer John Albert Cope (died in 1880) and Henry G assen (died 1877) 
who worked for a cotton ginning company. The structure had no architectural value, 
and the individuals were of no historical significance. Yet, they are supposed to get the 
same level of protection as the country’s most cherished monuments. 
(Para 3) 
The Committee also observed that the provision of 100 metre prohibited area 
and 300 metre regulated area around all ASI protected monuments and archaeological 
sites and remains generally invites public criticism and inconvenience. This provisio n 
was introduced in 2010 through an amendment in the AMASR Act, 1958 . It prohibits 
and regulates all activities like mining and construction around 100 metres and 300 
metres respectively, of all the protected monuments, which causes problem for the local 
community, living around it.  In some cases, the entire village is within a radius of 300 
metres which makes it difficult for the entire village to carry out the necessary repair 
work of their residential houses. Such a situation, at many places, creates a hostile 
scenario, pitching the local community against the monuments. In this light, the 
relevant Rules need to be reviewed and made realistic to meet the demands of the time. 
(Para 4) 
The Committee recommends that the list of monuments with ASI should be 
rationalised and categorised on the basis of their national significance, unique 
architectural value and specific heritage content. 
(Para 6) 
As far as the restrictive provisions are concerned, the Committee recommends 
that the present system of 100 metres and 300 metres around the protected monuments 
area as ‘Prohibited’ and ‘Regulated’, respectively should be rationalised as presently 
the same rule applies equally to both significant and insignificant monuments. For 
instance, the rules above apply identically to the iconic Ajanta and Ellora monuments as 
much as to Kosminars, unknown cemeteries and tombs etc. Rationalisation of the list of 
National Monuments by way of deletion of some of the kosminars may also be 
considered. 
(Para 7) 

31 
 
The Committee observes t hat preservation of a monument or a site is a core 
mandate of the ASI and recommends the ASI to develop preservation plans for all its 
work, especially before commencing excavations. This includes establishing clear 
strategies for documenting findings, con serving artifacts, and restoring structures to 
ensure minimal impact on the site's integrity. 
(Para 11) 
The Committee also feels that there is a need to prioritise excavation sites based 
on a comprehensive assessment of historical significance, research po tential, and 
preservation needs. The ASI should focus on areas that have the potential to answer 
crucial historical questions and contribute to a deeper understanding of India's rich 
past. 
(Para 12) 
Further, advanced technologies such as LiDAR, ground-penetrating radar, and 
3D scanning should be used for enhanced accuracy and efficiency of excavations. These 
tools can aid in non-invasive site analysis and data collection. 
(Para 13) 
The Committee is of the view that the ASI must also adhere to eth ical guidelines 
in managing recovered artifacts. It must respect cultural sensitivities, repatriate objects 
when appropriate, and ensure that artifacts are preserved, studied, and displayed with 
responsibility. 
(Para 14) 
The Committee also draws attention to the CAG Report No 10 of 2022 which 
stated that issues connected with exploration and excavation activities i.e. non –
existence of action plan, absence of centralized information and monitoring mechanism 
for excavation activities, delay in Report writing  work, insufficient budget allocation, 
etc. as pointed out in previous Reports have not been resolved.  
(Para 15) 
The Committee notes that there are certain places where restoration is being 
done without taking cognizance of the original design/beauty of t he Monument.  The 
restoration works at many sites do not gel with the original design. The Committee in 
this regard, recommends that the ASI must undertake restoration work keeping the 
original structure, its relevance and aesthetics in mind.  Restoration work must include 
maintaining the building’s original structure/ character and form.  The Committee 
recommends that the ASI must draw from its vast expertise in the field and 
scrupulously adhere to the cardinal tenets of restoration that seeks to repair re taining 
the structural originality rather than replacing it. 
(Para 24) 

32 
 
The Committee feels that indigenous systems and traditional practices are not 
being emphasized as much as they deserve. The indigenous system believes that 
buildings live, die and are r ebuilt in an organic cycle, described in the concept of 
jeernodharanam. Authenticity, in this perspective, is embedded in the continuously 
evolving integrity of the life of the building and its intended use. In this view, the site is 
more venerated than th e fungible nature of the building built over it.  It reflects the 
putative “cyclical” concept of time.  
(Para 25) 
The Committee recommends that the ASI should integrate sustainable practices 
in conservation and restoration projects. This includes using eco -friendly materials, 
energy efficient techniques, and taking into consideration the long -term environmental 
impact of interventions. 
(Para 26) 
The ASI should put in place a comprehensive monitoring system to assess the 
condition of monuments and sites regularly. Timely identification of issues will allow for 
proactive maintenance, preventing small problems from escalating into major concerns. 
(Para 27) 
 The ASI must recognise the uniqueness of each historical site and devise its 
restoration approaches accor dingly. What works for one monument might not be 
suitable for another due to variations in built -in materials, architectural style, and 
historical significance of the monument. 
(Para 28) 
The Committee also recommends ASI to recognize the impact of climate change 
on heritage sites and integrate adaptive strategies into restoration plans. This might 
involve modifying conservation methods to withstand rapidly changing environmental 
requirements. The ASI should also develop contingency plans to address natural 
disasters that might threaten historical sites. These plans should outline immediate 
response measures to minimize damage and facilitate swift restoration. 
(Para 29) 
The Committee notes that these laboratories have limited resources for analysis 
and resear ch, and are facing challenges in infrastructure upgradation and expertise. 
Such resource shortages may affect the timely analysis and preservation of excavated 
materials as well as research works. To overcome these limitations, collaboration with 
specialized institutions, museums and independent research institutions are imperative.  
(Para 39) 

33 
 
The Committee recommends that the ASI should forge collaborations with 
foreign academic and research institutions, as well as laboratories specializing in 
conservation and archaeology. These partnerships can help ASI access to the latest 
domain specific research findings and innovative techniques, thereby enriching 
manifold the ASI's restoration practices. 
(Para 40) 
The Committee observes that the ASI should  leverage digital technologies for 
comprehensive documentation. A database of detailed records, including 3D scans, 
high-resolution imagery, and archival data, must be created to ensure that requisite 
information in retrievable format is available for the benefit of posterity. 
(Para 41) 
The Committee further recommends that the vetting process of the 11 
excavation/ exploration reports must be expedited and the reports should also be 
published timely and kept in public domain. 
(Para 42) 
The Committee appreciates the efforts made by the ASI regarding expansion and 
upgradation of site Museums. However, the Committee finds that the promotion and 
outreach of these museums is very limited. The Committee, therefore, recommends that 
the ASI should develop a comprehe nsive strategic plan for museum expansion and 
upgradation, considering factors like target audiences, thematic focuses, accessibility, 
and sustainable practices. 
(Para 47) 
The ASI should prioritize visitors’ experience in museum design and create 
interactive and immersive exhibits that engage diverse audiences and facilitate a deeper 
understanding of historical contexts.  
(Para 48) 
The Committee notes that under the said module with respect of Centrally 
Protected Monuments and Sites (CPMS) a total of twenty  four MoUs were signed with 
various Monument Mitra (MMs). However, effective engagement had taken place only 
under 4 MoUs (Annexure-II). 
(Para 53) 
The Committee notes that concerns have been raised about the lack of prior 
experience of the private firms involved in restoration and conservation. There have 
been instances when companies without any expertise in the requisite domain are 
permitted to undertake those works, it has resulted in avoidable damage or destruction. 

34 
 
(Para 54) 
The Committee, therefore,  recommends that only active and experienced 
Monument Mitras may be hired for the purpose of restoration of Monuments. Further, 
the Committee would like to know the criteria adopted for selecting a particular 
company for undertaking the restoration work of  a Monument. In addition, the 
Committee may also be apprised of the measures taken to ensure transparency and 
fairness in the process of selection of Monument Mitras. 
(Para 55) 
The Committee observes that the progress under the NMMA has been sluggish. 
Only about 16.8 lakh antiquities out of a total estimated 58 lakh antiquities have been 
documented till date. The Committee recommends that the NMMA may encourage and 
engage more Departments of State Archaeology and Museums, Universities and Non -
Governmental Heritage bodies to get themselves recognized as Documentation Resource 
Centres (DRCs) to help expedite the documentation process. The advanced technology 
such as 3D imaging and virtual reality should be used fully to create a comprehensive 
database of monuments and antiquities.  
(Para 60) 
The NMMA should invest in capacity -building initiatives, such as training and 
hiring more young archaeologists and professionals, to increase the speed and accuracy 
of the documentation process.  
(Para 61) 
The ASI should explore options to increase funding to expedite the 
documentation process and accomplish the targets in a time -bound manner. The 
Committee is of the view that by implementing these recommendations, the 
documentation process of monuments and antiquities und er NMMA can be expedited, 
which will enable better preservation and protection of the country’s cultural heritage. 
(Para 62) 
The Committee recommends that the ASI should conduct a comprehensive 
survey of encroachments around all monuments under its jurisdi ction and document 
the nature, extent and impact of encroachments on each site to create a database for 
informed decision-making in this regard. 
(Para 66) 
The ASI should strive to involve local communities in the process of identifying 
encroachments and fi nding solutions, engage them as stakeholders in preserving their 
cultural heritage and seek their cooperation in the encroachment eviction efforts. 
Further, public awareness campaigns should be launched to inform and educate local 

35 
 
communities and the publi c about the importance of preserving historical monuments 
and the deleterious impact of encroachments on tourism and other developments of the 
historical monuments and sites.  
(Para 67) 
The Committee recommends that the ASI should also provide support and 
assistance to individuals or families affected in the process of encroachment removal 
and help them transition to alternative livelihoods. This has the potential to reduce the 
likelihood of public resistance and create a much cooperative atmosphere. 
(Para 68) 
Historical monuments are an integral part of the country’s cultural heritage, and 
climate change can have a devastating impact on them. The Committee may be apprised 
as to whether the conservation plans which are presently in force, factor in the adver se 
effects of climate change on the monuments. There is an imperative need for regular 
monitoring of historical monuments to ascertain as to whether any signs of damage or 
degradation have been caused by climate change. Monitoring can help identify potential 
problems early on, so that appropriate action can be taken to mitigate any adverse 
impact. The Committee feels that using climate resilient materials during restoration or 
conservation work can help protect monuments from the damaging effects of climate  
change.  
(Para 69) 
The Committee further notes that the CAG had declared 92 Centrally Protected 
Monuments as "missing". The ASI has located only 42 of these monuments. The 
remaining 50 monuments are either affected by rapid urbanisation, submerged under 
reservoirs/dams or are untraceable. The Committee observes that monuments once lost 
cannot ever be retrieved. The CPMS are central to our historical heritage. The ASI 
should, therefore, give the highest priority to ensuring the physical security of all CPMs  
across the country. The Committee recommends that the Ministry may conduct a 
survey of all remaining monuments to ensure their physical existence and safety.  
(Para 70) 
The Committee further recommends that regular physical surveys of all CPMs 
should be carried out from time to time. The ASI should maintain digital log books that 
include textual and photographic/ video records of the monument’s physical state and 
location coordinates. This would also allow the ASI to check encroachment, if any, of 
these CPMs at an early stage. 
(Para 71) 
The Committee notes that as per estimates, India spends a little amount on the 
protection and upkeep of monuments. It approximately amounts to INR 11 lakhs per 

36 
 
monument of national importance (INR 428 crores for 3693 monumen ts in 2019 -20).  
The Committee feels that this is precious little for a culturally rich country like India.  
(Para 76) 
The Committee recommends that the ASI should evolve innovative methods like 
CSR and Public -Private Partnership (PPP) to maximize the part icipation of non -
government organizations in the field of promotion and conservation of art and culture. 
The Committee feels that till the time a satisfactory level of investment is made by the 
private sector, the Ministry should ensure that adequate funds  are available with the 
ASI to perform its crucial role of preservation of monuments. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends that the Ministry may seek additional funds to ensure that the 
ASI’s projected demands are met at the 2023-24 R.E. stage.  
(Para 77) 
The Committee recommends that the Ministry should request the Ministry of 
Finance to allocate sufficient funds to enable the ASI to carry out its planned activities 
for restoration of unprotected monuments as well. 
(Para 78) 
Vacancies and staff expertise in ASI  
The Committee notes that a huge number of vacancies are lying vacant in the 
ASI and its circles, which hamper the working of the organisation; and the excavation, 
conservation, documentation and research works also immensely suffer due to it. 
(Para 79) 
The Committee notes that with the passage of time and new developments, 
requirements and demands, the ASI has not evolved or re -structured itself with 
reference to the expertise in this field. Therefore, the restructuring and rationalization 
of ASI would b e useful in the larger interest of the country.  The Committee observes 
that the ASI requires the following three functional verticals:-  
d) The expert archaeologists, who are involved in excavation, documentation 
and interpretation of the historical finds. 
 
e) Well skilled conservationists, who will be required to conserve and preserve 
the monuments on a regular basis, following the latest technologies in the field of 
conservation and continuously upgrading their technological skill sets.  
 
f) ASI should consider developing a management cadre for the management of 
centrally protected monuments with a mandate to manage the monuments and 
sites on a daily basis to ensure their safety and protection; manage ticketing and 

37 
 
circulation of visitors; ensure ease of access to  monuments by providing battery 
operated vehicles, signages, interpretation centres, audio visual guides, souvenirs 
shops, cafe, site museums, etc.  Alternatively, to make the ASI an effective 
agency, it would be advisable to divide the organization into t wo wings - the 
Archaeological Survey of India (ASI) and India Heritage Development 
Corporation (IHDC). While the former can look after the core mandate of ASI 
i.e. exploration, excavation and conservation aspects, the latter can deal with the 
ASI"s entire revenue, such as ticket collection, conducting auctions, issuing 
licences, running cafeterias, selling mementos and running Sound and Light 
systems, etc. This bifurcation will be functionally desirable to enhance greater 
professionalism of the ASI in handl ing both the cerebral and the managerial 
aspects of its functioning. 
(Para 84) 
The Committee recommends that the museologists should be associated while 
setting up and curating site museums which are required to be of international 
standard, especially for the World Heritage Sites.  
(Para 85) 
The Committee also recommends that ASI should invest in training programs 
for ASI staff and artisans involved in restoration work. Enhancing their skills in 
traditional craftsmanship, modern conservation methods, and t he use of advanced 
technologies will eventually contribute to the quality of restoration projects. 
(Para 86) 
The Committee notes that certain States have not yet constituted SLCC. The 
Ministry and the ASI should persuade these States to constitute the same  as early as 
possible in the larger interest of building greater interface and co -ordination between 
the ASI and the State’s Archaeology Department. 
(Para 90) 
The Committee recommends that the Ministry should also form joint committees 
comprising represent atives from ASI and state archaeological departments. These 
committees can facilitate regular communication, information exchange, and decision -
making related to heritage sites. 
(Para 91) 
The ASI should implement systems for data sharing and integration between ASI 
and State Archaeological Departments. A centralized database can provide a 
comprehensive overview of heritage sites, their condition, and ongoing activities. 
(Para 92) 

38 
 
The Committee also recommends organizing workshops and training programs 
for state officials to enhance their understanding of heritage preservation techniques, 
legal frameworks, and conservation best practices. 
(Para 93) 
The ASI must establish mechanisms for resolving conflicts that may arise 
between ASI and State authorities. Op en dialogue and mediation processes can prevent 
issues from escalating. Further, a two - way medium of communication should be 
developed to facilitate the sharing of best practices and success stories between ASI and 
State Archaeological Departments. Learning from each other's experiences can enhance 
preservation approaches manifold. 
(Para 94) 
Security issues at sites 
The Committee notes that the security of the monuments is a big challenge. The 
Monuments in India lack proper security and safety provisions. The security of 
monuments is being managed by monument attendants; private security and CISF at 
select monuments. There are, however, many challenges including lack of adequate 
number of personnel to ensure round the clock security of centrally protected 
monuments.   
(Para 95) 
The Committee recommends that the hiring process of the security personnel 
must be expedited without any further delay. Time bound action regarding deployment 
of security personnel in the historical monuments and sites will also act as a deterrent to 
the potential threats of encroachment of ASI premises. 
(Para 97) 
The Committee recommends ASI to conduct regular and comprehensive security 
audits of all heritage sites under its purview. These audits should identify 
vulnerabilities, assess risks, and inform the development of tailored security plans. 
(Para 98) 
Further, the ASI should leverage advanced technologies such as surveillance 
cameras, motion sensors, and intrusion detection systems to monitor and secure 
monument premises effectively. 
(Para 99) 
The ASI should assure that regular training and mock drill sessions on security 
protocols, emergency response, and crowd management are held from time to time. 
(Para 100) 

39 
 
The Committee also recommends ensuring proper lighting and surveil lance 
coverage, particularly during night -time hours. Well -lit areas deter vandalism and 
illegal activities, while surveillance helps in monitoring suspicious behaviour. Further, 
implementation of controlled access and visitor management protocols includin g 
limiting the number of visitors, conducting bag checks, and ensuring guided tours to 
prevent unauthorized activities can also be helpful. 
(Para 101) 
During its Study Visit to Kerala from 4 th September to 8 th September, 2023, the 
ASI has apprised the Comm ittee that visitor’s access is regulated during a fixed time 
across all monuments, barring a few exceptions in case of prominent monuments. Both 
the Departments of Tourism and Archaeology, the Government of Kerala have drawn 
the attention of the Committee to the need for opening the Bekal Fort, District 
Kasargod, Kerala till 21:00 hours from its existing closure time of 17:00 hours as the 
visiting tourists prefer to spend the evening time at the Fort to enjoy its tranquil and 
scenic surrounding including th e sunset. The Committee has found merit in the 
submissions and recommends that the ASI should actively consider extending the 
closure timing of the Bekal Fort and any other such monument in the country by way of 
relaxation of rules in the interest of enhan cing the tourist footfalls and improving 
tourism dependent local economy. 
(Para 102) 
The Committee welcomes the initiatives being taken by the ASI and the Ministry 
of Culture to employ digital techniques to aid and assist in the varied activities that they  
perform. However, the Committee feels that there are more scopes to use cutting edge 
technology by ASI to ensure the best outputs using the latest available technology in 
their respective fields of work. The Committee recommends that the ASI may organise 
training and workshops from time to time to educate its staff working in the different 
departments of the organization. This will allow the staff to keep themselves abreast of 
the latest advancements, in the field of digital technology. 
(Para 106) 
The Ministry may encourage research and development in the field of digital 
techniques for technology - induced cultural preservation. This will lead to the 
development of new and innovative techniques that can help in better preservation and 
management of cultural heritage sites. 
(Para 107) 
The Committee is of the view that ‘Adopt a Heritage’ Scheme, being innovative 
and visible, ASI should take maximum advantage of it. The Committee recommends 
organizing regular workshops, town hall meetings, and focus group d iscussions to 
provide a platform for communities to voice their opinions, concerns, and ideas 
regarding monument preservation. 

40 
 
(Para 110) 
The ASI should involve community members in small -scale conservation 
projects, such as cleaning, landscaping, or resto ration under the guidance of domain 
expert. This fosters a sense of ownership and responsibility. Further, local youths can be 
engaged in heritage preservation activities through workshops, internships, and 
volunteer programmes. This will go a long way in encouraging the new generation to 
value and protect their cultural legacy. 
(Para 111) 
The Committee also recommends ASI to acknowledge and celebrate community 
contributions through conferring awards, certificates, or public recognition. This will 
have positive spin-off effect on others to join the community engagement activities for 
better preservation of monuments. 
(Para 112) 
The Committee recommends that extensive collaborations with national level 
premier research institutions and, in particular, the for eign organizations should be 
made a priority for better learning of best practices as also the and knowledge sharing.  
(Para 118) 
The Committee recommends that archaic and colonial era related laws which 
have lost their relevance must be dispense with. Fur ther, the Ministry of Culture/ ASI 
should conduct a comprehensive comparative study of the excavation, conservation and 
restoration laws of foreign countries to come up with the best practices being followed 
globally and bring out the requisite course corrections in the present policy accordingly. 
(Para 121) 
***** 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

41 
 
 
 
 
 
ANNEXURES 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

42 
 
  Annexure -I 
Details of ASI -NCF Projects  
Sr. 
No. 
Project Donor Status Expected 
date of 
completion 
1 Restoration & 
Development of 
centrally protected 
monument site at  
Devbaloda,  Bhilai, 
Chhattisgarh 
SAIL-
Bhilai 
Steel Plant 
MOU was signed on 21 
December 2022. Thereafter 
funds released by NCF / 
MOC on 3 March 2023 
Estimates have been prepared 
and submitted for approval. 
Proposed works include - 
conservation of mo nument 
and development of Parking 
lot, cafeteria, toilets and 
drinking water.  
March 2024 
2 Conservation work and 
providing tourist 
amenities at Sri 
Lakshmi Narasimha 
Temple Nuggehalli,  
Channarayapatna Taluk 
Hassan District, 
Bengaluru,Karnataka 
Smt. N. 
Nagartham
ma 
Conservation of the temple 
has been started. 50 % works 
have been completed.  
 
December 
2023 
3 Conservation and 
restoration of Vishnu 
Temple, Bateshwar, 
Morena, Madhya 
Pradesh 
Infosys 
Foundation 
Conservation of temple is 
started. 65 % works have 
been completed. 
November 
2023 
4 Supply, Installation, 
commissioning and 
maintenance of 
Turnstile & RFID based 
access control system 
for the visitors at ASI 
monuments in Delhi, 
UP, Odisha, 
Maharashtra & Gujarat 
IIFCL Installation has been 
completed. A MC is ongoing 
on 8 monuments. 
March 2024 
5 Conservation and 
development of 
excavated remains at 
Vikramshila, Bihar 
NTPC Estimates are under 
preparation for conservation 
of excavated remains and 
providing of pathway 
amenities ( new toilet blocks) 
booking counter, cloack room 
etc. 
March 2024 
6 Ahom Group of 
Monuments at 
SibsagarDistt. Assam.  
•Rang Ghar  
ONGC Estimates have been prepared 
and approved. Funds ( 2.21 
Cr) have been released by 
NCF. Work under progress. 
March 2024 

43 
 
•KarengGhar – 
(Garhgoan) 
•TalatalGhar 
•Group of Four 
Madaims at Cheraideo 
 
Conservation of Rang ghar, 
Kareng Ghar & Talat ghar 
monuments and tourist 
amenities like toilet blocks, 
parking, pathways drinking 
water are proposed at Group 
of four Madaims at 
Charaideo. 
7 Improving Touri st 
Amenities at Hidimba 
Devi Temple, Himachal 
Pradesh. 
UCO 
BANK 
 December 
2023 
 
8 Development of 
infrastructure and other 
facilities at Lauriya 
Nandangarh, 
Chankigarh and 
Rampurva, Bihar. 
SAIL-
Bokaro 
Steel Plant 
Estimates have been prepared 
for developmen tal works like 
installation of signages, 
providing of drinking water, 
toilet blocks, boundary wall 
etc. 
Masrch 2024 
9 Up gradation of Sarnath 
Site & Museum 
Sony India 
Ltd. 
Unspent funds 1.87 Lac are 
being utilized for purchase of 
hardwares, cctv cameras, 
memory disc etc. 
October 
2023 
10 Preservation of the 
Dhamekh Stupa, 
Sarnath & 
Mahaparinirvana 
Temple,, Khushinagar, 
U.P. 
Vong 
Group,  
Thailand 
Estimates have been prepared 
for conservation / 
preservation of structures and 
providing railings etc. 
March 2024 
11 Jantar Mantar Project Apeejay         
Surrendra 
Park Hote 
Development of entry gate 
and providing amenities. 
November 
2023 
12 Conservation, 
upgradation and 
involvemental 
development of 
Hazardurai Palace, 
Murshidabad, West 
Bengal, West Bengal 
SBI  December 
2023 
13 Shiv Mandir, 
Ambernath, 
Maharashtra 
Nagrik 
Sewa 
Mandal 
 March 2024 
 
Details of  ASI-IOF Projects 
Sr. 
No. 
Name of Project Executing 
Agency 
Status Estimated date of 
completion 
1. Tourist Infrastructure 
facilities at Kala Aamb, 
 
 
DPR have been approved on 
14-2-2023. IOF has sought 
March 2024 

44 
 
Panipat Haryana 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
IOF / IOC 
revenue details of the 
monument ON 10 August 
2023 which have been 
provided on the same day. 
Works has to be started by 
IOF. Major items of work 
includes Development of 
parking, entry plaza, 
cafeteria, Interpretation 
centre, public amenities like 
construction of toilet blocks, 
providing of drinking water 
facilities, free standing 
installation, etc. 
2 Tourist Infrastructure 
facilities at Se Cathedral, 
Aguada Fort & Illu mination 
at Mahadev Temple, Goa 
The illumination of 
monument, providing of 
pathway, parking drinking 
water, toilets etc are in 
progress. 
March 2024 
 
3 Tourist Infrastructure 
facilities at Ancient remains 
at Mansar, Maharashtra 
DPR has to be prepared by 
IOF. 
June 2024 
4 Facade illumination at 
Group of Temples, 
Pattadakal, 
Work order have been issued 
by IOF for illumination of 
temples. 
December 2023 
5 Facade illumination at 
Golconda Fort. 
Work order for illumination 
of monument has been issued 
by IOF, Script for light & 
sound show is being vetted.. 
October 2023 
6 Facade illumination at 
Charminar Hyderabad, 
Telangana 
Work completed  Inaugurated on 5 
August 2023. 
7 Tourist Infrastructure 
facilities at Singorgarh Fort 
& associated sites - Damoh, 
Madhya Pradesh 
Land has to be transferred 
from State Government to 
A.S.I. for further handing 
over to IOF for 
commencement of works. 
Proposed item of works are 
construction of entry gate, 
Gazebo, interpretation centre, 
cafeteria etc. 
March 2024 
 
8 Facade Illumination of 
Lucknow Residency, Uttar 
Pradesh 
Work order have been issued 
by IOF for illumination of 
monument. 
November 2023 

45 
 
9 Tourist Infrastructure 
facilities at Ananta Sayan, 
Lord Vishnu and 
Kapileswara Temple, 
Dhenkanal, Odisha 
DPR approved by A. S.I. on 
14 February 2023. IOF has 
sought revenue details of the 
said monuments on 10 
August 2023 which have 
been provided on the very 
next day. Proposed work 
items are construction of 
boundary wall, approach 
road, watch tower, cafeteria 
and other amenities etc.  
March 2024 
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

46 
 
Annexure II 
 
Sl. 
No 
Name of Site State/ UT Name of Agency 
1. Development of Multi-
Lingual Audio Guide for 9 
Iconic Sites 
i. Dholavira, Gujarat 
ii. Humayun’s Tomb, Delhi 
iii. Red Fort, Delhi 
iv. Purana Quila Delhi 
v. Fatehpur Sikri, Agra 
vi. Taj Mahal, Agra 
vii. Mahabalipuram, Tamil 
Nadu 
viii. Khajuraho, Madhya 
Pradesh. 
8-ASI 
(Centrally 
Protected  
Monuments) 
Resbird Technologies Pvt. Ltd. 
(Now “Bird Heritage Foundation”) 
2.  Tomb of Abdur Rahim Khan – 
I -Khana 
New Delhi Interglobe Foundation 
3. Qutub Minar Delhi Yatra Online Pvt. Ltd. 
4. Jantar Mantar Delhi ApeejaySurrendra Park Hotels (P) 
Ltd. 
5. Sun Temple, Modhera Gujarat Akshar Travels Pvt. Ltd. 
6. Bekal Fort Kerala Drishti Lifesaving Pvt. Ltd. 
7. Rani ki Vav, Patan Gujarat Akshar Travels Pvt. Ltd. 
8. Red Fort Delhi Dalmia Bharat Ltd. 
9. Gandikota Fort Andhra 
Pradesh 
Dalmia Bharat Ltd. 
10. Surajkund Haryana Bliss Inn (India) Pvt. Ltd. (V 
Resorts) 
11. Aguada Fort Goa Drishti Lifesaving Pvt. Ltd. 
12. Mandore Fort Rajasthan Mehrangarh Museum Trust 
13. Ajanta Caves Maharashtra Yatra Online Pvt. Ltd. 
14. Hazara Rama Temple Karnataka Yatra Online Pvt. Ltd. 
15. Leh Palace Ladakh Yatra Online Pvt. Ltd. 
16. Champaner-Pavagadh 
Archaeological Park 
Gujarat Akshar Travels Pvt. Ltd. 
17. Buddhist Caves, Uparkot, 
Junagadh 
Gujarat Akshar Travels Pvt. Ltd. 
18.  Krishna Temple, Hampi Karnataka Heritage Resorts, Hampi 
19.  Elephant Stables, Hampi Karnataka Orange County Resorts, Hampi 
20. Pattabhirama Temple, Hampi Karnataka Orange County Resorts, Hampi 
21. Lotus Mahal (Zenana 
Enslosure), Hampi 
Karnataka Orange County Resorts 
22. Ugra Narashimha, Hampi Karnataka Hotel Malligi 

47 
 
Sl. 
No 
Name of Site State/ UT Name of Agency 
23. Badavalinga, Hampi Karnataka Hotel Malligi 
24. Rock Shelters of Bhimbetka Madhya 
Pradesh 
HEG Ltd 
 
***** 
 

48 
 
 
 
MINUTES 
  

49 
 
XXVII 
TWENTY-SEVENTH MEETING  
 
 The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Monday, the 27th June, 2023 in Committee No. 4, Block 
A, Parliament House Annexe Extension, New Delhi. 
 
Members present: 
1.  Shri V. Vijayasai Reddy -  Chairman   
Rajya Sabha 
2. Smt. S. Phangnon Konyak  
3. Shri Jugalsinh Lokhandwala  
4. Shri A. A. Rahim  
5. Dr. C.M. Ramesh  
Lok Sabha 
6. Shri Tapir Gao 
7. Shri K. Muraleedharan 
8. Shri S.S. Palanimanickam 
9. Shri Kamlesh Paswan 
10. Shri Sunil Kumar Pintu 
11. Shri Prince Raj 
12. Shri Tirath Singh Rawat 
13. Shri Krupal Balaji Tumane 
  
SECRETARIAT 
 Shri Sumant Narain, Joint Secretary  
 Shri Swarabji B., Director 
 Shrimati Monica Baa, Additional Director  
 Shrimati Subha Chandrashekar, Deputy Secretary  
 Shri Ranajit Chakraborty, Under Secretary 
 
 Shri Kaustubh Sudhakar Bhalekar, OSD to Hon‟ble Chairman 
  
WITNESSES 
Heads of National Akademis 
1. Prof. Kishor K. Basa, Director General, Archaeological Survey of India, 
2. Ms. Sanjukta Mudgal, Joint Secretary 
3. Prof. Alok Tripathi, Additional Director General, ASI  
(Complete list of witnesses is attached as Annexure-I) 
 

50 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members and informed them that the Committee has 
taken up the subject “Functioning of Archaeological Survey of India”. Now, the Committee has 
invited the Ministry of Culture and representatives of ASI to deliberate on the said subject. 
(After the witnesses took their respective seats) 
3. The Chairman welcomed the witnesses  of enquired about the key objectives and mandates of 
the ASI in preserving and managing India's archaeological heritage and how ASI prioritize s its 
archaeological projects/ sites f or excavation and conservation; the details of the funds utilized and 
whether ASI also seeks funds from other sources;  the policy in existence  on the conservation and 
preservation requirements of the archaeological sites, monuments and artefacts ;  the policy f or 
exploration and excavation; the role of the Central Advisory Board on Archaeology (CABA) and 
its constitution; modern technology adopted; the training and capacity -building programmes 
offered by the ASI to its staff including unfilled vacancies; ASI ‟s collaboration with other national 
and international organizations, research institutions, NGOs and universities; engagement with 
local communities, stakeholders and the general public in the preservation and management of 
archaeological sites; the requirements of legislative amendments in the Ancient Monuments and 
Archaeological Sites and Remains Act (AMASR Act), 1958 and the number of Heritage Bye-Laws 
presently in existence for all protected monuments to minimize and prevent encroachment. 
4. Director General, ASI, made a presentation and informed about the organizational structure of 
ASI. The details are placed at Annexure -II.  He informed about the budgetary allocation to ASI 
and stated that in the year 2020 -2021 due to the pandemic the grant as w ell as expenditure was 
less. But, in 2023-24, ASI was given Rs. 1,102.83 crores out of which Rs. 213.61 crores, which is 
around 20 per cent of the Budget, has been spent in this quarter till 16.06.2023.  
5. He informed that the Central Advisory Board of Ar chaeology (CABA) has been reconstituted 
and its last meeting was held in June, 2022. He also informed that they give licences to various 
State Governments, universities and institutions beyond the Archaeological Survey of India. Last 
year, they had given 4 5 such permissions for 33 sites to various circles and branches of the 
archaeological survey. He apprised the Committee that eleven excavation reports have been 
received during 2022 -23 and the vetting process for publication is underway; and that 52 
excavation reports have been vetted by a Committee of scholars.  
6. He further informed that an MoU was signed with IIT Gandhinagar in 2015, which was 
extended for further five years for setting up an Archaeological Science Centre and establishing an 
Archaeological Chair.  ASI collaborates with important institutions in the country and abroad. ASI 
has a history of more than 125 years in the conservation of monuments, preserving monuments for 
future structural conservation, scientific preservation and environmenta l development. The 
National Conservation Policy, 2014 lays down the basic guidelines on conservation. The focus is 
on maintaining the integrity of the monument by saving the original and historic material and to try 
and maintain the authentic nature of the  monument as far as possible. Every year, they resort to 
conservation works for around 750 to 800 monuments along with regular maintenance work for all 
monuments. Monuments are saved from imminent destruction caused by the vagaries of nature or 
acts of van dalism by carrying out scientific preservation at monuments, including sculptures and 

51 
 
paintings.  Also, a LiDAR survey of the archaeological site at Bhismaknagar, Arunachal Pradesh 
was conducted through IIT Guwahati. 
7. DG informed that there are unique aspects and challenges in different monuments and 
conservators take into account the specific aspects and then try to intervene in the way desirable. 
Nearly 600 monuments have been environmentally upgraded . by creating gardens, thereby 
ameliorating the env ironment. He  also apprised  the Committee about the major conservation 
projects within the country and abroad that are  being undertaken recently and are also being 
continued. 
8. He also informed about the future strategies of ASI which include  undertaking conservation 
works at several iconic monuments ; expansion of  ASI's footprints outside India like Uzbekistan 
and Vietnam; preservation and promotion of traditional skills such as stone carving, sthapathis, 
etc.; and accreditation and skilling programme with  Quality Council of India. Further, ASI has set 
up a fully equipped dating laboratory at the Institute of Archaeology in Greater Noida. Also, ASI 
has initiated discussions with IITs, Central Building Research Institute and ICCROM for 
knowledge exchange and technical cooperation.  
9. He informed that ASI is the nodal organization on behalf of the Ministry of Culture, 
Government of India for all W orld Heritage matters. ASI coordinates with the World Heritage 
Centre, Paris, PRI UNESCO and other international advisory bodies and various Ministries and 
State Governments in various tasks such as preparation of nomination dossiers; the State of 
Conservation Report, Site Management Plan, etc.; periodic review and updating of the tentative 
lists; synergy for various Missions; technical discussion on various world heritage matters; and, 
examining various documents and reports and Project Mausam.  
10. ASI has been actively involved in increasing India's presence by increasing the number as far 
as the World Heritage sites are concerned. India is sixth on the World Heritage List with 40 
properties. Apart from this, 52 properties are on the tentative list. For the fourth time, India is a 
Member of the World Heritage Committee, now from 2021 to 2025. The focus areas include a 
balanced and credible World Heritage list and equitable distribution of sites; transparent guidelines 
and policies; and, simplification of world heritage processes; and adding more sites per year. Also, 
the aim is to increase the tentative list from 52 to 75.  
11. He informed that UNESCO was dominated by a Western view. So, India's presence has 
enabled it to challenge that Eurocentric mindset in the consideration of nomination and finalization 
of the world heritage status of various monuments not only in India but also in various parts of the 
world. India aims at increasing the number of Indian sites to be added to the World Heritage List 
every year from 1 to 2 per year; simplifying the WH processes including operational guidelines 
and technical assistance to the countries.  
12.  He submitted that ASI is trying for nomination on theme -based nomination involving more 
than one country, especially from South East Asia and the Indi an Ocean Rim countries. He 
informed about the process of selection of monuments including Centrally Protected Monuments.  
He further informed that i n 2019-20, the revenue earned was Rs. 161.06 crore, but in 2022 -23, it 

52 
 
was reduced. He added that it was a challenge how to enhance the number of foreign tourists and 
also Indian tourists so that it would also lead to some earnings for the national exchequer.  
13.  He also informed that amenities are provided in collaboration with PSUs, and private 
stakeholders. ASI receives money from the National Culture Fund for visitor facilities at different 
sites. The concept of Monument Mitra 2.0 is a revamped scheme  which includes industry 
collaboration. Consultations are underway and ASI aims to tie up with 500 monuments by October 
2023. ASI also intends to collaborate with State Governments. ASI will be launching the Indian 
Heritage App in August 2023. It is a user -friendly mobile application involving information, 
ticketing, virtual tours, maps and citizen feedback. ASI is also preparing an Indian Heritage Atlas. 
14. He informed that the security of the monuments is a big challenge. It is being managed by 
monument attendants; private security and CISF at sel ect monuments. However, there i s a lack of 
adequate personnel. Based on an in -house assessment, the hiring of additional 5,340 security 
personnel is proposed. Also, there is a need for technology -based solutions.  ASI has signed an 
MoU with IIT Delhi in June 2022 for two years and an interim report is expected by August 2023.  
He further informed that documentation of 16.80 lakhs of antiquities which is a part of the 
National Database has been done. The Central Antiquity Collection houses approximately 3.25 
lakh artefacts. Many confiscated objects gallery have been brought and dis played in a gallery in 
Purana Qila. So far 250 antiquities have been retrieved from different parts of the country. It was 
only 13 before 2014. 238 antiquities have been brought back to this country since 2014.  
15. DG also informed that the Publication Section deals with the publishing of books of ASI and 
their supply to 115 sale counters in all ASI circles. He submitted that they have not published 
excavation reports for a long time. ho wever, ASI has taken steps in this regard .  H e assured the 
Committee that more excavation reports will be published in the coming year.  
16. He further informed that there are 52 such archaeological site museums in various parts of the 
country containing more than 1.36 lakh antiquities , Sarnath being first archaeological site museum 
which came up  in 1910 .  The Bharat Shared Repository of Inscriptions has been initiated and 
digitization of one lakh e-stampages of inscriptions has been done. ASI has also established a road 
map for museums which includes the creation and upgradation of various museums. 
17. With reference to human resources, he informed that the sanctioned strength of ASI is 8,778. 
7,505 are Group-C posts. As on 27.6.2023, 6,575 are on roll. Under Mission Recruitment, they are 
filling up 4,179 posts. 623 posts will be filled up through promotion and the remaining through 
direct recruitment. Details in this regard are placed in Annexure -III.  He further informed that they 
also plan to recruit young talent. They have an Interns Scheme where 53 interns have complet ed 
their assignment.  R ecently, 22 young archaeologists were engaged in work related to antiquities 
and excavation; 6 Archival Associates and 12 Archival Assistants were engaged; and 15 young 
legal professionals are being recruited. ASI is also reframing i ts policies- E-HRMS and Sparrow 
APAR.   Recruitment Rules for all cadres were drafted and comments are being sought. Refresher 
courses are being provided through engagement with the Capacity Building Commission. 
18. Thereafter, Members raised queries on the following issues:  

53 
 
● Poor public relations as there are  no involvement of MPs in the conservation and 
preservation process.  
● Delay in the documentation of 3,50,000 articles which have so far not been documented even 
after 55 years since the introduction of the Antiquities and Art Treasures Act in 1972.  
● Issue of age and value of the articles and need for giving more attention to Tamil Nadu. 
● Poor strength of manpower , plan of action for filling vacant posts, and the manner of 
recruiting legal professionals. 
● Reasons for only 50% expenditure out of the total budget allocated - F rom 2007 to 2022, 
only 61 per cent was spent. 
● Long pending issue of the need for a subway at Thanjavur Brihadeeswara temple. 
● Reason for non-inclusion of Brihadeeswara temple in the List of  the Wonders of the World.  
● Poor performance of Thrissur Circle in Kerala - Issues include -In the last 10 year s, ASI has 
not conducted a single research excavation in Kerala. Many posts are lying vacant in 
Thrissur. A key technical post like Dy. Superintendent (Archeology), Asst. Archaeologists 
and clerical posts are lying vacant. There is no effective and constru ctive intervention in 
the field of archaeology and monument conservation.  
● Need for a special team from the Ministry to visit the Circle, evaluate the situation and 
explore the way out. 
● Issue of special fee for morning walk at Palakkad Fort under the ASI.  
● No renovation work in Tellicherry Fort which was the first fort built by East India Company 
● Issues in administration and renovation of Padmanabhapurm Palace, Thalassery Fort and 
Anchuthengu Fort, Kannur Fort. 
● Inclusion of Kerala in the new circles established under ASI.  
● Need for collaboration with Archaeological Department at Kerala University, Kariavattom 
campus, which has been accredited with an AAA+ grade by NAAC. CAG report , 2022 
mentions that ASI is not doing whatever work or duty is assigned to it and monument like 
the Taj Mahal was not taken into consideration.  
●The status of retrieval of stolen idols, pillars and items which are  pending for retrieval. 
● Issue of littering and no facility of washrooms, restrooms, etc at tourist places. 
● Difference in tourist  fees for Indian and foreigner tourists.  
●Need for  a university for reconstruction and preservation of heritage.   
● Issue of nomenclature  of protected and unprotected monuments. 
● Black marketing of antiquities  and lack of service, security, and protection.  
●Issue of encroachment in Itanagar in Arunachal Pradesh as encroachers have destroyed the 
famous “Ita wall” in the region. 
● Preservation of  the Shivling and other religious sites in Zero Valley in Arunachal Pradesh.  

54 
 
●The number of Universities with Archaeological Departments for the study of archaeological 
subjects- The study of archaeological issues should be a 'must' in al most all Government 
universities so that we can generate the interest of younger generations in such activities. 
● Inclusion of the Chola Dynasty,   which ruled in South East Asia, in the Mausam Project for 
maritime routes and Cultural Landscapes. 
● No renovation of sites acquired by ASI such as Tungnath temple in Uttarakhand, an ancient 
temple constructed by Shankaracharya.  
● Neglect of contribution and condition of local workers or employees.  
19.  On the issue of Public Relations Management, ASI informed that 'Adopt a Heritage‟ Scheme 
is to be launched within the next few months. In this, participation from the private stakeholders is 
invited through their CSR initiative for creating and maintainin g the various amenities at the 
monuments. ASI has also proposed to have memoranda of understanding with the State 
Governments to maintain and create the infrastructure for amenities at various monuments. 
Further, the 'Jan Bhagidari' Scheme has been launched to involve the stakeholders at the local level 
and the State Government to protect the unprotected monuments and protected monuments. ASI is 
also emphasizing capacity building through the Capacity Building Commission.  
20.  ASI further informed that rega rding the protected and unprotected monuments, the matter is 
related to tangible heritage. It is contained in the Seventh Schedule under the three Lists. The 
monuments and archaeological sites and remains, which are of national importance, are on the 
Union List and are known as “Protected monuments”. They are taken care of by ASI. The State 
List has all other monuments which are known as 'Unprotected monuments'. The third one is the 
archaeological sites and remains that are not of national importance and th ey are in the Concurrent 
List, where the State and the Centre have jurisdiction.  
21.   The Ministry responded to some of the queries raised by the Members and took note of the 
suggestions made by the Members and also assured to give the details in writing  which could not 
be answered at that point of time. (The witnesses then withdrew) 
22.   A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept. 
23.    The meeting adjourned at 12.53 PM. 
 
New Delhi,                                                                                                                        Swarabji B.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            
27th  June, 2023                                                                                                                     Director 
                                         
                                                                                                                                                                                                 
  

55 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               
Annexure-I 
LIST OF WITNESSES WHO APPEARED BEFORE THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED 
PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND 
CULTURE 
  
11.00 A.M. 
Archaeological Survey of India 
1 Prof. Kishor K. Basa Director General, ASI 
2 Ms. Sanjukta Mudgal Joint Secretary, ASI 
3 Prof. Alok Tripathi Additional Director General, ASI 
4 Shri Janhwij Sharma Additional Director General, ASI 
5 Shri T.J. Alone Additional Director General, ASI 
  
Annexure-II 
He stated that DG is the head of ASI.  In the headquarters, there are three ADGs and also Joint 
Director Generals and Directors. But in the field, there are six Regional Directors, thirty -eight 
circles and 198 sub -circles. ASI has 3696 monuments and sites which are centrally protected, 143 
ticketed monuments and 24 World Heritage properties. In total, India has been given 40 World 
Heritage sites, out of which 24 are under ASI. There are 38 circles including one mini circle and 
six Regional Directors. The major aspects of activities include excav ation, protection, 
conservation, epigraphy, museums, prehistory, National Mission on monuments and antiquities, 
temple survey, building survey, antiquities, science, world heritage, publication and institute of 
archaeology.  
Annexure-III 
With reference to human resources, he informed that the sanctioned strength of ASI is 8,778. 7,505 
are Group-C posts. As on 27.6.2023, 6,575 are on roll. Under Mission Recruitment, they are filling 
up 4,179 posts. 623 posts will be filled up through promotion and the remain ing through direct 
recruitment.  Recently, the Staff Selection Commission has filled up around 1,100 posts of MTS 
for the ASI and the remaining are also getting filled. By December 2023, all these 4,179 posts will 
be filled up. The challenges include the r evision of the Recruitment Rules, litigation, and unfilled 
posts. They are taking recourse to five R's - (i) Revive or create posts, (ii) Restructure the 
organization to bring in efficiency (iii) Recruit young talent (iv) Reframe policy/processes (v) 
Refresh minds by giving interim professional training and also to revive and create posts. He 
further informed that Government has approved the creation/revival of over 800 posts. Following 
this, 500 plus are promoted and work is in progress for the remaining S SC and UPSC. These are 
the agencies that are going to fill up these posts. Compassionate appointments have been made and 
259 persons have been appointed. 
*** 

56 
 
 
XXXIII 
THIRTY-THIRD MEETING 
 
 The Committee met at 03.00 P.M. on Monday, the  21st August, 2023 in Committee Room D, Ground 
Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
Members present: 
1. Shri V. Vijayasai Reddy - Chairman  
Rajya Sabha 
2. Smt. S. Phangnon Konyak 
3. Dr. Sonal Mansingh 
4. Shri A. A. Rahim 
 
Lok Sabha 
5. Shri Tapir Gao 
6. Shri Rahul Kaswan 
7. Shri Sunil Baburao Mendhe 
8. Shri Prince Raj 
9. Shri Tirath Singh Rawat 
10. Shri Manoj Kumar Tiwari 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 Dr. Raghab Prasad Dash, Joint Secretary 
 Shrimati Monica Baa, Additional Director 
 Shrimati Subha Chandrashekar, Deputy Secretary  
 Shri Ranajit Chakraborty, Under Secretary 
 
WITNESSES 
 Indian National trust for Art and Cultural Heritage (INTACH) 
 Maj. Gen (Retd.) L. K. Gupta, AVSM, Chairman  
 Dr. Chuden Misra, IAS (Retd.), Member Secretary 
 
 Aga Khan Trust for Culture (AKTC) 
 Shri Ratish Nanda, Chief Executive Officer (India) 
 
(Complete list of witnesses is attached as Annexure) 
 
 

57 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members and informed  them that the Committee has 
already heard the views of the Ministry of Culture and ASI at its meeting held on 27th June, 2023 and also 
held discussions with the Ministry of Culture, ASI and the State Government of Maharashtra in Mumbai 
during its study vi sit to Mumbai and Goa during 5 -8 July, 2023. However, keeping in view the 
professionalism of the private sector, it was felt that an interaction with private organizations was also needed 
for a wholesome understanding of  the subject. Therefore, the Committ ee has invited the representatives of 
INTACH and AKTC to deliberate and guide the Committee on the said subject. 
 
(After the witnesses took their respective seats) 
 
3. The Chairman welcomed the representatives of INTACH and AKTC and enquired about the 
following issues: 
 Issues faced and their suggested solution in the larger interest of conservation and preservation works  
in the country. 
 Suggestions, based on experience, for improvements in the existing interface with the ASI for overall 
benefit of the sector. 
 New conservation practices followed by INTACH/AKTC and the extent to which these are better than 
those adopted by ASI. 
 How INTACH, AKTC and ASI combine their expertise and resources to 
effectively execute these conservation projects. 
 Role played by INTACH, AKTC in terms of research, documentation, technical 
and technological support to ASI. 
 Details of knowledge -sharing and capacity -building programmes between INTACH, AKTC and the 
ASI teams. 
 Details of their initiative - State of Built Heritage of India: Case of the Unprotected (SoBHI), its latest 
Report and the details of action taken by ASI thereon. 
 Extent to which suggestions given by INTACH, AKTC are adopted by ASI for preservation purpose. 
Also, how many of their suggestions have been accepted and adopted by the ASI. 
 Suggestions regarding any legislative amendments required to be  made to the Ancient Monuments 
and Archaeological Sites and Remains Act, 1958 (AMASR Act). 
 
4. A Member brought to the notice of INTACH, the dilapidated condition of the Martand Temple – Sun 
Temple – in Kashmir and requested them to take action in this regard. Chairman, INTACH agreed to this 

58 
 
fact, but also informed that there has been no initiative by the ASI to take up repair or conservation works in 
Kashmir. He informed th at there are a number of sites in Kashmir which are in dilapidated condition. 
However, no attention has been paid for conservation of sites in Kashmir as yet. The Chairman then enquired 
whether they want any agency to fund the project and renovate it.  Cha irman, INTACH informed that the 
Martand Temple is a protected monument, so, only the ASI can take it up. The National Culture Fund can act 
through that Fund immediately. 
 
5. Thereafter, the Chairman, INTACH through his presentation apprised the Committee t hat a vast 
majority of India‟s heritage lay unprotected and at the mercy of owners, developers, contractors and even the 
Government, including State Governments. He informed that INTACH has documented dismal status of the 
nation‟s heritage, along with 50 r ecommendations, as a part of its e fforts in a publication titled „The State of 
Built Heritage of India‟. 
 
6. The Chairman, INTACH attributed the appalling state of our heritage sites and museums to the blind 
adherence to the 19th and 20th century laws and policies of the colonial times; most of which are now archaic 
and irrelevant. These laws penalize the people who are proud owners of their own heritage and impose 
regulations and restrictions that only encourage harassment and corruption. He emphasized tha t not only the 
monuments, but archaeological sites, antiquities and the cultural diversity of the innumerable communities 
that practice art and culture need to be preserved, conserved, safeguarded and managed. He sensitized the 
Committee towards the importance of promotion of heritage for the following key reasons: 
 Culture represents the soft power of a nation which enhances the hard power of a nation; to teach 
children about the past and to give them an opportunity to find out about country‟s history, evolution 
and antiquities; to provide places of interest for people to visit and explore things; 
 For encouraging tourists to visit and creating jobs and boosting economy; 
 To enrich people‟s lives and lifestyles by visiting examples of country‟s heritage; and 
 For national and international scholars, to study the heritage of India. 
 
7. The Chairman, INTACH further submitted the following measures  for restructuring of the ASI to 
fulﬁll its functions e ffectively; and to rationalize, prioritize and categorize th e monuments under ASI‟s 
custody, so that they are efficiently managed and showcased: 
 To establish a special management authority, similar to the Special Purpose Vehicle, for specific 
conservation, development and tourists‟ related matters; 
 To set up a sepa rate cadre for heritage planning, conservation and management  disciplines  in  

59 
 
Government  organisations; To establish independent professional councils for bodies for archaeology 
conservation and museums; 
 To designate expert bodies as agencies, apart fro m the Government, to list and document India‟s 
heritage. 
 Development of lands around archaeological sites is an important issue for their well being. It is 
recommended that the States be incentivised to maintain and conserve heritage protected by the 
Central Government, rather than only the ASI. 
 There is a need to rationalise the regulation concerning the present system of 100 meters and 300 
meters around the protected area as prohibited and regulated areas respectively by differentiating 
between the significant and insignificant monuments. Particularly in cases where an entire village 
comes within the radius of 300 meters of a monument, the residents are unable to take up the repair 
work without specific permission. 
 Such a situation can create a hostile attitude against the concept of heritage. 
 The INTACH also feels that heritage conservation should be incentivised so that the people, who own 
heritage properties do not demolish them, save them for posterity and other useful purposes by 
adaptive reuse. Heritage belongs to the people. It is their fundamental duty to take care of the heritage. 
Therefore, more and more possibilities should be explored for people‟s participation by way of 
Public-Private Partnerships (PPP), urban local bodies, civil society o rganisations, NGOs, which work 
with the commitment and spirit to save, conserve and protect India‟s heritage. 
 
8. The Chairman, INTACH concluded his presentation on the note that INTACH is a society registered 
as a charitable trust to spread awareness abou t our heritage. To achieve this goal, INTACH has 230 chapters 
across the country. It has equipped itself with world -class knowledge on conservation of heritage to include 
architectural heritage and material heritage, i.e., the art objects of every kind, and natural heritage. It conducts 
diverse programmes in colleges and schools for children to discover their heritage and understand it. It has 
also established almost 6,000 heritage clubs for various schools in India including private and government 
schools. 
 
9. Thereafter, CEO, AKTC gave a presentation. He informed the Committee that the Aga Khan Trust for 
Culture has been working in close partnership with the Archaeological Survey of India (ASI) for the last 25 
years. As part of the Aga Khan developmental network, the objective of AKTC is similar to the other sister 
agencies, which is to improve quality of life. Across the world, AKTC is trying to leverage cultural assets, 
among heritage, intangible heritage of music, museums and food, and to improve the quality of life of 

60 
 
communities that live in the surrounding of hist oric areas. In India, AKTC‟s involvement in the garden 
restoration work of the Humayun Tomb, on the occasion of the 50th anniversary of India‟s Independence, has 
led to almost a 1,000 per cent increase in the visitors‟ numbers. From 160,000 annual visitors , Humayun 
Tomb today has more than two million annual visitors. The Government of India requested for further PPP 
projects. AKTC was offered PPP projects at several sites countrywide.  However, AKTC chose do a larger 
urban conservation project in Humayun‟s  Tomb, Nizamuddin area. This project was signed in 2007 and is a 
very important historic ensemble. The project area includes 300 acres in the heart of Delhi, one kilometre 
from India Gate, which includes the new park of Sunder Nursery, the Humayun‟s Tomb a nd the Nizamuddin 
basti. 
 
10. The CEO also informed that AKTC signed a single piece of  paper with the ASI, the CPWD and the 
MCD. He submitted that it becomes important because the historic monuments stand in urban areas where 
there are different Government  agencies; and all need to partner with the ASI towards the conservation -led 
development approach. He  informed  that AKTC is the only agency in India to have  partnered  with  the  
ASI  doing  hands-on  conservation. For improvement in the quality of cons ervation work, and in partnership 
with ASI, AKTC has adopted a variety of ways like bringing in state -of- art technology for conservation and 
emphasizing on craftsmanship. He added  that  the  conservation  work  undertaken  over  the  last  15 -odd 
years, required almost 15 lakh man-days of work by craftsmen; and that creating this sort of employment is a 
by-product of the conservation work undertaken. 
 
11. He informed that ASI and other agencies face tremendous litigations in various projects across the 
country and cited the example of a project in Hyderabad which was bogged down by 81 court cases from the 
Wakf Tribunal to the High Court, to the Supreme Court. AKTC has partnered with the ASI to remove almost 
20 acres of encroachment from the heart of Delhi - North of Humayun Tomb - which was totally encroached 
by over a hundred buildings. These have now been knocked down and the gardens restored and these 
monuments have been added to the UNESCO world heritage site. Since the restoration of the Humayun 
Tomb, year-after-year, two million people come and pay ticket revenue. The ASI earns Rs. 10 -15 crores in 
ticket revenue alone every year. 
12. Thereafter, the CEO, AKTC briefed the Committee about AKTC‟s developmental projects near the 
Nizamuddin Basti area near  Humayun's Tomb. It was informed that it is densely inhabited and rich in 
Hindustani culture; and holds historical signiﬁcance due to ﬁgures like Amir Khusuro and Hazrat 
Nizamuddin Auliya. Conservation efforts by the Aga Khan Foundation include restoring monu ments, 
reviving musical and food traditions, and developing the community. The approach integrates conservation 
with development measures, which includes creating employment, education, and self -help community 

61 
 
groups. Preservation of monuments by AKTC is c oupled with initiatives that beneﬁt the local population. 
AKTC has built MCD schools, toilets and self -help community groups. Near Barapullah Nullah, AKTC was 
able to do lot of housing improvements in the area connected to sewer lines and build community t oilets. 
AKTC‟s efforts in the Nizamuddin Basti have led to improvements in housing, sanitation, skill training, and 
community engagement, recognized by multiple UNESCO awards. 
 
13. He also highlighted the efforts of AKTC to create green spaces near the CPDW Sunder Nursery, 
which has been transformed into a city park with 20,000 trees of various species and 118 bird species. The 
conservation initiatives in places like Humayun's Tomb, Nizamuddin Basti, and Sunder Nursery have led to 
the expansion of the UN ESCO world heritage site from one monument to fourteen monuments, covering 
almost 200 acres. AKTC‟s expansion and conservation ef forts were recognized and acknowledged by 
UNESCO. Further, in collaboration with Tata Trust, a signiﬁcant effort has been made to form ulate 
conservation speciﬁcations for projects across India. This was recently shared with ASI and is available on 
Tata Trust's website. This initiative aims to standardize conservation practices and costs nationwide, 
potentially becoming an addition to the CPWD manual. The complex work r equires a diverse team of 
professionals spanning 30 disciplines over 15 years. The Aga Khan was honoured with the Padma Vibhushan 
by the Government of India in 2016, and the organization remains willing to assist ASI and the Indian 
government. 
 
14. The Com mittee Chairman raised a query regarding three verticals as proposed by INTACH. The 
Member Secretary, INTACH informed that the ASI is equipped with very academic work for excavations and 
they are skilled in that particular area. But for management of monuments and other related
 facilities, proper managerial cadre is required who are either skilled in MBA, or at least in 
tourism management, to manage sites and monuments, to examine the circulation of visitors who come in to 
visit the monuments, to interpret to monuments, to look at the ticketing of the monuments and to manage 
souvenir shops, cafes, etc. For all this a different kind of skill is required compared to the expertise that ASI 
presently entails. Therefore, INTACH proposed that there could be a proper management cadre for the ASI in 
small pilot projects at the world heritage sites in the beginning and not in all the monuments; then perhaps we 
could demonstrate to our tourists, particularly international tourists and visitors, that our monuments are 
properly managed and not left in derelict or isolated conditions. 
 
15. The Chairman also enquired about the requirement of legislative amendments in regulations 
concerning the present system of 100 metres and 300 metres around the protected area. Chairman, INTACH 
responded that there are no such restrictions across the world. He stated that there are some sites located in 

62 
 
the middle of villages in Chhattisgarh, Haryana and all over the country which makes it difficult for the 
communities to connect. Member, Secretary, INTACH stated  that the blanket 300 metres and 100 metres 
restriction is there for all monuments. But, if there is categorization of monuments where the restriction of 
100 metres and 300 metres is actually needed, then the villagers would not suf fer. She elaborated that certain 
monuments do not require these restrictions because they are just small minars or graves of British 
Lieutenants, etc. Only major iconic monuments require these legislations. INTACH was of the view that 
monuments needed to b e ﬁrst categorized and then the regulations applied in a rationalized fashion. 
Chairman, INTACH cited the Tower of London, which did not have such restrictions despite being a world 
heritage site. He shared an example from London where UNESCO objected to r oad construction around a 
world heritage site which led to a campaign in the UK propagating the importance of public convenience over 
these restrictions. Thus, he emphasized prioritizing community convenience when considering such 
regulations. Secretary, INTACH clariﬁed that INTACH was in favour of rationalization of these regulations. 
World heritage monuments may require some restrictions but every monument does not require such 
restriction. In particular, insigniﬁcant monuments, which have been notiﬁed by  the British, need not have 
these restrictions because people in the villages and others suffer as they cannot take up repair or restoration 
work without getting ASI's permission. She added that either the system needs to be changed or there needs 
to be a very good system of granting permissions, which at present, is not available in our country. 
 
16. The Chairman also elicited clariﬁcation from AKTC on their statement that the policy of ASI does not 
allow restoration of monuments. CEO, AKTC replied that the issue was since resolved with the introduction 
of the National Policy of 2014. However, in context of 100 metres and 300 metres rule, when the rule was 
enacted by Parliament, the idea was to make heritage bylaws. But these heritage bylaws have not been made 
for a variety of reasons. AKTC provided heritage bylaws for the 29 monuments in the Humayun Tomb sub -
circle; and if these heritage bylaws were made then  the categorization of monuments could happen very 
quickly. He added that in the U.K., there are over 6,00,000 protected buildings, in many of which one cannot 
even change the colour of the door without approval. But the approval process is very streamline d. It is a 
process that everybody respects and which is implemented very quickly, and there are no 100 metre 
prohibited area provisions. 
 
17. He also highlighted upon the issue of the sustainable nature of the conservation effort and informed 
that AKTC has  been able to fulﬁll 15 of the 17 U.N. Sustainable Development Goals through conservation. 
On the Chairman‟s query on the status of restoration work of Golconda, Chairman, INTACH informed that 
the draft was given to the ASI. Now, heritage impact studies ar e being done. The ASI and the National 
Monument Authority are interacting with INTACH and INTACH is doing heritage impact studies for the 

63 
 
development that takes place in a very large number for the National Monument Authority. Member 
Secretary, INTACH added that as far as INTACH's work with the ASI is concerned, it has partnered with the 
ASI in setting up the Virtual Museum at Man Mandir in Varanasi which was inaugurated by the Hon. Prime 
Minister. INTACH also participated in Chapter of Warangal and helped in making the dossier for Ramappa 
Temple in Telangana. For 1,000 Pillar Temple also, INTACH partnered with the ASI. But, INTACH cannot 
take up projects with the ASI because the ASI projects are very large and very huge amount of funds is 
required. Unlike Aga Khan Trust which has huge funds, INTACH does not have such funds and neither can 
the ASI make such funds available. Therefore, INTACH has only partnered with the ASI in smaller 
dimensions and has not taken up restoration work of large ASI monuments.  
 
18.       The CEO,   AKTC informed that it is working at Qutub Shahi  Tombs at Golconda, which is a 100 -
acre site of the State Government of Telangana. It is now eleven years since the partnership was started. 
However, one of the biggest challenges faced was  the stay orders at Wakf Tribunal. AKTC pleaded in 81 
court cases. Now, almost 100 monuments are nearing conservation, and, by next year, the project would 
ﬁnish which includes environmental development of 100+ acres of land and ﬁve baolis. AKTC has tried to go 
with heritage and environment hand-in-hand and has planted 15,000 trees on this site. 
 
19.  On a Member‟s query regarding the total budget of INTACH, it was informed that INTACH‟s budget 
was about Rs. 13.5 to 14 Crore. INTACH has done listing of 8000 0 monuments and identiﬁed more than 
80000 sites. However, given the size and diversity of our country, there would be more than 80 lakhs such 
sites. INTACH informed that being an NGO, it does not have any income and most of the amount comes 
from working wi th State Governments and also from INTACH‟s interest income. The total turnover of 
INTACH in a year is about Rs.30 to 35 crore. AKTC informed that income from the monuments is collected 
by ASI and not by AKTC. Thus, the income that is collected, for exampl e, at the Humayun Tomb, goes back 
to the Centre. 
 
20. Thereafter, Members raised queries on the following issues: 
 The total yearly income from tourists for all the heritage sites and monuments for all the three 
organisations, namely, ASI, INTACH and Aga Khan Trust 
 The basic difference between protected and unprotected monuments 
 Sanitation issues and lack of drinking water, toilet facilities and souvenir shops near monuments. 
 Grant of funds given to INTACH and AKTC by the Government of India or the ASI 
 Replication of other international UNESCO site in this country. 

64 
 
 Identification of sites which need this 100m and 300m rule. 
 Whether model of AKTC is being replicated in any other parts of the country. 
 Need for survey regarding categorisation of monuments 
 Need for conducting a meeting with National Mission on monuments and Antiquities. 
 
21. The Organisations responded to some of th e queries raised by the Members and took note of the 
suggestions made by the Members and also assured to give the details, in writin g, on the issues which could 
not be answered at that point of time. 
 
(The witnesses then withdrew) 
22. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept. 
23. The meeting adjourned at 04.38 PM. 
 
New Delhi,                                                                                      Monica Baa  
21st August, 2023                                                      Additional Director 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

65 
 
 
 
 
Annexure 
 
 
LIST OF WITNESSES WHO APPEARED BEFORE THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED 
PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE 
 
03.00 P.M. 
 
Indian National trust for Art and Cultural Heritage (INTACH) 
 
1 Maj. Gen (Retd.) L. K. 
Gupta AVSM 
Chairman 
2 Dr. Chuden Misra, IAS 
(Retd.) 
Member Secretary 
3 Shri Nilabh Sinha Principal Director 
4 Ms. A. Vijaya Director (Architectural Heritage 
Division) 
5 Shri Rakesh Mittal Director (P&P 
 
Aga Khan Trust for Culture 
 
1. Shri Ratish Nanda, Chief Executive Officer (India) 
 
 
  

66 
 
I 
FIRST MEETING 
  
The Committee met at 3:00 P.M. on Tuesday, the 19th September, 2023 in Committee Room-D, 
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe Building, New Delhi. 
  
Members present: 
1. Shri V. Vijayasai Reddy           - Chairman  
 Rajya Sabha 
2. Shri A.A. Rahim 
3. Dr. C.M. Ramesh 
 Lok Sabha 
4. Shri Anto Antony 
5. Shri Tapir Gao  
6. Shri Ramesh Chandra Majhi 
7. Shri Sunil Baburao Mendhe 
8. Shri Prince Raj 
9. Shri Tirath Singh Rawat 
10. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
11. Shri Manoj Kumar Tiwari 
12. Shri Krupal Balaji Tumane 
13. Shri Dinesh Lal Yadav “Nirahua” 
  
SECRETARIAT 
Dr. Raghab Prasad Dash, Joint Secretary  
Shrimati Monica Baa, Additional Director 
Shrimati Vishwarupa Bhattacharya, Additional Director  
Shrimati Subha Chandrashekar, Deputy Secretary  
 
At the outset, the Chairman extended a warm welcome to the Members of the Committee. He 
informed them that the agenda for the meeting is to consider and adopt the following Reports:- 

67 
 
(i) ***1 
(ii) *** 
(iii)  *** 
(iv) *** 
(v) „Functioning of Archaeological Survey of India‟. 
 
2. The Committee took up for consideration the draft Reports, one by one. After a brief discussion, 
the Committee adopted the aforesaid five draft Reports and authorised the Chairman to carry out minor 
modifications of typographical and factual errors and formatting, if need be in all the Reports. 
 
3.       The Committee authorised Dr. C. M. Ramesh, M.P., and in his absence, Shri A.A. Rahim, M.P., to 
present the aforesaid Reports in Rajya Sabha on 21st September, 2023. The Committee also authorised Shri 
Tapir Gao, M.P. and in his absence, Shri Prince Raj, M.P. to lay the Reports on the Table of Lok Sabha on 
the same date. 
 
4. *** 
 
5. *** 
 
6. *** 
 
7. The Meeting adjourned at 4:00 
P.M.                                                                                                                               
New Delhi,                                                                                                 Monica Baa 
19th September, 2023                                                                                    Additional Director  
 
                                                           
1 Relates to other matter 