PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA 171
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE
ONE HUNDRED SEVENTY FIRST REPORT
ON
THE FUNCTIONING OF SAHITYA AKADEMI, LALIT KALA AKADEMI,
SANGEET NATAK AKADEMI AND NATIONAL SCHOOL OF DRAMA
TH 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 17 AUGUST, 2011)
TH 
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 17 AUGUST, 2011)
TH 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 17 AUGUST, 2011)
TH 
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 17 AUGUST, 2011)
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
AUGUST, 2011/SRA V ANA, 1933 (SAKA)AUGUST, 2011/SRA V ANA, 1933 (SAKA)

Website:http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail:rsc-tt@sansad.nic.in

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA  SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE
ONE HUNDRED SEVENTY FIRST REPORT
ON
THE FUNCTIONING OF SAHITYA AKADEMI, LALIT KALA AKADEMI,
SANGEET NATAK AKADEMI AND NATIONAL SCHOOL OF DRAMA
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 17 TH AUGUST, 2011)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 17 TH AUGUST, 2011)
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
AUGUST, 2011/SRA V ANA, 1933 (SAKA)

CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ......................................................................................... (i)-(ii)
2. I NTRODUCTION ........................................................................................................................ (iii)
3. R EPORT OF THE C OMMITTEE .................................................................................................. 1—50
4. M INUTES ................................................................................................................................. 51—56

(i)
COMPOSITION OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE
(2010-2011)
1. Shri Sitaram Yechury – Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Ramdas Agarwal
3. Shri Shadi Lal Batra
4. Shri Narendra Kashyap
5. Shri Pyarimohan Mohapatra
6. Shri Syed Azeez Pasha
7. Shri Thomas Sangma
8. Shri Satish Sharma
9. Prof. Saif-ud-Din Soz
10. Shri Vikram Verma
LOK SABHA
11. Yogi Aditya Nath
12. Shri Avtar Singh Bhadana
#13. Shri V . Kishore Chandra S. Deo
14. Shrimati Bhavana Gawali Patil
15. Shri Mahesh Joshi
16. Shri P. Karunakaran
17. Shri Jose K. Mani
18. Shrimati Ranee Narah
19. Shri Rajaram Pal
20. Shri Bal Kumar Patel
21. Shri Nama Nageswara Rao
22. Shri S.D. Shariq
23. Shri Madan Lal Sharma
24. Shri Dushyant Singh
@25. Shri Jitendra Singh
26. Shri Rakesh Singh
27. Shri Shatrughan Sinha
28. Shri K. Sugumar
29. Shri Kabir Suman
30. Shri Anurag Singh Thakur
*31. Shri K.C. Venugopal
# Ceased to be a Member of the Committee w.e.f. 12 th July, 2011.
@ Ceased to be a Member of the Committee w.e.f. 12 th July, 2011.
* Ceased to be a Member of the Committee w.e.f.  19 th January, 2011.

(ii)
SECRETARIAT
Shri N.K. Singh, Joint Secretary
Shri Jagdish Kumar, Director
Shri Swarabji B., Joint Director
Shrimati Nidhi Chaturvedi, Assistant Director
(ii)

(iii)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman, Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport,
Tourism and Culture, having been authorized by the Committee to present on its behalf, do hereby
present this One Hundred Seventy-first Report on the “Functioning of Sahitya Akademi, Lalit Kala
Akademi, Sangeet Natak Akademi and National School of Drama”.
2. The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport, Tourism and
Culture received inputs from media and other agencies regarding the state of affairs of three
national Akademis and National School of Drama. The Committee also took note of the
recommendations made by the P.N. Haksar Committee constituted by the Government way back
in 1988 to study the functioning of National Akademis and National School of Drama. The
Committee found that Haksar Committee had examined the activities of the three Akademis and
NSD in details and made very comprehensive recommendations. The Committee, therefore, decided
to review the action taken by the Government on the recommendations made by the Haksar
Committee.
3. Apart from a background note obtained from the Ministry of Culture, the Committee
heard the views of the Secretary, Ministry of Culture, representatives from Sahitya Akademi, Lalit
Kala Akademi, Sangeet Natak Akademi and National School of Drama in its meeting held on the
18
th January, 2011. A questionnaire was sent to the Ministry, replies of which were considered by
the Committee.
4. The Committee wishes to express its thanks to the Secretary and other officers of the
Ministry of Culture for providing necessary inputs and clarifications during deliberations on the
subject.
5. The Committee considered and adopted the Report at its meeting held on the 11
th August, 2011.
SITARAM YECHURY
NEW D ELHI; Chairman,
August 11, 2011 Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Shravana 20, 1933  (Saka) Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture.

(iv)

1
REPORT
The Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport, Tourism & Culture is aware of the
significance of art and culture to the lives of the people. It concerns with creative activities in the
field of literature, visual and performing arts and to various forms of expressions by the individual
or community which gives a purpose to the human existence. The culture plays a very important
role in maturing of the good society. Thus, the social processes cannot remain disconnected with
the cultural activities. Our conventional wisdom says that a society bereft of art, music and
literature will consist of people as good as animals with no horns and tails. The main challenge
before us today is to protect and promote our tangible and intangible cultural assets at a right
perspective.
2. Our founding fathers like Dr. S. Radhakrishnan, Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru, Maulana Azad and
Dr. Rajendra Prasad, therefore, decided to set up independent cultural bodies such as Lalit Kala
Akademi, Sangeet Natak Akademi, Sahitya Akademi and National School of Drama for protection,
preservation and promotion of literature, song and dance and visual and performing arts as
prescribed in their constitutions.
3. A brief on the activities and mandate of the three academies and the National School of
Drama is given in succeeding paragraphs.
Sangeet Natak Akademi
4. Sangeet Natak Akademi was created by a resolution of the (then) Ministry of Education,
Government of India, dated 31 May, 1952. The first President of India, Dr. Rajendra Prasad,
inaugurated it on 28 January, 1953. The Akademi’s charter of functions was expanded along the
original lines in 1961, when Natak Akademi was reconstituted by the Government as a society and
registered under the Societies Registration Act of 1860  (as amended in 1957).
5. Since its inception the Akademi has been functioning as the apex body in the field of arts
in the country, preserving and promoting the vast intangible heritage of India’s diverse culture
expressed in forms of music, dance and drama. In furtherance of its objectives the Akademi
coordinates and collaborates with government and arts academies of different States and Union
Territories of the Union of India, as also with major cultural institutions in the country. The
Akademi establishes and looks after institutions and projects of national importance in the field of
the performing arts. Two national institutions of dance – Jawaharlal Nehru Manipur Dance
Academy in Imphal and Kathak Kendra in New Delhi - were set up in 1954 and 1964 respectively.
National Projects of Support to Kutiyattam, the age-old Sanskrit theatre of Kerala, to Chhau dance
of eastern India, and Sattriya traditions of Assam have been launched subsequently. After ten years
of intensive work under the Kutiyattam project, the UNESCO declared Kutiyattam as a Masterpiece
of Oral and Intangible Heritage of Humanity in May 2001. The Akademi inaugurated its Center for
Kutiyattam-Kutiyattam Kendra in Thiruvananthapuram on 27 May, 2007.
6. As a new initiative the Akademi set up the Sattriya Kendra (Centre for Sattriya dance, music
and theatre traditions) in Guwahati, Assam on 15 July, 2008 with the objective to promote,
propogate and preserve these traditions. The Akademi has also set up its North East Centre in
Shillong on 20 August, 2008 for purpose of preservation of traditional and folk performing art and
traditions of entire North East.
7. To look after puppetry traditions and practices of India Akademi has also recently set up
a Putul Kendra with its office in Delhi. The Akademi Awards are the highest national recognition

2
conferred on practicing artists. The Akademi also confers Fellowships on eminent artists and
scholars of music, dance and drama.
8. The Akademi subsidizes the work of institutions engaged in teaching, performing, or
promoting music, dance or theatre; gives grants-in-aid for research, documentation, and publishing
in the performing arts; organizes and subsidizes seminars and conferences of subject specialists;
and documents and records the performing arts for its audio-visual archive.
9. The Akademi’s archive, comprising audio/video tapes, photographs, and film is one of the
largest in the country and is extensively drawn upon for research on the performing arts. The
Akademi maintains a specialised library consisting of books in English, Hindi, and some regional
languages. It also has a documentation unit, which has recorded maestros in the field of music,
dance and theatre. The Akademi also publishes literature on relevant subjects regularly. Besides its
well known quarterly Sangeet Natak which publishes high quality research articles on performing
arts, Akademi is shortly launching a Hindi quarterly also.
10. The management of Sangeet Natak Akademi vests in its General Council. The general
superintendence, direction and control of the affairs of the Akademi vests in the Executive Board,
which is assisted by the Finance Committee, Grants Committee, Publication Committee and
Advisory Committees for Music, Dance, Theatre, Documentation and Archives, Puppetry and Folk
& Tribal arts. The objectives of the Akademi are more specifically stated in its Memorandum of
Association.
Sahitya Akademi
11. Sahitya Akademi (National Academy of Letters) was formally inaugurated by the
Government of India on March 12, 1954 to work actively for the development of Indian letters
and to set high literary standards in all the Indian languages. Sahitya Akademi has Regional
Offices in Bengaluru, Kolkata, Mumbai and centres in Chennai and Agartala with Head Office in
New Delhi.
12. Sahitya Akademi is the central institution for literary dialogue, publication and promotion in
the country and the only institution that undertakes literary activities in 24 Indian languages
including English. Over 57 years of its dynamic existence it has ceaselessly endeavoured to
promote good taste and healthy reading habits, to keep alive the intimate dialogue among the various
linguistic and literary zones through seminars, symposia, discussions, readings and performances,
to increase the pace of mutual translations through workshops and individual assignments, and to
develop a serious literary culture through its publications.
13. Sahitya Akademi annually conducts around 400 programmes viz. International and National
Seminars on different literary genres and trends, Literary Forum on current issues relating literature
and language, translation workshops which culminate into publications, Kavi Sandhi, in which
eminent poet is invited to read from his/her latest works followed by an interaction, Katha Sandhi,
where again an eminent fiction writer reads followed by an interactive section, Mulaqat, a
programme in which young writers get an opportunity to read, Meet the Author, features a
distinguished author who not only reads but talks about his literary journey, People and Books,
Loka: The Many V oices, is a programme on folklore consisting of lecture as well as demonstration.
Akademi lays a lot of importance on women writings and has a special programme called Asmita
under which they are invited to read from their works and also interact with the audience.
14. A special emphasis is laid on the celebration of birth centenaries of legends of Indian
literature. Seminars and Symposia are organized during the occasion and papers presented during
these seminars are brought out in a book form.

3
15. Sahitya Akademi is an active collaborator in the Cultural Exchange with various countries
taken up by the Department of Culture. Akademi nominates Indian writers for  the Cultural
Exchange Programmes, arranges literary programmes for  foreign writers-delegates and promotes
translations from foreign language into Indian languages and vice-versa to promote understanding
between different cultures.
Lalit Kala Akademi
16. Lalit Kala Akademi, National Academy of Art, New Delhi was set up by the Government
of India as an autonomous body. The first Prime Minister of Independent India, Pandit Jawaharlal
Nehru conceived and set up these agencies to rejuvenate and formulate the diverse Indian cultural
practices and promote them to play a comprehensive role in the making of the nation. These
national organizations were established with a strong focus  on artistic excellence. Lalit Kala
Akademi, one among such national organizations, emerged as the principal establishment of culture
that focuses its activities in the field of Visual Arts.
17. The Akademi was inaugurated on August 5, 1954 by the Honourable Minister for  Education,
Maulana Abul Kalam Azad. The Akademi was given statutory authority in 1957 under the Societies
Registration Act, 1860. Since its establishment it has been serving the entire country by promoting
creative endeavours of Indian artists and bringing their arts to bear upon a large number of people
thereby playing an important role in defining and redefining, the sensibility of an entire culture
falling under the visual arts spectrum.
18. Lalit Kala Akademi is an institution that has rendered service to the arts and through the
leadership of its members and staff, Lalit Kala Akademi manifests a commitment to the service of
arts by establishing, preserving and documenting art of the highest order that reflects the vitality,
complexity and unfolding patterns of modem and contemporary art in India. All through the year
it presents exhibitions and educational programs of unparalleled significance. It sustains a library,
art collection, archives, conservation laboratory and publishes books and journals of intellectual
merit.
19. The Lalit Kala’s mission is the encouragement and deeper understanding of modem and
contemporary art to the diverse local, national and international audiences. The National Exhibition
of Art and the Triennale-India are endeavours that have been held for  its quest for  discovering new
artistic trends.
National School of Drama
20. The National School of Drama is one of the foremost theatre training institutions in the
world and the only one of its kind in India. In 1975, it was registered as an autonomous
organization under the Societies Registration Act XXI of 1860, fully financed by the Ministry of
Culture. It was set up as a centre of excellence to provide training in Dramatic Arts. The 3-years
post graduate course provides comprehensive training in drama & theatre. The School has two
performing wings, Repertory Company and Theatre-in-Education Company (renamed Sanskar Rang
Toli).
21. The objectives of NSD include (i) development of suitable patterns of teaching in all
branches of drama, (ii) to raise the technical standards of Indian plays, (iii) to provide
undergraduate and post-graduate teaching in the art & craft of drama and its allied subjects,
(iv) to conduct and promote research in classical, traditional and modem drama in India and
abroad, (v) to establish a Repertory Company and regional schools, (vi) to produce, direct and
perform plays, (vii) to undertake translation and publication plays in Hindi and other regional
languages, etc.

4
22. National School of Drama has taken many measures to reach out to theatre workers in
various States through the Extension / Outreach Programme and also by organizing theatre Festivals
like Bharat Rang Mahotsav, Jashnebachpan and Bal Sangam, which is a festival for children
practicing traditional performing arts.
23. The Committee had received inputs from various quarters, governmental and non-
governmental including Media, about the working of our premier cultural bodies - Sangeet Natak
Akademi, Sahitya Akademi, Lalit Kala Akademi and National School of Drama. The issues ranged
from their constitution, composition, mandate and mainly their general functioning. It was felt that
most of these institutions were not able to live upto the original mandates set out by their founding
fathers. Controversies of different kind involving these institutions that keep cropping up from time
to time, had caught this Committee’s attention. Questions were also raised about the indifference
and helplessness shown by the Ministry of Culture to do anything in the face of autonomy enjoyed
by these institutions.
24. In view of this, the Committee wanted to find out if these institutions set up during the
initial years, were able to make the desired contribution towards enriching, promoting and
preserving our arts and culture. Therefore, the Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport,
Tourism & Culture decided to look into these issues in respect of the three Akademis and NSD
and to make a Report to Parliament containing the Committee’s suggestions and recommendations.
25. To begin with, the Committee prepared a questionnaire and sent to the Ministry of Culture
for furnishing replies, based on which it could begin its deliberations. During the deliberations, the
Committee came to know that similar sentiments about the functioning and activities of these
institutions had existed even during the sixties and thereafter, which is why different Committees
had to be set up for going into their working. For example, the affairs of National Akademis had
been reviewed earlier on two occasions - first by a Committee headed by Dr. H.J. Bhabha in 1964
and second one by Justice G.D. Khosla in 1970. But by far the most comprehensive review of the
affairs of these Akademis was done by a ‘High-Powered Committee’, headed by Shri P.N. Haksar
constituted in the year 1988.
26. The Committee asked for a copy of the High-Powered Committee Report (Haksar
Committee) from the Government and it was surprised to know that files relating to action taken
to most of its recommendations had gone missing and the Ministry of Culture was trying to locate
them. However, a copy of the Haksar Committee Report was furnished to this Committee. The
recommendations/observations of this Committee, in fact, were an eye-opener to this Committee
that were found to be as relevant today as they would have been more than two decades ago when
it was submitted to the Govt. of India in the year 1990. This Committee consisted of very eminent
people including those from the field of art and culture, had produced a widely discussed and well-
researched Report containing valuable observations and recommendations concerning different
aspects of working of these institutions. The Haksar Committee consisted of eminent people from
the fields of art, culture and other areas, with the following composition:–
1. Shri P.N. Haksar, Chairman, Former Deputy Chairman, Planning Commission,
2. Shri E. Alkazi, Former Director of National School of Drama,
3. Prof. Gulam Sheikh, Department of Fine Arts, M.S. University, Baroda,
4. Dr. Premlata Sharma, Vice-Chancellor, Indira Kala Sangeet Vishwavidyalaya,
Khairagarh, Madhya Pradesh,
5. Prof. Indira Parthasarthy, Tamil, Delhi University, Delhi,
6. Shri K.V . Ramanathan, Former Member-Secretary, Planning Commission,

5
7. Shri H.Y . Sharada Prasad, Media Adviser to the Prime Minister,
8. Shri M. V . Ramakrishnan, Member Secretary.
27. The term of reference of the Haksar Committee, was:–
(i) to review the working of the three Akademis, alongwith their affiliates and subsidiaries
and the NSD with reference to the objectives for which they were set up, and keeping
in mind the recommendations of Committees set up in the past in this behalf;
(ii) to recommend structural and/or other changes that may be necessary in the
Memorandum and Articles of Associations and Rules and Regulations of these bodies,
consistent with their autonomy and public accountability; and
(iii) to make recommendations on the role and functioning of the three Akademis and the
NSD as apex national institutions in their respective spheres, and suggest steps, inter-
alia, for their networking with similar State/Central bodies and other cultural
institutions of eminence in the country.
28. The Haksar Committee had relied on statistical data and questionnaire method to arrive at
its conclusion. On one hand, it had scrutinized the records of the institutions including the agenda
and proceedings of their policy-making bodies, executive and academic bodies and internal
committees; on the other hand, it contacted a across section of people active in the fields of
performing and visual arts, language and literature, education and cultural administration over the
country.
29. It was, therefore, felt that it would be unnecessary duplication of efforts and resources for
the Parliamentary Standing Committee to start another exercise of reviewing the working of these
institutions as it had initially decided. This Committee thereafter, took a decision to review the
implementation of the recommendations of the Haksar Committee and report its observations/
recommendations to Parliament which might sensitize the Government, Akademis, NSD and the
people at large, about the significance as well as the neglect of these bodies in our nation’s life.
30. The Committee while reviewing the (non) implementation of recommendation of the Haksar
Committee, called Sangeet Natak Akademi, Sahitya Akademi, Lalit Kala Akademi and National School
of Drama for the Action Taken by the Government. The Committee considered the
recommendations of the Haksar Committee and Action Taken by the Government thereon. The
observations and recommendations of the Committee in respect of these institutions are given
below:
SANGEET NATAK AKADEMI, NEW DELHI
Recommendations of the
HPRC
1
The artists who receive the
Akademi’s annual awards
may be offered an
opportunity, subject to their
willingness, to perform in a
few places of their choice in
the country during the year
following the Award (9.109)
Action Taken/Present
Status
2
Accepted
Awardees and Fellows are
included in events and
programmes specific to their
specialization. They are also
supported as and when they
request the Sangeet Natak
Observations/recommendations
of the DRPSC
3
The action taken reply by the
Ministry does not truly reflect
the spirit/idea behind the
recommendation of the HPRC,
which was aimed at organizing
performances by the award-
winning artists at more and
more places of their choice in

6
12 3
Although the constitution of
the Akademi provides for the
election of Associate
Fellows, in practice none
has been elected. The
provision may be deleted
(9.110)
The Akademi should step up
its support for research
schemes by the grant of
research fellowships, and by
undertaking research ventures
in collaboration with other
institutions and individuals
(9.111)
The Akademi’s collection of
audio-visual material could be
more extensive, considering
the immense potential (9.112)
Akademi for assistance for
their performances.
Accepted
This clause has been deleted
from the Rules &
Regulations of the Akademi
with the approval of the
General Council and the
Government of India.
Accepted
Since 1992-93 the Akademi
through its scheme titled
“Project Grants to Individual
Workers” in the field of
performing arts has stepped
up its support for research
undertaken by individuals.
Research ventures by
institutions are supported
from the Akademi’s scheme
of Financial Assistance to
Cultural Institutions. During
Eleventh Plan a Scheme of
grants for academic research
has already been introduced.
Accepted
During the last several years
extensive documentation and
recordings of identified forms,
styles, gurus and performers
were undertaken. The
priorities were laid out by the
Advisory Committees for
Music, Dance, Theatre and
Documentation and approved
by the Executive Board.
the country. The Committee
does not know the frequency as
well as the number of other
places where such performances
have been held. Without these
details, it would not be possible
to know if this recommendation
of HPRC has really been
implemented. It would like to
have details in this regard.
Reply Noted
The Committee would like to
have details indicating the
performance of the Scheme of
grant of akademic research
during the XI Plan. It should
include details about research
support provided to individuals
as well as institutions.
The idea behind the
recommendation of HPRC was to
ensure that “no major musician
or school of music, no dancer of
repute or dance system or school
is left unrepresented in its
collection”. The action taken
replies, however, is non-specific
and evasive. It does not show
efforts made by the Akademi for
documenting of identified forms,

7
The vital need for a matching
collection of written material
to support the recordings,
through appropriate research,
should not be overlooked
(9.113)
The serious deficiencies which
exist in classifying, indexing
and cataloguing the archival
material must be made good
(9.114)
The facilities for retrieval and
reference available on the
Akademi’s premises need great
improvement. The Akademi
must also improve the
accessibility of its archives
country-wide (9.115)
12 3
Accepted
Transcripts of recorded
discussions, seminars and
workshops were made. Research
scholars and others are also
persuaded to use the archival
material for publication. Data of
recordings is entered in as much
detail as possible.
Accepted
The deficiencies in classification,
indexing, cataloguing the
voluminous archival material
available in the Akademi have
been removed to considerable
extent. The entire data has been
computerized.
Accepted
An information system for the
Akademi’s Archives has been
developed with the assistance of
the Regional Computer Centre,
Chandigarh. Data entries for the
material stored are regularly being
made. The entire information about
the archival holding has been
uploaded on Akademi’s website.
Plans are afoot to keep a copy of
archival collection pertaining to the
particular field at Akademi’s
constituent units and centres.
Besides, one parallel archive in
Bangalore has also been approved
by Executive Board, but could not
be started due to shortage of funds.
styles, gurus and performers.
The Committee is of the view
that the collection of materials
has to be done more seriously
as it could serve the basis of
study and research in the
fields of music and dance.
The Committee finds the reply
of Ministry with regard to
entering of data of sound/
visual recording of the
performing arts, vague. There
should be proper research to
ensure that there is coherence
between the written material
and audio-visual recording of
the performing arts.
Use of computers for these
purposes, the Committee
hopes, would have taken care
of this to a large extent.
The Committee notes that the
entire information about the
archival holdings available
with the Akademi has been
uploaded on the Akademi’s
website. The Committee
recommends that funds may
be made available for starting
one parallel archive in
Bangalore without any delay.

8
12 3
More space and funds must
be found for the Akademi’s
Library and collection of
musical instruments (9.116)
A national institution
concerned with the performing
arts must necessarily present
the very best of performances,
the guiding considerations
being quality and the
promotion of taste (9.117)
Accepted
The Ministry of Culture was
requested to find adequate
space for the expansion of
Museum activities of the
Akademi and to take up the
matter with the Ministry of
Urban Development for
providing a suitable building
for it. A proposal for setting
up of the National Museum
of Performing Arts had been
sent to the Department of
Culture for inclusion in the
IX Plan. The Ministry has
sponsored SNA request to
DDA for allotment of suitable
land in Delhi. Meanwhile, the
NMPA is expected to be set
up soon in a new building in
Chanakyapuri, New Delhi.
Accepted
Performances built around
special themes like Kathakali,
Kutiyattam, Kuchipudi and
Odissi have been organized
during 1990 and to enable
audiences understand these
forms in depth. The
performances were carefully
worked out in consultation
with scholars and experts
from the region and were
supported by lecture
demonstrations, special
publications and brochures as
well as video films. Special
interviews and demonstrations
of these forms were also
recorded.
The decision to set up a National
Museum for Performing Arts
deserves appreciation. However, the
progress in respect of a permanent
space, manpower, funds and other
infrastructure for this Museum has
been astonishingly slow. Request
of the Akademi for all these are
yet to fructify. In the information
supplied to the Committee, it is
not clear whether it is ultimately
going to be set up in Chankayapuri
or Dwarka in Delhi or somewhere
else. A clear position in this regard
needs to be provided to the
Committee. The entire process
needs to be taken up on a fast
track basis by the Ministry.
Reply from the Ministry does not
say anything about the need to
increase space in the library as
recommended by HPRC.
Although the Ministry agrees in
principle with the
recommendations of the HPRC
regarding organizing
performances built around quality
and promotion of taste. Reply
given by the Ministry, however,
does not reflect the activities
organized in keeping with the
core idea behind the
recommendation of the HPRC for
organizing only those
performances which have referral
value, taste and are not of
routine kind. Moreover, most of
the performances indicated in the
reply were organized in 1990 and
2000 only. Details of such
performances held thereafter
have not been provided. The
Committee would also like to
have the names of areas/places
where these performances were
held in the country. The

9
12 3
Committee feels that these
performances should not be
held mainly in the big cities
and urban areas but also in
the cities/town and rural areas.
The concern of the HPRC
about being very selective in
organizing these performances
so as to leave enough time
and resources for academic
work like research, seminar,
etc. has not been reflected in
the replies given by the
Ministry.
The Committee would like to
have a complete response
from the Ministry on this
point.
As regards having a planned
building programme for
Kathak Kendra, the
Committee notes with concern
that even after twenty years,
a suitable and permanent
accommodation for this
Kendra could not be arranged
and the proposal for an
alternative site for the Kathak
Kendra is yet to be made.
Similar is the position about
JNMDA also.
In view of the useful purpose
being served by these
Institutions in imparting
training in respective dance
styles, it is imperative that
they should have independent
Festivals focusing on traditional
theatre forms, puppetry and
regional traditions of music of
the country were also organized
and extensively recorded.
The Akademi also organized
Music and Dance festivals on
national level during golden jubilee
of Indian Independence and 50
years of the Republtc featuring
outstanding artists.
Akademi regularly organizes
festival of your artists of music,
dance and theatre to promote the
best talents of the new generation.
Accepted
a) Kathak Kendra:
A new building of Kathak Kendra
is under construction in
Chanakyapuri.
Meanwhile, it has been decided
to house Akademi’s National
Museum of Performing Arts in
this building. As an alternative
arrangement it is being planned
to locate Kathak Kendra in North
Delhi in rented buildings available
in the campus of Harijan Sevak
Sangh. An alternative site for
Kendra’s own building will be
requested.
b) JNMDA
The Govt. of Manipur has
There must be a planned
building programme in the
Kathak Kendra and the
Jawaharlal Nehru Manipur
Dance Academy (9.118)

10
12 3
The remuneration offered to
faculty members in these
institutions should be
improved,  and disparities
remedied. The status and
salaries of the Directors of
the Kathak Kendra and the
Manipur Dance Academy may
be upgraded. The
conspicuously low
emoluments of the visiting
gurus in the Manipur Academy
need review. (9.119)
provided an adjacent school
campus next to JNMDA and
an integrated campus is being
developed in a planned
manner.
Accepted
The specific recommendations
made by the Haksar
Committee relating to
improvement in status of the
Directors of the Kathak
Kendra, New Delhi, and
Jawaharlal Nehru Manipur
Dance Academy, Imphal are
linked with the increase in
status and emoluments of the
Secretary of the Sangeet
Natak Akademi as
recommended by the
Committee in para 3.63 of its
report. The Akademi has in
the past requested the Ministry
of Culture to consider the
matter of revision of the pay
of the Secretary, Sangeet
Natak Akademi. Response
from the Department of
Culture on this issue is still
awaited. The recommendations
of the Review Committee for
Jawaharlal Nehru Manipur
Dance Academy set up by the
Akademi have been
implemented which includes
structural changes in the
staffing pattern of the teaching
unit and upward revision of
salaries of faculty members
and visiting gurus.
A similar review for the
Kathak Kendra was also
undertaken by the Akademi
and the recommendations
implemented. With the
introduction of the
and adequate accommodation. It
appears that it has not received
serious attention from the
Government. The Committee
would like to have the latest
status in this regard.
The Committee notes the efforts
made in implementing the
recommendations of the HPRC
regarding rationalizing
remuneration, salary, etc. of the
faculty members and the
Directors. It, however, fails to
understand that the proposal sent
by the Akademi to the Ministry
about revising the pay of the
Secretary, Sangeet Natak
Akademi has not evoked any
response. The Committee does
not know for how long it is
pending and in what manner pay
of Secretary, SNA is related to
the pay of the Directors of the
Kathak Kendra and Manipur
Dance Academy. The Committee
is constrained to say that in this
case also even after twenty years,
the issue could not be sorted out.
A detailed status report alongwith
the reasons for delay may be
supplied to the Committee.
Reply submitted by the Akademi
to the Ministry in this regard,
has been forwarded to the
Committee without adding its
response about the alleged delay
being made on its part on this
issue.

11
12 3
Sixth Pay Commission
recommendations, remunerations
have improved substantially.
Accepted
While the budget allocation of
the two institutions has been
increased to some extent, it is
subject to adequate enhancement
in the Akademi's own allocation
from the Govt. of India. With
the availability of funds under
North East grant in recent years
situation has improved with
regard to JNMDA, Imphal.
Accepted
Akademi does not favour UGC
recognition as it would impinge
on the character and independent
programmes and structures of the
institutions. Though, at one time
efforts were made at the initiative
of the then Governor of Manipur
to obtain Deemed university
status for Jawaharlal Nehru
Manipur Dance Academy,
Akademi is now keen to secure
equivalence for the teaching
courses of the two institutions
with existing universities. The
Indira Kala Sangeet
Vishwavidyalaya, Khairagarh has
already granted equivalence to
Kathak Kendra’s diploma with its
own diploma programme of
Visharad. The Manipur University
has also expressed its willingness
in this regard. Similar recognition
from IGNOU is also under
consideration.
Not accepted
The Sangeet Natak Akademi has
not favoured the setting up of
the institute of Choreography by
This budget allocation for the
two institutions need to be
increased (9.120)
The question of according
the University Grants
Commission’s recognition to
the diplomas and certificates
given by the two institutions
must be resolved soon (9.121)
The Akademi should start
an institute of Choreography
(9.122)
The Committee notes with
concern that due to want of
sufficient funds, some
activities/programmes had to
be rolled back. The
Committee, therefore, feels
that in view of the useful
work being done by these
Kendras, there is an urgent
need to augment their
allocations considerably.
The Committee notes the
reply. The issues regarding
recognition of its diplomas and
certificates with various
universities as shown in the
reply, must be settled as soon
as possible.
The Committee is also in
favour of encouraging
voluntary effort in the field
of culture but at the same
time, it should be seen that

12
12 3
The Akademi should undertake
a systematic drive to record
musical, dance and theatrical
performances of great living
artistes. It must search out
rare items of classical,
traditional and folk music,
dance and drama, as well as
rare and old manuscripts
(9.123)
There is a need to produce a
large body of literature on the
performing arts and
commercially available
recordings for listening and
viewing. Commercial houses
could be persuaded to issue
audio and video cassettes
bearing the Akademi’s stamp
(9.124)
the Govt. and has stated that
financial assistance to the
continuing programmes done
by individuals and groups may
be encouraged. This is also in
line with the recommendation
of the Haksar Committee
elsewhere that voluntary effort
in the field of culture should
be encouraged.
Accepted
Akademi is regularly and
systematically recording
performances of leading
artistes as well as varied
traditions of music, dance,
theatre and puppetry.
Recording of plays by leading
directors has also been made.
Accepted
The publication programme is
gradually expanding and a
number of publications have
been brought out. Akademi
has entered into Co-publication
agreements with leading
publishers to ensure wider
reach and distribution of its
publications. In the recent
years, participation in Delhi
Book Fair and other Book
Fairs has begun. A Hindi
quarterly journal of Akademi
is being launched this month.
A publication on the Fellows
and Awardees will be shortly
released. A much larger
publication programme is
under consideration in
different languages, subject to
availability of adequate
resources.
the Choreography does not
remain a neglected area in the
performing arts. Specific reasons
for SNA not favouring the setting
up of Institute of Choreography
by the Akademi should be given.
If the Akademi has been doing
all these recordings as claimed
in the reply, the Committee fails
to understand why had the HPRC
given this recommendation? Or
maybe Akademi was not doing it
at the required scale and manner.
Since the reply does not say
anything about rare and old
items, the Committee would like
to have a factual/specific reply
in this regard.
The Committee notes that the
production of large body of
literature on performing arts as
well as commercially available
recordings for listening and
viewing are not currently being
done at the required scale and
there is no publicity about their
availability in the market. The
much larger publication, as
claimed by the Ministry, would
require substantial funds. The
HPRC was perhaps aware of the
problems regarding mobilization
of the funds for this purpose,
therefore, it has suggested to
approach the commercial houses.
The Committee desires that the
pros and cons of private
association and having in-house
production cell should be
considered and an appropriate
decision be taken in this regard.
And efforts be made to ensure

13
12 3
As regards releasing audio and
video records from the archive,
Akademi has resolved the
copyrights issue with the advice
of the Ministry of Law and
started releasing CDs and DVDs.
An agreement was also entered
into with SA RE GA MA for
some time. But now Akademi is
marketing them under its own
lable “Akademi Music”. Recently
Akademi has also obtained Trade
Mark registration of its name and
logo for this purpose. Several
audio recordings of 1950s and
1960s vintage have been issued
for the public. But any large scale
programme in this direction will
require setting up in-house
production cell and substantial
funds.
Accepted
Through its schemes of Financial
Assistance to Cultural Institutions,
Awards and honours, festivals
etc., the Akademi has been
encouraging genuinely creative
innovations in music and dance.
Festival of innovative
choreography is regularly held.
Recently on the occasion of
Commonwealth Games 2010, a
series of innovative performances
by leading actors and dancers
based on Commonwealth
literature was conceived and
presented by Akademi
Accepted
Renesher courses for teachers are
being run in Akademi institutions
nom time to time.
that these are widely available
to the ordinary people at the
affordable rates. Necessary
funds need to be made
available for this purpose.
The Committee notes the
claim by the Akademi to have
been encouraging genuinely
creative innovations in music
and dance. It, however, does
not provide specific details
regarding schemes, etc. made
for this purpose.
As regards the innovative
performances during the
Commonwealth Games, much
has been said about this in
Media and cultural circle. The
Committee would like to know
the details about the
innovative programmes and
amount spent on them during
Commonwealth Games 2010.
Is it being done occasionally
or regularly? Please give
details.
The Akademi must recognize
and support genuinely creative
innovations in music and
dance (9.125)
Teachers who are part of the
institutionalized system of
education in music and dance,
who are themselves products
of the same system need to be
brought up to the mark through
refresher courses. (9.126)

14
12 3
In order to foster the guru-
sishya parampara the
Akademi’s schemes of
fellowships to masters and
disciples must be augmented.
The Akademi, in collaboration
with agencies like the NCERT
and the UGC, should be
involved in the preparation of
teaching material in music and
dance, and in evolving a
pattern of training suited is
conditions of the country on
the model of gurukulas and
conservatories. (9.127)
The performance of western
classical and church music
should not be overlooked by
the Akademi. The few
dedicated organizations in the
Accepted.
The Akademi’s scheme of
training in rare Art forms was
recast and broad based as
training and preservation of
Traditional performing arts in
1994, with the objective of
supporting specialised training
programmes under eminent
masters. Several training
programmes have been added
to the ongoing programmes
such as in Yakshagana
Gombetta, Nadaswaram,
Sufiana Kalam,
Panchmukhavadyam,
Rajasthan folk stringed
instruments, Kuchipudi
Yakshagana music and female
roles etc. Training
programmes in Mayurbhanj,
Seraikella Chhau and
Kutiyattam are also part of the
SNA projects for support to
Chhau and Kutiyattam.
Currently training in guru-
shishya parampara is going on
in Dhrupad, Pakhawaj,
Sarangi, Shehnai, Thumri,
making of musical instruments
and masks, Nattuvangam,
Jawalis, Ragam- Tanam-Pallavi
etc. Under Akademi’s Sattriya
Kendra a number of training
programmes in Sattriya
traditions of dance, music and
theatre have been started in
guru-shishya parampara.
Training in some traditional
theatre forms and puppetry
have also been supported.
Accepted.
Under its scheme of Financial
Assistance to Cultural
institutions the Akademi has
Reply Noted.
The Committee notes from the
reply that there is no specific
scheme for this purpose and the
Akademi itself feels that more
work in this area has to be done.

15
12 3
supported institutions concerned
with Western music. The
Akademi also supports
presentation of choral music
including Church music. More
work however in this areas has
to be done.
Not accepted.
The Festivals of India had a
tremendous impact on the
countries where they were held
which was not temporary, but
served as a basis of an increased
awareness and interest in India.
It has, however, never been the
policy of the Government to treat
our traditional artistes as museum
pieces. The skills of Indian
artistes abroad have been
universally admired and respected.
It is therefore not possible to
agree with the observations of
the Haksar Committee on this
point. However, at the same time,
it is necessary that the nature of
the festivals be re-examined but
their value in bringing the various
aspects of Indian culture into the
awareness of different countries
cannot be minimized.
Accepted.
The Akademi tries its best to
support and project artistic
activity of folk and tribal people
in its authentic context. As such
presentation and recording of
music and dance of tribals of
some States were done in the
field and in the context of their
life styles.
country which concern
themselves with serious
western music deserve its
support and encouragement.
(9.128)
The cause of culture is not
served by the cultural
extravaganza and utsavs
sponsored by the Government
agencies. The tempo of
organization of festivals
whether held abroad or within
the country needs to be
slowed done. Traditional
artistes whether folk or tribal
should not be treated as
museum pieces to be exhibited
in India or abroad. (9.129)
Artistic activity of our folk
and tribal people should be
viewed in its authentic context.
External elements ought not
to be brought into any given
cultural milieu in the name of
promotion or progress. (9.130)
The Committee emphasizes
the need to step up its support
to serious organizations
dedicated to western music
with a view to promoting
universalist outlook that
constitutes the very core of
our civilization.
The Committee nowhere finds
that the HPRC had even
remotely intended to say that
the festivals held abroad or
within the country need to be
stopped or they do not have
any cultural significance. It
had suggested to slow down
the tempo of organizing such
festivals, mainly because of
the problems, like emergence
of new class of cultural
contractors, cultural
patronage, cultural
bureaucracy, middle men, etc.
in organizing these festivals.
The Committee is also of the
opinion that our emphasis
should be on the quality of
such festivals rather than
quantity. The Committee feels
that policy of holding these
festivals in India and abroad
should be re-examined in the
light of the recommendations
made by the HPRC and
implemented at the earliest.
Reply sounds casual. India has
a highly varied and rich folk
and tribal art that needs to
be preserved/protected in their
natural context. It appears
that we do not have a specific
plan for doing this. The
Committee would like to have
detailed response, particularly
in the context of North-
Eastern region of the country.

16
12 3
The Akademi’s  General
Council and other bodies may
be restructured on the lines
recommended in section 8
Chapter 6. (9.131)
Accepted.
The amendments suggested by
the Haksar Committee were
brought to the notice of the
General Council which
accepted most of the
recommendations of the High
Powered Committee. Based on
the acceptance of the
recommendations of the
General Council and the
Government of India the Rules
and Regulations of the Sangeet
Natak Akademi 4(iv), 4(v) and
14(iv) have been amended.
Reply Noted.

17
SAHITYA AKADEMI, NEW DELHI
Recommendations of the
HPRC
1
Literary Awards
The Sahitya Akademi needs to
take note of the general
dissatisfaction regarding the
present system of deciding its
annual awards. (9.46)
The right forum for the final
decision for the awards should
be a jury of three eminent
persons who sit together and
come to a joint decision. The
jury's decision should not be
subject to review or
confirmation by the Executive
Board. (9.47)
Members of the Executive
Board should not be included
in the jury. At least one
member of the jury should be
a Fellow of the Akademi or
an author who had won a
Sahitya Akademi award in the
past. (9.48)
The Language Advisory
Boards may be closely
associated, as consultant
bodies, with the process of
selection of literary works for
awards. (9.49)
In addition to the present
award for a book in each
language published in the
preceding three years, a new
award may be instituted, to
be given (at intervals to be
Action Taken/Present
Status
2
Sahitya Akademi does not
agree to this, as there has
been no objection over our
present system of selection.
Recommendation accepted.
Generally the Executive Board
is guided by the
recommendations of the jury.
It is only in special
circumstances that it
intervenes. As it is the
Akademi does include the
Fellows and Award-winners in
the Final Panel.
Recommendation already
implemented, and is been done
successfully for many years.
Recommendation accepted.
The existing procedure
continues to maintain
confidentiality. The members
of the Advisory Board make
recommendations in their
individual capacities.
Recommendation is not
accepted as the Akademi is
already giving Awards in each
of the 24 recognized
languages and the institution
of more awards could create
Observations/recommendations
of the DRPSC
3
The Committee endorses the
recommendation of the HPRC
and is of the view that selection
process is not without any
controversy. It is true about
Sahitya Akademi (SA) award
also. What is needed is to follow
a very transparent and
comprehensive selection process
with least scope for favouritism,
etc. The existing selection process
may be re-examined accordingly
and intimated to the Committee.
Reply to this is in contradiction
to the reply to recommendation
contained in paragraph no. 9.46
above. The Committee fails to
understand how would the new
awards create complications,

18
12 3
decided) to a distinguished
writer in each recognized
language for his or her total
contribution to its literature.
(9.50)
The juries must apply the
most exacting standards. If no
book or author in any given
language comes up to the
mark, no prize need be
awarded. The existing
guideline to this effect should
be strictly enforced. (9.51)
Before any changes are
implemented the Akademi may
organize a national symposium
on the subject in which our
recommendations may be
discussed, so that the
community of authors
themselves, through a free and
frank exchange of views, can
evolve a system of awards
which is likely to gain general
acceptance all over the
country. (9.52)
Translation
The Akademi should undertake
a comprehensive survey of
the existing translations of
literary works, identify
important gaps, and set out
to fill them in a well-
conceived order of priority.
(9.53)
Selected works of authors
receiving an Akademi award
a for his or her total
contribution to literature (in
the new scheme envisaged)
may be taken up for
translation, alongwith award-
winning books in the normal
category. (9.54)
complications, controversies
and unavoidable criticism.
Recommendation implemented.
This is a procedural
recommendation. Sahitya
Akademi appointed a
committee to go into the entire
question of Awards before
accepting the recommendation.
Recommendation accepted and
is being implemented.
Since the recommendation
about instituting a new award
(9.50) has not been accepted.
This recommendation being
consequential to that, is also
not accepted.
controversies and criticisms?
Reply Noted.
Has the Committee appointed by
Sahitya Akademi to go into
questions raised by the HPRC
given its report, if so, have its
recommendations been processed/
implemented?
It is not clear if any study or
survey of the existing translation
of literary works to identify
important gaps, etc. as
recommended by the HPRC was
ever undertaken. If it was, the
Committee would like to have
the detailed findings of it.

19
12 3
The Akademi has recently
instituted an annual award for
the best translation in each
recognized language. The
process of selection bristles
with serious complications
which are inherent and may
not be remediable. It may be
a better idea to honour
distinguished translators of
literature on the basis of their
total contribution which has
won critical and public
acclaim. Meanwhile, the
principle of consulting source
language experts, which was
given up after a single year's
experience, may be restored.
(9.55)
The translation of books from
and into foreign languages
seems at present to have a
low priority. The Akademi
might review its approach in
this regard. (9.56)
The Akademi’s activities should
promote appreciation of the
literary wealth of all the
languages of India and thus
counter the regrettable trends
of linguistic chauvinism. (9.57)
Publications
The Akademi must improve
the quality of its journals,
especially Indian Literature. It
might also take note of the
criticism that certain languages
are not receiving the attention
they deserve. (9.58)
Recommendation about
restoring the principle of
consulting source language
experts is accepted. However,
the institution of a new award
is not favoured.
Recommendation accepted and
is implemented successfully.
Recommendation accepted and
already implemented.
Recommendation accepted and
already implemented.
While the recommendation of
HPRC about principle of
consulting source language
experts has been accepted, no
response has been offered about
the serious complications pointed
out by the HPRC in the process
of selection for the annual
awards for best translation in
each recognized language. The
Committee would like to have
the Akademi’s response on this
point.
The Committee would like to
have a list of books translated
from and into foreign languages
after the implementation of this
recommendation.
Reply is very causal, does not
contain the required details based
on which the Committee could
believe that such an important
recommendation has really been
implemented. The Committee
would like to have details about
this. It disapproves furnishing
such cryptic replies to a
Parliamentary Committee not
indicating anything.
-do-

20
12 3
The Akademi may sponsor a
set of one hundred great
Indian classics, ancient and
modern; these could first be
published in Hindi and
English, and then in the other
languages. (9.59)
The Akademi should be in
regular consultation with the
National Book Trust, the
Publication Division of the
Ministry of Information and
Broadcasting, and the Akademis
in the States and Union
Territories, in regard to its
publication programmes. (9.60)
The sale and distribution of
the books and other
publications are far from
adequate. The Akademi should
have country-wide retail outlet
and effective arrangements
with professional publishers
and distributors. (9.61)
Library
Offering advice in the matter
of acquiring books for the
Akademi’s library should be
an important function of the
Language Advisory Boards.
(9.62)
There should be specific
allocation of funds for
acquiring books in each
language. Audio-visual material
available in the library should
be augmented. (9.63)
The equipment and facilities in
the library must be modernized.
A computerized information
Recommendation accepted and
implemented.
Recommendation accepted and
is implemented.
Recommendation accepted and
is implemented.
Recommendation accepted and
is implemented.
Recommendation accepted and
is implemented.
Recommendation accepted and
is already implemented.
Reply is very causal, does not
contain the required details based
on which the Committee could
believe that such an important
recommendation has really been
implemented. The Committee
would like to have details about
this. It disapproves furnishing such
cryptic replies to a Parliamentary
Committee not indicating anything.
-do-
-do-
-do-
-do-
-do-

21
12 3
storage and retrieval system is
necessary. (9.64)
Timely steps should be taken
to provide enough space for
the library’s future needs.
(9.65)
Tulsi Sadan, an extension of
the Central Secretariat Library
which is located close to the
Akademi, may be transferred
to the Akademi, where its
collections would be more
useful. (9.66)
Language Advisory Boards
The concept of Language
Advisory Boards has added a
welcome dimention to the
organizational structure of the
Sahitya Akademi, but the
status, formation and functions
of the Boards are not defined
in the Akademi’s constitution.
This might be done now. (9.67)
The Boards must meet more
often that they do at present,
and consider the Akademi’s
programmes in greater depth.
They may be associated with
the selection of the members
representing the respective
language in the General
Council. (9.68)
The Boards may be
reconstituted in the manner
recommended in Chapter 4.
(9.69)
Recommendation accepted in
principle.
The Delhi Public Library has
already agreed to absorb the
Tulsi Sadan Library. It is not
possible to reopen the issue.
The status of the Language
Advisory Boards is not
mentioned in the Constitution.
However, they make a valuable
contribution in selections of
awards, implementation of
programmes and publications.
The Boards meet more often
when the agenda demands and
help in implementing its
programmes.
The present practice should
continue. However, the
Convener may prepare the
tentative list of names in
consultation with the other
members of the General
Councial representing the
respective language for the
approval of the President.
The Committee would like to
know the present position about
the space for the library as also
for its future needs and the
efforts made, if any, therefor.
Reply Noted.
The Committee reiterates the
recommendation of the HPRC for
defining the status, constitution,
composition, functions, etc. of the
Language Advisory Boards in the
Akademi’s constitution. It should
also provide for the number of
meetings, etc. Doing so, would
impart transparency in the
functioning of the Language
Advisory Boards to avoid possible
complications and controversies.

22
12 3
Literary Associations
Literary associations have an
important part to play in the
Akademi’s affairs. But in the
matter of giving them
recognition the Akademi has
been facing problems which
are still to be sorted out.
Several languages are not well
represented. Most of the State
Sahitya Akademis have not
been accorded recognition.
Each Language Advisory
Board should study the local
contexts in depts., and help
to find appropriate solutions.
(9.70)
It should be the Akademi’s
concern, as well as that of
the Central and State
Governments, to evolve ways
of encouraging the growth of
vibrant literary institutions.
(9.71)
Other Activities/Aspects
The existing provision in the
constitution for electing
Associate Fellows, which has
been inoperative right from
the outset, may be deleted.
(9.72)
The activities of the Akademi’s
four regional offices should
be more widely known.
Meanwhile no new regional
offices need be opened. (9.73)
Recommendation accepted and
implemented.
Recommendation accepted and
implemented, as Akademi
organize programmes in
collaboration with literary
organizations.
Deletion is accepted.
All the four centres are
working very actively and has
made its presence felt at
national level.
The Committee is happy to note
that the recommendation of
HPRC with regard to recognition
of literary association has been
accepted and implemented. The
Committee, however, is skeptical
about the extent to which the
recommendation has been
implemented. The Committee
while going through the Report
of HPRC observed that after the
work of review of the status of
the recognized association in the
light of Prabhakar Committee
was taken up, a number of
literary associations which were
earlier recognized could not be
recognized for one reason or the
other and as a result thereof,
some of the languages went
unrepresented in the Sahitya
Akademi. In order to encourage
the healthy literary institutions
in the country, the Sahitya
Akademi should make renewed
efforts with the help of Central
and State Governments so that
all Indian languages are
adequately represented in the
Sahitya Akademi.
Reply Noted.
The Committee finds the reply
vague as no information has been
provided about the steps taken
to make the presence felt of the
regional offices of the Akademi.
The Committee would like to be
informed of the steps taken to
strengthen the regional offices
so as to make them lively centres
of culture as observed by HPRC.

23
12 3
Activities like the Samvatsar
Lectures and ‘Meet the
Author’ programmes might be
undertaken in cities other than
New Delhi also. (9.74)
The travel grants available to
writers are insignificant, and
might be substantially raised.
(9.75)
In undertaking comprehensive
and historical studies of Indian
literature, the emphasis should
be on our common cultural
heritage in regard to oral
communication, aesthetics,
ethical tradition and social
philosophy. Research studies
by individuals on special
themes may be encouraged.
(9.76)
The Constitution
The provisions of the
Akademi’s constitution may be
reviewed and appropriately
amended in the light of our
recommendations in Section 8
of Chapter 4.
The constitution of the
Akademi shall be amended to
the effect that:
(a) The President of the
Sahitya Akademi will be
appointed by the President of
India from a small panel
drawn up by a search
committee consisting of three
members, one of whom shall
be nominated by the General
Council of the Akademi, while
Recommendation accepted and
is already implemented
successfully.
Recommendation accepted and
is already implemented.
Recommendation accepted and
is implemented and has started
a new programme ‘Writers in
Residence’ in which writer/
scholar does research work
on a special theme.
Recommendation not accepted.
General Council deliberated
over the proposed change in
electing the President and
found it unacceptable as it
involve change in the basic
structure of the constitution
affecting the autonomy of the
Akademi, and will go against
the very basic ideas and spirit
which inspired its founding
The Committee notes the
comments. It would, however,
like to have the details of the
cities other than New Delhi
where activities like the
Samvatsar Lectures and ‘Meet
the Anthor’ programmes have
been undertaken.
The Committee would like to
know the number as well as
grants made during the last three
years along with the guidelines,
if any, in this regard.
The Committee finds that the
reply does not cover all the
aspects on which the
recommendation of the HPRC
has desired to lay emphasis. It
is also not clear if the
programme ‘Writers in
Residence’ covers all those
aspects. The Committee would
like to have more specific details
on this.
The Committee notes that HPRC
had made important
recommendations for reviewing
and appropriately amending the
constitution of the Akademi
including selection of its
President. While some of the
recommendations have been
accepted, the one relating to the
selection of the President has
evoked a strong reaction from
the Akademi. The suggestion of
HPRC to select its President
through a search committee
mode by the President of India,
the Committee feels, was worth
serious consideration for avoiding
the inevitable complications of the
existing system of elections. The
Committee fails to appreciate the
contention of the Akademi that

24
12 3
the President of India will
nominate the other two
members, of whom shall be
past President of the Akademi.
The Committee might draw
up a panel of three names
(arranged in alphabetical
order) and submit it to the
President of India who will
make the appointment.
(b) Selection of persons
representing each language
and the universities in the
succeeding General Council
will be made by the full
outgoing General Council. In
the case of language
representatives, the outgoing
Language Advisory Board will
make recommendations for
the consideration of the
General Council. As regards
the State representatives,
wherever a State Sahitya
Akademi or equivalent
institution exists, it shall
specifically nominate a person;
in other cases the State
Government will make the
nomination. In either case, the
nominee must be a person
who is eminent in the field
of letters, and not a
functionary of Government.
fathers to constitute the
Sahitya Akademi. For the 57
years the election process has
not only come to stay but is
now identified with the
supreme values of autonomy
which the bulk of writers in
India consider to be vital to
the healthy growth of the
Akademi and creative
literature.
Recommendation accepted and
implemented.
Recommendation implemented,
except Central Institute of
Indian Languages, Mysore
which can be considered on
the Language Development
Board and regarding All India
Radio and Doordarshan, it is
already represented by the
representative of the Ministry
of Information and
Broadcasting.
the search committee mode would
go against the basic structure of
the constitution (of Akademi),
affecting its autonomy adversely.
This recommendation of the
HPRC was, in fact, made for the
sake of bringing uniformity in
the selection of chairpersons of
all the Akademis which are
currently different. The search
committee mode is already being
followed in the case of Lalit Kala
Akademi. The Committee would
like to have considered view of
the Akademi as well as of the
Ministry on this issue.
The Committee learnt that
Ministry's decision to do so in
the past had been opposed by
the Akademi on the ground that
it would undermine its autonomy
the corner-stone of their working.
The Committee would like to
know how two other Akademis
were protecting/preserving their
autonomy that are following
search committee mode for
electing their Presidents; and was
the opposition by the Akademi
to this proposal unanimous by
all the writers throughout the
country?
Had the opinion of Law Ministry
taken on this issue before back
tracking on this decision by the
Ministry.

25
12 3
Similar nominations shall be
obtained from each of the
Union Territories also.
(c) The Sangeet Natak
Akademi and the Lalit Kala
Akademi shall be represented
in the General Council by its
Chairperson, Indian Council
for Cultural Relations by its
Director General. The Central
Institute of Indian Languages.
Mysore, shall be added to this
list and be represented by its
Director. The Indira Gandhi
National Centre for the Arts
shall be  represented by its
Member Secretary and the
Akashvani and Doordarshan
shall be  represented by their
Director Generals.
(d) One representative of
publishers and another of
libraries in India shall be
selected by the General
Council as members and a
suitable procedure of their
choice will be devised and
incorporated in the
constitution.
(e) The 8 persons from the
category of eminent persons
to be selected by the General
Council shall include among
them two Fellows of the
Akademi.
(f) The Vice-President of the
Akademi shall be the Chairman
of the Finance Committee and
the Financial Adviser of the
Akademi will be the Member-
Secretary. The rest of the
composition of the Finance
Committee shall remain the
same.
Implemented; publishers
representative and also
representative of Raja
Rammohan Roy Library
Foundation.
Implemented.
Vice-President shall be the
Chairman of the Finance
Committee. General Council
did not agree to Financial
Advisor as Member Secretary
as according to Article 8 (i)
of our Constitution according
to which Secretary of the
Sahitya Akademi is its
Principal Executive Officer.
The status of the Language
Advisory Boards is not
mentioned in the Constitution.
However, they make a valuable
contribution in selections of
awards, implementation of
programmes and publications.
Implemented.
As regards the recommendation
about mentioning the status of
Language Advisory Board into the
Akademi’s constitution, the
Committee reiterates its
recommendation made in respect
of its Sangeet Natak Akademi.
Language Advisory Boards in
Para No. 9.67.

26
12 3
(g) The Language Advisory
Boards shall be accorded
formal status and functions
and method of their formation
shall be incorporated in the
constitution of the Akademi
and reconstituted in
accordance with the decision
as against Recommendations
No. 9.69.
(h) The provision relating to
Associate Fellowships may be
deleted. (9.77)

27
LALIT KALA AKADEMI, NEW DELHI
Recommendations
1
Exhibitions and Awards
There is a widespread feeling
that in recent years the
selections for the Lalit Kala
Akademi’s National Exhibitions
and annual awards are not
always fair, and that there is
a decline in standards. The
Akademi must adopt a system
of appointing a jury which
would generate confidence, in
the art world. The General
Council may prepare a special
roll of distinguished artists, art
historians and art critics,  from
among whom the members of
the jury for the National
Exhibition and, Akademi
awards may be selected. (9.78)
The cash prize accompanying
the Akademi awards may be
raised to Rs.25,000, as in the
other two Akademis. The
Akademi may secure ten
works from each award-
winning artist and organize a
special exhibition. The
conferment of the award may
be restricted to a single
occasion. (9.79)
The Akademi must maintain
the highest standards in the
Present Status
2
Following the
recommendations of Haksar
Committee the Administrator
had approved a special roll of
Juries recommended by the
Advisory Committee of the
Akademi during the year 1999
and all the Jury members were
expected to give undertaking
to convey their withdrawal
from the Jury in case of any
of their next to Kin’s work is
under consideration for
selection by the Jury where
the said Jury member is a
member. At present the Jury
is nominated by the General
Council after an open house
debate, however the Jury
members will continue to give
undertaking as mentioned
above.
At the present time the amount
of award has been raised to
Rs.1.00 lakh for the Lalit Kala
Akademi National awards. It
has been proposed by the
General Council that there will
be a two-tier Jury for
selection of the works to
participate in the exhibition and
selection for the awards. The
General Council has also
decided awards winning
works will be retained by the
Lalit Kala Akademi and the
Akademi will evaluated the
value of the works to be paid
by the artist.
Recommendation
accepted.
Observations/recommendations
of the DRPSC
3
The Committee notes the reply.
The Committee hopes that the
amount of such awards have been
raised proportionately in case of
awards in case of other
Akademies as well.
The Committee would like to
have a clarification with regard
to retention/evaluation/payment
of award-winning works for
exhibition.
Reply noted.

28
12 3
selection of exhibits to be sent
abroad for international
exhibitions. (9.80)
More retrospectives of our
eminent artists (apart from
those of the Akademi’s
Felloes) may be organized, as
also exhibitions featuring
specific themes and art
movements. (9.81)
The Triennale
There is no need to have a
separate organization for the
Triennale. It should be the
prerogative of the Akademi.
There must be a continuing
special cell which functions
as a clearing house for
information on developments
in the international art scene.
(9.82)
There is no virtue in the idea
of restricting the Triennale to
non-aligned nations. (9.83)
The decline in the standards
of the Indian exhibits in the
Triennale must be checked.
It is better to select not more
than ten artists and exhibit a
substantial number of their
works, than to have a very
large number of artists. (9.84)
The Commissioners might be
drawn from the panel
suggested above (9.78), of
eminent artists, art historians
and art critics. They must
have complete freedom to
select the exhibits and organize
the Indian section of the
Triennale. (9.85)
Recommendation
accepted.
Recommendation
accepted.
Recommendation
accepted.
Recommendation
accepted.
Recommendation
accepted.
Reply noted.
Details about the current system
in place for this purpose may be
provided.
Reply Noted.
Reply Noted.
Reply Noted.

29
12 3
Recommendation
accepted.
Recommendation
accepted.
Recommendation
accepted.
Recommendation
accepted.
Recommendation
accepted.
Reply does not reflect the specific
efforts made or steps taken
for implementing this
recommendation of the HPRC in
letter and spirit. The Committee
would like to have these details.
Reply does not reflect the specific
steps taken to implement this
recommendation. It would like
to have the number of
publications/periodicals and
efforts made for ensuring
regularity, quality, etc.
Information about steps taken to
make the publications widely
available be provided.
Reply noted.
Information about steps taken
for the dissemination of art may
be provided.
Research and
Documentation
Greater priority should be
given to research and
documentation in
contemporary art, in
collaboration with State
Akademis. Attention should be
paid to cataloguing archival
material and on having proper
facilities for conservation,
restoration and retrieval. (9.86)
Publications and
Dissemination
The Akademi might consider
bringing out its journals at
regular intervals. The journal
dealing with our traditional art
has attained a very high
international reputation; the
other publications must also
aim at achieving similar
standards of editing and
printing. (9.87)
The Akademi must find more
effective ways of selling its
publications, in collaboration
with commercial distributors.
(9.88)
An extensive collection of
significant art reviews
appearing in newspapers and
journals in India and abroad
must be built up, and should
be easily accessible to artists
and scholars. (9.89)
For the dissemination of art,
the Akademi might work in
close collaboration with other
organizations like the State
Akademies, universities,
museums, National Book
Trust, Indira Gandhi Centre
for the Arts, etc. Full

30
12 3
advantage should be taken of
the medium of television.
(9.90)
Other Activities/Aspects
The Akademis’ programme of
purchasing works of art from
contemporary artists is a
marginal one, but has given
rise to intense controversy
and charges of favoritism. It
has no special merit, and
should be given up. (9.91)
A fresh set of enforceable
guidelines for the occupation
and vacation of the studios in
the Garhi Centre in New Delhi
must be framed. This task
would be much simplified if
the distinguished artists who
have been indefinitely
occupying some of these
studios came forward in a co-
operative spirit to enable a
solution to be found. (9.92)
It is not necessary to have
State-wise representation for
art organizations in the
Akademi’s General Council.
Ten members co-opted by the
Council to represent these
organizations would be
sufficient. (9.93)
The Akademi must, jointly
with State Akademis and
Governments, promote the
proper growth and functioning
of art associations. (9.94)
Art Education
Among the most neglected
areas of culture is art education.
The Akademi must generate
Based on the
recommendations, the process
had been discontinued.
Recommendation accepted.
The guidelines for selection of
the studios in Garhi Centre
have already been framed. The
process for implementation is
being worked out.
Recommendation not
accepted.
The Lalit Kala Akademi is in
close coordination with the
State Akademies, State
Government and recognized Art
Organizations to work for
promotion of art and also
functioning of the Associations.
The Akademi is in close
coordination with State
Akademies, State Government
and Recognized Art
Reply noted.
The Committee would like to
have the latest position in this
regard.
The Committee would like to
have specific reasons for not
accepting this recommendation.
The information about the efforts
made for promoting art
associations in those States where
they are not there or to activate
the existing associations, may be
provided.
Reply noted.

31
12 3
constructive discussions on this
issue. (9.95)
The Akademi should provide
expertise to set up art
museums in the States and
Union Territories. (9.96)
The Akademi must have close
links with museums all over
India. (9.97)
Incentives to Artists
The production of art
materials within the country
needs to be augmented, and
better quality ensured. Import
of art materials should be
placed on Open General
Licence. There should be no
import duties, or only a
nominal one. (9.98)
The Government of India’s
policy of setting aside a
portion of the outlay on public
buildings to include the
making of murals and the
purchase of works of art
should be strictly enforced.
The State Governments may
also be approached with a
view to getting such a
provision adopted and
incorporated. (9.99)
A rebate for corporate
expenditure on the acquisition
of artistic works for the
purposes of income tax, on
the basis of the present
provision for recognized
donations, might be adopted.
(9.100)
The Government may, in
consultation with the Akademi
Organizations to holds camps
and exhibitions for promotion
of Art Education.
Recommendation
accepted.
Recommendation
accepted.
Recommendation
accepted.
Recommendation
accepted.
Recommendation
accepted.
Recommendation not
accepted.
Specific details may be provided.
Details about the steps taken to
augment production and quality
of art materials and orders of
the Finance Ministry regarding
OGL and Import Duties may be
provided.
This recommendation appears to
be too complex to be easily
accepted by the Akademi. How
had the Akademi ensured the
compliance of State Governments
in this regard? The Committee
would like to be enlightened
about this.
Relevant Orders of the Finance
Ministry in this regard may be
provided.
No reply would have been better
than such a evasive reply to a

32
12 3
and the ICCR, look into the
problems faced by artists
intending to take their works
abroad for participation in
exhibitions. The insistence on
including an Indian
Commissioner when
exhibitions on contemporary
Indian art are organized by
foreign art organization might
be given up. The procedures
for selling works of
contemporary Indian art
abroad may be liberalized.
(9.101)
The Akademi should have a
practical scheme for
subsidizing the transport of
works of art for the National
Exhibition and the Triennale
from distant places in the
country. The co-operation of
the Railways must be secured
in this context. (9.102)
Artist’s Constituency
Although serious a
controversies have arisen over
the election of fifteen
members to the Akademi’ s
General Council from the
artists’ community, the system
must be continued, with
important modifications. (9.103)
The number of General
Council members belonging to
the category of those elected
from the artist’s constituency
who may sit on the Executive
Board may be restricted to
two. (9.104)
The electoral roll for the
artists’ constituency should
consists of all artists who
have won an award or an
Recommendation
accepted.
Recommendation
accepted.
Recommendation
accepted.
Recommendation
accepted.
very specific and pointed
recommendation. The reasons for
not accepting the
recommendation should be
supplied.
The details of mechanism in place
to address the problems faced by
our artists in taking their works
abroad for exhibition/sale.
Specific steps taken to implement
this recommendation may be
provided.
The Committee would like to
know the important modifications
made in this regard.
Reply Noted.
Reply Noted.

33
12 3
honourable mention in any of
the Akademi’s national or
international exhibitions held
since the beginning, and also
the living Fellows of the
Akademi (instead of the
present system by which
anyone who has exhibited at
least once in the National
Exhibition is allowed to vote).
(9.105)
All members of the electorate,
and all other artists whose
works have been shown at
least once in the Akakdemi’s
national or international
exhibitions, may be eligible for
being considered for election.
(9.106)
Internal Conflicts
The affairs of the Akakdemi in
recent years have been
clouded by conflicts leading to
mutual allegations made against
one another by important
functionaries of the Akademi.
In order to generate
confidence, the existing General
Council may be dissolved and
the revised structure and
procedures recommended by
the Committee may be adopted.
(9.107)
The Constitution
The General Council,
Executive Board and Finance
Committee of the Akademi
may be restructured on the
lines recommended in section
10 of Chapter 5. (9.108)
Recommendation
accepted.
Recommendation not
accepted.
Partially accepted. The present
General Council of the
Akademi consists of the
following members:-
(i) Chairman
(ii) Vice-Chairman
(iii) Financial Advisor
(iv) Five nominees of the
Government of India,
Department of Culture.
Reply Noted.
‘No reply’ would have been better
than such a evasive reply to a
very specific and pointed
recommendation. The reasons for
not accepting the recommendation
should be supplied
Details regarding
recommendations not accepted
may be provided alongwith the
reasons.

34
12 3
(v) Eight nominees of the
Government of India,
Department of Culture
holding office under its
control.
(vi) Fellows of the Akademi
(vii) State Representatives:
In rotation from one of
the three groups A, B
and C.
(viii) Ten persons of high
integrity and record
management and
service in promotion of
art nominated by the
Government of India,
Department of Culture
out of the 30 names
proposed by General
Council.
(ix) Fifteen persons to be
elected from Artist
Constituencies
(x) An expert from sphere
of Handicrafts and Folk
Art; art critic; two art
historians; an eminent
person; an architect; a
creative photographer
(xi) Nine eminent artists
residing in India
nominated by the
General Council.
The Executive Board of the
Akademi consists of the
following members:
i. Chairman
ii. Vice-Chairman
iii. Financial Advisor
iv. Three nominees of the
Government of India
from among their
nominees of the
General Council failing
under sub clauses
l0(iv) & l0(v).

35
12 3
v. a. Two persons to be
elected by the
General Council
from among those
nominated to the
General Council
falling under sub
clauses l0(vii).
b. Two persons to be
elected by the
General Council
from among the
members of the
General Council
falling under sub
clause l0(viii).
c. Two persons to be
elected by the
General Council
from among the
members of the
General Council
falling under sub
clause 10(ix).
vi. Three persons to be
nominated by the
Chairman from among
members of the
General Council falling
under sub clause l0(vi),
10(x) & 10(xi).
The Finance Committee of
the Akademi consists of the
following members:
1. Financial Advisor
2. One nominee of the
Government of India
from among its nominees
on the General Council.
3. Two representatives of
General Council
nominated by it from
among its members.
4. One representative of
the Executive Board
nominated by its from
among its members.

36
NATIONAL SCHOOL OF DRAMA, NEW DELHI
Item/Recommendation
1
Courses of Study
The courses of study in the
NSD as they are imparted
today, whether in acting,
dramatic, literature or theatre
techniques, should become
wider in scope, more intensive
in treatment, and progressively
more strenuous as the
students advance from year
to year. (9.132)
The whole question of syllabus
must be viewed in the
perspective of a conceptual
framework for the  NSD as a
school of advanced learning
in theatre, and should not be
approached in an adhoc
manner. (9.133)
Status
2
Syllabus of NSD has been
reviewed from time to time
and changes have been made
keeping in view the changed
scenario of the theatre
environment of the country.
The first year of the 3-year
course is a combined course
with skill development and the
study of self. From the second
year, the students specialize
either in acting or theatre
techniques & design. In the
third year, the application of
skills via learning through
production cycles is in place.
The course work is graded to
allow the students to move
from skills, their application
and finally the ability to
improvise on the skills
imparted. Syllabus for
specialization in Children’s
theatre has been prepared and
is likely to be introduced
soon. Theatre involves both
theory and practice. Since
theory is ultimately tested in
very palpable terms in front
of an audience, a balance
between theory and practice
is of critical importance.
The NSD syllabus is graded
from skills acquisition to their
application. It is within this
general framework that inputs
of learning are adjusted in the
teaching routine. New areas
of learning, such as,
computer based technology
applicable to theatre has been
introduced. These effect the
Observations/recommendations
of the DRPSC
3
The Committee would like to
know the modality adopted to
review the NSD courses and
when was it done/implemented?
Was any feedback taken or
received particularly from the
students, faculty and the experts?
Details may be provided.

37
12 3
The interface between NSD and
Doordarshan is there but
activities and outreach of the
Sanskar Rang Toli is not
adequately visible and widespread
at the required scale. Whether
such Tolis are active at regional
and other levels down the line?
The product of the NSD, it
appears, are not being adequately
utilized by mass media for
education and dissemination.
The Committee would like to
know the steps taken to ensure
that students get exposed to the
learnings available in the Film
Institute, Pune and whether the
studios with appropriate facilities
and teachers with special
knowledge of film and T.V . media
have been provided in NSD.
The Committee would like to
know about the adequacy of
funds for this purpose.
practical manifestations of
training work in terms of
production and scene work.
Three productions of the NSD
were commissioned by
Doordarshan and telecast. The
NSD realized the importance
of theatre for education and
established Theatre-in-
Education Company in 1989.
The Company was later
renamed as Sanskar Rang Toli.
The TIE comprises a group
of actors-teachers who aimed
to educate children through
creative and meaningful
theatre. The TIE produces
plays by adults for children
and organizes performances in
schools. It also organizes
summer workshops for
children and trains teachers to
acquire skills to make
classroom learning more
enjoyable. In June 2006, the
NCERT approached the NSD
for the preparation of drama
syllabus. The syllabus was
prepared and handed over to
the NCERT in 2007. It is
understood that the NCERT
has already approved it.
From time to time, members
of the teaching Faculty are
deputed abroad for
participation in workshops and
for exchange of ideas with
colleagues from other
institutions. Faculty members
have had exchanges with
institutions in Bulgaria, Italy,
Sri Lanka, Australia, China,
Poland among others. Some
of these programmes have
come under the aegis of CEP.
Distinguished faculty from the
The NSD can contribute
artistic and educative material
to Doordarshan and the
educational programmes of the
NCERT. A comprehensive
course of study in respect of
children’s theatre must be
developed. (9.134)
The School must keep up with
innovations, new technology
and social attitudes in the
world theatre.  Members of
the teaching faculty may be
sent abroad for advanced
training and to exchange ideas
with their counterparts
elsewhere. The NSD should
establish a close working
relationship with prestigious
theatre training institutions
abroad. (9.135)

38
12 3
Better techniques of training
can be developed by bringing
expertise from outside. Visiting
theatre exponents can breathe
new life into the School.
(9.136)
The Committee finds no
validity in the view that the
NSD should be far away from
the larger cities. The
achievements of the faculty
and the students can be
effectively tested out only in
a major cosmopolitan
environment where there is a
well-informed and critical
audience. The institution,
however must be protected
from political pressures.
(9.137)
U.K. (RADA), from Australia
(NIDA), from Switzerland,
Poland, Bangladesh, Germany,
Russia, Uzbekistan among
other countries have been
invited to lead workshops and
to direct plays for the
students.
Practicing professionals from
India as well as abroad, such
as, from UK, Poland, Australia,
Switzerland etc. have been
invited to bring in their
expertise for the benefits of
students of the School. These
visits have provided for
opening up new areas of
performance and dramaturgy.
The Haksar Committee has
recommended that it is
necessary to develop, on a
planned basis, a campus for
the School which would have
all the essential infrastructure
and its existing location in
Bahawalpur House is an ideal
one as the achievements of
the faculty and the students
can be effectively tested out
only in a major cosmopolitan
environment where there is a
well-informed and critical
audience. The MOC
transferred the entire campus
to the NSD vide letter No.17-
9/91-Desk (PA), dated 24
th
June, 1994 for constructing
its own campus subject to the
condition that sister
organizations will find a
suitable alternative
accommodation elsewhere.
However, till date, the NSD
has not got full possession
of the campus. The
redevelopment plan of the
The Committee feels that in view
of a portion of land in the
Bahawalpur House already taken
over by the DMRC and its
subsequent demand for more
land (which is pending with
Ministry of Culture), as also
the sister organizations of the
NSD not moving out of
the Bahawalpur House,
recommendations of the HPRC
for operating NSD from the
present campus, needs re-
consideration. It is not clear from
the reply if the present campus
with the depleted space would be
sufficient enough for NSD to
function from the Bahawalpur
House. The Committee would
like to have the latest details/
proposals in this regard.

39
12 3
NSD which was initiated in
2006 envisages the School’s
future in the Bahawalpur
House but due to sister
organizations’ not moving out,
the redevelopment plan is at a
stand still. Further, DMRC is
also wanting to requisition a
portion of the land for the
second time for its plans of
expansion which is also likely
to disturb the redevelopment
of the campus. A proposal on
DMRC’s requisition of land
has been sent to the MOC
recently. However, a decision
on the same is still awaited.
A self-contained proposal for
adoption of UGC pay scales
for the teaching faculty of
the NSD was submitted to the
Ministry of Culture, in August
1999 which has not been
accepted by the Government
till date. However, vide
Ministry’s letter No.F.5-9/95-
Desk (PA) dated 03.10.2000,
the pay scales of the post of
Director and Professors have
been revised. But these still
fall short of the UGC pay
scales in case of Professors
and in the case of Director,
NSD at par with the pay scale
of Director’s, IIT’s as
recommended by the Haksar
Committee.  Further, the pay
scale of Associate Professors
in NSD still remains un-
revised till date despite several
proposals sent to the
Government.
Action Taken
The pay scales of the
Professors and Director in
NSD have been revised last
on 3
rd October, 2000 as under:-
Members of the teaching
faculty should be given UGC
scales of pay. The issue has
been tending to drift
indefinitely, and must be
resolved soon. The teaching
staff may also be provided
residential accommodation in
the improved campus. (9.138)
The Committee desires to know
the reasons for the delay in
taking a decision on the proposal
submitted to the Ministry as far
back in 1999 for adoption of UGC
pay scales for teaching faculty.
The Committee regrets to note
that revisions made in 2000 in
the pay scales of the Director
and Professor, fell short of UGC
pay scales, and the scales of the
Assistant Professors in the NSD
are yet to be revised. The
Committee would like to know
the reasons as to why the
Assistant Professors have been
left out and why the pay scales
of NSD faculty cannot be at par
with the UGC. The National
School of Drama is one of the
foremost theatre training
institutions in the world and the
only one of its kind in India.
The Committee is of the view
that teaching fraternity of the
institution should not be
discriminated against on this
count. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that the pay scales
of Director, Professor and

40
12 3
Director Rs.18400-22400
(Fifth Pay Commission)
Professors Rs.12000-16500
(Fifth Pay Commission)
It will bee seen that the above
revised pay scales are below
the UGC pay scales in case
of Professors and below the
IIT Directors’ pay scale in
case of Director, NSD as per
the recommendations of the
Haksar Committee.
A Work Study Team  from
the Ministry of HRD
(Department of Culture)
examined the proposal to
augment the teaching Faculty
and had made
recommendations for additional
teaching posts at various levels.
A self-contained proposal based
on the recommendations of the
IWS Unit was sent to the
Department of Culture.
Though, the posts were agreed
in principle, but could not be
formally approved as funds
were not available. The NSD
informed the Government that
it cannot accommodate the
required funds for these posts
within its own budget and had
requested the Government to
sanction the posts along with
budget. Till date, it has not
been approved.
Further, the NSD has made
additional requirement of
teaching posts keeping in mind
the new and expanded courses
as well as expanded student
intake. This proposal has been
sent to the Government and
is still pending.
Assistant Professors should not
only be revised but be brought
at par with that of UGC.
As regards the residential
accommodation for the NSD
fraternity, while it may not now
be possible to provide it in the
campus, efforts may be made in
this regard in consultation with
the DDA, MCD, and concerned
authorities to construct such
residential units for them.
The Committee finds that some
vital information have been
withheld in the reply such as
when was the Works Study Team
constituted, when the self-
contained proposal of IWS Unit
was sent to the Department of
Culture, how and when was self-
contained in-principle agreement
of the Department was conveyed
to the NSD and when was the
additional requirement of the
NSD given to Department?
In the absence of these vital
inputs, it is difficult to know
where and at what level the
things are held up. The
Committee, in this situation, is
constrained to observe that the
issue of expansion has been
taken in a highly casual manner,
particularly in view of the fact
that the recommendation by the
HPRC was given in 1999 and till
date, the proposal of expansion
has not seen light of the day
and unfortunately, the things are
held up in the Ministry. The
Committee would like to have
status report on this.
The strength of the teaching
faculty has not grown
commensurately with the
responsibilities of its members.
The theatre demands intense,
individualized training. The
staff strength should be
suitably structured department-
wise. (9.139)

41
12 3
The minimum qualification for
admission to the NSD should
be a degree plus deep
involvement in the theatre.
(9.140)
Auditions and interviews for
the selection of students must
be far more severe than at
present, so that the candidates
get a clear idea of the high
standards required of them.
(9.141)
Under no circumstances can
students justify resorting to
strikes. Demands for lowering
the academic and professional
standards should not be
acceded to. (9.142)
There is need for strict
discipline among the staff
also. (9.143)
There should be a certain
degree of openness in the
system of training as well as
examinations. The number of
outside experts associated
with the examinations might
be increased. (9.144)
A degree from a recognized
University along with deep
involvement in the theatre is
one of the essential
qualifications for admission in
NSD. To assess the aptitude
& involvement of candidates
in area of theatre, the
screening is done at 2 levels,
firstly with auditions at the
Regional level and secondly a
week-long workshop in Delhi.
All steps are taken to ensure
that meritorious candidates are
selected for the Diploma
Course.
As part of the Screening tests
for admission to 3-year
Diploma course, auditions &
interviews of the candidates
are already being done. A
rigorous workshop over a five
day period held at Delhi,
examines the students aptitude
and skill.
The academic & professional
standards of the NSD are
being maintained.
The staff of National School
of Drama works with
discipline and commitment to
further the objectives of the
Institution.
Outside experts are invariably
associated with the conduct
of examinations, in directing
plays and conducting teaching
workshops.
Reply noted.
Reply noted.
Earlier the Committee has noted
that there has been delay in
acceding to the additional
requirement of teaching post
which leads to frustration among
teaching fraternity as well as
students. The Committee,
therefore, recommends that in
order to ensure discipline among
the NSD community, the
Government should be sensitive
to the problems that may exist
in the School.
Reply Noted.

42
12 3
The Language Problem
Intensive courses in Hindi and
English should be provided in
the first year of training for
students who are weak in
these languages. (9.145)
The very diversity of
languages can be a means of
enriching the students with
the cultural wealth of the
country as a whole. The use
of the student’s tongue in
classes and even examinations
must be encouraged. (9.146)
Future Status of NSD
The NSD must in course of
time develop into an institution
of learning, a centre for
advanced studies in drama
and theatre, to be called the
National Academy of Dramatic
Arts. It should evolve a
conceptual framework for this
transition. Intensive courses in
Indian, Western Asian and
children’s theatre must be
developed. There should be
close links with the Sangeet
Natak Academy and
Doordarshan. (9.147)
It is already being provided.
Language awareness and
diction classes for both
English and Hindi are in place.
Students are admitted from
various parts of the country
with diverse mother tongues
and cultural backgrounds. It
is not feasible to use the
student’s mother tongue in all
teaching processes. However,
studies of regional literatures
and theatre forms nom various
parts of the country is part
of the academic syllabus of
the School. There have also
been several regional plays in
translation that have been
performed. On occasion,
multi-lingual plays have also
been performed and the
students present some projects
in their mother tongue.
The NSD Society in April
2005 constituted a Broad
Based Committee for making
an in-depth study of the
entirety of the NSD. The said
committee consisted of
eminent theatre persons,
educationists, representatives
of faculty, students and
staff. One of the main
recommendations of the
Committee is to make the
NSD an Institute of National
Importance. A proposal is
under process and will be sent
to the Government.
About renaming the NSD as
National Academy of Dramatic
Arts, the NSD Society has
welcomed the
Reply Noted.
Reply Noted.
The Committee is surprised to
know that a Broad Based
Committee was constituted in the
year 2005 consisting of eminent
theatre persons, educationists,
representatives of faculty, student
and staff of the NSD for “making
in-depth study of the entirety of
the NSD” which was not made
available to the Committee
during its study. The Committee
is at a loss to see that the report
of the Broad Based Committee
is still lying with the NSD and
they are yet to send a proposal
to the Government.
The Committee, however, will
welcome if NSD is declared as
an Institute of National
Importance.

43
12 3
Encouragement should be
given to the setting up of well-
equipped drama schools in
various places in India to
impart initial training. An
essential adjunct to such a
school would be a State
repertory company. Such
institutions should be established
and supported by the States.
(9.148)
Graduates from state drama
schools and university drama
departments must get
preference for admission to the
proposed National Academy of
Dramatic Arts. (9.149)
recommendation. However, the
Society is of the view that
much thought needs to be
given in formulating the
objectives and structure of the
NADA to avoid duplication in
the context of other institutions
like the SNA and IGNCA.
The NSD is already working
on a Scheme to open Regional
School of Drama in five
States, i.e.,  North-East,
Maharashtra/Goa, J&K,
Kolkata and Bangalore. The
Bangalore Chapter is already
in process. For the purpose
of opening of the centres, the
required funds have to be
sanctioned by the Government
of India/State Governments as
the NSD does not have budget
for this.
As regards establishment of
Repertory Companies in
States, this is a very
important initiative and the
State Governments need to
take a positive decision in this
regard. However, the NSD’s
support apart from funding
will always be available to the
State Governments.
There is a duly approved laid
down criteria for admission to
the School. Keeping in view
the limited number of seats
available, giving preference to
the graduates of state drama
schools/university drama
departments may not be
appropriate. All candidates
desirous of admission to the
Renaming the NSD as National
Academy of Dramatic Arts, which
was made by the HPRC is still
in consideration stage and the
NSD society is of the view that
much thought needs to be given
to this aspect. The Committee
fails to understand that they were
unable to apply their mind even
during two decades after the
submission of the HPRC report.
The Committee would like to
have the latest position for
opening regional school of drama
in different places in the country.
The Committee would also like
to know the efforts made to
have the State Repertory
Companies set up by the State
Governments.
Reply Noted.

44
12 3
The drama departments which
exist in some universities tend
to offer academic courses, the
emphasis being on theory and
classroom instruction. It is
important to stress the
performance aspect. There
must be close interaction
between the proposed NADA
and the university drama
departments. (9.150)
There should be no insistence
on the possession of a Ph.D
degree by teachers of drama
in the Universities. What is
really important is experience
in, and aptitude for, drama.
(9.151)
The NADA could perhaps be
a pioneer of therapeutic
theatre in our country,
working in co-operation with
institutions concerned with
health. (9.152)
Campus and Infrastructure
It is necessary to develop, on
a planned basis, a campus for
the School which would have
all the essential infrastructure.
Its existing location in
Bahawalpur House in the
Capital is an ideal one. Some
of the non-theatre activities
housed here may be moved
elsewhere, and a well-designed
building or set of building
School have to take the 2-tier
admission process of audition
and workshop to successfully
procure a seat in the School.
The NSD has been offering
practical know-how to drama
departments by deputing
teachers and holding
workshops under its Extension.
In the Recruitment Rules for
the Faculty posts, Ph.D. is
not an essential qualification.
Moreover, the NSD has also
written to UGC not to insist
on the degree of Ph.D. as
an essential qualification for
recruitment to teaching posts
at the level of Assistant
Professors/Associate
Professors.
Therapy via theatre is an
important and developing
concept. The NSD may make
attempts to develop this in the
course of time.
The recommendations of the
Haksar Committee are very
pertinent for the future of the
NSD. On the
recommendations of the
Broad-Based Committee, a
committee constituted by the
NSD Society in 2005 to make
in-depth study of entirety of
the NSD, the redevelopment
plan of NSD campus and
Reply Noted.
Reply Noted.
Reply Noted.
In addition to the Committee’s
observations in this regard
elsewhere in this report, the
Committee expresses its
displeasure over the delay in the
sanction and execution of the re-
development of the NSD that is
again pending with the
Government.

45
12 3
constructed for the NSD,
providing studies, workshops,
theatres and a hostel. (9.153)
Greater use must be made of
video equipment as teaching
aids. The library needs to be
expanded and integrated with
the teaching process. There
must be a script bank storing
important plays in all Indian
languages and English. (9.154)
Repertory Company
It is hoped eventually there
will be a repertory company
in every State, and also
resident theatre companies and
smaller theatre groups in all
major cities, with help from
the Central and State
Government. (9.155)
The NSD’s own Repertory
Company, while it has done
some good work, must
accomplish much more. It
must be constantly active,
build up a wide-ranging
repertoire, and tour widely in
modernization of the
infrastructure of the School
was devised and is under
consideration of the
Government.
Action Taken
Proposal for redevelopment
plan of the NSD campus and
its modernization has been
sent to the Government and
is under process.
The NSD has got a separate
video library which has got a
rich collection. The main
library of the NSD is
functioning on modern lines.
It is fully computerized and
provides On-Line Public
Access Catalogue (OPAAC). It
has got a rich collection of
plays, critical texts in English,
Hindi and other regional
languages about the art and
craft of the theatre. The
National School of Drama is
in the process of setting up a
Documentation and Archiving
Unit.
It is for the Government of
India to extend help to the
State Governments in setting
up Repertory Companies and
resident theatre companies and
also smaller theatre groups in
all major States of India. This
will provide a great impetus
to theatre activities in India.
Since its inception in 1964-
65, the Repertory Company
has produced a variety of
plays ranging from the stylized
musicals to realistic
contemporary works of Indian
drama and also adaptation of
The Committee may be informed
about the latest position of
setting up a Documentation and
Archiving Unit.
The Committee has made its
observations about this in
succeeding para.
The Committee had made
recommendations of far-reaching
significance regarding setting up
of Repertory Company in the
States including the Repertory
Company under the NSD. A
glance at the reply submitted to

46
12 3
the country. It should have a
close rapport with the Sangeet
Natak Academies at the Centre
and in the States, and offer
technical and artistic support
to its counterparts in the
States. (9.156)
The Repertory Company
should be a relatively
independent unit under a
full-time Director, working
under the umbrella of the
NSD. The Director’s status
and emoluments should be
equal to those of a Professor
in the School. (9.157)
The remuneration and service
conditions of the artists in the
Repertory Company must be
improved. There should be an
artist’s hostel. The artist’s
strength also needs to be
increased. (9.158)
foreign language plays. The
Repertory travels extensively
all over India and also abroad
whenever possible. It is,
however, not feasible to offer
technical and artistic support
to the Repertory Companies
in the States.
The Repertory Company is
headed by a full time Chief of
the Repertory who is in the
Professor’s scale of pay. It is
functioning under the umbrella
of the NSD.
The remuneration of the artists
in the Repertory Company has
been revised from time to
time but this is not
commensurate with the
excellence of the artistes and
needs to be looked at in a
sustained manner. Further, the
facility of mandatory provident
fund contributions, the usual
medical benefits, LTC and
residential accommodation has
not been given to the artistes.
However, the NSD has sent
its proposals to the
Government to provide these
facilities to the artistes which
are yet not approved by the
the Committee reveals that
nothing concrete has been done
in this regard and the proposals
relating to remuneration of the
artists in the Repertory
Company, facility of mandatory
Provident Fund, medical benefit,
LTC, residential accommodation
are pending with the
Government. The proposal to
increase artists is also waiting
the clearance from the
Government. So is the case of
structure and pay scale of
technical and artistic staff. Re-
development plan is also stuck
with the Government. The
Committee expresses its anguish
over such a state of affairs.

47
12 3
Government. This needs an
urgent consideration.
Action Taken
The remuneration of the
artistes in the Repertory
Company has been revised
from time to time by the
competent authority and the
last revision has been made in
July 2010. Their gratuity, LTC
and medical facility have not
been revived.
There is no hostel for the
artists of the Repertory
Company. The fund required
to provide the hostel has to
be sanctioned by the
Government and thereafter
necessary steps will be taken.
In order to further extend the
artistic reach of the Repertory
Company, increase in the
number of artistes is of
paramount importance and
proposals have been made to
the Government in this regard.
The structure and pay scales
of the technical and
supporting staff in the
Repertory Company needs to
be revised and a proposal in
this regard along with the
redevelopment plan of the
campus has been sent to the
Government and is under
consideration.
Under an administrative
arrangement at the direction
of the Government, the
‘Meghdoot’ premises in
Rabindra Bhavan have been
vacated by the NSD.
However, keeping in view the
The structure and pay scales
of the technical and
supporting staff in the
Company need to be reviewed
in the light of its future needs.
(9.159)
The ‘Meghdoot’ premises,
where an open-air theatre is
located, can be developed, into
a full-fledged set-up for
the Repertory Company’s
activities. (9.160)
The Committee would like to
have latest about NSD’s request
to transfer the Meghdoot
Premises of Ravinder Bhawan
back to NSD.

48
12 3
The Constitution
The NSD’s memorandum of
association and allied rules and
regulations may be
appropriately amended along
the lines of the
recommendations in Section 10
of Chapter 7. (9.161)
Director’s Status
The salary, perquisites and
powers of the School’s
Director should be on par with
those of the Directors of
the Indian Institutes of
Technology. (9.162)
expanding space requirement
of the School, the Meghdoot
is an ideal performance venue
for the NSD and it is NSD’s
request that the same is
transferred back with some
mutual adjustment of space
between NSD and SNA.
With regard to appropriately
amending the NSD’s
Memorandum of Association
and allied rules, the NSD
Society has adopted the
following alterations:-
Item 7.97 section (b) to read
as follows:-
(b) 5 persons from theatre/
drama departments of
universities, theatre training
institutes, repertory companies
from all over the country, to
be co-opted by the Society.
Item 7.97 section (1) to read
as follows:-
1. President – to be appointed
by the President of India, on
the basis of panels drawn up
by search committees
consisting of eminent persons.
As per the recommendations
of the Haksar Committee, the
Government has to take a
decision on the revision of the
pay scale of the Director,
NSD at par with those of
Directors of IITs. However,
it may be mentioned that the
present pay scale of Director,
NSD is Rs.37400-67000 with
Grade Pay of Rs.10000/--
which is below the pay scale
of the Directors of IITs.
The Committee would like to
have one-to-one response to the
recommendations of HPRC
regarding amending the NSD’s
MOA and allied rules, as
contained in Section 10, Chapter
7 of the Report.
The Committee has elsewhere
commented about this.

49
12 3
Action Taken
The Government has agreed
for a five years term or more
or 60 years of age whichever
is earlier to the Director, NSD.
Chairperson of the NSD
Society is appointed by the
President of India. He/She is
invariably a person of high
eminence in the field of theatre
and works in an honorary
capacity.
The Director should have a
minimum term of five years.
Chairperson
The Chairperson of the NSD
should be a person of high
eminence in public life who
has deep interest in culture
and particularly in drama. He
will be appointed by the
President of India and will
work in an honorary capacity.
(9.163)
Reply Noted.
GENERAL OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS
31. Haksar Committee thus, was a path breaking report on the issues concerning these
Akademis and NSD and its recommendations are as relevant today as they were about two
decades ago, when its Report was submitted. The Haksar Committee, in fact, had pointed
out many grey areas in the working of these institutions that needed to be rectified
urgently. The Committee is at a loss to find that the major recommendations of the Haksar
Committee were waiting to be taken up till today, not to speak of their implementation. The
Government appears to have given up or forgotten this Report as was evident from the
missing files relating to this Report. There appears to be no sense of urgency in this regard,
neither with the Akademis nor the Government.
32. The action taken replies submitted by the Ministry presents a disappointing picture.
The Ministry had conveniently passed on action taken replies obtained from the Akademis
and NSD to this Committee without adding its comments/response thereon. It reflects either
a lack of seriousness or helplessness on the Ministry’s part in improving the working of our
premier cultural institutions. It appears that things have got stuck between Government’s
helplessness/inaction and the Akademis’ autonomy. The element of accountability was
conspicuous by its absence both in the case of Akademis and the Ministry.
33. The Committee feels that the Akademis’ autonomy and Government’s role remain
sensitive aspect till date which needs to be resolved soon to the satisfaction of all. The
Committee is of the view that there should be a fine balance between institutional
autonomy and their financial accountability to Parliament. The Committee hastens to add
that while it does not favour the Government’s control over the Akademis, the Parliament’s
right to know if the moneys sanctioned by it were being spent in the intended manner and
the purpose, also cannot be denied. Having said this, the Committee recommends that the
Government should set up a mechanism to resolve the issues relating to Akademis’
autonomy and their accountability in consultation with all the stakeholders including the

50
Akademis, Union as well as State Governments. The Committee would like to be informed
about the efforts made in this regard.
34. The Committee notes that the Indira Gandhi National Centre for the Arts (IGNCA)
which was set up in the year 1987 could not be reviewed by the Haksar Committee since
it was just set up. Now, that it has completed more than two decades, the Committee feels
that the functioning of IGNCA also needs to be similarly reviewed.
35. The Committee feels that the Government should have been more serious while
dealing with the matters of our premier cultural bodies that are responsible particularly in
this fast changing world when there is a greater need to reinforce our cultural values. Our
cultural institutions have to be more pro-active and careful in sensitizing the public in
general and youth in particular.
36. In this context, the Committee would like to quote the observations made by the
Haksar Committee, which appropriately echoes this Committee’s views as well, on the
entire issue:
“…those concerned, in one way or another, with the entire field of culture have to
sensitize themselves to the fact that our country is involved in complex and even
turbulent processes of our economic, political, social and cultural transformation.
Factors of continuity are constantly in tussle with factors of change. We recognize
the validity and creative role of the market forces in the area of production, material
goods and services. That recognition does not blind us to the dire necessity of
relating development processes to the critical need for culture and education. In our
view, our biggest challenge lies in relating education, culture and development. The
integral nexus between these has yet to be conceptualized. Our Departments of
Culture and the Central Akademis as well as State Akademis have devoted hardly
any attention to finding an answer to the nagging question: Are culture and
education necessary pre-conditions to the development of a good society and for
ensuring the quality of life, howsoever defined, of millions upon millions of our
people? Must our response to the “hunger of the heart” and the “famine of the
brain” await, in a sequential manner, the response to the minimum needs dictated
by hunger of the body?”

51
MINUTES

52

53
VI
SIXTH MEETING
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Tuesday the 18 th January, 2011 in Committee Room
‘C’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Sitaram Yechury — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Ramdas Agarwal
3. Shri Shadi Lal Batra
4. Shri Narendra Kashyap
5. Shri Pyarimohan Mohapatra
6. Shri Syed Azeez Pasha
7. Shri Thomsa Sangma
8. Prof. Saif-ud-Din Soz
9. Shri Vikram Verma
LOK SABHA
10. Shrimati Bhavana Gawali Patil
11. Dr. Mahesh Joshi
12. Shri P. Karunakaran
13. Shrimati Ranee Narah
14. Shri Sharief-ud-din Shariq
15. Shri Shatrughan Sinha
16. Shri K.C. Venugopal
SECRETARIAT
Shri Jagdish Kumar, Director
Shrimati Nidhi Chaturvedi, Assistant Director
MINISTRY OF CULTURE
1. Shri Jawhar Sircar, Secretary
2. Shri N.C. Goel, Joint Secretary
3. Ms. Rubina Ali, Deputy Secretary
53

54
INDIRA GANDHI NATIONAL CENTRE FOR THE ARTS
1. Prof. Jyotindra Jain, Member Secretary
2. Shri Pyarelal, Joint Secretary
SANGEET NATAK AKADEMI
1. Ms. Leela Samson, Chairperson
2. Shri J.P. Kastuar, Secretary
SAHITYA AKADEMI
Shri A. Krishnamurthy, Secretary
LALIT KALA AKADEMI
Shri Sudhakar Sharma, Secretary
NATIONAL SCHOOL OF DRAMA
Dr. Anuradha Kapur, Director
2. The Chairman while welcoming the Members of the Committee and representatives of
Ministry of Culture and those of the autonomous bodies viz; Indira Gandhi National Centre for
Arts, Sangeet Natak Akademi, Sahitya Akademi, Lalit Kala Akademi and National School of Drama,
also extended good wishes for the New Year to everyone. Then, the Committee took up for
examination, the functioning of three National Akademies, National School of Drama and Indira
Gandhi National Centre for Arts (IGNCA) - the premier bodies engaged in promotion of our
civilization through art, culture and literature. There was a common perception that their working
left much to be desired and these cultural institutions have not been able to achieve the desired
objectives. The Committee sought explanation for this. It also wanted to know about the status of
implementation of various recommendations of the Haksar Committee Report that went into
working of the three National Akademies and the National School of Drama.
3. The Secretary, Ministry of Culture gave an overview of the functioning of the three National
Akademies, National School of Drama and Indira Gandhi National Centre for the Arts and various
issues and constraints faced by them. The representatives of the organizations also presented their
views/problems one-by-one. The Director, National School of Drama emphasized the need to create
cultural awareness through education in children in coordination with Ministry of Human Resource
Development. Further, he apprised the Committee about the need for strengthening National School
of Drama as training school. The Member Secretary, IGNCA, briefed about the activities and
problems being faced by IGNCA. The Secretary, Lalit Kala Akademi elaborated the plans of Lalit
Kala Akademi for future development. The Committee emphasized the need for the translation of
the books in Indian Languages while discussing issues with the Sahitya Akademi.
4. Members raised several queries to which the representatives replied, the Chairman directed
the Secretary, Ministry of Culture to furnish written replies to some of the queries raised by the
Members at the earliest.
5. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
6. The meeting adjourned at 5.36 
P.M.

55
XII
TWELFTH MEETING
The Committee met at 3.30 P.M. on Thursday, the 11 th August, 2011 in Room 62, First
Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Sitaram Yechury — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Ramdas Agarwal
3. Shri Shadi Lal Batra
4. Shri Thomas Sangma
5. Prof. Saif-ud-Din Soz
6. Shri Vikram Verma
LOK SABHA
7. Dr. Mahesh Joshi
8. Shri Sharief-ud-Din Shariq
9. Shri Dushyant Singh
10. Shri Rakesh Singh
11. Shri Shatrughan Sinha
12. Shri Anurag Singh Thakur
SECRETARIAT
Shri N.K. Singh, Joint Secretary
Shri Jagdish Kumar, Director
Shri Swarabji B., Joint Director
Shrimati Nidhi Chaturvedi, Assistant Director
2. The Committee considered the draft 171
st Report on the “Fun ctioning of Sahitya Akademi,
Lalit Kala Akademi, Sangeet Natak Akademi and National School of Drama” and 172 nd Report on
the “Development of Tourism in North-Eastern Region”. The Committee, after some discussion,
adopted both the Reports with some additions/modifications.
3. The Committee also authorized its Chairman to nominate the Members of the Committee and
fix the date for presentation/laying of these Reports to the Parliament.
55

56
4. The Committee decided to meet again during the current session to review the work done
by it, during the year gone by.
5. The meeting then adjourned at 4.00 P.M. to meet again on 17 th August, 2011.

Printed at : Bengal Offset Works, 335, Khajoor Road, Karol Bagh, New Delhi-110005.