Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
RAJYA SABHA
ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE
REPORT NO.
263
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on th December )14 2018
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on th December )14 2018
TWO HUNDRED SIXTY THIRD REPORT
December, 2018/Agrahayana, 1940 (Saka)
Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/
Observations of the Committee contained in its
Two Hundred and Fifty Seventh Report on
the Demands for Grants (2018-19) of
the Ministry of Civil Aviation

Website : http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail : rsc-tt@sansad.nic.in

46
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE
TWO HUNDRED SIXTY THIRD REPORT
Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/
Observations of the Committee contained in its
Two Hundred and Fifty Seventh Report on
the Demands for Grants (2018-19) of
the Ministry of Civil Aviation
 (Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 14th December, 2018)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 14th December, 2018)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
December, 2018/Agrahayana, 1940 (Saka)
Hindi version of this publication is also available


CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ....................................................................................... (i)-(ii)
2. I NTRODUCTION ...................................................................................................................... (iii)
3. A CRONYMS ............................................................................................................................ (iv )-(vi)
4. R EPORT ............................................................................................................................... .. 1-29
Chapter I : Recommendations/Observations which have been Accepted by ................ 2-17
the Ministry
Chapter II : Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not ............... 18-22
Desire to Pursue in view of the Replies of the Ministry
Chapter III : Recommendations/Observations in Respect of which Replies ................... 23-28
of the Ministry have not been Accepted by the Committee
Chapter IV : Recommendations/Observations in Respect of which the final ................. 29
Replies of the Ministry are Still Awaited
5. R ECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS — A T A G LANCE .......................................................... 30-31
6. M INUTES ............................................................................................................................... 33-36
7. A NNEXURES ........................................................................................................................... 37-44

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(2018-19)
(Constituted on 1st September, 2018)
1. Shri Derek O’Brien   —  Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Ritabrata Banerjee
3. Shri Sambhaji Chhatrapati
4. Dr. L. Hanumanthaiah
5. Dr. Sonal Mansingh
6. Shri Praful Patel
7. Kumari Selja
8. Shri Rewati Raman Singh
9. Shri Narendra Kumar Swain
10. Shri Vinay Dinu Tendulkar
LOK  SABHA
11. Shri Subrata Bakshi
12. Shri Ramcharan Bohra
13. Shri Vinod Chavda
14. Shri Rajeshbhai Naranbhai Chudasama
15. Kumari Arpita Ghosh
16. Shri Parvatagouda Chandangouda Gaddigoudar
17. Shri Rahul Kaswan
18. Maj. Gen. Bhuwan Chandra Khanduri, A VSM (Retd.)
19. Shri P . Kumar
20. Shri Kristappa Nimmala
21. Shri Ram Charitra Nishad
22. Shri Rajesh Pandey
23. Shri Rajesh Ranjan (Pappu Yadav)
24. Shri Ponguleti Srinivasa Reddy
25. Shri Ram Kumar Sharma
26. Shri Dushyant Singh
27. Shri Kunwar Haribansh Singh
28. Shri Rakesh Singh
29. Shri Shatrughan Prasad Sinha
30. Shri Manoj Kumar Tiwari
31. Shri K.C. V enugopal
(i)

SECRETARIAT
Shrimati Sunita Sekaran, Joint Secretary
Shri Swarabji B., Director
Shrimati Monica Baa, Additional Director
Shri Pushpender Verma, Deputy Secretary
Shrimati Catherine John L., Under Secretary
Shri K.V. Ramana Rao, Committee Officer
(ii)

INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman, Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport, Tourism and
Culture, having been authorised by the Committee to present on its behalf, do hereby present this Two
Hundred and Sixty Third Report on Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations
of the Committee contained in its Two Hundred and Fifty Seventh Report on the Demands for Grants
(2018-19) of the Ministry of Civil Aviation.
1. The Two Hundred and Fifty Seventh Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee
on Transport, Tourism and Culture was presented on the 6th March, 2018 to the Parliament.
2. The Action Taken Replies on the recommendations of the Committee contained in its Two Hundred
and Fifty Seventh Report was received from the Ministry of Civil Aviation on 30th July, 2018.
3. The Committee considered and adopted the Report in its meeting held on the 26th November, 2018.
DEREK O’ BRIEN
N
EW D ELHI; Chairman,
November 26, 2018 Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Agrahayana 5,  1940 (Saka) Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture,
Rajya Sabha.
(iii)

                  ACRONYMS
AA&ES : Administrative Approval and Expenditure Sanction
AAI : Airports Authority of India
AAIB : Aircraft Accident Investigation Bureau
AD : Assistant Director
AERA : Airports Economic Regulatory Authority
ASO : Aviation Security Officer
A TC : Air Traffic Control
A TF : Aviation Turbine Fuel
BCAS : Bureau of Civil Aviation Security
CAPEX : Capital Expenditure
CAPF : Central Armed Police Forces
CASLO : Civil Aviation Security Liaison Officer
CA T : Central Administrative Tribunal
CCI : Competition Commission of India
CE : Civil Enclave
CENV AT : Central Value Added Tax
CMD : Chairman & Managing Director
Cr. : Crore
DG : Director General
DGCA : Directorate General of Civil Aviation
DIAL : Delhi International Airport Limited
Dom. : Domestic
DoNER : Department of Development of North Eastern Region
DoP&T : Departm ent of Personnel and Training
ECIL : Electronic Corporation of India Limited
EOI : Expression of Interest
F A T A : Foreign Aircrew Temporary Authorization
FTO : Flight Training Organization
GA TE : Graduate Aptitude Test Engineering
(iv)

GMR : Grandhi Mallikarjuna Rao
GST : Goods & Service Tax
H A L : Hindustan Aeronautics Limited
HCI : Hotel Corporation of India
HT : High Tension
IAF : Indian Air Force
IBM : International Business Machines Corporation
ICAO : International Civil Aviation Organization
IGI : Indira Gandhi International Airport
IGRUA : Indira Gandhi Rashtriya Uran Akademi
ILS : Instrument Landing System
Intl. : International
ITB : Integrated Terminal Building
JD&DD : Joint Director & Deputy Director
JE : Junior Executive
KINFRA : Kerala Industrial Infrastructure Development Corporation
KVP : Kilovolt Peak
MIAL : Mumbai International Airport Limited
MLCP : Multi Level Car Parking
MOCA : Ministry of Civil Aviation
MOU : Memorandum of Understanding
MPP A : Million Passenger Per Annum
MPP A : Million Passengers Per Annum
MRP : Maximum Retail Price
MTOW : Maximum Take-off Weight
NA TS : National Air Traffic Services
NCAP : National Civil Aviation Policy
Pax : Passenger
PDC : Probable Date of Completion
Ph. : Phase
(v)

PHP : Peak Hour Passengers
PWD : Public Works Department
QCBS : Quality and Cost Based Selection
RBD : Reservation Booking Designator
RCS : Regional Connectivity Scheme
RCS-UDAN : Regional Connectivity Scheme-Ude Desh ka Aam Naagrik
RE : Revised Estimate
SASO : Senior Aviation Security Officer
SOP : Standard Operating Procedure
SRD : Special Recruitment Drive
TEFR : T echno-Economic Feasibility Report
U K : United Kingdom
UPSC : Union Public Service Commission
V A T : Value Added Tax
(vi)

1
REPORT
The Report of the Department-Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport, Tourism
and Culture deals with the Action Taken by the Ministry on the Observations/Recommendations as
contained in its Two Hundred and Fifty Seventh Report on Demands for Grants (2018-19) of the
Ministry of Civil Aviation which was presented to both the Houses of Parliament on 6th March,
2018.
The Action Taken Replies were received from the Ministry on 30th July, 2018 in respect of
all the observations/recommendations contained in the 257th Report. The replies have been categorized
as follows:—
Chapter I : Recommendations/ Observations which have been accepted by the Ministry:
Paragraph Nos.: 10, 10A, 13, 16, 22, 23, 26, 37, 39, 43, 51, 58, 61, 66, 70,
73, 76, 78, 82, 86, 88, 91, 93, 98, 103, 115, 119, 122, 129.
T
OTAL: 29
Chapter II : Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue
in view of the replies of the Ministry:-
Paragraph Nos.: 33, 55, 66A, 80, 84, 108, 113, 124, 126.
T
OTAL: 9
Chapter III : Recommendations/ Observations in respect of which replies of the Ministry
have not been accepted by the Committee:
Paragraph Nos.: 28, 41, 107, 109, 117, 128.
T
OTAL: 6
Chapter IV : Recommendations/ Observations in respect of which the final replies of the
Ministry are still awaited.
Paragraph Nos.: 30
T
OTAL: 1
3. The Committee desires that final replies in respect of those recommendations/observations
which have been categorized as interim replies by the Committee should be furnished at the
earliest.

CHAPTER-I
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY
THE MINISTRY
COMPARATIVE TABLE ON BE 2017-18, RE 2017-18 AND BE 2018-19
Recommendation/Observation
1. The Committee notes that 
` 6602.86 crores has been allocated for the Ministry of Civil
Aviation for 2018-19 against the allocation of ` 2710.30 crores at RE stage in 2017-18. The
Committee desires that the Ministry may take steps to ensure that the allocated funds are utilized
fully. (Para 10)
Reply of the Ministry
1.1. The Ministry has noted the suggestions of the Committee.
Further Recommendation/Observation
1.2. The Committee notes the reply.
Recommendation/Observation
2. The Committee further notes that 
` 4469.50 crores has been allocated under a new head for the
purchase of two new aircraft for Special Extra Section Flight operations. If this amount is deducted
from BE 2018-19, the remaining amount is ` 2133.36 crores. This is lower than RE 2017-18. Keeping
in view the considerable growth of the civil aviation sector, Committee is of the considered view that
with the present allocation, it would be difficult to run the existing schemes and other activities
undertaken by the Ministry. Therefore, the Committee recommends that the Ministry should actively
pursue the matter of increasing the allocation in the first supplementary and at the RE stage in the
current financial year 2018-19, with the Ministry of Finance. (Para 10A)
Reply of the Ministry
2.1 The proposal for increase in allocation of funds for Ministry of Civil Aviation for 2018-19 will
be taken up with Ministry of Finance through 1
st Supplementary grant and at RE stage as well.
Further Recommendation/Observation
2.2 The Committee notes the reply.
Recommendation/Observation
3. The Committee notes that there is a shortfall of 
` 70.06 crores in budgetary allocation for
2018-19 on the Capital side and that the Ministry of Finance has not intimated any reason for
this reduction. Keeping in view the great surge in the civil aviation sector, Committee is of the
considered view that lack of sufficient funds should not be a reason for inadequate allocation of
funds for the vital schemes/projects of the Ministry. Therefore, the Committee recommends that the
Ministry should actively pursue the matter of increasing the allocation at the RE stage in the
current financial year 2018-19, with the Ministry of Finance. (Para 13)
2

3
Reply of the Ministry
3.1. The proposal for increase in allocation of funds for Ministry of Civil Aviation for 2018-19
will be taken up with Ministry of Finance through 1 st Supplementary grant and at RE stage as
well.
Further Recommendation/Observation
3.2. The Committee notes the reply.
TWELFTH FIVE YEAR PLAN
Recommendation/Observation
4. The Committee takes note of the projects initiated by the Ministry during the 12th Five Year
Plan. (Para 16)
Reply of the Ministry
4.1. Noted.
Further Recommendation/Observation
4.2. The Committee notes the reply.
AIR INDIA LIMITED
Recommendation/Observation
5. The Committee appreciates Air India for making operational profits. The Committee hopes
that Air India would register further profits in the coming months. (Para 22)
Reply of the Ministry
5.1. Noted.
Further Recommendation/Observation
5.2. The Committee notes the reply.
Recommendation/Observation
6. The Committee observes that the shortfall in Equity Infusion in 2017-18 was to the tune of
`468.52 crores. The Committee is of the view that such shortfall adversely impacts the financial
and operational performance of the company as the same creates liquidity issues for the company
whereby the company is unable to meet its financial commitments and to maintain its the operational
efficiency. The Committee, therefore, is of the considered view that such short fall, at this stage
when the company is presently placed at a critical position in achieving the TAP targets, should
be avoided. Since the committed financial support from the Government is vital to sustain the
momentum of performance of Air India, the Committee strongly recommends that the full amount
of equity infusion should be restored to Air India. The Committee further recommends that the
Ministry of Civil Aviation may take up this matter with the Ministry of Finance for the restoration
of the full amount of Equity Infusion. (Para 23)

4
Reply of the Ministry
6.l. The proposal for increase in allocation of funds for Ministry of Civil Aviation for 2018-19 will
be taken up with Ministry of Finance through 1 st Supplementary grant and at RE stage as well.
Further Recommendation/Observation
6.2. The Committee notes the reply.
AIRPORTS AUTHORITY OF INDIA
Recommendation/Observation
7. The Committee notes that the work has been completed at Pakyong airport . (Para 26)
Reply of the Ministry
7.1. Noted.
Further Recommendation/Observation
7.2. The Committee notes the reply.
GREEN INITIATIVES TAKEN UP BY AAI
Recommendation/Observation
8. The Committee realizes that so far, the growth of airport infrastructure has not been commensurate
with the growth in the number of passengers and the huge growth in civil aviation sector . Keeping
in view the pace at which Indian aviation is growing, the Committee recommends that AAI and
other Airport Operators should bolster their efforts to build new infrastructure and to expand
existing airports to enhance the facilities available at airports. Decongesting the airports, decongesting
the runway and the airspace should be the top priority of the Government. Airport facilities need
to be upgraded on an urgent basis. While constructing new airports, a futuristic plan keeping pace
with the growth in the Civil Aviation sector is needed. (Para 37)
Reply of the Ministry
8.1. AAI has planned development of infrastructure with a CAPEX of ` 20000 Cr. in next 4-5
years. Details as per Annexure-I.
8.2. For construction of New Greenfield airports, MOCA has granted in-Principle approval for
setting up 20 Greenfield airports as per details given in Annexure-II.
(1) DIAL has finalized the revised Master Plan 2016, with the support from renowned
international master planning consultant, M/s Landrun and Brown and in consultation
with the stakeholders including MoCA and AAI. Master Plan 2016 proposes further
development of landside terminals and airside facilities to correspond to the traffic
growth anticipated in next 20 years (anticipated passenger traffic-109.3 MPPA, Cargo-
1.78 million ton per year). These developments will be undertaken in a phased manner
so that, additional capacities are available in time for anticipated growth of traffic. This
includes expansion of Terminal 1, Terminal 2, Terminal 3 and development of future
Terminal 4.Further, DIAL has recently engaged NATS, a UK firm who is a global

5
provider of air traffic management consulting services. As part of their engagement,
NATS will collaborate with the Airports Authority of India, Air Navigation Services to
identify procedures and air space enhancements to maximize the aircraft handling capacity
of IGI Airport going into the future.
(2) To remove the congestion at IGI Airport, Government of India, Ministry of Civil Aviation
has granted ‘in principle’ approval for setting up of Noida International Airport, Jewar,
Uttar Pradesh on 8th May, 2018, which is at tendering stage. Moreover, under RCS, M/
o Defence has granted approval for starting operations from Hindon Air Force station.
(3) Congestion at Cochin International Airport: To remove the congestion at Cochin airport,
M/s. Cochin International Airport Limited has started construction of new terminal
building which will not only decrease the congestion at the airport but will sustain the
passenger capacity till 2035.
(4) Congestion at Bangalore International Airport: To remove the congestion at Bangalore
airport, M/s. Bangalore International Airport Limited has started construction of 2
nd
terminal building and 2nd Runway will be ready by second half of 2019. The tendering
process has been completed along with the completion of runway, which will be ready
for operationalization till 2021. Besides, 20-30 more parking stands will be added by
2019.
(5) Congestion at Hyderabad International Airport: To remove the congestion at Hyderabad
airport, M/s. Hyderabad International Airport Limited has started the process to increase
the existing terminal capacity.
(6) Congestion at Mumbai International Airport: Mumbai International Airport has been saturated
and there is no land availability for expansion of the airport. However, a new Greenfield
Airport at Navi Mumbai, which is 40 Kms away from Mumbai, has been approved by
Government of India. City & Industries Development Corporation of Maharashtra (CIDCO)
is the nodal agency for the project and has completed the tendering process in February,
2017 where MIAL emerged as the successful bidder and work already started. Concession
Agreement was signed with Navi Mumbai International Airport Pvt. Ltd. (NMIAL), in
the presence of Hon‘ble Chief Minister, Govt. of Maharashtra on 8
th January, 2018.
Memorandum of Understanding (‘MoU’) signed at Navi Mumbai between Government
of India and M/s. Navi Mumbai International Airport Private Limited on 11 th April, 2018.
Further Recommendation/Observation
8.3. The Committee notes the reply.
BUREAU OF CIVIL A VIATION SECURITY (BCAS )
Recommendation/Observation
9. The Committee takes note of the allocation made for BCAS. (Para 39)
Reply of the Ministry
9.1. Noted.

6
Further Recommendation/Observation
9.2. The Committee notes the reply.
DIRECTORATE GENERAL OF CIVIL A VIATION (DGCA)
Recommendation/Observation
10. The Committee notes the allocation made for DGCA. (Para 43)
Reply of the Ministry
10.1. Noted.
Further Recommendation/Observation
10.2. The Committee notes the reply.
INDIRA GANDHI RASHTRIYA URAN AKADEMI (IGRUA)
Recommendation/Observation
11. The Committee desires that IGRUA may be allocated adequate funds to ensure that the steps
taken to make IGRUA self-sufficient turn out to be fruitful. (Para 51)
Reply of the Ministry
11.1. The Ministry of Civil Aviation in order to improve the functioning of IGRUA has appointed
a Consultant cum Transaction Advisor for formulating a strategic roadmap for the structuring and
development of IGRUA after comprehensive study of IGRUA‘s current capacity and Indian Market
Demand Assessment.
Further Recommendation/Observation
11.2. The Committee notes the reply.
HELIPORT AT ROHINI
Recommendation/Observation
12. The Committee is happy to note that the heliport at Rohini has been operationalized. The
Committee is of the view that the helicopter industry has tremendous potential to provide services
in the tourism sector, disaster management etc. The Committee desires that more such heliports may
be set up throughout the country. The Committee reiterates its earlier recommendation that Air India
and Pawan Hans can work together to ensure seamless travel on hub and spokes basis-bringing
passengers from smaller places to various tourist spots. (Para 58)
Reply of the Ministry
12.1. In addition to Rohini Helipad, a heli-hub at Juhu, Mumbai is already operational. Further,
regarding heli-hubs in North East Region and in Southern Region of the Country, the State Governments
of Assam and Andhra Pradesh have been requested for land allocation. Pawan Hans Ltd. has plans
to develop more such heliports in other regions i.e. Western Region, Southern Region & Eastern
Region. Regarding, Air India and Pawan Hans to work together to ensure seamless travel on hub

7
and spokes basis-bringing passengers from smaller places to various tourist spots, a committee has
been formed represented by the officers from Air India and Pawan Hans, based on the commercial/
financial viability decisions are taken.
Further Recommendation/Observation
12.2. The Committee notes the reply.
UNSERVED/UNDERSERVED AIRPORTS
Recommendation/Observation
13. The Committee feels that the development of un-served and under-served airports would give
a major boost to air connectivity to various small cities and towns. It will further give a fillip
to the economic development in these areas in terms of job creation and infrastructure development.
There should not be any unreasonable restriction on the allocation of fund to the demands of the
Ministry of Civil Aviation as the money spent will spur the overall growth of the country especially
in view of the Regional Connectivity Scheme UDAN. (Para 61)
Reply of the Ministry
13.1. Noted
Further Recommendation/Observation
13.2. The Committee notes the reply.
REGIONAL CONNECTIVITY SCHEME
Recommendation/Observation
14. The Committee takes note of the initiatives taken under RCS. Air connectivity is the main
mode of transport for majority of the population of North East to other parts of the country and
these States are demanding overall economic development. The Committee feels that better air
connectivity is the only solution to opening up the economy of North Eastern States. Therefore, the
Committee notes that it is very essential to give a preferential treatment to the North Eastern States
as far as air connectivity is concerned. (Para 66)
Reply of the Ministry
14.1. List of RCS routes / networks involving airports of States of North East awarded to Selected
Airline Operator (SAO) in 1st round of bidding under RCS-UDAN is as under :
Sl.N. Routes/Networks Route (Only RCS Routes) Selected Airline Operator
1 Shillong -Silchar -Shillong Shillong To Imphal
-Imphal -Shillong -Dimapur Imphal To Shillong
-Shillong -Aizawl -Kolkata Shillong To Dimapur
-Aizawl -Shillong -Agartala Dimapur To Shillong Deccan Air
-Shillong Shillong To Aizawl
Aizawl To Shillong
Shillong To Agartala
Agartala To Shillong

8
List of RCS routes / networks involving airports/helipads of States of North East awarded
to Selected Airline Operator(SAO) in 2nd round of bidding under RCS-UDAN Version 2.0
Sl.No. RCS Routes/Networks RCS Route Operator
Kolkata-Pakyong-Guwahati--Pakyong Guwahati To Pakyong
-Kolkata Pakyong To Guwahati Spicejet
Pakyong To Kolkata
Kolkata To Pakyong
Kolkata-Jorhat-Passighat-Jorhat-Kolkata Jorhat To Kolkata
Jorhat To Passighat
Zoom Air
Passighat To Jorhat
Kolkata To Jorhat
Kolkata-Jorhat-Tezu-Jorhat-Kolkata Jorhat To Kolkata
Jorhat To Tezu Zoom Air
Tezu To Jorhat
Kolkata To Jorhat
Kolkata-Lilabari-Kolkata Lilabari To Kolkata
Spicejet
Kolkata To Lilabari
Kolkata-Tezpur Kolkata To Tezpur Zoom Air
Lucknow-Hindan-Kolkata-Jorhat-Kolkata- Jorhat To Kolkata Indigo
Hindan-Lucknow Kolkata To Jorhat
Delhi-Pakyong-Kolkata-Bokaro-Kolkata- Bokaro To Kolkata
Pakyong-Delhi Kolkata To Bokaro
Kolkata To Pakyong
Spicejet
Pakyong To Delhi
Pakyong To Kolkata
Delhi To Pakyong
Tezpur-Kolkata T ezpur To Kolkata Zoom Air
Shillong-Tezpur-Lilabari-Kolkata Lilabari- Kolkata To Lilabari
Tezpur-Shillong Lilabari To Kolkata
Lilabari To Tezpur AAA A viation

9
Tezpur To Lilabari
Tezpur To Shillong
Shillong To Tezpur
Imphal-Moreh(Heliport)-Imphal Moreh (Heliport) To
Imphal Pawan Hans
Imphal To Moreh
(Heliport)
Imphal -Tamenglong (Heliport)- Jiribam (Heliport) To
Jiribam (Heliport)-Tamenglong (Heliport) Tamenglong (Heliport)
-Imphal Tamenglong (Heliport)
To Imphal Pawan Hans
Tamenglong (Heliport)
To Jiribam (Heliport)
Imphal To Tamenglong
(Heliport)
Imphal -Thanlon (Heliport)- Parbung (Heliport) To
Parbung (Heliport)-Thanlon (Heliport)- Thanlon (Heliport)
Imphal Thanlon (Heliport) To
Imphal Pawan Hans
Thanlon (Heliport) To
Parbung (Heliport)
Imphal To Thanlon
(Heliport)
Guwahati –Tezpur-Jorhat-Dibrugarh Dibrugarh To Jorhat
-Jorhat –Tezpur-Guwahati Jorhat To Dibrugarh Pawan Hans
Jorhat To Tezpur
Tezpur To Jorhat
Guwahati -Nagaon (Heliport)-Tezpur Itanagar (Heliport) To
-Itanagar (Heliport)- Tezpur
Tezpur Nagaon (Heliport)-Guwahati Nagaon (Heliport) To
Guwahati
Nagaon (Heliport) To
Tezpur Skyone Airways
Sl.No. RCS Routes/Networks RCS Route Operator

10
Tezpur To Itanagar
(Heliport)
Tezpur To Nagaon
(Heliport)
Guwahati To Nagaon
(Heliport)
Dibrugarh -Lilabari -Itanagar (Heliport)- Lilabari To Dibrugarh
Lilabari Dibrugarh Lilabari To Itanagar
(Heliport) Skyone Airways
Dibrugarh To Lilabari
Itanagar(Heliport) To
Lilabari
Dibrugarh Daparizo Yinghiong Dibrugarh Daparizo To Yinghiong
Yinghiong To Dibrugarh Skyone Airways
Dibrugarh To Daparizo
Dibrugarh – Passighat-Tuting -Dibrugarh Passighat To Tuting Skyone Airways
Tuting To Dibrugarh
Dibrugarh -Tezu – Walong-Dibrugarh Tezu To Walong
Walong To Dibrugarh Skyone Airways
Dibrugarh To Tezu
Dibrugarh -Itanagar (Heliport) - Ziro To Dibrugarh Heligo
Ziro Dibrugarh
Further Recommendation/Observation
14.2 The Committee notes the reply.
REGIONAL AIR CONNECTIVITY FUND
Recommendation/Observation
15. The Committee hopes that the Regional Air Connectivity Fund would stimulate growth and
development in the Civil Aviation sector . (Para 70)
Reply of the Ministry
15.1. Noted.
Sl.No. RCS Routes/Networks RCS Route Operator

11
Further Recommendation/Observation
15.2. The Committee notes the reply.
NATIONAL A VIATION UNIVERSITY
Recommendation/Observation
16. The Committee hopes that the University will churn out skilled professionals in the field of
Civil Aviation. (Para 73)
Reply of the Ministry
16.1. Noted.
Further Recommendation/Observation
16.2. The Committee notes the reply.
BIO-METRIC ACCESS CONTROL SYSTEMS AT AIRPORTS
Recommendation/Observation
17. The Committee desires that Bio-Metric Access Control Systems may be provided at all the
airports in order to ensure safety and security. The Committee impresses upon the Ministry that
steps should be taken to address the delays in this regard. (Para 76)
Reply of the Ministry
17.1. Electronics Corporation of India Limited (ECIL) a Government of India Enterprise under the
Department of Atomic Energy is the principle system integrator for this project. In order to make
system operational at the earliest, User Acceptance Test (UAT) commenced on 7th Feb, 2018 and
some bugs were reported in the application. However ECIL was not able to make any significant
progress to rectify the bugs and make the system operational. This seriously hampered the system
to go live.
17.2. The matter was accordingly, taken up with CMD, ECIL to resolve the impediments in order
to ensure successful launch of the project in a stipulated timeframe. Also, the matter was taken
up with Department of Atomic Energy through MoCA.
17.3. As result of rigorous follow-up, ECIL communicated on 2/5/2018. ECIL reconstituted it’s
technical team. This team started working on the development of application in May-2018. Currently,
application has been deployed at the Data Center by ECIL and is being assessed and tested by the
stakeholders (Airports). ECIL is working to fix all bugs as reported in the last User acceptance test.
Currently, ECIL is preparing the load testing prerequisites with their technology partner‘s (IBM).
The impediments/issues found during test are expected to be rectified by end of June, 2018.
However, the same could not be fixed by ECIL.
17.4. To expedite the implementation of project, a meeting was held on 06.07.2018 under Chairmanship
of DG , BCAS. In the meeting, ECIL has informed that the load testing of software is likely to
complete by 14
th Aug 2018, which will be followed by bug fixing, if any. Thereafter, the system
would Go-Live for the pass printing activity.

12
Further Recommendation/Observation
17.5. The Committee notes the reply.
HOTEL CORPORATION OF  INDIA LIMITED
Recommendation/Observation
18. The Committee desires that proactive steps should be taken by the Ministry to address the
concerns of the employees of HCIL. (Para 78)
Reply of the Ministry
18.1. The issue of wage revision for unionized category of employees of Hotel Corporation of India
Limited was discussed in the 241 st Board meeting of the company held on 20.3.2018 at Delhi and
it is decided to commence wage negotiations with the unions of all HCI Units. In this regard board
advised Air India to nominate senior officials for negotiation with the unions. In this regard, Air
India vide order dated 2.5.2018 has constituted a Committee to commence wage negotiation with
unions of all HCI Units and asked the Committee to submit its report within 6 months.
Further Recommendation/Observation
18.2. The Committee notes the reply.
GREENFIELD AIRPORT IN KUSHINAGAR, UTTAR PRADESH
Recommendation/Observation
19. The Committee notes that Kushinagar airport has a great potential to attract a large number
of tourists especially the Buddhist tourists who are visiting India and for overall economic development
of the surrounding region. The Committee, therefore, recommends that Government of India should
take necessary steps in co-ordination with the Government of Uttar Pradesh to ensure that the
Kushinagar airport is ready for operationalization soon. (Para 82)
Reply of the Ministry
19.1. Kushinagar Airport belongs to State Government of Uttar Pradesh and is being developed by
them. As per available information airside works are nearing completion. For Terminal Building State
Govt. has to decide on refurbishing of existing Terminal Building or construction of New Terminal
Building.
Further Recommendation/Observation
19.2. The Committee notes the reply.
KESHOD AIRPORT
Recommendation/Observation
20. The Committee notes the progress made with regard to Keshod Airport. (Para 86)
Reply of the Ministry
20.1. Noted.

13
Further Recommendation/Observation
20.2. The Committee notes the reply.
JEW AR AIRPORT
Recommendation/Observation
21. The Committee notes the progress made in respect of Jewar airport. (Para 88)
Reply of the Ministry
21.1. Noted
Further Recommendation/Observation
21.2. The Committee notes the reply.
NEW AIRPORTS
Recommendation/Observation
22. The Committee takes note of the proposals for new airports, accepted by the Government. The
Committee hopes that the construction of these airports will be taken up at the ear liest. (Para 91)
Reply of the Ministry
22.1. MoCA has granted In-principle approval for setting up 20 Greenfield airports by various
developers. Details are given as Annexure-II. Further action for construction of these airports is
to be taken by the State Government/ Project proponent.
Further Recommendation/Observation
22.2.  The Committee notes the reply.
CHANDIGARH AIRPORT
Recommendation/Observation
23. The Committee desires that the concern raised by the Member may be addressed suitably.
(Para 93)
Reply of the Ministry
23.1. Additional check-in-counters have been provided by deploying additional manpower to solve
the problem of long waiting queues at Chandigarh International Airport. Two vending machines
have also been placed at entrance of Airport.
Further Recommendation/Observation
23.2. The Committee notes the reply.
V ACANCIES IN V ARIOUS ORGANIZATIONS OF THE MINISTRY
Recommendation/Observation
24. The Committee notes that at least 2876 posts are lying vacant under various organization of

14
the Ministry of Civil Aviation at a time when a large number of educated youths are unemployed
in our country. The Committee is of the view that the existence of vacancies will hamper the
effective functioning of the organizations. The Committee strongly feels that it is inexcusable that
vacancies exist in such vital organizations. The Committee, therefore, desires that the Ministry
should pursue the matter with UPSC and other concerned agencies so that the bottlenecks in this
regard are sorted out. The Committee further desires that the amendment of Recruitment Rules may
be completed at the earliest. The Committee also recommends that the Ministry should take advance
action anticipating the vacancies in various organizations. (Para 98)
Reply of the Ministry
DGCA
24.1. DGCA has regular monitoring system which not only identifies the number of vacancies but
also chalks out an action plan for filling the same. This ensures that there is no time lost once
a vacancy arises and subsequent action taken to fill it. Further, DGCA has already revised the
Recruitments Rules for the cadres of Air Safety, Aircraft Engineering Directorate and Operations
in which provisions for filling posts on deputation have been enabled. Further, amendment of
Recruitment Rules for the Airworthiness cadres is in an advanced stage which will also allow
recruitment through deputation. This will ensure further filling of vacant posts. Both UPSC and
DoP&T have the mechanism of discussing proposals for recruitment through a single window
system which also speeds up the process. In cases where revival of posts are necessary DGCA
takes timely action for having the same revived by constant monitoring with Department of Expenditure.
BCAS
24.2. Consequent upon the restructuring of BCAS, the sanctioned strength of the organization has
been increased from 191 to 590. The current strength of BCAS has been increased from 130 to
291. The current status of hiring of staff in BCAS is as under:
Group ‘A’ Posts :-
There are three grades in Group  A‘ in BCAS namely Joint Director (JD), Deputy Director
(DD) and Assistant Director (AD). The officers borne on the permanent strength of BCAS have
obtained stay from CA T, Delhi on filling up the posts of JD & DD on deputation basis seeking
increase in percentage in promotion. The next date of hearing is 4
th September, 2018. Further action
in the matter would be taken as per the decision of the CA T.
As regards, filling up the posts of AD, the application received by BCAS, has been submitted
to UPSC on 5 th January, 2018. However, UPSC is yet to indicate the date of personal talk/interview
with suitable applicants. Director General (DG), BCAS has met the Secretary, UPSC for expediting
the selection of the AD. The number of applications received for each post is as under:-
Sl. No. Name of the post No of applications No. of V acancies
1 Joint Director 55 24
2 Deputy Director 68 20
3 Assistant Director 55 30

15
(b) Group ‘B’ Posts:-
The process for filling up of Group  B‘ posts is underway. DG, BCAS personally wrote to
Heads of all CAPFs and other concerned organizations to send the sufficient number of applications
for the post of Senior Aviation Security officer (SASO) and Aviation Security Officer (ASO). In
response, BCAS received 17 numbers of applications for SASO and 29 applications for ASO against
the total vacancies of 46 of SASO and 86 of ASO. However, in view of non-availability of
sufficient officers in the level of SASO & ASO, it was decided to fill up these posts in phased
manner by selecting eligible applicants. Accordingly, 8 SASO and 5 ASO were selected and appointed.
Thereafter, BCAS further invited applications for these posts. The last of receipt of application was
13.07.2018. As decided earlier, after scrutiny, 5 SASOs, 4 ASOs and 2 CASLO Coordinators have
been selected. Appointment letters have already been issued. One of the advantage of filling up
vacancies in phases is that since these posts are to be filled up on deputation, it would help in
avoiding a void due to exodus of staff at one go and would help in maintaining continuity as these
officers would be repatriated in phased manner to their parent organizations.
(c) Group ‘C’ Posts:- The appointment process for Group C‘ posts is completed.
Current Strength of BCAS
Sl. No. Group Sanctioned Filled V acant
1 A 87 32 55
2 B 255 41 214
3 C 248 218 30
Grand Total 590 291 299
AAI
24.3. The updated status of on points pertaining to the recruitment process for filling up 2237
identified vacancies is as below:
 200 posts of JEs were advertised for recruitment on the basis of GATE 2016 Marks.
Offer of appointment to provisionally shortlisted 194 candidates have been issued on
28.03.2018, out of which 103 candidates have joined and some others are under extension.
 The Selection process of 09 PWD candidates under SRD has been completed.
 Out of 538 vacancies of JE under 25% DE quota, selection processes for filling up 220
vacancies have been completed and for 277 vacancies, the selection process is likely to
be completed by July 2018. No departmental candidates were found eligible against 41
vacancies.
 651 candidates have been shortlisted for document verification to be held during July-
August 2018, for filling up 542 vacancies through GATE 2018 Marks.
 Advertisement for Recruitment in other disciplines approximately 908 vacancies through
conduct of online examination will be published by July 2018. Online examination shall

16
be conducted tentatively in September 2018. Selection process likely to be completed by
March 2019.
Further Recommendation/Observation
24.4. The Committee notes the reply.
AIR SEWA
Recommendation/Observation
25. The Committee notes that the Air Sewa initiative has integrated various stakeholders inaviation
sector with whom an air traveller has to interact during the air travel. The Committee appreciates
this initiative which has been launched for the benefit of the air travelers. (Para 103)
Reply of the Ministry
25.1. Noted.
Further Recommendation/Observation
25.2. The Committee notes the reply.
AERO CLUB OF INDIA
Recommendation/Observation
26. The Committee may be apprised of the reasons for not providing budgetary support for Aero
Club of India for 2018-19. (Para 115)
Reply of the Ministry
26.1. No proposal for budgetary support has been received from Aero Club of India in the Ministry.
Further Recommendation/Observation
26.2. The Committee notes the reply.
FLYING TRAINING INSTITUTES FOR CIVIL HELICOPTER PILOTS
Recommendation/Observation
27. The Committee desires that the Ministry should urgently intervene in this regard and sort out
the issues. (Para 119)
Reply of the Ministry
27.1. Directions have been given to HAL to complete the formalities as required.
Further Recommendation/Observation
27.2. The Committee notes the reply.
AIR CARGO
Recommendation/Observation
28. The Committee takes note of the growth in the Air Cargo sector. (Para 122)

17
Reply of the Ministry
28.1. Noted.
Further Recommendation/Observation
28.2. The Committee notes the reply.
NEED FOR GREATER COORDINATION AMONG THE UNION MINISTRIES
Recommendation/Observation
29. The Committee feels that an effective co-ordination mechanism among the Ministries of
Culture, Tourism, Civil Aviation and Road Transport & Highways is needed in order to ensure that
the places of tourist and cultural importance are integrated seamlessly with well-connected roads
and airports. Such a mechanism would ensure that the tourists are provided with required facilities
like budget hotels, taxis, souvenir shops, restaurants etc. The Committee, therefore, recommends that
the Ministry of Civil Aviation may co-ordinate in formulating an action plan with the above said
Ministries in this regard and that the Ministry of Tourism may be made the nodal Ministry for this
purpose. (Para 129)
Reply of the Ministry
29.1. The Committee has been constituted in Ministry of Tourism as a “National Tourism Advisory
Council” under the chairmanship of Minister of Tourism. The council will act as a “Think Tank”
and advice the government on various policy matter related to Tourism.
Further Recommendation/Observation
29.2. The Committee notes the reply.

CHAPTER – II
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES OF THE MINISTRY
AIRPORTS AUTHORITY OF INDIA
Recommendation/Observation
1. The Committee hopes that the monetization of AAI land will generate considerable revenue
to AAI. (Para 33)
Reply of the Ministry
1.1. Airports Authority of India is in the process of monetization of its city side land as per AAI
Act which provides planning, development, construction and maintenance of institutions / training
centers, workshops, hotels, restaurants and rest rooms, warehouses, cargo complex catering to the
needs of passengers and air traffic services.
1.2. The city-side development is being planned by AAI with a view to enhance the passenger
convenience and facilities at AAI Airports as well as to increase the revenue through development
of non-aeronautical activities to the extent permissible under the provisions of existing AAI Act.
1.3. The National Civil Aviation Policy 2016 strives to generate non-aeronautical revenue in excess
of 35% of the airport‘s total revenue for AAI airports with throughput above 0.5 mppa and has
identified that there are restrictions on the use of land allocated for commercial use of airport. In
order to maximize the revenue it is required to unlock the potential of the land on city side by
liberalizing the end-use restrictions for airports.
1.4. In order to implement the recommendations of the NCAP it has been felt that the Airports
Authority of India Act may be amended to liberalize the end use of airport land on city side for
enhancing the non – aero revenue and to allow flexibility to AAI in managing its land in its best
business interest.
1.5. Presently in phase-I the City Side development have been identified for Lucknow, Raipur,
Tirupati, Jaipur, Bhubaneswar, V aranasi, Kolkata and Amritsar Airports. Development of Multi Level
Car Park with commercial facilities has been also taken up at Chennai, Pune, Calicut, and Amritsar.
The tenders have been published for construction of Hotels at Amritsar, Bhubaneswar & Kolkata
Airports and MLCP Chennai & Pune. The Financial bid of 3 star and 5 star Hotels at Bhubaneswar
Airport have been opened and is under process of selection of Developer.
1.6. Based on the feedback due to the above bids further action shall be taken.
Further Recommendation/Observation
1.7. The Committee notes the reply.
PA WAN HANS LTD.
Recommendation/Observation
2. The Committee could understand that funds are required for Pawan Hans Ltd. to replace nine
18

19
Dauphin Helicopters which are 31 years old. The Committee desires that adequate funds should be
given for the fleet replacement and augmentation of Pawan Hans Ltd. The disinvestment of Pawan
Hans may be viewed in the light of the huge jump in the profit of the company. (Para 55)
Reply of the Ministry
2.2. In view of the strategic disinvestment decision of Pawan Hans Ltd by the Government, the
proposal for fleet replacement had been kept on hold. The EOI calling for bids has been floated
and is being processed as per Cabinet Decision.
Further Recommendation/Observation
2.3. The Committee notes the reply.
DIRECTORATE GENERAL OF CIVIL A VIATION (DGCA)
Recommendation/Observation
3. The Committee further notes that the Ministry has been steadily reducing Alliance Air operations
from Kolkata. Not a single one of the newly-acquired ATR-72 aircrafts has been inducted in
Kolkata. Bengal is the gateway to the North East, and the Committee is of the opinion that a
fleet of ATR-72 aircrafts should be introduced in Kolkata and operations should start at the
earliest. (Para 66A)
Reply of the Ministry
3.1. At present, Alliance Air has based one ATR42 aircraft at Kolkata which operates flights in the
North Eastern Region under a MoU with North Eastern Council. The route schedule has been
decided in consultation with North Eastern Council and the aircraft is fully deployed. The routes
operated are as under:
1. Kolkata /Guwahat / Tezpur / Lilabari / Guwahati / Kolkata – Four flights per week
2. Kolkata / Guwahati / Passighat / Guwahati / Kolkata -Three flights per week
3. Kolkata/Shillong/Kolkata – Seven flights per week
3.2. It may be noted that Alliance Air is in the process of inducting 70 seater ATR-72-600 type
of turbo prop aircraft in order to improve regional air connectivity. Alliance Air has plans to base
A TR72 aircraft at Kolkata in the near future.
Further Recommendation/Observation
3.3. The Committee notes the reply.
COMBINED HEADQUARTER BUILDING
Recommendation/Observation
4. The Committee is aware that the construction of Headquarter to these agencies is lingering
for a long period. The Committee desires that steps should be taken by the Ministry to ensure
that the construction of the combined Headquarter building is materialized without further
delay. (Para 80)

20
Reply of the Ministry
4.1. The works for constructing of an integrated office complex for DGCA, BCAS, AAIB, AERA
& AAI at Safdarjung Airport New Delhi is approved and awarded for execution. Work is under
Progress and expected to be completed by February, 2020.
Further Recommendation/Observation
4.2. The Committee notes the reply.
ONGOING WORK AT CALICUT AIRPORT
Recommendation/Observation
5. The Committee takes note of the progress made in the renovation work of the Calicut airport.
The Committee desires that the progress of the work may be closely monitored and that the
renovation work may be completed at the earliest. (Para 84)
Reply of the Ministry
5.1. As advised the progress of renovation work of the Calicut airport is closely monitored.
Present physical progress is 95% and likely to be completed by August, 2018.
Further Recommendation/Observation
5.2. The Committee notes the reply.
Recommendation/Observation
6. The Committee also notes that even after 50% reduction of the ATF prices over a period of
time, the airlines have not passed on the benefit of reduction in ATF prices to the consumers. The
Committee recommends that the Ministry should take effective steps to ensure that the airlines pass
on the benefit to the travellers by reducing the air fares and inform the Committee about the
specific steps taken in this regard and the outcome thereof. (Para 108)
Reply of the Ministry
6.1. Directorate General of Civil Aviation (DGCA) has carried out an analysis of the average fares
in 32 sectors over the three years period 2015 to 2017 and it was observed that there has been
a fall of 28% in the fares in 2016 over 2015 and a further 2% in 2017 over 2016. This clearly
brings out the fact that fall in A TF prices have been passed on to passengers.
Further Recommendation/Observation
6.2. The Committee notes the reply.
PRICE OF A VIATION TURBINE FUEL
Recommendation/Observation
7. The Committee takes note of the fact that a major difficulty being faced by airlines is the
high cost of ATF which is further aggravated by taxes and that due to the distortion in the price
structure caused by the taxation policies; the financial liability of airlines is getting strongly

21
affected. In this regard, the Committee urges that the Ministry of Finance may consider including
ATF in GST. (Para 113)
Reply of the Ministry
7.1 (i) Ministry of Civil Aviation has requested Ministry of Finance to include Aviation Turbine
Fuel (ATF) within the ambit of Goods and Service Tax (GST) at the earliest. The
Ministry has suggested that GST rate of ATF be:
 @5% on smaller aircraft, including freighter aircraft, (maximum take-off weight/
MTOW of less than 40 tonnes), which was the pre-GST ceiling rate of 5% V AT
for ‘Declared Goods‘ status.
 @18% on larger aircraft, including freighter aircraft, which is the top GST slab
rate leviable on goods (except for about 50 goods such as tobacco, alcohol and
some luxury items for which GST is leviable @ 28%). At this rate, ATF would
be at par with AvGas, another fuel solely used in the aviation sector.
 In the interregnum, it has been requested to restore the pre-GST V AT ceiling on
A TF consumed by smaller aircraft, including freighters, of 5% in order to offset
the additional tax burden due to the withdrawal of  Declared Goods Status‘ to A TF
for aircraft with MTOW of less than 40 tonnes which has rendered the Central
Excise/V AT on A TF on such aircraft non-CENV AT-able.
(ii) The Ministry has also requested various State Governments to provide full support for
bringing ATF within the GST‘s ambit at the earliest during the deliberations on the
matter in the GST Council.
Further Recommendation/Observation
7.2. The Committee notes the reply.
CLEAN TOILETS AT THE AIRPORTS
Recommendation/Observation
8. Poor experiences in the toilets are often very strongly linked to passenger’ s overall satisfaction.
Having enough washrooms in the right places and keeping the washrooms clean should be the
priority of the AAI and other Airport operators. The Committee recommends that cleanliness should
be given utmost importance by AAI and various other airport operators and they should take
effective steps to ensure that toilets at the airports should be maintained in a clean and tidy
manner . The Government of India should also monitor the quality of the toilets of all the
airports. (Para 124)
Reply of the Ministry
8.1. AAI has taken following effective steps to ensure high cleaning standards of toilets/terminal
buildings to achieve passenger satisfaction:-
 AAI has outsourced cleaning/up-keeping of toilets/terminal buildings to specialized
clea ning agency through Quality and Cost Based Selection (QCBS) contract process.

22
The provision of dedicated manpower in toilets has been made in contract to ensure
effective cleaning.
 SOPs to ensure effective cleaning and monitoring are being implemented at airports. The
toilets are being renovated with new fitting /facilities. The independent audit/assessment
of cleaning standard /passenger facilities at AAI airports is being carried out by independent
government agency. In addition to this, AAI has taken up the renovation work of toilets
at most of its airports.
Further Recommendation/Observation
8.2. The Committee notes the reply.
IMMIGRATION COUNTERS
Recommendation/Observation
9. The Committee notes that the officials at the immigration counters have no right to be rude
and discourteous. They are just Government servants regulated by the set of rules and regulations.
Their main role is to facilitate the passenger’ s journey and not to misbehave. The Committee
recommends that soft skills training be imparted to the persons at immigration counters given their
direct dealings with foreign tourists. (Para 126)
Reply of the Ministry
9.1. The Ministry of Home Affairs, in its reply to the Ministry of Civil Aviation, has informed that
in the year 2015, Bureau of Immigration (BoI) started imparting Soft Skills Training to its personnel
with an aim to develop their inter-personal skills, behavioral aspects and inculcate professionalism
while dealing with the passengers. Services of two agencies i.e. Inspirion Consulting and Ybrant
Peoples Training Academy were taken for this purpose This Soft skills training was organized for
Bol controlled Immigration Check Posts (ICPs) from December, 2015 to March, 2016 at 7 (seven)
Nodal FRROs for i668 Immigration Officers in 68 (sixty eight) batches of 25 (twenty five) each.
Further “Training for Trainers” in Soft Skills was organized for 48 (forty eight) immigration
officials to impart in-house training to the left out personnel. All immigration officials of BoI
controlled ICPs were imparted training on Soft Skill and Behavioral aspect by July, 2016. A total
of 2883 were imparted training during the year 2016 and 1123 during the year 2017. The module
for above training (Soft Skills) encompassed of Stress Management, Building Interpersonal Relations,
Conflict Management, Personal Excellence, Etiquette & Cultural Sensitization, Effective Communication
Style, Goal Setting and Personality Development.
The topic of Soft Skills has been incorporated in the curriculum of Basic Immigration
Training since March, 2016. Now each and every immigration official who is to deal with passengers
is imparted Soft Skill Training on induction in Bol. Refresher Courses on regular intervals are also
being organized on the Soft Skill and Behavioral Aspect for the immigration personnel.
Further Recommendation/Observation
9.2. The Committee notes the reply.

CHAPTER-III
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF
THE MINISTRY HA VE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE
OUTSTANDING TRAFFIC DUES OF AAI
Recommendation/Observation
1. The Committee is concerned about the huge amount of outstanding dues of AAI for a long
time. AAI, being the highest revenue generator, has to be actively helped by the Ministry of Civil
Aviation in this regard by taking it up with the defaulting Organizations and Ministries, including
legal recourse to recover the dues. The Committee recommends that consistent steps should be taken
by AAI to recover the outstanding dues. (Para 28)
Reply of the Ministry
1.1 The following steps are taken by Airport Authority of India for recovery of Pending Dues:
(a) The dues are monitored on regular basis.
(b) In case of delay, AAI issues notice to airlines to settle the dues.
(c) Penal interest is being charged on account of delay in settlement of bills.
(d) In case where delay persists, beside en-cashing the security deposit, the defaulting
(e) Airline is put on Cash & Carry‘ basis.
(f) Legal course of action is followed in case of over dues persists.
Further Recommendation/Observation
1.2. The Ministry in its Action Taken Replies submitted in the year 2016 on 238
th report of
the Committee had furnished the same word-to-word reply against the recommendation of
the Committee. As still the Ministry has failed to recover its outstanding dues, the above
measures seem not to be effective. The Ministry & AAI should tighten their approach and
legal action may be initiated in appropriate cases besides withholding necessary permission
and cancellation of licences, etc. The Committee desires that the Ministry/AAI shall explore
other penal measures, such as not granting requisite permissions, cancellation of licences,
etc. for recovery of outstanding dues.
BUREAU OF CIVIL A VIATION SECURITY (BCAS)
Recommendation/Observation
2. The Committee, therefore, reiterates its recommendation made in its 244th Report that the
senior positions of BCAS may be held exclusively by the cadre officials of BCAS. The Committee
further recommends that the Recruitment Rules of BCAS should be amended in such a way that
the cadre officers may, without any hindrance, be promoted up to the level of Joint Director
General. (Para 41)
23

24
Reply of the Ministry
2.1. The restructuring of the Bureau of Civil Aviation Security (BCAS) was approved by the
Ministry of Finance (Department of Expenditure) and accordingly steps have been taken to amend
the recruitment rules of various posts as per the prescribed guidelines, providing therein appropriate
promotions avenues.
Further Recommendation/Observation
2.2. The reply does not reflect the views expressed by the Committee or the current
scenario in so far as recruitment for senior level positions in BCAS is concerned. The
Ministry should be categorical to ensure that due consideration is extended to cadre officials
rather than deputationists in filling up senior level management positions. The Committee
may be apprised about the timelines proposed for the restructuring of BCAS and the
schedule of implementation.
EXORBITANT AIRFARES
Recommendation/Observation
3. The Committee, in its earlier Reports, had recommended that the Ministry should take effective
steps to control the surge in airfares. The Committee feels that the Ministry has not given serious
thought and deliberation to the recommendations of the Committee. (Para 107)
Reply of the Ministry
3.1. W ith the repeal of Air Corporation Act in March 1994, the process of airfare approval by
Government has been dispensed with. As per prevailing regulation, airfares are not regulated by the
Government. Under the provision of Sub Rule (1) of Rule 135 of the Aircraft Rules, 1937, every
air transport undertaking engaged in scheduled air services require to establish tariff having regard
to all relevant factors, including cost of operation, characteristic of services, reasonable profit and
the generally prevailing tariff. Airlines are free to charge reasonable airfares as per their operation
viabilities subject to compliance to above said rule. The airline pricing system runs in multiple levels
(buckets of RBDs) which are in line with practice being followed globally. The prices are fixed
by airlines keeping in mind the market, demand, seasonality and other market forces. The airfare
increases with increases in demand of seat as the lower fare buckets get sold out fast when
bookings are offered by airlines. Some of the airlines have introduced advance purchase schemes
of 90 days, 60 days, 30 days, 14 days etc.., wherein highly discounted fares are offered which
would entail travelling even during peak seasons on low fares. The fare structures are displayed
by airlines on their websites under the provision of Sub Rule (2) of Rule 135 of the Aircraft Rules,
1937. The airlines remain compliant to the prevailing regulation as long as fares charged by them
are in line with fare displayed on their website. Further, DGCA monitors airfares on certain routes
selected on random basis to ensure that the airlines do not charge airfares outside the range
declared by them. The analysis has shown that the airfares remain well within the fare bucket
uploaded by the airlines on the respective websites.
3.2. Competition Commission of India (CCI) in its order dated 06/03/2012 on fixing of MRP for
airfares has stated, CCI cannot give direction to the Government to fix MRP of a service provided

25
by private entrepreneur and that the same will be contrary to the spirit of the competition law. CCI
also stated that the forces of demand and supply govern airfares.
Further Recommendation/Observation
3.3. The reply does not reflect the seriousness of the efforts made by the Ministry in
containing the surge in airfares and the resultant profiteering by different airlines. The
Committee feels that concerted efforts should be consistently made by the Ministry to
prevail upon different Airlines not only to make available more and more low-fare bucket
seats but also to keep the airfares at reasonably affordable level. The Committee strongly
feels that an upper cap of airfare in each Sector is the need of the hour to discourage the
Airlines from predatory pricing of air tickets.
Recommendation/Observation
4. The Committee is of the view that the pricing mechanisms applicable in the developed
countries may not be suitable for India. The Committee believes that the Ministry of Civil Aviation
has a social responsibility towards its citizens. The Ministr y, though aware of the rampant exploitation,
is not showing any proactive role in regulating the airfares. The Committee, therefore, recomm ends
the Ministry of Civil Aviation to consider fixing an upper limit of the air tickets for every
sector . (Para 109)
Reply of the Ministry
4.1. W ith the repeal of Air Corporation Act in March 1994, the process of airfare approval by
Government has been dispensed with. As per prevailing regulation, airfares are not regulated by the
Government. Under the provision of Sub Rule (1) of Rule 135 of the Aircraft Rules, 1937, every
air transport undertaking engaged in scheduled air services require to establish tariff having regard
to all relevant factors, including cost of operation, characteristic of services, reasonable profit and
the generally prevailing tariff. Airlines are free to charge reasonable airfares as per their operation
viabilities subject to compliance to above said rule. The airline pricing system runs in multiple levels
(buckets of RBDs) which are in line with practice being followed globally. The prices are fixed
by airlines keeping in mind the market, demand, seasonality and other market forces. The airfare
increases with increases in demand of seat as the lower fare buckets get sold out fast when
bookings are offered by airlines. Some of the airlines have introduced advance purchase schemes
of 90 days, 60 days, 30 days, 14 days etc.., wherein highly discounted fares are offered which
would entail travelling even during peak seasons on low fares. The fare structures are displayed
by airlines on their websites under the provision of Sub Rule (2) of Rule 135 of the Aircraft Rules,
1937. The airlines remain compliant to the prevailing regulation as long as fares charged by them
are in line with fare displayed on their website. Further, DGCA monitors airfares on certain routes
selected on random basis to ensure that the airlines do not charge airfares outside the range
declared by them. The analysis has shown that the airfares remain well within the fare bucket
uploaded by the airlines on the respective websites.
4.2. Competition Commission of India (CCI) in its order dated 06/03/2012 on fixing of MRP for
airfares has stated, CCI cannot give direction to the Government to fix MRP of a service provided
by private entrepreneur and that the same will be contrary to the spirit of the competition law. CCI
also stated that the forces of demand and supply govern airfares.

26
Further Recommendation/Observation
4.3. The Committee reiterates that concerted efforts should be made to ensure that the
Airlines consistently increase the low-fare bucket seats to facilitate the common man to opt
for air travel. With every long weekend and vacation in sight, air fares are increased
manifold. Even during natural calamities, people are not spared to pay extremely higher
fares. The Committee also feels that till the time ATF is not included under GST, a system
may be developed to automatically pass the benefits to the consumers whenever ATF prices
are decreased.
INSTITUTES FOR PILOT TRAINING
Recommendation/Observation
5. The Committee notes that there has been a huge jump in the number of aircrafts used for
scheduled operations by various airlines. This implies the need for more pilots in the coming years.
This can be catered to by the pilot training institutes. India needs more and more pilot Training
Institutes to train our youngsters who are presently relying on foreign countries to get pilot training.
This will save lot of foreign exchanges in many ways. The Committee desires that the Ministry may
take steps to look into the reasons for the institutes for pilot training being non-operational and
revive them. (Para 117)
Reply of the Ministry
5.1. There were around 50 Flight Training Organizations in India, out of which only 30 are
operational right now. The exact reason of shutting down of FTOs cannot be ascertained now as
the FTOS which are non-operational cannot be contacted. However, it is seen that most of the
FTOs which are not operational belong to State Government or were operating from Airport
Authority of India airports.
5.2. It is also seen that the Government FTOs which are operational these days are not growing
in terms of infrastructure, equipment and aircraft. Most of them are operating with aircraft given
by Aero Club of India and State Govt. is not funding the FTOs for buying new aircraft or
improvement in infrastructure.
5.3. Steps for reviving of FTOs or opening of new FTOs can be broadly divided into two parts:-
1. DGCA regulations.
2. Infrastructure and Financial Issues.
These two are explained as below:-
1. DGCA regulations
 DGCA conducts quarterly meeting with FTO stake holders regularly and their
suggestions are well considered to improve the regulations related to Indian FTOs.
During one of the meetings, it was discussed that due to huge intake in the
airlines, there is a shortage of instructors which will keep on increasing. Subsequently,
DGCA has reviewed the Aircraft rules and Civil Aviation Requirements to simplify
the process of opening up new FTO.

27
 Draft Amendment to Section-Q & R (Assistant Flight Instructor Rating and Flight
Instructor Rating) of Schedule-II of Aircraft rules 1937 has been published in
Gazette for public comments which will be finalized shortly.
 Requirements for approval of Chief Flying Instructors and Dy. Chief Flying Instructors
have also been relaxed in consultation with stake holders in July 2017.
2. Infrastructure and financial issues
 The policy of AAI to give space to open a FTO should be relaxed or subsidized
to promote FTOs. At present FTOs are paying heavy bills to AAI.
 There are some FTOs who were operating from AAI airports but now their
hanger, office space, aircraft etc. are sealed by AAI because of payment related
issues and now the matters are pending in court. AAI may resolve the issue by
giving some  relaxation in fee.
 The fuel used in aircraft used for training is 100LL avgas which is imported in
India. GST on 100 LL is 18%, on import of new aircraft is 5%, import of spare
parts is 8-28% which makes the operational cost very high. Govt. may consider
relaxation in GST.
 DGCA had earlier allotted pushpak-MK1 and Hansa-3 aircraft, and Aero Club of
India (ACI) had allotted Cessna-152 and Cessna-172 aircraft to FTOs in India.
Most of the Government FTOs are operating with aircraft given by Aero Club of
India. State Government is not funding the FTOs for buying new aircraft or
improvement the infrastructure.
Further Recommendation/Observation
5.4. The Committee feels that the DGCA and the AAI should encourage setting up of new
FTOs and ensure smooth operation of existing FTOs by providing necessary infrastructure
and reducing the fee charged from them. The Committee calls upon the Government to see
the sluggishness in Flight Training Organisations in India. For any industry to survive, the
critical subsystems which support it should also grow and flourish along with the main
industry; if not the growth of 20% in Aviation may be short-lived. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that the Government should give all the encouragement for the FTOs to grow.
SHORTAGE OF PILOTS
Recommendation/Observation
6. The Committee desires that the Ministry should address this issue urgently. (Para 128)
Reply of the Ministry
6.1. There is a shortage of type rated Pilot-in-Command/Instructor/Examiner in Country with
respect of ATR operation as well as for other type of aircrafts. To cover the shortage, Airlines hire
pilots from foreign countries. The expat-pilots holding foreign license issued by ICAO contracting
states are allowed to fly Indian registered aircrafts in India under provisions contained under Rule

28
45 of Aircraft Rules, 1937 ( validation of foreign licenses ). FATA (Foreign Aircrew Temporary
Authorization) is issued to fly Indian registered aircraft as per the policy decision taken by M/o
Civil Aviation from time to time depending upon demand of industry.
Further Recommendation/Observation
6.2. The Committee notes the reply.  The Committee feels that the Ministry should be
proactive in tackling the issue of shortage of trained Pilots and take urgent steps to have
sufficient number of trained indigenous pilots and reduce dependence on foreign pilots.

CHAPTER-IV
THE RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE
FINAL REPLIES OF THE MINISTRY ARE STILL A WAITED
OUTSTANDING TRAFFIC DUES OF AAI
Recommendation/Observation
1. The Committee notes that the matter is long overdue and things are delayed deliberately. The
Committee, therefore, urges upon the Ministry to ensure that the findings of the Internal Committee
may be implemented at the earliest. (Para 30)
Reply of the Ministry
1.1. Ur gent Action is being taken to expedite the report of the committee.
Further Recommendation/Observation
1.2. The Committee feels that AAI should not buckle under pressure and implement the
report of the Internal Committee in right earnest to fix the responsibility for accumulation
of dues from Kingfisher Airlines and take urgent legal steps for recovery thereof.
29

RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV A TIONS  —  AT A GLANCE
CHAPTER-III
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF
THE MINISTRY HA VE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE
The Ministry in its Action Taken Replies submitted in the year 2016 on 238 th report of
the Committee had furnished the same word-to-word reply against the recommendation of
the Committee. As still the Ministry has failed to recover its outstanding dues, the above
measures seem not to be effective. The Ministry & AAI should tighten their approach and
legal action may be initiated in appropriate cases besides withholding necessary permission
and cancellation of licences, etc. The Committee desires that the Ministry/AAI shall explore
other penal measures, such as not granting requisite permissions, cancellation of licences,
etc. for recovery of outstanding dues. (Para 1.2)
The reply does not reflect the views expressed by the Committee or the current
scenario in so far as recruitment for senior level positions in BCAS is concerned. The
Ministry should be categorical to ensure that due consideration is extended to cadre officials
rather than deputationists in filling up senior level management positions. The Committee
may be apprised about the timelines proposed for the restructuring of BCAS and the
schedule of implementation. (Para 2.2)
The reply does not reflect the seriousness of the efforts made by the Ministry in
containing the surge in airfares and the resultant profiteering by different airlines. The
Committee feels that concerted efforts should be consistently made by the Ministry to
prevail upon different Airlines not only to make available more and more low-fare bucket
seats but also to keep the airfares at reasonably affordable level. The Committee strongly
feels that an upper cap of airfare in each Sector is the need of the hour to discourage the
Airlines from predatory pricing of air tickets. (Para 3.3)
The Committee reiterates that concerted efforts should be made to ensure that the
Airlines consistently increase the low-fare bucket seats to facilitate the common man to opt
for air travel. With every long weekend and vacation in sight, air fares are increased
manifold. Even during natural calamities, people are not spared to pay extremely higher
fares. The Committee also feels that till the time ATF is not included under GST, a system
may be developed to automatically pass the benefits to the consumers whenever ATF prices
are decreased. (Para 4.3)
The Committee feels that the DGCA and the AAI should encourage setting up of new
FTOs and ensure smooth operation of existing FTOs by providing necessary infrastructure
and reducing the fee charged from them. The Committee calls upon the Government to see
the sluggishness in Flight Training Organisations in India. For any industry to survive, the
critical subsystems which support it should also grow and flourish along with the main
industry; if not the growth of 20% in Aviation may be short-lived. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that the Government should give all the encouragement for the FTOs to
grow. (Para 5.4)
30

31
The Committee notes the reply. The Committee feels that the Ministry should be
proactive in tackling the issue of shortage of trained Pilots and take urgent steps to
have sufficient number of trained indigenous pilots and reduce dependence on foreign
pilots. (Para 6.2)
CHAPTER-IV
THE RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE
FINAL REPLIES OF THE MINISTRY ARE STILL A WAITED
The C ommittee feels that AAI should not buckle under pressure and implement
the report of the Internal Committee in right earnest to fix the responsibility for
accumulation of dues from Kingfisher Airlines and take urgent legal steps for recovery
ther eof. (Para 1.2)

MINUTES

35
* Relates to other matters.
II
SECOND MEETING
The Committee met at 2:30 P.M. on Monday, the 26th November, 2018 in Committee Room
D, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe Building, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Derek O’Brien   —  Chairman
RAJYA  SABHA
2. Shri Ritabrata Banerjee
3. Shri Sambhaji Chhatrapati
4. Dr. L. Hanumanthaiah
5. Dr. Sonal Mansingh
6. Kumari Selja
7. Shri Narendra Kumar Swain
8. Shri Vinay Dinu Tendulkar
LOK  SABHA
9. Shri Parvatagouda Chandangouda Gaddigoudar
10. Shri Ram Charitra Nishad
11. Shri Rajesh Pandey
12. Shri Rajesh Ranjan
13. Shri Ram Kumar Sharma
14. Maj. Gen. Bhuwan Chandra Khanduri, A VSM (Retd.)
15. Shri Shatrughan Sinha
SECRETARIAT
Shri Swarabji B., Director
Shri Pushpender Verma, Deputy Secretary
Shrimati Catherine John L., Under Secretary
Shri K.V. Ramana Rao, Committee Officer
WITNESSES
** * ;
2. The Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee to the meeting and informed that the
agenda of the meeting was to adopt six Reports of the Committee and *  *  *.
3. Thereafter, the Committee considered and adopted six Reports viz.,
(i)   * * *;
(ii) draft Report on Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations/observations

36
* Relate to other matters.
of the Committee contained in its Two Hundred Fifty Seventh Report on the Demands
for Grants (2018-19) of the Ministry of Civil Aviation;
(iii) * * *;
(iv) * * *;
(v) * * *;
(vi) * * * .
4. * * * .
5. * * * .
6. * * * .
7. * * * .
8. * * * .
9. * * * .
10. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
11. The meeting was adjourned at 4:22 
P.M.

ANNEXURES

39
ANNEXURE-I
MAJOR WORKS PLANNED BY AAI WITH A CAPEX OF ````` 20000 CR.
Major works completed
1. Phase-I of Terminal Building at Gorakhpur (CE) completed and inaugurated on 16.06.2017
by Hon’ble Chief Minister of Uttar Pradesh. Phase-II work of Terminal Building is in
progress.
2. Expansion of Terminal Building at Jammu Civil Enclave is completed and inaugurated on
17th August, 2017 by Chief Minister of Jammu & Kashmir, Mehbooba Mufti and
Shri P. Ashok Gajapathi Raju, Union Minister of Civil Aviation, Dr. Jitendra Singh, Union
Minister of State for DoNER& Shri Jayant Sinha, Union Minister of State for Civil
Aviation etc.
3. Strengthening & Extension of Runway including New Terminal Building and associated
facilities for operation of A-320 type of aircraft at Belgaum Airport completed at a cost
of ` 141.87 Crores and Modified Airport inaugurated on 14 September, 2017 by Union
Minister of Civil Aviation and Chief Minister of Karnataka.
4. Kishangarh Airport completed and Inaugurated in October, 2017 by Union Minister of
Civil Aviation and Chief Minister of Rajasthan.
5. Strengthening and Expansion of Runway for operation of A-320 type of aircraft at Hubli
Airport including New Terminal Building, completed at a cost of ` 141.87 Crores and
inaugurated on 12 Dec 2017 by Union minister of civil aviation.
6. Runway Resurfacing and construction of parallel taxi track and a new Arrival block
completed at Trivandrum Airport.
7. Strengthening of runway and taxiway at Calicut Airport completed at a cost of ` 55.42
Crores.
8. Runway and apron works completed at Tezu Airport. Airport is ready for operationalization
with renovated Old Terminal Building.
9. Pakyong Airport work completed ready for operationalization.
10. Commissioning of ILS Category III B at Kolkata and Amritsar Airport.
11. Expansion of Security Hold Area and face lifting completed at Agartala Airport for ease
of passenger movement.
12. City Side canopy installed and face lifting of Terminal Building completed at DimapurAirport
for convenience of passengers.
13. Expansion of Security Hold Area completed at Guwahati Airport for ease of passenger
movement.
14. Extension & Strengthening of Runway completed at Surat Airport at a cost of ` 72.14
crores.
15. Installation of 158 KVP rooftop Solar Plant at Port Blair Airport.

40
Works in progress/planning stage
(i) Calicut: Construction of New Arrival Hall for ITB & Modification of existing ITB and
extension of apron including allied work is in progress at Calicut Airport.
(ii) Port Blair:The Phase-II work at Port Blair i.e. C/o New Integrated Terminal Building is
in progress.  PDC June 2020.
(iii) Agartala: Work in Progress for construction of New Terminal Building to enhance the
annual passenger capacity from 0.50 MPPA to 2 MPPA (1000 Dom. + 200 Intl. PHP)
at an estimated cost of ` 438 crores. New Terminal Building work awarded on 15.06.2017.
PDC is May, 2019.
(iv) Lucknow: Construction of New Integrated Passenger Terminal Building at Lucknow
Airport at a cost of ` 1383 Cr. Pax capacity: (3200 Dom. + 800 Intl.) PHP
Award of Work: April 2018.
PDC : March 2021.
(v) Dehradun: Construction of New Integrated Terminal Building at Dehradun Airport at a
cost of ` 348 Cr.
Pax capacity: 1300 PHP
Award of work – May-18
PDC April 2020.
(vi) Jaipur: Development of New Integrated Terminal Building at Jaipur Airport at a cost of
` 1441 Cr.
Pax capacity: 5000 PHP
Award of work – Sep 2018
PDC Aug 2021.
(vii) Srinagar: Construction of New Integrated Terminal Building at Srinagar Airport at a cost
of ` 495 Cr.
Pax capacity: 2300 PHP
Award of work – Dec. 2018
PDC – June 2021
(viii) Tiruchirapalli: Construction of New Integrated Passenger Terminal Building at Tiruchirapalli
Airport at a cost of ` 764 Cr.
Award of work – July 2018
PDC Jan. 2021.
(ix) Chennai: Modernization of Chennai Airport Phase-II at Chennai Airport at a cost of
` 2100 Cr.
Award of work – May 2018
PDC Jan 2022.

41
(x) Pune: Construction of New Integrated Terminal Building at Pune Airport at a cost of
` 408.48 Cr.
Paxcapacity: (1700 Dom. + 600 Intl.) PHP
Award of work – Jul 2018
PDC J 2021.
(xi) Patna: Construction of New Domestic Terminal Building & other allied structures (Ph-
I&II) at Patna Airport at a cost of ` 722.05 Cr.
Award of work – Jun 2018
PDC May 2021.
(xii) Guwahati: Construction of a New Integrated Terminal Building at Guwahati Airport at a
cost of ` 1232 Cr.
Award of work – Work awarded. Foundation stone laid by Hon‘ble MoCA and Hon’ble
CM on 28.01.17
PDC Jan. 2021.
(xiii) Jabalpur: Construction of New Terminal Building, ATC Tower cum Technical Block, Fire
Station Category VII and all other associated works at Jabalpur Airport at a cost of
` 163 Cr.
Award of work – Jun 2018
PDC May 2020.
(xiv) Vijayawada: Construction of New Integrated Terminal Building at Vijayawada Airport, at
a cost of ` 420 Cr.
Award of work – Mar 2019
PDC Jan  2022.
(xv) Goa: Extension of Existing Terminal Building and allied works at Dabolim Airport, Goa
at a cost of ` 230 cr.
Award of work – Jan. 2019
PDC Dec. 2020.
(xvi) Leh: IAF has accorded working permission for development of Civil Enclave in Jun,
2017 which includes construction of Terminal Building for 800 peak hour passengers
(PHP) and other associated facilities at a cost of ` 267 Cr. Project Management Consultancy
(PMC) is awarded. Work is likely to start on May 2018. PDCMay 2021.’
(xvii) Jammu: Land transfer from Army/State Govt. awaited for extension of Runway. State
Government to hand over 138 acres of land for development of New Civil Enclave on
Tawi river side along with diversion of Public road, Canal & HT lines.
(xviii)200 additional aircraft parking bays are planned at various airports in next 5 years for
night parking of new aircrafts being purchased by airline operators.

42
Development of State Government Airstrips:
 Government of India is exploring the possibility of operationalizing the unused Airports/
Airstrips in the country. At the request of the State Governments, feasibility of developing
State Government airstrips into a full-fledged airport for commercial operations are also
being examined.
 MOU between AAI and State Government of Uttar Pradesh has been signed for the
development of 4 Civil Enclaves at Agra, Allahabad, Bareilly and Kanpur (Chakeri) and
for development of airports at Moradabad, Meerut and Faizabad.
 AAI Board has accorded AA&ES of ` 125.76 cr. for development of new civil
enclave at Allahabad and ` 61 Cr. for development of new civil enclave at Bareilly.
Work awarded for New Civil Enclave at Allahabad.
 AAI is in the process of preparing TEFR for development of airport at Meerut,
Moradabad and Faizabad. Consultant have been appointed for environmental clearance.
Development of these airports will be taken up when Airline operators bid for RCS
routes from these airports.
 MoU was signed for development of Jharsuguda, Raipur, Deoghar and Adampur (CE)
airports with State Governments of Odisha, Chhattisgarh and Jharkhand and Punjab
respectively.
 Jharsuguda:-Cost ` 177 Cr., work in progress. PDC Sep 2018.
 Raipur: Cost ` 128.4 Cr. Work in progress. PDC Sep 2018.
 Deoghar: Cost ` 185 Cr. Land acquisition in final stage. AAI has appointed consultant
for soil investigation. PDC Sept. 2019.
 Adampur: Construction of Temporary civil enclave for starting RCS flights completed.
Cost ` 9 Cr.

ANNEXURE-II
List of Greenfield Airports with ‘in principle’ approval and their Developers
Sl. Name of the Project/ Name of the Promoters Remarks
No. Date of Receipt of
proposal
1. Mopa Airport, Goa State Government To be developed by GMR.
International Foundation stone laid by
Hon’ble PM in Nov. 2016.
2. Navi Mumbai City & Industries W ork Started. Project
International airport, Development Corporation proponent is M/s CIDCO.
Maharashtra of Maharashtra Limited
(CIDCO)
3. Sindhudurg Airport, Maharashtra Industrial W ork in progress. Project
Maharashtra Development Corp. (MIDC) proponent is M/s MIDC.
4. Bijapur Airport, Karnataka State Government State Government of Karnataka
is the project proponent.
5. Gulbarga Airport, Karnataka State Gove rnment State Government of Karnataka
is the project proponent.
6. Hassan Airport, Karnataka State Government State Government of Karnataka
is the project proponent.
7. Simoga Airport, Karnataka State Government State Government of Karnataka
is the project proponent.
8. Kannur International M/s KINFRA Work in Progress. Commercial
Airport, Kerala operations planned under RCS
by end of June, 2018.
9. Dabra Airport, Gwalior, M/s Gwalior Agriculture State Government of Madhya
Madhya Pradesh Company Limited Pradesh is the project
proponent.
10. Pakyong airport, Sikkim Airports Authority of India W ork completed. DGCA
license in process.
11. Kushinagar in Uttar Government of Uttar Pradesh State Government of Uttar
Pradesh, International Pradesh is the project proponent.
12. Karaikal in Pudducherry Karaikal Airport Private Ltd. Land acquisition not
completed.
13. Shirdi in Ahmednagar Maharashtra Airport Inaugurated on 1.10.17.
District, Maharashtra- Development Corporation
International Ltd.
43

44
Sl. Name of the Project/ Name of the Promoters Remarks
No. Date of Receipt of
proposal
14. Dholera at Navagam M/s Dholera International State Government of Gujarat/
village, Ahmedabad Airport Company Limited. DIACL is the project
International proponent. Financial /PPP
model yet to be decided.
15. Bhogapuram in Bhogapuram International S tate Government of Andhra
Vizianagaram Distt. Airport Corporation Limited Pradesh is the project
near Visakhapatnam (BIACL). proponent.
16 Dagadarthi Mandal, Bhogapuram International S tate Government of Andhra
Nellore Distt. Airport Corp. Ltd. (BIACL). Pradesh is the project
proponent.
17 Oravakallu in Kurnool Bhogapuram International State Government of Andhra
Distt, Andhra Pradesh. Airport Corp. Ltd. (BIACL). Pradesh is the project
proponent.
18 Hirasar, Rajkot State Government of Gujarat State Government is the
project proponent. Engg.
consultancy by AAI - in
progress.