 
 
       
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
July, 2023 / Sravana, 1945 (Saka) 
 
  
REPORT NO. 
348
_ 
 
THREE HUNDRED FORTY EIGHTH REPORT  
'Heritage Theft – The Illegal Trade in Indian Antiquities and 
the Challenges of Retrieving and Safeguarding Our Tangible 
Cultural Heritage' 
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 24th July, 2023) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 24th July, 2023) 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Website:     https://rajyasabha.nic.in  
 E-mail:     rsc-tt@sansad.nic.in 
 

 
 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT,  
TOURISM AND CULTURE 
 
 
THREE HUNDRED FORTY EIGHTH REPORT  
'Heritage Theft – The Illegal Trade in Indian Antiquities and the 
Challenges of Retrieving and Safeguarding Our Tangible Cultural 
Heritage' 
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 24th July, 2023) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 24th July, 2023) 
 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
July, 2023 / Sravana, 1945 (Saka) 
 
 
Hindi version of this publication is also available 

 
 
 
 
C O N T E N T S 
 
P A G E S 
 
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE      i 
2. INTRODUCTION        ii 
3. ACRONYMS                iii-v 
 4. REPORT                                1-68 
5. RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS-AT A GLANCE   69-94 
6. ANNEXURES          95-108 
    7. *MINUTES   
 
         
        
        
      
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
______________________________________ 
 
*To be appended
109-137


i 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE  
 (2022-23) 
 
 (Constituted on 13th September, 2022) 
 
1. Shri V. Vijayasai Reddy   - Chairman 
 
Rajya Sabha 
s 
2. Shri Mohammed Nadimul Haque 
3. Shrimati S. Phangnon Konyak 
4. Shri Jugalsinh Lokhandwala 
5. Shri Manas Ranjan Mangaraj 
6. Dr. Sonal Mansingh 
7. Shrimati Rajani Ashokrao Patil 
8. Shri A. A. Rahim 
9. Dr. C. M. Ramesh 
10. Shri Vinay Dinu Tendulkar 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
11.  Shri Anto Antony 
12.  Shri Ram Margani Bharat 
13.  Shri Tapir Gao  
14.  Shri Rahul Kaswan 
15.  Shri Ramesh Chandra Majhi 
16.  Shri Sunil Baburao Mendhe 
17.  Shri K. Muraleedharan 
18.  Shri S. S.Palanimanickam  
19.  Shri Chhedi Paswan   
20.  Shri Kamlesh Paswan  
21.  Shri Sunil Kumar Pintu 
22.  Shri Prince Raj 
23.  Shri Tirath Singh Rawat 
24.  Shrimati Mala Roy 
25.  Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
26.  Shri Dushyant Singh 
27.  Shri Rajbahadur Singh 
28.  Shri Ramdas Chandrabhanji Tadas 
29.  Shri Manoj Kumar Tiwari 
30.  Shri Krupal Balaji Tumane 
31. Shri Dinesh Lal Yadav "Nirahua"  
 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Sumant Narain, Joint Secretary 
Shri Swarabji B., Director 
Shrimati Monica Baa, Additional Director 
Shrimati Subha Chandrashekar, Deputy Secretary  
Shri Ranajit Chakraborty, Under Secretary 
Shri Shrey Kansal, Secretariat Assistant 

ii 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 I, the Chairman, Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport, 
Tourism and Culture, having been authorized by the Committee to present on its behalf, do 
hereby present this Three Hundred Forty-Eighth Report on 'Heritage Theft – The Illegal 
Trade in Indian Antiquities and the Challenges of Retrieving and Safeguarding Our Tangible 
Cultural Heritage'.  
2. The Committee heard the views of the representatives of Indian National Trust for Art 
and Cultural Heritage (INTACH) , on the subject on 15th November, 2022. The Committee 
also heard the views of the Senior Officers of Ministry of Culture and Archaeological Survey 
of India, on the subject on 25th November, 2022. The Committee in its third meeting on the 
subject, held on 22nd December, 2022, heard the views of the Senior Officers of Directorate 
of Enforcement (ED); Central Board of Indirect Taxes and Customs  (CBIC); and Directorate 
of Revenue Intelligence (DRI) . The Committee also heard the representatives of Department 
of Legal Affairs, Ministry of Home Affairs and Ministry of External Affairs , on the subject 
on 5th January, 2023.  
3.  The Committee wishes to express its thanks to the officers of Ministry of Culture; 
Archaeological Survey of India; Ministry of Home Affairs;  Ministry of External Affairs; 
Department of Legal Affairs; Directorate of Enforcement; Central Board of Indirect Taxes & 
Customs; Directorate of Revenue Intelligence; and Indian National Trust for Art and Cultural 
Heritage for placing before the Committee , the material and information desired in 
connection with the subject and for clarifying the points raised by the Members. 
4. The Committee considered and adopted the Report in its meeting held on the  8th May, 
2023.   
 
 
(V. Vijayasai Reddy) 
NEW DELHI;                                                           Chairman, 
May 8, 2023                                                             Department-related Parliamentary Standing            
Vaisakha 18, 1945 (Saka)                                 Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture, 
                                                                                                                                 Rajya Sabha 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

iii 
 
 
ACRONYMS 
AA Assistant Archaeologist 
AAT Antiquities and Art Treasures Act 
AD Anno Domini 
ASA Assistant Superintending Archaeologist  
ASI Archaeological Survey of India  
BC Before Christ 
CAA Central Asian Antiquities 
CAC Central Antiquity Collection 
CAG Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
CAR Carpenter 
CBI Central Bureau of Investigation 
CBIC Central Board of Indirect Taxes and Customs 
CBP Customs and Border Protection  
CCTV Closed-Circuit Television 
CEIB Central Economic Intelligence Bureau 
CID Criminal Investigation Department 
CISF Central Industrial Security Force 
CNRS French National Centre for Scientific Research  
CPM Centrally Protected Monument 
CSR Corporate Social Responsibility 
CWG Culture Working Group 
DCT Data Centre & Technical Branch 
DFMD Door Frame Metal Detector 
DG Director General 
DGARM Directorate General of Analytics and Risk Management  
DGP Director-General of Police 
DoPT Department of Personnel & Training 
DRC Documentation Resource Centre  
DRI Directorate of Revenue Intelligence  
DYSA Deputy Superintending Archaeologist  
ED Directorate of Enforcement 
EFEO École française d'Extrême-Orient/ French School of Asian Studies 
EGM Export General Manifest  
EGMONT A Group of Financial Intelligence Units 
EL Electrician 
FBI Federal Bureau of Investigation 
FEMA Foreign Exchange Management Act 
FIR First Information Report 
FOC Federal Office of Culture  
GI Geographical Indication  
GOI Government of India 
HCI High Commission of India 

iv 
 
HHMD Hand Held Metal Detector  
HR&CE Hindu Religious and Charitable Endowments 
ICCR Indian Council for Cultural Relations  
ICE Investigations and Customs Enforcement  
ICES Indian Customs Electronic Data Interchange Systems 
ICJS Interoperable Criminal Justice System  
ICPRCP Intergovernmental Committee for Promoting the Return of Cultural 
Property 
ID Identity Document 
IFP Institut Français de Pondichéry/ French Institute of Pondicherry  
IGCAR Indira Gandhi Centre for Atomic Research 
IGM Import General Manifest 
IGNCA Indira Gandhi National Centre for the Arts  
IIT Indian Institute of Technology  
INR Indian National Rupee 
INTACH Indian National Trust for Art and Cultural Heritage 
INTERPOL International Criminal Police Organization 
IPC Indian Penal Code 
IR InfraRed 
JSK Junior Store Keeper  
KYC Knoy Uour Customer 
LDC Lower Division Clerk  
LEA Law Enforcement Agency 
LR Letters Rogatory  
MA Museum Attendant  
MAR Marksman  
MEA Ministry of External Affairs 
MET Metropolitan Museum 
MHA Ministry of Home Affairs 
ML Money Laundering  
MLAT Mutual Legal Assistance Treaty 
MOC Ministry of Culture 
MP Madhya Pradesh 
MTS Multi-Tasking Staff 
NAC Non-Antiquity Certificate 
NACIN National Academy of Customs, Indirect Taxes & Narcotics 
NCF National Culture Fund  
NCRB National Crime Record Bureau  
NCTC National Customs Targeting Centre 
NDPS Narcotics Drugs & Psychotropic Substance 
NGO Non-Governmental Organization 
NMMA National Mission on Monuments and Antiquities  
NSAF National Stolen Art File 
NSEC National Screening and Evaluation Committee 
NY New York 
OA Office Attendant  

v 
 
PCWA Pre-Columbian and Western Art 
PMLA Prevention of Money Laundering Act 
QRT Quick Response Team  
RFID Radio-Frequency Identification  
RGZM Römisch - Germanisches Zentralmuseum   
RMS Risk Management System  
SCN Show-Cause Notice  
SCOMET Special Chemicals, Organism, Materials, Equipment and Technologies 
SK Store Keeper  
SLL Special and Local Laws  
TEP Temporary Export Permit  
TPF Temple Protection Force  
UDC Upper Division Clerk  
UK United Kingdom 
UNESCO United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization  
UNIDROIT International Institute for the Unification of Private Law  
UPSC Union Public Service Commission 
US/USA United States/ United States of America 
USD United States Dollar 
UT Union Territory 
WOA Works of Arts  
X-RF Xray Florescence  
 
 
 
 

Page 1 of 108 
 
Report 
 India has always been one of the richest countries in the world in terms of archaeological and 
cultural wealth but the protection of this rich cultural herit age has always posed a challenge . In 
medieval times, invaders like Nadir Shah carried off a great many priceless gems and jewels and 
ancient fabled treasures. Under British colonial rule, there was a systematic and rapacious looting of 
India’s treasures. British museums today are filled with priceless antiques from India like the 
Sultanganj Bud dha, Maharaja Ranjit Singh’s throne and the sword and rings of Tipu Sultan. The 
looting of India’s treasures did not stop with independence from colonial rule but the heritage theft in 
the post-independence era has not gained as much prominence and visibility.   
2. While the colonial plunder of India’s tangible cultural heritage is well known, the 
contemporary rampant theft and smuggling of countless idols, antiquities and artefacts from the 
temples, forts, archaeological sites and even museums in modern In dia has gone largely unheeded.  
Many of these incidents of heritage theft are often not reported to the law enforcement agencies or to 
the ASI, possibly because no one knows exactly what has been stolen and when it has been stolen. 
As per UNESCO estimates, about 50,000 idols and artefacts had been stolen out of India till 1989. 
Despite various measures taken by the Government to curb smuggling of the Indian cultural wealth, 
many challenges still prevail in the process of  documentation, identification, safe guarding and 
repatriation of antiquities and lost cultural wealth.  
3. Cognizant of the massive scale of looting of our priceless antiquities, the Committee decided 
to take up the subject ‘Heritage Theft – The Illegal Trade in Indian Antiquities and challe nges of 
retrieving and safeguarding our Tangible Cultural Heritage’. The Ministry of Culture and its attached 
office of the Archaeological Survey of India are the nodal organisations concerned with the 
preservation and conservation of antiquities, but the humongous volume of our cultural wealth 
spread throughout the country and the sheer scale of theft of antiquities taking place means that the 
exercise of preservation of our cultural treasures requires the involvement of many government 
departments, NGOs a nd civil society organisations. The Committee , therefore, heard the Ministries 
of Culture, Home Affairs, External Affairs; Archaeological Survey of India (ASI); Directorate of 
Enforcement (ED); Directorate of Revenue Intelligence (DRI); Central Board of In direct Taxes and 
Customs (CBIC); Idol Wing of the Tamil Nadu Police; and Indian National Trust for Art and 
Cultural Heritage (INTACH) in its meetings held on 15 th November, 2022; 25 th November, 2022; 
22nd December, 2022; and 5th January, 2023.  

Page 2 of 108 
 
I 
Documentation of Tangible Cultural Heritage 
4. The Ministry of Culture informed the Committee that documentation of antiquities plays a 
very vital role in retrieving or claiming the stolen antiquities and proving the ownership of the said 
antiquity. India has a vast heritage and cultural repositories that are scattered all over the country. 
Some are protected by ASI, some are under state government and some are under Trusts/ local 
authority/ private ownership, etc. A big chunk of movable heritage is unprote cted and scattered all 
over the country without any vigilance and protection. While theft of antiquities in the Centrally 
Protected Monuments/sites under ASI and under State Governments is immediately reported and FIR 
is lodged, theft of unprotected antiquities which are neither documented nor reported makes retrieval 
of stolen property very difficult. The documentation of all such antiquities in the form of digitized 
records alongwith maintenance and periodic auditing of inventory is the first step to ensu re the 
safeguarding of India’s tangible cultural heritage. In this regard, the Government had launched a 
National Mission on Monuments and Antiquities (NMMA) to document the country’s monuments 
and antiquities which will help in creating a database of all antiquities and can be referred to readily 
in case of fraudulent dealings or theft in antiquities. 
 
National Mission on Monuments and Antiquities 
5. The National Mission on Monuments and Antiquities (NMMA) was launched on 19 th March, 
2007 for an initial pe riod of 5 years from 2007 to 2012. It was extended for a further period of 5 
years till 2017 and was later merged with Archaeological Survey of India (ASI). The objectives of 
NMMA are as follows: 
 Documentation and creation of suitable database on built her itage and sites through published 
and unpublished secondary sources for information and dissemination to planners, researchers, 
etc. and for better management of such cultural resources. 
 Documentation in a uniform manner developed by NMMA, of all Antiquiti es that are available 
in different formats in the form of Registered Antiquities, Catalogued Antiquities with Central as 
well as State Governments, Private museums and Collections, Universities, etc. 

Page 3 of 108 
 
 Promote awareness and sensitize people concerning the be nefits of preserving the historical and 
cultural aspects of built heritage, sites and antiquities. 
 Extend training facility and capacity building to the concerned State Departments, Local bodies, 
NGOs, Universities, Museums, Local communities etc. Help in developing synergy between 
Archaeological Survey of India, State Departments, concerned Institutions and NGOs to 
generate close interaction. 
6. Through inputs from eminent scholars, researchers, heritage  professionals and bureaucracy, 
the NMMA has develope d 21 parameters for cataloguing antiquities/sculptures and artefacts. These 
21 parameters are comprehensive and uniform in nature and have been approved by the Ministry of 
Culture. Till date, NMMA has documented 16.8 lakh antiquities out of 58 lakh antiqui ties, which is 
approximately 30 percent of the total estimated antiquities. Out of this, 15.7 lakh antiquities were 
documented by the NMMA before its merger with the ASI. This database also contains information 
of antiquities which are in the custody of the Archaeological Survey of India. 
7. The Ministry informed that any person can access 12.28 lakh templates of antiquities already 
published on the NMMA website. However, there are 3.5 lakh templates of antiquities, in possession 
of private individuals, which have been documented by NMMA, which cannot be accessed by the 
general public as per the guidance of the Ministry of Law. These remaining templates can be 
accessed by State Governments, law enforcement agencies, Non -Governmental Organisations 
(NGOs) and private museums, with special permission from the Competent Authority. 
8. The Ministry further informed the Committee that in most of the museums, the objects on 
display is a small fraction of what is there in the reserve collection.  The Ministry is al so considering 
the items kept in the reserve collection for the digitization process. There is a rotation policy in the 
Museums wherein objects are replaced from reserve collection to display from time to time, for the 
benefit of visitors/scholars, etc. 
9. The Committee notes that in the 15 years since  the inception of NMMA, only about 16.8 
lakh antiquities out of a total estimated 58 lakh antiquities i.e. about 30% have been 
documented as on date. Further,  the Committee was informed by  DG, ASI in the deposition 
that the figure of 58 lakh antiquities is only an estimate and there may well be many more 
antiquities existing in India. If so, it makes the slow pace of documentation un der NMMA all 
the more alarming. 

Page 4 of 108 
 
10. The Committee observes that the CAG in  its Follow-up Report of 2022 had noted the lack of 
defined strategy and annual targets for documentation and had commented that the whole project was 
poorly implemented. The Table below gives the progress in documenting monuments and antiquities 
from 2007-2021as mentioned in the CAG Report of 2022.  
Period Documentation Uploading of Data 
Monuments Antiquities Monuments Antiquities 
2007-12 34794 48411 0 0 
2012-17 1.84 lakh 15.0 lakh 9688 2.40 lakh 
2017-19* 3228 1.70 lakh 312 10.13 lakh 
2019-20 6039 32537 859 8952 
2020-21 3186 2400 703 1569 
Total 2.31 lakh 17.53 lakh 11562 12.64 lakh 
     
*Period counted upto/from October  
Note: For 2019 -20 and 2020 -21, status reported by NMMA (in October 2020 and December 2021) was upto October 
2020 and from November 2020 to 1 December 2021. 
 
11. The CAG Report, 2022 further states that in respect of 1.80 lakh monuments, the 
documentation work carried out was based on secondary sources and not verified through primary 
survey. After scrutinizing the work and de leting certain data, NMMA reported (in December, 2021) 
following reduced progress status:  
Period Documentation Uploading of Data 
Monuments Antiquities Monuments Antiquities 
Revised Progress 1.84 lakh 16.83 lakh 11406 12.06 lakh 
 
12. The Committee would like to know the reasons behind the concerning observations 
made by CAG even after nine years having passed since the publication of its original Report 
in 2013.   The Committee feels that documentation and maintenance of database of t he 
country’s antiquities is urgently needed and recommends that all out efforts should be made to 
complete the documentation process on a mission mode. 
13. The Committee has been informed by the ASI that documentation in the 55 Site 
Museums of ASI all over the country has been initiated and is likely to be completed by the end 
of 2023. The Committee feels that the documentation in ‘ASI owned sites ’ should have been 
accomplished much before. The Committee has learned from media reports that ASI Sites such 
as Chandraketugarh in West Bengal are sources of numerous artefacts which are sold 

Page 5 of 108 
 
worldwide in illegal antiquities markets while such sites itself lie abandoned. The Committee 
finds it perplexing that with all the emphasis on documentation as one of the major preventive 
measures against theft of antiquities, the ASI has not documented the antiquities in its own Site 
Museums.  The Committee notes that the Ministry of Culture has been in existence since 1961 
and the ASI predates the Ministry by a century.  The Committee also notes the observation of 
the Public Accounts Committee in its report regarding the huge amount of public money spent 
over the years on preservation and conservation.  Despite the anti quity of these two 
organisations, the years of efforts made towards conservation of our  heritage, and the funds  
allocated,  the documentation work which is the preliminary step in conservation has not 
shown satisfactory progress.  
14. The Committee recom mends that the ASI may ensure that the documentation process 
for all its Site Museums may be completed by the target timeline i.e., by end of 2023. The 
Committee may be updated on the progress and also upon the completion of documentation. 
The Committee al so urges the Ministry/ASI to expedite the documentation work on priority 
basis  in its National Musuems and other Centrally Protected sites.  
 
The Central Antiquity Collection (CAC)  
15. The Committee notes that the Central Antiquity Collection (CAC) is a rich repository of rare 
antiquities collected from various parts of the country.  The ASI informed that there is no separate 
sanctioned strength for the CAC and it forms part of the ASI Headquarters in Delhi. As per the CAG 
Report, 2022, the CAC is being m anaged by only one Assistant Archaeologist and the physical 
verification of artifacts in the CAC was last done in 2014.  The ASI informed the Committee that 
there is a plan to shift the CAC from its present location at Purana Qila, New Delhi to Pt. Deen Dayal 
Upadhyaya Institute of Archaeolo gy, Greater Noida and  Physical verification of artifacts would be 
done during that process.  
16. The Committee feels that an important repository of antiquities like the CAC should 
have a permanent and sufficient staff s trength for the management, physical verification and 
conservation of the antiquities. The Committee recommends that the sanctioned strength of the 
CAC may be assessed and sufficient staff may be posted there for its proper management. The 

Page 6 of 108 
 
Committee also r ecommends that the physical verification of antiquities in the CAC may also 
be taken up as soon as possible.  
17. The Committee observes that the CAG Report, 2013 had mentioned that the ASI had no 
policy/standard for transfer/shifting/acquisition/custody o f antiquities and that at the time of 
transfer of antiquities, neither any agreement with the associated firm nor any insurance is 
being done. The Committee directs that the ASI may give the updates on the policies and 
standards for shifting of antiquities.  
 
National Museum, New Delhi 
18. The National Museum, New Delhi has around 2.06 lakh works of art of both Indian and 
foreign origin in its possession. The Ministry informed that as on date 64,736 artefacts have been 
physically verified while handing over / taking over of the objects by th e concerned Curators. Each 
Collection Department has a set of CAR (Classified Accession Register), classified in various 
formats viz., year-wise, material -wise, object -wise and special collection, in form of donation and 
purchase safely kept in the vault s ituated on the ground floor of the Museum. The Digitization Unit 
of the Museum has undertaken a project to digitize the CAR, which is underway. In addition, each 
Department has comprehensive data of the CAR in digitized format - scanned copies and the excel  
sheet.  The Departmental curatorial staff (Assistant Curator) takes over objects from the Senior 
Curator, who are nearing their period of superannuation after conducting thorough physical 
verification, recording condition as per documentation/entry by ref erring the CAR (Classified 
Accession Register). Handing over/ taking over is duly signed by both members in the CAR.  
JATAN Software 
19. National Museum is digitizing its collection under JATAN software. The status is given 
below: 
Section Approved at 
Director Level 
Online on 
website Grand Total Total No. of antiquities 
Anthropology 6587 6029 9593 9452 
Archaeology 4750 4241 9496 9655 
Arms 4699 4561 6470 6457 
CAA 3784 3595 12705 12382 
Dec. Art 6981 5811 9420 9433 

Page 7 of 108 
 
Jewellery 461 457 587 535 
Manuscripts 3512 3068 12466 14143 
N&E 48324 48320 90776 119791 
Paintings 6679 5722 16753 16324 
PCWA 1975 1561 2258 2560 
Pre-History 1774 1757 4066 5437 
Total 89526 85122 174590 206169 
 
20. Out of total antiquities of 2,06,169, National Museum has taken data entry of 1,74,590 
antiquities. 85,122 of these antiquities are available for viewing to the public on portal - 
www.museumsofindia.gov.in. The rest h ave been uploaded in JATAN Software and awaiting final 
approval before uploading on the public portal. 
21. The Committee notes that digitization process in the National Museum is long overdue 
and recommends the Ministry to expedite the process and ensure c ompletion of the digitization 
process on mission mode.   
22. The Committee notes that as per the CAG Reports of 2013 and 2022 physical 
verification of artefacts has not been done regularly in the seven National Museums under the 
control of the Ministry.  Further, given that the documentation of antiquities in Site Museums 
of ASI  and the digitization in the National Museums  are still in progress with majority of the 
objects kept in the Reserve Collections yet to be digitized, the Committee feels that there is a 
huge possibility that in majority of the cases, the discovery of theft is made long after the 
antiquity has vanished from its place of or igin.  The Ministry and ASI are two organisations 
which must be most aware of the difficulties in bringing back stolen antiquities without proper 
documentation. Yet the Committee does not see any urgency in the activities of the Ministry 
and ASI to conclud e the documentation of monuments and antiquities. Proper documentation 
also constitutes provenance for consumers wishing to purchase antiquities legally.   
23. The Committee recommends the Ministry to initiate physical verification and 
digitization processes at all the National Museums and Site Museums under the purview of 
ASI, set targets for the processes and ensure that the entire process is completed within a 
reasonable period of time.  
24. The Committee notes that the CAG Reports had commented on the lack of Rotation 
Policy in the Museum stating that over 90% of artefacts lay in the Reserve Collection without 
ever being on display.  While the Ministry in its written submis sions has stated that a Rotation 

Page 8 of 108 
 
Policy is in place in the Museums,  it was acknowledged during the deposition that only a small 
fraction of artefacts were on display and the Museum was considering the digitization of the 
objects kept in the Reserve Collection.   
25. The Committee , therefore, recommends that the Ministry may ensure that all the 
Museums under its control may strictly follow the Rotation policy since display of all objects 
on rotation basis not only enhances the appeal of the museum, it also ensures that artefacts are 
not forgotten or misplaced.    
26. The Committee notes that  India has  put forth the agenda of “Technological 
Transformation and Digital Public Infrastructure” as one of the six priorities for the G -20 
dialogue in 2023. The Commit tee is of the opinion that India has to lead by example. The 
Ministry should strive to prioritize the documentation of antiquities at those locations/sites 
which have been identified for the ensuing G -20 Summit, scheduled to be held in September, 
2023.  Having a digital record of India’s Tangible Cultural Heritage will  further attract the 
international tourists and result in promoting tourism at these locations 
 
Challenges in Documentation of Antiquities 
27. The Ministry informed the Committee that the creation of database to prevent theft of 
antiquities is a time consuming process as it requires a dedicated team of professionals having good 
knowledge of antiquities documentation process. It also requires adequate monitoring and swift 
decisions for the utilization of fund. Besides, the number of 58 lakh antiquities is a tentative estimate, 
calculated during the initial years of the NMMA and re -verification of this estimate with active 
public participation is the need of the hour. Further, antiquity documentation is a detailed and tedious 
process, involving a lot of new innovative techniques such as 3D documentation and petrology etc. 
However, all these processes are time consuming and require physical and financial resources. 
28. The Ministry stated that t here is no estimated timeline for the completion of the process of 
documentation in absence of adequate and dedicated team of professionals, resources and planning 
for its execution, as antiquities have multiple ownerships and are ever increasing in volume . 
Therefore, it is not possible to provide an estimated timeline. 
29. The Ministry stated that a budget of Rs. 189.00 crore was proposed for NMMA during the 
first 10 years from 2007 to 2017. Against the budget proposal, the actual allocation of Rs. 53.39 

Page 9 of 108 
 
crore was made for NMMA, whereas only Rs.29.04 crore was spent during these 10 years. Further, 
a total strength of 54 staff (including 16 permanent and 38 contractual) was proposed for NMMA.  
However, the actual strength stands at 11 persons including contr actual staff and Multi -Tasking 
Staff (MTS).   
30. The Committee notes that the budget for NMMA is continuously being reduced in 
successive financial years.   The Committee would like to know the reasons for such reduced 
allocation and utilization thereof a nd whether the Ministry had approached the Ministry of 
Finance for more funds.   The Committee observes that apart from the financial reasons, lack 
of manpower is a major barrier in the documentation process. The Committee notes that 
against the requiremen t of 54, only 11 staff members are working under NMMA. The 
Committee would like to know the reasons for the shortage of staff under NMMA and 
Ministry’s plans to fill the requisite vacancies at the earliest.  
31. The Committee notes that several key positions are also lying vacant in various cadres 
of ASI and the National Museums and Site Museums for a long time  (Annexure-I). The 
Committee has been informed by the Ministry that direct recruitment has been initiated  for 
some of the vacancies (Annexure-II). The Committee is of the view that the Museums can 
function properly if they have key personnel in position to manage them. The Committee, 
recommends the Ministry to take urgent steps to fill the existing vacancies under the various 
cadres of ASI and the Museums at the earliest.   
32. The Committee does not accept the plea of the ASI that no time limit can be fixed for 
documentation due to the ever growing volume of antiquities.  The Committee recommends 
that the ASI should strive towards setting achiev able annual targets for documentation and 
make all efforts to achieve the same.  
33. The Committee further recommends that the Ministry should formulate fixed timelines 
for the completion of the documentation process and conduct regular checks to ensure 
adherence to such timelines.  At the same time Ministry should initiate a plan to recalculate the 
actual number of antiquities in the country while documenting the said antiquities. 
 
 
 

Page 10 of 108 
 
Coordination with other Agencies  
34. The Ministry in its written reply stated that the NMMA has entered into 87 MoUs with 
various local bodies, heritage organizations, State Archaeology Departments, Universities, Colleges 
and NGOs for documentation of antiquities. Currently, the NMMA has published a rolling 
advertisement at i ts website and also at the website of the Ministry of Culture for submission of 
proposals from interested Departments of State Archaeology and Museums, Universities, Non -
Governmental Heritage bodies and all associated bodies to get themselves recognized as  
Documentation Resource Centres (DRCs) since 2019. 
35. The Ministry also informed that the NMMA has already taken up initiatives to speed up the 
process of documentation of antiquities currently under the custody of the Archaeological Survey of 
India by en gaging Young Archaeologists in most Circle/Branch of the ASI offices. Regular 
webinars were arranged during the Covid days and 6 regional workshops have been conducted in 
the financial year 2022 -23, so far. The NMMA targets to finish documentation of nearl y 4.64 lakh 
antiquities (in house) in next one year.  
36. The Committee opines that the documentation of all the antiquities in a vast country 
like India, is a gigantic task.  The Committee appreciates the initiatives of the Ministry for 
signing various Mo Us with local bodies, heritage organizations, State Archaeology 
Departments, Universities, Colleges and NGOs for documentation of antiquities and would like 
to know the details regarding the proposals received for the identification of Documentation 
Resource Centres (DRCs) and the current status of these proposals.  
37. The Committee also recommends that the Ministry/ ASI m ay explore the possibility of 
involving State Governments and relevant bodies viz., Indian National Trust for Art and 
Cultural Heritage (INTACH); Indian Council for Cultural Relations (ICCR); IGNCA , 
National Culture Fund (NCF) as well as the French Institute of Pondicherry amongst others,  
in this process of documentation of India’s antiquities.   The Committee also recommends that 
a dedicated team may be constituted in ASI for better collaboration with such civil society 
organizations to enhance the documentation and recovery. 
38. The Committee also recommends the Ministry to examine the proposal for creating a 
Central Sector Scheme to ensure handholding and encouragement of the State Governments 
for creation of a master database of antiquities in the country. The Ministry may also 

Page 11 of 108 
 
formulate an incentivization scheme for the involvement of interested and relevant agencies/ 
stakeholders for record keeping of our Tangible Cultural Heritage. 
39. The Committee observes that there is a general lack of understanding among the public 
regarding the intrinsic historical value of such antiquities especially in old and abandoned 
temples in rural areas.  ASI officials have informed that they organize activities to create 
awareness among general public/school /college students in the form of herit age awareness 
weeks, antiquity - registration drive, World Heritage Day/Week, Museum Day, etc.   The 
Committee would like to know if ASI has held any such heritage awareness schemes in rural 
areas.  The Committee recommends that ASI interact with Village Pa nchayat Members and 
enlist their support in ensuring that the temples and artefacts in their villages are well 
protected.     
40. The Committee has been informed that a heritage portal app is presently being created 
in which reporting of thefts of antiquit ies can be considered under crowd sourcing. The 
Committee desires to know if the Ministry has any plans to develop a heritage portal which can 
also be used for documentation of antiquities.  
 
Technological Advancements for Documentation and Verification of Antiquities  
41. The Ministry has informed the Committee that the antiquities are verified based on 
archaeological verification processes. Also, Radiocarbon (C -14) dating is carried out with the 
excavated samples.  The Committee enquired about making use of technology to take measurements 
of dimensions of sacred idols, antiquities etc. in a contactless manner, to alleviate concerns of 
worshippers who oppose idols being measured for documentation purposes through conventional 
means, due to cultural reasons.    The Ministry stated that ASI has neither used any such technology 
so far nor it has any such information. 
42. Through his presentation, the Director General of Police , Tamil Nadu highlighted the two 
ways viz., photographic and oral, which are being foll owed to maintain documentary evidence of 
antiquities in the State of Tamil Nadu (Annexure-III).  
43. The Committee observes that Photo images of the idols of the temple were hard to come by 
since photography of idols under worship in the temples was prohibited since long.  In the absence of 
photo image of the idol, tracing and locating the idol become ext remely tenuous.   Further, existence 

Page 12 of 108 
 
of numerous such idols by the same name in thousands of temples in Tamil Nadu render the 
identification of the specific idol all the more difficult.  The photo archives of the French Institute of 
Pondicherry/ Institut Français de Pondichéry  (IFP) was started in 1956 and the collection is still  
being constantly enriched to build a database for the study of religious art in South India.  The photo 
archives of IFP now contain more than 1 ,60,000 photographs and are a unique resource for visual 
information about South India in the second half of the twentieth century, partic ularly its temple art.  
These collections of images of temple idols turned out to be the saviour for the identification and 
comparison of the burgled idols.  
44. The Committee recommends that the Ministry may enlist the help of the French 
Institute of Pondi cherry to build a database of photo archives of temple art and the best 
practices of this Institute may be adopted by the ASI.    
45. The Committee notes the present process being followed for verification and 
maintenance of documentary evidence of antiquities. The Committee recommends that modern 
technology such as photogrammetry and 3D laser scanning should be employed to provide 
extremely accurate documentation of antiquities. Also, a systematic photo documentation of all 
antiquities should be done which should also be accessible online.  
46. The Committee is also aware that it may not be possible to maintain a photographic 
evidence of certain antiquities/ idols due to traditional practices and beliefs. In this regard, the 
Committee recommends that the Ministry should lay its focus on research and development 
techniques to figure out ways and methods to maintain record without hurting p eople’s 
sentiments. 
47. The Committee also urges the Ministry to take help of technological advancements to 
develop a mechanism for scanning of antiquities in order to ascertain their authenticity, 
composition and dimensions in a contactless manner.  
48. The Committee also recommends identification and unique tagging of antiquities on the 
lines of Radio-Frequency Identification (RFID) and Geographical Indication (GI) tags.  
 
 
 

Page 13 of 108 
 
Registration of Antiquities  
49. The Ministry informed the Committee that a certa in category of Antiquities (which ar e more 
than 100 years old) needs  to be registered under the “Antiquities and Art Treasures (AAT) Act, 
1972”. As per S.O.448(E), dated 2.7.1976 as amended by S.O. 397 (E), dated 15.5.1980, painting 
and sculpture in all me diums (which are 100 years old) and Manuscript containing painting 
illustration and illuminations (which are 75 years old); need to be registered by the owners with ASI. 
Till date, ASI has registered approximately 3,52,484 antiquities and all the records a re adequately 
maintained with the Data Bank. It is to mention here that on the basis of records of registration, 
various antiquities have been claimed from Germany (Mahishasurmardini from J&K), USA 
(standing Buddha from Bihar), etc., and brought back to th e country. Section 14 of the AAT Act, 
1972 provides for registration of antiquities, which is as follows:- 
    “14. Registration of antiquities —(1) The Central Government may, from time to time, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, specify those antiquities which shall be registered under this 
Act. (2) In specifying the antiquities under sub -section (1), the Central Government shall have 
regard to the following factors, namely: - (i) the necessity for conserving the objects of art; (ii) the 
need to preserve such objects within India for the better appreciation of the cultural heritage of 
India; (iii) such other factors as will, or are likely to, contribute to the safeguarding of the cultural 
heritage of India. (3) Every person who owns, controls or is in possession of any antiquity specified 
in the notification issued under sub -section (1) shall register such antiquity before the registering 
officer— (a) in the case of a person who owns, controls or possesses such antiquity on the date of 
issue of such notification, within three months of such date; and (b) in the case of any other person, 
within fifteen days of the date on which he comes into ownership, control or possession of such 
antiquity, and obtain a certificate in token of such registration.” 

Page 14 of 108 
 
 
Standing Buddha Statue retrieved from USA on basis of registered record 
50. ASI informed that the Government usually issue notifications for sculptures and paintings to 
be registered. The details of such registered antiquities are kept in a databank whic h proves to be 
very useful in retrieval of antiquities which were later on smuggled to foreign countries. ASI is 
conducting special drives to incentivize registration of antiquities and trying to simplify the 
registration process. However, the registration process cannot be made completely online as physical 
inspection of an object is inevitable before registration. 
51. The Ministry stated that the ASI had initiated a major registration drive in September, 2019 
to spread knowledge and awareness among laymen, about registering the country’s wealth with the 
Government, so that the fear of losing ownership of individual anci ent cultural wealth to the 
Government could be eradicated. This step was taken up as a measure of inducing transparency and 
accountancy in Good-Governance.  


Page 15 of 108 
 
52. The Committee feels that registration of antiquities is an essential step to record all the 
privately owned antiquities in the country. Sufficient awareness should be created for the 
public to understand the importance of the cultural heritage and its registration.  
53. The Committee appreciates the registration drive initiated by the Ministry in 
September, 2019. However, the Committee feels that the window of 15 days for registration of 
antiquities is too short.  The Act itself provides three months for registration for the person 
who owns the antique on the date of such notification.  The Committee  recommends that the 
registration windows should be at least six months and the Ministry may include this 
amendment also at the time of amendment of the AAT Act.  
54. The Committee also recommends that the Ministry should initiate more such drives and 
take the help of social media and other electronic mediums to popularize the same.  The 
Committee recommends that the process may be simplified in order to encourage the 
concerned parties to come forward in large numbers for registration of antiquities. 
55. The Committee reiterates that the Ministry should further explore the possibility of 
devising an online portal/ app for virtual verification and registration of antiquities on the lines 
of the Heritage Portal App being developed for reporting thefts.  
 
Valuation of Antiquities  
56. The Directorate of Enforcement (ED) informed that the issue was discussed in detail with the 
officials of ASI and it was noticed from the details by ASI that there are no clear provisions, rules or 
guidelines related to valuation of Antiquities under the Antiquities and Art Treasures Act, 1972. The 
valuation of antiquities is not in the mandate of ASI. The valuation is done by National Screening 
and Evaluation Committee (NSEC) for insurance purpose in case of sending Antiquities for  
exhibition and other purposes to foreign countries. This Committee comprises of experts from their 
respective fields. Further, in case, if any Law Enforcement agency requests ASI for valuation of 
Antiquities, the valuation is done by a Committee constitut ed by the concerned Law Enforcement 
agency in which a member from ASI is also nominated. As such valuation of antiquities is a complex 
task and there cannot be uniform practice to ascertain the value of Arts or Antique item. Thus, the 
Directorate of Enforcement proposes that for independent valuation of such seized antiquities, there 
should be an expert agency which may comprise of expert of respective fields to ascertain their 

Page 16 of 108 
 
correct value. The same task may be undertaken in consultation of ASI. Previous trade of similar 
items in the international market may also be considered while ascertaining the value. 
57. The Committee notes the reply of the Directorate of Enforcement as regards valuation 
of antiquities. The Committee feels that the valuation of antiquities is essential as it will attach 
a monetary figure to the antiquities being stolen/ smuggled and retrie ved/ claimed. Also, the 
Indian Tangible Cultural Heritage is the national wealth and it is important to ascertain the 
value of it. The Committee reiterates the proposal of Directorate of Enforcement and 
recommends the Ministry to establish an independent b ody/ Committee consisting of members 
from ASI, ED, law enforcement agencies and heritage experts which can carry out the task of 
valuation of antiquities.  
 
Acquisition and Purchase of Antiquities by ASI 
58. With regard to the policy of the Government for purchasing of an antiquity in a private 
collection whose owner wants to sell it, the Ministry informed that the Art Purchase Committee of 
different museums invites purchase of different artifacts from private/ individuals. ASI has no such 
Art Purchase Committee.  ASI also stated that there is no provision to purchase antiquities by ASI 
from a foreign private museum.  The Committee raised the issue of creation of a policy wherein a 
private antiquity owner can get revenue from the display of their antiquity b y lending/ selling it to a 
museum.  T he Ministry stated that the matter has been noted for examination.  The Ministry also 
informed that there is no Acquisition Committee in the site Museums of ASI. Artefacts from 
archaeological sites are displayed in the S ite Museums and there is no provision of acquisition of 
artefacts in ASI. 
59. The Committee notes the reply of the Government of India on  both acquisition and 
purchase of antiquities . In this context, the Committee recommends two changes in the 
relevant Acts/ Rules. First , is to enable a private antiquity owner to display their antiquity by 
lending/ selling it to a museum, in return for revenue.   Secondly, in case a private antiquity 
owner wants to sell it, the Government of India should have a preemptive overriding right to 
buy before private persons. The said recommendations will ensure that the Indian heritage 
gets displayed in museums and the interests of the private owners are also protected. 
 

Page 17 of 108 
 
II 
Safeguarding of Antiquities at Museums and Centrally Protected Monuments 
60. The Committee desired to know about the technological innovations being utilized by the 
Ministry/ ASI for safeguarding of antiquities.  T he Ministry informed the Committee that frisking 
metal detectors, burglar alarms, and latest spy Cameras have been installed in all archaeological 
museums of ASI. Closed -Circuit Television (CCTV); 24x7 watch & ward; baggage scanning; fire 
fighting equipments; Hand Held Detectors; File Alarms and smoke Detectors; Door Frame Metal 
Detector etc have also been provided. Further, about 83 Centrally Protected Monuments /Sites under 
ASI have been provided with CCTV security systems.  
61. The Ministry has also stated that in most of the cases, State Governments, private agencies 
etc. do not share the information on theft of antiquities to ASI.  A list of stolen antiquities from the 
protected monuments/ sites of the ASI in different States and Union Ter ritories (UTs) and the status 
of recovery, is as follows:- 
S. No. States and UTs Number of 
Theft Cases 
Number of 
Objects Stolen Recovered 
1. Andhra Pradesh 18 18 3 
2. Assam 1 1 - 
3. Bihar 5 22 1 
4. Chhattisgarh 7 8 2 
5. Gujarat 1 2 1 
6. Himachal Pradesh 1 4 - 
7. Jharkhand 1 2 2 
8. Karnataka 13 15 2 
9. Madhya Pradesh 62 125 29 
10. Maharashtra 1 12 - 
11. Odisha 4 6 - 
12 Rajasthan 52 93 23 
13. Tamil Nadu 15 31 3 
14. Telangana 2 7 - 
15. Uttar Pradesh 12 86 11 
16. Uttarakhand 10 34 12 
17. West Bengal 1 3 - 
18. Delhi 2 5 2 
19. Jammu and Kashmir 2 12 - 
Total 210 486 91 
 
 

Page 18 of 108 
 
 
62. Upon query by the Committee, the ASI acknowledged that there is no dedicated Monitoring 
Cell to detect theft of antiquities from museums under ASI. However, safety and securities of 
antiquities is being taken care of under available manpower. The representatives of the 
Archaeological Survey of India submitted that besides regular watch and ward staff of ASI, Private 
Security Guards, State Police Armed Guards and Cent ral Industrial Security Force have been 
deployed as per requirement in order to prevent any kind of theft or related events that might 
prejudice the efforts being so perseveringly taken by the organization. If any theft of antiquity takes 
place in Centrally Protected Monuments, sites/museums, First Information Report (FIR) is lodged in 
the concerned police station and a "Look Out Notice" is issued to all law enforcement agencies, 
including all Custom exit channels, Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI), Dir ectorate of Revenue 
Intelligence (DRI), Police, etc, to keep vigil at tracing the stolen antiquity and prevent any such 
unsolicited incidence of illegal export. 
63. The Ministry of Home Affairs deposed before the Committee that Police and Public Order 
are State subjects under the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution of India and maintenance of law 
and order, prevention, detection, registration and investigation of crime including cases of stealing of 
antiquities are the responsibilities of the respective St ate Governments. The State Governments are 


Page 19 of 108 
 
primarily responsible for safeguarding cultural heritage in the country. The State Governments are 
competent to deal with such offences and prosecuting the criminals through their law enforcement 
agencies under th e extant provision of law. In this regard, Article 49 of the Constitu tion of India is 
very relevant which says, "Protection of monuments and places and objects of national importance: It 
shall be the obligation of the State to protect every monument or place or object of artistic or historic 
interest, declared by or under law made by Parliament to be of national importance, from spoliation, 
disfigurement, destruction, removal, disposal or export, as the case may be.”  Further, CISF is placed 
for security of important cultural and archaeological monuments. There are eight such monuments 
viz., National Museum, Delhi; Red Fort, Delhi; Salar Jung Museum, Hyderabad; Taj Mahal, Agra; 
Victoria Memorial, Kolkata; Indian Museum, Kolkata; Statue of Unity, Kevadia ; and Nehru 
Memorial Museum and Library, New Delhi. 
64. The Central Industrial Security Force (CISF), Ministry of Home Affairs in their written reply, 
highlighted the following steps taken by the CISF to ensure adequate protection of the CPMs and the 
precious antiquities/ artefatcs therein, at monuments/ museums where CISF personnel are posted:- 
 Strict Access Control – 100% frisking of visitors and employees ensured 
 Advanced security arrangements such as Hand Held Metal Detector (HHMD), Door 
Frame Metal Detector (DFMD) and X-Ray scanners are being used; 
 Opening and closing of museum galleries are done under the supervision of CISF and 
employees of Indian Museum; 
 Gate entry/ exit points and specific areas are covered under CCTVs and are monitored 
24X7 by trained CISF personnel; 
 Barricades have been placed at strategic locations so that no visitor can get access to 
restricted points; 
 Deployment of CISF personnel have been made at all vital points; 
 CISF personnel are deployed in watch towers to avoid any intrusion or any unlawful 
activities through the perimeter wall; 
 The workers are checked properly by CISF personnel while exiting through gates, to 
avoid stealing the property. Besides, all visitors/ tourists exiting through gates are 
watched properly by CISF personnel deployed at gates; 

Page 20 of 108 
 
 Shifting of artefacts is made under the presence of CISF personnel with proper escort;  
 Anti-Sabotage Check (after evacuation of visitors) is performed by dedicated team of 
CISF and dog squad wherever possible; 
 Proper locking and sea ling of galleries are done after closing hours in the presence of 
CISF personnel;  
 Dedicated armed Quick Response Team (QRT) component is deployed round the clock; 
 Few CISF personnel are deployed in plain clothes to observe the activities of   
visitors/tourists/ staff.  
65. The Archaeological Survey of India signed an MoU in June, 2022, with Indian Institute of 
Technology (IIT), Delhi on collaboration for providing expertise in the field of security and 
surveillance on ASI’s establishments including monumen ts, sites, museums, antiquities and offices.  
A team of partner institution visited 300 Centrally Protected Monuments (CPMs) and sites along 
with site museums including antiquities and other field establishment of ASI in order to carry out a 
study of the s ecurity requirements. IIT, Delhi will now submit an analysis Report containing short, 
medium and long terms security challenges and their solutions 
 
Security at Customs Exit Channels  
66. The ASI has deputed Archaeological officers at exit channels of Cust oms at Delhi, Mumbai, 
Kolkata, Jodhpur and Thiruvananthapuram to examine the objects which are suspected to be 
antiquities by the Customs.  ASI officers are deputed for ‘joint surprise check/ Joint 
investigation/operations, in order to check in fraudulent d ealing in antiquities. Constant interaction 
takes place between ASI, Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI) and Customs Authorities to share 
information on the smuggling of art objects which has resulted in recoveries of antiquities stolen 
from heritage sit es. From time -to-time officials of ASI also take part in Symposiums/ workshops 
organized by enforcing agencies. ASI is conducting such training workshops in collaboration with 
CBI Academy. 
67. The Ministry has stated that the outcome of all such preventive  steps has lead to fewer or 
almost no theft cases being reported from Centrally Protected Monuments/ Sites and Museums in the 
last five years. 

Page 21 of 108 
 
Measures prevailing in Tamil Nadu for Safekeeping of Antique Idols  
68. The DGP, Tamil Nadu Police elucidated upo n the following measures being taken for 
safekeeping of the antique idols:-  
 Formation of ICON centres in Tamil Nadu 
 In Tamil Nadu, so far 19 number of ICON centres have been established for the safe custody 
of 1463 antique idols. Movement of antique idol s from these centres to temples for annual 
processional festivals have been systemised with a view to ensure its safety. 
 Creating a database pertaining to antique idols available in these ICON centres  
 With the sincere efforts of Idol Wing CID, the metal composition in every idol available in 
Tiruvarur ICON centre had been ascertained through X -RF analyser (Xray Florescence 
Analyser) i.e. for nearly 6000 idols this documentation had been carried out with the 
assistance of Indian Institute of Technology (II T), Chennai and Indira Gandhi Centre for 
Atomic Research (IGCAR), Kalpakkam. The same exercise could have been extended in 
respect of the other ICON centres also. 
 Provision of Temple Protection Force for vulnerable temples located in remote places.  
 The District Superintendents of Police are empowered to nominate retired police and Military 
personnel for the Temple Protection Force (TPF). The TPF personnel nominated as such will 
be engaged in the protection of vulnerable temples located in remote places of districts.  
69. All these aforesaid measures have played a vital role in the safe keeping of antique idols in 
the temples in Tamil Nadu. 
70. The Committee notes that as per the data furnished by ASI, there have been 210 cases 
of antiquity theft, since ind ependence. In these cases, 486 stolen antiquities have been reported 
from Centrally Protected Monuments/ Sites/ Museums located in 19 States/ UTs out of which 
only 91 antiquities have been recovered till date, which is around 18.8% of the total antiquities  
stolen.  
71. The Committee is not convinced by the assurances of the Ministry and ASI that the 
theft in CPMs has gone down considerably in the last few years. As per media reports, many 
Indian antiquities surface in museums display and catalogues around the world or in  global 
markets. As reported, the Metropolitan Museum in New York has 77 antiquities with links to 

Page 22 of 108 
 
Subhash Kapoor, the high profile smuggler who is now in prison in India.  The MET 
Museum’s Asia Collection is also reported to contain more than 90 pieces fr om Jammu & 
Kashmir with no provenance details. The Committee further observes that as per the NCRB 
data for 2017 -2021, a total of 175 Special and Local Laws (SLL) Crimes have been reported 
under the Antiquities and Art Treasures Act, 1972 (Annexure -IV).   The Committee believes it 
is impossible to state the number of thefts with any accuracy unless all the antiquities in a 
museum have been documented and digitized.  In the absence of a centralized database of 
antiquities, theft can be detected only by rando m checks and it is possible that some thefts may 
go undetected for many years. A case in point is , as reported by the media, the Saraswati 
painting from J&K which has been found in the US but has still not been brought back due to 
the lack of any missing report.  
72. The Committee underlines the need of security of antiquities deployed at the different National 
Museums/ CPMs across the country. The Committee notes that out of 3695 Centrally Protected 
Monuments (CPMs)/sites under ASI, only a paltry 83 CPMs h ave been provided with CCTV 
cameras.  The Committee further observes that due to the shortage of staff, the ASI is unable 
to provide Monument Attendants in every monument. CCTV cameras provide real time 24X7 
surveillance in the remotest areas and are commo nly used nowadays even in residences and 
offices for security purposes.  The Committee feels that the ASI is not making use of available 
technology for protection of our priceless antiquities and monuments. The Committee 
recommends that the ASI and the Min istry may make every effort to ensure that all the 
Centrally Protected Monuments and Site Museum under ASI have CCTV cameras for 
protection. 
73. The Committee would also like to know the present status of the Comprehensive 
Security Policy being drafted by the IIT, Delhi, envisaging various security and surveillance 
systems to combat various threats. The Committee recommends that the Security Policy may 
be expedited and formulated at the earliest.  
74. The Committee appreciates the steps being taken by the C ISF personnel at various 
Museums/ CPMs to ensure safeguarding of valuable antiquities. The Committee recommends 
the Ministry to implement similar security measures in consultation with the CISF, MHA, at 
all the remaining Museums/CPMs/Sites of ASI. The Comm ittee feels that there is a grave need 

Page 23 of 108 
 
to establish a robust security system in coordination with CISF; State Police Departments; and 
private security services to have a foolproof system in place. 
75. The Committee, also recommends that the Ministry may co me up with a set of rules to 
ensure certain level of safety and security across all the National Museums and CPMs. 
Needless to mention, installation of CCTV systems, armed personnel, burglar alarm systems, 
etc. in the museums are a must and therefore the b udgetary requirements, alongwith 
provisions thereof within strict timeline be made for compliance of security requirements. 
76. The Committee recommends the Ministry to explore the usage of strong storage 
facilities for antiquities which are both at display and are in the reserve collection The 
Committee hopes that this would also deter the possible connivance of the Museum staff with 
organized art smuggling groups. 
77. The Committee appreciates the documentation of the idols in the Tiruvarur Icon Centre 
by X -RF analyser (X -ray Florescence Analyser) with the help of IIT, Chennai and IGCAR, 
Kalpakkam. The Committee recommends that the same exercise may be done in other ICON 
centres in Tamil Nadu also. The Committee further recommends the Ministry of Cul ture may 
take note of the security measures being taken by the Idol wing CID, Tamil Nadu Police 
including provision of Temple Protection Force and implement such practices, wherever 
feasible. 
78. The Committee also recommends that the Ministry may take urg ent measures to ensure 
that an effective disaster management plan is in place across all the museums to ensure the 
physical safety of the precious antiquities in times of natural calamities. 
  

Page 24 of 108 
 
III 
Illegal Export of Antiquities 
79. The objective of Directorate of Enforcement (ED) is the enforcement of two key Acts of the 
Government of India namely,  the Foreign Exchange Management Act, 1999 (FEMA) and the 
Prevention of Mo ney Laundering Act, 2002 (PMLA). As far as provisions of the PMLA are 
concerned, as soon as there is an FIR with regard to smuggling of antiquities or art treasures and 
there is predicate offence, the Enforcement Directorate registers a case under the PMLA Act. T he 
focus of the ED is to identif y the proceeds of crime  generated from the  smuggling of antiquities or 
art works. Under the FEMA, ED can levy penalty and, in certain circumstances, can also attach the 
proceeds of crime in the cases of money generated from smuggling of antiquities or artworks, parked 
outside the country.  
80. The Directorate of Enforcement (ED) informed the Committee that the Directorate is 
investigating a number of cases related to smuggling/theft of Art and Antiquities objects under the 
provisions of Prevention of Money Laundering Act (PMLA), 2002. The invest igation conducted by 
the Directorate of Enforcement revealed two types of modus operandi adopted by the accused 
persons, namely, Modus Operandi-1 where buyer is the mastermind and Modus Operandi-2 where 
buyer is identified after execution of theft. (Annexure V) 
 
Non-Antiquity Certificate 
81. A provision for issuing “Non-Antiquity Certificate” at the level of Circle offices of the ASI is 
present. A Committee has been constituted under the Chairmanship of Superintending 
Archaeologists of each Circle of fice of the ASI to examine handicraft objects, presented before the 
Committee, by handicraft exporters. This provision is offered for facilitating handicraft exporters 
keeping in mind the factor of ease of governance. Upon examination of presented handicra ft objects, 
a “Non -Antiquity Certificate” is provided to the exporter. However, in the event of a “Suspected 
Antiquity”, it is apprehended, so as to prevent it from moving out of the country. Archaeologists 
from ASI have also been posted at all Customs Exi t Channels to assist Customs authorities in such 
examinations. 

Page 25 of 108 
 
82. The process for issuing a Non -Antiquity Certificate entails that the exporter submit s the 
artifact to ASI for assessment. If it is ascertained that the ar tefact is not an antique, a Non-Antiquity 
Certificate which is valid for six months, is issued with a photo of the object stamped on the 
certificate. There is no time limit p rescribed for issuance of Non-Antiquity Certificates. However, a 
window of 15-30 days is required for the process. 
83. The Committee observes that the Non -Antiquity Certificate issued by the ASI circle 
offices has only a photo of the object stamped on it and its validity is for six months.  With this 
certificate in hand, the smugglers manufacture numerous fakes and sl ip in the original 
antiquity amidst the fakes at the time of export. On the advisability of reducing the validity 
period, the ASI stated that it is a continuing practice and provides adequate time -gap for 
smooth processing of procedural work.  The Committe e feels that the six months validity 
period gives much leeway for the smugglers to arrange for the manufacture of fakes and 
substitute it for the original antique. The Committee, therefore, recomme nds that the Ministry 
may consider reducing the validity period of the Non-Antiquity Certificate. 
84. The Committee also recommends the Ministry that the details regarding issued NACs 
should be digitized on an online portal along with clear pictures describing the measurements 
and composition of the handicraft. Th e portal may be accessed by the Custom s authorities at 
various Seaports/Airports/ Land. 
85. The Committee recommends that the Ministry may consider banning any artefact that 
is mutilated or damaged as often antiques are damaged while being stolen or due to the 
ravages of time whereas fakes would not show any such wear and tear. The Committee also  
desires to know the action presently being taken against any exporter who has violated the 
Customs Act or the AAT Act.  
86. The Committee recommends that at the time of issue of licence, the background of 
exporters may be scrutinized thoroughly.  Renewal of licence should not be done as a matter of 
routine but only after a thorough scrutiny of the exporter’s past record.  
87. The Committee recommends that the Ministry should ensure strong background checks 
of all the personnel posted in the Centrally Protected Monuments (CPMs); Museums; Sites etc. 
88. The primary role of the Central Board of Indirect Taxes and Customs (CBIC) , as far as 
antiquities and art treasures are concerned , is when it is being exported out of India  and the volume 

Page 26 of 108 
 
of trade from India on export side is huge. The CBIC informed the Committee that the relevant 
provisions of the Antiquities and Art Treasures Act, 1972 read with the prov isions of the Customs 
Act, 1962 impose prohibition on the export of any antiquity or a rt treasure from India. In case of 
detection of any antiquities or art treasures in an export consignment during examination, the same is 
referred to Archaeological Survey of India (ASI) and if found covered under the said Act, the same is 
confiscated and penalties imposed on the exporter. 
89. Customs export procedures provide for risk -based intervention as regards examination of 
export cargo. Starting in December, 2005, the Risk Management System (RMS) has been 
implemented in all major Customs ports/airpor ts of India. RMS is a tool to balance facilitation and 
enforcement. Instead of routine assessment and examination of all cargo, only selected consignments 
are taken up for scrutiny and examination. RMS based interventions coupled with alerts and 
intelligence gathered by enforcement teams of Indian Customs enable interception of 
consignments/parcels that are mis -declared in an attempt to export India’s cultural and ethnological 
heritage.  
 
Risk Management System (RMS) 
90. The Risk Management System (RMS) con sistently aims to strike a balance between trade 
facilitation and Customs interdictions. It aims to support the field officers in effective decision 
making by providing them with all the relevant information regarding an incoming or outgoing 
consignment. E valuation of consignments is done by using a host of risk parameters which are 
continuously evolved by using local, national and international risk trends, offence databases and 
feedbacks from the field received. Only the consignments deemed risky on any of the evolved factors 
are sent to the field officers for Assessment or Examination purposes. On the basis of the analysis of 
the self -declaration made by importer/exporter, Shipping Lines, Vessels involved, various risk 
factors are identified. The paramete rs are determined utilizing details such as the countries/ports 
involved; exporter/importer involved; consignee/supplier involved; commodities declared; Import 
General Manifest (IGM)/ Export General Manifest (EGM) declarations; past behaviour of entities 
involved etc.  
91. Further, specific targets have been inserted in the system to tackle specific types of 
smuggling like smuggling of Red Sanders; Antique goods; Narcotics Drugs & Psychotropic 

Page 27 of 108 
 
Substance (NDPS) goods; Special Chemicals, Organism, Materials, Equipment and Technologies 
(SCOMET) items; Exotic Plants; and Animals. These targets are reviewed and revised on a regular/ 
monthly basis. CBIC through implementation of RMS by National Customs Targeting Centre 
(NCTC) under Directorate General of Analytics  and Risk Management (DGARM) has adopted the 
use of latest technology such as evaluation of Container Scanned images; Machine Learning Models; 
Open Source Intelligence data sources; web scrapping; supply chain analysis and is already in the 
process of developing Machine Learning based Image Analytics modules. 
92. The Committee notes the steps being taken by the Central Board of Indirect Taxes and 
Customs (CBIC) to control and prevent the smuggling of Indian antiquities through various exit 
channels. The Committee is aware that with the increasing number of airports and seaports in the 
country, the task of monitoring the illegal trade of antiquities becomes more complex and 
challenging. Therefore the scope of Indian customs has become more significant in t he context of 
combating illicit trafficking of cultural property. The Committee is also conscious of the significant 
role of modern technology in the work of customs authorities and is pleased that CBIC has adopted 
the use of latest technology.  The Commit tee notes that Indian Customs Electronic Data Interchange 
Systems (ICES) is now operational at 252 major customs locations. 
93. The Committee desires to know if the Customs authorities have devised ways to apply 
ICES to prevent theft of antiquities.  The C ommittee also desires to know whether Indian 
Customs is using Block Chain and Distributed Ledger Technology as such technologies are 
increasingly being used to increase information accessibility in the global art market.  
94. The Committee recommends the Ministry to work in close coordination with the 
concerned agencies including CBIC, Directorate of Revenue Intelligence (DRI) and the 
Directorate of Enforcement (ED) to protect the illegal trade of India’s Tangible Cultural 
Heritage.   
95. The Committee notes that only the consignments deemed risky are sent to the field 
officers for Assessment or Examination purposes. The Committee is of the opinion that certain 
antiquities such as coins and small art objects are more prone to be smuggled as it is difficult to 
trace them and their identification in huge consignments is like looking for a needle in a 
haystack. To avoid such situations, the documentation and tagging of antiquities become 
inevitable. The Committee, therefore, recomme nds the Ministry to expedite the antiquities 
documentation/ tagging process.  

Page 28 of 108 
 
96. The Committee acknowledges the submission of the Customs Department regarding the 
near impossibility of checking every container leaving every port but feels that heritage theft 
can only be prevented if every container is thor oughly scrutinized. The Committee feels that 
adoption of the latest technology would help in overcoming such problems and recommends 
that the Ministry in consultation with CBIC, may utilize the latest a nd best technology with 
respect to RMS which can aid in tracking of antiquities in large consignments/ containers.  
 
Investigation of Cases - Illegal Trade of Antiquities 
97. The Ministry informed the Committee that if any theft of antiquity takes place in  Centrally 
Protected Monuments (CPMs), sites/museums, First Information Report (FIR) is lodged in the 
concerned police station and a "Look Out Notice" is issued to all Law Enforcement Agencies 
(LEAs), including all Custom exit channels, Central Bureau of I nvestigation (CBI), Directorate of 
Revenue Intelligence (DRI), Police, etc., to keep vigil at tracing the stolen antiquity and prevent any 
such unsolicited incidence of illegal export.  Three (03) Look Out Notices have been issued by ASI 
since 2018 till date. With regard to efficacy of Look Out notices, it has been informed that when ASI 
issues a Look Out Notice to Customs Office, they keep a strict vigil on the items to be exported to 
foreign countries.  If any suspected antiquity or stolen items comes to their notice, they inform ASI 
for further action. Based on receipt of Look Out Notices from ASI, Customs field formation and 
Directorate of Revenue Intelligence (DRI) formation are duly sensitized and appropriate action is 
initiated.  
98. The Directorate o f Enforcement (ED) stated that they are presently handling 4 cases 
involving domestic and one case that involves both the domestic and export of Antiquities and Art. 
The proceeds of crime in the cases being investigated by ED related to Antiquities and Art s 
Treasures Act is more than Rs. 800 crores (approx.). Domestic as well as Export Cases are dealt as 
per provisions of the Prevention of Money Laundering Act, 2002 (PMLA). Domestic Cases are dealt 
under Para 1 of Schedule where offences under Indian Penal Code are mentioned whereas Export 
Cases are dealt under Para 10 of the Schedule where offences under the Antiquities and Arts 
Treasures Act, 1972 are mentioned. Section 25 read with Section 3 and Section 28 of Antiquities and 
Art Treasures Act, 1972 are defined as schedule offences under PMLA.   

Page 29 of 108 
 
99. In Export cases, the investigation involves various inter -agency coordination including DRI, 
Customs, ASI and other Law Enforcement Agenci es (LEAs) like Police, Crime Branch etc. Further, 
the cooperation of other countries to which the antiquities have got exported to, is also very crucial in 
Export Cases whereas domestic cases involve less number of agencies Coordination. Conclusion of 
investigation depends on various factors and inter -agency coordination involved in a case. Thus, no 
strict timeline can be predicted in a case. However, if the desired information and evidences are 
available on record, the investigation may be concluded at the  earliest. For example, in some of the 
high profile and complex cases, the investigation could be completed within a period of less than two 
years by way of expeditious collection of evidences from various sources. Consistent inter -agency 
follow-up had res ulted in concluding the investigation in minimum period of time. If the desired 
information is not available domestically, then EGMONT (a group of Financial Intelligence Units), 
Mutual Legal Assistance Treaties (MLATs), and Letters Rogatory (LR) channels a re to be used 
which generally take some more time since agencies of different countries are involved.  
100. The details of the Subhash Kapoor Case were also furnished to the Committee  (Annexure-
VI). 
101. The Committee believes that the Subhash Kapoor case should be an eye -opener for 
Indian government agencies to the enormous scale of looting of India’s temples and 
archaeological sites and the complex network of common thieves, art thieves, exporters, 
businessmen and museum curators involved in the  process. The Committee recommends that 
the different government agencies of India - Customs Department, ASI, Deptt of Revenue 
Intelligence and Police forces work together in close collaboration to save Indian heritage from 
unscrupulous elements. 
102. The Committee n otes the process being followed by different Law Enforcement 
Agencies (LEAs) to investigate the cases of illegal trade of antiquities.  The Committee would 
like to know the present status and details of the 3 Look Out Notices issued by ASI from 2018 
till d ate. The Committee also desires to know the investigation status of those 4 cases being 
dealt with by ED along with the estimated valuation of the antiquities involved.  
103. The Committee feels that the involvement of various LEAs viz., Customs, CBI, ED, DRI 
and Police is extremely crucial to ensure prevention, detection and investigation of incidents 
related to the smuggling of antiquities. The Committee recommends the Ministry of Culture to 

Page 30 of 108 
 
have regular follow -ups with all these LEAs and develop a common  portal for quicker 
dissemination of information related to theft and probable export of antiquities. 
104. The Committee is of the opinion that even the slightest delay in reporting an antiquity 
theft or issuance of look out notice could be detrimental to the Tangible Cultural Heritage of 
the country. The Committee feels that if the information of theft is not passed to the concerned 
agencies within a time bound manner, there may be a situation where the antiquity has already 
been smuggled out of the countr y even before it is reported missing. The Committee 
recommends the Ministry to identify any shortcomings in tracking of theft and passing on the 
information to the concerned LEAs and make all out efforts to remove any such bottlenecks.  
 
Early Detection and Prevention of Illegal Trade of Antiquities 
105. The Directorate of Enforcement (ED) has highlighted that the coordination between ED and 
other agencies/Ministries such as Idol Wing (in Tamil Nadu), Customs, Ministry of Culture, Police 
and other border agencies etc. for awareness on the issue and for sharing of information to tackle the 
crime is important. Real-time exchange of data between agencies is desired. 
106. Enhanced due-diligence & KYC requirements in respect of big Art Galleries, Antique and 
Artifacts Sellers/Dealers would be a good option. Th e Law Enforcement Agencies need to be trained 
to invoke the relevant Sections of the Scheduled Offences i.e., Antiquities and Arts Treasures Act, 
1972 and to intimate the same to ED so that suitable and tim ely action can be taken under the 
provisions of Prevention of Money Laundering Act (PMLA), 2002.  The PMLA, 2002 has sufficient 
provisions to attach and confiscate the proceeds of crime and prosecute the offenders of money 
laundering. In this regard, it is  also suggested that the Ministry of Culture may appoint a Nodal 
Officer & establish an Anti -Money Laundering Cell for sharing of potential money laundering cases 
related to Arts and Antiquities on monthly basis to the Directorate of Enforcement for taking  further 
necessary action under the provisions of PMLA, 2002. 
107. The Committee enquired about the steps that can be taken by the Government to ensure 
increased transparency with respect to buying and selling in the antiquities/art market.  The  ED 
stated that Police and other Law Enforcement agencies should report the antiquity theft cases 
immediately to ED. Coordination between respective DGP offices of State with Zonal Heads of ED 
is required to be established for expeditious information on Antiquity th eft and robbery. Likewise 

Page 31 of 108 
 
Customs Department should also communicate Antiquities Export cases to the ED immediately and 
not later than the stage of Show -Cause Notice (SCN). To increase intensity and impact of the action, 
issue of implementation of Foreign Exchange Management Act (FEMA), 1999 provisions may also 
be looked into in Export of Antiquities cases.  
108. Buying and Selling of antiquities/art are allowed only through license as per the detailed 
provisions laid down under the Antiquities and Arts Act , 1972. Necessary mechanism for ensuring 
better transparency with respect to buying & selling may be provided by the concerned authorities 
who implement the said Act. 
109. The Directorate of Enforcement has access to Interoperable Criminal Justice System ( ICJS) 
portal of National Crime Records Bureau (NCRB) wherein the details of the FIRs registered all over 
India are entered by the concerned Police Authorities. The field formations of the Directorate of 
Enforcement regularly visit the ICJS portal for poten tial money laundering cases including offences 
related to Arts and Antiquities. Further, the Director, Directorate of Enforcement has written D.O. 
letters to all predicate agencies both Central and State, for sharing of potential cases warranting 
action un der PMLA, 2002 on monthly basis in Money Laundering (ML) -I & ML -II formats. In 
addition, ED has also written a D.O. letter to the Director -General of Police (DGP), Idol Wing, 
Tamil Nadu requesting to provide details of all the FIRs registered in respect of  the cases registered 
under the Antiquities and Arts Treasures Act, 1972 and others. The Directorate has also deputed a 
Deputy Director level officer to regularly coordinate with the Idol Wing situated at Chennai. The 
officers of ED are in regular touch wi th the SPPs/Counsels who are handling the LEA cases at the 
designated court for Idol Wing cases at Kumbakonam, Tamil Nadu. 
110. Further, Directorate of Revenue Intelligence (DRI), through its intelligence gathering 
network in India and abroad, collects and  disseminates intelligence, which includes export 
consignments suspected to ship out antiques/antiquities. DRI’s domestic information network is 
supplemented by its overseas intelligence network, which in coordination with foreign customs 
administrations, helps in not only the interdiction of suspect consignments but also in identifying the 
already smuggled out antiques/antiquities. In collaboration with the foreign Customs administrations, 
DRI has also worked for initiating the process of identification, t hrough ASI officials, of such 
antiques lying abroad and their restitution to India. The details of cases of antiquity theft detected/ 
prevented by the Customs authorities during the last five years are annexed in Annexure- VII.  

Page 32 of 108 
 
111. The Committee opines that to ensure early detection and prevention of illegal trade of 
antiquities, seamless coordination between agencies is inevitable.  Also, the Directorate of 
Revenue Intelligence (DRI) plays a crucial role in interdiction of suspect c onsignments and 
identification of the already smuggled out antiques/antiquities, by its overseas intelligence 
network, in coordination with foreign customs administrations.  
112. The Committee recommends the Ministry to examine the export policies of other  
countries and explore the possibility of banning export of handicrafts of certain antiquity items 
such as Chola Bronzes which are among the most sought after antiquities. The complete 
banning of exports of non -antiquity copies of such objects will prevent  their smuggling in the 
disguise of handicraft items. 
 
Challenges in assessment and examination by Customs  
113. The Central Board of Indirect Taxes and Customs informed the Committee that given the 
large volume of trade and the larger policy framework of ease of doing business and export 
facilitation, it is not feasible to physically scan/examine all export consignments leaving Indian 
shore. To address the risk in this situation, risk -assessment-based interventions are employed for 
checking the export cons ignments. This is supplemented by the intelligence gathering about any 
possible suspicious export-bound consignment. Whenever, any suspicious consignment, suspected to 
contain antiques/art treasures, is intercepted, services of Arch aeological Survey of Ind ia (ASI) are 
utilized for identification of and ascertaining that whether the suspicious items are antiquities or not. 
In case, any antiquities or art treasure is found being attempted to be exported, it is seized under the 
relevant provisions of the Customs Act, 1962 read with Antiquities and Art Treasures Act, 1972.   
114. DRI stated that there are following challenges in identification and retrieval of stolen tangible 
heritage: 
 There is a large volume of replicas  of antiquities in circulation and on display in museums and 
private collections worldwide. It becomes difficult even for experts to differentiate between a 
replica and a genuine antique, which limits immediate remedial action through diplomatic 
channels. 
 Once it is established that an antique  is genuine, international law enforcement agencies seek 
documents/evidence to establish that the antique was indeed stolen. There are very few cases of 

Page 33 of 108 
 
stolen Indian cultural property reported in INTERPOL’s Stolen Works of Arts (WOA) database 
which renders ‘matching of stolen Indian antiquities’ by international law enforcement agencies 
difficult.  
115. The Committee takes into cognizance the challenges viz., non-feasibility to physically 
examine all the export consignments; differentiation between genuine  & fake antique s; and 
under reporting of antique theft cases in INTERPOL’s Stolen Works of Arts (WOA) database, 
being faced by different agencies in preventing theft and export of antiquities. The Committee 
feels that the only way to tackle these challenge s is by researching and developing 
technologically competent measures.  
116. The Committee recommends the Ministry to expedite the process of documentation of 
all Indian antiques and digitizing their record on a common web portal which can be accessed 
by all the concerned Law Enforcement Agencies (LEAs). 
117. The Committee also recommends the Ministry to take up the matter of physical 
examination of all export consignments, with the Customs authorities to ensure that all the 
export consignments are at least electronically scanned for detection of any antiques.  
118. The Committee also recommends the Ministry to ensure that with the help of Indian 
Law Enforcement Agencies (LEAs), all the antiquity theft cases are invariably reported to the 
INTERPOL’s Stolen Works of Arts (WOA) database enabling the international LEAs to take 
appropriate actions. 
 
Co-ordination amongst all the Agencies 
119. The Ministry stated that once the stolen Indian artifacts are surfaced abroad, it is verified by 
the respective agenc y/department in the country. Once it is established that the object is same, the 
documents like FIR, any proof which establishes that the antiquity kept at that place is unlawfully 
shifted, is shared with the present owner through our Mission located in th at country. Though it is a 
long process, yet once it is established that the object was unlawfully shifted, efforts are taken that it 
is retrieved back. 
120. The CBIC has noted that since there is a large volume of fake antiquities in circulation, it 
becomes difficult to differentiate between fake and genuine antiques, which limit immediate 
remedial action through diplomatic channels. To a query of the Committe e regarding formation of a 

Page 34 of 108 
 
dedicated Cultural Heritage Division, the CBIC  informed the Committee that Customs Department 
is already seized of the menace of cross -border smuggling of stolen antiquities and is actively 
monitoring the same through its field formations at ports/airports/Land Customs Station, including 
the Directorate of Revenue Intelligence (DRI). Requisite assistance is sought from ASI and the 
Ministry of Culture to aid investigations from time to time. It therefore appears that creation of a  
separate cultural heritage wing is not required for the above mentioned cross border efforts of Indian 
Customs. Further, in case of DRI/Customs authorities require assistance to identify an object as an 
antique, in the context of export, assistance of ASI is sought on a case to case basis. 
121. The Ministry stated that establishing a dedicated cultural heritage squad for the recovery of 
stolen antiquities with trained officers shall prove to be highly advantageous for ASI. The team may 
be trained on various aspects as per requirement of set procedures of retrieval, followed by different 
countries 
122. In this regard, DRIs stated that they are not directly concerned with the task of retrieval of 
seized Antiques from outside the country, which is done by the Indian Missions abroad in 
coordination with the Ministry of External Affairs and ASI. In some of these cases, where the 
antiques were seized on the basis of intelligence passed on by DRI, their officers posted in Missions 
abroad, have assisted and coordina ted in the work related to retrieval. However, it is learnt that the 
process of restitution of antiquities after their location/identification overseas is a long -drawn 
process, involving:  
a. establishment of their doubtful provenance, 
b. recovery from pre sent owner(s) / custodian(s) which may also involve legal proceedings 
abroad,  
c. transfer of ownership to India (via Missions abroad) after due process of law,  
d. identification of the item as antique, and  
e. repatriation of antiques to India.  
123. The multiple stages involved, which follow in series, require coordination of various agencies 
and Ministries, with the Indian Mission abroad playing the anchor role. In detections / identifications 
as a result of intelligence inputs by DRI, often this rol e of anchoring coordination is discharged by 
the concerned overseas officer at the behest of their Mission. In DRI’s experience, necessary 
cooperation has been rendered by concerned agencies/Ministries on time, as the significance of 

Page 35 of 108 
 
restitution of cultura l heritage is widely recognized in the Government of India and actions 
accordingly prioritized. 
124. Further, as per the Information Sharing Protocol notified by the Central Economic 
Intelligence Bureau, details regarding detections made by DRI are being s hared with CEIB for 
disbursal among all law enforcement agencies (LEAs). Further, on detection of any important case or 
seizure of contraband including antiquity by DRI, a report is immediately shared with concerned 
LEAs. In addition, pro -active inter -agency cooperation is solicited on a case to case basis. 
Development of a portal where agencies/ministries can enter relevant inputs for timely and 
information sharing is already under way by the Central Economic Intelligence Bureau, Ministry of 
Finance. 
125. The Committee feels that coordination amongst different Agencies/ Ministries for 
prevention of cross -border smuggling of stolen antiquities as well as the recovery of stolen 
antiquities is of utmost importance. The Committee opines that all the concerned 
Ministries/Agencies viz., Ministry of Culture; Archaeological Survey of India; Ministry of 
Home Affairs; Ministry of External Affairs; State Governments Directorate of Enforcement; 
Central Board of Indirect Taxes & Customs; and Directorate of Revenue Intelli gence should 
be on the same page and take appropriate actions to safeguard/retrieve our Tangible Cultural 
Heritage. The Committee, therefore, recommends the Ministry of Culture to explore the 
possibility of establishing a dedicated Cultural Heritage Divisi on in consultation with all the 
aforesaid Agencies/Ministries.  
126. The Committee also feels that prompt and accurate information sharing is the key to 
smooth coordination amongst various Agencies/ Ministries. The Committee recommends the 
Ministry of Culture to lay its focus on technological advancements and work towards t he 
creation of an information sharing portal. The Committee also recommends the Ministry to 
devise a mechanism to have real -time information on the said information sharing portal 
which can be accessed by all the concerned Agencies and help in tracking the  movement of 
antiquities.      
 
 
 

Page 36 of 108 
 
Valuation of Smuggled Antiquities 
127. The Directorate of Enforcement (ED) presently relies on the preliminary information 
received from Predicate Law Enforcement Agencies (LEAs) regarding the valuation of antiquities. 
Further, LEA is generally requested to furnish the valuation reports, if any, of the antique pieces 
seized at the time of search conducted by it. The issue was discussed in detail with the officials of 
ASI and it was observed that there are no clear provisions, rules or guidelines related to the valuation 
of Antiquities. ASI further informed that the valuation is done by NSEC (National Screening and 
Evaluation Committee) for insurance purpose in case of sending Antiquities for exhibition & other 
purposes to fo reign countries. This Committee comprises of experts from their respective fields. 
Further, in case if any Law Enforcement agency requests ASI for valuation of Antiquities, then the 
valuation is done by a committee constituted by the concerned Law Enforcem ent agency in which 
member from ASI is also nominated. As such valuation of Antiquities is a complex task and there is 
no uniform practice to ascertain the value of Arts or Antique item. However, following factors may 
be considered for valuation purpose – 
 Workmanship  
 How rare the Antique is (whether Single copy or many copies available) 
 Finishing of the Antique.  
 Physical Condition. 
128. Therefore, determination of the exact quantum of Proceeds of the Crime is difficult in cases 
related to Antiquities and Arts Treasures Act, 1972  due to the complex issues related to valuation 
method mentioned above.  
129. The Committee notes the reply furnished by ED as regards the valuation of antiquities 
that have been smuggled. The Committee opines that the valuation of antiquities is essential to 
determine the exact quantum of value of property stolen and recovered. In this regard, the 
Committee reiterates its recommendation that valuation of antiquities shall be carried out at 
the documentation stage itself, so that it would be easier to ascertain the monetary value of the 
items which have been stolen/ smuggled. For this purpose, the Ministry may form a Committee 
consisting of experts, historians and officers from the ASI 
 

Page 37 of 108 
 
Capacity Building and Training 
130. CBIC through  its dedicated Directorate called the National Academy of Customs, Indirect 
Taxes & Narcotics (NACIN) curates and undertakes training programmes for CBIC personnel, 
including those posted with enforcement teams of the Customs formations and DRI. These trai nings 
are aligned to ensure effective implementation of the provisions of the Customs Act, 1962 as well as 
the other Allied Acts, including the Arts & Antiquities Act, 1972, administered by Indian Customs. 
131. The Ministry of Culture also stated that to e nsure capacity building, training cum hands on 
experience were given to 15 No. of Chemists in co -operation with Lisbon University, Portugal and 
Hercules Laboratory at Old Goa in January 2019. The second phase of the said training is scheduled 
to be held in  January 2023 which will be attended by 02 Senior Chemists. A training program 
sponsored by Department of Science and Technology on Integrated Scientific Project management 
for Women Scientists and Technologists is to be attended by 02 senior chemists in t he month of 
February 2023.  
132. A modern instrument of IR Reflectorgraph has been procured by ASI which may aid in 
tracking/retrieval of stolen artefacts. Further, procurement of modern specialized instruments for the 
study of Archaeo -metallurgy of metal artifacts is under progress. To ensure the authenticity of 
antiquities and artefacts, ASI is establishing a state -of-art scientific laboratory at Greater Noida with 
modern sophisticated instruments at par to the international standards of non- destructive methods.  
133. The Committee is of the opinion that the tracking and retrieval of stolen artefacts is a 
complex endeavour requiring a wide range of skills, ranging from antiquities preservation to 
forensic examinations. The authorities involved in the tracking and retrieval of stolen artefacts 
need to be well-versed with the latest and modern techniques. Further, it  is important to be 
familiar with investigation methods followed in other countries in case of cross -border transfer 
of stolen antiquities. The  Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Culture 
should develop varied training modules for its officers alongwith the personnel of other 
concerned Agencies and conduct regular sessions to empower them with skills required for 
identification, tracking and retrieval of stolen artefacts.  
 
 
 

Page 38 of 108 
 
Auction of Indian Antiquities in International Markets 
134. DRI, through its intelligence gathering network in India and abroad, collects and disseminates 
intelligence, including antiques/antiquities being attempted to or already illicitly taken out of the 
country and placed in private collections, museums and auct ion houses abroad. It works in close 
coordination with foreign customs administrations, in not only the interdiction of suspect 
consignments but also in identifying the already smuggled out antiques/antiquities and their timely 
restitution through coordina tion with Coordination between DRI and foreign Customs as well as 
border protection agencies is defined by the bilateral or multilateral Customs Mutual Administrative 
Agreements in place between India and concerned Administrations. This includes cooperatio n on 
subjects spanning from national and economic security as well as preservation of cultural and natural 
heritage of the country.  
135. In addition, India is a signatory to several international conventions, including the 1970 
UNESCO ‘Convention on the M eans of Prohibiting and Preventing the Illicit Import, Export and 
Transfer of Ownership of Cultural Property’, pertaining to illicit movement as well as transfer of 
ownership of cultural property. Ministry of Culture is the concerned line ministry for rati fication and 
enforcement of such mechanisms. 
136. The Committee is aware that there are numerous instances of Indian Antiquities being 
auctioned in international markets in recent years. The Committee recommends that  Ministry 
of Culture and ASI may ensure  to follow all such international auctions and strongly take up 
this matter with the Indian Missions in other countries to keep a tab on such auctions and 
share such information.  
137. The Committee also reiterates its recommendation and urges the Ministry  to ensure 
that, in consultation with Indian Law Enforcement Agencies (LEAs), all the antiquity theft 
cases should be reported to the INTERPOL’s Stolen Works of Arts (WOA) database with out 
any delay. The real -time reporting of cases will enable the Indian Missions and International 
LEAs to access the information and take appropriate actions.  
 

Page 39 of 108 
 
IV 
Amendments Required in Relevant Laws 
Amendments to the Antiquities and Art Treasures Act, 1972  
138. The Ministry submitted the Antiquities and Art Treasures Act”  of 1972 was implemented in 
1976 to regulate the internal trade in antiquities/ art treasures, prevention of smuggling and export of 
antiquities, and, fraudulent dealings in antiquities/ art treasures. The main provisions of the Act are as 
follows:- 
 Under Section 3 of the Act, only the Central Government can export antiquities.  Generally, this 
is only for the temporary permits for exhibitions or for temporary loans; antiquities are sent 
abroad and they are brought back.   
 One of the main objectives o f this Act is prevention of smuggling and fraudulent dealing, and it 
controls the sale of antiquities.  Under the provisions of this Act, no person, without the licence 
given from the licensing officer who is a senior officer of the Archaeological Survey o f India, 
can sell or offer to sell any antiquity. Antiquities cannot be sold in open market.  Only the licence 
holders can sell these and there are strict provisions in this regard.  They have to keep a proper 
record of all the antiquities which they have received with the details and photographs.  From 
time to time, these stocks are checked and also the sales which they have made.  So, within the 
country, they can sell it following the procedure which has been laid down in the Act. 
 There is also a provisio n of compulsory acquisition.  If the Government feels that any antiquity, 
is of importance and should be displayed or preserved at a public place for the public, any art 
object or any antiquity can be purchased compulsorily or acquired by the Government an d it can 
be displayed in the museum or can be kept in safe custody for the public benefit except the 
objects which are associated with religious practices.   
 There is also a provision for registration of antiquities, for certain classes of antiquities.  Th e 
Government, through a notification, can define as to which antiquities should be registered.  
Once the notification is issued, registration of such antiquities is a must.  
 If cases of theft are to be filed, there are provisions under the Act and the DG g ives the 
authorisation for filing the case in the AAT Act. 

Page 40 of 108 
 
 Section 25 and Section 26 of the AAT Act deals with punishments for theft of Antiquities.  The 
penalty for exporting or attempting to export any antiquity or art treasure in contravention of 
Section 3 is imprisonment for a term not less than six months but which may extend to three 
years and with fine. Under Section 25 and Section 26 of the AAT Act, 1972 authorization is 
issued to enforcing agencies for filing the charge sheet and initiating trial against the culprits. 
139. The Ministry submitted that from past experience, it has been found that the existing provisions 
in the act are not preventive enough to curb the menace of smuggling therefore certain amendments are 
proposed to the AAT Act, 1972 to make it more stringent.  
140. Upon enquiry by the Committee regarding the views of the Ministry on the amendments 
necessary to make the Act more effective, the Ministry has stated the following in its written 
submissions:- 
   No mention about import of antiquity  
   Section 25 of the Act may need to be modified 
141. The Ministry also stated that the Archaeological Survey of India is in the process of amending 
the AAT Act, 1972. The preliminary consultation of the Stakeholders h as been done to understand the 
shortcomings of the AAT Act, 1972. The proposed Bill “Antiquities and Art Treasure, Regulation, 
Export and Import Bill” is still in the draft stage and all these aspects would be addressed while 
finalizing. During its deposit ion, though the Ministry stated that as of now it is felt that the statutory 
provisions are adequate. However, the implementation is inadequate, particularly at the level of the State 
Governments who are either not sharing with the Ministry or the ASI the details of the lost antiquities 
not cooperating in the efforts to retrieve the lost antiquit ies as they should given that antiquities are in 
the Concurr ent List.  The Ministry emphasiz ed that very often the theft of antiquities under State 
Governments is n ot intimated to the ASI/Ministry of Culture as a result of which retrieval becomes a 
huge issue.  
142. The Committee also sought the opinions of the Ministries of Culture, Ministry of Home Affairs, 
Enforcement Directorate and CBIC in the matter. The Commit tee was informed about the following 
issues in the registering the theft of antiquities.  
 
 

Page 41 of 108 
 
143. Antiquity Theft under AAT  
 to invoke Section 25 r/w S ection 3, of the Antiquities and Art Treasures Act,  following two 
conditions have to be fulfilled:-  
 First, the idols should be categorized as Antique i.e. should be more than 100 years. 
In the state of Tamil N adu, unless the idols are proven  to be antique and the Hindu 
Religious and Charitable Endowments (HR & CE) Department certifies the same, 
then only the provisions related to Antiquities and Arts Treasures Act are invoked in 
the FIR. 
 Further, the stolen idols should have been exported or  attempted to be exported  
  Police and any other law enforcement agency has to take authorization from DG, ASI for 
launching prosecution under Section 25 of the Antiquities and Art Treasures Act, 1972 
 Further, there is no proper methodology for valuation and it is very difficult to arrive at a 
value that can be assigned to the idols recovered in the crime.  
 The penalty under Section 25 of the Act for exporting or attempting to export an antiquity is 
only six months which may be extended to 3 years with fine which is not effectively stringent.   
Antiquity Theft under IPC  
144. Cases of theft of antiquities can  also be covered under the IPC, but a few problems occur here 
also:- 
  Firstly, though the provision for theft, robbery and dacoity are provided in Sections 376, 380, 
395 and 396 of IPC, however, the IPC does not provide specifically for theft of antiquitie s. 
However, Government of Tamil Nadu has made State Amendment in Section 380 of IPC 
providing specific provision for theft of idol or icon in any building used as place of worship 
and also the punishment. 
   When an unexplained idol is found and seized from  any person/premise, the information is 
passed on by Idol Wing to the Antiquities Treasury department of the State government, 
which in turn is required to identify the particular idol seized and inform the Idol Wing as to 
from which temple/place such idol  is theft. Only pursuant to such claim and information by 
the concerned department, Idol Wing adds the penal sections of IPC etc. In some cases, 

Page 42 of 108 
 
therefore FIRs are simply registered under the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1972 (Section 
41(1)(d) and 102), without invoking any section of any substantive penal act.  
    Eventually, these cases will only involve the usual sections of IPC covering the provisions of 
theft, robbery, criminal conspiracy etc. 
145. Antiquity Theft under PMLA  
 There are sufficient provisions under PMLA, 2002 to deal with the crime of money 
laundering as a result of offence committed under the Antiquities and Arts Treasures Act, 
1972.  
 As soon as there is an FIR with regard to smuggling of antiquities or art trea sures and there 
is predicate offence, the Enforcement Directorate registers a case under the PMLA Act.  The 
focus of the ED is to identity the proceeds of crime, meaning thereby how much money they 
have generated from the smuggling of antiquities or art works.  
 Provisions of PMLA, 2002 provides that any proceeds of crime derived from the offence of 
money laundering shall be liable for confiscation and the offender will be subjected to 
prosecution.  
 Section 3 of PMLA, 2002 defines the offence of money launde ring and Section 4 of PMLA, 
2002 speaks about punishment for commission of money laundering which is not less than 
three years and may be extended to seven years. The Section 4 of PMLA, 2002 also 
empowers the Special Court to impose a fine on the accused w hile passing orders of 
conviction/confiscation. Further, the Directorate of Enforcement is empowered to take 
prohibitory actions like attachment, seizure, freezing to prevent dissipation of proceeds of 
crime 
 The provisions of PMLA are very clear regarding valuation of the proceeds. The book value 
of the item is taken and in cases where book value is not determined, then the fair market 
value is determined. For example, if a proceed of Rs. 1,05,000 crores has b een attached, it is 
only a book value. The real value would be more than Rs. ten lakh crores or more of this 
because only the value which was involved at the time of crime has been taken. However, 
the problem with antique is that there is no standard metho d of valuation of antiques in the 
economic principle. The ASI follows its own methodology of valuation of antique and 
painting. Hence, determination of the exact quantum of Proceeds of the Crime is difficult in 

Page 43 of 108 
 
cases related to Antiquities and Arts Treasur es Act, 1972 due to the complex issues related 
to valuation of antiques.    
146. The Committee sought the views of the Department of Legal Affairs on the issue of amendments 
to the Antiquities and Art Treasures Act, 1972.  The Department of Legal Affairs stated that as indicated 
by the Ministry of Culture, the proposals for amendment of the AAT Act, 1972, are still in 
discussion/draft stage and therefore the Department has no comments to offer at this stage.  However, if 
any final proposal for such amendments is received from the administrative Ministry, the same would be 
examined from legal and constitutional angle.  
147. The Committee noted that as per the CAG Report of 2013, the Ministry of Culture had 
started an exercise in 1997 and a draft Cabinet note had been approved by the Cabinet in 2003.  
However, the Ministry had accorded no priority for the work and no timeframe had been fixed for 
this purpose and consequently no amendments to the Act have been carried out so far.  A decade 
later, the issue is still in the discussion/draft stage.   
148. The Commi ttee observes that the AAT Act seems to have major shortcomings like 
excessively broad definition of ‘antiquities’ complex formalities for registration, and lack of strict 
punishment, among others and recommends that the Ministry may make all efforts to en sure that 
the required amendments to the Act are carried out to make it effective and to iron out the 
problems pointed out by various law enforcement Agencies. 
149. The Committee further notes that regarding the fixation of the 100 year criteria for 
categorizing an object as antique, the ASI has submitted  that it is reasonable keeping in view the 
long historical timeline of Indian history and archaeology. However, less than 100 years old 
objects can also be notified under Art Treasures category.     
150. The Department of Legal Affairs also opined that from the definition of the term ‘antiquity’ there 
are other criterion to categorize antiquities apart from the criteria of being 100 years old. Moreover, the 
provisions of the Act of 1972 are in addition to and not in derogation to other law for the time being in 
force. Thus, while analysing and to protect an antiquity, the relevant provisions of other laws m ay also 
be taken into account. The Committee accordingly notes that the Ministry may retain the 100 ye ar 
criteria for antiquities.  
151. The Committee referred the issue raised by the Ministry that State Governments and private 
parties do not inform the ASI or the Ministry about thefts in antiquities under their control to the 

Page 44 of 108 
 
Department of Legal Affairs f or comments.  The opinion of the Department of Legal Affai rs on the 
subject as under:- 
“With respect to the second issue, i.e. to share information pertaining to the theft of State 
protected Antiquities from State Governments, it is stated that offence per taining to theft are also 
punishable under section 379, 380, 381, 382 of Indian Penal Code and the offences punishable under 
these sections of IPC are cognizable offences. It is worthwhile to mention that crime records/data play a 
vital role in the scheme of police working for prevention and detection of crime.  One of the major 
activity of Data Centre & Technical (DCT) Branch of with National Crime Record Bureau (NCRB) is to 
build up, update and maintain a secure National Database on crimes, criminals and property which will 
make available informed, accurate and timely information on -line to all State forces and Central 
agencies for the purpose of improving day -to-day functioning in terms of crime detection, crime 
prevention and maintenance of public order.   The subject matter of sharing information pertaining to 
theft of State protected Antiquities and Art Treasures by the State Governments is relatable to Ministry 
of Home Affairs.  Thus it may be appropriate to obtain comments of Ministry of Home Affairs o n this 
issue.  However, prima facie, we do not find any objection on the mechanism of the issue”. 
152. The Committee accordingly recommends that the Ministry take up the matter with the 
Ministry of Home Affairs to make it mandatory for State Governments an d State Police to share 
information and FIRs pertaining to theft of State Protected Antiquities and Art Treasures with 
the ASI and the Ministry of Culture. Suitable amendments to the Act may be made at the time of 
amendment of the Act as a whole.   
153. The Committee observes that the present provisions of Section 25 of the AAT Act are not 
stringent enough which makes it relatively easy for criminals to escape the law or get away with 
light punishments for the crime of stealing centuries old and glorious treasures of India.  Keeping 
in view the increasing trend of illicit trafficking of the antiquities, the Committee recommends 
that severe punishment upto seven years and penalty upto fifty lakh may be provided to deter the 
illegal trade of exporting or att empting to export antiquities. The Committee also recommends 
that enhanced due -diligence & KYC requirements in respect of big Art Galleries, Antique and 
Artifacts Sellers/Dealers be made. 
154. The Committee further recommends that the Ministry of Culture m ay appoint a Nodal 
Officer & establish an Anti -Money Laundering Cell for sharing of potential money laundering 

Page 45 of 108 
 
cases related to Arts and Antiquities on monthly basis to the Directorate of Enforcement for 
taking further necessary action under the provisions of PMLA, 2002. 
155. The Committee also recommends that the Ministry may re -examine certain procedural 
aspects of investigation of theft of antiquities like the mandatory permission from the Magistrate 
to be taken by the police based on a report of the ASI  before they can take cognisance of an 
offence under the AAT Act.  The Committee also recommends that the ASI may make the 
conditions for grant and renewal of licences more stringent.  
156. The Committee notes the suggestions given by the ED in respect of inclusion of other 
offences as mentioned in Section 25(2) of the Antiquities and Art Treasures Act, 1972 under 
Para 10 of the Schedule of Prevention of Money Laundering Act (PMLA), 2022, to enhance the 
scope of domestic cases of Arts and Antiquities relate d transactions such as Sale of Antiquities 
without License (Section 5); Sale of Antiquities by a person whose License has been revoked to 
another Licensee (Section 12); and Business of sale of Antiquities by unauthorized person 
(Section 13). The Committee recommends the Ministry to examine the feasibility of inclusion of 
the aforesaid changes, in consultation with the Department of Legal Affairs, Ministry of Law & 
Justice and take appropriate actions accordingly.  
157. The Committee notes that the ASI had  been declared as a Scientific and Technological 
Institution w.e.f. 1st May, 1989 by a Gazette Notification but it was  never implemented. The 
Committee observes that three decades after the issue of the notification, the ASI still functions 
as an attached office of the Ministry of Culture. The Committee observes that in its Ninety-
First Report on “Functioning of the Archaeological Survey of India” of 2005, the Committee 
had recommended that the ASI needs to reinvent itself, not merely as an administrative wing of 
the Government but as an agency for protecting and safeguarding our national heritage which 
involves much scientific and technical work. The Committee re iterates its earlier 
recommendation that unless the ASI converts itself into a Scientific and Technical Institution, 
the basic role and function of the organisation would be defeated. The Committee recommends 
that the Ministry of Culture should take necessary legislative action s to make the ASI , a 
Scientific and Technical Department and avail all the benefits which accrue to such 
Departments.   
 
  

Page 46 of 108 
 
V 
Retrieval of Antiquities 
Kohinoor  
158. The early history of Kohinoor  is debatable but it definitely adorned the P eacock Throne of 
Shah Jahan, lodged on the head of a gemstone peacock at the very top of the throne. After the decline 
of the Mughals, the gemstone went into  the possession of various persons until Maharaja Ranjit 
Singh of Punjab acquired the diamond. After Ranjit  Singh’s death, a period of anarchy followed and 
the throne eventually passed to Maharaja Duleep Singh, a minor. In 1849, the British annexed Punjab 
and imprisoned Rani Jind Kaur, the Maharaja’s mother. Maharaja Duleep Singh then 10 years old, 
signed the T reaty of Lahore ceding his assets including the Kohinoor diamond to Queen Victoria. 
The Kohinoor is in the hands of the British since then. 
159. In response to a query of the Committee as to what are the existing legal provisions for 
brining the Kohinoor b ack and changes that may be needed in the legal framework to help the 
retrieval process, the Ministry stated that t aking away of the Kohinoor diamond pre -dates the entry 
into force of the Convention (1970 Convention on the Means of Prohibiting and Preventing the Illicit 
Import, Export and Transfer of Ownership of Cultural Property). There is no legal basis in 
International law in this case. The only recourse is to explore possibilities of seeking the return of 
illicitly transferred/ taken cultural property through negotiation/ agreement with the concerned 
foreign country/ies.  
160. The following legislations were in existence regarding antiquities laws: 
 Indian Treasure Trove Act of 1878 was promulgated to protect and preserve treasures 
found accidentally and had archaeological and historical value.   
 Then the Ancient Monuments Preservation Act, 1904 which provided effective 
preservation and control over a ncient monuments especially those under private 
ownership.   
 The Antiquities Export Control Act, 1947 followed which provided a regulation over the 
export of antiquities under a licence issued by the Director General and empowering him 
to decide whether any article or object was an antiquity or not for the purpose of the Act.   

Page 47 of 108 
 
 After independence, in 1951, the Ancient and Historical Monuments and Archaeological 
Sites and Remains (Declaration of National Importance) Act, 1951 was enacted. 
Consequently all th e ancient and historical monuments and Archaeological Sites and 
Remains protected earlier under Ancient Monuments Preservation Act, 1904 were re -
declared as monuments and archaeological sites under this Act. 
  In order to bring the Act on par with Constitut ional provisions and providing better and 
effective preservation of the archaeological wealth of the country, the Ancient 
Monuments and Archaeological Sites and Remains Act of 1958 was enacted repealing 
the 1951 Act.  
 The Antiquities and Art Treasures Act,  1972 is the latest Act enacted on 9 th September, 
1972 for effective control over movable cultural property consisting of antiquities and art 
treasures.  The Act is to regulate the export trade in antiquities and art treasures, to 
provide for the prevention of smuggling and fraudulent dealings in antiquities, to provide 
for the compulsory acquisition of antiquities and art treasures for preservation in public 
places and to provide for certain other matters connected therewith or incidental or 
ancillary thereto.  This legislation repealed the Antiquities Export Control Act, 1947.   
 
International Conventions  
161. The Ministry submitted that since 1945, various international legislative instruments have 
been adopted at the multilateral and national levels to ensure the protection of movable and 
immovable cultural heritage, and notably to fight against illicit trafficking and facilitate the return 
and restitution of cultural property. These include the Hague Convention of 1954 and its two 
protocols, the UNESCO Convention of 1970 and the UNIDROIT Convention of 1995. 
162. The Ministry in their Background Note submitted that the Indian heritage/ antiquarian wealth 
traced in foreign countries, delineates cultural wealth taken abroad, in three specific periods, as 
below: -  
I. Heritage/ antiquity taken out of the country, prior to India’s independence.  
II. Heritage/ antiquity taken out of the country, prior to implementation of Antiquities and Art 
Treasures Act 1972 (implemented in 1976) 

Page 48 of 108 
 
163. The restitution of cultural property in the above two cases, cannot be claimed in violation of 
any antiquarian laws like the Antiquities and Art Treasures Act, 1972 or any other existing law, 
enacted in independent India, and one has to depend only upon the goodwill of other  countries so far 
as their retrieval is concerned Retrieval of the antiquities which had been taken away from India 
before independence is especially difficult. Taking away of the Kohinoor diamond and other 
antiquities cited pre -dates the entry into force of the 1970 UNESCO  Convention on the Means of 
Prohibiting and Preventing the Illicit Import, Export and Transfer of Ownership of Cultural Property. 
There is no legal basis in International law in this case. The only recourse is to explore possibilities 
of seeking the return of illicitly transferred/ taken cultural property through negotiation/ agreement 
with the concerned foreign country with the help of  Ministry of External Affairs. However, the 
matter may be raised at international forums for the repatria tion of such cultural wealth. ASI, in case 
of pre-independence shifted antiquities, accepts them on the basis of goodwill of concerned country, 
based upon diplomatic and bilateral talks. Some of the cases, like the retrieval of Vagdevi 
(Saraswati) (from Dh ar, M.P.) taken up by Ministry of Culture and Sultanganj Buddha (found at 
Sultanganj, Bhagalpur district, Bihar) presently kept in Birmingham Museum and Art Gallery, 
Birmingham, taken up by Ministry of External Affairs are in process.  ASI/ MOC is receivin g 
applications from individuals/ societies/ trusts to retrieve antiquities related to Shivaji Maharaj, Rani 
LaxmiBai, Tipu Sultan, Stupa remains from Amravati, Kohi Noor diamond, etc.  
 
Legal/ Constitutional Position of Retrieval of Antiquities taken out o f the Country prior 
to Independence  
164. The Ministry informed that while Article 7.2 of the 1970 UNESCO convention mentions the 
retrievals and the process of repatriation, conventions are applied from the date of ratification by the 
country. There is no provision of conventions being enforced retrospectively. 
165. The comments of the Ministry of Law and Justice in the matter are as follows:- 
Provisions under 1970 UNESCO Convention  
  The Indian Penal Code, 1860 came into existence on 6 th October, 1860 and offences 
pertaining to stolen/theft of antiquities from India are punishable under Section 379, 380, 
381, 382 of the Indian Penal Code and the offences punishable under these sections of IPC are 

Page 49 of 108 
 
cognizable offences. Therefore, there may be a possibility of  having official record of such 
offences of theft/stolen of antiquities since 6th October, 1860. 
   It is understood that General Conference was convened in Paris from 12 th October to 14 th 
November, 1970 of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cul tural Organization 
(UNESCO) on the subject ‘Convention on the Means of Prohibiting and Preventing the Illicit 
Import, Export and Transfer of Ownership of Cultural Property’ (herein after referred as the 
1970 UNESCO Convention).  
 Article 15 of the 1970 UNESCO Convention states as under: 
 “Nothing in this Convention shall prevent State Parties thereto from concluding special 
agreements among themselves or from continuing to implement agreements already 
concluded regarding the restitution of cultural property removed, whatever the reason, from 
its territory of origin, before the entry into force of this Convention for the States concerned.” 
 It is the case of Ministry of Culture that the provisions of convention are applied from the 
date of ratification by the c ountry and there is no provision of conventions being enforced 
retrospectively. It appears that Ministry of Culture has formed this view in the light of Article 
7 of the convention.  It also appears that Ministry of Culture has not taken into consideration  
the entire provisions of the convention at the time of formulating their views. It is relevant 
that the provisions of the convention are to be read as a whole and not in part.  
 Combined reading of Articles 7 & 15 of the convention indicate that the conven tion shall not 
prevent state parties from entering into special agreements among themselves for restitution 
of removed cultural property. 
 From the above, it may be stated that Union of India may enter into special agreement with 
the concerned State Party to the conventions (i.e. Foreign Country) to evolve a mechanism 
for recovery of antiquities stolen from India in the pre -independent period/the period prior to 
the 1970 UNESCO Convention. 
Constitutional Provisions  
166. The Constitutional Provision regardi ng retrieval of antiquities taken out of the Country prior 
to Independence as detailed in Article 253 of the Constitution of India and the legal provision s as 
detailed in Section 166A of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 is placed at Annexure–VII.  

Page 50 of 108 
 
167. It is stated that in view of the fact that Indian had ratified 1970 UNESCO Convention, the 
Parliament is competent to enact a law in this regard as mandated under Article 253 of the 
Constitution of India. With regard to the constitutional/legal position o n retrospective application of 
laws for facilitating recovery of antiquities stolen from India in the pre -independent period, it is 
stated that the Indian Penal Code came into force on 6 th October, 1860 and offences pertaining to 
stolen/theft of antiquities from India which may be punishable under Section 379, 380, 381 and 382 
of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 and as per procedure prescribed under Section 166A of the Code of 
Criminal Procedure, 1973 necessary steps for such recovery may be taken after identify ing the stolen 
articles. 
168. UNESCO Convention, 1970 take care of retrievals and the process of repatriation of 
antiquities from the date of ratification, however, Article 15 of the Convention provides a mechanism 
for entering into special agreements amon gst the state parties for restitution of removed cultural 
property. Thus, the Union of India may consider to enter into agreement with the concerned State 
parties to the UNESCO Convention, 1970 (as on date 143 countries have ratified it) for restitution of  
removed cultural property. Such agreements may be effective from the retrospective period. 
169. The Committee observes that as per the opinion of the Ministry of Law and Justice and 
the provisions of Article 15 of the UNES CO Convention, nothing prevents  the Government of 
India from making special agreements for restitution of cultural property taken from its place 
of origin whatever the reason before the coming into force of the Convention.   
170. The Committee notes that as per the UNESCO website 1, there are three ways in which 
restoration and exchange of cul tural property is facilitated. The first is under the 1970 
Convention itself which provides for retrieval and reparations of cultural property between 
signatory nations.  There is also an UNESCO Inte rgovernmental Committee for Promoting the 
Return of Cultural Property (ICPRCP)  which seeks ways and means of facilitating bilateral 
negotiations, promoting multilateral and bilateral cooperation for the restitution and return of 
cultural property, encourag ing public information campaigns on this issue, and promoting 
exchanges of cultural property.  This intergovernmental body has an advisory role and its 
recommendations concern disputes between States, but are not legally binding. 
171. The Committee notes th at the UNESCO Website also records a third category of cases, 
where the 1970 Convention does not formally apply due to reasons like non -ratification by the 
                                                           
1 https://en.unesco.org/fighttrafficking/Return_and_Restitution_Cases  

Page 51 of 108 
 
States concerned or non -fulfilment of one of the conditions for its application such as non -
retroactivity. Other solutions are then sought so that the parties concerned can reach a 
mutually acceptable agreement. Even if they do not reflect a strict application of the provisions 
of the Convention, these solutions are often adopted in accordance with the s pirit and 
principles of the Convention. 
 
Global Practice in Retrieving Ancient Cultural Property  
172. The UNESCO website lists a number of cases where ancient cultural property has been 
restituted (Annexure-VIII).  Cases of return and restitution under the aegis of the ICPRCP  are as 
under: 
Sl. No. 
Countries that have 
returned ancient 
treasures/antiquit
ies 
Countries that have 
received ancient 
treasures/antiquit
ies 
Ancient treasures/antiquities 
returned 
1. Germany Turkey The “Boğazköy” sphinx 
2. Switzerland Tanzania The Makonde Mask 
3. United States of 
America 
Thailand, Jordan The Phra Narai Lintel 
Jordan 
To jointly exchange moulds of the 
respective parts of the sandstone panel 
of Tyche with the zodiac in their 
possession. 
4. Germany Turkey 7,400 Bogazköy cuneiform tablets 
5. Italy Ecuador Over 12,000 pre-Columbian objects 
 
173. The Committee  notes that the UNESCO website lists a number of cases where other 
countries like Turkey and Thailand have brought back their ancient cultural property , stolen 
much prior to the 1970 Convention . The Committee also notes that in December, 2016, two 
valuable paintings of former Dutch masters, despoiled by the Nazis in the late 1930s, were 
returned to the beneficiaries of a German Jewish art dealer.  
174. The Committee also notes the reply of Department of Legal Affairs wherein it has been 
stated that the c ombined reading of Articl es 7 and 15 of the 1970 UNESCO C onvention 
indicates that the C onvention shall not prevent State Parties from entering into speci al 
agreements among themselves for restitution of removed cultural property.  The Committee 

Page 52 of 108 
 
also notes that t he Law Secretary during his deposition had stated that “legislative competence 
exists” for formulating legislation for restitution of Kohinoor, as it rightly belongs to the people 
of India.  There are also precedents of other countries getting back their ancient treasures 
which were stolen before 1970, as detailed in above paras.  The Committee is of the view that 
there is nothing to prevent India from seeking the restitution of the Kohinoor and other 
antiquities stolen, taken or removed in whatsoever way prior to independence or prior to the 
1970 Convention. The Committee recommends that the Ministry of Culture may  adopt the 
global precedents in this regard and make all efforts to ensure that the Kohinoor and other 
precious historical artefacts are returned to India.  
 
Retrieval after 1976  
175. The Ministry stated that another category is of the Heritage/ antiquity taken out of the 
country, after implementation of Antiquities and Art Treasures Act 1972 (implemented in 1976). The 
repatriation of illegally exported antiquities/ art treasures in this category is governed by national as 
well as international regulations which are as follows: 
a) The claim for repatriation stands upon national legislation banning unlawful export of 
antiquities or art treasuries under section 3 of the Antiquities and Art Treasures Act, 1972 and 
supported by the Customs Act, 1962 as incorporated under clause 4 of the AAT Act, 1972.  
(b) At the international level, repatriation is facilitated under the UNESCO Convention, 1970 
governing means of prohibiting and preventing the illicit import, export and transfer of 
ownership of cultural property by the signatory member states. This Convention entered into 
force on 24 April 1972. It subsequently entered into force for each State three months after the 
date of deposit of that State’s instrument, except in cases of notificatio ns of succession, where 
the entry into force occurred on the date on which the State assumed responsibility for 
conducting its international relations. The said convention, under its Article 3 declares that 
provisions adopted by the states parties contrary  to those of the said convention shall be 
illegal. It also provides many significant steps to be taken up by the state parties for protecting 
the cultural properties of other countries. 
176. Article 7 (b) (ii) of the UNESCO Convention, 1970 lays down that if the state party of origin 
makes a request for repatriation, appropriate steps should be taken to recover and return the cultural 

Page 53 of 108 
 
property. The request for recovery and return shall be made through diplomatic offices. The 
documentation and other pieces o f evidence necessary to establish the claim have to be furnished by 
the requesting party and all the expenses incident to the return and delivery of cultural property are 
borne by the requesting nation. 
177. India is also a signatory to the 1970 UNESCO Con vention on the Means of Prohibiting and 
Preventing Illicit Trafficking in cultural property since 24thJanuary, 1977. 
178. The Ministry informed the Committee that the Government of India (GOI) has given renewed 
attention on safeguarding the tangible cultur al heritage which includes retrieving the treasures taken 
away illegally or smuggled out of India. Concerted efforts made by the GOI through involving “a 
whole of government approach” has resulted in bringing back 242 antiquities.   
179. In first of its kind effort, 157 antiquities were brought back to India during Prime Minister’s 
visit to USA in September, 2021. Both the countries renewed their commitment to strengthen efforts 
to combat theft, illicit trade and trafficking of cultural objects. It is pertinent to mention that till 2013, 
only 13 antiquiti es were brought back to India. India’s success in this regard is  an outcome of 
focused attention and coordinated action to deal with this long -pending issue, its goodwill as well as 
growing awareness at global level on this issue. The GOI is committed to continuously pursue this 
issue at various levels. 
180. The Ministry informed that there were four types of retrieval process detailed as follows:- 
1.  Indian antiquities offered by foreign countries.- 
 Nowadays many countries are presenting illicitly exported antiquities to the Indian 
Government upon goodwill. Recently, Canada has offered Goddess Annapurna to the 
Government of India, which belonged to the sacred ghats of Benaras. Australia returned 29 
antique paintings and sculptures in the year 2021. Metropolitan Museum of Art, New York, 
USA has offered two antiquities which were displayed in MET Museum in the year 2018, 
comprising of a sculpture of Mahishasurmardini (now displayed in the Gallery of Confiscated 
antiquities, Purana Quila), and a stucco head of Bodhisattva. Retrieval is comparatively 
smooth under this type of process.  
2.  Stolen antiquities claimed by the Indian Government:  
In this category, the antiquities which have been stolen from India and have adequate 
documentary proofs, are being claimed back, and this is an ongoing process. Examples may 

Page 54 of 108 
 
be taken of the divine sculptural masterpiece of Uma Parmeshwari in the year 2016  (from 
Singapore), Ganesha and Parvati in the year 2017 (from the USA), Nalanda Buddha in the 
year 2020 (from UK), etc. all of which have been claimed back under this category. 
Retrieval, in this category, is done only after substantial ground work, examin ing 
documentary proofs, literary records, epigraphical and iconographical investigations, 
photographs, availability of First Information Report, other published records, etc. Also to 
emphasize under this category, are antiquities stolen from ASI -protected sites are also 
claimed from USA & UK. Other examples include antiquities stolen from KariT alai, MP, 
Buddha from Nalanda, Bihar that have been traced in USA and UK respectively. 
3. Antiquities which are not documented/ reported stolen from anywhere in India- 
Bottlenecks are faced when it comes to the retrieval of undocumented antiquities stolen from 
unprotected monuments. In this category, it becomes difficult to claim an antique that has no/ 
proper documentary evidence. ASI asserts provenance of antiquities i n this category on the 
basis of iconographic style and related features, material, and inscriptions, if any. 
4. Antiquities which are in private collections/Museums:  
Retrieval of antiquities which are in private collection and museums are very difficult as even 
after possessing enough documentary proof, the other party sometimes refrain from returning 
the same,  having spent a huge amount in purchasing such antiquities. One stone sculpture 
from Nagada, Rajasthan namely Apsara is in Denver Museum, USA. Authori ties from the 
museum have delayed the matter even after providing then with substantial documentary 
proof. 
 
Process of Retrieval  
181. The Minis try informed that essentially the process of restitution of antiquities involves the 
following steps:- 
●    Establishment of their doubtful provenance 
●    Recovery from present owner/custodian(s) which may also involve legal proceedings abroad 
●    Transfer of ownership to India (via Mission abroad) after due process of law 
●   Identification of the item as antique and  

Page 55 of 108 
 
●   Repatriation of antiques to India 
182. Once the stolen artifacts of India surfaces abroad, it is verified by the respective 
agency/department in the country.  Archaeologists are deputed to go, study and verify  its 
authenticity. Once it is established that the object is same, the documents like FIR, any proof which 
establishes that the antiquity kept at that place is unlawfully shifted, is shared with the present owner 
through our Mission located in that country . Though it is a long process, yet once it is established 
that the object was unlawfully shifted, efforts are taken that it is retrieved back. The multiple stages 
involved which follow in series require coordination of various agencies and Ministries, with  the 
Indian Mission abroad playing the anchor role.   
 
Role of Indian Missions  
183. The role of the Ministry of External Affairs is retrieval of antiquities and artefacts as well as 
stopping misappropriation and theft of cultural assets. When such informa tion is received at the 
Ministry of External Affairs or at their Missions and posts abroad, the matter is examined and 
reported back. Based on the guidance provided by the lead Ministries and organisations such as 
Ministry of Culture, Archaeological Survey  of India, law enforcement agencies like CBI as well as 
the NGOs and private individuals, the issue is taken up with designated and appropriate authorities of 
the foreign Governments through diplomatic channels.  The Ministry of Culture (Mo C) regularly 
remains in touch with Ministry of External Affairs (MEA) and Missions/ Posts abroad on issues of 
cultural cooperation with foreign countries including on retrieval  of antiquities and artefacts. 
Whenever any artefact or antiquities of Indian origin surfaces  abroad or comes to the notice of 
Missions/ Posts, the MOC and ASI is pro-actively informed and under their guidance, matter is taken 
up bilaterally through diplomatic channels. Based on the documents submitted by the MOC and ASI, 
the claim of India is established.  Thereafter, specialised team of ASI representatives visit s abroad to 
establish the authenticity and ensure safe transfer of the antiquity to India. 
184. In addition, MEA is ready to further enhance the capabilities of its officers at Missions/ P osts 
abroad and at headquarters through orientation/ training programmes by ASI and other specialised 
agencies in this field.  This would not only enhance awareness and increase skill -sets of the officers 
in the Ministry but also bring efficiency in coordination on this issue.   
 

Page 56 of 108 
 
Role of DRI  
185. DRI, through its intelligence gathering network in India and abroad, collects and disseminates 
intelligence, including antiquities being attempted to or already illicitly taken out of the country and 
placed in private collections, museums and auction houses abroad.  DRI works in close coordination 
with foreign customs administrations, in not only the interdiction of suspect consignments but also in 
identifying the already smuggled out antiquities and their timely r estitution through coordination 
with relevant Indian agencies/Ministries. As per the Information sharing Protocol notified by the 
Central Economic Intelligence Bureau, details regarding detections made by DRI are being shared 
with CEIB for disbursal among all law enforcement agencies (LEAs).  Further, on detection of any 
important case or seizure of contraband including antiquity by DRI, a report is immediately shared 
with concerned LEAs. In addition, pro -active inter-agency cooperation is solicited on a ca se to case 
basis.   
186. The DRI informed that development of a digital portal where agencies/ministries can enter 
relevant inputs for timely and effective information sharing is under way by the Central Economic 
Intelligence Bureau, Ministry of Finance. C oordination between DRI and foreign customs as well as 
border protection agencies is defined by the bilateral or multilateral Customs Mutual Administrative 
Agreements in place between India and concerned Administrations. This includes cooperation on 
subjects spanning from national and economic security as well as preservation of cultural and natural 
heritage of the country. 
187. DRI is not directly concerned with the task of retrieval of seized antiques from outside the 
country but in some cases, where the antiques were seized on the basis of intelligence passed on by 
DRI, their officers posted in Missions abroad, have assisted and coordinated in the work related to 
retrieval. In detections/identifications as a result of intelligence inputs by DRI, often thi s role of 
anchoring coordination is discharged by the concerned overseas officer at the behest of the Mission  
(Annexure-IX).   
188. The Ministry cited some cases of successful repatriation of Cultural Objects to illustrate how 
Missions/Posts act on specific inputs:- 
Repatriation of Mahishasuramardini statue from Germany:  
 Following a communication from the ASI regarding Mahishasuramardini statue that was 
under the custody of the Linden Museum, Stuttgart, officials from the Consulate General of 

Page 57 of 108 
 
India, Munich visited the museum and sent a report confirming the presence of the statue in 
the museum.  
 Subsequently, the ASI sent the following documents to strengthen the claims for repatriation 
of the statue:  
 A certified copy of the duly registered FIR from the concerned local police station along with 
a translation;  
 A certified copy of the registration certificate that the statue has been registered under the 
Antiquities and Art Treasure Act 1972; Copies of s cholarly articles on the statue (e.g. copies 
of the relevant pages 4 from the book Indian Archaeology 1980-81 and copies of photographs 
from the book titled ‘Goddess Durga’);  
 Copy of the invoice dated July 27, 2000 indicating the transaction between the s eller and 
purchaser of the image (a document that was available with the concerned authorities);  
 Copy of excerpts from the eyewitnesses that corroborate the presence of the statue in 
Tengpora, Pulwama District.  
 After continued follow-up, the Ministry of Science, Research and Arts, State Government of 
Baden-Württemberg decided to hand over the statue to Embassy of India, Berlin. 

Page 58 of 108 
 
 
Mahishasuramardini Statue retrieved from Germany 
 Repatriation of Dancing Ganesh Statue:  
 Following an alert from the CBI through INTERPOL, Embassy of India, Berlin initiated 
proceedings to retrieve the Dancing Ganesha statue that was stolen from the temple of 
Vishnu’s Boar incarnation at Karitalai in Katni district, Madhya Pradesh. The idol wa s stolen 
in 2006 and a complaint was lodged at Vijayaraghavgarh Police Station. The idol was 
displayed by an art dealer named, Michael Wörner at the Cologne Art Fair in Germany held 
in November 2022.  
 The statue was subsequently taken over and repatriated to India after successful coordination 
with concerned authorities. 


Page 59 of 108 
 
 
Dancing Ganesha Statue 
189. The Committee observes that out of 486 items only 91 items have been retrieved as yet which 
leaves 385 items.  The Ministry submitted that it was the long legal process which was preventing 
the repatriation of the remaining items. However in most other cases it was lack of documentation 
which hampered retrieval and gave the example of the Leiden copper plates. The following are the 
details of antiquities and artefacts which are at different stages of retrieval from various countries: 
S. No. Country No. of Artefacts 
1. Australia 8 
2. Bangladesh 1 
3. Belgium 1 
4. France 1 
5. Germany 1 
6. Italy 1 
7. Netherlands 1 
8. Singapore 17 
9. Switzerland 1 
10. United Kingdom 9 


Page 60 of 108 
 
11. USA 338 (31 in the process of retrieval) 
Retrieval of artifacts under process: Retrieval cases from Australia, Bangladesh, Belgium, France, 
Italy, Netherlands, Singapore, Switzerland, UK, USA, and, Germany are in pipeline, among which Copper plate 
(Chola period) from Leiden Museum, Netherlands, portion of a Stupa pillar from (Nagarjuna Konda) from 
Belgium are of prime importance, as well. 
 
190. The Committee notes that from the year 1976 to 2013, onl y 13 antiquities were 
retrieved, however, from the year 2014, 229 antiquities have been retrieved till date. T he 
Committee observes that despite the ASI’s claims that the number of antiquities retrieved have 
gone up considerably in the last decade, the number has increased only due to t he arrest of one 
smuggler, Shri Subhash Kapoor in the USA from whom an approximate number of 300 
antiquities have been recovered, as per the media Reports and not due to the efforts of the ASI. 
The Committee recommends that a dedicated cultural heritage sq uad may be established for 
the recovery of stolen antiquities with trained officers. The team may be trained on various 
aspects as per requirement of set procedures of retrieval, followed by different countries.  The 
Committee however appreciates the efforts of the Government of India under the leadership of 
our Prime Minister to bring back our lost heritage and urges the ASI to maintain the 
momentum in this exercise.  
191. The Committee observes that many countries and law enforcement agencies have 
established a centralised database for stolen artefacts. Examples include the National Stolen 
Art File (NSAF) maintained by FBI in USA and the Stolen Works of Art Database by 
INTERPOL. These databases provide comprehensive descriptions and pictures of mill ions of 
stolen artefacts.  Such a database of stolen Indian antiquities can be integrated into the 
database under NMMA. This database can be  made, to the extent possible, available in the 
public domain to disseminate relevant information and generate great er awareness. The 
Committee recommends that the ASI follow the global practice in this regard.     
192. The Committee has been informed that ASI interacts with CBI, INTERPOL Unit of 
India and also utilizes the Interpol app called ID – Art and has circulate d it with all field 
offices.  The Committee understands that the ID -Art App of Interpol can be utilized by anyone 
after creating an account. The Committee recommends that the ASI may create awareness 
about this app among scholars, universities and cultural institutions for wide spread usage.  
193. The Committee has been informed that UNIDROIT Convention on Stolen or Illegally 
Exported Cultural Objects (Rome, 1995) is the international treaty on the subject of cultural 

Page 61 of 108 
 
property protection. It attempts to strengthen the main weaknesses of the 1970 UNESCO 
Convention on the Means of Prohibiting and Preventing the Illicit Import, Export and 
Transfer of Ownership of Cultural Property. The UNIDROIT Convention seeks to fight the 
illicit trafficking of cultural pr operty by modifying the buyer's behavior, obliging him/her to 
check the legitimacy of their purchase. The UNESCO Convention on the Means of Prohibiting 
and Preventing the Illicit Import, Export and Transfer of Ownership of Cultural Property 
(1970 UNESCO Co nvention) and the UNIDROIT Convention are compatible and 
complementary.  The Committee has also been informed that India is not a signatory to this 
treaty and would therefore like to know the reasons for the same.  The Committee recommends 
that the Ministry may take up the matter with MEA to explore the possibility of India being a 
signatory to the UNIDROIT Convention.  
 
Challenges in Retrieval  
194. Lack of coordination between State enforcing agency and ASI/MOC:  
 Retrieval of one stone sculpture of Varah is pending since 2017, from Switzerland. This 
sculpture was stolen from the Centrally Protected Monument, BaranAtru, Rajasthan in the 
year 31/7/1989. The matter got delayed due to delay in Letters Rogatory by the Rajasthan 
Police after which, it has been i nformed that the criminal case in the theft of the Varah 
sculpture has already been conducted in acquittal in the Court, and no criminal proceedings 
are pending in the matter 
 Likewise, retrieval of 16 antiquities stolen from Tamil Nadu to be retrieved from   Singapore, 
is pending. The Singapore authorities need documents under Mutual Legal Assistance Treaty. 
Necessary documents are required from Tamil Nadu Idol Wing for the retrieval process to 
proceed, which are still pending. 
 Retrieval cases related to Smuggler Subhash Kapoor: In this category, hundreds of sculptures 
have been seized by the Government of the USA (Customs, Homeland Security). A case is 
also ongoing upon Subhash Kapoor in at ThanjavurKumbakonam District and Session 
Courts, India, as well as i n the USA. After seizure of many antiquities and artefacts by 
authorities in the USA, 174 antiquities have been retrieved from the USA. Recently 307 
objects have been handed over by the Manhattan District Attorney’s office to the Office of 
the Counsel Gene ral of India on 17th October, which were stolen, smuggled or procured 

Page 62 of 108 
 
through illegal means. Out of the 307 items, some 235 pieces are those which were 
confiscated from Subhash Kapoor’s gallery. Retrieval of antiquities in this category is 
comparatively easy. 
 Countries/ c ountry which are not responding:  ASI has taken up a retrieval case of stone 
sculpture  of Vishnu (stolen from Tripura) from Bangladesh. ASI has taken up the issue for 
retrieval of this 9 -10th century old sculpture, wherein the HCI, Dhaka, Bangladesh has 
informed this office that authorities in Bangladesh is maintaining silence despite repeated 
correspondences in the matter.  
 Costly affair: Retrieval of antiquities is a costly affair that takes into consideration the 
following procedural necessity.  
 Antiquities must necessarily be p acked by an art handler and dul y insured after deciding its 
tentative market value in presence of an archaeological officer/ expert. For example, a 
sculpture of Yogini has been retrieved from UK in the month of Sep tember 2022, incurring 
an amount of £3527.10 plus insurance (total - £ 10023.10) (INR 9,52,056.92) for its 
transportation from HCI, London to ASI Headquarters., New Delhi.  
 Fake/ antique-looking sculpture/ replica: Large number of freshly made artefacts, w hich have 
been sculpted in an antique -look/ replicas are seized by Custom authorities of various 
countries. Examination for its verification/ authentication by archaeological experts from ASI 
in a short period of time poses as a challenge. 
 When States demand retrieval, ASI interfaces with the agency and the State Governments 
for  documentary proof – this takes time 
 Countries quote their own domestic laws which do not allow export of antiquity.  
195. It may not be out of place to mention that there are several challenges in identification and 
retrieval of stolen tangible heritage:  There is a large volume of replicas antiquities in circulation and 
in display in museums and private collections worldwide. It becomes difficult even for experts to 
differentiate between a replica and a genuine antique, which limits immediate remedial action 
through diplomatic channels. b. Once it is established that an antique is genuine, international law 
enforcement agencies seek documents/evidence to establish that the antique was indeed stolen. There 
are very few cases of stolen Indian cultural property reported in 7 INTERPOL’s Stolen Works of 
Arts (WOA) database which renders ‘matching of stolen Indian antiquities’ by international law 
enforcement agencies difficult. 

Page 63 of 108 
 
Leverage of G20 for facilitation of restitution of cultural property 
196. In response to a query of the Committee  as regards leveraging international forums for 
restitution of cultural property, the Ministry of External Affairs has stated that Ministry of Culture is 
the focal point for ‘Culture Working Group’ (CWG) under India’s Presidency of G -20. India 
endeavours to provide a forum for discussion where all actors involved in the fight against the illicit 
trafficking of cultural property can ex press their views, thus facilitating the development of new 
ways to combat illicit trafficking and facilitate the return and restitution of cultural property.  
197. The Indian Presidency will build on the efforts of the Italian and Indonesian Presidencies of 
the G20, which emphasised the significance of the fight against illicit trafficking, strengthened 
cooperation to protect movable cultural heritage, and promoted restitution to its rightful 
owner/countries of origin. 
198. To achieve these objectives, Ind ia’s CWG outlines the following specific strategies and call 
for actions: 
●     Achieve significant reduction in illicit trafficking of cultural property in G20 countries by 
2030; strengthen regulation of online trading platforms and social media; and prom ote 
awareness raising and educational campaigns for the general public. 
●   Increase the ratifications of key conventions and enhance access to information and 
sharing of knowledge by promoting interoperability among existing tools and databases 
at the dis posal of stakeholders, notably the databases on stolen cultural property and 
national cultural heritage legislations, thereby preserving the cultural rights of people by 
ensuring equitable access to cultural heritage. 
●   Promote an open and inclusive inte rnational dialogue to facilitate alternative dispute 
resolution mechanisms pertaining to the return and restitution of cultural property. 
●     Support cultural institutions and museums to enhance the skills of their professionals by 
developing and promoti ng capacity -building programs such as participatory activities, 
seminars, training sessions, and workshops that would assist in the provenance research 
of their collections as well as the establishment and updation of inventories.   
199. The Ministry submitted that the efforts were that at the very least, the foreign museums which 
have Indian objects should acknowledge that the provenance as from being in India. This is a big part 

Page 64 of 108 
 
of the agenda of G-20 to use diplomatic outreach to get recognition if not re turn of Indian antiquities 
abroad.  
200. The Committee feels that the reply furnished by the Ministry of External Affairs (MEA) 
is generic in nature and urges the Ministry of Culture to strongly take up the matter with 
MEA, as their role in retrieval of stolen antiquities through bilateral talks and using India’s 
diplomatic channels, is of utmost importance. The Committee recommends that the Ministry of 
Culture to formulate a plan to raise these issue s on global platforms inclu ding the G-20, so as 
to generate wider awareness and build pressure on non-cooperating countries. 
 
Procedure after Retrieval  
201. The Ministry informed that the present legal provisions support keeping retrieved/confiscated 
antiquities in the custody of state enforcing agency as their case property till final disposal of case in 
Court of Law.  ASI takes over confiscated objects recovered by law enforcing agencies as and when 
requested. Such artifacts are handed over to ASI only after settlement of the cas e when the owner 
cannot be traced. 
202. The Committee has learnt through media reports that Confiscated objects often remain in 
police custody for many years and due to lack of proper safe keeping often suffering irreversible 
damage. The CAG report of 2013 had observed that two Buddha statues and one Garuda statue from 
Patna circle were lying with Araria Police Station since 2005 while four antiquities of the Indian War 
Memorial Museum, Red Fort were with Daryaganj Police Station since 1989. The Committee 
enquired from the Ministry whether ASI has a list of the artifacts currently lying in police stations 
across the country.  The Committee also enquired about the number of antiquities lying in the 
Gallery of Confiscated and Retrieved Antiquities at the Centr al Antiquity Collection at Purana Qila, 
New Delhi and the action taken by the Ministry / ASI to ascertain the ownership of the retrieved 
antiquities lying with them to enable returning the same to their rightful owners 
203. The Ministry submitted that ASI does not have any listed data of the thefts across the country 
and artefacts lying in the police stations. If litigation over the ownership of the confiscated antiquities 
goes on for a long time, then the items remain in police Thanas in boxes.  
204. Regarding the Gallery of Confiscated and Retrieved Antiquities, the Ministry informed that 
antiquities which are not case property, which have not been claimed by anybody and which do not 

Page 65 of 108 
 
belong to any State Governments are sent to the Confiscated Gallery.  Eff orts are however taken to 
return the items to their place of origin.  Presently, 194 antiquities are displayed in the Gallery of 
which 25 retrieved antique sculptures have been handed over to Idol Wing Tamil Nadu, Bhopal state 
Museum, Khajuraho Archaeological Museum Khajuraho and S.P.S Museum, Srinagar. The Ministry 
submitted that CAC maintains a controlled air-conditioned environment in museums for preservation 
of antiquities and their display. The Reserve Collection is safeguarded in the strong room of CA C 
Section which is inside the Purana Qila, New Delhi, guarded round the clock by armed security 
personnel. 
205. The Committee has been informed that the dealers and collectors who purchase antiquities 
such as sculptures, statues and coins from auction houses abroad through proper channel, cannot 
bring them to India easily because there is 38 per cent tax which is levied on them.  
206. The Committee feels that the  considerable amount of tax hinders the process of 
bringing back antiquities to India. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry 
may take up the matter with the Central Board of Indirect Taxes & Customs and if possible, 
completely waive off the customs duty being levied on  antiquities brought back  to the country.  
207. The Committee observes that though legal provisions require case property to be in the 
custody of state enforcing agencies, allowing precious antiquities to gather dust for decades in 
police custody and suffering irreversible damage defeats the very purpos e of the judicial 
proceedings which is to preserve our cultural property and restore it to its rightful place of 
origin.  Different departments of the Government are working for the same aim though with 
different procedures.  
208. The Committee notes that the Odisha High Court vide judgement dated 10th April, 1998 
allowed the storage of stolen antiques which were case property in a museum till the resolution 
of the case.  The Committee has also been informed by INTACH that the organization has, 
with the intervention of the Hon’ble Chief Minister of U.P., reinstalled some idols, which were 
lying in a police station as case property, in a village temple in Gorakhpur.  
209. The Committee lauds the initia tives by INTACH in the matter. The Committee 
recommends th at the ASI may take up this matter with the Ministry of Law & Justice and 
work out a solution so that antiquities could either be stored in a gallery of the CAC until the 
resolution of the dispute or the ASI personnel would have access to the antiquities s tored in the 

Page 66 of 108 
 
thanas so as to maintain them. The Committee also recomm ends that ASI may obtain a list  of 
the antiquities stored in different thanas in the country.  
 
Procedure of Temporary Loan  
National Screening and Evaluation Committee for issuing of Temporary Export Permit  
210. The Ministry informed that as per section 3 of the AAT Act, 1972, antiquities are taken 
abroad only for the purpose of an exhibition upon the issuance of a “Temporary Export Permit” 
approved by the Ministry of Culture, and issued by the ASI. MOC has consti tuted a National 
Screening & Evaluation Committee for this purpose. TEP is only issued to Nodal Agency 
(Government Body) which keeps an eye on the exhibitor by accompanying them during the 
exhibition period.  Further, the valuation of antiquities is also d ecided by the committee for the 
purpose of insurance coverage. These antiquities are examined by the same committee, when they 
are back, in order to authenticate the art object and assess damage, if any.  
211. The Committee referred to the CAG Report of 20 13 (Performance Audit of Preservation and 
Conservation of Monuments and Antiquities) which had noted that part of the Aural Stein Collection 
in the National Museum, Delhi consisting of some 700 objects had been loaned to the Victoria & 
Albert Museum, Londo n, prior to independence and had not yet been received back.  The CAG 
Report had also noted that some more objects of this Collection had been lying in the Conservation 
Lab at the Museum for 50 years. 
212. The Committee enquired from the Ministry the actio n taken on bringing back the loaned 
collection from the V&A Museum, London and the objects lying in the Conservation Lab.  The 
Committee also enquired about the procedure for sending objects to the Conservation Lab and the 
general time limit followed in su ch cases.  The Ministry submitted that there was no 
record/document in the National Museum regarding the loan of the 700 objects of the Aural Stein 
Collection to the V&A Museum, London and since they had been taken away under British rule, it 
was not an ex port to be ruled under the Temporary Export Permit and the terms and conditions of 
loan do not come under temporary export.   
213. The Committee is not satisfied with the reply of the Ministry. The Committee is well 
aware that since the objects of the Coll ection were taken out of the country prior to 
independence, the Temporary Export Permit did not apply to them.  However, as per the 

Page 67 of 108 
 
findings of the CAG as per records these antiquities were still “owned by the ASI” and were on 
loan but there was no evidenc e of any efforts of ASI to retrieve them. The position of the 
Ministry contradicts the CAG report as per which records do show that these antiquities are 
still owned by the ASI.  Moreover the website of the V&A Museum London itself acknowledges 
that the ob jects are “on loan from the Government of India.”In such context, it is noted that 
the ASI has not even taken the basic steps to try and ascertain the background in which these 
objects were loaned to the Museum and make efforts for their retrieval.  The Committee notes 
that the collection of Aural Stein is perhaps the biggest collec tion of Central Asian Art 
including Chinese, Tibetan and Tangut manuscripts, paintings, textile fragments, ceramic, 
Buddhist art objects, Prakrit wooden tables and thousands of other art objects and documents.  
Such a collection if viewed in its entirety w ould greatly benefit research scholars and 
historians. The Committee recommends that the ASI may contact the V&A Museum, London 
and initiate the process of bringing back the objects of the Aural Stein collection.  The 
Committee also recommends that the Ministry and ASI may make efforts to find out any other 
cultural objects which are on loan to foreign museums or collections prior independence or 
pre-1972 and take action for their retrieval.  
214. Regarding the comments of the CAG about some objects of the Aural Stein Collection 
lying in the Conservation Lab for more than 50 years, the Ministry submitted that “the 
Conservation Lab received 09 pieces which were handed over by the ASI in 1958 and it was not 
part of Stein expedition as per Stein and Andrew’s ca talogue in badly deteriorated 
condition.  Due to different climate condition in Central Asia and Delhi and material used in 
these 09 stuccos which were given to the Laboratory by Central Asian Antiquities Section for 
conservation but it is learnt that Labo ratory was undecided with regard to their course of 
conservation treatment and are still lying in the conservation laboratory in a very bad 
condition & deteriorating day by day.” 
215. The Committee observe s that despite the lack of clarity in the Ministry’ s reply, it is 
clear that the 9 pieces received by the Conservation Lab which may or may not belong to the 
Aural Stein collection have been lying in the Laboratory for the past 50 years in very bad 
condition since the Laboratory is undecided with regard to  the course of their conservation 
treatment. The Committee notes the inaction and lack of urgency towards conservation of 
precious artefacts and that the Conservation Laboratory could not find a solution to the course 

Page 68 of 108 
 
of treatment in five decades. The Committee recommends that the Ministry look into this issue 
and find a solution for conservation for these 9 objects.   
216. The Committee notes the observations in the CAG report that the laboratory was 
conserving only 0.25% of the total antiquities of the Mu seum annually.  The Committee also 
requires that the Ministry may submit details of the number of antiquities that have been sent 
to the Conservation Laboratory in the last ten years, the amount of time taken by the 
Laboratory and the number of antiquities which have been received after treatment.  
217. The Committee notes  that besides undertaking archaeological research and 
conservation, ASI is tasked with the huge responsibility of recovering stolen antiquities.   Many 
countries like Italy, Canada, Netherlands, USA, Scotland, Spain and France have established 
dedicated cultural heritage squads with a team of experts that focus their efforts singularly on 
tracking and recovering stolen antiquities. The Committee recommends that establishing a 
dedicated cultural heritage squad for the recovery of stolen antiquities with trai ned officers 
shall prove to be highly advantageous for ASI. The team may be trained on various aspects as 
per requirement of set procedures of retrieval, followed by different countries. 
218. The Committee also recommends that to speed up the process of re trieval, it is 
suggested that the Government of India should set up a multi -departmental task force which 
should include senior officials from the Ministry of Home Affairs (police and investigation), the 
Ministry of External Affairs (for co -ordination with  foreign governments), ASI and senior 
scholars/experts. 
219. The Committee notes that ASI has noted that the recovery of stolen antiquities is a 
costly affair due to the complex and lengthy formalities entailing numerous expenses. Given 
the limited resources of the Ministry and ASI, other sources of funding can help in supporting 
the government’s efforts towards the recovery of antiquities. Upon enquiry by the Committee 
on the benefit of   CSR   and attracting private funding for the government’s efforts to wards 
tracking and retrieval of stolen antiquities, the ASI replied that funding for retrieval is from 
their regular allotment. The Committee suggests that in case extra funding is required, the 
National Culture Fund may be approached to obtain funds for retrieval of historical treasures.  
*** 

Page 69 of 108 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS – AT A GLANCE 
Documentation of Tangible Cultural Heritage 
National Mission on Monuments and Antiquities 
The Committee notes that in the 15 years since its inception, only about 16.8 lakh antiquities 
out of a total estimated 58 lakh antiquities i.e. about 30% have been documented as on date. 
Further, the Committee was informed by DG, ASI in the deposition tha t the figure of 58 lakh 
antiquities is only an estimate and there may well be many more antiquities existing in India. If 
so, it makes the slow pace of documentation under NMMA all the more alarming. 
(Para 9) 
The Committee would like to know the reasons be hind the concerning observations made by 
CAG even after nine years having passed since the publication of its original Report in 2013.  
The Committee feels that documentation and maintenance of database of the country’s 
antiquities is urgently needed and r ecommends that all out efforts should be made to complete 
the documentation process on a mission mode. 
(Para 12) 
The Committee has been informed by the ASI that documentation in the 55 Site Museums of 
ASI all over the country has been initiated and is likely to be completed by the end of 2023. The 
Committee feels that the documentation in ‘ASI owned sites’ should have been accomplished 
much before. The Committee has learned from media reports that ASI Sites such as 
Chandraketugarh in West Bengal are sources  of numerous artefacts which are sold worldwide 
in illegal antiquities markets while such sites itself lie abandoned. The Committee finds it 
perplexing that with all the emphasis on documentation as one of the major preventive 
measures against theft of antiquities, the ASI has not documented the antiquities in its own Site 
Museums.  The Committee notes that the Ministry of Culture has been in existence since 1961 
and the ASI predates the Ministry by a century.  The Committee also notes the observation of 
the Public Accounts Committee in its report regarding the huge amount of public money spent 
over the years on preservation and conservation.  Despite the antiquity of these two 
organisations, the years of efforts ma de towards conservation of our heritage, and the funds 

Page 70 of 108 
 
allocated, the documentation work which is the preliminary step in conservation has not shown 
satisfactory progress.  
(Para 13) 
The Committee recommends that the ASI may ensure that the documentation process for all 
its Site Museums may be comp leted by the target timeline i.e., by end of 2023. The Committee 
may be updated on the progress and also upon the completion of documentation. The 
Committee also urges the Ministry/ASI to expedite the docume ntation work on priority basis 
in its National Musuems and other Centrally Protected sites.  
(Para 14) 
The Central Antiquity Collection (CAC)  
The Committee feels that an important repository of antiquities like the CAC should have a 
permanent and sufficient staff strength for the management, physical ve rification and 
conservation of the antiquities. The Committee recommends that the sanctioned strength of the 
CAC may be assessed and sufficient staff may be posted there for its proper management. The 
Committee also recommends that the physical verificatio n of antiquities in the CAC may also 
be taken up as soon as possible.  
(Para 16) 
The Committee observes that the CAG Report, 2013 had mentioned that the ASI had no 
policy/standard for transfer/shifting/acquisition/custody of antiquities and that at the tim e of 
transfer of antiquities, neither any agreement with the associated firm nor any insurance is 
being done. The Committee directs that the ASI may give the updates on the policies and 
standards for shifting of antiquities.  
(Para 17) 
National Museum, New Delhi 
The Committee notes that digitization process in the National Museum is long overdue and 
recommends the Ministry to expedite the process and ensure completion of the digitization 
process on mission mode.   
(Para 21) 

Page 71 of 108 
 
The Committee notes that as per the CAG Reports of 2013 and 2022 physical verification of 
artefacts has not been done regularly in the seven National Museums under the control of the 
Ministry.  Further, given that the documentation of antiquities in Site M useums of ASI   and 
the digitization in the National Museums are still in progress with majority of the objects kept 
in the Reserve Collections yet to be digitized, the Committee feels that there is a huge 
possibility that in majority of the cases, the disc overy of theft is made long after the antiquity 
has vanished from its place of origin.  The Ministry and ASI are two organisations which must 
be most aware of the difficulties in bringing back stolen antiquities without proper 
documentation. Yet the Commit tee does not see any urgency in the activities of the Ministry 
and ASI to conclude the documentation of monuments and antiquities. Proper documentation 
also constitutes provenance for consumers wishing to purchase antiquities legally.   
(Para 22) 
The Commi ttee recommends the Ministry to initiate physical verification and digitization 
processes at all the National Museums and Site Museums under the purview of ASI, set targets 
for the processes and ensure that the entire process is completed within a reasonab le period of 
time.  
(Para 23) 
The Committee notes that the CAG Reports had commented on the lack of Rotation Policy in 
the Museum stating that over 90% of artefacts lay in the Reserve Collection without ever being 
on display.  While the Ministry in its wri tten submissions has stated that a Rotation Policy is in 
place in the Museums,  it was acknowledged during the deposition that only a small fraction of 
artefacts were on display and the Museum was considering the digitization of the objects kept 
in the Reserve Collection.   
(Para 24) 
The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry may ensure that all the Museums 
under its control may strictly follow the Rotation policy since display of all objects on rotation 
basis not only enhances the appeal of the museum, it also ensures that  artefacts are not 
forgotten or misplaced.    
(Para 25) 
 

Page 72 of 108 
 
The Committee notes that India has put forth the agenda of “Technological Transformation 
and Digital Public Infrastructure” as one of the six priorities for the G -20 dialogue in 2023. 
The Committee is of the opinion that India has to lead by example. The Ministry should strive 
to prioritize the documentation of antiquities at those locations/sites which have been identified 
for the ensuing G -20 Summit, scheduled to be held in September, 2023.  Having a digital 
record of India’s Tangible Cultural Heritage will further attract the international tourists and 
result in promoting tourism at these locations 
(Para 26) 
Challenges in Documentation of Antiquities 
The Committee notes that the budget for NMMA is c ontinuously being reduced in successive 
financial years.   The Committee would like to know the reasons for such reduced allocation 
and utilization thereof and whether the Ministry had approached the Ministry of Finance for 
more funds.   The Committee observes that apart from the financial reasons, lack of manpower 
is a major barrier in the documentation process. The Committee notes that against the 
requirement of 54, only 11 staff members are working under NMMA. The Committee would 
like to know the reasons for the shortage of staff under NMMA and Ministry’s plans to fill the 
requisite vacancies at the earliest.  
(Para 30) 
The Committee notes that several key positions are also lying vacant in various cadres of ASI 
and the National Museums and Site Museums f or a long time (Annexure -I). The Committee 
has been informed by the Ministry that direct recruitment has been initiated for some of the 
vacancies (Annexure -II). The Committee is of the view that the Museums can function 
properly if they have key personnel in position to manage them. The Committee, recommends 
the Ministry to take urgent steps to fill the existing vacancies under the various cadres of ASI 
and the Museums at the earliest.   
(Para 31) 
The Committee does not accept the plea of the ASI that no ti me limit can be fixed for 
documentation due to the ever growing volume of antiquities.  The Committee recommends 
that the ASI should strive towards setting achievable annual targets for documentation and 
make all efforts to achieve the same.  

Page 73 of 108 
 
(Para 32) 
The Committee further recommends that the Ministry should formulate fixed timelines for the 
completion of the documentation process and conduct regular checks to ensure adherence to 
such timelines.  At the same time Ministry should initiate a plan to recalcul ate the actual 
number of antiquities in the country while documenting the said antiquities. 
(Para 33) 
Coordination with other Agencies  
The Committee opines that the documentation of all the antiquities in a vast country like India, 
is a gigantic task.  The Committee appreciates the initiatives of the Ministry for signing various 
MoUs with local bodies, heritage organizations, State Archaeology Departments, Universities, 
Colleges and NGOs for documentation of antiquities and would like to know the details 
regarding the proposals received for the identification of Documentation Resource Centres 
(DRCs) and the current status of these proposals.  
(Para 36) 
The Committee also recommends that the Ministry/ ASI may explore the possibility of 
involving State Govern ments and relevant bodies viz., Indian National Trust for Art and 
Cultural Heritage (INTACH); Indian Council for Cultural Relations (ICCR); IGNCA, 
National Culture Fund (NCF) as well as the French Institute of Pondicherry amongst others,  
in this process of documentation of India’s antiquities.   The Committee also recommends that 
a dedicated team may be constituted in ASI for better collaboration with such civil society 
organizations to enhance the documentation and recovery. 
(Para 37) 
The Committee also recommends the Ministry to examine the proposal for creating a Central 
Sector Scheme to ensure handholding and encouragement of the State Governments for 
creation of a master database of antiquities in the country. The Ministry may also formulate an 
incentivization scheme for the involvement of interested and relevant agencies/ stakeholders 
for record keeping of our Tangible Cultural Heritage. 
(Para 38) 
 

Page 74 of 108 
 
The Committee observes that there is a general lack of understanding among the public 
regarding the intr insic historical value of such antiquities especially in old and abandoned 
temples in rural areas.  ASI officials have informed that they organize activities to create 
awareness among general public/school /college students in the form of heritage awarenes s 
weeks, antiquity - registration drive, World Heritage Day/Week, Museum Day, etc.   The 
Committee would like to know if ASI has held any such heritage awareness schemes in rural 
areas.  The Committee recommends that ASI interact with Village Panchayat Memb ers and 
enlist their support in ensuring that the temples and artefacts in their villages are well 
protected.     
(Para 39) 
The Committee has been informed that a heritage portal app is presently being created in 
which reporting of thefts of antiquities ca n be considered under crowd sourcing. The 
Committee desires to know if the Ministry has any plans to develop a heritage portal which can 
also be used for documentation of antiquities.  
(Para 40) 
Technological Advancements for Documentation and Verification of Antiquities  
The Committee recommends that the Ministry may enlist the help of the French Institute of 
Pondicherry to build a database of photo archives of temple art and the best practices o f this 
Institute may be adopted by the ASI.    
(Para 44) 
The Committee notes the present process being followed for verification and maintenance of 
documentary evidence of antiquities. The Committee recommends that modern technology 
such as photogrammetry and 3D laser scanning should be employed to provide extremely 
accurate documentation of antiquities. Also, a systematic photo documentation of all 
antiquities should be done which should also be accessible online.  
(Para 45) 
The Committee is also aware tha t it may not be possible to maintain a photographic evidence 
of certain antiquities/ idols due to traditional practices and beliefs. In this regard, the 
Committee recommends that the Ministry should lay its focus on research and development 

Page 75 of 108 
 
techniques to f igure out ways and methods to maintain record without hurting people’s 
sentiments. 
(Para 46) 
The Committee also urges the Ministry to take help of technological advancements to develop a 
mechanism for scanning of antiquities in order to ascertain their aut henticity, composition and 
dimensions in a contactless manner.  
(Para 47) 
The Committee also recommends identification and unique tagging of antiquities on the lines 
of Radio-Frequency Identification (RFID) and Geographical Indication (GI) tags.  
(Para 48) 
Registration of Antiquities  
The Committee feels that registration of antiquities is an essential step to record all the 
privately owned antiquities in the country. Sufficient awareness should be created for the 
public to understand the importance of the cultural heritage and its registration.  
(Para 52) 
The Committee appreciates the registration drive initiated by the Ministry in September, 2019. 
However, the Committee feels that the window of 15 days for registration of antiquities is too 
short.  The Act  itself provides three months for registration for the person who owns the 
antique on the date of such notification.  The Committee recommends that the registration 
windows should be at least six months and the Ministry may include this amendment also at 
the time of amendment of the AAT Act.  
(Para 53) 
The Committee also recommends that the Ministry should initiate more such drives and take 
the help of social media and other electronic mediums to popularize the same.  The Committee 
recommends that the process may be simplified in order to encourage the concerned parties to 
come forward in large numbers for registration of antiquities. 
(Para 54) 
 

Page 76 of 108 
 
The Committee reiterates that the Ministry should further explore the possibility of devising 
an online portal/ ap p for virtual verification and registration of antiquities on the lines of the 
Heritage Portal App being developed for reporting thefts.  
(Para 55) 
Valuation of Antiquities  
The Committee notes the reply of the Directorate of Enforcement as regards valuati on of 
antiquities. The Committee feels that the valuation of antiquities is essential as it will attach a 
monetary figure to the antiquities being stolen/ smuggled and retrieved/ claimed. Also, the 
Indian Tangible Cultural Heritage is the national wealth a nd it is important to ascertain the 
value of it. The Committee reiterates the proposal of Directorate of Enforcement and 
recommends the Ministry to establish an independent body/ Committee consisting of members 
from ASI, ED, law enforcement agencies and he ritage experts which can carry out the task of 
valuation of antiquities.  
(Para 57) 
Acquisition and Purchase of Antiquities by ASI 
The Committee notes the reply of the Government of India on both acquisition and purchase of 
antiquities. In this context, the Committee recommends two changes in the relevant Acts/ 
Rules. First, is to enable a private antiquity owner to display their antiquity by lending/ selling 
it to a museum, in return for revenue.  Secondly, in case a private antiquity owner wants to sell  
it, the Government of India should have a preemptive overriding right to buy before private 
persons. The said recommendations will ensure that the Indian heritage gets displayed in 
museums and the interests of the private owners are also protected. 
(Para 59) 
Safeguarding of Antiquities at Museums and Centrally Protected Monuments 
The Committee notes that as per the data furnished by ASI, there have been 210 cases of 
antiquity theft, since independence. In these cases, 486 stolen antiquities have been reported 
from Centrally Protected Monuments/ Sites/ Museums located in 19 States/ UTs out of which 
only 91 antiquities have been recovered till date, which is around 18.8% of the total antiquities 
stolen.  

Page 77 of 108 
 
(Para 70) 
The Committee is not convinced by the assurances of the Ministry and ASI that the theft in 
CPMs has gone down considerably  in the last few years. As per media reports, many Indian 
antiquities surface in museums display and catalogues around the world or in global markets. 
As reported, the Metropolitan Museum in New York has 77 antiquities with links to Subhash 
Kapoor, the hig h profile smuggler who is now in prison in India.  The MET Museum’s Asia 
Collection is also reported to contain more than 90 pieces from Jammu & Kashmir with no 
provenance details. The Committee further observes that as per the NCRB data for 2017 -2021, 
a total of 175 Special and Local Laws (SLL) Crimes have been reported under the Antiquities 
and Art Treasures Act, 1972 (Annexure -IV).   The Committee believes it is impossible to state 
the number of thefts with any accuracy unless all the antiquities in a mu seum have been 
documented and digitized.  In the absence of a centralized database of antiquities, theft can be 
detected only by random checks and it is possible that some thefts may go undetected for many 
years. A case in point is, as reported by the media, the Saraswati painting from J&K which has 
been found in the US but has still not been brought back due to the lack of any missing report.  
(Para 71) 
The Committee underlines the need of security of antiquities deployed at the different National 
Museums/ CPMs across the country. The Committee notes that out of 3695 Centrally Protected 
Monuments (CPMs)/sites under ASI, only a paltry 83 CPMs have been provided with CCTV 
cameras.  The Committee further observes that due to the shortage of staff, the ASI is u nable 
to provide Monument Attendants  in every monument. CCTV cameras provide real time 24X7 
surveillance in the remotest areas and are commonly used nowadays even in residences and 
offices for security purposes.  The Committee feels that the ASI is not mak ing use of available 
technology for protection of our priceless antiquities and monuments. The Committee 
recommends that the ASI and the Ministry may make every effort to ensure that all the 
Centrally Protected Monuments and Site Museum under ASI have CCTV  cameras for 
protection. 
(Para 72) 
The Committee would also like to know the present status of the Comprehensive Security 
Policy being drafted by the IIT, Delhi, envisaging various security and surveillance systems to 

Page 78 of 108 
 
combat various threats. The Committee recommends that the Security Policy may be expedited 
and formulated at the earliest.  
(Para 73) 
The Committee appreciates the steps being taken by the CISF personnel at various Museums/ 
CPMs to ensure safeguarding of valuable antiquities. The Committee rec ommends the 
Ministry to implement similar security measures in consultation with the CISF, MHA, at all 
the remaining Museums/CPMs/Sites of ASI. The Committee feels that there is a grave need to 
establish a robust security system in coordination with CISF; State Police Departments; and 
private security services to have a foolproof system in place. 
(Para 74) 
The Committee, also recommends that the Ministry may come up with a set of rules to ensure 
certain level of safety and security across all the National M useums and CPMs. Needless to 
mention, installation of CCTV systems, armed personnel, burglar alarm systems, etc. in the 
museums are a must and therefore the budgetary requirements, alongwith provisions thereof 
within strict timeline be made for compliance of security requirements. 
(Para 75) 
The Committee recommends the Ministry to explore the usage of strong storage facilities for 
antiquities which are both at display and are in the reserve collection The Committee hopes 
that this would also deter the possi ble connivance of the Museum staff with organized art 
smuggling groups. 
(Para 76) 
The Committee appreciates the documentation of the idols in the Tiruvarur Icon Centre by X -
RF analyser (X -ray Florescence Analyser) with the help of IIT, Chennai and IGCAR, 
Kalpakkam. The Committee recommends that the same exercise may be done in other ICON 
centres in Tamil Nadu also. The Committee further recommends the Ministry of Culture may 
take note of the security measures being taken by the Idol wing CID, Tamil Nadu Pol ice 
including provision of Temple Protection Force and implement such practices, wherever 
feasible. 
(Para 77) 

Page 79 of 108 
 
The Committee also recommends that the Ministry may take urgent measures to ensure that 
an effective disaster management plan is in place across a ll the museums to ensure the physical 
safety of the precious antiquities in times of natural calamities. 
(Para 78) 
Illegal Export of Antiquities 
Non-Antiquity Certificate 
The Committee observes that the Non-Antiquity Certificate issued by the ASI circle offices has 
only a photo of the object stamped on it and its validity is for six months.  With this certificate 
in hand, the smugglers manufacture numerous fakes and slip in the original antiquity amidst 
the fakes at the time of export. On the advisability  of reducing the validity period, the ASI 
stated that it is a continuing practice and provides adequate time -gap for smooth processing of 
procedural work.  The Committee feels that the six months validity period gives much leeway 
for the smugglers to arran ge for the manufacture of fakes and substitute it for the original 
antique. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry may consider reducing the 
validity period of the Non-Antiquity Certificate. 
(Para 83) 
The Committee also recommends the Minis try that the details regarding issued NACs should 
be digitized on an online portal along with clear pictures describing the measurements and 
composition of the handicraft. The portal may be accessed by the Custom authorities at 
various Seaports/Airports/ Land. 
(Para 84) 
The Committee recommends that the Ministry may consider banning any artefact that is 
mutilated or damaged as often antiques are damaged while being stolen or due to the ravages 
of time whereas fakes would not show any such wear and tear. The  Committee also desires to 
know the action presently being taken against any exporter who has violated the Customs Act 
or the AAT Act.  
(Para 85) 

Page 80 of 108 
 
The Committee recommends that at the time of issue of licence, the background of exporters 
may be scrutinized thoroughly.  Renewal of licence should not be done as a matter of routine 
but only after a thorough scrutiny of the exporter’s past record.  
(Para 86) 
The Committee recommends that the Ministry should ensure strong background checks of all 
the personnel posted in the Centrally Protected Monuments (CPMs); Museums; Sites etc. 
(Para 87) 
Risk Management System (RMS) 
The Committee desires to know if the Customs authorities have devised ways to apply ICES to 
prevent theft of antiquities.  The Committee also desir es to know whether Indian Customs is 
using Block Chain and Distributed Ledger Technology as such technologies are increasingly 
being used to increase information accessibility in the global art market.  
(Para 93) 
The Committee recommends the Ministry to wo rk in close coordination with the concerned 
agencies including CBIC, Directorate of Revenue Intelligence (DRI) and the Directorate of 
Enforcement (ED) to protect the illegal trade of India’s Tangible Cultural Heritage.   
(Para 94) 
The Committee notes that only the consignments deemed risky are sent to the field officers for 
Assessment or Examination purposes. The Committee is of the opinion that certain antiquities 
such as coins and small art objects are more prone to be smuggled as it is difficult to trace  
them and their identification in huge consignments is like looking for a needle in a haystack. To 
avoid such situations, the documentation and tagging of antiquities becomes inevitable. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends the Ministry to expedite the ant iquities documentation/ 
tagging process.  
(Para 95) 
The Committee acknowledges the submission of the Customs Department regarding the near 
impossibility of checking every container leaving every port but feels that heritage theft can 
only be prevented if e very container is thoroughly scrutinized. The Committee feels that 
adoption of the latest technology would help in overcoming such problems and recommends 

Page 81 of 108 
 
that the Ministry in consultation with CBIC, may utilize the latest and best technology with 
respect to RMS which can aid in tracking of antiquities in large consignments/ containers.  
(Para 96) 
Investigation of Cases - Illegal Trade of Antiquities 
The Committee believes that the Subhash Kapoor case should be an eye -opener for Indian 
government agencies t o the enormous scale of looting of India’s temples and archaeological 
sites and the complex network of common thieves, art thieves, exporters, businessmen and 
museum curators involved in the process. The Committee recommends that the different 
government agencies of India - Customs Department, ASI, Deptt of Revenue Intelligence and 
Police forces work together in close collaboration to save Indian heritage from unscrupulous 
elements. 
(Para 101) 
The Committee notes the process being followed by different Law E nforcement Agencies 
(LEAs) to investigate the cases of illegal trade of antiquities.  The Committee would like to 
know the present status and details of the 3 Look Out Notices issued by ASI from 2018 till date. 
The Committee also desires to know the investigation status of those 4 cases being dealt with by 
ED along with the estimated valuation of the antiquities involved.  
(Para 102) 
The Committee feels that the involvement of various LEAs viz., Customs, CBI, ED, DRI and 
Police is extremely crucial to ensure prevention, detection and investigation of incidents related 
to the smuggling of antiquities. The Committee recommends the Ministry of Culture to have 
regular follow-ups with all these LEAs and develop a common portal for quicker dissemination 
of information related to theft and probable export of antiquities. 
(Para 103) 
The Committee is of the opinion that even the slightest delay in reporting an antiquity theft or 
issuance of look out notice could be detrimental to the Tangible Cultural Heritage of the 
country. The Committee feels that if the information of theft is not passed to the concerned 
agencies within a time bound manner, there may be a situation where the antiquity has already 
been smuggled out of the country even before it is reported missing. The Committee 

Page 82 of 108 
 
recommends the Ministry to identify any shortcomings in  tracking of theft and passing on the 
information to the concerned LEAs and make all out efforts to remove any such bottlenecks.  
(Para 104) 
Early Detection and Prevention of Illegal Trade of Antiquities 
The Committee opines that to ensure early detection and prevention of illegal trade of 
antiquities, seamless coordination between agencies is inevitable.  Also, the Directorate of 
Revenue Intelligence (DRI) plays a crucial role in interdiction of suspect consignments and 
identification of the already smuggl ed out antiques/antiquities, by its overseas intelligence 
network, in coordination with foreign customs administrations.  
(Para 111) 
The Committee recommends the Ministry to examine the export policies of other countries and 
explore the possibility of banning export of handicrafts of certain antiquity items such as Chola 
Bronzes which are among the most sought after antiquities. The complete banning of exports 
of non -antiquity copies of such objects will prevent their smuggling in the disguise of 
handicraft items. 
(Para 112) 
Challenges in assessment and examination by Customs  
The Committee takes into cognizance the challenges viz., non-feasibility to physically examine 
all the export consignments; differentiation between genuine & fake antique s; and under 
reporting of antique theft cases in INTERPOL’s Stolen Works of Arts (WOA) database, being 
faced by different agencies in preventing theft and export of antiquities. The Committee feels 
that the only way to tackle these challenges is by researching and devel oping technologically 
competent measures.  
(Para 115) 
The Committee recommends the Ministry to expedite the process of documentation of all 
Indian antiques and digitizing their record on a common web portal which can be accessed by 
all the concerned Law Enforcement Agencies (LEAs). 
(Para 116) 

Page 83 of 108 
 
The Committee also recommends the Ministry to take up the matter of physical examination of 
all export consignments, with the Customs authorities to ensure that all the export 
consignments are at least electronically scanned for detection of any antiques.  
(Para 117) 
The Committee also recommends the Ministry to ensure that with the help of Indian Law 
Enforcement Agencies (LEAs), all the antiquity theft cases are invariably reported to the 
INTERPOL’s Stolen Works of Arts (WOA) database enabling the international LEAs to take 
appropriate actions. 
(Para 118) 
Co-ordination amongst all the Agencies 
The Committee feels that coordination amongst different Agencies/ Ministries for prevention 
of cross-border smuggling of stolen antiquities as well as the recovery of stolen antiquities is of 
utmost importance. The Committee opines that all the concerned Ministries/Agencies viz., 
Ministry of Culture; Archaeological Survey of India; Ministry of Home Affairs; Ministry of 
External Affairs; State Governments Directorate of Enforcement; Central Board of Indirect 
Taxes & Customs; and Directorate of Revenue Intelligence should be on the same page and 
take appropriate actions to safeguard/retrieve our Tangible Cultural Heritage. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends the Ministry of Culture to explore the possibility of 
establishing a dedicated Cultural Heritage Division in consultation with all the aforesaid 
Agencies/Ministries.  
(Para 125) 
The Committee also feels that prompt and accurate  information sharing is the key to smooth 
coordination amongst various Agencies/ Ministries. The Committee recommends the Ministry 
of Culture to lay its focus on technological advancements and work towards the creation of an 
information sharing portal. The  Committee also recommends the Ministry to devise a 
mechanism to have real -time information on the said information sharing portal which can be 
accessed by all the concerned Agencies and help in tracking the movement of antiquities.      
(Para 126) 
 

Page 84 of 108 
 
Valuation of Smuggled Antiquities 
The Committee notes the reply furnished by ED as regards the valuation of antiquities that 
have been smuggled. The Committee opines that the valuation of antiquities is essential to 
determine the exact quantum of value of proper ty stolen and recovered. In this regard, the 
Committee reiterates its recommendation that valuation of antiquities shall be carried out at 
the documentation stage itself, so that it would be easier to ascertain the monetary value of the 
items which have been stolen/ smuggled. For this purpose, the Ministry may form a Committee 
consisting of experts, historians and officers from the ASI 
(Para 129) 
Capacity Building and Training 
The Committee is of the opinion that the tracking and retrieval of stolen artefacts is a complex 
endeavour requiring a wide range of skills, ranging from antiquities preservation to forensic 
examinations. The authorities involved in the tracking and retrie val of stolen artefacts need to 
be well-versed with the latest and modern techniques. Further, it  is important to be familiar 
with investigation methods followed in other countries in case of cross-border transfer of stolen 
antiquities. The Committee, the refore, recommends that the Ministry of Culture should 
develop varied training modules for its officers alongwith the personnel of other concerned 
Agencies and conduct regular sessions to empower them with skills required for identification, 
tracking and retrieval of stolen artefacts.  
(Para 133) 
Auction of Indian Antiquities in International Markets 
The Committee is aware that there are numerous instances of Indian Antiquities being 
auctioned in international markets in recent years. The Committee recommen ds that  Ministry 
of Culture and ASI may ensure to follow all such international auctions and strongly take up 
this matter with the Indian Missions in other countries to keep a tab on such auctions and 
share such information.  
(Para 136) 
The Committee also  reiterates its recommendation and urges the Ministry to ensure that, in 
consultation with Indian Law Enforcement Agencies (LEAs), all the antiquity theft cases 

Page 85 of 108 
 
should be reported to the INTERPOL’s Stolen Works of Arts (WOA) database without any 
delay. The real-time reporting of cases will enable the Indian Missions and International LEAs 
to access the information and take appropriate actions.  
(Para 137) 
Amendments Required in Relevant Laws 
Amendments to the Antiquities and Art Treasures Act, 1972  
The Committee noted that as per the CAG Report of 2013, the Ministry of Culture had started 
an exercise in 1997 and a draft Cabinet note had been approved by the Cabinet in 2003.  
However, the Ministry had accorded no priority for the work and no timeframe had be en fixed 
for this purpose and consequently no amendments to the Act have been carried out so far.  A 
decade later, the issue is still in the discussion/draft stage.   
(Para 147) 
The Committee observes that the AAT Act seems to have major shortcomings like excessively 
broad definition of ‘antiquities’ complex formalities for registration, and lack of strict 
punishment, among others and recommends that the Ministry may make all efforts to ensure 
that the required amendments to the Act are carried out to make it effective and to iron out the 
problems pointed out by various law enforcement Agencies. 
(Para 148) 
The Committee further notes that regarding the fixation of the 100 year criteria for 
categorizing an object as antique, the ASI has submitted that it is r easonable keeping in view 
the long historical timeline of Indian history and archaeology. However, less than 100 years old 
objects can also be notified under Art Treasures category.     
(Para 149) 
The Committee accordingly recommends that the Ministry take  up the matter with the 
Ministry of Home Affairs to make it mandatory for State Governments and State Police to 
share information and FIRs pertaining to theft of State Protected Antiquities and Art 
Treasures with the ASI and the Ministry of Culture. Suitab le amendments to the Act may be 
made at the time of amendment of the Act as a whole.   

Page 86 of 108 
 
(Para 152) 
The Committee observes that the present provisions of Section 25 of the AAT Act are not 
stringent enough which makes it relatively easy for criminals to escap e the law or get away 
with light punishments for the crime of stealing centuries old and glorious treasures of India.  
Keeping in view the increasing trend of illicit trafficking of the antiquities, the Committee 
recommends that severe punishment upto seve n years and penalty upto fifty lakh may be 
provided to deter the illegal trade of exporting or attempting to export antiquities. The 
Committee also recommends that enhanced due -diligence & KYC requirements in respect of 
big Art Galleries, Antique and Artifacts Sellers/Dealers be made. 
(Para 153) 
The Committee further recommends that the Ministry of Culture may appoint a Nodal Officer 
& establish an Anti -Money Laundering Cell for sharing of potential money laundering cases 
related to Arts and Antiquities on monthly basis to the Directorate of Enforcement for taking 
further necessary action under the provisions of PMLA, 2002. 
(Para 154) 
The Committee also recommends that the Ministry may re -examine certain procedural aspects 
of investigation of theft of antiqu ities like the mandatory permission from the Magistrate to be 
taken by the police based on a report of the ASI before they can take cognisance of an offence 
under the AAT Act.  The Committee also recommends that the ASI may make the conditions 
for grant and renewal of licences more stringent.  
(Para 155) 
The Committee notes the suggestions given by the ED in respect of inclusion of other offences 
as mentioned in Section 25(2) of the Antiquities and Art Treasures Act, 1972 under Para 10 of 
the Schedule of Prevention of Money Laundering Act (PMLA), 2022, to enhance the scope of 
domestic cases of Arts and Antiquities related transactions such as Sale of Antiquities without 
License (Section 5); Sale of Antiquities by a person whose License has been revoked to another 
Licensee (Section 12); and Business of sale of Antiquities by unauthorized person (Section 13). 
The Committee recommends the Ministry to examine the feasibility of inclusion of the 
aforesaid changes, in consultation with the Department of Legal Affairs, Ministry of Law & 
Justice and take appropriate actions accordingly.  

Page 87 of 108 
 
(Para 156) 
The Committee notes that the ASI had been declared as a Scientific and Technological 
Institution w.e.f. 1st May, 1989 by a Gazette Notification but it was never implemented. The 
Committee observes that three decades after the issue of the notification, the ASI still functions 
as an attached office of the Ministry of Culture. The Committee observes that in its Ninety -
First Report on “Functioning of the Archaeological Survey of India” of 2005, the Committee 
had recommended that the ASI needs to reinvent itself, not merely as an administrative wing of 
the Government but as an agency for protecting and safeguarding our national heritage which 
involves much scientific and technical work. The Committee reiterates its earlier 
recommendation that unless the ASI converts itself into a Scientific and Technical Institution, 
the basic role and function of the organisation would be defeated. The Committee recommends 
that the Ministry of Culture should take necessary legislative actions to  make the ASI, a 
Scientific and Technical Department and avail all the benefits which accrue to such 
Departments.   
(Para 157) 
Retrieval of Antiquities 
Legal/ Constitutional Position of Retrieval of Antiquities taken out of the Country prior 
to Independence  
The Committee observes that as per the opinion of the Ministry of Law and Justice and the 
provisions of Article 15 of the UNESCO Convention, nothing prevents the Government of 
India from making special agreements for restitution of cultural property tak en from its place 
of origin whatever the reason before the coming into force of the Convention.   
(Para 169) 
The Committee notes that as per the UNESCO website 2, there are three ways in which 
restoration and exchange of cultural property is facilitated. Th e first is under the 1970 
Convention itself which provides for retrieval and reparations of cultural property between 
signatory nations.  There is also an UNESCO Intergovernmental Committee for Promoting the 
Return of Cultural Property (ICPRCP)  which seeks  ways and means of facilitating bilateral 
                                                           
 

Page 88 of 108 
 
negotiations, promoting multilateral and bilateral cooperation for the restitution and return of 
cultural property, encouraging public information campaigns on this issue, and promoting 
exchanges of cultural proper ty. This intergovernmental body has an advisory role and its 
recommendations concern disputes between States, but are not legally binding. 
(Para 170) 
The Committee notes that the UNESCO Website also records a third category of cases, where 
the 1970 Convention does not formally apply due to reasons like non -ratification by the States 
concerned or non -fulfilment of one of the conditions for its application such as non -
retroactivity. Other solutions are then sought so that the parties concerned can reach a 
mutually acceptable agreement. Even if they do not reflect a strict application of the provisions 
of the Convention, these solutions are often adopted in accordance with the spirit and 
principles of the Convention. 
(Para 171) 
Global Practice in Retrieving Ancient Cultural Property  
The Committee notes that the UNESCO website lists a number of cases where other countries 
like Turkey and Thailand have brought back their ancient cultural property, stolen much 
prior to the 1970 Con vention. The Committee also notes that in December, 2016, two valuable 
paintings of former Dutch masters, despoiled by the Nazis in the late 1930s, were returned to 
the beneficiaries of a German Jewish art dealer.  
(Para 173) 
The Committee also notes the r eply of Department of Legal Affairs wherein it has been stated 
that the combined reading of Articles 7 and 15 of the 1970 UNESCO Convention indicates that 
the Convention shall not prevent State Parties from entering into special agreements among 
themselves for restitution of removed cultural property. The Committee also notes that the 
Law Secretary during his deposition had stated that “ legislative competence exists ” for 
formulating legislation for restitution of Kohinoor, as it rightly belongs to the people of India. 
There are also precedents of other countries getting back their ancient treasures which were 
stolen before 1970, as detailed in above paras. The Commit tee is of the view that there is 
nothing to prevent India from seeking the restitution of the Kohinoor and other antiquities 
stolen, taken or removed in whatsoever way prior to independence or prior to the 1970 

Page 89 of 108 
 
Convention. The Committee recommends that the  Ministry of Culture may adopt the global 
precedents in this regard and make all efforts to ensure that the Kohinoor and other precious 
historical artefacts are returned to India.  
(Para 174) 
Retrieval after 1976  
The Committee notes that from the year 197 6 to 2013, only 13 antiquities were retrieved, 
however, from the year 2014, 229 antiquities have been retrieved till date. The Committee 
observes that despite the ASI’s claims that the number of antiquities retrieved have gone up 
considerably in the last d ecade, the number has increased only due to the arrest of one 
smuggler, Shri Subhash Kapoor in the USA from whom an approximate number of 300 
antiquities have been recovered, as per the media Reports and not due to the efforts of the ASI. 
The Committee rec ommends that a dedicated cultural heritage squad may be established for 
the recovery of stolen antiquities with trained officers. The team may be trained on various 
aspects as per requirement of set procedures of retrieval, followed by different countries.  The 
Committee however appreciates the efforts of the Government of India under the leadership of 
our Prime Minister to bring back our lost heritage and urges the ASI to maintain the 
momentum in this exercise.  
(Para 190) 
The Committee observes that many countries and law enforcement agencies have established a 
centralised database for stolen artefacts. Examples include the National Stolen Art File (NSAF) 
maintained by FBI in USA and the Stolen Works of Art Database by INTERPOL. These 
databases provide comp rehensive descriptions and pictures of millions of stolen artefacts.  
Such a database of stolen Indian antiquities can be integrated into the database under NMMA. 
This database can be made, to the extent possible, available in the public domain to 
disseminate relevant information and generate greater awareness. The Committee 
recommends that the ASI follow the global practice in this regard.     
(Para 191) 
The Committee has been informed that ASI interacts with CBI, INTERPOL Unit of India and 
also utilizes the Interpol app called ID – Art and has circulated it with all field offices.  The 
Committee understands that the ID -Art App of Interpol can be utilized by anyone after 

Page 90 of 108 
 
creating an account. The Committee recommends that the ASI may create awareness about 
this app among scholars, universities and cultural institutions for wide spread usage.  
(Para 192) 
The Committee has been informed that UNIDROIT Conventio n on Stolen or Illegally 
Exported Cultural Objects (Rome, 1995) is the international treaty on the subject of cultural 
property protection. It attempts to strengthen the main weaknesses of the 1970 UNESCO 
Convention on the Means of Prohibiting and Preventi ng the Illicit Import, Export and 
Transfer of Ownership of Cultural Property. The UNIDROIT Convention seeks to fight the 
illicit trafficking of cultural property by modifying the buyer's behavior, obliging him/her to 
check the legitimacy of their purchase.  The UNESCO Convention on the Means of Prohibiting 
and Preventing the Illicit Import, Export and Transfer of Ownership of Cultural Property 
(1970 UNESCO Convention) and the UNIDROIT Convention are compatible and 
complementary.  The Committee has also been informed that India is not a signatory to this 
treaty and would therefore like to know the reasons for the same.  The Committee recommends 
that the Ministry may take up the matter with MEA to explore the possibility of India being a 
signatory to the UNIDROIT Convention.  
(Para 193) 
Leverage of G20 for facilitation of restitution of cultural property 
The Committee feels that the reply furnished by the Ministry of External Affairs (MEA) is 
generic in nature and urges the Ministry of Culture to strongly take up the matter with MEA, 
as their role in retrieval of stolen antiquities through bilateral talks and using India’s 
diplomatic channels, is of utmost importance. The Committee recommends that the Ministry of 
Culture to formulate a plan to raise these issues  on global platforms including the G -20, so as 
to generate wider awareness and build pressure on non-cooperating countries. 
(Para 200) 
Procedure after Retrieval  
The Committee feels that the considerable amount of tax hinders the process of bringing back 
antiquities to India. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry may take up the 

Page 91 of 108 
 
matter with the Central Board of Indirect Taxes & Customs and if possible, completely waive 
off the customs duty being levied on  antiquities brought back  to the country.  
(Para 206) 
The Committee observes that though legal provisions require case property to be in the 
custody of state enforcing agencies, allowing precious antiquities to gather dust for decades in 
police custody and suffering irreversible damage def eats the very purpose of the judicial 
proceedings which is to preserve our cultural property and restore it to its rightful place of 
origin.  Different departments of the Government are working for the same aim though with 
different procedures.  
(Para 207) 
The Committee notes that the Odisha High Court vide judgement dated 10 th April, 1998 
allowed the storage of stolen antiques which were case property in a museum till the resolution 
of the case.  The Committee has also been informed by INTACH that the orga nization has, 
with the intervention of the Hon’ble Chief Minister of U.P., reinstalled some idols, which were 
lying in a police station as case property, in a village temple in Gorakhpur.  
(Para 208) 
The Committee lauds the initiatives by INTACH in the mat ter. The Committee recommends 
that the ASI may take up this matter with the Ministry of Law & Justice and work out a 
solution so that antiquities could either be stored in a gallery of the CAC until the resolution of 
the dispute or the ASI personnel would have access to the antiquities stored in the thanas so as 
to maintain them. The Committee also recommends that ASI may obtain a lists of the 
antiquities stored in different thanas in the country.  
(Para 209) 
Procedure of Temporary Loan  
The Committee is not satisfied with the reply of the Ministry. The Committee is well aware 
that since the objects of the Collection were taken out of the country prior to independence, the 
Temporary Export Permit did not apply to them.  However, as per the  findings of the CAG as 
per records these antiquities were still “owned by the ASI” and were on loan but there was no 
evidence of any efforts of ASI to retrieve them. The position of the Ministry contradicts the 

Page 92 of 108 
 
CAG report as per which records do show that  these antiquities are still owned by the ASI.  
Moreover the website of the V&A Museum London itself acknowledges that the objects are 
“on loan from the Government of India.”In such context, it is noted that the ASI has not even 
taken the basic steps to try and ascertain the background in which these objects were loaned to 
the Museum and make efforts for their retrieval.  The Committee notes that the collection of 
Aural Stein is perhaps the biggest collection of Central Asian Art including Chinese, Tibetan 
and Tangut manuscripts, paintings, textile fragments, ceramic, Buddhist art objects, Prakrit 
wooden tables and thousands of other art objects and documents.  Such a collection if viewed 
in its entirety would greatly benefit research scholars and historians . The Committee 
recommends that the ASI may contact the V&A Museum, London and initiate the process of 
bringing back the objects of the Aural Stein collection.  The Committee also recommends that 
the Ministry and ASI may make efforts to find out any other cultural objects which are on loan 
to foreign museums or collections prior independence or pre -1972 and take action for their 
retrieval.  
(Para 213) 
Regarding the comments of the CAG about some objects of the Aural Stein Collection lying in 
the Conservation Lab for more than 50 years, the Ministry submitted that “the Conservation 
Lab received 09 pieces which were handed over by the ASI in 1958 and it was not part of Stein 
expedition as per Stein and Andrew’s catalogue in badly deteriorated condition.  Due t o 
different climate condition in Central Asia and Delhi and material used in these 09 stuccos 
which were given to the Laboratory by Central Asian Antiquities Section for conservation but 
it is learnt that Laboratory was undecided with regard to their cours e of conservation 
treatment and are still lying in the conservation laboratory in a very bad condition & 
deteriorating day by day.” 
(Para 214) 
The Committee observe that despite the lack of clarity in the Ministry’s reply, it is clear that 
the 9 pieces received by the Conservation Lab which may or may not belong to the Aural Stein 
collection have been lying in the Laboratory for the past 50 years in very bad condition since 
the Laboratory is undecided with regard to the course of their conservation treatmen t. The 
Committee notes the inaction and lack of urgency towards conservation of precious artefacts 
and that the Conservation Laboratory could not find a solution to the course of treatment in 

Page 93 of 108 
 
five decades. The Committee recommends that the Ministry look in to this issue and find a 
solution for conservation for these 9 objects.   
(Para 215) 
The Committee notes the observations in the CAG report that the laboratory was conserving 
only 0.25% of the total antiquities of the Museum annually.  The Committee also r equires that 
the Ministry may submit details of the number of antiquities that have been sent to the 
Conservation Laboratory in the last ten years, the amount of time taken by the Laboratory 
and the number of antiquities which have been received after treatment.  
(Para 216) 
The Committee notes that besides undertaking archaeological research and conservation, ASI 
is tasked with the huge responsibility of recovering stolen antiquities.   Many countries like 
Italy, Canada, Netherlands, USA, Scotland, Spain and France have established dedicated 
cultural heritage squads with a team of experts that focus their efforts singularly on tracking 
and recovering stolen antiquities. The Committee recommends that establishing a dedicated 
cultural heritage squad for the recovery of stolen antiquities with trained officers shall prove to 
be highly advantageous for ASI. The team may be trained on various aspects as per 
requirement of set procedures of retrieval, followed by different countries. 
(Para 217) 
The Committee also recommends that to speed up the process of retrieval, it is suggested that 
the Government of India should set up a multi -departmental task force which should include 
senior officials from the Ministry of Home Affairs (police and investigation), the Minist ry of 
External Affairs (for co -ordination with foreign governments), ASI and senior 
scholars/experts. 
(Para 218) 
The Committee notes that ASI has noted that the recovery of stolen antiquities is a costly affair 
due to the complex and lengthy formalities en tailing numerous expenses. Given the limited 
resources of the Ministry and ASI, other sources of funding can help in supporting the 
government’s efforts towards the recovery of antiquities. Upon enquiry by the Committee on 
the benefit of   CSR   and attrac ting private funding for the government’s efforts towards 
tracking and retrieval of stolen antiquities, the ASI replied that funding for retrieval is from 

Page 94 of 108 
 
their regular allotment. The Committee suggests that in case extra funding is required, the 
National Culture Fund may be approached to obtain funds for retrieval of historical treasures.  
(Para 219) 
*** 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Page 95 of 108 
 
 
 
 
ANNEXURES 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Page 96 of 108 
 
Annexure-I 
Staff Strength at Archaeological Site Museums of ASI 
No. of 
Museums 
Strength in Various Cadre (Group-wise 
Posts) 
Additional requirement of Staff 
in Various Cadre (Group-wise 
Posts) 
A B C D B C D 
52 
Museums 
2 
(DYSA) 
18 
(ASA), 
15 (AA) 
4 (D), 6 
(MAR), 
5 
(UDC), 
13 
(LDC), 
2 (M), 2 
(CAR), 
1 (EL), 
1 (SK), 
1 (JSK) 
169 
(MA), 
20 
(OA), 
37 (S), 
69(C) 
8 (ASA), 14 
(AA) 
9 
(MAR), 
2 (M), 1 
(EL), 1 
(SK), 3 
(UDC), 
19 
(LDC) 
204 
(MA), 
17 
(OA), 
40 (S), 
92(C) 
 
 
No. of Museums Vacant Position of Staff in Various Cadre (Group-wise Posts) 
B C D 
52 Museums 05 (ASA) 07 (AA) 13 (LDC) 02 (M) 58 (MA), 10 (OA), 
07 (S), 59 (C) 
 
 
Abbreviations– 
DYSA - Deputy Superintending Archaeologist  
ASA - Assistant Superintending Archaeologist  
AA - Assistant Archaeologist  
D - Draftsman  
MAR - Marksman  
UDC - Upper Division Clerk  
LDC - Lower Division Clerk  
M - Modeller  
CAR - Carpenter  
EL - Electrician  
SK - Store Keeper  
JSK - Junior Store Keeper  
MA - Museum Attendant  
OA - Office Attendant  
C - Chowkidar  
S - Sweeper 
 
 
 

Page 97 of 108 
 
Annexure-II 
Details of Direct Recruitment vacancies reported to respective Recruitment Agency under 
Mission Recruitment 
  
Vacancy 
Reported Details of Vacancy Reason for delay 
58 vacancies 
reported to UPSC 
 
 
 
 
50 vacancies for Dy. 
Superintending Archaeologist 
Pending with DoPT (Surplus Cell)             for 
NoC. 
Also Court Case is pending. 
1 vacancy of Dy. 
Superintending Horticulturist Proposal has submitted to UPSC. 
2 vacancies of Dy. 
Superintending Epigraphist 
(Dravidian) 
NoC for 1 vacancy is received and 
proposal to be submitted before 
31.12.2022 
NoC for 1 vacancy is pending with DoPT 
(Surplus Cell) 
1 vacancy of Superintending 
Epigraphist (Sanskrit) 
Pending with DoPT (Surplus Cell) for 
NoC. 
4 vacancies of Dy. 
Superintending Chemist 
Pending with DoPT (Surplus Cell) for 
NoC. 
129 vacancies 
reported to SSC 
50 vacancies for Assistant 
Archaeologist 
Pending with DoPT (Surplus Cell) for 
NoC. 
33 vacancies of Asst. Archl. 
Chemist. 
NoC is received. Proposal has 
submitted to UPSC before 15.01.2023 
3 vacancies of Asst. 
Epigraphist. 
SSC has conducted the 
examination. Awaited for the result. 
40 vacancies of Lower Division 
Clerk 
Letter for NoC will be send before 
31.12.2022 
3 vacancies of Sr. Photographer Letter for NoC will be send before 
31.12.2022 
  
  
  

Page 98 of 108 
 
        Annexure-III 
Through his presentation, the Director General of Police, Tamil Nadu has highlighted the two ways 
viz., photographic and oral, which are being followed to maintain documentary evidence of 
antiquities in the State of Tamil Nadu.  
Photographic Evidence 
 Photo images of the idols of the temple were hard to come by since photography of idols 
under worship in the temples was prohibited since long. 
 In the absence of photo image of the idol, tracing and locating the idol become extremely 
tenuous.   Further, existen ce of numerous such idols by the same name in thousands of 
temples in Tamil Nadu render the identification of the specific idol all the more difficult. For 
example there will be hundreds of Natarajar idols in thousands of temple in Tamil Nadu. 
Identification of one particular Natarajar idol is like “Looking for a needle in a haystack” 
 The French Institute of Pondicherry (IFP), No. 11, Post Box No. 33, Saint Louis Street, 
Pondicherry – 605 001 is a research institution under the joint supervision of the Fren ch 
Ministry of Foreign Affairs and the French National Centre for Scientific Research (CNRS). 
 The photo archives of the French Institute of Pondicherry (IFP) was started in 1956 and the 
collection is still being constantly enriched, fulfilling the will of its founder, Jean Filliozat, to 
build a database for the study of religious art in South India. All the photos taken up to 1999 
are under the joint copyright of the French Institute of Pondicherry (IFP) and the French 
School of Asian studies (EFEO). 
 The ph oto archives of IFP now contain more than 160,000 photographs and are a unique 
resource for visual information about South India in the second half of the twentieth century, 
particularly its temple art. The major collection in the photo archives is from In dia (1,35,620) 
and a smaller collection from Indonesia (641). Among the richest to be found in these 
archives are images of stone sculptures, bronze statues, paintings, tower views, architectural 
details, wooden carvings on temple chariots, prehistoric roc k-art painting, palaces, jewellery 
and carvings in ivory.  
 This varied collection has material from the whole of Tamil Nadu (60% of the images), as 
well as from many parts of other Southern states of Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka and Kerala. 

Page 99 of 108 
 
Monuments of major  significance from other parts of India, such as Ajanta and Ellora, are 
also represented. 80% of the photographs are taken in large format (6cm x 6cm) on black and 
white negatives.  
 These collections of images of temple idols turned out to be the saviour f or the identification 
and comparison of the burgled idols. 
Oral Evidence 
 As in all other cases, the oral evidence also is an important factor in establishing the presence 
of the idol in the temple and in the identification of the idol.  
 The oral evidence o f the temple priests should specifically reveal the dimensions of the idol, 
peculiarities, damages or deformities in the idol if any, since the priest are all most daily seen 
the idol at close quarters. 
 The oral evidence of the temple priest may be corrobo rated by the evidence of Hindu 
Religion and Charitable Endowments (HR&CE) Department authorities and the devotees.  
 
  

Page 100 of 108 
 
Annexure-IV 
The National Crime Records Bureau (NCRB) has following data of Special and Local Laws (SLL) 
Crimes reported under the Antiquities and Art Treasures Act, 1972 from 2017-2021:- 
S. No. State/UT 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 
States: 
1. Andhra Pradesh 08 02 15 03 0 
2. Arunachal Pradesh 0 0 0 0 0 
3. Assam 0 0 0 0 0 
4. Bihar 0 02 0 01 0 
5. Chhattisgarh 0 0 0 0 0 
6. Goa 0 0 0 0 0 
7. Gujarat 22 0 0 02 0 
8. Haryana 0 0 0 0 0 
9. Himachal Pradesh 0 0 0 0 0 
10. Jharkhand 0 0 0 0 0 
11. Karnataka 09 05 11 06 11 
12. Kerala 01 0 0 0 0 
13. Madhya Pradesh 07 03 01 0 0 
14. Maharashtra 04 01 01 0 0 
15. Manipur 0 0 0 0 0 
16. Meghalaya 0 0 0 0 0 
17. Mizoram 0 0 0 0 0 
18. Nagaland 0 0 0 0 0 
19. Odisha 0 0 0 0 0 
20. Punjab 0 0 0 0 0 
21. Rajasthan 0 0 03 01 02 
22. Sikkim 0 0 0 0 0 
23. Tamil Nadu 01 0 0 0 0 
24. Telangana 13 07 04 04 05 
25. Tripura 0 0 0 0 0 
26. Uttar Pradesh 05 02 02 02 0 
27. Uttarakhand 0 0 0 0 0 
28. West Bengal 0 02 02 0 0 
Total State(s) 70 24 39 19 18 
Union Territories: 
29. A&N Islands 0 0 0 0 0 
30. Chandigarh 0 0 0 0 0 
31. D&N Haveli and 
Daman &Diu 0 0 0 0 0 
32. Delhi 0 0 03 02 0 
33. Jammu &Kashmir 0 0 0 0 0 
34. Ladakh 0 0 0 0 0 
35. Lakshadweep 0 0 0 0 0 
36. Puducherry 0 0 0 0 0 
Total UT(s) 0 0 03 02 0 
Total All India 70 24 42 21 18 

Page 101 of 108 
 
Annexure-V 
Modus Operandi adopted for Smuggling of Antiquities 
The Directorate of Enforcement (ED) informed the Committee that the Directorate is investigating a 
number of cases related to smuggling/theft of Art and Antiquities objects under the provisions of 
Prevention of Money Laundering Act (PMLA), 2002. The investigation conducted by the Directorate 
of Enforcement has revealed following modus operandi adopted by the accused persons:- 
Modus Operandi-1 where buyer is the mastermind 
In these types of cases, the antique smugglers first select a temple to carry out thef t/stealing antique 
idols of Hindu deities. Then, they visit the temple site to ascertain the timings, dates, crowding at the 
temple etc. They also enquire from people living around the vicinity of the targeted temples and try 
to gather details of antique i dols which were kept in the temples. After getting these details, the date 
for stealing of the antique idols is decided. The theft is carried out in the night. After theft the antique 
idols are transported from that place to the person (broker) who is hand ling all the activities on 
behalf of the Mastermind Smuggler sitting outside India. The broker gives some money in cash, to 
all the participants of the theft as a commission and keep all the antique idols. 
Thereafter, the broker, who is the owner of an art  gallery, fabricates the letterhead of another art 
gallery as if the stolen idols are newly made handicrafts items and attempts to export the same to the 
mastermind in a foreign country by approaching Handicrafts Department to obtain a Certificate for 
newly made handicrafts. The stolen idols are mixed or replaced with the newly made handicrafts 
items subsequently. The Certificate obtained from the Handicrafts Department is produced before the 
Customs Authority at the time of exporting the stolen idols to th e mastermind. After receiving the 
idols, the mastermind sends commission money to the broker who is in India in his bank accounts in 
the guise of payment made towards the purchase of Handicrafts items. The mastermind sells these 
antique idols in the intern ational market at exorbitant rates and acquires illegal money. The value of 
the smuggled antique idols is estimated to be in several crores in the international market. 
Modus Operandi-2 where buyer is identified after execution of theft 
In these cases, the  accused first steals the antiquities from the unknown historical places, 
archaeological excavation sites, ancient temples etc. Then, the stolen antiquity is taken to another 
place till the buyer is found and deal is materialized. After receipt of desired amount, the antiquities 
are smuggled/exported in the guise of exportable goods to the address of buyer. In one of the cases, 

Page 102 of 108 
 
the accused tried to ship the antiquities through courier in the form of ‘Brass Hindu four handed lord 
Vishnu statue’ and ‘Vintage brass tobacco weighing scale’ before being apprehended. In other case, 
the accused was apprehended with the unknown antiquity in his possession. The accused was 
searching for a buyer for the antiquity for an amount of Rs. 5 crore. 
 
 
  

Page 103 of 108 
 
Annexure-VI 
Details of Subhash Kapoor case  
 
Subhash Kapoor, a US citizen and owner of New York based Art Gallery - Art of the Past was found to 
be the mastermind behind smuggling of a large number of Antiques from India.  
 An intelligence was passed on by DRI to its overseas officer in New York on 14.02.2007 
regarding smuggling of antiquities in a shipment that was declared to contain “Garden Tea Sets” 
in the shipping bill presented in India. The said shipment was exported by “ Palace Knit Exports, 
Ludhiana” to “Nimbus Import Export Inc., NY”.  
 The said intelligence was shared by the overseas officer in New York with the officers of US 
Customs and Border Protection (CBP). 
  The shipment was, however, declared to US Customs as cont aining antiquities (in addition to 
items like marble tables). The importer had declared these items as antiquities pertaining to the 
period 2nd Century to 19th Century and valued at USD 60,400, in the invoice dated 05.01.2007.  
 The shipment of seven wooden  crates was detained and later examined by US Customs in the 
presence of overseas officer at New York on 22.02.2007 and it was found to contain, inter alia, 
various idols/figurines (mostly of metals). The Indian exporter and CHA denied having exported 
the consignment. The telephone number given on one of the import documents in USA was 
found to belong to “Art of the Past Inc.” (website: www.artofpast.com), a company located in 
New York, dealing in Asian antiquities and owned by Mr. Subhash Kapoor.  
 The examined antiquities were seized by US CBP and they conducted follow up. 
Simultaneously, surveillance and searches were also carried out by DRI in India on various 
exporters around the country, suspected to have links with smuggling of antiques.  
 A cla im was lodged in New York with the US Customs & Border Protection (CBP) for 
restitution of the seized Indian antiquities in August 2007.  
  Investigations and Customs Enforcement (ICE) of the U.S.A searched various galleries and 
warehouses owned/controlled by Mr. Subash Kapoor in USA on 5th January 2012 and recovered 
more than 2000 antiquities, valued at more than Rs. 1000 Crore. Some of these were of Indian 
origin. It was further revealed that he had supplied a number of antiquities to various US Art 
Galleries/ Museums/Private collectors. In cooperation with US enforcement agencies, these were 
recovered from time to time.  

Page 104 of 108 
 
 In October 2011, Mr. Subhash Kapoor was arrested while traveling through Germany, on the 
basis of an INTERPOL Red Corner Notice issued by  India. He was subsequently extradited to 
India and Criminal Cases were filed in 2016, against him and his accomplices, in the Court of the 
Additional District Magistrate, Kumbakonam, Tamil Nadu.  
The US Department of Justice sought access to Subhash Kapoo r through a request under Mutual Legal 
Assistance Treaty dated 24.10.2016. In August 2019, a Criminal Complaint was filed by the US 
Authorities in the Criminal Court of the City of New York [OCR -022431- 19NY] against Subhash 
Kapoor and his accomplices. 
 
Restitution of antiquities involves identification/location of the piece; establishing that the piece is 
smuggled/stolen; and identification of the item being as Antique. New York based overseas officer of 
customs had been closely involved in all the above s teps for the items received back from US 
Authorities. He was the authorized signatory for Agreements for receipt of these items. DRI 
Headquarters had also played an important role in establishing that the impugned consignments were not 
legally exported from India. This had helped us press our case for restitution of the relevant pieces.  
 
  

Page 105 of 108 
 
Annexure-VII   
Legal/ Constitutional Position of Retrieval of Antiquities taken out of the Country prior to 
Independence   
Article 253 of the Constitution of India reads as under: 
“ Legislation for giving effect to international agreements.- 
 Notwithstanding anything in the foregoing provisions of this Chapter, Parliament has power 
to make any law for the whole or any part of the territory of India for implementing any 
treaty, agreement or convention with any other country or countries or any decision made at 
any international conference, association or other body” 
Section 166A of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 is as follows: 
“Letter of request competent authority for investigation in a country or place outside India. 
(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Code, if, in the course of an investigation into 
an offence, an application is made by the investigating officer or any officer superior in rank 
to the investigating officer that evidence may be available in a country or place outside India, 
any Criminal Court may issue a letter of request to a Court or an authority in that country or 
place competent to deal with such request to examine orally any person supposed to be 
acquainted with the facts and circumstances o f the case and to record his statement made in 
the course of such examination and also to require such person or any other person to 
produce any document or thing which may be in his possession pertaining to the case and to 
forward all the evidence so taken or collected or the authenticated copies thereof or the thing 
so collected to the Court issuing such letter. 
(2) The letter of request shall be transmitted in such manner as the Central Government may 
specify in this behalf. 
(3) Every statement recorded or document or thing received under sub - section (1) shall be 
deemed to be the evidence collected during the course of investigation under this Chapter. 

Page 106 of 108 
 
Annexure-VIII   
The UNESCO website lists a number of cases where ancient cultural property has been restituted:- 
S. 
No. 
Countries/ 
Foundations/ 
Institutions that 
have returned 
ancient 
treasures/antiquities 
Countries that 
have received 
ancient 
treasures/ 
antiquities 
Ancient treasures/antiquities returned 
1. Norway 
Bulgaria 
The Norwegian Culture Minister, Abid 
Raja, returned more than 600 artefacts to the 
competent authorities of eight countries: Bulgaria, 
Germany, Italy, Latvia, Slovakia, Spain, Ukraine 
and the Baltic States. 
Germany 
Italy 
Latvia 
Slovakia 
Spain 
Ukraine 
Baltic States 
2. France Nigeria 
Six statues dated from the Neolithic period and the 
11th-14th centuries and cultural property of the 
Nok civilization. 
3. Germany 
Iraq 
Thirteen artefacts including eight cylinder seals 
dating back some 5,000 years as well as several 
sculptures and a Sumerian clay cuneiform tablet 
on that dates from 2049 B.C. 
Peru A ritual "Tumi" knife which is approximately 800 
years old. 
Mexico 3,000-year-old archaeological pieces 
Canada 
Two valuable paintings of former Dutch masters 
were returned to the beneficiaries of a German 
Jewish art dealer exiled to Canada. 
4. 
The Römisch - 
Germanisches 
Zentralmuseum  
(RGZM), Germany 
Italy A funeral trousseau dating from the 5th 
millennium BC. 
5. 
The state of Baden-
Württemberg, 
Germany 
Greece 
Two objects from the Cycladic civilization - a 
marble figurine dating from 2700-2300 B.C. and a 
tray dating from 2700-2400 B.C. 

Page 107 of 108 
 
6. 
The Federal Office of 
Culture (FOC) 
Switzerland 
Italy 
A batch of 32 ancient cultural properties dating 
from the Pharaonic and Roman periods. A king's 
head wearing a crown, a fragmentary stele in the 
name of King Siptah representing the polished 
goddess of Thebes dating from the New Kingdom 
(ca. 1500 to 1000 BC), and two architectural 
fragments of a lintel depicting scenes of worship 
from the Roman period (ca. 753 BC to 476 AD). 
7. 
The Prussian Cultural 
Heritage Foundation 
(Stiftung Preußischer 
Kulturbesitz) 
Iraq 2600-year-old clay brick with an inscription by 
King Nebuchadnezzar of Babylon 
8. United States of 
America 
Italy Etruscan vessel and Ancient artefacts 
Lebanon Three marble statues 
Libya 3,000-year-oldcollection of pottery artefacts 
9. Republic of Korea Mongolia Eleven dinosaur fossils 
10. Germany, Italy and 
Switzerland Guatemala 
Guatemala successfully repatriated 18 pre-
Columbian archaeological objects, which were 
illegally exported from the country in the 60s and 
were located in Germany, Italy and Switzerland. 
11. The Netherlands Cyprus Saint Mark's mosaic 
12. The United Kingdom Greece An ancient marble artefact 
13. Kuwait Egypt An ancient rare coffin 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Page 108 of 108 
 
Annexure-IX   
In detections/identifications as a result of intelligence inputs by DRI, often this role of anchoring 
coordination is discharged by the concerned overseas officer at the behest of the Mission  as in the 
following incidents :- 
 In May 2021, an officer of the British High Commission, New Delhi informed the overseas 
officer of customs posted at High Commission of India, London about the possibility of 
repatriation of six artefacts which were stolen  from temples from different parts of India 
during colonial period and later were donated to Glasgow Museums. Curator of said 
Museums was contacted who shared archival research on the six artefacts, which clearly 
established the doubtful provenance of the artefacts. Through efforts of the overseas officer, 
Glasgow Museums returned the said artefacts to the Govt. of lndia through High Commission 
of lndia. Following approval of Archaeological Survey of lndia, a formal request was made to 
Glasgow Life / Glasgow Museums in January 2022 for repatriation of the six artefacts.  
 Meanwhile, information was gathered about another artefact (a 14 th century ceremonial snake 
talwar owned by 6 thNizam of Hyderabad), which also could be repatriated along with the 
other six a rtefacts. Subsequently, another formal request was sent to Glasgow Museums in 
March 2022 for repatriation of total seven artefacts. Archaeological Survey of India provided 
their consent to accept the artefacts on behalf of Govt. of India and appointed High  
Commission of India, London to act on behalf of them. There has been no precedence of 
formal repatriation of artefact from any British Museum to India before. A ceremony was 
organised in August 2022 at the Kelvingrove Art Gallery and Museum, Glasgow for h anding 
over of the seven artefacts to the High Commission of India, UK. A formal letter of transfer 
of ownership dated 19.08.2022 was signed at the ceremony by Ms. Bailie Annetter Christie 
of Glasgow City Council and the overseas officer on behalf of HCl, London. The physical 
transfer would be completed in due course.  
 In another similar case, in October 2021, the overseas officer at London gathered intelligence 
regarding the location of a stolen 10 th century goat-headed Yogini sculpture, possibly stolen 
from a temple in Lokhari, Uttar Pradesh in the 1980s. The said sculpture had briefly surfaced 
in the London art market in 1988 and had then gone missing. The said sculpture was 
restituted to the Indian High Commission at London in January 2022 and is in the process of 
being sent to Archaeological Survey of India. 
***** 

109 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINUTES 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

110 
 
CONFIDENTIAL 
MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED 
PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM 
& CULTURE (2022-23) 
II 
SECOND MEETING 
  
The Committee met at 3:00 P.M. on Tuesday, the 15 th November, 2022 in Committee 
Room-2, First Floor, Parliament House Annexe Extension, New Delhi. 
Members present: 
 
1. Shri  V. Vijayasai Reddy                   -                Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shrimati S. Phangnon Konyak 
3. Shri A. A. Rahim 
4. Dr. C.M. Ramesh 
5. Shri Vinay Dinu Tendulkar 
LOK SABHA 
6. Shri Anto Antony 
7. Shri Ram Margani Bharat  
8. Shri Rahul Kaswan 
9. Shri S. S. Palanimanickam 
10. Shri Sunil Kumar Pintu 
11. Shri Prince Raj 
12. Shri Tirath Singh Rawat 
13. Shri Dushyant Singh 
14. Shri Ramdas Chandrabhanji Tadas 
15. Shri Krupal Balaji Tumane 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Swarabji B., Director 
Shri Rajendra Prasad Shukla, Additional Director 
Shrimati Subha Chandrashekar, Deputy Secretary 
Shri Ranajit Chakraborty, Under Secretary 
          


111 
 
Witnesses: - 
Indian National Trust for Art and Cultural Heritage  
i. Major General (Retired) L. K. Gupta,  (AVSM), Chairman; 
ii. Dr. (Smt) C. T. Misra, Member Secretary; and 
iii. Shri Rakesh Mittal, Director (P&P) 
            At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee,  and informed 
that the previous Chairman, Shri T.G. Venkatesh had presen ted five Reports to the Hon’ble 
Chairman, Rajya Sabha on 15 th June, 2022, viz. (i) 323rd Report on Commission of Railway 
Safety, (ii) 324 th Report on Issues relating to Untraceable Monuments and Protection of 
Monuments in India, (iii) 325 th Report on issues relating to Road Sector, (iv) 326 th Report on 
Role of Indian Missions Globally for the Growth of Tourism in India, and (v) 327th Report on 
Connectivity and Tourist Terminal Facilities at Ports. 
2.         As the term of the previous Chairman of the Commi ttee ended on 21 st June, 2022, 
these Reports could not be presented to the Houses of Parliament earlier and are required to 
be presented in the upcoming Winter Session. Therefore, the Committee authorized Dr. C.M. 
Ramesh, M.P. and in his absence, Shri Vina y Dinu Tendulkar, M.P. to present the 
abovementioned reports in Rajya Sabha and Shri Dushyant Singh, M.P. and in his absence, 
Shri Ram Margani Bharat to lay the above -mentioned Reports on the Table of Lok Sabha in 
the first week of the upcoming Session of Parliament. 
3.      The Chairman then informed the Committee that the agenda of the meeting was to hear 
the Chairman, Indian National Trust for Art and Cultural Heritage (INTACH) on the subject 
‘Heritage Theft - The Illegal Trade in Indian Antiquities and the challenges of retrieving and 
safeguarding our tangible cultural heritage.’ 
4.      Thereafter, the Chairman welcomed the representatives of INTACH and asked them to 
put forth their views/suggestions on the existing mechanisms in place for monitoring an d 
safeguarding the antiquities, the efficacy of the existing legislations/ rules/ regulations to 
recover the lost/stolen artefacts, and modifications/amendments required for such rules/ 
regulations and the steps that are required to be taken by the Ministr y or its subordinate 
organizations to enable NGOs and civil society to play a bigger role in safeguarding our 
priceless antiquities for future generations.   
5.         The Chairman, INTACH informed the Committee that the organisation is funded 
through a c orpus fund, through which an income of 13 crores is generated annually. The 

112 
 
main functions of INTACH are (i) to spread   awareness of both tangible and intangible 
heritage amongst the Indian people through its Chapter Network, (ii) to pass on the message 
of preserving and protecting our heritage to school children through establishing Heritage 
Clubs in schools and (iii) to create awareness regarding preservation of numismatics 
(including bank notes, coins, medals, tokens, etc.) among villagers/tribals/local folk. The 
Committee was further informed that approximately 220 chapters have been created in the 
country with the help of volunteers and about 7,000 Heritage Clubs have been established in 
schools by INTACH, which also publishes two magazines, namely, ‘Vi rasat,’ and ‘Young 
INTACH’, the latter being published in eight regional languages. About 65,193 properties 
have been listed by INTACH across the country for documentation of architectural heritage, 
out of nearly 4 -5 million sites. The Chairman, INTACH dis closed that temples owned by 
private trusts and erstwhile zamindari estates, while rich in antiquities, are more theft prone 
being situated in less populated areas but private owners do not allow access which hampers 
the progress in listing of art objects in the private domain.  While informing the Committee 
that a lot of idols are found while digging/ploughing the land, the Chairman, INTACH 
narrated an incident in Gorakhpur, where INTACH had persuaded villagers to install such 
idols after conservation in t heir temples thus ensuring public participation in conservation of 
heritage.  The Chairman, INTACH also stressed the importance of preservation of 
numismatics, including coins, bank notes, medals, tokens etc, as tangible items of historical 
importance as such small items get less focus than massive sculptures and idols and are more 
liable to be melted in furnaces. He drew the attention of the Committee to the heavy tax of 
about 38 per cent levied on account of packing and insurance charges on items of our c ultural 
heritage, including coins, brought back from abroad through proper channels which may be 
reduced to 5% and the general  lack of laws/guidelines in India in this regard. He mentioned 
that in absence of penal provisions in the Antiquities and Art Treasures Act, 1972, heritage 
theft is covered under simple theft under IPC.    He urged that stringent penalizing provisions 
should be added to 'The Antiquities and Art Treasures Act, 1972' and that an Enforcement 
Agency should be established in every Sta te under this Act.  He also brought to the notice of 
the Committee the large number of art objects lying in police stations across the country as 
Case properties for many years, in neglected conditions. The Chairman, INTACH also 
pointed out that nearly 440 0 objects had vanished from the protected sites of ASI and State 
sites and the situation in the unprotected heritage sites was likely to grow much worse. The 
Chairman of the Committee remarked that Section 25 of the Antiquities Act had penal 
provisions, al beit insufficient,  but INTACH could give in writing their observations and 

113 
 
suggestions regarding penal provisions so that the Committee could make suitably 
incorporate them in its recommendations.  
6.     A Member enquired about the number of antiquities l ost before and after 'The 
Antiquities and Art Treasures Act, 1972' came into being,   the number of antiquities 
recovered and the steps taken by INTACH to recover antiquities lying outside the country 
and another Member on the subject of British era Heritag e Bridges like the Havelock Bridge 
now under the control of Railways, enquired whether such heritage monuments under the 
State Governments could be taken under ownership of INTACH or like organizations for 
their conservation. The Chairman, INTACH, stressed  that the function of INTACH which is 
a registered Society, was only to create awareness of our cultural heritage and develop 
conservation expertise with the small budget of 13 crores available to the organization. 
 Documentation of art objects is time -consuming and expensive and is the responsibility of 
National Mission on Monuments and Antiquities of the Government of India. Upon a query 
regarding INTACH’s work in preservation of old buildings, the Chairman replied that 
INTACH has a Charter for Conservati on, akin to the UNESCO Charter, which seeks to 
promote the Indian perspective in studies on Indian cultural heritage. T he Members also 
raised queries regarding safeguarding precious idols/ heritage through documentation, 
conserving forts, havelis and promo ting them as tourist places,   encouraging and training 
local folks to document their intangible heritage, etc. A Member enquired about the functions 
of INTACH in the North -Eastern region where tradition is carried forward orally and needs 
to be documented and preserved as each of the many tribes in the North -East, 16 in Nagaland 
alone, have their own rich culture, dialects and knowledge system and documenting is a huge 
challenge. The Chairman INTACH responded that the INTACH had very active Chapters in 
the North East trying to document the intangible cultural heritage of the region and were also 
working on the issue of huge theft of ayurvedic medicinal plants to prevent the loss of 
knowledge and wisdom of traditional plant medicine . INTACH had also set up a Heritage 
Academy to train local people and youth in listing and documentation of their natural 
heritage. A Member made a query about the frequency of interactions of INTACH with the 
Ministry of Culture and was informed that the Ministries of Culture, Envir onment, Housing, 
the ASI and the National Museum participate in the Governing Council meetings of the 
INTACH which are held twice a year. The witnesses responded to some of the queries raised 
by the Chairman and Members of the Committee. The Chairman directed INTACH to furnish 
written replies to queries/points/issues raised by him and the Members of the Committee in 
case the replies were not readily available. He also informed that a meeting on the same 

114 
 
subject will be held on 25th November, 2022  inter-alia to seek clarifications from the 
Secretary, Ministry of Culture.  
 (The witnesses then withdrew) 
7.       A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept. 
8.       The meeting adjourned at 4:37 P.M. 
  
New Delhi,                                                                                                               Swarabji B. 
15th November, 2022                                                                                                Director 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

115 
 
CONFIDENTIAL 
MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED 
PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM & 
CULTURE (2022–23) 
IV 
FOURTH MEETING 
The Committee met at 11:00 A.M. on Tuesday, the 25 th November, 2022 in the 
Committee Room-4, First Floor, Parliament House Annexe Extension, New Delhi. 
Members present: 
1. Shri  V. Vijayasai Reddy                   -                Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Mohammed Nadimul Haque 
3. Shrimati S. Phangnon Konyak 
4. Shrimati Rajani Ashokrao Patil 
5. Shri A. A. Rahim 
6. Dr. C.M. Ramesh 
7. Shri Vinay Dinu Tendulkar 
LOK SABHA 
8. Shri Tapir Gao 
9. Shri Rahul Kaswan 
10. Shri Sunil Baburao Mendhe 
11. Shri Chhedi Paswan 
12. Shri Sunil Kumar Pintu 
13. Shri Prince Raj 
14. Shri Tirath Singh Rawat 
15. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
16. Shri Dushyant Singh 
17. Shri Manoj Kumar Tiwari 
  
SECRETARIAT 
Shri M.C. Tiwari, Joint Secretary 
Shri Swarabji B., Director 
Shri Rajendra Prasad Shukla, Additional Director 
Shrimati Subha Chandrashekar, Deputy Secretary 
Shri Ranajit Chakraborty, Under Secretary 
  
WITNESSES 
  
Ministry of Culture 


116 
 
1.    Shri Govind Mohan, Secretary; 
2.    Ms. V. Vidyavathi, Director General, Archaeological Survey of India; 
3.   Ms. Lily Pandeya, Joint Secretary; 
4.   Shri Alok Tripathi, Additional Director General, Archaeological Survey of India; 
5.   Shri Arvind Kumar, Director; 
6.   Shri A.K. Tiwari, Director, Archaeological Survey of India; 
7.   Shri K.K.S. Deori, Director, National Museum; and 
8.   Shri Javed Iqbal, Superintendent, National Museum. 
  
2. At the outset, the Chairman extended a warm welcome to the Members of the 
Committee.  He informed them of the agenda for the meeting i.e. (i) to consider and adopt the 
five draft Reports on Action Taken by the government on the 
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee contained in its various Reports; and (ii ) 
to hear the Secretary, Ministry of Culture and Director General, Archaeological Survey of 
India (ASI) and Head, Central Antiquity Collection, on the subject 'Heritage Theft - The 
Illegal Trade in Indian Antiquities and challenges of retrieving and safeguarding our Tangible 
Cultural Heritage.' The Chairman also informed the Committee that Five Reports which had 
earlier been presented to the Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha, in the inter -session period, 
would also be presented to the Parliament in the first week of the Winter Session. 
 
3. The Committee, thereafter, took up the first agenda of the meeting i.e. consideration 
of the five draft Action Taken Reports on the following Reports of the Committee: 
(i) 310th  Report on Functioning of Central Libraries in the Country; 
(ii) 312th Report on Review of Central Road and Infrastructure Fund (CRIF) Works; 
(iii) 315th Report on Demands for Grants (2022-23) of Ministry of Culture; 
(iv) 320th Report on Development of Tourism Infrastructure in the country; and 
(v) 321st Report on Issues related to Safety in Civil Aviation Sector; 
  
4. The Committee considered the said draft Reports and after a brief discussion, adopted 
all the five draft Action Taken Reports and authorized the Chairman to carry out minor 
modifications of typographical and factual errors.  
  
5. The Committee also authori zed Smt. S. Phangnon Konyak, M.P. and in her absence, 
Shri Mohammed Nadimul Haque, M.P., to present the Reports in Rajya Sabha on 13 th 
December, 2022 and Shri Tapir Gao, M.P. and in his absence, Shri Chhedi Paswan, M.P. to 
lay the Reports on the Table of L ok Sabha on the same date. The Committee further decided 

117 
 
that the five Reports of the Committee presented by the previous Chairman, Shri T.G. 
Venkatesh to the Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha on 15 th June, 2022, viz. (i) 323rd Report on 
Commission of Railway Safety, (ii) 324 th Report on Issues relating to Untraceable 
Monuments and Protection of Monuments in India, (iii) 325 th Report on issues relating to 
Road Sector, (iv) 326 th Report on Role of Indian Missions Globally for the Growth of 
Tourism in India, and (v) 327 th Report on Connectivity and Tourist Terminal Facilities at 
Ports, would be presented in Rajya Sabha/ laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 8 th December, 
2022 and authorized Dr C.M. Ramesh, M.P. and in his absence, Shri Vinay Dinu Tendulkar, 
M.P. to pr esent the Reports to Rajya Sabha and Shri Dushyant Singh, M.P. and in his 
absence, Shri Ram Margani Bharat, M.P. to lay the Reports on the Table of Lok Sabha on 
that day. 
  
6. Thereafter, the Chairman welcomed the Secretary, Ministry of Culture, Director 
General, Archaeological Survey of India (ASI) and other officials of the Ministry and ASI to 
the meeting.  The Chairman queried from the Ministry about the number of incidents of 
theft/loss of ancient antiquities/ sculptures/ artefacts which have occurred in  the last decade, 
the mechanism in place to safeguard the antiquities and the lacuna existing in the same. He 
asked the Ministry to brief the Committee about the coordination mechanisms employed by 
the Ministry with the Ministries of Home Affairs and Exter nal Affairs, and the Directorate of 
Revenue Intelligence in recovery of the stolen artefacts and the efficacy of the existing 
legislations/ rules/ regulations and mechanisms to recover the lost and retrieved art and 
antiquities. He also asked the Ministry to apprise the Committee of the reasons for non -
maintenance of an integrated database for stolen antiquities coming under purview of 
Central/State Governments and private organisations. 
  
7. Thereafter, the Chairman asked the DG, ASI, Head, Central Antiqui ty Collection and 
DG, National Museum, New Delhi, to inform the Committee about the existing mechanisms 
regarding physical verification of the artefacts lying in the Museums/Collections under their 
purview and whether the security personnel and arrangement s in place to ensure the safety of 
the artefacts are sufficient as per the requirements of such museums. 
  
8. Referring to the Comptroller and Auditor General of India (CAG)’s   2022 ‘Report on 
the Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of Monuments and 
Antiquities’which was a Follow Up Report on its 2013 Report on the same subject and which 

118 
 
contained concerning observations on persisting issues such as acute shortage of staff, lack of 
digitization and accession of artefacts, their display, verification, conservation, storage and 
security, etc. the Chairman queried about the protracted delay in resolutio n of issues first 
raised by the CAG nine years before in 2013.  
 
9. The Chairman also queried about the status of the proposed amendment to the 
Antiquities and Art Treasures Act, 1972, reasons for slow progress in registering only 16 lakh 
out of 58 lakh od d-antiquities by the NMMA, efficacy of the Act in meeting modern 
standards, reasons for rejection of CSR funding by ASI, the budget allocated to it and 
requirements and shortfalls arising in carrying out its mandated activities, the number of ASI 
sites in India that require repairing and maintenance and the reasons for delays thereof, and, 
reasons for negative image of ASI among the general public. 
  
10. The Secretary, M/o Culture informed the Committee that the mandate of the Ministry 
is to preserve, prote ct and disseminate Indian culture within and outside the country and the 
mandate of its attached subordinate office, the ASI, is to preserve the ancient monuments of 
India and showcase them as tourist sites. The Secretary acknowledged that the subject of 
heritage theft also came under the ASI which implements the Antiquities and Art Treasures 
Act (AAT) 1972 to regulate the internal trade in antiquities/art treasures and prevent 
smuggling/ export/ fraudulent dealing of antiquities and art treasures. The Comm ittee was 
also informed about the compulsory acquisition of antiquities under the AAT Act and 
mandatory requirement of registration of certain classes of antiquities after notification by the 
government. The ASI, however, admitted that compulsory acquisiti on of antiquities had 
never been done and that the rate of registration, at about Rs 3 to 5 lakhs, was very low due to 
concern among citizens about the consequences of registration. However, ASI was spreading 
awareness about the importance of registration,  and ways of making the registration process 
simpler were being explored. 
  
11. The Committee was informed that legislation, security and retrieval were the 
processes through which Government tries to prevent heritage theft and illegal trade of Indian 
antiquities. Ancient Monuments & Archaeological Sites & Remains (AMASR) Act, 1958 
was modified to authorize the government to issue a notice prohibiting the removal or 
transportation of antiquities from places of their specific locations and punish violators with a 
jail term. Also, ASI communicates/ consults with other nations to bring ba ck smuggled 

119 
 
Indian antiquities from foreign countries under the 1970 United Nations Convention, which 
prohibits and prevents the illicit import, export and transfer of ownership of cultural property 
and which was ratified by India in 1972. ASI apprised the  Committee of the challenges faced 
by it in retrieval and safeguarding Indian tangible/cultural heritage, art and antiquities, such 
as, lack of coordination on part of State Govts and law -enforcement agencies, lack of 
awareness about antiquity documentation, lack of documented database of Indian antiquities, 
distrust and fear among people in case of mandatory antiquity registration, need for a more 
convenient/reliable antiquity registration system, etc.. 
  
12. The ASI informed the Committee that cognizant o f the need to document all antiques 
in the country, including those with private persons/institutions, the Government had, in 
2007, started a National Mission for Monuments and Antiquities. Out of an estimated 54 lakh 
antiquities in the country, this Mission had so far documented 16.7 lakh antiquities, including 
3.52 lakh antiquities which are registered antiquities. The ASI had also initiated 
documentation of its 52 site museums which contain all the excavated material. This  process 
is expected to be completed by the end of 2023. 
  
13.       The Committee was informed that keeping antiquities secure and tracking them in 
case of theft is much easier in monuments under Central Government as round the clock 
security, watch & ward staff, state police and Centr al Industrial Security Force (CISF) have 
been deployed in the monuments/museums under preventive measures. In such cases, FIR is 
lodged immediately and a “Look Out” Notice is issued through the CBI and all the Custom 
exit channels are alerted. In the case of State protected monuments, FIR is generally lodged 
but the relevant information does  not come to the ASI. Tracing and retrieval of antiquities 
which are unprotected or under private ownership is the most challenging as in case of theft, 
they are mostly reported as general theft and the information generally is neither reported to 
the State Government or the ASI. Also, the ASI has interactions with and conducts training 
programmes for various investigative agencies including CBI and customs authorities an d 
from time to time to sensitize their employees about heritage loss.  ASI officials are also 
deputed from time to time to conduct joint or surprise checks to curb fraudulent dealing of 
antiquities, check stocks of different dealers etc. Besides, in case o f suspicious consignments 
in the major customs channels of Delhi, Mumbai, Kolkata, Jodhpur and Thiruvananthapuram, 
Archaeological officers are deputed to examine such objects along with Customs Officials. 
These efforts have resulted in reduction in number of thefts and higher rate of  recovery of 

120 
 
stolen antiquities. Once the objects are held, they become “Case Property” and kept in police 
custody till the case is settled, upon which they are returned to the owner and if the owner is 
not known, they are confi scated by ASI and then generally stored in the Central Antiquity 
Collection, Purana Qila.   
  
14.       The Committee was informed that 229 antiquities have been repatriated from abroad 
between the years 2014 to 2022 as compared to only 13 from 1976 upto 2 014. The process of 
retrieval involves the MEA which plays a key role in negotiations with the foreign 
authorities. However, foreign museums are reluctant to return Indian antiquities despite 
availability of documents/evidence and often took recourse to th eir domestic laws which 
prohibit the export of any antiquity. Thus, use of international fora was necessary for 
consensus among nations for the retrieval of stolen heritage.  It was informed that the 
restitution of cultural property was one of the importan t items on the agenda of the Ministry 
of Culture for the upcoming G20 summit to be presided over by India. ASI was also working 
on the possibility of foreign museums at least acknowledging the provenance of Indian 
antiquities in their possession, even if the objects are not returned to India. 
  
15.       The Committee was informed about the thriving business of selling fake antiques 
which are difficult to identify without detailed scientific analysis. The Ministry also   apprised 
the Committee of its antiqui ty digitization software - ‘JATAN’ through which every item of 
the five National Museums are proposed to be digitized.  On the query regarding preservation 
of oral/intangible heritage of North -Eastern India,  Ministry informed that as an active 
member of th e UNESCO 2003 Convention, it has included 14 inscriptions of intangible 
cultural heritage and also has 165 current research items. Besides, the Sangeet Natak 
Akademi, an autonomous body under the Ministry also works towards preserving and 
promoting the rich Indian intangible cultural heritage. 
  
16.       Regarding a Member’s queries on doing base valuation for retrieved antiquities and 
the registered antiquities of the country to enable   more awareness  of the significance of our 
historical assets as our n ational wealth, and, statutory provisions for self -declaration by the 
erstwhile royal families and big business houses of antiquities they own so that the antiquities 
are not lost between generations,  the ASI informed the Committee that it will take neces sary 
steps to do base valuation of retrieved antiquities. The Committee was informed that the 
royal families are not keen on self -declaring their assets with the govt.  Chairman then 

121 
 
enquired whether Government can be given a preemptive right if a family w anted to sell an 
antiquity.   Regarding the query about whether there was any intelligence system to track 
auction at large auction houses to check on the sale of Indian antiquities, and country wise 
lists of disputed antiquities, the   ASI informed that th ere is no formal system but acquiesced 
to the suggestion of the Member that there should be an intelligence system tracking the 
interface to get prior intimation of the auctions. There was no country wise list of stolen 
antiquities, but the ASI was also at tempting to document the known cases of stolen 
antiquities at least among the G20 nations.  
 
17.       Making an observation on the slow progress of documentation of antiquities, the 
Chairman wanted to know whether the registration of antiquities which are  privately owned 
can be made mandatory and whether amendments were needed to be brought in the AAT 
Act, 1972 to meet the current situation. The Director -General, ASI admitted that registration 
process should be made simpler and unexacting before making it mandatory. It was felt that 
the statutory provisions of the AAT Act, 1972 were adequate but the implementation by the 
State Governments is inadequate. 
  
18.       Regarding the Chairman’s query on bringing back Kohinoor Diamond, the Ministry 
informed the Committee that Kohinoor was taken long before the AAT Act, 1972 came into 
effect, and was therefore not covered under the current legal framework of India. The matter 
can be pursued only through bilateral negotiations by the Ministry of External Affairs. AS I 
and Ministry confirmed that the AAT Act had only prospective effect to which the Chairman 
suggested exploring the possibilities of retrospective effect in this regard. 
  
19.       A Member also expressed concern on the dilapidated conditions of the India n 
Museum, Kolkata, the first Museum in India and enquired about the technologies used in 
digitization, the security arrangements in place, and the storage and preservation of artifacts, 
the Ministry apprised the Committee that the Museum is re -curating nine galleries and there 
is a plan of complete overhaul of the museum.   Regarding the dilapidated condition of the 
Bibi ka Makbara, Aurangabad, Maharashtra, ASI informed that due to the ancient structure 
and resource crunch, it is impossible to restore it fully. 
  
20.   Members also  raised queries on issues such as protection and preservation of 
archaeological sites located in the Tiger Reserves in coordination with National Tiger 

122 
 
Conservation Authority (NTCA), possibility of having a barter exchange of antiq uities with 
countries asking for their antiquities from India, status of fossils in antiquities, lack of 
CCTV/surveillance system and proper lighting around the Museums/archaeological sites, 
recovery of the remaining 119 antiquities out of the 210 stolen, status of the Nobel Prize 
Medal of Guru Rabindranath Tagore stolen from the VisvaBharati University, rules and 
procedure of selling private antiquity collection and buried treasure troves,  technologies used 
in digitization as well as digital archival of documented records, provision for basic amenities 
and eateries near forts for tourists, recruitment of staff in ASI offices to tackle manpower 
shortage, amenities, lighting and information centre at Anchuthengu Fort 
Thiruvananthapuram, repair work at Kannur Fort under ASI to protect the dilapidated 
monument, filling of vacancies in Thrissur Circle office, dismal state of Gagron Fort under 
State Archaeology in Jhalawar, fake antique collections, employing online auction tracking 
system to prevent online smuggling of antiquities,  etc. 
  
21.       The Chairman directed that written replies to the points which had not been answered 
may be sent within a week. 
 
(The witnesses then withdrew) 
 
(The Committee re–assembled after lunch break) 
*1 
*       *      *      * 
*       *      *       *        * 
 
 
New Delhi,       Swarabji B. 
25th November, 2022     Director 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                           
1 Relates to other matters 

123 
 
CONFIDENTIAL 
MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED 
PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM & 
CULTURE (2022-23) 
VI 
SIXTH MEETING 
  
The Committee met at  3:00 P.M.  on Thursday, the 22nd December, 2022 in 
Committee Room A, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe Building, New Delhi. 
  
Members present: 
1. Shri V. Vijayasai Reddy             -             Chairman  
 Rajya Sabha 
2. Shri Mohammed Nadimul Haque 
3. Shrimati S. Phangnon Konyak 
4. Shri Jugalsinh Lokhandwala 
5. Shri Manas Ranjan Mangaraj 
6. Shrimati Rajani Ashokrao Patil 
7. Shri A. A. Rahim 
8. Dr. C. M. Ramesh 
9. Shri Vinay Dinu Tendulkar 
  
Lok Sabha 
10.  Shri Anto Antony 
11.  Shri Tapir Gao 
12.  Shri Sunil Baburao Mendhe 
13.  Shri K. Muraleedharan 
14.  Shri S. S. Palanimanickam 
15.  Shri Kamlesh Paswan 
16.  Shri Sunil Kumar Pintu 
17.  Shri Prince Raj 
18.  Shri Tirath Singh Rawat 
19.  Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
20.  Shri Dushyant Singh 
21.  Shri Rajbahadur Singh 
22.  Shri Ramdas Chandrabhanji Tadas 
23.  Shri Manoj Kumar Tiwari 
24.  Shri Krupal Balaji Tumane 
25. Shri Dinesh Lal Yadav "Nirahua" 
  
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Arun Sharma, Joint Secretary  
Shri Swarabji B., Director 
Shrimati Monica Baa, Additional Director  
Shrimati Subha Chandrashekar, Deputy Secretary  
Shri Ranajit Chakraborty, Under Secretary 


124 
 
WITNESSES 
  
Enforcement Directorate (ED) 
1. Shri Sanjay Kumar Mishra Director 
2. Shri Rahul Navin Special Director (HQ) 
3. Shri Yogesh Sharma Additional Director (HQ) 
  
Central Board of Indirect Taxes and Customs (CBIC)  
1. Shri Sanjay Kumar Aggarwal Special Secretary & Member 
2. Shri Harish Kumar Vashistha Commissioner (Investigation - Customs)  
  
Directorate of Revenue Intelligence (DRI) 
1. Shri Mohan Kumar Singh Director General 
2. Shri Abhishek Chandra Gupta Additional Director  
                         
2.         At the outset, the Chairman extended a warm welcome to the Members of the 
Committee.  He informed them of the agenda for the meeting i.e. (i) to consider and adopt the 
draft Reports on Action Taken by the Government on t he Recommendations/Observations of 
the Committee contained in its 317 th and 318th Reports; and (ii) to hear the representatives of 
Central Board of Indirect Taxes & Customs (CBIC); Director General, Directorate of 
Revenue Intelligence (DRI); and Director o f Enforcement, Enforcement Directorate (ED) on 
the subject ‘Heritage Theft – The Illegal Trade in Indian Antiquities and the challenges of 
retrieving and safeguarding our Tangible Cultural Heritage’. 
3.         The Committee, thereafter, took up the first agenda of the meeting i.e., consideration 
of the two draft Action Taken Reports on the following Reports of the Committee: 
(i) 317th Report on Demands for Grants (2022 -23) of Ministry of Road Transport and 
Highways; and 
(ii) 318th Report on Demands for Grants (2022-23) of Ministry of Tourism.  
4.         The Committee considered the said draft Reports and after a brief discussion, adopted 
both the draft Action Taken Reports and authorized the Chairman to carry out minor 
modifications of typographical and factual errors.   
5.         The Committee also authorized Shri Jugalsinh Lokhandwala, M.P. and in his absence, 
Shri Mohammed Nadimul Haque, M.P., to present the abovementioned Reports in Rajya 

125 
 
Sabha on 23 rd December, 2022 and Shri Prince Raj, M.P. and in his absence, Shri Ramdas 
Chandrabhanji Tadas, M.P. to lay the Reports on the Table of Lok Sabha on the same date. 
6.         Thereafter, the Chairman welcomed the Director, Enforcement Directorate (ED);  
Special Secretary & Member, the Central Board of Indirect Taxes and Customs (CBIC); 
Director General, Directorate of Revenue Intelligence (DRI); and other senior officials of the 
agencies to the meeting. He enquired from the agencies details of the role played by them in 
prevention of smuggling, and retrieving and safeguarding of antiquities. He so ught to know 
their views on the existing legislation/Acts/Rules to curb theft and smuggling of antiquities 
and the changes needed to be incorporated into the existing laws. He asked CBIC and DRI to 
share their views on the efficacy of the existing customs export procedures in tracking and 
prevention of smuggling of antiquities in the country and the loopholes therein. He further 
sought to know about the steps taken to ensure better coordination amongst CBIC, DRI, ED, 
Ministry of Culture, Archaeological Surv ey of India (ASI), State Police agencies and various 
other State Government law enforcing agencies to curb the theft and smuggling of antiquities 
at the State level itself. 
7.         Director, Enforcement Directorate informed the Committee that the smuggl ing of art 
and antiquities is an offence under the Antiquities and Art Treasures (AAT) Act and under 
various provisions of the IPC. He apprised the Committee that ED has two Acts – the 
Prevention of Money Laundering Act (PMLA) and the Foreign Exchange Mana gement Act 
(FEMA). He stated that the ED registers a case under the PMLA as soon as there is an FIR 
with regard to smuggling of antiquities and there is predicate offence.   He informed that the 
focus of ED is to identify the proceeds of crime and that any person who has dealt with the 
proceeds of crime is dealt with under the provisions of the PMLA. He apprised the 
Committee about the various powers of ED under the PMLA, to seize the proceeds, 
investigate the accused, file a chargesheet upon completion of t he investigation, request the 
competent court to issue letter of request to other countries for obtaining information, for 
collecting evidence from other countries, to request the country concerned to freeze, seize, 
confiscate, and repatriate the assets, a nd for extradition of the accused if they have left the 
country after committing an offence under the PMLA. He further informed that under FEMA, 
ED can levy penalty and, in certain circumstances, attach the proceeds of crime in case 
somebody has parked mon ey which is generated from smuggling of antiquities, outside the 
country. 

126 
 
8.         Director, ED apprised the Committee that ED is investigating a couple of cases under 
the PMLA wherein the amount involved in a particular case pertaining to Tamil Nadu is 
nearly Rs. 800 crores, and that though the middleman in that case has been examined by ED, 
it could not arrest the accused because proceedings cannot be initiated under PMLA against a 
person extradited from a country by an agency not involved in the extrad ition proceedings 
unless and until the competent court in that country permits the same. He stated that 
nowadays both the agencies like CBI and ED jointly go for extradition proceedings to avoid 
facing the problems faced in this case. He informed the Commi ttee that under PMLA, all the 
categories of people involved in the cases of theft and smuggling of antiquity can be 
prosecuted – the person or gang involved in stealing of antiquities, the person involved in 
their sale, the person involved in their smuggli ng, the main kingpin who mostly resides 
outside the country and the person who purchases it. Briefing the Committee about the 
methodology for inter-agency coordination, he informed the Committee that the Customs and 
DRI file a prosecution complaint under S ection 208 of Criminal Procedure Code, on receipt 
of which, ED registers the case under the PMLA. He further stated that the Central Economic 
Intelligence Bureau (CEIB), a Central agency, coordinates among all the agencies. He further 
elaborated that under the provisions of PMLA, ED has sufficient power for the coordination 
and dissemination of information, for example, to the Law Enforcement Agency concerned, 
who is duty-bound to register the case. 
9.         Special Secretary & Member, CBIC informed the C ommittee that CBIC’s role as 
regards antiquities starts when the antiquities are being exported out of India. He stated that 
given a large number of passengers travelling out of India every year and the huge volume of 
trade from India, Customs authorities cannot check each consignment and/ or passenger as it 
would be against ‘Ease of Doing Business’ norms and the larger policy of facilitation of 
cargo exports. He stated that in case of passengers, the main check exercise is from the 
security perspective, with a minimal check of check -in baggage of passengers. He added that 
CBIC uses technological tools by way of advance passenger information system, applies a 
risk-based approach and identifies passengers who may be suspicious for a thorough 
checking. With re gard to cargo, he stated that CBIC employs risk -based management 
approach, which uses artificial intelligence machine -learning tools for identification of cargo 
which may be considered as risky for thorough examination. He informed that less than 10 
percent cargo is subjected to examination at the time of export and that there is possibility of 
concealing items given such large flow of cargo from the country. He stated that on receipt of 
intimation from State police/ ASI or any other authority regarding any  stolen antique, an alert 

127 
 
circular is issued to all customs formations to keep a watch. With regard to coordination with 
other agencies, he informed of forums like CEIB at the Central level and Regional Economic 
Intelligence Committees (REICs) at the State  level. He apprised the Committee about a case 
where Customs, using its channels abroad, informed the U.S. Customs administration about a 
consignment that went out of India, based on which the United States (U.S.) Customs and 
Border Protection agency inter cepted the consignment when it reached U.S. on basis of the 
information passed on by the DRI. 
10.       Special Secretary & Member, CBIC further informed the Committee that AAT 
provides for application of the Customs Act in relation to all antiquities and art treasures, 
allowing CBIC to seize such consignments at the time of export and that as per AAT, the 
determination of whether a suspected item is antique or not is done by a competent officer of 
ASI. He stated that the restitution of stolen antiquities c an be ensured only if the theft has 
already been reported in INTERPOL and it is duly registered. He briefed the Committee 
about two cases of antiquity theft that were detected/ prevented by DRI in the last five years.  
11.       Director General, Directora te of Revenue Intelligence apprised the Committee that 
DRI draws powers from the Customs Act and deals with anti -smuggling work, drug 
trafficking cases and customs duty evasion cases. He informed that the penalty prescribed 
under the Customs Act is three t imes the value of the goods and there is a provision for 
imprisonment of six months to three years, and up to seven years of imprisonment in case of 
repeat offences. He stated that the penal provisions take care of the deterrent effect for such 
crimes. He informed the Committee that DRI does passenger profiling in case of passenger 
movement and employs the techniques of getting the scanning inputs from the security 
agencies at the airports. He added that DRI applies risk parameters to the export 
consignments in the containers and has procedures of collection of intelligence to detect cases 
of smuggling. He stated that the wide definition of antiquities in the AAT Act poses a 
practical problem as the official who has intercepted an item cannot ascertain wheth er the 
item is antique or not. He further added that DRI coordinates with all other intelligence 
agencies and sources available within India and outside and has overseas officers posted in 
the Missions abroad, and these Missions, with the help of the Minis try of External Affairs, 
have been bringing the antiquities which had been seized abroad back to the country. 
12.       Members raised various queries regarding steps taken to curb smuggling of items 
across Bihar -Nepal border, possible measures for profili ng/identification of new persons 
involved in smuggling of antiquities based on risk analysis, restitution of seized antiquities to 

128 
 
respective temples or museums, tracking of illegally exported Indian antiquities being 
auctioned by auction houses, using art ificial intelligence and robotic technology for better 
checking of cargos to curb smuggling of antiquities, valuation of antiquities, list of stolen 
antiquities that have went out of India, trafficking of drugs through Gujarat and Maharashtra 
borders, details of antiquities missing from 12 missing monuments in Delhi, low conviction 
rate under PMLA, inadequacy of manpower available with CBIC at Kochi airport, tackling 
the issue of display of fake antiquities in private galleries and museums, number of Indian  
antiquities brought back to India out of the 2000 antiquities seized by the Investigations and 
Customs Enforcement (ICE) of the U.S.A, feasibility of a barter system to exchange 
antiquities belonging to other nations and compulsory installation of CCTV ca meras at 
archaeological sites and temples, etc. 
13.       On the query raised by one of the Members regarding low conviction rate under 
PMLA, Director, ED replied that their conviction rate is 95.2%. He added that 1,100 cases 
are on trial but in a large nu mber of cases the prosecution is pending because the police has 
not filed a chargesheet. He further informed the Committee that ED has attached the proceeds 
of crimes of Rs. 1,05,000 crores out of which, in four cases, assets of Rs. 15,000 crores have 
been returned to the banks. He apprised the Committee about the problem faced in valuation 
of antiques as there is no standard method of valuation of antiques in the economic sense and 
that ASI follows its own methodology of valuation of antiques and paintings . Citing his 
experience of valuation of antiques as an erstwhile Member of Tirumala Tirupati 
Devasthanam, the Chairman stressed upon the need for a methodology for valuation of 
antiquities by the appropriate agencies which would be useful in case some untoward incident 
happens.  
14.       Special Secretary & Member, CBIC briefed the Committee about the process of 
checks performed by CBIC on containers to be exported. He stated that Customs allowed 
self-sealing of containers in their premises, so the exporter seals the goods in a container with 
an electronic seal and Customs just checks the integrity of the seal,  thus more than 90 
percent of such containers are exported without examination by Customs. Based on the Risk 
Management System, CBIC examines some co ntainers, which strikes a balance between 
enforcement and facilitation. Responding to some of the issues raised by the Member, he 
shared that Customs is aware of the challenges of the Indo -Nepal border and has a number of 
land Customs stations for the bord er. He also informed the Committee about the repatriation 
of seven artefacts from Glasgow Museum, United Kingdom (UK) and a stolen 10 th century 

129 
 
Goat-headed Yogini’s sculpture to the High Commission of India, UK through the efforts of 
overseas Customs Officers of India. He further stated that the recruitment of  Group ‘B’ level 
non-gazetted officials  is presently done through Staff Selection Commission which takes a 
cycle of two to three years and that the  issue of lack of manpower can be tackled if the time 
period for recruitment can be shortened. 
15.       The Chairman directed that written replies to the points which had not been answered 
may be sent within a week. 
 (The witnesses then withdrew) 
16.     The Committee further decided to undertake a Study Vis it to Thiruvananthapuram, 
Bekal and Mangaluru for holding meetings and visits from 16th January to 20th January, 2023, 
for detailed examination of various subjects  viz., Progress and Implementation of PM Gati 
Shakti National Master Plan for Multi -modal Connectivity; Development of Greenfield and 
Brownfield Airports and Issues Pertaining to Civil Enclaves in Defence Airports, with 
reference to airports in Kerala and Karnataka; Heritage Theft – The Illegal Trade in Indian 
Antiquities and the Challenges of Retrieving and Safeguarding Our Tangible Cultural 
Heritage; Examination of Draft National Tourism Policy  and ‘Functioning of Major Ports in 
the Country’ with reference to the status of New Mangalore Port Authority.   The Committee 
also decided that it may i nteract with various stakeholders and representatives of the State 
Governments of Kerala and Karnataka on these subjects. The Committee authorized the 
Chairman of the Committee to seek necessary approvals from the Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya 
Sabha for the purpose. 
17.    A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept. 
18.     The meeting adjourned at 4:47 PM. 
  
New Delhi,                                                                                                        Swarabji B. 
22nd December, 2022                                                                                            Director 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 


130 
 
CONFIDENTIAL 
MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED 
PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM & 
CULTURE (2022-23) 
VII 
SEVENTH MEETING 
  
 The    Committee    met    at    3:00    P.M.    on    Thursday,   the    5th January, 2023 
in Main Committee Room, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
  
Members present: 
1. Shri V. Vijayasai Reddy             -             Chairman   
RAJYA SABHA  
2. Shri Manas Ranjan Mangaraj 
3.  Shrimati Rajani Ashokrao Patil 
4. Shri Vinay Dinu Tendulkar 
  
LOK SABHA 
5. Shri Rahul Kaswan 
6. Shri K. Muraleedharan 
7. Shri S. S. Palanimanickam 
8. Shri Chhedi Paswan 
9. Shri Kamlesh Paswan 
10. Shri Prince Raj 
11. Shri Tirath Singh Rawat 
12. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
13. Shri Ramdas Chandrabhanji Tadas 
14. Shri Manoj Kumar Tiwari 
15. Shri Krupal Balaji Tumane 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Sumant Narain, Joint Secretary & Financial Advisor 
Shri Swarabji B., Director 
Shrimati Subha Chandrashekar, Deputy Secretary  
Shri Ranajit Chakraborty, Under Secretary  
  
 
Witnesses  
Department of Legal Affairs (Ministry of Law and Justice) 
Shri Niten Chandra, Secretary 
     (Complete list of witnesses is attached as Annexure)  
(After the witnesses of Department of Legal Affairs took their seats) 
2. The Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee and the witnesses who were 
present. The Chairman informed that the purpose of today’s meeting is to hear the views of 
Department of Legal Affairs, Ministry of Law and Justice on the subject ‘ Development of 


131 
 
Greenfield and Brownfield Airports and Issues Pertaining to Civil Enclaves in  Defence 
Airports’. He desired the views of the Secretary, D/o Legal Affairs on the following issues:-  
 whether the development of Airports, falling under Entry 29 in the Union List of the 
Constitution, is solely under the purview of the Central Government  and if so, the 
constitutional legality of the provisions at para 13(a)(iii) of the National Civil Aviation 
Policy, 2016 which requires land to be provided free of cost and free from all 
encumbrances by State Government without treating it as equity. 
 whether the M/o Civil Aviation’s 2008 Guidelines for setting up of Greenfield Airports, 
which have contradictory provisions regarding land acquisition, have been completely 
superseded by the National Civil Aviation Policy, 2016. 
 whether the Central Government has the power to ask the State Government to give land 
free of cost, free from encumbrances for a project that the Central Government would like 
to execute. 
3. The Secretary, D epartment of  Legal Affairs, Ministry of Law and Justice informed 
that:-  
 as per the Allocation of Business rule , the role of Department of Legal Affairs, Ministry 
of Law and Justice is restricted to interpretation of law. 
 development of airports falls in the exclusive  and sole  jurisdiction of the Central 
Government, being a part of the Item No.29 of the Union List as per the Seventh 
Schedule of the Indian Constitution. 
 the National Civil Aviation Policy, 2016 is intra-vires of the Constitution. 
 the National Civil Aviation Polic y (NCAP), 2016 clearly states that ‘the existing sub -
sectoral policies, if any, will automatically stand amended and modified to the extent of 
provisions contained in this National Civil Aviation Policy, 2016 with effect from the date 
of approval of this Policy’. 
 it is within the scope of the Parliament/Ministry  to decide upon a provision in the A ct on 
a subject which is within the purview of the Union List. 
4. A Member raised the issue of AAI having the responsibility of providing the land 
through the Guidelines issued in 2008 which were re -published in December, 2016 , thus 
contradicting the National Civil Aviation Policy, 2016. The Secretary, Dep artment of Legal 
Affairs submitted that these are executive instructions which the Ministry of Civil Aviation 
has made, which is within the mandate of the concerned Ministry. 
5. The Committee desired to hear both the Ministry of Civil Aviation and the 
Department of Legal Affairs together, in its next meeting , to seek further clarifications on the 
issue.  

132 
 
 (After the witnesses of Ministries of External Affairs and Home Affairs took their seats) 
 
Witnesses  
Ministry of External Affairs 
Shri Dammu Ravi, Secretary, (Economic Relations) 
Department of Legal Affairs (Ministry of Law and Justice)  
Shri Niten Chandra, Secretary 
Ministry of Home Affairs 
Shri Mritunjay Kumar, Additional Secretary (P-II) 
Central Industrial Security Force 
Shrimati Nina Singh, ADG (Headquarters) 
Tamil Nadu Police 
Dr. C. Sylendra Babu, Director General of Police, Tamil Nadu 
(Complete list of witnesses is attached as Annexure) 
6. The Chairman asked the  Secretary, D epartment of  Legal Affairs  to brief the 
Committee about the proposed amendments to the Antiquities and Art Treasures Act  (AAT), 
1972 and suggest appropriate amendments in the Act.  The Chairman informed that the 
Committee would like to hear from  the representative of M/o Home Affairs  about the steps 
taken by the Ministry and its departments to retrieve the smuggled antiquities and safeguard 
antiquities from smuggling. He asked the MEA to apprise the Committee of the steps taken to 
expedite the retrieval process of illegally exported Indian antiquities. 
7. The Secretary, D/o Legal Affairs, informed the Committee that legislative competence 
exists for recovering the artefacts/antiquities smuggled during the pre -Independence era,  
although there are exceptions to it. As regards the Chairman’s query on the legal issues 
involved in making it mandatory for the States to share information regarding antiquity 
theft/smuggling with the M/o Culture and ASI under the AAT Act, 1972, he informed that 
there would be no legal objection to requesting such information from the State Government. 
8. The Secretary (ER), MEA apprised the Committee of the efforts made by the Ministry 
during last 8 to 10 years in retrieving 229 illegally smuggled antiquities/artefacts from various 
countries. He informed the Committee that:-  
 the Ministry has taken up the matter with designated foreign Governments/authorities 
through diplomatic channels. 
 the Ministry has worked through bilateral relations to take up issue of antiquity theft with 
the foreign Governments. 

133 
 
 the lacunae in the process of retrieval of stolen antiquity/ artefacts, such as, lack of robust 
national legislation, lack of binding international conventions and absence of proper 
documentation etc.  
 the M/o Culture should organize training programmes for the Indian Missions abroad on 
identifying and tracking stolen/smuggled cultural heritage items.  
9. The Additional Secretary, MHA informed the Committee that:-  
 under the 7th Schedule of the Indian Constitution, ‘Police and Public Order’ are State 
subjects, meaning that the maintenance of law & order, prevention, detection, registration 
and investigation of crime including cases of stealing of antiquities are the responsibilit ies 
of the State Governments. 
 under the IPC, Section 378 defines theft ; Section 379 prescribes penal provision with 
regard to theft; and Section 411 of the code provides penal provision for dishonestly 
receiving stolen property. 
 due to the deployment of CI SF in handling checking, frisking, patrolling, sweeping and 
CCTV surveillance, etc. , no incidents of theft has taken place at places  where CISF has  
been deputed.  
10. The DGP, Tamil Nadu Police, in his presentation about the Idol Wing of Tamil Nadu  
Police, informed the Committee that:-  
 1,600 idols have been recovered and 132 cases registered overall, out of which 63 cases 
were registered in 2022 alone and 45 arrests were made to recover 249 idols. 
 the efforts of the Idol Wing in establishing 19 icon centres to safeguard the repatriated 
idols which are yet to be returned to their respective temples after identification. 
 there should be provision for special punishment for smuggling and theft of antiquity, 
similar to that of Sections 454 and 457 of the IPC, as the existing ones are inadequate. 
 the Police Departments should be given authority to register a case under the AAT Act, 
1972, without permission of the Magistrate and search the premises of any suspect. 
 ASI should inform the Police Departments abo ut licenses granted by it to owners of the 
valuable antique property.  
11. Members of the Committee  raised queries regarding allowing the manufacturing of 
the replicas of antiquities, coordination among various departments regarding curbing of gold 
smuggling in Kerala, making a retrospective legislation for bringing back stolen Indian 
antiquities from other countries, etc. 
12. The witnesses responded to some of the queries raised by th e Chairman and Members 
of the Committee. The Chairman directed the Department of Legal Affairs, MEA, MHA and 
CISF to furnish written replies to the points which had not been answered, may be sent within 
a week’s time. The Chairman also informed the witness es that an additional questionnaire 

134 
 
may be forwarded to them by the Secretariat and the written replies may be furnished within a 
week. 
(The witnesses then withdrew) 
13. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept. 
14. The meeting adjourned at 5:11 P.M. 
 New Delhi,                                                                                                          Swarabji B. 
5th January, 2023                                                                                                     Director  

135 
 
Annexure 
LIST OF WITNESSES WHO APPEARED BEFORE THE DEPARTMENT-
RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, 
TOURISM AND CULTURE 
 
5th January, 2023 
3:00 P.M. 
Department of Legal Affairs (Ministry of Law and Justice) 
(i) Shri Niten Chandra, Secretary 
(ii) Dr. Anju Rathi Rana, Additional secretary 
(iii) Shri Surendra Kumar, Assistant Legal Advisor 
 
3:30 P.M. 
Ministry of External Affairs 
(i) Shri Dammu Ravi, Secretary, (Economic Relations) 
(ii) Shri Kumar Tuhin, Director General (Indian Council for Cultural Relations) 
(iii) Shri Srinivas Gotru, Joint Secretary (UNES) 
(iv) Shri Vishvas Vidu Sapkal, Joint Secretary (South) 
(v) Shri Anil Kumar Rai, Joint Secretary (Parliament & Coordination) 
(vi) Ms. Archana Nair, Director (Europe West) 
(vii) Shri Sanjeev Jain, Director (South) 
(viii) Shri Anoop Dhingra, Director (UNES) 
 
Ministry of Home Affairs 
(i) Shri Mritunjay Kumar, Additional Secretary (P-II) 
(ii) Shri Sanjeev Kumar Jindal, Joint Secretary (Centre-State) 
 
Central Industrial Security Force 
(i) Shrimati Nina Singh, ADG (Headquarters) 
(ii) Shri N.G. Gupta, Inspector General (National Capital Region) 
(iii) Shri Alok Kumar, Inspector General (Northern Sector) 
(iv) Dr. Anil Pandey, Deputy Inspector General (Operations) 
(v) Shri S.K. Raghuwanshi, Assistant Inspector General (Technical) 
 
Tamil Nadu Police 
(i) Dr. C. Sylendra Babu, Director General of Police, Tamil Nadu 
(ii) Thiru R. Rajaram, Deputy Commissioner of Police, Tamil Nadu 
(iii) Dr. P. Ravi, Superintendent of Police, Tamil Nadu 
 
***** 
 

136 
 
 
CONFIDENTIAL 
MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED 
PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM & 
CULTURE (2022-23) 
XIX 
NINETEENTH MEETING 
  
The Committee met at 3:00 P.M. on Monday, the 8th May, 2023 in Committee Room 
‘A’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe Building, New Delhi. 
Members present: 
1. Shri V. Vijayasai Reddy -  Chairman   
Rajya Sabha 
2. Shrimati S. Phangnon Konyak 
3. Shri Jugalsinh Lokhandwala 
4. Shri A. A. Rahim 
5. Dr. C. M. Ramesh 
6. Shri Vinay Dinu Tendulkar 
Lok Sabha 
7. Shri Tapir Gao 
8. Shri Rahul Kaswan  
9. Shri K. Muraleedharan 
10. Shri Tirath Singh Rawat 
11. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
12. Shri Dushyant Singh 
13. Shri Krupal Balaji Tumane 
  
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Sumant Narain, Joint Secretary  
Shri Swarabji B., Director 
Shrimati Monica Baa, Additional Director  
Shrimati Subha Chandrashekar, Deputy Secretary  
Shri Ranajit Chakraborty, Under Secretary 
  
Shri Kaustubh Sudhakar Bhalekar, OSD to Hon’ble Chairman 
  
WITNESSES 
****** 
     (Complete list of witnesses who attended the meeting is attached as Annexure)  
  
2.         At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members the Chairman and informed that 
as per the Study -visit guidelines issued by Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha, either the Joint 


137 
 
Secretary/ Director/ Additional Director can accompany the Committee on tour however the 
Director is not eligible to accompany as he had already been on tours earlier. One of the 
Members asked for the verbatim record of the earlier meeting of the Committee as well as a 
copy of the guidelines issued by the Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha in this regard. The 
Committee decided to discuss the matter after hea ring the witnesses on the subject, as per the 
agenda for the day.   
3.         The Chairman then informed that  the first agenda for the meeting is to consider and 
adopt the two draft Reports on the subjects: (i) 'Heritage Theft – The Illegal Trade in India n 
Antiquities and the Challenges of Retrieving and Safeguarding Our Tangible Cultural 
Heritage'; and *****. The Committee, thereafter, considered  and adopted the draft Report on 
'Heritage Theft – The Illegal Trade in Indian Antiquities and the Challenges of Retrieving 
and Safeguarding Our Tangible Cultural Heritage'. ***** 
4.         *     *     *      * 
(After the witnesses took their respective seats) 
5.      *    *    *     *    *2 
18.       A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept. 
19.       The meeting adjourned at 5.52 PM. 
 
New Delhi,                                                                                                              Swarabji B. 
8th May, 2023                                                                                                               Director 
   
 
 
 
 
 
* * * * 
  
  
 
 
                                                           
2  Relates to other matter 