PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE
TWO HUNDRED FIFTIETH REPORT
The Major Port Authorities Bill, 2016
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 18th July, 2017)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 18th July, 2017 )
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
July, 2017/Ashada, 1939 (Saka)
250
REPORT NO.


Website : http://rajyasabha. nic. in
E-mail : rsc-tt@sansad.nic. in

Hindi version of this publication is also available
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE
TWO HUNDRED FIFTIETH REPORT
The Major Port Authorities Bill, 2016
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 18th July, 2017)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 18th July, 2017 )
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
July, 2017/Ashada, 1939 (Saka)

CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ............................................................................ (i)-(ii)
2. I NTRODUCTION ....................................................................................................... (iii)
3. A CRONYMS ............................................................................................................ (iv)
4. R EPORT ................................................................................................................ 1-49
5. R ECOMMENDA TIONS/OBSERV A TIONS — A T A G LANCE................................................... 50-59
6. M INUTES .............................................................................................................. 61-75
7. A NNEXURES ........................................................................................................... 77-137

(i)
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(2016-2017)
1. Shri Mukul Roy — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Ritabrata Banerjee
3. Dr. K. Chiranjeevi
4. Dr. Prabhakar Kore
5. Shri Kiranmay Nanda
6. Shri Rangasayee Ramakrishna
7. Kumari Selja
8. Shri Rajeev Shukla
9. Shri Narendra Kumar Swain
10. Shri Lal Sinh Vadodia
LOK SABHA
11. Shri Subrata Bakshi
12. Shri Ram Charitra Nishad
13. Shri Vinod Chavda
14. Shri Rajeshbhai Naranbhai Chudsama
15. Kumari Arpita Ghosh
16. Shri Rahul Kaswan
17. Shri P . Kumar
18. Shri Harish Chandra Meena
19. Yogi Aditya Nath
20. Shri Kristappa Nimmala
21. Shri Rajesh Pandey
22. Shri Rajesh Ranjan
23. Shri P. Srinivasa Reddy

(ii)
24. Shri Ram Kumar Sharma
25. Shri Prathap Simha
26. Shri Dushyant Singh
27. Shri Kunwar Haribansh Singh
28. Shri Rakesh Singh
29. Shri Shatrughan Sinha
30. Shri Manoj Tiwari
31. Shri K. C. Venugopal
SECRETARIAT
Shri J.G . Negi, Joint Secretary
Shri Swarabji B., Director
Shri Arun Kumar, Deputy Secretary
Shrimati Catherine John L., Under Secretary
Shri P .P . Raumon, Committee Officer

(iii)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport, Tourism
and Culture, having been authorised by the Committee to present on its behalf, do hereby present this
Two Hundred Fiftieth Report on The Major Port Authorities Bill, 2016 *.
2. In pursuance of rules relating to the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committees, the
Hon'ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha referred** the Bill as introduced in the Lok Sabha on the 16th December,
2016, to the Committee on 12th January, 2017 for examination and report within three months. On the
request being made by the Chairman of the Committee, Hon'ble Chairman had granted extension of time
for a period of three months, i.e., upto 12th July, 2017.
3. The Committee took oral evidence of the Secretary, Ministry of Shipping and senior officers of
Ministry of Law and Justice in its meeting held on the 25th April, 2017 on various provision of the Bill.
The Committee also heard the views of the representatives of the stakeholders/employees' unions
representatives of trade associations, Ship Owners' Associations, Shipping Lines Association, Private
Ports Associations etc. on the 3rd May, 2017. The Committee also undertook a study visit to Ahmedabad,
Mumbai and Kochi from 4th to 10th June, 2017 and heard the views of all the Major Port Trusts, Port
Employee Unions and other stakeholders. The Committee also received written memoranda from various
stakeholders and individuals.
4. The Committee considered and adopted the Report in its meeting held on the 12th July, 2017.
5. The Committee wishes to express its thanks to the Officers of Ministry of Shipping and Ministry
of Law and Justice for placing before the Committee the material and information desired in connection
with the Major Port Authorities Bill, 2016. The Committee also acknowledges the contribution of
representatives of various stakeholders and individuals who submitted their valuable suggestions on the
provisions of the Bill.
  N
EW D ELHI; MUKUL ROY
July, 12, 2017 Chairman,
Ashada 21, 1939 (Saka) Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee
on Transport, Tourism and Culture,
Rajya Sabha.
* Published in Gazette of India Extraordinary Part-II, Section-2, dated 16th December, 2016.
** Rajya Sabha Parliamentary Bulletin Part-II No. 56225, dated 13th January, 2017.

ACRONYMS
CFS : Container Freight Station
CSR : Corporate Social Responsibility
FDI : Foreign Direct Investment
FEMA : Foreign Exchange Management Act
ICD : Inland Container Depot
IPPTA : Indian Private Ports and Terminals Association
JNPT : Jawharlal Nehru Port Trust
MPA Bill : Major Port Authorities Bill
MPT Act : Major Port Trusts Act, 1963
PMO : Prime Minister Office
PPP : Public Private Partnership
RBI : Reserve Bank of India
TAMP : Tariff Authority for Major Ports
(iv)

REPORT
The Major Port Authorities Bill, 2016 (Annexure-I) was introduced in Lok Sabha on the 16th
December, 2016. The Hon'ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha in consultation with Speaker, Lok Sabha, on 12th
January, 2017, referred the Bill to the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport,
Tourism and Culture for examination and report within three months. As the Committee could not take
up the Bill immediately for discussion due to works related to examination of Demands for Grants
2017-18 of the Ministries of Civil Aviation; Culture; Road Transport and Highways; Shipping and Tourism
during that period, so, the Committee in its meeting held on 10th April, 2017 decided to seek an extension
of time for submission of the report on 'the Major Port Authorities Bill, 2016' to the Parliament from
the Hon'ble Chairman of Rajya Sabha. Accordingly, the Committee placed its request before the Hon'ble
Chairman of Rajya Sabha for extension of time and the latter granted extension of time for a further
period of three months, i.e., upto 12th July, 2017 for submission of the report to the Parliament.
2. The 11 Major Ports in India, except Kamarajar Port Limited at Ennore, are autonomous statutory
bodies functioning under the Major Port Trusts Act, 1963 (MPT Act). Kamarajar Port is functioning as
a company. The Committee was informed by the Ministry of Shipping that a number of measures are
being taken by the Government to augment capacity and improve the operational efficiency of Major
Ports. However, under the restrictive ambit of the MPT Act, the Major Ports are finding it difficult to
operate in a highly competitive environment and respond to market challenges. Even after delegating more
powers and making some amendment to MPT Act, from time to time, the basic objective of offering
efficient service to port users has not been achieved fully. The context in which MPT Act was introduced
in 1960s has changed drastically and in recent times, there has been a paradigm shift with Non-Major
Ports and private ports already accounting for more than 40% of the market share of the cargo handled.
The Major Ports have lost around 33% of their market share in last two decades. Moreover, trans-
shipment of containers is taking place in foreign ports such as Colombo, Singapore which causes great
loss to Indian Ports.
3. Therefore, with a view to provide more autonomy and flexibility to Major Ports and to professionalize
their governance, it is proposed to amend the Major Port Trust Act, 1963 comprehensively. Since the
number of amendments is large, it is proposed to replace the existing MPT Act, 1963 with a new
legislation viz. 'The Major Port Authorities Bill, 2016'.
4. The Bill, in its Statement of Objects and Reasons, mentions that the proposed Major Port Authorities
Bill, 2016, inter-alia, provides for the following, namely:—
(i) to constitute the Board of Port Authority for each Major Port in the place of the Board of
Trustees;
(ii) the Board for each Major Port Authority shall consist of—a Chairperson, a Deputy Chairperson,
one Member each from the (a) concerned State Government in which the Major Port is
situated; (b) Ministry of Railways; (c) Ministry of Defence; and (d) Customs, Department of
Revenue, minimum three and not exceeding four Independent Members, one Member

2
representing the interest of the employees and one Member nominated by the Central
Government;
(iii) to enable the Board of Port Authority—
(a) to use its property, assets and funds in such manner and for such purposes as it may
deem fit for the benefit of that Major Port;
(b) to enter into and perform any contract necessary for the performance of its functions
under the proposed legislation;
(c) to make regulations for the purposes of operations, development and planning of the
Major Port;
(d) to frame the scales of rates for assets and services available at Major Port;
(e) to claim lien on such goods and to seize and detain the same until such rates and rents
are fully paid;
(iv) to empower the Board of Port Authority to raise the loans and issue securities for the purposes
of the capital expenditure and working capital requirements of such Port Authority;
(v) empowering the Central Government—
(a) to order survey or examination of the works of the Port Authority;
(b) to restore and complete the works at the cost of the Port Authority;
(c) to take over the management of the Port Authority in certain circumstances;
(d) to exempt certain specified vessels from obligation to use port assets in the interest or
security of the nation or on account of a grave emergency; and
(e) to issue directions to every Port Authority;
(vi) to constitute an Adjudicatory Board for adjudication of disputes among Major Ports, Public
Private Partnership concessionaries and captive users. This Adjudicatory Board shall consist
of a Presiding Officer and such other Members not exceeding two, as may be appointed by
the Central Government; and
(vii) to make a provision for Corporate Social Responsibility measures within the port limits.
5. The Committee heard the views of the Secretary , Ministry of Shipping, and other senior officials
of the Ministry on the provisions of the Bill on the 25th April, 2017. The Committee also heard the views
of the representatives of the stakeholders/unions representatives of Trade Associations, Ship Owners'
Associations, Shipping Lines Association, Private Ports Associations etc. on the 3rd May, 2017
(Annexure-II). During its study visit to Ahmedabad, Mumbai and Kochi, the Committee heard the views
of all the Major Ports and their employee unions and other stakeholders on the Bill. Besides, the
individuals/organizations submitted written memoranda to the Committee on different aspects to various
clauses of the Bill as given in Annexure-V . The Committee sought comments from the Ministry of

3
Shipping on the points raised in various representations received by it. The Committee also considered
the background note and replies to queries furnished by the Ministry of Shipping while preparing the
report.
6. The Committee during deliberations enquired from the Ministry of Shipping the reasons for replacing
the existing Major Port Trusts Act, 1963 with the new legislation. The Ministry replied that a number
of measures had been taken by the Government in the past to augment capacity and improve the
operational efficiency of the Major Ports. However, under the present ambit of the Major Port Trusts
Act, 1963 ("MPT Act"), the Major Ports are facing difficulty to operate in a highly competitive environment
and respond to market challenges.
7. Under the present structure for Major Port Trusts (MPTs) the key reasons for their inability to
compete with private ports as furnished by the Ministry of Shipping are -
(a) The MPT Act was formulated on the 'service model' and not the 'landlord model';
(b) constitution of the Board of Trustees under the MPT Act is very large and comprises of
representatives of dependent interests such as port users, labour and trade associations which
makes decision making process cumbersome and imbalanced;
(c) MPTs have to approach the Government for approval of nearly all key and strategic decisions
that causes significant delay in implementation of operational matters;
(d) Inflexibility to fix tariffs makes Major Ports non-competitive with Minor Ports; and
(e) Limited options in raising financial resources.
8. The Ministry of Shipping further stated that even after delegating more powers and making some
amendments to MPT Act, from time to time, the basic objective of offering effective services to port
users has not been fully achieved. With a view that the Major Ports function more efficiently the existing
MPT Act is proposed to be changed with the new legislation viz., 'The Major Port Authorities Bill, 2016'
("MPA Bill"). The main advantages of the MPA Bill include -
• Transformation of major ports from 'service port' model to 'landlord port' model.
• Efficient & effective Governance structure with only 11-12 Members
• Appointment of Independent Members for professional and better decision-making.
• Powers to Port Authorities to fix tariff would allow price competitiveness with private ports
by removing the role of TAMP in tariff fixation
• Power to Port Authorities to take decision relating to day-to-day operations such as Master
Planning, staffing, contracts, property usage, PPP agreements, etc. without need for Central
Government approval.
• Power to raise loans / additional capital from Indian & foreign lenders (for facilitating /
mobilising funds & attract investments).
9. As regards the major provisions included in the proposed Bill to achieve higher growth in cargo
handling, the Ministry of Shipping informed that the market share of major ports has already improved

4
in the last 2 years on account of modernization and Port efficiency operations. The Ministry also stated
that the MPA Bill will help in a balanced manner for healthy growth of Major Ports and further submitted
the proposed legislation will enable in:-
a. Decision-making autonomy leading to speedier decision making;
b. Infusion of professionalism in the composition of the Board and its procedure;
c. Financial autonomy in tariff fixation; and
d. Allowing implementation of the 'landlord' model.
10. During deliberations, the Committee asked about the port models the Ministry has studied while
drafting the Bill. The Ministry of Shipping replied that the Ministry studied the mode of operation of the
Port of Rotterdam, Netherlands and Port of Singapore which are governed through an independent
'Authority' which is an autonomous body and aims to provide conductive business environment and
access to global maritime services to different port users/operators. These port authorities, amongst other
functions, lease sites/land in the port to operators under long term lease and use the revenue to invest
in the port infrastructure and also to meet its obligations such as interests and payments.
11. As regards the terminology 'service port' and 'landlord port' used in the Bill, the Ministry informed
that these terms are used internationally to explain two different models of port operation. These words
have only been used because in the international port practice, there are different models of development
of ports. Presently, the major ports in India functions as 'trust' and follow 'service port' based model
wherein the Board of Port Trusts own the land and all available assets-fixed and mobile and performs
all regulatory and port functions. Globally the ports are moving to landlord port model where the Port
Authority will maintain ownership of the port while the infrastructure is leased to operators that provide
and maintain their own superstructure and install own equipment to handle cargo. In return, the major
ports will get a share of the revenue from the operator. The Ministry of Shipping during the deliberations
informed the Committee that the Kamarajar Port (Ennore Port) is presently working under the 'Landlord
Model' and is working satisfactorily.
12. The employee unions of the Major Ports in their written memoranda expressed their concern that
the idea behind the conversion of Port Trust to Port Authority intended to convert the Ports as Companies
under Company's Act on later stage and hand over the assets and liabilities to the newly created
Company. In this context they have brought to the notice of the Committee that, a communication issued
by the PMO's Office to the Secretary, Shipping dated 11.07.2014 in which it is categorically mentioned
that appropriate Regulation should be made to enable corporatization of the Major Ports. Further several
sections/clauses/provisos of the proposed enactment have been formulated in line with the provisions of
the Company's Act. They further stated that a Port which is a National property and meant for public
and social benefits, to change them into Companies and then hand it over to private investors would not
be in Public interest, because when Ports were created, the State Government handed over the land and
the people happily shifted from those places being enthused with patriotic feelings that the Port will come
up to prosper them and the Nation, as well. Thousands of acres of land have been handed over by this
way for a National cause. A Port is a National property and meant for Public and Social benefits, to

5
change them into Companies and then hand it over to Private Investors would be against the interest of
the Nation and the Public.
13. The Ministry of Shipping has furnished a written reply to the above apprehension of the employees
union that there is no such provision in the MPA Bill, 2016 which provides for corporatization or
privatization of major ports. The object of the MPA Bill,2016 is to modernise the institutional structure
of major ports by bringing in autonomy, professionalism and strengthen decision-making. Accordingly,
the issue of control of Major Ports by MNCs does not arise. It is however to be noted that 100% FDI
is already permitted in the port sector under the 'automatic route' to develop individual berths in any of
the 'ports'.
14. The Committee has gone through the concern and apprehension of the various stakeholders
regarding corporatization/privatization of the ports. But, there are some clauses which give
impression that the proposed Bill provides the Government more teeth to allow private players
in the port sector which may, in future take full control over the port activities.
15. The Committee recommends that the Ministry in the first instance, should remove the fears
of the stakeholders on the issue of 'privatization of ports' and ensure that the administrative,
managerial and financial control of the Port will remain with the Port managements.
16. The Committee considered all the Clauses of the Major Port Authorities Bill, 2016 in detail. The
succeeding paragraphs will explain the views of various stakeholders interacted with the Committee, the
feedback received from the Ministry of Shipping, observations made by the Committee and its
recommendations on various Clauses of the Bill.
17. Clause 2
2.(1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "Adjudicatory Board" means the Board constituted by the Central Government under section
51;
(b) "Board" means the Board of Major Port Authority constituted by the Central Government in
accordance with sub-section (1) of section 3 for each Major Port under this Act;
(c) "capital reserves" for the purpose of this Act, shall mean the total of the revenue excluding
the reserves set forth in sub-section (1) of section 40 and the value of the current assets of
the Board in the preceding financial year;
(d) "Chairperson" means the Chairperson of the Board appointed under sub-section (1) of
section 4;
(e) "dock" includes all basins, locks, cuts, entrances, graving docks, graving blocks, inclined
planes, slipways, gridirons, moorings, transit-sheds, warehouses, tramways, railways and
other works and things appertaining to any dock, and also the portion of the sea enclosed or
protected by the arms or groynes of a harbour;

6
(f) "foreshore", in relation to a Major Port, means the area between the highwater mark and the
low-water mark relating to that Major Port;
(g) "goods" includes livestock and every kind of movable property;
(h) "grave emergency" means a condition as determined by the Central Government wherein the
Board is unable to discharge its duties appropriately and includes acts of sedition, non-
performance, unlawful and illegal actions, negligence and financial misappropriation;
(i) "high-water mark", in relation to a Major Port, means a line drawn through the highest points
reached by ordinary spring-tides at any season of the year at that Major Port;
(j) "immovable property" includes wharfage-rights and all other rights exercisable on, over, or in
respect of, any land, wharf, dock or pier;
(k) "Independent Member" means a Member of the Board appointed under sub-section (3) of
section 4;
(l) "Indian Ports Act" means the Indian Ports Act, 1908;
(m) "land" includes the bed of the sea or river below high-water mark, and also things attached
to the earth or permanently fastened to anything attached to the earth;
(n) "low-water mark", in relation to a Major Port, means a line drawn through the lowest points
reached by ordinary spring-tides at any season of the year at that Major Port;
(o) "Major Port" or 'Major Port Authority' means the Major Port as defined in clause (8) of section
3 of the Indian Ports Act;
(p) "Major Port approaches", in relation to a Major Port, means those parts of the navigable rivers
and channels leading to the Major Port, where the Indian Ports Act is in force;
(q) "master", in relation to any vessel or any aircraft making use of any Major Port, means any
person having for the time being the charge or control of such vessel or such aircraft, as the
case may be, except a pilot, harbour master, assistant harbour master, dock master or berthing
master of the Major Port;
(r) "Member" means the Member of the Board appointed under section 4;
(s) "notification" means a notification published in the Official Gazette and the expression "notify"
shall be construed accordingly;
(t) "owner",—
(i) in relation to goods, includes any consignor, consignee, shipper or agent for the sale,
custody, loading or unloading of such goods; and
(ii) in relation to any vessel or any aircraft making use of any Major Port, includes any part-
owner, charterer, consignee, or mortgagee in possession thereof;

7
(u) "pier" includes any stage, stairs, landing place, hard, jetty, floating barge, transhipper or
pontoon, and any bridges or other works connected therewith.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this clause, the term "transhipper" means a floating craft
or vessel, whether dumb or self-propelled, on which gears are provided for discharging cargo
from a barge or wharf and loading it into a ship;
(v) "port assets" means any asset within the port limits including land, movable or immovable
property or any other property, whether tangible or intangible, owned by or vested with the
Board through the Central Government or the State Government, as the case may be;
(w) "port limits" in relation to a Major Port, means the limits including any piers, jetties, landing-
places, wharves, quays, docks and other works made on behalf of the public for convenience
of traffic, for safety of vessels or for the improvement, maintenance or good governance of
the Major Port and its approaches whether within or without high-water-mark, and, subject
to any rights of private property therein, any portion of the shore or bank within fifty yards
of high-water mark and the area of such Major Port as may be determined by the Central
Government by way of notification from time to time;
(x) "port security" means the debentures, bonds or stock certificates issued by the Board in
respect of any loan contracted by it under the provisions of this Act or issued by any other
Authority for the payment of which the Board is liable under this Act;
(y) "prescribed" means prescribed by the rules made under this Act;
(z) "Public Private Partnership project" means the projects taken up through a concession contract
entered into by the Board of Major Port Authority under subsection (1) of section 21 based
on a revenue or royalty sharing basis;
(za) "rate" includes any toll, due, rent, rate, fee, or charge leviable under this Act;
(zb) "regulations" means the regulations made by the Board under this Act;
(zc) "vessel" includes anything made for the conveyance, by water, of human beings or of goods
and a caisson;
(zd) "wharf" includes any wall or stage and any part of the land or foreshore that may be used
for loading or unloading goods, or for the embarkation or disembarkation of passengers and
any wall enclosing or adjoining the same.
(2) Words and expression used but not defined in this Act and defined in the Indian Ports Act shall have
the same meanings respectively assigned to them in that Act.
18. Clause 2 of the Bill contains the definitions of various expressions used in the proposed legislation.
Some of the employee unions have suggested the following modifications to the definitions:
i. "Central Government" means the Government of India represented by the Ministry of Shipping;

8
ii. "Deputy Chairman" means the Deputy Chairman of the Board appointed;
iii. "Functional Heads" means the heads of the department including the heads of operations,
finance, works and business development in a Major Port who qualifies to become a Member;
iv. "Government Nominee Member" means the Government Nominee Member appointed on the
Board;
v. "Labour Nominee Member" means the labour nominee member appointed on the Board;
vi. "Major Port Trusts Act, 1963" means the erstwhile Major Port Trusts Act, 1963 (38 of 1963);
vii. "Non-Port Related use" means any activity for the purposes other than the Port activity;
viii. "Port Related use" means any activity for the purposes Port and its use;
ix. "Rules" means rules made under or pursuant to this Act by the Central Government for the
purposes of this Act.
19. The Ministry of Shipping replied that the above suggestions were noted by them and inclusion of
definitions except 'Functional Heads' as suggested may be considered. The Ministry of Shipping has
further stated that as regards the definition of 'Functional Heads', the same is now redundant as there
is no provision for 'Functional Heads' in the MPA Bill.
20. In view of the above, the Committee suggests that the following definitions may be added
under this Clause:
(i) "Central Government" means the Government of India represented by the Ministry
of Shipping;'
(ii) "Deputy Chairman" means the Deputy Chairman of the Board appointed;
(iii) "Government Nominee Member" means the Government Nominee Member appointed
on the Board;
(iv) "Labour Nominee Member" means the labour nominee member appointed on the
Board under;
(v) "Major Port Trusts Act, 1963" means the erstwhile Major Port Trusts Act, 1963
(38 of 1963);
(vi) "Non-Port Related use" means any activity for purposes other than the Port activity;
(vii) "Port Related use" means any activity for the purposes Port and its use;
(viii)"R ules" means rules made under or pursuant to this Act by the Central Government
for the purposes of this Act;
(ix) Definitions for the terms 'Public Servant, Eviction and Staff may be included. In
sub-clause (d), 'Chairperson' may be modified as "Chairperson and Deputy
Chairperson"

9
21. During the deliberations of the Committee one of the stakeholders has brought to notice that Major
Ports own vast land property even outside the port limits. Therefore, the definition for port assets should
include all its assets such as land even outside the Port limits.
22. The Committee recommends that under Clause 2(v) in the definition of Port assets may be
modified suitably to include any asset within the port limits including within or outside Port
limits.
23. The Committee notes that Major Ports are owning vast land property. Therefore, port assets
should include all its assets such as land even outside the Port limits. The Committee recommends
that under Clause 2(v), "Port assets means any asset within the port limits including" may be
replaced with the words "Port asset means any asset within or outside Port limits including".
24. The Committee also recommends that definition of "Rules" and "Deputy Chairperson"
should be incorporated in the MPA Bill, 2016.
25. Another stakeholder in their representation to the Committee has suggested that in Clause 2(ZC),
in the list of vessels, "Dredgers" may be added as dredgers are not coming under the category of the
vessels which are made for conveyance by water of human beings or of goods and a caisson.
26. The Committee recommends that Ministry of Shipping may include the dredgers also in the
list of vessels as suggested in the previous paragraph.
27. Clause 3
3. (1) The Central Government shall, within a period of ninety days from the date of commencement
of this Act, by notification, in respect of each Major Port, constitute a Board called the Board of Major
Port Authority for that Port which shall consist of the following Members, namely:—
(a) a Chairperson;
(b) a Deputy Chairperson;
(c) one Member each from the—
(i) Concerned State Government in which the Major Port is situated;
(ii) Ministry of Railways;
(iii) Ministry of Defence; and
(iv) Customs, Department of Revenue;
(d) not less than three and not exceeding four Independent Members;
(e) one Member not below the rank of Director nominated by the Central Government, ex officio;
and
(f) one Member representing the interest of the employees of the Major Port Authority:

10
Provided that until the constitution of the Board of Major Port Authority, the Board of Trustees
constituted under section 3 of the Major Port Trust Act, 1963 shall continue to function and shall cease
to exist immediately after the constitution of the Board under this Act. (2) The Board of each Major Port
Authority constituted under this Act shall be a permanent body having perpetual succession and a
common seal with power, subject to the provisions of this Act, to acquire, hold or dispose of property,
both movable and immovable, and to contract, and shall, by the said name, sue or be sued.
28. Clause 3 of the Bill lays down the provisions for the constitution and composition of the Board of
Major Port Authority. The Board shall consists of a Chairperson, a Deputy Chairperson, one Member
each from the (a) concerned State Government in which the Major Port is situated; (b) Ministry of
Railways; (c) Ministry of Defence; and (d) Customs, Department of Revenue, minimum three and not
exceeding four Independent Members, one Member representing the interest of the employees and one
Member nominated by the Central Government.
29. The Ministry of Shipping informed the Committee that the Board of Trustees under the present
Major Port Trusts Act, 1963 is very large and comprises of representatives of desparate interests
including port users, labour, trade, trade associations which make decision making cumbersome, and, at
times decisions are taken which are not fully based on commercial and economic interest. The Ministry
has further stated that the size of the proposed Board has been reduced from the present 17-19 members
to 11-12 members to have a compact and professional Board for better governance of the Port.
30. The Committee received large number of representations suggesting amendments to this Clause.
The labour unions of the Major Ports claimed that the ports are labour oriented organizations and the
production and productivity of ports lies only on management of labour. One of the representatives
pointed out that the Major Ports have progressed to the present level with the cooperation of its
employees and workers. In the initial stages the investment from the Central Government was very
minimum and the operation system was obsolete because of absence of mechanical system and
modernization there. The obsolete system is still going on in some ports. In spite of huge reduction in
manpower the production has gone up considerably. 53 per cent of the cargo is handled by the Major
Ports. After paying the income tax, other sales taxes, operational expenses and salaries etc., at present
the total income of Major Ports are about Rs.12000 crores. Apart from this, the Government is getting
about Rs.50,000 crores of customs duty. They claimed that the growth of Major Ports has occurred due
to the dedication and hard work of the port employees and that for the last 36 years not a single day
was lost in the Major Ports due to any strike and it shows dedication and concern of the employees about
the ports. They further stated that their representation has been reduced in the proposed Bill as they say
things openly in the Board meetings.
31. Another representative submitted before the Committee that Government is ignoring whatever
consensus that was reached after a prolonged discussion with federations on this Bill and that gross
injustice is done by reducing the labour representatives from two to one. As regards posting of independent
Members, the representative pointed out that independent Members should be persons who know the
ports and who have a vision.

11
32. The Ministry of Shipping responded to these demands in a negative way stating that the MPA Bill
aims to have a compact and professional Board of Major Port Authorities for quick and efficient decision
making, one nominee member representing the employees appears sufficient to represent the interest of
the employees.
33. In a written memorandum, the Committee was informed that qualifications and experience has been
prescribed in the case of members appointed under clause 3(1)(c) of the Bill though they are Government
officials, who are competent in their respective fields. Whereas for members appointed under clause
3(1)(d), no qualification or experience have been prescribed and it is left for the discretion of the Board
even though under clause 4(3) of the draft Bill published in 2005, qualification and experience of not less
than 10 years were insisted. They have suggested that instead of Independent Members, Functional
Heads need to be appointed in the Authority Boards from among those who are having adequate Port
experience and professional expertise in the Port sector.
34. The Ministry of Shipping replied that, originally the proposal was to have three "Functional Heads".
However, after deliberations, this provision has been modified by retaining representatives from State
Government, Railways, Defence and Customs. As regards, the independent members the Bill contemplates
that they should have adequate knowledge and professional experience of not less than 15 years in
Shipping, Marine, Management or Administration, the details of which shall be prescribed in the rules
to be framed under the Act.
35. The stakeholders have also shown the apprehension that the majority of the powers have been now
shifted to the Government nominees which will lead to misuse of powers and positions. Therefore, the
labours should be represented suitably. The trade unions have also suggested that while appointing the
Labour nominee, representing the labour employed in the port, the Central Government shall obtain the
opinion of the trade unions, if any, composed of persons employed in the port and registered under the
Trade Union Act, 1926.
36. One of the stakeholders claimed that there should be representation from the Mercantile Marine
Department also in the new Board. The representative from the Private Ports and Terminals Association
also pointed out that being an important constituent member, they should be given representation in the
Board.
37. Representatives from the Chambers of Commerce has deposed before the Committee that in the
Major Port Trusts Act, 1963, they have four representatives in the 'other' or 'elected' category, which
comprises Chambers of Commerce and trade bodies. However, in the proposed Bill, the opportunity is
completely denied and the door is closed for the representation of the Chambers of Commerce. The
exporters and importers are the members of the chamber of commerce and they are the actual port
users. They pay customs duty and port handling charges which is the major revenue for the port trust.
They also earn foreign exchange by exporting goods and services and importing other raw materials or
industries. However, their representation is not taken into account by the Ministry of Shipping, which
is injustice to the trade and industry. They demanded that there should be regional local representation
in the decision making Board of any Major Port all over the country.

12
38. The Ministry has informed that the manner of appointment can be considered while framing the
Rules.
39. The Committee notes that production and productivity of Ports lies on the proper management
of labour. Efficiency of any Port is measured particularly considering the labour productivity.
After considering all the aspects of the various representations received and the oral evidence
recorded before the Committee, the Committee suggests the following modifications in the
Clause 3 of Bill related to Constitution of the Board:
(i) The employees and labour involved in the Port activities are one of its major stakeholder
and they need a better representation in the Board. The Committee therefore
recommends that minimum 2 labour representatives should be appointed in the Port
Authority Board from among the serving employees of the Port. Here the Committee
would reiterate that the Labour Nominee should be a serving employee of the Port.
(ii) Provided further that before appointing any person to represent the labour employed
in the port, the Central Government shall obtain the opinion of the serving employees
of the Major Ports and the selection procedure of the labour representative should be
same as the existing one. In fact the Ministry of Shipping assured the Committee that
the selection of the Labour nominee should be same as that of the existing one and
the procedure will be prescribed in the Rules.
40. The Committee also notes that in the mode of appointment of Board of Directors in the
existing Major Port Trusts, the qualification and experience in the port operations are mostly
ignored and favoritism and other vested interests play a major role. The Committee notes that
the Independent Members are not so important and many a times they are representatives of
vested interests nominated to the Boards to perpetuate the business interests of some people.
The Committee recommends that the Independent Members should be persons having expertise
in port activities. And while prescribing the Rules, the qualifications and the criteria of expertise
should be specifically mentioned. The Committee also notes that in a Board consisting of eleven
members there is no point in having four Independent Members. The Committee therefore,
recommends that there should be a maximum of two members in the category of Independent
Members in the Board.
41. Clause 4
4. (1) The Chairperson and Deputy Chairperson of the Board shall be appointed by the Central
Government on the recommendation of a Select Committee consisting of such persons and
in such manner, as may be prescribed.
(2) The Members of the Board as mentioned in clause (c) of sub-section (3) of section 3 shall
be appointed by the Board in such manner as may be prescribed from amongst persons having
adequate knowledge and professional experience of not less than fifteen years in shipping,
marine, management or administration.

13
(3) The qualifications, experience and manner of appointment of Independent Members shall be
such as may be prescribed.
(4) The appointment of the Member referred to in clause (f) of sub-section (3) of section 3 shall
be made by the Central Government, by notification, from amongst the persons who in the
opinion of the Central Government are capable of representing the interest of the employees
in the Major Port Authority.
(5) Every person nominated or appointed to the office of the Chairperson or the Member of the
Board, shall, within thirty days of his nomination or appointment, furnish to the said Board
his consent and a declaration that he is not disqualified or ineligible to hold such office.
42. Clause 4 of the Bill lays down the provisions relating to the qualification, experience and the manner
of appointment of the Chairperson, Deputy Chairperson and Members of the Board.
43. The representatives of the trade unions demanded that appointment of labour nominee should be
done after taking the opinion of Trade Unions. They also suggested that the Members of the Board should
have adequate knowledge and professional experience of not less than fifteen years in Shipping, mercantile
Marine Department, Management of Port Administration, etc.
44. The Ministry of Shipping replied that as regards, qualification and the manner of appointment
of the Chairperson, Deputy Chairperson are concerned, the same will be formulated in the Rules
to be framed under Act. However, a small correction of the typographical error in clause 4 (2)
is required, by which in the first line "(c)" shall be substituted by "(d)" and (3) shall be
substituted by (1) in the new bill would and this correction meet the suggestion.
45. The Committee observes that the ports being the country's major trade centre, apart from
cargo handling, Major Ports have to undertake several ancillary functions like dredging,
maintenance of navigational channel, pilotage, berthing, buoying, bunkering, dry docking etc.
The Committee therefore recommends that the Members of the Board should have several years
of knowledge and professional experience in Shipping, Mercantile Marine Department, and
Management of Port Administration. The Committee also recommends that the necessary corrections
to Clause 4 as identified by the Ministry of Shipping may be carried out.
46. The Committee observes that cross reference given in Clause 4 (2) and 4 (4) does not
correlate to sub-clause (3) of clause (3), where sub-clause (3) does not exist. It should be
mentioned as clause (c) of Sub-clause (1) of Clause 3 and clause (f) of Sub-clause (1) of Clause
3 respectively.
47. Clause 5
5. (1) A person shall not be eligible for appointment or to continue as a Member of the Board, if —
(a) he has been adjudged as an insolvent; or
(b) he has become physically or mentally incapable of acting as a Member; or
(c) he has been convicted of an offence, involving moral turpitude; or

14
(d) he holds an office of profit or the office of the Functional Head in the Major Port
Authority or the Board of that Authority; or
(e) he has made a false declaration under sub-section (5) of section 4; or
(f) he has been removed or dismissed from the service of a Major Port Authority, Government
or a body corporate owned or controlled by the Central Government or the State
Government; or
(g) an order disqualifying him for appointment as a Member has been passed by a court or
tribunal and such order is in force.
(2) The Chairperson or Deputy Chairperson or any other Member shall not be removed from his
office except by an order of the Central Government on the ground of his proved misbehaviour
or incapacity or in contravention of the provisions of section 7 after the Central Government,
has, on an inquiry, held in accordance with the procedure prescribed in this behalf by the
Central Government, come to the conclusion that the Member ought on any such ground to
be removed.
(3) The Central Government may suspend the Chairperson or Deputy Chairperson or any other
Member in respect of whom an inquiry under sub-section (2) is being initiated or pending till
the Central Government has passed an order on receipt of the report of the inquiry.
48. The clause 5 of the Bill lays down the circumstances in which the Chairperson, Deputy Chairperson
and other Members of the Board shall be ineligible for appointment.
49. The employee unions represented that the proviso existing in the MPT Act, 1963 under Section 6(c)
has to be maintained in the case of labour representatives under Clause 5(1)(d) of the Bill. However, the
Ministry of Shipping replied that the present structure of Board of Trustees under the MPT Act allows
varied interested parties to have representation on the Board. Whereas, the MPA Bill aims to have a
professional Board without any Member having vested interest in port operations or activities. Accordingly,
it has been proposed to apply the disqualification on account of 'office of profit' on all Members of the
Board without providing any exception in respect of any particular Member as it is otherwise given in
section 6(c) of the MPT Act.
50. The Committee notes that Clause 9 also deals with removal of Chairperson by the Central
Government under certain circumstances. The Committee recommends that sections given under
Clause 9 in the Bill may be merged with Clause 5 in order to avoid duplication. The Committee
also recommends that the word 'Deputy Chairperson' may be included in Clause 5(1)(d).
51. Clause 6
6. (1) The Chairperson and the Deputy Chairperson shall hold office for a term not exceeding five
years from the date on which they enter upon their office or until they attain the age of
superannuation, whichever is earlier.
(2) Subject to the provisions of this Act, a person appointed as a Member of the Board by virtue

15
of an office under clause (c) of sub-section (3) of section 3 shall continue to be a Member
of the Board so long as he continues to hold that office.
(3) An Independent Member shall hold office for a term of three years from the date of his
appointment or up to the age of seventy years, whichever is earlier and shall be eligible for
re-appointment:
Provided that no Independent Member shall hold office for more than two consecutive terms:
Provided further that an Independent Member shall not, during the said period of three years,
be appointed to or be associated with any Major Port Authority in any other capacity, either
directly or indirectly.
(4) The Member appointed under clause f) of sub-section (3) of section 3 shall hold office for
a term of three years.
52. Clause 6 of the Bill lays down the term of office of the Chairperson, Deputy Chairperson and
Members.
53. Some of the Major Ports have suggested that the period of appointment of members to the Board
has different term of office depends on their mode of selection which may be uniform as provided in
the MPT Act, 1963.
54. The Ministry of Shipping replied that since the Members of the Board represent different backgrounds
and the MPA Bill aims to have a professional Board, it is not desirable to have uniform term of
appointment for all Members. It is essential that the Members appointed on the Board should complete
their fixed term and make way for the new talent and other professional / eligible candidates to be
appointed on the Board.
55. The stakeholders suggested that the Clause 6(4) instead of mentioning as Clause (f) of sub-section
(3) it should be mentioned as 'Labour Nominee'. To this suggestion, the Ministry of Shipping responded
that the suggestion is not required in view of provision under Clause (f) of sub section (3) of
Section 3.
56. The Committee notes the reply given by the Ministry of Shipping to the suggestions proposed
by the stakeholders. The Committee recommends that the labour nominee member appointed
representing the interest of the employees shall hold office for a term of 3 years and shall not
hold office for more than two consecutive terms. Provided the labour nominee should be a
serving employee and his Board Membership will be co-terminus with his retirement. The
Committee also recommends that the tenure of an independent Member should be 3 years,
however, the independent Member should have 15 years of experience of Port and port related
activities.
57. Clause 7
7. Before appointing any person as a Chairperson or Deputy Chairperson or Member, the Central
Government shall satisfy itself that the person does not have any such financial or other interest as is
likely to affect prejudicially his functions as such Chairperson, Deputy Chairperson or Member:

16
Provided that where any Member who is not so concerned or interested at the time of occupying
such office, he shall, if he becomes concerned or interested afterwards, disclose his concern or
interest forthwith when he becomes concerned or interested or at the first meeting of the Board
held after he becomes so concerned or interested and resign forthwith.
58. Clause 7 of the Bill provides that the Members of the Board shall disclose their interests which are
likely to affect their official functions within the Board.
59. IPPTA suggested that this clause may be amended as when the members have any such financial
or other interest as is likely to affect prejudicially his functions as a Member, such Members shall not
participate when such related matters are taken up for discussion at the meeting. This is a normal
professional practice followed where the concerned interested party steps out of the meeting. Other
stakeholders also pointed out that person appointed as Chairperson or Deputy Chairperson or Member
should not have any financial or other interest in functioning of ports.
60. The Ministry of Shipping informed the Committee that this point may be considered while drafting
Rules on Board Meetings.
61. The Committee recommends that person appointed as Chairperson or Deputy Chairperson
or Member should not have any financial or other interest in functioning of ports and Members
shall not participate when such related matters are taken up for discussion at the meeting. The
Committee also recommends that prescribed format for declaration of interests and assets may
be given in the rules.
62. Clause 10
10. The Members appointed under clauses (c), (d) and (f of sub-section (3) of section 3, shall be paid
such honorarium as may be prescribed.
63. Clause 10 of the Bill relates to fees and honorarium payable to Members appointed from amongst
the Members referred to in clauses (c), (d) and (f) of sub-section (1) of section 3.
64. The stakeholders suggested retaining Clause 18 of the MPT Act 1963 in this place.
65. The Ministry of Shipping replied that the provisions relating to fee and honorarium payable to
Members would be formulated in the Rules.
66. The Committee recommends that the Members appointed shall be paid honorarium as per
government rules. The Committee also suggests that the Clause 10 may be read as 'The Members
appointed under clauses (c), (d) and (f) of sub-section (1) of Section 3, shall be paid such
honorarium as may be prescribed'.
67. Clause 11
11. The Chairperson and in his absence, the Deputy Chairperson shall have powers of general
superintendence and directions in the conduct of affairs of the Major Port Authority and he shall, in
addition to presiding over the meetings of the Board, exercise supervision and control over the acts of
all employees of the Major Port Authority in matters of executive administration and in matters concerning
the accounts and records of such Board.

17
68. Clause 8 of the Bill provides that the Chairperson and in his absence, the Deputy Chairperson shall
have powers of general superintendence and directions in the conduct of the affairs of the Major Port
Authority and he shall, in addition to presiding over the meetings of the Board, exercise supervision and
control over the acts of all the employees of the Major Port Authority, in matters of executive administration
and in matters concerning the accounts and records of such Board.
69. The Ministry of Shipping responded to a suggestion on prescribing the duties of Members and
Chairperson that can be inserted in this clause that the Clause 11 of the MPA Bill defines the powers
and duties of both the Chairperson and the Deputy Chairperson. Clause 11 stipulates that the Chairperson
and in his absence, the Deputy Chairperson will have the power of general superintendence and directions
in the conduct of affairs of the Major Port Authority. By virtue of the above power, the Chairperson /
Deputy Chairperson can assign different duties and functions to the Members of the Board.
70. The Committee recommends that the powers and duties of Members may also be included
in this Clause to remove any ambiguity in the matter.
71. Clause 12
12. (1) The Board shall meet at such places and times, and shall follow such rules of procedure in
regard to the transaction of business at its meetings (including quorum at such meetings), as
may be specified by the regulations.
(2) If the Chairperson for any reason, is unable to attend a meeting of the Board, the Deputy
Chairperson and in the absence of such Deputy Chairperson, any other Member chosen by
the Members present amongst themselves at the meeting, shall preside at the meeting.
(3) All questions which come up before any meeting of the Board shall be—
(a) decided by a majority of votes by the Members present and voting, and in the event of
an equality of votes, the Chairperson or in his absence, the person presiding shall have
a second or casting vote;
(b) dealt with as expeditiously as possible and the Board shall dispose of the same within a
period of sixty days from the date of receipt of the application:
Provided that where any such application could not be disposed of within the said period
of sixty days, the Board shall record its reasons in writing for not disposing of the
application within that period.
72. Clause of the Bill lays down the procedure and manner in which the meetings of the Board shall
be conducted.
73. The Major Ports suggested that new provision to dispose application within sixty days can be
modified to 120 days and for non disposal within the said period the reasons should be recorded in
writing. They pointed out that in this regard, there is no mention about further disposal of the application,
which can be included in this section.

18
74. In response, the Ministry of Shipping has replied that the suggested timeline of 120 days appears
to be too large and would delay decision making by the Board. The time period of 60 days is specified
to enable efficient and quick disposal of questions / issues which come before the Board for consideration.
If the Board is unable to dispose of any issue within the specified time period, then the Board would
record the reasons in writing for such non-disposal.
75. As regards the future disposal of the undecided issue within a specific timeline, it is incumbent upon
the Board to formulate the future course to decide the said issue; which would also be recorded by the
Board in writing while recording the reasons for non-disposal. This requirement forms part of the
inherent powers of the Board in day-to-day operations of the major port and need not be specifically
mentioned in clause 12 of the MPA Bill.
76. The Committee notes the reply given by the Ministry of Shipping. The Committee recommends
that the provisions given under 12(3)(a) may be deleted as it impacts the functional and strategic
independence of the Board.
77. The Committee observes that the Clause 12(3)(b) needs more clarity. The Committee
therefore, suggests that the above clause may read as ".......the Board shall dispose of any
application addressed to it within a period of 60 days from the date of receipt of the application".
As regards the suggestion given by the Major Ports, the Committee recommends that the future
course of action on such non-disposed receipts may be uniform in all the Port Authorities.
78. The Committee also recommends that the manner to conduct Board meetings should be
separately defined in the Rules including that of conduct of Board meetings through video
conferencing and audio visual means.
79. Clause 13
13. (1) A Board may, from time to time, from amongst its Members and any other person, constitute
committees for the purpose of discharging such of its functions as may be delegated to such
committee or committees by the Board.
(2) The committee or committees constituted under this section shall meet at such time and at
such places and shall observe such rules of procedure in regard to the transaction of business
at its meetings (including the quorum) as may be provided by regulations made under this Act.
80. Clause 13 of the Bill lays down the power of the Board to appoint Committees and delegation of
powers to such Committees.
81. The Major Ports pointed out that the Board can constitute committees/sub committees from amongst
its Members or by any other person. Any committee or sub-committee to be constituted by Board under
sub-clause (1) shall only from amongst its members and the term "any other person" may be defined
for the purpose of sub-clause(1).
82. The Ministry of Shipping responded to this point that the Clause 13 of the MPA Bill aims to
empower the Board to appoint committees consisting of Members of the Board and any other person
to discharge the functions delegated by the Board to such committees. The words 'any other person' are

19
included in clause 13 with a view to empower the Board to appoint an 'expert' on the subject, issue which
may be delegated to the Committee.
83. The Committee notes the reply given by the Ministry of Shipping and agreed to it.
84. Clause 17
17. The Board shall after every five years prepare and submit to the Central Government a list of the
employees of the Board of Major Port Authority indicating therein the designations and grades of
employees and the salaries, fees and allowances which are proposed to be paid to them.
85. The clause 17 of the Bill provides that the Board shall prepare and submit to the Central Government,
after every five years, a list of the employees of the Board of the Major Port Authority indicating therein
the designations and grades of employees and the salaries, fees and allowances which are proposed to
be paid to them.
86. The employees unions have suggested that the time line of five years should be replaced as three
years because it is at par with the term of independent Members as Trustees. They have also demanded
that the Clause 23 "Schedule of Board's Staff' of the MPT Act, 1963 should be included in the Major
Port Authorities Bill, 2016.
87. The Ministry of Shipping responded that the five years period is reasonable and appears fine with
all major ports. They have further stated that as the MPA Bill, 2016 aims to provide administrative
autonomy to the Board of Major Port Authorities with minimum interference from the Central Government,
the provisions of section 23 of the MPT Act are not desired to be incorporated in clause 17 of the MPA
Bill.
88. Taking note of the reply furnished by the Ministry of Shipping, the Committee feels that
the period of five years is sufficient and there is no need to change the period.
89. The Committee observes that Section 25 of MPT Act, 1963 has provision for "power to
promote, grant leave, etc. to employees of Board" which has been removed in the MPA Bill, 2016.
The Committee recommends that the equivalent provision or adoption of rules may be included
in the Bill.
90. Clause 18
18. On and from the date of constitution of the Board—
(a) the Board of the Major Port Authority shall be the successor of the Board of Trustees
constituted under the Major Port Trusts Act, 1963;
(b) all the assets and liabilities of the Board of Trustees shall stand transferred to, and vested in,
the Board.
Explanation. — The assets of the Board of Trustees shall be deemed to include all rights and
powers, all properties, whether movable or immovable, including, in particular, cash balances,
deposits and all other interests and rights in, or arising out of, such properties as may be in

20
the possession of the Board of Trustees and all books of account and other documents relating
to the same; and liabilities shall be deemed to include all debts, liabilities and obligations of
whatever kind;
(c) without prejudice to the provisions of clause (a), all debts, obligations and liabilities incurred,
all contracts entered into and all matters and things engaged to be done by, with or for the
Board of Trustees immediately before that date, for or in connection with the purpose of the
said Board of Trustees, shall be deemed to have been incurred, entered into or engaged to be
done by, with or for, the Board;
(d) all sums of money due to the Board of Trustees immediately before that date shall be deemed
to be due to the Board;
(e) all suits and other legal proceedings instituted or which could have been instituted by or against
the Board of Trustees immediately before that date may be continued or may be instituted by
or against the Board;
(f) every employee serving under the Board of Trustees of the Major Port immediately before
such date shall become an employee of the Board, shall hold his office or service therein by
the same tenure and upon the same terms and conditions of service as he would have held
the same if the Board had not been established and shall continue to do so unless and until
his employment in the Board is terminated or until his tenure, remuneration or terms and
conditions of service are duly altered by the Board:
Provided that the tenure, remuneration and terms and conditions of service of any such
employee shall not be altered to his disadvantage without the previous sanction of the Central
Government.
91. Clause 18 of the Bill provides that the Board of the Port Authority shall be deemed to be the
successor of the Board of Trustees of Major Port and all assets, contracts, obligations, liabilities and
employees serving under the Board of Trustees under the Major Port Trusts Act, 1963 shall transferred
to the Board of the Port Authority constituted under the proposed legislation.
92. The employee unions in their written memoranda demanded that Pensioners/Family Pensioners of
the Major Ports should be added in the liability of the Board and the Clause 18(f) need to be amended
suitably. The Committee sought comments from the Ministry of Shipping in this matter.
93. The Ministry replied that the term 'pensioners' cannot be included since the Bill aims to regulate the
service conditions of the 'serving employees' and not 'retired employees'. Further, the MPT Act also does
not stipulate any provision in relation to the pensioners/retired employees. The Ministry further stated that
the subject matter relating to pensioners will be considered while framing Regulations.
94. The Ministry of Shipping also submitted that for protection of interests of all employees and
personnel presently serving under the Board of trustees of the Major Port will, immediately from the date
of constitution of the Board of Major Port Authority under the MPA Bill become employees of the new
Board and will hold his office for the same tenure and upon the same terms and conditions of his current

21
employment with the Board of trustees. Moreover, the tenure, remuneration and other terms and conditions
of service of the employees will not be altered to their disadvantage without the previous approval of
the Central Government.
95. The Committee considered the above matter and recommends that there shall be safeguards
to the existing benefits including the pensionery benefits. Necessary clause in this regard should
be inserted while finalizing the Bill.
96. In clause 18 (c) the Committee notes that even when an obligation was entered into by port
(say 5 years back) and is still to be fulfilled, it has to be taken care by the new Board. Therefore,
the word "immediately" may be removed.
97. Clause 19
19. (1) The Board of each Major Port shall be entitled to use its property, assets and funds in such
manner and for such purposes as it may deem fit for the benefit of that Major Port.
(2) All Port assets under the ownership of the Board or vested with the Board through the Central
Government shall be used and developed as per the regulations made by the Board in that
behalf and to the exclusion of any municipal, local or Government regulation:
Provided that any contract or arrangement by the Board for sale of land or immovable property
or for lease of land or immovable property for port related use for a term exceeding forty
years and for any purpose other than the purposes specified in section 22 for a term exceeding
twenty years shall be subject to the prior approval of the Central Government:
Provided further that the tenure for lease of land or immovable property for Public Private
Partnership projects by the Board shall be subject to the policy notified by the Central Government
in respect of such Public Private Partnership projects.
(3) The Board of each Major Port may erect, construct or build such civil structures within the
port limits for port development or improving commerce and trade in national interest for
which no regulatory license or approval from the State authorities shall be required, unless so
mandated by the Central Government.
98. Clause 19 of the Bill lays down the provisions relating to usage of property, assets, etc, by the
Board. This clause further lays down that any contract or arrangement to be entered by the Board for
sale of land or immovable property or for lease of land or immovable property for port related use for
a term exceeding forty years and for any purpose other than the purposes specified in clause 22 for a
term exceeding twenty years shall be subject to the prior approval of the Central Government. This
clause also provides that the tenure for lease of land or immovable property by the Board for Public
Private Partnership projects shall be subject to the policy notified by the Central Government in respect
of such Public Private Partnership projects.
99. The employees union made apprehensions about this Clause as the existing MPT Act, 1968 does
not permit any port to sell the land, rather it could give land on a long term lease. They further stated

22
that the proviso to Clause 19 lays down that any contract or arrangement to be entered by the Board
for sale of land or immovable property or for lease of land or immovable property for port related use
for a term exceeding forty years and for any purpose other than the purposes specified in section 22
for a term exceeding twenty years shall be subject to the prior approval of the Central Government. The
unions shown their apprehension that the above proviso will definitely would enable the ports to sell their
land after enactment of this Bill.
100. However, the Ministry of Shipping while replying to this point, stated that Clause 19(2) and Clause
48 of the proposed Bill takes care of this issue. In another reply they stated that there are no provisions
in the MPA Bill which entitles Major Ports to directly sell the port land to any third party. The Ministry
has further stated that as per first 'proviso' to clause 19(2) and clause 48 of the MPA Bill, approval of
the Central Government is mandatory for sale of port property and hence, apprehension shown is
unfounded.
101. The Ministry of Shipping replied to a questionnaire on the nature of ownership of the land belong
to the port that in both existing Act as well as in the new Bill, ownership of land rests with Government
only and it is vested in Major Port Authorities only for administration and management. However, in a
reply to another questionnaire, the Ministry of Shipping submitted that ports can give lease of land for
port related use for upto 40 years and for non-port use for upto 20 years without Government approval
under this clause.
102. Taking into consideration of the points raised by the stakeholders and the reply furnished
by the Ministry of Shipping, the Committee recommends that necessary modifications may be
made to this clause to have clear ownership terms on the properties of the Ports. The Committee
suggests that alternatively, Section 34(1) of MPT Act, 1963 may be retained in this place.
103. The Committee observes that in clause 19(3) for port development, sometimes assets are
to be developed by port outside port limits- for example storage areas, railheads etc. Similarly,
there is no reason to restrict any activities within port limits. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that the word "Port Limit" may be deleted from this sub-clause.
104. The Committee also recommends that the provision regarding sale of port assets may have
a condition of utilizing unused or wastelands, keeping aside the useful lands with it, in this
clause.
105. Clause 21
21. (1) The Board of each Major Port shall be competent to enter into and perform any contract
necessary for the performance of its functions under this Act.
(2) Every contract shall, on behalf of the Board of each Major Port, be made by the Chairperson
or by any such officer of the Board as the Chairperson may by general or special order,
authorise in this behalf and shall be sealed with the common seal of the Board.
(3) The form and manner in which any contract shall be made under this Act shall be such as
may be prescribed.

23
106. Clause 21 of the Bill empowers the Board to enter into contracts for performance of its functions
under the proposed legislation. This clause further provides that the contracts shall be entered into by
the Chairperson or any authorised officer on behalf of the Board.
107. The stakeholders suggested that contracts shall be made by any such officer of the Port Authority
as the Chairman may by general or special order authorized in this behalf. The Ministry of Shipping has
agreed to this suggestion and stated that this suggestion may be considered while framing Regulations.
108. The Committee recommends that necessary action may be taken while framing Regulations
regarding contracts sealed on behalf of the Board under this Clause.
109. Clause 22
22. For the purposes of planning and development of the Major Port, the Board in relation to that Major
Port shall have the power to make regulations, not inconsistent with the Customs Act, 1962 or any rules
made there under, to—
(a) undertake, execute and perform such works and provide such services at or within the port
limits and Major Port approaches on such terms and conditions as it may deem necessary or
expedient;
(b) declare availability of the port assets at the Major Port or Major Port approaches for port
related activities and services subject to such limits, conditions and restrictions as it may deem
necessary or expedient;
(c) develop and provide infrastructure facilities including setting up new ports, jetties, navigational
channels, dry ports and such other infrastructure in furtherance of the interest of the Major
Port;
(d) take charge of the goods from the concerned owner for the purpose of performing any port
related services;
(e) order, in cases of emergency or for any other reason, the master or owner or agent of any
sea-going vessel, not to bring any vessel alongside of, or to remove such vessel from, any
dock, berth, wharf, quay, stage, jetty or pier belonging to or under the control of the Board;
(f) permit construction and development by itself or through any person, to make, erect, fix or
remove within the port limits or Major Port approaches any wharf, dock, quay, stage, jetty,
pier, building or structure, erection or mooring or undertake any reclamation of foreshore
within the said limits and buildings and amenities required for the residence and welfare of the
employees of the Board, subject to such limits, conditions and restrictions as it may deem
necessary or expedient;
(g) provide exemption or remission from payment of any rate or charge leviable on any goods or
vessels or class of goods or vessels under this Act;
(h) provide any other services or amenities in respect of vessels, passengers, goods or employees;

24
(i) undertake, execute and perform such works, activities and studies to promote maritime education,
training skill development of coastal communities, seafarers welfare and Major Port related
development; and
(j) make or construct or erect within the port limits such structures, buildings, drains, roads,
fences, tube-wells, in-take wells, storage facilities, warehouses, pipelines, telephone lines,
communication towers, electricity supply or transmission equipment, and such other works
and conveniences as the Board of each Major Port thinks proper.
110. Clause 22 of the Bill empowers the Board to make different regulations for the planning and
development of the Major Port and such regulations shall not be inconsistent with the Customs Act, 1962
and the rules made there under.
111. Some of the stakeholders pointed out that powers need to be given within and or without the limits
of the Ports as many of the Port properties and assets are situated outside the port or beyond the port
limits. In addition, the following suggestions were also received from the stakeholders:
(i) The Port Authority of each Major Port shall be entitled to create specific Master Plan in respect
of any development or infrastructure established or proposed to be established within the Port
Limits. The Master Plan for development of the Port Limits would be independent of any local
or State government regulations of any authority whatsoever but will be subject to rules and
guidelines prescribed by the Central Government in that regard.
(ii) The Major Ports shall have the power to make their own regulations without any interference
of any authority.
(iii) It is necessary to notify Mumbai Port Trust as Planning Authority to enable the Mumbai port
Trust to develop the area according its needs and plan.
112. The Ministry of Shipping replied that the suggested amendments in clause 22 are not required as
the provision relating to master plan is separately covered in clause 27 of the MPA Bill, 2016.
113. The Committee observes that Major Ports shall have the power to make their own regulations
without any interference of any authority. The port limits would be independent of any local or
State Government regulations of any authority. The Committee recommends that the Ministry
of Shipping should incorporate necessary amendments accordingly.
114. Clause 23
23. (1) The Board of each Major Port Authority or the committee or committees appointed in this
behalf by the Board in accordance with section 13, may,—
(a) frame scale of rates at which, and a statement of conditions under which any services
shall be performed or made available;
(b) frame scale of rates at which, and a statement of conditions under which, the access
to and usage of the port assets may be allowed by the  Board;

25
(c) frame consolidated scale of rates for any combination of services specified in clause (a)
or for any combination of such service or services with any user or permission to use
or access to any port assets as specified in clause (b);
(d) pass an order for refund of any amount overcharged by the Board in relation to the
services provided to any person;
(e) pass an order for recovery of any rate or charge which is short-levied or erroneously
refunded by the Board to any person under this Act;
(f) frame different scales, fees, rates and conditions for different classes of goods and
vessels under this section:
Provided that the fixation and implementation of such scales, fees, rates and conditions shall—
(a) not be with retrospective effect;
(b) not be applicable for Public Private Partnership projects already awarded by the Board
or the Central Government;
(c) not be in derogation with the rules made by or the directives of the Central Government
in this behalf;
(d) not be inconsistent with the provisions of the Competition Act, 2002; and
(e) not be inconsistent with the provisions of any other law for the time being in force:
Provided further that in case of such Public Private Partnership projects, the Board may fix the
reference tariff for purposes of bidding only and the concessionaire appointed under any such
Public Private Partnership projects shall be free to fix the tariff based on market conditions and such
other conditions as may be notified:
Provided also that the revenue share and other conditions would be as per the provisions of the
specific concession agreement between the Board and the Public Private Partnership concessionaire
appointed under the Public Private Partnership project.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in clause (b) of sub-section (1), the Board may, by
auction or by inviting tenders, lease any land or shed belonging to or in its possession or
occupation at a rate higher than that provided under clause (b) of sub-section (1).
115. Clause 23 of the Bill empowers the Board to frame and fix the scale of rates for assets and services
available at Major Ports. This clause further provides that the fixation and implementation of such rates,
etc. shall not be (a) with retrospective effect; (b) applicable for Public Private Partnership projects
already awarded by the Board or the Central Government; (c) in derogation of the rules made by or
directives of the Central Government in this behalf; (d) inconsistent with the provisions of the Competition
Act, 2002; and (e) inconsistent with the provisions of any other law for the time being in force.
116. Ministry of Shipping while replying to a questionnaire stated that abolition of TAMP under this
clause will enable the Port Authorities to have greater autonomy to fix tariff for ports's own terminals
and services.

26
117. Some of the stakeholders pointed out that in view of the competition exists in the sector, all
operators should be allowed to change to a market determined tariff. Partnership in PPP projects should
be applicable to market linked tariff. The Ministry clarified in reply to a question that the exemption has
been provided specifically for PPP projects already awarded to avoid the possibility of violating the
contractual obligations contained in the existing concession agreement. However, the Port authority has
been given powers to fix tariff which will act as a reference tariff for purposes of bidding for prospective
PPP projects. PPP operators will be free to fix based on market condition with the coming into force
of the new Bill.
118. The representatives of the Private Ports and Terminals Association pointed out that as on date four
different guidelines are being operated of 2005,2008,2013 and 2015. As per the Clause 23, those who
come after the promulgation of the Bill have the freedom to set tariffs, i.e, Port-trust operated terminals
have the freedom of setting tariffs, but those who have come before and invested into this country since
1997 till today do not have the freedom to set their own tariffs. They will have to go to adjudicatory
board. He pointed out that every provisions of this clause 23 are creating an uneven level playing field
and they are not allowing the private terminals to compete.
119. He further stated that the TAMP has now been made applicable to those who have already operating
in the ports but those come after the date of the new Act, TAMP has been done away with. They further
stated that there exists sufficient competition in this sector and this has been acknowledged by the
Government when they issued the tariff guidelines of 2013 and 2015 and therefore all operators should
be allowed to change to a market determined tariff.
120. Ministry of Shipping has replied to these issues and stated that the power given to the Board of
Major Port Authorities to fix tariff is intended for future prospective projects which will be awarded to
private concessionaires after the commencement of the MPA Bill. There is no intention to disturb the
existing contractual arrangements which are entered into between the Board of Trustees and PPP
concessionaires under the MPT Act. As regards the fixation of reference tariff for bidding in PPP
projects, and the provisions for revenue sharing, the same will be determined by the respective Major
Port Authorities at the time of finalizing the bidding documents for PPP projects, on case to case basis.
121. The Major Ports submitted that provisions regarding meetings and notification for fixing scale of
rates/rate revision may be prescribed in the MPA Bill, 2016 as given in the Section 48 of the MPT Act,
1963 under TAMP.
122. The Ministry of Shipping replied that the power given to the Board to fix scale of rates inherently
includes the power to revise and notify the scale of rates. Further, in this regard, the Board is entitled
to make regulations for fixation, revision, meeting and notification of scale of rates. The general power
of the Board to make regulations is given in clause 61(2)(g).
123. The Committee notes the various arguments given by various stakeholders about clause 23.
The Committee recommends the following in this regard:
124. With reference to proviso (a) to Clause 23 (1) (f), the ports may be given flexibility to
implement the revised rates with retrospective effect in the following circumstances:

27
(i) Rectification of clerical, typographical and arithmetical mistakes observed in the revised
rates:
(ii) Annual escalation is due from 1st April of every year, based on the WPI variation
during the preceding calendar year.
(iii) The Board/competent authority may approve a tariff cycle for revision say 2 years or
3 years and the revision will be due from the next tariff cycle, which will be a specific
date, i.e., 1st April or 1st January.
(iv) Exemption may be given for implementation of rates with retrospective effect in case
of Court direction/orders
125. With reference to proviso (b) to Clause 23 (1) (f), the existing BOT operators are liable to
pay to the Ports, the charges for the services provided to them and lease rent for the land
allotted to them, as per the scale of rates, fixed in accordance with Clause 23 (1) (f), subject to
the provisions in the License Agreement. Hence, it may be considered to include "in so far as
the services provided by the BOT operators under PPP projects are concerned".
126. Regarding 23 (2), in view of public- private-partnerships, there should be an occasion to
lease any asset and need not be limited to land/sheds. Therefore, "Lease any land...." May be
amended to read as 'Leasing of any asset including..."
127. Clause 25
25. (1) If the master or owner of any vessel or his agent, at or before the time of landing from such
vessel or any goods at any port asset belonging to or in the occupation of the Board of the
Major Port, gives to such Board a notice in writing that such goods are to remain subject to
a lien for freight or other charges payable to the ship owner, to an amount to be mentioned
in such notice, such goods shall continue to be liable to such lien to such amount.
(2) The goods shall be retained in the custody of the Board at the risk and expense of the owners
of the goods until such lien is discharged and godown or storage rent shall be payable by the
party entitled to such goods for the time during which they may be so retained.
(3) Upon the production, before any officer appointed by the Board in that behalf, of a document
purporting to be a receipt for, or release from, the amount of such lien, executed by the person
by whom or on whose behalf such notice has been given, the Board may permit such goods
to be removed without regard to such lien, provided that the Board shall have used reasonable
care in respect to the authenticity of such document.
128. Clause 25 of the Bill relates to ship-owner's lien for freight and other charges and provides that if
the master or owner of any vessel or his agent, at or before the time of landing from such vessel or
any goods at any port asset belonging to or in occupation of the Board, gives to such Board a notice
in writing that such goods are to remain subject to a lien for 28 freight or other charges payable to the
ship owner, to an amount to be mentioned in such notice, such goods shall continue to be liable to such
lien to such amount.

28
129. The Committee was informed by the stakeholders from the ship operating sector that although
shipowners have a lien and right to seek from the Board to sell these goods which are under custody,
these rights are easily circumvented by ports/terminals by not allowing to discharge the cargo at the Port
area. This is observed frequently in bulk cargoes; however, containers are also affected. This is burdensome
and affects the business practices to ensure facilitation of trade.
130. The Ministry of Shipping replied that provision contained in clause 25 of the Bill of the point is
identical to what is provided in section 60 of the MPT Act, the two new clauses seeks to propose that
inspite of the lien marked on the goods, the Board should allow the vessel to discharge the goods and
retain the same in its custody even in such cases when the goods are moved to CFS or ICD at the
instance of major ports or customs, as the case may be.
131. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the following sections may be inserted under
this clause stating (1) 'the Board shall allow the vessel to discharge the goods and shall retain
the goods in the custody of the Board for purpose of this section, for all such vessel(s) that are
allowed to berth at such port and have received or allowed such berth from such port". (2) "If
any cargo which is required to be moved at the instance of Major Port or as per any Custom
requirements to Container Freight Station or Inland Container Depot from the major port, the
rights of the Board under this section and section 24 will subsist as if the goods are in custody
of the Board."
132. Clause 26
26. (1) The Board may, after expiry of such time and in such manner as stipulated in section 48 of
the Customs Act, 1962, sell any goods that have passed or placed into the custody of the
Board upon landing thereof—
(a) if any rates payable to the Board in respect of such goods have not been paid; or
(b) if any rent payable to the Board in respect of any place on or in which such goods have
been stored has not been paid; or
(c) if any lien of any ship-owner for freight or other charges of which notice has been given
has not been discharged and if the person claiming such lien for freight or other charge
has made to the Board an application for such sale; or
(d) if such goods are not removed by the owner or the person entitled thereto from the
premises of the Board.
(2) The procedure for sale of goods under sub-section (1) and the proceeds of any such sale shall
be applied in the manner as provided in section 150 of the Customs Act, 1962.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section, controlled goods may be sold at such time
and in such manner as the Central Government may direct.
Explanation.—In this section, "controlled goods" means the goods, the price or disposal of
which is regulated under any law for the time being in force.

29
133. Clause 26 of the Bill lays down the circumstances under which the Board may sell the goods that
have been passed or placed into its custody upon landing at the Major Port and also empowers the Board
to apply the sale proceeds of such goods in the manner stipulated under section 150 of the Customs Act,
1962.
134. During the deliberation of the Committee one of the stakeholders suggested that the sale of goods
under this Clause should be in a manner stated in section 48 of the Customs Act, 1962 thereby clearly
incorporating the principles of Customs Act into this proposed Bill. It was also pointed out that the
Container Freight Stations is an off-dock facility located near the servicing ports which helps in decongesting
the port by shifting cargo and Customs related activities outside the port area. Therefore, it is pertinent
that for easy movement of traffic and to ensure protection of rights of the ports, Container Freight
Stations and Shipowners, the rights given under section 26 in the proposed Bill should apply to cargoes
in Container Freight Stations. However, this may be restricted to scenarios to where cargo is moved to
Container Freight Stations for Direct Port Delivery Customers or moved at the instance of Port.
135. Another stakeholder has submitted that clause 26 (3) may be renumbered as clause 26 (4) and a
new sub clause may be added as Clause 26(3) as, "The right to sell shall also vest with any concessionaire
appointed by the board with whom a concession contract under a Private Public Partnership project for
operating any berth or terminal within port limits has been executed by the said board".
136. The Ministry of Shipping replied that Clause 26 stipulates the power of the Board to sell goods that
have passed or placed into the custody of the Board. However, such right may be granted by the Board
to the private concessionaire subject to the terms and conditions as may be mutually settled in a particular
concession contract.
137. The Committee notes that there should be provisions in the Bill to decongest the cargo
accumulations in the ports so that the unclaimed cargo can be easily disposed/auctioned. The
Committee therefore recommends that a new suitable sub-clause may be added to this Clause
for addressing the above issue.
138. The Committee also recommends that for easy movement of traffic and to ensure protection
of rights of the ports, Container Freight Stations and Shipowners, the rights under Clause 26 in
the proposed bill should also be applicable to cargoes in Container Freight Stations.
139. The Committee also notes that the port has got powers to sell any goods after expiry of such
time and manner as stipulated in the Section 48 of Customs Act, 1962 and applied in manner
as provided in section 150 of the Customs Act, 1962. The Committee recommends that any
amendment to the Act regarding sale process shall be applicable to the new Act and same may
be included in this Clause.
140. Clause 28
28. (1) If the master of any vessel in respect of which any rates or penalties are payable under this
Act, or under any regulations or orders made in pursuance thereof, refuses or neglects to pay
the same or any part thereof on demand, the Board may distrain or arrest such vessel and the

30
tackle, apparel and furniture belonging thereto, or any part thereof, and detain the same until
the amount so due to the Board, together with such further amount as may accrue for any
period during which the vessel is under distraint or arrest, is paid.
(2) In case any part of the said rates or penalties, or of the cost of the distress or arrest, or of
the keeping of the same, remains unpaid for the space of fifteen days next after any such
distress or arrest has been so made, the Board may cause the vessel or other thing so
distrained or arrested to be sold, and, with the proceeds of such sale, shall satisfy such rates
or penalties and costs, including the costs of sale remaining unpaid, rendering the surplus (if
any) to the master of such vessel on demand.
141. Clause 28 of the Bill relates to recovery of rates and charges by distrain of vessel and empowers
the Board to detain or arrest any vessel in respect of which the rates or penalties are not paid as per
the provisions of the proposed legislation.
142. IPPTA submitted that the recovery of rates or penalties clause may also vest with the concessionaire
and the clauses may be amended
143. The Ministry of Shipping replied that the purpose of MPA Bill is to vest regulatory and management
power with the Major Ports for port operations. However, the rights of the private concessionaire to
recover rates and charges may be specified by the Board in a particular concession contract with such
concessionaire.
144. The Committee recommends that the interests of the concessionaire may also be protected
and suitable amendments may be carried out in the above clause.
Clause 29
145. Any person aggrieved by any action of the Board while exercising its powers under sections 19 to
28 (except section 25), may approach the Adjudicatory Board constituted under section 51 by filing an
application before it in such form, manner and on payment of such fee, as may be prescribed.
Clause 29 of the Bill provides that any person aggrieved by the action or decision of the Board under
clauses 19 to 28 (except clause 25) of the Act to file an application against such action or decision before
the Adjudicatory Board.
146. The Major Ports suggested that the period of disposal of application received by Adjudicatory Board
for adjudicating disputes may be included.
147. The Committee recommends that relevant timeline for disposal of application would be
formulated in the Rules.
148. Clause 30
30. (1) The Board may for the purposes of its capital expenditure and working capital requirements
raise loans in any currency or currencies from any—
(a) scheduled bank or financial institution located within India; or

31
(b) financial institution in any country outside India in compliance with the laws for the time
being in force:
Provided that no loan or loans exceeding a sum equivalent to fifty per cent of the capital
reserves of the Board shall be raised by the Board without the previous sanction of the Central
Government.
(2) The loans may be raised by the Board in open market within India and in any country outside
India on port securities including but not limited to debentures, bonds and stock certificates
issued by the Board or may be obtained from the Central Government or a State Government:
Provided that no loan shall be raised from and no securities shall be issued to any person
resident outside India without complying with the Foreign Exchange Management Act, 1999,
the circulars and guidelines issued by the Reserve Bank of India, the Foreign Direct Investment
Policy issued by the Central Government and any other law for the time being in force.
(3) The holder of any port security in any form may obtain in exchange thereof, upon such terms
as the Board may from time to time determine, a port security in such form as may be
specified by the regulations made by the Board.
(4) The right to sue in respect of moneys secured by port securities shall be exercisable by the
holders thereof subject to the provisions of the Limitation Act, 1963.
(5) Nothing contained in this Act shall be deemed to affect the power of the Boards of Major Port
Authorities to raise loans under the Local Authorities Loans Act, 1914.
(6) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, the Board may borrow moneys by means of
temporary overdraft or otherwise by pledging the securities held by the Board in its reserve
funds or on the security of the fixed deposits of the Board in its banks:
Provided that such temporary overdrafts or other loans shall not be taken, without previous
sanction of the Central Government, if at any time in any year the amount of such overdrafts
or other loans exceeds a sum equivalent to fifty per cent. of the capital reserves of the Board:
Provided further that all moneys so borrowed by temporary overdrafts or otherwise shall be
expended for the purposes of this Act.
149. Clause 30 of the Bill empowers the Board to raise loans and issue port securities for capital
expenditure and working capital requirements of the Port Authority from any Scheduled Bank or financial
institution located in India or from any financial institutions in any country outside India without prior
approval of the Central Government up to fifty-one per cent. of the capital reserves of the Board.
150. Stakeholders suggested that the Board may raise loans for the purpose of its capital expenditure and
working capital requirement with the previous sanction of the Central Government from any Nationalized
Bank instead of any Scheduled Bank.
151. The Ministry of Shipping was asked to furnish their comments on this clause and they replied that
the proposed changes cannot be accepted as it seems to curtails the right of the major ports to raise/

32
generate funds from international market. The Ministry further stated that the Bill already put a restriction
on major ports to take prior approval of the Central Government if the amount of the loan proposed to
be raised exceeds 50% of the capital reserve of the such major port. The Ministry also stated that Clause
30 of the bill empowers the Board to raise loans from both (a) scheduled Bank or Financial Institutions
located within India or (b) Financial Institutions in any country outside India. This right to raise loan from
domestic and foreign institutions without Central Government approval is limited to the amount of loan
raised upto 50% of its capital reserves, reason being that, the Major ports have dollar denominated
income. The above provision would enable the Port Authorities to access long term low cost funding
(3-5%) as against high-cost rupee loans at interest rates of 8-12% from the domestic market.
152. Further, as per the proviso to clause 30(2) of the bill the provision to raise loan from and issuance
of security to any person resident outside India is subject to the compliance of provisions of FEMA, RBI
and FDI policy issued by the Government. Hence, the concerns raised are already addressed in clause
30 of the MPA Bill and there is no further requirement to make modifications as suggested.
153. The Ministry of Shipping further clarified that no Central Government approval is required by the
Board to raise loans upto 50% of its capital reserves and the Board is free to determine the terms and
conditions of the said loan.
154. The Committee notes the apprehensions shown by various stakeholders especially the
employee unions of ports that the provisions given in clause 30 to empower the port authorities
to raise loans from open market and also foreign financial institutions may finally lead to take
over the control of the port management by foreign entities or private parties. The loans from
the foreign financial institutions should not be a backdoor opening for such institutions to gain
administrative and managerial control of the Ports. The Committee therefore, cautions the
Government that this clause may be thoroughly scrutinized again and any loopholes in it may
be rectified so that the management and administrative control of the port authority may remain
with the Government at any circumstances.
155. The Committee recommends that a new para should be added in this clause 30 (1) as "Board
may without the approval of the RBI, Central Government and due notification in official
gazette, raise no loans for the purpose of the Act. Provided that no such notification shall be
necessary if a loan is obtained from State Government or Central Government".
156. Clause 39
39. All moneys received by or on behalf of the Board under the provisions of this Act shall be credited
to such general account or accounts of the Board which the Board may from time to time generally
open with the scheduled banks as per the guidelines of the Ministry of Finance, Government of
India.
157. Clause 39 of the Bill provides that all moneys received by the Board shall be credited to the general
accounts of the Board which it may open with the Scheduled Banks as per the guidelines of the Ministry
of Finance, Government of India.

33
158. During deliberations, the stakeholders have pointed out that the Clause 39 will enable the Port
Authority Board to open account in the scheduled banks, which are foreign based private banks also.
If the surplus funds of the ports are deposited in such banks, there is no guarantee that Indian money
will be spent inside India only for development works. They suggested that all money received by the
board shall be credited to the account of board opened in a nationalized bank. Therefore, they suggested
to retain the Section 88(2) of the MPT, Act, 1963 that the money credited to the general account may
be deposited only in "Nationalised Banks"
159. The Ministry of Shipping replied that as the MPA Bill, 2016 aims to give financial autonomy to Major
Ports, the suggested amendments do not seem necessary. They have also stated that the scheduled banks
include nationalized banks as well and they are defined and regulated by the Reserve Bank of India. They
also stated that this will help the ports to get better interest rates. Further, Section 40 of the MPA Bill
clearly specifies the purposes and the manner in which the moneys received by the Major Ports and
credited to the general account can be applied.
160. The Committee recommends that this clause may be modified as "Ports shall have power
to invest in any Nationalised Banks within India" and can borrow from any "scheduled Banks
and financial institutions".
161. Clause 40
40. (1) The moneys credited to the general account or accounts under section 39, shall be applied by
the Board in payment of the following charges, namely:-
(a) the salaries, fees, allowances, pensions, gratuities, compassionate allowances or other
moneys due to—
(i) the Members of the Board except Members appointed under clauses (d), (e) and (f)
of sub-section (3) of section 3;
(ii) the employees of the Board; and
(iii) the surviving relatives, if any, of such employees;
(b) the cost and expenses, if any, incurred by the Board in the conduct and administration
of any provident or welfare fund or loan or special fund established by the Board;
(c) the maintenance, development, security and protection of the Board and the docks,
warehouses and other properties of the Board;
(d) the cost of repairs and maintenance of the property belonging to or vested in the Board
and all charges upon the same and all working expenses;
(e) the costs, expenses, sums, payments and contributions to be made or incurred by the
Board for the purposes provided under section 23; and
(f) any other charge or expenditure for which the Board may be legally liable.

34
(2) All moneys standing to the credit of the Board which cannot immediately be applied in the
manner or for the purposes specified in sub-section (1) may be used for such lawful purposes
as the Board may from time to time decide.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 38 and sub-sections (1) and (2), moneys
received by or on behalf of the Board from non-port related use except those falling under
section 59 shall be credited to a designated account and shall be applied by the Board for
capital investment or for such purposes as may be prescribed.
162. Clause 40 of the Bill lays down the purposes for which the Board shall apply the moneys credited
into the general accounts of the Board. This clause further provides that the provision includes payment
of salaries, fees, allowances, pension, etc., of the Members and employees of the Board, cost and
expenses incurred by the Board in the conduct and administration of any provident or welfare fund
established by the Board, maintenance, development, security and protection of the Board, docks,
warehouses and other properties of the Board, and the like.
163. The employee unions insisted that the provisions contained under section 88 of the existing MPT
Act 1963 may be retained in place of section 40 of the proposed Bill which is more specific.
164. The Ministry of Shipping replied that Clause 40 of the MPA Bill largely incorporates identical
provisions given in section 88 of the MPT Act.
165. The Committee heard the views of the employees unions and the Ministry of Shipping
regarding the implications of this Clause. The Committee recommends that provision contained
under section 88 of the existing MPT Act, 1963 may be retained in place of this Clause.
166. Clause 41
41. (1) The Board shall prepare a budget, maintain proper accounts and other relevant records and
prepare an annual statement of accounts including the balance sheet in such form as may be
prescribed by the Central Government in consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor-
General of India.
(2) The accounts of the Board shall be audited by the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India
or such other person as may be appointed by him in this behalf and any amount payable to
him by the Board in respect of such audit shall be debitable to the general account of the
Board.
(3) The Comptroller and Auditor-General and any person appointed by him in connection with the
audit of the accounts of the Board under this Act shall have the same rights and privileges and
authority in connection with such audit as the Comptroller and Auditor-General generally has
in connection with the audit of Government accounts and, in particular shall have the right
to demand the production of books, accounts, connected vouchers and other documents and
papers, and to inspect any of the offices of the Authority.
(4) The accounts of the Board, as certified by the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India or
any other person appointed by him in this behalf, together with the audit report thereon shall

35
be forwarded annually to the Central Government by the Board and the Central Government
shall cause the same to be laid, as soon as may be after it is received, before each House of
Parliament.
167. Clause 41 of the Bill relates to the accounts and audit of the Board and requires the Board to prepare
a budget and an annual statement of its accounts. This clause further provides that the accounts of the
Board shall be audited by the office of the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India and the audited
report as certified by the Comptroller and Auditor- General shall be forwarded to the Central Government
for presentation before both the Houses of Parliament.
168. The empl oyee unions have given the following suggestion in this clause:
(i) The Board of each Port Authority shall appoint an internal auditor, who shall either be a
chartered accountant or such other professional as may be decided by the Board to conduct
internal audit of the functions and activities of the Major Port.
(ii) The internal auditor may or may not be an employee of the Port Authority;
(iii) The term "chartered accountant" shall mean a chartered accountant whether engaged in
practice or not.
169. The Ministry of Shipping has replied that this provision may be considered while formulating the
Rules.
170. The Committee recommends that the suggestions as given by the employees unions may be
considered while formulating the Rules under the Clause 41.
171. Clause 50
50. (1) Without prejudice to the foregoing provisions of this Chapter, the Board shall in discharge of
its functions under this Act, be bound by such directions on question of policy as the Central
Government may give in writing from time to time:
Provided that the Board shall be given an opportunity to express its views before any direction
is given under this sub-section.
(2) The decision of the Central Government on whether a question is one of policy or not shall
be final and binding on the Board.
172. Clause 50 of the Bill states that the Board shall in discharge of its functions under the Act, be bound
by the directions on questions of policy as the Central Government may give in writing from time to
time. This clause further states that the Board shall be given an opportunity to express its views before
any direction is given by the Central Government; but the decision of the Central Government on whether
a question is one of policy or not shall be final and binding on the Board.
173. The stakeholders pointed out that this provision is a repetition of the Section 111 of the existing
MPT Act, 1963. They deposed before the Committee that since the Port Trust Board is converted as
Port Authority with Director Board of the Authorities as envisaged in the new Act, the power of the

36
Central Government to issue directions to the Directors of the Board may finally lead to converting the
Port Authorities into companies through executive order of the Central Government.
174. They have explained their experience on a previous occasion that using the power enabled by the
Section 111 of the existing Major Port Trusts Act, 1963 the Ministry of Shipping issued an order on 21st
April, 2016 to three Major Ports viz. JNPT, Chennai Port and Cochin Port to issue no objection certificate
to Dubai Port World for making it a single holding company named Hindustan Ports Private Limited. This
direction was issued without obtaining the views of the Board of Trustees of the above three Ports. This
decision of the Government has caused irreparable loss and damages to the Cochin Port. Citing this
example, the employees union representatives have shown the apprehension that retaining the Section 111
of the MPT Act, 1963 in the new Bill may be intentional to use it at the appropriate time by the
Government and may endanger the very interest of the Major Ports, particularly when the ongoing policy
of privatization is aggressively taking forward by the Central Government.
175. Indian Private Ports and Terminals Association (IPPTA) suggested the following amendments as
matters related to Section 50 (1) would have major impact on the functioning of the concessionaire and
it is only fair that the concessionaire under PPP contract with the Port Authority be given the opportunity
to express the views.
176. The Ministry of Shipping replied that the suggested amendment is not desirable as clause 50(1) of
the MPA Bill is similar to section 111 of the MPT Act which stipulates the power of Central Government
to give directions to the Board and not to any private concessionaire appointed under a PPP project.
177. The Committee notes the points raised by the stakeholders and the reply given by the
Ministry. The Committee is also agreeable to the apprehension of the employee unions that
retaining the Section 111 of the MPT Act, 1963 in the new Bill may be intentional to use it at
the appropriate time by the Government and may endanger the very interest of the Major Ports,
particularly when the ongoing policy of privatization is aggressively pursued by the Central
Government. The power given to Central Government under the Clause 50 to issue directions
to the Directors of the Board may lead to converting the Port Authorities into companies through
executive order of the Central Government. The Committee recommends that the Government
should not misuse the provision given under this Clause for any such activities as pointed out
by the stakeholders.
178. Clause 51
51. (1) The Central Government may, by notification, constitute an Adjudicatory Board for adjudicating
disputes relating to Major Ports and such Board shall consist of a Presiding Officer and such
other members not exceeding two, as may be appointed by the Central Government.
(2) The head office of the Adjudicatory Board shall be in Mumbai:
Provided that the Adjudicatory Board may hold its sittings at such other places as the Presiding
Officer may decide from time to time having taken into consideration the convenience to
decide the disputes referred to it.

37
(3) The Adjudicatory Board referred to in sub-section (1) shall perform the following functions,
namely: —
(a) the functions envisaged to be carried out by the erstwhile Tariff Authority for Major Ports
arising from the Tariff Guidelines of 2005, 2008 and 2013 and tariffs orders issued by
the said Authority;
(b) to receive and adjudicate reference on any dispute or differences or claims related to
rights and obligations of Major Ports and Public Private Partnership concessionaires or
captive users for dedicated berth within the framework of their concession agreements
and to pass orders after considering and hearing all the parties involved in the dispute:
Provided that any party not agreeable with order of the Adjudicatory Board may resort
to arbitration as provided under the provisions of their respective concession agreements;
(c) to appraise, review the stressed Public Private Partnership projects as referred by the
Central Government or the Board of the Major Ports and to suggest measures to revive
such projects; and
(d) to look into the complaints received from port users against the services and terms of
service rendered by the Major Ports or the private operators operating in the Major Ports
and to pass necessary orders after hearing the parties concerned:
Provided that any party not satisfied with the order of the Adjudicatory Board shall be
free to resort to arbitration or any other available legal remedy.
(4) A person shall not be qualified for appointment as the Presiding Officer of the Adjudicatory
Board unless he is, or has been, or is qualified to be, a judge of a High Court.
(5) The Presiding Officer and members of the Adjudicatory Board shall be appointed by the
Central Government on the recommendation of a Select Committee consisting of such persons
and in such manner as may be prescribed.
(6) The Presiding Officer and members of the Adjudicatory Board shall hold office for a term not
exceeding five years from the date on which they enters upon their office or until they attain
the age of seventy years, whichever is earlier.
(7) A person shall not be qualified for appointment as a member of the Adjudicatory Board unless
he is an expert in the field of finance, commerce, marine, shipping and port related matters,
etc., having worked in the respective field for not less than twenty years.
(8) The salaries and allowances payable to and other terms and conditions of service of the
Presiding Officer and members of the Adjudicatory Board shall be such as may be prescribed:
Provided that neither the salary and allowance nor other terms and conditions of service of
the Presiding Officer or members of the Adjudicatory Board shall be varied to their disadvantage
after their appointment.

38
(9) The procedure to be adopted by the Adjudicatory Board, while discharging its functions
referred to in sub-section(1) shall be such as may be prescribed.
(10) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, while
exercising the powers under sub-section (1), the Adjudicatory Board shall have the same
powers as are vested in a civil court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 while trying
a suit, in respect of the following matters, namely:—
(a) the discovery and production of books of account and other documents, at such place
and at such time as may be specified by the Adjudicatory Board;
(b) summoning and enforcing the attendance of persons and examining them on oath;
(c) issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses or documents; and
(d) any other matter which may be prescribed.
(11) Any proceeding before the Adjudicatory Board shall be deemed to be a judicial proceeding
within the meaning of sections 193 and 228 and for the purposes of section 196 of the Indian
Penal Code and the Adjudicatory Board shall be deemed to a civil court for all the purposes
of section 195 and Chapter XXVI of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.
(12) Subject to the provisions of this Act, every order made by the Adjudicatory Board under this
Act shall be final and shall not be called in question in any suit, application, execution or other
proceeding and no injunction shall be granted by any court or other authority in respect of
any action taken or intended to be taken in pursuance of any power conferred by or under
this Act.
179. Clause 51 of the Bill provides for the constitution of the Adjudicatory Board for hearing the
application against any person aggrieved by any action of the Board while exercising its powers under
sections 19 to 28 (except section 25).
180. IPPTA submitted that they strongly opposes the continuation of tariff regulation and fixation by the
Adjudicatory Board. This provision just results in shifting the tariff fixation responsibility to the same
authority under a new name. This provision is self defeating. Continuance of the function of tariff
fixation by the Adjudicatory Board are also, to Concessionaires in major Ports, discriminatory given that
state ports which handle nearly 50% of the country's EXIM trade have the freedom of market determined
tariff. They have further submitted that the provisions of this Section appear not only to empower the
Adjudicatory Board to perform the existing functions of TAMP but in fact enlarges the scope to include,
for example, adjudication on disputes or differences concerning agreements.
181. The Ministry of Shipping has replied to their above apprehension and suggestion which stated that
the apprehensions expressed in relation to clause 51(3)(a) are unfounded. The functions to be carried
out by the Adjudicatory Board under clause 51(3)(a) are limited to the tariff fixed under the Tariff
Guidelines of 2005, 2008 and 2013 in relation to the works and contracts executed / awarded prior to
the commencement of the MPA Bill. As per clause 23 of the MPA Bill, the power to fix tariff is given

39
to the Board of Port Authority and it is also clarified in the first proviso to clause 23 that the fixation
and implementation of scale of rates by the Board will not have retrospective effect. Accordingly, there
is no power given to the Adjudicatory Board to fix tariff for any prospective projects. Instead, the said
power vests with the Board of the Major Port Authority under clause 23 of the MPA Bill.
182. As regards 51(3) (b) provides the Adjudicatory Board with judicial powers to decide disputes
between the Major Ports and PPP concessionaires, the Ministry of Shipping stated that Clause 51(3)(b)
does not mandate any PPP concessionaire to refer disputes to the Adjudicatory Board. Instead, it provides
an option to PPP concessionaires to refer disputes arising out of Concession contracts to Adjudicatory
Board. Further, it is only when the dispute is referred to the Adjudicatory Board, the Board will adjudicate
upon such dispute and pass order after hearing all concerned parties. There is also a proviso in clause
51(3)(b) which clarifies the position that any party not agreeable with the order of Adjudicatory Board
may resort to arbitration under the provisions of their respective concession agreements.
183. The stakeholder further suggested that in clause 51 (5) clarity needs to be provided regarding the
nature of the proposed "Select Committee", and also the parameters and process by which recommendations
will be provided by the Select Committee. Clarity also needs to be provided as to the manner in which
the rules and regulations for the recommendations will be "prescribed". The provision is vague and
ambiguous. The term "as may be prescribed" also occurs in Section 51 (8), (9), & (10).
184. The Ministry of Shipping replied that the criteria for selection of 'Select Committee', the process
for recommendation of Members and other matters pertaining to the Adjudicatory Board (as referred in
clause 51(8), (9) & (10)) will be defined in the Rules.
185. The stakeholder demanded a clarification regarding as to which Act the Sections 193 & 228 were
mentioned in the provision refers to the sections mentioned Clause 51 (11). The Ministry of Shipping
clarified that the reference of Section 193 and 228 pertains to the Indian Penal Code.
186. The stakeholder further pointed out that the provisions giving under clause 51 (12) is very draconian
in the sense that it takes away the right of the concessionaire to approach the courts to seek relief. This
clause must be deleted.
187. The Ministry of Shipping give the following explanation to this point: The reference of dispute to
the Adjudicatory Board under clause 51 is optional and not mandatory. It is only when the concerned
party refers the dispute to the Adjudicatory Board, the order passed by the Adjudicatory Board would
be final and binding on disputing parties. However, this is subject to the other provisions of the MPA
Act (as mentioned in the beginning of clause 51(12)).
188. Therefore, if the contract between the major port and the private concessionaire provides for
resolution of dispute through arbitration and any party voluntarily decides to first refer the dispute to
Adjudicatory Board without initiating arbitration, the order passed by the Adjudicatory Board on such
dispute would not be binding and the aggrieved party not satisfied with such order can resort to
arbitration under the terms of the concession contract. [proviso to clause 51(3)(b) & (c)]
189. However, if there is no arbitration mechanism agreed in the concession contract and if any party
voluntarily refers the dispute in relation to such contract before the Adjudicatory Board without initiating

40
any other contractual remedy, the order passed by the Adjudicatory Board in such matter would then be
final and binding on the disputed parties. This is so because the Adjudicatory Board has been accorded
a 'statutory status' of civil court and the proceedings before the Adjudicatory Board would be deemed
as judicial proceedings.
190. The Committee notes the reply given by the Ministry of Shipping over various points raised
by the stakeholders. The Committee notes that under 51(3)(b), the Adjudicatory Board is given
judicial powers to handle disputes. However, the composition of this authority does not seem to
be composition of a judicial authority. The Committee recommends that under 51(4), the Chairman
of the Adjudicatory Board may be equal to the status of a High Court Judge in order to avoid
any ambiguity on the matter.
191. The Committee recommends that the ambiguity in clause 51(11) may be clarified in the final
Bill.
192. In 51(d) the words "free to resort to arbitration" may be deleted since it is contradictory
to 51 (12).
193. The Committee recommends that provisions for transfer of existing disputes against Major
Ports to Adjudicatory Body for disposal may be included in this clause.
194. The Committee also recommends that the domain of the Adjudicatory Board on deciding
disputes arising from existing contracts would be defined in the Rules.
195. Clause 55
55. No suit or other legal proceeding shall lie against the Board or any Member or employee thereof
in respect of anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done under this Act or any
rule or regulation made there-under, or for any deficiency of service or any consequential losses
on account of deficiency in services.
Clause 55 of the Bill relates to protection of acts done in good faith and states that no suit or other
legal proceeding shall lie against the Board or any Member or employee thereof in respect of
anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done under the Act or any rule or regulation
made there-under, or for any deficiency of service or any consequential losses on account of
deficiency in services.
196. The Committee was informed by a stakeholder that in cases of any losses and damages to vessel
and cargo due to wilful negligence, default or gross negligence of the employees or Stevedores, the
employees or Stevedores are absolved of any liability in view of the old section 121 which is mirrored
in new bill vide Clause 55 "Protection of acts done in good faith". They have suggested that any act
due to negligence, default or gross negligence the employees or Stevedores are held responsible and
liable. This is necessary to bring accountability and due diligence thereby furthering Rationalisation and
Transparency in the business conducted by Government bodies.

41
197. The Committee recommends that the above issue may be considered while framing the
Rules. The Committee also recommends that Section 120 of the MPT Act, 1963 may be incorporated
under this clause.
198. Clause 56
56. Every person employed by the Board under this Act, shall be deemed to be a public servant within
the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code.
199. The clause 56 of the Bill stipulates that every person employed by the Board under the Act, shall
be deemed to be a public servant within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code.
200. Major Ports pointed out that the staff of the Board has been mentioned as "deemed to be a public
servant within the meaning of Sec. 21 of the Indian Penal Code", which was earlier under Penalties
chapter of MPT Act, 1963. The definitions of public servant may be inserted in the Bill and the applicable
rules of public servants.
201. The Committee recommends that the definitions of the public servant and the applicable
rules may be inserted in the Bill.
202. Clause 57
57. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, the Board
in exercise of the powers conferred on it by regulations made under this Act or by invoking
the contractual remedies available to the Board may cancel the allotment of any premises made
to any employee of the Board or any other person or evict an employee of the Board or any
person in occupation of any port asset or premises or area in the port limits, by notice in
writing, addressed to such allottee or employee or other person who may be in occupation
or possession thereof in violation of the regulations specified or formulated by the Board:
Provided that such notice shall indicate the reasons for cancellation of allotment or eviction
or removal along with the period within which the removal or eviction is sought and recovery
of the sums of dues in arrears and also for the extended unauthorised use of such premises.
(2) If any allottee or employee or other person is aggrieved by the order made under sub-section
(1), then the said allottee or employee or other person may appeal against the order with the
compensation officer so appointed by the Board within thirty days from the receipt of the
order under sub-section (1).
(3) If any allottee or employee or other person refuses or fails to comply with an order made
under sub-section (1), then any Magistrate of the First Class may, on application made by or
on behalf of the Board, order any police officer, with proper assistance, to enter into the
premises and evict any person from, and take possession of, the premises and to deliver the
same to the Board or a person appointed by the Board in that behalf and the police officer
may, for the purpose, use such force as may be necessary.

42
(4) Any such notice as is referred to in sub-section (1) may be served—
(a) by delivering or tendering it to the allottee or employee or any other person who may
be in occupation or possession of the whole or any part of the premises; or
(b) if it cannot be so delivered or tendered, by affixing it on the outer door or some other
conspicuous part of the premises; or
(c) by registered post; or
(d) by publishing in the local newspaper having circulation in the area.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section, the expression "premises" means any land, building
or part of a building which is part of port assets and includes—
(i) areas such as canteens, gardens, grounds and out-houses, if any, appertaining to such building
or part of a building;
(ii) any fittings affixed to such building or part of a building for the more beneficial enjoyment
thereof; and
(iii) any furniture, books or other things belonging to the Board and found in such building or part
of a building.
203. Clause 57 of the Bill relates to power of the Board to evict certain persons from premises of the
Board and stipulates that the Board in exercise of the powers conferred on it by regulations made under
the Act or by invoking the contractual remedies available to the Board may cancel the allotment of any
premises made to any employee of the Board or any other person or evict an employee of the Board
or any person in occupation of any port asset or premises or area in the port limits, by notice in writing,
addressed to such allottee or employee or other person who may be in occupation or possession thereof
in violation of the regulations specified or formulated by the Board.
204. The Committee received large number of representations on this Clause from the present occupants
of the port land. The Committee also heard one of the reperesentationist in this Clause. He while deposing
before the Committee stated that the Clause 57 has completely ignored the Constitutional provisions as
this will allow the Board to evict a person from the properties belong to the Board without hearing the
law of natural justice after issuing a notice for the eviction. They also pointed out that the evicting body
is not having the powers of a civil court. They requested that in such cases, the affected persons must
be given an opportunity to make representation and to explain the allegations made against him/them and
the authority conducting the proceedings must not be biased and should act in good faith.
205. The representations received by the Committee in this regard further stated that the eviction
authority should act fairly, reasonably and in a just manner in accordance with the principles of natural
justice particularly when the result of the exercise of the power is likely to affect any person or visit
him with civil consequences.
206. The port land occupants have also pointed out some of the drawbacks in the above clause as it
is not giving any provision for hearing of the affected party and no provision for statutory appeal before

43
any court or even a persona designate who act as a Judge or Court. They have claimed that the
provisions of clause 57 therefore (as they are currently drafted) are clearly vitiated in law because:
a. There is no provision for hearing of the affected party.
b. No provision for the affected person to represent his case: pursuant to the Notice viz. there
is no provision for "Show Cause" against the Notice.
c. No trial (no recording of evidence) by the parties.
d. No burden of proof required from the Port Authority.
e. No opportunity for the affected person to discharge the burden cast upon him by the allegations
and no opportunity of proving his case in answer to the allegations.
f. The issuance of Notice under clause 57(1) presupposes that the allegations of the Port
Authority are true.
g. No judicial determination by a court, or a judge vested with judicial powers or even limited
powers under the code of Civil Procedure, 1908.
h. The "Compensation Officer" is not defined. His qualifications, power, scope, role, functions,
and duties we also not defined.
i. There is no provision for statutory Appeal before any court or even a persona designata who
acts as a Judge or Court.
j. The predecessor Major Port Trust Act, 1953 does not contain any such provision.
k. The position today is that Ports already covered under the definition -under section 2(e)(2)(v)
of the Public Premises (Eviction of Unauthorised Occupants) Act, 1971: may initiate proceedings
under the said Act. Even under this Act, there is a provision (a safeguard) or issuance of Show
Cause Notice, proper opportunity to hear the affected party to show cause, a proper trial
(opportunity for both sides to lead evidence), and a judicial determination. There is also a
statutory right of Appeal under section 9 of the Public Premises (Eviction Unauthorised
Occupants) Act, 1971 before an Appellate officer, who shall be the district judge of the district
in which the public premises are situate or such other judicial officer in that district of not
less than 10 rears; standing as the district judge may designate in this behalf.
l. Neither the "Statement of Objects and Reasons" nor the "Notes on Clauses" in the proposed
bill afford any justification for drafting such a draconian provision.
m. As such the current provision (clause 57) contains no procedural judicial and/or constitutional
safeguards. The provision as it stands today does not pass the basic requirement viz. natural
justice and hence fails the test of the rule of law as enshrined in the Constitution of India. It
seeks (without hearing or trial)- to condemn, evict and recover sums of money.
207. The Ministry of Shipping gave the following reply to their grievances:
With a view to deal with the unauthorized occupants in the ports land and reclaim the port properties
for its development, the provision to empower Board to evict illegal occupants has been incorporated

44
in clause 57 of the MPA Bill. This provision is similar to section 130 of the MPT Act which
stipulates the power of the Board of Trustees to evict certain persons from the premises of the
Board. Even the procedure for eviction given in section 57 of the MPA Bill has been broadly
adopted/ retained from section 130 of the MPT Act.
The provision of appeal before the compensation officer [ under clause 57(2)] is a new provision
which would enable the aggrieved parties to challenge the notice / order for eviction before the
compensation officer appointed by the Board. This is in addition to other legal remedies available
to aggrieved parties under common civil laws.
The role / functions of the compensation officer (including other modalities viz., the need for
issuing show-cause notice, personal hearing, etc. would be defined by Major Ports in the regulations
to be made under the MPA Bill.
208. The Committee notes the grievances of certain individuals on the Clause 57 and the reply
furnished by the Ministry of Shipping on the matter. The Committee also notes the reply given
by the Ministry that section 130 of the Major Port Trusts Act, 1963 have similar provision for
eviction of the un-authorized occupants of the Port land though many people are continuing
there since generations. The Committee has the opinion that the ports have every right to
protect the land under their jurisdiction. There is no right for the unauthorized occupants to
claim a stake in the Port land. The Committee therefore recommends that the ports may evict
encroachers and unauthorized occupants from the port land at the earliest.
209. Clause 58
58. Without prejudice to any other action that may be taken under this Act, the Board may recover by
suit any rates, damages, expenses, costs, or in case of sale the balance thereof, when the proceeds
of sale are insufficient, or any penalties payable to, or recoverable by, the Board under this Act or
under any regulations made in pursuance thereof.
210. Clause 58 of the Bill entitles the Board with an alternate remedy to recover by suit any rates,
damages, expenses, costs, or in case of sale the balance thereof, when the proceeds of the sale are
insufficient, or any penalties payable to, or recoverable by, the Board under the Act or under any
regulations made in pursuance thereof.
211. IPPTA submitted that this clause may be amended to,"Without prejudice to any other action that may
be taken under this Act, the Board or any concessionaire may recover by suit any rates, damages,
expenses, costs, or in case of sale the balance thereof, when the proceeds of sale are insufficient, or
any penalties payable to, or recoverable by, the Board under this Act or under any regulations made in
pursuance thereof."
212. The Ministry of Shipping replied to this suggestion that the Clause 58 of the MPA Bill stipulates the
power of the Board to have alternate remedy by suit for recovery of any unpaid rates, damages,
expenses, costs, penalties, etc. payable to the Board. This power is identical to the power given to the
present Board of Trustee under section 131 of the MPT Act.

45
213. The stakeholder also suggested that the Draft Bill may incorporate provisions with regard to the
following:
Navigational Safety - Following a major accident (MSC Chitra and Al Khaleej collision in Mumbai
Port) the Government constituted a Committee headed by Chairman, NCB. The Committee
recommended that all major ports navigation safety systems and procedures be audited by National
Port Safety Committee. Accordingly, the Major Port Authorities Bill may introduce a clause to make
Navigation Safety Audits mandatory as two yearly intervals.
214. The Ministry of Shipping stated that the Board of Major Ports Authority shall have powers to make
Regulations and this suggestion may be considered while framing Regulations.
215. The Committee notes that navigational safety is a cause of concern especially the Indian coasts
witnessed similar incidents of vessels collisions and abandoning the vessels in a dangerous manner as
pointed out by the stakeholders. The Committee, therefore, recommends that specific clauses may be
added to the Bill empowering the Port Boards to make provisions for making Navigational Safety Audits
mandatory.
216. Clause 59
59. (1) Subject to the provisions of the Companies Act, 2013, the Board may use its funds for
providing social benefits including development of infrastructure in areas of education, health,
housing, accommodation, skill development, training and recreational activities within the port
limits for its own employees, customers, business partners, Government and Non-Governmental
Organisation, local communities, environment and society at large.
(2) The manner of utilisation of funds for the Corporate Social Responsibility shall be such, as
may be prescribed.
217. Clause 59 of the Bill relates to Corporate Social Responsibility of the Major Ports and requires the
Board of Port Authorities to utilise funds for providing social benefits including development of infrastructure
in areas of education, environment, health, housing, skill development, training, etc., within the port limits
for its employees, customers, business partners, Non-Governmental Organisations and society at large.
218. The stakeholders have pointed out that since the Port Authority is not coming under the purview
of Companies Act how the provision of Companies Act can be entertained for the purpose. The Ministry
of Shipping while furnishing the reply to this point clarified that the reference of Companies Act is
inadvertently mentioned in clause 59 and the Ministry is proposing to rectify the error.
219. The Committee notes the reply given by the Ministry. The Committee recommends that
appropriate corrections may be carried out to rectify the error in Clause 59.
220. The Committee also notes that Port limits as defined in Clause 2 (w) is a restricted area
and notified by the Central Government. Therefore, the provision of social benefits cannot be
restricted to port limits alone. The Committee therefore recommends that in Clause 59 (1) the
word "port limits" may be replaced with the word "within or outside port limits".

46
221. Clause 61
61. (1) The Board may, with the previous approval of the Central Government and after previous
publication, by notification, shall make regulations consistent with this Act and the rules made
there-under to carry out the provisions of this Act.
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such regulations
may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:—
(a) rules of procedure for transaction of business under sub-section (1) of section 12;
(b) rules of procedure for transaction of business under sub-section (2) of section 13;
(c) the appointment of employees under clause (b) of sub-section (1) of section 16;
(d) the use and development of the port assets under sub-section (2) of section 19;
(e) the purposes of planning and development of Major Port under section 22;
(f) the form of port security under sub-section (3) of section 30; and
(g) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, specified by regulations or in respect
of which provision is to be made by regulations.
222. Clause 61 of the Bill provides that the Board may, with the prior approval of the Central Government,
by notification, make regulations consistent with the provisions of the Act and the rules made there under.
223. The employee unions suggested the following amendments in this clause:
(i) The Board may make regulation for the appointment of any person and the terms and conditions
for such appointment.
(ii) The procedure for filing an appeal in respect of matters of eviction of persons from the
premises of the Board as set forth u/s 63.
(iii) Section 28, Power to make regulation and Section 122, Power of Central Government to make
rules to be included as it is in the Major Port Authority bill 2016.
224. The Ministry of Shipping replied that relevant provisions with regards to the Power of Central
Government to make rules and the Power of the Board to make regulations are stipulated in clause 60
and 61 of the MPA Bill, respectively.
225. The Committee recommends that the following provisions may also be inserted under Clause
61 (g) as under:
(a) the appointment, promotion, suspension, reduction in rank, compulsory retirement,
removal and dismissal of its employees;
(b) their leave, leave allowances, pensions, gratuities, compassionate allowances and
travelling allowances and the establishment and maintenance of a Provident Fund or
any other fund for their welfare;

47
(c) the terms and conditions of service of persons who become employees of the Board
under.
(d) the time and manner in which appeals may be preferred and the procedure for deciding
such appeals.
226. Clause 63
63. (1) The Major Port Trusts Act, 1963 is here by repealed.
(2) Notwithstanding the repeal of the Major Port Trusts Act, 1963 under sub-section (1),—
(a) anything done primarily by the Board of T rustees under the Major Port Trusts Act, 1963
in respect of any rule, notification, inspection, order or notice made or issued or any
appointment or declaration made or any operation undertaken or any direction given or
any proceeding taken or any penalty, punishment, forfeiture or fine imposed under the
Major Port Trusts Act, 1963, shall, insofar as it is not inconsistent with the provisions
of this Act, be deemed to have been done or taken under the corresponding provisions
of this Act;
(b) any order, rule, notification, regulation, appointment, conveyance, mortgage, deed, trust,
special purpose vehicle, joint venture, document or agreement made, fee directed, resolution
passed, direction given, proceeding taken, instrument executed or issued, or thing done
under or in pursuance of the repealed Major Port Trusts Act, 1963 shall, if in force at
the commencement of this Act and not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act,
continue to be in force, and shall have effect as if made, directed, passed, given, taken,
executed, issued or done under or in pursuance of this Act;
(c) any principle or rule of law, or established jurisdiction, form or course of pleading,
practice or procedure or existing usage, custom, privilege, restriction or exemption shall
not be affected, notwithstanding that the same respectively may have been in any manner
affirmed or recognised or derived by, in, or from, the repealed Major Port Trusts Act,
1963;
(d) any person appointed to any office under or by virtue of the repealed Major Port Trusts
Act, 1963 shall be deemed to have been appointed to that office under or by virtue of
this Act;
(e) any jurisdiction, custom, liability, right, title, privilege, restriction, exemption, usage,
practice, procedure or other matter or thing not in existence or in force shall not be
revised or restored;
(f) any documents and any funds constituted and established under the repealed enactments
shall be deemed to be documents and funds constituted or established under the
corresponding provisions of this Act;
(g) any prosecution instituted under the repealed enactments and pending immediately before

48
the commencement of this Act before any Court shall, subject to the provisions of this
Act, continue to be heard and disposed of by the said Court; and
(h) any inspection, investigation or inquiry ordered to be done under the repealed Major Port
Trusts Act, 1963 shall continue to be proceeded with as if such inspection, investigation
or inquiry has been ordered under the corresponding provisions of this Act.
(3) The mention of particular matters in sub-section (2) shall not be held to prejudice the general
application of section 6 of the General Clauses Act, 1897 with regard to the effect of repeal
of the Major Port Trusts Act, 1963.
227. Clause 63 of the Bill relates to repeal of the Major Port Trusts Act, 1963 and saving of certain
actions taken under the said Act.
228. Representatives of the Major Ports have suggested that the retired employees and the pension
payment under the earlier MPT Act, 1963 may be saved by including "retired employees and payment
of pension" in the Bill.
229. The Ministry of Shipping replied that Clause 18 (a) and (c) of the MPA Bill stipulates that upon the
constitution of the Board of Major Port Authority, the Board of Major Port Authority would be the
successor of the Board of Trustees under the MPT Act and all obligations of the Board of Trustees will
be deemed to be the obligations of the Board of Major Port Authority. Accordingly, the obligation of the
Board of Trustees to pay pension to the retired employees under the MPT Act will become the obligation
of the Board of Major Port Authority once the MPA Bill is notified by the Central Government and the
new Board of Major Port Authority is constituted under the MPA Bill and hence required no change.
230. The Committee is not satisfied with the reply of the Ministry of Shipping. The Committee
recommends that the retired employees and the pension payment under the earlier MPT Act,
1963 may be retained by including the words "retired employees and payment of pension" in the
Bill under this clause.
231. The Committee also recommends that Section 133 (2A), 2(B), and 2(C) of the MPT Act may
be retained which enables the municipal assessment of properties of Mumbai, Calcutta and
Chennai ports.
232. The Committee approved other Clauses of the Major Port Authorities Bill, 2016 without any
modifications.
General Observations and recommendations
233. The Committee was informed by the employee unions that there is a ban on recruitment in Major
Ports. At one time the Ports have about three lakh employees at one stage and it has come down to
38,000 now and many Major Ports are facing shortage of manpower.
234. The Committee recommends that government may make a study of the requirement of
staff at each port and as per study report necessary actions may be taken to recruit the staff
in the major ports.

49
235. The Committee notes that the Government intents to attract investors in the ports. However,
the ports like Cochin, Visakhapatnam, Mumbai and Goa are handling defence cargo. If the
private operators are given authority to handle such confidential cargo, there may be chances
of leakage of the details to anti national elements. The Committee recommends that while
handing over the port related activities to private operators, there should not be any compromise
on the national security and safety aspects.
236. The Committee recommends that necessary provisions may be incorporated for CSR Audit
by Practicing Company Secretaries in order to scrutinize the expenditure of CSR Fund and
transparency, accuracy and authenticity of the expenditure. CSR Audit by the Company Secretary
in practice is, therefore, an independent and objective assurance intended to add value and give
necessary comfort to the Port Authority.
237. The Committee notes that new ports are coming up in the vicinity of major ports affecting
the business and profitability of the major ports. The Committee therefore recommends that no
new ports should be established in the 100 km. vicinity of the existing major ports without the
permission of the Board of the existing major ports.

50
RECOMMENDA TIONS/OBSERV A TIONS— AT A GLANCE
The Committee has gone through the concern and apprehension of the various stakeholders
regarding corporatization/privatization of the ports. But, there are some clauses which give
impression that the proposed Bill provides the Government more teeth to allow private players
in the port sector which may, in future take full control over the port activities. (Para:14)
The Committee recommends that the Ministry in the first instance, should remove the fears
of the stakeholders on the issue of 'privatization of ports' and ensure that the administrative,
managerial and financial control of the Port will remain with the Port managements.
(Para:15)
Clause 2
In view of the above, the Committee suggests that the following definitions may be added
under this Clause:
(i) "Central Government" means the Government of India represented by the Ministry
of Shipping;'
(ii) "Deputy Chairman" means the Deputy Chairman of the Board appointed;
(iii) "Government Nominee Member" means the Government Nominee Member appointed
on the Board;
(iv) "Labour Nominee Member" means the labour nominee member appointed on the
Board under;
(v) "Major Port Trusts Act, 1963" means the erstwhile Major Port Trusts Act, 1963 (38 of
1963);
(vi) "Non-Port Related use" means any activity for purposes other than the Port activity;
(vii) "Port Related use" means any activity for the purposes Port and its use;
(viii)"R ules" means rules made under or pursuant to this Act by the Central Government
for the purposes of this Act;
(ix) Definitions for the terms 'Public Servant, Eviction and Staff may be included. In sub-
clause (d), 'Chairperson' may be modified as "Chairperson and Deputy Chairperson"
(Para:20)
The Committee recommends that under Clause 2(v) in the definition of Port assets may be
modified suitably to include any asset within the port limits including within or outside Port
limits. (Para:22)
The Committee notes that Major Ports are owning vast land property. Therefore, port assets
should include all its assets such as land even outside the Port limits. The Committee recommends
50

51
that under Clause 2(v), "Port assets means any asset within the port limits including" may be
replaced with the words "Port asset means any asset within or outside Port limits including".
(Para:23)
The Committee also recommends that definition of "Rules" and "Deputy Chairperson"
should be incorporated in the MPA Bill, 2016. (Para:24)
The Committee recommends that Ministry of Shipping may include the dredgers also in the
list of vessels as suggested in the previous paragraph. (Para:26)
Clause 3
The Committee notes that production and productivity of Ports lies on the proper management
of labour. Efficiency of any Port is measured particularly considering the labour productivity.
After considering all the aspects of the various representations received and the oral evidence
recorded before the Committee, the Committee suggests the following modifications in the
Clause 3 of Bill related to Constitution of the Board:
(i) The employees and labour involved in the Port activities are one of its major stakeholder
and they need a better representation in the Board. The Committee therefore
recommends that minimum 2 labour representatives should be appointed in the Port
Authority Board from among the serving employees of the Port. Here the Committee
would reiterate that the Labour Nominee should be a serving employee of the Port.
(ii) Provided further that before appointing any person to represent the labour employed
in the port, the Central Government shall obtain the opinion of the serving employees
of the Major Ports and the selection procedure of the labour representative should be
same as the existing one. In fact the Ministry of Shipping assured the Committee that
the selection of the Labour nominee should be same as that of the existing one and
the procedure will be prescribed in the Rules. (Para:39)
The Committee also notes that in the mode of appointment of Board of Directors in the
existing Major Port Trusts, the qualification and experience in the port operations are mostly
ignored and favoritism and other vested interests play a major role. The Committee notes that
the Independent Members are not so important and many a times they are representatives of
vested interests nominated to the Boards to perpetuate the business interests of some people.
The Committee recommends that the Independent Members should be persons having expertise
in port activities. And while prescribing the Rules, the qualifications and the criteria of expertise
should be specifically mentioned. The Committee also notes that in a Board consisting of eleven
members there is no point in having four Independent Members. The Committee therefore,
recommends that there should be a maximum of two members in the category of Independent
Members in the Board. (Para:40)
Clause 4
The Committee observes that the ports being the country's major trade centre, apart from
cargo handling, Major Ports have to undertake several ancillary functions like dredging,

52
maintenance of navigational channel, pilotage, berthing, buoying, bunkering, dry docking etc.
The Committee therefore recommends that the Members of the Board should have several years
of knowledge and professional experience in Shipping, Mercantile Marine Department, and
Management of Port Administration. The Committee also recommends that the necessary corrections
to Clause 4 as identified by the Ministry of Shipping may be carried out. (Para:45)
The Committee observes that cross reference given in Clause 4 (2) and 4 (4) does not
correlate to sub-clause (3) of clause (3), where sub-clause (3) does not exist. It should be
mentioned as clause (c) of Sub-clause (1) of Clause 3 and clause (f) of Sub-clause (1) of Clause
3 respectively. (Para:46)
Clause 5
The Committee notes that Clause 9 also deals with removal of Chairperson by the Central
Government under certain circumstances. The Committee recommends that sections given under
Clause 9 in the Bill may be merged with Clause 5 in order to avoid duplication. The Committee
also recommends that the word 'Deputy Chairperson' may be included in Clause 5(1)(d).
(Para:50)
Clause 6
The Committee notes the reply given by the Ministry of Shipping to the suggestions proposed
by the stakeholders. The Committee recommends that the labour nominee member appointed
representing the interest of the employees shall hold office for a term of 3 years and shall not
hold office for more than two consecutive terms. Provided the labour nominee should be a
serving employee and his Board Membership will be co-terminous with his retirement. The
Committee also recommends that the tenure of an independent Member should be 3 years,
however, the independent Member should have 15 years of experience of Port and port related
activities. (Para:56)
Clause 7
The Committee recommends that person appointed as Chairperson or Deputy Chairperson
or Member should not have any financial or other interest in functioning of ports and Members
shall not participate when such related matters are taken up for discussion at the meeting. The
Committee also recommends that prescribed format for declaration of interests and assets may
be given in the rules. (Para:61)
Clause 10
The Committee recommends that the Members appointed shall be paid honorarium as per
government rules. The Committee also suggests that the Clause 10 may be read as 'The Members
appointed under clauses (c), (d) and (f) of sub-section (1) of Section 3, shall be paid such
honorarium as may be prescribed'. (Para:66)

53
Clause 11
The Committee recommends that the powers and duties of Members may also be included
in this Clause to remove any ambiguity in the matter. (Para:70)
Clause 12
The Committee notes the reply given by the Ministry of Shipping. The Committee recommends
that the provisions given under 12(3)(a) may be deleted as it impacts the functional and strategic
independence of the Board. (Para:76)
The Committee observes that the Clause 12(3)(b) needs more clarity. The Committee
therefore, suggests that the above clause may read as ".......the Board shall dispose of any
application addressed to it within a period of 60 days from the date of receipt of the application".
As regards the suggestion given by the Major Ports, the Committee recommends that the future
course of action on such non-disposed receipts may be uniform in all the Port Authorities.
(Para:77)
The Committee also recommends that the manner to conduct Board meetings should be
separately defined in the Rules including that of conduct of Board meetings through video
conferencing and audio visual means. (Para:78)
Clause 13
The Committee notes the reply given by the Ministry of Shipping and agreed to it.
(Para:83)
Clause 17
Taking note of the reply furnished by the Ministry of Shipping, the Committee feels that
the period of five years is sufficient and there is no need to change the period. (Para:88)
The Committee observes that Section 25 of MPT Act, 1963 has provision for "power to
promote, grant leave, etc. to employees of Board" which has been removed in the MPA Bill, 2016.
The Committee recommends that the equivalent provision or adoption of rules may be included
in the Bill. (Para:89)
Clause 18
The Committee considered the above matter and recommends that there shall be safeguards
to the existing benefits including the pensionery benefits. Necessary clause in this regard should
be inserted while finalizing the Bill. (Para:95)
In clause 18 (c) the Committee notes that even when an obligation was entered into by port
(say 5 years back) and is still to be fulfilled, it has to be taken care by the new Board. Therefore,
the word "immediately" may be removed. (Para:96)

54
Clause 19
Taking into consideration of the points raised by the stakeholders and the reply furnished
by the Ministry of Shipping, the Committee recommends that necessary modifications may be
made to this clause to have clear ownership terms on the properties of the Ports. The Committee
suggests that alternatively, Section 34(1) of MPT Act, 1963 may be retained in this place.
(Para:102)
The Committee observes that in clause 19(3) for port development, sometimes assets are
to be developed by port outside port limits- for example storage areas, railheads etc. Similarly,
there is no reason to restrict any activities within port limits. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that the word "Port Limit" may be deleted from this sub-clause. (Para:103)
The Committee also recommends that the provision regarding sale of port assets may have
a condition of utilizing unused or wastelands, keeping aside the useful lands with it, in this
clause. (Para:104)
Clause 21
The Committee recommends that necessary action may be taken while framing Regulations
regarding contracts sealed on behalf of the Board under this Clause. (Para:108)
Clause 22
The Committee observes that Major Ports shall have the power to make their own regulations
without any interference of any authority. The port limits would be independent of any local or
State Government regulations of any authority. The Committee recommends that the Ministry
of Shipping should incorporate necessary amendments accordingly. (Para:113)
Clause 23
The Committee notes the various arguments given by various stakeholders about clause 23.
The Committee recommends the following in this regard: (Para:123)
With reference to proviso (a) to Clause 23 (1) (f), the ports may be given flexibility to
implement the revised rates with retrospective effect in the following circumstances:
(i) Rectification of clerical, typographical and arithmetical mistakes observed in the revised
rates:
(ii) Annual escalation is due from 1st April of every year, based on the WPI variation
during the preceding calendar year.
(iii) The Board/competent authority may approve a tariff cycle for revision say 2 years or
3 years and the revision will be due from the next tariff cycle, which will be a specific
date, i.e., 1st April or 1st January.
(iv) Exemption may be given for implementation of rates with retrospective effect in case
of Court direction/orders. (Para:124)

55
With reference to proviso (b) to Clause 23 (1) (f), the existing BOT operators are liable to
pay to the Ports, the charges for the services provided to them and lease rent for the land
allotted to them, as per the scale of rates, fixed in accordance with Clause 23 (1) (f), subject to
the provisions in the License Agreement. Hence, it may be considered to include " in so far as
the services provided by the BOT operators under PPP projects are concerned". (Para:125)
Regarding 23 (2), in view of public- private-partnerships, there should be an occasion to
lease any asset and need not be limited to land/sheds. Therefore, "Lease any land...." May be
amended to read as 'Leasing of any asset including..." (Para:126)
Clause 25
The Committee, therefore, recommends that the following sections may be inserted under
this clause stating (1) 'the Board shall allow the vessel to discharge the goods and shall retain
the goods in the custody of the Board for purpose of this section, for all such vessel(s) that are
allowed to berth at such port and have received or allowed such berth from such port". (2) "If
any cargo which is required to be moved at the instance of Major Port or as per any Custom
requirements to Container Freight Station or Inland Container Depot from the major port, the
rights of the Board under this section and section 24 will subsist as if the goods are in custody
of the Board." (Para:131)
Clause 26
The Committee notes that there should be provisions in the Bill to decongest the cargo
accumulations in the ports so that the unclaimed cargo can be easily disposed/auctioned. The
Committee therefore recommends that a new suitable sub-clause may be added to this Clause
for addressing the above issue. (Para:137)
The Committee also recommends that for easy movement of traffic and to ensure protection
of rights of the ports, Container Freight Stations and Shipowners, the rights under Clause 26 in
the proposed bill should also be applicable to cargoes in Container Freight Stations. (Para:138)
The Committee also notes that the port has got powers to sell any goods after expiry of such
time and manner as stipulated in the Section 48 of Customs Act, 1962 and applied in manner
as provided in section 150 of the Customs Act, 1962. The Committee recommends that any
amendment to the Act regarding sale process shall be applicable to the new Act and same may
be included in this Clause. (Para:139)
Clause 28
The Committee recommends that the interests of the concessionaire may also be protected
and suitable amendments may be carried out in the above clause. (Para:144)
Clause 29
The Committee recommends that relevant timeline for disposal of application would be
formulated in the Rules. (Para:147)

56
Clause 30
The Committee notes the apprehensions shown by various stakeholders especially the
employee unions of ports that the provisions given in clause 30 to empower the port authorities
to raise loans from open market and also foreign financial institutions may finally lead to take
over the control of the port management by foreign entities or private parties. The loans from
the foreign financial institutions should not be a backdoor opening for such institutions to gain
administrative and managerial control of the Ports. The Committee therefore, cautions the
Government that this clause may be thoroughly scrutinized again and any loopholes in it may
be rectified so that the management and administrative control of the port authority may remain
with the Government at any circumstances. (Para:154)
The Committee recommends that a new para should be added in this clause 30 (1) as "Board
may without the approval of the RBI, Central Government and due notification in official
gazette, raise no loans for the purpose of the Act. Provided that no such notification shall be
necessary if a loan is obtained from State Government or Central Government". (Para:155)
Clause 39
The Committee recommends that this clause may be modified as "Ports shall have power
to invest in any Nationalised Banks within India" and can borrow from any "scheduled Banks
and financial institutions". (Para:160)
Clause 40
The Committee heard the views of the employees unions and the Ministry of Shipping
regarding the implications of this Clause. The Committee recommends that provision contained
under section 88 of the existing MPT Act, 1963 may be retained in place of this Clause.
(Para:165)
Clause 41
The Committee recommends that the suggestions as given by the employees unions may be
considered while formulating the Rules under the Clause 41. (Para:170)
Clause 50
The Committee notes the points raised by the stakeholders and the reply given by the
Ministry. The Committee is also agreeable to the apprehension of the employee unions that
retaining the Section 111 of the MPT Act, 1963 in the new Bill may be intentional to use it at
the appropriate time by the Government and may endanger the very interest of the Major Ports,
particularly when the ongoing policy of privatization is aggressively pursued by the Central
Government. The power given to Central Government under the Clause 50 to issue directions
to the Directors of the Board may lead to converting the Port Authorities into companies through
executive order of the Central Government. The Committee recommends that the Government
should not misuse the provision given under this Clause for any such activities as pointed out
by the stakeholders. (Para:177)

57
Clause 51
The Committee notes the reply given by the Ministry of Shipping over various points raised
by the stakeholders. The Committee notes that under 51(3)(b), the Adjudicatory Board is given
judicial powers to handle disputes. However, the composition of this authority does not seem to
be composition of a judicial authority. The Committee recommends that under 51(4), the Chairman
of the Adjudicatory Board may be equal to the status of a High Court Judge in order to avoid
any ambiguity on the matter. (Para:190)
The Committee recommends that the ambiguity in clause 51(11) may be clarified in the final
Bill. (Para:191)
In 51(d) the words "free to resort to arbitration" may be deleted since it is contradictory
to 51 (12). (Para:192)
The Committee recommends that provisions for transfer of existing disputes against Major
Ports to Adjudicatory Body for disposal may be included in this clause. (Para:193)
The Committee also recommends that the domain of the Adjudicatory Board on deciding
disputes arising from existing contracts would be defined in the Rules. (Para:194)
Clause 55
The Committee recommends that the above issue may be considered while framing the
Rules. The Committee also recommends that Section 120 of the MPT Act, 1963 may be incorporated
under this clause. (Para:197)
Clause 56
The Committee recommends that the definitions of the public servant and the applicable
rules may be inserted in the Bill. (Para:201)
Clause 57
The Committee notes the grievances of certain individuals on the Clause 57 and the reply
furnished by the Ministry of Shipping on the matter. The Committee also notes the reply given
by the Ministry that section 130 of the Major Port Trusts Act, 1963 have similar provision for
eviction of the un-authorized occupants of the Port land though many people are continuing
there since generations. The Committee has the opinion that the ports have every right to
protect the land under their jurisdiction. There is no right for the unauthorized occupants to
claim a stake in the Port land. The Committee therefore recommends that the ports may evict
encroachers and unauthorized occupants from the port land at the earliest. (Para:208)
Clause 58
The Committee notes that navigational safety is a cause of concern especially the Indian
coasts witnessed similar incidents of vessels collisions and abandoning the vessels in a dangerous
manner as pointed out by the stakeholders. The Committee, therefore, recommends that specific

58
clauses may be added to the Bill empowering the Port Boards to make provisions for making
Navigational Safety Audits mandatory. (Para:215)
Clause 59
The Committee notes the reply given by the Ministry. The Committee recommends that
appropriate corrections may be carried out to rectify the error in Clause 59. (Para:219)
The Committee also notes that Port limits as defined in Clause 2 (w) is a restricted area
and notified by the Central Government. Therefore, the provision of social benefits cannot be
restricted to port limits alone. The Committee therefore recommends that in Clause 59 (1) the
word "port limits" may be replaced with the word "within or outside port limits". (Para:220)
Clause 61
The Committee recommends that the following provisions may also be inserted under Clause
61 (g) as under:
(a) the appointment, promotion, suspension, reduction in rank, compulsory retirement,
removal and dismissal of its employees;
(b) their leave, leave allowances, pensions, gratuities, compassionate allowances and
travelling allowances and the establishment and maintenance of a Provident Fund or
any other fund for their welfare;
(c) the terms and conditions of service of persons who become employees of the Board
under.
(d) the time and manner in which appeals may be preferred and the procedure for deciding
such appeals. (Para:225)
Clause 63
The Committee is not satisfied with the reply of the Ministry of Shipping. The Committee
recommends that the retired employees and the pension payment under the earlier MPT Act,
1963 may be retained by including the words "retired employees and payment of pension" in the
Bill under this clause. (Para:230)
The Committee also recommends that Section 133 (2A), 2(B), and 2(C) of the MPT Act may
be retained which enables the municipal assessment of properties of Mumbai, Calcutta and
Chennai ports. (Para:231)
The Committee approved other Clauses of the Major Port Authorities Bill, 2016 without any
modifications. (Para:232)
General Observations and recommendations
The Committee recommends that government may make a study of the requirement of
staff at each port and as per study report necessary actions may be taken to recruit the staff
in the major ports. (Para:234)

59
The Committee notes that the Government intents to attract investors in the ports. However,
the ports like Cochin, Visakhapatnam, Mumbai and Goa are handling defence cargo. If the
private operators are given authority to handle such confidential cargo, there may be chances
of leakage of the details to anti national elements. The Committee recommends that while
handing over the port related activities to private operators, there should not be any compromise
on the national security and safety aspects. (Para:235)
The Committee recommends that necessary provisions may be incorporated for CSR Audit
by Practicing Company Secretaries in order to scrutinize the expenditure of CSR Fund and
transparency, accuracy and authenticity of the expenditure. CSR Audit by the Company Secretary
in practice is, therefore, an independent and objective assurance intended to add value and give
necessary comfort to the Port Authority. (Para:236)
The Committee notes that new ports are coming up in the vicinity of major ports affecting
the business and profitability of the major ports. The Committee therefore recommends that no
new ports should be established in the 100 km vicinity of the existing major ports without the
permission of the Board of the existing major ports. (Para:237)

MINUTES

XIII
THIRTEENTH MEETING
The Committee met at 3:00 P.M. on Monday, the 10th April, 2017 in Committee Room 'A', Ground
Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Mukul Roy  —  Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Ritabrata Banerjee
3. Shri Prabhakar Kore
4. Shri Kiranmay Nanda
5. Shri Narendra Kumar Swain
6. Shri Lal Sinh Vadodia
LOK SABHA
7. Shri Ram Charitra Nishad
8. Kumari Arpita Ghosh
9. Shri Rahul Kaswan
10. Shri Harish Chandra Meena
11. Shri Rajesh Pandey
12. Shri Kunwar Haribansh Singh
13. Shri Rakesh Singh
SECRETARIAT
Shri J.G Negi, Joint Secretary
Shri Swarabji B., Director
Shri Arun Kumar, Assistant Director
Shrimati Catherine John L., Assistant Director
Shri P .P . Raumon, Committee Officer
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee to the meeting. The Committee
discussed its future course of action alongwith the pending subjects before the Committee. The Chairman
63

64
informed the Committee that the time allotted for examination and consideration of the two Bills viz., 'The
Merchant Shipping Bill, 2016' and 'The Major Port Authorities Bill, 2016' is expiring on the 12th April,
2017. The Committee could not consider the Bills since it was busy with the Motor Vehicles (Amendment)
Bill, 2016 and the examination of Demands for Grants (2017-18). The Committee needs three more
months to examine and submit its reports on the Bills. The Committee accordingly decided to approach
the Hon'ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha to seek extension of three months for submitting its reports on the
two Bills. The Committee then authorized its Chairman to approach the Hon'ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha
for seeking extension of time upto 12th July, 2017 to submit its reports.
3. The meeting was adjourned at 3.30 
P.M.

65
XIV
FOURTEENTH MEETING
The Committee met at 11:30 A.M. on Tuesday, the 25th April, 2017 in Committee Room A, Ground
Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Mukul Roy  —  Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Ritabrata Banerjee
3. Shri Kiranmay Nanda
4. Shri Rangasayee Ramakrishna
5. Kumari Selja
6. Shri Rajeev Shukla
7. Shri Lal Sinh Vadodia
LOK SABHA
8. Shri Ram Charitra Nishad
9. Shri Vinod Chavda
10. Kumari Arpita Ghosh
11. Shri P . Kumar
12. Shri Harish Chandra Meena
13. Shri Kristappa Nimmala
14. Shri Rajesh Pandey
15. Shri Rajesh Ranjan
16. Shri Ram Kumar Sharma
17. Shri Kunwar Haribansh Singh
18. Shri Rakesh Singh
19. Shri Shatrughan Sinha
20. Shri Manoj Tiwari
21. Shri K. C. Venugopal
65

66
SECRETARIAT
Shri Swarabji B., Director
Shri Arun Kumar, Under Secretary
Shrimati Catherine John L., Under Secretary
Shri P .P . Raumon, Committee Officer
Ministry of Shipping
1. Shri Rajive Kumar, Secretary
2. Dr. Alok Srivastava, Addl. Secy.
3. Dr. Pradeep Kumar, JS&FA
4. Shri Barun Mitra, JS (Ports)
5. Shri Parvir Krishan, JS (S&Parl.)
6. Shri M.M. Hasija, Adviser
7. Dr. Malini Shankar, DG (Shipping)
8. Shri Amitabh Kumar, Addl. Director Genl.
9. Shri Sanjay Bhatia, Chairman, MbPT as Chairman, IPA
10. Shri T.S. Balasubramanian, Member, Finance(TAMP)
11. Shri A. Janardhana Rao, MD(IPA)
12. Shri B.R. Sekhar, Chief Surveyor, DGS
13. Shri Suresh Kumar, Chief Ship Surveyor, DGS
14. Dr. Amol B. Kirtane, Dy.DG(Crew), DGS
15. Capt. Anish Joseph, Nautical Surveyor, DGS
16. Shri A.K. Saran, Director
Legislative Department (Ministry of Law & Justice)
17. Dr. Reeta Vasistha, Additional Secretary
18. Shri R. Sreenivas, Additional Legislative Counsel
19. Shri K. Biswal, Joint Secretary and Legislative Counsel
20. Shri R.K. Pattanayak, Deputy Legislative Counsel
2. At the outset, the Chairman, welcomed the Secretary , Ministry of Shipping and other senior officials
to the meeting. Since the Secretary, Shipping has some pre-scheduled engagement with the PMO, the

67
Chairman decided to take up only the Major Port Authorities Bill, 2016 for discussion for the day. The
Chairman asked the Secretary to make the presentation on the Major Port Authorities Bill, 2016. The
Secretary, explained about the salient features and other various aspects on the Major Port Authorities
Bill, 2016. The Secretary also gave the details of consultation they have made while formulating the Bill,
the various Clauses safeguarding the interests of the present employees of ports the various aspect for
protecting the business of the ports, autonomy of ports, financial freedom of ports, etc.
3. Members asked questions on various issues on the Bill and the Secretary replied some of them and
the Chairman directed the officials of the Ministry to send the replies of unanwered questions in writing
to the Secretariat at the earliest.
4. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
5. The meeting adjourned at 12.45 P.M.

68
XV
FIFTEENTH MEETING
The Committee met at 11:30 A.M. on Wednesday, the 3rd May, 2017 in Committee Room No.63,
First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Kumari Selja — In the Chair
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Ritabrata Banerjee
3. Shri Kiranmay Nanda
4. Shri Rangasayee Ramakrishna
5. Shri Rajeev Shukla
LOK SABHA
6. Shri Ram Charitra Nishad
7. Shri Rahul Kaswan
8. Shri P. Kumar
9. Shri Harish Chandra Meena
10. Shri Kristappa Nimmala
11. Shri Rajesh Pandey
12. Shri Kunwar Haribansh Singh
13. Shri Shatrughan Sinha
14. Shri Manoj Tiwari
15. Shri K. C. Venugopal
SECRETARIAT
Shri J.G .Negi., Joint Secretary
Shri Swarabji B., Director
Shri Arun Kumar, Under Secretary
Shrimati Catherine John L., Under Secretary
Shri P .P . Raumon, Committee Officer
68

69
Witnesses
1. Indian National Port & Dock Workers Federation
Sh. Prabhat Samantaray President
Sh. Mohan K. Aswani Addl. General Secretary
2. All India Port & Dock Workers' Federation (W)
Sh. S.K. Shetye President
Sh. S.R. Apraj General Secretary
3. All India Port & Dock Workers' Federation, Kochi
Sh. P.M. Mohammed Haneef President
Sh. M.L. Bellani Additional General Secretary
4. Water Transport Workers Federation of India
Mr. C.D. Nandakumar President
Mr. T. Narendra Rao General Secretary
5. Indian Private Ports & Terminals Association
Mr. Kevin D'Souza Vice President
Mr. Ravi Kumar Treasurer
6. The BPT Residential Tenants Association
Sh. Homi Chibber Chairman
Sh. Viren Asar
7. Container Shipping Lines Association
Mr. Tarun Kalra
Mr. Josy John
8. The Associated Chambers of Commerce and Industry of India
Mr. C.N. Rajasekar Managing Committee Member
Mr. Ritesh Dhasmana Senior Executive
2. As the Chairman of the Committee was not able to attend the meeting, the Members unanimously
requested Kumari Selja, Member of the Committee, to chair and conduct the proceedings of the meeting
for the day.
3. Thereafter, the Chairperson welcomed the Members of the Committee to the meeting. The Chairperson
also welcomed the representatives of various associations who deposed before the Committee, on the

70
Major Port Authorities Bill, 2016 which was referred to the Committee, for examination and report. The
chair asked Shri P. Samantaray ex-MP to make the presentation first followed by the other stakeholders.
4. Shri Samantaray then explained to the Committee about the short-comings in the proposed Major
Port Authorities Bill, 2016 as the Government has deviated a lot from the assurance given to the
stakeholders while interacting with them at the drafting stage of the Bill. He also explained the importance
of induction of two labour representatives in the proposed Port Authority Board with justifications for
his claim. The other representatives of the employees federations also put the same demand. They have
also opposed the proposal for induction of independent members in the Board as it may lead to appointment
of vested interests and persons don't having any link or experience with port related activities in the
Board. One of the representatives suggested some modifications in the definitions given in the Bill.
Another representative pointed out that the Government is not allowing the Port Board to act independently
and there is a ban on recruitment for the last many years and all the ports are at present understaffed.
The ports are not allowed to modernize its equipments, generate loans for port development etc. They
have also pointed out another drawback in the Bill as there is no provision given for protecting the interest
of the pensioners and family pensioners of the ports. Most of the employees federations pointed out that
the new Bill is going to allow to deposit the port revenues in the private banks including foreign based
banks and the ports can raise loans from foreign private banks after pledging the port land and other
assets to them. They expressed their concerns that this provision may later on lead to privatization of
the Major Ports or their acquisitions by foreign entities, which is not good for the port sector as well
as the country.
5. The representatives from the Private Ports and Terminals Association pointed out that there is no
level playing field for them after introduction of the new Act because of some faults in clause 23 of the
Bill. He also pointed out that some provisions in Clause 51 is also against their business interest.
Representatives from the Commerce and Industry sector demanded for their representation in the Board.
Representatives of the Container Shipping Lines Association also suggested some modifications in certain
clauses like Clause 25, 26 and 55 which are affecting their interest. Representatives from the BPT
Residential Tenants Association shown their apprehension over the Clause 57 of the Bill which is allowing
the Port Authorities to evict unauthorized encroachments in the port land and demanded for some justice
to the affected persons.
6. Members of the Committee also raised certain queries to which the representatives responded.
7. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
8. The meeting adjourned at 1.42 
P.M.

71
XVII
SEVENTEENTH MEETING
The Committee met at 3:00 P.M. on Friday, the 23rd June, 2017 in Committee Room A, Ground
Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
1. Shri Mukul Roy  —  Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Ritabrata Banerjee
3. Dr. Prabhakar Kore
4. Shri Kiranmay Nanda
5. Shri Rajeev Shukla
6. Shri Narendra Kumar Swain
7. Shri Lal Sinh Vadodia
LOK SABHA
8. Shri Ram Charitra Nishad
9. Kumari Arpita Ghosh
10. Shri Rahul Kaswan
11. Shri P . Kumar
12. Shri Kristappa Nimmala
13. Shri Rajesh Pandey
14. Shri Ram Kumar Sharma
15. Shri Kunwar Haribansh Singh
16. Shri Rakesh Singh
17. Shri Shatrughan Sinha
18. Shri K. C. Venugopal
SECRETARIAT
Shri M.K. Khan, Joint Secretary
Shri Swarabji B, Director
Shri Arun Kumar, Deputy Secretary
Shrimati Catherine John L. Under Secretary
Shri P .P . Raumon, Committee Officer
71

72
Ministry of Shipping
1. Dr. Alok Srivastava, Special Secretary
2. Dr. Pradeep Kumar, JS&FA
3. Shri Barun Mitra, Joint Secretary (Ports)
4. Shri Pravir Krishn, Joint Secretary (Shipping)
5. Shri A.K. Saran, Director
Mumbai Port Trust
6. Shri Sanjay Bhatia, Chairman
Jawaharlal Nehru Port Trust
7. Shri Naresh Kumar, Secretary
Kandla Port Trust
8. Shri Ravi Parmar, Chairman
Chennai Port Trust & (I/C Cochin Port Trust)
9. Shri Raveendran, Chairman
Visakhapatnam Port Trust & (I/C) Kolkata Port Trust)
10. Shri M.T. Krishna Babu, Chairman
New Mangalore Port Trust
11. Shri P.C. Parida, Chairman
Mormugao Port Trust
12. Shri I. Jeyakumar, Chairman
V .O. Chidambarnar Port Trust
13. Shri S.A.C Bose, Chairman
Paradip Port Trust
14. Shri Rinkesh Roy Chairman
Indian Port Association
15. Shri A. Janaradhana Rao, Managing Director
16. Shri B.S. Negi, Deputy Manager
Tariff Authority for Major Ports
17. Shri T.S. Balasubramanian, Member (F)

73
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed Members of the Committee alongwith the Special Secretary,
Ministry of Shipping, the Chairmen of Major Ports and other senior officials of the Ministry of Shipping
to the meeting. The Chairman asked the Special Secretary, Ministry of Shipping to explain their views
on the points that have been raised by various port employees unions, port managements and other
private stakeholders on the Major Port Authorities Bill, 2016 during the study visit of the Committee to
Ahmedabad, Mumbai and Kochi during the first week of June, 2017.
3. The Special Secretary, Ministry of Shipping then explained to Committee their views on the issues
like proposed amendments to definition on certain terminology used in the Bill: various suggestions
received on the constitution of the Port Authority Board; period of appointment of Members; powers and
duties of Members; sub-committees constituted by Board: sale of port assets; tariff fixation; disposal of
applications by Adjudicatory Board; protection of pensioners benefits in the major ports and other points
raised by the private stakeholders during the study visit of the Committee.
4. The Members of the Committee also raised certain queries to which the concerned officials replied.
5. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
6. The meeting then adjourned at 4:14 
P.M.

74
XIX
NINETEENTH MEETING
The Committee met at 2:00 P.M. on Wednesday, the 12lh July, 2017 in Committee Room A, Ground
Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Mukul Roy  —  Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Dr. Prabhakar Kore
3. Shri Kiranmay Nanda
4. Shri Rangasayee Ramakrishna
5. Kumari Selja
6. Shri Narendra Kumar Swain
7. Shri Lal Sinh Vadodia
LOK SABHA
8. Shri Ram Charitra Nishad
9. Kumari Arpita Ghosh
10. Shri Rahul Kaswan
11. Shri Harish Chandra Meena
12. Shri Kristappa Nimmala
13. Shri Ram Kumar Sharma
14. Shri Shatrughan Sinha
15. Shri Manoj Tiwari
16. Shri K. C. Venugopal
SECRETARIAT
Shri J.G . Negi, Joint Secretary
Shri Arun Kumar, Deputy Secretary
Shrimati Catherine John L., Under Secretary
Shri P.P. Raumon, Committee Officer
74

75
2. *** *** ***
3. Thereafter, the Committee considered draft Reports on 'The Merchant Shipping Bill, 2016' and 'The
Major Port Authorities Bill, 2016' for adoption. After some discussion, the Committee adopted both the
Reports without any change. The Committee decided to present/lay these Reports to both the Houses
of Parliament on 18th July, 2017.
4. The Committee, accordingly, authorized its Chairman and in his absence, Kumari Selja, M.P. and
in her absence Shri Lai Sinh Vadodia, M.P. to present the Reports in Rajya Sabha. Shri K. C. Venugopal,
M.P. and in his absence Shri Ram Charitra Nishad, M.P. was authorized to lay the above mentioned
Reports on the Table of Lok Sabha on 18th July, 2017.
5. The meeting then adjourned at 2:45 P.M.
*** Relate to other matters.

ANNEXURES

ANNEXURE-I
AS INTRODUCED IN L OK S ABHA
Bill No. 328 of 2016
THE MAJOR PORT AUTHORITIES BILL, 2016
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES
CLAUSES
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
1. Short title, commencement and application.
2. Definitions.
CHAPTER II
B
OARD OF M AJOR P ORT A UTHORITY
3. Constitution and composition of Board of Major Port Authority.
4. Qualifications of Chairperson, Deputy Chairperson and Members of Board.
5. Removal of Chairperson, Deputy Chairperson and Member from office in certain circumstances.
6. Term of office of Chairperson, Deputy Chairperson and Members.
7. Disclosure of interest.
8. Resignation of Members.
9. Removal from office of Chairperson, Deputy Chairperson and Members.
10. Fees and honorarium payable to Members.
11. Powers and duties of Chairperson, Deputy Chairperson and Members.
12. Meetings of Board.
13. Appointment of committees.
14. Delegation of powers.
15. Vacancies, etc., not to invalidate proceedings of Board.
16. Power to make appointments.
79

80
CLAUSES
CHAPTER III
MANAGEMENT AND A DMINISTRATION
A. S TAFF OF M AJOR P ORT A UTHORITY
17. List of staff of Board.
B. P ROPERTY AND C ONTRACTS
18. Board to be deemed as successor of Board of Trustees of Major Port.
19. Usage of property, assets, etc., by Board.
20. Procedure when immovable property cannot be acquired by agreement.
21. Contracts by Board.
C. P
LANNING AND DEVELOPMENT
22. Powers of Board in respect of planning and development.
D. I MPOSITION OF RATES
23. Scale of rates for assets and services available at Major Port.
24. Board's lien for rates.
25. ship-owner's lien for freight and other charges.
26. sale of goods and application of sale proceeds in certain cases.
27. Master Plan.
28. Recovery of rates and charges by distraint of vessel.
29. Application to Adjudicatory Board.
CHAPTER IV
P
OWERS OF B OARDS OF M AJOR P ORT A UTHORITIES IN R ESPECT OF L OANS AND S ECURITIES
A. F INANCIAL POWERS OF B OARDS OF M AJOR P ORT A UTHORITIES
30. Power to raise loans and issue securities.
31. Endorsements to be made on security itself.
32. indorser of security not liable for amount thereof.
33. Recognition as holder of port securities in certain cases and legal effect thereof.
34. Discharge in certain cases.
35. Security for loans taken out by Boards of Major Port Authorities.

81
CLAUSES
36. Power of Board to repay loans to Government before due date.
37. Establishment and application of sinking fund.
38. Existing loans and securities to continue.
B. General accounts of Major Port Authorities
39. General accounts of Board.
40. Application of money in general accounts.
C. A
CCOUNTS AND AUDIT
41. Accounts and audit.
CHAPTER V
SUPERVISION OF C ENTRAL G OVERNMENT
42. Administration report.
43. Power of Central Government to order survey or examination of works of Board.
44. Power of Central Government to restore or complete works at cost of Board.
45. Power of Central Government to take over management of Board.
46. Laying of report.
47. Power of Central Government to exempt from obligation to use port assets.
48. Board not to sell, alienate or divest its assets, properties, rights, powers and authorisations without
sanction of Central Government.
49. Remedies of Government in respect of loans made to Board.
50. Power of Central Government to issue directions.
CHAPTER VI
C
ONSTITUTION OF A DJUDICATORY B OARD
51. Constitution of Adjudicatory Board and its functions.
CHAPTER VII
PENALTIES
52. General provision for punishment of offences.
53. Offences by companies.

82
CLAUSES
CHAPTER VIII
MISCELLANEOUS
54. Cognizance of offences.
55. Protection of acts done in good faith.
56. Persons employed by Board of Authority to be public servants.
57. Power to evict certain persons from premises of Board.
58 Alternate remedy by suit.
59. Corporate Social Responsibility and development of infrastructure by Board.
60. Power of Central Government to make rules.
61. Power of Boards of Port Authorities to make regulations.
62. Laying of rules and regulations.
63. Repeal and savings.
64. Power to remove difficulties.
65. Transitional provision.

83
AS INTRODUCED IN L OK S ABHA
Bill No. 328 of 2016
THE MAJOR PORT AUTHORITIES BILL, 2016
A
BILL
to provide for regulation, operation and planning of Major Ports in
India and to vest the administration, control and management of
such ports upon the Boards of Major Port Authorities and for
matters connected therewith or incidental thereto
Be it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-seventh Year of the Republic
of India as follows:—
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
1. (1) This Act may be called the Major Port Authorities Act, 2016.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
(3) It shall, in the first instance, apply to the Major Ports of Chennai,
Cochin, Jawaharlal Nehru Port, Kandla, Kolkata, Mumbai, New
Mangalore, Mormugao, Paradip, V.O. Chidambaranar and
Short title
commencement
and application
83

84
Visakhapatnam and to such other Major Ports with effect from
such date as the Central Government may notify.
2. (1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "Adjudicatory Board" means the Board constituted by the
Central Government under section 51;
(b) "Board" means the Board of Major Port Authority
constituted by the Central Government in accordance with
sub-section (1) of section 3 for each Major Port under
this Act;
(c) "capital reserves" for the purpose of this Act, shall mean
the total of the revenue excluding the reserves set forth
in sub-section (1) of section 40 and the value of the
current assets of the Board in the preceding financial
year;
(d) "Chairperson" means the Chairperson of the Board appointed
under sub-section (1) of section 4;
(e) "dock" includes all basins, locks, cuts, entrances, graving
docks, graving blocks, inclined planes, slipways, gridirons,
moorings, transit-sheds, warehouses, tramways, railways
and other works and things appertaining to any dock, and
also the portion of the sea enclosed or protected by the
arms or groynes of a harbour;
(f) "foreshore", in relation to a Major Port, means the area
between the high-water mark and the low-water mark
relating to that Major Port;
(g) "goods" includes livestock and every kind of movable
property;
(h) "grave emergency" means a condition as determined by
the Central Government wherein the Board is unable to
discharge its duties appropriately and includes acts of
sedition, non-performance, unlawful and illegal actions,
negligence and financial misappropriation;
(i) "high-water mark", in relation to a Major Port, means a
line drawn through the highest points reached by ordinary
spring-tides at any season of the year at that Major Port;
(j) "immovable property" includes wharfage-rights and all other
Definitions

85
rights exercisable on, over, or in respect of, any land,
wharf, dock or pier;
(k) "Independent Member" means a Member of the Board
appointed under sub-section (3) of section 4;
(l) "Indian Ports Act" means the Indian Ports Act, 1908;
(m) "land" includes the bed of the sea or river below high-
water mark, and also things attached to the earth or
permanently fastened to anything attached to the earth;
(n) "low-water mark", in relation to a Major Port, means a
line drawn through the lowest points reached by ordinary
spring-tides at any season of the year at that Major Port;
(o) "Major Port" or 'Major Port Authority' means the Major
Port as defined in clause (8) of section 3 of the Indian
Ports Act;
(p) "Major Port approaches", in relation to a Major Port, means
those parts of the navigable rivers and channels leading to
the Major Port, where the Indian Ports Act is in force;
(q) "master", in relation to any vessel or any aircraft making
use of any Major Port, means any person having for the
time being the charge or control of such vessel or such
aircraft, as the case may be, except a pilot, harbour master,
assistant harbour master, dock master or berthing master
of the Major Port;
(r) "Member" means the Member of the Board appointed under
section 4;
(s) "notification" means a notification published in the Official
Gazette and the expression "notify" shall be construed
accordingly;
(t) "owner",—
(i) in relation to goods, includes any consignor,
consignee, shipper or agent for the sale, custody,
loading or unloading of such goods; and
(ii) in relation to any vessel or any aircraft making use
of any Major Port, includes any part-owner, charterer,
consignee, or mortgagee in possession thereof;
15 of 1908

86
(u) "pier" includes any stage, stairs, landing place, hard, jetty,
floating barge, transhipper or pontoon, and any bridges or
other works connected therewith.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this clause, the term
"transhipper" means a floating craft or vessel, whether
dumb or self-propelled, on which gears are provided for
discharging cargo from a barge or wharf and loading it
into a ship;
(v) "port assets" means any asset within the port limits
including land, movable or immovable property or any
other property, whether tangible or intangible, owned by
or vested with the Board through the Central Government
or the State Government, as the case may be;
(w) "port limits" in relation to a Major Port, means the limits
including any piers, jetties, landing-places, wharves, quays,
docks and other works made on behalf of the public for
convenience of traffic, for safety of vessels or for the
improvement, maintenance or good governance of the
Major Port and its approaches whether within or without
high-water-mark, and, subject to any rights of private
property therein, any portion of the shore or bank within
fifty yards of high-water mark and the area of such Major
Port as may be determined by the Central Government by
way of notification from time to time;
(x) "port security" means the debentures, bonds or stock
certificates issued by the Board in respect of any loan
contracted by it under the provisions of this Act or issued
by any other Authority for the payment of which the
Board is liable under this Act;
(y) "prescribed" means prescribed by the rules made under
this Act;
(z) "Public Private Partnership project" means the projects
taken up through a concession contract entered into by
the Board of Major Port Authority under sub-section (1)
of section 21 based on a revenue or royalty sharing basis;
(za) "rate" includes any toll, due, rent, rate, fee, or charge
leviable under this Act;

87
(zb) "regulations" means the regulations made by the Board
under this Act;
(zc) "vessel" includes anything made for the conveyance, by
water, of human beings or of goods and a caisson;
(zd) "wharf" includes any wall or stage and any part of the
land or foreshore that may be used for loading or unloading
goods, or for the embarkation or disembarkation of
passengers and any wall enclosing or adjoining the same.
(2) Words and expression used but not defined in this Act and
defined in the Indian Ports Act shall have the same meanings
respectively assigned to them in that Act.
CHAPTER II
B
OARD OF M AJOR P ORT A UTHORITY
3. (1) The Central Government shall, within a period of ninety days
from the date of commencement of this Act, by notification,
in respect of each Major Port, constitute a Board called the
Board of Major Port Authority for that Port which shall consist
of the following Members, namely:—
(a) a Chairperson;
(b) a Deputy Chairperson;
(c) one Member each from the—
(i) Concerned State Government in which the Major
Port is situated;
(ii) Ministry of Railways;
(iii) Ministry of Defence; and
(iv) Customs, Department of Revenue;
(d) not less than three and not exceeding four Independent
Members;
(e) one Member not below the rank of Director nominated by
the Central Government, ex officio; and
(f) one Member representing the interest of the employees of
the Major Port Authority:
Provided that until the constitution of the Board of Major
Port Authority, the Board of Trustees constituted under
Constitution and
composition of
Board of Major
Port Authority

88
section 3 of the Major Port Trust Act, 1963 shall continue
to function and shall cease to exist immediately after the
constitution of the Board under this Act.
(2) The Board of each Major Port Authority constituted under this
Act shall be a permanent body having perpetual succession and
a common seal with power, subject to the provisions of this
Act, to acquire, hold or dispose of property, both movable and
immovable, and to contract, and shall, by the said name, sue
or be sued.
4. (1) The Chairperson and Deputy Chairperson of the Board shall be
appointed by the Central Government on the recommendation
of a Select Committee consisting of such persons and in such
manner, as may be prescribed.
(2) The Members of the Board as mentioned in clause (c) of sub-
section (3) of section 3 shall be appointed by the Board in such
manner as may be prescribed from amongst persons having
adequate knowledge and professional experience of not less
than fifteen years in shipping, marine, management or
administration.
(3) The qualifications, experience and manner of appointment of
Independent Members shall be such as may be prescribed.
(4) The appointment of the Member referred to in clause (f of sub-
section (3)  of section 3 shall be made by the Central
Government, by notification, from amongst the persons who in
the opinion of the Central Government are capable of
representing the interest of the employees in the Major Port
Authority.
(5) Every person nominated or appointed to the office of the
Chairperson or the Member of the Board, shall, within thirty
days of his nomination or appointment, furnish to the said
Board his consent and a declaration that he is not disqualified
or ineligible to hold such office.
5. (1) A person shall not be eligible for appointment or to continue as
a Member of the Board, if —
(a) he has been adjudged as an insolvent; or
(b) he has become physically or mentally incapable of acting
as a Member; or
Qualification of
Chairperson,
Deputy
Chairperson and
Members of
Boards
Removal of
Chairperson,
Deputy
Chairperson and
Member from
office in certain
circumstances

89
(c) he has been convicted of an offence, involving moral
turpitude; or
(d) he holds an office of profit or the office of the Functional
Head in the Major Port Authority or the Board of that
Authority; or
(e) he has made a false declaration under sub-section (5) of
section 4; or
(f) he has been removed or dismissed from the service of a
Major Port Authority, Government or a body corporate
owned or controlled by the Central Government or the
State Government; or
(g) an order disqualifying him for appointment as a Member
has been passed by a court or tribunal and such order is
in force.
(2) The Chairperson or Deputy Chairperson or any other Member
shall not be removed from his office except by an order of the
Central Government on the ground of his proved misbehaviour
or incapacity or in contravention of the provisions of section
7 after the Central Government, has, on an inquiry, held in
accordance with the procedure prescribed in this behalf by the
Central Government, come to the conclusion that the Member
ought on any such ground to be removed.
(3) The Central Government may suspend the Chairperson or Deputy
Chairperson or any other Member in respect of whom an
inquiry under sub-section (2) is being initiated or pending till
the Central Government has passed an order on receipt of the
report of the inquiry.
6. (1) The Chairperson and the Deputy Chairperson shall hold office
for a term not exceeding five years from the date on which
they enter upon their office or until they attain the age of
superannuation, whichever is earlier.
(2) Subject to the provisions of this Act, a person appointed as a
Member of the Board by virtue of an office under clause (c)
of sub-section (3) of section 3 shall continue to be a Member
of the Board so long as he continues to hold that office.
(3) An Independent Member shall hold office for a term of three
years from the date of his appointment or up to the age of
Term of office
of Chairperson,
Deputy
Chairperson
and Members.

90
seventy years, whichever is earlier and shall be eligible for re-
appointment:
Provided that no Independent Member shall hold office for
more than two consecutive terms:
Provided further that an Independent Member shall not, during
the said period of three years, be appointed to or be associated
with any Major Port Authority in any other capacity, either
directly or indirectly.
(4) The Member appointed under clause (f) of sub-section (3) of
section 3 shall hold office for a term of three years.
7. Before appointing any person as a Chairperson or Deputy Chairperson
or Member, the Central Government shall satisfy itself that the person
does not have any such financial or other interest as is likely to
affect prejudicially his functions as such Chairperson, Deputy
Chairperson or Member:
Provided that where any Member who is not so concerned or
interested at the time of occupying such office, he shall, if he
becomes concerned or interested afterwards, disclose his concern
or interest forthwith when he becomes concerned or interested or
at the first meeting of the Board held after he becomes so concerned
or interested and resign forthwith.
8. The Chairperson, Deputy Chairperson and Members may, by notice
in writing under their hand addressed to the Central Government,
resign their office and on such resignation being accepted by that
Government, shall be deemed to have vacated their office.
9. The Central Government shall remove the Chairperson, Deputy
Chairperson or any Member, if he—
(a) becomes subject to any of the disqualification mentioned in
section 5; or
(b) has, in the opinion of the Central Government, ceased to
represent the interest by virtue of which he was appointed or
elected; or
(c) refuses to act or becomes incapable or acting; or
(d) is, without the permission of the Board previously obtained,
absent from six consecutive ordinary meetings of the
Board; or
Disclosure of
interest
Resignation of
Members
Removal from
office of
Chairperson,
Deputy
Chairperson
and Members

91
(e) is absent from the meetings of the Board for a period exceeding
six consecutive months; or
(f) acts in contravention of the provisions of this Act.
10. The Members appointed under clauses (c), (d) and (f) of sub-
section (3) of section 3, shall be paid such honorarium as may be
prescribed.
11. The Chairperson and in his absence, the Deputy Chairperson shall
have powers of general superintendence and directions in the conduct
of affairs of the Major Port Authority and he shall, in addition to
presiding over the meetings of the Board, exercise supervision and
control over the acts of all employees of the Major Port Authority
in matters of executive administration and in matters concerning the
accounts and records of such Board.
12. (1) The Board shall meet at such places and times, and shall follow
such rules of procedure in regard to the transaction of business
at its meetings (including quorum at such meetings), as may be
specified by the regulations.
(2) If the Chairperson for any reason, is unable to attend a meeting
of the Board, the Deputy Chairperson and in the absence of
such Deputy Chairperson, any other Member chosen by the
Members present amongst themselves at the meeting, shall
preside at the meeting.
(3) All questions which come up before any meeting of the Board
shall be—
(a) decided by a majority of votes by the Members present
and voting, and in the event of an equality of votes, the
Chairperson or in his absence, the person presiding shall
have a second or casting vote;
(b) dealt with as expeditiously as possible and the Board shall
dispose of the same within a period of sixty days from
the date of receipt of the application:
Provided that where any such application could not be
disposed of within the said period of sixty days, the Board
shall record its reasons in writing for not disposing of the
application within that period.
13. (1) A Board may, from time to time, from amongst its Members
and any other person, constitute committees for the purpose of
Fees and
honorarium
payable to
Members.
Powers and
duties of
Chairperson,
Deputy
Chairperson and
Members
Meetings of
Board
Appointment
of committees

92
discharging such of its functions as may be delegated to such
committee or committees by the Board.
(2) The committee or committees constituted under this section
shall meet at such time and at such places and shall observe
such rules of procedure in regard to the transaction of business
at its meetings (including the quorum) as may be provided by
regulations made under this Act.
14. The Board may, for the purpose of discharging of its powers,
functions and duties, by general or special order in writing, specify—
(a) the powers and duties conferred or imposed upon the Board by
or under this Act which may also be exercised or performed
by the Chairperson; and
(b) the powers and duties conferred or imposed on the Chairperson
by or under this Act, which may also be exercised or performed
by the Deputy Chairperson or any officer or officers of the
Board and the conditions and restrictions, if any, subject to
which the powers and duties may be exercised and performed:
Provided that any powers and duties conferred or imposed
upon the Deputy Chairperson or any officer of the Board under
this clause (b) shall be exercised and performed by him subject
to the supervision and control of the Chairperson.
15. No act or proceedings of the Board shall be invalid merely by reason
of—
(a) any vacancy in, or any defect in, the constitution of the Board;
or
(b) any defect in the appointment of a person acting as a Member
of such Board; or
(c) any irregularity in the procedure of the Board not affecting the
merits of the case.
16. (1) The power of appointing any person to any Post, whether
temporary or permanent shall—
(a) in the case of a post—
(i) the incumbent of which is to be regarded as the
Head of a department; or
(ii) to which such incumbent is to be appointed; or
Delegation of
powers
V acancies, etc.,
not to invalidate
proceedings of
Board.
Power to make
appointments

93
(iii) the maximum of the pay scale of which (exclusive
or allowances) exceeds such amount as the Central
Government may, by notification in the Official
Gazette, fix, be exercisable by the Central Government
after consultation with the Chairperson;
(b) in the case of any other post, be exercisable by the
Chairperson or by such authority as may be specified by
regulations:
Provided that no person shall be appointed as a pilot at
any port, who is not for the time being authorised by the
Central Government under the provisions of the Indian
Ports Act to pilot vessels at that or any other port.
(2) The Central Government may, by order, specify any post the
incumbent of which shall, for the purposes of this Act, be
regarded as the Head of a department.
CHAPTER III
M
ANAGEMENT AND A DMINISTRA TION
A. S TAFF OF M AJOR P ORT A UTHORITY
17. The Board shall after every five years prepare and submit to the
Central Government a list of the employees of the Board of Major
Port Authority indicating therein the designations and grades of
employees and the salaries, fees and allowances which are proposed
to be paid to them.
B. P ROPERTY AND CONTRACTS
18. On and from the date of constitution of the Board—
(a) the Board of the Major Port Authority shall be the successor
of the Board of Trustees constituted under the Major Port
Trusts Act, 1963;
(b) all the assets and liabilities of the Board of Trustees shall stand
transferred to, and vested in, the Board.
Explanation.—The assets of the Board of Trustees shall be
deemed to include all rights and powers, all properties, whether
movable or immovable, including, in particular, cash balances,
deposits and all other interests and rights in, or arising out of,
such properties as may be in the possession of the Board of
Trustees and all books of account and other documents relating
List of staff of
Board.
Board to be
deemed as
successor of
Board of
Truestees of
Major Port.

94
to the same; and liabilities shall be deemed to include all debts,
liabilities and obligations of whatever kind;
(c) without prejudice to the provisions of clause (a), all debts,
obligations and liabilities incurred, all contracts entered into and
all matters and things engaged to be done by, with or for the
Board of Trustees immediately before that date, for or in
connection with the purpose of the said Board of Trustees,
shall be deemed to have been incurred, entered into or engaged
to be done by, with or for, the Board;
(d) all sums of money due to the Board of Trustees immediately
before that date shall be deemed to be due to the Board;
(e) all suits and other legal proceedings instituted or which could
have been instituted by or against the Board of Trustees
immediately before that date may be continued or may be
instituted by or against the Board;
(f) every employee serving under the Board of Trustees of the
Major Port immediately before such date shall become an
employee of the Board, shall hold his office or service therein
by the same tenure and upon the same terms and conditions of
service as he would have held the same if the Board had not
been established and shall continue to do so unless and until his
employment in the Board is terminated or until his tenure,
remuneration or terms and conditions of service are duly altered
by the Board:
Provided that the tenure, remuneration and terms and conditions
of service of any such employee shall not be altered to his
disadvantage without the previous sanction of the Central
Government.
19. (1) The Board of each Major Port shall be entitled to use its property,
assets and funds in such manner and for such purposes as it
may deem fit for the benefit of that Major Port.
(2) All Port assets under the ownership of the Board or vested
with the Board through the Central Government shall be used
and developed as per the regulations made by the Board in that
behalf and to the exclusion of any municipal, local or
Government regulation:
Provided that any contract or arrangement by the Board for
sale of land or immovable property or for lease of land or
Usage of
property, assets,
etc. by Board.

95
immovable property for port related use for a term exceeding
forty years and for any purpose other than the purposes
specified in section 22 for a term exceeding twenty years shall
be subject to the prior approval of the Central Government:
Provided further that the tenure for lease of land or immovable
property for Public Private Partnership projects by the Board
shall be subject to the policy notified by the Central Government
in respect of such Public Private Partnership projects.
(3) The Board of each Major Port may erect, construct or build
such civil structures within the port limits for port development
or improving commerce and trade in national interest for which
no regulatory license or approval from the State authorities
shall be required, unless so mandated by the Central Government.
20. Where any immovable property is required for the purposes of the
Board, the Central Government or, as the case may be, the State
Government may, at the request of the Board, procure the acquisition
thereof under the provisions of the Right to Fair Compensation and
Transparency in Rehabilitation and Resettlement Act, 2013 or any
other law for the time being in force, and on payment by the Board
of the compensation awarded under that Act and of the charges
incurred by the Government in connection with the proceedings, the
land shall vest in the Board.
21. (1) The Board of each Major Port shall be competent to enter into
and perform any contract necessary for the performance of its
functions under this Act.
(2) Every contract shall, on behalf of the Board of each Major
Port, be made by the Chairperson or by any such officer of the
Board as the Chairperson may by general or special order,
authorise in this behalf and shall be sealed with the common
seal of the Board.
(3) The form and manner in which any contract shall be made
under this Act shall be such as may be prescribed.
C. P
LANNING AND DEVELOPMENT
22. For the purposes of planning and development of the Major Port, the
Board in relation to that Major Port shall have the power to make
regulations, not inconsistent with the Customs Act, 1962 or any
rules made thereunder, to—
(a) undertake, execute and perform such works and provide such
Procedure when
immovable
property cannot
be acquired by
agreement
Contracts by
Board.
Powers of Board
in respect of
planning and
development.

96
services at or within the port limits and Major Port approaches
on such terms and conditions as it may deem necessary or
expedient;
(b) declare availability of the port assets at the Major Port or Major
Port approaches for port related activities and services subject
to such limits, conditions and restrictions as it may deem
necessary or expedient;
(c) develop and provide infrastructure facilities including setting up
new ports, jetties, navigational channels, dry ports and such
other infrastructure in furtherance of the interest of the Major
Port;
(d) take charge of the goods from the concerned owner for the
purpose of performing any port related services;
(e) order, in cases of emergency or for any other reason, the
master or owner or agent of any sea-going vessel, not to bring
any vessel alongside of, or to remove such vessel from, any
dock, berth, wharf, quay, stage, jetty or pier belonging to or
under the control of the Board;
(f) permit construction and development by itself or through any
person, to make, erect, fix or remove within the port limits or
Major Port approaches any wharf, dock, quay, stage, jetty,
pier, building or structure, erection or mooring or undertake
any reclamation of foreshore within the said limits and buildings
and amenities required for the residence and welfare of the
employees of the Board, subject to such limits, conditions and
restrictions as it may deem necessary or expedient;
(g) provide exemption or remission from payment of any rate or
charge leviable on any goods or vessels or class of goods or
vessels under this Act;
(h) provide any other services or amenities in respect of vessels,
passengers, goods or employees;
(i) undertake, execute and perform such works, activities and
studies to promote maritime education, training skill development
of coastal communities, seafarers welfare and Major Port related
development; and
(j) make or construct or erect within the port limits such
structures, buildings, drains, roads, fences, tube-wells, in-take

97
wells, storage facilities, warehouses, pipelines, telephone lines,
communication towers, electricity supply or transmission
equipment, and such other works and conveniences as the
Board of each Major Port thinks proper.
D. I MPOSITION OF RATES
23. (1) The Board of each Major Port Authority or the committee or
committees appointed in this behalf by the Board in accordance
with section 13, may,—
(a) frame scale of rates at which, and a statement of conditions
under which any services shall be performed or made
available;
(b) frame scale of rates at which, and a statement of conditions
under which, the access to and usage of the port assets
may be allowed by the Board;
(c) frame consolidated scale of rates for any combination of
services specified in clause (a) or for any combination of
such service or services with any user or permission to
use or access to any port assets as specified in clause (b);
(d) pass an order for refund of any amount overcharged by
the Board in relation to the services provided to any person;
(e) pass an order for recovery of any rate or charge which
is short-levied or erroneously refunded by the Board to
any person under this Act;
(f) frame different scales, fees, rates and conditions for
different classes of goods and vessels under this section:
Provided that the fixation and implementation of such scales,
fees, rates and conditions shall—
(a) not be with retrospective effect;
(b) not be applicable for Public Private Partnership projects
already awarded by the Board or the Central Government;
(c) not be in derogation with the rules made by or the directives
of the Central Government in this behalf;
(d) not be inconsistent with the provisions of the Competition
Act, 2002; and
(e) not be inconsistent with the provisions of any other law
for the time being in force:
Scale of rates for
asses and services
available at Major
Port.

98
Provided further that in case of such Public Private
Partnership projects, the Board may fix the reference tariff
for purposes of bidding only and the concessionaire
appointed under any such Public Private Partnership
projects shall be free to fix the tariff based on market
conditions and such other conditions as may be notified:
Provided also that the revenue share and other conditions
would be as per the provisions of the specific concession
agreement between the Board and the Public Private
Partnership concessionaire appointed under the Public
Private Partnership project.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in clause (b) of sub-section
(1), the Board may, by auction or by inviting tenders, lease any
land or shed belonging to or in its possession or occupation at
a rate higher than that provided under clause (b) of sub-section
(1).
24. (1) The Board for the amount of all rates leviable under this Act
in respect of any goods and for the rent due to such Board for
any buildings, plinths stacking areas, or other premises on or
in which any goods may have been placed, it shall have a lien
on such goods, and may seize and detain the same until such
rates and rents are fully paid.
(2) The right of lien referred to in sub-section (1) shall have priority
over all other liens and claims, except for general average and
for ship owner's lien upon the said goods for freight and other
charges where such lien exists and has been preserved in the
manner provided in sub-section (1) of section 25, and for
money payable to the Central Government under any law for
the time being in force relating to customs, other than by way
of penalty or fine.
(3) The right of lien shall also vest with any concessionaire appointed
by the Board with whom a concession contract under a Public
Private Partnership project for operating any berth or terminal
within the port limits has been executed by the said Board.
25. (1) If the master or owner of any vessel or his agent, at or before
the time of landing from such vessel or any goods at any port
asset belonging to or in the occupation of the Board of the
Major Port, gives to such Board a notice in writing that such
Board's lien for
rates.
Ship-owner's
lien for freight
and other
charges.

99
goods are to remain subject to a lien for freight or other charges
payable to the ship owner, to an amount to be mentioned in
such notice, such goods shall continue to be liable to such lien
to such amount.
(2) The goods shall be retained in the custody of the Board at the
risk and expense of the owners of the goods until such lien is
discharged and godown or storage rent shall be payable by the
party entitled to such goods for the time during which they
may be so retained.
(3) Upon the production, before any officer appointed by the Board
in that behalf, of a document purporting to be a receipt for, or
release from, the amount of such lien, executed by the person
by whom or on whose behalf such notice has been given, the
Board may permit such goods to be removed without regard
to such lien, provided that the Board shall have used reasonable
care in respect to the authenticity of such document.
26. (1) The Board may, after expiry of such time and in such manner
as stipulated in section 48 of the Customs Act, 1962, sell any
goods that have passed or placed into the custody of the Board
upon landing thereof—
(a) if any rates payable to the Board in respect of such goods
have not been paid; or
(b) if any rent payable to the Board in respect of any place
on or in which such goods have been stored has not been
paid; or
(c) if any lien of any ship-owner for freight or other charges
of which notice has been given has not been discharged
and if the person claiming such lien for freight or other
charge has made to the Board an application for such
sale; or
(d) if such goods are not removed by the owner or the person
entitled thereto from the premises of the Board.
(2) The procedure for sale of goods under sub-section (1) and the
proceeds of any such sale shall be applied in the manner as
provided in section 150 of the Customs Act, 1962.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section, controlled
goods may be sold at such time and in such manner as the
Central Government may direct.
Sale of goods and
application of
sale proceeds in
certain cases.
52 of 1962
52 of 1962

100
Explanation.—In this section, "controlled goods" means the
goods, the price or disposal of which is regulated under any
law for the time being in force.
27. Subject to the rules made under this Act, the Board of each Major
Port shall be entitled to create specific master plan in respect of any
development or infrastructure established or proposed to be established
within the port limits and such master plan shall be independent of
any local or State Government regulations of any authority whatsoever.
28. (1) If the master of any vessel in respect of which any rates or
penalties are payable under this Act, or under any regulations
or orders made in pursuance thereof, refuses or neglects to
pay the same or any part thereof on demand, the Board may
distrain or arrest such vessel and the tackle, apparel and furniture
belonging thereto, or any part thereof, and detain the same until
the amount so due to the Board, together with such further
amount as may accrue for any period during which the vessel
is under distraint or arrest, is paid.
(2) In case any part of the said rates or penalties, or of the cost
of the distress or arrest, or of the keeping of the same, remains
unpaid for the space of fifteen days next after any such distress
or arrest has been so made, the Board may cause the vessel or
other thing so distrained or arrested to be sold, and, with the
proceeds of such sale, shall satisfy such rates or penalties and
costs, including the costs of sale remaining unpaid, rendering
the surplus (if any) to the master of such vessel on demand.
29. Any person aggrieved by any action of the Board while exercising
its powers under sections 19 to 28 (except section 25), may approach
the Adjudicatory Board constituted under section 51 by filing an
application before it in such form, manner and on payment of such
fee, as may be prescribed.
CHAPTER IV
P
OWERS OF B OARDS OF M AJOR P ORT A UTHORITIES IN
RESPECT OF L OANS AND S ECURITIES
A. F INANCIAL P OWERS OF B OARDS OF M AJOR P ORT A UTHORITIES
30. (1) The Board may for the purposes of its capital expenditure and
working capital requirements raise loans in any currency or
currencies from any—
(a) scheduled bank or financial institution located within
India; or
Master Plan.
Recovery of rates
and charges by
distrant of vessel.
Application to
Adjudicatory
Board.
Power to raise
loans and issue
securities.

101
(b) financial institution in any country outside India in
compliance with the laws for the time being in force:
Provided that no loan or loans exceeding a sum equivalent
to fifty per cent. of the capital reserves of the Board shall
be raised by the Board without the previous sanction of
the Central Government.
(2) The loans may be raised by the Board in open market within
India and in any country outside India on port securities
including but not limited to debentures, bonds and stock
certificates issued by the Board or may be obtained from the
Central Government or a state Government:
Provided that no loan shall be raised from and no securities
shall be issued to any person resident outside India without
complying with the Foreign Exchange Management Act, 1999,
the circulars and guidelines issued by the Reserve Bank of
India, the Foreign Direct Investment Policy issued by the Central
Government and any other law for the time being in force.
(3) The holder of any port security in any form may obtain in
exchange thereof, upon such terms as the Board may from
time to time determine, a port security in such form as may be
specified by the regulations made by the Board.
(4) The right to sue in respect of moneys secured by port securities
shall be exercisable by the holders thereof subject to the
provisions of the Limitation Act, 1963.
(5) Nothing contained in this Act shall be deemed to affect the
power of the Boards of Major Port Authorities to raise loans
under the Local Authorities Loans Act, 1914.
(6) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, the Board may
borrow moneys by means of temporary overdraft or otherwise
by pledging the securities held by the Board in its reserve funds
or on the security of the fixed deposits of the Board in its
banks:
Provided that such temporary overdrafts or other loans shall
not be taken, without previous sanction of the Central
Government, if at any time in any year the amount of such
overdrafts or other loans exceeds a sum equivalent to fifty per
cent. of the capital reserves of the Board:
42 of 1999
36 of 1963
9 of 1914

102
Provided further that all moneys so borrowed by temporary
overdrafts or otherwise shall be expended for the purposes of
this Act.
31. Notwithstanding anything contained in section 15 of the Negotiable
Instruments Act, 1881, no indorsement of a port security, which is
transferable by indorsement, shall be valid unless made by the
signature of the holder inscribed on the back of the security itself.
32. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Negotiable Instruments
Act, 1881, a person shall not by reason only of his having indorsed
any port security be liable to pay any money due, either as principal
or as interest, thereunder.
33. (1) The person to whom a duplicate or new security has been
issued under the regulations made by the Board under section
22 shall be deemed for the purposes of sub-section (2) to have
been recognised by the Board as the holder of the security; and
a duplicate security or a new security so issued to any person
shall be deemed to constitute a new contract between the
Board and such person and all persons deriving title thereafter
through him.
(2) No recognition by the Board of a person as the holder of a port
security shall be called in question by any court so far as such
recognition affects the relations of the Board with the person
recognised by it as the holder of a port security or with any
person claiming an interest in such security; and any such
recognition by the Board of any person shall operate to confer
on that person a title to the security or securities subject only
to a personal liability to the rightful owner of the security for
money had and received on his account.
34. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Limitation Act,
1963—
(a) on payment of the amount due on a port security on or after
the date on which payment becomes due; or
(b) when a duplicate security has been issued under the regulations
made by the Board under section 22; or
(c) when a new security has issued upon conversion, consolidation
or sub-division under the regulations made by the Board, the
Board shall be discharged from all its liability in respect of the
Endorsements
to be made on
security itself.
Indorser of
security not
liable for amount
thereof.
Recognition as
holder of port
securities in
certain cases and
legal effect
thereof.
Discharge in
certain cases. 36 of 1963

103
security so paid or in place of which a duplicate or new security
has been issued—
(i) in the case of payment after the lapse of six years from
the date on which payment was due;
(ii) in the case of a duplicate security after the lapse of six
years from the date of the issue thereof or from the date
of the last payment of interest on the original security,
whichever date is later;
(iii) in case of a new security issued upon conversion,
consolidation or sub-division after the lapse of six years
from the date of the issue thereof.
35. If a loan is raised by the Board of any Major Port and a security
other than the port security is required to be furnished to secure
such loan, the Board of that Major Port may secure such loan
against—
(a) the port assets other than—
(i) any sum set apart by the Board—
(A) as the sinking fund for the purpose of paying
off any loan; or
(B) for the payment of pension to its employees; or
(ii) the provident or pension fund established by the Board;
and
(b) income of the Board from the port assets and services.
36. The Board may apply any sums, out of moneys which may come
into its hands under the provisions of this Act and which can
be so applied without prejudicing the security of the other
holders of port securities, in repaying to the Government any
sum which may remain due to it in respect of the principal
account of any loan although the time fixed for the repayment
of the same may not have arrived.
37. (1) In respect of loans raised by the respective Board of the Major
Port Authorities under this Act, which are not repayable before
the expiration of one year from the date of such loans, such
Boards shall set apart out of their income enough sinking fund
or funds to service or liquidate such loans for a period of at
least one year.
Security for
loans taken
out by Boards
of Major Port
Authorities.
Power of Board
to repay loans
to Government
before the date.
Establishment
and application
of sinking fund.

104
(2) Before the commencement of this Act, if any sinking fund had
been established by the Board of Trusts constituted under the
Major Port Trusts Act, 1963 in respect of a loan raised by it
for which loan, the Board is liable under this Act and the
sinking fund so established by that Board of Trusts shall be
deemed to have been established by the Board under this Act.
(3) The sums so set apart by the Board under sub-section (1) and
the sums forming part of any sinking fund referred to in sub-
section (2) shall be applied in such manner as may be prescribed.
(4) The Board may apply the whole or any part of the sums
accumulated in any sinking fund in or towards the discharge
of the moneys borrowed for the repayment of which the fund
has been established:
Provided that The Board pays into the fund in each year, and
accumulates until the whole of the moneys borrowed are
discharged a sum equivalent to the interest which would have
been produced by the sinking fund, or the part of the sinking
fund so applied.
38. Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, all loans raised or
borrowed and all securities issued or pledged in relation to a Major
Port prior to the commencement of this Act shall continue to be
governed in accordance with the provisions of the Major Port Trusts
Act, 1963.
B. G
ENERAL ACCOUNTS OF M AJOR P ORT A UTHORITIES
39. All moneys received by or on behalf of the Board under the provisions
of this Act shall be credited to such general account or accounts of
the Board which the Board may from time to time generally open
with the scheduled banks as per the guidelines of the Ministry of
Finance, Government of India.
40. (1) The moneys credited to the general account or accounts under
section 39, shall be applied by the Board in payment of the
following charges, namely:—
(a) the salaries, fees, allowances, pensions, gratuities,
compassionate allowances or other moneys due to—
(i) the Members of the Board except Members appointed
under clauses (d), (e) and (f) of sub-section (3) of
section 3;
Existing loans
and securities to
continue.
38 of 1963
38 of 1963
General
accounts of
Board.
Application of
money in general
accounts.

105
(ii) the employees of the Board; and
(iii) the surviving relatives, if any, of such employees;
(b) the cost and expenses, if any, incurred by the Board in the
conduct and administration of any provident or welfare
fund or loan or special fund established by the Board;
(c) the maintenance, development, security and protection of
the Board and the docks, warehouses and other properties
of the Board;
(d) the cost of repairs and maintenance of the property
belonging to or vested in the Board and all charges upon
the same and all working expenses;
(e) the costs, expenses, sums, payments and contributions to
be made or incurred by the Board for the purposes
provided under section 23; and
(f) any other charge or expenditure for which the Board may
be legally liable.
(2) All moneys standing to the credit of the Board which cannot
immediately be applied in the manner or for the purposes
specified in sub-section (1) may be used for such lawful
purposes as the Board may from time to time decide.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 38 and sub-
sections (1) and (2), moneys received by or on behalf of the
Board from non-port related use except those falling under
section 59 shall be credited to a designated account and shall
be applied by the Board for capital investment or for such
purposes as may be prescribed.
C. A
CCOUNTS AND AUDIT
41. (1) The Board shall prepare a budget, maintain proper accounts
and other relevant records and prepare an annual statement of
accounts including the balance sheet in such form as may be
prescribed by the Central Government in consultation with the
Comptroller and Auditor-General of India.
(2) The accounts of the Board shall be audited by the Comptroller
and Auditor-General of India or such other person as may be
appointed by him in this behalf and any amount payable to him
by the Board in respect of such audit shall be debitable to the
general account of the Board.
Accounts and
audit

106
(3) The Comptroller and Auditor-General and any person appointed
by him in connection with the audit of the accounts of the
Board under this Act shall have the same rights and privileges
and authority in connection with such audit as the Comptroller
and Auditor-General generally has in connection with the audit
of Government accounts and, in particular shall have the right
to demand the production of books, accounts, connected
vouchers and other documents and papers, and to inspect any
of the offices of the Authority.
(4) The accounts of the Board, as certified by the Comptroller and
Auditor-General of India or any other person appointed by him
in this behalf, together with the audit report thereon shall be
forwarded annually to the Central Government by the Board
and the Central Government shall cause the same to be laid, as
soon as may be after it is received, before each House of
Parliament.
CHAPTER V
S
UPERVISION OF C ENTRAL G OVERNMENT
42. As soon as may be after the first day of April in every year and not
later than such date as may be fixed by the Central Government, the
Board shall submit to the Central Government a detailed report of the
administration of the Board during the preceding year ending on the
thirty-first day of March, in such form as the Central Government
may direct.
43. The Central Government may, at any time, order a local survey or
examination of any works of the Board, or the intended site thereof
and the cost of such survey and examination shall be borne and paid
by the Board from and out of the moneys credited to its general
account.
44. (1) If, at any time, the Central Government is of the opinion that
the inaction by any Board in repairing, completing, restoring,
carrying out or providing any work or appliance mentioned in
sub-section (2) has led to a grave emergency, the Central
Government may cause such work to be restored or completed
or carried out, or such repairs to be carried out or such
appliance to be provided and the cost of any such restoration,
completion, construction, repair or provision shall be paid by
the concerned Board from and out of the moneys credited to
its general account.
Administration
report.
Power of Central
Government to
order survey or
examination of
works of Board.
Power of Central
Government to
restore or
complete works at
costs of Board.

107
(2) The following actions or omissions may be considered to have
led to grave emergency under sub-section (1), if any Board—
(a) allows any work or appliance constructed or provided by,
or vested in, the Board to fall into disrepair; or
(b) does not, within a reasonable time, complete any work
commenced by the Board or included in any estimate
sanctioned by the Central Government; or
(c) does not, after due notice in writing, proceed to carry out
effectually any work or repair or provide any appliance
which is necessary in the opinion of the Central Government
for the purposes of this Act.
45. (1) If, at any time, the Central Government is of the opinion—
(a) any Board is unable to perform the duties imposed on it
by or under the provisions of this Act or of any other law
for the time being in force; or
(b) that any Board has persistently made defaults in
performance of the duties imposed upon it by or under
the provisions of this Act or of any other law for the time
being in force and as a result of such default, the financial
position or the administration of that Board has greatly
deteriorated, the Central Government may, by notification,
take over the management of that Board for such period,
not exceeding twelve months at a time, as may be specified
in the notification:
Provided that before issuing a notification under this sub-
section for the reasons mentioned in clause (b), the Central
Government shall give a reasonable time of not less than
three months to the Board to show-cause why its
management should not be taken over and shall consider
the explanations and objections, if any, of that Board.
(2) Upon the publication of a notification under sub-section (1) for
taking over the management of the Board,—
(a) all the Members of the Board shall, as from the date of
taking over, stand removed from their respective office or
position in the Board;
(b) all the powers and duties which may, by or under the
provisions of this Act or of any other law for the time
Power of Central
Government to
take over
management of
Board.

108
being in force, to be exercised or performed by or on
behalf of the Board, shall be exercised and performed by
such person or persons as the Central Government may
direct in this behalf until the Board is reconstituted under
clause (b) of sub-section (3);
(c) all property vested in the Board shall, until the Board is
reconstituted under clause (b) of sub-section (3), vest in
the Central Government.
(3) On the expiration of the period of taking over specified in the
notification issued under sub-section (1) or at any time prior to
such expiration, the Central Government may by
notification —
(a) extend the period of taking over the management of the
Board for such further term, not exceeding twelve months,
as it may consider necessary; or
(b) reconstitute the Board by making fresh appointment to all
posts of the Board on such terms and conditions as the
Central Government may consider necessary, and in such
case, any persons who stand removed from their offices
under clause (a) of sub-section (2) shall be deemed
disqualified for appointment.
46. For any action or actions taken under sections 42 and 44 and any
notification issued under section 45, the Central Government shall
prepare and cause a full report of any such action or actions and
notification and the circumstances leading to such action to be laid
before each House of Parliament.
47. Notwithstanding anything contrary in this Act, the Central Government
may, in the interest of security of the nation or on account of a
grave emergency, by general or special order, from time to time,
permit certain specified vessels or classes of vessels to discharge or
ship goods or certain specified goods or classes of goods, at such
place in a Major Port or within the Major Port approaches, in such
manner, during such period and subject to such payments to the
concerned Board in relation to such Major Port or such Major Port
approaches and on such conditions as the Central Government may
think fit.
Laying of
report.
Power of
Central
Government to
exempt from
obligation to
use port assets.

109
48. The Board shall not sell, alienate or divest its assets, properties,
rights, powers and authorisation vested in it under this Act without
the prior sanction of the Central Government.
49. (1) The Central Government or a State Government, from the date
of commencement of this Act, shall have, in respect of loans
made by it to the Board or to any other authority for the
repayment of which the Board is legally liable on such
commencement, the same remedies and priority as applicable
under the Major Port Trusts Act, 1963 as if this Act had not
been passed.
(2) For prospective loans by the Central or State Governments or
of loans made by any other authority, the remedies would be
the same as available to holders of port securities issued by the
Board unless priority or greater rights are granted by the Board
in respect of such loans within the respective loan agreements.
50. (1) Without prejudice to the foregoing provisions of this Chapter,
the Board shall in discharge of its functions under this Act, be
bound by such directions on question of policy as the Central
Government may give in writing from time to time:
Provided that the Board shall be given an opportunity to express
its views before any direction is given under this sub-section.
(2) The decision of the Central Government on whether a question
is one of policy or not shall be final and binding on the Board.
CHAPTER VI
C
ONSTITUTION OF A DJUDICA TORY B OARD
51. (1) The Central Government may, by notification, constitute an
Adjudicatory Board for adjudicating disputes relating to Major
Ports and such Board shall consist of a Presiding officer and
such other members not exceeding two, as may be appointed
by the Central Government.
(2) The head office of the Adjudicatory Board shall be in Mumbai:
Provided that the Adjudicatory Board may hold its sittings at
such other places as the Presiding officer may decide from
Board not to sell,
alienate or divest
its assets,
properties, rights,
powers and
authorisations
without sanction
of Central
Government.
Remedies of
Government in
respect of loans
made to Board.
Power of
Central
Government to
issue directions.
Constitution of
Adjudicatory
Board and its
functions.

110
time to time having taken into consideration the convenience to
decide the disputes referred to it.
(3) The Adjudicatory Board referred to in sub-section (1) shall
perform the following functions, namely:—
(a) the functions envisaged to be carried out by the erstwhile
Tariff Authority for Major Ports arising from the Tariff
Guidelines of 2005, 2008 and 2013 and tariffs orders
issued by the said Authority;
(b) to receive and adjudicate reference on any dispute or
differences or claims related to rights and obligations of
Major Ports and Public Private Partnership concessionaires
or captive users for dedicated berth within the framework
of their concession agreements and to pass orders after
considering and hearing all the parties involved in the
dispute:
Provided that any party not agreeable with order of the
Adjudicatory Board may resort to arbitration as provided
under the provisions of their respective concession
agreements;
(c) to appraise, review the stressed Public Private Partnership
projects as referred by the Central Government or the
Board of the Major Ports and to suggest measures to
revive such projects; and
(d) to look into the complaints received from port users
against the services and terms of service rendered by the
Major Ports or the private operators operating in the Major
Ports and to pass necessary orders after hearing the parties
concerned:
Provided that any party not satisfied with the order of the
Adjudicatory Board shall be free to resort to arbitration or
any other available legal remedy.
(4) A person shall not be qualified for appointment as the Presiding
Officer of the Adjudicatory Board unless he is, or has been, or
is qualified to be, a judge of a High Court.
(5) The Presiding Officer and members of the Adjudicatory Board
shall be appointed by the Central Government on the
recommendation of a Select Committee consisting of such
persons and in such manner as may be prescribed.

111
(6) The Presiding Officer and members of the Adjudicatory Board
shall hold office for a term not exceeding five years from the
date on which they enters upon their office or until they attain
the age of seventy years, whichever is earlier.
(7) A person shall not be qualified for appointment as a member of
the Adjudicatory Board unless he is an expert in the field of
finance, commerce, marine, shipping and port related matters,
etc., having worked in the respective field for not less than
twenty years.
(8) The salaries and allowances payable to and other terms and
conditions of service of the Presiding Officer and members of
the Adjudicatory Board shall be such as may be prescribed:
Provided that neither the salary and allowance nor other terms
and conditions of service of the Presiding Officer or members
of the Adjudicatory Board shall be varied to their disadvantage
after their appointment.
(9) The procedure to be adopted by the Adjudicatory Board, while
discharging its functions referred to in sub-section(l) shall be
such as may be prescribed.
(10) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the
time being in force, while exercising the powers under sub-
section (1), the Adjudicatory Board shall have the same powers
as are vested in a civil court under the Code of Civil Procedure,
1908 while trying a suit, in respect of the following matters,
namely:—
(a) the discovery and production of books of account and
other documents, at such place and at such time as may
be specified by the Adjudicatory Board;
(b) summoning and enforcing the attendance of persons and
examining them on oath;
(c) issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses or
documents; and
(d) any other matter which may be prescribed.
(11) Any proceeding before the Adjudicatory Board shall be deemed
to be a judicial proceeding within the meaning of sections 193
and 228 and for the purposes of section 196 of the Indian
45 of 1860

112
Penal Code and the Adjudicatory Board shall be deemed to a
civil court for all the purposes of section 195 and Chapter
XXVI of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.
(12) Subject to the provisions of this Act, every order made by the
Adjudicatory Board under this Act shall be final and shall not
be called in question in any suit, application, execution or other
proceeding and no injunction shall be granted by any court or
other authority in respect of any action taken or intended to be
taken in pursuance of any power conferred by or under this
Act.
CHAPTER VII
P
ENALTIES
52. Any person who contravenes any of the provisions of this Act or
any rule, regulation or order made thereunder, shall be punishable
with fine which may extend to rupees one lakh.
53. (1) If the person committing an offence under this Act is a company,
every person who, at the time the offence was committed was
in charge of, and was responsible to, the company for the
conduct of business of the company, as well as the company,
shall be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable
to be proceeded against and punished accordingly:
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall render
any such person liable to such punishment provided in this Act
if he proves that the offence was committed without his
knowledge or that he exercised all due diligence to prevent the
commission of such offence.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), where
an offence under this Act has been committed by a company
and it is proved that the offence has been committed with the
consent or connivance of, or that the commission of the offence
is attributable to any negligence on the part of, any director,
manager, secretary or other officer of the company, such
director, manager, secretary, or other officer shall also be
deemed to be guilty of that offence and shall be liable to be
proceeded against and punished accordingly.
Explanation.— For the purposes of this section,—
(a) "company" means a body corporate and includes a firm
or other association of individuals; and
2 of 1974
General provision
for punishment of
offences.
Offences by
companies

113
(b) "director", in relation to a firm, means a partner in the
firm.
CHAPTER VIII
MISCELLANEOUS
54. No court inferior to that of a Metropolitan Magistrate or Judicial
Magistrate of the First Class shall try any offence punishable under
this Act or any rule or regulation made thereunder.
55. No suit or other legal proceeding shall lie against the Board or any
Member or employee thereof in respect of anything which is in good
faith done or intended to be done under this Act or any rule or
regulation made thereunder, or for any deficiency of service or any
consequential losses on account of deficiency in services.
56. Every person employed by the Board under this Act, shall be deemed
to be a public servant within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian
Penal Code.
57. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the
time being in force, the Board in exercise of the powers
conferred on it by regulations made under this Act or by invoking
the contractual remedies available to the Board may cancel the
allotment of any premises made to any employee of the Board
or any other person or evict an employee of the Board or any
person in occupation of any port asset or premises or area in
the port limits, by notice in writing, addressed to such allottee
or employee or other person who may be in occupation or
possession thereof in violation of the regulations specified or
formulated by the Board:
Provided that such notice shall indicate the reasons for
cancellation of allotment or eviction or removal along with the
period within which the removal or eviction is sought and
recovery of the sums of dues in arrears and also for the
extended unauthorised use of such premises.
(2) If any allottee or employee or other person is aggrieved by the
order made under sub-section (1), then the said allottee or
employee or other person may appeal against the order with the
compensation officer so appointed by the Board within thirty
days from the receipt of the order under sub-section (1).
(3) If any allottee or employee or other person refuses or fails to
comply with an order made under sub-section (1), then any
Cognizance of
offences.
Protection of
acts done in good
faith
Persons employed
by Board of
Authority to be
public servants.
Power to evict
certain persons
from premises of
the Board.

114
Magistrate of the First Class may, on application made by or
on behalf of the Board, order any police officer , with proper
assistance, to enter into the premises and evict any person
from, and take possession of, the premises and to deliver the
same to the Board or a person appointed by the Board in that
behalf and the police officer may, for the purpose, use such
force as may be necessary.
(4) Any such notice as is referred to in sub-section (1) may be
served—
(a) by delivering or tendering it to the allottee or employee or
any other person who may be in occupation or possession
of the whole or any part of the premises; or
(b) if it cannot be so delivered or tendered, by affixing it on
the outer door or some other conspicuous part of the
premises; or
(c) by registered post; or
(d) by publishing in the local newspaper having circulation in
the area.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section, the expression
"premises" means any land, building or part of a building which
is part of port assets and includes—
(i) areas such as canteens, gardens, grounds and out-
houses, if any, appertaining to such building or part
of a building;
(ii) any fittings affixed to such building or part of a
building for the more beneficial enjoyment thereof;
and
(iii) any furniture, books or other things belonging to the
Board and found in such building or part of a building.
58. Without prejudice to any other action that may be taken under this
Act, the Board may recover by suit any rates, damages, expenses,
costs, or in case of sale the balance thereof, when the proceeds of
sale are insufficient, or any penalties payable to, or recoverable by,
the Board under this Act or under any regulations made in pursuance
thereof.
Alternate remedy
by suit.

115
59. (1) Subject to the provisions of the Companies Act, 2013, the
Board may use its funds for providing social benefits including
development of infrastructure in areas of education, health,
housing, accommodation, skill development, training and
recreational activities within the port limits for its own employees,
customers, business partners, Government and Non-Government
Organisation, local communities, environment and society at
large.
(2) The manner of utilisation of funds for the Corporate Social
Responsibility shall be such, as may be prescribed.
60. (1) The Central Government may, by notification, make rules for
carrying out the provisions of this Act.
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the
foregoing power, such rules may provide for all or any of the
following matters, namely:—
(a) the composition of the Select Committee and the manner
of appointment of the Chairperson and Deputy Chairperson
of the Board under sub-section (1) of section 4;
(b) the manner of appointment of Members of Board under
sub-section (3) of section 4;
(c) the procedure for conducting of any inquiry made under
sub-section (3) of section 5;
(d) the honorarium payable to the Members of the Board
under section 10;
(e) the form and manner in which contracts shall be made by
the Board under sub-section (3) of section 21;
(f) the form, manner and fees for filing application before the
Adjudicatory Board under section 29;
(g) the manner of applying the sums under sub-section (3) of
section 37;
(h) the purposes for which the moneys received by the Board
shall be applied under sub-section (3) of section 40;
(i) the form in which and the time at which the Board shall
prepare an annual report under sub-section (1)  of
section 41;
Corporate Social
Reponsibility and
development of
infrastructure by
Board.
Power of Central
Government to
make rules
18 of 2013

116
(j) the salaries and allowances payable to and other terms
and conditions of services of the Presiding officer and
members of the Adjudicatory Board under sub-section (8)
of section 51;
(k) the procedure to be adopted by the Adjudicatory Board,
under sub-section (9) of section 51;
(1) other functions of the Adjudicatory Board under sub-section
(10) of section 51;
(m) the manner of utilisation of funds for Corporate Social
Responsibility under sub-section (2) of section 59; and
(n) any other matter which is required to be, or may be,
prescribed, or in respect of which provision is to be
made, by rules.
61. (1) The Board may, with the previous approval of the Central
Government and after previous publication, by notification, shall
make regulations consistent with this Act and the rules made
thereunder to carry out the provisions of this Act.
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the
foregoing power, such regulations may provide for all or any
of the following matters, namely:—
(a) rules of procedure for transaction of business under sub-
section (1) of section 12;
(b) rules of procedure for transaction of business under sub-
section (2) of section 13;
(c) the appointment of employees under clause (b) of sub-
section (1) of section 16;
(d) the use and development of the port assets under sub-
section (2) of section 19;
(e) the purposes of planning and development of Major Port
under section 22;
(f) the form of port security under sub-section (3) of section
30; and
(g) any other matter which is required to be, or may be,
specified by regulations or in respect of which provision
is to be made by regulations.
Power of Boards
of Port
Authorities to
make regulations.

117
62. Every rule made by the Central Government, every regulation made
by the Board and every notification issued by the Central Government
under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session for a total
period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in
two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the
session, immediately following the session or the successive sessions
aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule,
regulation or notification or both Houses agree that the rule, regulation
or notification should not be made, the rule, regulation or notification
shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no
effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification
or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything
previously done under that rule, regulation or notification.
63. (1) The Major Port Trusts Act, 1963 is here by repealed.
(2) Notwithstanding the repeal of the Major Port Trusts Act, 1963
under sub-section (1),—
(a) anything done primarily by the Board of Trustees under
the Major Port Trusts Act, 1963 in respect of any rule,
notification, inspection, order or notice made or issued or
any appointment or declaration made or any operation
undertaken or any direction given or any proceeding taken
or any penalty, punishment, forfeiture or fine imposed
under the Major Port Trusts Act, 1963, shall, insofar as
it is not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, be
deemed to have been done or taken under the corresponding
provisions of this Act;
(b) any order, rule, notification, regulation, appointment,
conveyance, mortgage, deed, trust, special purpose vehicle,
joint venture, document or agreement made, fee directed,
resolution passed, direction given, proceeding taken,
instrument executed or issued, or thing done under or in
pursuance of the repealed Major Port Trusts Act, 1963
shall, if in force at the commencement of this Act and not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, continue to
be in force, and shall have effect as if made, directed,
passed, given, taken, executed, issued or done under or
in pursuance of this Act;
Laying of rules
and regulations.
Repeal and
savings
38 of 1963
38 of 1963
38 of 1963
38 of 1963
38 of 1963

118
(c) any principle or rule of law, or established jurisdiction,
form or course of pleading, practice or procedure or
existing usage, custom, privilege, restriction or exemption
shall not be affected, notwithstanding that the same
respectively may have been in any manner affirmed or
recognised or derived by, in, or from, the repealed Major
Port Trusts Act, 1963;
(d) any person appointed to any office under or by virtue of
the repealed Major Port Trusts Act, 1963 shall be deemed
to have been appointed to that office under or by virtue
of this Act;
(e) any jurisdiction, custom, liability, right, title, privilege,
restriction, exemption, usage, practice, procedure or other
matter or thing not in existence or in force shall not be
revised or restored;
(f) any documents and any funds constituted and established
under the repealed enactments shall be deemed to be
documents and funds constituted or established under the
corresponding provisions of this Act;
(g) any prosecution instituted under the repealed enactments
and pending immediately before the commencement of
this Act before any Court shall, subject to the provisions
of this Act, continue to be heard and disposed of by the
said Court; and
(h) any inspection, investigation or inquiry ordered to be done
under the repealed Major Port Trusts Act, 1963 shall
continue to be proceeded with as if such inspection,
investigation or inquiry has been ordered under the
corresponding provisions of this Act.
(3) The mention of particular matters in sub-section (2) shall not
be held to prejudice the general application of section 6 of the
General Clauses Act, 1897 with regard to the effect of repeal
of the Major Port Trusts Act, 1963.
64. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this
Act, the Central Government may, by order, published in the
Official Gazette, make such provisions not inconsistent with
38 of 1963
38 of 1963
38 of 1963
38 of 1963
10 of 1897
Power to remove
difficulties.

119
the provisions of this Act, as appears to it to be necessary or
expedient for removing the difficulty:
Provided that no such order shall be made in respect of a
Major Port after the expiry of a period of three years from the
date on which this Act is made applicable to that Major Port.
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as
may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament.
65. Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, the Board of Trustees
functioning as such immediately before the commencement of this
Act shall continue to so function until the Board for each Major Port
is constituted under this Act, but on the constitution of such Board,
under this Act, the Members of the Board of Trustees holding office
before such constitution shall cease to hold office.
Transitional
provision.

120
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Major Ports Trust Act was enacted in the year 1963 for constitution of Port Authorities for
certain Major Ports in India and to vest the administration, control and management of such ports in such
authorities and for matters connected therewith.
2. In India, the Major Port Trusts were created by the Central Government in the 1960's following
the Service Port Model. Each of the Major Port Trust so constituted is being governed by a Board of
Trustees. The powers of these Trustees are limited as they are bound by the directions on policy matters
and orders of the Central Government. The current model of the Board of Trustees has operational
restrictions due to diverse representation of the Trustees. With the growth and development of private
ports, the Major Ports are facing severe competition and difficulties in implementing the changes which
may help the Major Ports compete in the evolving market conditions. The regulation of tariff in the Major
Ports by the Tariff Authority under the Major Port Trusts Act, 1963 and their administrative control by
the Central Government are some of the critical factors hindering their growth and development.
3. In view of the above, and to provide greater autonomy, flexibility to the Major Ports and to
professionalise their governance, it is proposed to repeal the Major Port Trusts Act, 1963 and to replace
it with a new legislation, namely the Major Ports Authorities Bill, 2016.
4. The proposed Major Port Authorities Bill, 2016, inter-alia, provides for the following, namely:—
(i) to constitute the Board of Port Authority for each Major Port in the place of the Board of
Trustees;
(ii) the Board for each Major Port Authority shall consist of—a Chairperson, a Deputy Chairperson,
one Member each from the (a) concerned State Government in which the Major Port is
situated; (b) Ministry of Railways; (c) Ministry of Defence; and (d) Customs, Department of
Revenue, minimum three and not exceeding four Independent Members, one Member
representing the interest of the employees and one Member nominated by the Central
Government;
(iii) to enable the Board of Port Authority—
(a) to use its property, assets and funds in such manner and for such purposes as it may
deem fit for the benefit of that Major Port;
(b) to enter into and perform any contract necessary for the performance of its functions
under the proposed legislation;
(c) to make regulations for the purposes of operations, development and planning of the
Major Port;
(d) to frame the scales of rates for assets and services available at Major Port;
120

121
(e) to claim lien on such goods and to seize and detain the same until such rates and rents
are fully paid;
(iv) to empower the Board of Port Authority to raise the loans and issue securities for the purposes
of the capital expenditure and working capital requirements of such Port Authority;
(v) empowering the Central Government—
(a) to order survey or examination of the works of the Port Authority;
(b) to restore and complete the works at the cost of the Port Authority;
(c) to take over the management of the Port Authority in certain circumstances;
(d) to exempt certain specified vessels from obligation to use port assets in the interest or
security of the nation or on account of a grave emergency; and
(e) to issue directions to every Port Authority;
(vi) to constitute an Adjudicatory Board for adjudication of disputes among Major Ports, Public
Private Partnership concessionaries and captive users. This Adjudicatory Board shall consist
of a Presiding Officer and such other Members not exceeding two, as may be appointed by
the Central Government; and
(vii) to make a provision for Corporate Social Responsibility measures within the port limits.
5. The Notes on Clauses explain in detail the various provisions contained in the Bill.
6. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
   N
EW D ELHI; NITIN DADKARI
The 15th December, 2016.

122
Notes on Clauses
Clause 1.—This clause relates to the short title and commencement of the proposed legislation and
enables the Central Government to appoint a date with respect to the commencement of the proposed
legislation.
Clause 2.—This clause contains the definitions of various expressions used in the proposed legislation.
Clause 3.—This clause lays down the provisions for the constitution and composition of the Board
of Major Port Authority. The Board shall consists of a Chairperson, a Deputy Chairperson, one Member
each from the (a) concerned State Government in which the Major Port is situated; (b) Ministry of
Railways; (c) Ministry of Defence; and (d) Customs, Department of Revenue, minimum three and not
exceeding four Independent Members, one Member representing the interest of the employees and one
Member nominated by the Central Government.
Clause 4.—This clause lays down the provisions relating to the qualification, experience and the
manner of appointment of the Chairperson, Deputy Chairperson and Members of the Board.
Clause 5.—This clause lays down the circumstances in which the Chairperson, Deputy Chairperson
and other Members of the Board shall be ineligible for appointment.
Clause 6.—This clause lays down the term of office of the Chairperson, Deputy Chairperson and
Members.
Clause 7.—This clause provides that the Members of the Board shall disclose their interests which
are likely to affect their official functions within the Board.
Clause 8.—This clause lays down the procedure and manner in which the Chairperson, Deputy
Chairperson and Members of the Board may resign from their office.
Clause 9.—This clause lays down the circumstances under which the Chairperson, Deputy Chairperson
or any Member of the Board shall be removed from his office.
Clause 10.—This clause relates to fees and honorarium payable to Members appointed from amongst
the Members referred to in clauses (c), (d) and (f) of sub-section (1) of section 3.
Clause 11.—This clause provides that the Chairperson and in his absence, the Deputy Chairperson
shall have powers of general superintendence and directions in the conduct of the affairs of the Major
Port Authority and he shall, in addition to presiding over the meetings of the Board, exercise supervision
and control over the acts of all the employees of the Major Port Authority, in matters of executive
administration and in matters concerning the accounts and records of such Board.
Clause 12.—This clause lays down the procedure and manner in which the meetings of the Board
shall be conducted.
Clause 13.—This clause lays down the power of the Board to appoint Committees and delegation
of powers to such Committees.
122

123
Clause 14.—This clause provides that Board may, for the purpose of discharging its powers,
functions and duties, by general or special order in writing, specify (a) the powers and duties conferred
or imposed upon the Board by or under this Act which may also be exercised or performed by the
Chairperson; and (b) the powers and duties conferred or imposed on the Chairperson by or under this
Act, which may also be exercised or performed by the Deputy Chairperson or any officer or officers
of the Board and the conditions and restrictions, if any, subject to which the powers and duties may
be exercised and performed.
Clause 15.—This clause provides that any vacancy, defect or irregularity in the constitution of the
Board or appointment of the Members shall not invalidate the proceedings of the Board.
Clause 16.—This clause, inter alia, specifies the relevant authorities empowered to make appointments
on different posts in the Major Port.
Clause 17.—This clause provides that the Board shall prepare and submit to the Central Government,
after every five years, a list of the employees of the Board of the Major Port Authority indicating therein
the designations and grades of employees and the salaries, fees and allowances which are proposed to
be paid to them.
Clause 18.—This clause provides that the Board of the Port Authority shall be deemed to be the
successor of the Board of Trustees of Major Port and all assets, contracts, obligations, liabilities and
employees serving under the Board of Trustees under the Major Port Trusts Act, 1963 shall transferred
to the Board of the Port Authority constituted under the proposed legislation.
Clause 19.—This clause lays down the provisions relating to usage of property, assets, etc, by the
Board. This clause further lays down that any contract or arrangement to be entered by the Board for
sale of land or immovable property or for lease of land or immovable property for port related use for
a term exceeding forty years and for any purpose other than the purposes specified in clause 22 for a
term exceeding twenty years shall be subject to the prior approval of the Central Government. This
clause also provides that the tenure for lease of land or immovable property by the Board for Public
Private Partnership projects shall be subject to the policy notified by the Central Government in respect
of such Public Private Partnership projects.
Clause 20.—This clause lays down the procedure for the Board to acquire immovable property
through the Central Government or State Government by payment of compensation under the Right to
Fair Compensation and Transparency in Rehabilitation and Resettlement Act, 2013.
Clause 21.—This clause empowers the Board to enter into contracts for performance of its functions
under the proposed legislation. This clause further provides that the contracts shall be entered into by
the Chairperson or any authorised officer on behalf of the Board.
Clause 22.—This clause empowers the Board to make different regulations for the planning and
development of the Major Port and such regulations shall not be inconsistent with the Customs Act, 1962
and the rules made thereunder.
Clause 23.—This clause empowers the Board to frame and fix the scale of rates for assets and
services available at Major Ports. This clause further provides that the fixation and implementation of

124
such rates, etc. shall not be (a) with retrospective effect; (b) applicable for Public Private Partnership
projects already awarded by the Board or the Central Government; (c) in derogation of the rules made
by or directives of the Central Government in this behalf; (d) inconsistent with the provisions of the
Competition Act, 2002; and (e) inconsistent with the provisions of any other law for the time being in
force.
Clause 24.—This clause empowers the Board to have lien over the goods in respect of which any
fee or rent is leviable and due to the Board under the proposed legislation. This clause further provided
that the Board also has powers to detain such goods until the outstanding fee or rate is fully paid to the
Board.
Clause 25.—This clause relates to ship-owner's lien for freight and other charges and provides that
if the master or owner of any vessel or his agent, at or before the time of landing from such vessel
or any goods at any port asset belonging to or in occupation of the Board, gives to such Board a notice
in writing that such goods are to remain subject to a lien for freight or other charges payable to the ship
owner, to an amount to be mentioned in such notice, such goods shall continue to be liable to such lien
to such amount.
Clause 26.—This clause lays down the circumstances under which the Board may sell the goods
that have been passed or placed into its custody upon landing at the Major Port and also empowers the
Board to apply the sale proceeds of such goods in the manner stipulated under section 150 of the
Customs Act, 1962.
Clause 27.—This clause empowers the Board to create specific master plan in respect of development
of infrastructure within the port limits. The said master plan shall be independent of any local or State
Government regulations.
Clause 28.—This clause relates to recovery of rates and charges by distraint of vessel and empowers
the Board to detain or arrest any vessel in respect of which the rates or penalties are not paid as per
the provisions of the proposed legislation.
Clause 29.—This clause provides that any person aggrieved by the action or decision of the Board
under clauses 19 to 28 (except clause 25) of the Act to file an application against such action or decision
before the Adjudicatory Board.
Clause 30.—This clause empowers the Board to raise loans and issue port securities for capital
expenditure and working capital requirements of the Port Authority from any Scheduled Bank or financial
institution located in India or from any financial institutions in any country outside India without prior
approval of the Central Government up to fifty-one per cent of the capital reserves of the Board.
Clause 31.—This clause relates to indorsements to be made on port security such as debentures,
bonds and stock certificates issued by the Board and states that notwithstanding anything contained in
section 15 of the Negotiable Instruments Act, 1881, no endorsement of a port security, which is
transferable by indorsement, shall be valid unless made by the signature of the holder inscribed on the
back of the security itself.

125
Clause 32.—This clause provides that the indorser of security not liable for amount thereof and
states that notwithstanding anything contained in the Negotiable Instruments Act, 1881, a person shall
not by reason only of his having indorsed any port security be liable to pay any money due, either as
principal or as interest, thereunder.
Clause 33.—This clause provides for recognition of the person to whom a duplicate or new port
security has been issued under the regulations made by the Board under clause 22 as the holder of the
security. This clause further provides that such recognition by the Board of a person as the holder of
a port security shall not be called in question by any court so far as such recognition affects the relations
of the Board with the person recognised by it as the holder of a port security or with any person claiming
an interest in such security. This clause also provides that such recognition by the Board of any person
shall operate to confer on that person a title to the security or securities subject only to a personal liability
to the rightful owner of the security for money had and received on his account.
Clause 34.—This clause lists out the events and circumstances in which the Board of Major Port
Authority shall be discharged from its liability to make payments on amount due on port securities.
Clause 35.—This clause lists out different securities (other than the port security) that the Board
of Major Port Authority may secure for raising loans.
Clause 36.—This clause relates to the power of the Board to repay loans to the Government before
due date.
Clause 37.—This clause requires the Board to establish sinking fund in respect of loans raised by
the Board which are not repayable before the expiry of one year from the date of such loan. This clause
further provides that the Board is also required to set apart enough funds from its income as sinking
fund and apply those funds to service or liquidate its loans.
Clause 38.—This clause clarifies that the loans raised and securities issued or pledged by the Major
Ports before the commencement of the proposed legislation shall continue to be governed by the
provisions of the Major Port Trusts Act, 1963.
Clause 39.—This clause provides that all moneys received by the Board shall be credited to the
general accounts of the Board which it may open with the Scheduled Banks as per the guidelines of the
Ministry of Finance, Government of India.
Clause 40.—This clause lays down the purposes for which the Board shall apply the moneys
credited into the general accounts of the Board. This clause further provides that the provision includes
payment of salaries, fees, allowances, pension, etc., of the Members and employees of the Board, cost
and expenses incurred by the Board in the conduct and administration of any provident or welfare fund
established by the Board, maintenance, development, security and protection of the Board, docks,
warehouses and other properties of the Board, and the like.
Clause 41.—This clause relates to the accounts and audit of the Board and requires the Board to
prepare a budget and an annual statement of its accounts. This clause further provides that the accounts
of the Board shall be audited by the office of the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India and the audited

126
report as certified by the Comptroller and Auditor-General shall be forwarded to the Central Government
for presentation before both the Houses of Parliament.
Clause 42.—This clause requires the Board to submit to the Central Government, an annual report
in relation to the administration of the Major Port.
Clause 43.—This clause empowers the Central Government to order a survey or examination of
the works of the Board and the cost of such survey and examination by the Central Government shall
be borne and paid by the Board from and out of the moneys credited to its general account.
Clause 44.—This clause relates to the power of the Central Government to restore or complete
works at the cost of the Board in case of non-completion or inaction of the Board to complete such
works has led to grave emergency. This clause further provides the circumstances under which the
actions or omissions of the Board may be considered to have led to grave emergency.
Clause 45.—This clause provides the circumstances under which the Central Government may take
over the management of the Board.
Clause 46.—This clause requires the Central Government to prepare and lay report of actions taken
under clauses 42, 44 and 45 before each House of the Parliament.
Clause 47.—This clause relates to the power of the Central Government to exempt from obligation
to use port assets and states that the Central Government may, in the interest of security of nation or
on account of grave emergency, by general or special order, from time to time, permit certain specified
vessels or classes of vessels to discharge or ship goods or certain specified goods or classes of goods,
at such place in a Major Port or within the Major Port approaches, in such manner, during such period
and subject to such payments to the concerned Board in relation to such Major Port or such Major Port
approaches and on such conditions as the Central Government may think fit.
Clause 48.—This clause restricts the Board not to sell, alienate or divest its assets, properties,
rights, powers and authorisation vested in it under the Act without the prior sanction of the Central
Government.
Clause 49.—This clause, inter-alia, provides that the Central and State Governments in respect of
loans given by it to the Board or of loans given to any other authority for the repayment of which the
Board is legally liable on the commencement of the Act, the same remedies and priority as applicable
under the Major Port Trusts Act, 1963, as if the new Act had not been passed.
Clause 50.—This clause states that the Board shall in discharge of its functions under the Act, be
bound by the directions on questions of policy as the Central Government may give in writing from time
to time. This clause further states that the Board shall be given an opportunity to express its views before
any direction is given by the Central Government; but the decision of the Central Government on whether
a question is one of policy or not shall be final and binding on the Board.
Clause 51.—This clause provides for the constitution of the Adjudicatory Board for hearing the
application against any person aggrieved by any action of the Board while exercising its powers under
sections 19 to 28 (except section 25).

127
Clause 52.—This clause relates to general provision for punishment of offences and states that any
person who contravenes any of the provisions of the Act or any rule, regulation or order made thereunder,
shall be punishable with fine which may extend to rupees one lakh.
Clause 53.—This clause relates to the offences by companies and inter-alia, states that if the
person committing an offence under the proposed legislation is a company, then, every person who, at
the time the offence was committed was in charge of, and was responsible to, the company for the
conduct of business of the company, as well as the company, shall be deemed to be guilty of the offence
and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly. This clause further provides that
no such person shall be liable to punishment if he proves that the offence was committed without his
knowledge or that he exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence.
Clause 54.—This clause relates to cognizance of offences and states that no court inferior to that
of a Metropolitan Magistrate or Judicial Magistrate of the First Class shall try any offence punishable
under the proposed legislation or any rule or regulation made thereunder.
Clause 55.—This clause relates to protection of acts done in good faith and states that no suit or
other legal proceeding shall lie against the Board or any Member or employee thereof in respect of
anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done under the Act or any rule or regulation made
thereunder, or for any deficiency of service or any consequential losses on account of deficiency in
services.
Clause 56.—This clause stipulates that every person employed by the Board under the Act, shall
be deemed to be a public servant within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code.
Clause 57.—This clause relates to power of the Board to evict certain persons from premises of
the Board and stipulates that the Board in exercise of the powers conferred on it by regulations made
under the Act or by invoking the contractual remedies available to the Board may cancel the allotment
of any premises made to any employee of the Board or any other person or evict an employee of the
Board or any person in occupation of any port asset or premises or area in the port limits, by notice
in writing, addressed to such allottee or employee or other person who may be in occupation or
possession thereof in violation of the regulations specified or formulated by the Board.
Clause 58.—This clause entitles the Board with an alternate remedy to recover by suit any rates,
damages, expenses, costs, or in case of sale the balance thereof, when the proceeds of the sale are
insufficient, or any penalties payable to, or recoverable by, the Board under the Act or under any
regulations made in pursuance thereof.
Clause 59.—This clause relates to Corporate Social Responsibility of the Major Ports and requires
the Board of Port Authorities to utilise funds for providing social benefits including development of
infrastructure in areas of education, environment, health, housing, skill development, training, etc., within
the port limits for its employees, customers, business partners, Non-Government Organisations and
society at large.
Clause 60.—This clause provides that the Central Government may, by notification make rules for
carrying out the provisions of the Act.

128
Clause 61.—This clause provides that the Board may, with the prior approval of the Central
Government, by notification, make regulations consistent with the provisions of the Act and the rules
made thereunder.
Clause 62.—This clause provides that every rule, regulation and notification made under the Act
shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament.
Clause 63.—This clause relates to repeal of the Major Port Trusts Act, 1963 and saving of certain
actions taken under the said Act.
Clause 64.—This clause relates to power to remove difficulties and provides that if any difficulty
arises in giving effect to the provisions of the proposed legislation, the Central Government may, by
order, published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions not inconsistent with the provisions of the
Act, as appears to it to be necessary or expedient for removing the difficulty.
Clause 65.—This clause relates to the transitional provision and provides that the Board of Trustees
functioning as such immediately before the commencement of the Act shall continue to so function until
the Board for each Major Port is constituted under the proposed legislation, but on the constitution of
such Board under the proposed legislation, the Members of the Board of Trustees holding office before
such constitution shall cease to hold office.

129
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 23 of the Major Port Authorities Bill, 2016 Bill empowers the Board of each Major Port
authority to frame scale of rates for services to be performed or made available, and for access to and
usage of the port assets.
2. Clause 30 of the Bill empowers the Board to raise loans for capital expenditure and working
capital requirements of the Port Authority from any Scheduled Bank or financial institution located in
India or from financial institutions in any country outside India without prior approval of the Central
Government upto fifty per cent. of the capital reserves of the Board.
3. Clause 37 of the Bill, inter-alia, requires the Board to establish sinking fund in respect of loans
raised by the Board which are not repayable before the expiry of one year from the date of such loan.
4. Clause 39 of the Bill provides that all moneys received by or on behalf of the Port Authority
under the provisions of this Act shall be credited to such general account or accounts of the Port
Authority which the Board may from time to time generally open with the Scheduled Banks as per the
guidelines of the Ministry of Finance, Government of India.
5. Clause 40 of the Bill requires that the moneys credited in the general account shall be applied
by the Port Authority for payment of such charges and for such purposes as mentioned in the said
clause.
6. The Bill does not involve any other expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India, either
recurring or non-recurring.
129

130
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 60 of the Major Port Authorities Bill, 2016 seeks to empower the Central Government to
make rules for—(a) the composition the Select Committee and the manner of appointment of the
Chairperson and Deputy Chairperson of the Board under sub-section (1) of section 4; (b) the manner
of appointment of members of the Board under sub-section (3) of section 4; (c) the procedure for
conducting any inquiry made under sub-section (3) of section 5; (d) the honorarium payable to the
Members of the Board under section 10; (e) the form and manner in which contracts shall be made by
the Board under sub-section (3) of section 21; (f) the form, manner and fees for filing application before
the Adjudicatory Board under section 29; (g) the manner of applying the sums under sub-section (3) of
section 37; (h) the purposes for which the moneys received by the Board shall be applied under sub-
section (3) of section 40; (i) the form in which and the time at which the Board shall prepare an annual
report under sub-section (1) of section 41; (j) the salaries and allowances payable to and other terms
and conditions of services of the Presiding Officer and members of the Adjudicatory Board under sub-
section (8) of section 51; (k) the procedure to be adopted by the Adjudicatory Board, under sub-section
(9) of section 51; (l) other functions of the Adjudicatory Board under sub-section (10) of section 51;
(m) the manner of utilisation of funds for Corporate Social Responsibility under sub-section (2) of
section 59; and (n) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, prescribed, or in respect of
which provision is to be made, by rules.
2. Clause 61 of the Bill empowers the Board, with the previous approval of the Central Government,
by notification, to make regulations consistent with the provisions of the Act and the rules made
thereunder to provide for — (a) rules of procedure for transaction of business under sub-section (1)
of section 12; (b) rules of procedure for transaction of business under sub-section (2) of section 13;
(c) the appointment of employees under clause (b) of sub-section (1) of section 16; (d) the use and
development of the port assets under sub-section (2) of section 19; (e) the purposes of planning and
development of Major Port under section 22; (f) the form of port security under sub-section (3) of
section 30; and (g) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, specified by regulations or in
respect of which provision is to be made by regulations.
3. The matters in respect of which the aforementioned rules and regulations may be made are
matters of procedure and administrative detail, and as such, it is not practicable to provide for them in
the proposed Bill itself. The delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character.
130

131
LOK SABHA
A
BILL
to provide for regulation, operation and planning of Major Ports in India and to vest the
administration, control and management of such ports upon the Boards of Major Port
Authorities and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
(Shri Nitin Gadkari, Minister of Road Transport, Highways and Shipping)
GMGIPMRND—3933LS(S3)—15-12-2016.
131

132
ANNEXURE-II
List of Witnesses who appeared before the Department- Related Parliamentary
Standing Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture
3rd May, 2017
1. INDIAN NATIONAL PORT & DOCK WORKERS FEDERATION
Sh. Prabhat Samantaray, President
Sh. Mohan K. Aswani, Addl. General Secretary
2. ALL INDIA PORT & DOCK WORKERS' FEDERATION (W)
Sh. S.K. Shetye, President
Sh. S.R. Apraj, General Secretary
3. ALL INDIA PORT & DOCK WORKERS' FEDERATION, KOCHI
Sh. P .M. Mohammed Haneef, President
Sh. M.L. Bellani, Additional General Secretary
Sh. Thomas Sebastian
4. WATER TRANSPORT WORKERS FEDERATION OF INDIA
Mr. C.D. Nandakumar, President
Mr. T. Narendra Rao, General Secretary
5. INDIAN PRIV ATE PORTS & TERMINALS ASSOCIATION
Mr. Kevin D'Souza, Vice President
Mr. Ravi Kumar, Treasurer
6. THE BPT RESIDENTIAL TENANTS ASSOCIATION
Sh. Homi Chibber, Chairman
Sh. Viren Asar
7. CONTAINER SHIPPING LINES ASSOCIATION
Mr. Tarun Kalra
Mr. Josy John
8. THE ASSOCIATED CHAMBERS OF COMMERCE AND INDUSTRY OF INDIA
Mr. C.N. Rajasekar, Managing Committee Member
Mr. Ritesh Dhasmana, Senior Executive
132

133
ANNEXURE-III
List of Witnesses who appeared before the Department- Related Parliamentary
Standing Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture
25th April, 2017
MINISTRY OF SHIPPING
1. Shri Rajive Kumar Secretary
2. Dr. Alok Srivastava Addl. Secy.
3. Dr. Pradeep Kumar JS&FA
4. Shri Barun Mitra JS (Ports)
5. Shri Parvir Krishan JS (S&Parl.)
6. Shri M.M. Uasija Adviser
7. Dr. Malini Shankar DG(Shipping)
8. Shri Amitabh Kumar Addl. Director Genl.
9. Shri Sanjay Bhatia Chairman, MbPT as Chairman, IPA
10. Shri T.S. Balasubramanian Member, Finance(TAMP)
11. Shri A.Janardhana Rao MD(IPA)
12. Shri B.R. Sekhar Chief Surveyor, DGS
13. Shri Suresh Kumar Chief Ship Surveyor, DGS
14. Dr. Amol B. Kirtane Dy .DG(Crew), DGS
15. Capt. Anish Joseph Nautical Surveyor, DGS
16. Shri A.K. Saran Director
LEGISLATIVE DEPARTMENT (MINISTRY OF LAW & JUSTICE)
17. Dr. Reeta Vasistha Additional Secretary
18. Shri R. Sreenivas Additional Legislative Counsel
19. Shri K. Biswal Joint Secretary and Legislative Counsel
20. Shri R.K. Pattanayak Deputy Legislative Counsel
133

134
ANNEXURE-IV
List of Witnesses who appeared before the Department- Related Parliamentary
Standing Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture
23rd June, 2017
MINISTRY OF SHIPPING
1. Dr. Alok Srivastava Special Secretary
2. Dr. Pradeep Kumar JS&FA
3. Shri Barun Mitra Joint Secretary (Ports)
4. Shri Pravir Krishn Joint Secretary (Shipping)
5. Shri A.K. Saran Director
MUMBAI PORT TRUST
6. Shri Sanjay Bhatia Chairman
JA WAHARLAL NEHRU PORT TRUST
7. Shri N arcsh Kumar Secretary
KANDLA PORT TRUST
8. Shri Ravi Parmar Chairman
CHENNAI PORT TRUST & (I/C COCHIN PORT TRUST)
9. Shri Raveendran Chairman
VISAKIIAPATNAM PORT TRUST & ((I/C) KOLKATA PORT TRUST)
10. Shri M.T. Krishna Babu Chairman
NEW MANGALORE PORT TRUST
11. Shri P.C. Parida Chairman
MORMUGAO PORT TRUST
12. Shri I. Jeyakumar Chairman
V .O. CHIDAMBARNAR PORT TRUST
13. Shri S.A.C Bose Chairman
134

135
PARADIP PORT TRUST
14. Shri Rinkesh Roy Chairman
INDIAN PORT ASSOCIATION
15. Shri A. Janaradhana Rao Managing Director
16. Shri B.S. Negi Deputy Manager
TARIFF AUTHORITY FOR MAJOR PORTS
17. Shri T.S. Balasubramanian Member (F)

136
ANNEXURE-V
List of Stakeholders
List of stakeholders who furnished their representations on the Major Port Authorities Bill, 2016:
(i) Cochin Port Employees Sangh;
(ii) Cochin port Labour Union;
(iii) Cochin Port Thozhilali Union;
(iv) Kandla Port Karmachari Sangh;
(v) Cochin Port Employees' Organisation;
(vi) Kandla Port Worker's Union;
(vii) Tra nsport & Dock Worker's Union, Kandla;
(viii) Federation of Ship Agents Association of India;
(ix) T ransport & Dock Worker's Union, Mumbai;
(x) Mumbai Port Trust, Dock and General Employees' Union;
(xi) Mb. P .T. Mazdoor Sangh;
(xii) Bharatiya Port & Dock Employees Union;
(xiii) Joint representation of Six Trade Unions;
(xiv) The Tuticorin Port Mariners and General Staff Union;
(xv) Tuticorin Port Employees Trade Union;
(xvi) Tuticorin Port Trust Democratic Staff Union;
(xvii) Madras Port & Dock Employees' Union (CITU);
(xviii) The Madras Port Trust Employees' Union;
(xix) The Cochin Port Staff Association;
(xx) New Mangalore Port & General Employees Association;
(xxi) Cochin Port & Dock Employee's Union;
(xxii) Chennai Port & Dock Labour Liberation Front Trade Union;
(xxiii) Cochin Thuramugha Thozhilali Union;
(xxiv) Nhava-Sheva Bandar Kamagar Sanghatana (A);
(xxv) Container Ship Liner Association;
(xxvi) Kandla Port & Dock SC/ST Employees Union.
136

137
(xxvii) All India Port & Dock Workers Federation;
(xxviii) Indian Private Ports & Terminals Association (1PPTA);
(xxix) The BPT Residential Tenants Association;
(xxx) W ater Transport Workers' Federation of India;
(xxxi) Indian National Port & Dock Workers Federation;
(xxxii) All India Port & Dock Workers Federation (W);
(xxxiii) The Associated Chambers of Commerce & Industry of India (ASSOCHAM);
(xxxiv) The Bombay Iron Merchants' Association;
(xxxv) Mb.PT V irrudhi Sangharsh Samiti;
(xxxvi) Cotton Association of India;
(xxxvii) The BPT Residential Tenants Association;
(xxxviii) All Kerala Fishing Boat Operators Association;
(xxxix) Central Warehousing Corporation;
(xl) The Tamil Chamber of Commerce;
(xli) Steel Chamber of India;
(xlii) Container Corporation of India Ltd.
(xliii) Indian Ports Association;
(xliv) The Darukhana Iron Steel & Scrap Merchants Association;
(xlv) Dharti Dredging and Infrastrcture Ltd.;
(xlvi) Association of Multimodal Transport Operators of India;
(xlvii) Kamarajar Port Limited;
(xlviii) V .O. Chidambaranar Port Trust;
(xlix) All India Port & Dock Workers' Federation;
(1) Mormugao Port Trust;
(li) Competition Commission of India;
(lii) The Associated Chambers of Commerce & Industry of India;
(liii) Indian National Port and Dock Workers Federation, Chennai;
(liv) Association of Multimodal Transport Operators of India.
(lv) Cochin Port Trust; and
(Ivi) Chennai Port Trust.