Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
February, 2014/Magha, 1935 (Saka)
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
RAJYA SABHA 
ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE
TWO HUNDRED FIFTH REPORT
REPORT NO. 
205
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 6th February, 2014)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 6th February, 2014)
Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/
Observations of the Committee contained in its One Hundred
and Ninety Second Report on the Demands for Grants (2013-14)
of the Ministry of Culture

Website: http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail: rsc-tt@sansad.nic.in

67
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE
TWO HUNDRED FIFTH REPORT
Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/
Observations of the Committee contained in its One Hundred
and Ninety Second Report on the Demands for Grants (2013-14)
of the Ministry of Culture
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 6th February, 2014)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 6th February, 2014)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
February, 2014/Magha, 1935 (Saka)
Hindi version of this publication is also available

CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ..................................................................................... (i)-(ii)
2. I NTRODUCTION ..................................................................................................................... (iii)
3. L IST OF A BBREVIATIONS ..................................................................................................... (iv)-(v)
4. R EPORT OF THE C OMMITTEE ............................................................................................. 1—34
5. O BSERV ATIONS/CONCLUSIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS — A T A G LANCE ................................. 35—38
6. A NNEXURE ............................................................................................................................ 39— 43
7. M INUTES .............................................................................................................................. 4 5—48
8. L IST OF R EPORTS ............................................................................................................... 49—66

COMPOSITION OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE
(2013-14)
1. Shri Sitaram Yechury — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Shashi Bhusan Behera
3. Shri Kunal Kumar Ghosh
4. Shri Narendra Kumar Kashyap
5. Prof. Alka Balram Kshatriya
6. Shri Aayanur Manjunatha
7. Shri V . Hanumantha Rao
8. Shri Satish Sharma
9. Shrimati Bimla Kashyap Sood
10. Shrimati Vasanthi Stanley
LOK SABHA
11. Yogi Adityanath
12. Shri Sisir Kumar Adhikari
13. Shri Ghanshyam Anuragi
14. Shri Subrata Bakshi
15. Shri Haribhai Parthibhai Chaudhary
16. Shrimati Tabassum Hasan
17. Dr. Mahesh Joshi
18. Shri M. Krishnaswamy
19. Shri G.V . Harsha Kumar
20. Shri S. Pakkirappa
21. Shri Prabodh Panda
22. Shri Deoraj Singh Patel
23. Shri Adhalrao Shivaji Patil
24. Shri Nilesh N. Rane
25. Shri Modugula Venugopala Reddy
26. Shri Madan Lal Sharma
27. Shri Dushyant Singh
28. Shri Rakesh Singh
29. Shri Shatrughan Sinha
30. Shri K. Sudhakaran
31. Shri Dinesh Trivedi
(i)

(ii)
SECRETARIAT
Shri N.K. Singh, Joint Secretary
Shri Swarabji B., Joint Director
Dr. (Shrimati) Subhashree Panigrahi, Joint Director
Shrimati A.S. Chakravani, Assistant Director
Shri T. Kennedy Jesudossan, Committee Officer
Shri P.P. Raumon, Committee Officer

(iii)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman, Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport,
Tourism and Culture, having been authorized by the Committee to present on its behalf, do hereby
present this Two Hundred Fifth Report on Action Taken by the Government on the
recommendations/observations of the Committee contained in its One Hundred and Ninety Second
Report on the Demands for Grants of Ministry of Culture (2013-14).
2. One Hundred and Ninety Second Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture was presented to the Parliament on the 3
rd May, 2013.
3. The Action Taken Replies on the recommendations of the Committee contained its One
Hundred Ninety Second Report were received from the Ministry of Culture on 5 th December, 2013.
4. The Committee considered and adopted the Report in its meeting held on the 17 th December, 2013.
SITARAM YECHURY
NEW D ELHI; Chairman,
17th December, 2013 Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Agrahayana 26, 1935 (Saka) Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture

LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS
A.S.I. – Archaeological Survey of India
A E – Actual Estimates
AMASR – Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Sites and Remains (Amendment and
Validation) Act
An.S.I. – Anthropological Survey of India
B E – Budget Estimates
C-DAC – Centre for Development of Advanced Computing
CEP – Cultural Exchange Programme
CPC – Central Pay Commission
CSR – Corporate Social Responsibility
CSS – Centrally Sponsored Scheme
D A – Dearness Allowance
DDA – Delhi Development Authority
DMRC – Delhi Metro Rail Corporation
FIR – First Information Report
IGNCA – Indira Gandhi National Centre for Arts
KBOPL – Khuda Bakhsh Oriental Public Library
MACP – Minimum Assured Career Progression
NAI – National Archives of India
NCF – National Cultural Fund
NEZCC – North-East Zone Cultural Centre
NGMA – National Gallery For Modern Arts
NMA – National Monument Authority
PC – Planning Commission
(iv)

PPP – Public Private Partnership
PSU – Public Sector Undertaking
RE – Revised Estimates
SA – Superintending Archeologist
TMSSML – The Thanjavur Maharaja Serfoji's Sarasvati Mahal Library
UNESCO – United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization
USP – Unique Selling Proposition
ZCC – Zonal Cultural Centre
(v)

1
REPORT
The Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Government on the
observations/recommendations as contained in its One Hundred and Ninety Second Report on
Demands for Grants 2013-14 of the Ministry of Culture which was presented to both the Houses
of Parliament on 3
rd May, 2013.
2. Action Taken Replies have been received from the Government on 5 th December, 2013, in
respect of all the observations/recommendations contained in the Report. The replies have been
categorized as follows:–
(i) Recommendations/observations that have been accepted by the Government:
Paragraph Nos. 6, 17, 21, 23, 30, 31, 32, 35, 37, 45, 50, 62, 63, 64, 66, 69, 70,
71, 72, 73,79, 80, 81, 85, 89(4) and 89(5) Total:26
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue in
view of the Government replies:–
Paragraph Nos. 22, 29, 54, 57, 61, 78, 79, 80, 83 and 84 Total:10
(iii) Recommendations/observations in respect of which replies of the Government have
not been accepted by the Committee:
Paragraph Nos. : Nil
(iv) Recommendations/observations in respect of which final replies of the Government are
still awaited.
Paragraph Nos: 17, 21, 23, 28, 30, 31, 32, 35, 41, 42, 50, 66, 68, 70, 71, 72, 73,
75, 76, 83, 85 and 89(6) Total:22
3. The Committee desires that final replies in respect of those recommendations/
observations which have been categorized as interim replies by the Committee should be
furnished at the earliest.
4. On scrutiny of the Action Taken Replies, the Committee has made observations on
each item of Action Taken/proposed to be taken by the concerned Ministries. The
recommendations of the Committee contained in the One Hundred and Ninety Second
Report, action taken thereon by the Ministry and recommendations/observations of the
Committee on each item of action taken has been given in the succeeding paragraphs:
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
5. The Committee noticed that while there has been about two-fold increase in allocation from
one Plan to another Plan, the expenditure pattern has not been very encouraging.
(Para No. 6 of the 192
nd Report)
Reply of the Government
6. Financial allocation and expenditure position of the Ministry from Eighth to Twelfth Five
Year Plan has been given in the following table:

2
(Rs. in crore )
Plan Allocation Actual allocation Expenditure % w.r.t.
Period approved made on year to Allocation in
by Planning year basis by PC Col. 3
Commission
Eighth Plan 385.00 479.06* 529.47 1 10.52
Ninth Plan 920.41 748.00* 679.02 90.78
Tenth Plan 1720.00 1921.12 1526.29 79.45
Eleventh Plan 3524.11 3377.00 3047.90 90.25
Twelfth Plan 7275.00 On-going
*Allocation for Capital works included under DDG of Ministry of Urban Development.
7. From the above trend of expenditure, it may be seen that excepting Tenth Plan period, the
expenditure level in other Five Year Plan periods is above 90%. This Ministry has now evolved a
mechanism to monitor the phase of expenditure of budgetary allocation constantly during financial
year. This arrangement has been found to be very effective in quicker utilization of budgetary
allocation. In order to properly plan activities/schemes along with their implementation, instructions
are also issued to all the attached, sub-ordinate offices, autonomous organizations and to all
divisional heads in the Ministry every year, at the beginning of the financial year to phase out the
expenditure in such a manner so that the quantum of expenditure incurred under these
organizations/schemes is propelled and also sustained in an even manner during the months of the
financial year. This system has been continued for the last three years i.e. 2010-11, 2011-12 and
2012-13 under which the Ministry achieved a record expenditure between 92% to 99% of plan
funds provided at RE stage. By adopting on-going mechanism, it is expected that the expenditure
pattern would be optimum in each Annual Plan of the Twelfth Five Year Plan.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
8. The mechanism evolved and the results achieved by the Ministry are noteworthy.
Judicious allocation and effective monitoring of expenditure and proper utilization of funds
with proper instructions of coordination at all levels shows the results achieved in the
Ministry of Culture. The Committee is of the view that the utilization of overall allocation
of the Twelfth Five Year Plan is a target which the Ministry should fulfil.
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
9. As regards the strategies for the Twelfth Five Year Plan, the Committee is of the firm view
that these are more of vision than strategies, as these are vague and do not provide a clear road
map for the organizations working under the aegis of the Ministry. The Committee has strong
reservation about the Government’s commitment to privatize heritage conservation activities.
Moreover, the Committee also fails to understand the meaning of the “new approach and
appropriate policies which are less dependent on Government financing.” The Committee feels that
these could be high on ideal but low on implementation on ground and therefore, less practicable.
The Twelfth Plan strategies reflect a paradigm shift in the heritage conservation activities, but the
Committee did not find specific initiatives/intervention in keeping with the said “new approach and
appropriate policies”. Instead, these are vague and high sounding ideals only which do not inspire
required confidence. It turns out to be an attempt to obfuscate the real issues and practical

3
problems faced by the Ministry and different stakeholders. The Committee finds a critical
disconnect in the approach of the Ministry towards heritage conservation vis-a-vis the people and
community. The view that conservation of our ancient cultural heritage would become the concern
and responsibility of every citizen appears to be too idealistic. The Committee understands that
excavation, recording of excavation findings, chemical and physical conservation of our monuments
require a certain level of knowledge, expertise and deft handling. The Committee agrees in principle
with the need for involving community in this exercise but it appears to be better said than done.
The Committee is surprised to note that the linkage between culture and economic growth has not
been properly reflected in the strategy outlined by the Planning Commission and feels that because
of this, the Ministry may not be able to harness the Cultural resources for economic development
of the Country.
(Para 17)
Reply of the Government
10. The Archaeological Survey of India, an attached office of the Ministry of Culture, is the
premier organization for the archaeological researches and protection of the cultural heritage of the
nation. Excavation is one of its central activity under which ancient mounds with cultural deposits
are excavated scenically to understand contemporary society, material culture, art-craft, etc. The
archaeological Excavation involves many activities such as prior survey of the area i.e. Exploration,
documentation of prevailing conditions, tentative understanding of cultural materials, preparing of
survey maps, drawings etc.
11. The Archaeological Survey of India carries out its duties related to Excavation and
Exploration with the help of six Excavation Branches and 24 Circles, which are spread across the
country. The concern shown by the Committee for involving community in excavation related work
is a very important and relevant.
12. However, in many ways ASI comes out its responsibility towards the common people of
the country, something very similar to the observation made by the committee for involving them
in excavation related works in various capacities such as skilled/unskilled labours, guarding sites
and antiquities in the camps, cleaning and classification of retrieved archaeological materials and
antiquities. Before engaging them in these works they are informed, formally and informally, about
the value and importance of the archaeological excavation and overall importance of preserving
heritage and their role in fulfilling these objectives.
13. During Exploration and village to village survey, a small team of 2-4 persons visit the
villages and gather information of archaeological importance. While doing so, they have even better
opportunity to interact with local community and convey our version of heritage importance. In
most of the cases, the survey teams are dependent on the local panchayat and gram sabhas for
the logistical arrangements also. All these factors enhance the opportunities of interaction with local
community.
14. Also, on some special occasions like Republic Day, Independence Day, World Heritage
weeks ASI organizes celebrations wherein they have an opportunity to interact with local
community by way of exhibitions, photo-Exhibitions, inviting local leaders/ Administration. The
advantages of heritage preservations and role of community in these activities is also circulated
through printed material. ASI not only sensitizes local community but it also spreads awareness
among the various agencies of local bodies and State administrations.
15. There are several strategies available today for the involvement of the community in the
protection of Heritage and for raising resources for heritage conservation:

4
1. The MOC, Government of India has instituted an avenue by which companies can
fulfill their corporate Social responsibility (CSR) in the field of culture. The Ministry
of Culture, through the National Culture Fund  promotes the CSR and PPP model for
the protection of the cultural heritage of the country.
2. Corporate Social Responsibility:  With the approval of Indian Companies Bill it is now
mandatory for companies with a turnover of over 500 crores to ear- mark 2% of their
net profit for the preceding three years on CSR. The CSR initiative could well be used
to promote a joint and shared responsibility of civil society, Government and corporate
sector to create appropriate means and avenues to preserve and develop the invaluable
heritage of this country. It is important for the corporate sector to identify with, and
then implement measures for the sustenance of this irreplaceable cultural resource. The
Ministry of Corporate Affairs has been requested for the inclusion of “Preservation of
Heritage and Promotion of Art and Culture” in the newly approved CSR Guidelines.
This will greatly augment the involvement of the Corporate Sector in Heritage
Protection and harness new approaches and policies which are not dependent on
Government funding alone.
3. NCF reaches out through the CSR/PPP model  throughout the country to ensure
community participation and social responsibility in the culture sector. NCF has
actively associated with many leading corporate houses, public sector units,
international trusts and funding agencies. In exchange for their support NCF offers
100% tax exemption to donors to heritage projects. NCF’s has mobilized resources for
the restoration, conservation, protection and development of India’s rich, natural,
tangible and intangible heritage.
4. Preserving Rural Culture  is also a key to our national development programme.
Strengthening our traditional culture, the arts, music, dance, architecture, literature and
the crafts can secure creative human endeavour and pave the way for a robust
economy. Culture is a major contributor to rural employment and exports. NCF has
undertaken several projects for crafts development and the employment of marginalized
women and crafts communities to develop creative skills so that they can have an
equal share in nation building.
5. Community Skill development : NCF has also raised funds to create a panel of
Master Craftsmen for conservation for ASI monuments. Heritage conservation has
been opened up as a new employment option for skilled craftsmen-stone cutters, jaali
makers, metal-smiths etc. which can help them continue to practice their tradition with
dignity and adequate financial returns rather than migrating to less dignified jobs.
6. Presentation and conservation of heritage in cities  will bring additional tourism to
the country and enhance the purchase of crafts in urban outlets and shops. NCF has
made special efforts to raise corporate funding from PSU’s to provide enhanced visitor
experience at heritage sites by providing interpretation centres and visitor facilities.
NCF has collaborated with NGOs and ASI to protect and package urban heritage and
add value to Indian Cities and generate interest in tourism and the holistic development
of the nation.
7. Museums as an avenue for tourism development . In the cities, rural and remote
areas there are over 1000 ASI, state, regional and private museums for whom NCF
has instituted a PPP programme to provide leadership training and visitor oriented site
management to museum professionals. After training and with the development of
museum infrastructures and visitor facilities, it is hoped then museums too will add to

5
the tourism visitor numbers throughout the country and add to the economic growth
of the nation.
8. Technical Expertise for all heritage conservation and excavation works:  NCF is
engaging ASI and other experts to assist in the process of bringing the best technology
and scientific knowledge to the aid of heritage. NCF has for example raised funds for
the scientific soil analysis under the precariously positioned Jaisalmer Fort, Rajasthan.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
16. The Committee reiterates that the avenues being explored for community participation
in this regard is easier said than done. It, however, is not impossible provided the Ministry
of Culture is able to take it up at all levels. For instance, involving of local community with
the classification, cleaning and guarding the antiquities and giving them valuable information
about the archaeological excavations involves lot of potential risks which has been learnt from
the few recent cases in the State of U.P. The conservation and protection of monuments
through corporate social responsibility also appears to be limited in amount because the
concept has not taken off fully even now. The Committee would like to know the working
modules of the avenues being employed by the Ministry in this direction.
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
17. Therefore, the Committee strongly recommends that the overall allocation for the Twelfth
Plan period should be increased and the Ministry of Culture may take it up with the Planning
Commission and Ministry of Finance. Since, the Ministry has been consistently utilizing its
allocations above 90%, the Committee feels it is a good case for incentivizing the Ministry by
increasing their allocation.
(Para 21)
Reply of the Government
18. This recommendation was taken up with the Planning Commission and Ministry of Finance
separately. In response, their comments/views are reproduced as under for kind perusal of the
Committee:–
19. Planning Commission has already noted the above recommendations of PSC and further
stated that the increase in the outlay for Twelfth Plan period has been about 106.40% over Eleventh
Plan approved outlay. Further, the increase in the Annual Plan outlay for 2013-14 over the approved
outlay for Annual Plan 2012-13 is 66.10%. These are substantial increases. Ministry of Finance has
intimated that as regards size of overall Twelfth Plan outlay and the Ministry-wise allocations, this
is dependent on the estimated resource availability and competing requirements of various
Ministries/Departments. However, the requirement of higher allocation during the remaining period
of Twelfth Plan may be taken up with the Planning Commission at appropriate time.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
20. The Committee recommends that Ministry of Culture should keep pursuing their
case with the Ministry of Finance and the Planning Commission.
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
21. The Committee would like to point out the under-utilization of funds under the heads -
Archaeology, Archives and Archival Libraries, Museums, Public Libraries and International

6
Cultural relations. The Committee finds a dichotomy between the Ministry’s claim of spending
more than 90% during the last many years and reporting underutilization in the areas which
constitute a large share in the Ministry’s allocation. The Committee would like to have a
clarification about this.
(Para 22)
Reply of the Government
22. It may be mentioned in this regard that total budget figures reflected in Table No. 4 of the
192nd Report indicated Actual expenditure figures upto 20.2.2013 during 2012-13, the latest position
with regard to Sector-wise budget figures (Plan and Non-Plan) for the year 2012-13 is given in
the following Table:
(Rs. in crore )
Sl. Sectors BE RE AE
No. 2012-13 2012-13 2012-13*
I Secretariat- Social Services 23.25 23.45 23.01
II Archaeological Survey of India 489.9 488.5 493.59
III Promotion and Dissemination of Art and Culture 249 252.39 274.96
IV Anthropology 42.8 42.43 46.51
V Archives and Archival Libraries 55.35 55.83 58.67
VI Buddhist and Tibetan Studies 37.68 39.17 48.21
VII Museums 200.5 202.05 201.85
VIII Public Libraries 108.1 104.8 105.79
IX Memorials, Centenaries and Others 103.4 104.83 107.45
X International Cultural Relations (ICR) 12.6 12.30 2.97
XI Activities for the North East Region* 86.4 86.40 *
TOTAL (Revenue) 1409.00 1412.15 1363.01
Building Projects for Attached/Subordinate Offices 38.00 38.00 27.73
GRAND T OTAL 1447.00 1450.15 1390.74
*Expenditure for Activities for NER included under respective Sector/Scheme/Organization.
23. From the above statement, it may be clarified that there was no under-utilization of funds
against the major Sectors like Archaeology, Archives and Archival Libraries, Museums, Public
Libraries, etc. However, the actual expenditure for International Culture Relations during 2012-13
was not upto the mark as no Festival of India could be organized by the Ministry and non-
utilization of funds authorized to MEA for the scheme of “International Cultural Activities and Grant
to Indo-Friendship Society” also resulted in lower utilization under the head.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
24. The Committee notes the reply.

7
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
25. The Committee feels that almost all proposed schemes of the Ministry may be adversely
affected due to inadequate funds. A total of 26 planned schemes, including on-going/new schemes,
will be implemented from 2013-14 by the Ministry. The Archaeological Survey of India will now
implement one Centrally Sponsored Scheme (CSS) from the year 2013-14 as two proposed CSSs
have also been merged. Accordingly, the Committee recommends that proper monitoring of the
Schemes/Plans should be done on regular basis and proposals of the Plans/Schemes should be
made after thorough planning to ensure that the allocated funds are expended uniformly throughout
the plan period.
(Para 23)
Reply of the Government
26. This Ministry has now evolved a mechanism to monitor the progress of expenditure of
budgetary allocation constantly during financial year. This arrangement has been found to be very
effective in quicker utilization of budgetary allocation. In order to properly plan activities/ schemes
along with their implementation, instructions have been issued to all the attached, sub-ordinate
offices, autonomous organizations and to all divisional heads in the Ministry, at the beginning of
the financial year to ensure that the allocated funds are expended uniformly throughout the year.
They have also been directed to phase out the expenditure in such a manner that the quantum of
expenditure incurred under these organizations/ schemes is propelled and also sustained in an even
manner during the months of the financial year. This system has been continuing for the last three
years i.e. 2010-11, 2011-12 and 2012-13 under which the Ministry achieved a record expenditure
between 92% to 99% of plan funds provided at RE stage. By adopting on-going mechanism, it is
expected that the expenditure pattern would be optimum in each Annual Plan of the Twelfth Five
Year Plan. It may also be intimated that the Planning Commission has not agreed to the Centrally
Sponsored Scheme of the ASI and once approved, it would be implemented as a Central Sector
Scheme.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
27. The Committee notes that the centrally sponsored scheme of the ASI has not been
approved by the Planning Commission. The details of the scheme and whether the matter
has been taken up at appropriate level may be intimated to the Committee.
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
28. The Committee expects that special allocation of Rs.485 crore made for five areas as
shown in Table 5 would be judiciously and adequately utilized.
(Para 24)
Reply of the Government
29. The Ministry would make all out efforts to judiciously and adequately utilize special
allocation earmarked for five special projects amounting to Rs. 485.00 crore reflected in Table
No. 5 of the report. In this connection, the Ministry has already initiated action relating to EFC/
SFC meetings for these projects and an amount of Rs.224 crore has already been released to Nehru
Memorial Museum and Library and Indian Museum.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
30. The Committee notes the reply.

8
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
31. The Committee notes that though the budgetary support to ASI has been consistently
increasing since the last three years, the present Budgetary allocation of Rs. 250.00 crore is
insufficient in view of the increasing cost of conservation and preservation and huge
responsibilities to be discharged by the ASI in terms of safety, security, protection and upkeep
of the monuments.
(Para 28)
Reply of the Government
32. Archaeological Survey of India is doing its best for conservation of protected monuments
within the available allocations of funds. Higher allocation are desirable for better conservation and
preservation of the monuments for which additional demand would be sent again.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
33. The Committee was concerned about the inadequate budgetary allocations made to
the ASI but the reply does not mention anything about increased allocations at the R.E.
stage or during the next year’s Budget. In view of this, the Committee feels that suitable
action should be taken well in time.
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
34. The Committee also feels that number of protected monuments under the ASI at present is
far too less and lakhs of our ancient monuments are languishing. As a result, large numbers of
them have either vanished or encroached or illegally occupied. The Committee emphasizes the
urgent need to bring most of them under protected category. Therefore, the Committee strongly
recommends that number of protected monuments should be increased on priority and in a phased
manner for which we should have a roadmap and realistic allocation of funds required.
(Para 29)
Reply of the Government
35. The Central Government has declared 3678 Archaeological sites and remains as monuments
of National importance under the Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Sites and Remains
Act, 1958. Further, the list of some more monuments/sites (State-wise) identified for declaration
as of National importance is given below. The process of declaration of monuments/sites as of
National importance is a continuous process which requires detailed scrutiny of protection proposal
of monument/site, owing to which no specific time limit is fixed for protection clearance.
36. Besides the above, the State Governments and local bodies have also enacted laws for the
protection and conservation of monuments, archaeological sites and remains other than those
declared as of National importance by the Central Government .
LIST OF MONUMENTS/SITES IDENTIFIED FOR DECLARATION
AS OF NATIONAL IMPORTANCE
Sl. No. Name of Monument/Site Locality District State
12 3 4 5
1. Ancient Site Junikaran Kutch Gujarat

9
12 3 4 5
2. Palace building near Firozshah Palace and Hissar Hissar Haryana
Tehkhana
3. Group of Temples Haradib Ranchi Jharkhand
4. Shahpur QuiIa Shahpur Palamu Jharkhand
5. Navratanagarh Fort and Temple Complex Gumla Gumla Jharkhand
6. Tiliagarh Fort Sahebganj Sahebganj Jharkhand
7. Fort and Jain Rock Cut sculptures Koluha hill Chatra Jharkhand
8. Janardana Temple Panamaram W aynad Kerala
9. Vishnu Temple Nadavayal W aynad Kerala
10. Fortification wall of Daulatabad Fort Daulatabad Aurangabad Maharashtra
11. Old High Court Building Nagpur Nagpur Maharashtra
12. Fort Ginnurgarh Sehore Madhya
Pradesh
13. Biranchi Narayana Temple Buguda Ganjam Odisha
14. Group of Temples Ranipur Bolangir Odisha
Jharial
15. Sita Ram Ji Temple Deeg Bharatpur Rajasthan
16. Rambagh Palace Deeg Bharatpur Rajasthan
17. Bala Qila Alwar Alwar Rajasthan
18. Step well Neemrana Alwar Rajasthan
19. St. Thomas Church Dehradun Dehradun Uttarakhand
20. Nauseri Banu Mosque Kella Murshidabad West
Nizamat Bengal
21. Chowk Masjid Kella Murshidabad West
Nizamat Bengal
22. Archaeological Site (Sakeesena Mound) Mogalbari Paschim West
Medinapur Bengal
23. Khwaza Anwar Berh (Nawab Bari Palace) K hawaja Barddhaman West
Anwar Berh Bengal
24. Brindaban Chandra Temple Birsingha Bankura West
Bengal
25. Radha Damodar Temple Birsingha Bankura West
Bengal
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
37. The Committee notes the reply.

10
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
38. For taking our monuments scattered all over the country under archaeological protection,
we will have to take State on board, who it appears are not able to pay required attention to this
aspect. The Committee is of the view that our National Policy must provide adequate emphasis on
this aspect to make conservation and protection as a joint effort with adequate financial and other
support for the culture.
(Para 30)
Reply of the Government
39. Conservation of monuments is a subject matter on the concurrent list of the Constitution
of India for which both Central Government and State Governments can enact laws with
supremacy of central law. Sufficient funds have been allocated to various State Governments for
heritage conservation under 13
th Finance Commission. The ASI Circle Offices are maintaining
coordination with respective State Governments to address the various issues related to Central/
State protected monuments. In addition, financial assistance is also provided for unprotected
monuments which are less than hundred years old. A Central Sector Scheme to provide financial
assistance to State Governments, Universities, NGO’s etc. for protection to non-ASI monuments
scattered all over the country is also being processed.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
40. The Committee expresses again that in a concerted effort, the State Governments
must be roped in. The Committee is apprehensive why even a single State Government’s
support could not be garnered till now. The State collaboration methodology in the proposed
Central Sector Scheme may either be revisited or it may be taken up on case to case basis
with respective State Governments.
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
41. With changing times and technology as well as increasing threat perceptions to our
monuments, works concerning ASI are acquiring newer dimensions and they have to keep up with
them. Therefore, our strengths and weaknesses need a detail examination and the Committee hopes
that the Ministry will keep such aspects in mind while adopting National Conservation Policy.
(Para 31)
Reply of the Government
42. The National Conservation Policy is being finalized where effort will be made to include and
address all such issues. In addition the proposal for re-structuring of different cadres of the ASI
is under process wherein it is being projected to enhance the staff strength of the ASI to meet
the challenges of present times.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
43. The Committee may be apprised about the progress made so far. However, scheduled
date/time for finalization of National Conservation policy may be clearly spelt out. The
Committee also feels that it deserved a more elaborate reply on a very serious issue as of
conservation of monuments.
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
44. The Committee also notes that ASI cannot undertake renovation work during monsoon
months which restricts time as well as its fund utilisation capacity. Due to this, the RE allocation

11
is reduced as it is made on the basis of the BE utilisation and as a result, their fund lapses. The
Committee realises that this is the major reason for their inability to complete capital work. The
Committee strongly recommends that the ASI may be exempted from the BE utilisation restriction
while deciding RE. The Ministry of Finance is requested to give a favorable consideration to this
so that ASI activities do not suffer and their funds do not lapse. The Committee reiterates its
recommendation made in its (Para 30and31) 175
th Report for creation of a non-lapsable fund for
ASI activities.
(Para 32)
Reply of the Government
45. The slow progress of work during the monsoon months is a fact and has been righty
projected. Hence RE allocations should not be fixed on the basis of the BE utilization. This point
will be highlighted while sending the demands in RE proposal. The proposal for creation of non-
lapsable fund was sent to Ministry of Finance but the same has not been agreed to.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
46. The Committee feels that the Ministry of Culture should again approach Ministry of
Finance for taking a pragmatic view on the creation of Non-lapsable Funds and Committee
may be apprised of it duly.
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
47. The Committee is aware that National Culture Fund has not received the required response,
neither from the corporate sector nor from the private sector. It could be made attractive for
Corporates/PSUs, if culture and heritage are included in the list of activities under CSR. These may
be an added attraction for them to put their plaque, etc. to be noticed by the visiting public thereby,
enhancing their image-building. The Committee appreciates that the Ministry of Culture has taken
up the issue with the Ministry of Corporate Affairs as well as with Prime Minister himself. The
Committee strongly recommends incorporating “heritage and culture” in the Indian Companies Bill
as a CSR activity. The Committee may be apprised about the progress made in this matter.
(Para 35)
Reply of the Government
48. A unique event titled ‘CSR for Indian Culture’ was hosted by National Culture Fund in
March, 2013 to bring the Cultural and Corporate Sector together. The Ministry took up the matter
with Hon’ble Prime Minister for inclusion of Preservation of Heritage and Promotion of Art and
Culture as priority areas in guidelines for CSR under the Companies Act. The matter has been taken
up with Ministry of Corporate Affairs for inclusion of “Preservation of Heritage and Promotion of
Art and Culture” in the Guidelines of CSR in Schedule VII of the Companies Act, 2012.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
49. The Committee is apprehensive of this initiative by the Ministry of Culture.
However, it would like the Ministry to go ahead in its efforts and keep apprised of the
development and modules undertaken in this regard.
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
50. The Committee finds a strong case for allocating the fund raised on the entry tickets to ASI
to be used for the conservation, protection, preservation, etc. of our monuments. The Committee

12
strongly recommends that the Ministry of Finance should appreciate the value of our heritage and
allow the amounts collected out of entry fee at monuments to be allocated to ASI for its activities
and it should be made a non-lapsable fund. The matter may be pursued at apex level and the
response of Ministry of Finance should be informed to the Committee.
(Para 37)
Reply of the Government
51. The matter regarding creation of “Non-Lapsable Fund for Conservation and Preservation
Activities on National Monuments of ASI” by allocating part of the income generated by sale of
entry tickets at the National Monuments has been taken up regularly with the Ministry of Finance
between the years 2005 to 2008. The matter was again taken up with the Ministry of Finance
through for favourable consideration in March, 2013 . However, the same has not been agreed to
by Ministry of Finance .
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
52. The Committee would like to know the reasons/justification extended by the Ministry
of Finance for not favouring the creation of “Non-Lapsable Fund”. The Ministry of Culture
is requested to furnish the same.
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
53. The Committee is surprised to note that not a single encroachment could be demolished on
the archaeological sites out of 780 demolition notices/ orders issued in this regard. The Committee
is also aware of the apathy of the civic authorities, local Police and other agencies in the matter.
ASI has no power to ensure compliance for such orders from them. Even court orders were also
ignored at times. The Committee is aware that encroachment, unauthorized occupation and illegal
construction near our monuments is a problem about which we have not been able to do much
so far. The Committee feels that possibility of a nexus between the vested interests, private parties
and civic and police authorities cannot be ruled out in this context. Defacing of our national
monuments is another serious problem. Therefore, strong action should be taken against not only
the encroachers/offenders but also the agencies/officials of the concerned departments if these do
not obey/cooperate. The Committee may be informed about the efforts made and responses of the
concerned authorities in this regard.
(Para 41)
Reply of the Government
54. The encroachment in the premises of the protected monuments and protected areas and
unauthorisedly constructed structures in the prohibited and regulated areas are removed as per the
provisions contained in the Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Sites and Remains Act, 1958
and Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Sites (Amendment and Validation) Act, 2010 and Rules
framed thereunder. In so far as the encroachments in protected monuments and protected areas are
concerned, section 19(2) provides that “the Central Government may, by order, direct that any
building constructed by any person within a protected area in contravention of the provisions of
sub-section (1) shall be removed within a specified period and, if the persons refuses or fails to
comply with the order the Collector may cause the building to be removed and the person shall
be liable to pay the cost of such removal.”
55. The Archaeological Survey of India in each case of encroachment at protected monuments
actions as given below:

13
The step-wise action to be taken by Archaeological Survey of India after the encroachment activity
in the protected area is noticed on ground
1. Whenever any encroachment takes place at any monument or even in cases where in
the encroachments already exist action is initiated by Superintending Archaeologist (SA)
of the Circle in accordance with Section 19 of the Ancient Monuments and
Archaeological Sites and Remains Act 1958 in addition to lodging First Information
Report (FIR) with the concerned Police Station.
2. Under Section 19 (2), the Superintending Archaeologist of the Circle issues show cause
notice to the encroachers for eviction of the protected monument, part thereof or
protected area as defined in the protection notification to be returnable within a period
of three weeks and also endorses copies to the police, revenue and State Government
authorities.
3. The Circle SA also requests the police, revenue and State Government authorities
simultaneously for removal of encroachments from the protected monument.
4. While issuing the show cause notice and also taking up the matter with police, revenue
and State Government authorities details in respect of the encroachments duly marked
on the site plan besides the khasra details are provided.
5. The action taken by the Circle is informed to the Directorate General along with
details.
6. In case the encroachers do not respond to the show cause notice issued by the Circle,
the Director General is requested to issue directions to the encroachers for eviction
from the protected monument/area.
7. The copy of the order issued by the Director General is delivered to the encroachers
dasti under proper receipt or affixed on prominent portion of the encroached area/
unauthorizedly constructed structure.
8. The copies of the order are also made available to the police, revenue and State
Government authorities.
9. The Circle SA informs the Director General immediately after the expiry of time
specified. The status at site in compliance of the order is intimated to the Director
General by SA of the concerned Circle within a week.
10. On receipt of the report from the SA, the Director General issues an order to the
Collector to remove the encroachment clearly stating that the encroacher is liable to
pay the cost for removal of such encroachment.
11. Section 30(1) (iv) provides imposition of penalty for doing any act in contravention of
sub-section (1) of Section 19 with imprisonment which may extend to three months,
or with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees or with both. In accordance
with the provision, in the Act, legal action is also taken against the encroachers in
case, the order of Director General is not complied with by the Collector.
56. In regard to unauthorized constructions in prohibited and regulated areas the Archaeological
Survey of India takes up action against the person/agency as per the details furnished as under:–
57. The step-wise action to be taken by Archaeological Survey of India after the construction
activity in the prohibited and regulated areas is noticed on ground:

14
1. Notice is issued to the owner/occupier for taking up construction, reconstruction/
repair and renovation in the prohibited/regulated area without obtaining permission from
the Competent Authority under intimation to Circle.
2. Sub-Circle of ASI lodges FIR/police complaint against the owner/occupier for taking
up construction/reconstruction/repair and renovation in the prohibited/regulated area
without obtaining permission from the Competent Authority.
3. Sub-Circle of ASI requests the local authorities/Municipality to get the construction/
reconstruction/repair and renovation in the prohibited/regulated area stopped forthwith.
4. Circle of ASI issues show cause notice to the owner/occupier to stop the construction/
reconstruction/repair and renovation in the prohibited/regulated area without obtaining
permission from the Competent Authority under intimation to District Collector,
Municipality and police.
5. If the construction activity is not stopped within the stipulated time as per the report
of the Sub-Circle In-charge, DG, ASI is approached for issue of notice for demolition
with complete details of the case including photographs, exact distance, nature of
construction activities and actions so far taken by Sub-Circle/Circle.
6. If the owner/occupier does not comply to the notice DG, ASI issues demolition orders
under Rule 38 (1) to the owner/occupier under intimation to all the concerned authorities.
7. If the owner/occupier does not comply with the order issued by DG, ASI within the time
stipulated by Circle, DG, ASI issues demolition orders to the District Collector under Rule
38 (2) to the owner/occupier under intimation to all the concerned authorities.
8. After the demolition order under Rule 38 (2) Sub-Circle informs the Circle the status
on ground in compliance of the order.
58. As per the statutory provisions the Archaeological Survey of India is required to approach
the District Magistrate/Collector for removal of encroachments from protected monuments/areas
and unathorised constructions in the prohibited and regulated areas. In few cases, Archaeological
Survey of India approaches even the Courts for legal action against the persons who have
encroached upon the protected monument/area or have indulged in construction activities in
prohibited and regulated areas in violation of the AMASR Act, 1958 or Rules, 1959.
59. Such matters are regularly taken up by field offices of ASI with the concerned authorities.
This Ministry would also write to the State Governments to be more vigilant and to take prompt
action when such matters are brought to their notice. A letter has been issued to Chief Secretaries
of all States regarding initiating prompt action by the District Authorities for the removal of
encroachment/illegal construction in and around the centrally protected monuments/sites.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
60. The Committee expects that matter would be appropriately taken up with State
Governments. The Committee recommends that proactive measures should be taken by the
Ministry to fulfill its obligations.
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
61. The Committee understands that creation of mechanisms under the provisions of Ancient
Monuments and Archaeological Sites and Remain (Amendment and Validation) Act, 2010 has been

15
very slow so far. These are essential for the implementation of the Act. The Committee was not
informed about the reasons for this and the efforts made in this regard. The Committee would like
the Ministry to be proactive for putting the required mechanism in place at the earliest in order
to save our ancient sites/monuments and the Ministry may also apprise the Committee about it
through an explanatory note.
(Para 42)
Reply of the Government
62. Under the provision of the Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Sites and Remain
(Amendment and Validation) Act, 2010, an institutional mechanism has been provided for, to deal
with the applications for grant of permission to undertake repairs/renovation/re-construction or
construction in the ‘prohibited’ and ‘regulated’ areas of centrally protected monuments/sites. The
mechanism include establishment of Competent Authorities and setting up of a National
Monument Authority. The National Monument Authority has been set up with Chairman one
whole-time Member and four part-time Members in addition to Member Secretary. The office of
the NMA has been set up at 24, Tilak Marg, New Delhi. Besides, Competent Authorities have
been specified to process applications for construction related activities and grant permission in
all the State/UTs.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
63. The reply does not contain details about ‘Competent Authorities’ establishment and
procedure for processing application and granting permission. Ministry of Culture may
submit an elaborate reply on all the aspects involving the implementing of the Act.
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
64. The Committee takes strong exception to the fact that the dossiers sent to the UNESCO
for including our Heritage sites in the List of World Heritage Sites are generally found not to be
in order. As a result, these are sent back for corrections, etc. This has happened several times in
respect of our different sites. The Committee has taken up this issue earlier also with the Ministry
and had expressed its concern about this. It feels that with the kind of vast technical and other
expertise that we have in this regard, we are unable to present our case properly to the UNESCO.
It appears we do not do our homework seriously and send dossiers to UNESCO casually. It is
alleged that dossiers are deliberately not processed properly for unknown reasons. It is a serious
matter that our dossiers have been returned several times. The committee recommends that a
“Dossiers Committee” should be constituted comprising eminent persons from relevant areas as
well as other professionals for the purpose so that Nation does not have to hear again about our
proposals being returned.
(Para 45)
Reply of the Government
65. The Ministry of Culture has constituted an Advisory Committee on World Heritage Matters
(ACWHM) and a Working Group on ‘Nomination Dossiers’ in the Ministry to deal with various
matters pertaining to the World Heritage, in particular the participation of India in the activities
of UNESCO and the World Heritage Committee, including the processes involved in inscription
of sites on the World Heritage List of UNESCO and their Sites Management Plan(s). The
constitution of the ACWHM comprises the following Members and Experts, and Secretariat
Members :

16
Advisory Committee on World Heritage Matters
1. Chairman
2. 2 Ex-officio Members An Additional Secretary/Joint Secretary (Culture) and
Director General, ASI or his nominee not below the rank
of Additional Director General.
3. 8 Nominated experts From the related multidisciplinary fields.
4. 4 Associated experts From the related multidisciplinary fields.
5. 2 Secretariat Members A senior Consultant to the ACWHM as Member Secretary;
and Director (World Heritage, ASI) as Convener.
66. Till Date, ACWHM, in liaison with the Ministry of Culture and ASI, has organized 11
meetings to streamline and speedily supplement the processes, besides various thematic workshops
at regional and national levels. In addition to above, it has also organized a Consultative Workshop
for Category II Centre (an entity of UNESCO) in September 2012 in Delhi, and an international
workshop on “Visual Integrity” in March 2013 in Agra. As a result of concerted efforts of all –
Ministry of Culture, ASI and ACWHM – serial nomination of 6 Hills Forts of Rajasthan has been
inscribed on the World Heritage List in the year 2013, nomination dossiers of Rani-ki-Vav in Gujarat
prepared by ASI, and vetted by the ACWHM, has been accepted by the UNESCO for evaluation
for the year 2013, which are some success examples to cite.
67. The nomination dossier on Rani-ki-Vav, Patan (Gujarat) was prepared in-house by the
Superintending Archaeologist, Archaeological Survey of India, Vadodara Circle and after review by
Advisory Committee on World Heritage Matters and kind approval of Hon’ble Minister of Culture
was sent to the World Heritage Centre through PRI to UNESCO in January, 2013. A two days’
workshop involving all Stakeholders concerning core and buffer area was held on
18
th–19th September, 2013 in Vadodara followed by site visit in or der to review issues before the
visit of ICOMOS expert. As a follow up to the recommendations of the workshop, a consultative
committee has already been constituted under Chairmanship of Regional Director (West), ASI,
Gandhi Nagar.
68. ICOMOS expert, Prof. Zhang Jie of China visited Rani-ki-Vav between 21
st to 25 th October,
2013. The additional information sought by ICOMOS have been sent through PRI to UNESCO in
the first week of November, 2013.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
69. The Committee appreciates the efforts and wants the Ministry to continue the same.
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
70. The Committee emphasizes the urgent need for strengthening of all wings of Archaeological
Survey of India like Monument, Conservation, Exploration and Excavation, Epigraphy, Chemistry
etc. due to increase in the quantum as well as nature of these works. The Committee observes
that the workload Horticulture Wing has increased manifold with the increase in number of gardens
under maintenance from 100 to 500 with no corresponding increase in the manpower. As a result,
sites, monuments, etc. are not being properly maintained and landscaped. Their upkeep is generally
not upto the mark. The Committee, therefore, recommends that there should be a commensurate
increase in the workforce engaged in all the Department of ASI, particularly in Horticulture for

17
show-casing our heritage sites. The Committee also recommends that vacancies at all levels should
be filled up on priority and revival of posts whenever necessary also be expedited with the Ministry
of Finance. It is taking lot of time. The Committee desires the Ministry to keep it informed about
the recommendations of the Management and Planning Consultants and status of its implementation.
(Para 50)
Reply of the Government
71. The need for Restructuring and Strengthening of Archaeological Survey of India (ASI) is
based upon the consideration and analysis of the fundamental functions of the ASI both technical
and non-technical. The technical functions of the ASI include inter-alia preservation conservation
and monument including Science and Horticulture. Various committees over the years have given
recommendations, specifically or in general, suggesting revisions on the structure of the ASI, but
no significant changes on a sweeping scale have ever been made so far. The latest study was
conducted by the Manpower and Management Planning Consultant (MMPC) appointed in 2010. The
Consultants submitted their report in May 2011, based on which further scrutiny was carried by
ASI. A proposal of Restructuring and strengthening of ASI is under process.
72. The restructuring proposal being processed has the following components:
(i) Restructuring of cadres such as –
● Archaeology,
● Conservation,
● Horticulture,
● Science,
● Epigraphy,
● Library and
● Museums
(ii) Assessment of the actual requirement of Monument and Museum Attendants
(iii) Restructuring of Administrative cadres
(iv) Building up of a proper Finance and Account infrastructure
(v) Highlighting other requirements of ASI offices which need to be fulfilled such as
computerization, vehicles, revision of Performance Appraisal Reports, internships, etc.
73. As regard Horticulture Department, over and above the Sanctioned posts of Garden
Attendants the Director (Horticulture) is empowered to outsource more Garden Attendants in case
of additional requirement.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
74 The Committee desires that the Ministry of Culture should give a précise time-
schedule for processing and implementing the “Restructuring and strengthening proposal”
pertaining to the ASI.
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
75. The Committee notes with concern that the allocated amount of Rs. 42.43 crore to the
anthropology sector could not be utilized fully as the actual utilization was Rs. 40.63 Crore only

18
up to 28 th February 2013. In view of this, Committee recommends that the efforts be made to
ensure that the increased allocation for the year 2013-14 is optimally utilized. The details of the
new central scheme for which the budget has been enhanced should also be informed to this
Committee.
(Para 54)
Reply of the Government
76. The actual utilization of fund anthropology sector during 2012-13 was Rs.46.51 crore as
against RE of Rs.42.43 Crore. This expenditure includes the activities for North-eastern Regions
under anthropology sector. All efforts will be made to fully utilize the allocation of funds made
during 2013-14. The utilization of funds is regularly reviewed by Secretary (Culture). As regards
the new Central Scheme “Assistance to State Governments, Institutions and Organizations for
Documentation and Dissemination of Research Results in the Field of Anthropology” States have
been initiated to get the Scheme approved for its implementation.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
77. The Action Taken Reply has been noted for future the Ministry should also endeavor
that funds are optimally utilized and adequate monitoring of work is being done at all
levels.
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
78. The Committee fails to understand the reasons as to why the ‘Setting up of National
Mission on Libraries’ could not be taken up in full swing and because of the slow progress the
allocations were reduced at RE stage during the last two years. Surprisingly, for the same Mission
again additional funds worth Rs. 50.00 crore has been provided in BE 2013-14. The Committee
should be apprised about the reasons for such a slow progress of this important scheme and
wishes to know if the Ministry has formulated a road map for its implementation in the current
financial year. The status of implementation of the scheme may be furnished to it in detail. In this
context, the Committee reiterates its earlier recommendations contained in paragraph 76 of the 175
th
Report given last year as follows:
“The Committee notes that the National Mission on Libraries is an ambitious project of the
Government which can do a lot to improve education and knowledge of the population if
it is implemented in right earnest. The Committee is also of the view that there is a need
to strengthen the existing libraries and generate awareness about the importance of reading
in this internet savvy world of today. For this, with the help of the Ministry of Human
Resource Development, initiative should start from the primary classes. The Committee also
recommends that in order to set up such a vast network of libraries, specialized and trained
staff would be required. For this purpose, requirement should be assessed of the various
categories of personnel so that the Mission succeeds in its objective.”
(Para 57)
Reply of the Government
79. To ensure sustained attention to development of libraries, National Knowledge Commission
recommended to set up a “National Mission on Libraries”. A high level Committee (HLC) i.e.,
National Mission on Libraries was accordingly set up vide notification no. 18-4/2009-Lib (Pt.)
dated 4
th May, 2012 in pursuance of Cabinet Secretariat’s I.D. No. 292/2/1/2012-CA.III dated
20th March, 2012.

19
80. High Level Committee has held six meetings so far and decided to constitute four Working
Groups to identify the core areas that are to be taken up initially by the NML for the
improvement of library and information sector of the country and also to decide the priority of
the projects that are likely to be taken up by the NML for strengthening of library services
throughout the country.
81. On the basis of recommendations of the Working Groups and after further deliberations in
the High Level Committee, NML decided to address the following core areas initially:
● Creation of National Virtual Library of India (NVLI)
● Setting up of NML model libraries
● Quantitative and Qualitative survey of libraries
● Capacity building
82. EFC proposal with detailed road map has been prepared and has already been submitted to
the Ministry of Finance for approval. Implementation of the projects will be started after approval
of the EFC proposal. Provision has been made in the EFC proposal for “Advocacy and Outreach
programmes” to attract Children to the libraries.
83. Projects to be implemented under the National Mission on Libraries have already been
included in the FYP and Rs. 400 crore has been earmarked for the Twelfth plan period 2013-2017.
The total estimated cost as proposed in the EFC proposal for 2013-17 is Rs. 440.05 crore.
Proposed B.E. for 2013-14 is Rs. 50 crore.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
84. The Committee notes the details of the cost estimated for the ‘National Mission on
Libraries during the Twelfth Plan period. However, the Committee is sorry to mention that
our public libraries are still languishing and no much improvement has come over period.
Therefore, the Committee recommends that physical targets should also be fixed through
the Mission.
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
85. The Committee finds that the renovation of the galleries of the National Museum, New Delhi
has taken unduly a long time and we are not sure when are these going to be completed/opened.
Prolonged closure of these Galleries will also cause revenue loss to the National Museum apart
from the public not being able to see them. Therefore, these Galleries should be opened without
any further delay.
(Para 60)
Reply of the Government
86. Out of the six closed galleries, two galleries namely Thanjavur Painting and Decorative Art
Gallery-I have been reopened on 3.5.2013 and 5.7.2013 respectively. The Rajasthan and Himachal
Mural gallery has also been reopened. Regular review meetings with concerned officials are being
taken up for completing of renovation and reopening of remaining closed galleries.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
87. The Committee notes the reply and desires that the other three galleries may also
be opened as soon as possible.

20
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
88. The Committee notes that advertisement for the post of Director, National Museums on
deputation basis has been given. It recommends that efforts be made to fill it up very soon.
Further, the National Museum is not acquiring new objects for so many years owing mainly to the
lack of storage space. This itself is a cause for serious concern to the Committee as well as our
culture-loving people. In the absence of government acquisition, all rare art and antiquities might
go into the hands of private and foreign hands. It may encourage illegal activities like smuggling
etc. causing huge national loss. The Committee, therefore, recommends to constitute the acquisition
committee which is remaining defunct for a long time, and start the process of acquisition at the
earliest.
(Para 61)
Reply of the Government
89. The post of Director General, National Museum was re-advertised in February, 2013. It was
also circulated in all Central Ministries, State Govts./UTs, Universities, etc. and posted on website
of the Ministry. In response to the advertisement, 35 applications (including one received after due
date) were received. Meetings of the Search-cum-Selection Committee (SCSC) for Selection of
Suitable candidate to the post of DG, National Museum were held. However, no one was found
suitable for the post of DG, National Museum.
90. The recommendation of the Committee for constituting Art Acquisition Committee for
acquiring new objects for display in the National Museum has been noted for compliance.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
91. The Committee notes the reply and suggest the Ministry of Culture to keep pursuing
for filling up the post of Director, National Museum.
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
92. The Committee observes that Rs.60 crore has been allocated to the National Museum as
approved outlay for the Twelfth Five Year Plan, which, the Committee feels, is by all means
inadequate for the works to be undertaken. The Committee notes that our museums are in bad
shape. Only 10% of the acquisitions are put to display and those are not even rotated regularly.
Museum stores and galleries are in poor condition and lot of improvement has to come in all these
spheres in order to bring our museums at par with global standard. The Committee recommends
that allocation should be increased in museum sector and hopes that the present amount allocated
would be fully utilized for the earmarked projects/work.
(Para 62)
Reply of the Government
93. Funds allocated to the National Museum in the Twelfth Five Year Plan are sufficient.
However, in case the 3
rd phase of National Museum is constructed, additional funds would be
required.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
94. The Committee notes the reply. The Committee will revisit the subject in detail in
near future.

21
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
95. The Committee appreciates the new initiatives for digitization of the Museums and master
pieces, thorough increased professionalism, recruitment of staff and capacity building programmes
would no doubt bring in necessary fillip. But, the outreach in terms of foot-fall in the museums
and recognition as national heritage are both the tangible aspects that should be the yardstick in
measuring the initiatives and the allotment of funds. The Ministry of Culture should not lose sight
of this target in their endeavour.
(Para 63)
Reply of the Government
96. In order to bring qualitative changes in the museums under this Ministry and increase the
footfalls, various museums have taken the following steps:
(i) National Museum : National Museum has digitized 142 art objects as part of Google
Art Project and has started a V olunteer Guide Programme to provide guided tours to
visitors of National Museum.
(ii) National Gallery of Modern Art : National Gallery of Modern Art organizes various
exhibitions on its own and in collaboration with other eminent national and
international museums and art galleries. It also organizes lectures, seminars,
workshops and summer camps. During 2012-2013, more than 12 exhibitions have
been organized in order to increase the foot fall in NGMA. Efforts are being made to
increase foot falls by organizing more events and increasing facilities for the visitors.
(iii) Salarjung Museum : The numbers of visitors both Indian and Foreigners have
increased in Salarjung Museum. There is an increase in the footfalls to the extent of
4.89% in the year 2012-2013 as compared to the year 2011-12.
(iv) Allahabad Museum: Allahabad Museum has taken various initiatives to attract visitors
to increase footfalls such as various training programmes for capacity building have
been conducted. III
rd Module of Leadership Training Programme will be organized
during the current financial year in collaboration with British Museum, London.
(v) National Council of Science Museums  (NCSM): National Council of Science
Museums, Kolkata has been using digital media extensively in gallery presentations,
design and online promotions. All museums under NCSM have as a practice, an annual
target of visitors as well as activities. The growth of visitors to these centres has been
positive.
(vi) Indian Museum : For capacity building, the museum nominated its officials for
different capacity building programmes like the Leadership Training Programme in
collaboration with British Museum, Vivekananda Memorial Programme for Museum
Excellence in collaboration with the Art Institute of Chicago, Capacity Building
Programme for Museum Professionals at Victoria and Albert Museum, London and a
five week programme by the Cultural Heritage Institute/Pakistan and India held by the
American Institute of Pakistan Studies with support form the Council of process of
getting a total facelift with funding form the government of India and it is hoped that
the outreach in terms of visitor foot-fall shall get a substantial boost once the project
is over, however, even in its present state, the Indian Museum has been drawing a
large number of visitors and the foot-fall has been on the rise each year.
(vii) Victoria Memorial Hall  (VMH): About 78% of the collections have already been
digitized. Digitization of remaining collections is going on, and the uploading of these

22
images on JATAN software is also ongoing. Victoria Memorial Hall (VMH), Kolkata is
one of the most visited museums in India. Total number of visitors to the museum
in the year 2012-13 was 18.50 lakhs, and another 13 lakhs visited the garden of
Victoria Memorial Hall (VMH), Kolkata.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
97. The Committee appreciates the good initiatives taken up by the Ministry.
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
98. The Committee appreciates the signing of Memorandum of Understanding with the three
world famous Museums and feels that our association with them would bring necessary fillip to
the working of our Museums.
(Para 64)
Reply of the Government
99.  The Ministry organized Leadership Training Programme- 2013 in collaboration with the
British Museum, London in which 20 professionals from Indian Museums were trained. A Seminar
is being organised by the Ministry from July 25-27, 2013 on the theme of ‘Museum Best Practices’
under the Vivekananda Memorial Programme for Museum Excellence undertaken by the Ministry of
Culture with the Art Institute Chicago.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
100. The Committee appreciates the efforts and hopes that all such good work will
continue in future also.
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
101. The Committee recommends that due care be taken while renovating this heritage building
and conservation and restoration work should be given priority in view of our proposed bicentenary
celebration related activities.
(Para 66)
Reply of the Government
102. The work for restoration, repair, renovation and painting of Indian Museum buildings has
been taken up having due regard to the fact that they are heritage buildings. Expert consultancy
from Conservation Architects and other experts in repair and maintenance of heritage structures are
being availed of. His Excellency the Governor of West Bengal in his capacity as Chairman, Board
of Trustees has constituted expert committees with qualified professionals in the field of
conservation architecture and museums.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
103. The Committee appreciates the efforts. The details of the bicentenary celebration
may also be informed to this Committee.
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
104.  The Committee expresses concern about under utilization of funds/unspent balances of
previous years. It hopes that the allocations to the tune of 67.44 crore for the archives and archival

23
libraries for 2013-14 will be fully spent particularly on upgradation and strengthening
activities.
(Para 68)
Reply of the Government
105. The recommendation of the Committee is noted and the organizations shall be making all
efforts to utilize the funds allocated under the Plan budget during 2013-14.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
106. T he Committee observes that the reply is quite evasive. A more specific and pointed
reply should be furnished on “upgradation of archives and archival libraries”.
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
107. The Committee notes that the country has the Archives of only the pre-independent India
and we do not have archive for post independent India. If we do not start archiving our post-
Independence records at the earliest, it would be a daunting task afterwards. The Committee
therefore, recommends that the Ministry should take initiative on priority to have the archives for
post independence period as well.
(Para 69)
Reply of the Government
108. The National Archives of India (NAI) is the nodal agency for the implementation of the
Public Records Act – 1993, and Public Records Rules – 1997 for the management, administration
and Preservation of Public Records of the Records Creating Agencies of the Government of India.
109. The transfer of post-independence records to NAI has been a matter of concern of the
Government of India. The Cabinet Secretary in 2009 had taken a serious view of the situation and
at his instance; the NAI initiated the critical area project of appraisal and transfer of records of
post 1947 from various Ministries/Departments. Under the project, which started in February, 2010
substantial progress has been achieved. Since 2010 till April 2013, 5, 86, 578 files have been
transferred from various Ministries/Department to NAI. It is pertinent to mention that bulk of post
independence records approximately 5.80 lakhs files/records have been received by NAI from various
ministries i.e. Rehabilitation Division and Freedom Fighters Division, Ministry of Home Affairs
w.e.f. May 2010 onwards to facilitate to conduct research.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
110. The Committee appreciates the efforts. The Gandhi Heritage Sites Mission with a
budget of Rs. 42.00 crore is a laudable proposal. The blue print of project and further plan
of action may also be shared with this Committee.
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
Gandhi Heritage Site Missions
111. The Government of India has decided to set up the Gandhi Heritage Site Missions with a
total outlay of Rs. 42.00 crore during a five year period. The mandate of the Mission will be to
develop the Gandhi Heritage Sites according to the comprehensive list prepared by the Panel of
Gandhi Heritage Sites. The Ministry informed the Committee that the projects which are to be
executed under the Mission are:–

24
1. Construction and commissioning of a grand statue of Mahatma Gandhi and his
followers who undertook the yatra;
2. Establishing a modern library of Gandhian studies at Dandi which will bring together
resources and facilities to enable greater insights into the genius of Mahatma;
3. Building a heritage road connecting Ahemedabad and Dandi, with a pathway, along the
route that Gandhi and his followers took; and
4. Developing each venue at which Mahatma halted for the night on his historic yatra,
as heritage sites.
The Committee was informed that out of the funds of Rs. 10.00 crore released by the
Ministry of Culture, an amount of Rs. 9.58 crore has been utilized by the State Government of
Gujarat and 80% work has been completed.
112. The Committee describes the development of 21 sites/places related to Dandi March as a
welcome step. Besides, there are several other places in different parts of the country that are
associated with Mahatmas’ life and works. Mahatma had delivered historic addresses, halted for the
night and took important decisions at such places. The Committee feels that all such major sites/
places also should be identified and similar work may be taken up at these places as well.
(Paras: 70 and 71)
Reply of the Government
113. The projects mentioned at Sl. No. 1 to 4 are to be undertaken as per the announcements
made by Hon’ble PM on the occasion of 75
th Anniversary of Dandi March in June, 2005 and are
not under the Mission as mentioned in the report.
114. The Cabinet in its meeting held on 16 th May, 2013 approved the proposal for setting up of
Gandhi Heritage Sites Mission with a total budget outlay of Rs.42.00 crores with its headquarters
in Delhi. Accordingly, Gandhi Heritage Sites Mission has been set up for undertaking the work
relating to conservation and restoration of Heritage Sites associated with Mahatma Gandhi with a
fixed term of five years. Chairman and 7 other members have been nominated to Gandhi Heritage
Sites Mission. The first meeting of Gandhi Heritage Sites Mission was held on 11.9.2013.
115. 39 Core sites and some important of the other 2000 other sites visited by Mahatma Gandhi
would be taken up for conservation, restoration and development to propagate the ideals and vision
of Mahatma Gandhi.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
116. The Committee appreciates the efforts. The Gandhi Heritage Sites Mission with a
budget of Rs.42.00 crore is a laudable proposal. The blue print of project and further plan
of action may also be shared with this Committee.
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
117. The Annual Plan 2013-2014 provides an amount of Rs.50.00 crore for undertaking various
activities under National Mission on Libraries. The main objective of the Mission is to ensure
sustained attention for development of libraries, besides other recommendations of the National
Knowledge Commission.
(Para 72)

25
Reply of the Government
118. B.E. for 2013-14 for undertaking various activities under National Mission on Libraries is
Rs.50.00 crore.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
119. The Committee would like to know the schemes and objectives under which the
amount is anticipated to be spent.
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
120. The Committee notes that certain of National Virtual Library of India, setting up of NML
Model Libraries, capacity building and qualitative survey of libraries are the four important areas
of National Library Mission and hopes that the allocated amount of Rs.50.00 crore will be spent
in achieving the desired targets.
(Para 73)
Reply of the Government
121. EFC proposal for Creation of National Virtual Library of India (NVLI), Setting up of NML
model libraries, Quantitative and Qualitative survey of libraries and Capacity building has already
been submitted to the Ministry of Finance for approval. Implementation of the projects will be
started after approval of the EFC proposal.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
122. The committee notes that even till date the projects have not started. A substantial
part of the financial year is over. The Committee recommends that work should start
without further delay and would also like to know about the progress.
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
123. The Committee notes that our capital city lacks class integrated infrastructure facility of
international standards. The Committee recommends that we may have such a centre located near
Indira Gandhi National Centre for Arts at Rajpath, the most happening place in the capital rather
than elsewhere. A cultural multiplex in the proximity of such as IGNCA, Mandi House, Shri Ram
Centre, National School of Drama and Lalit Kala Akademi can be developed as a cultural hub.
The different art centres are also dispersed like, Mandi House, Sri Ram Centre, National School
of Drama etc. The Committee feels that all these should become part of the single cultural hub.
Several countries already have such facilities, having different sized auditoriums, galleries, halls,
etc. right in the centre of their capital. Even, the possibility of underground cultural centre at
Mandi House with the help of Delhi Metro can be worked out. Delhi Metro Rail Corporation
(DMRC) can lease out space for cultural activity which would also help DMRC raising its
revenue and also helping in national cause. It could be a Unique Selling Propositions (USP) for
the DMRC.
124. The Committee suggests that the IGNCA which has occupied a prime space in the capital
but not being able to make rational use of the land should be better utilized. Whereas, Lalit Kala
Akademi and NGMA have got little space to display. There are several galleries operating in private
space and charging exorbitantly, which the upcoming artists are not able to afford.
(Paras 75 and 76)

26
Reply of the Government
125. The space (including open space) available with the IGNCA is utilized not only by IGNCA but
other agencies as well, involved in cultural activities. The space at IGNCA which includes Art Galleries,
Exhibition Halls, Auditorium Conference Hall, Lecture Rooms and Open grounds may also be utilized,
as and when available, by Lalit Kala Akademi and National Gallery of Modern Arts (NGMA) and other
such organizations. IGNCA has also now agreed to use all spaces for at least 100 days in a year.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
126. Committee has a doubt as to whether the solution being suggested will solve
IGNCA’s problem of space crunch. In this context the Committee would like to reiterate its
earlier recommendation made in the 192
nd Report that:
“The Committee suggests that the IGNCA which has occupied a prime space in the
capital but not being able to make rational use of the land should be better utilized.
Whereas, Lalit Kala Akademi and NGMA have got little space to display. There are
several galleries operating in private space and charging exorbitantly, which the
upcoming artists are not able to afford. (Paras 76)”.
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
127. The Committee directs that the statute should be made operational fully and adequate
budgetary provisions should be made separately for the Authority, not form the budget of ASI
which is already scanty for them.
(Para 78)
Reply of the Government
128. As per clause 20F of the AMASR Act 2010, the composition of National Monuments
Authority is as under:–
(a) Chairperson
(b) Whole Time Members – 5, Part time Members - 5
(c) Director General, ASI as member, ex officio.
129. The National Monuments Authority has started functioning w.e.f. 23
rd November, 2011 after
the joining of one Whole Time Member and two Part Time Members, the Chairperson has joined
on 31
st August, 2012. The filling up of two posts of Whole Time Members and three posts of part
time Members of National Monuments Authority are under process. After finalization of the same,
action to fill up the remaining posts would be initiated. During the current financial year, an
allocation of Rs.9 Crore has been made to NMA under Plan scheme of Ministry of Culture. This
is separate from the ASI budget now.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
130. The Committee notes the reply.
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
International Cultural Relations, Cultural Exchange Programmes and Festivals of India
131. The Ministry of Culture sanctions Grant-in-aid to Indo-Foreign Friendship/Cultural
Societies in various countries under the Grant-in-aid scheme. The grants are given to Indo-

27
Foreign Friendship Societies on the specific recommendations of Indian Missions abroad who are
expected to be engaged in the task of fostering friendly relations and projecting India’s image in
the country concerned. The societies must have a definite and well planned programme of
activities to qualify itself for financial assistance from the Government of India. The Indian
Missions in various countries select and identify the Friendship Societies eligible for financial
assistance. The flexibility given to the Indian Embassies/High Commissions will be on the basis
of certain guidelines. The grant is sanctioned to the Indian Mission concerned, giving them the
freedom to decide on their discretion, based on the performance of the society, the societies to
whom the grants are to be sanctioned. The Mission would also be free to decide the number
of societies for assistance. The Committee noted serious underutilization of the allocated amount
under this head and inquired from the Ministry about the reasons for under utilisation of the
funds allocated for international culture relations as in the year 2012-13 BE was Rs.12.60 crore;
RE was 12.30 crore and the actual expenditure was just about Rs.2.04 crore only. Similarly, in
the previous year 2011-12 the RE was Rs.11.79 crore and the actual expenditure was 4.02 crore
only. The Secretary explained to the Committee that the Festival of India was not organised for
the last two-three years. Cultural Exchange Programmes (CEP) signed with many countries
largely remained inoperative. Now the Ministry is planning to release the money to the missions
for giving to those indo-foreign friendship societies so that the Missions that are taking interest
the Government would be able to spend on them. But, the major constraint in this regard is that
there is no demand from the missions even and they are not evincing interest. Moreover, long
time taken by the Ministry of External Affairs for booking of authorizations is also another reason
behind it.
(Para 79)
132. The Committee expresses its concern about the utilization pattern in this regard and
observes that for the year 2012-13, as against the BE of Rs.12.60 crore; and RE of Rs.12.30
crore, the actual expenditure was Rs.2.04 crore only. In the previous year also, BE of Rs.13.79
crore was reduced to Rs.11.79 crore at RE and the actual expenditure was Rs.4.02 crore only.
(Para 80)
Reply of the Government
133. (a) In the light of the PSC’s observation it is to inform that the BE and RE for 2012-13
was Rs.896 lakhs and 666.40 lakhs respectively whereas the BE and RE mentioned by PSC is
Rs.12.60 crore (Rs.1260 lakh) and 12.30 crore (Rs.1230 lakh) respectively. It includes the Plan
head of Indo Friendship Society and Scheme for ILA and non-plan heads Indo Friendship Society,
Festival of India and Delegation under CEP. The funds under the above heads are given for the
following purposes:-
(i) Indo Foreign Friendship Society
134. Indian culture is also promoted/strengthened in foreign countries through the Scheme of
Grant-in-aid to Indo Foreign Friendship Cultural Societies.
(ii) Indian Literature Abroad
135. Indian Literature Abroad (ILA) as a project seeks to identify, translate and propagate works
of classical and contemporary Indian literature in the six UN languages, i.e. French, Arabic,
English, Spanish, Russian and Chinese, and also in other international languages. This will help in
enriching cultural dialogue and mutual understanding between India and nations of the world
through promotion and dissemination of Indian literature.

28
(iii) Festival of India
136. To disseminate Indian Culture Abroad, Ministry of Culture is organizing Festival/days of
India in foreign countries.
137. (iv) Delegation under Cultural Exchange Programme (CEP)
(a) The Ministry is making its international presence felt through the bilateral Cultural
Exchange Programmes (CEPs) entered into with various countries. CEPs specify the
exchanges the two countries mutually agree to undertake for periods of two to three
years. The expenditure Under this head is incurred for Joint Working Group meetings
and also for incoming delegations from abroad etc.
(b) From the above, it has been seen that the actual expenditure incurred during 2012-13
is Rs.266.03 lakh against the RE of Rs.666.40 lakh whereas the expenditure figure noted
by the PSC is Rs.2.04 crore (Rs.204 lakh) only against the RE of Rs.12.30 crore
(Rs.1230 lakh). The reasons for underutilization of the funds are as under:–
(i) The funds under Indo-Friendship Society are given to our Mission through MEA
by way of authorization. The fund allocation at RE stage during 2012-13 was
Rs. 300 lakh and the whole amount of Rs. 300 lakh was placed at the disposal
of MEA by way of authorization. Amount utilized by MEA reflects as expenditure
on Ministry of Culture only when MEA books it as expenditure. To ascertain the
amount booked in our Budget Head before the end of financial year, several
reminders were issued to MEA in this regard but actual figure booked were not
intimated to this Ministry till much later. Had MEA intimated the actual
expenditure from the amount placed at their disposal, we may have been able to
reallocate funds to other missions who had sent in their requests for additional
funds. Since UCs were not received from many Missions, no funds could be
considered for release to them and this necessitated re-appropriation of Rs. 200
lakhs to other scheme/programme of the Ministry of Culture.
For better monitoring of the utilizations of the funds allocated to the
Mission under Indo-Friendship Society, meeting was held by Ministry of Culture
with Pr. CCA, Ministry of External Affairs wherein it was agreed by Chief
Controller of Account, Ministry of Culture that on 20 th of each month their
expenditure and statement be reconciled with MEA. This mechanism would help
in reconciliation and would give information regarding funds allocation by the
MEA to the Missis abroad.
(ii) Festival of India (Non Plan) was held in the year 2009. After 2009, it was
undertaken in collaboration with ICCR (MEA). The activities proposed by ICCR
basically pertained to exhibitions and the Museum Division of this Ministry
organized the exhibitions from their Budget Head. Hence, the amount was
surrendered as savings.
For the year 2013-14, Festival of India has been held in Peru and Cuba by
Ministry of Culture.
(iii) As regard delegation under CEP (Non-Plan) is concerned, it may be pointed out
that the funds under this Budget Head are used for holding of JWG meeting and
also for incoming delegations from abroad etc. The provisions under CEP are
executed by the IAs from their funds and does not require funds from
Delegation under CEP Head. Since such meetings are held in consultation with
other country and no meetings could be scheduled for the year 2011-12 and
2012-13 the funds could not be used and were surrendered as saving.

29
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
138. The Committee notes the elaborate reply and appreciates the efforts undertaken.
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
139. The Committee draws the attention of the Ministry of Finance and the Ministry of Culture
that the huge fund allocated for this purpose remained underutilised and the same amount could
have gone elsewhere it was needed the most. The Ministry should have been pro-active in all the
activities under the Cultural Exchange Programmes (CEP).The Committee strongly recommends
that all kinds of possible cooperation and collaboration should be explored at the premiere museum
levels of different countries for such exchange programmes. The Ministry should take it up with
the Ministry of External affairs in order to remove the procedural bottlenecks.
(Para 81)
Reply of the Government
140. It is to inform that provisions under CEP are executed by the implementing agencies from
their funds and does not require funds from Delegation under CEP Head. Since such meetings are
held in consultation with other country and no meetings could be scheduled for the year 2011-12
and 2012-13. However, some of the savings could be utilized through reappropriations.
141. As regards taking up the matter with Ministry of External Affairs is concerned, it is to
inform that funds under Indo-Friendship Society are given to our Mission through MEA by way
of authorization. The matter was taken up with MEA vide letter no. 157-2/2013-ICR-I dated
14-06-2013.
142. The above issue was discussed in the SFC meeting held on 25
th June, 2013, wherein it
was proposed to allocate the funds directly to the Mission. The same was not agreed upon by
MEA since the same is against the codal provision of para 8.5 of Civil Account Manual which
does not provide cash settlement of Inter Departmental transactions between civil Ministries/
Department and MEA has further advised that the existing procedure for authorizing funds to
Indian Missions may be continued. It may further be pointed out that till March, 2013, the
expenditure shown by MEA against the sanctioned amount of Rs.300 lakh was Rs.166 lakh
(approx..) whereas in June, 2013, MEA has disclosed the amount of expenditure was Rs.244 lakh
(approx.). This is because the authorisations get reflected in the actual expenditure after close
of the financial year.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
143. The Committee notes the reply.
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
144. The Committee recommends that the State Central Library should be made operational
very soon which was established under the assistance of Raja Rammohun Roy Library
Foundation. The Committee also hopes that the budgetary allocation made for the year 2013-14
will be fully utilized for the targeted works and projects. The Committee strongly feels that all
North Eastern States have a very rich and variegated cultural traditions as well as monuments
and heritage sites which need to be brought to the lime light through appropriate policy
mainstreaming measures.
(Para 83)

30
Reply of the Government
145. Library is a State subject as per parameter of the Constitution of India. The State Central
Libraries are established and run by the concerned State Government/UT Administration. Raja
Rammohun Roy Library Foundation (RRRLF) only extends assistance under certain schemes
approved by the Central Government to the libraries including State Central Libraries on the
recommendation of the State Government/UT Administration. However, State Central Libraries
under various State Governments/UT Administrations are operational with the assistance of Raja
Rammohun Roy library Foundation. Conventionally, RRRLF fully utilise the regular allocated fund
from the Ministry of Culture, government of India for implementation of the schemes for
development of libraries all over country in each and every year.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
146. The Committee notes that only part reply has been given. Ministry of Culture did
not inform about policy mainstreaming measures on cultural traditions, monuments and
heritage sites of the North Eastern States which remained neglected largely since long.
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
147. As regards the actual expenditures incurred on the activities in North East the Committee
wishes to reiterate its recommendation in its 175
th Report of the Committee on “The Demands for
Grants 2012-13”. The Committee had observed that expenditures on the activities in North East
have been clubbed with total expenditure of these institutions due to which the Committee could
not know the exact amount spent on these activities in NE region. The Committee notes with
dismay that despite this, in the current year also the said statistics have not been given separately.
The Committee directs that a separate appraisal should be made for North East and sector-wise
actual utilization be given separately under various heads.
(Para 84)
Reply of the Government
148. The statement is enclosed as Annexure.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
149. The Committee notes the reply.
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
General Recommendations
150. The Committee appreciates that the Ministry of Culture is trying to enhance the
visibility of the cultural sector through more exhibitions, participation in biennial and
greater international collaborations under cultural exchange programmes and organising
festival of India. But, protection and the preservation of our monuments and heritage sites
is the core area of its activity which should not be ignored at any cost and utmost priority
should be given to that area.
(Para 85)
Reply of the Government
151. The Ministry has noted for future compliance.

31
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
152. The Committee notes the reply and hopes that the compliance report would be
presented to it with a specified time line.
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
153. The Committee has been emphasizing/raising some important issues relating to Ministry of
Culture mainly through its previous Reports; yet no satisfactory action has been taken with regard
to their implementation. The Committee expects that a point-wise reply will be furnished on all
these issues for its information. Some of these points have already been included in the Report:–
1. The Committee notes the constraints faced by ASI due to its specific nature of work
where maintenance and conservation is limited to only a few months and also the fact
that the RE allocation is received in March and as per specific instruction of
Department of Expenditure, the expenditure cannot be more than 33% in the last
quarter and 15% in the last month. The Committee recommends that ASI should utilize
the allocation in a time frame and opt for relaxation on case-to-case basis.
2. The Committee notes that Ministry of Culture had sent a letter to Principal Secretary,
PMO for creation of non-lapsable fund in 2008. The Committee would like to know
the response of the PMO in this regard. It recommends that owing to the nature of
seasonal work, the Ministry’s proposal for creation of non-lapsable fund for ASI
activities deserves serious considerations.
3. The Committee also recommends the Government to consider ASI as scientific
department and technical bodies in the Government. In this connection, the Committee
reiterates its earlier recommendations contained in its 91
st report on the “Functioning
of ASI’.
4. The Committee notes that Horticulture Branch responsible for landscaping of
monuments maintained by ASI and presently handling more than 500 gardens.
However, the sanctioned strength reminded almost static in case of horticulture branch
whereas in other cadre it has gone up. (Para 89)
Reply of the Government
154. 89 (1): The budget allocation in respect of Archaeological Survey of India is primarily for
structural conservation and special repairs and exploration and excavation. The working season
of the conservation/ excavation activities of the ASI starts from the month of September and up
to March i.e.  after the extreme summer and the monsoon rains during which conservation
works/excavations are not possible. Accordingly, the pace of expenditure in ASI is generally
higher in 3
rd and 4 th quarters of each financial year. As suggested by the Committee, the relaxation
of phasing of the expenditure beyond the prescribed limit will be taken up with the Ministry of
Finance.
155. 89 (2): As already indicated the proposal for creation of non-lapsable fund for ASI has not
been approved by Ministry of Finance.
156. 89 (3): ASI does not distinguish the monuments for conservation on the basis of their
revenue earning capacity. It provides provision for conservation/ preservation of ticketed as well
as non-ticketed monuments depending upon the urgency and priority of repair work required at
different sites and availability of budget provisions. Similarly, provision made for providing public
amenities, drinking water, easy access etc.

32
157. ASI has got 4 additional posts of Additional Directors General and 18 additional posts of
Joint Directors General. A detailed proposal for restructuring of ASI is under process.
158. ASI is a multidisciplinary body consisting of different disciplines/cadres i.e. Conservation
Engineers, Archaeologists, Epigraphists, Archaeological Scientists, and Archaeological
Horticulturists. Among these disciplines, the main stream officers ( i.e.  Archaeologists and
Epigraphists) do not possess the prescribed academic qualification ( i.e. Masters’ Degree in Natural/
Agricultural Sciences or “Bachelors Degree in Engineering/Technology/Medicine”) essential to come
under the definition of Scientists/ Engineer for the purpose of Flexible Complementing Scheme
(FCS). The academic qualifications required to become Archaeologist/Epigraphist is History/
Archaeology/ Languages are not branches of the Natural Science. Therefore, these officers do not
have the prescribed qualification to become eligible for FCS.
[Para 89 (4)]
159. As regard Horticulture Department, over and above the Sanctioned 1267 posts of Garden
Attendants, the Director (Horticulture) is empowered to outsource more Garden Attendants in case
of additional requirement.
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
160. The Committee notes the efforts being made in putting the Museums in order. The
Committee is no doubt aware of the constraints being faced by the Museums in terms of shortage
of staff, space and other problems. It however feels that the recommendations of the Goswami
Committee should be taken up in a time bound manner and the Committee would like to be
informed about the achievements/action taken so far.
[Para 89(5)]
Reply of the Government
161. The Government has initiated 14 points agenda on museum reforms in 2009 in an effort
to bring qualitative changes in museums in India to keep pace with the international developments
in the field. Efforts have been initiated to build up domain knowledge in best international practices
on each of the identified issues. In this pursuit, a Memorandum of Understanding between the
Ministry of Culture and three important British Cultural Institutions in London, namely British
Museum, Victoria and Albert Museum and British Library was signed in June 2010 under which
following training programmes for Museum professional have been initiated in collaboration with
British Museum and Victoria and Albert Museum, London.
Leadership Training Programme-I
162. The Leadership Training Programme was initiated in 2012 by the Ministry of Culture in
collaboration with the British Museum London. The programme was designed in three (3) modules
of two weeks each, two in India and the 3
rd at British Museum, London. This Training Programme,
included intensive training sessions on Curation, Museum Education, Design and Display, Scientific
Storage, Conservation, Museum Marketing, Outreach and Collection Management. 20 Museum
Professionals from National Museum, NGMA, ASI NMI, Allahabad Museum, IGRMS, VMH, Indian
Museum, Salar Jung Museum and CSMVS underwent this Leadership Training in Delhi, London
and Mumbai respectively. This programme was designed to generate Museum Leaders who would
further train Museum Professionals all across the country to create a rich web of world class
Museum in India.

33
Leadership Training Programme–II
163. The Ministry has also undertaken the Leadership Training Programme -II in which 20
Museum Professionals from various Museums underwent this Leadership Training in collaboration
with the British Museum, London.
Capacity Building Programme
164.  The Victoria and Albert Museum, London has developed a comprehensive programme of
activities and events for a wide range of visitors over many years. This two week training
programme on Capacity Building aimed for Museum Professionals was developed by Victoria and
Albert Museum in collaboration in Indian Museums to share their experience with their staff who
are responsible for planning and delivering education and public programmes. 15 Museum
Professionals from National Museums, NGMA, NCSM, VMH, Indian Museum Salar Jung Museum
and ASI and State Museums of Chennai, UP Odisha, Rajasthan and Madhya Pradesh had
participated in this programme.
165. The Ministry has signed an MOU with Louvre Museum, Paris in 2012 for carrying out
training in respect of staff in the Museums in India.
166. Another Memorandum of Understanding between the Ministry of Culture and the Art
Institute of Chicago was signed in January, 2012 for creation of living testament to Swami
Vivekanada’s legacy with the launch of the Vivekanada Memorial Programme for Museum
Excellence. This is a 4 year programme. 6 Professionals from various institutions under the
Ministry were awarded internships for 3 weeks at Art Institute of Chicago, under this programme
during the first year. During 2013, 8 selected fellows will be undergoing training at the Art Institute
of Chicago.
167. Digitization of Museums:  A programme on digitization of Museums has also been
undertaken by the Ministry of Culture. After discussion with C-DAC, Pune a software namely
JATAN developed by C-DAC is proposed to be installed in 10 museums functioning under this
Ministry as well as ASI in the 1
st phase of implementation.
168. Victoria Memorial Hall  and Indian Museum, Kolkata: Ministry is overseeing the process
of recruitment of staff in the Indian Museum, Kolkata and Victoria Memorial Hall, Kolkata.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
169. The Committee appreciates the efforts put on by the Ministry of Culture.
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
170. The Committee notes that large numbers of vacancies are existing in the cultural institutions
including Akademies, Museums. Libraries, etc. Somehow, the Ministry has not been able to fill up
those vacancies. The Committee learnt that many of these posts have lapsed due to delay in
recruitment process but some of these got revived after a longish procedure. The Committee
observes that with so many vacancies lying vacant in various cadres and also the head of
the organization, these premier institutes failed to fulfil the objectives for which they were created
and deliver the best. The Committee knows that there are various recruitment rules and the posts
in the purview of UPSC that takes a lot of time. The Committee reiterates its earlier
recommendations to keep these posts out of purview of UPSC. The Committee recommend
that the Ministry should make all out efforts to fill up these vacancies in all these institutions.
[Para 89(6)]

34
Reply of the Government
171. Recruitment Rules for various posts in National Museum and National Gallery of Modern
Art are under consideration in consultation with DOPT and UPSC. Vacant posts in these
organizations will be filled up on finalization of Recruitment Rules. Salarjung Museum and Allahabad
Museum are also taking actions to fill up the vacancies in their respective Museums.
172. The process to fill up the vacant posts at Sahitya Akademi, Sangeet Natak Akademi,
National School of Drama, Lalit Kala Akademi, Kalashetra Foundation and IGNCA is going on.
Filling up of the posts is a continuous process. Efforts are being made to expedite the process of
filling up the vacancies at these Institutions. None of the posts in the above organization is filled
up through UPSC.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
173. The Committee appreciates the work done. However, the Committee in its
201
st Report had observed that the Secretariat of these cultural institutions were manned
by the people who have little idea/knowledge about how to manage Arts and Culture. Many
of them lack professionalism required for the field. The Committee feels that a cultural
cadre distinct from the regular administrative cadre needs to be created to man the
functioning of the Akademis, Museums and other cultural institutions. This should consist
of individuals who may be ‘generalists in the arts’. Courses would have to be introduced for
educating them in the arts to make them conversant with different forms of theatre, dance,
music, poetry and literature, painting, sculpture and architecture. Courses in ‘art
administration’ could be part of the regular educational stream or even special courses
created under the Ministries of HRD and Culture to produce right kind of persons to
administer our cultural institutions in a better way. The Committee further recommends
that the Ministry should seriously consider the creation of cultural cadre on the above lines.

35
35
OBSERVATIONS/CONCLUSIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS — AT A GLANCE
The Committee desires that final replies in respect of those recommendations/
observations which have been categorized as interim replies by the Committee should be
furnished at the earliest. (Para 3)
The mechanism evolved and the results achieved by the Ministry are noteworthy.
Judicious allocation and effective monitoring of expenditure and proper utilization of funds
with proper instructions of coordination at all levels shows the results achieved in the
Ministry of Culture. The Committee is of the view that the utilization of overall allocation
of the Twelfth Five Year Plan is a target which the Ministry should fulfill. (Para 8)
The Committee reiterates that the avenues being explored for community participation
in this regard is easier said than done. It, however, is not impossible provided the Ministry
of Culture is able to take it up that all levels. For instance, involving of local community with
the classification, cleaning and guarding the antiquities and giving them valuable information
about the archaeological excavations involves lot of potential risks which has been learnt from
the few recent cases in the State of U.P. The conservation and protection of monuments
through corporate social responsibility also appears to be limited in amount because the
concept has not taken off fully even now. The Committee would like to know the working
modules of the avenues being employed by the Ministry in this direction. (Para 16)
The Committee recommends that Ministry of Culture should keep pursuing their
case with the Ministry of Finance and the Planning Commission. (Para 20)
The Committee notes the reply. (Para 24)
The Committee notes that the centrally sponsored scheme of the ASI has not been
approved by the Planning Commission. The details of the scheme and whether the matter
has been taken up at appropriate level may be intimated to the Committee. (Para 27)
The Committee notes the reply. (Para 30)
The Committee was concerned about the inadequate budgetary allocations made to
the ASI but the reply does not mention anything about increased allocations at the R.E.
stage or during the next year’s Budget. In view of this, the Committee feels that suitable
action should be taken well in time. (Para 33)
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
The Committee notes the reply. (Para 37)
The Committee expresses again that in a concerted effort, the State Governments
must be roped in. The Committee is apprehensive why even a single State Government’s
support could not be garnered till now. The State collaboration methodology in the proposed
Central Sector Scheme may either be revisited or it may be taken up on case to case basis
with respective State Governments. (Para 40)
The Committee may be apprised about the progress made so far. However, scheduled
date/time for finalization of National Conservation policy may be clearly spelt out.
Committee also feels that it deserved a more elaborate reply on a very serious issue as of
conservation of monuments. (Para 43)

36
The Committee feels that the Ministry of Culture should again approach Ministry of
Finance for taking a pragmatic view on the creation of Non-lapsable Funds and Committee
may be apprised of it duly. (Para 46)
The Committee is apprehensive of this initiative by the Ministry of Culture.
However, it would like the Ministry to go ahead in its efforts and keep apprised of the
development and modules undertaken in this regard. (Para 49)
The Committee would like to know the reasons/justification extended by the Ministry
of Finance for not favouring the creation of “Non-Lapsable Fund”. The Ministry of Culture
is requested to furnish the same. (Para 52)
The Committee expects that matter would be appropriately taken up with State
Governments. The Committee recommends that proactive measures should be taken by the
Ministry to fulfil its obligations. (Para 60)
The reply does not contain details about ‘Competent Authorities’ establishment and
procedure for processing application and granting permission. Ministry of Culture may submit
an elaborate reply on all the aspects involving the implementing of the Act. (Para 63)
The Committee appreciates the efforts and wants the Ministry to continue the same.
(Para 69)
The Committee desires that the Ministry of Culture should give a précise time-
schedule for processing and implementing the “Restructuring and strengthening proposal”
pertaining to the ASI . (Para 74)
The Action Taken Reply has been noted for future the Ministry should also
endeavour that funds are optimally utilized and adequate monitoring of work is being done
at all levels. (Para 77)
The Committee notes the details of the cost estimated for the ‘National Mission on
Libraries’ during the Twelfth Plan period. However, the Committee is sorry to mention that
our public libraries are still languishing and no much improvement has come over period.
Therefore, the Committee recommends that physical targets should also be fixed through
the Mission. (Para 84)
The Committee notes the reply and desires that the other three Galleries may also
be opened as soon as possible. (Para 87)
The Committee notes the reply and suggest the Ministry of Culture to keep pursuing
for filling up the post of Director, National Museum. (Para 91)
The Committee notes the reply. The Committee will revisit the subject in detail in
near future. (Para 94)
The Committee appreciates the good initiatives taken up by the Ministry. (Para 97)
The Committee appreciates the efforts and hopes that all such good work will
continue in future also. (Para 100)
The Committee appreciates the efforts. The details of the bicentenary celebration
may also be informed to this Committee. (Para 103)
The Committee observes that the reply is quite evasive. A more specific and pointed
reply should be furnished on “upgradation of archives and archival libraries”. (Para 106)

37
The Committee appreciates the efforts. The Gandhi Heritage Sites Mission with a
budget of Rs. 42.00 crore is a laudable proposal. The blue print of the project and further
plan of action may also be shared with this Committee. (Para 110)
The Committee appreciates the efforts. The Gandhi Heritage Sites Mission with a
budget of Rs.42.00 crore is a laudable proposal. The blue print of project and further plan
of action may also be shared with this Committee. (Para 116)
The Committee would like to know the schemes and objectives under which the
amount is anticipated to be spent. (Para 119)
The committee notes that even till date the projects have not started. A substantial
part of the financial year is over. The Committee recommends that work should start
without further delay and would also like to know about the progress. (Para 122)
The Committee has a doubt as to whether the solution being suggested will solve
IGNCA’s problem of space crunch. In this context the Committee would like to reiterate its
earlier recommendation made in the 192
nd Report that:
“The Committee suggests that the IGNCA which has occupied a prime space in the
capital but not being able to make rational use of the land should be better utilized.
Whereas, Lalit Kala Akademi and NGMA have got little space to display. There are
several galleries operating in private space and charging exorbitantly, which the
upcoming artists are not able to afford. (Para: 76)”. (Para 126)
The Committee notes the reply. (Para 130)
The Committee notes the elaborate reply and appreciates the efforts undertaken.
(Para 138)
The Committee notes the reply. (Para 143)
The Committee notes that only part reply has been given. Ministry of Culture did
not inform about policy mainstreaming measures on cultural traditions, monuments and
heritage sites of the North Eastern States which remained neglected largely since long.
(Para 146)
The Committee notes the reply. (Para 149)
General Recommendations
The Committee appreciates that the Ministry of Culture is trying to enhance the
visibility of the cultural sector through more exhibitions, participation in biennial and
greater international collaborations under cultural exchange programmes and organising
festival of India. But, protection and the preservation of our monuments and heritage sites
is the core area of its activity which should not be ignored at any cost and utmost priority
should be given to that area. (Para 150)
The Committee notes the reply and hopes that the compliance report would be
presented to it with a specified time line. (Para 152)
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
The Committee appreciates the efforts put on by the Ministry of Culture.
(Para 169)
The Committee appreciates the work done. However, the Committee in its
201
st Report had observed that the Secretariat of these cultural institutions were manned

38
by the people who have little idea/knowledge about how to manage Arts and Culture.
Many of them lack professionalism required for the field. The Committee feels that a
cultural cadre distinct from the regular administrative cadre needs to be created to man
the functioning of the Akademis, Museums and other cultural institutions. This should
consist of individuals who may be ‘generalists in the arts’. Courses would have to be
introduced for educating them in the arts to make them conversant with different forms
of theatre, dance, music, poetry and literature, painting, sculpture and architecture.
Courses in ‘art administration’ could be part of the regular educational stream or even
special courses created under the Ministries of HRD and Culture to produce right kind of
persons to administer our cultural institutions in a better way. The Committee further
recommends that the Ministry should seriously consider the creation of cultural cadre on
the above lines. (Para 173)

39
ANNEXURE

41
ANNEXUR
(Vide para 148 of the Report)
PAY AND ACCOUNTS OFFICE
MINISTRY OF CULTURE
NEW DELHI
NORTH EAST EXPENDITURE 2012-13
I. BTI
(Rs. in crores )
Sl. Name of Agency/Scheme Budget Amount Expenditure
No. Allocation Re-appropriated
1. Centre for Buddhist Cultural Studies 1.20 1.20 1.20
2. Central Institute of Himalayan Culture Studies 7.40 7.96 7.96
3. Namgyal Inistitute of Tibetology 0.50 0.50 0.50
4. Nava Nalanda Mahavihara 0.75 0.75 0.75
5. Financial Assistance for Development of 1.40 1.40 0.88
Buddhist Tibetan Institutions etc.
6. Financial Assistance for promotion of 0.50 0.38 0.18
Himalayan Art
TOTAL: 11.75 12.19 1 1.47
II. ZONAL CULTURAL CENTRE
(Rs. in crores )
Sl. Agency/Scheme Budget Amount Expenditure
No. Allocation Re-appropriated
1. Eastern Zonal Cultural Centre 9.00 9.00 0.48
2. North Central Zone Cultural Centre 0.42
3. West Zone Cultural Centre 0.60
4. South Central Zone Cultural Centre 0.27
5. North Zone Cultural Centre 0.46
6. North East Zone Cultural Centre 3.38
TOTAL: 9.00 9.00 5.61

42
III. AKADEMIES
(Rs. in crores )
Sl. Agency/Scheme Budget Amount Expenditure
No. Allocation Re-appropriated
1. Sahitya Akademi 2.00 2.50 2.50
2. National School of Drama 11.00 12.00 12.00
3. Centre for Cultural Resources and Training 2.00 2.50 2.00
4. Lalit Kala Akademi 1.00 1.00 0.94
5. Sangeet Natak Akademi 12.00 12.00 12.00
6. Indira Gandhi National Centre of the Arts 5.00 5.00 4.63
7. Assistance to Persons Distinguished in Arts 0.50 0.50 0.50
8. National Mission for Manuscripts 0.50 1.00 0.50
9. Kalakshetra Foundation 0.50 0.30 0.11
TOTAL: 34.5 36.80 35.18
IV. LIBRARY DIVISION
(Rs. in crores )
Sl. Agency/Scheme Budget Amount Expenditure
No. Allocation Re-appropriated
1. Raja Rammohan Ray Library Foundation 3.50 3.50 3.50
V. C&M
(Rs. in crores )
Sl. Agency/Scheme Budget Amount Expenditure
No. Allocation Re-appropriated
1. Maulana Abul Kalam Azad Institute of 0.50 0.50 0.50
Asian Studies
2. Gandhi Simriti and Drashan Simriti 0.50 0.50 0.50
3. Nehru Memorial Museum and Library 0.25 0.25 0.05
TOTAL: 1.25 1.25 1.05
VI. A&A
(Rs. in crores )
Sl. Agency/Scheme Budget Amount Expenditure
No. Allocation Re-appropriated
1. Indira Gandhi Rashtriya Manav 2.00 2.00 2.00
Sangrahalaya

43
VII. M-II
(Rs. in crores )
Sl. Agency/Scheme Budget Amount Expenditure
No. Allocation Re-appropriated
1. National Council of Science Museums 3.00 3.00 3.00
VIII.
(Rs. in crores )
Sl. Agency/Scheme Budget Amount Expenditure
No. Allocation Re-appropriated
1. Archacological Survey of India 5.30 5.30 2.50
IX.
(Rs. in crores )
Sl. Agency/Scheme Budget Amount Expenditure
No. Allocation Re-appropriated
1. National Archives of India 0.30 0.30 0.04
X.
(Rs. in crores )
Sl. Agency/Scheme Budget Amount Expenditure
No. Allocation Re-appropriated
1. Dance Drama and Theatre Ensembles 2.50 2.50 1.09
X. MPCC
(Rs. in crores )
Sl. Agency/Scheme Budget Amount Expenditure
No. Allocation Re-appropriated
1. Mizoram Art and Cultural Society 2.00 2.00 0.72
Total Budget under North East = 86.40 crores
Amount Reappropriated till date = 77.84 crores
Expenditure upto 31.03.2013 = 66.16 crores

MINUTES

46

47
VII
SEVENTH MEETING
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Tuesday, the 17 th December, 2013 in Room No. 67,
First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Sitaram Yechury — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Shashi Bhusan Behera
3. Shri Narendra Kumar Kashyap
4. Prof. Alka Balram Kshatriya
5. Shri Aayanur Manjunatha
6. Shri V . Hanumantha Rao
7. Shrimati Bimla Kashyap Sood
8. Shrimati Vasanthi Stanley
LOK SABHA
9. Shri Haribhai Parthibhai Chaudhary
10. Shri M. Krishnaswamy
11. Shri S. Pakkirappa
12. Shri Prabodh Panda
13. Shri Shatrughan Sinha
SECRETARIAT
Shri N.K. Singh, Joint Secretary
Dr. (Shrimati) Subhashree Panigrahi, Joint Director
Shrimati A.S. Chakravani, Assistant Director
Shri T. Kennedy Jesudossan, Committee Officer
Shri P.P. Raumon, Committee Officer
2. ***  ***  ***. Thereafter, the Committee considered and adopted the following draft Action
Taken Reports on the Demands for Grants (2013-14).
(i) Two Hundred Fourth Report on the Action Taken Replies on the Demands for Grants
(2013-14) of Ministry of Civil Aviation;
(ii) Two Hundred Fifth Report on the Action Taken Replies on the Demands for Grants
(2013-14) of Ministry of Culture;
(iii) Two Hundred Sixth Report on the Action Taken Replies on the Demands for Grants
(2013-14) of Ministry of Road Transport and Highways;
47
*** Relate to other matters.

48
(iv) Two Hundred Seventh Report on the Action Taken Replies on the Demands for Grants
(2013-14) of Ministry of Shipping; and
(v) Two Hundred Eighth Report on the Action Taken Replies on the Demands for Grants
(2013-14) of Ministry of Tourism.
3. The Committee adopted the said reports with certain modifications after some discussion.
4. * * *
5. The meeting adjourned at 3.45 P.M.
*** Relate to other matters.

49
49
LIST OF REPORTS
Report
No.
1
1st
2nd
3rd
4th
5th
6th
7th
8th
9th
10th
11th
l2th
13th
Title of the Report
2
Demands for Grants (1993-94) of
Department of Tourism
Government Policy on Private Air Taxi
Operation and Matters connected
therewith
Inland Waterways Authority of India
(Amendment), Bill, 1992
Air Corporations (Transfer of
Undertakings and  Repeal) Bill, 1992 (with
evidence)
The Airports Authority of India Bill, 1993
(with evidence)
The Anti-Hijacking (Amendment) Bill, 1993
The Suppression of Unlawful Acts Against
Safety of Civil Aviation (Amendment)
Bill, 1993
Demands for Grants (1994-95) of
Department of Tourism
Demands for Grants (1994-95) of
Ministry of Civil Aviation
Demands for Grants (1994-95) of
Ministry of  Surface Transport
Merger of Vayudoot with Indian Airlines
Development of Tourism and Transport in
North-East
National Highway System
Date of
Presentation
4
30.04.1993
17.08.1993
08.12.1993 (RS)
09.12.1993 (LS)
08.12.1993 (RS)
09.12.1993 (LS)
16.03.1994
19.04.1994
19.04.1994
21.04.1994
22.04.1994
25.04.1994
24.08.1994
20.03.1995
25.04.1995
Date of
Adoption
3
29.04.1993
21.07.1993
08.09.1993
20.10.1993
14.02.1994
29.03.1994
29.03.1994
05.04.1994
12.04.1994
19.04.1994
28.06.1994
29.12.1994
21.02.1995
1993-94 (5 Reports)
1994-95 (8 Reports)

50
1
14th
15th
16th
17th
18th
19th
*20th
21st
22nd
23rd
24th
25th
26th
27th
28th
2
Demands for Grants (1995-96) of
Department of Tourism
Demands for Grants (1995-96) of
Department of Civil Aviation
Demands for Grants (1995-96) of
Ministry of Surface Transport
National Highways (Amendment) Bill,
1995 (with evidence)
Inland Waterways
Dock Workers (Regulation of Employment)
(Inapplicability to Major Ports) Bill, 1995
(with evidence)
Privatisation Policy in regard to Major
Ports
Seamen’s Provident Fund (Amendment)
Bill, 1995
Civil Enclaves in Defence Airfields
Demands for Grants (1996-97) of
Department of Tourism
Demands for Grants (1996-97) of
Ministry of Civil Aviation
Demands for Grants (1996-97) of
Ministry of Surface Transport
Demands for Grants (1997-98) of
Department of Tourism
Demands for Grants (1997-98) of
Ministry of Civil Aviation
Demands for Grants (1997-98) of
Ministry of Surface Transport
4
26.04.1995
26.04.1995
10.05.1995
26.05.1995
25.08.1995
04.12.1995
27.02.1996 (LS)
28.02.1996 (RS)
28.02.1996 (RS)
29.02.1996 (LS)
07.03.1996
27.08.1996
04.09.1996 (RS)
06.09.1996 (LS)
09.09.1996
15.05.1997
15.05.1997
15.05.1997
3
18.04.1995
18.04.1995
04.05.1995
24.05.1995
22.08.1995
11.10.1995
04.01.1996
07.02.1996
29.02.1996
21.08.1996
29.08.1996
04.09.1996
08.05.1997
08.05.1997
08.05.1997
1995-96 (8 Reports)
1996-97 (8 Reports)
*Presented to Hon’ble Chairman on the 25 th January, 1996.

51
1
29th
30th
31st
32nd
33rd
34th
35th
36th
37th
38th
39th
40th
41st
42nd
43rd
2
Ship-building and Ship-repair Industry in
India
Functioning of Indian Airlines and Alliance
Air
Demands for Grants (1998-99) of
Department of Tourism
Demands for Grants (1998-99) of
Ministry of Civil Aviation
Demands for Grants (1998-99) of
Ministry of Surface Transport
Merchant Shipping Second (Amendment)
Bill, 1998 (with evidence)
Functioning of Air India
Major Port Trusts (Amendment) Bill, 1998
(with evidence)
Demands for Grants (1999-2000) of
Ministry of Tourism
Demands for Grants (1999-2000) of
Ministry of Civil Aviation
Demands for Grants (1999-2000) of
Ministry of Surface Transport
Problems faced by Tourists/Passengers at
the Airport in the country
Demands for Grants (2000-2001) of
Ministry of Tourism
Demands for Grants (2000-2001) of
Ministry of Civil Aviation
Demands for Grants (2000-2001) of the
Ministry of Surface Transport
4
24.07.1997
14.08.1997
03.07.1998 (RS)
06.07.1998 (LS)
06.07.1998
06.07.1998
04.12.1998
04.03.1999 (LS)
08.03.1999 (RS)
04.03.1999 (LS)
08.03.1999 (RS)
19.04.1999 (RS)
22.04.1999 (LS)
19.04.1999 (RS)
22.04.1999 (LS)
19.04.1999 (RS)
22.04.1999 (LS)
07.03.2000 (RS)
08.03.2000 (LS)
19.04.2000
19.04.2000
19.04.2000
3
08.07.1997
11.08.1997
29.06.1998
01.07.1998
01.07.1998
02.12.1998
01.02.1999
26.02.1999
07.04.1999
07.04.1999
08.04.1999
01.03.2000
03.04.2000
03.04.2000
13.04.2000
1997-98 (l Report)
1998-99 (9 Reports)
1999-2000 (7 Reports)

52
1
44th
45th
46th
47th
48th
49th
50th
51st
52nd
53rd
54th
55th
56th
57th
58th
59th
2
Disinvestment of Air India
Functioning and Revival of Central Inland
Water Transport Corporation Ltd. (CIWTC)
Chartering and Management of flights for
Haj Pilgrims
Functioning of the Department of
Lighthouses and Lightships
Demands for Grants (2001-2002) of the
Department of Tourism
Demands for Grants (2001-2002) of
Department of Culture
Demands for Grants (2001-2002) of
Ministry of Civil Aviation
Demands for Grants (2001-2002) of the
Ministry of Road Transport and Highways
Demands for Grants (2001-2002) of the
Ministry of Shipping
The Aircraft (Exemption From Taxes and
Duties on Fuel and Lubricants) Bill, 2000
(with evidence)
Functioning of Border Roads Organisation
Demands for Grants (2002-2003) of the
Department of Tourism
Demands for Grants (2002-2003) of
Department of Culture
Demands for Grants (2002-2003) of the
Ministry of Shipping
Demands for Grants (2002-2003) of
Ministry of Civil Aviation
Demands for Grants (2002-2003) of the
Ministry of Road Transport and Highways
4
22.8.2000
13.12.2000 (LS)
15.12.2000 (RS)
14.12.2000 (LS)
15.12.2000 (RS)
21.03.2001 (LS)
23.03.2001 (RS)
26.04.2001
26.04.2001
26.04.2001
26.04.2001 (RS)
27.04.2001 (LS)
26.04.2001 (RS)
27.04.2001 (LS)
27.11.2001 (RS)
28.11.2001 (LS)
12.12.2001
23.04.2002 (LS)
24.04.2002 (RS)
23.04.2002 (LS)
24.04.2002 (RS)
23.04.2002 (LS)
24.04.2002 (RS)
23.04.2002 (LS)
24.04.2002 (RS)
23.04.2002 (LS)
24.04.2002 (RS)
3
17.08.2000
06.12.2000
06.12.2000
14.03.2001
11.04.2001
11.04.2001
11.04.2001
11.04.2001
11.04.2001
29.10.2001
28.11.2001
16.04.2002
16.04.2002
16.04.2002
18.04.2002
18.04.2002
2001 (8 Reports)
2002 (7 Reports)

53
1
60th
61st
62nd
63rd
64th
65th
66th
67th
68th
69th
70th
*71st
72nd
2
Development of Tourism in the Country
The Airports Authority of India
(Amendment) Bill, 2000 (with evidence)
The Major Port Trusts (Amendment)
Bill, 2001 (with evidence)
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its Fifty-eighth
Report on Demands for Grants 2002-03
of Ministry of Civil Aviation
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its Fifty-seventh
Report on Demands for Grants 2002-03
of Ministry of Shipping
Sale of Centaur Hotel Mumbai Airport
Demands for Grants (2003-04) of the
Department of Tourism
Demands for Grants (2003-04) of the
Ministry of Road Transport and Highways
Demands for Grants (2003-04) of
Department of Culture
Demands for Grants (2003-04) of
Ministry of Civil Aviation
Demands for Grants (2003-04) of the
Ministry of Shipping
Jallianwala Bagh National Memorial
(Amendment) Bill, 2003 (with evidence)
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its Sixtieth Report
on Development of Tourism in the
country
4
21.11.2002
21.11.2002
19.02.2003
25.02.2003
25.02.2003
10.03.2003
10.04.2003
10.04.2003
25.04.2003
25.04.2003
25.04.2003
11.11.2003
03.12.2003
3
06.08.2002
11.11.2002
03.02.2003
10.01.2003
20.02.2003
05.03.2003
08.04.2003
08.04.2003
23.04.2003
23.04.2003
23.04.2003
16.10.2003
29.10.2003
2003 (12 Reports)
*Presented to Hon’ble Chairman on the 11 th November, 2003.

54
1
73rd
74th
75th
76th
77th
78th
79th
80th
81st
82nd
2
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its Sixty-sixth
Report on Demands for Grants (2003-04)
(Demand No. 91) of Department of
Tourism
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its 67
th Report on
Demands for Grants (2003-04) of
Ministry of Road Transport and Highways
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its 70
th Report on
Demands for Grants (2003-04) of
Ministry of Shipping
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its 68
th Report on
Demands for Grants (2003-04) of
Department of Culture
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its 69
th Report on
Demands for Grants (2003-04) of
Ministry of Civil Aviation
Demands for Grants (2004-05) of
Ministry of Civil Aviation
Demands for Grants (2004-05) of
Ministry of Tourism
Demands for Grants (2004-05) of
Ministry of Culture
Demands for Grants (2004-05) of
Ministry of Shipping
Demands for Grants (2004-05) of
Ministry of Road Transport and Highways
4
03.12.2003
03.02.2004
03.02.2004
03.02.2004
03.02.2004
18.08.2004
26.08.2004
26.08.2004
26.08.2004
26.08.2004
3
29.10.2003
09.01.04
09.01.04
22.01.04
22.01.04
14.08.2004
23.08.2004
23.08.2004
25.08.2004
25.08.2004
2004 (4 Reports)
2004-05 (12 Reports)

55
1
83rd
84th
85th
86th
87th
88th
89th
90th
91st
92nd
93rd
94th
2
Functioning of the Commission of
Railway Safety
Demands for Grants (2005-06) of
Department of Road Transport and
Highways
Demands for Grants (2005-06) of
Ministry of Culture
Demands for Grants (2005-06) of
Department of Shipping
Demands for Grants (2005-06) of
Ministry of Tourism
Demands for Grants (2005-06) of
Ministry of Civil Aviation
The Merchant Shipping (Amendment)
Bill, 2004 (with evidence)
Development of Airport Sector with Special
Emphasis on New Modern Airports
Functioning on Archaeological Survey of
India
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its Eighty-fourth
Report on Demands for Grants (2005-06)
of Department of Road Transport and
Highways
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its Eighty-fifth
Report on Demands for Grants (2005-06)
of Ministry of Culture
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its Eighty-sixth
Report on Demands for Grants (2005-06)
of Department of Shipping
4
6.12.2004 (RS)
3.12.2004 (LS)
29.04.2005
29.04.2005
29.04.2005
29.04.2005
29.04.2005
27.07.2005
23.08.2005
25.11.2005
27.2.2006
27.2.2006
27.2.2006
3
17.11.2004
15.04.2005
15.04.2005
21.04.2005
21.04.2005
27.04.2005
06.06.2005
17.08.2005
19.9.2005
22.2.2006
22.2.2006
22.2.2006
2005-06 (18 Report)

56
1
95th
96th
97th
98th
99th
100th
101st
102nd
103rd
104th
105th
106th
2
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its Eighty-seventh
Report on Demands for Grants (2005-06)
of Ministry of Tourism
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its Eighty-eighth
Report on Demands for Grants (2005-06)
of Ministry of Civil Aviation
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its Ninetieth
Report on the ‘Development of Airport
Sector with special emphasis on new
modern airports’
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained In its Eighty-third
Report on the ‘Functioning of the
Commission of Railway Safety’
The Admiralty Bill, 2005
The Inland Vessels (Amendment) Bill, 2005
The Carriage By Road Bill, 2005
Demands for Grants (2006-07) of the
Department of Road Transport and
Highways
Demands for Grants (2006-07) of the
Department of Culture
Demands for Grants (2006-07) of the
Department of Tourism
Demands for Grants (2006-07) of the
Department of Shipping
Demands for Grants (2006-07) of the
Ministry of Civil Aviation
4
27.02.2006
27.02.2006
27.02.2006
21.03.2006
21.03.2006
21.03.2006
21.03.2006
22.05.2006
22.05.2006
22.05.2006
22.05.2006
22.05.2006
3
22.02.2006
22.02.2006
22.02.2006
17.03.2006
17.03.2006
17.03.2006
17.03.2006
19.05.2006
19.05.2006
19.05.2006
19.05.2006
19.05.2006

57
1
107th
108th
109th
110th
111th
112th
113th
114th
115th
2
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its Ninety-first
Report on ‘Functioning of the
Archaeological Survey of India’
Functioning and Performance of India
Tourism Development Corporation Limited
(ITDC)
The Aircraft (Amendment) Bill, 2006
The Central Road Fund (Amendment)
Bill, 2006
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
and Second Report on Demands for
Grants (2006-07) of Department of Road
Transport and Highways
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
and Third Report on Demands for Grants
(2006-07) of Department of Culture.
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
and Fourth Report on Demands for Grants
(2006-07) of Ministry of Tourism
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred and
Fifth Report on Demands for Grants
(2006-07) of Department of Shipping
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred and
Sixth Report on Demands for Grants
(2006-07) of Ministry of Civil Aviation
4
22.05.2006
15.12.2006
13.03.2007
20.03.2007
14.05.2007
14.05.2007
14.05.2007
14.05.2007
14.5.2007
3
19.05.2006
12.12.2006
09.03.2007
19.03.2007
16.04.2007
16.04.2007
16.04.2007
16.4.2007
16.4.2007
2006-07 (13 Reports)

58
1
116th
117th
118th
119th
120th
121st
122nd
123rd
124th
125th
126th
2
Demands for Grants (2007-08) of the
Ministry of Civil Aviation
Demands for Grants (2007-08) of the
Department of Shipping
Demands for Grants (2007-08) of the
Department of Road Transport and Highways
Demands for Grants (2007-08) of the
Ministry of Tourism
Demands for Grants (2007-08) of the
Ministry of Culture
The National Waterway (Talcher-Dhamra
Stretch of Rivers Geonkhali-Charbatia
Stretch of East Coast Canal, Charbatia-
Dhamra Stretch of Matai River and
Mahanadi Delta Rivers) Bill, 2006.
The National Waterway (Kakinada-
Pondicherry Stretch of Canals and the
Kaluvelly Tank, Bhadrachalam –
Rajahmundry Stretch of River Godavari
and Wazirabad-Vijayawada Stretch of
River Krishna) Bill, 2006.
The Seamen’s Provident Fund
(Amendment) Bill, 2007
The Carriage by Air (Amendment) Bill, 2007
presented to Hon'ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha
on 17.10.2007
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred and
Sixteenth Report on Demands for Grants
(2007-08) of Ministry of Civil Aviation
The Action Taken by the Government on
the recommendations/observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
Nineteenth Report on Demands for Grants
(2007-08) of the Ministry of Tourism
4
14.5.2007
14.5.2007
14.5.2007
14.5.2007
14.5.2007
16.8.2007
16.8.2007
05.09.2007
17.10.2007
(Presented to Chairman)
20.11.2007
(Presented to House)
20.11.2007
20.11.2007
3
9.5.2007
9.5.2007
9.5.2007
9.5.2007
9.5.2007
18.07.2007
18.07.2007
31.08.2007
25.09.2007
02.11.2007
02.11.2007
2007-08 (19 Reports)

59
1
127th
128th
129th
130th
131st
132nd
133th
134th
135th
136th
137th
138th
139th
2
Action Taken by the government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
and Eighteenth Report on Demands for
Grants (2007-08) of the Department of
road Transport and Highways
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
and Seventeenth Report on Demands for
Grants (2007-08) of Department of
Shipping
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
and Twentieth Report on Demands for
Grants (2007-08) of Ministry of Culture
The National Waterway (Lakhipur-Bhanga
Stretch of the Barak River) Bill, 2007
Closure of Bangalore and Hyderabad
Airports and matters related thereto
The Indian Maritime University Bill, 2007
The Airports Economic Regulatory
Authority of India Bill, 2007
Demands for Grants (2007-08) of the
Department of Shipping
Demands for Grants (2008-09) of the
Department of Road Transport and Highways
Demands for Grants (2008-09) of
Ministry of Tourism
Demands for Grants (2008-09) of
Ministry of Culture
Demands for Grants (2008-09) of
Ministry of Civil Aviation
The Motor Vehicle (Amendment) Bill, 2007
4
04.03.2008
04.03.2008
04.03.2008
04.03.2008
05.03.2008
17
.04.2008
17.04.2008
17.04.2008
28.04.2008
28.04.2008
28.04.2008
28.04.2008
28.04.2008
3
18.01.2008
18.01.2008
18.01.2008
31.01.2008
04.03.2008
15.04.2008
15.04.2008
15.04.2008
24.04.2008
24.04.2008
24.04.2008
24.04.2008
24.04.2008

60
1
140th
141st
142nd
143rd
144th
145th
146th
2
Promotion of tourism in Jammu and
Kashmir
Modernization of Airports
Functioning of Private Airports and the
related issues
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
and Thirty Fourth Report on Demands for
Grants 2008-2009 of the Department of
Shipping
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
and Thirty Fifth Report on Demands for
Grants 2008-2009 of the Department of
Road, Transport and Highways
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
and Thirty Sixth Report on Demands for
Grants 2008-2009 of the Ministry of
Tourism
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
and Thirty Seventh Report on Demands
for Grants 2008-2009 of the Ministry of
Culture
4
20.08.2008
(Presented to Hon’ble
Chairman and Hon’ble
Speaker)
Presented to Parliament
on 23.10.08
20.08.2008
(Presented to Hon’ble
Chairman and Hon’ble
Speaker)
Presented to Parliament
on 23.10.08
23.10.2008
19.12.2008
19.12.2008
19.12.2008
19.12.2008
3
11.08.2008
11.08.2008
20.10.2008
18.12.2008
18.12.2008
18.12.2008
18.12.2008
2008-09 (l0 Reports)

61
1
147th
148th
149th
150th
151st
152nd
153rd
154th
155th
156th
157th
2
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
and Thirty Eighth Report on Demands for
Grants 2008-2009 of the Ministry of Civil
Aviation
The National Highways Authority of India
(Amendment) Bill, 2008
Development of Tourism Infrastructure
and Amenities for the Commonwealth
Games 2010
The National Commission for Heritage
Sites Bill, 2009
Merger of Indian Airlines and Air India: Its
Impact on The Civil Aviation Sector
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
and Fortieth Report on promotion of
Tourism in Jammu and Kashmir
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
and Forty Ninth Report on Development
of Tourism Infrastructure and Amenities
for the Commonwealth Games, 2010
Demands for Grants (2010-11) of
Ministry of Tourism
Demands for Grants (2010-11) of
Ministry of Road Transport and Highways
Demands for Grants (2010-11) of
Ministry of Shipping
Demands for Grants (2010-11) of
Ministry of Culture
4
19.12.2008
17.12.2009
24.02.2009
23.11.2009
21.01.2010
(Presented to Hon’ble
Chairman and Hon’ble
Speaker)
Presented to Parliament
on 03.03.2010
03.03.2010
03.03.2010
20.04.2010
20.04.2010
22.04.2010
22.04.2010
3
18.12.2008
13.02.2009
19.02.2009
13.11.2009
08.01.2010
09.02.2010
09.02.2010
07.04.2010
07.04.2010
20.04.2010
20.04.2010
2009-10 (11 Reports)

62
1
158th
159th
160tn
161st
162nd
163rd
164th
2
Demands for Grants (2010-11) of
Ministry of Civil Aviation
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
and Thirty First Report on Closure of
Bangalore and Hyderabad Airports; One
Hundred and Forty First Report on
Modernisation of Airports; and One
Hundred and Forty Second Report on
Functioning of Private Airports
The National Road Safety and Traffic
Management Board Bill, 2010
The Anti-Hijacking (Amendment)
Bill, 2010
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
Fifty Fourth Report on Demands for
Grants (2010-11) of the Ministry of
Tourism
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
Fifty Fifth Report on Demands for Grants
(2010-11) of the Ministry of Road
Transport and Highways
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
Fifty Sixth Report on Demands for
Grants (2010-11) of the Ministry of
Shipping
4
22.04.2010
06.05.2010
28.07.2010
(Rajya Sabha)
27.07.2010
(Lok Sabha)
18.10.2010
(Presented to Hon’ble
Chairman and Hon’ble
Speaker)
Presented to the Houses
of the Parliament
01.03.2011
04.03.2011
04.03.2011
04.03.2011
3
20.04.2010
05.05.2010
14.07.2010
08.10.2010
20.12.2010
20.12.2010
20.12.2010
2010-11 (12 Reports)

63
1
165th
166th
167th
168th
169th
170th
171st
172nd
173rd
174th
175th
176th
2
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
Fifty Seventh Report on Demands for
Grants (2010-11) Ministry of Culture
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
Fifty Eight Report on Demands for Grants
(2010-11) of the Ministry of Civil Aviation
Functioning of National Museum
Directorate General of Civil Aviation
(DGCA) – Issues and Challenges
Helicopter operations in India
Modernization of Major Port
Functioning of Sahitya Akademi, Lalit Kala
Akademi, Sangeet Natak Akademi and
National School of Drama
Development of Tourism in North-Eastern
Region
The National Highways Authority of India
(Amendment) Bill, 2011
Demands for Grants (2012-13) of Ministry
of Civil Aviation
Demands for Grants (2012-13) of Ministry
of Culture
Demands for Grants (2012-13) of Ministry
of Tourism
4
04.03.2011
04.03.2011
10.03.2011 (RS)
11.03.2011 (LS)
04.05.2011 (Presented to
Hon’ble Chairman and
Hon’ble Speaker)
Presented to the House of
the Parliament 11.08.2011
04.05.2011 (Presented to
Hon’ble Chairman and
Hon’ble Speaker)
Presented to the House
of the Parliament on
11.08.2011
11.08.2011
17.08.2011
17.08.2011
15.03.2012
27.04.2012
07.052012
07.05.2012
3
20.12.2010
20.12.2010
25.01.2011
13.04.2011
13.04.2011
02.05.2011
11.08.2011
11.08.2011
13.03.2012
26.04.2012
03.05.2012
03.05.2012
2011-12 (8 Reports)

64
1
177th
178th
179th
180th
181st
182nd
183rd
184th
185th
2
Demands for Grants (2012-13) of Ministry
of Shipping
Demands for Grants (2012-13) of Ministry
of Road Transport and Highways
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
Sixty Seventh Report on ‘Functioning of
National Museum’
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
and Seventy Second Report on Development
of Tourism in North-Eastern Region
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
Sixty eighth Report on Directorate General
of Civil Aviation (DGCA) – Issues and
Challenges
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
Sixty-ninth Report on Helicopter Operations
in India
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
Seventy-seventh Report on the Demands for
Grants of Ministry of Shipping (2012-13)
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
Seventy-sixth Report on the Demands for
Grants of Ministry of Tourism (2012-13)
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
Seventy-fourth Report on the Demands for
Grants of Ministry of Civil Aviation (2012-13)
4
07.05.2012
07.05.2012
21.05.2012
21.05.2012
04.12.2012
04.12.2012
04.12.2012
04.12.2012
04.12.2012
3
03.05.2012
03.05.2012
17.05.2012
17.05.2012
18.10.2012
18.10.2012
05.11. 2012
05.11.2012
18.10.2012
2012-13 (20 Reports)

65
1
186th
187th
188th
189th
190th
191st
192nd
193rd
194th
195th
2
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
Seventy-fifth Report on the Demands for
Grants of Ministry of Culture (2012-13)
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
Seventy-eighth Report on the Demands
for Grants of Ministry of Road Transport
and Highways (2012-13)
Functioning of Commission of Railway
Safety
Development of National Waterways-
Potential and Challenges
Development of Tourism in Darjeeling and
Sikkim
Demands for Grants (2013-14) of
Ministry of Civil Aviation
Demands for Grants (2013-14) of
Ministry of Culture
Demands for Grants (2013-14) of
Ministry of Road Transport and Highways
Demands for Grants (2013-14) of
Ministry of Shipping
Demands for Grants (2013-14) of
Ministry of Tourism
4
04.12.2012
04.12.2012
06.02.2013 (Presented to
Hon’ble Chairman)
Presented to the
Parliament
on 27.02.2013
06.02.2013 (Presented to
Hon’ble Chairman)
Presented to the
Parliament
27.02.2013
06.02.2013 (Presented to
Hon’ble Chairman)
Presented to the
Parliament
27.02.2013
03.05.2013
03.05.2013
03.05.2013
03.05.2013
03.05.2013
3
05.11. 2012
18.10.2012
03.01.2013
03.01.2013
03.01.2013
02.05.2013
02.05.2013
02.05.2013
02.05.2013
02.05.2013

66
1
196th
197th
198th
199th
200th
201st
202nd
203rd
204th
2
The National Waterway (Lakhipur-Bhanga
Stretch of the Barak River) Bill, 2013
The Merchant Shipping (Amendment) Bill, 2013
Management of Road Transport in National
Capital Region: Issues and Challenges
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
and Eighty Ninth Report on the
Development of National Waterways-
Potentials and Challenges
Development of Tourism, National
Highways and Water Transport in Kerala
and Cochin Shipyard Limited
Functioning of National Akademis and
other Cultural Institutions: Issues and
Challenges
The Merchant Shipping (Second
Amendment) Bill, 2013
Privatization of Services at Airports
The Civil Aviation Authority of India
Bill, 2013
4
26.06.2013 (Presented to
Hon’ble Chairman)
Presented to the
Parliament
07.08.2013
26.06.2013 (Presented
to Hon’ble Chairman)
Presented to the
Parliament
07.08.2013
27.08.2013
27.08.2013
27.08.2013
l7.10.2013 (Presented to
Hon’ble Chairman)
Presented to the
Parliament 17.12.2013
20.11.2013
(Presented to Hon’ble
Chairman)
Presented to the
Parliament 17.12.2013
20.11.2013
(Presented to Hon'ble
Chairman)
Presented to the
Parliament 17.12.2013
24.01.2014
(Presented to Hon'ble
Chairman)
Presented to the
Parliament 06.02.2014
3
20.05.2013
17.06.2013
23.08.2013
23.08.2013
23.08.2013
01.10.2013
31.10.2013
31.10.2013
13.01.2014
2013-14 (4 Reports)
(The above mentioned reports are available on the website of Rajya Sabha
http://rajyasabha.nic.in ➝Committees➝Department related RS-committee on Transport, Tourism and
Culture ➝Reports)

Printed at : Bengal Offset Works, 335 Khajoor Road, Karol Bagh, New Delhi-110005.