 
 
 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
February, 2024/ Magha, 1945 (Saka) 
 
  
REPORT NO. 
368
_ 
 
THREE HUNDRED SIXTY EIGHTH REPORT 
‘Status of Ship building, Ship Repair and Ship breaking 
industries in the Country’ 
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on  08th February, 2024) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on  08th February, 2024) 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Website:https://rajyasabha.nic.in 
E-mail:rsc-tt@sansad.nic.in 
 

 
 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT,  
TOURISM AND CULTURE 
 
 
THREE HUNDRED SIXTY EIGHTHREPORT 
‘Status of Ship building, Ship Repair and Ship breaking 
industries in the Country’ 
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 08th  February, 2024) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 08th  February, 2024) 
 
 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
February, 2024 / Magha, 1945 (Saka) 
 
 
 
Hindi version of this publication is also available 

 
 
 
 
C O N T E N T S 
 
P A G E S 
 
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE     i 
2. INTRODUCTION       ii 
3. ACRONYMS        iii-vi 
4. REPORT         1-41 
5. RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS-AT A GLANCE   42-48 
6. ANNEXURES         49-63 
7. *MINUTES   
 
         
        
        
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
______________________________________ 
 
*To be appended
64-85

i 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE  
 (2023-24) 
 
 (Constituted on 13th September, 2023) 
 
1. Shri V. Vijayasai Reddy  - Chairman 
 
 Rajya Sabha 
2. Shri Mohammed Nadimul Haque 
3. Shrimati S. Phangnon Konyak 
4. Shri Manas Ranjan Mangaraj 
5. Dr. Sonal Mansingh 
6. Shrimati Rajani Ashokrao Patil 
7. Shri A. A. Rahim 
8. Dr. C. M. Ramesh 
9. Shri Zala Kesridevsinhji* 
10. Shri Surendra Singh Nagar* 
 
 Lok Sabha 
11.  Shri Anto Antony 
12.  Shri Ram Margani Bharat 
13.  Shri Tapir Gao  
14.  Shri Rahul Kaswan 
15. Shri Ramesh Chandra Majhi 
16.  Shri Sunil Baburao Mendhe 
17.  Shri K. Muraleedharan 
18.  Shri S. S.Palanimanickam 
19.  Shri Chhedi Paswan  
20.  Shri Kamlesh Paswan  
21.  Shri Sunil Kumar Pintu 
22.  Shri Prince Raj 
23.  Shri Tirath Singh Rawat 
24.  Shrimati Mala Roy 
25.  Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
26.  Shri Dushyant Singh 
27.  Shri Rajbahadur Singh 
28.  Shri Ramdas Chandrabhanji Tadas 
29.  Shri Manoj Kumar Tiwari 
30.  Shri Krupal Balaji Tumane 
31. Shri Dinesh Lal Yadav "Nirahua"  
 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri D. S. Prasanna Kumar, Joint Secretary 
Shrimati Monica Baa, Director 
Shrimati Subha Chandrashekar, Deputy Secretary  
Shri Ranajit Chakraborty, Deputy Secretary 
 
 
*Nominated as Member w.e.f. 26th September, 2023 

ii 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 I, the Chairman, Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport, 
Tourism and Culture, having been authorized by the Committee to present on its behalf, do 
hereby present this Three Hundred Sixty-Eighth Report on ‘Status of Ship building, Ship 
Repair and Ship breaking industries in the Country’. 
2. The Committee heard the views of the representatives of  the Ministry of Ports, 
Shipping and Waterways   and Inland Waterways Authority of India on 6th October, 2023 to 
delve into the intricacies of the situation.  Further, the Committee  during its Study Visit to 
Kochi, Thiruvananthapuram and Bekal during 4 th -8th September, 2023, held meetings with 
the representatives of the Ministry of Ports,  Shipping & Waterways and Cochin Shipyard 
Limited, on the subject. The Committee also heard the Directorate General of Shipping, the 
Gujarat Maritime  Board and the representatives of the Ship Recycling Association of 
India at its meeting on 20th December, 2023. 
3.  The Committee wishes to express its thanks to the officers of the Ministry of Ports, 
Shipping & Waterways ; Inland Waterways Authority of India; Gujarat Maritime Board; 
Directorate General of Shipping and Ship recycling Industries Association (India), for placing 
before the Committee, the material and information desired in connection with the subject 
and for clarifying the points raised by the Members. 
4. The Committee considered and adopted the Report in its meeting held on the  
6thFebruary, 2024.  
 
 
(V. Vijayasai Reddy) 
NEW DELHI;                                                           Chairman, 
February 6, 2024                                                 Department-related Parliamentary Standing 
Magha 17, 1945 (Saka)                                  Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture, 
                                                                                                                                 Rajya Sabha 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

iii 
 
 
ACRONYMS 
ASTM American Society for Testing and Materials 
BCG Boston Consulting Group 
BIS Bureau of Indian Standards 
CSL Cochin Shipyard Limited 
CT Scan Computed Tomography Scan 
CSOV Commissioning Service Operation Vessels 
CPSUs Central Public Sector Undertakings 
DG(S) Directorate General of Shipping 
DWT Dead Weight Tonage 
ECB External Commercial Borrowings 
EOI Expression of Interest 
EU European Union 
FY Financial Year 
GDP Gross Domestic Product 
GHG Greenhouse Gas 
GMB Gujarat Maritime Board 
GST Goods and Services Tax 
GT Gross Tonnage 
GTTP Green Tug Transition Program 
HCSL Hooghly Cochin Shipyard Limited 
ICU Intensive Care Unit 
IMF International Monetary Fund 
IMO International Maritime Organization 
INR Indian Rupee 
IRS Indian Register of Shipping 
ISRF International Ship Repair Facility 
LNG Liquefied Natural Gas 
LOA Length Overall 
M/s Messrs (used for companies) 
MRI Magnetic Resonance Imaging 
MSRA Master Ship Repair Agreement 
MIV Maritime India Vision 
MRI Magnetic Resonance Imaging 
NCoEGPS 
National Centre of Excellence for Green Port and 
Shipping 
NDC Nationally Determined Contributions 
PPP Public-Private Partnership 
PSU Public Sector Undertaking 

iv 
 
RE Renewable Energy 
R&D Research and Development 
RoFR Right of First Refusal 
SBFA Shipbuilding Financial Assistance 
SMPK Syama Prasad Mukherjee Port Kolkata 
SoP Standard Operating Procedure 
TMT Thermo-Mechanically Treated 
TRT Turnaround Time 
TSL Tebma Shipyards Limited 
TERI The Energy and Resources Institute 
UCSL Udupi Cochin Shipyard Limited 
USD United States Dollar 
US United States 
 
 
 
 

 
1  
REPORT 
 
SHIP BUILDING 
India has long-standing maritime tradition, with shipbuilding activities 
documented as early as the Indus Valley Civilization. Coastal regions like 
Gujarat, Kerala and  West Bengal have been centers of shipbuilding for 
centuries. Modern shipbuilding as an industrial activity gained momentum in 
the post-independence era. Shipbuilding industry  holds strategic significance 
due to its role in energy security, national defence and its immense direct and 
indirect linkages with most  other leading industries. The  shipbuilding 
industry has the same impact as infrastructure sector due to higher multiplier 
effect on investment and turnover  (11.6 and 4.2) and high employment 
potential due to multiplier e ffect of 6.4.  The industry has the potential of 
generating mass employment in remote, coastal and rural areas. Promotion of 
ship building and ship repair industries therefore should  be given prime 
importance due to their potential to strengthen the mission of an Atmanirbhar 
Bharat. 
2. Despite the significance of the ship building and ship repair 
industries, India‘s share in the global ship building and ship repair market 
remains meager,  hovering around 1-2%. In fact, India‘s position in both  
sectors has witnessed a decline in the past decade. Recognising this 
concern, the Department -related Parliamentary Standing Committee on 
Transport, Tourism and Culture undertaken an examination and report on the 
subject ‗Status of Ship Bu ilding, Ship Repair and Ship Recycling Industries 
in India‘.    
3. The Ministry informed the Committee that there are 45 Shipyards in  the 
country, 7 under Central Public Sector, 2 under State Governments and 36  
under private sector (ANNEXURE-I). The Ministry of Ports, Shipping and 
Waterways formulates policies and programs for shipping, marine 

 
2  
development, Ship Building, Ship Repair, and Ship Breaking Industry. 
However, the Ministry has  direct control only over the Public Sector 
shipyards under the Central Government. Remaining shipyards operate as  
separate entities which ensure they take informed decision making. 
4. The Ministry also informed that over last few decades, India's 
shipbuilding capacity increased substantially, witnessing emergence of state-
of-the-art shipyards equipped with advanced technology and infrastructure. 
Indian shipyards are developing a wide range of vessels, including aircraft 
carriers, cargo ships, oil tankers, passenger ships, offshore support vessels & 
naval ships. Currently, the maximum size of the vessels, which can be 
built in India in the public sector is 1,10,000 Dead Weight Tonage (DWT) 
which is increasing to built vessels up to 3,00,000 DWT by Cochin Shipyard 
Ltd. Private sector shipyards can  build vessels upto cape size vessels 
comparable to some of the leading shipyards in the world. Reliance Naval 
Engineering Limited has the capacity to build vessels upto 400,000 DWT and 
L&T Shipbuilding -Kattupalli 300,000 DWT   which includes large LNG 
Carriers. Smaller size LNG Carriers, Dredgers and other specialized 
vessels can be built by other shipyards in the Private sector such as Shoft 
Shipyard Private Ltd., Chowgule & Co. Ltd., Titagarh Wagons Ltd.,  Vijay 
Marine Services, Mandovi Dry Docks Ltd., A.C. Roy & Co., Dempo 
Shipbuilding and Engineering Pvt. Ltd. etc. 
5. The Global ship building market is estimated to be approx. USD 70 
billion, primarily dominated by China, South Korea and Japan which account 
for about  85% of global Ship Building. The Ship buildin g industry has 
however been going  through an extended global downturn for the past few 
years, with world‘s leading  shipyards facing ﬁnancial troubles due to lack 
of orders. During early 2000s, Indian ship building industry produced over 
3,00,000+ Gross Tonnage (GT) and ranked amongst top 10 in the World. The 
global downturn in the shipbuilding  industry signiﬁcantly impacted the 
Indian shipyards and India‘s share in the Global markets has declined to less 

 
3  
than 1%.  At present, India holds the 20th position among the top shipbuilding 
nations globally. 
6. Under the present depressed prevailing market, the growth in the 
Industry is likely to be accelerated through the ―Atmanirbhar Bharat‖ 
initiative under the Make in India Programme of the Government of India. In 
this regard, the Ministry had informed the various support initiatives   taken 
by the Ministry such as: 
(i) Providing preference to local built Tugs for the employment of services 
in all the Major ports. -In order to promote small and medium shipyards, 
in September,  2020, the Ministry has issued Standard Operating 
Procedures pertaining to  Procurement/Chartering of Port Crafts by the 
Major Ports. As per this SOP, no  Global Tender has to be issued for 
Procuring or Chartering the Tugs with value less than 200 crores, 
making these procedures simple and more efficient. To assist the Major 
ports in expeditious implementation of  the Make in India Order' an 
Approved Standardized Tug Design & Specifications (ASTDS) has also 
been issued and published. This ensures consistency and quality in the 
construction of tugs and promotes uniformity across major ports. 
Overall, these initiatives are aimed to boost the domestic shipbuilding 
industry aligning with the broader "Make in India" initiative. 
(ii) Schemes for the coastal shipping and Inland water 
(iii) Defence market and deep sea fishing segment. As per a published report, 
the Indian Navy‘s perspective plan  outlines an ambitious goal  of 
expanding   its fleet from the present       137 vessels to 200 nos. by the year 
2027. The strategic vision  aligns with the broader goals set up by the 
Government of India as  otlines in the recently circulated Defence  
Production Policy.  the vision aims ―To make India among the Top Five  
countries of the world in Aerospace and Defence I ndustries‖, with active 
participation of public and private sector, fulfilling the objective of self -

 
4  
reliance  and meeting the demands of other friendly nations in the field of 
defense.  
7. Further, th e Ministry issued Standard Operating Procedure (SOP) in  
2021 for Procurement of Deep-Sea Fishing Vessels to assist the state  fishery 
departments in expeditious implementation of Prime Minister Matsya 
Sampada Yoyana (PMMSY). Consolidated Standard Operating Procedure 
(SOP) for Procurement of Deep -Sea Fishing Vessels for Steel and FRP was 
issued on 31.01.2022. Further, three variants of Standardized DSFV Design 
& Speciﬁcations (ASDDS) for Fishing vessels approved by Nodal authority 
have been sent to D/o Fisheries for necessary action. 
8. The Ministry informed t hat given the huge scope in, in urban transport 
segment and the Short sea shipping  market where environment friendly 
electric mobility technology is fast catching up  and provides new 
opportunity for Indian Shipbuilders the private shipyards are upgrading 
their capabilities for  construction of Hybrid Vessels, so  that those also 
become eligible to be  considered for construction of  such vessels,  with 
support of the government. 
9. The Government of India is also actively considering framing of rules 
to reduce  the age profile of vessels to improve safety and to improve 
emission standards  as well as overall improvement of maritime 
environment. This would enable  creation of additional demand for 
domestic shipbuilding industry. 
10. The Committee appreciates the initiatives of the Ministry for its 
efforts under the “Make In India” programme for promotion of 
shipbuilding activities . The Committee observes that Approved 
Standardized Tug Design and Speciﬁcations (ASTDS) have been issued 
by the Ministry to  assist the Major Ports in expeditious implementation 
of the Make in India  Order. The Committee desires to know how many 
locally built Tugs have  been ordered by the Major Ports since the 

 
5  
implementation of this Order in September, 2020. 
11. Maritime Vision 2030 provides for making  Indian ship building to 
become competitive    by 2025 and then build on the momentum  to reach 
―Make in India Make for World‖ levels..  The ultimate objective is for India 
to emerge as one of the top 10 shipbuilding nations globally. Major 
initiatives include channelizing the  cargo to improve demand, improving the 
ecosystem for ancillary industries for  better productivity with appropriate 
Governmental interventions to create level  playing ﬁelds to make the 
industry competitive in inter national arena. Further,  Maritime India Vision  
2030 has set a target of taking up India to  top 10 Ship building country 
with  with a Gross Tonnage (GT) exceeding 500,000, a substantial increase 
from the current production level of around 30,000 GT. This strategic 
roadmap outlines a comprehensive approach to propel the Indian 
shipbuilding industry into a more prominent and competitive position on the 
international stage. 
12. Maritime India Vision 2030 provides for various interventions  to  
augment and promote the shipbuilding industry in India,which  include: 
(i) Channelize domestic demand for Indian Shipbuilding leveraging 
Atmanirbhar PPP provisions and RoFR rules efficiently 
(ii) Develop common platform for ancillaries to showcase the products 
available for Indian shipbuilding 
(iii) Create a common database of standard vessel basic designs with 
pre-approval from Indian Register of Shipping (IRS) to drive 
standardization, improve design  process and leverage cost 
economies 
(iv) Develop strong marine design ecosystem by identifying 
design clusters and incentivizing for ‗Design in India‘ 
13. The Ministry further informed about the following initiatives taken to  

 
6  
promote the shipbuilding industry in country: 
FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE POLICY 
13.1 In order to encourage domestic shipbuilding and to provide a level 
playing ﬁeld vis -a-vis foreign shipyards, the Union Cabinet approved the 
Shipbuilding Financial Assistance Policy for Indian Shipyards on 09 
December, 2015.  This policy, applicable for a duration of 10 years, covers 
shipbuilding contracts secured between 1 April, 2016, and 31 March, 2026, 
(including these dates). Any ship which is built in India whether in 
Government sector or private and does not fall under the category of an 
armored ship—meaning it does not have armory  or arms fitted —is eligible 
for ﬁnancial assistance. 
13.2 Under the Shipbuilding Financial Assistance Policy, Indian 
Shipyards  are eligible for financial assistance  equivalent to 20% of the  
lower of ―Contract Price‖ or the ―Fair Price‖ or ―actual payments received‖, 
whichever is the least.  This assistance is granted for a minimum period of 
10 years starting from the fiscal year 2016 -17. This rate  of 20% will be 
reduced by 3% every three years. Presently, 14% of the cost  of that ship is 
provided by Government through this scheme. Budget of Rs. 4,000  crore has 
been approved by the Government of India for this initiative The and the 
Directorate General of  Shipping [DG(S)]  serves as the implementing 
authority for release of  financial assistance . The applications for release of 
ﬁnancial assistance  are processed through an online portal in order to 
expedite the disbursement process to Indian shipyards. The amount of 
ﬁnancial assistance released so far is as under: 
Year Amount of financial assistance released 
2018-19 Rs. 29.02 Cr 
2019-20 Rs. 26.97 Cr 

 
7  
2020-21 Rs. 58 Cr 
2021-22 Rs. 65 Cr 
2022-23 Rs. 58 Cr 
2023-24 (until 17.12.2023) Rs. 32.24 Cr (expected to reach 97Cr 
approx. in) 
13.3 The Ministry further informed that so far 31 Shipyards are 
approved under SBFA policy and a total of 99 ships have been delivered by  
various shipyards.146 applications have been received and the cost of the 
ships to be built is Rs. 8239 crores.  Under this policy Rs.275.7 crore rupees  
have been  released to the shipyards as part of ﬁnancial assistance thus 
far.The target for the current ﬁnancial year is 102 crores and next year target 
is beyond 200 crores.  Notably, the policy has introduced incentives for green 
shipbuilding, offering a flat rate  of 30% for ships using green fuel as 
propulsion and 20% for hybrid fuel ships (diesel plus electric or diesel plus 
hydrogen). Due to these incentives, the CSL has      been able to build fully 
autonomous vessels for export to Norway. 
13.4 The increase in ﬁnancial assistance over the years proves that the 
volume of ship building is steadily increasing in India. In the government 
sector, CSL is the only company taking advantage of this Scheme but in the 
private sector, both medium scale and small shipyards have been benefitted 
by this scheme. 
13.5 The Committee observes that the earlier subsidy scheme of 
the Ministry of 5 years offered shipbuilders 30% extra on building ocean-
going merchant vessels that are more than 80 metres  in length, if they 
are manufactured for the domestic market. For export orders, however, 
ships of all types and capacities were eligible for the subsidy. In the new 
ﬁnancial assistance scheme, assistance will be given for all types of 

 
8  
ships irrespective of size. In the new scheme, both state-owned and private 
yards will get the assistance only after they construct and hand over to the 
ship to  the buyer to ensure timely delivery of ships. The new ﬁnancial 
assistance scheme was therefore for double the period of the earlier 
subsidy scheme, the focus extended for all ships and ensured timely 
delivery which had been a constraint in the earlier scheme. The 
Committee also observes that when commercial orders dried up in the 
wake of the 2008 ﬁnancial crisis, Indian shipyards were focusing mainly 
on defence orders to stay aﬂoat. The Government’s ﬁnancial assistance 
policy was meant to help bring in more and major commercial ship 
building orders. 
13.6 However, the Committee observes that in the nearly 8 years 
since the launch of the scheme, only a paltry 6-7% of the Rs. 4000 corpus 
has been utilized. The target of Rs. 200 crores for the next ﬁnancial year 
appears to  be bit rather unrealistic considering the poor response of 
the past few years. Since there are only 2 years left for the  Scheme, it 
appears that the  ﬁnancial beneﬁts under the Scheme have not been 
utilized to the extent  possible. The Committee disagrees with the 
Ministry’s contention that the  increase in ﬁnancial assistance availed 
over the years is signiﬁcant enough  to prove that the volume of ship 
building is increasing in India. The Committee desires to know how 
many of the 31 Shipyards approved under  the policy have actually 
utilized the beneﬁts of the scheme and how many  ships have been built 
by individual shipyards under the Scheme. The Committee may also be 
informed of the type of vessels that have been built  by the Shipyards 
which have actually utilized the beneﬁts.  While CSL in the  government 
sector has been able to win orders from global clients, the  Committee 
desires to know whether the private shipyards beneﬁtting under  the 
scheme have also been competitive enough to win global orders to 
build large container ships. The leading Ship Building nations of 

 
9  
China, South Korea and Japan thrive on export orders to build their 
shipbuilding expertise. The Committee while appreciating the 
Government’s e fforts to  create an ecosystem for boosting shipbuilding 
recommends that the Ministry should evaluate the reasons for the poor 
utilization of the ﬁnancial  assistance scheme and whether technical 
reasons like high imports of material for shipbuilding, less automation in 
the shipbuilding processes are  affecting the competitiveness of Indian 
Ship yards. 
 Right of Refusal to Indian Shipyards 
13.7 On 09.12.2015 the Union Cabinet  also approved a directive that 
all government  departments or agencies including CPSUs  must provide 
Right of First Refusal to Indian shipyards while procuring or repairing 
vessels meant for governmental  or own use. This mandate will be in effect 
till 2025,  beyond which Indian shipyards would build and repair  vessels of 
these organizations. Guidelines were uploaded on website of this Ministry on 
31.05.2016. Subsequently, a few provisions of the guidelines regarding 
Quay Length and Non -Destructive Testing facilities have been modiﬁed  by 
this Ministry to facilitate more Indian shipyards including small shipyards 
to take advantage of this policy. The modiﬁed guidelines have been uploaded 
on website of Ministry of Ports, Shipping & Waterways. 
 
Grant of Infrastructure Status 
 
13.8 The Department of Economic Affairs has notiﬁed the inclusion of 
standalone ‗Shipyards‘ in the Harmonized Master List of Infrastructure Sub- 
sectors on 13.04.2016. With this inclusion, shipyards will be able to avail 
ﬂexible structuring of long term project loans, long term funding from 
Infrastructure Funds  at lower rates of interest and for a longer tenure 
equivalent to the economic life of  their assets, relaxed ECB norms, issuance 

 
10  
of infrastructure bonds for meeting working capital requirements. Standalone 
shipyard is defined as a floating or land - based facility with the essential 
features of waterfront, turning basin, berthing and  docking facility, slipways 
and/or ship lifts, and which is self suﬃcient for carrying on 
shipbuilding/repair/breaking activities. 
14.   Promotion of tonnage under Indian Flag 
The criteria for granting the Right of First Refusal in chartering of 
vessels through tender process has been revised, for promoting tonnage under 
Indian ﬂag  and shipbuilding in India, so as to make India an 
Atmanirbhar/self-reliant Bharat, in terms of tonnage and ship-building in 
India. The following is the revised hierarchy of RoFR: 
(i) Indian built, Indian flagged (Indian owned); 
(ii) Foreign built, Indian flagged (Indian owned); 
(iii) Indian built, foreign flagged (foreign owned). 
15. This will promote demand of Indian built vessels as the Indian built 
vessels will have the priority in chartering and will also provide additional 
market access  and business support to ships built in India. Further,  the 
Shipbuilding Financial  Assistance is provided to Indian Shipyards in 
order to promote the Indian Shipbuilding Industry and to enable them to 
acquire global Shipbuilding Contracts  while competing in International 
Markets. 
16. The following number of In dian-ﬂagged ships are manufactured in 
our shipyards per year 
Financial Year Nos. 
FY-2018-19 07 
FY-2019-20 11 

 
11  
FY-2020-21 09 
FY -2021-22 20 
FY -2022-23 26 
FY -2023-24 10. FY ongoing) 
 
17. The Committee observes that while India has about 25% of the global 
market in ship recycling, its share of ship building is barely 1-2%. The 
Committee has been informed that the main reason for the low percentage 
share in ship building is the high cost of ship building in India which in turn 
is due to high cost of material and labour costs. Some of the other reasons are 
lack of strategic  guidance, level playing ﬁeld between private and public 
sector companies, funding, technology. The Committee has been informed 
that while India is very  competitive in normal steel an d even automative 
graded steel, the steel required  for ship building is more specialized.  Since 
the market for such specialized steels  is small in India, this further drives up 
the material costs. Since most Indian steel mills are located near to the mines, 
the rail transportation costs are also high and further push up the costs. Indian 
steel is therefore costlier by about 50 – 70 dollars a tonne. Further, the labour 
costs are also higher in India due to productivity  issues. Labour productivity 
in India is also low due to the fact that there is less automation  in India 
unlike Korea and China which have high levels of automation due to the 
investments made by these countries in this regard. 
18. Further, though Shipyards come under ‗Infrastructure‖, ships themselves 
do not come under Infrastructure and getting long -term ﬁnance at easy rates 
for ships is di ﬃcult. Shipbuilding payments is usually done in stage 
payments as per  deﬁned stages. If the owner defaults, he forfeits the money 
and the ship, the half built ship, belongs to the purchaser.  But then the 

 
12  
purchaser has to sell the ship in  the global market to recover his costs, so 
there is a risk involved.  The Committee was also informed that most of the 
leading maritime countries have got risk insurance cover given to banks or 
lending institutions. China has got Sinesure,  Korea has got K -sure and 
Netherlands has got Atradius. If India could get a scheme like that, the banks 
would be able to offer much lower rates of interest. 
19. The Committee observes that the high cost of steel, labour costs and high 
interest rates drive up the material costs of shipbuilding. The Ministry has 
informed that interests rates are as high as 10 -12 % in India while only 2 -
2.5% in China. Upon query of the Committee on whethe r the Ministry has 
any plans to  give interest subsidy to encourage ship building, the Ministry 
informed that in the  Harmonized Master List, only Shipyards and not Ships 
are regarded as infrastructure. Therefore ships do not get long term ﬁnancing 
and other advantages that Infrastructure gets. 
20. If India is to be positioned among the top 10 nations in Ship 
Building, then an ecosystem which would address the infrastructure, 
regulatory, ﬁscal issues and capability development is to be developed. 
The Committee observes that as per the Rangarajan Commission, six 
indicators of sectors to be classiﬁed under Infrastructure were –  
(a) natural monopoly;  
(b) non-tradability of output;  
(c) bestowing externalities on society;  
(d) high- sunk costs or asset speciﬁcity; 
 (e) non-rivalness (up to congestion limits) in consumption; and,  
(f) possibility of price exclusion.  The Commission had recommended 
the inclusion of Ships and other Vessels on the basis of the  
characteristics from (d) to (f).  
21. The Committee appreciates  the grant of infrastructure status to 

 
13  
Shipyards due to which the Ship Building industry  would be able to 
avail long term funding at lower rates and for various forms of 
ﬁnancial assistance, beneﬁts and concessions.  The Committee  also 
observes that the Government is planning to give infrastructure status to 
coastal shipping. The Committee recommends that the Government may 
consider extending infrastructure status granted to Shipyards to all 
ships and Vessels, not only coastal shipping. 
22. The Committee recommends that the production of specialized steels 
domestically should be incentivized and strategic partnerships with 
global suppliers should be established to ensure a cost -effective supply 
chain to address the high costs of materials . The Committee 
recommends that setting up a specialized ﬁnancing  institution/marine 
ﬁnance scheme could provide a much -needed boost to  the shipbuilding 
industry. The Ministry may also explore the possibility of  getting a risk 
insurance cover scheme for sh ips in India on the lines of the  ones in 
Korea and China  which would attract domestic and international 
investors to participate in financing maritime projects. The Committee 
observes that the private sector  ship building companies are mostly 
struggling with hardly any proﬁts, the  most recent casualties being 
Western India, Bharati and ABG Shipyards. The Committee 
recommends that the private sector must be considered as  much of a 
stakeholder in shipping as the public sector and a level playing  field for 
both sectors must be the concern of the Government. 
23. The Committee observes that Skilled manpower is the most essential  
prerequisite in Ship Building industry. Ensuring proper education and 
training could bolster the effectiveness of the industry. The Committee 
observes that a s per studies  the labour productivity value for India is 
approximately 10 times lower than the major shipbuilding nations. All 
these translate to about 20 -25 per cent cost advantage for major 

 
14  
shipbuilding nations vis -à-vis India. 1 The Committee recommends that 
investments in automation should be encouraged in order to improve 
labor productivity and reduce costs. 
24. One of the constraints of shipbuilding in India is the limited 
investment in R&D in ship  design and innovation.  The Committee 
recommends that the Government  focus on skill development and 
developing an R&D base to increase the  competitiveness of the Indian 
shipbuilding industry. 
25. The MIV document also advocates creation of a Maritime 
Development Fund to provide easy access to working capital and long -
term ﬁnance needs across marine sectors.  The Committee recommends 
that the Ministry may implement the creation of the Fund which can give 
access to Indian ship owners to improve their capacity   and shipyards to 
improve the infrastructure 
26. The Ministry also informed the Committee about the key milestones 
achieved in                  shipbuilding and repair industry in the last decade: 
(i) Cochin Shipyard Limited has also incorporated a 100% subsidiary 
company viz.  Hooghly Cochin Shipyard Limited (HCSL) at Kolkata. 
HCSL targets to develop  various types of vessels like Ro -Ro Vessels, 
River-Sea Cargo Vessels for bulk,  liquids, containers, Passenger 
Vessels, other watercrafts for the inland waterways. 
(ii) CSL has also recently acqu ired Tebma Shipyards Limited (TSL), a 
medium sized shipbuilding facility at Malpe, Karnataka, through the IBC/ 
NCLT process as a  100% subsidiary. The name of the Company as 
subsequently changed to Udupi  Cochin Shipyard Limited (UCSL) to 
relate the company more appropriately to CSL. UCSL mainly focuses on 
building fishing vessels (especially technologically advanced deep sea  
fishing vessels), tugs and specialized  crafts of up to 80 M length which 
                                                           
1 https://maritimeindia.org/navigating-economic-security-through-shipbuilding/ 

 
15  
projects huge potential in domestic as well as international markets. Upon 
enquiry by the Committee, the Ministry informed that the total revenue  
generated through export of ships by CSL in 2022-23 is Rs.69.06 Cr. 
GREEN SHIP BUILDING 
27.  The Committee was informed that from fossil fuels, Ship building 
is now  happening in hybrid or green fuels. Upon query by the Committee 
regarding the  strategy adopted to promote green vessels the Ministry 
informed that to promote  building of green vessels, ﬁnancial assistance of 
30% is provided through SBFA  for vessels where m ain propulsion is 
achieved by means of green fuels such as  Methanol/ Ammonia / Hydrogen 
fuel cells and Financial Assistance of 20% is  provided for vessels with 
electric means of propulsion or vessels ﬁtted with hybrid  propulsion system, 
thereby increasing the competitiveness of Indian shipyards and to gain 
export orders. 
28.  India will also be implementing IMO energy e ﬃciency 
requirements for existing ships and carbon intensity requirements on all its 
vessels whether coastal  or international in order to help achieve IMO GHG 
reduction targets. India is already supplying shore power to ships with power 
demand less than 150 KW at  present and targeting to supply shore power to 
all visiting ships. India is working  actively at Marine Environmental 
Protection Co mmittee of IMO to help devise  acceptable regulatory 
requirements for GHG emission reduction in line with IMO  GHG initial 
strategy. 
29. India‘s Nationally Determined Contributions (NDC) under the Paris  
Agreement for the Period 2021 -2030 include: to reduce t he emissions 
intensity of its GDP by 33 to 35 per cent by 2030 from 2005 level, and to 
achieve about 40  percent cumulative electric power installed capacity from 
non-fossil fuel-based energy resources by 2030 with the help of transfer of 
technology and low -cost international ﬁnance. India is well on its way to 

 
16  
achieve these targets and has  already achieved more than 24.5% share of 
Renewable Energy (RE) in total  Installed Capacity. Globally, today India 
stands 4th in RE power capacity, 4th in  Wind power, and 5th in Solar Power 
capacity. 
30. The pace at which the Green initiatives are undertaken by the 12 major  
ports will surely bring a green revolution in the sector making the ports 
cleaner and greener, which is also a key component of ‗Blue Economy‘, 
creating environmental benefits and balancing the investments and cash flow. 
31.  Following are the initiatives by Ministry of Ports, Shipping and 
Waterways in exporting Green ships: - 
(i) In June 2022, CSL has delivered two autonomous electric barges for 
the Norway- based ASKO Maritime AS. 
(ii) In November 2022, CSL signed an international order for 
constructing 2 nos. of  Commissioning Service Operation Vessels 
(CSOV) at a price of approximately  Rs 500 crores each from a 
European Client, with an option to build 4 more of such vessels to 
be exercised by the Owner within a period of one year. These  
vessels are intended for the services of offshore wind farm 
installations towards  its commissioning and maintenance and are 
powered by methanol fuelled engines. 
(iii) In March 2 023, CSL signed another international order with a 
Norwegian companies for design and construction of a total of two 
nos. of Zero Emission  Feeder Container Vessels with an option for 
two more vessels at a price of  Rs.550 crores approximately. These 
ships c an carry abt. 365 Nos.  of 45-feet long high cube containers 
and are intended to serve the European Market where  sustainable 
transportation solutions are in high demand. 
(iv) On 10 May 2023 Udupi Cochin Shipyard Limited, a subsidiary 
of CSL has  contracted for th e construction of 6 Nos 3800 DWT  

 
17  
bulk carrier for Wilson As Norway. These ―Future proof dry cargo 
vessels‖ are environmentally friendly diesel-electric vessels which 
are ready for installation of wind foil units and  battery hybrid 
systems. 
(v) Construction of first Zero Emission 50 Pax Hydrogen Fuel Cell 
Passenger Catamaran Vessel is in collaboration with M/s KPIT, Pune. 
The catamaran vessel will be deployed at Varanasi after test and trial 
at Kochi. Based on the success of  this project, the technology can be 
adopted for greening of, cargo vessels, small  country crafts etc. 
enabling significant reduction in pollution levels in the National  
Waterways. 
(vi) Construction of 23 number of Hybrid Electric Aluminium 
Catamaran Hull vessel for Kochi Water Metro Project out of  which 
twelve vessels have already been delivered. 
(vii) CSL is also constructing 8 Nos of 50 Pax Hybrid Electric 
Aluminium Catamaran  Hull vessel vessels, similar to KMRL to 
enhance urban water mobility in the  National waterways of 
Varanasi, Ayodhya, Madurai and Guwahati. 
(viii) CSL along with three other ports viz. Deendayal Port Authority, 
Kandla, Paradip  Port Authority, Paradip, V.O Chidambarnar Port 
Authority, Thoothkudi, has  partnered in the National Centre of 
Excellence for Green Port and Shipping (NCoEGPS) which has been 
established by MoPSW  in TERI campus  Government of India has 
announced the Green Tug Transition Program (GTTP),  which will 
gradually convert tugs operating in different ports to battery - 
powered/greener fuel vessels in order to reduce carbon emissions 
from port operations. As a first step towards this 4 major ports 
Deendayal Port Authority,  Kandla, Paradip Port Authority, Paradip, 
V.O Chidambarnar Port Authority, Thoothkudi and Jawaharlal Nehru 

 
18  
Port Authority Mumbai are tasked to  operationalize 2 green tugs 
each. 
(ix) In order to enhance the share of Green Shipping, various 
projects are being  implemented by Cochin Shipyard Ltd., India‘s 
largest shipbuilding and  maintenance facility. These include green 
urban mobility solutions like Hybrid  Electric Ferries, autonomous 
Zero-emission vessels, pilot project on Hydrogen  Fuel Cell Ferry, 
Electric Catamaran Water Taxi, Hybrid Electric Ro -Ro, Hybrid  
LNG-Electric Inland Cargo Carrier, Hybrid Tugs, etc. 
32.  The Committee observes that ship engines and ship fuels are 
undergoing rapid change and moving away from fossil fuels to new fuels  
like green methanol, green ammonia etc. In the near future, every 
goods/service will have an identiﬁable carbon footprint and carbon 
neutral products and services will have a competitive advantage. While 
the Committee appreciates the initiatives of CSL in constructing green 
vessels, there does not appear to be the same e fforts on the part of other 
shipyards. The Committee recommends that the National Centre for 
Excellence in Green Ports and Shipping may act as a nodal entity for 
green shipping so  that there is a coordinated e ffort by all shipyards to 
position India as a global hub for green shipping. 
33. Overall, the Committee observed that faced with high financial costs, 
the shipbuilders in India encounter difficulties in expanding their 
operations and providing competitive pricing to end -users. This 
predicament has led to low orders, diminished profits and a constrained 
capacity for reinvestment. 
34. As per a FICCI report, In dian shipyards require about 25 -35% of 
the ship's cost as working capital during construction, with interest rates 
averaging 10 -10.5%. In contrast, overseas shipbuilding yards enjoy 

 
19  
significantly lower rates along with lower -interest export credit. 2 The 
Committee, therefore, recommends that measures to reduce interest 
rates on working capital for Indian shipyards be explored .  
35. The Committee feels that a potential Production Linked Incentive 
(PLI) scheme can go a long way to boost the shipbui lding industry. This 
multifaceted scheme could include output -based rewards, wherein 
shipbuilders stand to receive incentives commensurate with the quantity 
and type of ships they manufacture. Additionally, the PLI scheme might 
introduce investment incenti ves tailored to encourage shipbuilders to 
modernize their facilities and integrate advanced manufacturing 
technologies. Shipbuilding entities making investments in upgrading 
infrastructure and adopting state -of-the-art manufacturing processes 
could qualify  for these investment incentives. This dual approach of 
incentivizing both production and investment could create a dynamic 
environment that propels the shipbuilding industry towards 
technological advancement, increased efficiency and global 
competitiveness. 
 
SHIP REPAIR 
36. The Committee was informed that the global ship repair market is 
approximately US$ 12 billion and is expected to witness significant growth, 
reaching a market value of USD 40 Billion by 2030. The global market for ship 
repair and maintenance service is currently dominated by shipyards in China, 
Singapore and Middle East largely due to the availability of skilled workforce 
and latest technology. India‘s share in the global ship repair market is currently 
less than 1%. 
                                                           
2 https://ficci.in/public/storage/events/24269/ISP/FICCI_IN_Compendium_Nation -Building-
Shipbuilding.pdf 

 
20  
37. The Committee was further informed that India has the following inherent 
advantages to become a major player  in the global ship repair market.   
Strengths of Indian ship repair industry 
(i) Geostrategic location of India 
India has a long coast line of around 7516 kilometre. There are a  number of all 
weather ports which are not subjected to severe weather conditions. The 
country's considerable coastal expanse, featuring numerous all -weather ports 
shielded from harsh weathe r conditions, stands as a significant advantage.  It is 
positioned strategically along major trade and shipping routes, with 7 to 9 % of 
the global trade passing within 300 NM nautical miles  of  its coastline. This 
represents increasing market potential fo r the ship -repair business, as ship 
owners prefer to repair their ships without deviating from their trade routes as 
much as possible. Additionally, India is poised well to offer repair services to 
Indian Navy and the ally US Navy for its 5th and 7th fleet  deployed in the 
Indian Ocean and the Arabian Sea. 
(ii) Abundance of labour 
Among   the resources required for the Ship Repair Units to function efficiently, 
labour market plays an important role and India has a huge untapped potential in 
terms of all segments of labour – from unskilled to highly skilled. Most of the 
existing and new ship repair yards in India concentrate on new building  and 
providing services to naval and coastal vessels. 
(iii) Competitive labour rates 
Apart from abundance of labour, the subcontract labour rates for steel work, 
pipe work, blasting and painting, mechanical and electrical works are  cheaper 
in India and are comparable to labour rates in Indonesia and Vietnam. In fact it 
is 10 to 15% lower than subcontract labour rates of Indonesia. 
38. With strategic location in the trade route of tanker/bulk carrier traffic on 
east & west and  availability of trained workforce, there are  opportunities for 
huge revenue generation in the ship repair market. Ship-repair service, a 

 
21  
supplementary service pr ovided by most of the shipyards, is also a labour -
intensive activity that utilizes the existing ship -building infrastructure to provide 
additional returns on the capital invested.  It is estimated that market size for ship 
repairs for domestic vessels is a round INR 4K crore, out of which nearly 800 
crores of ship repair market is under Government/PSU control.   
Constraints 
39. Despite such advantages, India‘s share in the global ship repair market is 
currently less than 1%. The Ministry informed that there are  major issues with 
the Indian Ship Repair Industry such as  higher Turnaround Time as compared to 
other South-East Asian countries and a lack of efficiency in the working process 
along with higher cost of procurement. The untapped potential in the Indi an ship 
repair market can also be attributed to the following reasons – 
(i) presence of competing international ship repair yards on major trade routes  
(ii) a capability gap of Indian yards in repairing certain kinds of vessels.  
(iii) One of the major deterrents in shi p repair has been GST which is an 
additional tax burden. 
(iv) Further, import of raw materials and parts for use in maintenance & 
repair of Ships/ Vessels by the Ship building/repair yards shall now also 
attract customs duty at applicable tariff rates (5%, 7.5% /10%/15%/20% 
etc) as the current exemption vide Sl. No. 549, 550 will not be available 
from 1st April 2024 as per Notification 02/2023 dated  01.02.2023. The 
industry is also facing the issue of accumulation of input tax credit which 
results in working capital cost. All this will increase the cost of ship repair 
in India. Other reasons of cost disadvantages include high cost of 
financing, lack of supply of ship spares in India, ancillary support and 
technology related issues increasing ship repair execution cycle time. Due 
to these disadvantages, only about 5 -6 shipyards out of a total of 24 
shipyards in the country carry out any significant repair jobs.   
 

 
22  
40. Referring to the formal framework agreement signed in 2023 with the U.S. 
Government on naval ship repair with Larsen & Toubro at the shipyard at 
Kattupalli, lndia, the Committee  asked about the efforts taken by the 
Government to increase foreign partnersh ips in the realm of Ship Repair and 
make India a logistics hub for countries in the lndo Pacific Region.  
41. The Committee was informed that the Maritime India Vision, 2030 has set 
the target for India to be in the top 10 countries by 2030 in global ship repair 
activities. To address the untapped potential of the Indian Ship Repair market, the 
Government of India under the Maritime Vision 2030 is giving a string forward 
thrust to the industry with multiple initiatives which include infrastructure 
creation of two Ship Repair Clusters in the south coast and west coast to enhance 
the Ship Repair capability of the nation. A Ship Repair cluster is a Ship Repair 
ecosystem which will have Maritime or Ancillary Parks, all Services, Space for 
Stockyard and Common Us e facilities. As the international shipping routes are 
very close to these clusters, this will open a new arena for the ship repair 
industry. Cochin Shipyard is in the process of being an anchor company for both 
the Ship Repair clusters being planned.  
Initiatives of the Ministry to promote the Ship Repair Industry  
Development of ship repair clusters:  
42. Cochin Shipyard Limited has engaged M/s Boston Consulting Group 
(BCG) to prepare a Strategy Report for setting up of the two Ship Repair Clusters 
in India. The BCG carried out a detailed study of the requirements of ship repair 
clusters and held interactions with various potential stake holders. Deep dive 
study of the ship repair cluster models operating successfully in Dubai and China 
was also carried  out by BCG with an aim to benchmark the requirement for 
India. The Ship Repair  cluster strategy report was deliberated in detail and the 
overall cluster strategy brought out therein was agreed in -principle by?. The 
MoPSW accordingly directed that necessar y actions towards implementation of 
the strategy as brought out in the action plan and road map of the report shall be 

 
23  
initiated by respective organisations. As per the report, the initial two Ship 
Repair Clusters proposed are:- 
(i) Southern Cluster (Kochi):  
This would be set up in association with the new International Ship repair 
Facility (ISRF) being set up by CSL at Kochi. It would be implemented in two 
phases as follows:- 
a) Phase–1: This would include the ISRF facility built by CSL with the ship 
lift and six work stations at an investment of Rs. 970 crores.  The proposal 
is for CSL to utilise this facility as part of the Kochi SR Cluster on an 
Operate & Maintain mode with another shipyard of International repute. 
An  – Expression of Interest or Request for Proposal  (EOI/RFP) for 
identifying an International Operating Partner will be issued shortly. Road 
Show and meeting with potential partners are currently in progress to help 
on-board a best in class global partner.  
b) Phase-2: This would be an extended ISRF facility as per which another ten 
workstations will be added to the original six, thereby making ISRF a 
facility with 16 Work Stations centered around the ship lift of 6000 T 
capacity, capable of handling ships up to 130 Mtr long. Phase -2 will be 
taken up subsequently at an appropriate time. The O&M partner of Phase -
1 will have the ROFR on partnering with CSL in Phase -2, which is 
proposed to be on a JV mode between CSL and the partnering entity. 
43. A detailed Expression of Interest (EOI) for identifyin g an International 
Operating Partner will be issued shortly, Road Show and meeting with potential 
partners are also planned to help on -board a best in class global partner.   CSL 
has finalized M/s BCG for  consultancy for its part of the implementation phas e 
of the ship repair clusters above. The Consultant has commenced  the 1st phase 
from 14 Aug 2023  for a period of 10 weeks assignment. The initial reach out to 
potential global ship repair partners has commenced. The EOI towards this will 
also be issued by the CSL shortly.   

 
24  
44. In addition to the above and to facilitate the overall development of the 
region as part of the SR Cluster eco system, it would be necessary to set up 
Ancillary Parks for suppliers, service providers, contractors, etc. and Hospitalit y 
Hubs to ensure accommodation and other facilities for technical teams, client 
teams, foreign OEM representatives and service engineers etc. 
45. Upon a query of the Committee about the necessity of a foreign partner in 
establishing the Ship Repair Cluster , it was informed that adding ten more 
workstations at the ISRF facility at Cochin would require an investment of an 
additional 1500 crores and a foreign partner would not only provide the 
investment required but also bring in international best practices.   
(ii) Western Cluster (Mumbai / Vadinar):  
46. Vadinar, at the mouth of a gulf with Mundra port on one end  and Kandla 
port nearby, forms a catchment area with natural draft which receives the 
maximum number of ships and therefore a major ship repair cluster is being 
planned here.  
47. CSL is already operating the Ship repair facility in Hughes Dry -dock in 
Mumbai (called CMSRU). A floating dry -dock (FDD) will also be positioned  at 
CMSRU for which tendering is in progress, after receipt of clearance from 
Ministry for global procurement. This will increase the ship repair capacity in the 
area. Along with this and as brought out in the Strategy Report a new Ship 
Repair facility, based 2/3 large Floating Dry -docks capable of handling large 
ships of around 250 Mtr is planned to be set up in Vadinar, Gujarat.  CSL and 
Deendayal Port Authority (DPA) will jointly build up the facility. An operating 
model in association with a leading International partner will also be put in place.  
CSL and DPA are in the early stages of discussing the facility layout, and DPA is 
actively working on securing the required environmental clearances for the 
project. 
Development of International Ship Repair Facility (ISRF) and New Dry 
Dock (NDD) at Cochin Shipyard  

 
25  
48. Cochin Shipyard Limited (CSL) is the largest and most accomplished Ship 
Repair Yard in India with more than 2500 Ship Repair projects completed. It is 
the only yard capable of handling Aircraft Carriers – 15 Refits including Life 
Extension projects.  The existing Ship Repair Docks of CSL are as follows:- 
CSL Ship Repair Docks 
270 x 45 x 12M at Kochi  
300 x 30 x 9M at Mumbai  
172 x 23 x 8M - 2 Nos at Kolkata  
88 x 20 x 7M at Port Blair  
68 x 20 x 5M at Port Blair  
Shiplift: 6000T (130 x 25M) at Kochi1  
Slipways: 35 M x 250 MT - 5 Nos at Port Blair 
 
49. CSL is developing International Ship Repair Facility (ISRF) and New Dry 
Dock (NDD). Their details are as under:- 
International Ship Repair Facility (ISRF) 
 Start date: 08.01.2018 
 Target completion: December, 2023 (allied works by May, 2024) 
 Cost: Rs. 970Cr 
 Area: taken from CoPT 
 Scope of work:  
 Shiplift for vessels of size 130 m LOA x 25 m Beam, Capacity: -  
6000 T 
 06 Work stations for repair of vessels 
 4 nos. Cranes  
 1.25 Km Berthing space for afloat repair of vessels: Jetty 1 (277 m) 
and Jetty 2 (537 m) 

 
26  
 Baffle wall & floating gate 
 
New Dry Dock (NDD) 
 Start date: 01.06.2018 
 Target completion: December, 2023  
 Cost: 1799Cr 
 Area: At premises of CSL 
 Scope of work:  
 Dock Size: 310m x 75/60m x 13m (Stepped Dry Dock) 
 
50. The new dock will augment the Company‘s shipbuilding and ship repair 
capacity essentially for building specialized and technologically advanced 
vessels such as LNG Carriers, Aircraft Carriers of higher capacity, jack up rigs, 
drill ships, large dredgers and repairing of offshore platforms and larger vessels. 
51. The cost disadvantages of ship repair in India are also intended to be 
reduced and efficiencies to be enhanced:- 
Reduction in repair cost in India by at least 40% by:- 
 Higher costs of procurement due to import requirements 
 Enhance efficiency by improved working processes and modern tools 
 
Reduction of Turnaround Time (TRT) for repairs in Indian shipyards by at 
least 60% by- 
 Simplify procedures for procurement and custom clearances 
 Shortage of specialized lifting/material handling equipment and shore 
cranes 
 Standardize operations and increase training manpower 

 
27  
 Shorten lead times in procurement and operations which are constrained 
by policies of public undertaking structure  
 
52. The Ministry is also taking other initiatives like channelising of domestic 
demands leveraging Public Procurement (Preference to Make in India), Order 
2020, reduction of GST from 18% to 5%,  infrastructure development through 
better access to financial ins truments, providing better opportunities for overall 
development and enhanced business in the Industry by creating free trade depots, 
maritime clusters etc. For acquisition of any type of vessel/ repair of vessel by 
Government Department/ Agencies including public Sector Undertakings (PSUs) 
through global tendering process, the Ministry of Ports, Shipping and 
Waterways, existing policy of RoFR (Right of First Refusal) would continue to 
be implemented. This is a major policy to create demand. 
53. The Committ ee notes that India is suitably located to offer repair 
services for the Indian Navy as well as the US Navy for its 5 th and 7 th Fleet 
deployed in the Indian Ocean and the Arabian Sea. It has also been seen that 
many contracts of the US Navy have been award ed to either private Indian 
Shipyards or to other foreign shipyards.  Indian PSU Shipyards are not 
strong contenders for repair amidst global competition.  The Committee has 
also learnt from media reports that the US Navy and L&T have signed a 5 
year Maste r Ship Repair Agreement (MSRA) which shows that the US is 
committed to utilize ship repair facilities on a regular basis at the L&T 
shipyard in Katupalli in Tamil Nadu. The Committee understands that 
Mazagon Docks Shipbuilders have also concluded an agreem ent with an 
entity of the US Navy. While appreciating the above -said achievements, the 
Committee feels that while other Asian countries, notably Singapore and 
Japan have bagged many foreign ship repair orders, India has lagged 
behind due to inadequate infr astructural support services needed for ship 
repair. The Committee recommends that the Ministry may make efforts to 

 
28  
improve the infrastructure to enable PSU shipyards to bag ship repair 
orders. 
54. The Committee notes that as per the Statistics of the Mini stry placed 
at Annexure -II, 725 ships were repaired in private shipyards during the 
years from 2019 -20 to 2021 -22 whereas 448 ships were repaired in 
Government/PSU shipyards in the same period. Among Government/PSU 
shipyards, Cochin Shipyards handles the b ulk of the ship repair market.  In 
2021-22 for example, out of the total 157 ships repaired in the public sector 
shipyards, 100 ships were repaired by CSL, 33 by Goa Shipyard and 14 by 
Hindustan Shipyard Ltd. That is, out of the approximately 24 Shipyards in 
the country, only 3 Shipyards are carrying out Ship Repair works of 
significance. The Committee notes that among the Major Ports, the Syama 
Prasad Mukhejee Port (SMPK), Kolkata has 5 Dry Docks while the Mumbai 
Port, Vishakhapatnam Port, Paradip Port and  Deendayal Port have 1 Dry 
Dock each but no ship repair activity has been undertaken by these Major 
Ports in the last few years.  The Committee desires to know the reason  for  
no ship repair activity in the Dry Docks of the above -said Major Ports and 
also whether the facilities in the Dry Docks are lying unutilized or are being 
utilized for other purposes. The Committee also sought to know the plans of 
the MoPSW for augmenting facilities at the these ports to carry out ship 
repair actitvities. 
55. The Committee, on an earlier Study Visit to Mumbai Port, had been 
informed that the Mumbai Port has been having financial difficulties and 
the only solution appeared to be monetization of its landbank. Due to the 
nearby JNPA port, there was no scope for container or any other type of 
cargo except liquid bulk cargo. The Port had a Ship breaking facility second 
only to Alang which is now almost closed.  The Committee desires to know 
whether Ship Repair activities can be revived in the Mumbai Port to offset 
its financial difficulties.   

 
29  
56. The Committee also observes that a Ship Repair facility at Pandu first 
announced in August, 2021 is now rescheduled for completion by 2025. This 
facility at Pandu would enable repair of inland vessels with dry docking in 
the North -Eastern Region itself instead of having to go to Kolkata, which 
will result in less cost and shorter repair time. The Committee would like to 
know the status of the project at Pandu.   
SHIP RECYCLING 
57. Ship recycling plays an integral role in the maritime  industry's life cycle, 
addressing the end -of-life phase of vessels. The ship recycling industry 
converts end-of-life ships into steel bars, billets, and rods for the construction 
industry, as  well as electronic equipment and tools for homes and small 
businesses. On the  one hand, such transformation of ships into new products 
positively affects the environment  as it avoids extracting iron ore – which is 
often associated with energy-intensive processes. In addition, the usage of 
ferrous scrap extracted from vessels promotes the use of Electric Arc Furnaces 
that usually emit lower amount of carbon -di-oxide per ton of steel produced  
compared to  Blast Furnaces/Basic Oxygen Furnaces.On the other hand, ship 
recycling poses  high risks to human health and the env ironment if it is not 
carried out in a proper and safe way, thereby leading to high levels of fatalities, 
injuries and work -related diseases. Ships contain many toxic substances, such 
as PCBs, PVCs, PAHs, TBT, mercury, lead, and asbestos, which can intoxicate 
workers and can have  signiﬁcant negative e ffects on the environment when 
dumped into the soil and coastal waters. Thus, while the practice can contribute 
to a circular economy by recycling valuable materials, if not carried out 
properly, it can pose si gniﬁcant environmental degradation as well as pose 
safety risks to the workers in the industry 
58. The history of modern ship breaking dates back to the 1960s and 1970s  
wherein ship breaking was largely carried out in large ship building yards of the 
developed countries such as United States of America and Europe. The 

 
30  
high costs involved in demolition of a ship in a safe and sound manner along 
with the development of stringent environmental regulations led to shifting of 
the ship recycling business, in the early 1990s, to South Asian countries such as 
Bangladesh, India, China, Pakistan and Turkey. 
59. Currently, these five leading ship recycling nations collectively account 
for nearly 97 percent of the world's ship recycled tonnage. However,  last 
decade witnessed China  slowing down their ship recycling business due to 
the domestic production of steel and change in their policy. Thus at present  
the ship recycling business rests with the rest of the 4 countries with major ship 
recycling in South East Asia in Bangladesh, India and Pakistan. As per 
UNCTAD report, in 2022, India (30.98%),  Bangladesh (38.13%), Pakistan 
(17.23%) and Turkey (6.33%) accounted for 92.66  per cent of known ship 
scrapping across the world. 
60. India, once the leader in the global ship recycling market with a substantial 
40 percent share, has now slipped to the second position, witnessing a decline in 
its market share to approximately 25 percent. In 2022, India recycled nearly 2.34 
million gross tons (GT), securing the second positi on behind Bangladesh, which 
recycled nearly 2.87 million GT during the same period. 
61. The Indian Government has set a goal to double its existing ship 
recycling capacity through the Maritime India Vision 2030 (MIV 2030) 
initiative. 
62. Regulatory framework for Sustainable Ship Recycling in India. 
(i) Ship Breaking Code in 2013: 
In 2013, the Government of India enacted the Ship Breaking Code , a 
comprehensive set of guidelines  that  encompasses various statutes and 
rules related to the management of  hazardous waste disposal, Factory 
Rules, Explosive Act, Petroleum Rules, Atomic Regulatory Board Act, 
Labour Laws, Employee State Insurance Corporation Act, Air Act, 
Water Act, etc. This code  was  formulated  in consultation  with 

 
31  
Directorate General of Shipping, Mu mbai,  ensuring alignment  with 
the stipulation   outlined in the Hong Kong Convention for Ship 
Recycling (HKC) 2009. Hong Kong Convention for Ship Recycling, 
2009 
63. The  growing demand for ship recycling has rightly led to an increase in  
regulatory pressure at both national and international levels. This regulatory 
demand resulted in the development of the Hong Kong International 
Convention for the Safe and Environmentally Sound Recycling of Ships 
(HKC) by the International Maritime Organization (IMO) in 2009. This 
Convention aims to establish mandatory standards  for safety and 
environmental protection standards at ship recycling yards.  Despite its 
adoption in 2009, it is noteworthy that the Hong Kong Convention has not 
yet come into force. 
64. The Convention  becomes internationally effective 24 months after  
being ratified by 15 States, representing 40 per cent of world merchant 
shipping by gross tonnage and a combined maximum annual ship recycling 
volume not less than 3  per cent of their combined tonnage. Meeting these 
criteria, the Convention is set to enter into force on 25th June 2025, 
following accession by Bangladesh and Liberia on 26th June 2023. The  
Convention will provide a global standard for ship recycling,   promoting   
level-playing   ﬁeld   amongst   ship   recycling   facilities worldwide. The 
potential impact is  a reduction  in  incentives for ship-breaking in countries 
with lax environmental and safety regulations.   Currently, shipyards are 
investing between Rs. 5 cr ores to 10 crores each to meet international 
standards, creating a financial disparity of about 30 -50 dollars between India 
and Bangladesh. 
 
 65.  The implementation  of Hong Kong International Convention 
(HKC) in July 2025  opens up more opportunities to the Indian Ship 

 
32  
Recycling Industry.  Currently  India is having 114 Ship Recycling Yards  
that are in compliance  with HKC standards and  an additional 27 yards  are  
on the  verge of  being included in  to the European list of approved Ship 
Recycling yards as per European Union Ship Recycling Regulations 
(EUSRR). This number is  nearly 4 times the combined total  of HKC 
compliant yards in other major ship recycling states. 
66.  Flag Administrations and Shipping Companies will now have to 
partner with  HKC Comp laint yards in India to ensure that their ships are 
recycled in safe and  environmentally sound manner. Further, a Voluntary 
Resolution encouraging member states to recycle their ships in HKC 
complaint yards has been adopted at the Assembly  of the   International 
Maritime Organization (IMO), London, at the initiative of India. 
67.   Recycling of Ships Act, 2019 
The Recycling of Ships Act of 2019 places restrictions and 
prohibitions on the use and installation of hazardous materials on ships, 
regardless of  whether they are intended for recycling. New ships will be 
subject to immediate restrictions  or prohibitions on hazardous materials  
starting from the legislation's effective date., whereas existing ships will have 
ﬁve years to comply It's important to note that these restrictions or 
prohibitions regarding hazardous materials do not apply to government -
operated warships and non-commercial ships. 
SHIP RECYLING YARDS IN INDIA 
68. At present India has more than 131 recycling yards dismantling end -of-
life ships to extract various types of scraps and equipment for recycling and 
reusing. Out of these 131 yards, nearly 111 yards are currently complying 
with the requirements of Hong Kong Convention (HKC). In addition, nearly 
25 yards are in  the process  of getting enlisted under European Union (EU) 
Ship Recycling Regulations (EU-SRR 1257/2013). 

 
33  
List of Ship Recycling Yards in India 
 Location of Yards Total no. of 
Yard Plots 
No of 
allotted 
yards 
No. of
 HKC 
Complaint 
yards 
1 Alang, Bhavnagar
 (Dt), 
153 131 111 
 Gujarat    
2 Steel Industries Limited 
Kerala (SILK), Thrissur 
(Dt), 
Kerala 
1 1 0 
3 Amar Iron Udyog , 
Syama Prasad 
Mukherjee Port, 
Kolkata 
1 1 0 
 
69.  The Committee was informed that the Alang Ship Recycling Yard 
located in Bhavnagar, Gujarat, is one of the most preferred ship recycling 
destinations around the world and caters to nearly 98 per cent of the 
recycling capacity in India. 
70. Alang which has an almost 10 kilometre sea-front, favourable for ship 
recycling, was started in 1983. Alang has a very high inter-tidal gradient due 
to which very big ships can come up to the shore in Alang with very little 
expenditure involved. More than 400 ships a year are being recycled at Alang 

 
34  
on average and a total of more than 8,600 ships and 68 million tones of LTD 
has been recycled at  Alang, which is almost 98 per cent of India‘s total 
and 32 per cent of global volume of the ships. It provides direct 
employment to 15,000 persons and indirect employment to 1,50,000 
persons. 
71. A complete ecosystem and circular economy exists in Alang 
wherein Ship - recyclers completely breakdown the ships by cutting and 
processing. The waste  material goes for waste management facilities and 
other materials, mostly steel,  go for reuse.  There are more than 60 -plus 
induction furnaces and 80-plus re- rolling mills at Bhavnagar which re-rolls 
this steel and provides TMT bars.  The commodities which come out of the 
ship are sold directly to the public through  more than 200 retail and 
wholesale shops at Alang. There is systematic  disposal of TSDF  
(Treatment, Storage  and Disposal Facilities), and  environmentally and 
ecologically-compliant method for ship recycling is being used. Further, 
the cutting process is done by high pressure water in impermeable floors so 
that there is no water leakage into the sea. 
72. The plots at Alang are rented out on lease at a rent of three hundred 
rupees per square metre.  Additional charges include development charges 
and housing cess which are subsidized during recession times so that plot 
owners do not suffer. 
73. Upon a query of the Committee about the percentage of expenses spent 
by a shipyard on recycling, the representatives of the GMB informed that it 
varies from ship to ship. It would be more for a Reefer ship which contains  
more glass wool and hazardous material. In a container or bulker ship, the 
hazardous material is less so it would cost less. Generally it costs 15 -20 
dollars to handle the hazardous material and Rs 20 lakh to maintain the HKC 
certiﬁcation which Pakistan and Bangladesh do not have to pay. 
74. Upon query of the Committee regarding the technical know -how 

 
35  
received from bilateral agreements, the representatives of the GMB 
informed that due to the Basel Ban, presently there is no bilateral agreement 
with any European countries. But the GMB and Ship Recyling Association is 
in talks with ship recycling associations in other countries. The Committee 
was also informed that  nowadays ships are built according to a highly 
advanced technology. The concept now is that when a ship is built, at that 
time itself its recycling plan is  prepared. In new ships,  hazardous waste like 
asbestos is not allowed. 
Initiatives taken for reviving the Ship Recycling Industry - 
75. The representatives of the Gujarat Maritime Board informed the 
Committee about the initiatives taken by the Board for reviving the industry.  
The following  seven major initiatives which were required to be taken for 
HKC compliance have been completed- 
 recycling facility management plan  
 ship-specific dismantling plan 
 oily waste reception facility 
 paint-chip removal plan  
 asbestos waste handling 
 hazardous waste management and  water treatment 
plants. 
76. The EU norms are a little stricter than the HKC norms. The EU 
Committee inspected the Alang yards and required that certain conditions 
must be met for EU certification. 
77. The initiatives taken for EU compliance are  enumerated below – 
 Development of advanced healthcare facilities at Alang. Fifty -six 
per cent of the  work of hospital facilities like MRI, CT Scan, ICU, 
35-beds, doctors, X -Ray, Operation Theatre, Advanced laboratory, 

 
36  
Pharmacist has been completed. 
 Scientific treatment of effluents including hazardous and toxic 
materials. 
 Mandatory use of PPEs with minimum fatal accidents.  Key facility 
equipment include fire fighting installation and water storage, 
breathing sets for emergency  situation or gas meters for explosive 
gases, Co2, H2S and  oxygen metres. All operation procedure is 
under the supervision of certified safety officer only  Development 
of an advanced labour safety and training institute. Since its  
operation in 2003, more than 1.5 lakh workers have been trained 
there. 
 Compulsory training for all new workers 
 Downstream waste management.  99.95 per cent of the salvaged 
materials are dispatched to downstream industries and traders for use 
with less than 0.05 per cent treated as a waste. The remaining 0.05 % 
which is hazardous waste is treated at a facility at Alang. 
 Environmental impact analysis, regular monitoring of gas emission, 
sea water and soil water around the entire yard area by independent 
agencies like the  Central Salt Research Organisation.  There has not 
been any oil spilling at Alang till date. 
 Twenty-seven plots have applied for EU Certiﬁcation so that EU 
ships can also be recycled at Alang. 
78.  The Ministry also informed that the Government of India has also 
taken the following measures to help the ship recycling industry – 
 reduced the customs duty on ship recycling from 2.5 per cent to zero, 
which has helped the yard owners. 
 incentives of Rs.50 lakhs given as subsidy to those yards which are 

 
37  
HKC certified. 
 Central Government provided financial assistance of Rs.11 crore for 
construction of labour housing colony, Rs.20 crore for hospital, Rs.49 
crore for obtaining the  HKC-compliant plot  and Rs.30 crore for 
providing training 
 Annual fix charges have also been relaxed for the yards to the 
tune of Rs.52  crore in the financial year 2020 -21, 2021 -22 and 
Rs.28 crore in 2023 -24 GMB and Government of India 
participated in EUSR Summit to boost the business. 
 Government has also resolved the issue pertaining to Customs, 
GPCB, ESIC and also some finance related issues. 
 as a long -term measure, a Master Plan of Alang -Sosiya Ship 
Recycling Yard to  develop new plots and double the capacity of the  
plots has been made. Right  now, the plot size is generally 40 -80 
metres. Bigger plots of  sizes 200 to 300  metres are proposed to be 
developed since for bigger ships, bigger size of plot is required  for 
safety reasons. 
 latest beaching methods which are compliant with the international 
standards. 
79. Besides, the GMB has provided free housing facility for one thousand 
workers with the help of ﬁnancial assistance from the Central Government. 
Temporary settlements and encroachments removed in consultation with 
local authority. A few community centres have also been made but are not 
operational because not  many labourers  have shifted  to the  new housing  
facility. 
80. The Committee was informed that the following two main issues have 
contributed to the decline in India‘s share of recycling - 
 

 
38  
 the policy change by the Bureau of Indian Standards (BIS) due to 
which the TMT  (Thermo-Mechanically Treated) steel bars made 
from recycled steel from ships  are no longer recognized for 
reinforcement purposes, leading to significant revenue loss and 
reduction in turnover for the ship -breaking industries at Alang.  A 
Committee under the chairmanship of BIS is examining the issue 
and is due to give its report shortly. 
 non-arrival of ships from EU countries due to the Basel Ban 
Agreement of 2019  which prohibits any hazardous material of 
OECD countries from being taken to non-OECD countries. 
81. Besides, other reasons for the decline are – 
 Business cycle of the world economy is declining 
 Shortage of ships and increased freight rate 
 Environmental and safety compliance increased the cost of recycling 
 Impact of the Covid pandemic 
  
82.    The Committee was also informed about the status of the two main 
issues  due to which ship recycling has declined in India- 
(i) Regarding the Basel ban on export of hazardous material from 
OECD to non - OECD countries, in 2019, the European Union 
decided that any hazardous  waste, which is being produced in the 
OECD countries, will not be exported to  the non-OECD countries, 
and ship -breaking comes under haz ardous waste. That is why, the 
ships were stopped from being transferred from EU countries to  the 
non-OECD countries for recycling. The status on this issue is that a 
political agreement between the European Parliament and the 
European Council has  been reached in November, 2023. With this 
agreement, by April, 2024, the EU  will allow their ships to come to 

 
39  
India after Indian yards earn EU certification.  Further, Europe 
hardly has the capacity to recycle even 10% of their own ships  and 
would have to send 9 0% of their ships for recycling to India and 
other Asian countries. A ship has an average lifetime of 30 -35 years 
and many ships would  be completing this lifetime in the next few 
years. 
(ii) Regarding the  TMT bars issue, the Committee was informed that  
95% of a ship is made of steel and before the enforcement of the BIS 
standards, 60 per cent of  ship recycling plate was used as TMT bar. 
In 2012,  BIS deleted TMT bars of  over 6 mm diameter 
manufactured from recycled steel plates from its list of  approved 
products. After the quality control order has been implemented, the  
steel has to be sent to furnace plant to make ingots which are then 
used to make  the TMT bars. However, if the reclaimed steel plates 
can be rolled directly into  TMT bars, the melting cost of makin g 
steel into ingots can be avoided.  Many small industries in the 
Bhavnagar zone were selling the TMT bars made from  recycled ship 
steel. Because of this issue, many of the small industries have  closed 
down and thousands of workers have lost their jobs. 
83.   The representative of the Ship Recyling Industries Association 
informed the Committee that the ship steel plate   is as per the ASTM -A131 
brand, which is much above the BIS standards.  The Committee studying the 
issue had visited the plant and its report is awaited. 
84.    The Committee appreciates the steps taken by all agencies involved 
to resolve the issues arising out of the Basel Ban Agreement and that EU  
ships may start to arrive in India from April, 2024 which would restore  
much of the problems aff ecting the recycling industry.   Regarding the  
issue of TMT bars, the Committee has learnt from media reports that 
the Committee set up by the Steel Ministry to look into the issue of the 

 
40  
manufacturing TMT bars from ship steel has reportedly been unable to  
devise an SoP ( Standard Operating Procedure) for usage of ship plates  
without testing of chemical composition. Non-standardised offerings and 
the absence of wider data are seen as major reasons  for the rejection of  
using ship breaking steel plates for making TM T bars. The Committee 
studying the issue has also suggested that ship breakers can sell the  
plates along with grade certiﬁcate and chemistry. The Committee 
recommends that the Ministry, GMB and Ship Recyclers may cooperate  
with the Committee and ensure that large size data is made available for 
long-term durability studies to settle the issue of use of TMT bars 
for structural purposes.  The Committee also recommends that the 
industry may explore the possibility of making other forms of steel, 
apart from TMT bars, from ship scraps, like grills, strips and other bars 
which may not require the same standards as TMT bars. 
85.   The Committee has been informed that due to the issue of the 
TMT bars, thousands of workers employed in small industries selling 
such bars have lost their jobs.  The Committee recommends that 
workers from such  allied industries may be trained in various 
processes of ship recycling. The Committee also desired to know the 
impact of the incentives provided  by the Government of India and the 
Gujarat Maritime Board and socio- cultural benefits being given to the 
people of the area. 
86.    While appreciating the eff orts being made to establish India once 
again as the top country in ship recycling as the industry is an economic 
driver for India,   the Committee underlines the importance of strategic 
planning to ensure that environmental conditions and workers safety 
and health standards are not compromised in the pursuit of doubling 
the capacity of the industry by 2030. 
87.   The Committee had been  informed  at  the presentation by the 

 
41  
representatives of the Ship Recyling Association that trade speciﬁc 
diseases like those found in the mining industry were not present in 
the Ship Recyling Industry and the risk of accidents was the main  
occupational hazard. The Committee observes that exposure to 
some pollutants like asbestos only manifest after long periods post 
exposure. The Committee recommends that comprehensive risk 
assessment studies due to exposure to pollutants in the ship recycling 
industry may be  conducted. Like the regular monitoring of gas 
emissions and sea water and soil water,  the pollution exposure of 
workers should also be  monitored continuously. 
88.   The Committee observes that as informed by the GMB, the 
activities at Alang does not encroach any vegetation cover and infact the 
green covers are seen to have been increased by more than 10% in the 
last 15 years. While appreciating the non-encroachment of green areas, 
the Committee further recommends that green areas like herbal gardens 
and green avenues may be developed in the residential areas for 
labourers to counter the ill effects of ship breaking activities which is 
highly polluting. The Community Centres should also have libraries, ﬁlm 
shows and other recreational facilities for the psychological well being 
of labourers and their families.  
 
*** 
  

 
42  
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS - AT A GLANCE 
 
SHIP BUILDING 
The Committee appreciates the initiatives of the Ministry for its efforts  
under the “Make In India” programme for promotion of shipbuilding activities . 
The Committee observes that Approved Standardized Tug Design and 
Speciﬁcations (ASTDS) have been issued by the Ministry to  assist the Major 
Ports in expeditious implementation of the Make in India Order. The Committee 
desires to know how many locally built Tugs have  been ordered by the Major 
Ports since the implementation of this Order in September, 2020. 
(Para 10) 
FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE POLICY 
The Committee observes that the earlier subsidy scheme of the Ministry of 5 
years offered shipbuilders 30% extra on building ocean-going merchant vessels 
that are more than 80 metres  in length, if they are manufactured for the 
domestic market. For export orders, however, ships of  all types and capacities 
were eligible for the subsidy. In the new ﬁnancial assistance scheme, assistance 
will be given for all types of ships irrespective of size.  In the new scheme, both 
state-owned and private yards  will get the assistance only after they construct and 
hand over to the ship to  the buyer to ensure timely delivery of ships. The new 
ﬁnancial assistance scheme was therefore for double the period of the earlier 
subsidy scheme, the focus extended for all ships and ensured timely delivery 
which had been a constraint in the earlier scheme. The Committee also observes 
that when commercial orders dried up in the wake of the 2008 ﬁnancial crisis, 
Indian shipyards were focusing mainly on defence orders to stay aﬂoat. The 
Government’s ﬁnancial assistance policy was meant to help bring in more and 
major commercial ship building orders. 
(Para 13.5) 
However, the Committee observes that in the nearly 8 years since the  launch 
of the scheme, only a paltry 6 -7% of the Rs. 4000 corpus has been  utilized. The 
target of Rs. 200 crores for the next ﬁnancial year appears to  be bit rather 
unrealistic considering the poor response of the past few years. Since there 
are only 2 years left for the Scheme, it appears that the  ﬁnancial beneﬁts under 
the Scheme have not been utilized to the extent  possible. The Commit tee 
disagrees with the Ministry’s contention that the  increase in ﬁnancial assistance 
availed over the years is signiﬁcant enough  to prove that the volume of ship 
building is increasing in India. The Committee desires to know how many of the 
31 Shipyards approved under the policy have actually utilized the beneﬁts of the 

 
43  
scheme and how many  ships have been built by individual shipyards under the 
Scheme. The Committee may also be informed of the type of vessels that have 
been built by the Shipyards which ha ve actually utilized the beneﬁts.  While CSL 
in the  government sector has been able to win orders from global clients, the  
Committee desires to know whether the private shipyards beneﬁtting under  the 
scheme have also been competitive enough to win global orders to build 
large container ships. The leading Ship Building nations of China, South 
Korea and Japan thrive on export orders to build their shipbuilding  expertise. 
The Committee while appreciating the Government’s efforts to  create an 
ecosystem for boosting shipbuilding recommends that the Ministry should 
evaluate the reasons for the poor utilization of the ﬁnancial  assistance scheme 
and whether technical reasons like high imports of material for shipbuilding, less 
automation in the shipbuilding proc esses are  affecting the competitiveness of 
Indian Ship yards. 
(Para 13.6) 
Promotion of tonnage under Indian Flag 
 If India is to be positioned among the top 10 nations in Ship Building,  then an 
ecosystem which would address the infrastructure, regulatory, ﬁscal issues and 
capability development is to be developed. The Committee observes that as per 
the Rangarajan Commission, six indicators  of sectors to be classiﬁed under 
Infrastructure were –  
(a) natural monopoly;  
(b) non-tradability of output;  
(c) bestowing externalities on society;  
(d) high- sunk costs or asset speciﬁcity; 
 (e) non-rivalness (up to congestion limits) in consumption; and,  
(f) possibility of price exclusion.  The Commission had  recommended the 
inclusion of Ships and other Vessel s on the basis of the  characteristics 
from (d) to (f).  
(Para 20) 
The Committee appreciates the grant of infrastructure status to Shipyards 
due to which the Ship Building industry  would be able to avail long term 
funding at lower rates and for various forms of ﬁnancial assistance, beneﬁts 
and concessions.  The Committee  also observes that the Government is 
planning to give infrastructure status  to coastal shipping.  The Committee 
recommends that the Government may  consider extending infrastructure 
status granted to Shipyards to all ships and Vessels, not only coastal shipping. 

 
44  
(Para 21) 
         The Committee recommends that the production of specialized steels 
domestically should be incentivized and strategic partnerships with global 
suppliers should be established to ensure a cost -effective supply chain to 
address the high costs of materials. The Committee recommends that se tting 
up a specialized ﬁnancing  institution/marine ﬁnance scheme could provide a 
much-needed boost to  the shipbuilding industry.  The Ministry may also 
explore the possibility of  getting a risk insurance cover scheme for ships in 
India on the lines of the  ones in Korea and China which would attract 
domestic and international investors to participate in financing maritime 
projects. The Committee observes that the private sector  ship building 
companies are mostly struggling with hardly any proﬁts, the  most recent 
casualties being Western India, Bharati and ABG Shipyards. The 
Committee recommends that the private sector must be considered as  much of 
a stakeholder in shipping as the public sector and a level playing  field for both 
sectors must be the concern of the Government. 
(Para 22) 
        The Committee observes that Skilled manpower is the most essential  
prerequisite in Ship Building industry. Ensuring proper education and 
training could bolster the effectiveness of the industry. The Committee 
observes that  as per studies  the labour productivity value for India is 
approximately 10 times lower than the major shipbuilding nations. All these 
translate to about 20 -25 per cent cost advantage for major shipbuilding 
nations vis -à-vis India. The Committee recommends  that investments in 
automation should be encouraged in order to improve labor productivity and 
reduce costs. 
(Para 23) 
One of the constraints of shipbuilding in India is the limited investment in 
R&D in ship  design and innovation.  The Committee recommends  that the 
Government focus on skill development and developing an R&D base to 
increase the competitiveness of the Indian shipbuilding industry. 
(Para 24) 
          The MIV document also advocates creation of a Maritime Development 
Fund to provide easy acce ss to working capital and long -term ﬁnance needs 
across marine sectors.  The Committee recommends that the Ministry may 
implement the creation of the  Fund which can give access to Indian ship 
owners to improve their capacity   and shipyards to improve the infrastructure 
(Para 25) 
GREEN SHIP BUILDING 

 
45  
The Committee observes that ship engines and ship fuels are  undergoing 
rapid change and moving away from fossil fuels to new fuels  like green 
methanol, green ammonia etc. In the near future, every goods/service will 
have an identiﬁable carbon footprint and carbon neutral  products and 
services will have a competitive advantage. While the Committee appreciates 
the initiatives of CSL in constructing green vessels,  there does not appear to 
be the same efforts on the part of other shipyards.  The Committee 
recommends that the National Centre for Excellence in Green Ports and 
Shipping may act as a nodal entity for green shipping so  that there is a 
coordinated effort by all shipyards to position India as a  global hub for green 
shipping. 
(Para 32) 
Overall, the Committee observed that faced with high financial costs, the 
shipbuilders in India encounter difficulties in expanding their operations and 
providing competitive pricing to end -users. This predicament has led to low 
orders, diminished profits and a constrained capacity for reinvestment. 
(Para 33) 
As per a FICCI report, Indian shipyards require about 25 -35% of the 
ship's cost as working capital during construction, with interest rates 
averaging 10 -10.5%. In contrast, ov erseas shipbuilding yards enjoy 
significantly lower rates along with lower -interest export credit. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends that measures to reduce interest rates on 
working capital for Indian shipyards be explored .  
(Para 34) 
The Committee feels that a potential Production Linked Incentive (PLI) 
scheme can go a long way to boost the shipbuilding industry. This 
multifaceted scheme could include output -based rewards, wherein 
shipbuilders stand to receive incentives commensurate with t he quantity and 
type of ships they manufacture. Additionally, the PLI scheme might introduce 
investment incentives tailored to encourage shipbuilders to modernize their 
facilities and integrate advanced manufacturing technologies. Shipbuilding 
entities mak ing investments in upgrading infrastructure and adopting state -
of-the-art manufacturing processes could qualify for these investment 
incentives. This dual approach of incentivizing both production and 
investment could create a dynamic environment that prop els the shipbuilding 
industry towards technological advancement, increased efficiency and global 
competitiveness. 
(Para 35) 
 

 
46  
SHIP REPAIR 
The Committee notes that India is suitably located to offer repair services for 
the Indian Navy as well as the US Navy for its 5 th and 7 th Fleet deployed in the 
Indian Ocean and the Arabian Sea. It has also been seen that many contracts of 
the US Navy have been awarded to either private Indian Shipyards or to other 
foreign shipyards.  Indian PSU Shipyards are not strong contenders for repair  
amidst global competition.  The Committee has also learnt from media reports 
that the US Navy and L&T have signed a 5 year Master Ship Repair Agreement 
(MSRA) which shows that the US is committed to utilize ship repair facilities on a 
regular basis at the  L&T shipyard in Katupalli in Tamil Nadu. The Committee 
understands that Mazagon Docks Shipbuilders have also concluded an agreement 
with an entity of the US Navy. While appreciating the above -said achievements, 
the Committee feels that while other Asian c ountries, notably Singapore and 
Japan have bagged many foreign ship repair orders, India has lagged behind due 
to inadequate infrastructural support services needed for ship repair. The 
Committee recommends that the Ministry may make efforts to improve the  
infrastructure to enable PSU shipyards to bag ship repair orders. 
(Para 53) 
The Committee notes that as per the Statistics of the Ministry placed at 
Annexure-II, 725 ships were repaired in private shipyards during the years from 
2019-20 to 2021 -22 whereas  448 ships were repaired in Government/PSU 
shipyards in the same period. Among Government/PSU shipyards, Cochin 
Shipyards handles the bulk of the ship repair market.  In 2021 -22 for example, out 
of the total 157 ships repaired in the public sector shipyard s, 100 ships were 
repaired by CSL, 33 by Goa Shipyard and 14 by Hindustan Shipyard Ltd. That is, 
out of the approximately 24 Shipyards in the country, only 3 Shipyards are 
carrying out Ship Repair works of significance. The Committee notes that among 
the Major Ports, the Syama Prasad Mukhejee Port (SMPK), Kolkata has 5 Dry 
Docks while the Mumbai Port, Vishakhapatnam Port, Paradip Port and 
Deendayal Port have 1 Dry Dock each but no ship repair activity has been 
undertaken by these Major Ports in the last few  years.  The Committee desires to 
know the reason  for  no ship repair activity in the Dry Docks of the above -said 
Major Ports and also whether the facilities in the Dry Docks are lying unutilized 
or are being utilized for other purposes. The Committee als o sought to know the 
plans of the MoPSW for augmenting facilities at the these ports to carry out ship 
repair actitvities. 
(Para 54) 
The Committee, on an earlier Study Visit to Mumbai Port, had been 
informed that the Mumbai Port has been having financial d ifficulties and the only 
solution appeared to be monetization of its landbank. Due to the nearby JNPA 

 
47  
port, there was no scope for container or any other type of cargo except liquid 
bulk cargo. The Port had a Ship breaking facility second only to Alang whi ch is 
now almost closed.  The Committee desires to know whether Ship Repair activities 
can be revived in the Mumbai Port to offset its financial difficulties.   
(Para 55) 
The Committee also observes that a Ship Repair facility at Pandu first 
announced in A ugust, 2021 is now rescheduled for completion by 2025. This 
facility at Pandu would enable repair of inland vessels with dry docking in the 
North-Eastern Region itself instead of having to go to Kolkata, which will result in 
less cost and shorter repair ti me. The Committee would like to know the status of 
the project at Pandu.   
(Para 56) 
Regulatory framework for Sustainable Ship Recycling in India. 
(ii) Ship Breaking Code in 2013: 
In 2013, the Government of India enacted the Ship Breaking Code , a 
comprehensive set of guidelines  that  encompasses various statutes and rules 
related to the management of  hazardous waste disposal, Factory Rules, 
Explosive Act, Petroleum Rules, Atomic Regulatory Board Act, Labour 
Laws, Employee State Insurance Corporation Act, Air Act, Water Act, etc. 
This code was  formulated  in consultation  with Directorate General of 
Shipping, Mumbai,  ensuring alignment  with the stipulation   outlined in the 
Hong Kong Convention for Ship Recycling (HKC) 2009. Hong Kong 
Convention for Ship Recycling, 2009 
(Para 62) 
Initiatives taken for reviving the Ship Recycling Industry 
The Committee appreciates the steps taken by all agencies involved to  
resolve the issues arising out of the Basel Ban Agreement and that EU  ships may 
start to arrive in India from April, 2024 which would restore  much of the 
problems affecting the recycling industry.   Regarding the  issue of TMT bars, 
the Committee has learnt from media reports that the  Committee set up by the 
Steel Ministry to look into the issue of the manufacturing TMT bars from ship 
steel has reportedly been unable to  devise an SoP ( Standard Operating 
Procedure) for usage of ship plates  without testing of chemical composition.  
Non-standardised offerings and  the absence of wider data are seen as major 
reasons for the rejection of  using ship breaking steel plates for making TMT 
bars. The Committee  studying the issue has also suggested that ship breakers 
can sell the  plates along with grade certiﬁcate and chemistry. The Committee 
recommends that the Ministry, GMB and Ship Recyclers may cooperate with the 
Committee and ensure that large size data is made available for  long-term 

 
48  
durability studies to settle the issue of use of TMT bars for structural 
purposes. The Committee also reco mmends that the industry  may explore the 
possibility of making other forms of steel, apart from TMT  bars, from ship 
scraps, like grills, strips and other bars  which may not  require the same 
standards as TMT bars. 
(Para 84) 
 The Committee has been informed that due to the issue of the TMT  bars, 
thousands of workers employed in small industries selling such bars have lost their jobs. 
The Committee recommends that workers from such  allied industries may be trained 
in various processes of ship recycling. The Committee also desired to know the impact 
of the incentives provided  by the Government of India and the Gujarat Maritime 
Board and socio- cultural benefits being given to the people of the area. 
(Para 85) 
While appreciating the efforts being made to establish India once again  as the top 
country in ship recycling as the industry is an economic driver  for India,   the 
Committee underlines the importance of strategic planning  to ensure that 
environmental conditions and workers s afety and health  standards are not 
compromised in the pursuit of doubling the capacity of the industry by 2030. 
(Para 86) 
          The Committee had  been  informed  at  the presentation by the 
representatives of the Ship Recyling Association that trade speciﬁc diseases like 
those found in the mining industry were not present in the Ship Recyling
 Industry and the risk of accidents was the main occupational hazard.
 The Committee observes that exposure to some pollutants like asbestos 
only manifest after long periods post exposure. The Committee recommends that 
comprehensive risk assessment studies due to exposure to pollutants in the ship 
recycling industry may be  conducted. Like  the regular monitoring of gas emissions 
and sea water and soil water,  the pollution exposure of workers should 
also be  monitored continuously. 
(Para 87) 
The Committee observes that as informed by the GMB, the activities at Alang does 
not encroach any vegetation cover and  infact the green covers are seen to have been 
increased by more than 10% in the last 15 years. While appreciating the non-
encroachment of green areas, the Committee further recommends that green areas like 
herbal gardens  and green avenues may be developed in the residential areas for 
labourers to counter the ill effects of ship breaking activities which is highly polluting. 
The Community Centres should a Also have libraries, ﬁlm shows  and other recreational 
facilities for the psychological well being of labourers and their families.  
(Para 88) 
 

 
49  
 
 
 
ANNEXURES 

50

51

52

   
 
 
STATISTICS OF INDIA’S SHIP BUILDING 
AND SHIP REPAIRING INDUSTRY 
 
  2021-22 
  
 
 
 
 
Government of India 
Ministry of Ports, Shipping and Waterways 
Transport Research Wing 
New Delhi 
53
Annexure-II

STATISTICS OF INDIA’S SHIP BUILDING 
AND SHIP REPAIRING INDUSTRY 
 
2021-22 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Government of India 
Ministry of Ports, Shipping and Waterways 
Transport Research Wing 
New Delhi 
54

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Section-2 
INDIA’S SHIP-REPAIRING INDUSTRY 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
55

 
 
2. INDIA’S SHIP-REPAIRING INDUSTRY 
 
2.1 Ship repair capacity essentially reflects capability in terms of the number of ships 
repaired and maximum size of ship that can be repaired in terms of DWT. 
 
2.2 Amongst public sector companies, Cochin Shipyard Ltd (CSL) had the highest capacity 
for ship repairing (125 thousand DWT) followed by Hindustan Shipyard Ltd. (HSL) (80 
thousand DWT) and Goa Shipyard Ltd. (GSL) (4.5 thousand DWT) in 2021-22. In private sector 
category amongst the reporting companies, Waterways Shipyard  Pvt. Ltd. ( WSPL) ( 8.00 
thousand DWT) had the highest capacity for ship repairing followed by Modest Infrastructure 
Pvt. Ltd. (MIPL) (6 thousand DWT), Mandovi Drydocks (MDD) (5 thousand DWT) and Dempo 
Shipbuilding and Engineering Pvt. Ltd. (3 thousand DWT). Charts VI& VII below depict the 
ship repairing capacity of major public and private sector shipbuilding yards as on 31 st March 
2022 and details of the same are given in table 2.1 (page 25-27). 
 
 
125
80
4.5
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
CSL HSL GSL
Capacity (in '000 DWT)
Name of Companies
Chart VI: Ship Repairing Capacity of Public Sector 
Companies: 2022
8
6
5
3
0
2
4
6
8
10
WSPL MIPL MDD DSEL
Capacity (in '000 DWT)
Name of Companies
Chart VII: Ship Repairing Capacity of Private Sector 
Companies: 2022
2025356/2023/Transport Research Wing
File No. MR-11025/1/2019-TRW(P) (Computer No. 339663)
Generated from eOffice by ASHISH KUMAR SAINI, AKS-TRW(SSO), SENIOR STATISTICAL OFFICER, M/o Shipping on 22/11/2023 10:20 AM
56

 
 
 
NUMBER OF SHIPS REPAIRED  
2.3  In 2021-22, total 319 ships were repaired out of which 158 ships were repaired by 
private sector shipyards and 161 ships were repaired by public sector shipyards against 376 ships 
repaired in 2020-21. Chart–VIII given below depicts comparative picture of the number of ships 
repaired by all public and private sector shipbuilding yards during 20 18-19 to 2021-22 and 
details of the same are given in Table 2.4 (page 32-34). 
 
 
2.4  In 2021-22 amongst the Public sector, Cochi n Shipyard Ltd had repaired the highest 
number of ships ( 100 ships with earnings of Rs. 672.53 crore) followed by Goa Shipyard Ltd. 
(33 ships with earnings of Rs. 190.14 crore) and Hindustan Shipyard Ltd. (14 ships with earnings 
of Rs 72.26 crore). In the private sector, amongst the reporting companies Dempo Shipbuilding 
& Engineering Pvt. Ltd.(DSEL) had the highest number of ships repaired (40 ships with earnings 
of Rs 6.23 crore), followed by High Seas Shipping Associates (40 ships with earnings of Rs 9.87 
crore), Sea Blue Shipyard Ltd.(1 6 ships repaired with an earnings of Rs 1 9.08 crore), Mandovi 
Drydocks (1 4 ships with earnings of Rs 4.69 crore) and JITF Shipyards Ltd ( 8 ships with 
earnings of Rs 0.50 crore). Amongst reporting companies, in terms of shi ps repaired, the private 
sector and public sector accounted for a share of 49.5% ( 158 Ships) and 50.5% (1 61 Ships) 
respectively in the total ships repaired (319 Ships) during 2021-22. Company wise ship repairing 
facilities for dry docks, wet docks and othe r repairing facilities as on 31 st March 2022 is given in 
Table 2.3 (page 29) & 2.3(a) (page 30-31) respectively. Company wise earnings from the year 
2018-19 to 2021-22 along with number of ships repaired by Indian vessels and foreign vessels is 
given in Table 2.4 (page 32-34). 
341 332
235
158
365
146
141
161
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
2018-19 2019-20 2020-21 2021-22
Chart VIII: Number of Ships Repaired 
(in numbers)
Private Sector Public Sector
2025356/2023/Transport Research Wing
File No. MR-11025/1/2019-TRW(P) (Computer No. 339663)
Generated from eOffice by ASHISH KUMAR SAINI, AKS-TRW(SSO), SENIOR STATISTICAL OFFICER, M/o Shipping on 22/11/2023 10:20 AM
57

 
 
2.5 Table 5 given below depicts the number of ships repaired and earnings by both public 
and private ship yards in India during 2020-21 and 2021-22. 
Table No. 5 : Number of Ships Repaired and Earnings 
 Name of The 
Company 
2020-21 2021-22 
Indian Vessels Foreign 
Vessels 
Total Vessels Indian Vessels Foreign 
Vessels 
Total Vessels 
 
S 
 
E 
 
S 
 
 
E 
 
 
S 
 
 
E 
 
S 
 
 
E 
 
 
S 
 
 
E 
 
S 
 
 
E 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) (11) (12) (13) 
A. PUBLIC    
    SECTOR (Total) 138 118915.61 3 568.74 141 119484.35 156 132385.42 5 3093.34 161 135478.76 
1. Alcock Ashdown   &  
Co. Ltd.@             
2. Cochin Shipyard Ltd. 94 39025.33 3 535.74 97 39561.07 99 67088.51 1 164.20 100 67252.71 
3. Garden Reach   
    Shipbuilders & 
    Engineers Ltd. 
No Merchant Ships repaired during 2020-21 2 52.68 2 2437.90 4 2490.58 
4. Goa Shipyard Ltd. 31 15415.00 - 33.00 31 15448.00 33 18904.09 N.A 110.24 33 19014.33 
5. Hindustan Shipyard 
Ltd. 6 21174.16 - - 6 21174.16 12 6845.00 2 381.00 14 7226.00 
6. Hooghly Dock & Port 
Engineers  Ltd.** - - - - - -       
7. MazagonDock  
Shipbuilders Ltd. 4 43263.00 - - 4 43263.00 6 39368.17 0 0 6 39368.17 
8. Shalimar Works Ltd. 3 38.12 - - 3 38.12 4 126.97 0 0 4 126.97 
B. PRIVATE  
    SECTOR     (Total) 
211 8308.07 24 173.67 235 8481.74 157 8188.28 1 278.10 158 8466.38 
9. Abhishek 
Engineers** 6 150.00 - - 6 150.00       
10. A.C.Roy& Co.  
      Ltd. 8 420.00 - - 8 420.00 5 199.00 0 0 5 199.00 
11. A.H. Wadia Boat 
Builders - - - - - - 0 0 0 0 0 0 
12. A.S. Moloobhoy 
Pvt. Ltd.             
13. Bristol BoatsPvt. 
Ltd. 2 1.39 - - 2 1.39 3 35.79 0 0 3 35.79 
14.  Chidambaram 
ShipcarePvt. Ltd 82 721.64 21 162.79 103 884.42  272.90  233.81  506.71 
15.  Chowgule& Co. 
Pvt. Ltd - - - - - - 3 446.34 0 0 3 446.34 
16. Dempo 
Shipbuildiing & 
Engg. Ltd. 
26 513.21 - - 26 513.21 40 623.41 0 0 40 623.41 
17. Equiptrans Logistics 
Pvt. Ltd.** 21 678.39 - - 21 678.39       
 18.Ferromar Shipping 
Pvt. Ltd. - - - - - - 0 0 0 0 0 0 
19. M/s Glory 
Shipmanagement Pvt. L 4 177.29 - - 4 177.29 8 266.73 0 0 8 266.73 
20. High Seas Shipping 
Associates 2 76.76 - - 2 76.76 40 986.77 0 0 40 986.77 
21. Homa Engineering 
Works 1 452.12 - - 1 452.12       
22. M/s Island Ship 
Repairers       3 605.96 0 0 3 605.96 
23. JITF Shipyards Ltd.  10 236.48 - - 10 236.48 8 50.24 0 0 8 50.24 
24. KSINC 1 14.00 - - 1 14.00 1 14.00 0 0 1 14.00 
2025356/2023/Transport Research Wing
File No. MR-11025/1/2019-TRW(P) (Computer No. 339663)
Generated from eOffice by ASHISH KUMAR SAINI, AKS-TRW(SSO), SENIOR STATISTICAL OFFICER, M/o Shipping on 22/11/2023 10:20 AM
58

 
 
 
SHIP REPAIR FACILITIES AVAILABLE AT MAJOR PORTS 
2.6  Apart from shipbuilding yards, ship repair facilities are also available at major ports. Data 
provided by different major ports on dry docks, dry dock hire charges and equipments available 
for ship repairing have been compiled and presented in three different tables (Table 2.5  (page 
35), Table 2.6 (page 36) & Table 2.7 (page 37).  
2.7  Available data on Ship repair facilities reveal that Syama Prasad Mukherjee Port (SMP, 
Kolkata) has a maximum number of dry docks (5), Mumbai Port Trust, Visakhapatnam Port 
Trust, Paradip Port Trust and Deendayal Port Trust have 1 Dry Dock  each. The remaining major 
25. L&T Shipbuilding 
Ltd             
26. Mandovi Drydocks 13 461.00 - - 13 461.00 14 469.00 0 0 14 469.00 
27. Marine Care ‘N’ 
Associates 8 987.00 - - 8 987.00 2 286.00 0 0 2 286.00 
28. Marine Frontiers 
Pvt. Ltd. - - - - - - 0 0 0 0 0 0 
29. Modest 
Infrastructure Pvt. Ltd. 6 1686.63 - - 6 1686.63 7 1931.50 0 0 7 1931.50 
30.  NN Shipbuilders 
&Engg. Pvt Ltd - - - - - - 0 0 0 0 0 0 
31. Patra Shipping Pvt. 
Ltd.             
32. Reliance Naval & 
Engineering Ltd.@             
33. Roshini Ship 
Repairs and 
Engineers 
      4 186.82 0 0 4 186.82 
34. San Marine - - - - - - 0 0 0 0 0 0 
35. Sea Blue Shipyard 
Ltd. 15 1247.72 3 10.98 18 1258.60 15 1863.77 1 44.29 16 1908.06 
36. Sembmarine 
Kakinada Ltd. @             
37.  Shoft Shipyard Pvt. 
Ltd. 4 435.34 - - 4 435.34 4 136.88 0 0 4 136.88 
38.  Tebma Shipyard 
Ltd       0 0 0 0 0 0 
39. Timblo Drydocks 
Pvt. Ltd.** - - - - - -       
40. Titagarh Wagons 
Ltd. - - - - - - 0 0 0 0 0 0 
41. Vijai Marine 
Shipyards** 1 35.03 - - 1 35.03       
42. West Coast 
Shipyard Ltd.** 1 14.09 - - 1 14.09       
43. Waterways Shipyard 
Pvt. Ltd. - - - - - - 0 0 0 0 0 0 
 Grand Total (A + B) 349 127223.68 27 742.41 376 127966.09 313 140573.70 6 3371.44 319 143945.14 
Note (1):  S : No. of Ships ;   E : Earnings in Rs. Lakh;      -  : NIL 
Note (2): Note: New companies (At S. No. 22, 31 & 33) have been added from 2021-22; based on the list obtained from Indian Shipping Register. 
** No information is received for 2021-22 
@ Removed in view of Point 1.4 of Chapter 1 of the Publication 
2025356/2023/Transport Research Wing
File No. MR-11025/1/2019-TRW(P) (Computer No. 339663)
Generated from eOffice by ASHISH KUMAR SAINI, AKS-TRW(SSO), SENIOR STATISTICAL OFFICER, M/o Shipping on 22/11/2023 10:20 AM
59

 
 
Ports do not have any ship repairing facilities. With regard to cranes availability and capacity 
SMP (Kolkata) has five cranes followed by Visakhapatnam Port Trust and Deendayal Port Trust 
with 1 crane each. 
 
DRY DOCK HIRE CHARGES 
2.8  Dry dock hire charges vary from port to port depending upon a number of factors, which 
include the size and type of vessels and time spent at dock.  The charges are different for 
different types of vessels (foreign going and coastal). The charges also vary for inne r harbour 
and fishing harbour. The details of dry dock hire charges are given in the table 2.6 (page 36). 
2025356/2023/Transport Research Wing
File No. MR-11025/1/2019-TRW(P) (Computer No. 339663)
Generated from eOffice by ASHISH KUMAR SAINI, AKS-TRW(SSO), SENIOR STATISTICAL OFFICER, M/o Shipping on 22/11/2023 10:20 AM
60

(Rs. in Lakhs)
Year
No. Earnings No. Earnings No. Earnings
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9)
A. PUBLIC SECTOR (Total) 2021-22 156 132385.42 5 3093.34 161 135478.76
2020-21 138 118915.61 3 568.74 141 119484.35
2019-20 145 89511.70 0 0.00 146 89815.55
2018-19 363 113159.60 0 0.00 365 113166.60
2021-22 0 0.00
2020-21 0 0.00
2019-20 0 0.00
2018-19 NIL NIL NIL NIL 0 0.00
2021-22 99 67088.51 1 164.20 100 67252.71
2020-21 94 39025.33 3 535.74 97 39561.07
2019-20 98 56222.00 1 291 99 56513.00
2018-19 329 83197.46 NIL NIL 329 83197.46
2021-22 2 52.68 2 2437.90 4 2490.58
2020-21 0 0.00
2019-20 0 0.00
2018-19 NIL NIL NIL NIL 0 0.00
2021-22 33 18904.09 N.A 110.24 33 19014.33
2020-21 31 15415.00 NIL 33.00 31 15448.00
2019-20 30 11876.19 NIL 13 30 11889.04
2018-19 22 19825.96 NIL NIL 22 19825.96
2021-22 12 6845.00 2 381.00 14 7226.00
2020-21 6 21174.16 0 0.00 6 21174.16
2019-20 13 5410.37 0 0.00 13 5410.37
2018-19 12 7454.18 1 7 13 7461.18
2021-22 0 0.00
2020-21 NIL NIL NIL NIL 0 0.00
2019-20 NIL NIL NIL NIL 0 0.00
2018-19 NIL NIL NIL NIL 0 0.00
2021-22 6 39368.17 NIL NIL 6 39368.17
2020-21 4 43263.00 NIL NIL 4 43263.00
2019-20 1 15893.00 NIL NIL 1 15893.00
2018-19 1 2682.00 NIL NIL 1 2682.00
2021-22 4 126.97 NIL NIL 4 126.97
2020-21 3 38.12 NIL NIL 3 38.12
2019-20 3 110.14 NIL NIL 3 110.14
2018-19 0 0.00 NIL NIL 0 0.00
B. PRIVATE SECTOR (Total) 2021-22 157 8188.28 1 278.10 158 8466.38
2020-21 211 8308.07 24 173.67 235 8481.74
2019-20 281 42675.19 51 961.79 332 43636.98
2018-19 302 21972.72 39 1029.13 341 23001.85
9 Abhishek Engineers** 2021-22 NIL NIL 0 0.00
2020-21 6 150.00 NIL NIL 6 150.00
2021-22 5 199.00 NIL NIL 5 199.00
2020-21 8 420.00 NIL NIL 8 420.00
2019-20 7 534.00 NIL NIL 7 534.00
2018-19 12 65.00 NIL NIL 12 65.00
2021-22 0 0.00 0 0 0 0.00
2020-21 0 0.00 0 0 0 0.00
2021-22
2020-21
2019-20
2018-19 NIL NIL NIL NIL 0 0.00
2021-22 3 35.79 NIL NIL 3 35.79
2020-21 2 1.39 NIL NIL 2 1.39
2019-20 2 51.34 NIL NIL 2 51.34
2018-19 4 51.12 NIL NIL 4 51.12
2021-22 272.90 233.81 0 506.71
2020-21 82 721.64 21 162.79 103 884.42
2019-20 80 333.02 44 76.52 124 409.54
2018-19 130 818.08 30 143.86 160 961.94
A.C.Roy & Co. Ltd.  
Shalimar Works Ltd. 
10
8
13
11
A.S. Moloobhoy Pvt. Ltd. @
Chidambaram Shipcare Pvt. Ltd. 
No Merchant Ships were repaired during 2020-21
No Merchant Ships were repaired during 2019-20
Hooghly Dock & Port Engineers Ltd.**
Mazagaon Dock Shipbuilders Ltd.
Garden Reach Shipbuilders and 
Engineers Ltd.
A.H. Wadia Boat Builders
Hindustan Shipyard Ltd.
Goa Shipyard Ltd.
Bristol Boats Pvt. Ltd
14
No. Of Ships Repaired And Earnings, Company-wise - (2018-19 to 2021-22)
Indian Vessels Foreign Vessels Total
S.No
1
3
12
2
Name of The Company
Alcock Ashdown (Gujarat) Ltd. @
5
6
7
Cochin Shipyard Ltd.
4
Table No. 2.4
2025356/2023/Transport Research Wing
File No. MR-11025/1/2019-TRW(P) (Computer No. 339663)
Generated from eOffice by ASHISH KUMAR SAINI, AKS-TRW(SSO), SENIOR STATISTICAL OFFICER, M/o Shipping on 22/11/2023 10:20 AM
61

(Rs.in Lakhs)
Year
No. Earnings No. Earnings No. Earnings
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9)
2021-22 3 446.34 NIL NIL 3 446.34
2020-21 NIL NIL NIL NIL 0 0.00
2019-20 48 17005.26 NIL NIL 48 17005.26
2018-19 54 82.00 NIL NIL 54 82.00
2021-22 40 623.41 NIL NIL 40 623.41
2020-21 26 513.21 NIL NIL 26 513.21
2019-20 37 562.83 NIL NIL 37 562.83
2018-19 15 900.86 NIL NIL 15 900.86
2021-22 0 0.00
2020-21 21 678.39 NIL NIL 21 678.39
2021-22 NIL NIL NIL NIL 0 0.00
2020-21 NIL NIL NIL NIL 0 0.00
2019-20 NIL NIL NIL NIL 0 0.00
2018-19 NIL NIL NIL NIL 0 0.00
2021-22 8 266.73 NIL NIL 8 266.73
2020-21 4 177.29 NIL NIL 4 177.29
2021-22 40 986.77 NIL NIL 40 986.77
2020-21 2 76.76 NIL NIL 2 76.76
2021-22 0 0.00
2020-21 1 452.12 NIL NIL 1 452.12
2019-20 4 1792.49 NIL NIL 4 1792.49
2018-19 2 NIL NIL NIL 2 0.00
22 M/s Island Ship Repairers Ltd 2021-22 3 605.96 NIL NIL 3 605.96
2021-22 8 50.24 NIL NIL 8 50.24
2020-21 10 236.48 NIL NIL 10 236.48
2019-20 15 172.72 NIL NIL 15 172.72
2021-22 1 14.00 NIL NIL 1 14.00
2020-21 1 14.00 NIL NIL 1 14.00
2021-22 0 0.00
2020-21 NIL NIL 0 0.00
2019-20 8 10385.01 NIL NIL 8 10385.01
2018-19 10 10932.17 NIL NIL 10 10932.17
2021-22 14 469.00 NIL NIL 14 469.00
2020-21 13 461.00 NIL NIL 13 461.00
2019-20 21 1097.18 NIL NIL 21 1097.18
2018-19 7 143.70 NIL NIL 7 143.70
2021-22 2 286.00 NIL NIL 2 286.00
2020-21 8 987.00 NIL NIL 8 987.00
2019-20 2 987.00 NIL NIL 2 987.00
2021-22 NIL NIL NIL NIL 0 0.00
2020-21 NIL NIL NIL NIL 0 0.00
2019-20 6 88.25 NIL NIL 6 88.25
2018-19 6 40.83 NIL NIL 6 40.83
2021-22 7 1931.50 NIL NIL 7 1931.50
2020-21 6 1686.63 NIL NIL 6 1686.63
2019-20 4 937.44 NIL NIL 4 937.44
2018-19 4 263.50 NIL NIL 4 263.50
2021-22 NIL NIL NIL NIL 0 0.00
2020-21 NIL NIL NIL NIL 0 0.00
2019-20 NIL NIL NIL NIL 0 0.00
2018-19 NIL NIL NIL NIL 0 0.00
31 Patra Shipping Pvt. Ltd 2021-22
2021-22 0 0.00
2020-21 0 0.00
2019-20 0 0.00
2018-19 2 1775.97 NIL NIL 2 1775.97
33 Roshini Ship Repairs and Engineers 2021-22 4 186.82 NIL NIL 4 186.82
2021-22 NIL NIL NIL NIL 0 0.00
2020-21 NIL NIL NIL NIL 0 0.00
2019-20 0 0 0 0 0 0.00
2021-22 15 1863.77 1 44.29 16 1908.06
2020-21 15 1247.72 3 10.88 18 1258.60
2019-20 14 1553.08 NIL NIL 14 1553.08
2021-22 0 0.00
2020-21 0 0.00
2019-20 19 6219.37 7 885.27 26 7104.64
2018-19 19 6219.37 7 885.27 26 7104.64
19
20
No. Of Ships Repaired And Earnings, Company-wise - (2018-19 to 2021-22)
S.No
17
23
25
26
24
15
16
18
21
29
27
High Seas Shipping Associates
Modest Infrastructure Pvt. Ltd. 
Total
Name of The Company
Chowgule & Co. Pvt. Ltd.
Indian Vessels
San Marine
Homa Engineering Works
L&T Shipbuilding Ltd
Mandovi Drydocks
30
32
35
KSINC
JITF Shipyard Ltd  
Sea Blue Shipyard Ltd 
36
34
Reliance Naval & Engineering Ltd. @
Sembmarine Kakinada Ltd @
Dempo Shipbuilding & Engineering Pvt. Ltd.
Ferromar Shipping Pvt. Ltd. 
M/s Glory Shipmanagement Pvt. Ltd.
Equiptrans Logistics Pvt. Ltd**
Foreign Vessels
N N Shipbuilders and Engineers Pvt. Ltd.
Marine Frontiers Pvt. Ltd.
Marine Care 'N' Associates
28
Table No. 2.4 (Contd…)
2025356/2023/Transport Research Wing
File No. MR-11025/1/2019-TRW(P) (Computer No. 339663)
Generated from eOffice by ASHISH KUMAR SAINI, AKS-TRW(SSO), SENIOR STATISTICAL OFFICER, M/o Shipping on 22/11/2023 10:20 AM
33
62

(Rs.in Lakhs)
Year
No. Earnings No. Earnings No. Earnings
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9)
2021-22 4 136.88 NIL NIL 4 136.88
2020-21 4 435.34 NIL NIL 4 435.34
2019-20 3 218.48 NIL NIL 3 218.48
2018-19 5 501.40 NIL NIL 5 501.40
2021-22 0 0.00 0.00 0.00 0 0.00
2020-21 0 0.00
2019-20 3 45.88 NIL NIL 3 45.88
2018-19 14 89 NIL NIL 14 88.93
2021-22 0 0.00
2020-21 NIL NIL NIL NIL 0 0.00
2019-20 NIL NIL NIL NIL 0 0.00
2018-19 NIL NIL NIL NIL 0 0.00
2021-22 NIL NIL NIL NIL 0 0.00
2020-21 NIL NIL NIL NIL 0 0.00
2019-20 NIL NIL NIL NIL 0 0.00
2018-19 NIL NIL NIL NIL 0 0.00
2021-22 0 0.00
2020-21 1 35.03 NIL NIL 1 35.03
2019-20 6 602.05 NIL NIL 6 603.37
2018-19 16 NIL 2 NIL 18 0.00
2021-22 0 0.00
2020-21 1 14.09 NIL NIL 1 14.09
2019-20 2 89.79 NIL NIL 2 89.79
2018-19 2 89.79 NIL NIL 2 89.79
2021-22 NIL NIL NIL NIL NIL NIL
2020-21 N.A N.A N.A N.A N.A N.A
2021-22 313 140573.70 6 3371.44 319 143945.14
2020-21 349 127223.68 27 742.41 376 127966.09
2019-20 426 132186.89 51 961.79 478 133148.68
2018-19 665 135132.32 39 1029.13 706 136161.45
@ Removed in view of Point 1.4 of Chapter 1 of the Publication ** No information is received for 2021-22
* Includes expenditure on others $ Udupi Cochin Shipyard Ltd earlier known as Tebma Shipyard ltd
Note : New companies (At S. No. 22, 31 & 33) have been added from 2021-22; based on the list obtained from Indian Register of Shipping.
Total
43
Indian Vessels Foreign Vessels
39 Timblo Drydocks Pvt. Ltd. **
West Coast Shipyard Ltd.**
No. Of Ships Repaired And Earnings, Company-wise - (2018-19 to 2021-22)
Titagarh Wagons Ltd.
42
41
C. Grand Total (A + B)
Vijai Marine Shipyards**
Waterways Shipyard Pvt. Ltd.
Shoft Shipyard Pvt. Ltd. 
Udupi Cochin Shipyard Ltd/ Tebma Shipyard ltd $
40
S.No
38
37
Name of The Company
Table No. 2.4 (Contd…)
34
2025356/2023/Transport Research Wing
File No. MR-11025/1/2019-TRW(P) (Computer No. 339663)
Generated from eOffice by ASHISH KUMAR SAINI, AKS-TRW(SSO), SENIOR STATISTICAL OFFICER, M/o Shipping on 22/11/2023 10:20 AM
8
63

64 
 
 
 
MINUTES 
  

65 
 
 
III 
THIRD MEETING 
  
The Committee met at 11:00 A.M. on Friday, the 6th October, 2023, in Committee Room 
„1‟, First Floor, Parliament House Annexe Extension Building, New Delhi. 
 
Members present: 
1. Shri V. Vijayasai Reddy -  Chairman   
Rajya Sabha 
2. Shrimati S. Phangnon Konyak 
3. Shri Manas Ranjan Mangaraj 
4. Dr. Sonal Mansingh 
5. Shrimati Rajani Ashokrao Patil 
6. Dr. C. M. Ramesh 
Lok Sabha 
7. Shri K. Muraleedharan 
8. Shri Chhedi Paswan  
9. Shri Sunil Kumar Pintu 
10. Shri Tirath Singh Rawat 
11. Shri Ramdas Chandrabhanji Tadas 
12. Shri Manoj Kumar Tiwari 
13. Shri Krupal Balaji Tumane  
  
SECRETARIAT 
Dr. Raghab Prasad Dash, Joint Secretary  
Shrimati Monica Baa, Additional Director  
Shrimati Vishwarupa Bhattacharya, Additional Director  
Shrimati Subha Chandrashekar, Deputy Secretary  
Shri Ranajit Chakraborty, Under Secretary 
   
WITNESSES 
Ministry of Ports, Shipping and Waterways  
 Shri T. K. Ramachandran, Secretary 
 Shri Madhu S. Nair, Chairman and Managing Director, Cochin Shipyard Limited  
     (Complete list of witnesses who attended the meeting is attached as Annexure)  
 
2.         At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members and infor med them that the 
Committee has taken up the subject “ Status of Ship building, Ship Repair and Ship breaking 

66 
 
industries in the Country ” and has invited the Ministry of Ports, Shipping & Waterways, to 
deliberate on the said subject.  
 
 (After the witnesses took their respective seats) 
 
3.      The Chairman welcomed the Secretary , Ministry of Ports, Shipping & Waterways; 
Chairman & Managing Director, Cochin Shipyard Limited; and other Senior Officers  of the 
Ministry. The Chairman informed that the Ministry has been invited to share their views and 
valuable suggestions on various aspects related to the subject  “Status of Ship building, Ship 
Repair and Ship breaking industries in the Country ”. He remarked that India, despite having a 
long coastline of over 7,500 km, favourable geographical location and  low labour costs,  has an 
insignificant share in the global shipbuilding and ship repair market. He also highlighted that  
India‟s share in Ship Breaking or Recycling market is  about 40% of the global market, perhaps 
due to the weak enforcement of environment and labor -related laws in India, as compared to 
developed countries. He further desired that the Committee may be appr ised on the following 
points:- 
i. Ministry‟s plans to promote and incentivise the shipbuilding and ship repair industries , to 
achieve the Maritime India Vision 2030 and be once again among the top ten nations in 
shipbuilding by 2030; 
ii. Impact of policies related to granting Infrastructure status and financial assistance , on the 
growth of shipbuilding industry; 
iii. Roadmap of the Ministry to further promote the Ship Recycling industry; and 
iv. Efforts to enforce stricter environmental and labour laws to ensure the safety of the 
workers in the Ship Breaking industry.  
 
4.         The Secretary, Ministry of Ports, Shipping and Waterways (MoPSW) alongwith 
Chairman & Managing Director, Cochin Shipyard Limited  (CMD, CSL) made a detailed 
presentation on the subject and  highlighted the Ministry‟s Maritime India Vision, 2030 which 
envisages improving India's rankings in shipbuilding and ship repair; enhancing country‟s 
capabilities for shipbuilding with hybrid or green fuels; and positioning India as the global leader 
in s hip recycling industry.  The Secretary, MoPSW informed the Committee that there are 43 
shipyards in the country out of which 08 are in the Central Public Sector ; 02 with State 
Governments; and remaining 33 in the private sector. He informed the Committee that the cost of 

67 
 
ship building is higher in India primarily because of three factors viz., material cost; low labour 
productivity due to lack of automation ; and higher financing cost, in comparison with China, 
Korea and Japan. He also informed the Committee that while shipbuilding is declared as 
infrastructure, ships are not infrastructure , so they do not get long term financing and other 
advantages. Upon being queried by the Chairman, the Ministry clarified that while India is 
competitive in normal and automotive gr ade steels, steel for shipbuilding requires more 
specialization. Besides, the small market and high transportation costs further the cost of steel.  
 
5.         The Committee was informed that the present share  of India in Shipbuilding, Ship repair 
and Ship breaking/recycling in the global market is about less than 1 %, 1 -2% and 25%, 
respectively, and the Ministry is taking certain steps with regard to demand activation; ecosystem 
development; fiscal & regulatory  support; and capability development, to improve India‟s share 
and global rankings as well.  The Additional Secretary, MoPSW added that the Government has 
initiated several policy measures for the revival of the Shipbuilding industry viz., introducing 
Ship Building Financial Assistance  (SBFA) Policy, 2016 ; granting infrastructure status to 
shipbuilding in 2016; drafting Standard Operating Procedure for chartering/procurement of tugs; 
and effective implementation of the Atmanirbhar Bharat (Make in India) Policy for generation of 
employment. Under the SBFA Policy, 2016 , 14% of the cost of the ship is provided by the 
Government through an electronically driven scheme, implemented by the Directorate General of 
Shipping, from 2016 to 2026 . About  Rs. 58 crore were disbursed under this scheme in the 
previous year, while the budgetary allocation for 2023-24 stands at Rs. 102 crore. He also stated 
that under the SBFA Policy, 2016, assistance will be extended to vessels where propulsion is by 
means of 'green fuels' such as Methanol/ Ammonia / Hydrogen fuel cells and where propulsion is 
by 'electric and hybrid', at 30% and 20%, respectively, in order to incentivise green ship building. 
 
6. Further, the CMD, Cochin Shipyard Limited enumerated the various  types of ships/ 
ferries which are being developed in the country, as follows:- 
 Autonomous zero-emission ferry: a fully autonomous vessel and 100% export order by 
Norway; 
 Windfarm Service Vessels: equipped with Methanol engines to reduce emissions; 
 Zero Emission Shortsea Container Vessel: World‟s first hydrogen fuel cell powered 
vessel, for export order of Norway; 
 Future Proof Dry Cargo Vessel: with battery hybrid diesel-electric propulsion; 

68 
 
 Hybrid Electric Water Metro Ferry: already being used in the Kochi Water Metro and 
supported by the German funding; 
 Hydrogen Fuel Cell Ferry: India‟s first, being developed by CSL and after trials will be 
shifted to Varanasi for operation; and 
 Fully Electric Catamaran Ferry: fully electric, ordered by Inland Waterways Authority of 
India for NWs 1 & 2. 
  
7. The CMD, CSL highlighted the efforts being taken by private and small shipyards in the 
field of green shipbuilding including the development of energy -efficient electric hybrid vessel s 
by Chowgule shipyard in Goa and India‟s first solar -powered ferry named Aditya being 
developed by a Kerala based company called NavAlt. He informed the Committee about various 
other initiatives being taken by the Ministry for development of green shipping , including 
development of methanol or ammonia fueled vessels ; CSL‟s Maritime Startup Funding 
Programme with a corpus of Rs. 50 crore in collaboration with IIT, Madras and IIM, Kozhikode; 
and inauguration of National Centre of Excellence in Green Ports and Shipping in collaboration 
with TERI Institute, Gurugram.  
 
8. The Secretary, MoPSW also highlighted the roadmap for Green Shipping involving 
Green Tug Transition Programme; Special Finance Assistance for Green Ships; and Urban Water 
Transport Models, through which  the Ministry aims to achieve 02 green tugs at all major ports 
by 2026, and thereafter 75% green tugs by 2035 and 100% green tugs by 2040, at all the major 
ports.  
 
9. The Additional Secretary, MoPSW apprised the Committee about the ship repair industry 
in the country. He stated that the market size of ship repairs for domestic vessels is around Rs. 
4,000 crore, out of which nearly Rs. 800 crore is under the control of Government and PSUs. 
The main issues affecting the ship repair industry were the higher cost of procurement, lack of 
efficiency in the working processes, absence of modern tools and higher turnaround time. He 
added that in order to improve the status of ship repair industry, certain steps are being taken  
which includes reducing repair cost by at  least 40%; reduc ing turnaround time for repairs by at  
least 60%; optimis ing working processes; im proving utilization of ship repair facilities ; and 
focusing o n training &  skill development  and collaboration with foreign partners to adopt 
international best practices . He also mentioned that the Ministry is developing two major ship 

69 
 
repair clusters at Kochi & Vadinar and building an ancillary ecosystem to improve spares 
availability, which will enhance the ship repair capability in India.  
 
10. The representative of the Ministry also briefed the Committee about the Ship 
Breaking/Recycling industry in the country and stated that as per the UNCTAD Report, 2022, 
India is at number 02 among the ship recycling nations, having recycled 31% of the  World‟s 
total recycled tonnage. He added that ship recycling primarily concentrated at Alan g Sosiya Ship 
Recycling Yards in Bhavnagar, Gujarat and the process is governed by the Ship Breaking Code, 
2013. Further, he elaborated upon the Recycling yard at Alang which is owned by the Gujarat 
Maritime Board, having a 10 km long sea front and 131 ope rational plots which caters to 98% 
and 32% of ship recycling market in India and  World, respectively. Upon a query by the 
Chairman, the Ministry informed that the steel in the ships is recycled to make rods, grills etc., 
and the fixtures in the ship like chandelier, refrigerator etc. are sold in the retail and wholesale 
market at Alang.  
 
11. The Committee was also informed about the Hong Kong Convention (HKC) which is a 
convention of International Maritime Organisation and deals with the environmental and labour 
standards at the ship recycling yards. The representative of the Ministry stated that 103 plots  at 
the recycling yards at Alang are HKC compliant, and 27 of these have upgraded their compliance 
levels to meet the standards of the European Union (EU). He added that the EU Ship Recycling 
Regulation (EU -SRR) are very stringent and include downstream waste management system; 
concrete yard floors to prevent any material from going in to the water while recycling; 
development of social & health infrastructure  along with a 24X7 trauma centre ; and welfare & 
training of workers . He stated that to further the ship recycling industry, the Central and State 
Government of Gujarat has taken various initiatives including ratification of the “HKC for safe 
and environmentally sound ship recycling , 2009”; enactment of Recycling of Ships Act, 2019; 
amendment in ship recycling regulations, 2015; and master planning of Alang Recycling yard 
with development of new plots for capacity expansion.    
 
12. The representatives of the Ministry also highlighted two major issues being found i n ship 
recycling. The first being the regulation by the Bureau of Indian Standards (BIS) of the steel 
recycled from ships which has prevented their use for reinforcement purposes. The issue is under 
study by a BIS Committee. The second issue is the non -arrival of ships from EU countries, due 

70 
 
to Basel Ban Agreement in 2019 which prohibits any hazardous material (like ships for 
recycling) of OECD countries from being taken to non -OECD countries. The hazardous content 
in ships is about 0.22 to 0.30 percent and include s oil, paint, insulation material, asbestos etc.  
However, the EU has very limited recycling capability and are dependent on India and other 
countries for ship recycling.  
  
13. The Chairman and Members also raised the following queries/ issues , some of which 
were replied to by the representatives of MoPSW and the CMD, CSL:- 
 Details of hazardous material being used for ship building; 
 Process being followed for inviting the foreign partner and what was their response of to 
invest money for the development of Cochin Shipyard; 
 Details of ship breaking units in India;  
 Initiatives being adopted for development of Cochin Shipyard; 
 Tentative Timeline for completion of initiatives taken by the Ministry including 
standardization of operations and increasing manpower in terms of ship repair industry;  
 Reasons for Alang Ship Breaking Yard prominence in ship recycling; 
 Proposal to operationalise Aditya – India‟s first solar powered ferry, in different parts of 
the country; 
 Timeline for completion of two ship repair clusters at Kochi and Vadinar; 
 Implementation of international regulations at the ship recycling yards for the safety and 
welfare of employees including medical facility, trauma care centre and waste 
management system; 
 Status of vegetation/tree plantation (Neem and Peepal)  around the Alang Ship Breaking 
Yard to minimize the impact of pollution;  
 Reasons for EU to select only two yards out of the eight ship breaking yards inspected at 
Alang; 
 Possibility of utilizing Ethanol instead of Methanol vessel operations; 
 Steps taken to reduce the time taken for turnaround operations; 
 Comparative study regarding the performance of Central Government, State Government 
and Private Sector shipyards; 
 Reasons for ship breaking units being concentrated in the Indian subcontinent; 
 Steps being taken to address the financial viability of Kochi Water Metro; and 
 Ministry‟s plans to give interest subsidy to encourage the ship building industry in India. 

71 
 
 
14.       The Secretary, MoPSW took note of all queries and suggestions made by the Members. 
The Chairman gave a list of ten questions on the subject to the Ministry and  directed that written 
replies to the se ten questions and also to the points which had not been adequately answered 
during the meeting, may be sent within one week. 
(The witnesses then withdrew) 
15.       A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept. 
16.       The meeting adjourned at 12:55 P.M.  
 
 
New Delhi,                                                                                                       Monica Baa  
6th October, 2023          Additional Director  
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

72 
 
 
Annexure 
  
LIST OF WITNESSES WHO APPEARED BEFORE THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED 
PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND 
CULTURE 
  
11:00 A.M. 
 
Ministry of Ports, Shipping and Waterways 
S. No. Name of the Officer Designation 
1. Shri T. K. Ramachandran  Secretary 
2. Shri Rajesh Kumar Sinha  Additional Secretary 
3. Shri Madhu S. Nair CMD, Cochin Shipyard Limited 
4. Shri Pradeep Sudhakar K.  Deputy Chief Ship Surveyor, Directorate 
General of Shipping 
5. Shri P. Gopi Nandan Engineer & Ship Surveyor, Directorate 
General of Shipping 
 
* * * * 
  
  

73 
 
VII 
SEVENTH MEETING  
  
The Committee met at 03.00 P.M. on Wednesday, the 20 th December, 2023 in Main 
Committee Room, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe Extension, New Delhi. 
Members present: 
Chairman- Shri V.Vijayasai Reddy 
Rajya Sabha 
1. Dr. Sonal Mansingh  
2. Shri Zala Kesridevsinhji  
Lok Sabha 
3. Shri Ramesh Chandra Majhi 
4. Shri Sunil Baburao Mendhe 
5. Shri Tirath Singh Rawat 
6. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
7. Shri Dushyant Singh 
8. Shri Manoj Kumar Tiwari 
9. Shri Dinesh Lal "Nirahua" Yadav 
  
SECRETARIAT 
Shri D.S. Prasanna Kumar, Joint Secretary  
Shrimati Monica Baa, Director  
Shrimati Vishwarupa Bhattacharya, Additional Director 
Shrimati Subha Chandrashekar, Deputy Secretary  
  
WITNESSES 
  
Gujarat Maritime Board 
Shri S. S. Rathore, Chairman 
Shri Rajkumar Beniwal, Vice Chairman & Chief Executive Officer 
Directorate General of Shipping 
Shri Kumar Sanjay Bariar, Additional Director General 
Shri Ajithkumar Sukumaran, Chief Surveyor 
Ship Recycling Industries Association (India) 
Shri Haresh Kumar Parmar, Secretary 
(Complete list of witnesses is attached as Annexure) 
  

74 
 
2.        The Chairman extended greetings to all the Members and informed that in the last 
meeting on 6 th October, 2023, the Committee heard the views of the Secretary, Ministry of 
Ports, Shipping &  Waterways on the subject of Ship Building, Repair and Recycling. Now, 
the Committee has invited the representatives of Gujarat Maritime Board, Ship Recycling 
Industries Association and the Directorate General of Shipping to provide valuable insights 
into the Ship Recycling Industry.  
(After the witnesses took their respective seats) 
3.        The Chairman welcomed the representatives of Gujarat Maritime Board, Ship 
Recycling Industries Association and the Directorate General of Shipping.  He observed that 
the Alang Ship Recycling Yard located in Bhavnagar, Gujarat, is one of the most preferred 
ship recycling destinations around the world and it caters to nearly 98 per cent of the 
recycling capacity in India. The Chairman asked the  Ship Recycling Association  to provide 
information regarding the safety and sanitary conditions of the workers and the welfare 
measures taken to ensure their well -being at the Alang Yard. Citing the ill effects of the 
recycling activity and weak enforcement of environment and labour-related laws in India, the 
Chairman enquired whether the ship yards in Alang are adhering rigorously to the 
regulations prescribed under the Hong Kong Convention (HKC).  He also sought information 
about the details of infrastructure development undertaken  by the Gujarat Maritime Board as 
well as the process of allotment of plots to ship breakers 
The Chairman observed that  India‟s current share in the ship breaking or recycling market is 
about 25 per cent of the global share, having decreased from about 40 % earlier.   The 
Chairman sought information on the present status, challenges faced, possible solutions and 
the scope of improvement in the area of ship recycling.  He observed that the Ministry in its 
earlier meeting had cited the following two reasons for  this decrease and desired to know the 
status of the same : 
 The policy change by the Bureau of Indian Standards (BIS) due to which the TMT 
(Thermo-Mechanically Treated) steel bars made from recycled steel from ships are no 
longer recognized for reinforcement purposes, leading to significant revenue loss and 
reduction in turnover for the ship-breaking industries at Alang.  A Committee under 
the chairmanship of BIS was examining the issue and was due to give its report 
shortly.   

75 
 
 The second major issue was stated to be non-arrival of ships from EU countries due to 
the Basel Ban Agreement of 2019 which prohibits any hazardous material of OECD 
countries from being taken to non-OECD countries. 
5.        The Chairman asked Directorate General of Shipping (DGS)  about the latest measures 
and initiatives taken to enhance safety standards for shipping and prevent accidents at sea 
and addressing challenges related to piracy and security threats in maritime regions. 
6.       The CEO, Gujarat Maritime Board, informed that  as of 2022, India is at second 
position with 32.28 per cent of the global share in ship recyling, after Bangladesh.   The 
Alang Ship Recycling yard has recycled almost 4.5 million LTD or more than 400 ships a 
year, accounting for 98% of India's total and 3 2% of the global ship volume. Out of 131 
operational plots, 101 are HKC -compliant, while 27 have applied for EU certification for 
ship recycling. He informed that this industry follows a circular economy and all items are 
reused or recycled. There are more  than 200 shops of retailers and wholesaler dealers in 
Alang for items recovered from ships which are sold there.   There are more than 60 -plus 
induction furnaces and 80 -plus re -rolling mills at Bhavnagar which re -rolls the steel 
recovered from the ships to  provide  TMT bars.   There is systematic disposal with TSDF 
(Treatment, Storage and Disposal Facilities), and environmentally and ecologically -
compliant method for ship recycling is being used. 
7.       He informed that the trend in ship recycling is fluct uating not only in India but all 
around the globe.  In 2021, all across the world, approximately 13,000 ships were recycled, 
and, in 2022, the figure came down to almost 6,500 due to reasons like increased transport 
costs and adverse impact of Covid -19. How ever, the following major reasons have been 
identified for substantial decline in Alang: 
 Decline in the business-cycle of the world economy;  
 Shortage of ships and increased freight rates;  
 Strong competition among nations and their need for steel;  
 Non-arrival of ship from EU countries; 
 Non-recognition by BIS standards; and 
 Rise in cost of recycling due to statute, environment and safety-compliance. 
 

76 
 
8.        He apprised the Committee that seven major initiatives that were required to be taken 
for HKC comp liance have been completed, namely, recycling facility management plan, 
ship-specific dismantling plan, oily waste reception facility, paint -chip removal plan, 
asbestos waste handling, hazardous waste management and water treatment plants.   He also 
informed that three conditions required for HKC to come into force have also been 
completed. Thereafter, he explained about the impact and benefits of Hong Kong 
International Convention. 
9.        It was informed that for compliance of EU certification, Medical f acilities at yards are 
also being developed and fifty -six per cent of the work of hospital facilities has been 
completed. For training purposes of workers, an advanced labour safety and training institute 
has been established. Since its inception in 2003, more than 1.5 lakh workers have been 
trained there. Free accommodation has been provided to more than one thousand workers.   
With reference to downstream waste management, it was informed that 99.95 per cent of the 
salvaged materials are dispatched to down stream industries and traders for use. However, 
less than 0.05 per cent is treated as hazardous waste. The facility to treat this waste will be 
upgraded to make it fully complied with EU norms. 
10.      Regarding the issue of non -arrival of ships from EU countries, tt was submitted 
that Ministry of External Affairs has informed that a political agreement, that is the EU's 
Waste Shipment Regulation has been reached between the European Parliament and the 
European Council in November, which signifies that the EU will agree to send their ships to 
Alang yards by next year after the certification. The Committee was also informed that the 
Government of India has taken following steps to support this industry: 
 Customs duty on ship recycling has been reduced from 2.5 per cent to zero, which has 
helped the yard owners. 
  Incentives of Rs.50 lakhs have been given to those yards which are HKC certified. 
 Annual charges have also been relaxed for the yards to the tune of Rs.52 crore in the 
financial year 2020-21, 2021-22 and Rs.28 crore in 2023-24. 
11.     The Committee was also informed about the short -term, medium-term and long -term 
initiatives for the development of the Alang yard.   It was informed that amen dments have 
been made in Ship Recycling Regulations, 2015 as a short -term measure.  As a mid -term 
measure, auctioning the vacant plots have been started and as a long -term measure, a Master 

77 
 
Plan of Alang -Sosiya Ship Recycling Yard to develop new plots and d ouble the capacity of 
the plots has been adopted.   The Committee was also informed that a 10 -kilometre long 
stretch along the coastline is also being developed, which will lead Alang to become the 
highest capacity ship recycling yard in the world. Further,  the plot sizes will also be 
expanded from 40-80 m to 200-300m. 
12.      The Chairman again raised the issue of non recognition of TMT steel bars for 
reinforcement purposes and asked about the difference between Basel Ban Agreement, Hong 
Kong Convention an d EU recognition. The CEO, Gujarat Maritime Board explained that in 
2019, the European Union decided that any hazardous waste, produced in the OECD 
countries, will not be exported to the non -OECD countries. Since the ship -breaking 
industries come under the  hazardous waste category, the ships were stopped from being 
transferred from EU countries to the non-OECD countries for recycling.   
(Shri Dushyant Singh in the Chair) 
13.      A Member enquired about the development of Trauma centre and other facilities like 
library, cultural centres, etc. The CEO informed that fifty -six per cent of the work has been 
completed and the hospital with state -of-the-art technology and equipment will be ready 
within next few months. With reference to community centres, he informed that some centres 
have been built, however, they are not functional yet. He also noted the issue raised by the 
Member regarding provision of green spaces, libraries, etc for the psychological well -being 
of workers and assured that action would be taken on the same. 
14.      Upon a query by a Member about the impact on labour safety after application of rules 
and regulations of HKC, CEO apprised that it has led to increase in labour safety because the 
entire process of recycling is now systematic and more methodological. However, a  problem 
which is now occurring is due to the size of the plots because the size of the ships nowadays 
is quite huge and the yards are smaller.   
15.      Upon the query by the Acting Chairman regarding GST earnings and the nee d for 
development of tertiary industries, CEO informed that the major problem lies with the BIS 
standards as it does not allow recycled steel bars (more than 8 mm) to be used for building or 
other purposes. Earlier, before the enforcement of BIS standards, most of the small industries 

78 
 
were selling the bars made by recycling ship steel in Bhavnagar zone. However, now most of 
these industries have closed and thousand of workers have lost their jobs. The Acting 
Chairman also enquired about the financial struct ure, earning and taxation system. In the 
response, CEO stated that they have conducted research to expand their capacity and will 
submit a report for the information of the Committee. He also informed that in the coming 
ten years, more than 20000 ships wil l be recycled and since Europe has capacity to recycle 
only ten per cent of their ships, rest 90 per cent will be sent to India. 
16.      The Acting Chairman also enquired about the agreements with EU countries to create 
more shipbuilding areas and technol ogy exchange. The CEO, Gujarat Maritime Board 
(GMB) stated that once the Basel Ban hurdle is over, then agreement can be made with the 
countries for ship recycling. It was also informed that these days, the recycling plan of ship is 
made at the time of its  construction. GMB and the Ship Recycling Association have been in 
talks with ship owners to understand their requirements for recycling and accordingly 
enhancing the recycling facilities at Alang as per new technologies and methodologies. 
17.      Thereafter, Secretary, Ship Recycling Industries Association, gave a brief 
presentation. He informed that Ship Recycling in India began in 1912 in Kolkata and 
Mumbai. In 1983, a ship recycling yard was established on the western coast of Gulf of 
Cambay near Alang  Village due to its high intertidal gradient, allowing large ships to reach 
the shore.   He also informed that Alang Shipyard is eco -friendly, cost-efficient and follows 
Green Ship Recycling as it does not use any natural resources like iron ore or coal or  
electricity or water for production of steel. 
18.      With reference to reduction of Custom Duty on recycling to zero, the Acting 
Chairman enquired about the benefits and the beneficiaries. He also asked about the 
expansion of recycling facilities to oth er coastal areas. The representatives of GMB 
submitted that they would send a detailed note on this issue. The Secretary also informed that 
regular medical check -up for all workers in the recycling yards is conducted biannually and 
specific medical check-up is conducted for the workers involved in removal and handling of 
hazardous materials like asbestos, glass wood and hydrocarbons. In this connection, the 
Acting Chairman sought information about the common illness being faced by the workers. 
CEO, GMB informed that trade specific disease are not prevalent there. However, accidents 

79 
 
happen sometimes and a trauma centre is under construction to handle such cases. It was also 
informed that during Covid period only 20 people were found to be Covid positive out o f 
40000 people. There have been no casualty in Alang and workers are properly trained 
through mock drills, emergency preparedness. Workers are also equipped with PPE kits and 
helmets for their safety.  
19.      Secretary, Ship Recyling Association apprised  the Committee that the operation 
procedure is supervised by a certified safety officer, and key facility equipment includes fire 
fighting, water storage, breathing sets, gas meters, Co2, H2S, and oxygen meters for 
confidential work, ensuring safety in all  operations. Central Salt Research Organisation 
regularly conducts environmental impact analysis including monitoring of gas emission, sea 
water and soil water. It has been found till today there has been no instance of oil spilling in 
Alang. It was also i nformed by Chairman, GMB that training is a pre -requisite for any 
worker. There are three training modules free of cost – 12 days‟ comprehensive safety 
training programme, 3 days‟ refresher safety training only for workers who trained earlier 
and then 2 days‟ for gas cutter safety training. There is special training and drills for confined 
space, asbestos removal and evacuation in emergency. 
20.      The Committee was informed about the achievements of Alang yard like mandatory 
issuance coverage to all, AICC  Provident Fund and   other benefits; multispecialty hospital 
started from   March 2019, operated by Red Cross; upgradation to fulfil remaining facility 
i.e., trauma centre; fully equipped operation theatre is in progress; a housing colony, phase I, 
under operation from 2018. There is also a plan to develop housing colony in front of each 
yard equipped with fully operated TSDF site, which is available only in India.   
21.      The Acting Chairman also raised the issue of payment to labour when there is no 
work. However, it was informed that Government supports the plot owners. The Chairman 
further enquired about the fee for a plot. In response, CEO, GMB informed that the plot is 
available on lease basis which costs around  three hundred rupees per square metre.  There are 
different other charges like development charges, housing cess, etc and a subsidy is given 
when there is a recession. In 2021, around Rs. 54 crore worth of different charges was 
subsidized to ease the burden on plot owners. He also assured to se nd a note indicating plot 
fee, labour cost and other different charges. 

80 
 
22.      Upon a query on adherence to HCK norms, Secretary, Ship Recycling Associatio n 
informed that they are spending around Rs.5 crore to Rs.10 crore in each yard for meeting 
international standards.  There is a gap of around 30 to 50 dollars for Pakistan, Bangladesh 
and India. Around 15 dollars have been saved by reducing the duty of 2.5 percent and the 
remaining 15 -20 dollars will be saved once the HKC comes into force. With referenc e to 
expenses, it was informed that it varies from ship to ship. Reefer ships have higher costs as it 
has more hazardous waste and requires more labour and lengthy removal processes. 
Container and bulker ships have lower costs as there is no hazardous mate rial. Handling 
hazardous waste as per HKC certification, costs 15 -20 dollars per ship. Class N.K. ships 
charge 20 lakh rupees per annum for certification maintenance, unlike Pakistan and 
Bangladesh.  
23.     It was also reiterated that the steel in Pakista n is recycled and used in all construction 
works because there is shortage of steel. The cost for the plot owner to sell the steel turns out 
to be much more than what we get in India. However, in case of India, BIS Standard does not 
allow more than a certa in diameter of re -rolled steel for structural work. Before this quality 
control order, the ship recycling industry used 60 per cent of its ship recycling plate for 
manufacturing TMT bars. After implementing of this   quality control order, the industry 
became scrap-based, sending material to a furnace plant for ingot production. The industry is 
working on its ASTM -A131 steel plate, which exceeds BIS standards. The committee had 
already visited the plant and praised the plate's quality. If approved, the plate  will be used in 
a rolling mill for TMT bars. 
24.      Secretary, Ship Recycling Association apprised the Committee that they had a 
meeting with GMB and Ministry of Ports, Shipping and Waterways in October and 
convinced EU to amend their hazardous waste la w, which will give an edge to India and EU 
ships may reach India by next year.    By voluntarily enforcing HKC 2009, Alang yards can 
establish a minimum three to four -year long -term association with selected 
ports/plots/facility. There are approximately 5000 owners in the world and 300 recycling 
yards and 111 HKC complied Indian yards, but only 15 -20 ship owners are sending their 
ships in India. Therefore, support from international community becomes important.  

81 
 
25.      CEO also clarified that, in the European Union, all the countries together have only 10 
per cent capacity to recycle the ships. GMB proved to EU that 90 per cent of the ships were 
going to non -EU compliant yards for recycling purposes and convinced them to certify 
Alang yards  which are complying with the regulations. With reference to flags of 
convenience, Chief surveyor, DGS informed that after the enforcement of HKC or SOLAS 
Convention, the era of flags of convenience will be over.   
26.      Secretary, Ship Recycl ing Association informed the Committee about the steps taken 
by Government of India to boost the ship recycling industry . The MoPSW has passed the 
Ship Recycling Act, 2019, removing 2.5 per cent Customs Duty, amending the Admiralty 
Act for smooth recycling , and providing Rs.50 lakh financial assistance to HKC -compliant 
plots in form of subsidy. He added that the Central Government provided financial assistance 
of Rs.11 crore for construction of labour housing colony, Rs.20 crore for hospital, Rs.49 
crore for obtaining the HKC -compliant plot and Rs.30 crore for providing training. It was 
also informed that GMB and Government of India participated in EUSR Summit to boost 
business.  Also, the MoPSW is supporting the industry by amending the Quality Control 
Order.  .  Ministry of Health is working on the affiliation of GMB multi-specialty hospital, its 
upgradation and work as per the EU requirement.   MoPSW is also working to amend a few 
clauses of Ship Recycling Code, 2013. Government has also resolved the issue pertaining to 
Customs, GPCB, ESIC and also some finance related issues. 
27.      He also gave brief overview of steps taken by GMB for boosting the industry by 
constructing a 25 crores labour housing colony, providing financial relief of 52 crores in 
2023-24 and 26 crores during Covid -19, amending the Ship Recycling Regulation, allotting 
free land, merging plots for larger ships, upgrading the multi -speciality hospital, and locating 
a new landfill site. He also added that the hospital run by GMB is providin g free -of-cost 
facilities not only to the Ship Recycling Yard's labour but also to the twenty surrounding 
villages. Thereafter, he showed some visuals of Alang Ship recycling Yard showcasing the 
work process at the site. He also made a point that GMB is pa ying ESIC for each and every 
labour, however, till today, the ESIC has not spent a single penny on recycling yard. 
 
 

82 
 
 
28.        The stakeholders assured to give the details in writing on the issues which could not 
be answered at that point of time. 
(The witnesses then withdrew) 
29.        A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept. 
30.       The meeting adjourned at 04.54 PM. 
  
  New Delhi,                                                                                       Monica Baa 
 20th December, 2023                                                                          Director 
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

83 
 
Annexure 
LIST OF WITNESSES APPEARING BEFORE THE DEPARTMENT- 
RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE 
2:30 P.M. 
Gujarat Maritime Board 
S. No. Name Designation 
1 Shri S. S. Rathore Chairman 
2 Shri Rajkumar Beniwal Vice Chairman & Chief Executive Officer 
3 Shri B. B. Talavia Chief Engineer 
4 Shri Mehul Diwan Deputy Executive Engineer (Civil) 
  
Directorate General of Shipping 
  
  
S. 
No. 
Name Designation 
1 Shri Kumar Sanjay Bariar Additional Director General 
2 Shri Ajithkumar Sukumaran Chief Surveyor 
3 Shri Pradeep Sudhakar Deputy Chief Ship Surveyor 
  
Ship Recycling Industries Association (India) 
  
S. No. Name Designation 
1 Shri Haresh Kumar Parmar Secretary 
  
 
  

84 
 
VIII 
EIGHTH MEETING 
  
The Committee met at  10:00 A.M. on  Wednesday, the 6th February, 2024 in 
Committee Room-2, First Floor, Parliament House Annexe Extension Building, New Delhi. 
  
  
Members present: 
1. Shri V. Vijayasai Reddy           - Chairman  
 Rajya Sabha 
  
2. Shrimati S. Phangnon Konyak  
3. Shrimati Rajani Ashokrao Patil  
4. Shri A. A. Rahim 
5. Dr. C. M. Ramesh 
6. Shri Zala Kesridevsinhji 
  
 Lok Sabha 
  
7. Shri Anto Antony 
8. Shri Ramesh Chandra Majhi 
9. Shri Sunil Baburao Mendhe 
10. Shri K. Muraleedharan 
11. Shri Tirath Singh Rawat 
12. Shri  Dushyant Singh 
13. Shri Manoj Kumar Tiwari 
14. Shri Krupal Balaji Tumane 
  
SECRETARIAT 
Shri D. S. Prasanna Kumar, Joint Secretary  
Shrimati Vishwarupa Bhattacharya, Additional Director  
Shri Ranajit Chakraborty, Deputy Secretary 
  
 At the outset, the Chairman extended a warm welcome to the Members of the 
Committee and informed  that the agenda for the meeting is to consider a nd adopt 
the following draft Reports of the Committee: - 

85 
 
1) ***1 
2) *** 
3) *** 
4) *** 
5) Status of Ship building, Ship Repair and Ship breaking industries in the Country 
6) *** 
2.        The Committee took up for consideration the draft Reports, one by one. After a brief 
discussion, the Committee adopted the aforesaid six draft Reports and authorized the 
Chairman to carry out minor modifications o f typographical and factual errors and 
formatting, if needed in all the Reports. 
3.       The Committee authorized Dr. C. M. Ramesh, M.P., and in his absence, Shri A. A. 
Rahim, M.P., to present the aforesaid Reports in Rajya Sabha on 8 th February, 2024. Th e 
Committee also authorized Shri Anto Antony, M.P. and in his absence, Shri K. 
Muraleedharan, M.P. to lay the Reports on the Table of Lok Sabha on the same date. 
4.        *** 
5.        A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept. 
6.       The Meeting adjourned at 10:35 A.M. 
                                                                                                                                      
New Delhi,                                                                                      D. S. Prasanna Kumar 
6th February, 2024                                                                                    Joint Secretary 
 
 
  
 
                                                           
1 Relates to other matter 