96threport of Standing Committee On Transport, Tourism & Culture
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/96threport.htm[22-10-2018 12:09:22]
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON
 TRANSPORT, TOURISM & CULTURE
NINETY-SIXTH REPORT
ON
ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE
 RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE CONTAINED IN
 ITS EIGHTY-EIGHTH REPORT ON DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2005-06) OF
 MINISTRY OF CIVIL AVIATION
 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 27.2.2006)
 (LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 27.2.2006)
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
FEBRUARY, 2006/PHALGUNA, 1927(SAKA)
E-mail:rsc-tt@sansad.nic.in
Website:http://rajyasabha.nic.in
C O N T E N T S
 
1.      COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
      2..  INTRODUCTION
3. REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE      
4.   OBSERVATIONS/CONCLUSIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS AT A  GLANCE
      5.   ANNEXURE                                                                                      
      6.   MINUTES                                                                                                                                                      
COMPOSITION OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE
(2005-2006)
1.   Shri Nilotpal Basu - Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2.   Shri Kamal Akhtar
3.
      Prof. Ram Deo Bhandary
4.   Shri S.S. Chandran
5.
      Smt. Hema Malini
6.      Shri Janardhana Poojary
7.      Shri Satish Kumar Sharma
8.      Shri Shatrughan Sinha
9.      Shri Rama Muni Reddy Sirigireddy
10.  Vacant*
 
LOK SABHA
11.  Shri Ramdas  Athawale
12.  Shri Raj Babbar
13.  Shri Anil Basu
14.  Shri Sartaj Singh Chhatwal
15.  Shri N.S.V. Chitthan
16.  Shri Adhir Chowdhury
17.  Dr. K. Dhanaraju
18.  Shri Ravindra Naik Dharavath

96threport of Standing Committee On Transport, Tourism & Culture
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/96threport.htm[22-10-2018 12:09:22]
19.  Shri Dip Gogoi
20.  Shri Vijay Kumar Khandelwal
21.  Shri W. Wangyuh Konyak
22.  Dr. Ramkrishna Kusmaria
23.  Shri Samik Lahiri 
24.  Shri Sudam Marandi
25.  Shri Alok Kumar Mehta
26.  Shri Gingee N. Ramachandran
27.  Shri Manabendra Shah
28.  Shri Dushyant Singh
29.  Shri Madan Lal Sharma
30.  Shri Chengara Surendran
31.  Shri Umakant Yadav 
SECRETARIAT
Shri Sham Sher Singh, Joint Secretary
Shrimati Agnes Momin George, Director
Shri Jagdish Kumar, Under Secretary         
Shrimati Subhashree Panigrahi, Committee Officer
                                                           
 
* Vacancy caused by induction of Smt. Ambika Soni in the Council of Ministers w.e.f. 29.1.2006
 
INTRODUCTION
         I, the Chairman, Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture, having
 been authorised by the Committee to present on its behalf, do hereby present this Ninety-sixth Report of the Committee on
 Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations of the Committee contained in its Eighty-eighth
 Report on Demands for Grants (2005-06) of Ministry of Civil Aviation.
 
2.    The Eighty-eighth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport, Tourism and
 Culture was presented to the Parliament on the  29
th  April 2005. 
3.    The Action Taken Replies on the recommendations of the Committee contained in its Eighty-eighth Report were
 received from the Ministry of Civil Aviation on 30th September 2005.
4.    The Committee considered the subject in its meeting held on 17 th August 2005.  The Committee considered and adopted
 the Report at its meeting held on the 22nd February 2006.
NEW DELHI ;
February 22, 
2006
Phalguna 3, 1927 (Saka)
 
                          NILOTPAL BASU
  Chairman
Department-related Parliamentary Standing
 Committee on Transport, Tourism & Culture.
 
 
R E P O R T
The Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Ministry of Civil Aviation on the observations/
 recommendations as contained in its           Eighty-eighth Report on Demands for Grants (2005-2006) (Demand No. 9) of
 Ministry of Civil Aviation, which was presented to both the Houses of Parliament on 29
th April, 2005.
 
 2.         Action Taken Replies have been received from the Ministry of Civil Aviation on 30
th September, 2005 in respect of
 all the observations/recommendations contained in the Report, which have been categorised as follows: -
 
(i)         Recommendations/observations, which have been accepted by the Ministry:
Para Nos. 9, 42, 55, 108, 135 and 136                                                    Total- 6
(ii)        Recommendations/observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue in view of the Ministry’s replies:
Para Nos. 22, 86, 90, 109 and 138                                                           Total- 5
(iii)       Recommendations/observations in respect of which replies of the Ministry have not been accepted by the


96threport of Standing Committee On Transport, Tourism & Culture
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/96threport.htm[22-10-2018 12:09:22]
 Committee:
Para Nos. 26, 32, 35, 39, 50, 60, 65, 99, 100, 112, 127 and 133          Total- 12
(iv)       Recommendations/observations in respect of which final replies of the    Ministry are still awaited:
Para Nos. 29, 75 & 78, 80, 115, 118, 128 and 137                                 Total- 7
3.         The Committee desires that final replies in respect of the recommendations, which have been categorized as interim
 replies by the Committee should be furnished to it at the earliest.
4.         On scrutiny of the said Action Taken Replies, the Committee  has made observations on each item of Action
 taken/proposed to be taken by the Ministry.  The recommendations of the Committee contained in the Eighty-eighth  Report,
 action taken thereon by the Ministry, and recommendations/observations of the Committee on each item of action taken has
 been given in the succeeding paragraphs.
ASSESSMENT OF ANNUAL PLAN 2004-05 AND ALLOCATION FOR    2005-06
(Recommendation at Para 9)
5.         The Committee notes that Ministry of Civil Aviation has failed to fully utilize the outlay approved during 2004-05. 
 The Ministry anticipated to utilize an amount of Rs.1473.03 crore out of the approved allocation of Rs.1620.98 crore during
 the year 2004-05, which exemplifies the poor financial management in the Ministry of Civil Aviation.  The Committee feels
 that there is a lack of proper planning in the various organizations of Ministry of Civil Aviation, as a result of which the
 Ministry was unable to utilize optimally the approved outlays at its disposal.  The Committee, therefore, recommends that
 the Ministry of Civil Aviation should impress upon the concerned agencies to make a realistic assessment of their financial
 requirements so that the allocations made do not remain unutilized.
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
6.         The observations of the Committee have been noted for compliance.  Due care would be taken to ensure that Plan
 budgets are formulated on realistic basis so as to ensure that the same are properly utilized.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
7.         The Committee is of the view that the Ministry should formulate Plan budgets on realistic basis and also review the
 same at quarterly intervals to monitor the utilization of the allocations under different Budget Heads.  The Committee
 therefore recommends that the exercise undertaken during the preparation of Revised Budget Estimates should involve a
 detailed review of the progress of various projects rather than conducting the same in a routine manner.
INDIAN AIRLINES
(Recommendation at Para 22)
8.         The Committee would like to record its appreciation regarding the role played by Indian Airlines and Alliance Air in
 evacuation of people from Andaman & Nicobar Islands after the tsunami disaster and heavy snowfall in parts of Jammu &
 Kashmir in the winter season this year.    The Committee notes that Indian Airlines is expected to earn a profit of Rs.8.75
 crores by the end of the financial year 2004-05.   The Committee understands the reasons for the low amount of profit likely
 to be earned by Indian Airlines.   The Committee observes that Indian Airlines does not have sufficient number of aircraft to
 optimally utilize the domestic seat capacity available in the country and the average age of the aircraft available with Indian
 Airlines is on the higher side.   Also Indian Airlines has to take the lion's share in undertaking social responsibilities of the
 nation.   As part of its social obligation, Indian Airlines also has to fly to those unremunerative destinations, which other
 airlines choose not to fly due to commercial considerations.   The Committee, therefore, appreciates that, inspite of the odds
 being placed heavily against the company, Indian Airlines would be ending the financial year 2004-05 with marginal profits.
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
9.         Ministry of Civil Aviation would like to thank the Committee for its views with regard to role and financial
 performance of Indian Airlines/Alliance Air.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
            10.       The Committee desires that Indian Airlines/Alliance Air would maintain their special role in fulfilling the
 social obligations of the nation especially during the times of extreme distress.
(Recommendation at Para 26)
11.       The Committee notes that the revision of scales of pay of employees of Indian Airlines had become due on 1.1.1997.  
 However, even after a lapse of a period of more than eight years, the Government is yet to take a decision in the matter.  
 The Committee feels that the revision of scales of pay would contribute towards preventing the exodus of trained manpower
 from Indian Airlines.   The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Government should take an early decision in the
 matter so that the employees of Indian Airlines are not deprived of their legitimate right to the revision of scales of pay
 which has been pending for long.
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
12.       The Government has noted the recommendation.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
13.       The Committee expresses its anguish over the evasive comments of the Ministry offered in response to the

96threport of Standing Committee On Transport, Tourism & Culture
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/96threport.htm[22-10-2018 12:09:22]
 recommendation of the Parliamentary Committee.  The Committee is extremely unhappy about the lackadaisical approach of
 the Ministry on the issue of revision of scales of pay of employees of Indian Airlines.  The Committee is of the view that the
 satisfaction level of the personnel in the matter of service conditions is a major factor affecting the performance of any
 organisation.  The total inaction on the part of the Ministry in the matter of pay revision of employees of Indian Airlines is
 surprising especially in the present age of poaching and stiff competition by other Indian scheduled carriers.  The
 Committee, therefore, reiterates that the Ministry should expedite its decision in the matter in the overall interest of the
 employees and the organisation. 
(Recommendation at Para 29)
 
14.       The Committee observes that the issues relating to acquisition of aircraft for Indian Airlines has been lingering on for
 a long time.   The Committee welcomes the decision of the Government to augment the fleet of Indian Airlines through
 acquisition of aircraft.   The Committee recommends that all further actions in this context should be taken on priority basis
 and the actual fleet acquisition process should begin at the earliest.   However, the Committee notes that there are some
 distributing news in the press regarding the pricing of the aircraft being procured by Indian Airlines.   The Committee
 recommends that adequate care should be taken while concluding the aircraft deal so that the acquisition of aircraft is carried
 out in the best interests of Indian Airlines and the nation.
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
 
15.       The Government has taken note of the paras report regarding sale of A 320 aircraft by Airbus Industries to Air Asia at
 a price much lower than IAL and clarification has been obtained in the matter. Based on the further negotiations held with
 the manufacturers, it has been possible to obtain additional concessions/discounts and formal sanction of the Government for
 purchase of 43 aircraft by IAL is expected to be issued shortly. 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
16.       The Committee notes the reply and is happy to note that the Ministry has now taken due cognizance of its
 apprehensions regarding the pricing of aircrafts being procured by Indian Airlines. The Committee desires that the actual
 acquisition of aircrafts would now commence at the earliest in the best interest of Indian Airlines and the nation.
OPENING OF INTERNATIONAL ROUTES FOR PRIVATE AIRLINES
(Recommendation at Para 32)
17.       The Committee is not convinced with the reply given by the Ministry of Civil Aviation regarding its decision to open
 up international skies to a particular airlines and granting it passage rights to some international routes on the opening day of
 its public offer. The Committee is of the view that the timing of the decision pushed up the company’s IPO prospects and the
 policy adopted by the Government and the clearances granted by the Ministry to the company were too close to the public
 offer of the company to be termed as coincidence.  The Committee feels that grant of speedy clearances to the company
 helped the airline get a good opening for its equity offering.  The Committee is, therefore, of the view that the conduct of
 Ministry of Civil Aviation in granting speedy clearances to the airline and the policy changes should be further enquired into
 by an independent agency.
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
18.       Minister (Civil Aviation) has clarified the position of the Government in a statement made in the Rajya Sabha on
 13.05.2005.  It is reiterated that the decision to permit Indian scheduled airlines to operate to foreign destinations was the
 culmination of a long process and was consciously taken after due consideration.
 19.      Requests for allowing private airlines to operate on international routes were received in the Ministry for the past
 several years from various quarters like industry associations and trade bodies as well as Ministries like Tourism. It was
 emphasised that this would help in better utilisation of India’s bilateral rights, improve connectivity and create business
 opportunities within the country, which in turn would help the national economy as a whole.
 
20.       In fact, the process to allow Indian scheduled carriers to fly abroad began as early as October, 2003 with the
 announcement of the Prime Minister during the visit of Sri Lankan Prime Minister to permit private airlines of India to fly to
 Sri Lanka.  In December 2003, the Government decided to also allow private airlines to operate to all SAARC countries. In
 pursuance of these decisions, two private airlines - Jet Airways and Air Sahara - commenced operations to Sri Lanka and
 Nepal. It is, therefore, pertinent to mention that the policy to allow private carriers to operate abroad is not a recent one. 
21.       The Naresh Chandra Committee, constituted to prepare a road map for the civil aviation sector in their report
 submitted in December 2003, also recommended that private airlines be allowed to operate on international routes in view of
 the under utilisation of capacity in the international segment, particularly during peak season. The Committee also noted that
 India was using barely 40% of its bilateral rights.
22.       In the Cabinet Meeting held on 10.12.2003, while allowing private airlines to operate to SAARC countries, the
 Cabinet also directed Ministry of Civil Aviation to bring up a comprehensive note on liberalising international air services. 
 In pursuance of this decision, a proposal was initiated for allowing private airlines to operate on international routes except

96threport of Standing Committee On Transport, Tourism & Culture
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/96threport.htm[22-10-2018 12:09:22]
 Gulf countries. This proposal was considered by the previous Government in the Cabinet Meeting held on 4.2.2004.  
 However, a decision on this proposal was postponed.
23.       After the present Government assumed office, the Cabinet in its meeting on 8 th September, 2004, while approving
 this Ministry’s proposal to sign the Air Services Agreement with Tunisia, directed the Ministry to bring up a proposal for
 building up of capacity both in public and private sector for operation of air services for optimum utilisation of our bilateral
 rights.
24.       Accordingly, a proposal to allow private airlines to operate on international sectors except the Gulf countries was
 inter alia placed before the Cabinet after following all established procedures. The draft Cabinet note was circulated to all
 concerned Ministries on 10.11.2004 and after receipt of their comments, the proposal was sent to Cabinet Secretariat in
 December 2004. Thereafter, the Cabinet considered and approved the proposal in its meeting on 29.12.2004.  Thus, it may
 be observed that the proposal was moved in accordance with Cabinet’s directions and the necessary procedures were fully
 adhered to. 
25.       It may also be mentioned that the contention that rights were allocated to a particular airline on the opening day of its
 public offer does not appear to be factually correct. In pursuance of Government’s decision taken on 29.12.2004, the first
 traffic rights were allocated to Air India and other Indian scheduled carriers for operations to UK on 31.01.2005, as the
 airlines were required to confirm their entitlements to the UK authorities for slot allocation at UK airports. However, this
 date has no relevance to the IPO offer of a private airline, as the opening day of the IPO issue of a particular airline was
 apparently on 18.02.2005. In any case, Government’s decisions were in no way guided by the dates of issue of IPO’s of
 private companies. 
26.       It is, therefore, evident that the decision to allow Indian scheduled carriers to operate on international routes was the
 culmination of a well considered process over a period of one year, starting in December 2003. The sequence of events
 clearly reveals that the Government decision had nothing to do with the IPO issue of any airline. It was entirely based on the
 need to allow Indian carriers to optimise our entitlements vis-à-vis foreign airlines. In view of the facts enumerated, no
 enquiry into this issue by an independent agency is warranted, since this Ministry has been fully transparent in its processes,
 has adhered to all procedures and no issue emerges that needs to be investigated.
 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
27.       The Committee notes that the reply furnished by the Ministry which consists of the details of the process of decision
 making in the matter of allowing Indian scheduled carriers/private airlines to operate on international routes except the Gulf
 countries.  However, the Committee is unhappy to note that the Ministry has given evasive reply to the main issue in
 question regarding the grant of speedy clearances to a particular airline in pursuance of above decision.  The Committee
 feels that if the Ministry is confident about the legality and transparency of the matter, as it has been attempted to be made
 out in the reply, there should be no objection against an inquiry by an independent agency.  The Committee, therefore,
 reiterates its recommendation that the matter of grant of speedy clearances to the particular airlines to enhance its IPO
 prospects, after the decision of the Government to allow Indian scheduled Carriers to operate on international routes, should
 be inquired into by an independent agency. 
(Recommendation at Para 35)
28.       The Committee is not convinced with the reply furnished by Ministry of Civil Aviation with regard to the criteria
 adopted in selection of scheduled domestic airlines to be allowed to fly on international routes.  The Committee feels that
 there is an element of arbitrariness in imposing restrictions on airlines in terms of experience of flying etc. and not allowing
 all the domestic scheduled airlines to fly on international routes.  By imposing such restrictions, the Ministry of Civil
 Aviation did not give a fair chance to the other scheduled domestic private airline operating in the country.  The Committee
 is also of the view that Ministry of Civil Aviation did not carry out any due diligence of the performance record of the
 existing private sector airlines in terms of fulfilling the social obligations by flying to remote and inaccessible areas of the
 country and utilizing the costly technologies installed at the airports such a ILS CAT-III system.
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
29.       Minister (Civil Aviation) has clarified the position of the Government in a statement made in the Rajya Sabha on
 13.05.2005.  The minimum requirement prescribed for airlines to qualify for operations on international routes is entirely
 based on the consideration that only airlines with proven track records in the domestic sectors should be allowed to operate
 internationally. This is particularly important, as the Government does not want airlines to withdraw or curtail operations on
 domestic routes once they start international operations. Therefore, a minimum fleet strength of 20 aircraft has been
 prescribed. This would ensure sustained domestic connectivity while enabling the airlines to gain greater experience and put
 in place the required infrastructure facilities for operation on international routes at a later stage. 
30.       The eligibility criteria of five years’ operation in the domestic sector is also a carefully thought-out decision based on
 advice received from the safety regulator, Director General of Civil Aviation (DGCA). Experience of five years’ operations
 in domestic sector was considered necessary as a start up airline invariably needs that much time to put its entire
 maintenance and other safety related systems in place. It may be appreciated that once airlines start operating to foreign
 countries, they would be subject to safety checks by regulatory authorities of other countries. It is, therefore, essential that

96threport of Standing Committee On Transport, Tourism & Culture
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/96threport.htm[22-10-2018 12:09:22]
 airlines first stabilise operations in the domestic sectors and establish the requisite safety/maintenance standards before they
 are considered for international operations.
31.       It may also be mentioned that on the date of Government decision in this regard, i.e. 29.12.2004, there were only
 three private scheduled airlines operating on domestic sectors.  Out of the three, two qualified for international operations as
 per the eligibility criteria decided. One airline, which did not qualify, was in any case only about one year old and had also
 not shown any interest in international operations. Therefore, there was no discrimination against any airline as such. 
32.       As regards due diligence and performance records of airlines, once an airline has operated in domestic sectors for 5
 years in accordance with the laid down standards, its track record in safety and overall performance would have been
 adequately monitored by DGCA. There are stringent safety requirements that the airlines are required to follow while
 operating on domestic sector and each of the airlines is also required to meet social obligations by adhering to route
 dispersal guidelines.  There is strict monitoring of their adherence to the route dispersal guidelines on a monthly basis by the
 DGCA.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
33.       The Committee notes from the reply of the Ministry that there are only two minimum eligibility criteria prescribed
 for selection of scheduled domestic airlines to be allowed to operate on international routes, namely, a minimum fleet
 strength of 20 aircrafts and a minimum experience of five years operations on domestic routes.  The Committee also notes
 that the basic policy of the Government to allow the scheduled carriers to operate on international routes has been framed
 after due consideration of the Report of Naresh Chandra Committee, which was submitted to the Ministry in December
 2003.  The said committee had reportedly revealed that we are presently using only 40% of our bilateral rights.  However,
 the Committee feels that the steep restrictions imposed by the Ministry are impediments in achieving the basic objectives
 behind the new policy to mitigate under capacity in the international segment and to enhance global connectivity to and
 from different states in the country.   The Committee recommends that in view of the irreversible nature of the new policy,
 the Ministry should review its prescribed standards regarding fleet strength, maintenance facilities, safety systems etc. for
 granting licences to new airlines in the domestic sector, taking into consideration the requirements for the international
 sector also.  Such a review would enable the relaxation of the existing stringent restrictions on Indian scheduled airlines for
 international operations. The Committee also notes that the stringent restrictions have not been able to avoid the denial of
 flights to one of the private airlines to destinations in the United States of America.
(Recommendation at Para 39)
34.       The Committee notes that there is a contradiction between the objectives stated by the Ministry of Civil Aviation in
 allowing private airlines to fly to international destinations and the routes actually allotted by the Ministry of Civil Aviation
 to the private airlines.  The Committee observes that the basic objective of the Government in allowing private airlines to fly
 to international destinations was providing connectivity to such destination which the Ministry has not been able to provide
 in the past because of lack of capacity of Air India and Indian Airlines.  However, the Ministry of Civil Aviation has granted
 permission to these private airlines to fly to those destinations, which were already being serviced, by Air India and Indian
 Airlines.  Hence the stated position of the Government in this respect is in total contradiction with the actual decisions of the
 Government and the basic objective of the Government to provide connectivity to new international destinations has been
 defeated.
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
35.       While it is the intention of the Ministry to encourage operation of eligible airlines to newer destinations, it may be
 emphasised that the primary objective behind the decision to permit Indian scheduled carriers to fly abroad is to ensure
 optimal utilisation of traffic rights available to India. The traffic rights available to India through various bilateral
 agreements were under-utilised for a variety of reasons.
36.       India offers tremendous opportunities to airlines because of the rapidly growing international traffic to/from this
 country.  This potential was largely exploited by foreign airlines. While it is true that most of the routes so far allocated to
 Indian scheduled airlines are also being served by Air India/Indian Airlines, this would ensure better utilisation of the traffic
 rights available with us. Otherwise, the traffic on these routes would have been diverted to foreign airlines allowing them to
 derive disproportionate benefits.  It would not be desirable if foreign airlines  were allowed to carry traffic to/from India in
 increasing numbers while restricting our own airlines – public or private – from operating on international routes. 
37.       It may also be mentioned that most of the routes allocated to foreign airlines have witnessed significant growth of
 traffic in recent past and therefore provide ample commercial opportunities to all airlines.  It is also the considered view of
 the Ministry that direct connectivity between point-to-point destinations needs to be encouraged.  For instance, if the traffic
 size between UK and India is significant, the commercial opportunities out of this demand should ideally be utilised by
 Indian carriers or carriers of UK. The Government have approached the issue of liberalization of international air services
 with these objectives in mind. 
38.       It may also be emphasised that implementation of the policy is still at an early stage. As the process evolves,
 Government will continue to take stock of the situation and it is inevitable that newer destinations will get added over a
 period of time. 
 

96threport of Standing Committee On Transport, Tourism & Culture
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/96threport.htm[22-10-2018 12:09:22]
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
 
39.       The Committee is not satisfied with the reply.  The Ministry has not charted out any long-term plan for the
 implementation of the new policy of opening up the international skies to the Indian scheduled airlines.  The Committee
 recommends that the Ministry should frame a comprehensive plan identifying international sectors to be covered by Air
 India/Indian Airlines/International Scheduled Carriers so as to avoid any conflict of interests and at the same time ensuring
 full realization of the objective to enhance utilization of traffic rights available to India.  
 
REVIEW OF ROUTE DISPERSAL GUIDELINES
(Recommendation at Para 42)
 40.      The Committee is of the view that the present aviation policy being followed by the Government has not been
 effective in making the private airlines share the social obligations of the country.  The Committee feels that the private
 airlines have been focusing on lucrative trunk routes only.  These airlines have been operating only on the basis of
 commercial terms and tend to follow the bare minimum of what is mandatory for them under the Route Dispersal
 Guidelines. The Committee recommends that the Route Dispersal Guidelines should be revisited to ensure that the private
 domestic airlines also share the social obligation of connecting remote parts of the country in the true sense and not by
 merely completing the formalities in this regard.
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
41.       The Route Dispersal Guidelines (RDG) issued by the Government in 1994, require all scheduled airlines to deploy at
 least 10% of the capacity deployed by them on major trunk routes (i.e. CAT-I routes) on the routes to/from North East,
 Jammu & Kashmir, Lakshadweep and Andaman & Nicobar Islands (i.e. CAT II routes). Out of the total capacity so
 deployed in CAT-II routes, 10 % of the capacity is required to be deployed for connectivity with North East, Jammu &
 Kashmir, Lakshadweep and Andaman & Nicobar Islands. Further, the airlines are also required to deploy 50% of the
 capacity, deployed on CAT-I routes, on non-trunk routes i.e. CAT-III routes. The Director General of Civil Aviation
 monitors the compliance with the RDG on a monthly basis.
42.       The Government had set-up a Committee under the Chairmanship of Director General of Civil Aviation vide Order
 dated 23.9.2003 to review the existing Route Dispersal Guidelines. The Committee has   submitted its report on 18.3.2005,
 which is under active consideration of the Government. The concerns expressed by the Committee shall be duly considered
 before taking any final decision in the matter. The private airlines are also being apprised about these concerns for
 appropriate action.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
43.       The Committee fails to understand the nature and reasons for the inordinate delay by DGCA and that of the Ministry,
 of over nine months to come out with a specific time frame for accepting the recommendation. The Committee recommends
 that the matter be expedited with desired pace.
REQUIREMENT OF TRAINED MANPOWER
(Recommendation at Para 50)
 
44.       The Committee is of the view that as per the policy being pursued by the Government in granting licenses to new
 private airlines, a lot of investment is coming in the airline industry. Vast expansion of fleet is also taking place in the
 existing national and private carriers. The Committee feels that there is a mismatch between the pace at which the airline
 fleet is expanding and the human resource being groomed for the same thereby, resulting in tremendous shortage of trained
 manpower. The Committee recommends that Ministry of Civil Aviation should undertake an objective assessment of the
 requirement of trained manpower for civil aviation sector as a whole in the country on priority basis.   The Committee also
 recommends that the Ministry should fix standard norms and strictly monitor the quality of training being imparted by the
 training institutes in the private sector.  Due emphasis should also be laid on Human Resource Development with focus on
 training for increasing the productivity and for providing better and customer friendly service.
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
45.       The growth and expansion of the civil aviation sector has created a shortfall of trained manpower.  Ministry of Civil
 Aviation recognizes this constraint and is endeavoring to bridge the gap to the best of its ability and with the resources
 available. There is a continued emphasis on Human Resource Development as a part of on going training programmes of
 airlines which, inter-alia encompasses increase in productivity and better and more customer friendly services.
(i)        Assessment of requirement of trained manpower
46.       Whenever  any Airline/operator proposes to start operation after obtaining approval of Ministry of Civil Aviation,
 Directorate General of Civil Aviation conducts preparatory meeting to ensure the availability of the infrastructure and
 necessary manpower. If they are found equipped with necessary manpower and infrastructure, the Directorate General of
 Civil Aviation issues the “No objection certificate” for manpower for import of aircraft.
47.       Requirement of Scheduled Airlines as assessed by DGCA is at Annexure-I.
(ii)       Standard norms for training of pilots in private sector

96threport of Standing Committee On Transport, Tourism & Culture
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/96threport.htm[22-10-2018 12:09:22]
48.       The Directorate General of Civil Aviation has already fixed/established standard norm for any training institute in the
 form of Civil Aviation Requirement (CAR.) The training institutes are inspected by DGCA to ensure that they meet the
 requirements for issue of approval. These institutes are also audited/inspected from time to time and at least once a year
 before renewal of approval by Regional Airworthiness office of DGCA.   The DGCA has approved 35 AME Training
 Institutes.
(iii)      Training of Human Resources
 
49.       Various scheduled Airlines have their own Human Resource Development and training facilities. Directorate General
 of Civil Aviation have also conducted seminars/workshops  under EU-India and COSCAP(SA) project on human factor in
 the maintenance for increasing productivity, reliability, airworthiness and safety. Operators impart Ground Training,
 Simulator Training and Flying Training to the Pilots as per the Training Syllabus approved by DGCA and laid down in the
 Operations/Training Manual. The Training is carried out by the Operator at Manufacturers Training Facility/any other
 Training Institute approved by FAA/CAA/State Regulatory Authority. The Training facilities of the Airlines in India are
 monitored regularly by DGCA. The Simulator Training facilities of the Airlines in India are also inspected as per the Civil
 Aviation Requirements.
 
(iv)      Private Sector- Standard norms for   training:-
a)        Status on Private Flying Schools
A total number of 11 Flying Clubs/Schools/Institutes etc. are operating in private sector which are not covered
 under the subsidy scheme of the Govt. of India and no financial assistance is provided to them.  Out of these
 11, three Flying Clubs are non-functional.
b)         Figures for Inspections of these private institutes.
During the period from 1
st Jan., 2005 to till date following 4 flying clubs under private sector were inspected
 for renewal of their approval: 
i)          Garg Aviation Pvt. Ltd., Kanpur
ii)         HAL Rotary Wing Academy, Bangalore
iii)         Academy of Carveer Aviation Pvt. Ltd., Mumbai.
iv)        Ahmedabad Aviation Academy, Ahmedabad.
 
c)         Private schools are operational and approved by DGCA:
There are 11 Flying Clubs/Schools/Institutes are in private sector and out of which the following 8 private
 flying clubs are operational:-
(i)         Ahmedabad Aviation Academy, Ahmedabad
(ii)        Academy of Carveer Aviation Pvt. Ltd., Mumbai.
(iii)       Flytech Aviation Academy, Secunderabad
(iv)       Garg Aviation Pvt. Limited., Kanpur
(v)        HAL Rotary Wing Academy, Bangalore
(vi)       Orient Flight School, Pondicherry
(vii)      Wings Aviation Private Ltd., Hyderabad
(viii)      Yash Air Limited, Indore.
 
 
d)         Comments on inspection of these schools.
During the course of inspection of these private flying schools/clubs no shortfall has been reported and their
 approval for one year have been granted.
 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
 
50.       It is evident from the reply of the Ministry that their major emphasis is the training of pilots and other equally
 important areas of civil aviation sector are being ignored.  The Committee recommends that the Ministry should encourage
 the opening of training institutions in public sector/joint venture/private sector for imparting holistic training covering all the
 areas of the civil aviation sector.
(Recommendation at Para 55)
51.       The Committee is aware that with the increase in the number of flights, poaching of trained manpower, especially

96threport of Standing Committee On Transport, Tourism & Culture
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/96threport.htm[22-10-2018 12:09:22]
 pilots, is being indulged in by some private airlines, which is not a healthy practice.   The practice is not limited to the
 poaching of trained manpower by private airlines from the national carriers but also among the private airlines themselves.  
 The Committee regrets to note that no thought was given to assess the requirement of trained manpower and development of
 airport infrastructure by the Government before granting license to the private airlines to operate, as a result of which there
 is a huge difference between the demand and supply of trained manpower by the different airlines.    The Committee is of
 the view that the pilots of national carriers are well-trained and do not require specific training to fly new aircraft of the
 private airlines.   By poaching upon the manpower of national carriers, private airlines save a substantial amount as they do
 not have to spend in their training.    The Committee recommends that the Ministry of Civil Aviation should devise
 strategies, whereby trained manpower of our national carriers continue to remain with the organizations concerned and are
 not lured away by private operators.     The Committee also recommends that Ministry of Civil Aviation should take a
 decision regarding raising retirement age in Indian Airlines from 58 to 60 years, which, as an immediate measure, will help
 the airlines in retaining some of the trained manpower within the organization and help the government to recover the
 training cost to an extent.   The Committee also recommends that the Government should come up with a legal framework to
 prevent poaching of trained manpower by private airlines so that the investment made by the Government on training of
 such manpower is not utilized by private airlines at the cost of our national carriers.
 
 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
 
52.       In so far as increase in retirement age from 58 to 60 years is concerned , it is felt that this issue can not be considered
 in isolation  i.e. only in respect of pilots as other category of employees would feel discriminated. However, the matter is
 under consideration of Indian Airlines Ltd.
53.       The Committee’s recommendation that the Ministry of Civil Aviation should devise strategies where trained
 manpower of the national carriers continue to remain with them and that Government should come up with a legal frame
 work to prevent poaching of trained manpower is a step in the right direction and an appropriate decision on this aspect
 would be taken in due course.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
 
54.       The Committee notes carefully the assurance given by the Ministry.  The Ministry, however, must ensure that Indian
 Airlines, which has to meet the social obligations also, should not suffer from the shortage of manpower. The Committee is
 suspicious of the intention of the Government to prevent poaching of trained manpower from Indian Airlines because no
 action has been taken by the Government with regard to the revision of scales of pay of the employees of Indian Airlines,
 which became due on 1.1.1997.
 
UNDERUTILISATION OF ILS CAT-III SYSTEM INSTALLED AT INDIRA GANDHI INTERNATIONAL
 AIRPORT, DELHI.
(Recommendation at Para 60)
 
55.       The Committee is constrained to note that while the current policy of the Government aims at allowing more and
 more airlines to operate in the country, it has not made it obligatory for them to utilize the modern facilities installed at the
 airports with huge investments for the convenience of the passengers.   The Committee is surprised to note that the three
 private airlines i.e. Jet Airways, Sahara Airlines and Air Deccan have not trained any of their pilots for CAT-III operations
 and there is no legal requirement in the Aircraft Rules and Civil Aviation requirements to make it mandatory for private
 airlines to train their pilots on ILS CAT-III System.   The Committee is also not satisfied with the progress achieved with
 respect to the training of the pilots by the National Carriers viz. Indian Airlines and Air India, for utilizing the CAT-III
 System.   The Committee recommends that in order to improve the operational efficiency during the extreme foggy
 conditions, the Ministry should amend 'Aircraft Rules' to incorporate a provision for making training of pilots compulsory
 by the private airlines on CAT-III System so that the investment made by the Government on the installation of the system
 through the tax payers' money is not underutilized.   The Committee hopes that the national carriers and the private airlines
 will optimally utilize the ILS CAT-III System installed in the IGI Airport, New Delhi during the period of poor visibility,
 which will certainly reduce the hardships faced by the passengers.
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
 
56.       The present status of Pilots trained and approved for ILS CAT-II/III Operations is as under:
I.
                              Air India
    CAT-II CAT-IIIA CAT-IIIB

96threport of Standing Committee On Transport, Tourism & Culture
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/96threport.htm[22-10-2018 12:09:22]
A-310-Pilots
Trained      
152 27 03
B 747-Pilots Trained 115 29 15
                 
 
II.                           Indian Airlines
 CAT-II CAT-IIIA CAT-IIIB
A-320-Pilots Trained 181 52 22
 
III.                         Jet Airways
 CAT-II CAT-IIIA CAT-IIIB
B-737-400/500/700/ 800- Pilots Trained 153 NIL NIL
 
IV.                        Sahara Airlines
 CAT-II CAT-IIIA CAT-IIIB
B-737-400/700/800-
Pilots Trained
08 NIL NIL
 
V.                          Air Deccan
Air Deccan has not trained and approved any of its pilots for ILS CAT-II/III operations.
 
57.       With regard to recommendation for incorporation of a provision for making training of pilots compulsory by private
 airlines on CAT-III System, is is stated that there is no legal requirement in the Aircraft rules and also in the Civil Aviation
 Requirements that makes it mandatory for private airlines to train their pilots on ILS CAT – III B System.  However, it has
 been emphasized to various airlines from time to time to train their pilots for using the ILS CAT III System in order to
 improve their operational efficiency during poor visibility conditions.
 FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
58.       The Committee is not satisfied with the reply of the Ministry and feels vindicated by the developments during the fog
 this winter.  The massive disruption of flights into and out of Delhi has highlighted the gross underutilization of the costly
 ILS CAT-III system installed at Indira Gandhi International Airport.  This has resulted in the non-utilisation of the
 expenditure from the tax payers’ money.  It appears that the different airlines resort to diversion of flights instead of using
 the available infrastructure because it is economical for them to follow such practice rather than training the pilots on CAT-
III system.   The Committee feels that whatever be the reasons, the passenger facilities should be paramount and they should
 not be put to any hardship.  Moreover, even if IA and AI have trained their pilots and are using the system, the diversion of
 flights of the private carriers gives adverse publicity to the civil aviation sector as a whole.  The Committee feels that there
 should be some penal provision to discourage the diversion of flights due to fog by the private operators or they should be
 compelled to utilise the ILS CAT-III system. The Committee takes note of the relevant news reports appearing in the print
 and visual media and the inadequate response of the Ministry thereon. The Committee also notes that the Ministry is now
 waking up to the need for the implementation of the recommendation in the face of severe public criticism. The Committee,
 therefore, reiterates its recommendation that in order to improve the operational efficiency during the extreme foggy
 conditions, training of pilots should be made compulsory by the private airlines on CAT-III System.  The Committee further
 recommends that utilization of CAT-II and CAT-III systems by private airlines should be made compulsory by training a
 fixed minimum proportion of their pilots and it should be enforced by the Government strictly.
ALLOTMENT OF PARKING BAYS
(Recommendation at Para 65)
59.       The Committee is constrained to note that before giving licenses to new airlines to commence operations, the
 Government did not deliberate on the infrastructure and maintenance facilities required at the airports after these airlines
 commence operations.  The Committee notes with serious concern that adequate parking bays for overnight halt for
 scheduled carriers are not available at Delhi, Mumbai, Chennai and Kolkata airports and the carriers are allotted parking
 stands for overnight halt on first-cum-first serve basis.  The Committee is of the view that no transparent policy is being
 followed for allotment of parking space.  Since more private airlines are expected to commence operations, shortly, the
 availability of physical facilities at the airports should be reviewed before granting any further licenses.  The Committee
 recommends that the Government should ensure that adequate infrastructure and maintenance facilities, hangers and parking
 bays are made available for all the airlines providing a level playing field in the matter of allotment of parking bays etc.
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
60.       Due to increase in aircraft movements, the demand for parking bays has increased specially at metro airports.  Eight
 additional parking bays have been commissioned at IGI airport in April, 2005 and 16 additional domestic parking stands and

96threport of Standing Committee On Transport, Tourism & Culture
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/96threport.htm[22-10-2018 12:09:22]
 four international parking stands are planned to be commissioned in one year.  Similarly, 11 domestic parking stands and 7
 additional international parking stands are planned for CSI Airport, Mumbai.  Similarly, 15 domestic parking stands are
 planned to be commissioned at Chennai in 2006 and 12 domestic parking stands are planned to be commissioned by July,
 2006 at Kolkata airport.  Airlines are also encouraged to have their night halt at non-metro airports near Delhi and Mumbai. 
 AAI is formulating schemes for giving incentives for the same.
61.       It has been seen that New Delhi, Mumbai and Kolkata will have a shortage of 16, 11 and 1 parking bays respectively
 by the end of 2006. On the other hand, Chennai and Trivandrum will have surplus of four and one parking bays
 respectively.  AAI has been advised to plan in advance for meeting the additional demand for parking bays accordingly.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
62.       The Committee is not satisfied with the reply of the Ministry and stresses the fact that before giving licenses to new
 airlines to commence operations, the Ministry should deliberate on the infrastructure and maintenance facilities like,
 taxiways, additional bays, runways etc required at the airports to avoid further load on the already congested infrastructure
 available at the airports.  The Committee, therefore, reiterates its recommendation that the Government should frame a
 transparent policy for allotment of parking space and also take immediate steps to ensure that adequate infrastructure and
 maintenance facilities, hangers and parking bays are made available for all the airlines providing a level playing field in the
 matter of allotment of parking bays etc. 
HIGH COST OF AIR TURBINE FUEL (ATF)
(Recommendations at Paras 75 and 78)
63.       Fuel plays a crucial role in the cost structure and profitability of any airline. High cost of ATF in the country
 increases the cost of operation. The Committee welcomes the proposed amendment in the Central Sales Tax Act whereby
 sales tax on bonded ATF uplifted for international operation would be exempted. The Committee is hopeful that this move
 would, to some extent, help our national carriers strengthen their financial position.  The Committee, however, is concerned
 to note that some states which had earlier taken initiative and reduced sales tax on ATF, have retracted and imposed high
 rates of sales tax on ATF.,  The Committee recommends that Ministry of Finance should consider and give approval  to the
 proposal of Ministry of Civil Aviation regarding notifying ATF as ‘Declared Good’ under Section 14 of Central Sales Tax
 Act on priority basis so that sales tax on ATF could be contained with the maximum rate of 4%. The Committee further
 recommends that the Ministry of Finance may also discuss the issue with the State Governments and try to convince them
 that the reduction in the sales tax on ATF will certainly increase the efficiency and viability of our carriers.
64.       The Committee recommends that the Government should create conditions, which provide wider choice to the airline
 companies for procurement of ATF. The Committee hopes that this step would promote competition among the suppliers
 and help lowering the rates of ATF to some extent.
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
65.       ATF is a major cost component of airlines in India. It constitutes about 35% of total operating cost for domestic
 operations.
 
66.       Two reasons for high price of ATF in India are:
 
(i)   High rate of sales tax charged by State Governments on ATF sold to domestic flights.
(ii)  High marketing and distribution margins charged by Oil PSUs, which are in monopoly situation for supply of ATF.
67.       As per notification issued under section 5 of Central Sales Tax Act (CST) w.e.f. 7
th June, 2005, there would be no
 sales tax on ATF purchased for international flights of designated Indian Carrier. This would bring Indian designated carries
 at par with foreign carriers, which are already getting sales tax exemption on ATF purchase.
68.       With a view to reduce the incidence of sales tax, it has been suggested to the Finance Ministry that ATF sold to
 domestic flights may be notified as ‘Declared Goods’ under Section 14  of the Central Sales Tax Act, so as to cap the rate of
 Sales Tax on ATF to 4%. Finance Ministry has, however, informed that the proposal could not be agreed to due to serious
 revenue implications for the State Governments.  ATF sold to turbo-prop aircraft is already notified as ‘Declared Goods’
 under Section 14 of the Central Sales Tax Act attracting 4% sales tax on ATF.
69.       The State Governments may get affected only marginally by the above measure. But, these would go a long way in
 improving the health of the aviation industry in the country and ultimately fostering the economy, tourism and regional
 development to a great extent.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
70.       The Committee is happy to note that the Sales Tax on ATF purchased for International flights by designated Indian
 carriers has been exempted.  The Committee does not agree with the Finance Ministry that the proposal for notifying ATF
 sold to domestic flights, as "Declared Goods" would have serious revenue implications for the State Governments. The
 Committee, however, appreciates the view of the Ministry of Civil Aviation that the State Governments may get affected
 only marginally by the above measure and such measure will certainly improve the health of the aviation industry in the
 country and ultimately fostering the economy, tourism and regional development to a great extent.
IMPACT OF FRINGE BENEFIT TAX ON CIVIL AVIATION SECTOR

96threport of Standing Committee On Transport, Tourism & Culture
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/96threport.htm[22-10-2018 12:09:22]
 (Recommendations at Para 86)
71.       The Committee is of the view that, as brought out by the Ministry of Civil Aviation, the proposals of Fringe Benefits
 Tax, if implemented on the airlines industry, would have a major financial impact on airlines operators.   The Committee is
 of the view that the elements brought out in para 84 above do not truly form part of benefits being given to the employees.  
 In fact, these are clear-cut major cost components for the functioning of airlines and should not be considered as qualifying
 factors for the imposition of Fringe Benefit Tax as proposed in the Budget.   Imposition of tax on the above stated cost
 elements would adversely affect the profitability of the airlines, which have very recently started coming out of the
 recessionary trend.   Further, the imposition of tax on aircraft repair, running and maintenance expenses (including
 depreciation) and consumption of fuel will directly raise the cost of operations.   This may result in fare increase, thereby
 making the air travel costlier.   Further, treating the main operating costs of airlines at par with fringe benefits appears to be
 illogical.    Taxing such cost is not in consonance with the basic objective of this new levy.   The Committee, therefore,
 recommends that Ministry of Finance should reconsider its decision and recognizing the peculiarity of the nature of working
 of the airlines industry, exclude the expenditure on items mentioned in para 84 above from the purview of the Fringe
 Benefits Tax.
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
72.       Ministry of Finance has duly considered Airline’s plea in respect of expenditure incurred on repairs running and
 maintenance of aircraft, consumption of fuel and depreciation on aircraft. Recognizing that these are major cost components
 for functioning of airlines and in no way result in any fringe benefit to employees, these items have been removed from the
 ambit of fringe benefit tax when the bill was finally passed.
73.       The cost of free or concessional ticket for private journeys of employees or their family members and expenditure
 incurred by airlines on Crew Hotel accommodation and foreign travel expenses has not been removed from the purview of
 FBT. The free and concessional tickets provided to employees is on a ‘subject to load’ basis and are made available to the
 employees in accordance with the IATA Resolutions. As per the provisions of FBT, the valuation of these tickets has to be
 made at a value at which these tickets are offered to the public. It is very relevant that such tickets cannot be offered to the
 public and hence such tickets have no market value. Therefore, the value of such free concessional tickets is not
 determinable. It may be pertinent to mention that the airline employees are provided seats on a subject to availability basis
 and that to at the last moment that is prior to departure of the flight.  Where the business of the enterprise itself is carriage of
 passengers and where such enterprise does not provide any LTC facility to its employees, such free concessional tickets
 should be outside the purview of FBT.
74.       In the course of conduct of the business, the crew is required to travel in the aircraft and stay in hotel which is a
 necessity in course of their flight duties and it cannot be stated that benefit accrues to the crew out of such travel and stay at
 hotel. Considering the peculiar nature of the airline business, crew hotel expenses and foreign travel expenses in case of
 airlines needs to be excluded from the purview of FBT.
75.       The matter has been taken up with the Ministry of Finance.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
76.       The Committee notes the reply and desires that the outstanding issues should be pursued with the Ministry of Finance
 in the interest of the aviation sector.
INCOME TAX EXEMPTION ON PAYMENT OF LEASE RENTALS FOR LEASE OF AIRCRAFT.
(Recommendation at Para 90)
77.       The Committee observes that the withdrawal of Income Tax exemption on payment of lease rentals of aircraft/aircraft
 engines will, in particular, adversely affect Air India and Indian Airlines as they have a significant portion of their fleet as
 leased aircraft, which are due for renewal and are also planning to induct additional aircraft through lease.   Alliance Air, a
 subsidiary of Indian Airlines is also planning to commence replacement of ageing fleet initially through lease route.   
 Similarly, Air India plans to establish a low cost airline named Air India Express by leasing aircraft.   The withdrawal of this
 facility will also pose an entry barriers to new airlines planning to introduce low cost operations as most of these airlines
 plans to induct aircraft initially through lease route.   All these new initiatives will be adversely affected with the withdrawal
 of income tax exemption, which was available to payment of lease rentals on aircraft.   The Committee, therefore,
 recommends that Ministry of Finance should give special consideration to the facts brought out above and in the interest of
 the civil aviation sector, more so in the interest of the public sector operators, provide exemption from tax on agreements to
 acquire aircraft or aircraft engine on lease beyond September 2005 also, as suggested by the Ministry of Civil Aviation.
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
78.       Ministry of Civil Aviation fully agree with the comments of the Committee. Leasing of aircraft is one of the
 commonly adopted methods for augmenting the fleet. This method of expansion of fleet is likely to stay for an indefinite
 period of time even if the airlines expand their fleet by the acquisition mode.  The exemption u/s 10(15A) of the income Tax
 Act 1961 be extended indefinitely.
 
79.       The matter is being taken up with the Finance Ministry.
 

96threport of Standing Committee On Transport, Tourism & Culture
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/96threport.htm[22-10-2018 12:09:22]
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
80.       The Committee notes the reply and recommends that the follow-up action should be expedited with the Finance
 Ministry.
MODERNISATION AND RETRUCTURING OF DELHI AND MUMBAI AIRPORTS
(Recommendation at Para 99)
81.       The Committee is constrained to note that the decision to modernize Delhi and Mumbai airports was initiated in the
 year 2000 and till now, the Government has not been able to come out with any concrete plans in this regard.  The
 Committee is dissatisfied to note that the Ministry has made different cost estimate at different stages and there exists a huge
 difference in the figures quoted by the Ministry.  The Committee also regrets to note that the Ministry has not considered the
 alternate proposal submitted by the AAI Employees Joint Forum on the modernisation of Mumbai and Delhi Airports.   The
 Committee is surprised to find as to why the Government has not updated the proposal submitted by the Airports Authority
 of India in the year 2000 to effect modernisation and feels that the proposal should be implemented.
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
82.       The Government had decided to restructure in the year 2000 the four metro airports of Delhi, Mumbai, Chennai and
 Kolkata through leasing route.  However, the legal process for introducing a suitable amendment in the AAI Act, 1994 could
 be finalised in 2003.  In the meantime, the Government had reviewed the process and it was decided in September, 2003 to
 restructure Delhi and Mumbai airports through Joint Venture Route (JVR).  The Government has made substantial progress
 in the matter. Nine consortia of bidders had been short listed on the basis of Expression of Interest (EOI).  They have already
 been issued Request for Proposal (RFP) document and draft of other transaction documents on 01.04.2005.  These Pre
 Qualified Bidders (PQBs) were given 12 weeks of time to submit their technical and financial bids which has since been
 extended because of inter ministerial consultation process in taking decisions on some key issues raised by PQBs etc.    The
 cost estimates have been made by the Global Technical Advisor appointed by AAI (which does not include cost on account
 relocation of the existing assets and for removal of encroachment). 
83.       Presently, the estimated investment expected to be made by the JVCs is Rs.7961 crores and Rs.6131 crores at Delhi
 and Mumbai airports respectively (at current prices) over a 20-year development plan period.
84.       A broad concept of alternate plan submitted by AAI Employees Joint Forum was examined by a Committee of AAI
 officers constituted for this purpose under the chairmanship of Member (Finance), AAI.  It was found that the concept of
 alternate plan submitted by the forum was very sketchy in nature and incomplete in many aspects and therefore needed to be
 developed into a comprehensive alternate plan.  Since October, 2004, a number of meetings have been held between
 members of Joint Forum, Financial Consultants and the constituted Committee during which clarifications and other inputs
 desired by the Joint Forum were furnished. However, no comprehensive alternate plan has been furnished as yet by the Joint
 Forum for examination of the Committee.
 
85.       As regard proposal of AAI of the year 2000, the proposal of AAI for construction of terminal buildings of Delhi and
 Mumbai airports were not processed in view of the fact that a decision for restructuring of four metro airports through
 leasing route had already been taken at that time.  The modernisation of Delhi and Mumbai airports to world class standards
 is expected to be carried out by the Joint Venture Companies after the restructuring of these airports, as per the provisions in
 the Transaction Documents.
 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
 
86.       The Committee is not convinced with the reply put forth by the Ministry and observes that clear-cut statistics with
 regard to modernization of airports should be given to the public and the Parliament.  As the proposal regarding
 modernization and restructuring of Delhi and Mumbai Airports involves huge expenditure and also determines the future of
 aviation sector in this country, the exaggerated initial cost estimates indicates poor financial planning.  The Committee feels
 that the unrealistic cost estimates at the planning stage might have swayed the decision in favour of the Joint Venture route.
 
87.       The Committee is constrained to note that the proposal of AAI of the year 2000 for construction of terminal buildings
 of Delhi and Mumbai airports were kept pending till September, 2003 and thereafter shelved when it was decided to
 restructure Delhi and Mumbai airports through Joint Venture Route (JVR). The Committee notes with grave concern that
 even after the lapse of more than two years since this decision, which was targeted to make the two airports of “world class
 standards”, the modernisation and expansion plans are still hanging in air, thereby affecting the capability of these two most
 important airports to handle the demands of fast changing international as well as domestic aviation sector.           
88.       The Committee is also of the view that the Ministry has taken a prejudiced view on the alternative proposal submitted
 by the AAI Employees Joint Forum.  The Ministry has submitted the following documents for the perusal of the Committee
 vide its O.M. No.AV.24011/012/1998 – VB (Pt.) dated the 29
th December, 2005: -  
(i)            Para-wise comments of the Ministry of Civil Aviation on the D.O. letter dated 5/12/2005 from Shri Dipankar

96threport of Standing Committee On Transport, Tourism & Culture
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/96threport.htm[22-10-2018 12:09:22]
 Mukherjee, Member of Parliament, addressed to the Hon’ble Prime Minister regarding modernisation of Delhi
 and Mumbai Airports (Annexure –V);
(ii)          Alternate Plan submitted by the AAI Employees Joint Forum for development and modernisation of Delhi and
 Mumbai Airports (Annexure –VI); and  
(iii)         Report of the Committee to examine the Alternate Plan submitted by the AAI Employees Joint Forum
 (Annexure - VII).
89.       The Committee notes that the Ministry had sent the Alternate Plan to the GTA and Financial Consultant for
 evaluation, however, their report is not annexed with the comments of the Review Committee but only the brief comments
 of the Review Committee on the evaluation report is included therein. The Review Committee has held that the basic
 characteristics of the proposals of the Bidders vis-à-vis the Alternate Plan are incomparable and therefore the methodology
 adopted by GTA cannot be considered fair. As the Alternate plan was not submitted in response to RFP document meant for
 the bidders in the JVR, it is surprising that the Ministry initially forwarded the plan to the GTA & FC for evaluation and
 thereafter rejected their report thereby rendering the process an exercise in futility. The Review Committee decided that the
 Alternate Plan is to be evaluated on stand alone basis on the merit of its content. The Committee however notes that the
 Review Committee has at many places drawn comparisons with the private bidders. However, the Committee also notes that
 the Review Committee has accepted the concepts and the details of works proposed in the Alternate Plan on the grounds that
 it is similar to the earlier proposal of  Airports Authority of India but subject to updating/revision of the cost estimates to
 current levels.
90.       On the examination of the comments of the Review Committee, the Committee wishes to highlight the conclusions
 that the estimated expenditure required for Delhi & Mumbai airports and the projects at non-metro airports is feasible
 through internal resource generations and borrowings. The financial strength of Airports Authority of India and the growth
 realized/witnessed in the aviation sector in the recent past also supports the conclusion reached by the Review Committee. In
 this context, the Committee has earlier expressed its reservations/objections on the financial implications projected by the
 Ministry on the modernisation plans for the Delhi & Mumbai Airports and reiterated that the estimates put forth by them are
 exaggerated and not firmed up on realistic basis. The other factors commented to in the report of the Review Committee viz.
 fast track procedures for granting approvals / sanctions to the projects; benchmarking of services to achieve higher levels of
 customer satisfaction; maximizing non-aeronautical revenue etc., are achievable with proactive efforts of the
 Ministry/Airports Authority of India on the one hand and plan implementing agency on the other.
91.       The Committee therefore recommends that the Government should rethink its strategy for modernisation of Delhi &
 Mumbai Airports and immediately implement the in-house plan developed by Airports Authority of India Employees Joint
 Forum.    
 (Recommendation at Para 100)
92.       The Committee is not convinced with the replies furnished by the Ministry of Civil Aviation with regard to the
 modernisation and restructuring of Delhi and Mumbai airports.  The Committee is of the opinion that modernisation is not
 merely about the provision of facilities and expansion of the terminal buildings of the airports. It should also increase the
 capacity of the airports to handle more flights, by construction of additional runways, which does not seem to be a
 probability in case of Mumbai airport. The Committee further notes that a major chunk of the profit from airports in
 generated from Mumbai and Delhi airports and it is these two airports that the Government proposes to restructure and
 modernize through the joint venture route. The Committee understands that the revenue generated by the Government from
 the profit making airports is used to fulfill the developmental needs as well as day-to-day activities of the other airports.  The
 Committee fails to understand as to how the Government would fulfill the developmental needs of the other airports after the
 management of these airports is passed on to the Joint Venture Companies.  The sustained existence of such airports would
 become difficult in such a scenario.  The Committee is in favour of modernisation of the Mumbai and Delhi airports, but not
 at the cost of the other airports in the country maintained by the Airports Authority of India. The Committee, therefore,
 recommends that the Government should re-look at the modernisation process of Delhi and Mumbai airports so that the
 development and maintenance of the other airports in the country is not compromised.
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
93.       As per the report of GTA, upto four runways at Delhi airport for enhancing capacity can be developed.  In Mumbai,
 the GTA has suggested construction of a second parallel runway of limited length after closing the existing secondary
 runway. What is being further examined from Cost Benefits point view as it involves relocation of certain assets, acquisition
 of land etc. The restructuring and modernization of Delhi and Mumbai airports to world-class standards is estimated to cost
 around Rs.7961 crores in the first five years and Rs.6131 crores over a 20 year period.  At present AAI has only around
 Rs.1200 crores as reserves.  If the development of these two airports is to be financed from AAI’s internal resources, it is
 likely that AAI will not have funds for development and maintenance of other airports.  On the other hand after restructuring
 of the two metro airports, AAI will continue to get revenue from the following sources: 
(i)
                  Revenue from Route Navigation Facilities & Terminal Navigation landing charges will continue to accrue to
 AAI.
(ii)                AAI share from upfront fee, annual lease rentals and dividend income from the restructuring exercise at Delhi &

96threport of Standing Committee On Transport, Tourism & Culture
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/96threport.htm[22-10-2018 12:09:22]
 Mumbai airports.
(iii)               Increase in aeronautical revenue at Delhi & Mumbai airports after increasing the runway capacity, which in turn
 will increase aircraft movements and passenger movements.
(iv)              Increase in non – aeronautical revenue at these airports on account of enhanced exploitation of non –
 aeronautical revenue generating resources and AAI’s share of upside on the same.
(v)                Increase in aeronautical and non – aeronautical revenue at other metro / non-metro airports of AAI, as the same
 will be developed on city side and airside and capacity in terms of air traffic and passenger movements will be
 increased.
(vi)              Besides, AAI shall receive dividends from share holding in Greenfield airports.
94.       These revenues are expected to be adequate to maintain and upgrade the other airports managed by AAI.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
 
95.       The Committee has already expressed its views on the modernization plan of the Ministry in respect of Delhi &
 Mumbai Airports and has also made its recommendations on the subject at paras 86 and 87 above.
 
 
NEW GREENFIELD AIRPORTS AT BANGALORE AND HYDERABAD
 (Recommendation at Para 108)
 
96.       The Committee observes that the Ministry has been categorizing airports as international airports, airports of world-
class standards and airports to be upgraded in view of inflow of international traffic.  The Committee feels that such kind of
 categorizations is without a very well defined basis.  The Committee recommends that the Ministry should develop standard
 norms and definitions for benchmarking all airports not only in terms of facilities available for the international passengers
 but also in terms of capital investments made or required to be made in future.
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
97.       Ministry welcomes the suggestion of the Committee, which has been noted for taking suitable follow up action. 
 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
98.       The Committee notes the reply and expects that the Ministry would frame the standard norms and definitions
 for benchmarking of airports before proceeding further to implement the new Greenfield Airports.
(Recommendation at Para 109)
99.       The Committee also recommends that in case of Hyderabad Airport, the Ministry of Civil Aviation should clearly fix
 the ratio of share holding amongst the State Governments, Private Players and the Airports Authority of India.  The
 Committee further recommends that the Ministry should structure a financial model for these airports detailing the total
 project cost in terms of debt and equity and the ratio in financing.
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
 
100.     It has already been decided that the State Government and AAI together will hold 26% equity in the Hyderabad
 International Airport Limited (HIAL) and the remaining 74% will be held by the private sector.  The Government has
 already signed a Concession Agreement with HIAL for construction of a new international airport at Shamsabad near
 Hyderabad and financial model including the debt and equity ratio have been taken into account.
 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
 
101.     The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry.
 
CLOSURE OF EXISTING HYDERABAD AIRPORT
(Recommendation at Para 112)
 
102.     The Committee is distressed to note that the Ministry of Civil Aviation has decided to shut down the existing airport
 at Hyderabad for commercial operations.  The Committee fails to understand as to why such kind of concessional agreement
 was signed when the Ministry itself was of the opinion that the present terminals could be utilized at least for one more
 decade.  The Committee also expresses its doubt as to how the Ministry is planning to compensate with the losses to be
 incurred, in case the existing terminal at Hyderabad is closed, by developing shopping complexes, housing etc. on
 commercial basis. The Committee is opposed to this move of the Government for closing the existing airport at Hyderabad
 for commercial flights once the new Hyderabad International Airport Limited is operational and urges the Government to
 reconsider this decision.

96threport of Standing Committee On Transport, Tourism & Culture
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/96threport.htm[22-10-2018 12:09:22]
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
103.     The decision to shut down the existing airport for civil operations on commissioning of new airport had been taken by
 the Government on the basis of recommendation of Taskforce on Infrastructure headed by the Deputy Chairman, Planning
 Commission. The existing airport has severe limitations for expansion because of natural and manmade obstructions like
 hill, railway over bridge, factory chimney, building etc. and even though the present runway length is 9080 ft., landing
 length is 7060 ft. due to the obstruction in the approach path. Since the decision has already been incorporated in the
 Concession Agreement signed with the Hyderabad International Airport Limited (HIAL), the issue has acquired finality.  
 Reconsideration of this issue at this stage would amount to Government of India’s default and may invite payment of
 compensation to HIAL.  Besides, this would create uncertainty in the minds of prospective future investors on the credibility
 of the Government’s policy to involve private sector in the development of infrastructure through public private
 partnerships.
 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
104.     The Committee is not satisfied with the reply.  The aviation sector in the country has changed dramatically with the
 low cost carriers gaining ground.   The previously unviable routes are now proving to be profitable ones and there is stiff
 competition amongst the private operators to extend their reach to all parts of the country.  In this changed scenario, instead
 of reassessing its strategy, the Ministry is following the unhealthy policy of creation of monopoly by promoting only one
 airport at different metros, as in the case of Delhi and Mumbai. The Committee also notes that the justification put forward
 by the Ministry for the closure of the existing airport at Hyderabad is contrary to the rationale of the Ministry for rejecting
 the proposals for Greenfield airports at Delhi and Mumbai.  In respect of those two airports, the Ministry has maintained
 throughout that unless the capacity is not optimized or added in the existing Brownfield airport, it is not prudent to set up a
 Greenfield airport.  The Committee, therefore, reiterates that the Government should reconsider the decision to close down
 the existing airport at Hyderabad on the commissioning of a new International airport.
PROTECTION TO THE INTERESTS OF THE EMPLOYEES OF AIRPORTS AUTHORITY OF INDIA.
(Recommendation at Para 115)
105.     The Committee is of the opinion that due protection must be given to the interests of employees of Airports Authority
 of India while proceeding with the commissioning of new international airports at Bangalore and Hyderabad and
 restructuring of Delhi and Mumbai airports.  The Committee recommends that all decision relating to absorption of
 employees of Airports Authority of India by other companies should be taken in a transparent manner in consultation with
 the representatives of the employees of Airports Authority of India.  The Committee cautions that adequate care should be
 taken to protect the interests of the employees of the Authority and it should be ensured that the existing terms and
 conditions of service of the employees of the Authority are not altered after their absorption into the said companies.
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
106.     In respect of Delhi / Mumbai airports a provision has already been made in the RFP document that the JVC will have
 an Employee Arrangement for a period of three years whereby AAI employees, other than those pertaining to ATC & CNS
 departments, posted at the Airports will continue to provide their services at these airports.  The JVC will be required, during
 the period of three years to make offers of employment in order to absorb a minimum of 40% or such higher percentage as
 committed by the Bidder of the existing AAI employees working at these airports, excepting those engaged in
 Communication Navigation Surveillance (CNS), Air Traffic Management (ATM), Security, as reduced for retirements,
 resignations, transfers and death.  Employment offers can be made at any time during the Employee Arrangement Period. At
 the end of this Employment Arrangement Period those employees who do not take up the employment offers or who are not
 made such employment offer will return to AAI. Consultation is being held through periodic meetings with the
 representatives of AAI Employees Joint Forum.  AAI is also committed to provide full protection to the employees of AAI
 working at Delhi and Mumbai airports on their restructuring. These employees shall continue to have same rights and
 privileges as enjoyed by employees assigned at other Airports of AAI.
107.     Government has obtained a Comfort letter from HIAL stating that the HIAL will consider taking on deputation /
 absorption basis the employees of AAI at the existing Hyderabad airport, excepting employees belonging to ATM / CNS
 who are working in connection with Civil operations subject to merit & efficiency against available positions in HIAL Those
 employees who are not absorbed by the HIAL would be absorbed at other airports of AAI subject to rules and regulations of
 AAI. Government is considering the options available under CA to take up the issues relating to the employees at the
 existing Bangalore airport with Bangalore International Airport Limited. Government has already written to BIAL to issue a
 comfort letter to the Ministry regarding employees of AAI working at the existing airport on the lines similar to HIAL.
 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
108.     The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry and finds that there is no assurance of protection of the existing terms
 and condition of service of the employees of Airports Authority of India after restructuring of Delhi/Mumbai airports.  With
 respect to Greenfield airports of Bangalore and Hyderabad, the Committee is not satisfied with the reply that Government
 has obtained comfort letters from the JV Companies that they would consider taking on deputation / absorption basis the

96threport of Standing Committee On Transport, Tourism & Culture
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/96threport.htm[22-10-2018 12:09:22]
 existing employees other than Communication Navigation Surveillance (CNS) /Air Traffic Management (ATM) employees.
 The Committee recommends that performance standard appraisal of the employees to be retained in JVCs should be done on
 fair basis.
 
CREATION OF A EASTERN HUB AT KOLKATA
(Recommendation at Para 118)
109.     The Committee is of the opinion that with the growth of the aviation sector in the country, the pressure and strain on
 Mumbai and Delhi airports is also increasing. The Committee is apprehensive that with the arrival of private players in the
 airline sector, there will be a further intensification of this pressure. As accepted by the Secretary of the Ministry, the Delhi
 and Mumbai – centric activity was also becoming unmanageable. Therefore there exists a need to develop alternate
 destinations, particularly in the eastern part of country. The Committee, therefore, recommends that Ministry of Civil
 Aviation should take steps for the creation of an eastern hub at Kolkata. The Committee also notes that while a foreign
 carrier was fully exploiting the availability of air traffic in Kolkata, our own carriers did not even have presence there. The
 Committee, therefore, also recommends that Ministry of Civil Aviation should introduce international flights from Kolkata.
 In the context of look East policy of the Government, the Committee feels that locational advantage of Kolkata vis-à-vis
 South East and Far East Asia can be leveraged. Apart from this, the Committee feels that this will reduce the pressure on
 Delhi & Mumbai airports to a great extent. On similar grounds, the Committee also feels that a Southern hub should be
 established at Chennai.
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
110.     The Government has been encouraging international connectivity to/from Kolkata in bilateral talks held with different
 countries in recent times. As a result of Government initiative, several airlines have commenced flights to/from Kolkata. The
 following foreign airlines are presently operating to/from Kolkata:
(i)
                  Biman Bangladesh
(ii)                British Airways
(iii)               Druk Air
(iv)              CMG Airlines
(v)                Gulf Air
(vi)              Royal Jordan Airlines
(vii)             Malaysian Airlines
(viii)           Singapore Airlines
(ix)              Thai Airways
 
111.     It may be noted that most of the foreign airlines operating to Kolkata are providing connectivity to East-bound
 destinations, particularly in South East Asia. It may also be mentioned that Government has a very liberal policy towards
 grant of traffic rights to foreign airlines for operations to Kolkata. At present, no requests from any country is pending before
 the Government for traffic rights to Kolkata.
112.     In addition to the foreign airlines, Air India has also commenced thrice-weekly flights w.e.f. June, 2005 on Kolkata-
Dhaka and Kolkata-London routes. This has met a long-standing demand of West Bengal/Eastern sector for international
 operations by Air India out of Kolkata. Air India is also operating 3 hub and spoke flights on the route Kolkata-Mumbai-
Kolkata, which provide connection over Mumbai to all major Air India international destinations. Air India is also evaluating
 the possibility of operating to South East Asia from Kolkata on the budget-carrier, Air India Express. As regards Chennai,
 Air India is in the process of finalizing operations from Chennai to Kuala Lumpur and Singapore subject to additional
 aircraft being inducted in its fleet.
113.     It is felt that with the initiatives taken by the Government, which are outlined above, Kolkata would emerge as an
 important hub in the Eastern part of the country for international operations.
114.   The details of the scheduled air services operated by Indian carriers to/from Kolkata are as under:
 
a)        Kolkata
            Domestic
·
        Inbound      -           403 flights per week
·        Outbound   -           403 flights per week
 
International
·        Inbound      -           20 flights per week
·        Outbound   -           20 flights per week
 
115.     Details of Major Developmental works undertaken by AAI at Kolkata during the year 2005 –2006 are:

96threport of Standing Committee On Transport, Tourism & Culture
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/96threport.htm[22-10-2018 12:09:22]
 
Sr. No. Name of the Scheme Estimated Cost
 (Rs. In crores)
1. Reconstruction of bay nos.11 and 12 4.96
2. Strengthening of ‘D’ taxi – track 5.80
3. Construction of Integrated Cargo Complex 49.66
4. Construction of 2 nos. additional in contact parking bays 3.50
5. Construction of 2 nos. additional remote parking bays 4.00
6. Linking of 1st phase apron with existing taxiway 5.40
 
116.     Details of Major works proposed to be taken up at Kolkata during tenth five year plan 2002 – 2007 are as under:
 
Sr. No. Name of the Scheme Estimated Cost
(Rs. In crores)
1. Modification of Terminal – 2 (Phase – II) 47.74
2. Extension of secondary runway 23.00
3. Resurfacing of Secondary Runway 10.00
4. Construction of 6 nos. domestic parking stand 10.00
5. Construction of 2 nos. additional aerobridges alongwith connecting corridor at
 Domestic Terminal Building
7.00
6. Construction of 1 no. additional aerobridge at International Terminal Building 3.50
7. Reconstruction of bays no. 42 & 43 4.77
 
117.     Details of the scheduled air services operated by Indian Carriers to/from Chennai are as under:
      Chennai
            Domestic
·
        Inbound      -           413 flights per week
·        Outbound   -           413 flights per week
 
International
·        Inbound      -           96 flights per week
·        Outbound   -           96 flights per week
 
118.     Proper attention is also being paid for development of Chennai airport as Southern hub and recommendations of the
 Committee in this regard have been noted.
 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
119.     The Committee notes the reply and finds that the Ministry has not mentioned anything about the recommendation for
 the creation of a southern hub at Chennai.  Further, the reply has not indicated the details of the work undertaken at Chennai
 airport.  The Committee desires that air hubs at Kolkata and Chennai will be created very soon and airlines would be given
 incentives for use of these airports for parking etc. by levying lesser charges.
 
PAWAN HANS HELICOPTERS LIMITED
(Recommendation at Para 127)
 
120.     The Committee notes that PHHL has been acquiring new fleet of helicopters with a view to extending its services in
 the Domestic Sector for short-haul distances.  The Committee feels that there is a need for reinventing Air Transport
 Services to connect different regions of the country for contributing towards the process of national economic growth.  The
 Committee recommends that the Ministry should explore the possibility for providing regular air transport services to PHHL
 to connect specific places, especially hilly areas which are inaccessible by a fixed wing aircraft or other modes of travel. 
 The Committee further recommends that in order to give a fillip to tourism and for unlocking the value of various tourist
 destinations in the country, the Ministry should operate regular helicopter services in certain parts like, North Eastern States,
 Khajuraho (Madhya Pradesh), Nanded, Kohalapur, Shirdi (Maharashtra) Tirupati (Andhra Pradesh) and Northern Hill States
 of Jammu and Kashmir, Himachal Pradesh and Uttranchal.
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
121.     PHHL has been providing helicopter services to connect inaccessible and hilly areas in various parts of the country

96threport of Standing Committee On Transport, Tourism & Culture
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/96threport.htm[22-10-2018 12:09:22]
 from its commencement of operations since 1986-87.  The details of the services presently being provided by PHHL in this
 sector are as under: -
North Eastern States, Andaman & Nicobar and Lakshadweep Administrations:-
122.     Pawan Hans Helicopters Limited provides Helicopters  on wet lease basis to the State Govts./Govt. Agencies/Private
 Parties and also on long term lease/short term charter basis to meet their requirements such as VIP transportation, regular
 passenger services etc.   PHHL has provided helicopters to the State Govts. Of Meghalaya, Tripura, Sikkim, Arunanchal
 Pradesh and A & N and Lakshadweep Administrations, which are utilizing PHHL helicopters for running regular passenger
 services, VIP transportation etc.   The State Govts. – Arunanchal Pradesh, Sikkim, Tripura, Meghalaya are given 75% and
 Andaman & Nicobar – 90% & Lakshadweep Administration- 80%, subsidy from the Government of India for using Pawan
 Hans Helicopters Limited for running regular passenger services.  The fare, scheduling, ticketing and handling of passengers
 etc. are decided by the respective State Govts./Adminisatrations.
123.     At Present, PHHL connect 33 destinations, 64 sectors and 155 weekly flights by regular helicopter services being run
 by PHHL under aegis of NE States and A & N and Lakshadweep Administrations.
124.     As regards providing Helicopter Services to various tourist destination, PHHL has been making regular efforts for
 connecting important tourist & pilgrimage places based on the request of the State Govts./Govt. Agencies/Shrine Boards etc.
 The details of the initiatives taken by PHHL to connect the places with tourist potential presently are as under:-
125.     PHHL has been providing regular passenger services under the aegis of the State Govts. of Sikkim, Meghalaya,
 Tripura, Arunanchal Pradesh, Lakshadweep and Andaman & Nicobar Administrations for connecting important placaes in
 their respective states.
126.     During the season ( May-June and Sept.-Oct.) PHHL operates regular passenger flights to Kedarnath Shrine from
 Augustmuni.  The service for Shri Kedarnath Dham has been started from the year 2003 onwards. During the second phase
 of operations i.e. in October, 04, the helicopter was also given on charter from Augustmuni for visiting Badrinath Dham (on
 demand).  This year also, in the first phase PHHL operated the services from 12
th May, 2005 to Shri Kekarnath Dham,
 Badrinath.
127.     PHHL has signed a MOU with Garhawal Vikas Nigam Ltd. (GMVN) in August, 04 to connect important tourist
 places in Uttaranchal like Ghagharia, Hemkund Sahib, Valley of Flowers etc. from Gauchar from 2005 onwards, subject to
 permission from the State Govt. 
128.     PHHL has provided 2 Bell 407 helicopters on wet lease basis to a private party for running passenger services to
 Amarnath Dham this season i.e. May-August, 2005.
Services to other places- Khajuraho (MP), Kohalapur, Nanded, Shirdi, Tirupati etc.:-
129.     Helicopter services are useful for short-haul distances and in those areas such as mountains/seas, which are not well
 connected by other modes of transportations.  Further, the cost of helicopter operation are almost  five times costlier than
 that of fixed wing and hence is incompetitive to fixed wing.  It is pertinent to bring out that NE State Govts recovers only
 25% of the cost of the tickets from the passengers utilizing PHHL helicopters and deficit, if any, being met from the State
 Govt fund; and balance 75% is being paid by the Central Govt. as subsidy.  It is brought out that the cost of ticket per seat on
 Delhi-Jaipur sector by helicopter would be around Rs.13875/- each way, while the same by scheduled airlines is only
 Rs.3210/-each way.  Therefore only the top end domestic & foreign tourists/Executives/passengers are likely to utilize the
 helicopter.  Fixed wing aircraft is also preferable because it is more comfortable and faster than a helicopter.  Helicopters are
 therefore chartered normally to places which are inaccessible by a fixed wing aircraft or other modes of travel.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
130.     The Committee notes the reply and feels that the Ministry has not fully appreciated its recommendation.  There is no
 denying the fact that helicopter services could not be a viable alternate mode of travel in those places where fixed wing
 aircrafts are operating presently.  The Committee is of the view that if the Ministry finds the non-accessible tourist
 destinations non-viable for operations by PHHL, it should at least offer attractive terms and conditions for the wet lease of
 helicopters to State Governments/Government agencies/Private parties to enable them to tap the tourism potential in various
 parts of the country.
(Recommendation at Para 128)
131.     The Committee expresses its concern over the rise in helicopter accidents in the country and feels that there is an
 urgent need for revamping the system of safety audits of various helicopter operators. The Committee is of the view that the
 operations of helicopter companies, especially in the private sector, should be monitored and regulated properly in the light
 of the recent helicopter accidents. The Committee recommends the Ministry for creation of a dedicated cell for carrying out
 the safety audits for helicopter under DGCA. The committee also takes strong exception to the failure of the Ministry of
 Civil Aviation to furnish information sought by the Committee with respect to the proficiency rating system of pilots in
 DGCA.
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
132.     DGCA ensures, on a continuous basis, strict compliance of safety norms by all air operators, including private
 operators by way of safety audits. Besides, spot checks on maintenance activities are also carried out by the DGCA.  DGCA

96threport of Standing Committee On Transport, Tourism & Culture
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/96threport.htm[22-10-2018 12:09:22]
 also keeps updating the Civil Aviation Requirements/Circulars to provide better airworthiness schedule and for enhancement
 of air safety aspects. Government is running two international training programmes for the officials of DGCA and airlines
 viz. Co-Operative Development of Operational safety and Continuing Airworthiness Programme and European Union-India-
Training Programme.
133.     A special Committee set up under the Chairmanship of Gp. Capt. D.C. Kaushik (Retd.) examined the issue of
 helicopter Operations from all aspects, excluding the Standards, frequency and syllabus for the training of helicopter Pilots,
 Requirements for safe Helicopter Operations in line with the standards and Recommended Practices of ICAO Convention as
 well as the National air safety and Civil Aviation demands and made recommendations in respect of Training, Helicopter
 Services Operations, especially in Hills, remote and areas with difficult accessibility, Medical evacuation and Rescue etc.
134.     The Kaushik Committee in its report submitted on 10.03.2005, has made recommendations relevant to safety Audits
 and training  syllabus of initial and refresher training for Helicopters, proficiency monitoring and Instrument Rating, off-
shore flying, operating in the hilly areas, emergency medical services, electronic news gathering, low flying for mining
 surveys and requirements for certification of helicopter training establishments, etc.
135.     All the recommendations of the Kaushik Committee have been accepted for implementation by Dte.GCA.  Of the 20
 recommendations, 11 have been implemented and 2 are actually statements, which require no action. Action is on hand, on
 remaining recommendations requiring Rules, Policy and regulatory procedural amendments.
 
Status on Helicopter Cell in DGCA:
136.     The creation of Helicopter Cell in DGCA is under active consideration.  The proposal for providing manpower
 requirement under the Plan Scheme was sent to the Planning Commission for their approval.  The same has not been agreed
 to by them.  The proposal for creation of Non-plan posts is being considered in consultation with Ministry of Finance. 
 Meanwhile a Helicopter Group has been constituted in DGCA.  The brief on Helicopter Group is as under:
(a)
    A Helicopter Group is operative in DGCA.  The Helicopter Group Co-ordinates with the industry on matters
 related to safety of operations.  The Group coordinated the implementation of Kaushik Committee
 Recommendations and will oversee the implementation and adoption of the new procedures.
(b)   All Helicopter Operators have been advised on 10 th August 2005 to adopt revised training procedures for
 conversion training and recurrent training.
(c)    Helicopter ab-initio training is being streamlined through approved training organisations like IGRUA, Rotary
 Wing Academy and PHHL.  Pawan Hans Helicopters have also decided to provide a grant of Rs. 1 crore per year
 to IGRUA to set up ground and simulator training facilities at IGRUA for helicopter pilots.
(d)
   The group, through Director of Airworthiness, Mumbai has issued instructions to all operators to draw a plan for
 retrieval of helicopters damaged in recent flooding of Juhu Airport in Mumbai in consultation with the Helicopter
 manufacturers.  The same is being monitored by members of the Helicopter Group.
137.     The requisite information regarding proficiency rating system of pilots in DGCA was sent to the Rajya Sabha
 Secretariat vide O.M. No. A.60011/020/2005-VE dated 4
th May, 2005 (copy at Annexure II).The delay in sending this
 information is regretted.
 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
 
138.     The Committee is not satisfied with the reply furnished by the Ministry.  The Committee has not been apprised about
 the details of the safety audits of the Helicopter operators and instead a routine reply that ‘safety audits are being conducted
 on continuous basis’ has been given.  The Committee recommends that the Ministry should evolve permanent mechanism
 viz. constitution of a Helicopter Cell, to monitor the helicopter operations in view of the Kaushik Committee Report.  As
 regards the proficiency rating system of pilots in DGCA, the Ministry vide  O.M. No.A.60011/020/2005-VE dated 4
th May,
 2005 had informed, inter-alia, that the lone post of Flight Inspector (Helicopter) in the Office of DGCA fell vacant in
 December 2001 and the same was filled up on ad-hoc basis for one year w.e.f. 16
th August 2003.  This post has again fallen
 vacant as the appointee was unwilling to continue beyond one year and was relieved of his duties w.e.f. 16 th August 2004. 
 Accordingly, this post was re-advertised.  The Ministry has, however, not informed whether the same has been filled up
 now.  The Ministry further informed that proficiency checks of Pilots are conducted by Examiners approved by DGCA, on
 bi-annual basis to comply with the requirements of the Aircraft Rules, 1937.  The Committee notes that the DGCA Inspector
 is associated as an observer in those cases where consecutive checks are carried out by the same examiner to ensure sanctity
 of the proficiency check.    The Committee finds that the reply is highly insufficient on the procedure for proficiency checks
 of the pilots.  The Committee is surprised to note that the post of Flight Inspector (Helicopter) has been lying vacant for long
 periods of time and therefore is of the opinion that the Ministry has not been able to ensure foolproof proficiency checks.  
 The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry should review its institutional mechanism on the proficiency rating
 system of pilots in DGCA.
REVAMPING OF TRANSPORT SECTOR IN ANDAMAN AND NICOBAR ISLANDS IN POST TSUNAMI

96threport of Standing Committee On Transport, Tourism & Culture
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/96threport.htm[22-10-2018 12:09:22]
 SCENARIO
(Recommendation at Para 133)
 
139.     The Committee notes that transportation of tourists from the mainland has been a major constraint for Andaman &
 Nicobar Islands.   The Committee is of the opinion that affordable air connectivity is a crucial element in sustaining tourism
 in Andaman & Nicobar Islands for the economic sustenance of the islands.   Therefore, corrective actions to reduce the
 exorbitant airfares, which deter the increase of the tourist inflow in the region, need to be taken urgently.    The Committee
 recommends that LTC facility from Kolkata to Andaman and Nicobar Islands should also be introduced and number of seats
 available under Apex Fare Schemes should be increased in order to encourage more and more domestic tourists to visits
 these islands.   The Committee also recommends that direct flights should be introduced to Port Blair from other stations in
 the country apart from Kolkata and Chennai.   Private airlines should also be encouraged to fly to these Islands besides
 allowing airlines operating from South and South East Asian countries to have stopover at Port Blair.    The Committee also
 recommends for increasing the inter-island air connectivity in Andaman and Nicobar Islands in order to boost tourism in
 these islands.
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
140.     Alliance Air (subsidiary of Indian Airlines), presently connects Port Blair with Kolkata and Chennai as detailed
 below:
 
Flight NO.                               Route                                      A/c      Freq/week
CD 7287/7288             Kolkata-Port Blair-Kolkata                  B-737           5
CD 7549/7550             Chennai-Port Blair-Chennai                  B-737        Daily
 
141.     Alliance Air was operating a daily B-737 flight on the Kolkata-Port Blair-Kolkata route in the Summer 2005 schedule
 effective 27
th March 2005.  Due to the onset of the lean season and coupled with the resources constraints being faced by
 Alliance  Air, the frequency of the flight has been temporarily reduced to 5 flights per week instead of the earlier daily
 operation w.e.f. 20th June 2005 till 31st August, 2005.
142.     Indian Airlines currently has no plans to introduce direct flights to Port Blair from new points.  Indian Airlines has
 been providing air services to Port Blair from Chennai and Kolkata for the past many decades.  Over the period of time,
 Chennai has come to be accepted as a gateway point for travel to Port Blair, from South, West as well as North India, while
 Kolkata serves as a gateway to Port Blair from East and North India.  Both Chennai and Kolkata are as such serving as hub
 points for operations to Port Blair.  Indian Airlines provides a daily over night connection to Port Blair over
 Chennai/Kolkata and a same day connection in the return direction.  While it would be ideal to have a same day onward
 connection to Port Blair, due to the limitations of Port Blair airfield, the same is not possible and the operations to/from Port
 Blair have to be restricted to morning hours.
143.     Indian Airlines used to operate a B-737 service on the Kolkata-Port Blair-Car Nicobar routes on a once weekly basis
 till December 1992. This service was withdrawn due to low passenger demand on the route. In IA’s opinion the existing air
 traffic demand between Inter-Island points in the Andaman & Nicobar islands cannot be viably served with the jet type of
 aircraft currently available on IA’s fleet. Services between these points can be served only with smaller capacity aircraft. 
 Indian Airlines’ fleet of smaller capacity aircraft comprising Dornier is fully deployed for scheduled operations in the
 Lakshadweep Islands. The 4 ATR aircraft leased-in by Alliance Air are operating dedicated services to/from and within
 North East under financial assistance provided by Department for Development of North East. Due to non-availability of
 suitable smaller capacity aircraft Indian Airlines/Alliance Air is not in a position to consider Inter-Island operations.
144.     The existing Normal fares (fare component) on sectors to/from Port Blair are as under:
 
Ÿ
         Chennai-Port Blair    ‘J’            Rs.15269/-
                                  ‘Y’            Rs.10289/-
 
Ÿ
         Kolkata-Port Blair     ‘J’            Rs.16744/-
                                        ‘Y’            Rs.11169/-
145.     On 04 th May 2002 the then Hon’ble Minister of Civil Aviation had visited Port Blair for the renaming of Port Blair
 airport.  During the function, the Hon’ble Minster had announced a reduction of fares ex-Port Blair by 10%. This discount is
 applicable only for travel by Economy class.
 
146.     In view of the above, the One way and Round Trip fares on Port Blair-Chennai and Port Blair-Kolkata were revised
 effective 15
th May, 2002.  The fares were kept 10% lower than fares ex-Chennai to Port Blair and ex-Kolkata to Port Blair.
 The reduction in fare is applicable to tickets issued at Port Blair. The existing discounted fare (fare component) is:
Ÿ         Port-Blair-Chennai          Rs.9304/-

96threport of Standing Committee On Transport, Tourism & Culture
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/96threport.htm[22-10-2018 12:09:22]
Ÿ         Port-Blair-Kolkata         Rs.10084/-
147.     After “Tsunami” Port Blair is not a preferred tourist destination. In order to provide a boost to tourism Indian Airlines
 has introduced ‘Fly Select’ fares, now called ‘Easy Fares’ on sectors to/from Port Blair.  These fares are special discounted
 fares.  Under the category a maximum of four levels of fares are offered.  The levels vary from 1 to 4. The tickets can be
 booked at any point of time depending on the availability of seats in the specified booking class.
 148.    The fare levels currently available are:
 
Sector                          Level 1           Level 2            Level 3            Level 4
Chennai-Port Blair        7700                6200                5200                4200
Kolkata-Port Blair        8400                6700                5600                4500
 
149.     It may be added that the ‘APEX fares’ offered earlier have been brought under the purview of ‘Easy Fares’. The
 APEX fares now cease to exist.  The passenger is at an advantage since there are no prebooking conditions attached and
 ‘Easy Fares’ offer greater flexibility.
150.     The various other Promotional Schemes offered including the LTC scheme are based on business policy
 considerations like extent of competition, market size, capacity offered on particular route/sector etc. since, these parameters
 are dynamic parameters of market forces.  Moreover, any Promotional Scheme that is extended has implications in respect
 of other similar concessions offered and a number of factors need to be taken into account e.g. booking pattern on flights,
 seat factor, the possible dilutionary effect of the change proposed etc. The availability/non-availability of any Promotional
 Scheme on a particular sector is governed by these factors.
151.     Also, there is a certain percentage of discount offered under the Promotional Schemes.  A provision, therefore, exists
 to place an embargo on select flights/sectors having high seat factors under the scheme so as to protect dilution of revenue. 
 In view of the above factors embargo is placed for travel on LTC on all flights operating between Port Blair-Kolkata or vice
 versa sector.
152.     It may be added that Indian Airlines carries a heavy burden of social responsibilities by operating uneconomic
 operations.  The entire burden of such uneconomic operations falls on Indian Airlines, inspite of its extremely difficult
 financial situation. It is not possible to lift embargo on the above sector/flights during a specified period of time within the
 validity of the scheme.  It is pertinent to mention that Indian Airlines is a Commercial Organization and has to act on
 business principles. 
 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
153.     The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry regarding affordable air connectivity to Port Blair, Andaman &
 Nicobar Islands.  However, the Ministry has not responded to the recommendation regarding the need to encourage private
 airlines to fly to these Islands besides allowing airlines operating from South and South East Asian countries to have
 stopover at Port Blair.    The Ministry should also review its stand on inter-island air connectivity in Andaman and Nicobar
 Islands in order to boost tourism in these islands. As regards LTC facility, it seems that the Ministry has not appreciated
 fully the recommendation made by the Committee. However, the Minister in his Statement made in Lok Sabha on the 12
th
 May, 2005 had appreciated the recommendation and had assured to take up the matter regarding LTC facility with the
 Department of Personnel & Training. The Committee understands that the Government had since formulated a LTC Scheme
 for the Central Government employees for visiting Andaman & Nicobar Islands, which was effective till 25 th November,
 2005. The Committee feels that the period of operation of the Scheme is too short to have a positive impact on the tourism
 sector of the Islands specifically taking into consideration the magnitude of the devastation caused by tsunami. The
 Committee noted that a large number of government employees had already availed this facility but still there are many who
 desire to avail LTC to Andaman and Nicobar Islands. The Committee therefore recommends that this LTC Scheme should
 be extended for a suitable period of time in order to encourage more and more domestic tourists to visit these islands,
 thereby helping its tourism sector to attain sustaining levels.
DEVELOPMENT OF AIRPORTS AND INCREASE IN FLIGHTS IN NORTH EASTERN STATES
(Recommendation at Para 135)
 
154.     The Committee is of the view that because of the difficult terrain and inaccessibility of the region by road, there exists
 a strong requirement for more flight-connectivity to all north-eastern States, though some of these airports are non profit
 making destinations.  Accordingly, the Committee recommends that the private operators should also share the social
 obligation and provide more flights to all destinations instead of just fulfilling the existing minimum requirements of Route
 Dispersal Guidelines.
    
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
155.     The Route Dispersal Guidelines (RDG) issued by the Government in 1994, require all scheduled airlines to deploy at
 least 10% of the capacity deployed by them on major trunk routes (i.e. CAT-I routes) on the routes to/from North East,

96threport of Standing Committee On Transport, Tourism & Culture
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/96threport.htm[22-10-2018 12:09:22]
 Jammu & Kashmir, Lakshadweep and Andaman & Nicobar Islands (i.e. CAT II routes). Out of the total capacity so
 deployed in CAT-II routes, 10 % of the capacity is required to be deployed for connectivity with North East, Jammu &
 Kashmir, Lakshadweep and Andaman & Nicobar Islands. Further, the airlines are also required to deploy 50% of the
 capacity, deployed on CAT-I routes, on non-trunk routes i.e. CAT-III routes. The Director General of Civil Aviation
 monitors the compliance with the RDG on a monthly basis.
156.     The Government had set-up a Committee under the Chairmanship of Director General of Civil Aviation vide Order
 dated 23.9.2003 to review the existing Route Dispersal Guidelines. The Committee has   submitted its report on 18.3.2005,
 which is under active consideration of the Government. The concerns expressed by the Committee shall be duly considered
 before taking any final decision in the matter. The private airlines are also being apprised about these concerns for
 appropriate action.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
157.     As already observed by the Committee, it fails to understand the nature and reasons for the inordinate delay by
 DGCA and that of the Ministry, of over nine months to come out with a specific time frame for making suitable changes in
 the Route Dispersal Guidelines.
(Recommendation at Para 136)
158.     The Committee observed that airports at Imphal and Aizawl were recently constructed ones. The Committee
 emphasized that while constructing the terminal building local art and architecture should be kept in mind and building
 should be designed accordingly. Civil Aviation and Tourism go hand in hand as airport is the gateway for the tourists, which
 should unveil the rich cultural and architectural heritage of the region. This would also attract more and more tourists and
 would substantially take care of the capacity under-utilization problem of the airports. The Committee also pointed out that
 adequate care should be taken with the help of the State Government to open shopping outlets / cafeteria for showcasing
 local cuisines / handicrafts etc.
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
 
159.     The infrastructure facilities at Imphal airport have been developed in a phased manner. The new terminal building
 complex was constructed during 9
th five-year plan at the cost of Rs.20 crores by AAI and has been expanded with highlight
 of state architectural character. In the Lounges, the Imphal paintings depicting the rich heritage of Manipur have been
 displayed to enhance the Manipuri flavour captured by the architecture of the terminal building. Efforts are being made to
 further augment the local culture and architecture in the interiors of the terminal building of Lengpui in consultation with the
 Government of Mizoram. Besides, to promote the art and handicrafts and local culture at Lengpui and Imphal, action has
 been initiated to create Sale Counters and Restaurants.
160.     State Govt. is also being approached for opening of handicrafts shops at above airports for encouraging local artisans
 and sale of their products.
161.     In case of Aizawl (Lengpui) airport, which belongs to Govt. of Mizoram, the building has been designed keeping the
 local art and architecture in view.
Efforts are made to incorporate local architecture and heritage touch in the outer fascia of the buildings at many other
 airports.
162.     The terminal building normally have stalls/shops for daily requirements of passengers, medical shops, newspapers
 and magazines shops, snack bar, handicrafts, floriculture shops prepaid taxies, hotel facilitation etc.
 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
 
163.     The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry and hopes that the need for reflecting the rich cultural and architectural
 heritage of respective regions through airport buildings will be made mandatory while modernizing the existing airports
 albeit with private participation and also while commissioning new airports in public or private sector in the country.
 
 
(Recommendation at Para 137)
 
164.     While discussing the security aspect at the airport the Committee raised the issue of payment for security at non-
operational airports also. The Committee recommends that in addition to profit and loss accountability, there should be value
 audit and development audit in this field. The Committee also desires that the Ministry should furnish a written note to the
 Committee detailing the break-up of security related expenditure and developmental expenditure at various airports in North
 Eastern States.
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
 

96threport of Standing Committee On Transport, Tourism & Culture
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/96threport.htm[22-10-2018 12:09:22]
165.     Details of recommendations of the Committee with respect to value audit and development audit in provision of
 security at airports have been brought to the notice of AAI for compliance.  Security expenditure at various airports in North
 East Region are given at Annexure-III.  Details ofexpenditure on major developmental works at various airports in North
 East Region is given at Annexure-IV.
 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
 
166.     The Committee notes that the data furnished by the Ministry in the matter of security-related and developmental
 expenditure relates to different time periods. Whereas, the security-related expenditure gives the actual amounts incurred
 during the financial year 2003-04, the details under the developmental expenditure are tentative/estimated figures in respect
 of the ongoing major developmental works. The lack of correlation between the data under the two heads exhibits the non-
serious attitude of the Ministry towards the recommendation of the Committee for initiating value audit and development
 audit. The Committee expresses its unhappiness on the casual approach of the Ministry towards the development of the
 aviation sector in the North-Eastern region of the country.
 
(Recommendation at Para 138)
 
167.     The Committee accordingly recommends that the Aizawl airport should be upgraded from VFR to IFR status and a
 proper Metrological observatory equipped with all modern gadgets like, skopograph, Ceilograph etc., should also be
 installed there.
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
 
168.     Lengpui airport serving Aizawl belongs to the State Govt. of Mizoram. It is equipped with VOR, NDB and Fire
 station. VOR instrument approach to land procedure for circling approaches for IFR operations is available at Lengpui.
 However, due to surrounding terrain minimas are higher i.e. 3600 mtrs. for small aircraft (Cat. A and B) and 4800 mtrs. for
 bigger aircraft (Cat. C & D). AAI provides ATC, Fire and Rescue and Maintenance support for navigation aids and
 communication facilities. A draft MoU for operational and maintenance lease to AAI is pending at State Govt. end.
 
169.     A team of AAI officers had visited Lengpui airport on 17-18 May, 2005 for obtaining necessary data for obstruction
 and terrain for installation of ILS on runway 17 (installation of ILS at the other end is not feasible due to prevalent terrain).
 AAI has undertaken feasibility study for installation of Instrument Landing System (ILS).
 
170.     Meteorological services provided at the moment are adequate for the VOR instrument approach procedure. Once the
 installation of ILS is found feasible and the MOU is finalized, necessary action will be taken by AAI with the help of India
 Meteorological Department to arrange necessary meteorological equipment commensurate with the operational
 requirements.
 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
 
171.     The Committee partially accepts the reply of the Government but still recommends that operational / procedural
 bottlenecks should be removed at the earliest and the Aizwal Airport should be given IFR status which is much required for
 a hill locked State like Mizoram.
OBSERVATIONS/CONCLUSIOINS/RECOMMENDATIONS AT A GLANCE
 
The Committee desires that final replies in respect of the recommendations, which have been categorized as interim
 replies by the Committee should be furnished to it at the earliest.(Para 3)
    ASSESSMENT OF ANNUAL PLAN 2004-05 AND ALLOCATION FOR    2005-06
 
            The Committee is of the view that the Ministry should formulate Plan budgets on realistic basis and also review the
 same at quarterly intervals to monitor the utilization of the allocations under different Budget Heads.  The Committee
 therefore recommends that the exercise undertaken during the preparation of Revised Budget Estimates should involve a
 detailed review of the progress of various projects rather than conducting the same in a routine manner. (Para 7)
INDIAN AIRLINES
           
            The Committee desires that Indian Airlines/Alliance Air would maintain their special role in fulfilling the social
 obligations of the nation especially during the times of extreme distress. (Para 10)
 

96threport of Standing Committee On Transport, Tourism & Culture
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/96threport.htm[22-10-2018 12:09:22]
            The Committee expresses its anguish over the evasive comments of the Ministry offered in response to the
 recommendation of the Parliamentary Committee.  The Committee is extremely unhappy about the lackadaisical approach of
 the Ministry on the issue of revision of scales of pay of employees of Indian Airlines.  The Committee is of the view that the
 satisfaction level of the personnel in the matter of service conditions is a major factor affecting the performance of any
 organisation.  The total inaction on the part of the Ministry in the matter of pay revision of employees of Indian Airlines is
 surprising especially in the present age of poaching and stiff competition by other Indian scheduled carriers.  The
 Committee, therefore, reiterates that the Ministry should expedite its decision in the matter in the overall interest of the
 employees and the organisation.  (Para 13)
           
The Committee notes the reply and is happy to note that the Ministry has now taken due cognizance of its
 apprehensions regarding the pricing of aircrafts being procured by Indian Airlines. The Committee desires that the actual
 acquisition of aircrafts would now commence at the earliest in the best interest of Indian Airlines and the nation.(Para 16)
 
OPENING OF INTERNATIONAL ROUTES FOR PRIVATE AIRLINES
 
            The Committee notes that the reply furnished by the Ministry which consists of the details of the process of decision
 making in the matter of allowing Indian scheduled carriers/private airlines to operate on international routes except the Gulf
 countries.  However, the Committee is unhappy to note that the Ministry has given evasive reply to the main issue in
 question regarding the grant of speedy clearances to a particular airline in pursuance of above decision.  The Committee
 feels that if the Ministry is confident about the legality and transparency of the matter, as it has been attempted to be made
 out in the reply, there should be no objection against an inquiry by an independent agency.  The Committee, therefore,
 reiterates its recommendation that the matter of grant of speedy clearances to the particular airlines to enhance its IPO
 prospects, after the decision of the Government to allow Indian scheduled Carriers to operate on international routes, should
 be inquired into by an independent agency.  (Para 27)
 
            The Committee notes from the reply of the Ministry that there are only two minimum eligibility criteria prescribed
 for selection of scheduled domestic airlines to be allowed to operate on international routes, namely, a minimum fleet
 strength of 20 aircrafts and a minimum experience of five years operations on domestic routes.  The Committee also notes
 that the basic policy of the Government to allow the scheduled carriers to operate on international routes has been framed
 after due consideration of the Report of Naresh Chandra Committee, which was submitted to the Ministry in December
 2003.  The said committee had reportedly revealed that we are presently using only 40% of our bilateral rights.  However,
 the Committee feels that the steep restrictions imposed by the Ministry are impediments in achieving the basic objectives
 behind the new policy to mitigate under capacity in the international segment and to enhance global connectivity to and
 from different states in the country.   The Committee recommends that in view of the irreversible nature of the new policy,
 the Ministry should review its prescribed standards regarding fleet strength, maintenance facilities, safety systems etc. for
 granting licences to new airlines in the domestic sector, taking into consideration the requirements for the international
 sector also.  Such a review would enable the relaxation of the existing stringent restrictions on Indian scheduled airlines for
 international operations. The Committee also notes that the stringent restrictions have not been able to avoid the denial of
 flights to one of the private airlines to destinations in the United States of America.(Para 33)
 
            The Committee is not satisfied with the reply.  The Ministry has not charted out any long-term plan for the
 implementation of the new policy of opening up the international skies to the Indian scheduled airlines.  The Committee
 recommends that the Ministry should frame a comprehensive plan identifying international sectors to be covered by Air
 India/Indian Airlines/International Scheduled Carriers so as to avoid any conflict of interests and at the same time ensuring
 full realization of the objective to enhance utilization of traffic rights available to India.   (Para 39)
 
REVIEW OF ROUTE DISPERSAL GUIDELINES
            The Committee fails to understand the nature and reasons for the inordinate delay by DGCA and that of the Ministry,
 of over nine months to come out with a specific time frame for accepting the recommendation. The Committee recommends
 that the matter be expedited with desired pace. (Para 43)
 
REQUIREMENT OF TRAINED MANPOWER
            It is evident from the reply of the Ministry that their major emphasis is the training of pilots and other equally
 important areas of civil aviation sector are being ignored.  The Committee recommends that the Ministry should encourage
 the opening of training institutions in public sector/joint venture/private sector for imparting holistic training covering all the
 areas of the civil aviation sector.
(Para 50)
 

96threport of Standing Committee On Transport, Tourism & Culture
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/96threport.htm[22-10-2018 12:09:22]
            The Committee notes carefully the assurance given by the Ministry.  The Ministry, however, must ensure that Indian
 Airlines, which has to meet the social obligations also, should not suffer from the shortage of manpower. The Committee is
 suspicious of the intention of the Government to prevent poaching of trained manpower from Indian Airlines because no
 action has been taken by the Government with regard to the revision of scales of pay of the employees of Indian Airlines,
 which became due on 1.1.1997. (Para 54)
UNDERUTILISATION OF ILS CAT-III SYSTEM INSTALLED AT INDIRA GANDHI INTERNATIONAL
 AIRPORT, DELHI.
 
            The Committee is not satisfied with the reply of the Ministry and feels vindicated by the developments during the fog
 this winter.  The massive disruption of flights into and out of Delhi has highlighted the gross underutilization of the costly
 ILS CAT-III system installed at Indira Gandhi International Airport.  This has resulted in the non-utilisation of the
 expenditure from the tax payers’ money.  It appears that the different airlines resort to diversion of flights instead of using
 the available infrastructure because it is economical for them to follow such practice rather than training the pilots on CAT-
III system.   The Committee feels that whatever be the reasons, the passenger facilities should be paramount and they should
 not be put to any hardship.  Moreover, even if IA and AI have trained their pilots and are using the system, the diversion of
 flights of the private carriers gives adverse publicity to the civil aviation sector as a whole.  The Committee feels that there
 should be some penal provision to discourage the diversion of flights due to fog by the private operators or they should be
 compelled to utilise the ILS CAT-III system. The Committee takes note of the relevant news reports appearing in the print
 and visual media and the inadequate response of the Ministry thereon. The Committee also notes that the Ministry is now
 waking up to the need for the implementation of the recommendation in the face of severe public criticism. The Committee,
 therefore, reiterates its recommendation that in order to improve the operational efficiency during the extreme foggy
 conditions, training of pilots should be made compulsory by the private airlines on CAT-III System.  The Committee further
 recommends that utilization of CAT-II and CAT-III systems by private airlines should be made compulsory by training a
 fixed minimum proportion of their pilots and it should be enforced by the Government strictly.(Para58)
 
ALLOTMENT OF PARKING BAYS
            The Committee is not satisfied with the reply of the Ministry and stresses the fact that before giving licenses to new
 airlines to commence operations, the Ministry should deliberate on the infrastructure and maintenance facilities like,
 taxiways, additional bays, runways etc required at the airports to avoid further load on the already congested infrastructure
 available at the airports.  The Committee, therefore, reiterates its recommendation that the Government should frame a
 transparent policy for allotment of parking space and also take immediate steps to ensure that adequate infrastructure and
 maintenance facilities, hangers and parking bays are made available for all the airlines providing a level playing field in the
 matter of allotment of parking bays etc.  (Para 62)
 
HIGH COST OF AIR TURBINE FUEL (ATF)
            The Committee is happy to note that the Sales Tax on ATF purchased for International flights by designated Indian
 carriers has been exempted.  The Committee does not agree with the Finance Ministry that the proposal for notifying ATF
 sold to domestic flights, as "Declared Goods" would have serious revenue implications for the State Governments. The
 Committee, however, appreciates the view of the Ministry of Civil Aviation that the State Governments may get affected
 only marginally by the above measure and such measure will certainly improve the health of the aviation industry in the
 country and ultimately fostering the economy, tourism and regional development to a great extent. (Para 70)
 
IMPACT OF FRINGE BENEFIT TAX ON CIVIL AVIATION SECTOR
           
            The Committee notes the reply and desires that the outstanding issues should be pursued with the Ministry of Finance
 in the interest of the aviation sector.
(Para 76)
INCOME TAX EXEMPTION ON PAYMENT OF LEASE RENTALS FOR LEASE OF AIRCRAFT.
                        The Committee notes the reply and recommends that the follow-up action should be expedited with the
 Finance Ministry.(Para 80)
 
MODERNISATION AND RETRUCTURING OF DELHI AND MUMBAI AIRPORTS
            The Committee is not convinced with the reply put forth by the Ministry and observes that clear-cut statistics with
 regard to modernization of airports should be given to the public and the Parliament.  As the proposal regarding
 modernization and restructuring of Delhi and Mumbai Airports involves huge expenditure and also determines the future of
 aviation sector in this country, the exaggerated initial cost estimates indicates poor financial planning.  The Committee feels
 that the unrealistic cost estimates at the planning stage might have swayed the decision in favour of the Joint Venture route.
(Para 86)

96threport of Standing Committee On Transport, Tourism & Culture
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/96threport.htm[22-10-2018 12:09:22]
 
            The Committee is constrained to note that the proposal of AAI of the year 2000 for construction of terminal buildings
 of Delhi and Mumbai airports were kept pending till September, 2003 and thereafter shelved when it was decided to
 restructure Delhi and Mumbai airports through Joint Venture Route (JVR). The Committee notes with grave concern that
 even after the lapse of more than two years since this decision, which was targeted to make the two airports of “world class
 standards”, the modernisation and expansion plans are still hanging in air, thereby affecting the capability of these two most
 important airports to handle the demands of fast changing international as well as domestic aviation sector. (Para 87)
 
            The Committee is also of the view that the Ministry has taken a prejudiced view on the alternative proposal submitted
 by the AAI Employees Joint Forum.  The Ministry has submitted the following documents for the perusal of the Committee
 vide its O.M. No.AV.24011/012/1998 – VB (Pt.) dated the 29
th December, 2005: -  
(i)                  Para-wise comments of the Ministry of Civil Aviation on the D.O. letter dated 5/12/2005 from Shri
 Dipankar Mukherjee, Member of Parliament, addressed to the Hon’ble Prime Minister regarding
 modernisation of Delhi and Mumbai Airports (Annexure –V);
(ii)          Alternate Plan submitted by the AAI Employees Joint Forum for development and modernisation of Delhi
 and Mumbai Airports (Annexure –VI); and  
(iii)               Report of the Committee to examine the Alternate Plan submitted by the AAI Employees Joint Forum
 (Annexure - VII) .
                    (Para 88) 
 
The Committee notes that the Ministry had sent the Alternate Plan to the GTA and Financial Consultant for
 evaluation, however, their report is not annexed with the comments of the Review Committee but only the brief comments
 of the Review Committee on the evaluation report is included therein. The Review Committee has held that the basic
 characteristics of the proposals of the Bidders vis-à-vis the Alternate Plan are incomparable and therefore the methodology
 adopted by GTA cannot be considered fair. As the Alternate plan was not submitted in response to RFP document meant for
 the bidders in the JVR, it is surprising that the Ministry initially forwarded the plan to the GTA & FC for evaluation and
 thereafter rejected their report thereby rendering the process an exercise in futility. The Review Committee decided that the
 Alternate Plan is to be evaluated on stand alone basis on the merit of its content. The Committee however notes that the
 Review Committee has at many places drawn comparisons with the private bidders. However, the Committee also notes that
 the Review Committee has accepted the concepts and the details of works proposed in the Alternate Plan on the grounds that
 it is similar to the earlier proposal of  Airports Authority of India but subject to updating/revision of the cost estimates to
 current levels.(Para 89)
 
             On the examination of the comments of the Review Committee, the Committee wishes to highlight the conclusions
 that the estimated expenditure required for Delhi & Mumbai airports and the projects at non-metro airports is feasible
 through internal resource generations and borrowings. The financial strength of Airports Authority of India and the growth
 realized/witnessed in the aviation sector in the recent past also supports the conclusion reached by the Review Committee. In
 this context, the Committee has earlier expressed its reservations/objections on the financial implications projected by the
 Ministry on the modernisation plans for the Delhi & Mumbai Airports and reiterated that the estimates put forth by them are
 exaggerated and not firmed up on realistic basis. The other factors commented to in the report of the Review Committee viz.
 fast track procedures for granting approvals / sanctions to the projects; benchmarking of services to achieve higher levels of
 customer satisfaction; maximizing non-aeronautical revenue etc., are achievable with proactive efforts of the
 Ministry/Airports Authority of India on the one hand and plan implementing agency on the other.
(Para 90)
 
            The Committee therefore recommends that the Government should rethink its strategy for modernisation of Delhi &
 Mumbai Airports and immediately implement the in-house plan developed by Airports Authority of India Employees Joint
 Forum.    
 (Para 91)
 
            The Committee has already expressed its views on the modernization plan of the Ministry in respect of Delhi &
 Mumbai Airports and has also made its recommendations on the subject at paras 86 and 87 above.(Para 95)
 
NEW GREENFIELD AIRPORTS AT BANGALORE AND HYDERABAD
            The Committee notes the reply and expects that the Ministry would frame the standard norms and definitions for
 benchmarking of airports before proceeding further to implement the new Greenfield Airports.(Para 98)
 
            The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry. (Para 101)

96threport of Standing Committee On Transport, Tourism & Culture
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/96threport.htm[22-10-2018 12:09:22]
 
CLOSURE OF EXISTING HYDERABAD AIRPORT
 
            The Committee is not satisfied with the reply.  The aviation sector in the country has changed dramatically with the
 low cost carriers gaining ground.   The previously unviable routes are now proving to be profitable ones and there is stiff
 competition amongst the private operators to extend their reach to all parts of the country.  In this changed scenario, instead
 of reassessing its strategy, the Ministry is following the unhealthy policy of creation of monopoly by promoting only one
 airport at different metros, as in the case of Delhi and Mumbai. The Committee also notes that the justification put forward
 by the Ministry for the closure of the existing airport at Hyderabad is contrary to the rationale of the Ministry for rejecting
 the proposals for Greenfield airports at Delhi and Mumbai.  In respect of those two airports, the Ministry has maintained
 throughout that unless the capacity is not optimized or added in the existing Brownfield airport, it is not prudent to set up a
 Greenfield airport.  The Committee, therefore, reiterates that the Government should reconsider the decision to close down
 the existing airport at Hyderabad on the commissioning of a new International airport.(Para 104)
PROTECTION TO THE INTERESTS OF THE EMPLOYEES OF AIRPORTS AUTHORITY OF INDIA.
 
            The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry and finds that there is no assurance of protection of the existing terms
 and condition of service of the employees of Airports Authority of India after restructuring of Delhi/Mumbai airports.  With
 respect to Greenfield airports of Bangalore and Hyderabad, the Committee is not satisfied with the reply that Government
 has obtained comfort letters from the JV Companies that they would consider taking on deputation / absorption basis the
 existing employees other than Communication Navigation Surveillance (CNS) /Air Traffic Management (ATM) employees.
 The Committee recommends that performance standard appraisal of the employees to be retained in JVCs should be done on
 fair basis. (Para 108)
CREATION OF A EASTERN HUB AT KOLKATA
            The Committee notes the reply and finds that the Ministry has not mentioned anything about the recommendation for
 the creation of a southern hub at Chennai.  Further, the reply has not indicated the details of the work undertaken at Chennai
 airport.  The Committee desires that air hubs at Kolkata and Chennai will be created very soon and airlines would be given
 incentives for use of these airports for parking etc. by levying lesser charges.(Para 119)
 
PAWAN HANS HELICOPTERS LIMITED
 
            The Committee notes the reply and feels that the Ministry has not fully appreciated its recommendation.  There is no
 denying the fact that helicopter services could not be a viable alternate mode of travel in those places where fixed wing
 aircrafts are operating presently.  The Committee is of the view that if the Ministry finds the non-accessible tourist
 destinations non-viable for operations by PHHL, it should at least offer attractive terms and conditions for the wet lease of
 helicopters to State Governments/Government agencies/Private parties to enable them to tap the tourism potential in various
 parts of the country. (Para 130)
 
            The Committee is not satisfied with the reply furnished by the Ministry.  The Committee has not been apprised about
 the details of the safety audits of the Helicopter operators and instead a routine reply that ‘safety audits are being conducted
 on continuous basis’ has been given.  The Committee recommends that the Ministry should evolve permanent mechanism
 viz. constitution of a Helicopter Cell, to monitor the helicopter operations in view of the Kaushik Committee Report.  As
 regards the proficiency rating system of pilots in DGCA, the Ministry vide  O.M. No.A.60011/020/2005-VE dated 4
th May,
 2005 had informed, inter-alia, that the lone post of Flight Inspector (Helicopter) in the Office of DGCA fell vacant in
 December 2001 and the same was filled up on ad-hoc basis for one year w.e.f. 16
th August 2003.  This post has again fallen
 vacant as the appointee was unwilling to continue beyond one year and was relieved of his duties w.e.f. 16 th August 2004. 
 Accordingly, this post was re-advertised.  The Ministry has, however, not informed whether the same has been filled up
 now.  The Ministry further informed that proficiency checks of Pilots are conducted by Examiners approved by DGCA, on
 bi-annual basis to comply with the requirements of the Aircraft Rules, 1937.  The Committee notes that the DGCA Inspector
 is associated as an observer in those cases where consecutive checks are carried out by the same examiner to ensure sanctity
 of the proficiency check.    The Committee finds that the reply is highly insufficient on the procedure for proficiency checks
 of the pilots.  The Committee is surprised to note that the post of Flight Inspector (Helicopter) has been lying vacant for long
 periods of time and therefore is of the opinion that the Ministry has not been able to ensure foolproof proficiency checks.  
 The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry should review its institutional mechanism on the proficiency rating
 system of pilots in DGCA. (Para 138)
 
REVAMPING OF TRANSPORT SECTOR IN ANDAMAN AND NICOBAR ISLANDS IN POST TSUNAMI
 SCENARIO

96threport of Standing Committee On Transport, Tourism & Culture
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/96threport.htm[22-10-2018 12:09:22]
 
            The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry regarding affordable air connectivity to Port Blair, Andaman &
 Nicobar Islands.  However, the Ministry has not responded to the recommendation regarding the need to encourage private
 airlines to fly to these Islands besides allowing airlines operating from South and South East Asian countries to have
 stopover at Port Blair.    The Ministry should also review its stand on inter-island air connectivity in Andaman and Nicobar
 Islands in order to boost tourism in these islands. As regards LTC facility, it seems that the Ministry has not appreciated
 fully the recommendation made by the Committee. However, the Minister in his Statement made in Lok Sabha on the 12
th
 May, 2005 had appreciated the recommendation and had assured to take up the matter regarding LTC facility with the
 Department of Personnel & Training. The Committee understands that the Government had since formulated a LTC Scheme
 for the Central Government employees for visiting Andaman & Nicobar Islands, which was effective till 25 th November,
 2005. The Committee feels that the period of operation of the Scheme is too short to have a positive impact on the tourism
 sector of the Islands specifically taking into consideration the magnitude of the devastation caused by tsunami. The
 Committee noted that a large number of government employees had already availed this facility but still there are many who
 desire to avail LTC to Andaman and Nicobar Islands. The Committee therefore recommends that this LTC Scheme should
 be extended for a suitable period of time in order to encourage more and more domestic tourists to visit these islands,
 thereby helping its tourism sector to attain sustaining levels. (Para 153)
 
DEVELOPMENT OF AIRPORTS AND INCREASE IN FLIGHTS IN NORTH EASTERN STATES
 
            As already observed by the Committee, it fails to understand the nature and reasons for the inordinate delay by
 DGCA and that of the Ministry, of over nine months to come out with a specific time frame for making suitable changes in
 the Route Dispersal Guidelines.(Para 157)
 
            The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry and hopes that the need for reflecting the rich cultural and architectural
 heritage of respective regions through airport buildings will be made mandatory while modernizing the existing airports
 albeit with private participation and also while commissioning new airports in public or private sector in the country.(Para
 163)
 
            The Committee notes that the data furnished by the Ministry in the matter of security-related and developmental
 expenditure relates to different time periods. Whereas, the security-related expenditure gives the actual amounts incurred
 during the financial year 2003-04, the details under the developmental expenditure are tentative/estimated figures in respect
 of the ongoing major developmental works. The lack of correlation between the data under the two heads exhibits the non-
serious attitude of the Ministry towards the recommendation of the Committee for initiating value audit and development
 audit. The Committee expresses its unhappiness on the casual approach of the Ministry towards the development of the
 aviation sector in the North-Eastern region of the country. (Para 166)
 
            The Committee partially accepts the reply of the Government but still recommends that operational / procedural
 bottlenecks should be removed at the earliest and the Aizwal Airport should be given IFR status which is much required for
 a hill locked State like Mizoram.(Para 171)
M I N U T E S
XIV
 
FORTEENTH  MEETING
 
            The Committee met at 4.30 p.m. on Wednesday, the 22
nd February 2006 in Committee Room '074’, Ground Floor,
 Parliament Library Building, New Delhi.
            MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Nilotpal Basu – Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Kamal Akhtar
3. Prof. Ram Deo Bhandary
4. Shri Janardhana Poojary
5. Shri Rama Muni Reddy Sirigireddy
6. Shri Shatrughan Sinha
LOK SABHA
7. Shri Anil Basu
8. Shri Sartaj Singh Chhatwal

96threport of Standing Committee On Transport, Tourism & Culture
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/96threport.htm[22-10-2018 12:09:22]
9. Shri Adhir Chowdhury
10. Shri Ravindra Naik Dharavath
11. Dr. Ramkrishna Kusmaria
12. Shri Alok Kumar Mehta
13. Shri Manabendra Shah
            SECRETARIAT
            Shri Sham Sher Singh, Joint Secretary
Shrimati Agnes Momin George, Director
            Shri Jagdish Kumar, Under Secretary   
            Shrimati Subhashree Panigrahi, Committee Officer
 
 
2.         The Committee considered the following six draft Reports:
(i)
                  Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations of the Committee contained in its
 Eighty-fourth Report on Demands for Grants (2005-06) of Department of Road Transport and Highways;
(ii)                Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations of the Committee contained in its
 Eighty-fifth Report on Demands for Grants (2005-06) of Ministry of Culture;
(iii)               Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations of the Committee contained in its
 Eighty-sixth Report on Demands for Grants (2005-06) of Department of Shipping;
(iv)              Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations of the Committee contained in its
 Eighty-seventh Report on Demands for Grants (2005-06) of Ministry of Tourism;
(v)                Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations of the Committee contained in its
 Eighty-eighth Report on Demands for Grants (2005-06) of Ministry of Civil Aviation; and
 
(vi)              Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations of the Committee contained in its
 Ninetieth Report on the ‘Development of Airport Sector with special emphasis on new modern airports’.
After some discussion the Committee adopted all the six Report with minor modifications.    The Committee also authorized
 the Chairman to nominate the Members for presentation of the said report to the Parliament during the current session.
3.         The Committee also decided to meet on 21
st, 22nd, 23rd, March, 2006 to examine the Demands for Grants (2006-07)
 of the concerned Ministries/Departments
and on 27
th and 28th March 2006 to adopt the draft reports thereon. . 
4.         The meeting of the Committee then adjourned at 5.45 p.m.