 
 
       
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
December, 2021/ Agrahayana, 1943 (Saka) 
REPORT NO. 
301
_ 
THREE HUNDRED FIRST REPORT  
Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/ 
Observations of the Committee contained in its Two Hundred 
and Eighty Seventh Report on the Demands for Grants (2021-
22) of Ministry of Road Transport and Highways 
 
 (Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 17th December, 2021) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 17th December, 2021) 
 

 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Website:     https://rajyasabha.nic.in  
 E-mail:     rsc-tt@sansad.nic.in 

 
 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT,  
TOURISM AND CULTURE 
 
 
THREE HUNDRED FIRST REPORT  
 
Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/ 
Observations of the Committee contained in its Two Hundred and 
Eighty Seventh Report on the Demands for Grants (2021-22) of 
Ministry of Road Transport and Highways 
 
 (Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 17th December, 2021) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 17th December, 2021) 
 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
December, 2021/ Agrahayana, 1943 (Saka) 
Hindi version of this publication is also available 

 
 
 
 
C O N T E N T S 
 
P A G E S 
 
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE     i 
2. INTRODUCTION       ii 
3. ACRONYMS               iii-vii 
 4. REPORT                                1-72 
5. RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS-AT A GLANCE   73-80 
    6. MINUTES         81 
 
         
        
        
      
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

i 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE  
 (2021-22) 
 (Constituted on 13th September, 2021) 
 
1. Shri T.G. Venkatesh                          - Chairman 
 
    RAJYA SABHA 
 
2. Shri Prasanna Acharya 
3. Shrimati Priyanka Chaturvedi 
4. Shri Sambhaji Chhatrapati 
5. Shri Shaktisinh Gohil 
6. Shri Md. Nadimul Haque 
7. Shri Jugalsinh Lokhandwala 
8. Dr. Sonal Mansingh 
9. Shri Tiruchi Siva 
10. Shri Vinay Dinu Tendulkar 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
11. Shri Anto Antony 
12.  Shri Margani Bharat 
13.  Shri Tapir Gao  
14.  Shri Rahul Kaswan 
15.  Shri Ramesh Chandra Majhi 
16.  Shri Sunil Baburao Mendhe 
17.  Shri K. Muraleedharan 
18.  Shri S. S. Palanimanickam 
19.  Shri Chhedi Paswan   
20.  Shri Kamlesh Paswan  
21.  Shri Sunil Kumar Pintu 
22.  Shri Prince Raj 
23.  Shri Tirath Singh Rawat 
24.  Shrimati Mala Roy 
25.  Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
26.  Shri Dushyant Singh 
27.  Shri Rajbahadur Singh 
28.  Shri Ramdas C. Tadas 
29.  Shri Manoj Tiwari 
30.  Shri Krupal Balaji Tumane 
31.  Shri Dinesh Chandra Yadav  
 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Puneet Kumar, Joint Secretary 
Shri P. Narayanan, Director 
Shri Dinesh Singh, Additional Director 
Shri Rajendra Prasad Shukla, Additional Director 
Shri Ranajit Chakraborty, Under Secretary 
Shri Gaurav Singh Gahlain, Assistant Committee Officer 

ii 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairman, Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport, 
Tourism and Culture, having been authorized by the Committee to present on its behalf, do 
hereby present this Three Hundred First Report on Action Taken by the  Government on the 
recommendations/observations of the Committee contained in its Two Hundred and Eighty 
Seventh Report on the Demands for Grants (2021 -22) of Ministry of Road Transport and 
Highways.  
2. The Two Hundred and Eighty Seventh Report of the Department -related 
Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture was presented on the 
9th March, 2021 to the Parliament. 
3.  The Action Taken Replies on the recommendations of the Committee contained in its 
Two Hundred and Eighty Seventh Report were received from the Ministry of Road Transport 
and Highways on 23rd August, 2021. 
4. The Committee considered and adopted the Report in its meeting held on the  6th 
December, 2021.   
 
 
(T.G. Venkatesh) 
NEW DELHI;                                                           Chairman, 
December 6, 2021                                                    Department-related Parliamentary Standing            
Agrahayana 15, 1943 (Saka)                            Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture, 
                                                                                                                                 Rajya Sabha 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

iii 
 
 
ACRONYMS 
 
ADB Asian Development Bank 
AEB Autonomous Emergency Braking 
AH Asian Highway 
AI Artificial Intelligence 
AIS Automotive Industry Standard 
AISC Automotive Industry Standards Committee 
APUIAML Andhra Pradesh Urban Infrastructure Asset Management Limited 
ASRTU Association of State Road Transport Undertakings 
ATMS Advance Traffic Management System 
BE Budget Estimates 
BM Bharatmala  
BOT Build-Operate-Transfer 
BRO Border Roads Organization  
CCIE Conciliation Committee of Independent Experts 
CCTV  Closed-Circuit Television 
CIRP Corporate Insolvency Resolution Process 
CNG Compressed Natural Gas 
COS Change of Scope 
COVID-19 Coronavirus Disease 
CRF Central Road Fund 
CRIF Central Road and Infrastructure Fund  
CRRI Central Road Research Institute 
CSR Corporate Social Responsibility 

iv 
 
DEA Department of Economic Affairs 
DISHA District Development Coordination and Monitoring Committee  
DLP Defect Liability Period 
DO Demi-Official 
DPM Draft Placement Memorandum 
DPR Detailed Project Report 
DR Direct Recruitment 
DTC Delhi Transport Corporation 
EAP Externally Aided Projects 
EC Empowered Committee 
EIA Environmental Impact Assessment 
EPC Engineering, Procurement, Construction  
FY Financial Year 
GFR General Financial Rules 
GIS Geographical Information System 
GNHCP Green National Highways Corridor Project 
HAM Hybrid Annuity Model 
HC High Court 
HCNG Hydrogen Compressed Natural Gas 
HPC High Power Committee 
HQ Headquarters 
I&C Inspection and Certification 
IAHE Indian Academy of Highway Engineers 
IBC Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code 
IDTR Institute of Driving and Traffic Research 
IEBR Internal and Extra Budgetary Resources 

v 
 
IECV Initial Estimated Concession Value 
IHMCL Indian Highways Management Company Limited 
IIT Indian Institute of Technology 
IRC Indian Road Congress 
IRQP Improvement of Riding Quality Programme 
IT Information Technology 
ITS Intelligent Transportation System 
JICA Japan International Cooperation Agency 
LA Land Acquisition 
LCM Legal Case Management 
LWE Left Wing Extremism 
M&R Maintenance and Repair 
MCA Model Concession Agreement 
MMCC Multi-Member Consultative Committee 
MoRTH Ministry of Road Transport and Highways 
MoSJ&E Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment 
MV Motor Vehicles 
NCLT National Company Law Tribunal 
NDRF National Disaster Response Force 
NE North-East 
NH National Highway 
NHAI National Highways Authority of India 
NHDP National Highways Development Project 
NHIDCL National Highways & Infrastructure Development Corporation Limited 
NHIIP National Highway Interconnectivity Improvement Programme 
NITI National Institution for Transforming India 

vi 
 
NOC No Objection Certificate 
NRSB National Road Safety Board 
OFC Optical Fiber Cable 
OMT Operate, Maintain and Transfer 
PCOD Provisional Commercial Operation Date 
PD Project Director 
PMIS Project Monitoring Information System 
PPP Public Private Partnership 
PR Periodical Renewal 
PWD Public Works Department 
R&D Research and Development 
RDTC Regional Driving Training Centre 
RE Revised Estimates 
RFP Request For Proposal 
RO Regional Officer 
ROB Road Over Bridge 
ROW Right of Way 
RTO Regional Transport Office 
RW Roads Wing 
SAP Swachhata Action Plan 
SARDP Special Accelerated Road Development Programme  
SC Scheduled Caste 
SCSP Scheduled Caste Sub Plan 
SEBI Securities and Exchange Board of India 
SLAO Special Land Acquisition Officer 
SOP Standard Operating Procedure 

vii 
 
SOR Schedule of Rates 
SP Superintendent of Police 
SPV Special Purpose Vehicle 
TOR Terms of Reference 
TOT Toll, Operate and Transfer 
TRW Transport Research Wing 
UC Utilization Certificate 
UNECE United Nations Economic Commission for Europe 
UT Union Territory 
VLT Vehicle Location Tracking 
 
  

1 
 
 
REPORT 
The Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport, 
Tourism and Culture deals with the Action Taken by the Ministry of Road Transport and 
Highways on the recommendations/observations as contained in its Two Hundred and Eighty 
Seventh Report on ‗Demands for Gra nts (2021 -22) of Ministry of Road Transport and 
Highways‘ which was presented to both the Houses of Parliament on 9th March, 2021. 
2. The Action Taken Replies were received from the Ministry on 23 rd August, 2021 in 
respect of all the recommendations/observations contained in the 287 th Report. The replies 
have been categorized as follows:— 
Chapter-I: 
Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the Ministry:  
Paragraph Nos.:  19, 24, 28, 3 0, 69, 72, 80, 124, 127, 128, 134, 136, 163, 178, 
180, 186, 188, 189                                                                                                   
Total:  18 
Chapter-II: 
Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not desire t o pursue 
in view of the replies of the Ministry: 
Paragraph Nos.:   8, 13, 16, 20, 21, 34, 39, 49, 50, 55, 58, 64, 75, 79, 82, 84, 90, 
91, 95, 96, 97, 99, 109, 112, 113, 122, 125, 133, 137, 141, 146, 149, 153, 155, 
156, 167, 168 , 170, 191                                                                                                
Total:   39 
Chapter-III: 
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Ministry have 
not been accepted by the Committee: 
Paragraph Nos.:   9, 12, 22, 33, 42, 45 , 53, 59, 65, 67, 100, 102, 105, 106, 115, 
116, 121, 123, 126, 131, 138, 158, 159, 160, 161, 182  
Total:   26 
Chapter-IV: 
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which the final replies of the 
Ministry are still awaited: 
Paragraph Nos.:   184  
Total:   1 
 
3. The Committee desires that final replies in respect of those 
recommendations/observations which have been categorized as interim replies by the 
Committee should be furnished at the earliest. 
 
 
 

2 
 
 
CHAPTER-I 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY 
THE MINISTRY 
ANNUAL PLAN 2021-22 
Recommendation/Observation 
1. The Committee notes that whereas the budgetary allocation at the B.E. 2021 -22 stage 
is approximately 84.2% of the demand projected, the allocation under the head 'Maintenance 
of NHs  including Swachhta Action Plan' comes to only about 52% of the requirement 
projected by the Ministry. The Committee would like to know the reasons behind the large 
48% gap between the requirement and allocation made under this head, when the overall gap 
between the requirement and allocation made to the Ministry is only about 16%. 
(Para 19) 
Reply of Ministry 
1.1 Allocation of funds under M&R head falls under Revenue section of the Budget and 
allocations under the Revenue section were restricted to Rs. 9,870.89 crore under BE 2021-22 
against the projected requirement of Rs. 14,557.60 crore. Accordingly, less allocations were 
made under M&R head. However, to overcome such shortfall, it has been decided by the 
Ministry to shift the scheme of Periodical Repair/ IRQP from Revenue Section (M&R) to 
Capital Section (NH -O) w.e.f. 2021 -22. Hence, more fund will be available for keeping the 
National Highways traffic worthy. However, demand, if any, for additional fund will be made 
at RE 2021-22 stage keeping in view the expenditure upto September, 2021. 
Recommendation/Observation 
2. The Committee hopes that the Ministry would be able to make optimum use of the 
increased budget allocation made to the Ministry at B.E. 2021 -22 stage and achieve the 
targets it has set for the Financial Year 2021 -22. The Committee recommends that the 
Ministry may assign top priority to the maintenance of existing NH network, road safety as 
well as the completion of delayed brownfield projects across the country. 
(Para 24) 

3 
 
 
Reply of Ministry 
2.1 Noted for needful compliance 
ROAD DEVELOPMENT 
Recommendation/Observation 
3. The Committee notes the consistent increase in pace of construction of National 
Highways in the country over the last several years. The Committee appreciates the efforts 
made by the Ministry in this regard and hopes that further efforts would be made to remove 
the bottlenecks in the road infrastructure sector and achieve timely completion of the ongoing 
road projects in the country. 
(Para 28) 
Reply of Ministry 
3.1 Noted for needful compliance. 
Recommendation/Observation 
4. The Committee is happy to note that HAM projects account for 49.4% of the overall 
projects awarded by the Ministry during the last three years, in terms of project cost. The 
Committee recommends that the Ministry may continue to work on the periodic review and 
updation of the Model Concession Agreement (MCA) for HAM projects to address the 
apprehensions of the private sector and attract further investments from the private sector to 
augment the budgetary allocation available with the Ministry. 
(Para 30) 
Reply of Ministry 
4.1 MCAs were recently amended duly considering concerns of various stakeholders. As 
recommended by the Committee, the MCAs shall continue to be periodically reviewed for 
needful amendments addressing concerns of the Industry and stakeholders. 
 
 
 

4 
 
FINANCING OF ROAD PROJECTS 
Recommendation/Observation 
5. The Committee is concerned to note that even though the expenditure incurred by 
NHAI is consistently rising, the investment by the private se ctor has been minuscule 
compared to the expenditure incurred by NHAI during the Financial Year 2020 -21. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends the Ministry to take concrete steps to encourage the 
participation of private sector in the road infrastructure pro jects across the country. The 
Committee would like the Ministry to review and modify its Concession Agreements in such a 
way that the private investments are not impacted by frequent policy changes since the 
gestation period for many road infrastructure projects last more than 10-15 years. 
(Para 69) 
Reply of Ministry 
5.1 MoRTH/NHAI have conducted an extensive exercise to update the Model Concession 
Agreements for various PPP Modes (including BOT Toll and HAM) based on industry and 
stakeholder feedback. The proposals have been deliberated and approved by Inter -Ministerial 
Committees and the revised Model Concession Agreements have now been adopted in 
August 2020 and in October 2020. The revised risk sharing framework has been well 
received by the industry. NH AI has recently managed to award two projects in the state of 
West Bengal on BOT (Toll) Mode on premium. During 2020 -21, 59% projects (on total 
project cost basis) have been awarded on PPP mode  under Bharatmala by NHAI. This will 
result in enhanced Private Investment. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
6. The Committee is distressed to note the huge debt servicing liability of NHAI in the 
upcoming years. The Committee notes that the debt servicing liability of NHAI for the next 
three Financial Years are even higher than the estimates that the Ministry had provided to 
the Committee during its examination of Demands for Grants (2020-21) of the Ministry (para 
89 of 278th  Report of the Committee). The Committee recommends that NHAI may prioritise 
the completion of its delayed road projects to prevent further cost escalation in such projects. 
The Committee further recommends the NHAI to explore restructuring of its existing debt and 
prepare proposals to raise long -term funds through the upcoming Development Financi al 

5 
 
Institution announced in the Budget Speech (2021-22) by the Hon‟ble Finance Minister. 
(Para 72) 
Reply of Ministry 
6.1 The recommendations of the Committee for restructuring of its existing debt shall be 
explored. NHAI has been raising funds for long-term period, the tenor ranging from 15 -30 
years. The fund raising through upcoming Development Financial Institution, when set up by 
the Govt., shall also be tried. 
 
MAINTENANCE OF NATIONAL HIGHWAYS 
Recommendation/Observation 
7. The Committee notes that the length targeted as well as the length achieved by the 
Ministry under IRQP has been decreasing, having once peaked in 2017 -18. The Committee 
feels that a large portion of the NH network in the country needs further improvement. The 
Committee recommends that the Ministry may bring more NHs under IRQP in the upcoming 
years and that suitable budgetary provisions may be made for the same. 
(Para 80) 
Reply of Ministry 
7.1 Noted for compliance. It has been decided by the Ministry to shift the scheme of 
Periodical Repair/IRQP from Revenue Section (M&R) to Capital Section (NH -O) w.e.f. 
2021-22. Hence, more fund will be available for keeping the National Highways traffic 
worthy. Accordingly, more lengths of NHs are intended to be taken up for PR / IRQP works.  
 
RESEARCH, TRAINING, STUDIES AND OTHER ROAD SAFETY SCHEMES 
Road Safety 
Recommendation/Observation 
8. The Committee recommends that the Ministry may develop a Road Safety score to quantify 
the safety of the National Highways across the country. The ongoing projects of the Ministry 
may be granted approval only if they score excellent in terms of Road Saf ety. The Committee 
further recommends that the Ministry may prescribe a standard format of data to be collected 

6 
 
by the concerned local authorities. The data thus obtained, may be tapped into in order to 
gain actionable insights into the factors causing road accidents. 
(Para 124) 
Reply of Ministry 
8.1 Safety audit of all the designs prepared by the contractor /concessionaire are carried 
out. Similarly, on completion of construction, satisfactory report of safety audit is necessary 
before issue of completion certificate.  
8.2 Further, Ministry has decided to rate National Highways in the country. Highway 
Rating Criteria and Methodology with detailed Standard Operating Procedure (SOP) for 
Divided carriageways has been issued vide circular dated 07.07.2020 by NH AI. The 
procedure and methodology have been prepared with an overview of the user‘s 
perspective/requirement of efficiency, safety and user facilities on highways. 
8.3 Rating has been completed for 19,346 km of completed 4/6 lane NH stretches 
covering 343 toll plazas. 
Recommendation/Observation 
9. The Committee takes note of reduction of 54% in deaths occurring due to road accidents in 
the State of Tamil Nadu in the last four years. Even if the data for the year 2020 is excluded 
from consideration on accoun t of low vehicular traffic due to the COVID -19 pandemic, the 
Committee feels that the consistent decrease in the deaths caused due to road accidents, is 
commendable. The Committee lauds the efforts of the Government of Tamil Nadu and the 
concerned authorit ies in this regard. The Committee recommends that the Ministry may 
conduct extensive research into the methodologies adopted in Tamil Nadu regarding Road 
Safety and replicate the same across the country on an urgent basis.  
(Para 127) 
Reply of Ministry 
9.1 The Tamil Nadu model is being forwarded to all the States/UTs with the request to 
implement the same in their States / UTs.  
 
 

7 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
10. The Committee desires the Ministry has to come up with solutions to minimize the large 
number of accidents that take place due to merging of traffic from service lanes to the 
highway. Proper signage in three languages viz., English, Hindi and regional language, may 
be ensured to alert the drivers at the points where the road traffic gets merged with 
highways. The Ministry may look into the best international practices in terms of ensuring 
safety with regard to merging of traffic on the highways and incorporate the same in its road 
projects at the design stage itself. 
(Para 128) 
Reply of Ministry 
10.1 To ensure safety with regard to merging of traffic on highways, the Ministry has taken 
following steps: - 
a. To carry out all stage (Design, construction, and operation) road safety audits for all 
National Highways as per IRC Code ―IRC -SP- 88‖ and rectification of accident/black 
spots accordingly. 
b. Provision of Rumble strips or bar markings at the approaches of junctions on NHs 
as per IRC: 99- 2018. 
c. Provision of Speed Limit signs at desired locations of NHs network. 
d. As per IRC -67 -2012, Sign Boards are provided in regional/local language and 
English to alert the drivers. 
e. Provision of speed calming measures and associated signage on side roads. 
f. Provision of amber beacons for traffic approaching a junction. 
g. Access control to minimize accident conflict points. 
h. Provision of Advance Traffic Management System (ATMS) etc. - ATMS includes 
components such as CCTV, video incident detection system, vehicle actuated speed 
displays, variable message system etc. which assist in timely capture of inciden ts, 
dissemination of important information to road users. 
 
 

8 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
11. The Committee takes note of the frequent road accidents that occur in mountainous areas 
and recommends that crash barriers, made of steel or bricks, should be made mandatory on 
all Highways in hilly areas. The Committee further recommends that the Ministry should 
ensure the installation of adequate signages and reflectors on roads in such areas. 
(Para 134) 
Reply of Ministry 
11.1 To minimise the overturning of the veh icles towards the valley side, Crash Barriers 
made of steel like w -beam crash barrier and Thrie crash barriers are being installed as per 
IRC Code IRC: 119 -2015 on highways in hilly areas. Further adequate signages and 
reflectors are also being installed o n roads as per IRC -67-2012 in such areas to reduce 
accidents. 
 
Core Group on Safety and Security 
Recommendation/Observation 
12. In this regard, the Committee would like to make the following recommendations to be 
added to the mandate of Core Group on Safety and Security for better outcomes:  
i. The Core Group on Safety and Security should ensure necessary coordination 
between NHAI/Ministry of Road Transport & Highways and Ministry of Railways in 
order to identify sketches/pockets of land, along National Highways and Railway 
tracks to facilitate emergency landing of helicopter ambulance in the event of 
accidents/natural calamities and should be a part of the DPR in new road projects. 
ii. In order to further strengthen the Core Group, a Sub-Committee may be formed in 
the Ministry of (i) Railways; (ii) Road Transport & Highways; (iii) Ports, 
Shipping & Waterways; and (iv) Civil Aviation. 
iii. The Sub -Committees mentioned at point (ii) should be headed by an officer not 
below the rank of Joint Secretary. 
iv. The Sub -Committees given at point (ii) should employ, within two months, the 
services of consultants who are experts in the respective fields and who have the 
requisite global exposure and good reputation for the services rendered by them. 

9 
 
v. The above stated Sub -Committees should mandatorily report to the Core Group 
on Safety and Security, on a monthly basis. The Core Group should review and 
monitor the activities of these Sub-Committees. 
vi. Another issue which is of urgent importance in the context of safety is the 
identification of black spots in highways and roads and quick action for their 
rectification. It should be ensured that Chief Engineers of the respective road 
projects should be made Members of this Sub -Committee. The Ministry of Road 
Transport & Highways/NHAI should  accord top priority to such rectification and 
furnish monthly progress to the above cited Sub -Committee of Ministry of Road 
Transport & Highways.  
vii.  Ministry of Road Transport &  Highways/NHAI should furnish to the Sub -
Committee referred to at point (ii), the data regarding the number of accidents 
which took place in 2019 and 2020, category wise, along with the time gap 
between such accidents & reasons for the same; and the remedi es 
undertaken/proposed to be undertaken. The updation of data should invariably be 
done periodically.  
(Para 136) 
Reply of Ministry 
12.1 Noted for compliance. 
 
MISCELLANEOUS 
Policy Framework for Electric Vehicles and Autonomous Vehicles 
Recommendation/Observation 
13. In order to permit Indian vehicle manufacturers to keep pace with the vehicle 
manufacturers around the world and keeping in mind the positive effects of autonomous 
vehicles on Road Safety through features such as autonomous e mergency braking, the 
Committee recommends that the Ministry should analyze the policy framework for 
autonomous vehicles which is already in effect in several countries around the world and 
develop a comprehensive policy framework of its own to govern the testing and commercial 
operation of autonomous vehicles in the country.   
(Para 163) 

10 
 
Reply of Ministry 
13.1 The Automotive Standards Committee (AISC) has already initiated the formulation of 
Standards for Autonomous Emergency Braking (AEB) for commercial vehicles of M2, M3, 
N2, N3 categories. Additionally, certain other features  of autonomous vehicles, like lane 
departure warning system, are in discussion. Also, MoRTH is  keeping close track of the 
progress being made at United Nations Economic Commission f or Europe (UNECE) in the 
area of Autonomous driving, so that a policy framework for Indian use cases/ scenarios may 
be formulated. 
Exemption from earmarking funds for Scheduled Castes Sub Plan (SCSP) Component 
Recommendation/Observation 
14. The Committee endorses the views of the Ministry of Road Transport and Highways in 
this regard and recommends that the Ministry of Finance and Ministry of Social Justice and 
Empowerment may grant special exemption to MoRTH from earmarking a part of the 
allocated funds for SC welfare. The Committee may be apprised about the response received 
in this regard from MoSJ&E, DEA and NITI Aayog. 
(Para 178) 
Reply of Ministry  
14.1 Recommendations of the Committee has been conveyed to Ministry of Social Justice 
& Empowerment, Depa rtment of Economic Affairs (Ministry of Finance) and NITI Aayog. 
The Ministry has not been earmarking dedicated outlay under SCSP so far. 
 
Special Focus on Maintenance of National Highways in Jammu and Kashmir Region 
Recommendation/Observation 
15. The Committee is of the considered view that the Ministry must place special focus on the 
maintenance of roads in the Jammu and Kashmir region, since the region needs good 
connectivity throughout the year, from both economic as well as strategic viewpoint.  A well-
connected, well maintained road network would spur economic activities and further the 
tourism prospects of the region. The Committee, therefore, recommends the Ministry to 
ensure sufficient budgetary provisions for this purpose and in case any sho rtage is felt in this 
regard, the same may be communicated to the Ministry of Finance at the Revised Estimates 

11 
 
(2021-22) stage. 
(Para 180) 
Reply of Ministry  
15.1  Development of Punjab / J&K border to Jammu to Srinagar section has been taken up 
by NHAI: - Development of 4 lane from Punjab / J&K border to Jammu and Jammu to 
Udhampur has been completed. Further Udhampur to Chenani and Nasri to Ramban is in 
progress (76% physical progress). Tunn el work between Chenani and Nasri has been 
completed. Stretch from Ramban to Banihal is in progress (30% Physical progress). Stretch 
from Banihal to Kajikund and upto Srinagar has been substantially completed.  
15.2 Maintenance activities taken up by NHAI:- Maintenance of Jammu -Srinagar 
National Highway -44 has been carried out on regular basis. NHAI field officers including 
IEs/AEs regularly monitor the maintenance works being carried out by the Concessionaires/ 
Contractors. Any important / urgent maintenan ce, if observed is immediately brought to the 
notice of the Concessionaire/ Contractor for necessary rectification and is carried out 
accordingly from time to time.  
15.3 To bypass the landslide prone areas between Ramban to Banihal, Realignment/Value 
addition proposal in the form of Tunnel/Viaduct has been proposed and bids have been 
invited in three different packages. Since completion of these packages will take 
approximately 2.5-3 years, one time improvement of existing stretch (which will be bypassed 
after realignment) amounting to Rs. 20 Cr (Approx) has been proposed and work for the same 
has been started. 
15.4 NHAI also invited bids for maintenance of under construction stretches between 
Udhampur to Banihal at the risk and cost of contractors, who had  failed to maintain the 
highway as per standards. Maintenance works will be completed before the onset of Monsoon 
season. 
15.5 Further, in the UT of Jammu and Kashmir NHIDCL has been entrusted with 
development and maintenance of 424.75 km of National Highw ays. Routine maintenance of 
Batote- Kishtawar section is in under progress. As on date 15 projects of length 268.63 Km of 
cost Rs. 13784 crore are under implementation including Z -Morh and Jozilla Tunnel. 
NHIDCL has awarded 10 projects of length 167 Km costing about Rs 5598 crore in FY 2020-
21. Further in FY 2021 -22, NHIDCL is planning to award projects of length 372.93 Km of 
about Rs 17994.77 crore including Chenani- Sudhmahadev-Daranga and Vailoo Tunnel. 

12 
 
Measures taken to provide relief to stakeholders from adverse impact of Coronavirus 
pandemic 
Recommendation/Observation 
16. The Committee appreciates the steps taken by the Ministry to provide relief to the 
contractors, concessionaires and developers of road sector from the adverse impacts of the 
Coronavirus pandemic restrictions during the Financial Year 2020 -21. The Committee 
recommends that the Ministry may continue to work closely with various stakeholders in the 
road sector to ensure the desired pace of development of roads in the country. The Committee 
further recommends that the Ministry may devise strategies to infuse liquidity into road 
contractors and concessionaires, as well as to help the banks and lending organizations 
recover their loans by timely completion of delayed/stuck projects. 
(Para 186) 
Reply of Ministry  
16.1 Besides the short term measures taken during FY 2020 -21 to resolve liquidity issue 
for Contractors, Concessionaires, and Developers, Ministry/NHAI have taken multiple 
initiatives to improve long term liquidity issues in the sec tor. The Model Concession 
Agreement for HAM projects has been revised to increase the number of payment milestones. 
Policy measures have been taken to expedite refinancing proposals for PPP projects. Further, 
a number of delayed/stuck projects have been re solved through the Conciliation Committee 
of Independent Experts (CCIE). NHAI Board has also approved internal guidelines for 
calculation of Termination Payments, which has resolved a number of disputes in calculation 
of Termination Payments. As a result, NHAI Executive Committee has already approved 
revised Termination Payments for 3 projects. 
 
Loss of toll revenue on account of construction of parallel roads  
Recommendation/Observation 
17. The Committee recommends that the Ministry may work in coordination with the State 
Governments and ensure that roads are not constructed parallel to National Highways as far 
as possible, since the same have a damaging impact on the toll collection from the NHs, 
thereby affecting their viability.  
(Para 188) 

13 
 
Reply of Ministry 
17.1 View of the Committee is being apprised to the State Governments. Further State 
support agreement is being amended which includes non -construction of the competing 
facilities of Toll Road. 
 
Preparation of Detailed Project Reports (DPRs) for National Highway projects 
Recommendation/Observation 
18. The Committee recommends that DPRs of National Highways road projects should have 
provisions for right of way and service roads. The DPRs should be prepared after public 
consultation and i nputs from Members of Parliament of the area. The Committee further 
recommends that provisions for public amenities such as dhabas, washroom facilities etc. 
should be included at the DPR stage of NH projects.  
(Para 189) 
Reply of Ministry  
18.1 DPR activities for all major road activities are being pursued considering future 
expansion capacities and accordingly provisions of ROW and service roads requirements are 
assessed. Views of local people, peoples‘ representatives, State Governments are duly 
considered while preparing the DPRs. As part of increasing user experience of highways and 
provide world class amenities to commuters in the up and coming greenfield corridors and 
expressways, dedicated wayside amenities are being developed in strategic loca tions at an 
interval of 30 mins to provide seamless and standardized experience to users. A dedicated 
bidding strategy has been developed to invite interested concessionaires to bid for concession 
rights to run facilities like restaurants, dhabas and other  amenities like shopping malls, 
hospitals, auto repair garages etc. The plans and designs of these Way Side Amenities are 
being developed in the DPR stage by the DPR consultants in tandem with DPR for road 
infrastructure development activities. In addition , steps have been taken internally by the 
authority to improve the evaluation structure of DPR performance holistically. 
  
  

14 
 
 
CHAPTER-II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES OF THE MINISTRY 
 
ANNUAL PLAN 2020-21 
Recommendation/Observation 
1.  The Committee is happy to note that significant increase in allocation has been 
made to the Ministry at the Revised Estimates (R.E.) stage in 2020 -21 and commends the 
Ministry for managing a good pace of utilization under major heads such as NH(O) and 
Capital Outlay for NE Region.  
(Para 8) 
Reply of Ministry 
1.1 Utilisation of funds under the schemes NH(O), Investment under NHAI from CRIF 
and Capital Outlay for NE Region during 2020-21 are given as follows : - 
(Amount Rs. In crore) 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the Scheme BE 2020 -21 
Provision 
RE 2020 -21 
Provision 
Final 
Expenditure 
1. NH(O) including under 
Tribal sub Plan 
27034.06 31160.56 31135.67 
2. Investment under  NHAI 
from CRIF 
20750 27250 27249.33 
3. Capital Outlay for NE 
Region 
6780 7970 7935.22 
 
 
 

15 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
2. The Committee would also like to know the reasons behind the substantially decreased 
demand as well as the actual allocation at the R.E. 2020 -21 stage for Externally Aided 
Projects.  
(Para 13) 
Reply of Ministry 
2.1 Demands under Externally Aided Projects (EAP) were made considering present 
status of works and estimated fund requirements of various agencies.  
 
Recommendation/Observation 
3. The Committee appreciates that despite the unprecedented challenges faced on account of 
the COVID-19 pandemic, the Ministry managed to improve its physical achievements during 
the Financial Year 2020 -21. The Ministry has utilized 76.2% of the allocation made under 
the Capital head at the B.E. 2020 -21 stage, till the third quarter o f FY 2020 -21. The 
Committee, however, observes that the expenditure made under the Revenue head till the 
third quarter of FY 2020-21 is falling a little behind at 69.6% of the B.E. 2020 -21 allocation. 
The Committee hopes that the Ministry will take necessa ry action to optimally utilize the 
funds available under the Revenue head and the pace of construction of roads will continue 
at the current speed, in the coming years. 
(Para 16) 
Reply of Ministry 
3.1 Ministry incurred an expenditure of Rs. 9,532.09 crore against the RE allocation of 
Rs. 9,770.05 crore under revenue section. Overall expenditure of Ministry was Rs. 98,258.20 
crore against the RE 2020-21 allocation of Rs. 1,01,823.22 crore. 
 
ANNUAL PLAN 2021-22 
Recommendation/Observation 
4. The Committee may be apprised about the reasons for a mere token allocation of ₹2.00 
crore under Special Grant for Vijaywada -Ranchi road at B.E. 2021 -22, as against the 

16 
 
projected requirement of ₹25 crores.  
(Para 20) 
Reply of Ministry 
4.1 The project is almost completed.  A token provision of Rs.2 crore has been made only 
for any pending bill under the project.  
Recommendation/Observation 
5. The Committee would also like to be apprised of the reasons behind the huge allocation of 
₹745 crores in B.E. 2021 -22 against the projected requirement of ₹50 crores under the head 
“Bharatmala Priyojana – work under State PWDs/NHIDCL/BRO in Tribal Area”. 
(Para 21) 
Reply of Ministry 
5.1 At first, it was decided to keep the provision for Bharatmala Pariyojana in Tribal Area 
for the work under State PWDs/NHIDCL etc under the main head of Bharatmala Pariyojana.  
Later on it was decided in consultation with Budget Section that the entire provision for 
Tribal Sub Plan may be made under the Specific Head for Tribal Sub Plan ‗796‘, which is 
also in conformity with the requirements of Ministry of Tribal Affairs.  Hence, the provision 
was made under the Head.  
 
ROAD DEVELOPMENT 
Delayed Road Projects 
Recommendation/Observation 
6. The Committee notes that the State of Maharashtra has an abnormally high number of 
delayed road projects, as compared to other States. The Committee recommends the Ministry 
to evolve a robust coordination mechanism with the States and work out the delay re solution 
mechanism. The Committee is equally worried over long delays in completion of four -laning 
project in Gaya -Hisa-Rajgir-Nalanda-Bihar Sharif section, the Patna -Gaya-Dhobi road 
project connecting Mahabodhi Temple and Bodh Gaya, the road projects from  Goa to 
Karnataka and Goa border to Mumbai, the construction of bypass on NH -77 in Muzaffarpur 
and the ongoing road projects in Kaudiyala, Uttarakhand. The Committee recommends that 

17 
 
the Ministry may look into the reasons behind these delays and sort them o ut so as to 
complete these important road projects at the earliest. 
(Para 34) 
Reply of Ministry   
6.1 The Ministry is consistently reviewing progress of delayed projects and taking up 
necessary actions for resolving outstanding issues and bottlenecks in co nsultation with State 
Governments and other Ministries/ Departments concerned. 
Status of the specific projects mentioned above are as follows: - 
i.  Gaya-Hisua-Rajgir-Nalanda-Bihar Sharif section – The overall progress of the project is 
68.46% achieved till June 2021. Initially work was delayed due to non -availability of land & 
slow progress of Contractor. Now, encumbrance free land is available. It is expected that 
work is expected to complete till 31.03.2022. 
ii.  Patna-Gaya-Dhobi road project connecting Mahabodhi Temple and Bodh Gaya – Initially 
the project was terminated due to very slow progress of the Contractor and now has been re -
awarded. Now work is under progress in all three packages which are targeted to be 
completed by December 2022. Physical  progress of more than about 9% (of the balance 
awarded works) has been achieved till June, 2021.  
iii.  Construction of bypass on NH -77 in Muzaffarpur -  The work on Muzaffarpur Bypass 
was delayed due to Land Acquisition (LA) project. Now it is resolved a fter intervention of 
High Court, Patna. Work is under progress which is targeted to be completed by 31.12.2021. 
Physical progress of more than about 16% (of the balance awarded works) has been achieved 
till June, 2021. 
iv. Goa –Karnataka boarder road progress is slow due to following reasons: - 
● Slow disbursement of compensation to land owners on account of non -submission of 
land documents by land owners.  
● Delay in posting of SLAO Honnavar by Govt. of Karnataka.  No dedicated SLAO 
was posted. 
● Due to mis sing Survey nos. in original and additional 3D. Now 3A, 3D & 3G 
completed and 3H also being done as forceful possession order is being issued by DC 
Karwar and for balance land the possession/Disbursement is under progress. 
● Forest Department was not allowin g removal of boulders obtained from the 
excavation.  This issue is resolved. 

18 
 
● Stoppage of work by land owners for less Compensation & demand of under pass.  
However, Provisional Commercial Operation Date (PCOD) has been issued for a length 
of 141 km out of 187.24 km of the project length on 31.01.2020. Presently, 167.66km 
Land acquisition issue is regularly being discussed with all DC‘s through Video 
Conference by Honorable Chief Secretary of Goa-Karnataka and issues are being cleared. 
 
v.  Road Project in Kaudiyala Uttrakhand:- Widening work between Brahmpuri (km 235.00) 
to Kaudiyala (km 268.00) of NH -07 (Old NH -58) including 600m Marine Drive viaduct 
portion near Byasi in State of Uttarakhand is currently under implementation. The work 
was started in Dec 2 017 and has been delayed due to heavy rain falls, stoppage of works 
as per Orders of Hon‘ble High Court and Hon‘ble Supreme Court, ban on hill cutting by 
the State Government during Chardham Yatra, lockdown due to COVID -19 etc. The 
current progress of work  is 91% and work has been completed in 28.57 km length out of 
total length of 30.59 km. 
 
BHARATMALA PARIYOJANA 
Recommendation/Observation 
7. The Committee expresses its concern that against a target of 6,469 kilometer for awarding 
during the FY 2020 -21, the Ministry has been able to award only 2,517 kilometers till 
January, 2021. Similarly, the Ministry has been able to complete construction of only 2,273 
kms, as against the target of 4,571 kms under the Scheme. The Committee feels that if this 
trend cont inues, it would not be possible for the Ministry to meet the targeted timeline of 
completion of Bharatmala Pariyojana Phase -I by FY 2025 -26, which is already lagging four 
years behind the originally targeted completion of Phase -I by FY 2021 -22. The Committ ee, 
therefore, recommends the Ministry to look into the reasons which prevented it from 
achieving the targets set for the ongoing Financial Year and make dedicated efforts to tackle 
the same so that the Bharatmala Pariyojana Phase -I is on track and gets co mpleted before 
the set revised timeline. 
(Para 39) 
 
 

19 
 
Reply of Ministry  
7.1 In the Financial Year of FY 2020 -21, National Highways Authority of India (NHAI) 
awarded a total of 4,863 km as part of the Bharatmala Pariyojana Program. This is in spite of 
COVID-19 related time delays and issues associated with the pandemic. Similarly, pace of 
construction of project has been found to accelerate with construction of 5,303 km length 
completed by end of FY 2020 -21. Major sources of delay have been identified across  the 
value chain, starting from pre -construction activities like preparation of DPR, LA, 
environmental, forest and wildlife clearances; to eliminate delays while also increasing pace 
of construction, introduction of new technologies like pre -cast technologies, etc., are being 
adopted to reduce both time and cost of construction significantly. The Ministry and NHAI 
acknowledge the concerns of the committee and would like to reiterate full commitment to 
successfully completing the phase 1 of the Bharatmala Pa riyojana program at the earliest 
possible timeframe. 
 
NATIONAL HIGHWAYS AUTHORITY OF INDIA 
Recommendation/Observation 
8. The Committee notes that allocation of ₹57,350 crore made to NHAI at B.E. 2021 -22 is a 
40% increase over the ₹42,500 crore allocated to  NHAI at B.E. stage in 2020 -21. The 
Committee recommends that the NHAI must prioritize the maintenance of the existing road 
network in the country, along with the completion of projects under NHAI which are delayed 
at present. 
(Para 49) 
Reply of Ministry  
8.1 The observations of the Committee are noted for needful compliance.  
 
Recommendation/Observation 
9. The Committee further recommends that the NHAI should review the guidelines for 
construction of roads to ensure road safety in all its projects right from the stage of 
preparation of Detailed Project Report (DPR). NHAI may analyze the data available with 
regard to black spots which have been identified across the country and utilize the experience 

20 
 
and feedback so that ongoing and upcoming road projects in the country are devoid of black 
spots from day one. 
(Para 50) 
Reply of Ministry  
9.1 Third party indepe ndent Road Safety Audits are being carried out during design, 
construction and O&M stages of NHs projects. In addition, NHAI has issued comprehensive 
guidelines to field units for rectification of identified blackspots on priority. As per the 
blackspots data analysis, majority of blackspots are observed to be locations where approach 
roads are meeting/joining with NHs, and NHs sections located along urban settlements. 
Accordingly, necessary directions have been issued to field units to improve safety at existing 
vulnerable spots on NHs and ensure that adequate safety measures are taken for all road users 
for NHs under DPR stage. 
 
Amounts raised through IEBR and TOT Mode 
Recommendation/Observation 
10. The Committee apprehends that NHAI might fall short of its targeted IEBR amount of ₹ 
65,000 crore budgeted allocation for FY 2020 -21, since it has managed to raise only about 
65% of the targeted amount till the end of January, 2021. The Committee would lik e to know 
as to how NHAI plans to tackle the shortfall, in case it is unable to raise the targeted  IEBR 
amount for the FY 2020 -21. The Committee recommends that the Ministry may consider 
offering TOT Bundles of various sizes and IECVs so as to attract smal l as well as large 
investors. 
(Para 55) 
Reply of Ministry 
10.1 NHAI raised an amount of Rs. 65,035 crore during 2020 -21 as against the target of 
Rs. 65,000 crore. Recommendation of the Committee for offering TOT Bundles of various 
sizes and IECVs so as to attract small as well as large investors has been noted. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
11. The Committee appreciates the introduction of Artificial Intelligence based project 

21 
 
management software Digital Data Lake to allow NHAI to manage its projects in an ef ficient 
manner. The Committee would like the NHAI to utilize the data pertaining to its existing 
projects, to gain insights which can help in better awarding and management of its upcoming 
projects. The Digital Data Lake software may be utilized to manage a central database of 
road contractors across the country, to identify contractors who perform well, as opposed to 
those who delay their projects, indulge in avoidable litigations, deliver substandard quality of 
roads etc. The information thus collected ab out the road contractors and construction 
companies, may be shared with the PWDs and concerned road departments of State 
Governments as well and should also be placed on public platforms through a compatible 
software/ application. 
(Para 58) 
Reply of Ministry    
11.1 (a) NHAI has developed Vendor Performance Evaluation System so that 
implementation of projects can be improved by regularly monitoring the performance of 
Vendors (Contractors/Concessionaires/Consultants).  It is being implemented through Data 
Lake Portal in which vendors are required to conduct self -assessment and upload the 
documents related to the project activities being executed by them for further assessment by 
NHAI. The ongoing and completed projects pertaining to  EPC, HAM, B OT-Toll, BOT – 
Annuity, Authority Engineer & Independent Engineer are covered under this.      
  
(b)    The self-assessment made by the vendors will be assessed by a Committee of NHAI 
comprising of CGM/GM at HQ, RO & PD.  After assessment by the aforesaid committee, the 
scores of all the projects of one specific Vendor will be analyzed by a Committee of NHAI 
Members. This committee will give its single overall score for each vendor covering all its 
projects. In case of evaluation of performance of consultan ts, 60% weightage will be given to 
analysis done by the Committee of CGM/GM at HQ, RO & PD and balance 40% weightage 
to analysis done by the committee of NHAI Members. The mechanism for evaluation of 
performance of contractors/concessionaires is under finalization. 
(c)    The score of each vendor considering all its projects with NHAI will be shared with the 
vendor concerned who will have an opportunity to appeal against the allotted score to a 
Review Committee comprising of Chairman & Members of NHAI. The decision of the 
Review Committee on the score/ ranking of vendor shall be final. 
 

22 
 
Quality Inspection 
Recommendation/Observation 
12. The Committee takes note of the various initiatives taken by the Ministry/NHAI to ensure 
good quality in the road infrastructure projects. The Committee, however, feels that the 
existing quality of roads leave a lot to be desired and need more stringent quality check 
mechanisms to ensure high quality construction of roads across the country, with specific 
reference to  levelings and smoothness, and also to ensure use of standardized and world -
class equipment, technology and know -how to ensure relevant friction, sloping and gradient 
to allow rain water to flow out and side margin for road safety. In order to prevent road  
accidents due to drowsiness of drivers on long routes, rumble strips should be installed at 
appropriate places/road intersections. 
(Para 64) 
Reply of Ministry  
12.1 NHAI has taken following additional steps to ensure quality of its roads:-  
● Retired officers from MoRT&H and State PWDs have been engaged as Team leaders 
for projects. The projects are selected randomly. 
● In order to ensure smooth/pothole free roads, equipment based monitoring of the 
highways using latest technology like network survey veh icle, falling weight 
deflectometer etc. at specified frequencies has been mandated under contractual 
provisions. 
 
MAINTENANCE OF NATIONAL HIGHWAYS 
Recommendation/Observation 
13. The Committee is concerned to note that the Ministry has been able, to spend only ₹ 
1385.33 crores out of the R.E. allocation of ₹ 2654.07 crores for „Maintenance and repairs of 
National Highways‟ in 2020 -21. The Ministry has managed to spend ₹ 471.33 crores in the 
first quarter of FY 2020 -21, and even in the next two quarters that followed. The Committee 
would like to know in detail, the reasons behind this gross underutilization of funds under 
this important head, beyond the generic excuse of COVID-19 pandemic restrictions.  
(Para 75) 

23 
 
Reply of Ministry 
13.1 Final expenditure under Maintenance and Repair during 2020 -21 is Rs.2650.54 crore 
against the RE allocation of Rs. 2,653.92 crore.    
 
Recommendation/Observation 
14. The Committee takes note of the fact that the demand of funds for maintenance and repair 
of NHs has gone down in the last few years. The Committee fails to comprehend the reasons 
behind the decreasing demand projected by the Ministry under this head. The Committee may 
also be apprised of the length of NHs across the country, which are currently not being 
maintained under any scheme of the Ministry/State PWDs or under any sort of maintenance 
contracts. 
(Para 79) 
Reply of Ministry 
14.1 Demand under M&R head at RE stage are projected as per the requirement of funds 
received from different agencies. Allocation of funds for maintenance and repair of NHs are 
made for States / UTs to ensure traffic worthiness of NHs excluding the NH stretches under 
Defect Liabilit y Period (DLP) obligation or stretches under BOT / OMT Concessions, 
ongoing works on NHs, status of action taken up for new developmental works, availability 
of funds, etc. Works on NHs are taken up accordingly to keep them in traffic worthy 
condition. Out of about 1,32,299 km length of NHs, 8,567 km newly notified NHs are yet to 
be entrusted to agencies. Of balance 1,23,732 km NHs, as on 31.05.2021, works on about 
31,340 km length were yet to be taken up; these stretches are required to be maintained in 
traffic worthiness through various types of maintenance & repair works. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
15. The Committee recommends that the Ministry may ensure the construction of high quality 
roads which have provisions for efficient drainage system, in flood prone regions such as 
Northern Bihar, so that road connectivity is maintained in these regions at all  times. The 
Ministry/NHAI need to frame stricter provisions regarding monitoring of quality of 
construction materials used in road projects in such regions. By doing so, the Ministry would 
be in a position to save sizable funds on maintenance of these road s, every year after floods. 

24 
 
The Committee further recommends that the Ministry may allocate funds for carrying out 
research in road construction techniques that are best suited for flood-prone areas. 
(Para 82) 
Reply of Ministry  
15.1 Noted for compliance. It is pertinent to mention here that for efficient drainage 
system, NHAI has issued Policy Guidelines/Miscellaneous/2020 subject ―Drainage system: 
Adequacy & effectiveness‖ dated 8th July 2020. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
16. The Committee recommends that the Ministry should urgently look into the poor 
condition of the above mentioned road stretches and take immediate corrective action to 
improve the same, so as to provide relief to commuters travelling on these roads. 
(Para 84) 
Reply of Ministry 
16.1 The stretch from Delhi to Meerut has been substantially completed as Expressway 
except one ROB; however traffic is plying through the existing 4 lane ROB.  Further the 4 
laning work in the stretch from Meerut to Bahsuma and Bijnor to Najibabad is in progress 
and DPR is in progress for the remaining section of Bahsuma to Bijnor and Najibabad to 
Kotdwar. The stretch from Meerut to Kotdwar is in traffic worthy condition. 
16.2 NH stretches in Haridwar region is in traffic worthy condition. 
16.3 The potholes have been repaired in the Aurangabad Dobhi section and the stretch is in 
traffic worthy condition. 
 
DEVELOPMENT OF NATIONAL HIGHWAYS IN NORTH-EASTERN REGION 
Special Accelerated Road Development Program (SARDP) for North Eastern Areas 
Recommendation/Observation 
17. The Committee notes that the total allocation for SARDP for North Eastern Areas has 
witnessed an increase at both R.E. 2020 -21 and B.E. 2021 -22 stages. The Committee hopes 

25 
 
the enhanced budget allocation would help in completion of the various projects under 
SARDP for North Eastern Areas. The Committee expects the Ministry to revise targeted 
timeline for the completion of SARDP -NE Phase A. The Committee recommends the Ministry 
to ensure that contractors with poor track record are not awarded road project s and the 
SARDP-NE Phase A is completed within the revised targeted timeline. 
(Para 90) 
Reply of Ministry 
17.1 Contract Agreements with non performing contractors are being 
foreclosed/terminated with the condition that these Contractors shall not be eligible to bid for 
NHIDCL projects for a fixed period as specified in the agreement. 
17.2 The revised target to complete/improve roads under SARDP -NE Phase –A works is 
2023-24. Further, it is pertinent to mention that now most of the works are awarded under 
EPC mode of Execution as per Ministry Standard RFP and Bidding Document. In the 
Ministry‘s Standard RFP for EPC works, there is a clause that the Bidder, including any 
individual or any of its joint venture member should not be a non - performing party on the 
bid submission date. Further, various review meetings are being held regularly with 
contractors/Field Officers and State Government Officials by Ministry‘s  Higher Authorities 
to expedite the progress and timely completion of projects.  
Recommendation/Observation 
18.  The Committee would also like the Ministry to resolve the difficulties be ing faced in 
obtaining environment/forest/wildlife clearances with respect to SARDP -NE road projects 
and suitably modifying the proposal, wherever possible. The Committee urges upon the 
Ministry to work in close coordination with the Environment and Forest  Departments and 
exercise due diligence and care at the time of DPR preparation stage itself, in ecologically 
sensitive regions such as the North -East and also to draw up a consolidated list of 
environmental issues that are impeding the progress of road projects. 
(Para 91) 
Reply of Ministry 
18.1 NHIDCL has appointed Executive Directors at all the Regional Offices of all the 
North-Eastern States in order to smoothen the coordination with the State Government 

26 
 
authorities, local representative of the public and the DPR consultants during DPR 
preparation in order to minimize the impact on the environment. 
18.2 Generally, Detailed Project Reports (DPR) are prepared such that least disturbance is 
caused to the ecology  and environment. Wherever required, due proc edure is followed for 
taking clearance from Environment and Forest Department. Further, now most of the works 
are awarded under EPC mode of Execution as per Ministry Standard RFP and works are 
awarded/appointed dates are given to the contractor when more than 90% of the encumbrance 
land is available. 
 
SCHEME FOR DEVELOPMENT OF ROADS IN THE LEFT WING EXTREMISM 
AFFECTED (LWE) AREAS 
Recommendation/Observation 
19.  The Committee recommends that the Ministry may evaluate the reasons for the slow 
pace of progress  under the Scheme for Development of Roads in the Left Wing Extremism 
Affected Areas. The Committee desires the Ministry to opt for EPC model in the region in 
case sufficient interest is not being shown under the HAM and BOT (Toll) models. 
(Para 95) 
Reply of Ministry 
19.1 Slow progress under the Scheme for Development of Roads in the Left Wing 
Extremism (LWE) Affected Areas is mainly due to poor law and order situation, poor 
participation of the Contractors etc.  
19.2 Projects under LWE Scheme have been awarded on Item Rate only. Further MORTH 
has relaxed various bidding conditions vide its circular dated 25.08.2015 for enhanced 
participation of the Contractors as under:- 
(i) Acceptance of bids: - State Government has been a uthorized to accept bids up to 
10% excess over the cost of work based on current SOR. 
 
(ii) Schedule of Rates (SOR): - If required, separate SOR for LWE areas may be 
adopted while preparing estimates of works under LWE scheme.  Accordingly, 
Chhattisgarh State PW D revised SoR with an ad hoc increase of 40% for road 
works & 20% for bridge works in certain districts in Bastar Region. 

27 
 
 
(iii) Clubbing and splitting of works horizontally and vertically have been 
permitted, where there is no response to tenders even after sev eral calls. Ministry 
had permitted splitting of 11 works covering a length of 545 km into small 
packages of 2 to 3 km to enable local contractors to participate.  Altogether, above 
works were split into about 220 packages & all are awarded except for one s mall 
package of 3 km. 
 
19.3 Further Secretary (RTH) had requested Chief Secretaries of concerned States vide his 
letter dated 01.03.2013 to constitute District Level Coordination Committee headed by 
District Magistrate and comprising of District SP, Central Armed Forces, State PWD and 
Contractor to plan and proceed with the Area Domination by Armed Forces for ex ecution of 
works. Accordingly, security has been provided wherever requested/ sought by State PWD/ 
Contractor. To further expedite progress, Secretary (RT&H) requested the Union Home 
Secretary vide his DO letter dated 23.06.2016 to provide 81 additional security camps.   
19.4 Projects in LWE affected areas were awarded mostly on Item Rate contracts, no 
projects were awarded on HAM and BOT (Toll) modes.  
 
Recommendation/Observation 
20. The Committee further impresses upon the Ministry that special efforts may be made to 
maintain the National Highways in good condition, in the Left Wing Extremism affected 
areas, so as to support economic growth and prosperity in the region. For this to happen, the 
Ministry should establish a close coordination mechanism with  the local law and order 
agencies, so that both maintenance as well as construction of the projects in the region are 
carried out smoothly. 
(Para 96) 
Reply of Ministry 
20.1 As given in reply to Para 95 above,  Secretary (RTH) had requested Chief Secretaries  
of concerned States vide his letter dated 01.03.2013 to constitute District Level Coordination 
Committee headed by District Magistrate and comprising of District SP, Central Armed 
Forces, State PWD and Contractor to plan and proceed with the Area Dominati on by Armed 
Forces for execution of works. Accordingly, security has been provided wherever requested/ 

28 
 
sought by State PWD/ Contractor. To further expedite progress, Secretary (RT&H) requested 
the Union Home Secretary vide his DO letter dated 23.06.2016 to  provide 81 additional 
security camps.  
 
EXTERNALLY AIDED PROJECTS 
Recommendation/Observation 
21. The Committee notes that the expenditure under Externally Aided Projects head is ₹ 
2487.85 crores, upto 31 st January, 2021, which is about 54% of the amount allocated under 
the head at B.E. 2020 -21 stage. This slow pace of expenditure resulted into a substantial 
reduction at R.E. 2020 -21. The slow pace of utilization of funds under the EAP head thus 
cannot be fu lly accounted for by the problems the Ministry must have faced because of the 
Coronavirus pandemic restrictions. The Committee calls upon the Ministry to review the 
actual reasons behind this slow pace of utilization of funds and ensure that the reduced 
allocation of ₹ 3750 crore for EAPs is optimally utilized during the FY 2021-22. 
(Para 97) 
Reply of Ministry 
21.1 Expenditure incurred under EAP during 2020 -21 is Rs. 2,768.50 crore against the RE 
allocation of Rs. 2,800 crore. In one of the component of EAP i.e. World Bank assisted Green 
National Highways Corridor Project (GNHCP), while projecting this budget requirement, it 
was assumed that the works on many of the projects under this scheme would get started in 
FY 2020-21, which did not actually happen, an d only 03 works out of total 23 Road Projects 
could only be given the Appointed Date in the 4 th Quarter of the FY 2020 -21; hence 
expenditure incurred were low on these projects. 
21.2 Besides the above, the 6 projects (as 09 out of 15 road projects are already completed) 
under World Bank Financed scheme National Highways Interconnectivity Improvement 
Project (NHIIP) could not show the desired progress firstly due to Covid 19 and thereafter 
financial constraints of EPC contractors of 05 projects as they w ere facing Corporate 
Insolvency Resolution Process (CIRP) under the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code (IBC) 
Laws and are under the purview of the respective honorable benches of National Company 
Law Tribunal (NCLT). However, in the later part of the year, bar ring only 1 project in 
Odisha, all other projects have started showing good progress and are likely to be completed 
by December 2021. 

29 
 
  
Recommendation/Observation 
22. The Committee is happy to note that the World Bank funded National Highways 
Interconnectivity Improvement Project (NHIIP) is likely to be completed by 30 th June, 2021, 
albeit with a delay of 9 months. The Committee may be apprised of the steps being taken by 
the Ministry to resolve the land acquisition issues being faced in the project. 
(Para 99) 
Reply of Ministry 
22.1 The 6 projects (as 09 out of 15 road projects are already completed) under the World 
Bank Financed scheme NHIIP could not show the desired progress firstly due to Covid 19 
and thereafter financial constraints of EPC contractors o f 05 projects as they were facing 
Corporate Insolvency Resolution Process (CIRP) under the IBC Laws and are under the 
purview of the respective honorable benches of NCLT. However, in the later part of the year, 
except for only 1 project in Odisha, all other projects have started showing good progress and 
the remaining amount has been accommodated in new loan of World Bank viz. GNHCP. 
These projects are likely to be completed by December 2021. 
 
DEVELOPMENT, PLANNING, QUALITY ASSURANCE, RESEARCH AND TRAINING 
– FINANCED FROM CRIF 
Recommendation/Observation 
23. The Committee notes that the budgetary, allocation for „Development, Planning, Quality 
Assurance, Research and Training‟ has dropped to ₹ 48.96 crore at B.E. 2021 -22 stage as 
compared to ₹ 79 crore at R.E . 2020 -21. The Committee is not convinced by the reasons 
furnished by the Ministry for this decrease in allocation. The Committee deplores that the 
projected fund requirement as well as the utilization by the Ministry, under this vital head, is 
minuscule and instead it should have been several times more than the present allocation, to 
help push the road infrastructure sector in the country in the right direction.  
(Para 109) 
 
 

30 
 
Reply of Ministry 
23.1 Allocation under the head for the year 2021-22 amounting to Rs. 48.96 crore has been 
made keeping in view present commitment, likely expenditure under ongoing R&D Schemes 
and last year expenditure. However, to increase the pace of expenditure under R&D scheme, 
MoRTH has approved an Annual Plan of Rs 75.78 crore for FY 2021 -22 for ‗Development, 
Planning, Quality Assurance, Research and Training‘. It is the endeavor of the Ministry to 
sanction as many research schemes as possible related to innovation in road design and 
construction, safety issues etc. 
 
RESEARCH, TRAINING, STUDIES AND OTHER ROAD SAFETY SCHEMES 
Recommendation/Observation 
24. The Committee is concerned to note the sizeable reduction in the allocation made for 
Research, Training, Studies and Other Road Safety Schemes at R.E. 2020 -21 stage. The 
Committee recommends that the Ministry may look into the quantum of funds utilized by 
developed countries across the world, for the purpose of research, training and road safety, 
factor in the statistical input of road accidents and arrive upon the realistic budg etary 
requirement actually needed under this head against such worrisome road safety situation in 
the country.  
(Para 112) 
Reply of Ministry 
24.1 An expenditure of Rs. 164.99 crore has been incurred against the BE allocation of Rs. 
230.50 crores under the above scheme for the year 2020-21. 
24.2 The reasons for decrease in allocation at R.E. stage and less expenditure is as under: -  
i. Non receipt of UC from ASRTU, States, and organizations for projects/campaign/activities 
sanctioned to SRTUs and for State level conferences, Covid -19 funds and events related to 
National Road Safety Month.  
ii. Non receipt of Revised UC in GFR 12C from State of Jammu and Kashmir for National 
Highways Accident Relief Service Project.  
iii. Funds for IDTR, RDTC is released to t he States/UTs based on the physical progress of 
work and utilization of available funds but due to COVID situation across the country, the 

31 
 
progress was slow. Further, the stay on the scheme of DTC by Madras HC has resulted into 
savings as no proposal under the scheme could be sanctioned.  
iv. Less demand by States for I&C centers. 
v. Draft rules for setting up NRSB are under finalization. Thus the fund is unutilized. 
Recommendation/Observation 
25. The Committee is of the considered view that the North -Eastern Region is very important 
to the country from the point of view of strategic security and development perspective. Road 
infrastructure projects in the region pose unique challenges, owing to the  ecologically 
delicate, mountainous terrain which receives very heavy rainfall. The Committee 
recommends the Ministry to allocate funds for carrying out research in the field of 
construction techniques specific to the region, which can withstand the heavy rainfall in 
harmony with the environment.  
(Para 113) 
Reply of Ministry  
25.1 With respect to North -Eastern region, Ministry/NHAI/ NHIDCL has taken several 
initiatives to develop road infrastructure in order to connect the remote areas through rest of 
the country. For the upcoming projects, various challenges have been taken under 
consideration while preparing Detailed Project Report (DPR) under the guidelines of reputed 
agencies like Japan International Cooperation Agency (JICA) which specifies special 
mitigation measures to improve soil capacity & prevent landslides particularly in high rainfall 
areas in the state of Assam. 
25.2 Further, a multi -discipline expert group with active coordination of Department of 
Science & Technology has been formed to render  technical support and provide advice on 
new technologies and material. Border Roads organization (BRO) is using plastic waste, Geo 
Cell technique, soil stabilization through biological enzyme and cementitious base 
technology in the field of road construction in the North-eastern region.  
25.3 Also the Contractors are being encouraged to adopt the Ministry‘s guidelines for New 
Technologies in accordance with its suitability to the terrain and weather condition prevailing 
in the region. 
 

32 
 
 
Road Safety 
Recommendation/Observation 
26. The Committee takes note of the 2021 World Bank Report titled “Traffi c Crash Injuries 
and Disabilities: The Burden on Indian Society”  which states that India tops the world in 
road crash deaths, contributing to 11% of all road accident deaths worldwide, despite 
accounting for only 1% of the world‟s vehicles. The 2019 World Bank Report “Guide for 
Road Safety Opportunities and Challenges:  Low- and Middle -Income Countries Country 
Profiles” estimates the road crash and serious injury cost estimate at 7.5% of India‟s GDP. 
The Committee is of the considered view that the observations made in World Bank Report 
should serve as a stark reminder o f the gravity of the situation and a sense of urgency with 
which the Ministry should flag Road Safety as top priority, right from the DPR stage of a NH 
project. 
(Para 122) 
Reply of Ministry 
26.1 Ministry has taken Road safety on Top Priority.  In order to t ake precautionary 
measures for road safety, Ministry has issued guidelines for frequent safety Audits at all 
stages (Design, construction, and operation). Road Safety Audit has been made an integral 
part of DPR/Feasibility study as per IRC Code ―IRC:SP -88-2019‖ and action is being taken 
by Ministry accordingly in all projects.  
26.2 Priority has been accorded to road safety by incorporating safety measures at DPR 
stage itself of NH projects for minimizing ―Traffic Crash Injuries & Disabilities‖. Some of 
the measures adopted include: - 
a. Erection of necessary information / warning sign boards. 
b. Road marking with paint including cat eyes and delineators. 
c. Provision of crash barriers on high embankments, sharp and blind curves. 
d. Construction of retaining walls. 
e. Slope stabilization with Geo cell / grid to arrest any debris falling on the road. 
f. Improvement of road geometrics. 
g. Upgradation of bridges on National Highways. 
 

33 
 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
27. The Committee recommends that the Ministry should promote the toll free accident 
helpline number 1033 at toll booths and other suitable sites on the NHs, so as to spread 
awareness among road users as to how they can get help within the golden hour and 
potentially save the life of the accident victim.  
(Para 125) 
Reply of Ministry   
27.1 Noted for compliance. 
27.2 1033 Helpline number related informatory signage is installed at divider on national 
highway stretches and toll booths also to spread awareness a mong road users.  In view of 
growing popularity of NH Helpline 1033 and increasing number of queries/complaints, 
Indian Highways Management Company Limited (IHMCL) has increased Full Time 
Equivalent (FTEs) up to 250 in 2021 from 50 at the time of inception in 2018.  
27.3 IHMCL is handling 1033 helpline number also for providing  resolution to the 
complaints related to FASTags, for hassle free journey to road users on Fee Plazas. 
27.4 Further, an AI -based chatbot facility is also being enabled to allow NH user s to give 
feedback as well as lodge complaints on NH road conditions and other issues using 
WhatsApp. 
Recommendation/Observation 
28. The Committee is of the view that the funds generated through payment of penalties for 
traffic offences should be utilized for the purpose of enhancing Road Safety across the 
country. The Committee finds that the largest number of deaths due to road accide nts, is on 
roads other than National Highways and State Highways. The Committee, would like the 
Ministry to urge the State Governments to follow certain Guidelines and Rules in the 
construction of roads and in the maintenance of roads, to ensure safety of road users, on 
roads other than National Highways and State Highways also. The State/UT Governments 
may be encouraged to utilize the funds collected from the general public as penalty for 
committing traffic offences towards a Road Safety Corpus to fund pro jects/activities that 
improve Road Safety in the respective State.   

34 
 
(Para 133) 
Reply of Ministry 
28.1 Concerns of the Committee (regarding encouraging State / UT Governments to utilize 
the funds collected from the general public as penalty for committing traffic offences towards 
a Road Safety Corpus to fund projects/activities that improve Road Safety in the respective 
State) have been noted for needful compliance. 
 
Core Group on Safety and Security 
Recommendation/Observation 
29. The Committee further takes note of the fact that the 'Supreme Court Committee on Road 
Safety' was constituted in April 2014. The Committee would like the Core Group on Safety 
and Security to work in tandem with the Supreme Court Committee to address the issues 
related to Road Safety. 
(Para 137) 
Reply of Ministry 
29.1 As per the mandate, the Supreme Court Committee on Road Safety has filed reports 
to the Hon'ble Supreme Court from time to time. So far the Committee has filed 27 reports on 
which actions are being taken by the States/UTs. 
29.2 Further, as per observations made by the Department -related Parliamentary Standing 
Committee, the same are being forwarded to the Supreme Court Committee on Road Safety 
as well. 
 
CHAR DHAM PARIYOJANA 
Recommendation/Observation 
30. The Committee notes the delays being faced in the Char Dham Pariyojana on account of 
the litigations in the National Green Tribunal and Supreme Court. Keeping in view the fact 
that the regions covered under the Char Dham Pariyojana are ecologically sensitive in 
nature, the Committee recommends the Ministry to exercise due caution, diligence and care, 
while executing the remaining stretches of the project and make sincere efforts to minimize its 

35 
 
adverse impact, if any, on the environment and ecological balance. 
(Para 141) 
Reply of Ministry  
30.1 The recommendation of the Committee is duly noted for remaining stretches. It is also 
submitted that as per the specific directions of the High Power Committee (HPC) appointed 
by the Hon‘ble Supreme Court, Rapid Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) has been 
conducted for the Char Dham Project through a National Accreditation Board for Education 
and Training (NABET) Accredited EIA Consultant. As per report submitted by the 
Consultant, the impact on ecology due to the ongoing works of Char Dham Project is 
low/medium. 
 
SCHEME ON WOMEN SAFETY ON PUBLIC ROAD TRANSPORT 
Recommendation/Observation 
31. The Committee is distressed to note that substantial reduction of funds under the Scheme 
on „Women Safety on Public Road Transport‟ from B.E. 2020 -21 allocation of ₹ 174 crores 
to R.E. 2020 -21 allocation of ₹ 140 crores. For the Financial Year 2021 -22, the amount 
allocated under this head has been further decreased to ₹ 100 crores. The Committee feels 
that the decreasing all ocation under the head, alongwith the meagre utilization of ₹ 62.402 
crores till 31 st January, 2021 reflects the lack of sense of urgency towards the safety of 
women. The Committee is of the strong view that the issue of women safety has to be 
addressed proactively, in order to increase the participation of women in the workforce. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry should ensure optimum utilization of the 
funds under the head and also encourage better participation of State Governments, to 
ensure the same. The Committee observes that this allocation needs to be substantially 
increased in future, in order to protect the dignity of women in the country.  
(Para 146) 
Reply of Ministry 
31.1 The scheme of Nirbhaya Fund is mainly maintained / su pervised by the Ministry of 
Women and Child Development (M/oWCD). So far as M/oRT&H is concerned, the Ministry 
examines the proposals received from the States / UTs and releases funds to them on the 
recommendation of Empowered Committee  (EC) under the M/oW CD. MoRTH follows up 

36 
 
with the States / UT Govts for utilization of funds released by this Ministry. 
31.2 The projects submitted by the State Govt. are appraised by the EC in the M/oWCD. 
The projects related to safety of women in Public Transport, being exe cuted by various State 
Govts and State Transport Undertakings, are monitored by this Ministry for early completion 
as well as the required outcome. Following steps are being taken by Ministry to expedite the 
utilization of funds under the Scheme on ‗Women Safety on Public Road Transport‘: - 
● In reference to the scheme for implementation of ―Development, Customization, 
Deployment and Management of State -wise Vehicle Tracking Platform for safety & 
enforcement with AIS 140 specifications under Nirbhaya Fund‖, guidelines were 
circulated to all States/UTs on 15.01.2020. 
● So far out of thirty six (36) States/UTs, twenty nine (29) States/UTs have submitted 
the proposals to this Ministry. All twenty nine (29) proposal have been approved and 
the first instalment of Ce ntre‘s share has been disbursed to twenty five (25) 
States/UTs and balance four sanctions are in process of release. 
● In order to persuade States/UTs to seek the financial assistance, this Ministry has been 
organizing meetings, following up with letters and  periodic telephonic conversations. 
Through these communications, the States/UTs have been informed of the procedure 
for seeking funds as elaborated in the scheme guidelines. 
● The States/UTs, who have applied to the scheme, are in the process of selecting t he 
implementing agency for setting up the Monitoring Centre. This Ministry is providing 
all the support, financial and technical, to States/UTs for the implementation of the 
scheme. 
● Further, Ministry will again remind the balance States/UTs to submit the p roposal 
seeking financial assistance under the scheme.  
 
MISCELLANEOUS 
Accessible India Campaign (Sugamya Bharat Abhiyan) 
Recommendation/Observation 
32. The Committee welcomes and appreciates the above mentioned new initiatives of the 
Ministry. 
(Para 149) 
Reply of Ministry 

37 
 
32.1 Noted.  
 
Strengthening the Public Transport System in the States/UTs 
Recommendation/Observation 
33. The Committee observes that the number of „Passenger/km Performed‟ as per the 
combined physical performance of 56 State Road Transport Undertakings data has 
decreased from 55,91,694 crores in 2016 -17 to 55,84,156 crores in 2018 -19. This data, 
coupled with increasing population of the country every year, suggests that the share of 
public transport as a mode of transport, is witne ssing a constant decrease. The Committee 
feels that the decrease in the share of public transport translates into traffic jams, higher 
environmental pollution as well as increased fuel consumption per capita. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends the Minist ry to encourage maximum utilization of funds under the 
“Strengthening ITS in Public Transport System” scheme and come up with more schemes for 
bolstering the public transport system across the country, so as to encourage more 
passengers to take up public transport. 
(Para 153) 
Reply of Ministry 
33.1 Directions of the Committee are noted for compliance. 
 
Promotion of usage of environment friendly vehicles 
Recommendation/Observation 
34. The Committee takes note of the steps being taken by the Ministry to promote the usage of 
environment friendly vehicles in India. However, the Committee strongly feels that the same 
may not be enough to achieve the pace of adoption of such vehicles needed in the country, to 
tackle the damaging effect of petroleum based vehicles. The Committee recommends that the 
Ministry may pilot a legislation, in coordination with the concerned Ministries, to facilitate 
faster manufacturing and adoption of electric vehicl es across the country. While piloting 
such a legislation, the Ministry may look into the feasibility of making it mandatory for the 
vehicle manufacturers, to manufacture a certain minimum percentage of their vehicles, as 
vehicles powered by electricity or other clean energy sources with low emission. The draft 

38 
 
legislation may also consider mandating electric vehicle manufacturers to utilize a certain 
part of their profits in setting up electric vehicle charging infrastructure across the country.  
(Para 155) 
Reply of Ministry 
34.1 Status has been sought from Department of Heavy Industries. 
Recommendation/Observation 
35. The Committee reiterates the recommendation that it made in para 34.2 of Chapter III of 
its 285th Report on “Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations 
of the Committee contained in its 278 th Report of the Committee on Demands for Grants 
(2020-21) of Ministry of Road Transport and Highways”, underlining the need of a lucrative 
Electric Vehicle Policy.  
(Para 156) 
Reply of Ministry 
35.1 Promoting / Incentivizing the Electric Vehicle policies falls under the domain of 
Department of Heavy Industries. Concern of the Committee has been conveyed to the 
department and inputs have been sought. 
   
Accountability of Road Contractors, Consultants and Approving Authorities 
Recommendation/Observation 
36. The Committee takes note of the Policy Circular issued by NHAI on 8 th January, 2021 to 
decide penal action on the contractor, in case of failure of structures/highways in NHAI 
projects. The Committee recommends that NHAI may reconsider the upper limit of penalty 
since a sanction of ₹ 10 crore might not have the desired detr imental effect on the road 
contractors, in case of large road projects to the tune of hundreds of crores of rupees. 
(Para 167) 
Reply of Ministry   
36.1 The Policy circular under Para 1.3(iii) specifies the penalty provisions as: -  

39 
 
" Rectification by contractor/Concessionaire on own cost  and/or Debarment upto 2 years + 
Financial Penalty of Rs. 1 Cr. to Rs. 10 Cr. depending upon the severity of failure/neglect." 
36.2 Hence, it may be noted that the  penalty provision is not limited to  financial penalty 
only but provides for rectification by Contractor/ Concessionaire on their own cost and/or 
debarment of up to 2 years as well. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
37. The Committee desires to be apprised of the accountability of the consultants who 
prepare the Detailed Project Report for any given project of the Ministry. The Committee is 
of the view that many of the issues faced in the execution of road projects across the country 
are due to lack of due diligence at the time of preparation of DPR of the road projec t. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry may come up with Rules, to fix the 
accountability of the personnel responsible for drafting the Detailed Project Report, till a 
stipulated period of time, after the completion of the project, for co nstruction of poor quality 
roads and also to devise a mechanism for broader consultation with public representatives 
and other stakeholders, prior to finalization and should be vetted in the District Development 
(DISHA) Committees headed by the respective Member of Parliament.  
(Para 168) 
Reply of Ministry  
37.1 The Penalty provisions for various discrepancies in preparation of Detailed Project 
Report have been specified in the RFP document for appointment of Consultancy Services 
for preparation of Detailed  Project Report (DPR) in respect of National Highways and 
centrally sponsored road works issued vide MoRTH letter No. H -39011/30/2015-P&P (Pt-l) 
dated 15.02.2019, under Para 7.3 of General Conditions of Contract. The provision of Public 
consultation, inclu ding consultation with Communities located along the road, NGOs 
working in the area, other stake -holders and relevant Government departments at all the 
different stages of assignment is also included in the General scope of services of the 
consultant, vide Para 4.1(ii(a)) of TOR in RFP. 
 
Check barriers on National Highways 
Recommendation/Observation 

40 
 
38. The Committee feels that the Policy of the Ministry to not permit erection of check 
barriers on National Highways needs better implementation, since the presence of check 
barriers on NHs is almost ubiquitous across the country. The Committee may be appris ed of 
the steps taken by the Ministry to ensure the implementation of this Policy of the Ministry in 
its true spirit, so as to prevent frequent occurrence of traffic jams because of the check 
barriers.  
(Para 170) 
Reply of Ministry 
38.1 State Governments are being requested for not raising the check barriers on National 
Highways.  
 
Status of in-principle approved road projects in Rajasthan 
Recommendation/Observation 
39. The Committee desires to be apprised of the status of those National Highway projects in 
the State of Rajasthan which have been stuck for years despite in-principle approval.  
(Para 191) 
Reply of Ministry  
39.1 The Ministry approved ―In -Principle‖ declaration of about 71,898 km length of State 
roads as NHs in the State of Rajasthan since April, 2014 subject to outcome of their DPRs.   
39.2 No timeline can be committed for designating State roads as National Highw ays that 
already have in -Principle approval. However, the Ministry considers declaration of some 
State roads as NHs from time to time based on requirement of connectivity, inter -se priority 
and availability of funds, etc. The same is also applicable for St ate Roads approved ―In -
Principle‖ as NHs. 625 km length of State roads approved ―In -Principle‖ has been notified as 
NHs in the State of Rajasthan so far.  
39.3 The Ministry adopted the practice of approving State roads ―In -Principle‖ as NHs 
with a view to providing financial assistance for preparation of their DPRs, either through the 
concerned State Governments, or, through any other implementing agencies, viz. the NHAI, 
NHIDCL, BRO, etc., and for ascertaining the feasibility of upgradation of such State r oads as 
NHs. Mere completion of their DPRs does not mean that such State Roads were to be 

41 
 
necessarily upgraded to NHs, as any decisions regarding upgradation of such State Roads as 
NHs, or, otherwise, are to be taken based on the outcome of the DPRs.  
39.4 There is no commitment of the Ministry to either develop or maintain such State roads 
till they are notified as NHs and entrusted with executing agencies (such as NHAI, NHIDCL, 
State PWDs, etc.) after State Governments convey their no objection for handin g over assets 
thereof pursuant to notifying the roads as NHs. 
39.5 The State Governments may utilize finalized DPRs for development of other State 
Roads which are not upgraded as NHs, either out of their own funds, or out of the State share 
of Central Road and Infrastructure Fund (CRIF) (as per the CRIF Act, 2000, i.e. Central Road 
Fund (CRF) Act, 2000 amended by the Finance Act, 2018), or out of the funds raised through 
multilateral funding agencies, such as World Bank, ADB, etc. 
39.6 Thus, the State Gover nments would have a bank of DPRs for potential roads which 
may be utilized by them for drawing up a development plan as per available resources.  
39.7 Therefore, initiatives of the Ministry would actually enable drawing up of an Action 
Plan and for fixing inter-se priority of the roads for undertaking their developments even at 
the State Governments‘ levels as per their estimated resource availability. 
   
 
  

42 
 
 
CHAPTER-III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
THE MINISTRY HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
ANNUAL PLAN 2020-21 
Recommendation/Observation 
1.  The Committee, however, notes with concern that several important heads do not 
seem to be on track to utilize the allocated amount of funds by the end of the Financial 
Year 2020 -21. The Committee observes that the 'Road Transport and Road Safety' head 
witnessed a major decrease in allocation at R.E. stage, even though the overall budget of 
the Ministry received a significant bump in allocation. Even after the reduction of about 
39% at the R.E. 2020 -21 allocation as compared to B.E. 2020 -21 stage, the Minist ry has 
been able to spend a mere 41 percent of the reduced R.E. 2020 -21 allocation till the end of 
January, 2021 which is highly deplorable. The head 'Maintenance and Repairs of National 
Highways including Swachhata activities Plan' also witnessed a nomina l increase in 
allocation at R.E. stage, but the expenditure made till the end of January, 2021 is only 59 
percent. Similarly, against an allocation of ₹79.00 crore for the year 2020 -21 at both B.E. 
and R.E. stages, for 'Research & Development', the Ministr y has been able to spend only 
₹24.93 crore so far, which is just 31.5% of the allocated amount for this head. The 
Committee would like to be apprised of the reasons behind the failure of the Ministry to 
make optimum use of the funds available under these t hree crucial heads, in view of the 
vast NH network across the country, and considering their importance in the road sector.  
(Para 9) 
Reply of Ministry 
1.1 BE 2020-21 provision, RE and final expenditure under the schemes M&R, Swachhata 
Action Plan, R&D and Road Transport is given as under: 
(Amount  Rs. In crore) 
Sl.No. Name of the Scheme BE 2020 -
21 
RE 2020 -21 
Provision 
Final 
Expenditure 

43 
 
Provision 
1. M&R 2520.00 2653.92 2650.44 
2. Swachhata Action Plan (SAP) 80.00 80.00 40.84 
3. Research and Development 
(R&D) 
79.00 79.00 34.36 
4. Road Transport 359.00 225.00 159.65 
 
1.2 Funds under M&R have been utilized however there is savings under  Swachhata 
Action Plan, R& D and Road Transport. Fund requirements under Swachhata Action Plan 
(SAP) for NHAI and National Highways and Infrastructure Development Corporation 
Limited (NHIDCL) were less as compared to budgeted provisions. Further, less expenditure 
under R&D is primarily due to lesser sanction of new schemes and slow progress of ongoing 
R&D Schemes during 2020-21.  
1.3 Less expenditure on Road Transport & Road Safety is mainly on account of 
following:- 
i. Non receipt of Utilization Certificate (UC) from Association of State Road 
Transport Undertakings (ASRTU), States, and organizations for 
projects/campaign/activities sanctioned to SRTUs and for State level conferences, 
Covid-19 funds and events related to National Road Safety Month.  
ii. Non receipt of Revised UC in Ge neral Financial Rules (GFR) 12C from State of 
Jammu and Kashmir for National Highways Accident Relief Service Project.  
iii. Funds for Institute of Driving and Traffic Research (IDTR,) Regional Driver 
Training Centre (RDTC) are released to the States/UTs based on the physical progress 
of work and utilization of available funds but due to COVID situation across the 
country, the progress was slow. Further, the stay on the scheme of Driving Training 
Centre (DTC) by Madras HC has resulted into savings as no pro posal under the 
scheme could be sanctioned.  
iv. Less demand by States for Inspection and Certification (I&C) centers. 
v. Draft rules for setting up National Road Safety Board (NRSB) are under 
finalization. Thus the fund is unutilized. 

44 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
1.4 The Committee is not fully satisfied with the reasons furnished by the Ministry 
for savings under ‘Swacchata Action Plan’, ‘Research and Development (R&D)’ and 
‘Road Transport’ schemes. The Committee desires to know the reaso ns for having 
sought higher budgetary provisions than the actual fund requirements under the 
Swacchata Action Plan. The Committee is deeply concerned to note that the Ministry 
was able to spend only 43.5% of the budget allocated for Research and Developmen t at 
RE 2020-21. The Committee strongly recommends that the Ministry of Road Transport 
& Highways may ensure that fund requirements are projected correctly at the time of 
requesting funds from the Ministry of Finance. The Committee also desires the Ministry 
to pursue the State Governments, Association of Road Transport Undertakings 
(ASRTUs) and executing agencies to timely utilize the funds allocated to them under the 
various schemes of Road Transport & Road Safety and to submit the utilization 
certificates for the same on time, so as to ensure optimal utilization of the funds 
allocated to the Ministry each year. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
2. The Committee takes note that against the projected demand of ₹5,100 crores under the 
head 'Maintenance and Repairs of National Highways including Swachhata activities Plan' 
in B.E. 2020-21; only ₹2,600 crores was allocated. The Committee fails to understand as to 
how the projected requirement of the Ministry fell to ₹3,080 crore at the R.E. stage in 2020 -
21. Further, t he Committee may be apprised of the reasons behind the decrease in the 
budgetary requirement of the Ministry under this head at the R.E. stage in 2020 -21, as 
compared to the B.E. 2020-21. 
(Para 12) 
Reply of Ministry 
2.1 Demand under M&R head at RE 2020-21 stage was reduced as per the requirement of 
funds received from different agencies. Against the demand of Rs. 3,080 crore under M&R 
including SAP at RE stage, an amount of Rs. 2,733.92 crore were allocated. Allocation of 
funds under M&R head falls under Re venue section of the Budget and allocations under the 
Revenue section were restricted to Rs. 9,770.05 crore only against the projected requirement 
of Rs. 10,550.13 crore. However to overcome such shortfall, it has been decided by the 
Ministry to shift the scheme of Periodical Repair/IRQP from Revenue Section (M&R) to 

45 
 
Capital Section (NH -O) w.e.f. 2021 -22. Hence, more fund will be available for keeping the 
National Highways traffic worthy. 
 Further Recommendation/Observation 
2.2 The Committee fails to appreciate as to how the demand under M&R head at 
RE 2020 -21 stage fell so drastically as compared to the Demand at BE 2020 -21 stage 
although the maintenance and repairs should have been given much higher priority and 
weightage given the poor condition of National Highways. The Committee recommends 
that the Ministry may look into the discrepancies and ensure that accurate demands are 
made under all the heads at the BE and RE stage each year, in order to avoid 
unnecessary savings. 
 
ANNUAL PLAN 2021-22 
Recommendation/Observation 
3. The Committee further notes that the Ministry has been allocated only ₹3,750.00 crores at 
B.E. 2021 -22 for Externally Aided Projects (EAP) against its projected demand of ₹6,965 
crores. The Committee may be informed about how the Ministry plans to keep the EAP on 
track with this amount, given that several of these projects have already witnessed delays. 
The Committee recommends that the Ministry may impress upon the Ministry of Finance, the 
need for additional funds under this head at the R.E. 2021-22 stage. 
(Para 22) 
Reply of Ministry 
3.1 The provisions made for EAP at BE 2021 -22 stage are considered as adequate 
considering the progress of projects. Additional requirement of fund under EAP head shall be 
projected at RE 2021-22 stage appropriately. 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
3.2 The Committee is surprised to note that the provisions of Rs. 3,750 crores made 
for EAP at BE 2021 -22 stage are being considered as adequate by the Ministry, even 
though it had projected a demand of Rs. 6,965 crores under this head. The Committee 
recommends that the Ministry may strive to ensure that the requirements as projected 
by it under various heads at the BE and RE stages, are as close as possible to the actual 

46 
 
needs under the head, considering the progress made of the projects involved. 
 
ROAD DEVELOPMENT 
Delayed Road Projects 
Recommendation/Observation 
4. The Committee is anguished to note that 888 road projects under the Ministry are delayed 
at present, which amount to ₹ 3,15,373.3 crores involving a length of 27,665.3 kilometers. 
Delays in completion of ongoing road projects cause a huge loss of time and greater 
consumption of fuel, to countless number of road users across the country, besides the 
increase in the project cost that has to be incurred by the Ministry. The Committee desires 
the Ministry to focus and prioritize completion of ongoing delayed projects instead of 
announcing and awarding new road projects in the country. 
(Para 33) 
Reply of Ministry    
4.1 Noted for needful compliance. 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
4.2 The Committee desires to know the steps taken by the Ministry to complete the 
completion of the ongoing delayed road projects in the country. A detailed roadmap 
alongwith details of Infrastructure funding and the approximate timelines may also be 
provided. 
 
BHARATMALA PARIYOJANA 
Recommendation/Observation 
5. The Committee is anguished over the slow progress made by the Ministry in the port 
connectivity projects under the Bharatmala Pariyojana Phase -I. The Committee notes the 
reasons listed by the Ministry for  the slow progress and would like to know whether the 
series of discussions with the multiple stakeholders in this regard have now been concluded. 
The Committee feels that the road stretches covered under these port connectivity projects 

47 
 
are of crucial imp ortance to the Shipping sector and would help in creating a cost effective 
multimodal transport system in the country. Port connectivity to the land locked States, 
especially with reference to Bihar, Jharkhand, Madhya Pradesh and Chhattisgarh, should be 
given top priority. The Committee calls upon the Ministry to work out the modalities for early 
completion of these port connectivity projects in close coordination with the stakeholders. 
(Para 42) 
Reply of Ministry  
5.1 As part of Bharatmala Pariyojana Program, development of Port Connectivity Roads 
are an important part of the Ministry and NHAI‘s objective of improving the movement of 
freight across the nation by integrating freight corridors, roads and ports through 35 world 
class Multi-Modal Logistics Parks. Development of MMLPs is in early stages of feasibility 
and DPR studies with development of road connectivity being undertaken parallelly on a 
priority basis. As on date, out of the total 2,272 km of port connectivity and coastal roads as 
part of Bh aratmala Pariyojana Program, 168 km of the roads have been awarded with the 
remaining 2,105 km are in various stages of DPR preparation. All port connectivity roads are 
expected to be awarded as per the readiness of the project reports and their pre -construction 
activities. Regular consultations are also being held with the Ministry of Shipping for 
expansion and capacity augmentation of key stretches, which are of importance to logistics 
and freight movement. 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
5.2 The Committee is deeply concerned to note the extremely slow progress of works 
under development of Port Connectivity Roads as a part of the Bharatmala Pariyojana 
Program. The Committee notes that even though the initially targeted date of 
completion of Bharat mala Pariyojana Phase -I was 2021 -22, only 168 km of the port 
connectivity roads have been awarded while the rest of the 2,105 kms are in various 
stages of DPR preparation. The Committee is of the considered view that lack of robust 
road connectivity to por ts is one of the major bottlenecks faced by the Shipping sector 
in India. The Committee strongly recommends that the Ministry should take a serious 
look at the various factors impeding the award of these road projects and take urgent 
steps and undertake de dicated efforts to iron out the same to bolster the growth of the 
Shipping sector in the country. 
 

48 
 
 
CENTRAL SECTOR SCHEMES/PROJECTS 
Recommendation/Observation 
6. The Committee is concerned to note that the Revenue head under the Central Sector 
Schemes/Projects has witnessed a paltry 0.36 percent increase in budgetary allocation at 
B.E. 2021 -22 stage as compared to that of B.E. 2020 -21, even though the Capital head 
witnessed a staggering increase of 32% in B.E. 2021 -22 as compared to B.E. 2020 -21. The 
Committee observes that the underutilization of funds under Revenue head of Central Sector 
Schemes/Projects, is the primary reason for the low allocation of funds at bo th R.E. stage in 
2020-21 and B.E. stage in 2021 -22. The Committee recommends that the Ministry may 
analyze the bottlenecks being faced by the Ministry in optimal utilization of the funds under 
the Revenue head and request the Ministry of Finance for additi onal funds at the Revised 
Estimates stage in 2021 -22 to bolster the activities/projects under important heads such as 
Maintenance and Repair of NHs; and Research, Training and Road Safety Schemes etc.  
(Para 45) 
Reply of Ministry 
6.1 Allocations under the Revenue section were restricted to Rs. 9,870.89 crore only 
against the projected requirement of Rs. 14,557.60 crore for the year 2021 -22. Ministry 
incurred an expenditure of Rs. 9,532.09 crore against the RE allocation of Rs. 9,770.05 crore. 
Additional demand will be made appropriately at RE 2021 -22 stage, if required, keeping in 
view the progress of the various projects and expenditure. To increase the expenditure under 
R&D, the annual plan of Rs. 77.78 crore has been approved for start of various R&D 
Schemes during 2021-22. 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
6.2 The Committee desires to know the reasoning provided, if any, for allocation of 
only Rs. 9,870.89 crores under the Revenue section at B.E. 2021 -22 stage, as against the 
projected requirement of Rs.  14,557.60 crore. The Committee notes that several 
critically important schemes of the Ministry are funded by the allocation made under 
the Revenue section and therefore, it must pursue the Ministry of Finance for allocation 
of higher funds under the Revenue head in future. 
 

49 
 
NATIONAL HIGHWAYS AUTHORITY OF INDIA 
Monetization of National Highways 
Recommendation/Observation 
7. The Committee takes note of the details regarding the five TOT bundles that have been put 
up for bidding so far, as well as the future projections made by the Ministry for the 
monetization of National Highways through TOT/InvIT. The Committee would like to be 
apprised as to how the Ministry/NHAI plans to monetize TOT Bundle 2 and 4 which stand 
annulled as on date. The Committee desires NH AI to apprise it as to what was the Initial 
Estimated Concession Value (IECV) amount in case of TOT Bundle 2 and what amount was 
quoted by the bidders including the reason for lower quotes than the IECV, by the bidders. 
The Committee welcomes the initiativ e of InvIT mechanism to generate funds by NHAI. 
However, it would like to be apprised of the status of implementation of InvITs for the 
monetization of National Highways in the country. 
(Para 53) 
Reply of Ministry  
7.1 3 projects of TOT -bundle 2 have been taken up for monetization under Infrastructure 
Investment Trust (InvIT) model. Further, balance stretches of TOT Bundle -2 and TOT 
Bundle-4 are proposed to be taken up in future TOT Bundles / InvIT. 
7.2 Further, as approved by the Govt. of India, NHAI has also formed an Infrastructure 
Trust and the Investment Manager Company & the Project Manager Company for fund 
raising against the projects transferred to the said Infra Trust. The DPM (Draft Placement 
Memorandum) has been filed with SEBI on 31st March 2021. 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
7.3 The Committee notes that the reply furnished by the Ministry does not provide 
any details regarding the Initial Estimated Concession Value (IECV) amount in case of 
TOT Bundle 2 and the amounts quoted by the bidders for Bundle 2. In case the bids 
received from the bidders have been lower than the IECV, the Ministry may apprise the 
Committee regarding possible reasons for the same. 
 
 

50 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
8. The Committee recommends that NHAI may quantify the benefits gained from the 
implementation of the Digital Data Lake software and onboard State PWDs to utilize the 
platform to manage the road projects executed by them. By doing so, the Committee feels that 
it would help the platform gather more data from ro ad projects across the country and allow 
the State PWDs to function more efficiently. 
(Para 59) 
Reply of Ministry  
8.1 Output from the Data Lake is facilitating the decision making process with timely and 
correct decisions. Financial impact of different alternatives is also being predicted based on 
the historical data. This has enabled reduction in disputes, proper record maintenance and 
also quick correspondences between the contractors / consultants and NHAI. It has enhanced 
the transparency, as all off icers and stakeholders, connected with the project can see what is 
going on real time basis which will amount to concurrent performance audit by the seniors. 
8.2 For State PWD and NHIDCL projects, there already exists an online monitoring 
portal called Project Monitoring Information System (PMIS). PMIS captures real time project 
progress resulting in optimization, digitization & automation of the whole process of 
monitoring of projects. This has led to significant reduction in manual efforts by streamlining 
the process of data entry and generation of reports thereof for monitoring and further decision 
making based on the outcome of this portal. Further, this portal is being enhanced to include 
all other features under one umbrella called E -DISHA. Some of these 
enhancements/integrations include Implementation of GIS functionality & Integration with 
the Bhoomi Rashi, LCM (Legal Case Management) & SAP applications. This  will further 
enhance the management of road projects.    
8.3 In addition, Integrated MoRTH Dashboard has also been developed so as to 
consolidate dashboards of PMIS and Data Lake which shows the integrated progress of all 
three organizations Road Wings, N HAI, and NHIDCL on real -time basis. This Integrated 
Dashboard of MoRTH helps in monitoring and decision making of all implementing agencies 
at highest level in the Ministry. 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
8.4 The Committee takes note of the positive im pact made by the Data Lake 
software on the decision making process of NHAI. The Committee is of the considered 

51 
 
view that the Ministry/NHAI should take necessary steps to onboard State PWDs on the 
Data Lake platform so as to improve the decision making proc ess of the State PWDs as 
well, not just for National Highways projects, but for the State Highways and other 
roads as well. 
 
Quality Inspection 
Recommendation/Observation 
9. The Committee recommends that random checks for construction & material quality 
and the compliance of mandatory guidelines, may be made by NHAI for all its road projects, 
in addition to the checks made by the approving officials. Any discrepancies/ deficiencies 
found in the same, should result in disciplinary action against the person / agencies involved 
in preparing DPR, the concessionaire as well as the approving official. The Committee feels 
that connivance of the approving authorities with the concessionaire might be the major 
cause of below par quality of construction in National H ighways projects across the country. 
The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry may introduce necessary checks and 
balances in order to ensure that the approving authorities as well as the concessionaire are 
accountable for their work, till a s tipulated period of time, even after the completion of the 
project. 
(Para 65) 
Reply of Ministry 
9.1 In order to check  construction and material quality, NHAI conducts random Quality 
Inspection of the projects by involving retired government officials of the rank of 
Chief   Engineer and above as Independent Team Leaders.   NHAI has  constituted 36 such 
teams and actions on the deficiencies  of Contractors/Concessionaires/ Consultants are taken 
in accordance with the Contract Provisions. 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
9.2 The Committee notes that the reply of the Ministry does not furnish any 
information regarding the action taken by it to ensure disciplinary action against the 
person/agencies involved in preparing DPR, the concessionaire as w ell as the approving 
official, in case discrepancies/ deficiencies are found in the compliance of guidelines for 

52 
 
road construction and material quality. The Committee would like to be apprised 
regarding the steps taken by the Ministry in this regard. 
 
Vacancies and Staffing in NHAI 
Recommendation/Observation 
10. The Committee is distressed to note that a large number of vacancies are existing in 
NHAI, which is implementing a large number of National Highways projects in the country. 
With this shortfall in manpower, the Committee wonders how the NHAI can work effectively 
and efficiently. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry should take urgent 
action to fill up the vacant positions in NHAI at the earliest. The details of NHAI staff posted 
on deputation basis and how many of them are working on permanent basis may also be 
shared with the Committee. 
(Para 67) 
Reply of Ministry  
10.1 With regard to the observation of Committee about a large number of vacancies in 
NHAI, it is stated that over the past few years, sincere efforts have been made and continuous 
recruitments have been undertaken to fill up the vacancies. As a result of these recruitments, 
most of the posts under DR and promotion modes have been filled up and the unfilled 
vacancies are mainly under deputation quota. The major impediments in filling -up the 
deputation vacancies are as under:-  
● Skill gap between certain State Govt. officers/ PSUs vis -à-vis eligibility criteria in 
NHAI Regulations. 
● Unwillingness of Central/ State Govts/PSUs to spare officers on deputation. 
● Parent departments don‘t issue NOC after specific period for deputationist. 
● Major chunk of vacancies in the Technical cadre (20% of sanctioned posts) reserved 
under MoRTH quota remain unfilled.  
 
10.2 In order to overcome the hindrance in filling-up the vacancies, the following remedial 
measures have been taken: - 
● Review of the recruitment rules for technical cadre has been carried out.  
● To retain the deputationists for maximum period, the deputation period has been 
extended from 07 to 10 years in the RRs.   

53 
 
● The RRs of finance cadre has also been revised and fresh recruitment based on revised 
RRs has been undertaken.    
● After analysing the reasons for non -filling up of the vacancies, a comprehensive 
review of existing RRs of NHAI has been undertaken and the same are expected to be 
finalised shortly. 
 
10.3 Further, as desired, the details of manpower working on deputation and on regular 
strength of NHAI as on 31.03.2021 is submitted as under: - 
Total sanctioned strength  1892 
No. of regular officers   877 
No. of officers on deputation  245 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
10.4 The Committee notes the various hindrances being faced in the filling up of 
vacancies in NHAI and the remedial measures undertaken to overcome the same. The 
Committee, however, is distressed to note that the total manpower working in NHAI, 
including both regular officials and those on deputation, as on 31.03.2021 is just 1122 
out of the total sanctioned strength of 1892. The Committee is of the stron g view that 
given the huge financial allocation made to NHAI each year, it is pertinent to ensure 
that sufficient manpower is in place so as to make optimal utilization of the available 
funds. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the ongoing comprehen sive review 
of existing Recruitment Rules of NHAI may be finalized at the earliest and sincere 
efforts may be made to ensure that the vacancies presently lying unfilled in NHAI are 
filled up at the earliest. 
 
EXTERNALLY AIDED PROJECTS 
Recommendation/Observation 
11. The Committee notes that land acquisition is a major bottleneck in Externally Aided 
Projects as well as other NH road projects in the country. The Committee desires the 
Ministry to look into the issue from a holistic perspective and consider suitable legis lative 

54 
 
changes to discourage the stakeholders from initiating litigations which contribute to not 
only increasing their cost but also causing immense trouble to the people living in the nearby 
regions. The Committee recommends that the Ministry may analyze  the possibility of 
periodically sharing a part of the revenue generated from road infrastructure projects with 
those, whose land was acquired, since one of the core reasons behind the reluctance of the 
land-owners to willingly let go of their land is that  the land is the source of livelihood for 
landowners and a one -time payment does not promise a regular livelihood to them, post 
acquisition of their land. 
(Para 100) 
Reply of Ministry 
11.1 Views of the Committee for ―analyzing the possibility of periodically sharing a part of 
the revenue generated from road infrastructure projects with those, whose land was acquired‖ 
has been noted for needful action. 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
11.2 The Committee may be apprised of the action taken by the Ministry for 
analyzing the possibility of periodically sharing a part of the revenue generated from 
road infrastructure projects with those whose land was acquired and the possible effects 
of the same on the land acquisition process. 
 
SCHEMES OF UTs FINANCED FROM CRIF 
Recommendation/Observation 
12. The Committee is anguished over the slow pace of utilization of funds under the Schemes 
of UTs financed from CRIF, across all Union Territories except Pondicherry. Poor pace of 
utilization of funds particul arly in UTs does not augur well for their being under the direct 
control of Central Government. The Committee is especially concerned to note that upto 31 st 
January, 2021, funds released to Jammu and Kashmir are a mere 17.3% of the amount 
allocated for the year 2020 -21. Similarly, the funds released to Ladakh are also just 27% of 
the amount allocated for the year 2020 -21. The Committee would like to be appris ed of the 
reasons for the nominal amount of funds released to these crucial, newly formed Union 
Territories, along with the steps taken by the Ministry to encourage higher utilization of 
funds in future. 

55 
 
(Para 102) 
Reply of Ministry 
12.1 Proposals for development of roads in UTs are sent by the concerned UT and are 
examined in the Ministry.  Then, fund is released to that UT against the approved projects 
and on the receipt of Utilisation Certificate of previous fund released to that UT.    
12.2 During the year 2020 -21, funds to UTs of J&K, Ladakh, Puducherry, Andaman & 
Nicobar Islands and Dadra & Nagar Haveli and Daman & Diu have been released as under: 
 
Amount Rs.in crore 
Sl. No. Name of the UT Budget Provision Fund released 
1. Andaman & Nicobar Islands 15.12 15.12 
2. Dadra & Nagar Haveli and 
Daman & Diu 
5.61 5.61 
3. Ladakh 246.22 96.95 
4. Puducherry 8.47 8.47 
5. Jammu and Kashmir 94.51 79.40 
 
12.3 Less release in the UT of Ladakh and J&K is due to less receipt of utilization certificate.  
Further Recommendation/Observation 
12.4 The Committee takes note of the details of funds released to the various UTs 
during the year 2020 -21. The Committee is concerned to note that the amount of funds 
released i.e. Rs. 96.95 crores to the UT of Ladakh is less than even 40 percent of the 
budgetary provisions available for the UT during the year 2020 -21. Given the strategic 
location of the UT of Ladakh and the pressing need for development of a robust roa d 
network in the region, the Committee recommends that the Ministry may proactively 
reach out to the UT Department concerned and try to iron out any technical difficulties 
being faced in the execution of projects, if need be, so that the budgetary provisio ns 
made for the UT of Ladakh can be utilized optimally. 

56 
 
 
DEVELOPMENT, PLANNING, QUALITY ASSURANCE, RESEARCH AND TRAINING 
– FINANCED FROM CRIF 
Recommendation/Observation 
13. Low utilization of funds under the head „Development, Planning, Quality Assurance, 
Research and Training‟ upto 31 st December, 2020 is a matter of serious concern. The 
Committee is pained to point out the failure of the Ministry to utilize even the small allocation 
of ₹ 79 crore under this critical head.  
(Para 105) 
Reply of Ministry 
13.1 Total expenditure under Highway Research is Rs. 34.36 crore against the RE 
allocation of Rs. 79.00 crore. Less expenditure under R&D is primarily due to less sanction 
and ongoing R&D Schemes. To increase the expenditure under R&D, the annual plan of Rs. 
77.78 crore has been approved for start of various R&D Schemes during 2021 -22. Further 
following steps have also been taken to broaden the scope of R&D Schemes which will 
enable additional expenditure: -  
(i) MoRTH has signed MoU with IIT Roorkee and IIT (BHU) Varanasi for 
establishment of MoRTH Chair professorship at these institutes for undertaking 
research & development on various aspects related to planning, design and 
construction of roads and bridges. Further, MoU with IIT, Madras for 
establishment of MoRT H Chair professorship has been finalized and it will be 
signed very soon. 
(ii) MoRTH has also taken up 6 research schemes through different IITs / Central 
Road Research Institute (CRRI) on subjects that will have practical application in 
highway projects. MoRTH  has been consistently undertaking various researches 
through reputed academic/ research institutes and these researches have been the 
backbone for framing standards and guidelines by Indian Roads Congress. 
Besides, NHAI is also sponsoring seventeen research schemes on various topics of 
highway industry. 
(iii) Indian Academy of Highway Engineers (IAHE) is conducting various training for 
MoRTH officers and highway engineers across the country on various technical 
topics. Also, IAHE is conducting foundation trainin g for fresh recruited AEEs of 

57 
 
the MoRTH. MoRTH provides funds for the training of its officers. Besides, 
MoRTH is collaborating with ten premier institutes of the country for conducting 
trainings of its officers on various topics. Refresher training on pro motion to the 
next level has also been planned. 
  
Further Recommendation/Observation 
13.2 The Committee is not satisfied with the reasons furnished by the Ministry for 
managing to spend a mere Rs. 34.36 crores under Highway Research as against the RE 
allocation of Rs. 79.00 crores. The Committee strongly recommends that the Ministry 
should take up more schemes under this head and urgently look into the reasons behind 
low sanction of R&D schemes in the road sector. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
14. The Committee would like the Ministry to initiate and fund researches to gain insights 
into innovative road construction techniques, road safety issues and measures for both 
pedestrians and vehicle passengers, increasing longevity of roads across the varied 
landscape of the country, standards for road construction of international standards, tackling 
issues such as water -logging, etc. The insights gained by the Ministry from such studies and 
researches would be of immense value to the entire road transport sector in the country. 
(Para 106) 
Reply of Ministry 
14.1 Noted for compliance.  
Further Recommendation/Observation 
14.2 The Committee would like to be apprised about the action taken by the Ministry 
in order to initiate and fund researches to gain insights into various issues pertaining to 
road transport sector. 
 
 
 

58 
 
RESEARCH, TRAINING, STUDIES AND OTHER ROAD SAFETY SCHEMES 
Recommendation/Observation 
15. The Committee takes serious note of the budgetary shortfall being faced by the Indian 
Roads Congress and feels that the same reflects the apathy of the Ministry towards research 
and development in the road sector of the country. The Committee is of the view that the 
research programmes carried out by Indian Roads Congress are of critical importance to 
make it possible for the Ministry to execute high quality road projects and improve the state 
of Road Safety in the country. The Committee would like the Ministry to provide budgetary 
support needed by the IRC to carry out research programmes in collaboration wit h the 
leading Universities/ Research Institutions in the country, as well as abroad. 
(Para 115) 
Reply of Ministry 
15.1 Indian Roads Congress (IRC) is a registered society. Ministry has been supporting 
IRC from time to time in various ways as one -time assistance like construction of IRC 
building, development of software etc. Besides, the findings of the research activities 
undertaken by Ministry are utilized by IRC in upgrading existing/framing new standards and 
guidelines. The Ministry has been providing possible supports to IRC. 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
15.2 The Committee feels that the role played by Indian Roads Congress in carrying 
out research programmes pertaining to road construction is of immense value and that 
the Ministry should ensure that budgetary constraints are not faced by IRC since the 
guidelines issued by it are followed across the country and have enormous implications 
on the quality of roads in India. In this light, the Committee reiterates its 
recommendation that the Mi nistry should provide adequate budgetary support needed 
by IRC to carry out research programmes in collaboration with the leading 
Universities/ Research Institutions in the country. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
16. The Committee recommends the Ministry to m ake dedicated efforts to seek CSR funds for 
the development of driving training institutes across the country, for capacity building of the 

59 
 
vehicle drivers who are often found lacking in proper driving training and are unaware of 
traffic laws. The Ministry should plan the development of a driving training institute in every 
district of the country. 
(Para 116) 
Reply of Ministry 
16.1 Noted for needful compliance.  
Further Recommendation/Observation 
16.2 The Committee desires to be apprised of the actions taken by the Ministry in this 
regard. 
 
Road Safety 
Recommendation/Observation 
17. The Committee takes note of the various initiatives taken/being taken by the Ministry to 
address the issue of road safety in the country. The statistics give a snapshot regarding road 
accidents in the country to suggest that although there is a consistent  increase in the number 
of persons getting killed in road accidents, the number of road accidents taking place is 
witnessing a decrease. The Committee is apprehensive whether the trend indicates a decrease 
in the reporting of road accidents across the coun try or the severity of the road accidents 
occurring in the country has increased over time. The Committee finds that a  significant 
percentage of these deaths belongs to working age individuals which might be pushing the 
livelihood of many families at stake , causing serious financial trouble/ poverty. The 
Committee recommends the Ministry to target zero accidents on account of faults in road 
design and construction. The Ministry should take up identification and rectification of black 
spots on a war footing,  across the country. The Committee further recommends the Ministry 
to conduct research and analyze into why these black spots existed in the road projects in the 
first place and how the same can be avoided from the DPR preparation stage itself in the 
upcoming projects of the Ministry. 
(Para 121) 
 
 

60 
 
Reply of Ministry 
17.1 Transport Research Wing (TRW) of the Ministry published its report ―Road 
Accidents in India 2019‖. The reported number of accidents during year 2019 was 4,49,002 
leading to 1,51,113 deaths a nd 4,51,361 injuries. National Highways, which comprise of 
2.03% of total road network, accounted for a high share of 35.7% of deaths. The data indicate 
that about 24% accidents/killing/injuries took place at road locations with features e.g. curved 
road, bridges, culverts, pot holes, steep grade and ongoing road construction works while a 
large number 76% of accidents/fatalities took place on straight roads etc. This data further 
indicates that about 13,598 deaths occurred during 2019 possibly due to road related 
deficiencies while 40,349 deaths occurred possibly due to behavioral attitude of drivers on 
the roads or due to vehicular failures. 
17.2 In order to save accidents and precious human lives, the Ministry decided to identify 
National Highway location s which has shown frequent accidents/loss of human lives and 
defined these locations as Black spots vide circular no. RW/NH -15017/109/2015-P&M 
(RSCE) dated 28.10.2015. Road accident black spot is defined as a stretch of National 
Highway of about 500m in le ngth in which either 5 road accidents (in all three years put 
together involving fatalities/grievous injuries) took place during the last 3 calendar years or 
10 fatalities (in all three years put together) took place during the last 3 calendar years. 
17.3 Based on accident data received from various sources, so far 5,995 accident black 
spots have been identified on NHs; action on these 5,995 identified black spots have started. 
So far, 95.16% of these blackspots are attended – 3,320 with permanent measures and 2385 
with temporary measures. Other Black spot locations are under study and shall be taken up 
soon for their improvements. 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
17.4 The Ministry takes note of the data furnished by the Ministry with regard to 
black spots across the country. The Committee reiterates its recommendation that the 
Ministry may analyze the data pertaining to the existing black spots in order to gain 
actionable insights into prevention of creation of such accident -prone black spots in the 
upcoming road projects of the Ministry. The Committee further recommends that the 
rectification of black spots across the country should be given topmost priority and the 
Ministry may review the existing framework in place to ensure the same. 
 

61 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
18. World Bank Report further highlights that as high as 44% of the households in rural 
areas reported at least one death after a road crash, compared to 11.6% of the households in 
urban areas. Similarly, Low Income Households reported twice the n umber of deaths post -
crash vis -à-vis High Income Households. The Committee feels that this striking difference 
might be because of the difference in the quality of medical care available to the victims of 
road accidents. The Committee recommends that the M inistry should work in close 
coordination with the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, to ensure that free quality 
medical help is provided to road accident victims belonging to Low -Income Households. The 
Committee recommends that this may be partially funded by the penalties collected for the 
violation of traffic Rules. 
(Para 123) 
Reply of Ministry 
18.1 Scheme for cashless treatment of road accident victims is under consideration in 
consultation with Ministry of Health & Family welfare, National Health Authority and other 
Stakeholders. 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
18.2 The Committee appreciates that a scheme for cashless treatment of road 
accident victims is under consultation with the Ministry of Health & Family Welfare, 
National Health Authority and other Stakeholders. The Committee recommends that 
the same may be finalized within a fixed timeline so as to save precious lives in road 
accidents. The Committee further desires to be kept apprised about the progress made 
in this regard. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
19. The Committee desires the Ministry to formulate an Action Plan with quantifiable goals 
regarding the number of black spots to be identified and rectified; reduction of response time 
in case of accidents; reduction in the number of accidents; and deaths caused thereby, etc. 
(Para 126) 
 

62 
 
Reply of Ministry 
19.1 Ministry has defined Protocol for identification of Black spot as per the circular no. 
RW/NH-15017/109/2015-P&M (RSCE) Dated 28.10.2015. As per this circular, Road 
Accident Black-spot is a stretch of National Highway of about 500 m in Length  in which 
either 5 road accidents  (in all three years put together involving fatalities /grievous injuries) 
took  place during the last 3 calendar years or 10 fatalities (in all three   years put together) 
took place during the last 3 calendar years. 
19.2 Ministry has issued several guidelines / circulars for rectification of black spots so 
that the road accidents could be minimized and precious lives of the road users are saved.  
19.3 Various measures taken by the Ministry for rectification of black spots are as below:- 
i. It has been made mandatory to carry out all stage (Design, Construction, Operation) 
road safety audits for all National Highways. 
ii. Provision of rumble strips or bar markings at the approaches of the major junctions on 
NHs. 
iii. Provision of speed limit signs at desired locations of NHs network. 
iv. Provision of Rumble Strips and associated signages on side roads. 
v. Provision of amber beacons for traffic approaching a junction or mid -block median 
opening of NHs. 
vi. Installation of crash barriers on high embankments, hilly terrains. 
vii. Encouraging engineers for certificate course in Road Safety Audit. 
viii. MoRTH has developed a Blackspot MIS portal where details of all blackspots, ids, 
photographs, rectification feedback shall be collected and monitored. 
 
19.4 The Ministry vide its letter dated 15 th April 2021, 04 th March 2021, 26 th February 
2021 and 11 th January 2021 directed all the executing agencies to complete the rectification 
of Black spots by Long Term Measures/Permanent Rectification by 30.09.2021. 
19.5 Efforts are being made to rectify all identified Black spots by September, 2021. 
Regular review meetings are conducted by senior officers of the Ministry with Regional/field 
officers of the Ministry, NHAI and NHIDCL for rectification of black spots within the 
targeted timeline.  
19.6 Road Accidents are occurring due to multiple causes such as over speeding, drunken 
driving/consumption of alcohol, driving on wrong side/lane indiscipline, fault  of the driver of 

63 
 
motor vehicle, use of mobile phones during driving, mechanical defect/fault of the vehicle, 
defect in road condition, weather condition and lack of knowledge on road signage, etc. 
 19.7 The Ministry has formulated a multi -prolonged strategy to address the issue of road 
safety based on Education, Engineering (both of roads and vehicles), Enforcement and 
Emergency Care. Accordingly, various initiatives have been taken by the Ministry as detailed 
below:- 
 i Education: 
● The Ministry implements a scheme for undertaking publicity measures and awareness 
campaigns on road safety to create awareness among road users through the electronic 
media, print media, NGOs etc. 
● Observance of National Road Safety Week/Road Safety Month every year for 
spreading awareness and strengthening road safety. The award for Road Safety is also 
provided during Road Safety Week/Road Safety Month. 
● A Certification Course for Road Safety Auditors has been commenced in Indian 
Academy of Highway Engineers (IAHE). 
ii. Engineering (both of Roads and vehicles) 
● Road engineering 
✔ High priority to identification and rectification of black spots (accident prone 
spots) on national highways. 
✔ Road safety has been made an integral part of road design at planning stage. 
✔ The threshold for four laning of National Highways have been reduced from 
15,000 Passenger Car Units (PCUs) to 10,000 PCUs. 
✔ Ministry has delegated powers to Regional Officers of MoRTH for technical 
approval to the detailed estimates for rectification of identified Road Accident 
black spots. 
✔ Guidelines for pedestrian facilities on National Highways for persons with 
disabilities have also been issued to all States / UTs. 
  
● Vehicle engineering:  
✔ Safety standards for automobiles have been improved. 
✔ Ministry has notified fitment of Speed Limiting devices on all transport 
vehicles 

64 
 
✔ Scheme for setting up one model Inspection & Certification Centre in each 
State/UT with Central assistance for testing the fitness of vehicles through an 
automated system 
iii. Enforcement 
✔ The recently passed motor vehicles (Amendment) Act, 2019 provides for strict 
enforcement through use of technology and further provides for strict penalties 
for ensuring strict compliance and enhancing deterrence for violation of traffic 
rules. 
✔ Rules for protection of Good Samaritans as per MV (Amendment) Act, 2019  
iv. Emergency care: 
✔ The Motor Vehicles (Amendment) Act, 2019 provides for a scheme for the 
cashless treatment of victims of the accident during the golden hour. 
✔ The National Highways Authority of India has also deployed 550 ambulances 
at toll plazas on the completed corridor of National Highways. 
✔ Out of 550 ambulances, 171 ambulances have been upgraded to Basic Life 
Support as per AIS-125. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
19.8 The Committee takes note of the various measures taken by the Ministry for 
rectification of black spots and recommends that a mechanism may be put in place to 
ensure that periodical monitoring and maintenance of measures such as amber beacons, 
crash barriers, signages etc. is carried out  on National Highways across the country. 
The Committee recommends that the Ministry must bring out strict guidelines 
specifying that long-lasting rust-free materials are used for signages and that the shrubs 
and trees on the Highways are trimmed regularly  so as to ensure that signages installed 
on the Highways remain clearly visible to the drivers at all seasons. The Committee 
hopes that the Ministry would be able to succeed in its efforts to rectify all identified 
Black spots by September, 2021. The Commi ttee further recommends that the Ministry 
may consider reviewing the definition of Black spots scientifically following the 
international standards, once all the presently identified Black spots have been rectified. 
19.9 The Committee, after going through the installed A.C. (Asbestos Cement) Road 

65 
 
Reflector in various Municipalities and PWDs like MCGM (Mumbai), Uttarakhand etc. 
used under Road Safety & Road Furniture Division as a Road/ Highway Divider & 
Crash Barrier in place of Metallic Crash Barrier, foun d that it is a cheaper, green 
product having more strength and durability which can take the strength of the vehicle 
in case of an accident, avoiding any extreme fatal  damages, in comparison to the 
metallic and other alternatives. The A.C. Road Reflector/  Crash Barrier installed are 
rust and theft proof as its components have Asbestos and Cement which are not prone 
to rust and have no resale value, resulting in no theft, this unique feature can help save 
large exchequer amount and simultaneously give highe r road safety while beautifying 
the roads. The Committee was informed that the product comes with a seven year 
guarantee, though its life span is estimated to be more than two decades. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry may explore the possibility of 
using A.C. Road Reflector/ Delineator/ Crash Barrier in the highway projects as an 
alternative to metallic crash barrier. 
Recommendation/Observation 
20. The Committee notes that the meetings of District Road Safety Committees are barely 
held. The Committee recommends that the Ministry may keep track of the frequency of the 
meetings held by the District Road Safety Committees and as part of the monitoring 
mechanism. Further, the Committee recommends that it should be strictly ensured that the 
Member of Parliament from the area is duly invited for the said meetings. The Committee 
further recommends that a Road Safety Committee should be constituted at the State level, 
comprising, inter alia, of representatives from the Ministry of Road Transport  and Highways 
and State Road Departments, Chief Secretary of the State and Members of Parliament 
belonging to the State, which may meet at least twice a year, to discuss the road safety issues 
in the State.   
(Para 131) 
Reply of Ministry 
20.1 Road Safety Committee is constituted in each district of the country to promote 
awareness amongst road users under the chairmanship of Hon'ble Member of Parliament 
(Lok Sabha) from the district. If the district has more than one Member of Parliament (M.P.), 
then the senior most M.P. would be the Chairman of the Committee. The Hon'ble Member of 
Parliament (Rajya Sabha), residing in the district, shall be special invitee. District Collector is 
the Member Secretary of the Committee. 

66 
 
20.2 To ensure that the meetings of Dis trict Road Safety Committees are held regularly, a 
letter dated 08.02.2021 from this Ministry was sent to the Chief Secretaries of all States/UTs 
for uploading of minutes of the Member of Parliament‘s Road Safety Committee meeting on 
the portal of the Comm ittee. It was requested to direct all District Collectors that the date, 
agenda, proceedings etc. of the meeting be uploaded on the relevant portal of the MoRT&H 
by 15th February, 2021. 
20.3 Further, to ensure uploading of the meeting details on the Member  of Parliament's 
Road Safety Committee -Portal by the districts, the Log -in ID and password for each district 
have been sent to all the States/UTs. 
20.4 The Ministry is taking up the matter with all the States / UTs on regular basis. After 
08.02.2021, two more letters dated 10.05.2021 and 29.06.2021 have been written to the States 
/ UTs for uploading the meeting details on the website. Till date, 7 meetings‘ details have 
been uploaded by 4 States / UTs. 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
20.5 The Committee takes note of the efforts made by the Ministry to ensure that the 
meetings of District Road Safety Committees. The Committee, however, is disheartened 
to note that details of only 7 meetings of District Road Safety Committees have been 
uploaded by 4 States/ UTs and feels that the same might be a reflection of the number of 
meetings of the District Road Safety Committees actually being held across the country. 
The Committee recommends that the Ministry may further pursue the matter with the 
Chief Secretaries of the various States in order to increase the frequency of the meetings 
of the District Road Safety Committees and look into other possible measures that can 
be taken to this end. The Committee further notes that the reply of the Ministry does 
not addres s the recommendation made by the Committee for constitution of a Road 
Safety Committee at the State level. The Committee desires to be apprised of the action 
taken by the Ministry in this regard. 
 
Core Group on Safety and Security 
Recommendation/Observation 
21. Taking cognizance of the glacier burst at Uttarakhand that occurred on 7 th February, 
2021 which led to loss of precious lives, the Committee underlines the urgent need for 
providing for helicopter landing facilities at ecolog ically sensitive areas, in order to ensure 

67 
 
effective disaster management operations. For such facilitation, the Core Group should 
actively engage with NDRF also regularly. The Committee stresses upon the need for close 
monitoring of ecological changes usin g the latest technology available, in order to prevent 
such natural disasters. In brief, the Committee accentuates the necessity for a very close and 
effective coordination among all the related Ministries/Departments/Organisations and 
entities. 
(Para 138) 
Reply of Ministry  
21.1 Noted for compliance. However, field officers of Ministry, NHAI, NHIDCL and 
Border Roads Organisation (BRO) keep a close watch of the NHs communication in the hilly 
states like Uttarakhand and it is generally ensured that disturbed  NHs communication, if any, 
are restored at the earliest. 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
21.2 The Committee desires to know whether the Ministry has looked into the 
feasibility of providing for helicopter landing facilities at strategic places at ecologically 
sensitive areas, in order to ensure effective disaster management operations. 
 
MISCELLANEOUS 
Multi-Member Consultative Committee  
Recommendation/Observation 
22. The Committee recommends that a  strong Research & Development wing may be formed 
with the collaborative efforts of the Ministries that are a part of the MMCC, to evolve new, 
cost-efficient ways in the country, for shifting to environment friendly fuels. The Research & 
Development wing should look into re gion-specific strategies, to identify the best possible 
alternatives for conventional fuel, depending upon the availability of natural resources in the 
region. A detailed study of the strategies adopted by the most carbon efficient countries for 
switching to environment friendly fuels in their country may be undertaken by the Ministry. 
The suitability of the same in the Indian context may be looked into and global best practices 
may be incorporated, after suitable modifications. 
(Para 158) 

68 
 
 
23. The Committee feels that Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) and environmental 
clearances are often thought of as impediments, by the public, to the various infrastructure 
projects of the Ministries. The Committee recommends, in this regard, that the Ministr y 
should explore ways and means to bring about a change in mindset of the public, by creating 
greater awareness on such issues, and that the officials must be held accountable for the 
adverse environmental impact of the projects, if any, being proposed and  undertaken by 
them. The MMCC may look into the existing mechanism for coordination of the Ministries 
comprising the MMCC, with the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change and 
suggest necessary changes in the same. 
(Para 159) 
24. The Committee further recommends that the MMCC may come up with budgetary 
requirements for the promotion of environment friendly fuel, carrying out the necessary 
R&D, providing subsidies to the common man as well as to the industries for such adoption,  
and submit the same to the Ministry of Finance. The MMCC may devise a quantifiable Action 
Plan to promote the manufacturing and purchase of electric vehicles in the country, along 
with the creation of necessary infrastructure such as charging stations, ba ttery 
manufacturing and disposal etc.  
(Para 160) 
25. The Committee takes cognizance of the fact that although norms regarding emissions for 
automobiles, railways, aircrafts, ships, power plants and industries exist on paper, they are 
not implemented in le tter and spirit. The Committee recommends that a concrete plan to 
efficiently and regularly monitor such emissions across the different industries should be 
chalked out. Checks may be put in place to ensure that large companies do not circumvent 
the testin g methodologies of the concerned bodies, through the use of software and such, 
similar to the incidents that were widely reported in the media in the recent past. The MMCC 
may also pursue the timely review of the emission norms specified by the various Min istries 
as well as the monitoring and enforcement strategies for the same, and take necessary 
remedial measures, promptly. 
(Para 161) 
 
 

69 
 
 
Reply of Ministry 
25.1 With the approval of the Hon‘ble Minister, Road Transport and Highways,  a 
Committee, vide order dated 4 th November, 2020, has been constituted under the 
Chairmanship of Secretary, Ministry of Road Transport & Highways and the Members, not 
below the rank of Joint Secretary, from the following Ministries: 
i. Secretary, Ministry of Road Transport & Highways - Chairman 
ii. Department of Heavy Industry, Ministry of Heavy Industry and Public Enterprises 
iii. Ministry of Civil Aviation 
iv. Ministry of Railways 
v. Ministry of Shipping, 
vi. Ministry of Power 
vii. Ministry of Commerce and Industry, and 
viii. Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas 
ix. Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change 
x. Other subject experts, as the committee may deem fit. 
25.2 The committee is constituted for the following purposes: - 
(i) Evolve ways for increasing the use of alternate sustainable pollution -free fuel to achieve 
fuel efficiency and reduction of carbon emission, as per goals of Mission 2030. 
(ii)     Railways, aircrafts, automobiles, ships, power plants and industries to evolve ways to 
augment the use of pollution free alternate fuel like Hydrogen CNG t o replace the present 
petrol/diesel/ coal in a phased manner to achieve Prime Minister‘s vision -2030 in all 
practical ways. 
(iii)   Advise Automobile industry to go for production of a minimum of 10% of HCNG 
vehicles of their total production every year. 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
25.3 The Committee appreciates the constitution of a committee by the Ministry 

70 
 
under the Chairmanship of Secretary, Ministry of Road Transport & Highways. The 
Committee, however, notes that the reply furnished by the Ministry does not provide 
any information regarding the action taken on the recommendations made by the 
Committee in this regard. 
 
Impact of vehicle overloading on National Highways 
Recommendation/Observation 
26. The Committee recommends that the Ministry may look into the significant impact of 
vehicle overloading on the condition of National Highways across the country. The 
Committee recommends that the Ministry may employ weigh -in-motion system at its toll 
booths across the country, to identify the extent  of overloading by heavy vehicles, compared 
to the permitted load which may be obtained through FASTag data of the vehicle and impose 
suitable penalty automatically, so as to have a strong detrimental effect on truck owners. The 
Committee feels that this w ill tackle the possible connivance of RTO officials with the truck 
owners for allowing such overloading, and will help in better maintenance of National 
Highways. There should be a special check on overloaded trucks, especially with reference to 
those transporting goods – stone chips and other minerals, causing damage to the roads.  
(Para 182) 
Reply of Ministry 
26.1 NHAI has installed weigh-in-Motion systems at 377 Toll Plaza Locations. 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
26.2 The Committee may be apprised of the future plans of the Ministry/NHAI for 
installation of weigh -in-motion systems at all toll plazas across the country in order to 
deter the menace of overloading of heavy vehicles. 
 
 
  

71 
 
 
CHAPTER-IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLY OF 
THE MINISTRY IS STILL AWAITED 
MISCELLANEOUS 
Setting up Dedicated Underground Utility Corridors 
1. The Committee is of the view that roads across the country require frequent trenching for 
the purpose of laying of fiber lines, gas pipelines, and other similar amenities. The patchwork 
done thereafter is often delayed and rarely meets the desired construction quality, thus 
thwarting the speed of vehicles on the road and acting as a safety hazard. The Committee 
recommends that the Ministry may consid er the inclusion of a provision for dedicated 
underground utility corridors in its upcoming National Highways projects to prevent frequent 
trenching. The provision for construction of dedicated underground utility corridor should be 
included at the DPR sta ge itself. The extra cost incurred for building the underground utility 
corridors may be replenished by monetizing the constructed utility corridors by charging the 
Departments and Companies which will benefit from avoidance of frequent trenching of 
roads. The Committee recommends that the Ministry may create a Special Purpose Vehicle 
(SPV) for the purpose of monetization of the utility corridors. 
 (Para 184) 
Reply of Ministry 
1.1 The Ministry agrees that the development of essential utility corridors to lay 
down    water pipelines, OFC cable, power line, drainage/sewerage network, gas pipelines 
etc. along with highway development shall be definitely time and cost saver as well as i t will 
enhance economic viability and environment sustainability.  
1.2 This is to inform that the existing National Highway Right of Way (ROW) varies 
from 12 -60 m and depending upon the availability of space in ROW, permissions to lay 
utilities in a width of 2 m on extreme edges of ROW are being given. As the different 
agencies approach this Ministry for such permissions at different timelines, the utility space is 
utilized mostly in an unorganized manner. While developing the National Highways of 
standards to serve projected future traffic, the additional ROW is being acquired to make a 
consistent ROW of 30-60 mtr. For a 4-lane divided carriageway development, 45-60 m ROW 

72 
 
is maintained through acquisition while for a 2 -lane paved shoulder development ROW up to 
30 mtr is maintained. Further the National Highways passes through rural and urban areas 
and in some cases, ROWs are compromised in urban areas.  
1.3 The need of utility corridors may also be divided into two parts i.e.  long distance 
utilities viz. OFC, gas/oil pipelines etc. passing through rural areas and short distance utilities 
viz. power lines, drainage/ sewerage, water pipelines etc. needing urban space. There are also 
security/safety & operational issues related to parallel and close running of p ower & OFC 
lines, power & gas/oil pipelines etc.  
Another area of concerns is: - 
i. the economical viability - whether such ducts are compulsorily to be built along 
highways without actual assessment of need in the area, or to be built on the basis of 
need after getting requirements from various agencies and 
ii. cost of such ducts - cost sharing of construction of ducts and required land to be 
acquired specifically for such utility corridor, investments & tariff, operation & 
maintenance cost etc.  
1.4 In order to get all the above issues examined and to have a draft Policy Note/SOP, it 
has been decided by Ministry to take consultancy services of Andhra Pradesh Urban 
Infrastructure Asset Management Limited (APUIAML). Necessary instructions have been 
given to NHAI on 25th September 2020 to engage APUIAML. The draft policy so prepared 
shall be shared with all stake holders before its finalization. Based on the finalized policy, the 
decision on creation of a Special Purpose Vehicle (SPV) for the purpose of monetizatio n of 
the utility corridors may be taken. 
1.5 In this connection, APUIAML has recently submitted an interim feasibility report for 
laying of integrated utility corridors along greenfield NHs.   
Further Recommendation/Observation 
1.6 The Committee desires to be kept apprised of the progress made by the Ministry 
with regard to preparation of draft Policy Note/ SOP on the viability of having 
provisions for utility corridors and the decision regarding creation of a Special Purpose 
Vehicle for the purpose of mone tization of the utility corridors, based on the finalized 
policy. 
 
**** 

73 
 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS – AT A GLANCE 
CHAPTER-III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
THE MINISTRY HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
ANNUAL PLAN 2020-21 
The Committee is not fully satisfied with the reasons furnished by the Ministry for 
savings under ‘Swacchata Action Plan’, ‘Research and Development (R&D)’ and ‘Road 
Transport’ schemes. The Committee desires to know the reasons for having sought 
higher budgetary provisions than the actual fund requirements under the Swacchata 
Action Plan. The Committee is deeply concerned to note that the Ministry was able to 
spend only 43.5% of the budget allocated for Research and Development at RE 2020-21. 
The Committee strongly recommends that the Ministry of Road Transport & Highways 
may ensure that fund requirements are projected correctly at the time of requesting 
funds from the Ministry of Finance. The Committee also desires the Ministry to pursue 
the State G overnments, Association of Road Transport Undertakings (ASRTUs) and 
executing agencies to timely utilize the funds allocated to them under the various 
schemes of Road Transport & Road Safety and to submit the utilization certificates for 
the same on time, so as to ensure optimal utilization of the funds allocated to the 
Ministry each year. 
(Para 1.4) 
 
The Committee fails to appreciate as to how the demand under M&R head at RE 2020 -
21 stage fell so drastically as compared to the Demand at BE 2020 -21 stage although the 
maintenance and repairs should have been given much higher priority and weightage 
given the poor condition of National Highways. The Committee recommends that the 
Ministry may look into the discrepancies and ensure that accurate demands are ma de 
under all the heads at the BE and RE stage each year, in order to avoid unnecessary 
savings.  

74 
 
(Para 2.2) 
ANNUAL PLAN 2021-22 
The Committee is surprised to note that the provisions of Rs. 3,750 crores made for 
EAP at BE 2021-22 stage are being considered as adequate by the Ministry, even though 
it had projected a demand of Rs. 6,965 crores under this head. The Committee 
recommends that the Ministry may strive to ensure that the requirements as projected 
by it under various heads at the BE and RE stages, a re as close as possible to the actual 
needs under the head, considering the progress made of the projects involved.  
(Para 3.2) 
ROAD DEVELOPMENT 
Delayed Road Projects 
The Committee desires to know the steps taken by the Ministry to complete the 
completion of the ongoing delayed road projects in the country. A detailed roadmap 
alongwith details of Infrastructure funding and the approximate timelines may also be 
provided.  
(Para 4.2) 
BHARATMALA PARIYOJANA 
The Committee is deeply concerned to note the extremel y slow progress of works under 
development of Port Connectivity Roads as a part of the Bharatmala Pariyojana 
Program. The Committee notes that even though the initially targeted date of 
completion of Bharatmala Pariyojana Phase -I was 2021 -22, only 168 km o f the port 
connectivity roads have been awarded while the rest of the 2,105 kms are in various 
stages of DPR preparation. The Committee is of the considered view that lack of robust 
road connectivity to ports is one of the major bottlenecks faced by the Sh ipping sector 
in India. The Committee strongly recommends that the Ministry should take a serious 
look at the various factors impeding the award of these road projects and take urgent 
steps and undertake dedicated efforts to iron out the same to bolster th e growth of the 
Shipping sector in the country.  
(Para 5.2) 
 

75 
 
 
CENTRAL SECTOR SCHEMES/PROJECTS 
Recommendation/Observation 
The Committee desires to know the reasoning provided, if any, for allocation of only Rs. 
9,870.89 crores under the Revenue section at B.E. 2021 -22 stage, as against the 
projected requirement of Rs. 14,557.60 crore. The Committee notes that several 
critically important schemes of the Ministry are funded by the allocation made under 
the Revenue section and therefore, it must pursue the Min istry of Finance for allocation 
of higher funds under the Revenue head in future.  
(Para 6.2) 
NATIONAL HIGHWAYS AUTHORITY OF INDIA 
Monetization of National Highways 
The Committee notes that the reply furnished by the Ministry does not provide any 
details regarding the Initial Estimated Concession Value (IECV) amount in case of TOT 
Bundle 2 and the amounts quoted by the bidders for Bundle 2. In case the bids received 
from the bidders have been lower than the IECV, the Ministry may apprise the 
Committee regarding possible reasons for the same.  
(Para 7.3) 
The Committee takes note of the positive impact made by the Data Lake software on the 
decision making process of NHAI. The Committee is of the considered view that the 
Ministry/NHAI should take necessary ste ps to onboard State PWDs on the Data Lake 
platform so as to improve the decision making process of the State PWDs as well, not 
just for National Highways projects, but for the State Highways and other roads as well.  
(Para 8.4) 
Quality Inspection 
The Committee notes that the reply of the Ministry does not furnish any information 
regarding the action taken by it to ensure disciplinary action against the 
person/agencies involved in preparing DPR, the concessionaire as well as the approving 
official, in case discrepancies/ deficiencies are found in the compliance of guidelines for 

76 
 
road construction and material quality. The Committee would like to be apprised 
regarding the steps taken by the Ministry in this regard.  
(Para 9.2) 
Vacancies and Staffing in NHAI 
The Committee notes the various hindrances being faced in the filling up of vacancies in 
NHAI and the remedial measures undertaken to overcome the same. The Committee, 
however, is distressed to note that the total manpower working in NHAI, includin g both 
regular officials and those on deputation, as on 31.03.2021 is just 1122 out of the total 
sanctioned strength of 1892. The Committee is of the strong view that given the huge 
financial allocation made to NHAI each year, it is pertinent to ensure tha t sufficient 
manpower is in place so as to make optimal utilization of the available funds. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends that the ongoing comprehensive review of existing 
Recruitment Rules of NHAI may be finalized at the earliest and sincere effort s may be 
made to ensure that the vacancies presently lying unfilled in NHAI are filled up at the 
earliest.  
(Para 10.4) 
EXTERNALLY AIDED PROJECTS 
The Committee may be apprised of the action taken by the Ministry for analyzing the 
possibility of periodically sharing a part of the revenue generated from road 
infrastructure projects with those whose land was acquired and the possible effects of 
the same on the land acquisition process.  
(Para 11.2) 
SCHEMES OF UTs FINANCED FROM CRIF 
The Committee takes note of the details of funds released to the various UTs during the 
year 2020-21. The Committee is concerned to note that the amount of funds released i.e. 
Rs. 96.95 crores to the UT of Ladakh is less than even 40 percent of the budgetary 
provisions available for the UT during the year 2020 -21. Given the strategic location of 
the UT of Ladakh and the pressing need for development of a robust road network in 
the region, the Committee recommends that the Ministry may proactively reach out to 
the UT Department concerned and try to iron out any technical difficulties being faced 
in the execution of projects, if need be, so that the budgetary provisions made for the 
UT of Ladakh can be utilized optimally.  

77 
 
(Para 12.4) 
DEVELOPMENT, PLANNING, QUALITY ASSURANCE, RESEARCH AND TRAINING 
– FINANCED FROM CRIF 
The Committee is not satisfied with the reasons furnished by the Ministry for managing 
to spend a mere Rs. 34.36 crores under Highway Research as against the RE allocation 
of Rs. 79.00 crores. The Committee strong ly recommends that the Ministry should take 
up more schemes under this head and urgently look into the reasons behind low 
sanction of R&D schemes in the road sector.  
(Para 13.2) 
The Committee would like to be apprised about the action taken by the Ministr y in 
order to initiate and fund researches to gain insights into various issues pertaining to 
road transport sector.  
(Para 14.2) 
RESEARCH, TRAINING, STUDIES AND OTHER ROAD SAFETY SCHEMES 
The Committee feels that the role played by Indian Roads Congress in  carrying out 
research programmes pertaining to road construction is of immense value and that the 
Ministry should ensure that budgetary constraints are not faced by IRC since the 
guidelines issued by it are followed across the country and have enormous im plications 
on the quality of roads in India. In this light, the Committee reiterates its 
recommendation that the Ministry should provide adequate budgetary support needed 
by IRC to carry out research programmes in collaboration with the leading 
Universities/ Research Institutions in the country.  
(Para 15.2) 
The Committee desires to be apprised of the actions taken by the Ministry in this 
regard.  
(Para 16.2) 
Road Safety 
The Ministry takes note of the data furnished by the Ministry with regard to black spots 
across the country. The Committee reiterates its recommendation that the Ministry may 
analyze the data pertaining to the existing black spots in order to gain actionab le 

78 
 
insights into prevention of creation of such accident -prone black spots in the upcoming 
road projects of the Ministry. The Committee further recommends that the rectification 
of black spots across the country should be given topmost priority and the Ministry may 
review the existing framework in place to ensure the same.  
(Para 17.4) 
The Committee appreciates that a scheme for cashless treatment of road accident 
victims is under consultation with the Ministry of Health & Family Welfare, National 
Health Au thority and other Stakeholders. The Committee recommends that the same 
may be finalized within a fixed timeline so as to save precious lives in road accidents. 
The Committee further desires to be kept apprised about the progress made in this 
regard.  
(Para 18.2) 
The Committee takes note of the various measures taken by the Ministry for 
rectification of black spots and recommends that a mechanism may be put in place to 
ensure that periodical monitoring and maintenance of measures such as amber beacons, 
crash barriers, signages etc. is carried out on National Highways across the country. 
The Committee recommends that the Ministry must bring out strict guidelines 
specifying that long-lasting rust-free materials are used for signages and that the shrubs 
and trees on the Highways are trimmed regularly so as to ensure that signages installed 
on the Highways remain clearly visible to the drivers at all seasons. The Committee 
hopes that the Ministry would be able to succeed in its efforts to rectify all identified 
Black spots by September, 2021. The Committee further recommends that the Ministry 
may consider reviewing the definition of Black spots scientifically following the 
international standards, once all the presently identified Black spots have been rectified.  
(Para 19.8) 
The Committee, after going through the installed A.C. (Asbestos Cement) Road 
Reflector in various Municipalities and PWDs like MCGM (Mumbai), Uttarakhand etc. 
used under Road Safety & Road Furniture Division as a Road/ Highway Divider & 
Crash B arrier in place of Metallic Crash Barrier, found that it is a cheaper, green 
product having more strength and durability which can take the strength of the vehicle 
in case of an accident, avoiding any extreme fatal  damages, in comparison to the 
metallic and other alternatives. The A.C. Road Reflector/ Crash Barrier installed are 
rust and theft proof as its components have Asbestos and Cement which are not prone 

79 
 
to rust and have no resale value, resulting in no theft, this unique feature can help save 
large exchequer amount and simultaneously give higher road safety while beautifying 
the roads. The Committee was informed that the product comes with a seven year 
guarantee, though its life span is estimated to be more than two decades. The 
Committee, therefore , recommends that the Ministry may explore the possibility of 
using A.C. Road Reflector/ Delineator/ Crash Barrier in the highway projects as an 
alternative to metallic crash barrier.  
(Para 19.9) 
The Committee takes note of the efforts made by the Ministry to ensure that the 
meetings of District Road Safety Committees. The Committee, however, is disheartened 
to note that details of only 7 meetings of District Road Safety Committees have been 
uploaded by 4 States/ UTs and feels that the same might be a reflection of the number of 
meetings of the District Road Safety Committees actually being held across the country. 
The Committee recommends that the Ministry may further pursue the matter with the 
Chief Secretaries of the various States in order to increase the frequency of the meetings 
of the District Road Safety Committees and look into other possible measures that can 
be taken to this end. The Committee further notes that the reply of the Ministry does 
not address the recommendation made by the Commi ttee for constitution of a Road 
Safety Committee at the State level. The Committee desires to be apprised of the action 
taken by the Ministry in this regard.  
(Para 20.5) 
Core Group on Safety and Security 
The Committee desires to know whether the Ministry has looked into the feasibility of 
providing for helicopter landing facilities at strategic places at ecologically sensitive 
areas, in order to ensure effective disaster management operations.  
(Para 21.2) 
MISCELLANEOUS 
Multi-Member Consultative Committee  
The Committee appreciates the constitution of a committee by the Ministry under the 
Chairmanship of Secretary, Ministry of Road Transport & Highways. The Committee, 
however, notes that the reply furnished by the Ministry does not provide any 

80 
 
information r egarding the action taken on the recommendations made by the 
Committee in this regard.  
(Para 25.3) 
Impact of vehicle overloading on National Highways 
The Committee may be apprised of the future plans of the Ministry/NHAI for 
installation of weigh-in-motion systems at all toll plazas across the country in order to 
deter the menace of overloading of heavy vehicles.  
(Para 26.2) 
 
CHAPTER-IV 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLY OF 
THE MINISTRY IS STILL AWAITED 
MISCELLANEOUS 
The Committee desires to be kept apprised of the progress made by the Ministry with 
regard to preparation of draft Policy Note/ SOP on the viability of having provisions for 
utility corridors and the decision regarding creation of a Special Purpose Vehicle for the 
purpose of monetization of the utility corridors, based on the finalized policy.  
(Para 1.6) 
***** 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
MINUTES 
 
 
 
 
  

81 
 
 
V 
FIFTH MEETING 
The Committee met at 3:00  P.M. on Monday, the 6 th December, 2021 in Committee 
Room ‗A‘, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
Members present: 
1. Shri T.G. Venkatesh                   - Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Prasanna Acharya 
3. Shri Shaktisinh Gohil 
4. Shri Nadimul Haque 
5. Shri Jugalsinh Lokhandwala 
LOK SABHA 
6. Shri Tapir Gao 
7. Shri Sunil Kumar Pintu 
8. Shri Prince Raj 
9. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
10. Shri Rajbahadur Singh 
11. Shri Ramdas C. Tadas 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Puneet Kumar, Joint Secretary 
Shri P. Narayanan, Director 
Shri Dinesh Singh, Additional Director 
Shri Rajendra Prasad Shukla, Additional Director 
Shri Ranajit Chakraborty, Under Secretary 
  
 At the outset, the Chairman extended a very warm welcome to the Members of the 
Committee. He informed them that the agenda for the meeting is to consider and adopt the 
draft Report on ‗Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/ Observations of 
the Committee contained in its Two Hundred and Eighty Seventh (287 th) Report on the 
Demands for Grants (2021-22) of Ministry of Road, Transport and Highways. 
2. The Committee, thereafter, considered the aforesaid draft Report and after a brief 
discussion, adopted the same with minor changes. 
3. The meeting adjourned at 5:05 P.M. 
  
 