 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA         153 
 
 
 
DEPARTMENT - RELATED  PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE  
 
 
  
ONE HUNDRED FIFTY THIRD REPORT 
ON 
ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE 
CONTAINED IN ITS ONE HUNDRED AND FORTY NINTH REPORT ON 
DEVELOPMENT OF TOURISM INFRASTRUCTURE 
AND AMENITIES FOR THE COMMONWEALTH, GAMES 2010 
 
 
 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 03.03.2010) 
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 03.03.2010) 
 
 
 
RAJYA  SABHA  SECRETARIAT 
NEW  DELHI 
 
MARCH, 2010/PHALGUNA, 1931 (SAKA) 
  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Website:http://rajyasabha.nic.in  
E-mail:rsc-tt@sansad.nic.in  

 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
 
DEPARTMENT - RELATED  PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE  
 
 
  
ONE HUNDRED FIFTY THIRD REPORT 
ON 
ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE CONTAINED IN 
ITS ONE HUNDRED AND FORTY NINTH REPORT ON DEVELOPMENT OF 
TOURISM INFRASTRUCTURE 
AND AMENITIES FOR THE COMMONWEALTH, GAMES 2010  
 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 03.03.2010) 
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 03.03.2010) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
RAJYA  SABHA  SECRETARIAT 
NEW  DELHI  
MARCH, 2010/PHALGUNA, 1931 (SAKA) 

CONTENTS  
  PAGES  
1. C OMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ......................................................................................... (i)-(ii) 
2. I NTRODUCTION ................................................................................................................. (iii) 
3. R EPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ............................................................................................... 1-33 
4. O BSERVATIONS /C ONCLUSIONS /R ECOMMENDATIONS ---AT A GLANCE ............................................. 34-37  
5. M INUTES ........................................................................................................................ 39-42 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

COMPOSITION OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE 
(2009-2010)  
 1. Shri Sitaram Yechury   ----- Chairman  
  RAJYA SABHA  
 2. Shri Ramdas Agarwal 
 3. Shri Birendra Prasad Baishya 
 4. Shri Shadi Lal Batra 
 5. Shri Naresh Gujral 
 6. Shri Syed Azeez Pasha 
 7. Shri Thomas Sangma 
 8. Shri Satish Kumar Sharma 
 
*9. Prof. Saif-ud-Din Soz 
 10. Shri Vikram Verma 
  LOK SABHA 
 11. Yogi Aditya Nath 
 12. Shri Avtar Singh Bhadana 
 13. Shri V.Kishore Chandra S. Deo 
 14. Shrimati Bhavana Gawali Patil 
 15. Shri Mahesh Joshi 
 16. Shri P. Karunakaran 
 17. Shri Jose K. Mani 
 18. Shrimati Ranee Narah 
 19. Shri Rajaram Pal 
 20. Shri Bal Kumar Patel 
 21. Shri Nama Nageswara Rao 
 22. Shri S.D. Shariq 
 23. Shri Madan Lal Sharma 
 24. Shri Dushyant Singh 
 25. Shri Jitendra Singh 
 26. Shri Rakesh Singh 
 27. Shri Shatrughan Sinha 
 28. Shri K. Sugumar 
 29. Shri Kabir Suman 
 30. Shri Anurag Singh Thakur 
 31. Shri K.C. Venugopal 
 
 

  SECRETARIAT 
  Shri N.K. Singh, Joint Secretary 
  Shri Jagdish Kumar, Director 
  Shri Swarabji B., Joint Director 
  Shrimati Nidhi Chaturvedi, Assistant Director 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

INTRODUCTION  
  I, the Chairman, Department-related Parliamentary  Standing Committee on, Transport, Tourism and Cult ure, 
having been authorised by the Committee to present on its behalf, do hereby present this One Hundred a nd Fifty Third 
Report on Action Taken by the Government on the Rec ommendations/Observations of the Committtee contained in its 
One Hundred and Forty Ninth Report on Development of Tourism Infrastructure and Amenities for the Commonwealth 
Games 2010. 
2.  The One Hundred and Forty Ninth Report of the D epartment-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on 
Transport, Tourism and Culture was presented to the Parliament on the 24 
th  February, 2008. 
3.  The Action Taken Replies on the recommendations  of the Committee contained on its One Hundred and Forty 
Ninth Report were received from the (i) Ministry of Tourism on the 17 th  August 2009; (ii) Ministry of Civil Aviation on 
the 24 th  August 2009; (iii) Ministry of Urban Development on the 26th August 2009; (iv) Government of NCT of D elhi 
on the 6 th  January, 2010; and (v) Ministry of Culture on 4 th  February, 2010. 
4.  The Committee considered and adopted the Report  at its meeting held on the 9 th  February, 2010. 
 
 
 
 
  SITARAM  YECHURY 
 
NEW DELHI ; Chairman,  
February 9, 2010 Department-related  Parliamentary Standing  
Magha 20, 1931 (Saka)   Committee on Transport, Tourism & Culture. 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

REPORT  
  The Report of the Committee deals with the Action  Taken by the Government on the 
observations/recommendations as contained in its On e-Hundred and Forty-ninth  Report on Development of  Tourism 
Infrastructure and Amenities for the Commonwealth G ames 2010 which was presented to both the Houses of  
Parliament on 23 rd  October, 2008. 
2.  Action Taken Replies have been received from th e Ministries of Tourism on the 17 
th 
 August 2009, Civil Aviation 
on the 24 
th 
 August 2009, Urban Development on the 26 
th 
 August 2009, Government of NCT of Delhi on the 6 
th 
 January, 
2010 and from Ministry of Culture on 4 
th 
 February, 2010 in respect of all the observations/ recommendations contained 
in the Report, which have been categorized as follows: 
(i) Recommendations/observations, which have been a ccepted by the Department: 
 Para No.19,   Total- 1 
(ii) Recommendations/observations which the Committ ee does not desire to pursue in view of the Departm ent 
replies: 
 Para Nos. 18,27  Total-2 
(iii) Recommendations/observations in respect of wh ich replies of the Department have not been accepte d by 
the Committee: 
 Para Nos. 14,20,27,28,29,44,57,68,73,90 and 92 Tot al-11 
(iv) Recommendations/observations in respect of whi ch final replies of the Department are still awaited: 
 Para Nos.15,81 and 95 Total-3 
3.  The Committee desires that final replies in res pect of the recommendations, which have been catego rized as 
interim replies by the Committee should be furnished to it at the earliest. 
4.  On scrutiny of the Action Taken Replies, the Co mmittee has made observations on each item of Actio n 
taken/proposed to be taken by the concerned Ministr ies. The recommendations of the Committee contained  in the One 
Hundred and Forty-ninth Report, action taken thereo n by the Ministries and recommendations/observation s of the 
Committee on each item of action taken has been given in the succeeding paragraphs. 
5.  The Committee notes that during the Commonwealt h Games a large number of tourists are expected int o India 
besides the participants. The Committee feels that the Commonwealth Games would provide us good opport unity to 
showcase our rich cultural heritage and achievement s of the contemporary India to the International co mmunity, that 
would act as catalyst for development of infrastruc ture and capacity building. The success of Commonwe alth Games 
will not only position India as a multifaceted destination but will bring economic returns through business and tourism. 
The Committee, therefore, calls upon the Government  and all the stakeholders to make concerted efforts  for creating 
best of the facilities and infrastructure, renovati on and better up-keep of our tourism and ancient si tes, improving road 
and air connectivity and safety and security of the  tourist and providing adequate accommodation at re asonable prices. 
The Committee also recommends that Delhi being the Centre of important literary and cultural activitie s, should 
refurbish its Libraries, Museums, Art Galleries, Ha ats, etc., for showcasing its rich and varied cultu ral and intellectual 
heritage. 
       (Recommendations at Para 4 of the 149th Report)  
 

Replies of the Ministry of Tourism, Government of India and Government of NCT of Delhi  
6.  Development and promotion of tourist destinatio ns is primarily undertaken by the State Government/  Union 
Territory Administrations. The Ministry of Tourism,  however provides financial assistance for tourism projects on the 
basis of proposals received from them subject to av ailability of funds and interse priority. Ministry of Tourism has 
written to Government of NCT of Delhi and Ministry of Culture to take appropriate steps in this direct ion in order to 
facilitate the free movement of tourists to the mon uments and also provide delay free access. The Mini stry of Tourism 
along with the Ministry of Culture would be introdu cing the provision of extending bulk ticketing for monuments well 
in advance to the industry stakeholders viz.  hotels, tour operators and travel agents. In view of the shortage of qualified 
guides at the monuments, a tripartite agreement bet ween the Ministries of Tourism and Culture and the industry 
stakeholders has been proposed for the introduction  of audio guides at identified A.S.I. monuments. Fu rther, it is 
proposed to introduce hygienically maintained toile ts at A.S.I. monuments which would be set up by the  Ministry of 
Tourism and thereafter maintained by the industry s takeholders. Ministry of Tourism has noted the obse rvations of the 
Committee and letters have been sent to the Government of NCT of Delhi and others. 
Delhi Tourism and Transportation Development Corporation Government of NCT of Delhi  
7.  Delhi Tourism is in the process for setting up of Soft Adventure Park at Sanjay Lake in East Delhi , Tourism 
Complex with Camping facility at Kangan Heri and Soft Adventure Park at NH-8 near Shiv Murti. The facilities would 
be ready before Commonwealth Games 2010. 
8.  Delhi Tourism is also in the process for settin g up of web portal for its various facilities vide which airline ticket, 
package tours, accommodation etc. would be available online. 
9.  Delhi Tourism has widely publicized the Bed & B reakfast scheme in which accommodation at reasonabl e cost 
would be made available to the visitors to the capital. 
10.  The literature and pamphlet of tourist nature is being upgraded by Delhi Tourism and would also b e made 
available at the Commonwealth Games venues besides positioning of touch screen kiosk at important plac es of tourist 
interest giving information related to tourism in and around Delhi. 
11.  Delhi Tourism also plans to upgrade/refurbish its Dilli Haat INA before Commonwealth Games 20l0. 
12.  A number of cultural programmes at various pla ces in Delhi before and during Commonwealth Games have also 
planned with the help of various academies of Government of NCT of Delhi. 
Department of Archaeology Government of NCT of Delhi  
13.  Department of Archaeology is maintaining few m onuments of local importance which have very little  potential 
for the National/International tourists. The monume nts of National importance and World Heritage Sites  are under the 
jurisdiction of Archaeological Survey of India, Gov ernment of India. However, the Department has selec ted 14 
monuments which fall on the route of Commonwealth G ames 2010 and is making necessary arrangements for their 
conservation and illumination through INTACH under the MoU entered by Department of Archaeology.  
Delhi Police  
14.  Delhi Police has prepared a security plan for Delhi which includes upgraded security of the city besides venue 
specific arrangements for the Commonwealth Games 20 10. Delhi Police is mobilizing its manpower by new 
recruitment and training, mobilization from CPOs an d other States through MHA for manpower deployment during 
CG-20l0. The upgraded security of Delhi will also i nclude tourist places within Delhi. For better policing and ensuring 
visible presence on the ground, Delhi Police has created 2 new districts, 12 new Sub-Divisions, 42 new Police Stations, 

increased the number of PCR vans, increased traffic  patrol, and surveillance over criminals. As such g round level 
police presence would be enhanced and prompt response would be available to public in general. 
FURTHER  RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS  OF  THE  COMMITTEE  
15.  The Committee has learnt that the common ticket/adv ance ticket for visiting monuments under ASI has 
been in the process. The Ministry should ensure tha t the system worked without any flaw and was advert ised 
through print & electronic media. The Committee also desires to know the current status of the actions  planned 
by various departments of the Government of NCT of Delhi as mentioned above.  
16.  The Committee notes that there are adequate fu nds available with the Ministry of Tourism under in frastructure 
upgradation of tourism destination schemes. However , the, Committee notes with concern that no proposa ls from the 
Delhi Government for development of infrastructure and capacity building including creation and renova tion of 
hospitality facilities, modernization of tourism si tes, etc., was submitted/pending with the Ministry of Tourism till 
November 2008. The Committee feels that since the Commonwealth Games are drawing closer, so many projects have 
yet to be initiated, let alone completed. In such a situation, absence of any proposal from the NCT of Delhi surprises the 
Committee. The Committee therefore, recommends the Ministry of Tourism to impress upon the Government of Delhi 
and also the Government of Uttar Pradesh, Haryana a nd Rajasthan for submitting projects proposals for developing 
tourism infrastructure including hotel accommodatio n for the Games and release the funds at the earlie st for 
implementing the development works on time.   
(Para 8 ibid ) 
Reply of Ministry of Tourism, Government of India  
17.  Ministry of Tourism has impressed upon the Gov ernment of Delhi and also comments of Uttar Pradesh, Haryana 
and Rajasthan for submitting project proposals for developing tourism infrastructure in the wake of the Commonwealth 
Games 2010. Some more project proposals have been s anctioned to these States by the Ministry as under (amount 
sanctioned in lakh): 
1. Development of Ajmer-Pushkar Rs. 1069.68 
 as a mega project in Rajasthan  
2. Development of soft Adventure Park at Rs. 451.82  
 Sanjay Lake, Delhi  
3. Conservation and Dev. of Amer Rs. 485.39 
 Palace, Jaipur  
4. Development of Nahargarh Fort, Jaipur Rs. 432.06  
5. Integrated Development of Panipat-Kurukshetra- R s. 1545.22 
 Pinjore Circuit, Haryana (Phase II)  
  
FURTHER  RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS  OF  THE  COMMITTEE  
18.  The Committee notes that the NCT of Delhi, Uttar Pr adesh and Rajasthan have submitted proposals. The 
Committee recommends that the matter should be take n up at the higher level, so that the proposals are  
expedited. The Committee may also be apprised of th e progress made in materializing the above projects , the 
quantity of work completed so far, the percentage o f work remaining to be completed and the targeted d ate of 
completions of the entire projects.  

19.  The Committee notes that the Government of Raj asthan is utilizing the opportunity for promotion of tourism and 
introducing various packages for the guests/tourist s visiting Rajasthan during the games. The Committe e recommends 
the Ministry of Tourism to provide adequate funds t o the Government of Rajasthan for promotion of vari ous tourism 
products in the State. It also recommends that the tax incentives/benefits as provided to the hotels i n the National 
Capital Region (NCR) of Delhi may suitably be extended to the hotels in Uttar Pradesh, Haryana, Madhya Pradesh and 
Rajasthan, so as to remove the imbalance in the dem and and supply of hotel rooms’ inventory. The Commi ttee also 
recommends that the Government of Rajasthan should make concerted efforts and coordinate with the Mini stry of 
Tourism (for promotional support), Ministry of Civi l Aviation (for introduction of more international flights to and 
from Jaipur and development of Airports and air con nectivity from Ajmer and Kota) and Ministry of Rail ways (for 
increasing the speed of the trains and double linin g of rail line between Delhi and Jaipur). The State  Government 
should also impress upon the hotels in the State to  take adequate security measures such as installing  x-ray machines 
for screening of baggage which is a must in the present scenario. (Para 13 ibid ) 
Reply of Ministry of Tourism, Government of India  
20.  Ministry of Tourism besides sanctioning of meg a project in Rajasthan (Ajmer Pushkar) at the total  amount of 
Rs.1069.68 lakh has also provided central financial  assistance amounting to Rs.7.5 crore in 2008-09 fo r Royal Palace 
on Wheels Luxury Train to promote tourism in Rajast han. The recommendations of the Committee has been conveyed 
to the Government of Rajasthan and Ministry of Tourism and the Ministry of Railways. Development and promotion of 
tourist destinations is primarily undertaken by the State Governments/Union Territory Administrations. Details of funds 
sanctioned by Ministry of Tourism to the State of Rajasthan for the development of tourism during last three years is as 
under: 
Years Amount sanctioned (Rs. In lakh) 
 Rajasthan Uttar Pradesh Haryana Madhya Pradesh 
2006-07 903.94 3544.46 1836.16 3609.78 
2007-08 1554.46 1399.63 2250.43 3825.75 
2008-09 2495.49 3839.64 2495.49 3071.66 
  
21.  In the Income Tax Act 2007-08, Section 80-ID w as introduced to give encouragement to 2, 3 and 4 s tar Hotels 
and Convention Centres of a minimum seating capacity of 3,000 persons being set up in the National Capital Region of 
Delhi, Gurgaon, Faridabad by March 2010 though the Commonwealth Games are to be held in October 2010, a Tax 
Holiday of five years was granted to these hotels t hat would be operational before March 31, 2010. How ever, letters 
has been written to Department of Revenue, Ministry  of Finance, Ministry of Railways and Ministry of C ivil Aviation 
flagging this issue. 
22.  On the request of the Ministry of Tourism, the  Finance Minister having regard to the significant rise in tourist 
arrivals, especially for cultural tourism, had in t he budget of 2008-09 granted a five year holiday fr om income tax to 
two, three or four star hotels that are established  in specified districts which have UNESCO-declared ‘World Heritage 
Sites’. The hotel should be constructed and start f unctioning during the period April 1,2008 to March 31, 2013. This 
incentive is not applicable to the revenue districts of Mumbai and Delhi. 

23.  Ministry of Tourism has recently reviewed and revised its Guidelines for Classification of hotels  wherein the 
issues of safety and security have been addressed viz.  X Ray machines, under belly scanners for vehicles,  metal 
detectors, verification of staff and service providers, etc. based on the star category. 
FURTHER  RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS  OF  THE  COMMITTEE  
24.  The Committee notes the reply given by the Ministry  and hopes that the State Governments would take 
the advantage of various schemes to boost tourist arrivals in the State.   
25.  While going around the Amber Fort, the Committ ee saw preparation for some film shooting by erecti ng big sets. 
The Committee was assured that it was not going to cause any damage to the monuments. The Committee’s 
apprehension came true just few days after when it was reported that a part of wall inside the monumen ts came 
crashing down. The Committee recommends that while allowing any activity including commercial in the monuments, 
which should necessarily be remain very exceptional, the Governments must ensure that safety, security, originality and 
cleanliness of the monuments is not impaired upon and no damages of any kind is caused.  
(Para 14 ibid ) 
Reply of the Ministry of Culture, Government of India  
26.  The Archaeological Survey of India allows only  cultural events to be organized in the selected mo numents 
subject to the terms and conditions laid down by th e Director General. Utmost care is taken by the sta ff of the ASI 
posted at the monuments/sites for the safety, secur ity and cleanliness of the monuments/sites during a ny such event. 
ASI shall take extra care during any cultural event that will be organized during the Common- wealth Games 2010. 
FURTHER  RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS  OF  THE  COMMITTEE  
27.  The Committee finds the reply to be rather cryptic that does not answer to specific event referred by it.  
28.  The Committee notes that the conservation work  is being carried out in Amber Fort by Amer Develop ment 
Authority. The Committee however, desires that the concerned agencies be cautioned not to destroy/alter the originality 
while making effort to renovate the monuments. The Committee also notes with concern that the conditio n of 
monuments like Jantar Mantar and Albert Hall is not  upto the mark and desires that Amer Development Au thority 
should provide funds for their maintenance and upkeep. (Para 15 ibid ) 
Reply of the Ministry of Tourism, Government of India  
29.  The concerns of the Committee have been convey ed to the State Government of Rajasthan. 
Reply of the Ministry of Culture, Government of India  
30.  It is hereby clarified that mandate of the Sta te Level Implementation Committee (SLIC), which have been set up 
as advisory bodies part of the National Mission on Monuments & Antiquities operational process, does n ot include 
conservation or protection works of monuments. Sinc e the monuments mentioned namely, Jantar Mantar and  Albert 
Hall in Jaipur are under State protection, it was f elt that a body like SLIC would provide appropriate  forum to convey 
the concern of the Standing Committee so that the State Government can initiate necessary steps in this regard. 
FURTHER  RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS  OF  THE  COMMITTEE  
31.  The Committee desires to know the reaction of the G overnment of Rajasthan in this regard and 
recommends that follow up action should be pursued with Government of Rajasthan.  
32.  The Committee notes that a large number of per sons were likely to stay in the vicinity of Delhi during the games 
and the city of Taj Mahal is gearing up to meet the  expected tourists rush during the CWG 2010. The Co mmittee also 
notes that the Government of Uttar Pradesh is asses sing and preparing the infrastructural needs of the  city to 

accommodate around a million tourists likely to vis it the Taj Mahal during the Games. The Committee fe els that there 
is a need for expansion of hotels as more rooms would be required to accommodate the tourist and recommends that the 
Government should come up with some concessional/incentive packages to motivate the hoteliers to add rooms to their 
existing structures. The Committee recommends that the guidelines for funding existing hotels structur es needs to be 
looked into and the Government should amend the gui delines to provide financial assistance to the hote ls which are 
under construction. The State Governments of Uttar Pradesh, Haryana and Rajasthan should be provided Central grants 
in order to meet the shortfall in hotel accommodation.  
(Para 18 ibid ) 
Reply of the Ministry of Tourism, Government of India  
33.  Construction of hotels is primarily a private sector activity. In order to overcome the shortage of accommodation 
in the country, Ministry of Tourism has been in reg ular touch with the State Governments and the vario us Land 
Owning Agencies for creation of land banks. These a gencies have also been asked to allocate land on Jo int Venture/ 
Revenue Sharing basis and also to provide incentives and benefits to facilitate the growth of the accommodation sector 
in the country. They have also been requested to in crease the FAR/FSI in respect of the existing hotel s. As a result, 
various incentives/measures have been announced by the Government to encourage the growth of hotel roo ms in the 
NCR. As a result, the Ministry of Urban Development  has announced grant of additional Floor Area Ratio  (FAR) to 
hotels in Delhi except Lutyens Bungalow Zone, from 150 to 225. 
34.  Hotels of two, three and four star category th at are established in Agra are eligible for the 5 y ear Income Tax 
Holiday declared in the budget of 2008-09 being located in UNESCO declared World Heritage sites. 
35.  The External Commercial Borrowing (ECB) upto U S $ 100 million has also been allowed by Ministry of Finance 
in solving the liquidity crunch being faced by the hotel industry for setting up new hotel projects. 
36.  Details of funds sanctioned by Ministry of Tou rism to the State of Rajasthan for the development of tourism 
during last three years is as under: 
                                                  
Years Amount sanctioned (Rs. in lakh) 
 Rajasthan Uttar Pradesh Haryana 
2006-07 903.94 3544.46 1836.16 
2007-08 1554.46 1399.63 2250.43 
2008-09 2495.49 3839.64 2495.49 
  
FURTHER  RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS  OF  THE  COMMITTEE  
37.  The Committee notes the steps taken in making arran gements for more rooms. However, the Committee 
feels that it needs to be taken up in a time bound manner. The Committee desires to know the funds uti lized, 
scheme-wise, by the State Governments during the above period.  
38.  The Committee notes the problems like long and  arduous train/road journey from New Delhi to Agra,  lack of 
tourist buses attached to the railway stations in A gra and Delhi, inadequate access from Agra Cantt. R ailway station to 
Taj Mahal and Sikandara, poor condition of the batt ery operated vehicles, lack of adequate parking, ca feteria, security 
check, long queues for tickets, drinking water, toi lets, luggage room, facilitation centres, etc. The Committee feels that 
these are not big issues and can be resolved by way  of better coordination among different agencies es pecially the 

Ministry of Defence for construction of underpass i n Shahganj area for proper road connectivity to Taj  Mahal. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends the Government to find immediate solutions to these problems and intr oduce easy 
ticketing procedures like prior ticketing, e-ticket ing, composite tickets, flexible tickets, group tic kets, tatkal system, 
transit passes system, etc. for gaining entry to Ta j Mahal, besides restructuring and strengthening of  the security. The 
drinking water, toilet facilities and facilitation centres should be provided outside the Taj Mahal to  facilitate the 
tourists. The problems of guides should be resolved  by the Ministry of Tourism, Culture and Government  of Uttar 
Pradesh with mutual interaction.   
  (Para 19 ibid ) 
Reply of the Ministry of Tourism, Government of India  
39.  The concerns of the Committee regarding the pr oblems in accessibility of Agra City have been communicated to 
the Ministry of Railways and Transport. Regarding t he poor tourist infrastructure in the city, the Sta te Government, 
ASI and the concerned authorities at the district l evel are being impressed upon to bring about tangible changes so that 
to make the destination world class. Secretary (Tourism) himself is monitoring these concerns and a se ries of meetings 
with the State Government, District Authorities, Fo rest Departments, ASI, Ministry of Culture etc. hav e been taken by 
him and certain decisions reached to facilitate the tourists. 
40.  The Ministry of Tourism has requested State Go vernment and the Department of Road Transport and H ighways 
to improve the condition of State Road. An Inter- M inisterial Group on this issue of road connectivity  has been set up. 
Provision is being made for sales of entry tickets in advance for ASI sites to Government of India app roved Travel 
Trade members. Newly designated tickets are likely to be launched. It has also been discussed to have clean washroom 
facility for international travellers at world heri tage monuments to be run and managed by IATO and ot her trade 
associations. On the issue of problem of guides and  other difficulties faced by Travel Trade members, stress was given 
on the introduction of hand held audio guide in at least 6 foreign languages besides English to cope up with the issue of 
shortage of guides. 
Reply of the Ministry of Culture, Government of India  
41.  It is true that the number of buses attached t o the Agra Cantt. railway station are not adequate in proper line to the 
tourist inflow, hence there is a possibility to imp rove the public transport system at the important r ailway station at 
Agra. ASI has recently introduced common entry tick ets at all the ticketed monuments under their juris diction 
including Taj Mahal in order to reduce the queue at  the ticketed window at the monument. The drinking water, toilet 
and clock room facilities are being provided to the tourists visiting at Taj Mahal. 
42.  The archaeological Survey of India has propose d for visitor’s centre on the eastern and western g ates of Taj 
Mahal for which the design concept has been formula ted by Taj Mahal conservation collaborative. The pr oposal is 
under consideration before the Hon’ble Supreme Cour t of India wherein the hon’ble apex court has direc ted ASI to 
demonstrate the power-point presentation on their p roposal before the Hon’ble Justice Shri Kapadia and  Shri Altaf 
Ahmed on 11.1.2010. The Hon’ble Justice have apprec iated the proposal mooted by ASI for providing faci litation 
centre which should facilitate the visitors for smooth entry, security checks, cloak room, drinking water, toilet facilities, 
audio guide, photographers, kiosks, etc. within the facilitation centre on the western and eastern gate of Taj Mahal. The 
proposal has been approved in principle by the Hon’ble Justices. 
43.  Tourists visiting Fatehpur Sikri, after seeing  Taj Mahal have to cross almost the whole Agra city  and the narrow 
roads sometimes became overcrowded. In order to ove rcome this situation, an underpass is planned in th e Shahganj 
area for an easy communication of tourists. The Sha hganj area is within the control of the cantonment board, therefore 
the agencies involved for providing an underpass ar e the Ministry of Defence, Directorate of Defence e states, Ministry 
of Railways, and State Government of U.P. and Minis try of Tourism, Government of U.P. In this regard t he 

recommendations and the observations made by the Pa rliamentary Standing Committee are being sent to co ncerned 
agencies for taking further necessary action so that not only the issue is resolved but also a sigh of  relief is provided to 
the tourists who are on their way to Fatehpur Sikri. 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
44.  The Committee feels that ferry services like those operated by Delhi Metro Rail Corporation may be 
introduced between Agra Cantt. railway station and Taj Mahal so that the tourists were not put to any trouble 
by unscrupulous elements at the railway station and  in the premises of Taj Mahal. Further coordination  with 
various agencies should be closely monitored and a nodal agency made to implement the steps.  
45.  The Committee notes the Ministry’s efforts to issue  common entry ticket. The Committee desires that th e 
process of setting up of facilitation centre should be expedited and the construction of underpass should be taken 
up with the concerned agencies with a view to present Agra in a better way to the visiting tourists.  
46.  The Committee notes that the view of Taj from the other side of Yamuna from Mehtab Bagh may be a thrilling 
experience for the tourists during full moon night that creates a view of Taj being black. The Committ ee recommends 
that viewing of Taj Mahal from this side should be promoted and permission for adequate parking and to ilet facilities 
should be provided there. The Committee desires tha t in maintaining the monuments, environmental devel opments 
including horticulture works and landscaping, civic  amenities for tourists and display of cultural not ice boards and 
signages should be taken care of. The Government should make concerted efforts to involve public and corporate sector 
for the purpose. The Committee also recommends that  a survey should be conducted by the Government to ascertain 
the carrying capacity of the monument to protect it from being damaged by overcrowd. (Para 20 ibid ) 
Reply of the Ministry of Tourism, Government of India  
47.  The State Government, ASI and the concerned au thorities at the district level are being impressed  upon to bring 
about tangible changes to the tourist infrastructur e in the city, so as to make the destination world class. Secretary 
(Tourism) is monitoring these concerns and a series of meetings with the State Government, District Authorities, Forest 
Departments, ASI, Ministry of Culture and Ministry of Home Affairs have been held and certain decision s have been 
taken to facilitate the tourists. Under the Mega De stination scheme, the Ministry of Tourism has sanct ioned Central 
Financial Assistance for Revitalisation of Taj under the Xth Plan comprising of East Gate and West Gate entry. 
Reply of the Ministry of Culture, Government of India  
48.  The night viewing of Taj Mahal was started in compliance of the order issued by the Hon’ble Supre me Court 
dated 25.11.2004. The proposal of night viewing of Taj Mahal from the Mehtab Bagh side needs to be examined in the 
light of the above mentioned court order, which contains very specific direction for night viewing. If the night viewing 
from Mehtab Bagh is permitted, a notification is al so to be issued for opening of the monument for nig ht viewing. 
Mehtab Bagh is a CPM and basic amenities like cultu ral notice board, signages and toilet facilities ar e available. 
However, necessary public amenities may be upgraded keeping in view of the tourist inflow. 
49.  The Agra Development Authority, Agra Cantonmen t Board, and the Commissioner, Agra are being appro ached 
to ensure the safety of the monument (externally) as well as of tourists. 
FURTHER  RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS  OF  THE  COMMITTEE  
50.  The Committee notes the reply given by the Ministry  and hopes that the Ministry of Tourism will play a  
pro-active role. Ministry of Culture should also ex pedite the process to facilitate night viewing of T aj and take 
up the upgradation of public amenities well before and also after the Commonwealth Games.  

51.  The Committee found the practice of night view ing of Taj more restrictive due to tight security a rrangements as 
well as lack of coordination between U.P. Police and CISF. The distance between the monument and the t ourists is too 
long to be able to feel the beauty of the monument. The Committee without compromising the need for security of Taj, 
feels that with a proper coordination and communica tion between the two forces and with proper trainin g for good 
behavior with the tourists, efforts can be made to allow the tourists to see the Taj in night from the  floor where the 
stairs reach the main structure. It would be a lifetime experience for them.  
(Para 21 ibid ) 
Reply of the Ministry of Tourism, Government of India  
52.  This recommendations of the Hon’ble Committee has been communicated to the State Government of U. P., 
Ministry of Home Affairs and the CISF for taking ap propriate action. Ministry of Tourism under its sch eme of 
Capacity Building for Service Providers (CBSP), has  been undertaking short duration training programme s for all 
tourism service providers. The Indian Institute of Tourism and Travel Management (IITTM) has drawn up a two day 
training module for the immigration personnel posted at airports. 
Reply of the Ministry of Culture, Government of India  
53.  The recommendations of the Committee has been taken note of and necessary steps are being taken t o have 
coordination and communication between Uttar Prades h Police and Central Industrial Security Force for courteous 
behavior with the tourists. In so far as allowing t he visitors upto the main plinth of mausoleum for v iewing Taj Mahal 
at night, it is stated that this could be done only  after having ascertained the fool-proof security a rrangement for which 
the ASI is initiating a dialogue with police author ities of Uttar Pradesh Government and CISF, keeping  in view the 
directions given by the Hon’ble Supreme Court of India from time to time in the matter. 
FURTHER  RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS  OF  THE  COMMITTEE  
54.  The Committee notes the reply and recommends that c oncerted efforts on security aspect should be made 
by the Ministries to allow the tourists to see the Taj during night from the floor where the stairs re ach the main 
structure. This move will certainly help in boosting tourism in the State.  
55.  The Committee notes that the hotel accommodati on is the key component of the tourism infrastructure needed for 
the CWG-2010. At present there is huge gap in deman d and supply of the hotel rooms in India in general  and Delhi in 
particular. The Committee finds that the hotel deve lopment in India is ailing with many impediments su ch as 
regulatory, financing, clearances, operations etc. The Committee is perturbed to note that the countdo wn to CWG has 
begun but there seems inadequate infrastructure in all sectors such as road, airport, accommodation, s urface transport, 
entertainment, basic amenities, parking, informatio n centers, security, stadia and supply of powers. T he Committee 
feels that the problems brought out by the Hotel As sociation of India and Federation of Hotels and Res taurants 
Association of India before the Committee are justi fied and needs serious attention of Governments. Th e Committee 
therefore, recommends the Government to address the  key issues and challenges faced by the hotel secto r in India 
including NCR for development of tourism infrastructure and amenities for the CWG-2010. (Para 27 ibid ) 
Reply of the Ministry of Tourism and Culture, Government of India  
56.  The tourism and hospitality associations and o ther related tourism stakeholders have been taking up the matter 
for the grant of Infrastructure status which entails benefits under the Income Tax Act with the Ministry of Finance from 
time to time. On the request of the Ministry of Tou rism, the Ministry of Finance had announced a 5 yea r Tax Holiday 
in the budget of 2007-08, for new hotels of 2, 3 an d 4 star category coming up between 1.4.2007 to 31. 3.2010 in the 
National Capital Territory of Delhi and the districts of Faridabad, Gurgaon, Gautam Budh Nagar and Ghaziabad. A five 
year Tax Holiday was also announced in the budget o f 2008-09 for hotels of 2, 3 and 4 star category lo cated in all 
UNESCO declared World Heritage sites (except Mumbai  and Delhi) which start operating w.e.f.  01.04.2008 to 

31.3.2013. The Ministry of Urban Development has announced grant of additional Floor Area Ratio (FAR) to hotels in 
Delhi except Lutyens Bungalow Zone from 150 to 225.  Ministry of Tourism has been in constant touch wit h the 
various Land Owning Agencies like DDA, Ministry of Urban Development etc. to identify hotel sites. The se agencies 
and the State Governments of the NCR have also been  advised to follow investor friendly land policies and a single 
window approach for promoting hotel projects and al so for allotting sites on revenue sharing basis, gr anting extra 
FSI/FAR for hotels, permitting extra commercial usa ge in the hotels etc., so that budget hotels are pr omoted. Ministry 
of Tourism has recently reviewed and revised its Gu idelines for Classification of hotels based on the inputs received 
from the hotel industry associations and other stakeholders wherein various issues have been addressed. 
FURTHER  RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS  OF  THE  COMMITTEE  
57.  The Committee notes the reply given by the Ministry.  
58.  The Committee notes that the Government has ex tended tax holiday scheme for construction of budge t hotels in 
NCT of Delhi and the districts of Faridabad, Gurgao n, Gautam Buddh Nagar (NOIDA) and Ghaziabad. It see ms to the 
Committee that the financial incentives and tax hol idays announced by the Government have not been use d. optimally 
by the private parties for construction of the new hotels in Delhi and, adjoining areas. The Committee recommends the 
Government to pursue the State Governments of Harya na and Uttar Pradesh and Delhi and various land own ing 
agencies, DDA/Ministry of Urban Development to allocate land on joint venture/revenue sharing basis and provide tax 
incentives/benefits and tax holidays with single wi ndow clearances for the hotel projects to these pri vate players in 
State of Haryana, Uttar Pradesh, Rajasthan and Madh ya Pradesh who are interested in setting up of new hotels to 
facilitate the growth of the accommodation sector t o tourist during the period of the Games. The Commi ttee also 
recommends that since the CWG are almost the round the corner, the Government may, if necessary, furth er liberalize 
the incentive schemes to attract investment in the hotel projects. (Para 28 ibid ) 
Reply of the Ministry of Tourism and Culture, Government of India  
59.  Ministry of Tourism is in constant touch with the various Land Owning Agencies like DDA, Ministry  of Urban 
Development etc. to identify hotel sites. These agencies and the State Governments of the NCR have also been advised 
to follow investor friendly land policies and a sin gle window approach for promoting hotel projects an d also for 
allotting sites on revenue sharing basis, granting extra FSI/FAR for hotels, permitting extra commerci al usage in the 
hotels etc., so that budget hotels are promoted. On  the request of the Ministry of Tourism, the Minist ry of Finance has 
announced a 5 year Tax Holiday in the budget of 200 7 -08, for new hotels of 2, 3 and 4 star category c oming up 
between 1.4.2007 to 31.3.2010 in the National Capit al Territory of Delhi and the districts of Faridaba d, Gurgaon, 
Gautam Budh Nagar and Ghaziabad. 
FURTHER  RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS  OF  THE  COMMITTEE  
60.  The Committee notes the reply given by the Ministry  and hopes that the State Governments will take 
benefits of the scheme.  
61.  The Committee has serious doubts about the cap ability of the DDA for expediting the issue of iden tification and 
allotment of hotel sites for construction of budget  hotels for the Games. The Committee notes with con cerns that the 
pace of creation of additional hotel accommodation at 39 hotel sites auctioned by DDA since January, 2 006 is lagging 
behind schedule, though the Committee has been assu red by the Ministry of Urban Development that compl etion of 
these sites would generate 6019 rooms and the DDA and the Ministry have been actively monitoring from time to time 
the process to complete the formalities and progress of work. The Committee does not agree with the co ntention of the 
Ministry of Urban Development as the recent assessm ent reveals that only 1924 rooms will be available under the 
definite category, 2015 rooms under the likely cate gory and the remaining 1990 rooms under the doubtfu l category. 
This way only fewer rooms will be available as per the assessment. The Committee therefore, recommends  the 

Government to once again ascertain the position wit h the concerned agencies and come out with more rea listic 
assessment in this regard. A concrete plan for faci litating the hotel proposals including the alternat ive proposal for 
conversion of motels into hotels and identification  of vacant DDA flats to offset the deficit of hotel  room before the 
commencement of the Games should be considered. The  Committee hopes that the Government will take the steps to 
address the problem of shortage of rooms and comple te the exercise for developing the accommodation to  the visitors 
well in time.  (Para 29 ibid ) 
Reply of the Ministries of Tourism and Urban Development, Government of India  
62.  The Task Force has been constituted in the Min istry of Tourism, under the chairmanship of Secreta ry, Tourism 
for monitoring the progress of the various agencies for creation of additional hotel accommodation in NCT of Delhi. As 
per the 23rd Task Force meeting held on 08.07.2009,  the number of definite rooms stands at 9500 rooms and the 
number of likely rooms at 2194. The total number of rooms in both these categories would amount to 11,694 rooms. 
63.  Further, for the purpose of augmentation of ad ditional budget accommodation during the Games, it has been 
decided to use 5,500 housing flats of the Delhi Dev elopment Authority (DDA). DDA would construct these  flats with 
richer specifications under various categories whic h are located at Vasant Kunj and Jasola. The India Tourism 
Development Corporation (ITDC) would upgrade and furnish these flats and operate such units during the Games. The 
observations of the committee has been conveyed to DDA and Ministry of Urban Development. 
64.  At a meeting held by Minister of Urban Develop ment with Minister of Tourism and Culture on 4.1.07 , it was 
noted that as against the requirement of 75 hotel sites in Delhi projected by the Ministry of Tourism, 42 sites have been 
identified which included 26 sites by DDA. It was d ecided at that meeting that DDA would identify at l east 10 more 
sites. Thus, a total of 36 sites were put on auctio n by DDA after 1.1.06, six sites were auctioned pri or to 1.1.06. Based 
on the plot area and admissible built up area of th ese 42 sites, it was assessed by DDA that on comple tion of the hotels 
on all these sites, it is likely to generate 6600 rooms. However, later on, 3 of these sites not having been auctioned, this 
target came down to 6,000 rooms. This target has been accepted and is being reviewed at all concerned forums. In fact, 
Secretary (Tourism) has also been reviewing this ta rget, including at meetings with the hotel plot own ers themselves. 
At one such meeting held on 14.5.2008, the figure of 6,019 rooms was discussed/accepted. 
65.  Secretary (Tourism) reviewed the matter in Nov ember, 2008 and it was noted that the progress of hotel rooms has 
slowed down for the following reasons: 
(i) the present economic recession, 
(ii) the time involved in the process of enhancemen t of FAR and consequent fixation of additional FAR 
charges; and 
(iii) the matter of imposition of penalty for const ruction by certain plot owners without due sanction s by the 
Delhi Pollution Control Pollution Control Committee (DPCC). 
66.  Due to certain internal issues between M/o Civ il Aviation/AAI and the private developer M/s GMR, the initial 
target of around 2,500 rooms in the proposed hospit ality district at the IGI Airport did not materiali ze. Similarly, M/o 
Railways had initially stated that they would gener ate rooms through PPP mode, but this too has not wo rked out. 
Similarly, DMRC has not been certain about the 200 rooms which are likely to be created at its Dwarka hotel project. 
The possibility of hotels coming up at ISBT Depots has also not materialized in view of the unwillingn ess of GNCTD 
in this regard. In view of the failure of the other  agencies to launch hotel projects, the entire burd en of generating 
additional hotel accommodation within Delhi has fal len on DDA, which is making persistent efforts to m eet the stated 
target of 6,000 rooms. Considering that augmentation of hotels rooms is essentially based on the initiative of the private 
sector hoteliers, and cannot be enforced as such, M /o Tourism ought to have anticipated the situation and should have 

moved for getting a directive from the highest leve ls to all the above mentioned agencies to augment h otel 
accommodation within their respective domains. 
67.  DDA has made all out efforts to facilitate the  augmentation of hotel rooms by proactive and const ant interaction 
with the hoteliers. Several meetings have been take n by VC and by the concerned Principal Commissioner  with 
hoteliers. Some of the hoteliers mentioned about th e problems being faced due to the current economic slowdown 
resulting in lack of finances. The other problems m entioned included non-waiver of pre-sanction charge s for 
construction without release of building plans by D PCC, the eagerness to avail the recently enhanced F AR, non-
approval of amalgamation of plots, pending court ca ses etc. However, the hoteliers who have achieved t he substantial 
progress and are in the ‘definite’ category are con fident that they would be able to deliver the rooms  as schedule. The 
position as emerging as on 1.7.2009 is as follows: 
  Rooms from Sites Rooms from sites Total 
  Auctioned after 1.1.06 auctioned prior to rooms 
   1.1.06  
1 Definite 1,741 463 2204 
2 Likely 1,131  1131 
3 Doubtful 2,497 187 2612 
 T OTAL : 5,369 650 6019 
  
68.  In the ‘definite’ category, out of 5 cases, on e hotel has become ful1y functional (with 83 rooms, at District Centre 
Saket). At another hotel, construction has been com pleted (116 rooms, at hotel DLF, District Centre, S aket) and in the 
remaining three cases, construction is well over 90 %, 50% & 40% each. Over-all, out of the 33 sites, c onstruction 
above plinth level in 12 cases, and excavation in 15 cases has been completed. 
69.  As stated above, the hoteliers are facing fund ing problems due to the global recession. Also, the  statutory 
clearances from various bodies i.e. DUAC, CFO, DPCC , MoEF, despite facilitation by DDA in this regard,  is a time 
taking process. Similarly’, while DDA took some pro -active steps, including permitting advance constru ction at site, 
the hoteliers were slapped penalties in this regard  by the Delhi Pollution Control Committee which has  resulted in 
further delay. A related issue here is the non-incl usion of hotels in the category of industry, for th e purposes of 
institutional financing, due to which loans are dif ficult to come by for the hotel projects. This fact or has assumed 
significance in the present global economic scenario, where even the reputed firms such as M/s Emaar M GF are facing 
financing problems not only for their hotel project s but also for the prestigious CWG Village Project at Noida Mor 
(being executed by M/s Emaar MGF as a private developer in PPP mode with DDA). 
70.  Ready-to-use DDA flats as Tourist Accommodatio n: 
71.  Since the progress of construction of hotel ro oms were not satisfactory, DDA initiated the proces s of identifying 
flats in Vasant Kunj and South Delhi to be complete d by March, 2010. About 5500 rooms are expected to be made 
available from 2704 flats which can be utilized for visitor’s accommodation during Commonwealth Games, 2010. Thus 
the shortfall in the hotel rooms will be compensate d by providing these flats for visitors’ accommodat ion during the 
Games. It was further informed that the Group of Mi nisters has decided that the flats which have been identified for 
visitors’ accommodation during Commonwealth Games, 2010 should have facilities equivalent to 3 star ho tels. A 
couple of review meetings have already been taken b y VC on this issue and it has been decided to provi de 3 star 
facilities in the identified flats for which the furniture and furnishings will be provided by ITDC. For this purpose, after 

completion, the flats will be handed over to ITDC on 1.4.2010 for use during the Games. The issues (including land use 
issues, if any) relating to use of these flats as a ccommodation for the CWG Games will be sorted out b y DDA in 
consultation with agencies concerned. 
PRO-ACTIVE  STEPS  TAKEN  FOR  AUGMENTATION  OF  HOTEL  ROOMS  
72.  Ministry and DDA have taken various steps to a ugment the hotel accommodation and some of those im portant 
steps are listed below: 
(i) The Ministry has amended the Master Plan enhanc ing the FAR and ground coverage in respect of hotel s 
vide  Notification dated 12.8.2008. 
(ii) The Master Plan was further amended vide  Notification dated 26.2.2009 to ensure that the benefit of higher 
FAR and ground coverage is available to hotels loca ted in various use zones including commercial centr es, 
Metropolitan Centres and Central Business Districts as well. 
(iii) The rate for availing the enhanced FAR was no tified on 10.10.2008. 
(iv) The rate was subsequently reduced vide  Notification dated 27.2.2009. 
(v) About 40 meetings have been held by ODA for the  last one and a half years to ensure timely construction of 
hotels. 
(vi) The matter was also reviewed by Secretary (UD)  on a monthly basis for the last many months. 
(vii) Ministry as well as DDA facilitated clearance  of various statutory bodies like. DUAC and CFO for  
expeditious clearance of the building plans. 
(viii) Excavation permission allowed after payment of 25% of premium amount as against earlier require ment of 
100% payment. 
(ix) Construction up to plinth level was allowed pe nding various clearances including clearance from D PCC, 
DUAC, CFO, etc. 
(x) Hotels where the built up area is 20,000 sq. mt r. or more required clearance from Ministry of Envi ronment 
& Forests, 16 hotels required this clearance. All 1 6 projects were got included in the Fast Track mode  for 
environment clearance and the same were cleared. 
(xi) Building Plans were processed after payment of  only 25% of bid amount as against the requirement of 
100% payment. 
(xii) Anticipating the difficulty in creation of th ese rooms, DDA came up with the proposal of utilizi ng the 
rooms in flats for providing accommodation to the visitors. 
(xiii) The period for payment of premium by the ind ividual auctioneers, which is 180 days, has been ex tended 
with the permission of the competent authority by M oUD in 4 cases so that the hotel project does not g et 
stalled in the beginning itself. 
73.  The issue of cancellation of allotment of hote ls which are not completed before the time schedule  was raised 
many times in the past. As per the terms and conditions of disposal of freehold hotel plots, 5% of the bid amount can be 
forfeited if hotels are not completed before the scheduled date. In leasehold cases there is a provision to extend the time 
for construction by payment of compensation fee. Th e past experience of DDA shows that cancellation is  only a paper 
exercise and taking back possession of cancelled pl ots is an extremely difficult exercise. Cancellatio n of allotment on 

account of failure of construction before the sched uled time was considered at the time of finalizing the bidding 
documents and was not found feasible. 
74.  Since none of the other Government agencies ha ve been able to take up hotel projects in the city,  the onus of 
augmenting hotel rooms has fallen on DDA alone, as the prime land owning agency. 
75.  Despite such pro-active action, some of the pl ot owners are not likely to complete the hotels due  to the present 
economic meltdown and liquidity crunch. It need not  be overemphasized that each plot owner has to make  his own 
business judgment for timely completion of the hote ls failing which he is aware that he will forfeit 5 % of the bid 
amount and may also not be able to avail the tax be nefit. It is, therefore, necessary that Ministry of  Tourism monitors 
the individual cases of hoteliers facing problems r elated to cash flows, and, facilitates them, as far  as possible, in 
procuring finances. Since the overall number of hotels is not very large, such close monitoring appears possible. 
76.  A substantial number of rooms will also emerge  from the liberalized guest house policy that has p ut in place 
through MPD 2021. Ministry of Urban Development has  also reduced the conversion charges for guest hous es 
operating in residential areas. substantially to en courage guest houses. Apart from this, the Master P lan also provided 
for enabling process for bed and breakfast scheme f rom residential premises in Delhi. Successful imple mentation and 
close monitoring of the provisions of liberalized g uest/house policy and bed and breakfast scheme woul d provide 
sizeable number of rooms during the Games for budget tourists. The Task Force constituted under the Chairmanship of 
Secretary (Tourism) is monitoring this matter also to make it a success. 
77.  The problems being faced in augmentation of ho tel accommodation have also been brought to the not ice of the 
Group of Ministers (GoM) and it has been decided th at the mandate given to DDA for generating 6,000 ro oms will be 
undertaken by a combination of hotel rooms and utilization of the upcoming DDA flats at Vasant Kunj and Jasola. 
78.  A Task Force under the chairmanship of Secreta ry, Ministry of Tourism has also been constituted t o review the 
creation of additional hotel rooms in the NCR for t he Commonwealth Games-2010. This Committee is regul arly 
monitoring the progress made in this matter and so far 23 meetings have been held by the Task Force. 
FURTHER  RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS  OF  THE  COMMITTEE  
79.  The Committee notes the reply and recommends that a ll the Ministries/Departments should take make 
joint efforts to achieve the target.  
80.  The Committee notes that there are so many age ncies including Task Force, Committees of Secretari es and the 
Group of Ministers to monitor and review the infras tructure development and hotel projects for the Com monwealth 
Games. These agencies have conducted series of meetings in connection with the infrastructure development work and 
augmentation of the accommodation besides monitorin g the progress of different tourism projects. The C ommittee 
notes that the large number of meetings with variou s agencies did not yield any result; every thing wa s back to square 
one. The Committee also notes that there are a larg e number of civic and other agencies like DDA, CPWD , MCD, 
NDMC, ASI, Delhi Government and its agencies like D epartment of Tourism, DTTDC, Delhi Jal Board, etc. engaged 
in the task. The Committee finds a distinct absence  of a coordinating mechanism to ensure that all the  
authorities/agencies worked in united manner. The C ommittee emphasizes the need to designate a single authority 
which will coordinate and develop synergies between  all the agencies involved in developmental work an d 
augmentation of room capacity for the Commonwealth Games 2010. (Para 42 ibid ) 
Reply of the Government  
81.  The Task Force constituted in the Ministry of Tourism, regularly monitors the progress of new hot el projects of 
the various land owning agencies coming up in the N CR. In addition to hotel projects, the Task Force a lso reviews 

other alternative additional accommodation being co nsidered for the Games viz.  licensed Guest Houses, housing flats 
of DDA, Bed and Breakfast establishments etc. 
Reply of the Ministry of Urban Development, Government of India  
82.  The Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports is th e nodal agency in respect of conducting the Commonw ealth 
Games-2010. Review meetings are held by the Task Fo rce under the Chairmanship of Secretary, Ministry o f Tourism 
and so far 23 meetings have been held on the issue of augmentation of hotel rooms for tourists expected to visit during 
the Games. 
FURTHER  RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS  OF  THE  COMMITTEE  
83.  The Committee notes the reply and is of the view th at a properly coordinated efforts jointly by all th e 
agencies is the need of the hour, to have all the facilities and infrastructure well in time.  
84.  The Committee further recommends the Governmen t that in order to facilitate and promote the hotel projects and 
expedite clearances, permissions, etc., there is a need to implement a single-window clearance system for expedition 
the creation of accommodation infrastructure. It is high time that the Government agencies should wake up and act fast 
for the development/completion of various projects to keep the time schedule of the Commonwealth Games. (Para 
43 ibid ) 
Reply of the Ministry of Tourism, Government of India  
85.  The hotel industry has been requesting for a ‘ Single Window Clearance’ system to facilitate time bound 
clearance of approvals for setting up of hotel proj ects. Accordingly, the Ministry of Tourism on the d irections of the 
Committee of Secretaries (COS) is working on a prop osal for setting up of such a system based on the i nputs received 
from the various State/Union Territory Governments, hotel industry and other related stakeholders. DDA with a view to 
facilitate and monitor the hotel projects coming up for the Games, conducts a hotel-wise review on a fortnightly basis. 
FURTHER  RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS  OF  THE  COMMITTEE  
86.  The Committee notes the reply and wishes that all the projects will be completed as planned.  
87.  The Committee notes the efforts made by the Mi nistry of Tourism for pursuing the State Government s of 
Haryana and Uttar Pradesh and other land owning age ncies for identification of hotel sites and their a uction 
notwithstanding, the response of the State Governme nts and various agencies was not encouraging at all . Both the 
States Governments have not come out with a concret e proposals for creation of additional rooms to mee t the 
requirements of the Commonwealth Games 2010. The Co mmittee finds that there had always remained a larg e deficit 
on the projection and the actual availability of th e rooms. Therefore, the Committee recommends the Mi nistry to 
supplement the efforts for creation of additional r ooms and impress upon the Governments of Haryana, U ttar Pradesh, 
Rajasthan in the neighbourhood and other land owing  agencies to act fast for creation of additional ho tel rooms before 
the Commonwealth Games. 
(Para 44 ibid ) 
Reply of the Ministry of Tourism, Government of India  
88.  Ministry of Tourism is in constant touch with the various State Governments like Haryana and Uttar Pradesh and 
Land Owning Agencies like DDA, Ministry of Urban De velopment, etc. for the expeditious implementation of the on 
going hotel projects. As per the 23rd Task Force me eting held on 08.07.2009, the number of definite ro oms stands at 
9500 rooms and the number of likely rooms at 2194. The total number of rooms in both these categories would amount 
to 11,694 rooms. During this meeting, the Governmen t of Haryana informed that land for the setting up of Tented 
Accommodation during the Games would be provided to  the interested stakeholders. Further, for the purp ose of 

augmentation of additional budget accommodation during the Games, it has been decided to use 5,500 hou sing flats of 
the Delhi Development Authority (DDA). DDA would co nstruct these flats with richer specifications unde r various 
categories which are located at Vasant Kunj and Jas ola. The India Tourism Development Corporation (ITD C) would 
upgrade and furnish these flats and operate such units during the Games. DDA with a view to facilitate and monitor the 
hotel projects coming up for the Games, conducts a hotel-wise review on a fortnightly basis. 
FURTHER  RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS  OF  THE  COMMITTEE  
89.  The Committee notes the reply given by the Ministry  and recommends that all the pre-requisite 
formalities with other agencies should be done before time.  
90.  The Committee notes that the Ministry has prop osed several measures to meet the shortage of about  30,000 
rooms during the Commonwealth Games 2010 in Delhi a nd NCR. The Ministry has mooted a proposal to Centr e and 
States Governments for augmenting the accommodation  infrastructure and to convert selected Government properties 
into heritage hotels and making use of the vacant l and in Government premises including surplus land a vailable with 
the Ministry of Civil Aviation, Railways and D.D.A. , D.M.R.C., DTC and DIAL for creation of land banks  for 
developing hotels. In order to offset the demand, t he operation of Guest Houses has been liberalized i n the National 
Capital Territory of Delhi as per the Master Plan 2 021 of the Ministry of Urban Development. The conve rsion charges 
that are levied on the Guest Houses have also been rationalized. However, the Committee is not hopeful  that the 
Ministry will be able to make up the demand of addi tional rooms before the Commonwealth Games. As with  all 
sources taken into account, there is still a shorta ge of around 15000 rooms. The Committee emphasizes upon the 
Ministry that the State Governments would also need  to consider various tax incentives and exemptions in their 
respective jurisdictions to attract investments in tourist accommodation. The Committee, therefore, re commends the 
Ministry to find an early solution to the problem o f creation of rooms and encourage the Central and State agencies for 
expeditious allocation of land for construction of hotels on surplus land, creation of single window f acility for investor 
in tourism projects to meet the demand for addition al rooms for Commonwealth Games 2010. Attempts shou ld be 
made for exploring the possibilities for augmenting  additional accommodation on lands available with t he Ministry of 
Railways, Ministry of Civil Aviation, State Governm ents of Delhi, Haryana and DMRC etc. The hotel room s in the 
vicinity of NCR of Delhi like Mathura, Agra, Jaipur , Bhiwadi, Rewari may also be explored to make the room 
inventory but for that train/road/air connectivity is a must. (Para 45 ibid ) 
Reply of the Ministry of Tourism, Government of India  
91.  In addition to monitoring hotel projects comin g up for the Games, Ministry of Tourism is also mon itoring 
additional accommodation in the form of 5,500 housi ng flats of the Delhi Development Authority (DDA), 3,000 Bed 
and Breakfast units, around 11,083 rooms form identified licensed Guest Houses in Delhi etc. Further, the setting up of 
Tented Accommodation in the NCR is being explored. Additionally, the Ministry of Sports is pursuing wi th various 
colleges/educational institutions in Delhi for the use of the existing hostels which would be upgraded for the Games. 
92.  Ministry of Tourism has requested the State Go vernments of Haryana and Uttar Pradesh to introduce  
concessions/incentives approved Bed and Breakfast e stablishments similar to that as announced by the G overnment of 
Delhi which treats such charges on non-commercial basis. 
93.  Ministry of Tourism has been in regular touch with the State / Union Territory Governments which have been 
advised to follow investor friendly land policies a nd a single window approach for promoting hotel pro jects and also 
for allotting sites on revenue sharing basis, granting extra FSI/FAR for hotels. 
 
 

FURTHER  RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS  OF  THE  COMMITTEE  
94.  The Committee also desires that Haryana and UP Gove rnments may come forward to allot extra lands in 
the adjoining areas of NCR where temporary shelters  of the requisite quantity and facilities can be pr ovided, 
thereby increasing the accommodation facility.  
95.  To remove the fear of not getting the business  after the games, the Government may continue to gr ant the tax 
incentives/benefits to the hotel sector. The Commit tee may be apprised of the details of the progress made in the 
matter. The Committee also urges the Ministry to impress upon the Central and State Governments for implementation 
of single window clearance system for tourism proje cts in order to encourage the private players to bu ild hotels in the 
country. This would not only optimize the utilizati on of infrastructure facilities but also ensure the  early completion of 
the projects. (Para 46 ibid ) 
Reply of the Ministry of Tourism, Government of India  
96.  The hotel industry has been requesting for a ‘ Single Window Clearance’ system to facilitate time bound 
clearance of approvals for setting up of hotel proj ects. Accordingly, the Ministry of Tourism is worki ng on a proposal 
for setting up of such a system based on the inputs received from the various State /Union Territory Governments, hotel 
industry and other related stakeholders. 
97.  DDA is reviewing the progress of construction of hotels on fortnightly basis and assisting the en trepreneurs to 
obtain the requisite clearances. The status of hote l rooms is being monitored regularly in the Task Fo rce meeting 
constituted by MOT. As mentioned in earlier paras, a 5 year Tax Holiday has been given in NCR Delhi an d in 
UNESCO declared World Heritage sites for two, three and four star hotels by the Ministry of Finance. 
FURTHER  RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS  OF  THE  COMMITTEE  
98.  The Committee is of the view that apart from the ta x holidays, the Ministry should organize such 
programmes of tourist interest occasionally so that  the tourist flow to India remains steady for long and better 
business to the investors.  
99.  However, the Committee hopes that “single window cl earance system” being worked out by Ministry of 
Tourism was already made operational to speed up the hotel projects.  
OTHER INITIATIVES/MEASURES TO AUGMENT ACCOMMODATION  FOR THE COMMONWEALTH 
GAMES-2010:  
100.  The Committee notes various options proposed to be explored by the Government for meeting the shortage of the 
rooms during the Games. However, the Committee reco mmends that in addition to the hostels of Delhi Uni versity the 
hostels of other Universities such as JNU, Jamia Mi lia and various educational institutions such as II T may also be 
utilized for the Games accommodation. The Committee  also notes that the Master Plan of Delhi 2021 have  also been 
amended to make scope for construction of guest hou ses in terms of road width, plot-size and permissib le area for 
catering to lower tariff accommodation besides allo wing bed and breakfast accommodation in residential  houses and 
flats for creation of more accommodation. The Commi ttee therefore, recommends the Ministry to take exp editious 
steps for facilitating additional hotel accommodati on through “Incredible India Bed and Breakfast Sche me”, Guest 
Houses, Upgradation and renovation of existing hote l rooms, tented accommodation and hostel accommodat ion in the 
wake of the Commonwealth Games 2010. (Para 53 ibid ) 
Reply of the Ministry of Tourism, Government of India  
101.  The Ministry of Tourism has estimated that 11 ,083 rooms of requisite standards would be availabl e from the 
identified licensed Guest Houses in Delhi. Site ins pections of cluster of Guest Houses identified by M CD in Paharganj 

and Karol Bagh were carried out by officials of Ministry of Tourism, Ministry of Urban Development, MCD, Delhi Jal 
Board, Delhi Police (Licensing) with respect to the beautification and upgradation of the surrounding areas of the Guest 
Houses. MCD has already submitted proposals for the  upgradation of street lights, roads and pathways e tc. for seeking 
funding from the Ministry of Roads and Highways and  other Ministries etc. In order to be ready for the  Games, the 
Ministry of Tourism has initiated the training of t he owners management and staff of these identified guest houses to 
upgrade their standards and soft skills under the Scheme of Capacity Building of Service Providers (CBSP) through the 
IHM, Pusa, New Delhi.  
102.  It has further been decided to use 5,500 hous ing flats of the Delhi Development Authority (DDA).  DDA would 
construct these flats with richer specifications un der various categories which are located at Vasant Kunj and Jasola 
which would be upgraded, furnished and operated by India Tourism Development Corporation (ITDC) during  the 
Games. A joint inspection of these flats was carried out by Ministry of Tourism, Ministry of Urban Development, DDA 
and ITDC. The Government of Delhi has been requested to launch a publicity campaign to promote the scheme in order 
to meet the target of 3,000 rooms under the Bed and  Breakfast scheme. The Delhi Government has informe d that they 
would promote and publicize this scheme to enlist m ore and more establishments before the beginning of  the Games. 
With a view to encourage the growth of such establi shments and also to smoothen the procedure of appro vals, the 
Ministry of Tourism has recently reviewed the scheme and has simplified the guidelines by amending certain norms. 
103.  The Ministry of Sports is pursuing with vario us colleges / educational institutions in Delhi for  the use of the 
existing hostels. An assessment is being made in this regard by Ministry of Sports. 
104.  The guidelines for setting up of Tented /Camp  sites were circulated to all the States including Haryana, 
Rajasthan, Madhya Pradesh and Uttar Pradesh and NCT  of Delhi. The Government of Haryana informed that land for 
the setting up of Tented Accommodation during the Games could be provided to the interested stakeholders. 
FURTHER  RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS  OF  THE  COMMITTEE  
105.  The Committee desires to know the present status and the target fixed for completion of the above works.  
TRAVEL  FACILITIES:  
106.  The Committee notes that one of the major con straints being faced in the development of tourism is lack of 
accessibility and road connectivity to many destina tions and monuments, resulting in near absence of t ourists to such 
places. Although, the Government has undertaken var ious infrastructure projects like constructions of flyovers at 
NOIDA More and Badarpur Border; flyover at the junction of National Highways-24 to facilitate free traffic movement 
to the Games Village and construction of an under-p ass for smooth flow of traffic to the Indira Gandhi  International 
Airport. The Committee recommends that the city mon uments, places of tourist’s interest and the Games Village 
should be well connected for easy accessibility to these places and for smooth flow of traffic. The Co mmittee also 
recommends that the Ministry of Railway should be p ursued for providing basic amenities like, drinking  water, tea, 
coffee, parking facilities, clean toilets and well maintained clean waiting rooms, porters with trolle ys at the main 
stations. The Ministry of Civil Aviation should provide infrastructure facilities at the airport to meet the ever increasing 
traffic requirements and quality of service. The De lhi Government should make a comprehensive map for the entire 
city with all information regarding different bus. routes and metro-lines to make commuting easy. This way, the tourist 
will get wonderful feeling and experience of reaching a place and coming back safe and sound. 
 (Para 57 ibid ) 
Reply of the Ministries of Tourism, Civil Aviation, Government of India and Government of NCT of Delhi 
107.  The recommendations of the Committee have bee n conveyed to the Government of NCT of Delhi, Minis try of 
Civil Aviation and Ministry of Railways. 

108.  DDA has informed that the following works rel ated with Commonwealth Games Projects are being und ertaken 
by DDA to improve accessibility and road connectivity: 
1. Flyover on NH-24 at the intersection of Akshardh am bund road near Commonwealth Games Village. 
2. Improvement of circulation around newly construc ted Rotary near Domestic Airport-Construction of 
Underpass at Rotary along Dwarka Road. 
3. Construction of cloverleaves and slip roads at N oida More Flyover - Partial modification to be carried out. 
109.  In order to cater to the increase in traffic requirements and maintain standard quality service,  Delhi Internation 
Airport Ltd. (DIAL) is constructing a new terminal T3 with world class facility. Dial has also refurbi shed the existing 
international terminal for better quality of servic e and customer experience. DIAL has also constructe d new Departure 
Terminal, 1D for better passenger experience. 
110.  In order to cater to the increase in traffic requirements and maintain standard quality service, Delhi International 
Airport Ltd. (DIAL) is constructing a new Terminal T3 with world class facility. DIAL has also refurbi shed the 
existing international Terminal for better quality of service and customer experience. DIAL has also c onstructed new 
Departure Terminal, 1D for better passenger experience. 
Department of Archaeology Government of NCT of Delhi  
111.  Department of Archaeology is maintaining few monuments of local importance which have very littl e potential 
for the National/International tourists. The monume nts of National importance and World Heritage Sites  are under the 
jurisdiction of Archaeological Survey of India, Gov ernment of India. However, the Department has selec ted 14 
monuments which fall on the route of Commonwealth G ames 2010 and is making necessary arrangements for their 
conservation and illumination through INTACH under the MOU entered by Department of Archaeology. 
Delhi Tourism and Transportation Development Corporation Ltd.  
112.  Delhi Tourism is in the process of renovating  its Delli Haat at INA for Commonwealth Games 2010.  It would 
also be producing a map for the entire city and wou ld set up touch screen information kiosks at variou s important 
places in Delhi. 
Delhi Police  
113.  Delhi Police has prepared a security plan for  Delhi which includes upgraded security of the city  besides venue 
specific arrangements for the Commonwealth Games - 2010. Delhi Police is mobilizing its manpower by ne w 
recruitment and training, mobilization from CPOs an d other states through MHA for manpower deployment during 
CG-2010. The upgraded security of Delhi will also include tourist places within Delhi. For better policing and ensuring 
visible presence on the ground, Delhi Police has created 2 new districts, 12 new Sub-Divisions, 42 new Police Stations, 
increased the number of PCR vans, increased traffic patrol, and surveillance over criminals. A such ground level police 
presence would be enhanced and prompt response would be available to public in general. 
FURTHER  RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS  OF  THE  COMMITTEE  
114.  The Committee notes the reply.  
115.  The Committee notes with dismay that higher r ate of taxes on tourist transport vehicle in the St ates have had 
adverse impact on the growth of tourism. The Commit tee recommends the Government to rationalize the tr ansport 
taxes and design consolidated entry tax on the tourist vehicles that would also be applicable in the neighbouring  States 
for hassle free movements of the tourist vehicles. The Committee also recommends that sufficient numbe r of CNG 

stations need to be provided in and beyond NCR to improve the transportation system.   
  (Para 58 ibid ) 
Reply of the Ministry of Tourism, Government of India  
116.  The Ministry of Tourism has taken up the matt er with the various States/UT Governments for ratio nalization of 
transport taxes so that there is hindrance free and  convenient inter-State movement of tourist vehicles. In this regard, a 
meeting was held with the Chairman, Empowered Committee of State Ministries on 21.01.2009 at New Delhi, wherein 
the Chairman mentioned that the issues would be considered favorably. The 13 th  meeting of the Committee on National 
Capital Region was held on 16th April, 2009, under the Chairmanship of Member Secretary, NCR Planning Board, 
where, Transport Commissioners/ Secretaries of UP, Haryana, Rajasthan and Delhi were present. The Special Secretary 
(Transport), Government of U.P. informed that they have proposed to reduce passenger taxes for buses. A meeting in 
this regard was also held recently on 22nd July, 20 09 under the chairmanship of Secretary (Road Transp ort and 
Highways) and Secretary (Tourism) to discuss these issues which would remove the harassment being face d by the 
tourists on inter State borders and lead to seamless travel. 
FURTHER  RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS  OF  THE  COMMITTEE  
117.  The Committee notes the reply and hopes that some d ecision must have been taken by now to sort out the  
issue.  
118.  While making plans for tourist packages for t he visitors, arrangement for Buddhist circuit trave l may also be 
explored which shall cover all the holy places of B uddhists. A travel plan by Indian Railways is alrea dy in place. 
However, the road connecting to Lumbini, which falls in Nepal is in a very bad condition resulting in chaos and traffic 
jam. The Committee recommends that there is need to  build a by-pass by using the Border Development Fu nd and the 
Ministry should take steps to expedite the same. (Para 59 ibid ) 
Reply of the Ministry of Tourism, Government of India  
119.  The recommendations of the Committee have been conveyed to the State Government. 
FURTHER  RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS  OF  THE  COMMITTEE  
120.  The Committee desires to know the reply received fr om the State Government and the action taken 
thereof.  
121.  The Committee notes that infrastructure is mo st important segment for successful operation of th e CWG- 2010. 
The Committee is of the view that such internationa l sporting events trigger growth in different areas  and creating 
tourism infrastructure. India is on the cusp of hig h growth in tourism and has potential to attract 10  millions by 2012. 
The Committee fully agrees with the points put forw ard by the Tour-travel Associations, especially the  requirement of 
type of fleet in car, buses, their colour, uniform for drivers and supporting staff and their training etc. during the CWG. 
The Committee recommends the Ministry of Tourism to look into the issues and areas of concern seriously and take up 
the matter with concerned authorities either of the  State Government or Government of India. The Commi ttee hopes 
that the Ministry of Tourism will come out with an early decision for putting up the required infrastr ucture and policy 
framework in a definite time frame.   
  (Para 60 ibid ) 
Reply of the Ministry of Tourism, Government of India  
122.  The Travel Trade Division of Ministry of Tour ism, Government of India grants recognition to serv ice providers 
in different categories viz.  Travel Agency, Inbound Tour Operator, Domestic Tou r Operator, Adventure Tour Operator 

and Tourist Transport Operator. The approval of Dep artment of Tourism is voluntary. The issues of Trav el trade were 
taken with the Empowered Committee of Finance Minis ters on 21st January, 2009. Now the Regional Confer ence is 
being organized to flag the issues of travel trade with the State Governments and the first conference  for North and 
Central States would be held on 18th August, 2009. 
FURTHER  RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS  OF  THE  COMMITTEE  
123.  The Committee desires to know the details of the decisions taken and further development over the issue.  
HUMAN  RESOURCES  DEVELOPMENT  
124.  The Committee notes that the Ministry has a s cheme for Capacity Building for Service Providers ( CBSP) to 
impart basic training to service providers, namely,  taxi/auto and bus drivers, majority of whom are in  the unorganized 
sector. The Committee notes that a large number of trained and experienced volunteers would be require d for 
Commonwealth Games. The volunteers may be adequatel y educated to explain the history and culture of ou r country 
and most of the historic monuments in and around De lhi. Immigration/customs staff, Police force, gover nment 
officials, etc. also need to be specifically trained for the mega event.   
  (Para 66 ibid ) 
Reply of the Ministry of Tourism, Government of India  
125.  As of now, the Ministry of Tourism has firmed  up plans for the training of more than 3,000 stude nts under its 
Earn While You Learn Programme and 3,000 taxi and b us drivers as also conductors and other help staff,  prior to the 
Commonwealth Games. The trainings under the former will cover subjects and concerns on a wide range in cluding 
history and culture and an acquaintance with historical monuments in and around Delhi. 
FURTHER  RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS  OF  THE  COMMITTEE  
126. The Committee is of the view that it is high time s uch volunteers be deputed on trial basis to some of  the 
places and feedback may be obtained. The shortcomings may be sorted out for better results. Further, p ublicity 
material/brochure should be made available at the tourist places to facilitate tourists.  
127.  The Committee notes that to offset shortage of trained manpower in the tourism sector, the Ministry has proposed 
to setting up of more institute of Hotel Management s and FCIs in the States and providing financial as sistance for the 
modernization and capacity upgradation of existing institutes and FCIs. The Committee recommends the M inistry that 
to fill up the trained manpower gap, the Ministry should consider augmenting the infrastructure of the existing institutes 
and setting up of more Institutes and FCIs in the p rivate sectors in a phased manner so that the probl em of manpower 
could be addressed to some extent. 
(Para 67 ibid ) 
Reply of the Ministry of Tourism, Government of India  
128.  The Ministry of Tourism extends need-based fi nancial assistance to the Institutes of Hotel Manag ement (IHMs) 
and Food Craft Institutes (FCIs) set up/sponsored b y it for augmenting/expanding infrastructure. In th e first two years 
of the 11 
th 
 Plan, the MoT has further sanctioned setting up of  11 State Institutes of Hotel Management and 10 Foo d 
Craft Institutes. The target is to have a network o f 49 IHMs and 31 FCIs by the close of 11 
th 
 Plan. However, the MOT 
has given the National Council of Hotel Management & Catering Technology (an autonomous body of the MO T) the 
mandate to affiliate private IHMs. So far, the NCHMCT has affiliated 12 private IHMs.  
 
 

FURTHER  RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS  OF  THE  COMMITTEE  
129.  The Committee notes the reply and cautions the Mini stry of Tourism to be more careful while granting 
affiliation to private Institutes of Hotel Management (IHMs) and adhere to stringent norms.  
130.  The Committee notes the suggestions given by the Tourist Guide Federation of India especially th e printing of 
special tickets for CWG-2010 for foreign tourists, special queues for foreign entry tickets, proper pa rking facilities, 
first-class pay toilets, recruitments of guide and state of art glow signs and facilitation desk in al l the monuments. The 
Committee recommends the Government to see that no inconvenience is caused to the tourist at the monuments and the 
monuments should have these facilities including trained guides for the tourists during the CWG.          Para  68 ibid ) 
Reply of the Ministry of Tourism, Government of India  
131.  The Ministry of Tourism has taken up with the  A.S.I. /Ministry of Culture the issues regarding printing of special 
tickets for the Games, special queues, proper parki ng facilities, first-class pay toilets, synages and  facilitation desk in 
the monuments. 
Reply of the Ministry of Culture, Government of India  
132.  The specially designed entry tickets have alr eady been introduced at World Heritage Sites and ot her centrally 
protected ticketed monuments with effect from 3rd D ecember, 2009. The Ministry of Tourism, India Touri sm 
Development Corporation, Indian Association of Tour  Operators, the other concerned travel agencies hav e already 
been informed that they may procure the entry ticke ts from any of the ticketed counters or the offices  of the 
Archaeological Survey of India, its regional office and Circle offices in advance. The 'A' series of the first lot of tickets 
is valid upto 30.4.2010. The second lot of ‘B’ seri es is also in the process of issue to the respectiv e Circles/ticketed 
counters of Archaeological Survey of India and their agencies. These tickets shall be valid upto 31st March, 2011. 
133.  The specially designed entry tickets have bec ome very popular amongst the tourists and these are  preserved by 
the tourist as souvenir. 
FURTHER  RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS  OF  THE  COMMITTEE  
134.  The Committee notes the reply and desires that coor dination with Ministry of Culture and ASI should be  
made well in advance. Further, the tickets should be available on Internet also to facilitate the tourists.  
BRANDING  AND  PUBLICITY:  
135.  Road Shows/India evenings would be conducted to promote the games. Specific events would be held  in key 
markets and Specific Media Campaigns in identified markets. Special attractive brochures would be prod uced to 
promote the Games. An estimated expenditure of Rs.6 0 Crores would be involved in this area for which s eparate 
additional funds would be required. The Committee feels that it should be done as a par t of Incredible India 
Campaign already being done by the Department of Tourism.  (Para 70 ibid ) 
Reply of the Ministry of Tourism, Government of India  
136.  The Ministry of Tourism has taken up with Pla nning Commission, Group of Ministers for CWG and ot her 
ministries for allocating additional funds for undertaking promotion and publicity of the Common- weal th Games. The 
ministry has drafted a specific media and promotion  strategy for the identified markets to generate to urist traffic to 
India for the Commonwealth Games. the organising co mmittee, CWG 2010 would be setting up a games trave l office 
(GTO) which would handle all the requirements of ho tels, transport arrangements, ticketing needs, guid es etc. for the 
persons associated with the games All the facilitie s catering to the requirements/travel needs arrange d by the games 
travel office would be available on a central website of the games travel office. 

 
FURTHER  RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS  OF  THE  COMMITTEE  
137.  The Committee notes the reply given by the Ministry.  
CENTRAL  RESERVATION  SYSTEM/GAMES  TRAVEL  OFFICE  FOR  THE  CWG  2010  
138.  The Committee notes that the Ministry has the  promotional plan to promote the Commonwealth Games  2010 in 
the overseas market to showcase the rich cultural heritage of India to the international community. The Committee feels 
that the tourists who come for the Commonwealth Gam es will also like to see the India and its differen t tourist 
destination. The Committee therefore recommends the Ministry to design comprehensive tour packages to select places 
to suit to the need of the tourists coming for the Commonwealth Games 2010 in collaboration with the Tour and Travel 
Operators so that the tourists can see India in its  entirety. The Ministry should also launch a dedica ted portal on the 
website and specific media campaigns for the Games in the identified tourism markets to generate touri st traffic to 
India.      (Para 72 ibid ) 
FURTHER  RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS  OF  THE  COMMITTEE  
139.  The Committee recommends that the Game Travel Offic e may be later on converted to a Tourism 
Promotion centre so that the infrastructure could be further utilized for tourism promotion.  
140.  The Committee recommends that a dedicated Cen tral Web Portal for Commonwealth Games should be de signed 
to cater to the need of the tourists. The website should be interactive and must contain all the data inputs and feedbacks, 
that is required for the tourists viz.  booking of rooms, travel planner etc. to facilitat e their journey and make the stay 
comfortable.    (Para 73 ibid ) 
Reply of the Ministry of Tourism, Government of India  
141.  The Organising Committee, CWG 2010 would be s etting up a Games Travel Office (GTO) which would h andle 
all the requirements of hotels, transport arrangeme nts, ticketing needs, guides etc. for the persons a ssociated with the 
Games. The Organising Committee has been asked to t ake necessary action in this regard. Further, neces sary 
information regarding the IXth Commonwealth Games i s available on the official website which also comp rises of 
links to various sites related to the Games. 
FURTHER  RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS  OF  THE  COMMITTEE  
142.  The Committee notes the reply.  
SPECIAL  TOURISM  FORCE  
143.  The Committee is surprised to know that there  is no specific law to deal with the touts stringen tly. At present the 
action is taken under Section 151 of CrPC and Secti on 97 of the Delhi Police Act for creating nuisance  that provide 
very minor punishment. The Committee welcomes the move of the Government of Delhi for enactment of a law for the 
safety of the tourists and to protect the tourist f rom the touts. The Committee is of the opinion that  the safety and 
security of tourists is paramount and should be loo ked into seriously and recommends the Ministry to p ursue the other 
State Governments for enactment of the law and crea tion of tourist police force for ensuring of the sa fety and security 
of the tourists at the earliest. 
(Para 80 ibid ) 
 
 

Reply of the Ministry of Tourism, Government of India  
144.  ‘Public order’ & ‘Police’ are State subjects as per the Seventh Schedule of the Constitution of India. However, in 
order to protect/ensure safety and security of the tourists being fleeced by the touts and kind of harassment, Ministry of 
Tourism has advised all the State Governments/Union  Territory Administrations to deploy Tourist Police  at tourist 
destinations. Ministry of Tourism has also circulat ed guidelines for formation of Tourist Security Org anization(s) 
comprising Ex-Servicemen, for the safety and securi ty of tourists to all State Governments/Union Terri tory 
Administrations. 
FURTHER  RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS  OF  THE  COMMITTEE  
145.  Tourist Police should be properly trained that may be a helping hand. Further, the issue of safety and  
security of tourists is of paramount importance and issue should be taken up with Ministry of Home Affairs.  
146. The Committee appreciates the work done by the  U.P. Tourism Police in Agra to prevent fleecing of  tourists and 
misbehaviour with them. However, the Committee feel s the need for strengthening the Tourist Police at all the tourist 
centers/destination and recommends the Ministry of Tourism to impress upon the Government of U.P. for looking into 
the service conditions of the personnel deployed as  Tourism Police, who are all ex-servicemen. The Tou rism Police 
must be provided tourist vehicles with mobile telep hones and given training in English language for pr oviding 
information/guidance to tourist. (Para 81 ibid ) 
Reply of the Ministry of Tourism, Government of India  
147.  Ministry of Tourism has advised all the State  Governments/Union Territory Administrations to dep loy Tourist 
Police at tourist destinations. Ministry of Tourism  has also circulated guidelines for formation of To urist Security 
Organization(s) comprising Ex-Servicemen, for the s afety and security of tourists to all State Governm ents/Union 
Territory Administrations. 
FURTHER  RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS  OF  THE  COMMITTEE  
148.  The Committee desires to know the feedback/response  Ministry has received so far. Since the tourism 
promotion outside Delhi is an ongoing process, the infrastructure and other support measures need to b e taken 
and may be continued even after the Commonwealth Games were over.  
PROTECTION  AND  PRESERVATION  OF  MONUMENTS  
149.  The Committee notes that Delhi is the home to  around 1200 heritage buildings, out of which 173 a re listed as 
protected by the ASI. Three protected sites i.e., R ed Fort, Qutab Minar and Humayun Tomb have been giv en World 
Heritage Status by the UNESCO and get top priority for providing visitors’ amenities and their overall  maintenance. 
The Committee notes that the Ministry of Culture and the ASI has already identified the monuments for sprucing them 
up that are important from tourism point of view an d are located on the games route. The Committee not es that the 
conservation and preservation of monuments has star ted and good work has been dose by the ASI in this regard. 
However, a lot of work on building essential touris ts facilities at city monuments was yet to be done,  inspite of the 
additional allocation of funds for this purpose to the ASI. The Committee feels that the Commonwealth Games will be 
a great opportunity for state to showcase, its heri tage to a large number of tourists who will be comi ng to the city for 
the event. The Committee, therefore, recommends the  Government to renovate and repair to conserve the monuments 
and create more tourist facilities like, canteens, toilets, interpretation centre, museums, ramps for disabled and 
enhanced parking lots. The Committee recommends tha t the Government should take immediate steps for pr oper 
maintenance of the pathways and approach roads, ill uminations/floor lighting of the monuments etc. nee d immediate 
attention. The Committee also recommends the Govern ment to promote lesser known monuments, places, lik e 

Kashmiri Gate, Sheesh Mahal, Baradari and other tourist sites for the tourists with improved connectivity.  
(Para 85 ibid ) 
Reply of the Ministry of Culture, Government of India  
150.  The ASI has identified 46 protected monuments  in Delhi for comprehensive special repairs and upg radation 
besides overall improvement in the existing public amenities. The remaining monuments in Delhi have al so been 
selected for sprucing up for the Commonwealth Games  2010 out of the Departmental funds. The work at 46  
monuments have already commenced keeping an eye on the Commonwealth Games 2010. Sprucing up of the 
monuments is being taken up by way of improving the  pathways, repairs and painting to the railings/bou ndary walls, 
upgradation of toilets, drinking water facilities, publication counters, signages etc. The work of upgradation of existing 
kachha pathways within the premises of Safdarjung T omb, Afsarwala Mosque, Isa Khan’s Tomb, Asokan Rock  Edict, 
Qutub Archaeological Area has been included under the programme. 
FURTHER  RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS  OF  THE  COMMITTEE  
151.  Recent efforts of the ASI in improving the amenities notwithstanding there is still scope to further upgrade 
the facilities and cover all the monuments in a time bound manner. If need be students, NGOs and RWAs should 
be roped in to monitor the monuments.  
152.  The Committee notes that 13 monuments have be en taken up for illumination by the ITDC. The Commi ttee 
recommends the Government to consider illumination work for other popular monuments in Delhi to attrac t a large 
number of tourists. However, the Committee cautions  the Government that while carrying out the illumin ation work, 
the originality of the monuments should be restored  and in no way the monuments should be subjected to  damage by 
installing the lightening equipments, etc. (Para 86 ibid ) 
Reply of the Ministry of Tourism, Government of India  
153.  The concerns of the Committee have been communicated to the ITDC for compliance. 
Reply of the Ministry of Culture, Government of India  
154.  A draft containing the guidelines for illumin ation of monuments was presented before the Central  Advisory 
Board on Archaeology (CABA) on 2nd December, 2009. The CABA in its meeting has constituted a Committee  
comprising of the following for finalization of the guidelines: 
  1. PROF. SHIREEN MOOSVI............ MEMBER 
  2. PROF. R.C. AGARWAL,................ MEMBER 
  3. SHRI A.K. SINHA,........................ COORD INATOR 
155.  The Committee has already discussed the issue  in its meeting held on 25 
th  December, 2009 and 8th January, 
2010. The draft guidelines have been finalized with  certain suggestions and recommendations and the re port is under 
submission to the Government for approval. 
FURTHER  RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS  OF  THE  COMMITTEE  
156.  The Committee desires to know the current status thereof on the illumination work.  
157.  The Committee notes with dismay that the Gove rnment and the civic authorities have not paid much attention for 
laying the approach roads to monuments, pathways, s tructural repairs etc. The Committee feels that the  beautiful 
building and the monuments will loose out the visit ors because of their location, inadequate parking f acilities, poor 
access route, trained guides and encroachment. The Committee recommends the Government to improve on the overall 

ambience of the site itself and make it more approa chable and attractive for the visitors besides, rem oving 
encroachment from the places of historical and tourists' interest. (Para 87 ibid ) 
Reply of the Ministry of Culture, Government of India  
158.  All the Superintending Archaeologists of the Circles under Archaeological Survey of India, who a re the 
custodian of 3675 monuments/sites declared as of na tional importance, have been informed about the obs ervation of 
the Committee, i.e. “the Committee notes with disma y that the Government and the civic authorities hav e not paid 
much attention for laying the approach roads to monuments, pathways, structural repairs, etc. The Committee feels that 
the beautiful building and the monuments will loose  out the visitors because of their location, inadeq uate parking 
facilities, poor access route, trained guides and e ncroachment. The Committee recommends the Governmen t to 
improve on the overall ambience of the site itself and make it more approachable and attractive for the visitors besides, 
removing encroachment from the places of historical and tourists' interest.” 
159.  They have been requested to take up the matte r with the concerned Municipal and Development Auth orities to 
ensure that proper approach roads upto the monument  are laid and kept well maintained for the convenie nce of the 
visitors. It has also been requested that proper fa cilities for the visitors should be provided and th e encroachments, if 
any, within the protected area of the monuments are removed without any loss of time. 
160.  In addition, the Chairman, New Delhi Municipa l Council, New Delhi, Agra Development Authority, 
Commissioner, Agra Municipal Corporation, Municipal Corporation of Delhi, Principal Commissioner cum S ecretary, 
Delhi Development Authority have also been requeste d to adhere to the observations made by the Committ ee and to 
take appropriate measures in the matter. 
FURTHER  RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS  OF  THE  COMMITTEE  
161.  The Committee is of the view that the Ministry of C ulture should be in continuous dialogue with variou s 
agencies including state government to get the makeover at the earliest.  
DEMOLTION  OF  LAL  MAHAL  
162.  The Committee pointed out the dismal picture of state of affairs relating to the poor management  and upkeep of 
the monuments which is evident through the demoliti on of Lal Mahal. The Committee is perturbed to note  that the 
concerned agencies are shying away from their respo nsibility and passing the buck and blame each other . The ASI has 
washed its hands off claiming that Lal Mahal was no t a protected monument and that the MCD should have  preserved 
it. The MCD claims that it was not on the heritage list and it was protected in the INTACH list as it cares about 
unprotected ones. The Ministry of Urban Development does not know anything about the incident, although it has been 
much highlighted in the media. The ASI is being blamed for inaction despite Lal Mahal being in the Zafar Hasan’s List 
for the Central Protection. The State Government is  being blamed for not notifying monuments like the Lal Mahal 
despite a list sent to them three years ago and the  police have not been able to nab the culprits so f ar. This shows the 
utter lack of coordination and confusion between di fferent agencies of the Union as well as the State Government and 
the local bodies. In this connection a communicatio n was sent to the Ministries of Tourism and Culture  to provide 
information about the role of different agencies in  protection of the monuments in Delhi and NCR regio n, but the 
Committee is constrained to say that no response was given by the Ministries till the adoption of the report. 
(Para 90 ibid ) 
Reply of the Ministry of Culture, Government of India  
163.  Lal Mahal is neither protected by the Central  Government nor the Government of National Capital Territory of 
Delhi. Lal Mahal and its premises were under use fo r residential purposes. Even after demolition of ol d structures 
located within the premises, to make way for some m odem construction, traces are still visible. Immedi ately after the 

construction activities started at Lal Mahal, the Archaeological Survey of India had lodged a complaint with the Police 
Station against construction in the prohibited area  of Chausath Khambha, a centrally protected monumen t, located in 
Basti Nizamuddin, in violation of the Ancient Monum ents & Archaeological Sites & Remains Rules, 1959 a nd 
Notification 1992. As per the rule, no construction  is permissible in 100 m area of any centrally prot ected monument. 
The police complaint was followed by letters to Dy.  Commissioner, Delhi Police and Dy. Commissioner, M unicipal 
Corporation Delhi with the request to stop unauthor ized construction activities at the site. Subsequen tly, show-cause 
notice was also issued to the offender under rule 3 8 of the Ancient Monuments & Archaeological Sites &  Remains 
Rules, 1959. The ASI declares ancient monuments, ar chaeological sites and remains as protected under t he Ancient 
Monuments and Archaeological Sites and Remains Act,  1958 only when the same is found worthy of nationa l 
importance. In Delhi, to be specific, there are a l arge number of monuments out of which only 174 have  been declared 
as of national importance. The monuments other than those declared protected by the Central Government had not been 
considered for declaration as protected earlier dul y considering their historical, archaeological or a rtistic importance. 
Since archaeology falls in the concurrent list, it becomes the responsibility of the State Government to declare the 
monuments other than those protected by the Central Government as State protected, more so, when the Government of 
National Capital Territory of Delhi has its own Act  in force. The Central Government declares an ancie nt monument, 
archaeological site or remains as of national impor tance under Section 4 of the Ancient Monuments & Ar chaeological 
Sites & Remains Act, 1958 only when the same, in it s opinion, is found to be of national importance, a fter issuing a 
notification declaring its intention in the Officia l Gazette and inviting objections front interested persons giving two 
months notice. Subsequent to issue of notification,  the interested persons are at liberty to file obje ctions against the 
intention of the Central Government. The Central Go vernment after the expiry of two months period and considering 
the objections so received declare the said monumen t as of national importance by issuing a notificati on again in the 
Official Gazette. The procedure to declare a monume nt as of national importance is a time consuming pr ocess. More 
so, when its ownership is private. In cases where t he ownership is private, the Central Government is required to enter 
into an agreement with the owner for the maintenanc e of the monument as per Section 6 of the Ancient M onuments & 
Archaeological Sites & Remains Act, 1958. 
164.  In Delhi the ancient monuments and heritage buildings fall under following categories--- 
  Centrally protected monuments, 
  State protected monuments, and 
  Unprotected monuments. 
165.  While the responsibility of protection of cen trally protected monuments rests with the Central G overnment 
through the Archaeological Survey of India, the Govt. of NCT Delhi is responsible for State protected monuments. The 
unprotected monuments and heritage buildings fall u nder the purview of Municipal Corporation of Delhi/ New Delhi 
Municipal Council/Cantonment Board, since they are required to list such buildings as heritage propert ies and the 
responsibility for these protection lies with the respective civic agency as per the area under jurisdiction. 
FURTHER  RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS  OF  THE  COMMITTEE  
166.  The Committee still feels that there is lack of coordination among the agencies responsible for maintaining 
the monuments.  
167.  The representatives of Union Ministry of Urba n Development who was asked about the role and perf ormance of 
the Heritage Conservation Committee, was not able t o say much about it. Be that as it may, the Committ ee has no 
option but to express its unhappiness about the whole affair. As a result of this, a large number of o ur monuments have 
either withered away or have been encroached/demoli shed by the unscrupulous elements. This cannot happ en without 

the connivance of the local agencies/authority. Police do not have adequate legal backup to try the culprit in a deterrent 
way. 
168.  The Committee therefore, recommends the Gover nments to prepare an authentic list of monuments at  various 
levels - Central, State and local and notify them so that it is easy to remove encroachments from the monuments and fix 
responsibility for their protection, maintenance an d conservation. The heritage conservation committee  needs to be 
made more active. The Committee recommends to the Governments that they should take immediate steps to notify all 
the unprotected monuments in Delhi and evolve a coo rdination mechanism among different agencies involv ed in the 
protection of monuments. Role of INT ACH also needs  to be highlighted in this regard. It has done good  work and 
needs to be promoted. (Para 91& 92 ibid ) 
Reply of the Ministry of Culture  
169.  The Central Government has launched National Mission on Monuments and Antiquities under which al l the 
monuments irrespective of their protection status in the country are to be listed and documented to ensure that adequate 
steps are taken for their protection as per their s tatus. The work under the Mission has already begun . Besides, the 
Central Government has also introduced the Heritage  Sites Commission Bill in the Rajya Sabha. for prot ection of the 
monuments and to decide about their future protection and maintenance. 
Reply of the Ministry of Urban Development  
170.  Para 90,91 & 92: The Delhi Building Bye-laws,  1983 was amended vide Notification S.O.No.188 dated 9.2.2004 
incorporating provisions for Conservation of Herita ge sites including Heritage buildings, Heritage/ Pr ecincts and 
natural feature areas. This Notification provided f or constituting Heritage Conservation Committee. A copy of the 
Notification dated 9.2.2004 is enclosed. Clause 23. 16 thereof contain the composition of the Heritage Conservation 
Committee and its functions. The Committee was constituted on 6.8.2004. 
171.  Clause 23.5 of the said notification provides  that the list of heritage sites including Heritage  Buildings, Heritage 
Precincts and listed Natural Features Areas is to b e prepared and supplemented by the Commissioner, MC D/Vice-
Chairman, DDA/Chairman, NOMC on the advice of the H eritage Conservation Committee. Before being finali zed, 
objections and suggestions of the public are to be invited and considered. The list may be supplemente d from time to 
time by Government on receipt of proposal from the agency concerned or by Government suo moto  provided that 
before the list is supplemented, objections and sug gestions from the public be invited and duly consid ered by the 
Commissioner, MCD/Vice-Chairman, DDA/Chairman, NDMC and/or Government and / or the Heritage Conservati on 
Committee. 
172.  The list of heritage building etc. is yet to be notified. As per the information made available,  the HCC had 
recommended a list of Heritage buildings in the NDM C area for Notification. The list is yet to be noti fied. MCC had 
also prepared a list of heritage buildings in areas  falling under its jurisdiction. It is understood t hat list was 
recommended by HCC and objections/suggestions were called for by Municipal Corporation of Delhi. After  due 
consideration by MCD/ HCC, this was sent to Government of NCT of Delhi for notification & is yet to be notified. 
FURTHER  RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS  OF  THE  COMMITTEE  
173.  The Committee notes the indifferent attitude of the Delhi Government in issuing notification. The concern 
of the Committee is reiterated as no concrete step has been taken so far. The Committee desires that t he 
notification process should be expedited.  
 
 

BEAUTIFICATION  OF  DELHI  
174.  The pollution of River Yamuna and its cleansi ng up was another issue caught the attentions of th e Committee. 
The Committee wanted to know about the plans of the  MCD or Delhi Jal Board for its cleaning and mainte nance and 
river front development. The MCD informed that the entire Yamuna operation is with the Delhi Jal Board. The MCD is 
implementing a part of it. The Yamuna front is actu ally belongs to the DDA. The entire Yamuna belt bel ongs to the 
Delhi Development Authority and the mechanism to ke ep it clean is with the Delhi Jal Board, because al l the effluents 
come from the Delbi Jal Board nalas, etc. The DDA informed that the responsibility of cleaning all the nalas which fall 
into the river Yamuna lies with the Delhi Jal Board  itself. The river itself is the joint responsibili ty of the Delhi Jal 
Board and the Irrigation Department of the Delhi Go vernment. As far as river-front is concerned, they have taken up 
this project of detailed landscaping of the river f ront in phases. In fact, near ISBT, a part has alre ady been developed. 
DDA are taking up the whole length from Wazirabad bridge to Okhla both sides of the river, for a detailed landscaping. 
The Delhi Jal Board informed the Committee that the  problem of cleaning of Yamuna is a massive one and  to clean 
Yamuna by 2010 will not be possible. However, they have drawn specific schemes for rehabilitation of t he sewer 
system by intercepting the water from the three maj or drains is Nazafgarh Shahdara and supplementary d rain. These 
three drains carry about 75 perc ent of the pollution to Yamuna and they are fed by 220 or so smaller drains. The DDA 
is also executing environmental improvement upgrada tion programmes by covering nallahs, providing gree nery and 
landscaping at Defence Colony and Lajpat Nagar. The  Barapullah Nallah is also going to be substantiall y improved to 
provide a good environment to traffic meant for Games Village and Nehru Stadium. 
175.  The Committee notes the sorry state of affair s in cleaning and maintenance of river Yamuna. The concerned 
agencies are not aware of who is doing what and passing the blame and responsibility to one and other. The Committee 
feels that there appears a lack of coordination bet ween different agencies of Union, State and the loc al bodies. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends that the work of c leaning and beautification of river-bed should be i ntegrated and 
designated to a single agency for better result or else, there should be close coordination between DJ B and the DDA 
who are mandated to do the two works. The Committee  was surprised to find that DDA was blissfully’ una ware of its 
responsibility of developing Yamuna river front. Th ese works cleansing and beautification of river fro nt - should be 
given utmost importance and urgency because the ent ire Games Village is being erected just on the bank s of Yamuna. 
(Para 94 ibid ) 
Reply of the Ministry of Urban Development, Government of India  
176.  Pertains to Government of Delhi. The DDA and DJB have been informed about this. 
Reply of the Government (Urban Development)  
177.  The work of cleaning of the river pertains to  Delhi Government whereas the beautification work of the river front 
is under DDA since the land belongs to DDA. DDA has  informed that the landscape plans for area from Ku desia Ghat 
to Raj Ghat have already been prepared and approved by the Screening Committee of DDA and issued to the concerned 
Engineering and Horticulture Departments of DDA. An  area of 156 acres near Wazirabad is developed as a  Bio-
diversity Park by DDA and 300 acres has been added on the North of the Existing Biodiversity Park for which the 
plans have already been approved by the Screening C ommittee of DDA and execution work is to be taken u p. In the 
Zonal Plan of ‘0’ Zone, it has also been decided by  Hon’ble LG to develop the river front as a Biodive rsity Park for 
which the site studies are under progress. 
178.  The Central Government has constituted a High  powered Committee for Yamuna River Development to be 
chaired by Lt. Governor GNCTD. The terms and refere nces of the High Powered Committee includes study o n 
different aspects of the development of the river, viz.  hydrology, ecology, environmental pollution, susta inable use of 

the river front, etc. to feed into the policy frame work and develop a policy framework and prepare an integrated plan 
addressing issues of both quantity in terms of river flow and quality in the Yamuna River. 
179.  Quarterly review meetings are being convened by the Chief Secretary of Delhi in this regard. 
 
 
FURTHER  RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS  OF  THE  COMMITTEE  
180.  The Committee expresses its anguish on the lack of initiative to be taken by DJB. The situation of Yamuna 
River is worsening. DDA should also expedite the work of setting up the Biodiversity Park.  
181.  The Committee observes that the entire Delhi should be clean and neat for attracting tourists. H owever, the 
nallahs criss crossing the city give an unpleasant experience to anyone who visits Delhi. The Committe e therefore, 
recommends that the Ministry of Tourism should take  up the issue of cleaning of nallahs at the highest  level to ensure 
that all the drains are cleaned and landscaping and  beautifications work is done before the Commonweal th Games 
2010. (Para 95 ibid ) 
Reply of the Ministry of Urban Development, Government of India  
 182. Pertains to Government of Delhi. Government of NCT Delhi has been informed about this. 
FURTHER  RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS  OF  THE  COMMITTEE  
183.  The Committee desires that continuous follow up sho uld be done with Government of NCT of Delhi since 
it is hoisting CWG is a national issue.  
GENERAL  OBSERVATION  
184.  The Committee sees the Commonwealth Games, 20 10 an opportunity for us to showcase besides our 
contemporary achievements our rich culture heritage to the world and also to conceptualize ‘Atithi Devo Bhava’ in true 
sense. After hearing the views of different agencie s of the Government and representatives of hotelier s, tour operators, 
etc. and the views of the representatives of Govern ments of Rajasthan, Haryana and Uttar Pradesh, the Committee is 
constrained to note that there appear utter lack of  coordination, determination and sense of urgency a mongst the 
agencies engaged in providing facilities to the tourists who will be visiting India in connection with the Commonwealth 
Games. The Committee finds that these agencies are still confused about their roles. This fact is evid ent when 
Committee raised the issues of demolition of Lal Ma hal, cleaning of Yamuna River and beautification of  the cities. 
Though not much time is left, however numbers of sc hemes are still at planning stage. As per Governmen t’s estimate 
about 1 lac foreign tourists likely to visit Delhi to witness the sports events. The Government has projected the shortage 
of about 30,000 rooms. However, by March, 20 I 0 ab out 14,000 rooms likely to be ready. Entrepreneurs are shying 
away from making investment in hotel industry. There is need to instill confidence among them about the sustainability 
of business in hotel industry even after Commonweal th Games, 2010. To meet the requirement of hotel 
accommodations we have to look for hotel accommodat ions beyond Delhi and NCR. In such a situation citi es like 
Agra, Jaipur, Udaipur, Jodhpur, Khajurao can serve as alternative. It appears to be a difficult task, but not impossible. 
There is need to increase the speed of trains runni ng between Delhi and Agra and Delhi and Jaipur. The re should be 
direct air connectivity to and from Delhi to these cities where tourists can stay and come to Delhi to enjoy game events 
without much loss of time. Even other cities like M umbai and Kolkata may be sensitized to accommodate the tourists 
pressure during Commonwealth Games. We have to ensu re better roads in and around Delhi. Efforts are al so required 
to make our cities beautiful. Agra need special att ention not only in terms of beautification, but als o for providing 
smooth connectivity of world famous monuments there. Let there be dedicated heritage corridors which s hould be free 

from all types of encroachments and connect the monuments of the national importants either to National Highways or 
the State Highways. To begin with the monuments of Agra i.e. Fatehpur Sikri, Taj Mahal, I’timad-ud-Daula Tomb and 
Secundra Tomb can be connected by way of heritage c orridor. It will be possible to make the Commonweal th Games, 
2010 a successful event only when each and everyone of us is prepared for the occasion especially the police to ensure 
safety and security of the tourists, well behaved d rivers and officials working at the airports. Stude nts may also be 
trained and engaged as volunteers during the Common Wealth Games. The Committee is of the view that the need is of 
concerted and coordinated efforts by different wing s of the Government at Centre viz.  DDA, MCD, ASI, Ministry of 
Tourism, Ministry of Culture, Ministry of Railways,  Department of Road Transport and Highways with Gov ernments 
of the States to make Commonwealth Games a successful event. 
Reply of the Government (Urban Development)  
185.  DDA has been mandated to make available 6000 rooms. This target is expected to be achieved. 
FURTHER  RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS  OF  THE  COMMITTEE  
186.  The committee desires to know the final status thereof.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS –– AT A GLANCE 
  The Committee has learnt that the common ticket/a dvance ticket for visiting monuments under ASI has 
been in the process. The Ministry should ensure tha t the system worked without any flaw and was advert ised 
through print & electronic media. The Committee also desires to know the current status of the actions  planned 
by various departments of the Government of NCT of Delhi as mentioned above. (Para 15)  
  The Committee notes that the NCT of Delhi, Uttar Pradesh and Rajasthan have submitted proposals. The 
Committee recommends that the matter should be take n up at the higher level, so that the proposals are  
expedited. The Committee may also be apprised of th e progress made in materializing tbe above projects , the 
quantity of work completed so far, the percentage o f work remaining to be completed and the targeted d ate of 
completions of the entire projects. (Para 18)  
  The Committee notes the reply given by the Minist ry and hopes that the State Governments would take 
the advantage of various schemes to boost tourist arrivals in the State. (Para 24)  
  The Committee finds the reply to be rather crypti c that does not answer to specific event referred by it. 
       (Para 27)  
  The Committee desires to know the reaction of the  Government of Rajasthan in this regard and 
recommends that follow up action should be pursued with Government of Rajasthan. (Para 31)  
 
  The Committee notes the steps taken in making arr angements for more rooms. However, the Committee 
feels that it needs to be taken up in a time bound matter. The Committee desires to know the funds uti lized, 
scheme wise, by the State Governments during the above period. (Para 37)  
 
  The Committee feels that ferry services like thos e operated by Delhi Metro Rail Corporation may be 
introduced between Agra Cantt Railway Station and T aj Mahal so that the tourists were not put to any t rouble 
by unscrupulous elements at the railway station and  in the premises of Taj Mahal. Further coordination  with 
various agencies should be closely monitored and a nodal agency made to implement the steps.    (Para 44)  
  The Committee notes the Ministry’s efforts to iss ue common entry ticket. The Committee desires that the 
process of setting up of facilitation centre should be expedited and the construction of underpass should be taken 
up with the concerned agencies with a view to present Agra in a better way to the visiting tourists.  (Para 45)  
  The Committee notes the reply given by the Minist ry and hopes that the Ministry of Tourism will play a 
pro-active role. Ministry of Culture should also ex pedite the process to facilitate night viewing of T aj and take 
up the upgradation of public amenities well before and also after the Commonwealth Games.          (Para 52)  
  The Committee notes the reply and recommends that  concerted efforts on security aspect should be mad e 
by the Ministries to allow the tourists to see the Taj during night from the floor where the stairs re ach the main 
structure. This move will certainly help in boosting tourism in the State. (Para 54)  
  The Committee notes the reply given by the Minist ry. (Para 57)  
  The Committee notes the reply given by the Minist ry and hopes that the State Governments will take 
benefits of the scheme.   (Para 60)  
  The Committee notes the reply and recommends that  all the Ministries/ Departments should take make 
joint efforts to achieve the target. (Para 79)  

  The Committee notes the reply and is of the view that a properly coordinated efforts jointly by all the 
agencies is the need of the hour, to have all the facilities and infrastructure well in time.             (Para 83)  
  The committee notes the reply and wishes that all  the projects will be completed as planned.  (Para 86)  
  The Committee notes the reply given by the Minist ry and recommends that all the pre-requisite 
formalities with other agencies should be done before time. (Para 89)  
  The Committee also desires that Haryana and UP Go vernments may cornel forward to allot extra lands in 
the adjoining areas of NCR where temporary shelters  of the requisite quantity and facilities can be pr ovided, 
thereby increasing the accommodation facility. (Para 94)  
  The Committee is of the view that apart from the tax holidays, the Ministry should organize such 
programmes of tourist interest occasionally so that  the tourist flow to India remains steady for long and better 
business to the investors.  (Para 98}  
  However, the Committee hopes that “single window clearance system” being worked out by Ministry of 
Tourism was already made operational to speed up the hotel projects. (Para 99)  
OTHER INITIATIVES/MEASURES TO AUGMENT ACCOMMODATION  FOR THE COMMONWEALTH 
GAMES-2010: 
  The Committee desires to know the present status and the target fixed for completion of the above works. 
       (Para 105)  
TRAVEL FACILITIES: 
  The Committee notes the reply. (Para 114)  
  The Committee notes the reply and hopes that some  decision must have been taken by now to sort out t he 
issue.      (Para 117)  
  The Committee desires to know the reply received from the State Government and the action taken 
thereof.     (Para 120)  
The Committee desires to know the details of the decisions taken and further development over the issue. 
       (Para 123)  
HUMAN  RESOURCES  DEVELOPMENT: 
  The Committee is of the view that it is high time  such volunteers be deputed on trial basis to some of the 
places and feedback may be obtained. The shortcomings may be sorted out for better results. Further, p ublicity 
material/brochure should be made available at the tourist places to facilitate tourists. (Para 126)  
  The Committee notes the reply and cautious the Mi nistry of Tourism to be more careful while granting  
affiliation to private Institutes of Hotel Management (IHMs) and adhere to stringent norms.    (Para 129)  
 
  The Committee notes the reply and desires that co ordination with Ministry of Culture & ASI should be  
made well in advance. Further, the tickets should be available on Internet also to facilitate the tourists.  
       (Para 134)  
BRANDING AND PUBLICITY 
  The Committee notes the reply given by the Minist ry. (Para 138)  
 

CENTRAL RESERVATION SYSTEM/GAMES TRAVEL OFFICE FOR THE CWG 2010 
  The Committee recommends that the Game Travel Off ice may be later on converted to a Tourism 
Promotion centre so that the infrastructure could be further utilized for tourism promotion. 
(Para 140)  
  The Committee notes the reply. (Para 143)  
SPECIAL TOURISM FORCE: 
  Tourist Police should be properly trained that ma y be a helping hand. Further, the issue of safety a nd 
security of tourists is of paramount importance and issue should be taken up with Ministry of Home Affairs. 
       (Para 146)  
  The Committee desires to know the feedback/respon se Ministry has received so far. Since the tourism 
promotion outside Delhi is an ongoing process, the infrastructure and other support measures need to b e taken 
and may be continued even after the Commonwealth Games were over. (Para 149)  
PROTECTION AND PRESERVATION OF MONUMENTS 
  Recent efforts of the ASI in improving the amenit ies notwithstanding there is still scope to further upgrade 
the facilities and cover all the monuments in a tim e bound manner. If need be students, NGOs and RW As  
should be roped in to monitor the monuments. (Para 152)  
  The Committee desires to know the current status thereof on the illumination work. 
(Para 157)  
  The Committee is of the view that the Ministry of  Culture should be in continuous dialogue with vari ous 
agencies including state government to get the makeover at the earliest. (Para 162)  
DEMOLITION OF LAL MAHAL 
  The Committee still feels that there is lack of c oordination among the, agencies responsible for maintaining 
the monuments.    (Para 167)  
  The Committee notes the indifferent attitude of t he Delhi Government in issuing notification. The concern 
of the Committee is reiterated as no concrete step has been taken so far. The Committee desires that t he 
notification process should be expedited. (Para 174)  
BEAUTIFICATION OF DELHI 
  The Committee expresses its anguish on the lack o f initiative to be taken by DJB. The situation of Yamuna 
River is worsening. DDA should also expedite the work of setting up the Biodiversity Park.  (Para 181)  
  The Committee desires that continuous follow up s hould be done with Government of NCT of Delhi since  
it is hoisting CWG is a national issue. (Para 184)  
GENERAL  OBSERVATION 
 The committee desires to know the final status the reof.  (Para 187) 
 
 
 
   

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINUTES 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
VIII 
EIGHTH MEETING 
 
  The Committee met at 3:30 P.M. on Tuesday the 9th February, 2010 in Committee Ro om A, Ground Floor, 
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
  MEMBERS  PRESENT 
 1.  Shri Sitaram Yechury    ----    Chairman  
  RAJYA  SABHA  
 2.  Shri Ramdas Agarwal 
 3.  Shri Birendra Prasad Baishya 
 4.  Shri Shadi Lal Batra 
 5.  Shri Naresh Gujral 
 6.  Shri Syed Azeez Pasha 
 7.  Shri Thomas Sangma 
  LOKS  ABHA  
 8.  Shri Mahesh Joshi 
 9.  Shrimati Bhavana Gawali Patil   
 10.  Shrimati Ranee Narah 
 11.  Shri Rajaram Pal 
 12.  Shri Nama Nageswara Rao 
 13.  Shri S.D. Shariq 
 14.  Shri Dushyant Singh 
 15.  Shri K. Sugumar 
 16.  Shri Anurag Singh Thakur 
 17.  Shri Kabir Suman 
 18.  Shri K.C. Venugopal 
  SECRETARIAT  
Shri N.K.Singh, Joint Secretary  
Shri Jagdish Kumar, Director  
Shri Swarabji B., Joint Director 
 * * * 
2.  At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the member s of the Committee. Thereafter, the Committee took up the 
draft 152 
nd  and 153 rd  Reports on the Action Taken by the Government on i ts recommendations/observations contained 
in 140 th  Report on 'Promotion of Tourism in Jammu and Kashm ir' and 149 th  Report on ‘Development of Tourism 
Infrastructure and Amenities for the Commonwealth G ames 2010, respectively, for consideration and adop tion. The 
Committee adopted both the reports with minor additions/ modifications. 
3.   The Committee authorized its Chairman to nomin ate the Members to present the reports to the Parliament during 
the ensuing Budget Session. 

4.   While considering the Reports, the Committee n oted the inordinate delay in preparing the Action-T aken Report 
on the 149 th  Report. The Committee was informed that this delay  was due to late submission of action taken notes b y 
the Ministry of Culture. The Chairman informed the Committee that after a number of reminders, the Min istry 
submitted the ATNs on the 4 th  February, 2010, nearly one year after the presentation of Report to the Parliament. 
5.  While examining the action taken replies of the  Ministry of Tourism, the Committee noticed that to  a large 
number of its recommendations, the Ministry had rep lied that it has forwarded the recommendations to t he concerned 
agencies. The Committee was of the view that the Mi nistry of Tourism should have obtained the response s of those 
agencies and provided to it for taking a view. By n ot doing so, the Ministry has not taken the Committ ee’s 
recommendations as seriously as they deserved. It e xpressed its concern about inordinate delay in subm itting action 
taken replies and also about not giving proper/comp lete replies. The Committee directed the Secretaria t to convey its 
concern to the Ministries of Culture and Tourism. 
6. * * * 
7. * * * 
8. * * * 
9. * * * 
10. * * * 
11. * * * 
12. * * * 
13. * * * 
14.  A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.  
15.  The meeting adjourned at 5.20 
P.M. 
 
 
 
 
 