Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
RAJYA SABHA
ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE
REPORT NO.
274
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on December )9 2019
th
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on )9 2019
th
December
TWO HUNDRED SEVENTY FOURTH REPORT
December, 2019/Agrahayana, 1941 (Saka)
Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations
of the Committee contained in its Two Hundred and Seventy First
Report on ‘Fellowships, Scholarships, Grants, Pensions and
Schemes administered by the Ministry of Culture’

Website : http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail : rsc-tt@sansad.nic.in

26
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE
TWO HUNDRED SEVENTY FOURTH REPORT
Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations
of the Committee contained in its Two Hundred and Seventy First
Report on ‘Fellowships, Scholarships, Grants, Pensions and
Schemes administered by the Ministry of Culture’
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 9th December , 2019)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 9th December, 2019)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
December, 2019/Agrahayana, 1941 (Saka)
Hindi version of this publication is also available


CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ....................................................................................... (i)-(ii)
2. I NTRODUCTION ...................................................................................................................... (iii)
3. A CRONYMS ............................................................................................................................ (iv )
4. R EPORT ............................................................................................................................... .. 1-17
Chapter-I Recommendations/Observations which have been Accepted by
the Ministry .................................................................................................... 2-5
Chapter-II Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not
Desire to Pursue in view of the replies of the Ministry ......................... 6-8
Chapter-III Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of
the Ministry have not been accepted by the Committee .......................... 9-15
Chapter-IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of which the final
replies of the Ministry are still awaited ...................................................... 16-17
5. R ECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS — A T A G LANCE .......................................................... 18-20
6. M INUTES ............................................................................................................................... 21-24

(i)
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(2019-20)
(Constituted on 13th September, 2019)
1. Shri T.G . Venkatesh   —  Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Prasanna Acharya
3. Shri Raj Babbar
4. Shri Sambhaji Chhatrapati
5. Dr. Sonal Mansingh
6. Shri Derek O’Brien
7. Kumari Selja
8. Shri Tiruchi Siva
9. Shri Dharmapuri Srinivas
10. Shri Vinay Dinu Tendulkar
LOK SABHA
11.  Shrimati Sumalatha Ambareesh
12.  Shri Anto Antony
13.  Shrimati Veena Devi
14.  Shri Tapir Gao
15.  Shri Rahul Kaswan
16.  Shri Saumitra Khan
17.  Ms. Goddeti Madhavi
18.  Shri Ramesh Chandra Majhi
19.  Shri Sunil Baburao Mendhe
20.  Shri K. Muraleedharan
21.  Shri S.S. Palanimanickam
22.  Shri Chhedi Paswan
23.  Shri Kamlesh Paswan
24.  Shri Tirath Singh Rawat
25.  Shrimati Mala Roy
26.  Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy
27.  Shri Rajbahadur Singh
28.  Shri Dushyant Singh
29.   Shri Ramdas Chandrabhanji Tadas
30.  Shri Krupal Balaji Tumane
31.  Shri Dinesh Chandra Yadav

(ii)
SECRETARIAT
Shri J. Sundriyal, Joint Secretary
Shri P. Narayanan, Director
Shri Dinesh Singh, Additional Director
Ms. Catherine John L., Under Secretary
Shri K.V. Ramana Rao, Committee Officer
Shri Gaurav Singh Gahlain, Assistant Committee Officer

INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman, Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport, Tourism and
Culture, having been authorized by the Committee to present on its behalf, do hereby present this Two
Hundred and Seventy Fourth Report on Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/
Observations of the Committee contained in its Two Hundred and Seventy First Report on ‘Fellowships,
Scholarships, Grants, Pensions and Schemes administered by the Ministry of Culture’.
2. The Two Hundred and Seventy First Report  of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee
on Transport, Tourism and Culture was presented on the 21
st December, 2018 to the Parliament.
3. The Action Taken Replies on the recommendations of the Committee contained in its Two Hundred
and Seventy First Report were received from the Ministry of Culture on 15 th October, 2019.
4. The Committee considered and adopted the Report in its meeting held on the 5 th December, 2019.
T.G . VENKA TESH
NEW D ELHI; Chairman,
5 December , 2019 Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Agrahayana 14, 1941 (Saka) Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture,
Rajya Sabha.
(iii)

ACRONYMS
CCRT : Centre for Cultural Resources and Training
CGHS : Central Government Health Scheme
CGST : Central Goods and Services Tax
CPGRAMS : Centralized Public Grievance Redress and Monitoring System
EC : Expert Committee
ESI : Employees State Insurance
FY : Financial Year
ICH : Intangible Cultural Heritage
IGST : Integrated Goods and Services Tax
NEFT : National Electronic Funds Transfer
NIC : National Informatics Centre
NSD : National School of Drama
NZCC : North Zone Cultural Centre
PFMS : Public Financial Management System
RSC : Regional Science Centre
RTGS : Real-Time Gross Settlement
SFC : Standing Finance Committee
SPOCS : Scheme for Promotion of Culture of Science
SRSC : Sub Regional Science Centre
SY A : Scholarships to Young Artistes
(iv)

1
REPORT
The Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport, Tourism and
Culture deals with the Action Taken by the Ministry of Culture on the Recommendations/Observations as
contained in its Two Hundred and Seventy First Report on ‘Fellowships, Scholarships, Grants, Pensions
and Schemes administered by the Ministry of Culture’ which was presented to both the Houses of Parliament
on 21
st December, 2018.
2. The Action Taken Replies were received from the Ministry on 15 th October, 2019 in respect of all the
Recommendations/Observations contained in the 271st Report. The replies have been categorized as follows:—
Chapter I: Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the Ministry:
Paragraph Nos.:   22, 32, 36, 38, 39, 45, 50, 51.
TOTAL:   8
Chapter II: Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue in view of the
replies of the Ministry:
Paragraph Nos.:   8, 18, 30, 42, 48, 49, 56.
TOTAL:   7
Chapter III: Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Ministry have not been
accepted by the Committee:
Paragraph Nos.:   14, 15, 17, 21, 26, 27, 28, 29, 34, 46, 52, 53.
TOTAL:   12
Chapter IV: Recommendations/Observations in respect of which the final replies of the Ministry are still
awaited:
Paragraph Nos.:   9, 16, 54.
T
OTAL:   3
3. The Committee desires that final replies in respect of those Recommendations/Observations which
have been categorized as interim replies by the Committee should be furnished at the earliest.

CHAPTER-I
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE MINISTRY
TRANSPARENCY IN THE ALLOCATION OF FUNDS
Recommendation/Observation
1. The works of the artistes and organizations, wherever possible, should be uploaded on the website of
the Ministry of Culture. This will make the public aware of the cultural activities being performed by the
artistes / organizations and display the richness of our cultures. Also, digitizing the works would preserve
these for the future. (Para 22)
Reply of the Ministry
1.1 Media Cell of Ministry of Culture is entrusted with the task of uploading all such relevant material on
various social media handles like Twitter, Youtube, Instagram and Facebook.  Further, the relevant information
is made available to the public through ‘Sanskriti App’ managed by the Media Cell and the official website of
the Ministry managed by NIC.
Further Recommendation/Observation:
1.2 The Committee notes the reply.
PROPER UTILISATION OF FUNDS
Recommendation/Observation
2. The Committee feels that such a central database would also aid in ensuring proper utilization of
allocated funds and keep a check on frauds. In pursuance of the same, the Committee recommends that the
work on the central database should be expedited and that it should include information on the beneficiaries
of all Schemes along with the records of their work. A system should then be put in place which makes use
of this data and checks for any redundancies to ensure that an artiste/organization does not get benefits
under multiple Schemes. Rules should be framed to restrict the award of Grants to a beneficiary, say, only
under one Scheme at a time, or only a certain number of times in their lifetime. This will ensure that the
reach of the funds is maximized over time. (Para 32)
Reply of the Ministry
2.1 Noted for further action.
Further Recommendation/Observation:
2.2 The Committee may be apprised of the progress being made in this regard.
NEED FOR MORE BENEFICIARIES OF FELLOWSHIPS AND SCHEMES
Recommendation/Observation
3. The Committee strongly feels that these figures are not satisfactory keeping in mind the vast and
varied artistic community in our country. Many deserving artistes are not getting the benefits of these
schemes. Therefore, the Committee recommends that effective measures may be taken by the Ministry of
2

3
Culture to increase the number of artistes and organizations supported by its Schemes. The Ministry should
explore the option of lowering the eligibility criteria for Schemes that are not garnering enough response
from the artistes so that besides seasoned artistes, upcoming artistes also get adequate support from the
Ministry. (Para 36)
Reply of the Ministry
3.1 Noted for further action. Time to time, spaces on Media regarding the benefits to the old artists
through the Scheme of Artistes Pension and Medical Aid to Artistes will be considered, specially in local
media as maximum numbers of artistes applying for the Scheme are from rural and interior areas. The
information regarding artistes pension is spreading through the existing beneficiaries of respective States
also.
3.2 As regards the schemes of Award of Senior / Junior Fellowships to Outstanding Artistes in the Field of
Culture and Award of Scholarships to Young Artistes in Different Cultural Fields, it is informed that the
response in both the schemes is satisfactory and the number of applications received for both the schemes
is almost 8 to 10 times of the total number of Fellowships / Scholarships granted under the scheme.
Further Recommendation/Observation:
3.3 The Committee notes the reply.
ANNUAL REVIEW OF PRESENT SCHEMES
Recommendation/Observation
4. The Committee is of the considered view that annual review of the Schemes can help arrive at conclusions
regarding the possible future course of action for the Schemes. This becomes all the more important given
the fact that the Ministry of Culture is short on funds and therefore, only Schemes having the desired impact
at ground level should be continued.    (Para 38)
Reply of the Ministry
4.1 A Third-Party review of the schemes concerning this Ministry was carried out while considering the
continuation of these schemes till FY 2019-20.  These schemes are due for further review for their continuation
beyond March 2020.  The recommendation of the committee shall be duly kept in mind while conducting
the review exercise.
Further Recommendation/Observation:
4.2 The Committee appreciates the periodic reviews of the Schemes being conducted by the Ministry
of Culture as the same will lead to meaningful insights about the schemes presently in operation.
The Committee may be informed of the outcome of the review of the Schemes carried out / planned
to be carried out.
Recommendation/Observation
5. The Committee recommends that the Ministry should conduct annual review of the performance and
achievements of its Schemes. The feedback received on the existing Schemes should be analyzed to update/
modify the Schemes at regular intervals to maximize their impact and to explore the possibility of the

4
initiation of new Schemes which could help the Ministry to reach out to more deserving artistes and
organizations. The outcome of such review should be made public so as to allow constructive criticism and
collect feedback thereon which can then be reflected in streamlining the Schemes further. (Para 39)
Reply of the Ministry
5.1 Noted for further action. A mechanism for analyzing the on-ground performance of various schemes
is already in existence so as to judge the outcome of these schemes. The same is ensured through random
physical inspection carried out through the officials of the Ministry and its various attached/subordinate/
autonomous offices and organizations.
Further Recommendation/Observation:
5.2 The Committee notes the reply.
COMPLAINT REDRESSAL MECHANISM REGARDING GRANTS AND FELLOWSHIPS
Recommendation/Observation
6. The Committee recommends that the details on the procedure to be followed in order to register a
complaint regarding the Schemes of the Ministry should be available and prominently visible on the Schemes
section of the website of the Ministry. Name, designation and contact details of the officer in charge of
handling such complaints should also be made available. The progress of the action taken to address such
complaints should also be uploaded on the website. Wherever possible, the list of complaints received should
be available publicly in order to ensure transparency.    (Para 45)
Reply of the Ministry
6.1 Noted for further action.  However, there exists a specific portal (CPGRAMS) developed by the
Government for redressal of individual grievances relating to any subject concerning this Ministry including
schemes.
6.2 All complaints are attended on priority basis as and when received. The immediate replies/clarifications
are sent by e-mail, speed post to the complainant.
Further Recommendation/Observation:
6.3 The Committee notes the reply.
SCHEME SPECIFIC RECOMMENDATIONS
Recommendation/Observation
7. The Committee recommends that the eligibility criteria for availing the Scheme for Pension and
Medical Aid to Artistes should be revised periodically, keeping in mind the rising cost of living. Similarly,
the amount paid to the artistes also be revised periodically. (Para 50)
Reply of the Ministry
7.1 Eligibility criteria for availing the pension to artists are reviewed and revised periodically. The latest
guidelines in this regard have been revised in 2017-18. The reply of para 49 is also applicable for this specific
recommendation.

5
Further Recommendation/Observation:
7.2 The Committee notes the reply.
Recommendation/Observation
8. The Committee recommends that the artistes/fellows eligible for the medical aid should be covered
under some medical insurance Scheme with broad coverage like CGHS/ESI.  (Para 51)
Reply of the Ministry
8.1 The matter is related to policy and will be taken into consideration at the time of reviewing the scheme
in future.
Further Recommendation/Observation:
8.2 The Committee notes the reply.

CHAPTER-II
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS WHICH THE
COMMITTEE DOES NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE
REPLIES OF THE MINISTRY
SAFEGUARDS IN THE SELECTION PROCESS OF BENEFICIARIES OF V ARIOUS SCHEMES
Recommendation/Observation
1. The Committee recommends that in order to ensure that the funds are being utilized for the intended
activities, the progress of activities performed by the beneficiaries should be monitored closely and at
frequent intervals. Digital records of the activities performed by the beneficiaries may be kept wherever
possible, in the form of photographs, video etc. (Para 8)
Reply of the Ministry
1.1 The monitoring mechanism in respect of all the schemes being handled in this Ministry is provided in
the Scheme guidelines.  The individuals/organizations applying under the schemes are, inter-alia, required
to provide proofs of activities being performed by them in their area of expertise which is examined by the
Expert Committee constituted for selecting beneficiaries.  Similarly, these individuals/organizations are required
to provide Utilization certificate, photographs, videos, upload their activities on Youtube etc. for release of
subsequent grants by the Ministry of Culture.
Further Recommendation/Observation:
1.2 The Committee notes the reply and hopes that the required proof of activities performed by
the beneficiaries uploaded on Youtube etc., are being thoroughly verified for their authenticity. The
Committee desires that the Ministry may assess the efficacy of the existing monitoring mechanism
and take corrective action from time to time based on the findings.
SENSITIZING THE STATE GOVERNMENTS TO ENCOURAGE MORE APPLICATIONS FOR THE
SCHEMES
Recommendation/Observation
2. The Committee recommends that the importance of preserving and celebrating our different cultures
should be communicated to the State Governments. The Ministry of Culture may drive home to the State
Governments, the positive impact of the richness of a culture on the tourism prospects of a State. A detailed
plan should be evolved in order to encourage better participation of the State Governments. Incentivizing
the State Governments having good participation by highlighting the work of the artistes from such states
on the Ministry’s website, should be considered and implemented suitably. (Para 18)
Reply of the Ministry
2.1 Noted for further action. However, so as to protect, preserve and promote various forms of art and
cultural heritage in the country, Government has set up 07 Zonal Cultural Centres (ZCCs) with headquarters
at Patiala, Allahabad, Nagpur, Udaipur, Kolkata, Dimapur and Thanjavur. All the States of the country are the
participating States of 01 or more of these ZCCs, which organize various cultural activities and programmes
throughout the country with participation of artistes from all over the country.
6

7
Further Recommendation/Observation:
2.2 The Committee notes the reply.
PROPER UTILISATION OF FUNDS
Recommendation/Observation
3. The Committee is of the view that a practical and effective monitoring mechanism lies at the core of
ensuring the proper utilization of funds for any Scheme. Such a mechanism should be framed with inputs
from the artistes and beneficiaries so as to keep a check on fraudulent claims, while minimizing the trouble
caused to the beneficiaries in complying with the monitoring mechanism. (Para 30)
Reply of the Ministry
3.1 The beneficiary organizations are required to submit Utilization Certificate, Newspaper cuttings, proof
of conduct of function etc. before further release of grant to them.
Further Recommendation/Observation:
3.2 The Committee notes the reply.
EASE OF PROCESS OF APPLICATION
Recommendation/Observation
4. The Committee strongly feels that no eligible artist should be left out of availing financial assistance
because of their lack of understanding of the intricacies involved in the process. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that necessary assistance should be readily available to artistes and organizations. Contact
details of officials to be contacted in case of queries should be provided in the Schemes section of the
website of the Ministry and in the advertisements published for creating awareness about the Schemes. The
Committee desires that the Ministry should ensure that no application is rejected for trivial reasons and that
rejected applications should provide specific reasons for the rejection, so that deserving candidates can re-
apply if they fulfil the criteria, but were left out, because of ignorance of the relevant rule. (Para 42)
Reply of the Ministry
4.1 It has been the constant endeavor of this Ministry to ensure that no deserving candidate is denied an
opportunity for trivial reasons. For this purpose, contact numbers of the concerned officials of this Ministry
are made available on the official website and at the time of issuance of advertisement. All necessary support
and guidance is provided to the applicants, online as well as offline.
Further Recommendation/Observation:
4.2 The Committee notes the reply.
TAKING SUO MOTO COGNIZANCE IN EXTRAORDINARY CASES
Recommendation/Observation
5. The Committee feels that this is not an isolated case since such news keep appearing in the media from
time-to-time. This points to the poor living conditions faced by a vast section of the artistes community in

8
our country once they reach old age and to the fact that the Ministry’s pension scheme is not reaching the
intended recipients. (Para 48)
Reply of the Ministry
5.1 Time to time, spaces on Media regarding the benefits to the old artists through the Scheme of Artistes
Pension and Medical Aid to Artistes may be considered specially on local media as maximum numbers of
artistes applying for the Scheme are from rural and interior areas. The information regarding artistes pension
are spreading through the existing beneficiaries of respective States also.
Further Recommendation/Observation:
5.2 The Committee notes the reply.
Recommendation/Observation
6. The Committee recommends that the Ministry should be proactive and suo motu extend its Artistes
Pension Scheme whenever a case comes to the light, where an artist with significant contribution to our
cultural heritage is found to be living in penury. The reasons for which such deserving artistes got left out
in the first place should be looked into by the Ministry and the Artistes pension Scheme should be updated
accordingly to ensure a dignified life to all deserving artistes. If need be, the Ministry should allocate
more funds to this Scheme since financial assistance is direly needed by artistes in the later stage of their
life. (Para 49)
Reply of the Ministry
6.1 The guidelines and terms and conditions of the Artistes Pension Scheme are being reviewed time to
time to ensure dignified life to all deserving artistes. The updated Scheme guidelines are already available in
our website along with other relevant information for getting artistes pension. The matter of allocation of
more funds to this scheme will be decided as and when required.
Further Recommendation/Observation:
6.2 The Committee notes the reply.
GENERAL RECOMMENDATION
Recommendation/Observation
7. In this regard, the Committee would like to point out the need to have Zonal Cultural Centres in
Punjab and Haryana and the need to give more attention to the Central Schemes of financial assistance to
artistes. The Committee suggests that theatre culture may be developed in the country so as to provide a
platform for recognition of small artistes and artisans. (Para 56)
Reply of the Ministry
7.1 The Mandate of Zonal Cultural Centres (ZCCs) is to promote and preserve folk & tribal art of the
country. North Zone Cultural Centre (NZCC), established by the Government of India in Patiala is already
catering to the needs of the artistes of the States of Punjab and Haryana. Further, it may also be mentioned
that National School of Drama (NSD), an autonomous body under the Ministry of Culture is actively working
in the field of development and preservation of culture.
Further Recommendation/Observation:
7.2 The Committee notes the reply.

CHAPTER-III
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
REPLIES OF THE MINISTRY HA VE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED
BY THE COMMITTEE
EQUITABLE REPRESENTATION OF CULTURES FROM ALL STATES IN V ARIOUS SCHEMES OF
THE MINISTRY
Recommendation/Observation
1. The Committee notes that effective steps must be taken in order to ensure uniform representation of the
whole country. India is an amalgamation of many distinct cultures and the allocation of the majority of the
Grants of the Ministry to artistes and organisations of only a few States goes against the spirit of such
Schemes wherein funds are allocated in the first place. The culture of each State is equally important and
this should reflect in the efforts that must be put in to ensure their conservation. (Para 14)
Reply of the Ministry
1.1 The Ministry has no state specific scheme, however, schemes being implemented in the Ministry are
open to citizens from all the States of the country. It may also be stated that the response to the schemes is
over whelming from all the states.  All efforts are made and will continue to be made in order to accord wide
publicity to the schemes in all the States to ensure equal and further better representation.
Further Recommendation/Observation:
1.2 The Committee reiterates its recommendation that some mechanism should be there in place
to ensure a certain minimum representation of artists and organisations from all States in the
schemes of the Ministry. An upper limit for representation from an individual State may also be set
after analyzing the statistics of representation from an individual in the various schemes, while
factoring in the population and size of the States in deciding upon such limit.
Recommendation/Observation
2. The Committee recommends that the Ministry of Culture should ensure equitable allocation of funds
to States for Grants, Fellowships, Pensions and Schemes. In case of lack of adequate representation of
artistes / organizations from a State in a particular year, the reasons behind the lack of representation should
be looked into and necessary remedial action may be taken without delay. (Para 15)
Reply of the Ministry
2.1 The schemes being handled in the Ministry are Central Sector Schemes and no grant is therefore,
directly provided to the States.
Further Recommendation/Observation:
2.2 India has a vast pool of artistes and their organizations. The Committee, in para 15 of its 271
st
Report, sought selection of artistes under the Scheme for Grants, Fellowships and Pensions to
ensure that the interests of artistes from all the States are duly protected and there is no room for
a few States-centric selection of artistes and in that way, vast cultural ethos of the country can be
propagated and preserved effectively. The Committee would like to reiterate its recommendation
made in this regard.
9

10
SENSITIZING THE STATE GOVERNMENTS TO ENCOURAGE MORE APPLICATIONS FOR THE
SCHEMES
Recommendation/Observation
3. The Committee could understand that the biggest reason for the lack of representation of the vast
majority of States in the various Schemes of the Ministry is the inaction and indifference shown by the State
Governments. The Committee strongly feels that deserving artistes and beneficiaries should not suffer for
no fault of theirs. The Committee, therefore, urges the Ministry of Culture to impress upon the State Governments
to show more interest in getting the artistes their due benefits. The Committee is working towards facilitating
greater cooperation between the Ministry of Culture and State Governments. Improvement in Centre-State
and intra-State dialogue will ensure the performance of State Governments through shared learnings and
collaborations for overcoming challenges. (Para 17)
Reply of the Ministry
3.1 The schemes being handled in this Ministry are Central Sector Schemes and no grant is, therefore,
provided directly to the States,
Further Recommendation/Observation:
3.2 The Committee is aware that the Culture Departments of State Governments accord priorities
to other sectors, as a result of which various dimensions of Arts and Culture get totally neglected.
The Committee, therefore, recommends that to help more and more artistes in the fields of Music,
Drama, Dance, etc., the Ministry should devise a robust Centrally Sponsored Scheme which would
give a little flexibility to the States in terms of extending financial assistance to deserving artistes.
The Committee feels that the Scheme may be executed through the State machinery.
TRANSPARENCY IN THE ALLOCATION OF FUNDS
Recommendation/Observation
4. The Committee, therefore, recommends that there should be a section of the website specially meant
for showing information related to beneficiaries viz., the amount of grant received, previous works of the
beneficiary, status of monitoring of the utilization of the grant etc. The information thus available should
be in an easy to decipher format and searchable, so as to allow better public scrutiny. The cases where a
higher amount is given as grants under exceptional circumstances should also be available on the website,
along with justification for awarding the higher amount to the beneficiary. Information on State-wise
representation in terms of number of artistes should also be available on the website, so that lethargy on the
part of a lot of State Governments gets pointed out.  This would act as a call to action for the State
Governments to reach out to their artistes and ensure their adequate representation. (Para 21)
Reply of the Ministry
4.1 The minutes of the meeting of various Expert Committees held to select beneficiaries are regularly
uploaded on the website of the Ministry of Culture to bring transparency in implementation of schemes.
Further, the status of pending Utilisation certificates is regularly uploaded so as to enable grantees to submit
the required documents for processing of release of grants. Similarly, the sanction orders regarding release
of grant to the beneficiaries are being regularly uploaded on the website of Ministry of Culture.

11
Further Recommendation/Observation:
4.2 The Committee appreciates the steps taken by the Ministry to bring transparency in the
process of awarding of grants and schemes. The Committee would like to know the status of
information uploaded in terms of State-wise representation  in the various schemes of the Ministry
of Culture on its website, so that it acts as an impetus to the States showing lack of interest in the
schemes of the Ministry.
PROPER UTILISATION OF FUNDS
Recommendation/Observation
5. The statement showing the amount allocated and expenditure incurred under various schemes of the
Ministry of Culture shows that the total funds allocated to various schemes of the Ministry has increased
from 
` 236.07 crores in Financial Year (FY) 2016-17 to ` 318.73 crores in FY 2018-19, which is an increase
of about 35%. Yet, the amount allocated to the “Scheme for Safeguarding the Intangible Cultural Heritage
and Diverse Cultural Traditions of India” remains stagnant at ` 3.50 crores and has not seen a commensurate
increase. Moreover , even out of the paltry ` 3.50 crores allocated to this Scheme, the Ministry was able to
spend only ` 0.65 crores in the FY 2016-17. This points to a huge gap between the on-paper plans of the
Ministry for this Scheme and its execution thereof. In this regard, the Committee desires that the Ministry of
Culture should analyze the reasons for under utilization of funds for this scheme. The Committee is of the
view that the damage dealt to intangible Cultural heritage is irreparable and hence, the Ministry should
ensure proper utilization of funds for the implementation of this scheme. (Para 26 & 27)
Reply of the Ministry
5.1 The Scheme for Safeguarding the Intangible Cultural Heritage and Diverse Cultural Traditions of India
was formulated in the year 2013 to support and strengthen the efforts of various stakeholders vis-à-vis
wider recognition and acceptance, dissemination, preservation and promotion of the rich, diverse and vast
Intangible Cultural Heritage of India.
5.2 Under the scheme, there is an Expert Committee comprising of eminent ICH experts, formed to
scrutinize/ screen the proposals/ applications. However, the tenure of the Expert Committee was constituted
for a tenure of two years expired in 2016 and could not be reconstituted for a long time which led to the
under utilisation of funds allocated for the same.
5.3 However, now the Expert Committee has been reconstituted and it is expected that the scheme would
now be implemented more smoothly.
Further Recommendation/Observation:
5.4 The Committee is at a loss to understand as to why there was such a long delay in reconstituting
the Expert Committee (EC) when an allocation of ````` 3.50 crores was made for the Financial Year
2017-18. It is really intriguing as to how the EC responsible for an important scheme like this could
be allowed to be non-functional for such a long period. The Committee feels that since the tenure of
the EC is known beforehand, the requisite actions to reconstitute the EC should have been set in
motion well before the tenure of the EC expired in 2016. The Committee may be apprised of the
reasons for the undue delay in reconstitution of the Expert Committee. The Committee may also

12
be updated on the financial performance under the head ‘Scheme for Safeguarding the Intangible
Cultural Heritage and Diverse Cultural Traditions of India’ in FY 2019-20.
Recommendation/Observation
6. The Committee observes a pattern of underutilisation of funds for the “Scheme of Financial Assistance
for Creation of Cultural Infrastructure” in Financial Years 2016-17 and 2017-18. The Committee recommends
that Ministry should look into the matter and come up with ways and means to properly utilize the allocated
funds for this Scheme. (Para 28)
Reply of the Ministry
6.1 The components of the scheme for Financial Assistance for Creation of Cultural Infrastructure are
Building Grant and Tagore Cultural Complexes. As and when proposal complete in all aspects comes from
different states of India, the proposal was examined in accordance with the guidelines and eligible proposals
referred to the expert committee for consideration. The Ministry is utilizing allocated funds for the respective
schemes in a transparent way.
Further Recommendation/Observation:
6.2 The Committee is constrained to note that the reply of the Ministry is vague and devoid of any
relevant facts. While disapproving the Ministry’s half-hearted approach in implementing the Scheme
for Financial Assistance for Creation of Cultural Infrastructure in FY 2016-17 and 2017-18, the
Committee observes that had the Ministry effectively taken up the matter with the State
Governments for timely finalization of their proposals, funds allocated under this head would not
have remained unutilized. Non-drawal of funds not only reflects poorly on the functioning of the
Ministry but also impacts on creation of Cultural Infrastructure in the country. The Committee
desires to be kept updated on the financial performance under the above head.
Recommendation/Observation
7. The Committee notes that the “Scheme for Promotion of Culture of Science” in Financial Year 2017-
18 could only utilize 
` 32.60 crores out of the ` 39.00 crores that were allocated to the Ministry. Given the
gradual decline of interest among the students of our country in Science and Technology and the sheer
contribution of scientific research in the overall development of the Country, the Scheme is crucial for
igniting the interest of our young generation and for development of scientific temper and curiosity in their
minds. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry should look into the reasons for underutilisation
of funds for this Scheme during last year and that utmost care must be taken for proper utilization of the
available funds for this Scheme in future. (Para 29)
Reply of the Ministry
7.1 During the current financial year 2019-20, proposals are lined up for release of funds by Ministry of
Culture for the projects of Sub Regional Science Centre (SRSC), Palampur, Himachal Pradesh; Regional
Science Centre (RSC), Kottayam, Kerala; SRSC, Mayabunder, Andaman; and SRSC, Kokrajhar, Assam.
The said four projects have been approved to be taken up by Ministry of Culture under Scheme for Promotion
of Culture of Science (SPOCS) during the SFC meeting held on 22.09.2017. Funds are also to be released
by the Ministry during 2019-20 for the projects of setting up of Science Centres (Category-II) at Ambala,
Haryana and Ujjain, Madhya Pradesh and upgradation Regional Science Centre, Dehradun to a Science City.

13
The said three projects were approved in-principle during 2018-19 to be taken up by Ministry of Culture
under Scheme for Promotion of Culture of Science (SPOCS).
7.2 In addition to the above, funds are likely to be released by Ministry of Culture for the upgradation of
Science City, Kolkata and setting up of SRSC, Gaya, Bihar under SPOCS. Ministry is trying to do the best
for proper utilisation of the available funds for Scheme for Promotion of Culture of Science.
Further Recommendation/Observation:
7.3 The Committee, in para 29 of its 271
st Report, had made a specific recommendation to the
Ministry to find out the reasons for underutilisation of funds allocated under the “Scheme for
Promotion of Culture of Science” for the Financial Year (FY) 2017-18 and take corrective measures
accordingly for optimal utilisation of funds . Though the Ministry has outlined a roadmap for proper
utilisation of funds allocated for the FY 2019-20, it has not indicated the reasons for under-utilisation
of funds allocated for the FY 2017-18. The Committee, therefore, desires to be apprised of the
reasons for under-utilization of funds under the above head and also recommends that in future,
the Ministry should project its budgetary requirements keeping in view the trend of expenditure
and actual requirement so that they prove realistic.
Recommendation/Observation
8. The Committee notes that the involvement of other employees in the scam should be looked into since
a scam of this scale could possibly involve the connivance of several employees and officers. The occurrence
of such a scam indicates loopholes in the supervisory mechanism for funds distribution. The Committee
recommends revamping of the entire fund distribution in view of the lessons learnt from the scam. The
Committee recommends that a training session may be held for the employees of the CCRT in view of the
fraud detected in the system. Software solutions may be developed to help CCRT to prevent such frauds in
future. Proactive steps may be taken by the Ministry to ensure that no scam occurs in the future. A system to
monitor and audit the financial transactions should be put into place so as to catch any leakages or scams
at an early stage. (Para 34)
Reply of the Ministry
8.1 CCRT is implementing following schemes for the Cultural integration of Children as well as youth in
the age group of 10 to 14 years and 18 to 25 years both respectively, the details of which are as follows:-
8.1.1  Cultural Talent Search Scholarship Scheme :
The Cultural Talent Search Scholarship Scheme aims at providing facilities to selected meritorious
young children to develop their talents in various performing, visual & literary art fields. Children
in the age group of 10 to 14 years studying either in recognized schools or belonging to families
practicing traditional arts forms are selected for the scholarships. The scholarship awarded
under the Scheme is initially for two years and is renewable after every two years till the
completion of the first University degree stage of education or upto the age of 20 years, whichever
is earlier subject to the awardee maintaining satisfactory progress.
8.1.2  Scheme of “Award of Scholarships to Young Artistes (SYA) in different Cultural fields”:
The Scheme for “Award of Scholarships to Young Artistes (SYA) in different Cultural fields”
have also been transferred to CCRT partially under which 400 scholarships are provided in the

14
age group of 18 to 25 years in the field of Indian Classical Music, Classical Dances, Light
Classical Music, Theatre, Visual Arts and Folk/ Traditional and Indigenous Arts. The panel
related to various arts forms are constituted by the Ministry of Culture, Govt. of India.
8.1.3  Scheme for the “Award of Junior and Senior Fellowship” in the field of Culture :
The Ministry of Culture, Govt. of India transferred its scheme titled “The Scheme for the Award
of Fellowship to Outstanding Persons in the Field of Culture” in the year 2014 to CCRT. The
focus of this scheme is on “in- depth study/research” in various facets of culture. These include
new emerging areas of Cultural Studies. The broad area of research are mainly on the field of
Classical Music, Light Classical Music, Dance and Dance Music, Folk/Traditional and indigenous
Art, Literature, New Areas, Theatre and Visual Art.
8.2 Following actions are being taken to ensure that no scam occurs in the future:-
8.2.1 Transparency in the allocation of funds: Utmost efforts are made for allocation of funds as
funds are transferred through RTGS/NEFT/PFMS.
8.2.2 Proper utilization of funds: The funds are utilized with maximum transparency and reach to the
beneficiaries as transferred through RTGS/NEFT/PFMS. Proper and duly signed payment receipts
are received from Guru & Parents etc.
Further Recommendation/Observation:
8.3 The Committee notes the steps taken by the Ministry to ensure that such frauds do not take
place in future, but the Ministry has been found lacking in its efforts. The Committee reiterates
that software solutions must be developed to detect and curb the possibility of any such incidents
and the employees involved in the disbursement of the scheme funds should be well trained on it.
The Committee would like to know the actual process being followed to obtain duly signed payment
receipts from Guru, Parents etc. and steps taken to prevent scams which deprive the deserving
recipients of the fellowships and schemes.
TAKING SUO MOTO COGNIZANCE IN EXTRAORDINARY CASES
Recommendation/Observation
9. The Committee recommends that targeted campaigns should be run to reach old artistes since the
Pension Scheme of the Ministry can provide them the dignified life that they deserve. (Para 46)
Reply of the Ministry
9.1 The details of Artistes Pension Scheme is already available on the public portal at www.indiaculture.nic.in.
Proforma of application for the said scheme is also available online.
Further Recommendation/Observation:
9.2 The Committee notes that the Artistes Pension Scheme of the Ministry covers old artistes but
would like the Ministry to run targeted campaigns in print and electronic media to ensure awareness
amongst old artistes eligible for the Pension Scheme of the Ministry. Mere information about the
Pension Scheme on the Ministry’s website does not guarantee awareness among the intended Artistes
community.

15
SCHEME SPECIFIC RECOMMENDATIONS
Recommendation/Observation
10. The Committee notes that the newly introduced ‘Scheme of Financial Assistance under ‘Seva Bhoj
Yojna’ reimburses the Central Goods and Services Tax (CGST), Integrated Goods and Services Tax (IGST)
for only those religious institutions that serve food to at least 5000 people in a calendar month. While the
Committee appreciates the introduction of this new Scheme, the Committee fails to understand the reason for
this eligibility criterion since smaller religious institutions are more likely to be in need of this Scheme.
Moreover, ascertaining the number of people to whom food is served by a religious institution in a month is
difficult and could lead to religious institutions in actual need of the support being left out. The Committee,
thus, recommends that this eligibility criterion should be reconsidered by the Ministry. (Para 52)
Reply of the Ministry
10.1 Seva Bhoj Yojna is a newly introduced scheme which has been operationalized w.e.f. 01/08/2018. The
recommendations/observations of the Committee will be taken into account when the scheme is reviewed.
Further Recommendation/Observation:
10.2 The Committee would like to be informed of the time-frame by which the review of the above
Scheme will be undertaken as also the findings thereof.
Recommendation/Observation
11. The Committee notes that the guidelines for the ‘Scheme of Financial Assistance under Seva Bhoj
Yojna’ state that inspection would be carried out by Ministry officials or its authorized representatives every
year at least in 5% of the cases. The Committee feels that the proper utilization of funds is very important in
the implementation of all Schemes and this Scheme could be maliciously exploited for getting reimbursement
of taxes by commercial food outlets. Considering this fact, the Committee feels that the minimum inspection
limit of 5% of the cases seems very low and might not have a deterring effect on the organizations. The
Committee, therefore, recommends that the inspection should be carried out by the officials of the Ministry
in at least 10% of the cases. (Para 53)
Reply of the Ministry
11.1 Seva Bhoj Yojna is a newly introduced scheme which has been operationalized w.e.f. 01/08/2018. The
recommendations / observations of the Committee will be taken into account when the scheme is reviewed.
Further recommendation/observation:
11.2 The Committee reiterates its recommendation made in para 10.2 of this Report.

CHAPTER-IV
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
REPLY OF THE MINISTRY IS STILL AWAITED
SAFEGUARDS IN THE SELECTION PROCESS OF BENEFICIARIES OF V ARIOUS SCHEMES
Recommendation/Observation
1. The guidelines should prescribe such safeguards in a way that ensures that no hassle is caused to the
beneficiaries. The monitoring of the Schemes should be done by the Ministry in such a way that the beneficiaries
can submit the required information easily and assistance can be readily made available to them with regard
to complying with the guidelines. Effective measures should be taken to ensure that favoritism does not
affect the selection of the beneficiaries. (Para 9)
Reply of the Ministry
1.1 All efforts are made and will continue to be made so as to ensure that beneficiaries can submit the
required information in a hassle free manner and do not face any hardship in complying with the scheme
guidelines.  The Ministry takes adequate measures to ensure that the process of selection of grantees is free
from any manipulation and favoritism and is held in a transparent manner.
Further Recommendation/Observation:
1.2 The Committee would like to be apprised of the specific steps taken by the Ministry to ensure
a transparent process of selection of grants free from manipulations and favouritism.
EQUITABLE REPRESENTATION OF CULTURES FROM ALL STATES IN V ARIOUS SCHEMES OF
THE MINISTRY
Recommendation/Observation
2. The Committee recommends that a part of the funds should be allocated to spread awareness among
artistes about the Schemes they are eligible for. Cultural events of the Ministry should project and display
information about various Schemes of the Ministry to the people attending the events. Easy to grasp
advertisements should be published in newspapers in local languages, laying out the eligibility criteria for
the different Grants of the Scheme. The selection of artistes for grant of pension in each Scheme should be
free from any manipulation and favoritism and should be decided in a transparent manner as per the
procedure laid out for the Scheme. (Para 16)
Reply of the Ministry
2.1 The Ministry takes adequate measures to ensure that the process of selection of grantees is free from
any manipulation and favoritism and held in a transparent manner. All efforts are made and will continue to
be made in order to accord wide publicity to the Scheme grants.
Further Recommendation/Observation:
2.2 The Committee would like that specific measures be taken by the Ministry to make the
process transparent. It may also be shared in public domain to generate awareness about the grants
and schemes among the artistes community across the country.
16

17
SCHEME SPECIFIC RECOMMENDATIONS
Recommendation/Observation
3. The Committee recommends that whole-hearted efforts should be made by the Ministry to increase the
awareness about different Schemes of the Ministry in remote areas of the country, especially North-Eastern
areas, so that artistes from these areas may increase their representation under various Schemes. (Para 54)
Reply of the Ministry
3.1 All efforts are being made and will continue to be made to increase awareness of the scheme in remote
areas of the country especially the North-eastern areas so as to increase the representation of artistes from
these states in the schemes being operated by the Ministry of Culture.
Further Recommendation/Observation:
3.2 The Committee would like to know the specific steps being taken by the Ministry to increase
awareness about the different schemes of the Ministr y, in remote areas of the country.

RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS — AT A GLANCE
CHAPTER-I
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE MINISTRY
The Committee may be apprised of the progress being made in this regard. (Para 2.2)
The Committee appreciates the periodic reviews of the Schemes being conducted by the Ministry
of Culture as the same will lead to meaningful insights about the schemes presently in operation.
The Committee may be informed of the outcome of the review of the Schemes carried out / planned
to be carried out. (Para 4.2)
CHAPTER-II
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS WHICH THE
COMMITTEE DOES NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF
THE REPLIES OF THE MINISTRY
The Committee notes the reply and hopes that the required proof of activities performed by
the beneficiaries uploaded on Youtube etc., are being thoroughly verified for their authenticity. The
Committee desires that the Ministry may assess the efficacy of the existing monitoring mechanism
and take corrective action from time to time based on the findings. (Para 1.2)
CHAPTER-III
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
REPLIES OF THE MINISTRY HA VE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY
THE COMMITTEE
The Committee reiterates its recommendation that some mechanism should be there in place
to ensure a certain minimum representation of artists and organisations from all States in the
schemes of the Ministry. An upper limit for representation from an individual State may also be set
after analyzing the statistics of representation from an individual in the various schemes, while
factoring in the population and size of the States in deciding upon such limit. (Para 1.2)
India has a vast pool of artistes and their organisations. The Committee, in para 15 of its 271
st
Report, sought selection of artistes under the Scheme for Grants, Fellowships and Pensions to
ensure that the interests of artistes from all the States are duly protected and there is no room for
a few States-centric selection of artistes and in that way, vast cultural ethos of the country can be
propagated and preserved effectively. The Committee would like to reiterate its recommendation
made in this regard. (Para 2.2)
The Committee is aware that the Culture Departments of State Governments accord priorities
to other sectors, as a result of which various dimensions of Arts and Culture get totally neglected.
The Committee, therefore, recommends that to help more and more artistes in the fields of Music,
Drama, Dance, etc., the Ministry should devise a robust Centrally Sponsored Scheme which would
give a little flexibility to the States in terms of extending financial assistance to deserving artistes.
The Committee feels that the Scheme may be executed through the State machinery. (Para 3.2)
18

19
The Committee appreciates the steps taken by the Ministry to bring transparency in the
process of awarding of grants and schemes. The Committee would like to know the status of
information uploaded in terms of State-wise representation  in the various schemes of the Ministry
of Culture on its website, so that it acts as an impetus to the States showing lack of interest in the
schemes of the Ministry. (Para 4.2)
The Committee is at a loss to understand as to why there was such a long delay in reconstituting
the Expert Committee (EC) when an allocation of ````` 3.50 crores was made for the Financial Year
2017-18. It is really intriguing as to how the EC responsible for an important scheme like this could
be allowed to be non-functional for such a long period. The Committee feels that since the tenure of
the EC is known beforehand, the requisite actions to reconstitute the EC should have been set in
motion well before the tenure of the EC expired in 2016. The Committee may be apprised of the
reasons for the undue delay in reconstitution of the Expert Committee. The Committee may also be
updated on the financial performance under the head ‘Scheme for Safeguarding the Intangible
Cultural Heritage and Diverse Cultural Traditions of India’ in FY 2019-20. (Para 5.4)
The Committee is constrained to note that the reply of the Ministry is vague and devoid of any
relevant facts. While disapproving the Ministry’s half-hearted approach in implementing the Scheme
for Financial Assistance for Creation of Cultural Infrastructure in FY 2016-17 and 2017-18, the
Committee observes that had the Ministry effectively taken up the matter with the State
Governments for timely finalisation of their proposals, funds allocated under this head would not
have remained unutilised. Non-drawal of funds not only reflects poorly on the functioning of the
Ministry but also impacts on creation of Cultural Infrastructure in the country. The Committee
desires to be kept updated on the financial performance under the above head. (Para 6.2)
The Committee, in para 29 of its 271
st Report, had made a specific recommendation to the
Ministry to find out the reasons for underutilisation of funds allocated under the “Scheme for
Promotion of Culture of Science” for the Financial Year (FY) 2017-18 and take corrective measures
accordingly for optimal utilisation of funds . Though the Ministry has outlined a roadmap for proper
utilisation of funds allocated for the FY 2019-20, it has not indicated the reasons for under-utilisation
of funds allocated for the FY 2017-18. The Committee, therefore, desires to be apprised of the
reasons for under-utilization of funds under the above head and also recommends that in future,
the Ministry should project its budgetary requirements keeping in view the trend of expenditure
and actual requirement so that they prove realistic. (Para 7.3)
The Committee notes the steps taken by the Ministry to ensure that such frauds do not take
place in future, but the Ministry has been found lacking in its efforts. The Committee reiterates
that software solutions must be developed to detect and curb the possibility of any such incidents
and the employees involved in the disbursement of the scheme funds should be well trained on it.
The Committee would like to know the actual process being followed to obtain duly signed payment
receipts from Guru, Parents etc. and steps taken to prevent scams which deprive the deserving
recipients of the fellowships and schemes. (Para 8.3)
The Committee notes that the Artistes Pension Scheme of the Ministry covers old artistes but
would like the Ministry to run targeted campaigns in print and electronic media to ensure awareness
amongst old artistes eligible for the Pension Scheme of the Ministry. Mere information about the

20
Pension Scheme on the Ministry’s website does not guarantee awareness among the intended Artistes
community. (Para 9.2)
The Committee would like to be informed of the time-frame by which the review of the above
Scheme will be undertaken as also the findings thereof. (Para 10.2)
The Committee reiterates its recommendation made in para 10.2 of this Report. (Para 11.2)
CHAPTER-IV
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
REPLY OF THE MINISTRY IS STILL AWAITED
The Committee would like to be apprised of the specific steps taken by the Ministry to ensure
a transparent process of selection of grants free from manipulations and favouritism. (Para 1.2)
The Committee would like that specific measures be taken by the Ministry to make the
process transparent. It may also be shared in public domain to generate awareness about the grants
and schemes among the artistes community across the country. (Para 2.2)
The Committee would like to know the specific steps being taken by the Ministry to increase
awareness about the different schemes of the Ministry, in remote areas of the country. (Para 3.2)

MINUTES

23
IV
FOURTH MEETING
The Committee met at 3:00 P.M. on Thursday , the 5 th December, 2019 in Room Number 67, First
Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri T.G. V enkatesh — Chairman
RAJYA  SABHA
2. Shri Sambhaji Chhatrapati
3. Dr. Sonal Mansingh
4. Shri Derek O’Brien
5. Kumari Selja
6. Shri Tiruchi Siva
7. Shri Vinay Dinu Tendulkar
LOK SABHA
8. Shrimati Veena Devi
9. Shri Rahul Kaswan
10. Shri  Saumitra Khan
11. Smt Ramesh Chandra Majhi
12. Shri Sunil Baburao Mendhe
13. Shri K. Muraleedharan
14. Shri S.S. Palanimanickam
15. Shri Kamlesh Paswan
16. Shri Tirath Singh Rawat
17. Shrimati Mala Roy
18. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy
19. Shri Rajbahadur Singh
20. Shri Dushyant Singh
21. Shri Krupal Balaji Tumane
SECRETARIAT
Shri J. Sundriyal, Joint Secretary
Shri P. Narayanan, Director
Shri Dinesh Singh, Additional Director
Ms. Catherine John L., Under Secretary
Shri K.V. Ramana Rao, Committee Officer
2. At the outset, the Chairman extended a very warm welcome to the Members of the Committee. He
informed them that the agenda for the meeting is to consider and adopt the following Reports:-
(i) * *     *;
* Relates to other matter.

24
(ii) * * *; and
(iii) Draft Report on Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/ Observations of
the Committee contained in its Two Hundred and Seventy First Report on ‘Fellowships,
Scholarships, Grants, Pensions and Schemes administered by the Ministry of Culture’.
3.  The Committee, thereafter, adopted the draft Reports after a brief discussion.
4. The Committee then decided to present/lay the Reports to both the Houses of Parliament on 9
th December,
2019. The Committee, accordingly, authorized Shri T.G . Venkatesh, Chairman and in his absence, Shri
Tiruchi Siva, M.P. to present the Reports in Rajya Sabha. Shri Kamlesh Paswan, M.P. and in his absence,
Shri Saumitra Khan, M.P. were authorized to lay the above mentioned Reports on the Table of Lok Sabha.
5. The Chairman then thanked the Members including Members of previous Committee  and Secretariat
for their contribution in the preparation of the Reports.
6. * * *;
7.   The meeting adjourned at 4:14 
P.M.
* Relate to other matters.