  
DEPARTMENT -
ON 
 
TWO HUNDRED TWENTY FOURTH 
The Merchant Shipping (Amendment) Bill, 2015 
(
(L
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA  
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
-RELATED PARLIAMENTAR Y STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM A ND CULTURE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
December 2015/ Agrahayana,  1937 (Saka) 
TWO HUNDRED TWENTY FOURTH  REPORT 
Merchant Shipping (Amendment) Bill, 2015 
 
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 2.12.2015 ) 
Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 1.12.2015 )
 
Y STANDING COMMITTEE  
ND CULTURE  
1937 (Saka)  
REPORT NO.  
224  
REPORT  
Merchant Shipping (Amendment) Bill, 2015  
 
) 

  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
E-mail:rsc-tt@sansad.nic.in 
Website:http://rajyasabha.nic.in 
 
 

 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, 
TOURISM AND CULTURE 
 
 
 
 
TWO HUNDRED TWENTY FOURTH REPORT 
The Merchant Shipping (Amendment) Bill, 2015 
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 2.12.2015 ) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 1.12. 2015 ) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
December, 2015/ Agrahayana,  1937 (Saka)  
 


C O N T E N T S 
 
P A G E S  
 
1.  COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE     (i) 
2. INTRODUCTION       (ii) 
3. ACRONYMS         (iii)-(iv) 
4. REPORT             
5. RECOMMENDATIONS/ OBSERVATIONS-AT A GLANCE  
 6. MINUTES 
7. ANNEXURES         
        
        
      
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                             1- 13
14-15
16-19
20-220

COMPOSITION OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE 
(2015-2016) 
(Constituted on 1 st  September, 2015) 
 
1. Dr. Kanwar Deep Singh   - Chairman 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
2. Shri Ritabrata Banerjee 
3. Dr. K. Chiranjeevi 
4. Shri Narendra Kumar Kashyap 
5. Shri Avinash Rai Khanna 
6. Dr. Prabhakar Kore 
7. Shri Kiranmay Nanda 
8. Kumari Selja 
9. Shri Rajeev Shukla 
10. Vacant 
LOK SABHA  
11. Shri Ram Charitra Nishad 
12. Shri Vinod Chavda 
13. Shri Rajeshbhai Naranbhai Chudasama 
14. Km. Arpita Ghosh 
15. Shri Rahul Kaswan 
16. Shri P. Kumar 
17. Shri Faizal P.P. Mohammed 
18. Yogi Aditya Nath 
19. Shri  Kristappa Nimmala 
20. Shri Rajesh Pandey 
21. Shri Rajesh Ranjan 
22. Shri P. Srinivasa Reddy  
23. Shri Ram Kumar Sharma 
24. Shri Prathap Simha 
25. Shri Dushyant Singh  
26. Shri Kunwar Haribansh Singh 
27. Shri Rakesh Singh 
28. Shri Shatrughan Sinha 
29. Shri Dasrath Tirkey 
30. Shri Manoj Tiwari 
31. Shri K.C. Venugopal 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 Shri J.G. Negi, Joint Secretary 
 Shri Swarabji B., Joint Director 
Smt. Catherine John L., Assistant Director 
Shri T. Kennedy Jesudossan, Committee Officer 
Shri P.P. Raumon, Committee Officer 
 
(i) 

INTRODUCTION 
 
 I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliame ntary Standing Committee 
on Transport, Tourism and Culture, having been auth orised by the Committee to 
present on its behalf, do hereby present this Two H undred Twenty Fourth Report on 
The Merchant Shipping (Amendment) Bill, 2015*. 
2.  In pursuance of rules relating to the Departmen t-related Parliamentary Standing 
Committees the Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha referr ed** the Bill as introduced in 
the Lok Sabha on the 10 
th  August, 2015, to the Committee on 26 th  August, 2015 for 
examination and report within three months. 
3. The Committee took oral evidence of the Secretar y, Ministry of Shipping and 
other senior officers in its meeting held on the 16
th  September, 2015 on various 
provision of the Bill.  The Committee also heard th e views of the Indian National Ship-
owners’ Association (INSA) on 24 th  September, 2015.  The Committee also received 
written memoranda from M/s. GOL Offshore Private Li mited and ICC Shipping 
Association.  After detailed deliberation, the Comm ittee considered the Bill clause by 
clause on the 16 th  November, 2015 and adopted the same.   
4.  The Committee wishes to express its thanks to t he Officers of Ministry of 
Shipping and Directorate General (Shipping) for pla cing before the Committee the 
material and information desired in connection with  the Merchant Shipping 
(Amendment) Bill, 2015. 
  
 
DR. KANWAR DEEP SINGH  
NEW DELHI;                      Chairman,  
16 
th  November ,  2015                         Department-related Parliament ary Standing  
25 th  Kartika, 1937 (Saka)             Committee on  Transport, Tourism  and Culture.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
* Published in Gazette of India Extraordinary Part-II, Section-2, dated 10 th  August, 2015 
**Rajya Sabha Parliamentary Bulletin Part-II No  54545 , dated 27 th  August, 2015 
(ii) 

TABLE OF ABBREVIATIONS 
 
CPC   -  Civil Procedure Code 
DG (S)  -  Director General (Shipping) 
DGLL   -  Directorate General Lighthouse and Lights hips 
EEZ   -  Exclusive Economic Zone 
GT   –  Gross Tonne 
ICCSA   -  ICC Shipping Association  
IMO   -  International Maritime Organisation  
INSA   -  Indian National Shipowners’ Association  
MoS   -  Ministry of Shipping  
P&I Club  –  Protection and Indemnity Club 
UNCLOS  -  
United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
REPORT  
The Merchant Shipping (Amendment) Bill, 2015 (Annex ure-I) was introduced 
in Lok Sabha on the 10 th  August, 2015. The Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha, o n 26 th  
August, 2015, referred the Bill to the Department-r elated Parliamentary Standing 
Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture for exa mination and report within three 
months. 
2. The Merchant Shipping Act, 1958 was enacted to f oster the development and 
efficient maintenance of an Indian mercantile marin e sector in a manner best suited to 
serve the national interest. International Maritime  Organisation (IMO), as the global 
standard-setting authority for the safety, security  and environmental performance of 
international shipping, creates fair and effective regulatory framework for the shipping 
industry in the form of Conventions for universal adoption and implementation.  
3. The Bill, in its Statement of Objects and Reason s, mentions that India is a 
member of IMO and as and when Government of India a pproves to be a party to an 
International Convention by accession/ratification,  the Convention is given effect by 
suitably incorporating its provisions in the concer ned domestic legislation , i.e,  the 
Merchant Shipping Act, 1958. India has already acce ded to three International 
Conventions of the IMO  viz ., the International Convention on Civil Liability for 
Bunker Oil Pollution Damage, 2001 (hereafter referr ed to as Bunker Convention); the 
Nairobi International Convention on the Removal of Wrecks, 2007 (hereafter referred 
to as Nairobi Convention); and the International Co nvention on Salvage, 1989 
(hereafter referred to as Salvage Convention).  
4. It has further been stated that the accession to  Bunker Convention has now been 
approved and for implementing the Convention, the M erchant Shipping Act, 1958 
requires further amendments. The amendment seeks to  incorporate the Convention 
provisions by inserting Part XBA in the Act titled ‘Civil Liability for Bunker Oil 
Pollution Damage’. India is already a party to the Nairobi Convention and Salvage 
Convention. However, in the light of experiences ga ined in implementing Part XIII 
titled “Wreck and Salvage”, it was felt necessary t o amend the Part  XIII to make them 
progressive and in tune with Nairobi Convention and Salvage Convention. 
5. The Committee heard the views of the Secretary, Ministry of Shipping, Director 
General (Shipping) and other senior officials of th e Ministry on the provisions of the 
Bill on the 16 
th  September, 2015. The Committee also heard the view s of the 
representative of the Indian National Shipowners’ A ssociation (INSA) on the 24 th  
September, 2015. Besides INSA, ICC Shipping Associa tion and GOL Salvage Services 
Ltd. submitted written memoranda to the Committee o n different aspects of the above 
stated Conventions and the amendments proposed to t he Merchant Shipping Act, 1958. 
The Committee also considered the background note a nd replies to its questions 
furnished by the Ministry of Shipping. 
6. The succeeding paragraphs state the salient feat ures of the three International 
Conventions as well as the proposed amendments in t he Merchant Shipping Act, 1958 
to give effect thereto and also the reasons for the proposed amendments. 
Bunker Convention 
 
7. The Bunker Convention was adopted to ensure that  adequate, prompt and 
effective compensation is available to persons who suffer damage caused by spills of 
oil (hydrocarbon mineral oil including lubricating oil), when carried as fuel in ships’ 

bunkers. This Convention was adopted in 23 rd  March, 2001 and had come into force 
from 21 st  November, 2008. The Convention applies to damage c aused on the territory, 
including the territorial sea, and in exclusive eco nomic zones of States Parties. The 
Convention provides a separate instrument covering pollution damage only. A key 
requirement in the Bunker Convention is the need fo r the registered owner of a vessel 
to maintain a compulsory insurance cover. 
8. Under the provisions of the Merchant Shipping (A mendment) Bill, 2015, the 
registered owner of a vessel has to maintain compul sory insurance cover which allows 
claim for compensation for bunker pollution damage to be brought directly against an 
insurer. Ships of 1000 Gross Tonn and above have to  carry a certificate onboard to the 
effect that it maintains insurance or other financial security, without which these vessels 
will not be allowed to enter or leave India. The li ability cover for bunker pollution 
damage shall be equal to the limits of liability un der the applicable national or 
international limitation regime, but in all cases, not exceeding an amount calculated in 
accordance with the Convention on Limitation of Liability for Maritime Claims, 1976. 
9. The written reply furnished by the Ministry of S hipping stated that Article 14 of 
the Bunker Convention stipulates that the Conventio n shall enter into force one year 
following the date on which 18 States, including 5 States each with ships whose 
combined gross tonnage is not less than 1 million, have either signed it without 
reservation as to ratification, acceptance or appro val or have deposited the instruments 
of ratification, acceptance, approval or accession with the secretary General of the 
IMO. Accordingly, the Bunker Convention, 2001 came into force only on 21.11.08. 
10. The Ministry of Shipping informed the Committee  that amendments based on 
the Bunker Convention were considered necessary in view of the following: 
i. It is difficult to obtain compensation to pollution  caused by bunker oil 
spill/leakage from ships other than tankers. Local 
Authorities/Government find it difficult to recover  costs on preventive 
measures and cleanup operation on such type of poll ution. This problem 
can be suitably addressed if India becomes party to  this Convention and 
incorporates its provision into the Merchant Shipping Act, 1958. 
ii. In spite of best precautionary efforts, accidents m ay happen in Indian as 
well as foreign flag ships. In that scenario, it is  vital to have an 
internationally agreed effective liability compensation regime in place. 
iii. Indian ships having 1000 GT or more, on internation al trade will be 
issued with a certificate from the Indian Maritime Administration. This 
would enable to carry out international trade witho ut approaching other 
Governments for such certificate, who have acceded to this Convention. 
iv. India would be able to ensure that all foreign flag vessels entering Indian 
territorial waters or Exclusive Economic Zone are d uly covered by 
insurance as required under the Convention. 
v. The Convention has already been adopted by major Ma ritime States, 
therefore, it is binding on Indian Ships involved i n worldwide trade, 
irrespective of whether India is a party to the Convention. 
vi. Indian ships have to carry “Blue Card” issued by in surance companies 
irrespective of whether India is a party to the Con vention or not, if, it is 
trading in countries that are parties to this Conve ntion.  However, vice 
versa the same is not applicable for foreign ships trading in India.  Even 
if they are carry blue card, pollution in Indian wa ters will not be under 
the purview of such insurance as India is not party to this Convention. 
1

11. The following are the salient provisions of the  Bill related to Bunker 
Convention:- 
• Applies to all Indian vessels (irrespective of size ) anywhere in the world 
and to all foreign vessels while in Indian Waters; 
• Preventive measures and curative measures taken to minimize damage 
shall also be liable for compensation; 
• While owners of all vessels are liable to compensat e against bunker oil 
pollution damage for vessels of 1000 GT and above, the insurer is liable 
to compensate; 
• Liability of owner is exempted if the pollution dam age is due to war, act 
of God, intentional act/omission of third person, negligence/wrongful act 
of Government/Authority; 
• Owner entitled to limit his liability as per Conven tion for Limitation of 
Liability for Maritime Claims, which will be determ ined by the High 
Court of jurisdiction; 
• Claims to be preferred within 3 years from date of damage or 6 years 
from date of incident; 
• Vessels of 1000 GT and above to compulsorily mainta in 
insurance/financial security.  DG(S) to issue a cer tificate to this effect; 
No such vessel shall enter or leave Indian port without certificate; and 
• Rule making powers in respect of form & manner of a pplication to High 
Court to limit liability, financial securities, for m of certificate and 
conditions of issue, fee for issue of certificate, manner of renewal and 
renewal fee provided under. 
12.  Regarding the cost to be incurred due to the a mendments proposed to the Merchant 
Shipping Act, 1958 based on the Bunker Convention, the Ministry  has stated that : 
/head2right Vessels on International voyages are already comply ing with the 
requirement as Convention is already in force, henc e no additional cost 
for such vessels. 
/head2right Vessels on the coast of India may have to take addi tional insurance 
cover. 
/head2right Cost of such insurance is not expected to exceed 1$  per GT per annum 
(Rs.66.4 per GT per annum), subject to the conditio n of the vessels, risk 
factor, claims history of the company and ships. 
13. The Ministry of Shipping, in its written reply to a pointed query of the 
Committee, stated that United States of America and  Japan are the two major maritime 
nations who are not a party to the Bunker Conventio n.  The United States has enacted 
the Oil Pollution Act, 1990 that covers all types o f oil, from the ship, whether bunkers 
or cargo.  The compensations and the requirement ar e more stringent than the Bunker 
Convention and hence, there was no need by USA to a dopt the Bunker Convention 
which came into force at a much later stage in 2008 . Similarly, Japan amended the ‘Act 
on Liability for Ship Oil Pollution, 1975' in 2005 to cover bunker pollution damage, 
before the Bunker Convention came into force intern ationally in 2008. Since the 
requirement under the local regulations were more s tringent, Japan never felt the need 
for the Bunker Convention.  As regards India, the p rovision relating to pollution from 
oil (except bunker oil pollution damage) are there in the Merchant Shipping Act, 1958, 
but there are no specific legislation for covering the pollution incidents caused by the 
2

bunker oil of the ships and a need was being felt t o provide for this. Hence, the 
proposed Bill is introduced. 
14. To the Committee’s query regarding the impact o f exemptions given to vessels 
having capacity below 1,000 GT from this Convention, the DG (Shipping) replied: 
“......below 1,000 GT, it is the requirement or the  obligation on the part of the 
owner or the operator that he will not be able to e scape or get away from. The 
threshold is only for purposes of a financial secur ity which is mandated in the  
Convention and that is through the insurance Blue C ards, which is then counter-
certified through a compliance certificate which is  issued by the Government.  
But that does not detract from the primary responsi bility of the owner or the 
operator to still ensure that he mitigates and mini mizes the pollution damage, 
compensates for that or removes the wreck, as the c ase may be, or salves the 
vessel”. 
15. When asked, the representative of Indian Nation al Shipowners' Association 
(INSA), also agreed that the exemption to the vesse ls which are 1000 GT and less,  
since the number of such vessels would be around 500 to 600 only. 
16. As regards Clause No. 352 RH, the DG (Shipping)  gave his clarification as 
under: 
“...if there is a claim for an immediate damage whi ch converts into a 
financial liability and, if it is substantive in na ture, it has to be claimed 
within a period of three years.  If there is an inc ident which otherwise is 
not so significant, but can be related to the origi nal cause of action and 
more by way of a social cause, for that the Sunset clause is six years.  
So, it is in terms of graded impact on the environment and ecology”. 
17. The Ministry, in its written reply clarified in  this regard that one may get the 
compensation, if a claim is made within three years  from the date of damage. However, 
no claim can be made six years after the incident causing the damage.  In simple words, 
if it is perceptible damage for which there is an a ctionable claim, then the maximum 
limit is three years. However, if there is an incid ent which otherwise is not so 
significant but later on can be related to original  cause of action and more by way of 
social cause, then in such cases the limitation per iod shall be six years. It is in terms of 
graded impact on the environment and ecology which may occur immediately on 
occurrence of the incident or may come out after passage of time. 
18. When asked as to the liability that would fall on the Ports after the Bunker 
Convention is to be implemented, the Secretary, Shipping replied that: 
“…as far as major ports are concerned, we have a sc heme available in 
the Ministry where we give 50 per cent subsidy for them to procure 
equipment for fighting any pollution because of oil  spillage. We are 
promoting that. We are also auditing that, ports co mply with this 
requirement.  That is also available to other priva te ports which handle 
crude and other oil products.  That is the action t aken by ports as far as 
Bunker Convention is concerned.” 
19. The Committee also made a specific query about the provisions for arbitration 
in this regard. The DG (Shipping) replied that : 
“......arbitration mechanism kicks in when it is no t mutually resolved.  
Usually, we find that arbitration proceedings are largely held in London 
or in Singapore. This is through a mutual process o f acceptance of the 
arbiter. It is a panel of three arbitrators. One no minated by each, the 
3

second and the third one is mutually agreed upon. T here is also an 
International Arbitration Council which nominates these people”.  
20. The Committee took note of the Ministry’s reply  that Act of God or force 
majure  is a condition of occurrence of a natural calamity. Such an act needs to be an act 
which is not foreseen and is beyond the control of the human beings. If the person 
wants an exemption from the liability, he has to pr ove that such an act is not caused by 
him or his employee or agent, but by a third person . Hence, the third person needs to be 
a totally external person not connected with the owner as employee or agent. As regards 
the act of God, there are number of case laws which  have been well adjudicated and it 
is now settled by the apex court as to what constit utes an act of God or the force 
majure . It is very well understood in terms of juristic p rinciples, and there may not be 
any ambiguity for it during the adjudication procee dings. The Court will decide, if it is 
an act of third party, in case there is a claim for an exemption from the liability. 
21. The Committee observes that the exemption given  to the owner if the 
pollution damage is due to an ‘Act of God’ as given  in clause 352 RD, is likely to 
leave ample scope for litigation and that the owner  of a ship can run away from 
his responsibilities of giving compensation to the pollution damage caused by the 
ship owned by him. The Committee, therefore, recomm ends to reconsider this 
aspect to ensure that the law does not leave any sc ope for the shipowners to get 
away from their responsibility of paying compensation. 
22. The Committee observes that Ports have ample ch ances of oil spillage and 
environment pollutions from the vessels at the time  of loading/unloading of cargo. 
The Committee recommends that latest modern equipme nts being used at 
International level may be provided to the Ports fo r addressing this challenge. The 
Committee further recommends that for our cash stra pped Major Ports, the 
present subsidy limit of 50% be enhanced substantia lly for procurement of the 
modern equipment for fighting any pollution due to oil spillage on a case to case 
basis. 
Nairobi Convention 
 
23.  The Nairobi International Convention on the Removal  of Wrecks 2007 (Nairobi 
Convention) provides the legal basis to remove ship wrecks that may have the potential 
to affect adversely the safety of lives, goods and property at sea, as well as the marine 
environment.  The Convention fills the gap in the e xisting international legal 
framework by providing the first set of uniform int ernational rules aimed at ensuring 
the prompt and effective removal of wrecks located beyond the territorial sea. 
24. The Nairobi Convention was adopted by an Intern ational Conference held in 
Kenya in 2007.  It has entered into force on 14.4.2015. 
25. The Ministry of Shipping informed the Committee  during the deliberations that 
amendments based on Wreck Removal Convention, 2007,  is considered necessary, in 
view of the following: 
i) The existing provision in Part XIII of the Merchant  Shipping Act, 1958 
relating to wreck removal is not adequate in dealin g with increasing amount of 
wreck in the coast of India. 
ii) The amendments will enable the implementation of Na irobi Convention 
on the Removal of Wrecks 2007, to which India is al ready a Party, thereby 
4

bringing in internationally recognized and approved uniform rules for removal of 
wrecks. 
iii) The Convention will provide uniform international r ules aimed at 
ensuring the prompt and effective removal of wrecks  located beyond the 
territorial sea.  The Convention includes an option al clause enabling countries to 
apply certain provisions to their territory, including their territorial sea. 
iv) Increasing number of vessels and limited space avai lable in the ports 
have resulted in increased number of accidents caus ing wrecks resulting in 
pollution.  Most of the perpetrators go scot-free d ue to ignorance about the 
incident or lack of importance given to remedial measures to be adopted. 
v) The problems due to wreck are three-fold: first, a wreck may constitute a 
hazard to navigation, potentially endangering other  vessels and their crews; 
second, wreck has a potential to cause damage to th e coastal and marine 
environment, depending on the nature of the cargo; and third, there is the issue of 
costs involved in the marking and removal of hazardous wrecks. 
vi) The current provisions in the Merchant Shipping Act , 1958 are 
inadequate in dealing with the increasing number of  wrecks in Indian Coast.  
Therefore, to control this problem and to bring the  existing regulation in line 
with the developments in international shipping, it  is vital to make these 
amendments in the Act. 
26. The Ministry, in its written reply furnished to  the Committee, stated that Article 
18 of the Nairobi Convention stipulates that the Co nvention shall enter into force 
twelve months following the date on which 10 states  have either signed it without 
reservation as to ratification, acceptance or appro val or have deposited the instruments 
of ratification, acceptance, approval or accession with the secretary General of the 
IMO. Accordingly, the Nairobi Convention, 2007 came into force only on 14.04.15 [i.e. 
this year only] 
27. The following are the salient features of the B ill relating to Nairobi Convention 
provided by the Ministry of Shipping: 
• The Bill makes the existing provisions of the Act d ealing with wreck 
[Part XIII] in line with Nairobi Convention; 
• The master/operator of ship is statutorily obliged to report wreck incident 
in Indian Territory to receiver of wrecks (Deputy C onservator of 
Ports/District Magistrate) and D.G. (Shipping). Ind ian ship to report 
wreck incident in foreign territory to D.G. (Shipping). 
• D.G. (Shipping) can direct Directorate General Ligh t House and Light 
Ships, Coast Guard, Port or other authority, for lo cating & marking 
wrecks; 
• D.G. (Shipping) to inform ship’s registry country and in consultation with 
that country proceed to remove wreck.  If the owner  does not remove the 
wreck, receiver of wreck (at the expense of the own er) may remove the 
wreck; 
• Registered owner is liable for the cost of activiti es related to locating, 
marking and removal of wreck; 
• Registered owner of ship of 300 GT and above to mai ntain compulsory 
insurance/financial security.  D.G. (Shipping) to i ssue a certificate to this 
effect.  Contravening ships can be detained; and  
5

• Claim for recovery of costs for locating and marking wreck to be within 3 
years from date of determination of hazard and 6 ye ars from date of 
maritime casualty that resulted in the wreck. 
28.   As regards the cost to be incurred due to the  amendments proposed, based on 
the Nairobi Convention, the Ministry stated that : 
/head2right Vessels on International voyages are already comply ing with the 
requirement as Convention is already in force, henc e no additional cost 
for such vessels. 
/head2right Vessels on the coast of India may have to take addi tional insurance 
cover. 
/head2right Cost of such insurance is not expected to exceed 1$  per GT per annum 
(Rs.66.4 per GT per annum), subject to the conditio n of the vessels, risk 
factor, claims history of the company and ships. 
/head2right The  P&I cover provided by the IG group of clubs ge nerally includes 
cover for both Bunker pollution damage and wreck removal. 
29. The Ministry of Shipping, in their written subm ission, has stated that:   
United States of America, China and Japan, Italy, Norway, Republic of Korea, 
and Russian Federation are the major maritime natio ns which are not party to 
the Convention.  As of now the national legislation  of the above countries 
provide adequate mechanism of direct action against  the ship owners in their 
coastal waters hence there may not be a need for th em to be a party to this 
Convention.  However, the Nairobi Wreck Removal Con vention has entered 
into force this year only, i.e. , on 14.04.2015.  Hence, it is still early stages a s 
most of the countries may still be evaluating the C onvention from deciding to 
become party to the Convention.  Moreover, now the Convention extends its 
scope beyond coastal waters up to Exclusive Economi c Zone (EEZ), thus there 
may be reconsideration by other countries in due co urse to decide on being a 
party to this Convention.  As regard India, the pro visions related to the wreck 
removal already exist in the Merchant Shipping Act,  1958.  However, these are 
proposed to be updated, as an opportunity to make I ndian legislation fully 
compliant with the Convention.   
30. The Committee enquired about the procedure to b e followed by the authorities 
if an incident of wreck happened in the premises of  a Major Port, as in the case which 
occurred in the vicinity of Mumbai Port a few years  ago.  The DG Shipping, explained 
that: 
“…..if it were to happen in a Port of call, it is t he Deputy Conservator of Ports 
who would then take necessary action as he would be  the receiver of wrecks.  
In case the owner or operator did not discharge in spite of notification and 
being given adequate notice to do so, then the Depu ty Conservator of Port 
would takeover that asset as a receiver of wreck an d then do all that is required 
to spend money and then lodge the claims.  That is why the designation has 
been given as 'receiver of wrecks'.  That is the suo motu  assumption of 
responsibility.  But, that is a residual responsibi lity after having failed in 
convincing the owner or operator to discharge their  duty.  Correspondingly, 
beyond the port limit, as I submitted, if it were within the territorial waters, this 
power is delegated to the District Collector or District Magistrate to do so”. 
6

31. To the Committee’s query about the possible rea sons why Government owned 
vessels are exempted, the Secretary, Shipping replied that: 
“........the broad principle is, because Government s, in case of accidents, are 
funded sufficiently, and if they have to compensate somebody, they would do 
so.  Therefore, most of the equipment in the Government is not insured.  That 
is one aspect.  But that is, especially, for milita ry machines because they also 
partake in war.” 
 
32. In the written reply furnished by the Ministry,  it has been stated that the vessels 
owned or operated by the Government and used for th e non commercial service, are 
exempted from the compulsory insurance, as the broad principle is that the Government 
in case of accidents are funded sufficiently and if  some compensation is to be paid to 
some person, the Government will be able to pay. Go vernment is a kind of sovereign 
guarantee in itself. Therefore, most of the equipme nts in the Government are not 
insured.  
33. In this regard, the Indian National Shipowners'  Association, in its written 
submission, has stated that: 
It is found that Warships, other Naval vessels and Government non-
commercial vessels are often exempted from the prov isions of a Convention 
since it is presumed that a sovereign Government  h as adequate funds and 
resources to meet any eventuality. However, in all cases, even such vessels 
are advised to be in compliance with all Internatio nal Conventions, rules and 
regulations, as far as practically possible and feasible. 
34. In response to the Committee’s query as to whet her these three Conventions are 
applicable to the fishing and cruise vessels, the M inistry has furnished the reply that, 
the three Conventions do not make any reference or differentiate its application to the 
type of vessel. The general principle of applicatio n adopted is the gross tonnage of the 
vessel.  The criteria for application of Bunker Con vention to a ship are that it should be 
above 1000 GT. The Nairobi Wreck Removal Convention  shall be applicable to ships 
which are of 300 GT and above. No such limit is mentioned in the Salvage Convention. 
35. When asked by the Committee about the advantage s of acceding to the Nairobi 
Convention, the representative of the Indian Nation al  Shipowners' Association stated 
that: 
“A lot of old vessels used to keep coming to India,  but, now, this is something 
which will stop happening.  Because we do not have these Conventions and we 
do not have the ability to enforce the law, it beco mes easier for me as an 
imprudent ship owner to bring the old ships, which are not allowed in other 
regimes.”   
36. The Ministry of Shipping, in their written repl y, has stated that Nairobi 
Convention provides a sound legal basis for coastal  countries to remove, or have 
removed, from their coastlines, wrecks which pose a  big environment hazard to the 
safety of navigation or to the marine and coastal lives, or both. It will make ship-owners 
financially liable and require them to take out ins urance or provide other financial 
security to cover the costs of wreck removal. This Convention also includes an optional 
Clause enabling States Parties to apply certain pro vision to their territory, including 
their territorial sea. 
37. The Committee took cognizance of the status of the wrecks already there in the 
Indian waters, furnished by the Ministry of Shippin g (Annexure II). There are a total of 
39 wrecks in Indian waters, some of the wrecks are affecting the shipping channels. 
The Committee recommends that the Government should  chalk out a time bound 
7

action plan to remove the wrecks that are already t here in the Indian waters 
especially those wrecks which are affecting the shipping channels. 
Salvage Convention  
38. The International Convention on Salvage 1989 (S alvage Convention) replaced 
the prevalent “no cure, no pay” principle where a s alvor is only rewarded for services if 
the operation is successful.  By towing a damaged t anker away from an 
environmentally sensitive area, salvor prevents maj or pollution incidents.  But the 
prevalent “no cure, no pay” principle acted as a di sincentive for operation, where 
chances of success were slim.  The 1989 Salvage Con vention remedied this deficiency 
by making provision for an enhanced salvage award i n preventing or minimizing 
damage to the environment and by introducing a “spe cial compensation” to be paid to 
salvors who fail to earn a reward in the normal way. 
39. This Convention replaced a Convention on the la w of  salvage adopted in 
Brussels in 1910.  The 1989 Convention introduced a  “special compensation”  to be 
paid to salvors who have failed to earn a reward in  the normal way (i.e.,  by salving the 
ship and cargo).  It was adopted in 28.4.1989 and h as entered into force from 
14.7.1996. 
40. The Ministry of Shipping has informed the Commi ttee that amendment based 
on the International Convention on Salvage, 1989 is  considered essential and desirable 
in view of the following: 
i) The present provision of Part XIII of the Merchant Shipping Act, 1958 is 
inadequate in dealing with salvage operation as the  salver will only be 
awarded, if the salvage is successful (no-cure-no-p ay principle). Salvage 
Convention seeks to remedy this deficiency by makin g provision for an 
enhanced salvage award taking into account the skil l and efforts of the 
salvors in preventing or minimizing damage to the environment. 
ii) The amendment in the Merchant Shipping Act, 1958 wi ll revise the text 
with the updated provisions mentioned in the Conven tion. The 
amendments would also highlight the significance of  article 13 and 14 of 
the Convention which relates to criteria for paymen t of award and special 
compensation to the salvors respectively. 
iii) India is already a signatory to this Convention and  has obligation to give 
full and complete effect to the provision of the Convention. The proposed 
amendment in the Act would enable the Government to  discharge this 
obligation by including the key parameters of the C onvention as 
substantive part in the Act and also frame detailed  procedures under the 
rule making powers as specified in the Act. 
41. The Ministry, in its written reply, stated that  Article 29 of the Salvage 
Convention stipulated that the Convention shall ent er into force one year following the 
date on which 15 States have expressed their consen t to be bound by it. For a State 
which expresses its consent to be bound by this Con vention after the conditions for 
entry into force thereof have been met, such consen t shall take effect one year after the 
date of expression of such consent. Accordingly, th e Salvage Convention 1989 came 
into force only on 14.07.1996. 
42. The following are the salient features of the B ill relating to Salvage Convention: 
• The Bill makes the existing provisions of the Act d ealing with Salvage in 
[Part XIII] in line with Salvage Convention; 
• does not apply to warships, Government non-commerci al vessels, fixed 
or floating platforms or to mobile offshore drillin g units when engaged in 
sea-bed mining; 
8

• the owner of the vessel is obliged to pay the salvo r for his services 
towards saving life, cargo, etc; 
• salvage services by Indian Navy/Coast Guard/Port au thority also entitled 
for compensation;  
• master of ship is authorized to conclude salvage co ntract on behalf of 
owner of vessel and master of ship or owner of ship  can conclude salvage 
contract on behalf of persons and/or cargo on board of vessel; 
• lays down duties of salvor, owner and master; 
• lays down rights and duties of Central Government i n relation to salvage 
operations; 
• lays down rights of salvors to payment for the serv ices rendered by them 
relating to salvage operations; 
• under. S. 402 H (2), Government can make rules pres cribing criteria for 
claiming rewards, the manner of fixing rewards, spe cial compensation, 
apportionment of rewards amongst salvors etc.; 
• disputes relating to claims shall be adjudicated by  concerned High Court 
(where vessel is registered/vessel is situated/cause of action arises); and 
• period for claim-within 2 years. 
43. On the matter of the costs likely to be incurre d due to the amendments proposed 
based on the Salvage Convention, the Ministry of Shipping stated: 
/head2right  generally no cost on owner, unless salvage service  is required due to the 
exigency; and 
/head2right cost of salvage will vary depending on the value of the property salvaged. 
44. The Ministry, in its written reply, informed th e Committee that United States of 
America and Japan are not a party to Bunker Convent ion; China, Japan, Italy, Norway, 
Republic of Korea and Russian Federation are not pa rty to the Nairobi Convention; and 
Japan, Panama and Republic of Korea are the major c ountries which are not a party to 
the Salvage Convention.  
45. In this regard, in a written submission, the In dian National Shipowners' 
Association has stated that often USA practices and  adopts domestic rules which in 
most of the cases are far more stringent that some of the international regulations are in 
operation much prior to similar rules or provisions  being adopted by International 
Maritime Organization and that this could be one of  the reasons for USA not to be a 
signatory to the Nairobi Convention. It has been fu rther stated that USA is also not a 
signatory to 
 the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea ( UNCLOS)1982; the 
International Convention on Civil Liability for Oil  Pollution Damage 1969 (CLC 
Convention); Bunker Convention 2001; Hong Kong Recy cling Convention 2009; 
Nairobi Wreck Removal Convention 2007; and the Mari time Labour Convention 2006 
to list a few. 
46. In a written reply, the Ministry of Shipping ha s stated: 
“Japan, Panama and Republic of Korea are few major maritime nations 
which are not party to the Convention. The prime re ason for such 
maritime countries not becoming a party to the Conv ention is that their 
national legislation has already made necessary pro visions for salvage 
and the courts have the sole jurisdiction of awardi ng the salvage 
compensation. The Salvage Convention applies to jud icial or arbitral 
proceedings pertaining to salvage. Salvage is gener ally between private 
parties and disputes between them are generally dec ided by 
9

arbitration/judicial process.  The local legislatio n of such countries also 
provides mechanism for arbitration and compensation  for efforts of the 
salvor irrespective of degree of success. Thus, suc h countries have not 
felt the need for adoption of the Convention. As re gards India, the 
provisions related to salvage are already there in the Act. However, these 
are proposed to be updated, as an opportunity to ma ke Indian legislation 
fully compliant with the Convention.  
47. As regards the reasons for delay in implementin g the Salvage Convention, the 
Ministry of Shipping stated that having met the req uirement of tonnage and the number 
of States, as per the requirement of the stated Con vention, it actually came into force 
internationally after nearly seven years, i.e ., on 14.07.1996.  India became a party to 
this Convention on 18.10.1995, as provisions relate d to the Salvage Convention largely 
exist in the Merchant Shipping Act ever since 1958 and continued to be part of the Act 
till date. Indian Parliament in their great wisdom had provided the provisions related to 
salvage in the Act from 1958 itself, i.e ., much before 1989 Salvage Convention came 
into force. Therefore, the broad provisions on salv age already exist in the present 
Merchant Shipping Act. However, in the present Bill , the provisions related to the 
Salvage Convention are being updated, as an opportu nity to make Indian legislation 
fully compliant with the Convention.   
48. The Ministry informed the Committee that the si gnificant improvement made 
by the Salvage Convention 1989 is that it has enabl ed compensation for unsuccessful 
salvage efforts, and that the salvors dealing with the salvage operation is free to make a 
contract with the ship-owner whose ship is being sa lved by it, so as to cover the 
compensation even if the salvage operation is not f ully successful. The Salvage 
Convention has done away with the old principle of ‘No cure No pay’. It encourages 
the salvors to assist the distressed vessel and eve n if the salvage may not be totally 
successful, the salvor is compensated by invoking c ontract and the special 
compensation scope clause. 
49. In response to the Committee's query regarding the jurisdiction on the disputes 
of claims in the case of a salvage operation, the M inistry stated that the jurisdiction has 
been given based on the broad principles as given i n the Civil Procedure Code, 1908 
with respect to jurisdiction of the Courts. The Min istry further stated that the case may 
not proceed in more than one Court, as the principl e of res  sub judice  will apply. The 
case may proceed at one location based on the princ iple that where it is instituted first. 
The period of limitation shall commence from date of completion of salvage operation. 
50. Regarding the financial or other loss caused to  the country due to not following 
these Conventions, the Ministry of Shipping stated,  in its written reply furnished to the 
Committee: 
As regards financial or other loss to the country i n absence of following 
these Conventions, it is submitted that Indian ship s on international 
voyage are already complying with the requirements of the Bunker 
Convention and Nairobi Convention.  For salvage ope rations and also to 
the extent with respect to the Nairobi Convention, the provisions are 
already in existence in the Merchant Shipping Act, 1958.  As shipping is 
international in nature, Indian ships trading world wide had to abide by 
the requirements of the Conventions. Therefore, Ind ian ships were 
issued certificates by other Convention countries a t a certain cost.  Now, 
with the above adoption, Indian ships can be issued  certificates by the 
Indian Administration after enactment.  Secondly, w ith the enactment, 
every ship entering Indian Coastal waters will be r equired to have 
10

necessary financial guarantee and a certificate bea ring a proof of the 
same.  In case of any pollution by way of bunker or  ship becoming a 
wreck, direct action can be initiated against the o wners/insurers through 
the process of Arbitration instead of passing throu gh the lengthy judicial 
process. Such compulsory carriage of certificate an d the provision of 
direct action will be an indirect method and deterrent thus giving indirect 
protection to the coastal marine environment.  Fina ncial or other loss to 
the country could occur if the provisions of the Co nventions are not 
brought into force in India as owners of foreign fl ag vessels will not 
require to have insurance or financial security to deal with bunker oil 
spills or wrecks occurring in our waters, leading t o environmental 
damage and consequential loss to the country. 
51. The Committee, in its meeting held on the 24 th  September, 2015 heard the 
representative of the Indian National Shipowners' A ssociation, who informed the 
Committee that they are fully satisfied with the Clauses of the Bill and that the Ministry 
of Shipping had consulted them at the time of draft ing of this Bill. The ICC Shipping 
Association also conveyed their agreement to the Cl auses without offering any further 
suggestion. M/s GOL Offshore Limited gave written s uggestions on some of the 
Clauses of the Bill.  
52. The Committee welcomes the Bill which seeks to suitably incorporate the 
provisions of the International Convention on Civil  Liability for Bunker Oil 
Pollution Damage, 2001 (Bunker Convention); the Nai robi International 
Convention on the Removal of Wrecks, 2007 (Nairobi Convention); and the 
International Convention on Salvage, 1989 (Salvage Convention) in the Merchant 
Shipping Act, 1958. 
53. The Committee’s observations/recommendations on  the Clauses/Sub-Clauses of 
the Bill have been given in the succeeding paragraphs:- 
Sub-Clause 402D (2) & (3) 
 
54. In this Sub Clause, the master of the Ship has been given authority to sign the 
salvage contracts on behalf of the owner of the vessel. 
55. When Committee enquired about the adequacy of t he provisions of this Sub- 
Clause and the chances of any foul play against the  interest of the owners, the 
representative of the Indian National Shipowners’ Association replied that: 
“….the master of the ship engaging and getting into  a salvage contract is quite a 
normal process.  ….. all contracts of insurance or even the certificate of registry, it 
is not in the name of the owner of the company; it is in the name of the master 
itself.  So, this is something which over a period of time has been a part of our 
industry.  Yes, where there is temptation, there is  a chance of something going 
wrong but, by and large, as an industry we have rar ely seen a case where a master 
has entered into an illegal or untenable salvage co ntract and thereby alienated the 
asset.  It also serves very useful because sometime s, you may have a vessel which 
is farther away from you.  I could be sitting here in India and an accident or a 
salvage contract may take place in Brazil.  I may b e in a situation where 
financially it may not be viable to actually travel  and sign a contract.  At such 
times, the master becomes useful for the purposes of signing the contract.”   
56. The  Committee observes that the Master of the Ship has been given the 
authority to execute a salvage contract or any such  contracts on behalf of the ship 
owner. Since the Master of the ship is only an empl oyee of the owner, there might 
be situations when the owner may not honour the contract signed by the Master of 
the Ship and the Salvor. Therefore, the Committee f eels that a strict provision 
11

should be made in the Bill in order to save the interests of the Master of the Vessel. 
In view of the availability of sophisticated Inform ation and Communication 
Technology tools, it is easy to consult the owner o f the Vessel by the Master of the 
Vessel before agreeing to the contract or in case of  any contingency. 
57. The Committee, therefore, recommends that a new  Sub Clause-“in both the 
cases at (2) and (3), the owner of the vessel or ca rgo as the case may be, shall not 
be entitled to challenge the decision of the master /owner of the vessel, if such a 
decision is taken after sufficient consultation” may be inserted in the Bill.   
Sub Clause 402G  
58. Sub Clauses under this Clause prescribe the rig hts and duties of Central 
Government in case there is a need of salvage opera tion of a vessel. It includes means 
to protect its coast line or related interests from  pollution or threat of pollution arising 
out of a maritime casualty or acts relating to such  casualty which may result in major 
harmful consequences, its duties to seek the assistance and to give facilities to salvors. 
59. The Committee also feels that within the territ orial waters of India, Indian 
Companies should be given priority for salvage oper ations.  Accordingly, the 
Committee recommends that the following sub Clause may be added in the Bill: 
“The Central Government shall ensure that the salvo rs of Indian origin are 
given first right of refusal as against the salvors  of foreign origin, for any 
salvage operations within the territorial waters of India”. 
 
Sub Clause 402 H 
 
60. This Clause ensures the Salvor a right to payme nt for the services rendered by 
him relating to salvage operations, provided that n ow such payment shall be made 
where there is express and reasonable prohibition from the owner or master of vessel or 
owner of any other property in danger. 
61. Under this Clause, the Central Government may p rescribe the criteria for 
claiming rewards, manner of fixing rewards, the pay ment of special compensation, the 
apportionment of payment amongst salvors, the salva ge of persons, the payment under 
the contract, the payment for additional services n ot covered under the contract and the 
effect of misconduct of salvors on reward or paymen t. The salvors shall have right to 
enforce his maritime lien against the owner or mast er of vessel or owner of any other 
property in danger when satisfactory security for h is claim, including interest and costs, 
has not been provided by such person. 
62.  M/s GOL Offshore Limited has, in their written subm ission, stated that in the 
case of owner of the vessel failing to pay the salvors due to bankruptcy, due to absence 
of proper insurance cover or any other reason, ther e should be suitable provision for 
making payment to the salvor who has carried out th e salvage operation under the 
instructions of the Central Government.  
63. The Committee recommends that the Government ma y appropriately look 
into the absence of such a provision in the Bill, w ith a view to deal with the cases 
of owner of the vessel failing to pay the salvors d ue to bankruptcy, absence of 
proper insurance cover or any other reasons and to ensure that the salvors get 
their payment for the salvage operation carried out. 
GENERAL RECOMMENDATIONS 
64. The Committee observes that there is no provisi on for grievance redressal 
mechanism in the Bill. The Committee also observes that there are lots of 
probabilities of a grievance that can arise at any stage of the salvage operation, 
wreck removal, etc. The Committee, therefore, recom mends that necessary 
provisions for redressal of grievances should be incorporated suitably, in the Bill.  
12

65. During the time of deliberations on the Bill, t he Committee enquired about the 
inordinate delay in bringing these Conventions part icularly as the Bunker Convention 
which is of the year 2001; the Nairobi Convention i s of 2007; and the Salvage 
Convention is of 1989, for which the Secretary, Shipping replied that: 
 “There are three Conventions.  In two of those, we  had become parties 
because there were certain provisions in existence.  This process goes through 
the MEA and their Legal Treaties Division. They, no rmally, assess whether 
our existing legal provisions are adequate for us t o agree to a certain 
Convention.  So, out of these three Conventions, th ey agreed that even at a 
minimum base level, in respect of two of them, we c an become parties and we 
went ahead and became parties on the basis of the p rovisions which already 
existed under the Merchant Shipping Act. 1958.  As far as the Bunker 
Convention is concerned, when we sent this file, th eir opinion was that unless 
we first go through the process of getting an appro val for the legislation, for 
the Bill, this may not be accepted.  So, the Bunker  Convention, for that 
reason, was also clubbed here.” 
66. Further to this, the Ministry of Shipping has f urnished a self-contained note 
showing the reasons for the inordinate delay in fin alizing these three International 
Conventions, to the Committee (Annexure-II). The Mi nistry has further submitted that 
the delay, if any, is attributable to the difficult ies faced in harmonization of the draft 
provisions based on the three International Convent ions after starting the process in 
the year 2009 onwards. Further, the fresh approval of the Union Cabinet, consequent 
upon the change of Union Government was also one of  the procedures that was 
required to be followed by them. 
67. The Committee notes that cumbersome procedures,  inter-ministerial and 
pre-legislative consultations led to the delay in b ringing the legislation. The 
Committee feels that confusion, lack of farsightedn ess, lack of decision making 
capabilities and indecisiveness at various levels also contributed to this delay. The 
Committee recommends that in future, the Ministry s hould ensure that the 
legislations are processed within the shortest poss ible time by avoiding the steps 
which are unnecessary and unwarranted. The Committe e has seen that in many 
situations, the Ministry’s line of action was not c lear because of which the action 
initiated way back in April, 2009 could be accompli shed after a gap of more than 
six years i.e.,  on the 10 
th  August, 2015. 
68. The Committee recommends that necessary amendme nts as suggested by 
the Committee, may be brought in the relevant Clauses of the Merchant Shipping 
(Amendment) Bill, 2015.  
69. The Committee, while going through the Merchant  Shipping Act, 1958, felt 
that the statute is quite bulky, with 461 Sections and Sub-sections.  The present 
Bill itself contains more than 50 Clauses.  The Com mittee, therefore, recommends 
that the Government may consider enacting a new Mer chant Shipping Act so that 
the obsolete Clauses could be removed and new Claus es could be brought in to 
keep it in tune with time. 
***** 
 
 
 
13

 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE AT A 
GLANCE  
 The Committee observes that the exemption given to  the owner if the 
pollution damage is due to an ‘Act of God’ as given  in clause 352 RD, is likely to 
leave ample scope for litigation and that the owner  of a ship can run away from 
his responsibilities of giving compensation to the pollution damage caused by the 
ship owned by him. The Committee, therefore, recomm ends to reconsider this 
aspect to ensure that the law does not leave any sc ope for the shipowners to get 
away from their responsibility of paying compensation. 
(Para No. 21) 
 The Committee observes that Ports have ample chanc es of oil spillage and 
environment pollutions from the vessels at the time  of loading/unloading of cargo. 
The Committee recommends that latest modern equipme nts being used at 
International level may be provided to the Ports fo r addressing this challenge. The 
Committee further recommends that for our cash stra pped Major Ports, the 
present subsidy limit of 50% be enhanced substantia lly for procurement of the 
modern equipment for fighting any pollution due to oil spillage on a case to case 
basis. 
(Para No. 22) 
 The Committee recommends that the Government should  chalk out a time 
bound action plan to remove the wrecks that are alr eady there in the Indian 
waters especially those wrecks which are affecting the shipping channels. 
(Para No. 37) 
 The Committee welcomes the Bill which seeks to sui tably incorporate the 
provisions of the International Convention on Civil  Liability for Bunker Oil 
Pollution Damage, 2001 (Bunker Convention); the Nai robi International 
Convention on the Removal of Wrecks, 2007 (Nairobi Convention); and the 
International Convention on Salvage, 1989 (Salvage Convention) in the Merchant 
Shipping Act, 1958. 
(Para No. 52) 
Sub-Clause 402D (2) & (3)  
 The  Committee observes that the Master of the Shi p has been given the 
authority to execute a salvage contract or any such  contracts on behalf of the ship 
owner. Since the Master of the ship is only an empl oyee of the owner, there might 
be situations when the owner may not honour the contract signed by the Master of 
the Ship and the Salvor. Therefore, the Committee f eels that a strict provision 
should be made in the Bill in order to save the interests of the Master of the Vessel. 
In view of the availability of sophisticated Inform ation and Communication 
Technology tools, it is easy to consult the owner o f the Vessel by the Master of the 
Vessel before agreeing to the contract or in case of  any contingency. 
(Para No. 56) 
 The Committee, therefore, recommends that a new Su b Clause-“in both the 
cases at (2) and (3), the owner of the vessel or ca rgo as the case may be, shall not 
be entitled to challenge the decision of the master /owner of the vessel, if such a 
decision is taken after sufficient consultation” may be inserted in the Bill.   
(Para No. 57) 
 
 
14

Sub Clause 402G  
 The Committee also feels that within the territori al waters of India, Indian 
Companies should be given priority for salvage oper ations.  Accordingly, the 
Committee recommends that the following sub Clause may be added in the Bill: 
“The Central Government shall ensure that the salvo rs of Indian origin are 
given first right of refusal as against the salvors  of foreign origin, for any 
salvage operations within the territorial waters of India”. 
(Para No. 59) 
Sub Clause 402 H  
 The Committee recommends that the Government may a ppropriately look 
into the absence of such a provision in the Bill, w ith a view to deal with the cases 
of owner of the vessel failing to pay the salvors d ue to bankruptcy, absence of 
proper insurance cover or any other reasons and to ensure that the salvors get 
their payment for the salvage operation carried out. 
(Para No. 63) 
GENERAL RECOMMENDATIONS 
 The Committee observes that there is no provision for grievance redressal 
mechanism in the Bill. The Committee also observes that there are lots of 
probabilities of a grievance that can arise at any stage of the salvage operation, 
wreck removal, etc. The Committee, therefore, recom mends that necessary 
provisions for redressal of grievances should be incorporated suitably, in the Bill.  
(Para No. 64) 
 The Committee notes that cumbersome procedures, in ter-ministerial and 
pre-legislative consultations led to the delay in b ringing the legislation. The 
Committee feels that confusion, lack of farsightedn ess, lack of decision making 
capabilities and indecisiveness at various levels also contributed to this delay. The 
Committee recommends that in future, the Ministry s hould ensure that the 
legislations are processed within the shortest poss ible time by avoiding the steps 
which are unnecessary and unwarranted. The Committe e has seen that in many 
situations, the Ministry’s line of action was not c lear because of which the action 
initiated way back in April, 2009 could be accompli shed after a gap of more than 
six years i.e.,  on the 10 th  August, 2015. 
(Para No. 67) 
 The Committee recommends that necessary amendments  as suggested by 
the Committee, may be brought in the relevant Clauses of the Merchant Shipping 
(Amendment) Bill, 2015.  
(Para No. 68) 
 The Committee, while going through the Merchant Sh ipping Act, 1958, felt 
that the statute is quite bulky, with 461 Sections and Sub-sections.  The present 
Bill itself contains more than 50 Clauses.  The Com mittee, therefore, recommends 
that the Government may consider enacting a new Mer chant Shipping Act so that 
the obsolete Clauses could be removed and new Claus es could be brought in to 
keep it in tune with time. 
(Para No. 69) 
***** 
 
 
 
 
15

 
 
MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED 
PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM & 
CULTURE (2015-16) 
II 
SECOND MEETING 
The Committee met at 3:00 P.M. on Thursday, the 24th September, 2015 in Committee 
Room ‘C’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.  
Members present: 
1. Dr. Kanwar Deep Singh   - Chairman 
Rajya Sabha 
2. Shri Ritabrata Banerjee  
3. Shri Avinash Rai Khanna  
4. Shri Rajeev Shukla 
Lok Sabha 
5. Shri Ram Charitra Nishad  
6. Kumari Arpita Ghosh 
7. Shri Rahul Kaswan  
8. Shri P. Kumar  
9. Shri Faisal P.P. Mohammad 
10. Shri Kristappa  Nimmala 
11.  Shri Rajesh Pandey  
12.  Shri Rajesh Ranjan  
13. Shri Kunwar Haribansh Singh 
14.  Shri Shatrughan Sinha 
15. Shri Manoj Tiwari  
16. Shri K. C. Venugopal  
SECRETARIAT 
 Shri J.G. Negi, Joint Secretary 
 Shri Swarabji B., Joint Director 
 Smt. Catherine John L., Assistant Director 
 Shri T. Kennedy Jesudossan, Committee Officer 
 Shri P.P. Raumon, Committee Officer 
Witness 
Shri Anil Devli, CEO, Indian National Shipowners Association 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members and Shri Anil Devli, CEO, Indian 
National Shipowners Association  to the meeting  convened for the purpose  of hearing the 
16

 
stakeholders on the Merchant Shipping (Amendment) Bill, 2015 . The Chairman asked the 
witness whether their Association was consulted by the Government at the time of drafting of the 
Bill and also asked him  to tender his views on the incorporation of three international 
Conventions viz., the Bunker Convention, the Nairobi Convention and Salvage Convention in the 
Merchant Shipping Act, 1958.  
3. The Chairman also enquired about his views on  the sunset clause in the Bill and absence 
of grievance redressal mechanism in the Bill, consequences of exemption given to certain 
categories of vessels  from these Conventions, the procedure involved in the current practice in 
wreck removal, the possible reasons why only few countries so  far have become party to these 
Conventions, various aspects of the insurance claim mechanism in the Bill, etc. 
4. The witness, while expressing his views on the Bill, stated that  their Association was 
consulted by the Government at the time of drafting of the Bill   and that all the Conventions are 
acceptable to them . He opined that by acceding to these Conventions, it  would streng then the 
maritime trade in the c ountry and agreed with the sunset clause, as it was borrowed from the 
convention of International Maritime Organisation, in the Bill. He stated that for salvage  
operations, there are fewer chances for disputes and hence, there is no need for a grievance 
redressal mechanism . He also stated that the insurance coverage is provided through a well 
settled mechanism (P &I Club) by the insurance Companies and that even at short notice , the 
insurance companies provide insurance coverage to vessels. 
 5. He concurred with the provision in the Bill regarding the master of the ship engaging into 
a salvage contract and informed the Committee that the 65 countries which have become party to 
the Nairobi International Convention on Wreck Removal are mainly the countries who are active 
in the maritime space.  
6. A verbatim record of the proceedings of  the meeting was kept. 
7. The meeting then, adjourned at 3.45 P.M.  
 
 
 
17

  
MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED 
PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM & 
CULTURE (2015-16) 
V 
FIFTH   MEETING 
The Committee met at 3:00 P.M. on Monday, the 16th November, 2015 in Committee 
Room ‘A’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.  
Members present: 
1. Dr. Kanwar Deep Singh   - Chairman 
Rajya Sabha 
2. Shri Ritabrata Banerjee  
3. Shri Kiranmay Nanda  
4. Shri Rajeev Shukla 
Lok Sabha 
5. Kumari Arpita Ghosh 
6.  Shri Rahul Kaswan 
7. Shri P. Kumar  
8. Shri Kristappa  Nimmala 
9. Shri Rajesh Ranjan 
10. Shri Ram Kumar Sharma 
11. Shri Kunwar Haribansh Singh 
12. Shri Shatrughan Sinha 
13. Shri Dasrath Tirkey 
14. Shri Manoj Tiwari 
SECRETARIAT 
 Shri J.G. Negi, Joint Secretary 
 Shri Swarabji B., Joint Director 
 Smt. Catherine John L., Assistant Director 
 Shri T. Kennedy Jesudossan, Committee Officer 
 Shri P.P. Raumon, Committee Officer 
2. The Chairman welcomed the Members to the Committee. Thereafter, the Committee 
considered the following draft reports for adoption: 
(i) Draft report on the Merchant Shipping (Amendment) Bill, 2015; 
(ii) *    *    *; 
(iii) *    *    *. 
 
* Relates to other matters 
 
18

  
3.  The Committee adopted the said reports after some discussion. 
4. The meeting was adjourned at 3.35 p.m. 
 
19

Annexure- I 
LIST OF WITNESSES APPEARING BEFORE THE DEPARTMENT- 
RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE ON 16.09.2015 
MINISTRY OF SHIPPING  
1 Shri Rajive Kumar Secretary 
2 Dr. Alok Srivastava Additional Secretary 
3 Shri C.B. Singh Adviser 
4 Shri K. Touthang Director (MG) 
5 Shri Lucas L. Kamsuan Director (Parliament) 
DIRECTORATE GENERAL OF SHIPPING 
6 Shri Deepak Shetty Director-General of Shipping 
7 Shri L.K. Panda Nautical Advisor 
8 Capt. Jaya Kumar Deputy Nautical Advisor 
LEGISLATIVE DEPARTMENT 
9 Dr. N.R. Battu Joint Secretary & Legislative Counsel 
10 Smt. Veena Kothavale Additional Legislative Counsel 
  
 
  
***** 
 
 
 
20

 
LIST OF WITNESSES APPEARING BEFORE THE DEPARTMENT- 
RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE ON 24.09.2015.  
INDIAN NATIONAL SHIP-OWNERS ASSOCIATION 
1. Shri Anil Devli  Chief Executive Officer 
 
 
 
***** 
 
21

 
 
22
ANNEXURE II

 
23

 
24

 
 
 
 
 
25

Reply to the queries raised and remained unanswered  during the course of 
recording of oral evidence before the Department Re lated Parliamentary 
Standing Committee on 16.09.15.  
 
1.  Question 
:  In the presentation it has been shown that Bunke r 
Convention is a Convention of the year 2001, and In dia to become party 
after the enactment of the Bill. Why has there been a delay of 14 years? 
 
Answers/submissions 
: International Convention on Civil Liability for B unker oil 
Pollution Damage [Bunker Convention], 2001 was adop ted by the International 
Maritime Organisation [IMO] in 2001. However, it came into force internationally 
only at the end of the year 2008 i.e. after a gap o f nearly eight years, on 
21.11.2008. Therefore, there was no delay from 2001  till the end of 2008, as 
the Convention itself was not in force, and there w as no obligation to follow the 
Convention. 
 
The process for the accession and subsequent amendm ent to the Merchant 
Shipping Act, 1958 was initiated in early 2009. The  details of step wise process 
followed for the accession and necessary amendment to the Merchant Shipping 
Act, 1958 is as mentioned below; 
 
1. Directorate General of Shipping [DG (S)] sent th e proposal to 
accede to Bunker Convention and to seek in- princip le approval 
of the Cabinet to subsequently introduce amendments  to 
Merchant Shipping Act, 1958. 
28.04.2009 
2. The proposal was examined in the Ministry and ap proval of 
Hon’ble Minister was obtained to take up the matter  before the 
Union Cabinet.  
29.06.2009 
3. The proposal was suitably formulated as a draft Note for 
Cabinet. 
22.09.2009 
4. The draft Cabinet Note circulated for Inter-Mini sterial comments. 31.03.2010 
5. The Ministry of External Affairs while conveying  their comments 
suggested that instead of seeking in- principle app roval of the 
Cabinet to subsequently introduce amendments to Mer chant 
Shipping Act, 1958, the amendment to Merchant Shipp ing Act, 
1958 (Bill) should be first passed by the by the Pa rliament 
before taking up the proposal for becoming a party to Bunker 
Convention.   
05.05.2010 
6. The Ministry of Shipping sought the inputs of DG  (S) on the 
comments of M/o External Affairs along with the com ments 
received from various other Ministries. 
11.08.2010 
26
Annexure-III

7. Inputs of DG (S) were received.  19.08.2010 
8. The Hindi version of the draft Cabinet Note and the draft Bill 
were referred to the DG (S) for verification of the  technical terms 
used in the translated version.  
22.10.2010 
9. DG (S) sent the corrected Hindi version of draft  Cabinet Note 
and the draft Merchant Shipping Amendment Bill. 
29.10.2010 
10. The final Note for Cabinet was sent to Prime Mi nister’s Office 
(PMO). The PMO suggested the Ministry of External A ffairs has 
suggested that the Bill be passed before becoming a party to the 
Convention the matter may be taken up before a Comm ittee of 
Secretaries (CoS). 
29.11.2010 
11. DG (S) sent their inputs and a Note was prepare d for the 
Committee of Secretaries. 
10.01.2011 
12. Committee of Secretaries meeting was held and i t was decided 
that Merchant Shipping Act amendment should precede  India 
becoming party to the convention and a draft amendi ng Bill or 
Ordinance should be prepared.  Secretary, D/o Legal Affairs and 
Secretary, Legislative Department were asked to ass ist Ministry 
of Shipping in drafting the Ordinances. 
15.03.2011 
13. The draft Ordinance and a draft proposal for Ca binet seeking 
approval to introduce an Ordinance on the Bunker Co nvention 
and the Nairobi Wreck Removal Convention were prepared. 
18.04.2011 
14.  The proposal for Ordinance on the Nairobi Conv ention and the 
Bunker Convention was approved by Hon’ble Minister. 
17.06.2011 
15. The Prime Minister’s Office advised that instea d of an Ordinance 
Merchant Shipping (Amendment) Bill be introduced as  per 
normal legislative process. 
03.07.2011 
16. The Note for Cabinet on Ordinance was circulate d for inter-
ministerial comments. 
08.11.2011 
17. The Legislative Department prepared the draft M erchant 
Shipping Amendment Bill instead of an Ordinance.  
08.01.2012 
 
18. Since the Legislative Department had made modif ications to the 
Bill and suggested that the Bill be discussed with the Legislative 
Department, DG (S) was requested to examine the mod ified Bill 
and depute an officer for discussions. 
28.02.2012 
19. DG (S) sent their inputs on the modified Bill w ith further 
changes. 
11.07.2012 
20. The revised Bill was discussed with Ministry of  Law. 27.09.2012 
27

21. The Legislative department sought further clari fications on the 
proposed Bill. 
19.10.2012 
22. Hon’ble Minister for Shipping directed that the  Merchant 
Shipping (Amendment) Bill should also include amend ing the 
provision contained in Section 356M regarding enhan cement of 
the oil pollution cess.  
04.11.2012 
23. In the course of discussions with Legislative D epartment the 
DDG, DG (S) incorporated the provisions of Salvage Convention 
in the Merchant Shipping (Amendment) Bill. 
04.01.2013 
24. The Bill was revised to incorporate provisions of Bunker 
Convention, Nairobi Convention, Salvage Convention and the 
amendment of Sec 356 M to enhance oil pollution cess. 
18.03.2013 
25. The revised draft Bill was again discussed with  Legislative 
Department. 
28.05.2013 
26. The fresh proposal for the Cabinet with the rev ised Bill 
containing Bunker Convention, Salvage Convention an d 
increase in oil pollution cess was approved by Hon.  Minister for 
Shipping. 
12.12.2013 
27. The revised draft Note for Cabinet Containing B ill for Bunker 
Convention, Salvage Convention, Nairobi Convention and 
increase of oil pollution cess was circulated for i nter-ministerial 
comments. 
16.12.2013 
28. The D/o Economic Affairs in their comments conv eyed that the 
amount of levy may be brought under the rules inste ad of 
quantifying it in the Bill and the financial implication arising in the 
freight charges as a result of the levy may be refl ected in the 
draft Note for Cabinet.  
07.02.2014 
29. Secretary, Legislative Department communicated that pre- 
legislative consultative policy should be followed for all 
legislative matters and therefore DG (S) was direct ed to upload 
the working draft of revised Merchant Shipping Amen dment Bill 
on the website of DG (S) and seek comments of stake holders 
and public. 
12.03.2014 
30. Before the Note for Cabinet and Bill could be f inalised election 
was declared and code of conduct came into force. 
 
--- 
31. The revised draft Merchant Shipping (Amendment)  Bill was 
loaded in the official website of the Directorate f or a period of 
one month seeking comments of all stakeholders i..e  on or 
before 02.06.2014, as per pre-legislative consultat ive policy 
02.5.2014 
28

prescribed by the Legislative Department. 
32. Follow up with the comments received from stake holders DG (S) 
held meetings with all stakeholders to discuss thei r comments 
on the draft Bill. 
09.6.2014 
33. The draft Bill after pre-legislative consultati on by DG (S) was 
finalised. 
11.6.2014 
34. The proposal was placed before the Hon’ble Mini ster of Shipping 
on the assuming of office of the present Government .  It was 
decided to remove provisions to increase oil/marine  pollution 
cess. This revised note for Cabinet and the revised  Bill was 
circulated for inter-ministerial consultations. 
08.08.2014 
35. Comments of various Ministries were received an d these 
comments were consolidated and sent to Legislative 
Department requesting them to finalise the Bill and  convey their 
concurrence to the proposal with the approval of Ho n. Law 
Minister. 
02.01.2015 
36. Legislative Department conveyed their concurren ce to the 
proposal and provided the final Bill with the appro val of Hon. 
Law Minister. 
09.02.2015 
37. The final Note for Cabinet and the final Bill w as approved by the 
Hon. Minister  
02.03.2015  
38. Official language wing of the Legislative Depar tment was 
requested for Hindi translation of the Bill. 
11.03.2015 
39. Official language wing of the Legislative Depar tment provided 
the Hindi translation of the Bill. 
23.04.2015 
40. The final note for Cabinet and the final Bill ( bilingual version) 
sent to Cabinet Secretariat and PMO. 
21.05.2015 
41. Proposal approved by the Union Cabinet. 10.06.2 015 
42. DG (S) sent inputs for the draft Statement of O bjects and 
Reasons, Notes on Clauses and Memorandum on Delegat ed 
Legislation. 
01.07.2015 
43. Draft Statement of Objects and Reasons, Memoran dum on 
Delegated Legislation approved by Hon. Minister and  referred to 
Legislative Department for vetting. 
09.7.2015 
44. Statement of Objects and Reasons, Memorandum on  Delegated 
Legislation vetted and finalized by Legislative Department. 
24.7.2015 
45. The Merchant Shipping (Amendment) Bill, 2015 in troduced in 
Parliament by Hon’ble Minister of Shipping. 
10.08.2015 
29

 
In light of the above mentioned circumstances, proc edures, inter-ministerial 
consultation, and pre-legislative consultations as well as combination of two 
more Convention [i.e. Nairobi and Salvage Conventio n] with the Bunker 
Convention, it may kindly be observed that the delay, if any is attributable to the 
difficulties faced in harmonization of the draft pr ovisions based on the three 
international Convention after starting the process  in the year 2009 onwards. 
Further, the fresh approval of the Union Cabinet, c onsequent upon the Change 
of the Union Government is also one procedure which  was required to be 
followed. 
 
2.  Question : In the presentation it has been shown that Intern ational 
Convention on Salvage is in force since 14.07.1996 and India is party 
since 18.10.1995. How do you correlate it? The delay to be explained. 
 
Answer/submission : Salvage Convention was adopted in the year 1989. 
However, having met the requirement of tonnage and the number of states, as 
per the requirement of the stated convention, it ac tually came into force 
internationally after nearly seven years i.e. on 14 .07.1996. India became a 
party to this Convention on 18.10.1995, as the provisions related to the Salvage 
Convention largely exist in the Merchant Shipping A ct ever since 1958 and 
continued to be part of the Act till date. Indian l aw makers [Hon’ble Parliament] 
in their great wisdom had provided the provisions r elated to salvage in the Act 
since from 1958 itself i.e. much before 1989 Salvag e Convention came into 
force. Therefore, the broad provisions on salvage a lready exist in the present 
Merchant Shipping Act.  
 
However, the significant improvement made by the Salvage Convention 1989 is 
that it has enabled compensation for unsuccessful s alvage efforts, and the 
salvor dealing with the salvage operation is free t o make a contract with the 
ship-owner whose ship is being salved by it, so as to cover the compensation 
even if the salvage operation is not fully successf ul. The salvage convention 
has done away with the old principle of “No cure No  pay “. It encourages the 
salvors to assist the distressed vessel and even if  the salvage may not be 
totally successful, the Salvor is compensated by in voking contract and the 
Special compensation scopic clause. 
 
It is submitted that as explained above, the provis ions related to salvage are 
already in existence in the present Merchant Shippi ng Act. However, the 
provisions related to the salvage Convention are be ing updated, as an 
opportunity to make Indian legislation fully compli ant with the Convention. 
Therefore, it may kindly be concluded that there is no delay in the legislation. 
 
30

3.  Question : Name of any major country which is not a signator y to 
these three Conventions [like US UK or Germany]. Wh at would be the 
possible reason for them not signing and we are opt ing for that 
Convention? 
 
Answer/submission 
: United States of America [USA] and Japan are the two 
major maritime nations who are not a party to the B unker Convention. The 
United States has enacted the Oil Pollution Act 199 0. The Act covers all types 
of oil, from the ship, whether bunkers or Cargo. Th e compensations and the 
requirement are more stringent than the Bunker Conv ention and hence there 
was no need by US to adopt the Bunker Convention wh ich came into force at a 
much later stage in 2008. Similarly, the Japanese ' Act on Liability for ship oil 
pollution 1975' was amended in 2005 to cover bunker  pollution damage before 
the bunker convention came into force international ly in 2008,  and also the 
requirement under the local regulations were more s tringent, thus Japan never 
felt the need for the bunker convention. As regards  India, the provision related 
to pollution from oil [except bunker oil pollution damage] are existing in the 
Merchant Shipping Act, 1958, but there is a need to  make specific legislation 
for covering the pollution incidents caused by the bunker oil of the ships, hence 
the proposed Bill is introduced. 
 
Nairobi Convention : United States of America [USA], China and Japan, Italy, 
Norway, Republic of Korea, and Russian Federation a re the major maritime 
nations which are not party to the Convention. As of now the national legislation 
of the above countries provide adequate mechanism of direct action against the 
ship owners in their coastal waters hence there may  not be a need for them to 
be a party to this Convention. However, the Nairobi  Wreck removal convention 
has entered into force this year only [i.e. on 14.0 4.2015].  Hence, it is still early 
stages as most of the countries may still be evalua ting the convention from 
deciding to become party to the Convention. Moreove r, now the Convention 
extends its scope beyond coastal waters up to Exclu sive Economic Zone 
(EEZ), thus there may be reconsideration by other c ountries in due course to 
decide on being a party to this Convention. As rega rd India, the provisions 
related to the wreck removal are already existing in the Act. However, these are 
proposed to be updated, as an opportunity to make I ndian legislation fully 
compliant with the Convention. 
 
Salvage Convention : Japan, Panama, Republic of Korea, are few major 
maritime nations which are not party to the Convent ion. The prime reason for 
such maritime countries not becoming a party to the  Convention is that their 
national legislation has already made necessary pro visions for salvage and the 
courts have the sole jurisdiction of awarding the s alvage compensation. The 
salvage convention applies to judicial or arbitral proceedings pertaining to 
salvage.   Salvage is generally between private par ties and disputes between 
31

them are generally decided by arbitration/judicial process. The local legislation 
of such countries also provides mechanism for Arbit ration and compensation 
for efforts of the salvor irrespective of degree of  success, thus such countries 
have not felt the need for adoption of the conventi on. As regard India, the 
provisions related to salvage are already existing in the Act. However, these 
are proposed to be updated, as an opportunity to ma ke Indian legislation fully 
compliant with the Convention. 
 
4.  Question : Give the list of nations which have signed and th e list of 
the nations which have not signed these three Conventions. 
 
Answer/submission 
: The list nations which are party to the Bunker Co nvention 
is enclosed [Appendix-I]. The list nations which ar e not party to this Convention 
is also enclosed [Appendix-II] 
 
The list of nations which are party to the Nairobi wreck removal Convention is 
enclosed [Appendix-III]. The list nations which are  not party to this Convention 
is also enclosed [Appendix-IV].   
 
The list of nations which are party to the Salvage Convention, 1989 is enclosed 
[Appendix-V]. The list nations which are not party to this Convention is also 
enclosed [Appendix-VI].   
 
  
32

5. Question :  What will be the procedure for recovery in case of wreck 
[Page No. 6 of the document containing recorded oral evidence]? 
 
Answer/submission : Any claim for costs arising under the new provisi ons may 
be brought directly against the insurer or other pe rson who has provided the 
financial security for the liability of the registe red owner of the vessel. Hence 
even the direct action for claim against the insure rs or the person giving the 
financial security is possible, so as to compensate  the damage caused by the 
incident of a ship becoming a wreck and hazard to safe navigation. 
 
6. Question 
:  Dispute relating to claims shall be adjudicated by 
concerned High Court [where vessel is registered/vessel is situated/cause 
of action arise. Clarify the three jurisdiction pro vided there. Also clarify 
from which time the claim [i.e. limitation period of within 2 years] will start 
in case of Salvage Convention [Page No. 6 of the do cument containing 
recorded oral evidence]. 
 
Answer/submissions 
: The jurisdiction has been given based on the broa d 
principles as given in the Civil Procedure Code, 19 08 w.r.to jurisdiction of the 
courts. The case may not proceed in more than one c ourt, as the principle of 
res sub judice will apply. The case may proceed at one location based on the 
principle that where it is instituted first. The pe riod of limitation shall commence 
from date of completion of salvage operation. 
 
7.  Question 
: Whether there are statistics about the benefits/p ositive 
impacts which have occurred or may occur in future,  to the ocean 
ecology of those countries which are party to these  Conventions. Is there 
a financial or other loss to the country in absence  of following these 
Conventions [Page No. 6 of the document containing recorded oral 
evidence]? 
 
Answer/submission 
: No specific statistics is available for benefits/ positive 
impacts which have occurred or may occur in future,  to the ocean ecology of 
those countries which are party to these Convention s. However, the benefits 
intended from these Conventions, are as follows; 
 
Bunker Convention : This Convention is intended to ensure that adequa te, 
prompt, and effective compensation is available to persons who suffer damage 
caused by spills of oil, when carried as fuel in sh ips' bunkers. The Convention 
applies to damage caused on the territory, includin g the territorial sea, and in 
exclusive economic zones of countries which Party t o the Convention. A key 
requirement in the Bunker Convention is the need, for the registered owner of a 
vessel, to maintain a compulsory insurance cover. A nother key provision is the 
enabling provision for initiating direct action aga inst the insurer, which would 
33

allow a claim for compensation for pollution damage  to be brought directly 
against an insurer. 
 
Nairobi wreck removal Convention:  This Convention provides a sound legal 
basis for coastal countries to remove, or have remo ved, from their coastlines, 
wrecks which pose a hazard to the safety of navigat ion or to the marine and 
coastal environments, or both. It will make ship-ow ners financially liable and 
require them to take out insurance or provide other  financial security to cover 
the costs of wreck removal. It will also provide St ates with a right of direct 
action against insurers. This Convention also inclu des an optional clause 
enabling States Parties to apply certain provisions  to their territory, including 
their territorial sea.  
 
Salvage Convention:  This Convention seeks to remedy the deficiency 
enshrined in the  “no cure, no pay" principle under  which a salvor is only 
rewarded for services, if the salvage operation is successful. Earlier the salvors 
were paid only if the salvage operation were succes sful. However, under this 
Convention the efforts of the salvors to prevent th e major pollution incident [for 
example, by towing a damaged tanker away from an en vironmentally sensitive 
area] have been recognized and now he may be reward ed even if he is not 
able to save the ship or the cargo. This will encou rage the salvors to come 
forwards for saving the environmental damage. 
 
As regards, financial or other loss to the country in absence of following these 
Conventions, it is submitted that Indian ships on i nternational voyage are 
already complying with the requirements of the Bunk er Convention & Nairobi 
Conventions. For salvage operations, & also to exte nt w.r.to the Nairobi 
Convention, the provisions are already in existence  in the Merchant Shipping 
Act, 1958 . As shipping is International in nature, Indian ship s trading worldwide 
had to abide by the requirements of the Conventions , therefore, Indian ships 
were issued certificates by other convention countr ies at a certain cost. Now, 
with above adoption, Indian ships can be issued cer tificates by the Indian 
Administration after enactment. Secondly with the e nactment, every ship 
entering Indian Coastal waters will be required to have necessary financial 
guarantee and a certificate being a proof of the sa me. In case of any pollution 
by way of bunker, or ship becoming a wreck direct a ction can be initiated 
against the owners / insurers through the process o f Arbitration instead of 
passing through the lengthy judicial process. Such compulsory carriage of 
certificate and the provision of direct action will  be an indirect method and 
deterrent thus giving indirect protection to the co astal marine environment.  
Financial or other loss to the country could occur if the provisions of the 
Conventions are not brought into force in India as owners of foreign flag 
vessels will not require to have insurance or finan cial security to deal with 
bunker oil spills or wrecks occurring in our waters , leading to environmental 
damage and consequential loss to the country. 
34

****** 
  
35

 
36

 
 
 
37

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
38

Appendix-II  
List of Nations not party to the Bunker Convention  
1.  Algeria  
2.  Angola 
3.  Argentina 
4.  Bahrain  
5.  Bangladesh  
6.  Benin 
7.  Bolivia (Plurinational State of) 
8.  Bosnia and Herzegovina 
9.  Brazil  
10.  Brunei Darussalam 
11.  Cambodia 
12 .  Cameroon  
13 .  Cabo Verde  
14.  Chile 
15.  Colombia 
16 .  Comoros  
17.  Costa Rica 
18.  Cuba 
19.  Democratic Republic of the Congo* 
20 .  Djibouti  
21.  Dominica 
22.  Dominican Republic 
23 .  Ecuador  
24 .  El Salvador  
25.  Equatorial Guinea 
26.  Eritrea 
27 .  Fiji  
28.  Gabon 
29.  Gambia 
30.  Georgia 
31 .  Ghana  
32 .  Grenada  
33.  Guatemala 
34.  Guinea 
35 .  Guinea -Bissau  
36 .  Guyana  
37.  Haiti 
38.  Honduras 
39.  Iceland 
40.  India 
41.  Iraq 
42.  Israel 
43 .  Japan  
44 .  Kazakhstan  
45.  Kuwait 
46.  Lebanon 
47 .  Libya  
48 .  Madagascar  
49.  Malawi 
50.  Maldives 
51.  Mauritania 
52.  Mexico 
53.  Monaco 
54.  Mozambique 
39

55.  Myanmar 
56.  Namibia 
57.  Nepal 
58 .  Oman  
59 .  Pakistan  
60.  Papua New Guinea 
61.  Paraguay 
62 .  Peru  
63 .  Philippines  
64.  Qatar 
65.  Republic of Korea 
66.  Republic of Moldova 
67.  Romania 
68.  Saint Lucia 
69 .  San Marino  
70 .  Sao Tome and Principe  
71.  Saudi Arabia 
72.  Senegal 
73 .  Seychelles  
74 .  Solomon Islands  
75.  Somalia 
76.  South Africa 
77.  Sri Lanka 
78.  Sudan 
79.  Suriname 
80.  Thailand 
81 .  The former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia  
82 .  Timor -Leste  
83.  Trinidad and Tobago 
84.  Turkmenistan 
85 .  Uganda  
86 .  Ukraine  
87.  United Arab Emirates 
88.  United Republic of Tanzania 
89.  United States of America 
90 .  Uruguay  
91.  Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) 
92.  Yemen 
93 .  Zambia  
94 .  Zimbabwe  
 
**** 
 
40

Annendix-III  
  
 
  
41

 
Appendix-IV  
42

List of nations not party to the Nairobi Wreck Removal Convention  
1.  Algeria 
2.  Angola  
3.  Argentina 
4.  Australia 
5.  Austria 
6.  Azerbaijan  
7.  Bahrain  
8.  Bangladesh 
9.  Barbados 
10 .  Belgium  
11 .  Belize  
12.  Benin 
13.  Bolivia (Plurinational State of) 
14.  Bosnia and Herzegovina 
15.  Brazil 
16.  Brunei Darussalam 
17 .  Cambodia  
18 .  Cameroon  
19.  Canada 
20.  Cabo Verde 
21 .  Chile  
22 .  China  
23.  Colombia 
24.  Comoros 
25.  Costa Rica 
26.  Côte d'Ivoire 
27.  Croatia 
28.  Cuba 
29 .  Czech Republic  
30 .  Democratic People's Republic of Korea  
31.  Democratic Republic of the Congo* 
32.  Djibouti 
33 .  Dominica  
34 .  Dominican Republic  
35.  Ecuador 
36.  Egypt 
37.  El Salvador 
38.  Equatorial Guinea 
39.  Eritrea 
40.  Estonia 
41 .  Ethiopia  
42 .  Fiji  
43.  Finland 
44.  France 
45 .  Gabon  
46 .  Gambia  
47.  Georgia 
48.  Ghana 
49.  Greece 
50 .  Grenada  
51.  Guatemala 
52.  Guinea 
53 .  Guinea -Bissau  
54 .  Guyana  
55.  Haiti 
43

56.  Honduras 
57.  Hungary 
58.  Iceland 
59 .  Indonesia  
60 .  Iraq  
61.  Ireland 
62.  Israel 
63 .  Italy  
64 .  Jamaica  
65.  Japan 
66.  Jordan 
67.  Kazakhstan 
68.  Kiribati 
69.  Kuwait 
70 .  Latvia  
71 .  Lebanon  
72.  Libya 
73.  Lithuania 
74 .  Luxembourg  
75 .  Madagascar  
76.  Malawi 
77.  Maldives 
78.  Mauritania 
79.  Mauritius 
80.  Mexico 
81.  Monaco 
82 .  Mongolia  
83 .  Montenegro  
84.  Mozambique 
85.  Myanmar 
86 .  Namibia  
87 .  Nepal  
88.  Netherlands 
89.  New Zealand 
90.  Nicaragua 
91 .  Norway  
92.  Oman 
93.  Pakistan 
94 .  Papua New Guinea  
95 .  Paraguay  
96.  Peru 
97.  Philippines 
98 .  Poland  
99 .  Portugal  
100.  Qatar 
101.  Republic of Korea 
102 .  Republic of Moldova  
103 .  Romania  
104.  Russian Federation 
105.  Saint Kitts and Nevis 
106 .  Saint Lucia  
107 .  Saint Vincent and the Grenadines  
108.  Samoa 
109.  San Marino 
110 .  Sao Tome and Principe  
111.  Saudi Arabia 
44

112.  Senegal 
113.  Serbia 
114.  Seychelles 
115 .  Sierra Leone  
116 .  Singapore  
117.  Slovakia 
118.  Slovenia 
119 .  Solomon Islands  
120 .  Somalia  
121.  Spain 
122.  Sri Lanka 
123.  Sudan 
124.  Suriname 
125.  Sweden 
126 .  Switzerland  
127 .  Syrian Arab Republic  
128.  Thailand 
129.  The former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia 
130 .  Timor -Leste  
131 .  Togo  
132.  Trinidad and Tobago 
133.  Tunisia 
134.  Turkey 
135.  Turkmenistan 
136.  Uganda 
137.  Ukraine 
138 .  United Arab Emirates  
139 .  United Republic of Tanzania  
140.  United States of America 
141.  Uruguay 
142 .  Vanuatu  
143 .  Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of)  
144.  Viet Nam 
145.  Yemen 
146.  Zambia 
147 .  Zimbabwe  
**** 
  
45

Appendix V 
List of nations Parties to Salvage Convention  
 
 
  
46

 
47

 
48

Appendix-VI  
List of Nations not party to the Salvage Convention 
1.  Angola  
2.  Antigua and Barbuda 
3.  Argentina 
4.  Australia  
5.  Bahamas  
6.  Bahrain 
7.  Bangladesh 
8.  Barbados 
9.  Belize  
10.  Benin 
11.  Bolivia (Plurinational State of) 
12 .  Bosnia and Herzegovina  
13 .  Brunei Darussalam  
14.  Cambodia 
15.  Cameroon 
16 .  Cabo Verde  
17.  Chile 
18.  Colombia 
19.  Comoros 
20 .  Cook Islands  
21.  Costa Rica 
22.  Côte d'Ivoire 
23 .  Cuba  
24 .  Cyprus  
25.  Czech Republic 
26.  Democratic People's Republic of Korea 
27 .  Democratic Republic of the Congo*  
28.  Djibouti 
29.  Dominican Republic 
30.  El Salvador 
31 .  Equatorial Guinea  
32 .  Eritrea  
33.  Ethiopia 
34.  Fiji 
35 .  Gabon  
36 .  Gambia  
37.  Ghana 
38.  Grenada 
39.  Guatemala 
40.  Guinea-Bissau 
41.  Haiti 
42.  Honduras 
43 .  Hungary  
44 .  Indonesia  
45.  Iraq 
46.  Israel 
47 .  Japan  
48 .  Kazakhstan  
49.  Kuwait 
50.  Lebanon 
51.  Libya 
52.  Luxembourg 
53.  Madagascar 
54.  Malawi 
49

55.  Malaysia 
56.  Maldives 
57.  Malta 
58 .  Mauritania  
59 .  Monaco  
60.  Morocco 
61.  Mozambique 
62 .  Myanmar  
63 .  Namibia  
64.  Nepal 
65.  Nicaragua 
66.  Pakistan 
67.  Panama 
68.  Papua New Guinea 
69 .  Paraguay  
70 .  Peru  
71.  Philippines 
72.  Portugal 
73 .  Qatar  
74 .  Republic of Korea  
75.  Republic of Moldova 
76.  Saint Lucia 
77.  Saint Vincent and the Grenadines 
78.  Samoa 
79.  San Marino 
80.  Sao Tome and Principe 
81 .  Senegal  
82 .  Serbia  
83.  Seychelles 
84.  Singapore 
85 .  Slovakia  
86 .  Solomon Islands  
87.  Somalia 
88.  South Africa 
89.  Sri Lanka 
90 .  Sudan  
91.  Suriname 
92.  Thailand 
93 .  The former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia  
94 .  Timor -Leste  
95.  Togo 
96.  Trinidad and Tobago 
97 .  Turkmenistan  
98 .  Tuvalu  
99.  Uganda 
100.  Ukraine 
101 .  United Republic of Tanzania  
102 .  Uruguay  
103.  Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) 
104.  Viet Nam 
105 .  Zambia  
106 .  Zimbabwe  
 
 
**** 
50

  
51

Supplementary submissions, for further clarity, on questions raised and replied 
during the course of recording of oral evidence before the Committee on 
16.09.15.  
  
1.  Question :  It is mentioned that liability of owner is exemp ted if the 
pollution damage is due to war, act intentional act /omission of third 
person, negligence/wrongful act of Government/ auth ority. Give some 
example of act of God and omission of third party. Who will decide on 
omission of third party Give some clarity on this a spect [Page No. 5 of 
document containing recorded oral evidence]. 
 
Answer/submissions 
: As was submitted by the DG Shipping, GoI, during the 
meeting, act of God or force majure is a condition of occurrence of a natural 
calamity. Such an act needs to be an act which is n ot foreseen and is beyond 
the control of the human beings. If the person want s an exemption from the 
liability, he has to prove that such an act is not caused by him or his employee 
or agent, but by a third person. Hence the third pe rson needs to be a totally 
external person not connected with the owner as emp loyee or agent. As 
regards, the act of God, there is a plethora of case laws which has now got very 
well adjudicated and now has got very well settled by the apex court, as to what 
constitute an act of God or the force majure situat ion. It is very well understood 
in terms of juristic principles, and there may not be any ambiguity for it during 
the adjudication proceedings. The court will decide , if it is an act of third party, 
in case there is a claim for an exemption from the liability. 
 
2.  Question 
:  Claims to be preferred within three years from t he date 
of damage or six years from the date of incident. E xplain the two 
limitations given in the Act [Page No. 5 of the doc ument containing 
recorded oral evidence]. 
 
Answer/Submissions 
: As was submitted by the DG Shipping,GoI, it is fu rther 
clarified that one may get the compensation if a cl aim is made within three 
years from the date of occurrence of damage. Howeve r, no claim can be made 
after six years from the date of incident which has  caused the damage.  In 
simple words, it is perceptible damage for which th ere is an actionable claim, 
then the maximum limitation is three years. However , if there is an incident 
which otherwise is not so significant but later on can be related to original 
cause of action and more by way of social cause, th en in such cases the 
limitation period shall be six years. It is in term s of graded impact on the 
environment and ecology which may occur immediately  on occurrence of the 
incident or may come out after passage of time. 
 
3.  Question 
:  There is mention of compulsory insurance & exemp tion 
to vessels owned or operated by the Government and used for the non 
52

commercial service. Explain such exemption to Govt.  vessels [Page No. 5 
of the document containing recorded oral evidence]. 
 
Answer/submission 
: As was submitted by the Secretary (S), the vessel s owned 
or operated by the Government and used for the non commercial service, are 
exempted from the compulsory insurance, as the broa d principle is that the 
Government in case of accidents are funded sufficie ntly and if some 
compensation is to be paid to some person, the Gove rnment will be able to 
pay. Government is a kind of sovereign guarantee in  itself. Therefore most of 
the equipments in the Government are not insured.  
 
4.  Question 
: When does a Convention come into force i.e. how 
countries are required to be party to a Convention to put it into force 
[Page No. 16 of the document containing recorded oral evidence]? 
 
Answer/submissions 
: There are different criteria which are mentioned in the 
text of the respective Conventions itself. However,  following is the criteria for 
putting these three Conventions into force; 
 
Bunker Convention 
: Article 14 of this Convention stipulates that the  Convention 
shall enter into force one year following the date on which 18 states, including 5 
states each with ships whose combined gross tonnage  is not less than 1 
million, have either signed it without reservation as to ratification, acceptance or 
approval or have deposited the instruments of ratification, acceptance, approval 
or accession with the secretary General of the IMO.  Accordingly the Bunker 
Convention, 2001 came into force only on 21.11.08 
 
Nairobi Convention 
: Article 18 of this Convention stipulates that the  Convention 
shall enter into force twelve month following the d ate on which 10 states have 
either signed it without reservation as to ratifica tion, acceptance or approval or 
have deposited the instruments of ratification, acc eptance, approval or 
accession with the secretary General of the IMO. Ac cordingly the Nairobi 
Convention, 2007 came into force only on 14.04.15 [i.e. this year only] 
 
Salvage Convention 
: Article 29 of this Convention stipulates that the  
Convention shall enter into force one year following the date on which 15 states 
have expressed their consent to be bound by it. For  an state which expresses 
its consent to be bound by this Convention after th e conditions for entry into 
force thereof have been met, such consent shall tak e effect one year after the 
date of expression of such consent. Accordingly the  Salvage Convention, 1989 
came into force only on 14.07.96. 
5.  Question 
: Details of the around 30 wrecks already there in the 
Indian waters & what is happening to them may be gi ve [Page No. 19 of 
the document containing recorded oral evidence]. 
53

 
Answer/submissions 
: The detail about the status of the wrecks already  there in 
the Indian waters, is enclosed [Appendix-VII]. 
 
6.  Question 
: Whether these Conventions are applicable to the f ishing 
and cruise vessels? 
 
Answer/submissions 
: The three conventions as mentioned do not make an y 
reference or differentiate its application to the t ype of vessel. The general 
principle of application adopted is the gross tonna ge of the vessel.  The criteria 
for application of Bunker Convention to a ship are that it should be above 1000 
GT. The Nairobi wreck removal Convention shall be a pplicable to ships which 
are of 300 GT and above. No such limit is mentioned  in the Salvage 
Convention. 
***** 
 
  
54

 
55

 
  
56

 
57

 
58

 
 
 
 
59

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
60

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
REPORT 
 
The Merchant Shipping (Amendment) Bill, 2015 (Annex ure-I) was introduced 
in Lok Sabha on the 10 th  August, 2015. The Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha, o n 26 th  
August, 2015, referred the Bill to the Department-r elated Parliamentary Standing 
Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture for exa mination and report within three 
months. 
2. The Merchant Shipping Act, 1958 was enacted to f oster the development and 
efficient maintenance of an Indian mercantile marin e sector in a manner best suited to 
serve the national interest. International Maritime  Organisation (IMO), as the global 
standard-setting authority for the safety, security  and environmental performance of 
international shipping, creates fair and effective regulatory framework for the shipping 
industry in the form of Conventions for universal adoption and implementation.  
3. The Bill, in its Statement of Objects and Reason s, mentions that India is a 
member of IMO and as and when Government of India a pproves to be a party to an 
International Convention by accession/ratification,  the Convention is given effect by 
suitably incorporating its provisions in the concer ned domestic legislation , i.e,  the 
Merchant Shipping Act, 1958. India has already acce ded to three International 
Conventions of the IMO  viz ., the International Convention on Civil Liability for 
Bunker Oil Pollution Damage, 2001 (hereafter referr ed to as Bunker Convention); the 
Nairobi International Convention on the Removal of Wrecks, 2007 (hereafter referred 
to as Nairobi Convention); and the International Co nvention on Salvage, 1989 
(hereafter referred to as Salvage Convention).  
4. It has further been stated that the accession to  Bunker Convention has now been 
approved and for implementing the Convention, the M erchant Shipping Act, 1958 
requires further amendments. The amendment seeks to  incorporate the Convention 
provisions by inserting Part XBA in the Act titled ‘Civil Liability for Bunker Oil 
Pollution Damage’. India is already a party to the Nairobi Convention and Salvage 
Convention. However, in the light of experiences ga ined in implementing Part XIII 
titled “Wreck and Salvage”, it was felt necessary t o amend the Part  XIII to make them 
progressive and in tune with Nairobi Convention and Salvage Convention. 
5. The Committee heard the views of the Secretary, Ministry of Shipping, Director 
General (Shipping) and other senior officials of th e Ministry on the provisions of the 
Bill on the 16 
th  September, 2015. The Committee also heard the view s of the 
representative of the Indian National Shipowners’ A ssociation (INSA) on the 24 th  
September, 2015. Besides INSA, ICC Shipping Associa tion and GOL Salvage Services 
61

Ltd. submitted written memoranda to the Committee o n different aspects of the above 
stated Conventions and the amendments proposed to t he Merchant Shipping Act, 1958. 
The Committee also considered the background note a nd replies to its questions 
furnished by the Ministry of Shipping. 
6. The succeeding paragraphs state the salient feat ures of the three International 
Conventions as well as the proposed amendments in t he Merchant Shipping Act, 1958 
to give effect thereto and also the reasons for the proposed amendments. 
Bunker Convention 
 
7. The Bunker Convention was adopted to ensure that  adequate, prompt and 
effective compensation is available to persons who suffer damage caused by spills of 
oil (hydrocarbon mineral oil including lubricating oil), when carried as fuel in ships’ 
bunkers. This Convention was adopted in 23 rd  March, 2001 and had come into force 
from 21 st  November, 2008. The Convention applies to damage c aused on the territory, 
including the territorial sea, and in exclusive eco nomic zones of States Parties. The 
Convention provides a separate instrument covering pollution damage only. A key 
requirement in the Bunker Convention is the need fo r the registered owner of a vessel 
to maintain a compulsory insurance cover. 
8. Under the provisions of the Merchant Shipping (A mendment) Bill, 2015, the 
registered owner of a vessel has to maintain compul sory insurance cover which allows 
claim for compensation for bunker pollution damage to be brought directly against an 
insurer. Ships of 1000 Gross Tonn and above have to  carry a certificate onboard to the 
effect that it maintains insurance or other financial security, without which these vessels 
will not be allowed to enter or leave India. The li ability cover for bunker pollution 
damage shall be equal to the limits of liability un der the applicable national or 
international limitation regime, but in all cases, not exceeding an amount calculated in 
accordance with the Convention on Limitation of Liability for Maritime Claims, 1976. 
9. The written reply furnished by the Ministry of S hipping stated that Article 14 of 
the Bunker Convention stipulates that the Conventio n shall enter into force one year 
following the date on which 18 States, including 5 States each with ships whose 
combined gross tonnage is not less than 1 million, have either signed it without 
reservation as to ratification, acceptance or appro val or have deposited the instruments 
of ratification, acceptance, approval or accession with the secretary General of the 
IMO. Accordingly, the Bunker Convention, 2001 came into force only on 21.11.08. 
10. The Ministry of Shipping informed the Committee  that amendments based on 
the Bunker Convention were considered necessary in view of the following: 
vii. It is difficult to obtain compensation to pollution  caused by bunker oil 
spill/leakage from ships other than tankers. Local 
Authorities/Government find it difficult to recover  costs on preventive 
measures and cleanup operation on such type of poll ution. This problem 
can be suitably addressed if India becomes party to  this Convention and 
incorporates its provision into the Merchant Shipping Act, 1958. 
viii. In spite of best precautionary efforts, accidents m ay happen in Indian as 
well as foreign flag ships. In that scenario, it is  vital to have an 
internationally agreed effective liability compensation regime in place. 
ix. Indian ships having 1000 GT or more, on internation al trade will be 
issued with a certificate from the Indian Maritime Administration. This 
would enable to carry out international trade witho ut approaching other 
Governments for such certificate, who have acceded to this Convention. 
62

x. India would be able to ensure that all foreign flag vessels entering Indian 
territorial waters or Exclusive Economic Zone are d uly covered by 
insurance as required under the Convention. 
xi. The Convention has already been adopted by major Ma ritime States, 
therefore, it is binding on Indian Ships involved i n worldwide trade, 
irrespective of whether India is a party to the Convention. 
xii. Indian ships have to carry “Blue Card” issued by in surance companies 
irrespective of whether India is a party to the Con vention or not, if, it is 
trading in countries that are parties to this Conve ntion.  However, vice 
versa the same is not applicable for foreign ships trading in India.  Even 
if they are carry blue card, pollution in Indian wa ters will not be under 
the purview of such insurance as India is not party to this Convention. 
11. The following are the salient provisions of the  Bill related to Bunker 
Convention:- 
• Applies to all Indian vessels (irrespective of size ) anywhere in the world 
and to all foreign vessels while in Indian Waters; 
• Preventive measures and curative measures taken to minimize damage 
shall also be liable for compensation; 
• While owners of all vessels are liable to compensat e against bunker oil 
pollution damage for vessels of 1000 GT and above, the insurer is liable 
to compensate; 
• Liability of owner is exempted if the pollution dam age is due to war, act 
of God, intentional act/omission of third person, negligence/wrongful act 
of Government/Authority; 
• Owner entitled to limit his liability as per Conven tion for Limitation of 
Liability for Maritime Claims, which will be determ ined by the High 
Court of jurisdiction; 
• Claims to be preferred within 3 years from date of damage or 6 years 
from date of incident; 
• Vessels of 1000 GT and above to compulsorily mainta in 
insurance/financial security.  DG(S) to issue a cer tificate to this effect; 
No such vessel shall enter or leave Indian port without certificate; and 
• Rule making powers in respect of form & manner of a pplication to High 
Court to limit liability, financial securities, for m of certificate and 
conditions of issue, fee for issue of certificate, manner of renewal and 
renewal fee provided under. 
12.  Regarding the cost to be incurred due to the a mendments proposed to the Merchant 
Shipping Act, 1958 based on the Bunker Convention, the Ministry  has stated that : 
/head2right Vessels on International voyages are already comply ing with the 
requirement as Convention is already in force, henc e no additional cost 
for such vessels. 
/head2right Vessels on the coast of India may have to take addi tional insurance 
cover. 
/head2right Cost of such insurance is not expected to exceed 1$  per GT per annum 
(Rs.66.4 per GT per annum), subject to the conditio n of the vessels, risk 
factor, claims history of the company and ships. 
63

13. The Ministry of Shipping, in its written reply to a pointed query of the 
Committee, stated that United States of America and  Japan are the two major maritime 
nations who are not a party to the Bunker Conventio n.  The United States has enacted 
the Oil Pollution Act, 1990 that covers all types o f oil, from the ship, whether bunkers 
or cargo.  The compensations and the requirement ar e more stringent than the Bunker 
Convention and hence, there was no need by USA to a dopt the Bunker Convention 
which came into force at a much later stage in 2008 . Similarly, Japan amended the ‘Act 
on Liability for Ship Oil Pollution, 1975' in 2005 to cover bunker pollution damage, 
before the Bunker Convention came into force intern ationally in 2008. Since the 
requirement under the local regulations were more s tringent, Japan never felt the need 
for the Bunker Convention.  As regards India, the p rovision relating to pollution from 
oil (except bunker oil pollution damage) are there in the Merchant Shipping Act, 1958, 
but there are no specific legislation for covering the pollution incidents caused by the 
bunker oil of the ships and a need was being felt t o provide for this. Hence, the 
proposed Bill is introduced. 
14. To the Committee’s query regarding the impact o f exemptions given to vessels 
having capacity below 1,000 GT from this Convention, the DG (Shipping) replied: 
“......below 1,000 GT, it is the requirement or the  obligation on the part of the 
owner or the operator that he will not be able to e scape or get away from. The 
threshold is only for purposes of a financial secur ity which is mandated in the  
Convention and that is through the insurance Blue C ards, which is then counter-
certified through a compliance certificate which is  issued by the Government.  
But that does not detract from the primary responsi bility of the owner or the 
operator to still ensure that he mitigates and mini mizes the pollution damage, 
compensates for that or removes the wreck, as the c ase may be, or salves the 
vessel”. 
15. When asked, the representative of Indian Nation al Shipowners' Association 
(INSA), also agreed that the exemption to the vesse ls which are 1000 GT and less,  
since the number of such vessels would be around 500 to 600 only. 
16. As regards Clause No. 352 RH, the DG (Shipping)  gave his clarification as 
under: 
“...if there is a claim for an immediate damage whi ch converts into a 
financial liability and, if it is substantive in na ture, it has to be claimed 
within a period of three years.  If there is an inc ident which otherwise is 
not so significant, but can be related to the origi nal cause of action and 
more by way of a social cause, for that the Sunset clause is six years.  
So, it is in terms of graded impact on the environment and ecology”. 
17. The Ministry, in its written reply clarified in  this regard that one may get the 
compensation, if a claim is made within three years  from the date of damage. However, 
no claim can be made six years after the incident causing the damage.  In simple words, 
if it is perceptible damage for which there is an a ctionable claim, then the maximum 
limit is three years. However, if there is an incid ent which otherwise is not so 
significant but later on can be related to original  cause of action and more by way of 
social cause, then in such cases the limitation per iod shall be six years. It is in terms of 
graded impact on the environment and ecology which may occur immediately on 
occurrence of the incident or may come out after passage of time. 
18. When asked as to the liability that would fall on the Ports after the Bunker 
Convention is to be implemented, the Secretary, Shipping replied that: 
64

“…as far as major ports are concerned, we have a sc heme available in 
the Ministry where we give 50 per cent subsidy for them to procure 
equipment for fighting any pollution because of oil  spillage. We are 
promoting that. We are also auditing that, ports co mply with this 
requirement.  That is also available to other priva te ports which handle 
crude and other oil products.  That is the action t aken by ports as far as 
Bunker Convention is concerned.” 
19. The Committee also made a specific query about the provisions for arbitration 
in this regard. The DG (Shipping) replied that : 
“......arbitration mechanism kicks in when it is no t mutually resolved.  
Usually, we find that arbitration proceedings are largely held in London 
or in Singapore. This is through a mutual process o f acceptance of the 
arbiter. It is a panel of three arbitrators. One no minated by each, the 
second and the third one is mutually agreed upon. T here is also an 
International Arbitration Council which nominates these people”.  
20. The Committee took note of the Ministry’s reply  that Act of God or force 
majure  is a condition of occurrence of a natural calamity. Such an act needs to be an act 
which is not foreseen and is beyond the control of the human beings. If the person 
wants an exemption from the liability, he has to pr ove that such an act is not caused by 
him or his employee or agent, but by a third person . Hence, the third person needs to be 
a totally external person not connected with the owner as employee or agent. As regards 
the act of God, there are number of case laws which  have been well adjudicated and it 
is now settled by the apex court as to what constit utes an act of God or the force 
majure . It is very well understood in terms of juristic p rinciples, and there may not be 
any ambiguity for it during the adjudication procee dings. The Court will decide, if it is 
an act of third party, in case there is a claim for an exemption from the liability. 
21. The Committee observes that the exemption given  to the owner if the 
pollution damage is due to an ‘Act of God’ as given  in clause 352 RD, is likely to 
leave ample scope for litigation and that the owner  of a ship can run away from 
his responsibilities of giving compensation to the pollution damage caused by the 
ship owned by him. The Committee, therefore, recomm ends to reconsider this 
aspect to ensure that the law does not leave any sc ope for the shipowners to get 
away from their responsibility of paying compensation. 
22. The Committee observes that Ports have ample ch ances of oil spillage and 
environment pollutions from the vessels at the time  of loading/unloading of cargo. 
The Committee recommends that latest modern equipme nts being used at 
International level may be provided to the Ports fo r addressing this challenge. The 
Committee further recommends that for our cash stra pped Major Ports, the 
present subsidy limit of 50% be enhanced substantia lly for procurement of the 
modern equipment for fighting any pollution due to oil spillage on a case to case 
basis. 
Nairobi Convention 
 
23.  The Nairobi International Convention on the Removal  of Wrecks 2007 (Nairobi 
Convention) provides the legal basis to remove ship wrecks that may have the potential 
to affect adversely the safety of lives, goods and property at sea, as well as the marine 
environment.  The Convention fills the gap in the e xisting international legal 
framework by providing the first set of uniform int ernational rules aimed at ensuring 
the prompt and effective removal of wrecks located beyond the territorial sea. 
24. The Nairobi Convention was adopted by an Intern ational Conference held in 
Kenya in 2007.  It has entered into force on 14.4.2015. 
65

25. The Ministry of Shipping informed the Committee  during the deliberations that 
amendments based on Wreck Removal Convention, 2007,  is considered necessary, in 
view of the following: 
vii) The existing provision in Part XIII of the Merchant  Shipping Act, 1958 
relating to wreck removal is not adequate in dealin g with increasing amount of 
wreck in the coast of India. 
viii) The amendments will enable the implementation of Na irobi Convention 
on the Removal of Wrecks 2007, to which India is al ready a Party, thereby 
bringing in internationally recognized and approved uniform rules for removal of 
wrecks. 
ix) The Convention will provide uniform international r ules aimed at 
ensuring the prompt and effective removal of wrecks  located beyond the 
territorial sea.  The Convention includes an option al clause enabling countries to 
apply certain provisions to their territory, including their territorial sea. 
x) Increasing number of vessels and limited space avai lable in the ports 
have resulted in increased number of accidents caus ing wrecks resulting in 
pollution.  Most of the perpetrators go scot-free d ue to ignorance about the 
incident or lack of importance given to remedial measures to be adopted. 
xi) The problems due to wreck are three-fold: first, a wreck may constitute a 
hazard to navigation, potentially endangering other  vessels and their crews; 
second, wreck has a potential to cause damage to th e coastal and marine 
environment, depending on the nature of the cargo; and third, there is the issue of 
costs involved in the marking and removal of hazardous wrecks. 
xii) The current provisions in the Merchant Shipping Act , 1958 are 
inadequate in dealing with the increasing number of  wrecks in Indian Coast.  
Therefore, to control this problem and to bring the  existing regulation in line 
with the developments in international shipping, it  is vital to make these 
amendments in the Act. 
26. The Ministry, in its written reply furnished to  the Committee, stated that Article 
18 of the Nairobi Convention stipulates that the Co nvention shall enter into force 
twelve months following the date on which 10 states  have either signed it without 
reservation as to ratification, acceptance or appro val or have deposited the instruments 
of ratification, acceptance, approval or accession with the secretary General of the 
IMO. Accordingly, the Nairobi Convention, 2007 came into force only on 14.04.15 [i.e. 
this year only] 
27. The following are the salient features of the B ill relating to Nairobi Convention 
provided by the Ministry of Shipping: 
• The Bill makes the existing provisions of the Act d ealing with wreck 
[Part XIII] in line with Nairobi Convention; 
• The master/operator of ship is statutorily obliged to report wreck incident 
in Indian Territory to receiver of wrecks (Deputy C onservator of 
Ports/District Magistrate) and D.G. (Shipping). Ind ian ship to report 
wreck incident in foreign territory to D.G. (Shipping). 
• D.G. (Shipping) can direct Directorate General Ligh t House and Light 
Ships, Coast Guard, Port or other authority, for lo cating & marking 
wrecks; 
• D.G. (Shipping) to inform ship’s registry country and in consultation with 
that country proceed to remove wreck.  If the owner  does not remove the 
66

wreck, receiver of wreck (at the expense of the own er) may remove the 
wreck; 
• Registered owner is liable for the cost of activiti es related to locating, 
marking and removal of wreck; 
• Registered owner of ship of 300 GT and above to mai ntain compulsory 
insurance/financial security.  D.G. (Shipping) to i ssue a certificate to this 
effect.  Contravening ships can be detained; and  
• Claim for recovery of costs for locating and marking wreck to be within 3 
years from date of determination of hazard and 6 ye ars from date of 
maritime casualty that resulted in the wreck. 
28.   As regards the cost to be incurred due to the  amendments proposed, based on 
the Nairobi Convention, the Ministry stated that : 
/head2right Vessels on International voyages are already comply ing with the 
requirement as Convention is already in force, henc e no additional cost 
for such vessels. 
/head2right Vessels on the coast of India may have to take addi tional insurance 
cover. 
/head2right Cost of such insurance is not expected to exceed 1$  per GT per annum 
(Rs.66.4 per GT per annum), subject to the conditio n of the vessels, risk 
factor, claims history of the company and ships. 
/head2right The  P&I cover provided by the IG group of clubs ge nerally includes 
cover for both Bunker pollution damage and wreck removal. 
29. The Ministry of Shipping, in their written subm ission, has stated that:   
United States of America, China and Japan, Italy, Norway, Republic of Korea, 
and Russian Federation are the major maritime natio ns which are not party to 
the Convention.  As of now the national legislation  of the above countries 
provide adequate mechanism of direct action against  the ship owners in their 
coastal waters hence there may not be a need for th em to be a party to this 
Convention.  However, the Nairobi Wreck Removal Con vention has entered 
into force this year only, i.e. , on 14.04.2015.  Hence, it is still early stages a s 
most of the countries may still be evaluating the C onvention from deciding to 
become party to the Convention.  Moreover, now the Convention extends its 
scope beyond coastal waters up to Exclusive Economi c Zone (EEZ), thus there 
may be reconsideration by other countries in due co urse to decide on being a 
party to this Convention.  As regard India, the pro visions related to the wreck 
removal already exist in the Merchant Shipping Act,  1958.  However, these are 
proposed to be updated, as an opportunity to make I ndian legislation fully 
compliant with the Convention.   
30. The Committee enquired about the procedure to b e followed by the authorities 
if an incident of wreck happened in the premises of  a Major Port, as in the case which 
occurred in the vicinity of Mumbai Port a few years  ago.  The DG Shipping, explained 
that: 
“…..if it were to happen in a Port of call, it is t he Deputy Conservator of Ports 
who would then take necessary action as he would be  the receiver of wrecks.  
In case the owner or operator did not discharge in spite of notification and 
being given adequate notice to do so, then the Depu ty Conservator of Port 
would takeover that asset as a receiver of wreck an d then do all that is required 
to spend money and then lodge the claims.  That is why the designation has 
67

been given as 'receiver of wrecks'.  That is the suo motu  assumption of 
responsibility.  But, that is a residual responsibi lity after having failed in 
convincing the owner or operator to discharge their  duty.  Correspondingly, 
beyond the port limit, as I submitted, if it were within the territorial waters, this 
power is delegated to the District Collector or District Magistrate to do so”. 
31. To the Committee’s query about the possible rea sons why Government owned 
vessels are exempted, the Secretary, Shipping replied that: 
“........the broad principle is, because Government s, in case of accidents, are 
funded sufficiently, and if they have to compensate somebody, they would do 
so.  Therefore, most of the equipment in the Government is not insured.  That 
is one aspect.  But that is, especially, for milita ry machines because they also 
partake in war.” 
 
32. In the written reply furnished by the Ministry,  it has been stated that the vessels 
owned or operated by the Government and used for th e non commercial service, are 
exempted from the compulsory insurance, as the broad principle is that the Government 
in case of accidents are funded sufficiently and if  some compensation is to be paid to 
some person, the Government will be able to pay. Go vernment is a kind of sovereign 
guarantee in itself. Therefore, most of the equipme nts in the Government are not 
insured.  
33. In this regard, the Indian National Shipowners'  Association, in its written 
submission, has stated that: 
It is found that Warships, other Naval vessels and Government non-
commercial vessels are often exempted from the prov isions of a Convention 
since it is presumed that a sovereign Government  h as adequate funds and 
resources to meet any eventuality. However, in all cases, even such vessels 
are advised to be in compliance with all Internatio nal Conventions, rules and 
regulations, as far as practically possible and feasible. 
34. In response to the Committee’s query as to whet her these three Conventions are 
applicable to the fishing and cruise vessels, the M inistry has furnished the reply that, 
the three Conventions do not make any reference or differentiate its application to the 
type of vessel. The general principle of applicatio n adopted is the gross tonnage of the 
vessel.  The criteria for application of Bunker Con vention to a ship are that it should be 
above 1000 GT. The Nairobi Wreck Removal Convention  shall be applicable to ships 
which are of 300 GT and above. No such limit is mentioned in the Salvage Convention. 
35. When asked by the Committee about the advantage s of acceding to the Nairobi 
Convention, the representative of the Indian Nation al  Shipowners' Association stated 
that: 
“A lot of old vessels used to keep coming to India,  but, now, this is something 
which will stop happening.  Because we do not have these Conventions and we 
do not have the ability to enforce the law, it beco mes easier for me as an 
imprudent ship owner to bring the old ships, which are not allowed in other 
regimes.”   
36. The Ministry of Shipping, in their written repl y, has stated that Nairobi 
Convention provides a sound legal basis for coastal  countries to remove, or have 
removed, from their coastlines, wrecks which pose a  big environment hazard to the 
safety of navigation or to the marine and coastal lives, or both. It will make ship-owners 
financially liable and require them to take out ins urance or provide other financial 
security to cover the costs of wreck removal. This Convention also includes an optional 
68

Clause enabling States Parties to apply certain pro vision to their territory, including 
their territorial sea. 
37. The Committee took cognizance of the status of the wrecks already there in the 
Indian waters, furnished by the Ministry of Shippin g (Annexure II). There are a total of 
39 wrecks in Indian waters, some of the wrecks are affecting the shipping channels. 
The Committee recommends that the Government should  chalk out a time bound 
action plan to remove the wrecks that are already t here in the Indian waters 
especially those wrecks which are affecting the shipping channels. 
Salvage Convention 
 
38. The International Convention on Salvage 1989 (S alvage Convention) replaced 
the prevalent “no cure, no pay” principle where a s alvor is only rewarded for services if 
the operation is successful.  By towing a damaged t anker away from an 
environmentally sensitive area, salvor prevents maj or pollution incidents.  But the 
prevalent “no cure, no pay” principle acted as a di sincentive for operation, where 
chances of success were slim.  The 1989 Salvage Con vention remedied this deficiency 
by making provision for an enhanced salvage award i n preventing or minimizing 
damage to the environment and by introducing a “spe cial compensation” to be paid to 
salvors who fail to earn a reward in the normal way. 
39. This Convention replaced a Convention on the la w of  salvage adopted in 
Brussels in 1910.  The 1989 Convention introduced a  “special compensation”  to be 
paid to salvors who have failed to earn a reward in  the normal way (i.e.,  by salving the 
ship and cargo).  It was adopted in 28.4.1989 and h as entered into force from 
14.7.1996. 
40. The Ministry of Shipping has informed the Commi ttee that amendment based 
on the International Convention on Salvage, 1989 is  considered essential and desirable 
in view of the following: 
iv) The present provision of Part XIII of the Merchant Shipping Act, 1958 is 
inadequate in dealing with salvage operation as the  salver will only be 
awarded, if the salvage is successful (no-cure-no-p ay principle). Salvage 
Convention seeks to remedy this deficiency by makin g provision for an 
enhanced salvage award taking into account the skil l and efforts of the 
salvors in preventing or minimizing damage to the environment. 
v) The amendment in the Merchant Shipping Act, 1958 wi ll revise the text 
with the updated provisions mentioned in the Conven tion. The 
amendments would also highlight the significance of  article 13 and 14 of 
the Convention which relates to criteria for paymen t of award and special 
compensation to the salvors respectively. 
vi) India is already a signatory to this Convention and  has obligation to give 
full and complete effect to the provision of the Convention. The proposed 
amendment in the Act would enable the Government to  discharge this 
obligation by including the key parameters of the C onvention as 
substantive part in the Act and also frame detailed  procedures under the 
rule making powers as specified in the Act. 
41. The Ministry, in its written reply, stated that  Article 29 of the Salvage 
Convention stipulated that the Convention shall ent er into force one year following the 
date on which 15 States have expressed their consen t to be bound by it. For a State 
which expresses its consent to be bound by this Con vention after the conditions for 
entry into force thereof have been met, such consen t shall take effect one year after the 
date of expression of such consent. Accordingly, th e Salvage Convention 1989 came 
into force only on 14.07.1996. 
69

42. The following are the salient features of the B ill relating to Salvage Convention: 
• The Bill makes the existing provisions of the Act d ealing with Salvage in 
[Part XIII] in line with Salvage Convention; 
• does not apply to warships, Government non-commerci al vessels, fixed 
or floating platforms or to mobile offshore drillin g units when engaged in 
sea-bed mining; 
• the owner of the vessel is obliged to pay the salvo r for his services 
towards saving life, cargo, etc; 
• salvage services by Indian Navy/Coast Guard/Port au thority also entitled 
for compensation;  
• master of ship is authorized to conclude salvage co ntract on behalf of 
owner of vessel and master of ship or owner of ship  can conclude salvage 
contract on behalf of persons and/or cargo on board of vessel; 
• lays down duties of salvor, owner and master; 
• lays down rights and duties of Central Government i n relation to salvage 
operations; 
• lays down rights of salvors to payment for the serv ices rendered by them 
relating to salvage operations; 
• under. S. 402 H (2), Government can make rules pres cribing criteria for 
claiming rewards, the manner of fixing rewards, spe cial compensation, 
apportionment of rewards amongst salvors etc.; 
• disputes relating to claims shall be adjudicated by  concerned High Court 
(where vessel is registered/vessel is situated/cause of action arises); and 
• period for claim-within 2 years. 
43. On the matter of the costs likely to be incurre d due to the amendments proposed 
based on the Salvage Convention, the Ministry of Shipping stated: 
/head2right  generally no cost on owner, unless salvage service  is required due to the 
exigency; and 
/head2right cost of salvage will vary depending on the value of the property salvaged. 
44. The Ministry, in its written reply, informed th e Committee that United States of 
America and Japan are not a party to Bunker Convent ion; China, Japan, Italy, Norway, 
Republic of Korea and Russian Federation are not pa rty to the Nairobi Convention; and 
Japan, Panama and Republic of Korea are the major c ountries which are not a party to 
the Salvage Convention.  
45. In this regard, in a written submission, the In dian National Shipowners' 
Association has stated that often USA practices and  adopts domestic rules which in 
most of the cases are far more stringent that some of the international regulations are in 
operation much prior to similar rules or provisions  being adopted by International 
Maritime Organization and that this could be one of  the reasons for USA not to be a 
signatory to the Nairobi Convention. It has been fu rther stated that USA is also not a 
signatory to 
 the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea ( UNCLOS)1982; the 
International Convention on Civil Liability for Oil  Pollution Damage 1969 (CLC 
Convention); Bunker Convention 2001; Hong Kong Recy cling Convention 2009; 
Nairobi Wreck Removal Convention 2007; and the Mari time Labour Convention 2006 
to list a few. 
46. In a written reply, the Ministry of Shipping ha s stated: 
“Japan, Panama and Republic of Korea are few major maritime nations 
which are not party to the Convention. The prime re ason for such 
70

maritime countries not becoming a party to the Conv ention is that their 
national legislation has already made necessary pro visions for salvage 
and the courts have the sole jurisdiction of awardi ng the salvage 
compensation. The Salvage Convention applies to jud icial or arbitral 
proceedings pertaining to salvage. Salvage is gener ally between private 
parties and disputes between them are generally dec ided by 
arbitration/judicial process.  The local legislatio n of such countries also 
provides mechanism for arbitration and compensation  for efforts of the 
salvor irrespective of degree of success. Thus, suc h countries have not 
felt the need for adoption of the Convention. As re gards India, the 
provisions related to salvage are already there in the Act. However, these 
are proposed to be updated, as an opportunity to ma ke Indian legislation 
fully compliant with the Convention.  
47. As regards the reasons for delay in implementin g the Salvage Convention, the 
Ministry of Shipping stated that having met the req uirement of tonnage and the number 
of States, as per the requirement of the stated Con vention, it actually came into force 
internationally after nearly seven years, i.e ., on 14.07.1996.  India became a party to 
this Convention on 18.10.1995, as provisions relate d to the Salvage Convention largely 
exist in the Merchant Shipping Act ever since 1958 and continued to be part of the Act 
till date. Indian Parliament in their great wisdom had provided the provisions related to 
salvage in the Act from 1958 itself, i.e ., much before 1989 Salvage Convention came 
into force. Therefore, the broad provisions on salv age already exist in the present 
Merchant Shipping Act. However, in the present Bill , the provisions related to the 
Salvage Convention are being updated, as an opportu nity to make Indian legislation 
fully compliant with the Convention.   
48. The Ministry informed the Committee that the si gnificant improvement made 
by the Salvage Convention 1989 is that it has enabl ed compensation for unsuccessful 
salvage efforts, and that the salvors dealing with the salvage operation is free to make a 
contract with the ship-owner whose ship is being sa lved by it, so as to cover the 
compensation even if the salvage operation is not f ully successful. The Salvage 
Convention has done away with the old principle of ‘No cure No pay’. It encourages 
the salvors to assist the distressed vessel and eve n if the salvage may not be totally 
successful, the salvor is compensated by invoking c ontract and the special 
compensation scope clause. 
49. In response to the Committee's query regarding the jurisdiction on the disputes 
of claims in the case of a salvage operation, the M inistry stated that the jurisdiction has 
been given based on the broad principles as given i n the Civil Procedure Code, 1908 
with respect to jurisdiction of the Courts. The Min istry further stated that the case may 
not proceed in more than one Court, as the principl e of res  sub judice  will apply. The 
case may proceed at one location based on the princ iple that where it is instituted first. 
The period of limitation shall commence from date of completion of salvage operation. 
50. Regarding the financial or other loss caused to  the country due to not following 
these Conventions, the Ministry of Shipping stated,  in its written reply furnished to the 
Committee: 
As regards financial or other loss to the country i n absence of following 
these Conventions, it is submitted that Indian ship s on international 
voyage are already complying with the requirements of the Bunker 
Convention and Nairobi Convention.  For salvage ope rations and also to 
the extent with respect to the Nairobi Convention, the provisions are 
already in existence in the Merchant Shipping Act, 1958.  As shipping is 
71

international in nature, Indian ships trading world wide had to abide by 
the requirements of the Conventions. Therefore, Ind ian ships were 
issued certificates by other Convention countries a t a certain cost.  Now, 
with the above adoption, Indian ships can be issued  certificates by the 
Indian Administration after enactment.  Secondly, w ith the enactment, 
every ship entering Indian Coastal waters will be r equired to have 
necessary financial guarantee and a certificate bea ring a proof of the 
same.  In case of any pollution by way of bunker or  ship becoming a 
wreck, direct action can be initiated against the o wners/insurers through 
the process of Arbitration instead of passing throu gh the lengthy judicial 
process. Such compulsory carriage of certificate an d the provision of 
direct action will be an indirect method and deterrent thus giving indirect 
protection to the coastal marine environment.  Fina ncial or other loss to 
the country could occur if the provisions of the Co nventions are not 
brought into force in India as owners of foreign fl ag vessels will not 
require to have insurance or financial security to deal with bunker oil 
spills or wrecks occurring in our waters, leading t o environmental 
damage and consequential loss to the country. 
51. The Committee, in its meeting held on the 24 th  September, 2015 heard the 
representative of the Indian National Shipowners' A ssociation, who informed the 
Committee that they are fully satisfied with the Clauses of the Bill and that the Ministry 
of Shipping had consulted them at the time of draft ing of this Bill. The ICC Shipping 
Association also conveyed their agreement to the Cl auses without offering any further 
suggestion. M/s GOL Offshore Limited gave written s uggestions on some of the 
Clauses of the Bill.  
52. The Committee welcomes the Bill which seeks to suitably incorporate the 
provisions of the International Convention on Civil  Liability for Bunker Oil 
Pollution Damage, 2001 (Bunker Convention); the Nai robi International 
Convention on the Removal of Wrecks, 2007 (Nairobi Convention); and the 
International Convention on Salvage, 1989 (Salvage Convention) in the Merchant 
Shipping Act, 1958. 
53. The Committee’s observations/recommendations on  the Clauses/Sub-Clauses of 
the Bill have been given in the succeeding paragraphs:- 
Sub-Clause 402D (2) & (3) 
 
54. In this Sub Clause, the master of the Ship has been given authority to sign the 
salvage contracts on behalf of the owner of the vessel. 
55. When Committee enquired about the adequacy of t he provisions of this Sub- 
Clause and the chances of any foul play against the  interest of the owners, the 
representative of the Indian National Shipowners’ Association replied that: 
“….the master of the ship engaging and getting into  a salvage contract is quite a 
normal process.  ….. all contracts of insurance or even the certificate of registry, it 
is not in the name of the owner of the company; it is in the name of the master 
itself.  So, this is something which over a period of time has been a part of our 
industry.  Yes, where there is temptation, there is  a chance of something going 
wrong but, by and large, as an industry we have rar ely seen a case where a master 
has entered into an illegal or untenable salvage co ntract and thereby alienated the 
asset.  It also serves very useful because sometime s, you may have a vessel which 
is farther away from you.  I could be sitting here in India and an accident or a 
salvage contract may take place in Brazil.  I may b e in a situation where 
72

financially it may not be viable to actually travel  and sign a contract.  At such 
times, the master becomes useful for the purposes of signing the contract.”   
56. The  Committee observes that the Master of the Ship has been given the 
authority to execute a salvage contract or any such  contracts on behalf of the ship 
owner. Since the Master of the ship is only an empl oyee of the owner, there might 
be situations when the owner may not honour the contract signed by the Master of 
the Ship and the Salvor. Therefore, the Committee f eels that a strict provision 
should be made in the Bill in order to save the interests of the Master of the Vessel. 
In view of the availability of sophisticated Inform ation and Communication 
Technology tools, it is easy to consult the owner o f the Vessel by the Master of the 
Vessel before agreeing to the contract or in case of  any contingency. 
57. The Committee, therefore, recommends that a new  Sub Clause-“in both the 
cases at (2) and (3), the owner of the vessel or ca rgo as the case may be, shall not 
be entitled to challenge the decision of the master /owner of the vessel, if such a 
decision is taken after sufficient consultation” may be inserted in the Bill.   
Sub Clause 402G  
58. Sub Clauses under this Clause prescribe the rig hts and duties of Central 
Government in case there is a need of salvage opera tion of a vessel. It includes means 
to protect its coast line or related interests from  pollution or threat of pollution arising 
out of a maritime casualty or acts relating to such  casualty which may result in major 
harmful consequences, its duties to seek the assistance and to give facilities to salvors. 
59. The Committee also feels that within the territ orial waters of India, Indian 
Companies should be given priority for salvage oper ations.  Accordingly, the 
Committee recommends that the following sub Clause may be added in the Bill: 
“The Central Government shall ensure that the salvo rs of Indian origin are 
given first right of refusal as against the salvors  of foreign origin, for any 
salvage operations within the territorial waters of India”. 
 
 
Sub Clause 402 H 
 
60. This Clause ensures the Salvor a right to payme nt for the services rendered by 
him relating to salvage operations, provided that n ow such payment shall be made 
where there is express and reasonable prohibition from the owner or master of vessel or 
owner of any other property in danger. 
61. Under this Clause, the Central Government may p rescribe the criteria for 
claiming rewards, manner of fixing rewards, the pay ment of special compensation, the 
apportionment of payment amongst salvors, the salva ge of persons, the payment under 
the contract, the payment for additional services n ot covered under the contract and the 
effect of misconduct of salvors on reward or paymen t. The salvors shall have right to 
enforce his maritime lien against the owner or mast er of vessel or owner of any other 
property in danger when satisfactory security for h is claim, including interest and costs, 
has not been provided by such person. 
62.  M/s GOL Offshore Limited has, in their written subm ission, stated that in the 
case of owner of the vessel failing to pay the salvors due to bankruptcy, due to absence 
of proper insurance cover or any other reason, ther e should be suitable provision for 
making payment to the salvor who has carried out th e salvage operation under the 
instructions of the Central Government.  
63. The Committee recommends that the Government ma y appropriately look 
into the absence of such a provision in the Bill, w ith a view to deal with the cases 
of owner of the vessel failing to pay the salvors d ue to bankruptcy, absence of 
73

proper insurance cover or any other reasons and to ensure that the salvors get 
their payment for the salvage operation carried out. 
GENERAL RECOMMENDATIONS 
64. The Committee observes that there is no provisi on for grievance redressal 
mechanism in the Bill. The Committee also observes that there are lots of 
probabilities of a grievance that can arise at any stage of the salvage operation, 
wreck removal, etc. The Committee, therefore, recom mends that necessary 
provisions for redressal of grievances should be incorporated suitably, in the Bill.  
65. During the time of deliberations on the Bill, t he Committee enquired about the 
inordinate delay in bringing these Conventions part icularly as the Bunker Convention 
which is of the year 2001; the Nairobi Convention i s of 2007; and the Salvage 
Convention is of 1989, for which the Secretary, Shipping replied that: 
 “There are three Conventions.  In two of those, we  had become parties 
because there were certain provisions in existence.  This process goes through 
the MEA and their Legal Treaties Division. They, no rmally, assess whether 
our existing legal provisions are adequate for us t o agree to a certain 
Convention.  So, out of these three Conventions, th ey agreed that even at a 
minimum base level, in respect of two of them, we c an become parties and we 
went ahead and became parties on the basis of the p rovisions which already 
existed under the Merchant Shipping Act. 1958.  As far as the Bunker 
Convention is concerned, when we sent this file, th eir opinion was that unless 
we first go through the process of getting an appro val for the legislation, for 
the Bill, this may not be accepted.  So, the Bunker  Convention, for that 
reason, was also clubbed here.” 
66. Further to this, the Ministry of Shipping has f urnished a self-contained note 
showing the reasons for the inordinate delay in fin alizing these three International 
Conventions, to the Committee (Annexure-II). The Mi nistry has further submitted that 
the delay, if any, is attributable to the difficult ies faced in harmonization of the draft 
provisions based on the three International Convent ions after starting the process in 
the year 2009 onwards. Further, the fresh approval of the Union Cabinet, consequent 
upon the change of Union Government was also one of  the procedures that was 
required to be followed by them. 
67. The Committee notes that cumbersome procedures,  inter-ministerial and 
pre-legislative consultations led to the delay in b ringing the legislation. The 
Committee feels that confusion, lack of farsightedn ess, lack of decision making 
capabilities and indecisiveness at various levels also contributed to this delay. The 
Committee recommends that in future, the Ministry s hould ensure that the 
legislations are processed within the shortest poss ible time by avoiding the steps 
which are unnecessary and unwarranted. The Committe e has seen that in many 
situations, the Ministry’s line of action was not c lear because of which the action 
initiated way back in April, 2009 could be accompli shed after a gap of more than 
six years i.e.,  on the 10 
th  August, 2015. 
68. The Committee recommends that necessary amendme nts as suggested by 
the Committee, may be brought in the relevant Clauses of the Merchant Shipping 
(Amendment) Bill, 2015.  
69. The Committee, while going through the Merchant  Shipping Act, 1958, felt 
that the statute is quite bulky, with 461 Sections and Sub-sections.  The present 
Bill itself contains more than 50 Clauses.  The Com mittee, therefore, recommends 
74

that the Government may consider enacting a new Mer chant Shipping Act so that 
the obsolete Clauses could be removed and new Claus es could be brought in to 
keep it in tune with time. 
***** 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE AT A 
GLANCE  
 The Committee observes that the exemption given to  the owner if the 
pollution damage is due to an ‘Act of God’ as given  in clause 352 RD, is likely to 
leave ample scope for litigation and that the owner  of a ship can run away from 
his responsibilities of giving compensation to the pollution damage caused by the 
ship owned by him. The Committee, therefore, recomm ends to reconsider this 
aspect to ensure that the law does not leave any sc ope for the shipowners to get 
away from their responsibility of paying compensation. 
(Para No. 21) 
 The Committee observes that Ports have ample chanc es of oil spillage and 
environment pollutions from the vessels at the time  of loading/unloading of cargo. 
The Committee recommends that latest modern equipme nts being used at 
International level may be provided to the Ports fo r addressing this challenge. The 
Committee further recommends that for our cash stra pped Major Ports, the 
present subsidy limit of 50% be enhanced substantia lly for procurement of the 
modern equipment for fighting any pollution due to oil spillage on a case to case 
basis. 
(Para No. 22) 
 The Committee recommends that the Government should  chalk out a time 
bound action plan to remove the wrecks that are alr eady there in the Indian 
waters especially those wrecks which are affecting the shipping channels. 
(Para No. 37) 
 The Committee welcomes the Bill which seeks to sui tably incorporate the 
provisions of the International Convention on Civil  Liability for Bunker Oil 
Pollution Damage, 2001 (Bunker Convention); the Nai robi International 
Convention on the Removal of Wrecks, 2007 (Nairobi Convention); and the 
International Convention on Salvage, 1989 (Salvage Convention) in the Merchant 
Shipping Act, 1958. 
(Para No. 52) 
Sub-Clause 402D (2) & (3)  
 The  Committee observes that the Master of the Shi p has been given the 
authority to execute a salvage contract or any such  contracts on behalf of the ship 
owner. Since the Master of the ship is only an empl oyee of the owner, there might 
be situations when the owner may not honour the contract signed by the Master of 
the Ship and the Salvor. Therefore, the Committee f eels that a strict provision 
75

should be made in the Bill in order to save the interests of the Master of the Vessel. 
In view of the availability of sophisticated Inform ation and Communication 
Technology tools, it is easy to consult the owner o f the Vessel by the Master of the 
Vessel before agreeing to the contract or in case of  any contingency. 
(Para No. 56) 
 The Committee, therefore, recommends that a new Su b Clause-“in both the 
cases at (2) and (3), the owner of the vessel or ca rgo as the case may be, shall not 
be entitled to challenge the decision of the master /owner of the vessel, if such a 
decision is taken after sufficient consultation” may be inserted in the Bill.   
(Para No. 57) 
Sub Clause 402G  
 The Committee also feels that within the territori al waters of India, Indian 
Companies should be given priority for salvage oper ations.  Accordingly, the 
Committee recommends that the following sub Clause may be added in the Bill: 
“The Central Government shall ensure that the salvo rs of Indian origin are 
given first right of refusal as against the salvors  of foreign origin, for any 
salvage operations within the territorial waters of India”. 
(Para No. 59) 
Sub Clause 402 H  
 The Committee recommends that the Government may a ppropriately look 
into the absence of such a provision in the Bill, w ith a view to deal with the cases 
of owner of the vessel failing to pay the salvors d ue to bankruptcy, absence of 
proper insurance cover or any other reasons and to ensure that the salvors get 
their payment for the salvage operation carried out. 
(Para No. 63) 
GENERAL RECOMMENDATIONS 
 The Committee observes that there is no provision for grievance redressal 
mechanism in the Bill. The Committee also observes that there are lots of 
probabilities of a grievance that can arise at any stage of the salvage operation, 
wreck removal, etc. The Committee, therefore, recom mends that necessary 
provisions for redressal of grievances should be incorporated suitably, in the Bill.  
(Para No. 64) 
 The Committee notes that cumbersome procedures, in ter-ministerial and 
pre-legislative consultations led to the delay in b ringing the legislation. The 
Committee feels that confusion, lack of farsightedn ess, lack of decision making 
capabilities and indecisiveness at various levels also contributed to this delay. The 
Committee recommends that in future, the Ministry s hould ensure that the 
legislations are processed within the shortest poss ible time by avoiding the steps 
which are unnecessary and unwarranted. The Committe e has seen that in many 
situations, the Ministry’s line of action was not c lear because of which the action 
initiated way back in April, 2009 could be accompli shed after a gap of more than 
six years i.e.,  on the 10 th  August, 2015. 
(Para No. 67) 
 The Committee recommends that necessary amendments  as suggested by 
the Committee, may be brought in the relevant Clauses of the Merchant Shipping 
(Amendment) Bill, 2015.  
(Para No. 68) 
 The Committee, while going through the Merchant Sh ipping Act, 1958, felt 
that the statute is quite bulky, with 461 Sections and Sub-sections.  The present 
Bill itself contains more than 50 Clauses.  The Com mittee, therefore, recommends 
76

that the Government may consider enacting a new Mer chant Shipping Act so that 
the obsolete Clauses could be removed and new Claus es could be brought in to 
keep it in tune with time. 
(Para No. 69) 
***** 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
77

 
78

 
79

 
80

 
 
Annexure-III  
 
 
81

Reply to the queries raised and remained unanswered  during the course of 
recording of oral evidence before the Department Re lated Parliamentary 
Standing Committee on 16.09.15.  
 
1.  Question 
:  In the presentation it has been shown that Bunke r 
Convention is a Convention of the year 2001, and In dia to become party 
after the enactment of the Bill. Why has there been a delay of 14 years? 
 
Answers/submissions 
: International Convention on Civil Liability for B unker oil 
Pollution Damage [Bunker Convention], 2001 was adop ted by the International 
Maritime Organisation [IMO] in 2001. However, it came into force internationally 
only at the end of the year 2008 i.e. after a gap o f nearly eight years, on 
21.11.2008. Therefore, there was no delay from 2001  till the end of 2008, as 
the Convention itself was not in force, and there w as no obligation to follow the 
Convention. 
 
The process for the accession and subsequent amendm ent to the Merchant 
Shipping Act, 1958 was initiated in early 2009. The  details of step wise process 
followed for the accession and necessary amendment to the Merchant Shipping 
Act, 1958 is as mentioned below; 
 
1. Directorate General of Shipping [DG (S)] sent th e proposal to 
accede to Bunker Convention and to seek in- princip le approval 
of the Cabinet to subsequently introduce amendments  to 
Merchant Shipping Act, 1958. 
28.04.2009 
2. The proposal was examined in the Ministry and ap proval of 
Hon’ble Minister was obtained to take up the matter  before the 
Union Cabinet.  
29.06.2009 
3. The proposal was suitably formulated as a draft Note for 
Cabinet. 
22.09.2009 
4. The draft Cabinet Note circulated for Inter-Mini sterial comments. 31.03.2010 
5. The Ministry of External Affairs while conveying  their comments 
suggested that instead of seeking in- principle app roval of the 
Cabinet to subsequently introduce amendments to Mer chant 
Shipping Act, 1958, the amendment to Merchant Shipp ing Act, 
1958 (Bill) should be first passed by the by the Pa rliament 
before taking up the proposal for becoming a party to Bunker 
Convention.   
05.05.2010 
6. The Ministry of Shipping sought the inputs of DG  (S) on the 
comments of M/o External Affairs along with the com ments 
received from various other Ministries. 
11.08.2010 
82

7. Inputs of DG (S) were received.  19.08.2010 
8. The Hindi version of the draft Cabinet Note and the draft Bill 
were referred to the DG (S) for verification of the  technical terms 
used in the translated version.  
22.10.2010 
9. DG (S) sent the corrected Hindi version of draft  Cabinet Note 
and the draft Merchant Shipping Amendment Bill. 
29.10.2010 
10. The final Note for Cabinet was sent to Prime Mi nister’s Office 
(PMO). The PMO suggested the Ministry of External A ffairs has 
suggested that the Bill be passed before becoming a party to the 
Convention the matter may be taken up before a Comm ittee of 
Secretaries (CoS). 
29.11.2010 
11. DG (S) sent their inputs and a Note was prepare d for the 
Committee of Secretaries. 
10.01.2011 
12. Committee of Secretaries meeting was held and i t was decided 
that Merchant Shipping Act amendment should precede  India 
becoming party to the convention and a draft amendi ng Bill or 
Ordinance should be prepared.  Secretary, D/o Legal Affairs and 
Secretary, Legislative Department were asked to ass ist Ministry 
of Shipping in drafting the Ordinances. 
15.03.2011 
13. The draft Ordinance and a draft proposal for Ca binet seeking 
approval to introduce an Ordinance on the Bunker Co nvention 
and the Nairobi Wreck Removal Convention were prepared. 
18.04.2011 
14.  The proposal for Ordinance on the Nairobi Conv ention and the 
Bunker Convention was approved by Hon’ble Minister. 
17.06.2011 
15. The Prime Minister’s Office advised that instea d of an Ordinance 
Merchant Shipping (Amendment) Bill be introduced as  per 
normal legislative process. 
03.07.2011 
16. The Note for Cabinet on Ordinance was circulate d for inter-
ministerial comments. 
08.11.2011 
17. The Legislative Department prepared the draft M erchant 
Shipping Amendment Bill instead of an Ordinance.  
08.01.2012 
 
18. Since the Legislative Department had made modif ications to the 
Bill and suggested that the Bill be discussed with the Legislative 
Department, DG (S) was requested to examine the mod ified Bill 
and depute an officer for discussions. 
28.02.2012 
19. DG (S) sent their inputs on the modified Bill w ith further 
changes. 
11.07.2012 
20. The revised Bill was discussed with Ministry of  Law. 27.09.2012 
83

21. The Legislative department sought further clari fications on the 
proposed Bill. 
19.10.2012 
22. Hon’ble Minister for Shipping directed that the  Merchant 
Shipping (Amendment) Bill should also include amend ing the 
provision contained in Section 356M regarding enhan cement of 
the oil pollution cess.  
04.11.2012 
23. In the course of discussions with Legislative D epartment the 
DDG, DG (S) incorporated the provisions of Salvage Convention 
in the Merchant Shipping (Amendment) Bill. 
04.01.2013 
24. The Bill was revised to incorporate provisions of Bunker 
Convention, Nairobi Convention, Salvage Convention and the 
amendment of Sec 356 M to enhance oil pollution cess. 
18.03.2013 
25. The revised draft Bill was again discussed with  Legislative 
Department. 
28.05.2013 
26. The fresh proposal for the Cabinet with the rev ised Bill 
containing Bunker Convention, Salvage Convention an d 
increase in oil pollution cess was approved by Hon.  Minister for 
Shipping. 
12.12.2013 
27. The revised draft Note for Cabinet Containing B ill for Bunker 
Convention, Salvage Convention, Nairobi Convention and 
increase of oil pollution cess was circulated for i nter-ministerial 
comments. 
16.12.2013 
28. The D/o Economic Affairs in their comments conv eyed that the 
amount of levy may be brought under the rules inste ad of 
quantifying it in the Bill and the financial implication arising in the 
freight charges as a result of the levy may be refl ected in the 
draft Note for Cabinet.  
07.02.2014 
29. Secretary, Legislative Department communicated that pre- 
legislative consultative policy should be followed for all 
legislative matters and therefore DG (S) was direct ed to upload 
the working draft of revised Merchant Shipping Amen dment Bill 
on the website of DG (S) and seek comments of stake holders 
and public. 
12.03.2014 
30. Before the Note for Cabinet and Bill could be f inalised election 
was declared and code of conduct came into force. 
 
--- 
31. The revised draft Merchant Shipping (Amendment)  Bill was 
loaded in the official website of the Directorate f or a period of 
one month seeking comments of all stakeholders i..e  on or 
before 02.06.2014, as per pre-legislative consultat ive policy 
02.5.2014 
84

prescribed by the Legislative Department. 
32. Follow up with the comments received from stake holders DG (S) 
held meetings with all stakeholders to discuss thei r comments 
on the draft Bill. 
09.6.2014 
33. The draft Bill after pre-legislative consultati on by DG (S) was 
finalised. 
11.6.2014 
34. The proposal was placed before the Hon’ble Mini ster of Shipping 
on the assuming of office of the present Government .  It was 
decided to remove provisions to increase oil/marine  pollution 
cess. This revised note for Cabinet and the revised  Bill was 
circulated for inter-ministerial consultations. 
08.08.2014 
35. Comments of various Ministries were received an d these 
comments were consolidated and sent to Legislative 
Department requesting them to finalise the Bill and  convey their 
concurrence to the proposal with the approval of Ho n. Law 
Minister. 
02.01.2015 
36. Legislative Department conveyed their concurren ce to the 
proposal and provided the final Bill with the appro val of Hon. 
Law Minister. 
09.02.2015 
37. The final Note for Cabinet and the final Bill w as approved by the 
Hon. Minister  
02.03.2015  
38. Official language wing of the Legislative Depar tment was 
requested for Hindi translation of the Bill. 
11.03.2015 
39. Official language wing of the Legislative Depar tment provided 
the Hindi translation of the Bill. 
23.04.2015 
40. The final note for Cabinet and the final Bill ( bilingual version) 
sent to Cabinet Secretariat and PMO. 
21.05.2015 
41. Proposal approved by the Union Cabinet. 10.06.2 015 
42. DG (S) sent inputs for the draft Statement of O bjects and 
Reasons, Notes on Clauses and Memorandum on Delegat ed 
Legislation. 
01.07.2015 
43. Draft Statement of Objects and Reasons, Memoran dum on 
Delegated Legislation approved by Hon. Minister and  referred to 
Legislative Department for vetting. 
09.7.2015 
44. Statement of Objects and Reasons, Memorandum on  Delegated 
Legislation vetted and finalized by Legislative Department. 
24.7.2015 
45. The Merchant Shipping (Amendment) Bill, 2015 in troduced in 
Parliament by Hon’ble Minister of Shipping. 
10.08.2015 
85

 
In light of the above mentioned circumstances, proc edures, inter-ministerial 
consultation, and pre-legislative consultations as well as combination of two 
more Convention [i.e. Nairobi and Salvage Conventio n] with the Bunker 
Convention, it may kindly be observed that the delay, if any is attributable to the 
difficulties faced in harmonization of the draft pr ovisions based on the three 
international Convention after starting the process  in the year 2009 onwards. 
Further, the fresh approval of the Union Cabinet, c onsequent upon the Change 
of the Union Government is also one procedure which  was required to be 
followed. 
 
2.  Question : In the presentation it has been shown that Intern ational 
Convention on Salvage is in force since 14.07.1996 and India is party 
since 18.10.1995. How do you correlate it? The delay to be explained. 
 
Answer/submission : Salvage Convention was adopted in the year 1989. 
However, having met the requirement of tonnage and the number of states, as 
per the requirement of the stated convention, it ac tually came into force 
internationally after nearly seven years i.e. on 14 .07.1996. India became a 
party to this Convention on 18.10.1995, as the provisions related to the Salvage 
Convention largely exist in the Merchant Shipping A ct ever since 1958 and 
continued to be part of the Act till date. Indian l aw makers [Hon’ble Parliament] 
in their great wisdom had provided the provisions r elated to salvage in the Act 
since from 1958 itself i.e. much before 1989 Salvag e Convention came into 
force. Therefore, the broad provisions on salvage a lready exist in the present 
Merchant Shipping Act.  
 
However, the significant improvement made by the Salvage Convention 1989 is 
that it has enabled compensation for unsuccessful s alvage efforts, and the 
salvor dealing with the salvage operation is free t o make a contract with the 
ship-owner whose ship is being salved by it, so as to cover the compensation 
even if the salvage operation is not fully successf ul. The salvage convention 
has done away with the old principle of “No cure No  pay “. It encourages the 
salvors to assist the distressed vessel and even if  the salvage may not be 
totally successful, the Salvor is compensated by in voking contract and the 
Special compensation scopic clause. 
 
It is submitted that as explained above, the provis ions related to salvage are 
already in existence in the present Merchant Shippi ng Act. However, the 
provisions related to the salvage Convention are be ing updated, as an 
opportunity to make Indian legislation fully compli ant with the Convention. 
Therefore, it may kindly be concluded that there is no delay in the legislation. 
 
86

3.  Question : Name of any major country which is not a signator y to 
these three Conventions [like US UK or Germany]. Wh at would be the 
possible reason for them not signing and we are opt ing for that 
Convention? 
 
Answer/submission 
: United States of America [USA] and Japan are the two 
major maritime nations who are not a party to the B unker Convention. The 
United States has enacted the Oil Pollution Act 199 0. The Act covers all types 
of oil, from the ship, whether bunkers or Cargo. Th e compensations and the 
requirement are more stringent than the Bunker Conv ention and hence there 
was no need by US to adopt the Bunker Convention wh ich came into force at a 
much later stage in 2008. Similarly, the Japanese ' Act on Liability for ship oil 
pollution 1975' was amended in 2005 to cover bunker  pollution damage before 
the bunker convention came into force international ly in 2008,  and also the 
requirement under the local regulations were more s tringent, thus Japan never 
felt the need for the bunker convention. As regards  India, the provision related 
to pollution from oil [except bunker oil pollution damage] are existing in the 
Merchant Shipping Act, 1958, but there is a need to  make specific legislation 
for covering the pollution incidents caused by the bunker oil of the ships, hence 
the proposed Bill is introduced. 
 
Nairobi Convention : United States of America [USA], China and Japan, Italy, 
Norway, Republic of Korea, and Russian Federation a re the major maritime 
nations which are not party to the Convention. As of now the national legislation 
of the above countries provide adequate mechanism of direct action against the 
ship owners in their coastal waters hence there may  not be a need for them to 
be a party to this Convention. However, the Nairobi  Wreck removal convention 
has entered into force this year only [i.e. on 14.0 4.2015].  Hence, it is still early 
stages as most of the countries may still be evalua ting the convention from 
deciding to become party to the Convention. Moreove r, now the Convention 
extends its scope beyond coastal waters up to Exclu sive Economic Zone 
(EEZ), thus there may be reconsideration by other c ountries in due course to 
decide on being a party to this Convention. As rega rd India, the provisions 
related to the wreck removal are already existing in the Act. However, these are 
proposed to be updated, as an opportunity to make I ndian legislation fully 
compliant with the Convention. 
 
Salvage Convention : Japan, Panama, Republic of Korea, are few major 
maritime nations which are not party to the Convent ion. The prime reason for 
such maritime countries not becoming a party to the  Convention is that their 
national legislation has already made necessary pro visions for salvage and the 
courts have the sole jurisdiction of awarding the s alvage compensation. The 
salvage convention applies to judicial or arbitral proceedings pertaining to 
salvage.   Salvage is generally between private par ties and disputes between 
87

them are generally decided by arbitration/judicial process. The local legislation 
of such countries also provides mechanism for Arbit ration and compensation 
for efforts of the salvor irrespective of degree of  success, thus such countries 
have not felt the need for adoption of the conventi on. As regard India, the 
provisions related to salvage are already existing in the Act. However, these 
are proposed to be updated, as an opportunity to ma ke Indian legislation fully 
compliant with the Convention. 
 
4.  Question : Give the list of nations which have signed and th e list of 
the nations which have not signed these three Conventions. 
 
Answer/submission 
: The list nations which are party to the Bunker Co nvention 
is enclosed [Appendix-I]. The list nations which ar e not party to this Convention 
is also enclosed [Appendix-II] 
 
The list of nations which are party to the Nairobi wreck removal Convention is 
enclosed [Appendix-III]. The list nations which are  not party to this Convention 
is also enclosed [Appendix-IV].   
 
The list of nations which are party to the Salvage Convention, 1989 is enclosed 
[Appendix-V]. The list nations which are not party to this Convention is also 
enclosed [Appendix-VI].   
 
  
88

5. Question :  What will be the procedure for recovery in case of wreck 
[Page No. 6 of the document containing recorded oral evidence]? 
 
Answer/submission : Any claim for costs arising under the new provisi ons may 
be brought directly against the insurer or other pe rson who has provided the 
financial security for the liability of the registe red owner of the vessel. Hence 
even the direct action for claim against the insure rs or the person giving the 
financial security is possible, so as to compensate  the damage caused by the 
incident of a ship becoming a wreck and hazard to safe navigation. 
 
6. Question 
:  Dispute relating to claims shall be adjudicated by 
concerned High Court [where vessel is registered/vessel is situated/cause 
of action arise. Clarify the three jurisdiction pro vided there. Also clarify 
from which time the claim [i.e. limitation period of within 2 years] will start 
in case of Salvage Convention [Page No. 6 of the do cument containing 
recorded oral evidence]. 
 
Answer/submissions 
: The jurisdiction has been given based on the broa d 
principles as given in the Civil Procedure Code, 19 08 w.r.to jurisdiction of the 
courts. The case may not proceed in more than one c ourt, as the principle of 
res sub judice will apply. The case may proceed at one location based on the 
principle that where it is instituted first. The pe riod of limitation shall commence 
from date of completion of salvage operation. 
 
7.  Question 
: Whether there are statistics about the benefits/p ositive 
impacts which have occurred or may occur in future,  to the ocean 
ecology of those countries which are party to these  Conventions. Is there 
a financial or other loss to the country in absence  of following these 
Conventions [Page No. 6 of the document containing recorded oral 
evidence]? 
 
Answer/submission 
: No specific statistics is available for benefits/ positive 
impacts which have occurred or may occur in future,  to the ocean ecology of 
those countries which are party to these Convention s. However, the benefits 
intended from these Conventions, are as follows; 
 
Bunker Convention : This Convention is intended to ensure that adequa te, 
prompt, and effective compensation is available to persons who suffer damage 
caused by spills of oil, when carried as fuel in sh ips' bunkers. The Convention 
applies to damage caused on the territory, includin g the territorial sea, and in 
exclusive economic zones of countries which Party t o the Convention. A key 
requirement in the Bunker Convention is the need, for the registered owner of a 
vessel, to maintain a compulsory insurance cover. A nother key provision is the 
enabling provision for initiating direct action aga inst the insurer, which would 
89

allow a claim for compensation for pollution damage  to be brought directly 
against an insurer. 
 
Nairobi wreck removal Convention:  This Convention provides a sound legal 
basis for coastal countries to remove, or have remo ved, from their coastlines, 
wrecks which pose a hazard to the safety of navigat ion or to the marine and 
coastal environments, or both. It will make ship-ow ners financially liable and 
require them to take out insurance or provide other  financial security to cover 
the costs of wreck removal. It will also provide St ates with a right of direct 
action against insurers. This Convention also inclu des an optional clause 
enabling States Parties to apply certain provisions  to their territory, including 
their territorial sea.  
 
Salvage Convention:  This Convention seeks to remedy the deficiency 
enshrined in the  “no cure, no pay" principle under  which a salvor is only 
rewarded for services, if the salvage operation is successful. Earlier the salvors 
were paid only if the salvage operation were succes sful. However, under this 
Convention the efforts of the salvors to prevent th e major pollution incident [for 
example, by towing a damaged tanker away from an en vironmentally sensitive 
area] have been recognized and now he may be reward ed even if he is not 
able to save the ship or the cargo. This will encou rage the salvors to come 
forwards for saving the environmental damage. 
 
As regards, financial or other loss to the country in absence of following these 
Conventions, it is submitted that Indian ships on i nternational voyage are 
already complying with the requirements of the Bunk er Convention & Nairobi 
Conventions. For salvage operations, & also to exte nt w.r.to the Nairobi 
Convention, the provisions are already in existence  in the Merchant Shipping 
Act, 1958 . As shipping is International in nature, Indian ship s trading worldwide 
had to abide by the requirements of the Conventions , therefore, Indian ships 
were issued certificates by other convention countr ies at a certain cost. Now, 
with above adoption, Indian ships can be issued cer tificates by the Indian 
Administration after enactment. Secondly with the e nactment, every ship 
entering Indian Coastal waters will be required to have necessary financial 
guarantee and a certificate being a proof of the sa me. In case of any pollution 
by way of bunker, or ship becoming a wreck direct a ction can be initiated 
against the owners / insurers through the process o f Arbitration instead of 
passing through the lengthy judicial process. Such compulsory carriage of 
certificate and the provision of direct action will  be an indirect method and 
deterrent thus giving indirect protection to the co astal marine environment.  
Financial or other loss to the country could occur if the provisions of the 
Conventions are not brought into force in India as owners of foreign flag 
vessels will not require to have insurance or finan cial security to deal with 
bunker oil spills or wrecks occurring in our waters , leading to environmental 
damage and consequential loss to the country. 
90

****** 
  
91

 
92

 
 
 
93

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
94

Appendix-II  
List of Nations not party to the Bunker Convention  
95 .  Algeria  
96.  Angola 
97.  Argentina 
98 .  Bahrain  
99 .  Bangladesh  
100.  Benin 
101.  Bolivia (Plurinational State of) 
102.  Bosnia and Herzegovina 
103 .  Brazil  
104.  Brunei Darussalam 
105.  Cambodia 
106 .  Cameroon  
107 .  Cabo Verde  
108.  Chile 
109.  Colombia 
110 .  Comoros  
111.  Costa Rica 
112.  Cuba 
113.  Democratic Republic of the Congo* 
114 .  Djibouti  
115.  Dominica 
116.  Dominican Republic 
117 .  Ecuador  
118 .  El Salvador  
119.  Equatorial Guinea 
120.  Eritrea 
121 .  Fiji  
122.  Gabon 
123.  Gambia 
124.  Georgia 
125 .  Ghana  
126 .  Grenada  
127.  Guatemala 
128.  Guinea 
129 .  Guinea -Bissau  
130 .  Guyana  
131.  Haiti 
132.  Honduras 
133.  Iceland 
134.  India 
135.  Iraq 
136.  Israel 
137 .  Japan  
138 .  Kazakhstan  
139.  Kuwait 
140.  Lebanon 
141 .  Libya  
142 .  Madagascar  
143.  Malawi 
144.  Maldives 
145.  Mauritania 
146.  Mexico 
147.  Monaco 
148.  Mozambique 
95

149.  Myanmar 
150.  Namibia 
151.  Nepal 
152 .  Oman  
153 .  Pakistan  
154.  Papua New Guinea 
155.  Paraguay 
156 .  Peru  
157 .  Philippines  
158.  Qatar 
159.  Republic of Korea 
160.  Republic of Moldova 
161.  Romania 
162.  Saint Lucia 
163 .  San Marino  
164 .  Sao Tome and Principe  
165.  Saudi Arabia 
166.  Senegal 
167 .  Seychelles  
168 .  Solomon Islands  
169.  Somalia 
170.  South Africa 
171.  Sri Lanka 
172.  Sudan 
173.  Suriname 
174.  Thailand 
175 .  The former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia  
176 .  Timor -Leste  
177.  Trinidad and Tobago 
178.  Turkmenistan 
179 .  Uganda  
180 .  Ukraine  
181.  United Arab Emirates 
182.  United Republic of Tanzania 
183.  United States of America 
184 .  Uruguay  
185.  Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) 
186.  Yemen 
187 .  Zambia  
188 .  Zimbabwe  
 
**** 
 
96

Annendix-III  
  
 
  
97

 
Appendix-IV  
98

List of nations not party to the Nairobi Wreck Removal Convention  
148.  Algeria 
149 .  Angola  
150.  Argentina 
151.  Australia 
152.  Austria 
153 .  Azerbaijan  
154 .  Bahrain  
155.  Bangladesh 
156.  Barbados 
157 .  Belgium  
158 .  Belize  
159.  Benin 
160.  Bolivia (Plurinational State of) 
161.  Bosnia and Herzegovina 
162.  Brazil 
163.  Brunei Darussalam 
164 .  Cambodia  
165 .  Cameroon  
166.  Canada 
167.  Cabo Verde 
168 .  Chile  
169 .  China  
170.  Colombia 
171.  Comoros 
172.  Costa Rica 
173.  Côte d'Ivoire 
174.  Croatia 
175.  Cuba 
176 .  Czech Republic  
177 .  Democratic People's Republic of Korea  
178.  Democratic Republic of the Congo* 
179.  Djibouti 
180 .  Dominica  
181 .  Dominican Republic  
182.  Ecuador 
183.  Egypt 
184.  El Salvador 
185.  Equatorial Guinea 
186.  Eritrea 
187.  Estonia 
188 .  Ethiopia  
189 .  Fiji  
190.  Finland 
191.  France 
192 .  Gabon  
193 .  Gambia  
194.  Georgia 
195.  Ghana 
196.  Greece 
197 .  Grenada  
198.  Guatemala 
199.  Guinea 
200 .  Guinea -Bissau  
201 .  Guyana  
202.  Haiti 
99

203.  Honduras 
204.  Hungary 
205.  Iceland 
206 .  Indonesia  
207 .  Iraq  
208.  Ireland 
209.  Israel 
210 .  Italy  
211 .  Jamaica  
212.  Japan 
213.  Jordan 
214.  Kazakhstan 
215.  Kiribati 
216.  Kuwait 
217 .  Latvia  
218 .  Lebanon  
219.  Libya 
220.  Lithuania 
221 .  Luxembourg  
222 .  Madagascar  
223.  Malawi 
224.  Maldives 
225.  Mauritania 
226.  Mauritius 
227.  Mexico 
228.  Monaco 
229 .  Mongolia  
230 .  Montenegro  
231.  Mozambique 
232.  Myanmar 
233 .  Namibia  
234 .  Nepal  
235.  Netherlands 
236.  New Zealand 
237.  Nicaragua 
238 .  Norway  
239.  Oman 
240.  Pakistan 
241 .  Papua New Guinea  
242 .  Paraguay  
243.  Peru 
244.  Philippines 
245 .  Poland  
246 .  Portugal  
247.  Qatar 
248.  Republic of Korea 
249 .  Republic of Moldova  
250 .  Romania  
251.  Russian Federation 
252.  Saint Kitts and Nevis 
253 .  Saint Lucia  
254 .  Saint Vincent and the Grenadines  
255.  Samoa 
256.  San Marino 
257 .  Sao Tome and Principe  
258.  Saudi Arabia 
100

259.  Senegal 
260.  Serbia 
261.  Seychelles 
262 .  Sierra Leone  
263 .  Singapore  
264.  Slovakia 
265.  Slovenia 
266 .  Solomon Islands  
267 .  Somalia  
268.  Spain 
269.  Sri Lanka 
270.  Sudan 
271.  Suriname 
272.  Sweden 
273 .  Switzerland  
274 .  Syrian Arab Republic  
275.  Thailand 
276.  The former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia 
277 .  Timor -Leste  
278 .  Togo  
279.  Trinidad and Tobago 
280.  Tunisia 
281.  Turkey 
282.  Turkmenistan 
283.  Uganda 
284.  Ukraine 
285 .  United Arab Emirates  
286 .  United Republic of Tanzania  
287.  United States of America 
288.  Uruguay 
289 .  Vanuatu  
290 .  Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of)  
291.  Viet Nam 
292.  Yemen 
293.  Zambia 
294 .  Zimbabwe  
**** 
  
101

Appendix V 
List of nations Parties to Salvage Convention  
 
 
  
102

 
103

 
104

Appendix-VI  
List of Nations not party to the Salvage Convention 
107 .  Angola  
108.  Antigua and Barbuda 
109.  Argentina 
110 .  Australia  
111 .  Bahamas  
112.  Bahrain 
113.  Bangladesh 
114.  Barbados 
115 .  Belize  
116.  Benin 
117.  Bolivia (Plurinational State of) 
118 .  Bosnia and Herzegovina  
119 .  Brunei Darussalam  
120.  Cambodia 
121.  Cameroon 
122 .  Cabo Verde  
123.  Chile 
124.  Colombia 
125.  Comoros 
126 .  Cook Islands  
127.  Costa Rica 
128.  Côte d'Ivoire 
129 .  Cuba  
130 .  Cyprus  
131.  Czech Republic 
132.  Democratic People's Republic of Korea 
133 .  Democratic Republic of the Congo*  
134.  Djibouti 
135.  Dominican Republic 
136.  El Salvador 
137 .  Equatorial Guinea  
138 .  Eritrea  
139.  Ethiopia 
140.  Fiji 
141 .  Gabon  
142 .  Gambia  
143.  Ghana 
144.  Grenada 
145.  Guatemala 
146.  Guinea-Bissau 
147.  Haiti 
148.  Honduras 
149 .  Hungary  
150 .  Indonesia  
151.  Iraq 
152.  Israel 
153 .  Japan  
154 .  Kazakhstan  
155.  Kuwait 
156.  Lebanon 
157.  Libya 
158.  Luxembourg 
159.  Madagascar 
160.  Malawi 
105

161.  Malaysia 
162.  Maldives 
163.  Malta 
164 .  Mauritania  
165 .  Monaco  
166.  Morocco 
167.  Mozambique 
168 .  Myanmar  
169 .  Namibia  
170.  Nepal 
171.  Nicaragua 
172.  Pakistan 
173.  Panama 
174.  Papua New Guinea 
175 .  Paraguay  
176 .  Peru  
177.  Philippines 
178.  Portugal 
179 .  Qatar  
180 .  Republic of Korea  
181.  Republic of Moldova 
182.  Saint Lucia 
183.  Saint Vincent and the Grenadines 
184.  Samoa 
185.  San Marino 
186.  Sao Tome and Principe 
187 .  Senegal  
188 .  Serbia  
189.  Seychelles 
190.  Singapore 
191 .  Slovakia  
192 .  Solomon Islands  
193.  Somalia 
194.  South Africa 
195.  Sri Lanka 
196 .  Sudan  
197.  Suriname 
198.  Thailand 
199 .  The former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia  
200 .  Timor -Leste  
201.  Togo 
202.  Trinidad and Tobago 
203 .  Turkmenistan  
204 .  Tuvalu  
205.  Uganda 
206.  Ukraine 
207 .  United Republic of Tanzania  
208 .  Uruguay  
209.  Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) 
210.  Viet Nam 
211 .  Zambia  
212 .  Zimbabwe  
 
 
**** 
106

  
107

Supplementary submissions, for further clarity, on questions raised and replied 
during the course of recording of oral evidence before the Committee on 
16.09.15.  
  
1.  Question :  It is mentioned that liability of owner is exemp ted if the 
pollution damage is due to war, act intentional act /omission of third 
person, negligence/wrongful act of Government/ auth ority. Give some 
example of act of God and omission of third party. Who will decide on 
omission of third party Give some clarity on this a spect [Page No. 5 of 
document containing recorded oral evidence]. 
 
Answer/submissions 
: As was submitted by the DG Shipping, GoI, during the 
meeting, act of God or force majure is a condition of occurrence of a natural 
calamity. Such an act needs to be an act which is n ot foreseen and is beyond 
the control of the human beings. If the person want s an exemption from the 
liability, he has to prove that such an act is not caused by him or his employee 
or agent, but by a third person. Hence the third pe rson needs to be a totally 
external person not connected with the owner as emp loyee or agent. As 
regards, the act of God, there is a plethora of case laws which has now got very 
well adjudicated and now has got very well settled by the apex court, as to what 
constitute an act of God or the force majure situat ion. It is very well understood 
in terms of juristic principles, and there may not be any ambiguity for it during 
the adjudication proceedings. The court will decide , if it is an act of third party, 
in case there is a claim for an exemption from the liability. 
 
2.  Question 
:  Claims to be preferred within three years from t he date 
of damage or six years from the date of incident. E xplain the two 
limitations given in the Act [Page No. 5 of the doc ument containing 
recorded oral evidence]. 
 
Answer/Submissions 
: As was submitted by the DG Shipping,GoI, it is fu rther 
clarified that one may get the compensation if a cl aim is made within three 
years from the date of occurrence of damage. Howeve r, no claim can be made 
after six years from the date of incident which has  caused the damage.  In 
simple words, it is perceptible damage for which th ere is an actionable claim, 
then the maximum limitation is three years. However , if there is an incident 
which otherwise is not so significant but later on can be related to original 
cause of action and more by way of social cause, th en in such cases the 
limitation period shall be six years. It is in term s of graded impact on the 
environment and ecology which may occur immediately  on occurrence of the 
incident or may come out after passage of time. 
 
3.  Question 
:  There is mention of compulsory insurance & exemp tion 
to vessels owned or operated by the Government and used for the non 
108

commercial service. Explain such exemption to Govt.  vessels [Page No. 5 
of the document containing recorded oral evidence]. 
 
Answer/submission 
: As was submitted by the Secretary (S), the vessel s owned 
or operated by the Government and used for the non commercial service, are 
exempted from the compulsory insurance, as the broa d principle is that the 
Government in case of accidents are funded sufficie ntly and if some 
compensation is to be paid to some person, the Gove rnment will be able to 
pay. Government is a kind of sovereign guarantee in  itself. Therefore most of 
the equipments in the Government are not insured.  
 
4.  Question 
: When does a Convention come into force i.e. how 
countries are required to be party to a Convention to put it into force 
[Page No. 16 of the document containing recorded oral evidence]? 
 
Answer/submissions 
: There are different criteria which are mentioned in the 
text of the respective Conventions itself. However,  following is the criteria for 
putting these three Conventions into force; 
 
Bunker Convention 
: Article 14 of this Convention stipulates that the  Convention 
shall enter into force one year following the date on which 18 states, including 5 
states each with ships whose combined gross tonnage  is not less than 1 
million, have either signed it without reservation as to ratification, acceptance or 
approval or have deposited the instruments of ratification, acceptance, approval 
or accession with the secretary General of the IMO.  Accordingly the Bunker 
Convention, 2001 came into force only on 21.11.08 
 
Nairobi Convention 
: Article 18 of this Convention stipulates that the  Convention 
shall enter into force twelve month following the d ate on which 10 states have 
either signed it without reservation as to ratifica tion, acceptance or approval or 
have deposited the instruments of ratification, acc eptance, approval or 
accession with the secretary General of the IMO. Ac cordingly the Nairobi 
Convention, 2007 came into force only on 14.04.15 [i.e. this year only] 
 
Salvage Convention 
: Article 29 of this Convention stipulates that the  
Convention shall enter into force one year following the date on which 15 states 
have expressed their consent to be bound by it. For  an state which expresses 
its consent to be bound by this Convention after th e conditions for entry into 
force thereof have been met, such consent shall tak e effect one year after the 
date of expression of such consent. Accordingly the  Salvage Convention, 1989 
came into force only on 14.07.96. 
5.  Question 
: Details of the around 30 wrecks already there in the 
Indian waters & what is happening to them may be gi ve [Page No. 19 of 
the document containing recorded oral evidence]. 
109

 
Answer/submissions 
: The detail about the status of the wrecks already  there in 
the Indian waters, is enclosed [Appendix-VII]. 
 
6.  Question 
: Whether these Conventions are applicable to the f ishing 
and cruise vessels? 
 
Answer/submissions 
: The three conventions as mentioned do not make an y 
reference or differentiate its application to the t ype of vessel. The general 
principle of application adopted is the gross tonna ge of the vessel.  The criteria 
for application of Bunker Convention to a ship are that it should be above 1000 
GT. The Nairobi wreck removal Convention shall be a pplicable to ships which 
are of 300 GT and above. No such limit is mentioned  in the Salvage 
Convention. 
***** 
 
  
110

 
111

 
  
112

 
113

 
114

 
 
 
 
115

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
REPORT 
 
The Merchant Shipping (Amendment) Bill, 2015 (Annex ure-I) was introduced 
in Lok Sabha on the 10 th  August, 2015. The Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha, o n 26 th  
August, 2015, referred the Bill to the Department-r elated Parliamentary Standing 
Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture for exa mination and report within three 
months. 
2. The Merchant Shipping Act, 1958 was enacted to f oster the development and 
efficient maintenance of an Indian mercantile marin e sector in a manner best suited to 
serve the national interest. International Maritime  Organisation (IMO), as the global 
standard-setting authority for the safety, security  and environmental performance of 
116

international shipping, creates fair and effective regulatory framework for the shipping 
industry in the form of Conventions for universal adoption and implementation.  
3. The Bill, in its Statement of Objects and Reason s, mentions that India is a 
member of IMO and as and when Government of India a pproves to be a party to an 
International Convention by accession/ratification,  the Convention is given effect by 
suitably incorporating its provisions in the concer ned domestic legislation , i.e,  the 
Merchant Shipping Act, 1958. India has already acce ded to three International 
Conventions of the IMO  viz ., the International Convention on Civil Liability for 
Bunker Oil Pollution Damage, 2001 (hereafter referr ed to as Bunker Convention); the 
Nairobi International Convention on the Removal of Wrecks, 2007 (hereafter referred 
to as Nairobi Convention); and the International Co nvention on Salvage, 1989 
(hereafter referred to as Salvage Convention).  
4. It has further been stated that the accession to  Bunker Convention has now been 
approved and for implementing the Convention, the M erchant Shipping Act, 1958 
requires further amendments. The amendment seeks to  incorporate the Convention 
provisions by inserting Part XBA in the Act titled ‘Civil Liability for Bunker Oil 
Pollution Damage’. India is already a party to the Nairobi Convention and Salvage 
Convention. However, in the light of experiences ga ined in implementing Part XIII 
titled “Wreck and Salvage”, it was felt necessary t o amend the Part  XIII to make them 
progressive and in tune with Nairobi Convention and Salvage Convention. 
5. The Committee heard the views of the Secretary, Ministry of Shipping, Director 
General (Shipping) and other senior officials of th e Ministry on the provisions of the 
Bill on the 16 
th  September, 2015. The Committee also heard the view s of the 
representative of the Indian National Shipowners’ A ssociation (INSA) on the 24 th  
September, 2015. Besides INSA, ICC Shipping Associa tion and GOL Salvage Services 
Ltd. submitted written memoranda to the Committee o n different aspects of the above 
stated Conventions and the amendments proposed to t he Merchant Shipping Act, 1958. 
The Committee also considered the background note a nd replies to its questions 
furnished by the Ministry of Shipping. 
6. The succeeding paragraphs state the salient feat ures of the three International 
Conventions as well as the proposed amendments in t he Merchant Shipping Act, 1958 
to give effect thereto and also the reasons for the proposed amendments. 
Bunker Convention 
 
7. The Bunker Convention was adopted to ensure that  adequate, prompt and 
effective compensation is available to persons who suffer damage caused by spills of 
oil (hydrocarbon mineral oil including lubricating oil), when carried as fuel in ships’ 
bunkers. This Convention was adopted in 23 rd  March, 2001 and had come into force 
from 21 st  November, 2008. The Convention applies to damage c aused on the territory, 
including the territorial sea, and in exclusive eco nomic zones of States Parties. The 
Convention provides a separate instrument covering pollution damage only. A key 
requirement in the Bunker Convention is the need fo r the registered owner of a vessel 
to maintain a compulsory insurance cover. 
8. Under the provisions of the Merchant Shipping (A mendment) Bill, 2015, the 
registered owner of a vessel has to maintain compul sory insurance cover which allows 
claim for compensation for bunker pollution damage to be brought directly against an 
insurer. Ships of 1000 Gross Tonn and above have to  carry a certificate onboard to the 
effect that it maintains insurance or other financial security, without which these vessels 
will not be allowed to enter or leave India. The li ability cover for bunker pollution 
damage shall be equal to the limits of liability un der the applicable national or 
117

international limitation regime, but in all cases, not exceeding an amount calculated in 
accordance with the Convention on Limitation of Liability for Maritime Claims, 1976. 
9. The written reply furnished by the Ministry of S hipping stated that Article 14 of 
the Bunker Convention stipulates that the Conventio n shall enter into force one year 
following the date on which 18 States, including 5 States each with ships whose 
combined gross tonnage is not less than 1 million, have either signed it without 
reservation as to ratification, acceptance or appro val or have deposited the instruments 
of ratification, acceptance, approval or accession with the secretary General of the 
IMO. Accordingly, the Bunker Convention, 2001 came into force only on 21.11.08. 
10. The Ministry of Shipping informed the Committee  that amendments based on 
the Bunker Convention were considered necessary in view of the following: 
xiii. It is difficult to obtain compensation to pollution  caused by bunker oil 
spill/leakage from ships other than tankers. Local 
Authorities/Government find it difficult to recover  costs on preventive 
measures and cleanup operation on such type of poll ution. This problem 
can be suitably addressed if India becomes party to  this Convention and 
incorporates its provision into the Merchant Shipping Act, 1958. 
xiv. In spite of best precautionary efforts, accidents m ay happen in Indian as 
well as foreign flag ships. In that scenario, it is  vital to have an 
internationally agreed effective liability compensation regime in place. 
xv. Indian ships having 1000 GT or more, on internation al trade will be 
issued with a certificate from the Indian Maritime Administration. This 
would enable to carry out international trade witho ut approaching other 
Governments for such certificate, who have acceded to this Convention. 
xvi. India would be able to ensure that all foreign flag vessels entering Indian 
territorial waters or Exclusive Economic Zone are d uly covered by 
insurance as required under the Convention. 
xvii. The Convention has already been adopted by major Ma ritime States, 
therefore, it is binding on Indian Ships involved i n worldwide trade, 
irrespective of whether India is a party to the Convention. 
xviii. Indian ships have to carry “Blue Card” issued by in surance companies 
irrespective of whether India is a party to the Con vention or not, if, it is 
trading in countries that are parties to this Conve ntion.  However, vice 
versa the same is not applicable for foreign ships trading in India.  Even 
if they are carry blue card, pollution in Indian wa ters will not be under 
the purview of such insurance as India is not party to this Convention. 
11. The following are the salient provisions of the  Bill related to Bunker 
Convention:- 
• Applies to all Indian vessels (irrespective of size ) anywhere in the world 
and to all foreign vessels while in Indian Waters; 
• Preventive measures and curative measures taken to minimize damage 
shall also be liable for compensation; 
• While owners of all vessels are liable to compensat e against bunker oil 
pollution damage for vessels of 1000 GT and above, the insurer is liable 
to compensate; 
• Liability of owner is exempted if the pollution dam age is due to war, act 
of God, intentional act/omission of third person, negligence/wrongful act 
of Government/Authority; 
118

• Owner entitled to limit his liability as per Conven tion for Limitation of 
Liability for Maritime Claims, which will be determ ined by the High 
Court of jurisdiction; 
• Claims to be preferred within 3 years from date of damage or 6 years 
from date of incident; 
• Vessels of 1000 GT and above to compulsorily mainta in 
insurance/financial security.  DG(S) to issue a cer tificate to this effect; 
No such vessel shall enter or leave Indian port without certificate; and 
• Rule making powers in respect of form & manner of a pplication to High 
Court to limit liability, financial securities, for m of certificate and 
conditions of issue, fee for issue of certificate, manner of renewal and 
renewal fee provided under. 
12.  Regarding the cost to be incurred due to the a mendments proposed to the Merchant 
Shipping Act, 1958 based on the Bunker Convention, the Ministry  has stated that : 
/head2right Vessels on International voyages are already comply ing with the 
requirement as Convention is already in force, henc e no additional cost 
for such vessels. 
/head2right Vessels on the coast of India may have to take addi tional insurance 
cover. 
/head2right Cost of such insurance is not expected to exceed 1$  per GT per annum 
(Rs.66.4 per GT per annum), subject to the conditio n of the vessels, risk 
factor, claims history of the company and ships. 
13. The Ministry of Shipping, in its written reply to a pointed query of the 
Committee, stated that United States of America and  Japan are the two major maritime 
nations who are not a party to the Bunker Conventio n.  The United States has enacted 
the Oil Pollution Act, 1990 that covers all types o f oil, from the ship, whether bunkers 
or cargo.  The compensations and the requirement ar e more stringent than the Bunker 
Convention and hence, there was no need by USA to a dopt the Bunker Convention 
which came into force at a much later stage in 2008 . Similarly, Japan amended the ‘Act 
on Liability for Ship Oil Pollution, 1975' in 2005 to cover bunker pollution damage, 
before the Bunker Convention came into force intern ationally in 2008. Since the 
requirement under the local regulations were more s tringent, Japan never felt the need 
for the Bunker Convention.  As regards India, the p rovision relating to pollution from 
oil (except bunker oil pollution damage) are there in the Merchant Shipping Act, 1958, 
but there are no specific legislation for covering the pollution incidents caused by the 
bunker oil of the ships and a need was being felt t o provide for this. Hence, the 
proposed Bill is introduced. 
14. To the Committee’s query regarding the impact o f exemptions given to vessels 
having capacity below 1,000 GT from this Convention, the DG (Shipping) replied: 
“......below 1,000 GT, it is the requirement or the  obligation on the part of the 
owner or the operator that he will not be able to e scape or get away from. The 
threshold is only for purposes of a financial secur ity which is mandated in the  
Convention and that is through the insurance Blue C ards, which is then counter-
certified through a compliance certificate which is  issued by the Government.  
But that does not detract from the primary responsi bility of the owner or the 
operator to still ensure that he mitigates and mini mizes the pollution damage, 
compensates for that or removes the wreck, as the c ase may be, or salves the 
vessel”. 
119

15. When asked, the representative of Indian Nation al Shipowners' Association 
(INSA), also agreed that the exemption to the vesse ls which are 1000 GT and less,  
since the number of such vessels would be around 500 to 600 only. 
16. As regards Clause No. 352 RH, the DG (Shipping)  gave his clarification as 
under: 
“...if there is a claim for an immediate damage whi ch converts into a 
financial liability and, if it is substantive in na ture, it has to be claimed 
within a period of three years.  If there is an inc ident which otherwise is 
not so significant, but can be related to the origi nal cause of action and 
more by way of a social cause, for that the Sunset clause is six years.  
So, it is in terms of graded impact on the environment and ecology”. 
17. The Ministry, in its written reply clarified in  this regard that one may get the 
compensation, if a claim is made within three years  from the date of damage. However, 
no claim can be made six years after the incident causing the damage.  In simple words, 
if it is perceptible damage for which there is an a ctionable claim, then the maximum 
limit is three years. However, if there is an incid ent which otherwise is not so 
significant but later on can be related to original  cause of action and more by way of 
social cause, then in such cases the limitation per iod shall be six years. It is in terms of 
graded impact on the environment and ecology which may occur immediately on 
occurrence of the incident or may come out after passage of time. 
18. When asked as to the liability that would fall on the Ports after the Bunker 
Convention is to be implemented, the Secretary, Shipping replied that: 
“…as far as major ports are concerned, we have a sc heme available in 
the Ministry where we give 50 per cent subsidy for them to procure 
equipment for fighting any pollution because of oil  spillage. We are 
promoting that. We are also auditing that, ports co mply with this 
requirement.  That is also available to other priva te ports which handle 
crude and other oil products.  That is the action t aken by ports as far as 
Bunker Convention is concerned.” 
19. The Committee also made a specific query about the provisions for arbitration 
in this regard. The DG (Shipping) replied that : 
“......arbitration mechanism kicks in when it is no t mutually resolved.  
Usually, we find that arbitration proceedings are largely held in London 
or in Singapore. This is through a mutual process o f acceptance of the 
arbiter. It is a panel of three arbitrators. One no minated by each, the 
second and the third one is mutually agreed upon. T here is also an 
International Arbitration Council which nominates these people”.  
20. The Committee took note of the Ministry’s reply  that Act of God or force 
majure  is a condition of occurrence of a natural calamity. Such an act needs to be an act 
which is not foreseen and is beyond the control of the human beings. If the person 
wants an exemption from the liability, he has to pr ove that such an act is not caused by 
him or his employee or agent, but by a third person . Hence, the third person needs to be 
a totally external person not connected with the owner as employee or agent. As regards 
the act of God, there are number of case laws which  have been well adjudicated and it 
is now settled by the apex court as to what constit utes an act of God or the force 
majure . It is very well understood in terms of juristic p rinciples, and there may not be 
any ambiguity for it during the adjudication procee dings. The Court will decide, if it is 
an act of third party, in case there is a claim for an exemption from the liability. 
120

21. The Committee observes that the exemption given  to the owner if the 
pollution damage is due to an ‘Act of God’ as given  in clause 352 RD, is likely to 
leave ample scope for litigation and that the owner  of a ship can run away from 
his responsibilities of giving compensation to the pollution damage caused by the 
ship owned by him. The Committee, therefore, recomm ends to reconsider this 
aspect to ensure that the law does not leave any sc ope for the shipowners to get 
away from their responsibility of paying compensation. 
22. The Committee observes that Ports have ample ch ances of oil spillage and 
environment pollutions from the vessels at the time  of loading/unloading of cargo. 
The Committee recommends that latest modern equipme nts being used at 
International level may be provided to the Ports fo r addressing this challenge. The 
Committee further recommends that for our cash stra pped Major Ports, the 
present subsidy limit of 50% be enhanced substantia lly for procurement of the 
modern equipment for fighting any pollution due to oil spillage on a case to case 
basis. 
Nairobi Convention 
 
23.  The Nairobi International Convention on the Removal  of Wrecks 2007 (Nairobi 
Convention) provides the legal basis to remove ship wrecks that may have the potential 
to affect adversely the safety of lives, goods and property at sea, as well as the marine 
environment.  The Convention fills the gap in the e xisting international legal 
framework by providing the first set of uniform int ernational rules aimed at ensuring 
the prompt and effective removal of wrecks located beyond the territorial sea. 
24. The Nairobi Convention was adopted by an Intern ational Conference held in 
Kenya in 2007.  It has entered into force on 14.4.2015. 
25. The Ministry of Shipping informed the Committee  during the deliberations that 
amendments based on Wreck Removal Convention, 2007,  is considered necessary, in 
view of the following: 
xiii) The existing provision in Part XIII of the Merchant  Shipping Act, 1958 
relating to wreck removal is not adequate in dealin g with increasing amount of 
wreck in the coast of India. 
xiv) The amendments will enable the implementation of Na irobi Convention 
on the Removal of Wrecks 2007, to which India is al ready a Party, thereby 
bringing in internationally recognized and approved uniform rules for removal of 
wrecks. 
xv) The Convention will provide uniform international r ules aimed at 
ensuring the prompt and effective removal of wrecks  located beyond the 
territorial sea.  The Convention includes an option al clause enabling countries to 
apply certain provisions to their territory, including their territorial sea. 
xvi) Increasing number of vessels and limited space avai lable in the ports 
have resulted in increased number of accidents caus ing wrecks resulting in 
pollution.  Most of the perpetrators go scot-free d ue to ignorance about the 
incident or lack of importance given to remedial measures to be adopted. 
xvii) The problems due to wreck are three-fold: first, a wreck may constitute a 
hazard to navigation, potentially endangering other  vessels and their crews; 
second, wreck has a potential to cause damage to th e coastal and marine 
environment, depending on the nature of the cargo; and third, there is the issue of 
costs involved in the marking and removal of hazardous wrecks. 
xviii) The current provisions in the Merchant Shipping Act , 1958 are 
inadequate in dealing with the increasing number of  wrecks in Indian Coast.  
Therefore, to control this problem and to bring the  existing regulation in line 
121

with the developments in international shipping, it  is vital to make these 
amendments in the Act. 
26. The Ministry, in its written reply furnished to  the Committee, stated that Article 
18 of the Nairobi Convention stipulates that the Co nvention shall enter into force 
twelve months following the date on which 10 states  have either signed it without 
reservation as to ratification, acceptance or appro val or have deposited the instruments 
of ratification, acceptance, approval or accession with the secretary General of the 
IMO. Accordingly, the Nairobi Convention, 2007 came into force only on 14.04.15 [i.e. 
this year only] 
27. The following are the salient features of the B ill relating to Nairobi Convention 
provided by the Ministry of Shipping: 
• The Bill makes the existing provisions of the Act d ealing with wreck 
[Part XIII] in line with Nairobi Convention; 
• The master/operator of ship is statutorily obliged to report wreck incident 
in Indian Territory to receiver of wrecks (Deputy C onservator of 
Ports/District Magistrate) and D.G. (Shipping). Ind ian ship to report 
wreck incident in foreign territory to D.G. (Shipping). 
• D.G. (Shipping) can direct Directorate General Ligh t House and Light 
Ships, Coast Guard, Port or other authority, for lo cating & marking 
wrecks; 
• D.G. (Shipping) to inform ship’s registry country and in consultation with 
that country proceed to remove wreck.  If the owner  does not remove the 
wreck, receiver of wreck (at the expense of the own er) may remove the 
wreck; 
• Registered owner is liable for the cost of activiti es related to locating, 
marking and removal of wreck; 
• Registered owner of ship of 300 GT and above to mai ntain compulsory 
insurance/financial security.  D.G. (Shipping) to i ssue a certificate to this 
effect.  Contravening ships can be detained; and  
• Claim for recovery of costs for locating and marking wreck to be within 3 
years from date of determination of hazard and 6 ye ars from date of 
maritime casualty that resulted in the wreck. 
28.   As regards the cost to be incurred due to the  amendments proposed, based on 
the Nairobi Convention, the Ministry stated that : 
/head2right Vessels on International voyages are already comply ing with the 
requirement as Convention is already in force, henc e no additional cost 
for such vessels. 
/head2right Vessels on the coast of India may have to take addi tional insurance 
cover. 
/head2right Cost of such insurance is not expected to exceed 1$  per GT per annum 
(Rs.66.4 per GT per annum), subject to the conditio n of the vessels, risk 
factor, claims history of the company and ships. 
/head2right The  P&I cover provided by the IG group of clubs ge nerally includes 
cover for both Bunker pollution damage and wreck removal. 
29. The Ministry of Shipping, in their written subm ission, has stated that:   
United States of America, China and Japan, Italy, Norway, Republic of Korea, 
and Russian Federation are the major maritime natio ns which are not party to 
the Convention.  As of now the national legislation  of the above countries 
122

provide adequate mechanism of direct action against  the ship owners in their 
coastal waters hence there may not be a need for th em to be a party to this 
Convention.  However, the Nairobi Wreck Removal Con vention has entered 
into force this year only, i.e. , on 14.04.2015.  Hence, it is still early stages a s 
most of the countries may still be evaluating the C onvention from deciding to 
become party to the Convention.  Moreover, now the Convention extends its 
scope beyond coastal waters up to Exclusive Economi c Zone (EEZ), thus there 
may be reconsideration by other countries in due co urse to decide on being a 
party to this Convention.  As regard India, the pro visions related to the wreck 
removal already exist in the Merchant Shipping Act,  1958.  However, these are 
proposed to be updated, as an opportunity to make I ndian legislation fully 
compliant with the Convention.   
30. The Committee enquired about the procedure to b e followed by the authorities 
if an incident of wreck happened in the premises of  a Major Port, as in the case which 
occurred in the vicinity of Mumbai Port a few years  ago.  The DG Shipping, explained 
that: 
“…..if it were to happen in a Port of call, it is t he Deputy Conservator of Ports 
who would then take necessary action as he would be  the receiver of wrecks.  
In case the owner or operator did not discharge in spite of notification and 
being given adequate notice to do so, then the Depu ty Conservator of Port 
would takeover that asset as a receiver of wreck an d then do all that is required 
to spend money and then lodge the claims.  That is why the designation has 
been given as 'receiver of wrecks'.  That is the suo motu  assumption of 
responsibility.  But, that is a residual responsibi lity after having failed in 
convincing the owner or operator to discharge their  duty.  Correspondingly, 
beyond the port limit, as I submitted, if it were within the territorial waters, this 
power is delegated to the District Collector or District Magistrate to do so”. 
31. To the Committee’s query about the possible rea sons why Government owned 
vessels are exempted, the Secretary, Shipping replied that: 
“........the broad principle is, because Government s, in case of accidents, are 
funded sufficiently, and if they have to compensate somebody, they would do 
so.  Therefore, most of the equipment in the Government is not insured.  That 
is one aspect.  But that is, especially, for milita ry machines because they also 
partake in war.” 
 
32. In the written reply furnished by the Ministry,  it has been stated that the vessels 
owned or operated by the Government and used for th e non commercial service, are 
exempted from the compulsory insurance, as the broad principle is that the Government 
in case of accidents are funded sufficiently and if  some compensation is to be paid to 
some person, the Government will be able to pay. Go vernment is a kind of sovereign 
guarantee in itself. Therefore, most of the equipme nts in the Government are not 
insured.  
33. In this regard, the Indian National Shipowners'  Association, in its written 
submission, has stated that: 
It is found that Warships, other Naval vessels and Government non-
commercial vessels are often exempted from the prov isions of a Convention 
since it is presumed that a sovereign Government  h as adequate funds and 
resources to meet any eventuality. However, in all cases, even such vessels 
123

are advised to be in compliance with all Internatio nal Conventions, rules and 
regulations, as far as practically possible and feasible. 
34. In response to the Committee’s query as to whet her these three Conventions are 
applicable to the fishing and cruise vessels, the M inistry has furnished the reply that, 
the three Conventions do not make any reference or differentiate its application to the 
type of vessel. The general principle of applicatio n adopted is the gross tonnage of the 
vessel.  The criteria for application of Bunker Con vention to a ship are that it should be 
above 1000 GT. The Nairobi Wreck Removal Convention  shall be applicable to ships 
which are of 300 GT and above. No such limit is mentioned in the Salvage Convention. 
35. When asked by the Committee about the advantage s of acceding to the Nairobi 
Convention, the representative of the Indian Nation al  Shipowners' Association stated 
that: 
“A lot of old vessels used to keep coming to India,  but, now, this is something 
which will stop happening.  Because we do not have these Conventions and we 
do not have the ability to enforce the law, it beco mes easier for me as an 
imprudent ship owner to bring the old ships, which are not allowed in other 
regimes.”   
36. The Ministry of Shipping, in their written repl y, has stated that Nairobi 
Convention provides a sound legal basis for coastal  countries to remove, or have 
removed, from their coastlines, wrecks which pose a  big environment hazard to the 
safety of navigation or to the marine and coastal lives, or both. It will make ship-owners 
financially liable and require them to take out ins urance or provide other financial 
security to cover the costs of wreck removal. This Convention also includes an optional 
Clause enabling States Parties to apply certain pro vision to their territory, including 
their territorial sea. 
37. The Committee took cognizance of the status of the wrecks already there in the 
Indian waters, furnished by the Ministry of Shippin g (Annexure II). There are a total of 
39 wrecks in Indian waters, some of the wrecks are affecting the shipping channels. 
The Committee recommends that the Government should  chalk out a time bound 
action plan to remove the wrecks that are already t here in the Indian waters 
especially those wrecks which are affecting the shipping channels. 
Salvage Convention 
 
38. The International Convention on Salvage 1989 (S alvage Convention) replaced 
the prevalent “no cure, no pay” principle where a s alvor is only rewarded for services if 
the operation is successful.  By towing a damaged t anker away from an 
environmentally sensitive area, salvor prevents maj or pollution incidents.  But the 
prevalent “no cure, no pay” principle acted as a di sincentive for operation, where 
chances of success were slim.  The 1989 Salvage Con vention remedied this deficiency 
by making provision for an enhanced salvage award i n preventing or minimizing 
damage to the environment and by introducing a “spe cial compensation” to be paid to 
salvors who fail to earn a reward in the normal way. 
39. This Convention replaced a Convention on the la w of  salvage adopted in 
Brussels in 1910.  The 1989 Convention introduced a  “special compensation”  to be 
paid to salvors who have failed to earn a reward in  the normal way (i.e.,  by salving the 
ship and cargo).  It was adopted in 28.4.1989 and h as entered into force from 
14.7.1996. 
40. The Ministry of Shipping has informed the Commi ttee that amendment based 
on the International Convention on Salvage, 1989 is  considered essential and desirable 
in view of the following: 
124

vii) The present provision of Part XIII of the Merchant Shipping Act, 1958 is 
inadequate in dealing with salvage operation as the  salver will only be 
awarded, if the salvage is successful (no-cure-no-p ay principle). Salvage 
Convention seeks to remedy this deficiency by makin g provision for an 
enhanced salvage award taking into account the skil l and efforts of the 
salvors in preventing or minimizing damage to the environment. 
viii) The amendment in the Merchant Shipping Act, 1958 wi ll revise the text 
with the updated provisions mentioned in the Conven tion. The 
amendments would also highlight the significance of  article 13 and 14 of 
the Convention which relates to criteria for paymen t of award and special 
compensation to the salvors respectively. 
ix) India is already a signatory to this Convention and  has obligation to give 
full and complete effect to the provision of the Convention. The proposed 
amendment in the Act would enable the Government to  discharge this 
obligation by including the key parameters of the C onvention as 
substantive part in the Act and also frame detailed  procedures under the 
rule making powers as specified in the Act. 
41. The Ministry, in its written reply, stated that  Article 29 of the Salvage 
Convention stipulated that the Convention shall ent er into force one year following the 
date on which 15 States have expressed their consen t to be bound by it. For a State 
which expresses its consent to be bound by this Con vention after the conditions for 
entry into force thereof have been met, such consen t shall take effect one year after the 
date of expression of such consent. Accordingly, th e Salvage Convention 1989 came 
into force only on 14.07.1996. 
42. The following are the salient features of the B ill relating to Salvage Convention: 
• The Bill makes the existing provisions of the Act d ealing with Salvage in 
[Part XIII] in line with Salvage Convention; 
• does not apply to warships, Government non-commerci al vessels, fixed 
or floating platforms or to mobile offshore drillin g units when engaged in 
sea-bed mining; 
• the owner of the vessel is obliged to pay the salvo r for his services 
towards saving life, cargo, etc; 
• salvage services by Indian Navy/Coast Guard/Port au thority also entitled 
for compensation;  
• master of ship is authorized to conclude salvage co ntract on behalf of 
owner of vessel and master of ship or owner of ship  can conclude salvage 
contract on behalf of persons and/or cargo on board of vessel; 
• lays down duties of salvor, owner and master; 
• lays down rights and duties of Central Government i n relation to salvage 
operations; 
• lays down rights of salvors to payment for the serv ices rendered by them 
relating to salvage operations; 
• under. S. 402 H (2), Government can make rules pres cribing criteria for 
claiming rewards, the manner of fixing rewards, spe cial compensation, 
apportionment of rewards amongst salvors etc.; 
• disputes relating to claims shall be adjudicated by  concerned High Court 
(where vessel is registered/vessel is situated/cause of action arises); and 
• period for claim-within 2 years. 
125

43. On the matter of the costs likely to be incurre d due to the amendments proposed 
based on the Salvage Convention, the Ministry of Shipping stated: 
/head2right  generally no cost on owner, unless salvage service  is required due to the 
exigency; and 
/head2right cost of salvage will vary depending on the value of the property salvaged. 
44. The Ministry, in its written reply, informed th e Committee that United States of 
America and Japan are not a party to Bunker Convent ion; China, Japan, Italy, Norway, 
Republic of Korea and Russian Federation are not pa rty to the Nairobi Convention; and 
Japan, Panama and Republic of Korea are the major c ountries which are not a party to 
the Salvage Convention.  
45. In this regard, in a written submission, the In dian National Shipowners' 
Association has stated that often USA practices and  adopts domestic rules which in 
most of the cases are far more stringent that some of the international regulations are in 
operation much prior to similar rules or provisions  being adopted by International 
Maritime Organization and that this could be one of  the reasons for USA not to be a 
signatory to the Nairobi Convention. It has been fu rther stated that USA is also not a 
signatory to 
 the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea ( UNCLOS)1982; the 
International Convention on Civil Liability for Oil  Pollution Damage 1969 (CLC 
Convention); Bunker Convention 2001; Hong Kong Recy cling Convention 2009; 
Nairobi Wreck Removal Convention 2007; and the Mari time Labour Convention 2006 
to list a few. 
46. In a written reply, the Ministry of Shipping ha s stated: 
“Japan, Panama and Republic of Korea are few major maritime nations 
which are not party to the Convention. The prime re ason for such 
maritime countries not becoming a party to the Conv ention is that their 
national legislation has already made necessary pro visions for salvage 
and the courts have the sole jurisdiction of awardi ng the salvage 
compensation. The Salvage Convention applies to jud icial or arbitral 
proceedings pertaining to salvage. Salvage is gener ally between private 
parties and disputes between them are generally dec ided by 
arbitration/judicial process.  The local legislatio n of such countries also 
provides mechanism for arbitration and compensation  for efforts of the 
salvor irrespective of degree of success. Thus, suc h countries have not 
felt the need for adoption of the Convention. As re gards India, the 
provisions related to salvage are already there in the Act. However, these 
are proposed to be updated, as an opportunity to ma ke Indian legislation 
fully compliant with the Convention.  
47. As regards the reasons for delay in implementin g the Salvage Convention, the 
Ministry of Shipping stated that having met the req uirement of tonnage and the number 
of States, as per the requirement of the stated Con vention, it actually came into force 
internationally after nearly seven years, i.e ., on 14.07.1996.  India became a party to 
this Convention on 18.10.1995, as provisions relate d to the Salvage Convention largely 
exist in the Merchant Shipping Act ever since 1958 and continued to be part of the Act 
till date. Indian Parliament in their great wisdom had provided the provisions related to 
salvage in the Act from 1958 itself, i.e ., much before 1989 Salvage Convention came 
into force. Therefore, the broad provisions on salv age already exist in the present 
Merchant Shipping Act. However, in the present Bill , the provisions related to the 
Salvage Convention are being updated, as an opportu nity to make Indian legislation 
fully compliant with the Convention.   
126

48. The Ministry informed the Committee that the si gnificant improvement made 
by the Salvage Convention 1989 is that it has enabl ed compensation for unsuccessful 
salvage efforts, and that the salvors dealing with the salvage operation is free to make a 
contract with the ship-owner whose ship is being sa lved by it, so as to cover the 
compensation even if the salvage operation is not f ully successful. The Salvage 
Convention has done away with the old principle of ‘No cure No pay’. It encourages 
the salvors to assist the distressed vessel and eve n if the salvage may not be totally 
successful, the salvor is compensated by invoking c ontract and the special 
compensation scope clause. 
49. In response to the Committee's query regarding the jurisdiction on the disputes 
of claims in the case of a salvage operation, the M inistry stated that the jurisdiction has 
been given based on the broad principles as given i n the Civil Procedure Code, 1908 
with respect to jurisdiction of the Courts. The Min istry further stated that the case may 
not proceed in more than one Court, as the principl e of res  sub judice  will apply. The 
case may proceed at one location based on the princ iple that where it is instituted first. 
The period of limitation shall commence from date of completion of salvage operation. 
50. Regarding the financial or other loss caused to  the country due to not following 
these Conventions, the Ministry of Shipping stated,  in its written reply furnished to the 
Committee: 
As regards financial or other loss to the country i n absence of following 
these Conventions, it is submitted that Indian ship s on international 
voyage are already complying with the requirements of the Bunker 
Convention and Nairobi Convention.  For salvage ope rations and also to 
the extent with respect to the Nairobi Convention, the provisions are 
already in existence in the Merchant Shipping Act, 1958.  As shipping is 
international in nature, Indian ships trading world wide had to abide by 
the requirements of the Conventions. Therefore, Ind ian ships were 
issued certificates by other Convention countries a t a certain cost.  Now, 
with the above adoption, Indian ships can be issued  certificates by the 
Indian Administration after enactment.  Secondly, w ith the enactment, 
every ship entering Indian Coastal waters will be r equired to have 
necessary financial guarantee and a certificate bea ring a proof of the 
same.  In case of any pollution by way of bunker or  ship becoming a 
wreck, direct action can be initiated against the o wners/insurers through 
the process of Arbitration instead of passing throu gh the lengthy judicial 
process. Such compulsory carriage of certificate an d the provision of 
direct action will be an indirect method and deterrent thus giving indirect 
protection to the coastal marine environment.  Fina ncial or other loss to 
the country could occur if the provisions of the Co nventions are not 
brought into force in India as owners of foreign fl ag vessels will not 
require to have insurance or financial security to deal with bunker oil 
spills or wrecks occurring in our waters, leading t o environmental 
damage and consequential loss to the country. 
51. The Committee, in its meeting held on the 24 
th  September, 2015 heard the 
representative of the Indian National Shipowners' A ssociation, who informed the 
Committee that they are fully satisfied with the Clauses of the Bill and that the Ministry 
of Shipping had consulted them at the time of draft ing of this Bill. The ICC Shipping 
Association also conveyed their agreement to the Cl auses without offering any further 
suggestion. M/s GOL Offshore Limited gave written s uggestions on some of the 
Clauses of the Bill.  
127

52. The Committee welcomes the Bill which seeks to suitably incorporate the 
provisions of the International Convention on Civil  Liability for Bunker Oil 
Pollution Damage, 2001 (Bunker Convention); the Nai robi International 
Convention on the Removal of Wrecks, 2007 (Nairobi Convention); and the 
International Convention on Salvage, 1989 (Salvage Convention) in the Merchant 
Shipping Act, 1958. 
53. The Committee’s observations/recommendations on  the Clauses/Sub-Clauses of 
the Bill have been given in the succeeding paragraphs:- 
Sub-Clause 402D (2) & (3) 
 
54. In this Sub Clause, the master of the Ship has been given authority to sign the 
salvage contracts on behalf of the owner of the vessel. 
55. When Committee enquired about the adequacy of t he provisions of this Sub- 
Clause and the chances of any foul play against the  interest of the owners, the 
representative of the Indian National Shipowners’ Association replied that: 
“….the master of the ship engaging and getting into  a salvage contract is quite a 
normal process.  ….. all contracts of insurance or even the certificate of registry, it 
is not in the name of the owner of the company; it is in the name of the master 
itself.  So, this is something which over a period of time has been a part of our 
industry.  Yes, where there is temptation, there is  a chance of something going 
wrong but, by and large, as an industry we have rar ely seen a case where a master 
has entered into an illegal or untenable salvage co ntract and thereby alienated the 
asset.  It also serves very useful because sometime s, you may have a vessel which 
is farther away from you.  I could be sitting here in India and an accident or a 
salvage contract may take place in Brazil.  I may b e in a situation where 
financially it may not be viable to actually travel  and sign a contract.  At such 
times, the master becomes useful for the purposes of signing the contract.”   
56. The  Committee observes that the Master of the Ship has been given the 
authority to execute a salvage contract or any such  contracts on behalf of the ship 
owner. Since the Master of the ship is only an empl oyee of the owner, there might 
be situations when the owner may not honour the contract signed by the Master of 
the Ship and the Salvor. Therefore, the Committee f eels that a strict provision 
should be made in the Bill in order to save the interests of the Master of the Vessel. 
In view of the availability of sophisticated Inform ation and Communication 
Technology tools, it is easy to consult the owner o f the Vessel by the Master of the 
Vessel before agreeing to the contract or in case of  any contingency. 
57. The Committee, therefore, recommends that a new  Sub Clause-“in both the 
cases at (2) and (3), the owner of the vessel or ca rgo as the case may be, shall not 
be entitled to challenge the decision of the master /owner of the vessel, if such a 
decision is taken after sufficient consultation” may be inserted in the Bill.   
Sub Clause 402G  
58. Sub Clauses under this Clause prescribe the rig hts and duties of Central 
Government in case there is a need of salvage opera tion of a vessel. It includes means 
to protect its coast line or related interests from  pollution or threat of pollution arising 
out of a maritime casualty or acts relating to such  casualty which may result in major 
harmful consequences, its duties to seek the assistance and to give facilities to salvors. 
59. The Committee also feels that within the territ orial waters of India, Indian 
Companies should be given priority for salvage oper ations.  Accordingly, the 
Committee recommends that the following sub Clause may be added in the Bill: 
128

“The Central Government shall ensure that the salvo rs of Indian origin are 
given first right of refusal as against the salvors  of foreign origin, for any 
salvage operations within the territorial waters of India”. 
 
Sub Clause 402 H 
 
60. This Clause ensures the Salvor a right to payme nt for the services rendered by 
him relating to salvage operations, provided that n ow such payment shall be made 
where there is express and reasonable prohibition from the owner or master of vessel or 
owner of any other property in danger. 
61. Under this Clause, the Central Government may p rescribe the criteria for 
claiming rewards, manner of fixing rewards, the pay ment of special compensation, the 
apportionment of payment amongst salvors, the salva ge of persons, the payment under 
the contract, the payment for additional services n ot covered under the contract and the 
effect of misconduct of salvors on reward or paymen t. The salvors shall have right to 
enforce his maritime lien against the owner or mast er of vessel or owner of any other 
property in danger when satisfactory security for h is claim, including interest and costs, 
has not been provided by such person. 
62.  M/s GOL Offshore Limited has, in their written subm ission, stated that in the 
case of owner of the vessel failing to pay the salvors due to bankruptcy, due to absence 
of proper insurance cover or any other reason, ther e should be suitable provision for 
making payment to the salvor who has carried out th e salvage operation under the 
instructions of the Central Government.  
63. The Committee recommends that the Government ma y appropriately look 
into the absence of such a provision in the Bill, w ith a view to deal with the cases 
of owner of the vessel failing to pay the salvors d ue to bankruptcy, absence of 
proper insurance cover or any other reasons and to ensure that the salvors get 
their payment for the salvage operation carried out. 
GENERAL RECOMMENDATIONS 
64. The Committee observes that there is no provisi on for grievance redressal 
mechanism in the Bill. The Committee also observes that there are lots of 
probabilities of a grievance that can arise at any stage of the salvage operation, 
wreck removal, etc. The Committee, therefore, recom mends that necessary 
provisions for redressal of grievances should be incorporated suitably, in the Bill.  
65. During the time of deliberations on the Bill, t he Committee enquired about the 
inordinate delay in bringing these Conventions part icularly as the Bunker Convention 
which is of the year 2001; the Nairobi Convention i s of 2007; and the Salvage 
Convention is of 1989, for which the Secretary, Shipping replied that: 
 “There are three Conventions.  In two of those, we  had become parties 
because there were certain provisions in existence.  This process goes through 
the MEA and their Legal Treaties Division. They, no rmally, assess whether 
our existing legal provisions are adequate for us t o agree to a certain 
Convention.  So, out of these three Conventions, th ey agreed that even at a 
minimum base level, in respect of two of them, we c an become parties and we 
went ahead and became parties on the basis of the p rovisions which already 
existed under the Merchant Shipping Act. 1958.  As far as the Bunker 
Convention is concerned, when we sent this file, th eir opinion was that unless 
we first go through the process of getting an appro val for the legislation, for 
the Bill, this may not be accepted.  So, the Bunker  Convention, for that 
reason, was also clubbed here.” 
129

66. Further to this, the Ministry of Shipping has f urnished a self-contained note 
showing the reasons for the inordinate delay in fin alizing these three International 
Conventions, to the Committee (Annexure-II). The Mi nistry has further submitted that 
the delay, if any, is attributable to the difficult ies faced in harmonization of the draft 
provisions based on the three International Convent ions after starting the process in 
the year 2009 onwards. Further, the fresh approval of the Union Cabinet, consequent 
upon the change of Union Government was also one of  the procedures that was 
required to be followed by them. 
67. The Committee notes that cumbersome procedures,  inter-ministerial and 
pre-legislative consultations led to the delay in b ringing the legislation. The 
Committee feels that confusion, lack of farsightedn ess, lack of decision making 
capabilities and indecisiveness at various levels also contributed to this delay. The 
Committee recommends that in future, the Ministry s hould ensure that the 
legislations are processed within the shortest poss ible time by avoiding the steps 
which are unnecessary and unwarranted. The Committe e has seen that in many 
situations, the Ministry’s line of action was not c lear because of which the action 
initiated way back in April, 2009 could be accompli shed after a gap of more than 
six years i.e.,  on the 10 
th  August, 2015. 
68. The Committee recommends that necessary amendme nts as suggested by 
the Committee, may be brought in the relevant Clauses of the Merchant Shipping 
(Amendment) Bill, 2015.  
69. The Committee, while going through the Merchant  Shipping Act, 1958, felt 
that the statute is quite bulky, with 461 Sections and Sub-sections.  The present 
Bill itself contains more than 50 Clauses.  The Com mittee, therefore, recommends 
that the Government may consider enacting a new Mer chant Shipping Act so that 
the obsolete Clauses could be removed and new Claus es could be brought in to 
keep it in tune with time. 
***** 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE AT A 
GLANCE  
 The Committee observes that the exemption given to  the owner if the 
pollution damage is due to an ‘Act of God’ as given  in clause 352 RD, is likely to 
leave ample scope for litigation and that the owner  of a ship can run away from 
his responsibilities of giving compensation to the pollution damage caused by the 
ship owned by him. The Committee, therefore, recomm ends to reconsider this 
aspect to ensure that the law does not leave any sc ope for the shipowners to get 
away from their responsibility of paying compensation. 
(Para No. 21) 
130

 The Committee observes that Ports have ample chanc es of oil spillage and 
environment pollutions from the vessels at the time  of loading/unloading of cargo. 
The Committee recommends that latest modern equipme nts being used at 
International level may be provided to the Ports fo r addressing this challenge. The 
Committee further recommends that for our cash stra pped Major Ports, the 
present subsidy limit of 50% be enhanced substantia lly for procurement of the 
modern equipment for fighting any pollution due to oil spillage on a case to case 
basis. 
(Para No. 22) 
 The Committee recommends that the Government should  chalk out a time 
bound action plan to remove the wrecks that are alr eady there in the Indian 
waters especially those wrecks which are affecting the shipping channels. 
(Para No. 37) 
 The Committee welcomes the Bill which seeks to sui tably incorporate the 
provisions of the International Convention on Civil  Liability for Bunker Oil 
Pollution Damage, 2001 (Bunker Convention); the Nai robi International 
Convention on the Removal of Wrecks, 2007 (Nairobi Convention); and the 
International Convention on Salvage, 1989 (Salvage Convention) in the Merchant 
Shipping Act, 1958. 
(Para No. 52) 
Sub-Clause 402D (2) & (3)  
 The  Committee observes that the Master of the Shi p has been given the 
authority to execute a salvage contract or any such  contracts on behalf of the ship 
owner. Since the Master of the ship is only an empl oyee of the owner, there might 
be situations when the owner may not honour the contract signed by the Master of 
the Ship and the Salvor. Therefore, the Committee f eels that a strict provision 
should be made in the Bill in order to save the interests of the Master of the Vessel. 
In view of the availability of sophisticated Inform ation and Communication 
Technology tools, it is easy to consult the owner o f the Vessel by the Master of the 
Vessel before agreeing to the contract or in case of  any contingency. 
(Para No. 56) 
 The Committee, therefore, recommends that a new Su b Clause-“in both the 
cases at (2) and (3), the owner of the vessel or ca rgo as the case may be, shall not 
be entitled to challenge the decision of the master /owner of the vessel, if such a 
decision is taken after sufficient consultation” may be inserted in the Bill.   
(Para No. 57) 
Sub Clause 402G  
 The Committee also feels that within the territori al waters of India, Indian 
Companies should be given priority for salvage oper ations.  Accordingly, the 
Committee recommends that the following sub Clause may be added in the Bill: 
“The Central Government shall ensure that the salvo rs of Indian origin are 
given first right of refusal as against the salvors  of foreign origin, for any 
salvage operations within the territorial waters of India”. 
(Para No. 59) 
Sub Clause 402 H  
 The Committee recommends that the Government may a ppropriately look 
into the absence of such a provision in the Bill, w ith a view to deal with the cases 
of owner of the vessel failing to pay the salvors d ue to bankruptcy, absence of 
proper insurance cover or any other reasons and to ensure that the salvors get 
their payment for the salvage operation carried out. 
131

(Para No. 63) 
GENERAL RECOMMENDATIONS 
 The Committee observes that there is no provision for grievance redressal 
mechanism in the Bill. The Committee also observes that there are lots of 
probabilities of a grievance that can arise at any stage of the salvage operation, 
wreck removal, etc. The Committee, therefore, recom mends that necessary 
provisions for redressal of grievances should be incorporated suitably, in the Bill.  
(Para No. 64) 
 The Committee notes that cumbersome procedures, in ter-ministerial and 
pre-legislative consultations led to the delay in b ringing the legislation. The 
Committee feels that confusion, lack of farsightedn ess, lack of decision making 
capabilities and indecisiveness at various levels also contributed to this delay. The 
Committee recommends that in future, the Ministry s hould ensure that the 
legislations are processed within the shortest poss ible time by avoiding the steps 
which are unnecessary and unwarranted. The Committe e has seen that in many 
situations, the Ministry’s line of action was not c lear because of which the action 
initiated way back in April, 2009 could be accompli shed after a gap of more than 
six years i.e.,  on the 10 th  August, 2015. 
(Para No. 67) 
 The Committee recommends that necessary amendments  as suggested by 
the Committee, may be brought in the relevant Clauses of the Merchant Shipping 
(Amendment) Bill, 2015.  
(Para No. 68) 
 The Committee, while going through the Merchant Sh ipping Act, 1958, felt 
that the statute is quite bulky, with 461 Sections and Sub-sections.  The present 
Bill itself contains more than 50 Clauses.  The Com mittee, therefore, recommends 
that the Government may consider enacting a new Mer chant Shipping Act so that 
the obsolete Clauses could be removed and new Claus es could be brought in to 
keep it in tune with time. 
(Para No. 69) 
***** 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
132

 
 
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK 
SABHA  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Bill No. 227 of 2015  
 
 
 
 
THE MERCHANT SHIPPING (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2015  
133

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
44 of 1958.  
A 
 
BIL 
L 
 
further to amend the Merchant Shipping 
Act, 1958  
 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-sixth Year of the Republic of 
India as follows:— 
 
1. (1) This Act may be called the Merchant Shipping 
(Amendment) Act, 2015.  
 
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, 
by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.  
 
5  2. In section 3 of the Merchant Shipping Act, 1958 (he reinafter 
referred to as the principal Act),— 
 
(a) after clause 14, the following clause shall be inserted, 
namely:— 
 
‘(14A) “gross tonnage” and “net tonnage” shall mean 
respectively the gross tonnage and the net tonnage of a ship as 
determined in accordance with  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Short title 
and com-
 
mencement.  
 
 
Amendment 
of section 3. 
10                            
the provisions of the International Convention on T onnage Measurement of  
Ships, 1969;’;  
 
(b) clause (58) shall be omitted. 
134

2  
 
Insertion of 
new Part 
XBA. 
 
 
 
Application 
of this Part. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Definitions.  
 
3. After Part XB of the principal Act, the following Part shall be 
inserted, namely:— 
 
‘PART 
XBA  
 
CIVIL LIABILITY FOR BUNKER OIL POLLUTION DAMAGE  
352RA. This Part applies to— 
(a) pollution damage caused due to escape or discharg e of 
bunker oil by every Indian vessel wherever it is and every foreign 
vessel while it is— 
(i) within the territory including territorial sea of 
India; and  
(ii) at a port or a place in India or within the terri torial 
waters of India or any marine areas adjacent theret o over 
which India has, or may hereafter have, exclusive 
jurisdiction in regard to control of marine pollution under the 
Territorial W aters, Continental Shelf, Exclusive Ec onomic 
Zone and other Maritime Zones Act, 1976 or any othe r law 
for the time being in force; 
 
(b) preventive measures, wherever taken, to prevent o r 
minimise such damage:  
Provided that this Part shall not apply to warships , naval 
auxiliary or other vessels owned or operated by the  Government 
and used, for the time being, only on Government no n-
commercial service:  
Provided further that the Bunker Convention shall not apply 
to pollution damage as defined in clause (f) of section 352H relating 
to Civil Liability Convention, whether or not compe nsation is 
payable in respect of it under that Convention.  
352RB. In this Part, unless the context otherwise requires,— 
(a) “Bunker Convention” means the International 
Convention on Civil  
Liability for Bunker Oil Pollution Damage, 2001, as amended from 
time to time;  
(b) “bunker oil” means any hydrocarbon mineral oil, 
including lubricating oil, used or intended to be u sed for the 
operation or propulsion of a ship, and any residues of such oil;  
(c) “Civil Liability Convention” means the Internatio nal 
Convention on  
Civil Liability for Oil Pollution Damage, 1992, as amended from 
time to time;  
(d) “incident” means any occurrence, or series of 
occurrences having the same origin which causes pol lution 
damage or creates a grave and imminent threat of ca using such 
damage;  
(e) “person” means any individual or partnership or a ny 
public or private body, whether corporate or not, i ncluding a 
State or any of its constituent sub-divisions;  
(
f
) 
“
p
o
l
l
u
t
i
o
n
 
d
a
m
a
g
e
”
 
m
e
a
n
s
,
—
 
(
i
) 
l
o
s
s 
o
r 
d
a
m
a
g
e 
c
a
u
s
e
d 
o
u
t
135

3  
s
i
d
e
 
t
h
e
 
s
h
i
p
 
b
y
 
c
o
n
t
a
m
i
n
a
t
i
o
n
 
r
e
s
u
l
t
-
 
i
n
g
 
f
r
o
m
 
t
h
e
 
e
scape or discharge of bunker oil from the ship, whe rever 
such escape or discharge may occur: 
 
Provided that compensation for impairment of the 
environment other than loss or profit from such imp airment 
shall be limited to costs of reasonable measures of  
reinstatement actually undertaken or to be undertak en; 
and  
(ii) the costs of preventive measures and further loss or 
damage caused by such preventive measures;  
(g) “preventive measures” means any reasonable measur es 
taken by any person after the occurrence of incident to prevent or 
minimise the pollution damage;  
 
(h) “registered owner” means the person or persons registered 
as the owner of the ship or, in the absence of registration, the person 
or persons owning such ship:  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10  
 
80 of 1976.  
 
 
 
15  
 
 
 
 
 
 
20  
 
 
 
 
 
 
25  
 
 
 
 
 
 
30  
 
 
 
 
 
35  
 
 
 
 
 
 
40  
 
 
 
 
 
45 
136

4  
 
Provided that in the case of a ship owned by a Stat e and 
operated by a company which in that State is regist ered as ship's 
operator, "registered owner" means such company;  
(i) “ship” means any seagoing vessel and sea borne craft of any 
type whatsoever;  
5  (j) “ship owner” means the owner including the regist ered 
owner, bareboat charterer, manager and operator of the ship;  
(k) “State of the ship’s registry” means, in relation to a registered 
ship, the State of registration of the ship and, in  relation to an 
unregistered ship, the State flag that ship is entitled to fly;  
10                            (l) “vessel” includes ship.  
352RC. (1) Save as otherwise provided in section 352RD,– 
(a) where pollution damage is caused due to discharge  or 
escape of bunker oil on board or originating from a  vessel, the 
owner of the vessel shall be liable— 
(i) for any pollution damage caused outside the 
vessel by  
15                                        contamination resulting from the discharge or escape;  
(ii) for the cost of any reasonable measures taken for the 
purpose of preventing or minimising any pollution d amage 
so caused or likely to be caused; and  
(iii) for any damage caused by any such preventive 
measures so taken:  
20  Provided that where an incident consists of a serie s of 
occurrences having the same origin, the liability s hall attach 
to the owner at the time of the first of such occur rences and 
where more than one person is liable, their liabili ty shall be 
joint and several;  
(b) where there arises a grave and imminent threat of damage 
being caused  
25 outside a vessel, the owner of the vessel shall be liable for the 
cost of any measures reasonably taken to prevent or  minimise 
any such damage.  
(2) Where any incident involving two or more vessels occurs 
resulting in pollution damage, the owners of all ve ssels involved in 
such incident shall, unless the damage is reasonabl y separable, be 
jointly and severally liable for such damage.  
30  (3) With respect to ships owned by the Government or the 
Government of any country and used for commercial p urposes, the 
Government or the Government of each of such country shall be liable 
for pollution damage under this part.  
352RD. (1) No liability for pollution damage shall be incurred by the 
owner of a vessel under this Part, if he proves that such damage,— 
35  (a) resulted from an act of war, hostilities, civil w ar, 
insurrection or a natural phenomenon of an exceptional, 
inevitable and irresistible character; or  
(
b
)
 
w
a
s
 
w
h
o
l
l
y
 
c
a
u
s
e
d
 
b
y
 
a
n
y
 
a
c
t
 
o
r
 
o
m
i
s
s
i
o
n
 
d
o
n
e
 
w
137

5  
ith an intent to cause such damage by any person ot her than an 
employee or agent of the owner; or  
(c) was wholly caused by the negligence or other 
wrongful act of the  
40 Government or other authority responsible for maint enance of 
lights or other navigational aids in the exercise of such function.  
(2) If the owner of a vessel proves that the pollutio n damage 
resulted wholly or partially either from an act or omission done with 
intent to cause damage by the person who suffered t he damage or 
from the negligence of that person, then, he shall be  
45                wholly or partially exonerated from his liability to such person.  
352RE. The owner of the vessel shall be entitled to limit his liability 
under this Part, in respect of any one or more incident, in accordance with the 
provisions of Part XA:  
Provided that the owner shall not be entitled to li mit his liability 
if it is proved that the incident causing pollution damage occurred as a 
result of his personal act or  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Liability for 
bunker oil 
 
pollution.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Exemption 
from liability.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Right of 
owner to 
 
limitation of 
liability.
138

6  
 
 
 
 
Determina- 
tion of 
 
limitation of 
liability.
 
 
 
 
 
 
Consolidation 
of claims and 
distribution of 
amount. 
 
 
Extinguish- 
ment of right 
to claim. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Maintenance 
of compul-
 
sory 
insurance or 
other 
 
financial 
security.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Issue of  
certificate.  
 
omission, committed or made with an intent to cause such damage, or 
recklessly and with knowledge that such damage would probably 
result.  
352RF. (1) Where the owner of a vessel has or is alleged to have 
incurred a liability under section 352RC, he may ma ke an application 
to the High Court for determination of limitation o f his liability in 
accordance with the provisions contained    5 in Part XA in such form and 
manner as may be prescribed.  
(2) After receiving the application under sub-section  ( 1), the 
High Court shall determine the amount of owner’s li ability in 
accordance with the provisions contained in Part XA and direct him to 
deposit such amount with the High Court.  
352RG. The High Court shall consolidate all claims against the owner 
of the    1 0  
vessel who has deposited the amount under section 3 52RF or his 
insurer and shall distribute the amount rateably am ongst the 
claimants in accordance with the provisions of Part  XA.  
352RH. The right to claim compensation in respect of an incident 
under this Part  
shall extinguish if such claim is not made within a period of three years from 
the date of    15  
occurrence of 
damage: 
 
Provided that in no case, such claim may be made af ter six years 
from the date of incident which caused such damage: 
Provided further that where such incident consists of a series of 
occurrences,  
the period of six years shall run from the date of the first of such 
occurrence.                 20  
352R-I. (1) Every registered owner of a vessel with more than  one 
thousand gross tonnage shall, for the purpose of co vering his liability for 
pollution damage under this Part, be required to maintain compulsory 
insurance coverage or such other financial security, as may be prescribed, 
for an amount equivalent to his liability as determ ined in accordance with 
the provisions of Part XA.                                               2 5  
(2) Any claim for compensation for pollution damage m ay be 
brought directly against the insurer or other perso n providing 
financial security for the registered owner’s liabi lity for pollution 
damage and in such a case, the insurer or such pers on may invoke 
defences (other than bankruptcy or winding up of th e owner) which 
the  
owner would have been entitled to invoke, including  limitation of liability 
pursuant to    30  
section 
352RF: 
 
Provided that where the owner is not entitled to li mitation of 
liability under section 352 RF, the insurer or such  person may limit 
139

7  
liabi 
lity 
to 
an 
amo 
unt 
equ 
al to 
the 
amo 
unt 
of 
the 
insu 
ranc 
e or 
othe 
r 
fina 
ncia 
l 
secu 
rity 
requ 
ired 
to 
be 
mai 
ntai 
ned 
und 
er 
 
sub-
section 
(1):                                                                                                                  
35  
P
rovi 
ded 
furt 
her 
that 
the 
insu 
rer 
or 
suc 
h 
pers 
on 
may 
invoke the defence that the pollution damage result ed from the wilful 
misconduct of the owner but shall not invoke any other defence which 
such insurer or person might have been entitled to invoke in 
proceedings brought by the owner against such insur er or person: 
 
Provided also that the insurer or such person shall have the right to 
require the    4 0  
owner to be joined in such 
proceedings. 
 
352RJ. ( 1) In respect of every vessel which maintains insura nce 
or other financial security under section 352R-I, t he Director General 
shall issue a certificate in such form, containing such particulars and 
subject to such conditions, as may be prescribed.  
(2) On an application made by the owner or agent of a ny foreign 
vessel, the    45  
Director General may issue a certificate in respect  of such foreign 
vessel on production  
of satisfactory evidence of maintenance of insuranc e or other 
financial security as required under section 352R-I.  
 
(3) Every certificate under sub-sections (1) and (2) may be issued 
on payment of  
such fee as may be prescribed .                                                                                         
50 
140

8  
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10  
 
 
 
 
 
 
15  
 
 
 
 
 
 
20  
 
 
 
 
 
 
25  
 
 
 
 
 
 
30  
 
 
 
 
 
 
35  
 
 
 
 
 
 
40  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
80 of 1976.  
 
(4) Every certificate issued under sub-sections (1) and (2) shall be 
renewed after its expiry in such manner and on payment of such fee as 
may be prescribed.  
352RK. (1) No vessel shall enter or leave or attempt to ente r or 
leave any port or place to which this Part applies,  unless it carries on 
board a certificate issued under section 352RJ.  
(2) Any certificate issued by a competent authority in any country 
outside India to a ship registered in that country or any certificate 
issued by a competent authority of any country whic h is a contracting 
party to the Bunker Convention to any ship wherever  registered, shall 
be accepted at any port or place in India as if it were issued under this 
Act.  
(3) No Port Officer shall permit inward entry or outward clearance 
to any vessel to which sub-section ( 1) applies unless the master of 
the vessel produces the certificate referred to in sub-section (1).  
352RL. Nothing contained in this Part shall prejudice the right of 
recourse that the owner of the vessel may have agai nst any other 
person in respect of his liability. 
352RM. (1) Any decision given by a court under sub-section 
(2) of section  
352 RF shall be recognised in the country where the cause of action has 
arisen, except where— 
(a) the judgment was obtained by fraud; or  
(b) the owner or the insurer or the person providing financial 
security who is a party to the proceedings was not given 
reasonable notice and a fair opportunity to present  his case.  
(2) A judgment recognised under sub-section ( 1) shall be 
enforceable in each of the affected country as soon  as the procedures 
required in that country have been complied with:  
Provided that such procedure shall not permit the merits of the case 
to be reopened.  
352RN. (1) The Central Government may make rules to carry out 
the purposes of this Part.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the gener ality of the 
foregoing power, such rules may provide for all or any of the following 
matters, namely:— 
(a) the form and manner of making application under s ub-
section (1) of section 352 RF;  
(b) the other financial securities under sub-section (1) of 
section 352R-I; (c) the form of the certificate, the 
particulars it may contain and the  
conditions subject to which it may be issued under sub-section (1) of 
section 352RJ;  
(d) the fee for issue of certificate under sub-section (3) of 
section 352RJ; (e) the manner of renewal of certificate and 
the fees under sub-section (4) 
of section 352RJ.’.  
4. For 
section 390 
of the 
principal 
Act, the 
following 
sections 
shall be 
substituted, 
namely:—
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
‘
390. 
This 
Part 
shall 
apply 
to the 
wreck 
s 
locate 
d 
within 
the 
territor 
y of 
India 
includ 
ing the 
territor 
ial sea 
or any 
marin 
e areas 
adjace 
nt 
theret 
o over 
which 
India 
has, or 
may 
hereaf 
ter 
have, 
exclus 
ive 
jurisdi 
141

9  
ction 
under 
the 
Territo 
rial 
Waters 
, 
Contin 
ental 
Shelf, 
Exclus 
ive 
Econo 
mic 
Zone 
and 
other 
Mariti 
me 
Zones 
Act, 
1976: 
 
 
 
 
 
Ban on entering or leaving port without  
certificate.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Right of recourse.  
 
Recognition and  
enforcements of decision of court.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Power to make rules.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Substitution of new  
sections 390,  
390A, 390B,  
390C, 390D,  
390E, 390F,  
390G, 390H and 390-I for section 390.  
Application of this Part to wrecks. 
142

1
0 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Definitions.  
 
Provided that this Part shall not 
apply to,—
 
(a) any measures taken under the International Conven tion 
relating to Intervention on the High Seas in Cases of Oil 
Pollution Casualties, 1969, as amended from time to time;  
(b) any warship or other ship owned or operated by th e 
Government for    5 
non-commercial 
service. 
 
390A. In this Part, unless the context otherwise requires,— 
(a) “authority” means the Director General or any person 
authorised by him; (b) “affected country” means the country 
in whose Convention area the  
wreck is located ;                                                                                                       
10  
(c) “coasts” include the coasts of creeks and tidal w aters;  
(d) “Convention” means the Nairobi Convention on the Removal of 
Wrecks,  
2007, as amended from time 
to time; 
 
(e) “Convention area” means the exclusive economic zone of a 
State Party established in accordance with the international law or, if 
a State Party has not    1 5 established such zone, an area beyond and 
adjacent to the territorial sea of that  
State determined by that State in accordance with i nternational 
law and extending not more than two hundred nautica l miles 
from the baselines from which the breadth of its te rritorial sea is 
measured;  
(f) “hazard” means any condition or threat that—                                          
20  
(i) poses a danger or impediment to navigation; or  
(ii) may reasonably be expected to result in major 
harmful conse- quences to the marine environment, o r 
damage to the coastline or related interests of Ind ia or any 
other country;  
(g) “maritime casualty” means a collision of ships, s tranding 
or other    2 5 incident of navigation or other occurrence on board  a 
ship or external to it, resulting in material damage or imminent threat of 
material damage to a ship or its cargo;  
(h) “operator of the ship” means the owner of the shi p or 
any other organisation or person including the manager or the 
bareboat charterer who has assumed the responsibility for operation of 
the ship from the owner of the ship    30 and who, on assuming such 
responsibility, has agreed to take over all duties and responsibilities 
established under the International Safety Manageme nt Code,  
as amended from time to 
time; 
 
(i) “receiver of wreck” means the person appointed as such under 
section 391;  143

1
1 
 
(
j
)
 
“
r
e
g
i
s
t
e
r
e
d
 
o
w
n
e
r
”
 
m
e
a
n
s
 
t
h
e
 
p
e
r
s
o
n
 
o
r
 
p
e
r
s
o
n
s
 
r
e
gistered as the owner     
35  
of the ship or, in the absence of registration, the person or 
persons owning the ship at the time of the maritime casualty:  
Provided that in the case of a ship owned by a Stat e and 
operated by a company which in that State is registered as the 
operator of the ship, registered owner shall mean such company ;                                                                            
40  
(k) “related interests”, in relation to the interests of India 
directly affected or threatened by a wreck, means— 
(i) maritime coastal, port and estuarine activities, including 
fisheries activities, constituting an essential mea ns of 
livelihood of the persons concerned ;                                                                                                     
45  
(ii) tourist attractions and other economic interests 
of the areas concerned;  
(iii) the health of the coastal population and the well 
being of the area concerned, including conservation of marine 
living resources and of wildlife; and  
 
(iv) offshore and underwater infrastructure;                                         
50 
144

1
2 
 
 
(l) “removal” means any form of prevention, mitigatio n or 
elimination of the hazard created by a wreck, and the expressions 
“remove”, “removed” and “removing” shall be constru ed 
accordingly;  
(m) “ship” means a seagoing vessel of any type whatsoever 
and includes  
5 hydrofoil boats, air-cushion vehicles, submersibles, floating craft 
and floating platforms, except when such platforms are on 
location engaged in the exploration, exploitation o r production 
of seabed mineral resources;  
(n) “State of the ship’s registry” means, in relation to a 
registered ship, the  
State of registration of the ship and, in relation to an unregistered 
ship, the State,  
10                            whose flag the ship is entitled to fly;  
(o) “wreck”, in relation to a maritime casualty, 
includes— (i) a sunken or stranded ship; 
or  
(ii) any part of a sunken or stranded ship, including any 
object or goods or cargo that is or has been on boa rd such a 
ship; or  
(iii) any object or goods or cargo that is lost at sea from a ship and  
15  
that is stranded, sunken or adrift at sea; or  
(iv ) a ship that is in distress or is about, or may 
reasonably be expected, to sink or to strand, where  effective 
measures to assist the ship or any property in dang er are not 
already being taken;  
20                                                    (v) a vessel abandoned without hope or intention of 
recovery. 
Explanation.—For the purpose of this sub-clause, any 
question as to whether the measures adopted to assi st the 
ship or any property in danger are effectively being taken or not 
shall be decided by the Director General.  
390B. (1) When any Indian ship, has been involved in a 
maritime casualty  
25 resulting in a wreck in any area to which this Part  applies, the master 
and the operator of the ship shall, without any delay, report such 
incident to the receiver of wreck and the office of the Director General.  
(2) When an Indian Ship has been involved in a maritime casualty 
resulting in a wreck in a Convention area of any co untry, the master 
and the operator of that ship  
30 shall, without any delay, report such incident to t he affected country 
in such manner as may be required by that country and shall also report 
such incident to the Director General.  
(3) When any ship other than Indian ship has been inv olved in a 
maritime casualty resulting in a wreck in any area to which this Part 
applies, the master and the operator of the ship sh all, without any 
delay, report such incident to the receiver of  
35                
wre 
ck 
and 
the 
offi 
ce 
of 
the 
Dir 
ect 
or 
Ge 
ner 
al. 
 
(
4
)
 
T
h
e
 
r
e
p
o
r
t
 
r
e
f
e
r
r
e
d
 
t
o
 
i
n
 
s
u
b
-
s
e
c
145

1
3 
 
tions ( 1) and ( 3) shall provide the name and the principal place of  
business of the owner or the operator of the ship a nd all relevant 
information necessary for the receiver of wreck or the Director 
General to determine whether the wreck poses a haza rd as per the 
provisions of section 390C or not,  
40 including the following information, 
namely:— (a) the precise 
location of the wreck;  
(b) the type, size and construction of the wreck;  
(c) the nature of the damage to, and the condition of, the 
wreck;  
(d) the nature and quantity of the cargo, in particular any 
hazardous and  
45                            noxious substances; and  
(e) the amount and types of oil, including bunker oil  and 
lubricating oil, on board.  
 
(5) The Director General may, if he considers necessa ry, direct 
the receiver of wreck or any other person or author ity to give report 
on details of the wreck.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Duty to 
report 
wrecks. 
146

1
4 
 
 
Determina- 
tion of 
hazard. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Locating and 
marking of 
wrecks. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Measures to  
facilitate the 
removal of 
wrecks. 
 
 
390C. For determining whether a wreck poses a hazar d, the 
following criteria shall be taken into account, namely:— 
 
(a) the type, size and construction of 
the wreck; (b) depth of the water in the 
area;  
(c) tidal range and currents in the area;                                                         
5 
 
(d) proximity to protected areas including coral reef s and 
other areas as notified by the Government;  
 
(e) particularly sensitive sea areas identified and, as 
appropriate, designated in accordance with guidelines adopted by the 
International Maritime Organisation, or a clearly defined area of the 
exclusive economic zone where   10 special mandatory measures 
have been adopted in accordance with requirements o f the 
United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea, 1982;  
 
(f) proximity of shipping routes or established 
traffic lanes; (g) traffic density and frequency;  
(h) type of traffic;                                                                                          
15  
(i) nature and quantity of the wreck’s cargo, the amount and 
types of oil (such as bunker oil and lubricating oi l) on board the 
wreck and, in particular, the damage likely to result if the cargo or 
oil is released into the marine environment;  
 
(j) vulnerability of port facilities;  
 
(k) prevailing meteorological and hydrographical conditions;                      
20  
 
(l) submarine topography of the area;  
 
(m) height of the wreck above or below the surface of the 
water at lowest astronomical tide;  
 
(n) acoustic and magnetic profiles of the wreck;  
 
(o) proximity of offshore installations, pipelines, telecommunication 
cables   2 5  
and similar structures;  
 
(p) proximity of tourist spots and heritage locations; and  
 
(q) any other circumstances that might necessitate the removal of the 
wreck.  
 
390D. (1) The Director General may, if he considers necessa ry, give 
directions to a receiver of wreck or any other person or authority including the 
Director General of Light   25  
House or the Port Authority or a Maritime Board or Indian Coast Guard, as the 
case may, 
within their respective jurisdiction to locate and mark the wreck.  
147

1
5 
 
(
2) 
Wh 
en 
a 
wre 
ck 
has 
bee 
n 
det 
erm 
ine 
d to 
be 
a 
haz 
ard 
und 
er 
sect 
ion 
390 
C, 
it 
sha 
ll 
be 
the 
dut 
y of 
the 
ow 
ner 
or 
the 
ope 
rato 
r of 
suc 
h a 
shi 
p to 
im 
me 
diat 
ely 
mar 
k 
the 
wre 
ck at his or 
 
its own cost in such manner as may be prescribed an d to maintain such marking 
until the   30  
wreck is removed.  
(3) The cost for locating and marking the ship shall be borne by or 
recovered from the registered owner. 
390E. (1) When it is determined that the wreck constitutes a hazard, the 
receiver of wreck shall inform the fact to the Director General who shall—                                                
35  
(a) at once, inform the Government of the State of th e ship’s 
registry and the registered owner of the ship; and  
(b) proceed to consult the Government of the State of  the ship’s 
registry and other countries affected by the wreck regarding 
measures to be taken in relation to  
such wreck.                                                                                                                       
40 
148

1
6 
 
 
(2) The registered owner of the ship or, as the case may be, the 
operator of the ship shall remove such wreck which has been 
determined to constitute a hazard:  
Provided that where any dispute arises as to whethe r the wreck 
constitutes a hazard or not, the decision of the Di rector General to 
whom such dispute may be  
5                referred shall be final and binding on all parties. 
(3) When a wreck has been determined to constitute a hazard, the 
registered owner of the ship or any interested pers on shall provide the 
Director General or the receiver of wreck or any pe rson or authority 
so authorised with the evidence of insurance or oth er financial 
security maintained by him in accordance with the  
10                provisions of section 390G. 
(4) The receiver of wreck shall, having regard to the nature of the 
hazard, set such time limit as may be prescribed fo r the owner of the 
ship or its operator to remove the wreck.  
(5) If the owner of the ship or its operator or agent does not 
remove the wreck  
15 within the time set under sub-section (4), the receiver of wreck may, at 
the expense of such owner or operators, remove the wreck by the most 
practical and expeditious means available, consiste nt with 
considerations of safety and protection of the marine environment and 
the wreck or any sale proceeds derived from such wr eck shall become 
the property of the Central Government.  
20  (6) In circumstances where immediate action is requir ed and 
the receiver of wreck has informed the owner of the  ship or the 
operator accordingly, he may, at the expense of suc h owner or 
operator, remove the wreck by the most practical an d expeditious 
means available, consistent with considerations of safety and 
protection of the marine environment.  
25  390F. (1) The registered owner shall be liable for the cost s of 
locating, marking and removing the wreck under this  Part unless he 
proves that the maritime casualty which caused the wreck— 
(a) resulted from an act of war, hostilities, civil w ar, 
insurrection, or a natural phenomenon of an excepti onal, 
inevitable and irrestible character; or  
30  (b) was wholly caused by act or omission done with an  
intent to cause damage by a third party; or  
(c) was wholly caused by the negligence or other wron gful 
act of any Government or other authority responsibl e for the 
maintenance of lights or other navigational aids in the exercise of 
that function.  
35  (2) Nothing contained in this Part shall affect the r ight of the 
registered owner to limit his liability in accordance with the provisions 
of section 352B.  
(3) Nothing contained in this Part shall prejudice an y right of 
recourse available to the registered owner against third parties.  
390G. (1) Every registered owner of an Indian ship of three  
hundred gross  
40 tonnages an 
(
2
)
 
E
v
e
r
y
 
o
w
n
e
r
 
o
r
 
o
p
e
r
a
t
o
r
 
o
f
 
a
 
s
h
i
p
 
o
t
h
e
r
 
t
h
a
n
 
a
149

1
7 
 
n Indian ship of three hundred gross tonnages and a bove, while it is 
in the area to which this Part applies, shall  
45 maintain insurance coverage or other financial secu rity to cover his 
liability under the Convention and shall carry on board a certificate 
attesting that such insurance or other financial se curity is in force in 
accordance with the provisions of the Convention.  
(3) The certificate referred to in sub-section (2) shall, in case 
the ship is— (a) an Indian ship, be issued by the 
Authority;  
50  (b) registered in a Convention country other than Ind ia, be 
issued by or under the authority of the Government of that 
country; and  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Liability of 
owner.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Maintenance 
of insurance 
 
or other  
financial 
security.
150

1
8 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Exception to 
liability.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Extinguish- 
ment of right 
to claim 
 
recovery of 
costs. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Amendment 
of section 
 
391.  
Amendment 
of section 
 
395.  
 
Amendment 
of section 
 
396.  
 
(c) registered in a country which is not a Convention country, 
be a certificate issued or certified by the appropr iate authority 
authorised by any Convention country. 
(4) Any ship found contravening the provisions of sub -section 
(2) shall be liable to be detained by the Authority. 
(5) Any claim for costs arising under this Part may b e brought 
directly against the insurer or other person provid ing financial 
security for the registered owner’s liability and i n such a case, the 
insurer or such person may invoke defences (other t han bankruptcy or 
winding up of the registered owner) which the registered owner would 
have been entitled to invoke, including limitation of liability as provided 
under section 352B:  
Provided that where the registered owner is not ent itled to 
limitation of liability under section 352B, the ins urer or such person 
may limit liability to an amount equal to the amount of the insurance or 
other financial security required to be maintained under sub-section 
(1):  
Provided further that the insurer or such person ma y invoke the 
defence that the maritime casualty resulted from the wilful misconduct 
of the registered owner but shall not invoke any ot her defence which 
such insurer or person might have been entitled to invoke in 
proceedings brought by the registered owner against  such insurer or 
person:  
Provided also that the insurer or such person shall  have the right 
to require the registered owner to be joined in such proceedings.  
390H. (1) The registered owner shall not be liable under this Part 
for meeting the costs referred to in section 390F i f, and to the extent 
that, liability for such costs is in conflict with— 
(a) any other Part or provisions of this Act;  
(b) the provisions of the Civil Liability for Nuclear Damage 
Act, 2010; or  
(c) any other applicable or binding international leg al 
instrument which  
India 
adopts.  
(2) Where measures are taken under this Part, to the extent such 
measures are construed to be salvage under the prov isions of section 
402, the provisions of said section 402 shall apply  for the purposes of 
remuneration or compensation payable to salvers.  
Explanation .— For the removal of doubts, it is hereby clarifie d 
that the provisions of this section shall be constr ued harmoniously 
with the provisions of the Indian Ports Act, 1908 a nd in case of any 
ambiguity or conflict thereof, the provisions of sa id Indian Ports Act, 
1908 shall prevail.  
390-I. Any claim for recovery of costs for locating and marking of 
the ship under sub-section (2) of section 390D shall be made within a 
period of three years from the date of determination of the hazard:  
Pr 
ovided 
that in 
no case 
such 
claim 
shall be 
made 
after six 
years 
from 
the date 
of the 
maritim 
e 
casualty 
that 
resulted 
in the 
wreck: 
 
Pr 
ovided 
further 
that 
where 
the 
maritim 
e 
casualt 
y 
consists 
of a 
series 
of 
occurre 
nces, 
the six 
year 
period 
shall 
run 
from 
the date 
of first 
occurre 
nce.’. 
 
5. In 
section 391 
of the 
principal 
Act, in sub-
151

1
9 
 
section (1), 
for the 
words 
“such local 
limits”, the 
words 
“such 
limits” 
shall be 
substituted. 
 
 
6. In 
sectio 
n 395 
of the 
princi 
pal 
Act, 
for the 
words 
“withi 
n any 
local 
limits 
”, the 
words 
 
“
w
i
t
h
i
n
 
t
h
e
 
l
i
m
i
t
s
”
 
s
h
a
l
l
 
b
e substituted. 
 
 
7. In section 396 of the principal Act, for the words “within the local 
limits”, the words  
“within the limits” shall be 
substituted.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
 
 
 
10  
 
 
 
 
 
 
15  
 
 
 
 
 
20  
 
 
 
 
 
 
25  
38 of 2010.  
 
 
 
 
 
30  
 
 
 
 
 
 
35  15 of 1908.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
40  
 
 
 
 
 
 
45 
152

2
0 
 
 
8. In section 398 of the principal Act, for clause ( a), the following 
clause shall be substituted, namely:—  
 
“(a) it poses a hazard within the meaning of clause (f) of 
section 390A;”.  
 
9. In section 399 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), for the words 
“are found on or  
5    near the coasts of India”, the words “are found in any area to which this 
Part applies” shall be substituted.  
 
10. In section 400 of the principal Act, in clauses (b) and (d), for the 
words “on or near the coasts of India”, the words “in any area to which this 
Part applies” shall be substituted.  
 
11. For section 402 of the principal Act, the following  sections shall 
be substituted,  
 
Amendment 
of section 
 
398.  
 
 
Amendment 
of section 
 
399.  
 
Amendment 
of section 
 
400.  
Substitution 
10  
namely:– 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
‘402. This Part shall apply to a judicial or arbitral proceedings 
relating to salvage  
of new  
sections 402,  
402A, 402B,  
402C, 402D,  
402E, 402F,  
402G, 402H,  
402-I and  
402J for  
section 402.  
 
Application 
operations in respect of a vessel or any other property which are 
instituted in India:  
 
Provided that this Part shall not apply to the fixe d or floating 
platforms or to mobile offshore drilling units when  such platforms or 
units are on location engaged in  
15              the exploration, exploitation or production of seabed mineral 
resources:  
Provided further that this Part shall also not appl y to warships or 
other non- commercial vessels owned or operated by the Government 
which are entitled, at the time of salvage operatio ns, to sovereign 
immunity. 
 
402A. In this Part, unless the context otherwise requires,— 
 
20  (a) “damage to the environment” means substantial 
physical damage to human health or to marine life o f resources 
in coastal or inland waters or areas adjacent there to, caused by 
pollution, contamination, fire, explosion or simila r major 
incidents;  
 
(b) “payment” means any reward, remuneration or 
compensation due  
25                          under the Salvage Convention;  
 
(c) “property” means any property not permanently and  
intentionally attached to the shoreline and includes freight at 
risk;  
 
(d) “Salvage Convention” means International Conventi on 
on Salvage,  
1989 as amended from time to time;  
 
30  (
 
i
)
 
t
h
e
 
r
a
i
s
i
n
g
,
 
r
e
m
o
v
a
l
,
 
d153

2
1 
 
estruction or rendering a vessel harmless which is sunk, 
wrecked, stranded or abandoned including anything that is  
35                                      or has been on board such vessel;  
 
(ii) the removal, destruction or rendering the cargo of a 
vessel harm- less; and  
(iii) the measures taken to avert or minimise loss to a  
vessel or its cargo or both;  
 
40  (f) “salvor” means any person rendering services in d irect 
connection with salvage operation;  
of this part to  
salvage.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Definitions. 
154

2
2 
 
 
 
 
Salvage 
payable for 
saving life, 
cargo or 
wreck. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Salvage  
operations 
controlled by 
Government 
or port and 
public 
 
authorities.  
 
Salvage  
contracts.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Annulment 
and modifica- 
tion of 
 
contracts.  
 
 
 
 
 
Duties of 
salvor and of 
owner and 
 
master.  
 
(g) “vessel” means any ship or craft, or any structure capable of 
navigation.  
 
402B. (1) Where services are rendered— 
 
(a) wholly or in part within the territorial waters of India in 
saving life from any vessel, or elsewhere, in saving life from a 
vessel registered in India; or  
 
(b) in assisting a vessel or saving the cargo or equi pment of a 
vessel    5 
which is wrecked, stranded or in distress at any place to which 
this Part applies as specified in section 390; or  
(c) by any person other than the receiver of wreck in saving 
any wreck, there shall be payable to the salvor by the owner of the 
vessel, cargo, equipment or  
wreck, a reasonable sum for salvage having regard to all the circumstances of 
the case.   10  
 
(2) Salvage in respect of the preservation of life when payable by 
the owner of the vessel shall be payable in priority to all other claims 
for salvage.  
 
402C. Where salvage services are rendered by or on behalf of the 
Government or by a vessel of the Indian Navy or of the Coast Guard or 
the commander or crew of any  
such vessel or the port authorities or a public authority, as the case may 
be, it shall be   15 entitled to salvage and shall have the same rights and 
remedies in respect of those services as any other salvor. 
 
402D. (1) Subject to the provisions of sections 402E and 40 2F, this 
Part shall apply to any salvage operations save to the extent a contract 
otherwise provides expressly or by implication .                                                                                             
20  
 
(2) The master shall have the authority to conclude c ontracts 
for salvage operations on behalf of the owner of th e vessel.  
 
(3) The master or the owner of the vessel shall have the 
authority to conclude such contracts on behalf of the owner of the 
property on board the vessel.  
 
402E. A contract or any terms thereof may be annulled or modified if,—                
25  
 
(a) the contract has been entered into under undue 
influence or the influence of danger and its terms are 
inequitable; or  
 
(b) the payment under the contract is excessive and 
disproportionate to the services actually rendered. 
 
402F. (1) The salvor shall have the following duties toward s the owner 
of the   30  
vessel or other property in danger, namely:– 
 
(a) to carry out the salvage operations with due care;  
 
155

2
3 
 
(
b
)
 
t
o
 
e
x
e
r
c
i
s
e
 
d
u
e
 
c
a
r
e
 
t
o
 
p
r
e
v
e
n
t
 
o
r
 
m
i
n
i
m
i
s
e
 
d
a
m
age to the environment during salvage operations; 
 
 
(c)  to  seek  assistance  from  other  salvors  including  port  
authorities  or   3 5  
public authorities when circumstances so require; and  
 
(d) to accept the intervention of other salvors when 
reasonably requested to do so by the owner or master of the 
vessel or other property in danger:  
 
Provided that if it is found that such a request was unreasonable, it 
shall  
not prejudice the amount of reward of such salvor.                                                
40  
(2) The owner and master of the vessel or the owner of 
other property in danger shall have the following duties to the 
salvor, namely:– 
 
(a) to co-operate fully with the salvor during the co urse of 
the salvage operations; 
156

2
4 
 
 
(b) to exercise due care to prevent or minimise damage to the 
environment during salvage operations;  
 
(c) when the vessel or other property has been brough t to 
a place of safety, to accept redelivery when reasonably requested 
by the salvor to do so; and  
 
5  (d) to provide satisfactory security for the claim, i ncluding 
interest and costs of the salvor for salvage operat ions, at the 
request of the salvor. 
 
402G. ( 1) The Central Government shall take such measures, 
as may be prescribed, to protect its coastline or r elated interests from 
pollution or threat of pollution arising out of a m aritime casualty or 
acts relating to such casualty which may  
10              result in major harmful consequences.  
 
(2) The Central Government shall give such directions  as it 
deems fit to the concerned ship owner or the master  or the salvor or a 
port authority or a public authority or any other p erson in relation to 
salvage operations.  
 
(3) The Central Government shall, for the purposes of  efficient 
and effective  
15 salvage operations, saving life or property in dang er and preventing 
damage to the environment, seek cooperation from the concerned ship 
owner or the master or the salvor or a port authori ty or a public 
authority or any other person, to give assistance t o vessels in need, to 
admit to ports of vessels in distress or in need of assistance and to give 
facilities to salvors.  
 
20  402H. (1) A salvor shall have a right to payment for the se rvices 
rendered by him relating to salvage operations:  
 
Provided that no such payment shall be made where t here is 
express and reasonable prohibition from the owner o r master of 
vessel or owner of any other property in danger. 
 
25  (2) The Central Government may prescribe the criteria  for 
claiming rewards, the manner of fixing rewards, the payment of special 
compensation, the apportionment of payment amongst salvors, the 
salvage of persons, the payment under the contract,  the payment for 
additional services not covered under the contract and the effect of 
misconduct of salvors on reward or payment.  
 
30  (3) The salvor shall have right to enforce his maritime lien against 
the owner or master of vessel or owner of any other property in danger 
when satisfactory security for his claim, including  interest and costs, 
has not been provided by such person.  
 
402-I. ( 1) A dispute relating to claims under this Part shal l be 
determined upon application made by either of the disputing parties to 
the concerned High Court.  
 
35  (2) Where there is any dispute as to the persons who are entitled 
to the salvage amount under this section, the High Court shall decide 
the dispute and if there are more persons than one entitled to such 
a
m
o
u
n
t
, 
t
h
e
 
H
i
g
h
 
C
o
u
r
t 
s
h
a
l
l 
a
p
p
o
r
t
i
o
n
 
t
h
e
 
a
m
o
u
n
t 
t
h
e
r
e
o
157

2
5 
 
f, among such persons.  
 
(3) The costs of and incidental to all proceedings before the High 
Court under  
40 this section shall be in the discretion of the High  Court and the High 
Court shall have full power to determine by whom or out of what 
property and to what extent such costs are to be pa id and to give all 
necessary directions for the purpose aforesaid.  
 
(4) The High Court may, by interim order, direct that  the salvor 
shall be paid such amount as may appear to it to be fair and just, upon 
such terms, including terms as to  
45 security, as may appear to it to be necessary, fair  and just, 
according to the circumstances of each case:  
 
Provided that where any interim payment is made, th e security 
provided under clause ( d) of sub-section ( 2) of section 402E shall be 
reduced accordingly. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rights and 
duties of 
 
Central  
Government in 
relation to 
salvage 
 
operations.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rights of 
salvors. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Adjudication 
of disputes. 
158

2
6 
 
 
Extinguish- 
ment of 
claims. 
 
 
 
 
Amendment 
of section 
 
404.  
 
402J. ( 1) Any action relating to payment under this Part sh all 
extinguish if such claim is not made within a period of two years.  
 
(2) For the purposes of this section, the period of l imitation shall 
commence from the date of completion of salvage operation.’.  
 
12. In section 404 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), after clause (g), the 
following    5 
clauses shall be inserted, namely:— 
 
“(h) the manner of marking wreck under sub-section (2) of 
section 390D; (i) the time limit for removing wreck under sub-
section (4) of section 390E; (j) the other financial security 
under sub-section (1) of section 390G;  
(k)  the  measures  to  be  taken  to  protect  the  coastline  related  
interests  from   10  
pollution or threat of pollution under sub-section ( 1) of section 402G;  
 
(l) any other matter for which rule is required to be  made for the 
implementation of the Nairobi Convention on the Rem oval of 
Wrecks, 2007 or the Salvage Convention.”. 
159

 
 
 
 
 
 
STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND 
REASONS  
 
The Merchant Shipping Act, 1958 was enacted to fost er the 
development and to ensure the efficient maintenance  of an Indian 
mercantile marine sector in a manner best suited to  serve the national 
interest. International Maritime Organisation ( IMO ), as the global 
standard-setting authority for the safety, security  and environmental 
performance of international shipping, creates fair and effective regulatory 
framework for the shipping industry in the form of Conventions for 
universal adoption and implementation.  
 
2. The International Convention on Civil Liability for Bunker Oil Pollution 
Damage  
2001 (Bunker Convention) ensures that adequate, pro mpt, and effective 
compensation is available to persons who suffer damage caused by spills of 
oil, when carried as fuel in ships' bunkers. The Co nvention applies to 
damage caused on the territory, including the terri torial sea, and in 
exclusive economic zones of States Parties.The Conv ention provides a 
separate instrument covering pollution damage only. 
 
3. The Nairobi International Convention on the Remo val of Wrecks 
2007 (Nairobi Convention) provides the legal basis to remove shipwrecks 
that may have the potential to affect adversely the  safety of lives, goods 
and property at sea, as well as the marine environm ent. The Convention 
fills the gap in the existing international legal f ramework by providing the 
first set of uniform international rules aimed at e nsuring the prompt and 
effective removal of wrecks located beyond the territorial sea.  
 
4. The International Convention on Salvage (Salvage  Convention) 
1989 replaced the prevalent "no cure, no pay" princ iple where a salvor is 
only rewarded for services if the operation is succ essful. By towing a 
damaged tanker away from an environmentally sensiti ve area, salvor 
prevents major pollution incidents. But the prevale nt "no cure, no pay" 
principle acted as a disincentive for operation, wh ere chances of success 
were slim. The 1989 Salvage Convention remedied thi s deficiency by 
making provision for an enhanced salvage award in p reventing or 
minimising damage to the environment and by introdu cing a "special 
compensation" to be paid to salvors who fail to earn a reward in the normal 
way. 
 
5. India is a member of IMO and as and when Governm ent of India 
approves to be a party to an International Conventi on by 
accession/ratification, the Convention is given eff ect by suitably 
incorporating its provisions in our domestic legisl ation. The accession to 
Bunker Convention  2001 is now approved and, for im plementing the 
Convention, the Merchant Shipping Act 1958 requires further amendments. 
The amendments incorporate the Convention provision s by inserting Part 
XBA in the Act titled "Civil Liability for Bunker O il Pollution Damage" 
India is already a party to the Nairobi Convention and Salvage 
Convention. However, in the light of experiences ga ined in implementing 160

 
Part XIII titled "Wreck and Salvage", it was felt necessary to amend the Part 
XIII to make them progressive and in tune with Nair obi Convention and 
Salvage Convention.  
 
6. Under the provisions of the Merchant Shipping (A mendment) Bill, 
2015, the registered owner of a vessel has to maintain compulsory insurance 
cover which allows claim for compensation for bunker pollution damage to 
be brought directly against an insurer. Ships of 10 00 GT and above has to 
carry a certificate onboard to the effect that it m aintains insurance or other 
financial security, without which these vessels will not be allowed to enter 
or leave India. The liability cover for bunker poll ution damage shall be 
equal to the limits of liability under the applicab le national or international 
limitation regime, but in all cases, not exceeding an amount calculated in 
accordance with the Convention on Limitation of Lia bility for Maritime 
Claims, 1976.  
 
7. The amendments shall also facilitate more purpos eful approach 
towards removal of wrecks and salvage, protect Indi an waters from the 
wreck hazards and introduce internationally recogni sed and approved 
rules for removal of wrecks. Private and public  
 
15 
161

 
16  
 
entities will be encouraged to participate in salva ge operations on account 
of adequate remuneration for services rendered spec ially to protect the 
environment or minimise its damage. Salvage service s provided for saving 
life, cargo or wreck will be paid on priority to ot her claims for salvage. 
Salvage services provided by the Government shall also be entitled to rights 
and remedies as those of any other salvor. The Bill provides for duties of the 
salvor, owner and master of a vessel. It also provides for rights and duties of 
the Central Government in cases of maritime casualt y in protecting its 
environment and coastline and to pass directions wi th regard to salvage 
operations.  
 
8. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.  
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                                                                                          
NITIN GADKARI.  
 
The 24 th July 
2015. 
162

 
 
 
 
 
 
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGA TED 
LEGISLA TION  
 
Clause 3 of the Bill seeks to insert a new Part XBA  in the Merchant 
Shipping Act, 1958 relating to Civil Liability for Bunker Oil Pollution 
Damage. The proposed section 352RN of the said Part XBA confers power 
upon the Central Government to make rules for carrying out the provisions 
of the Bill. The matters in respect of which rules may be made are— ( a) 
the form and manner of making application under sub-section (1) of section 
352 RF; ( b) the other financial securities under sub-section (1) of section 
352R-I; (c) the form of the certificate, the particulars it m ay contain and 
the conditions subject to which it may be issued un der sub-section (1) of 
section 352RJ; ( d) the fee for issue of certificate under sub-sectio n (3) of 
section 352RJ; (e) the manner of renewal of certifi cate and the fees under 
sub-section (4) of section 352RJ.  
 
Clause 12 of the Bill seeks to amend sub-section ( 2) of section 404 
relating to power to make rules respecting wreck and salvage so as to insert 
clauses (h) to (l) therein, to provide rule making powers in respect  of—(a) 
the manner of making wreck under sub-section ( 2) of section 390D; (b) the 
time limit for removing wreck under sub-section (4) of section 390E; (c) the 
other financial security under sub-section ( 1) of section 390G; ( d) the 
measures to be taken to protect the coastline related interests from pollution 
or threat of pollution under sub-section ( 1) of section 402G; and ( e) any 
other matter for which rules are required to be made for the implementation 
of the Nairobi Convention on the Removal of Wrecks, 2007 or the Salvage 
Convention.  
 
The rules made by the Central Government shall be l aid, as soon as 
may be after they are made before each House of Parliament.  
 
The matters in respect of which the rules may be ma de are generally 
matters of procedure and administrative details and  it is not practicable to 
provide for them in the Bill itself. The delegation  of legislative power is, 
therefore, of a normal character. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
163

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
17 
164

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Definitions.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Definition of  
“coasts”.  
Receivers of 
wreck. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Procedure to 
be observed 
by persons 
 
finding wreck.  
 
 
 
 
 
Investigation 
of certain 
 
matters in 
respect of 
vessels 
wrecked, etc. 
 
ANNEXUR 
E 
 
EXTRACTS FROM THE MERCHANT SHIPPING ACT, 
1958 (44 OF 1958)  
*                               *                               *                               *                               
* 
 
3.  In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— 
*  *                               *                               *                               
* (58) "wreck" includes the following when found in the sea or in 
tidal water or on  
the shores thereof—  
 
(a) goods which have been cast into the sea and then sink 
and remain under water;  
 
(b) goods which have been cast or fall into the sea and 
remain floating on the surface;  
 
(c) goods which are sunk in the sea, but are attached to a  
floating object in order that they may be found again;  
 
(d) goods which are thrown away or 
abandoned; and  
 
(e) a vessel abandoned without hope or intention of 
recovery;  
 
*                               *                               *                               *                               
* PART XIII  
WRECK AND SALVAGE  
Wrec 
k 
390. In this Part, the word "coasts" includes the coasts of creeks and tidal 
rivers.  
 
391. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in th e Official 
Gazette, appoint any person to be a receiver of wre ck (in this Part referred 
to as receiver of wreck) to receive and take posses sion of wreck and to 
perform such duties connected therewith as are here inafter mentioned, 
within such local limits as may be specified in the notification.  
 
*                               *                               *                               *                               
* 
 
395. Any person finding and taking possession of any wre ck with in 
any local limits for which there is a receiver of w reck, or bringing within 
such limits any wreck which has been found and take n possession of 
elsewhere, shall, as soon as practicable—  
 
165

 
(
a
)
 
i
f
 
h
e
 
b
e
 
t
h
e
 
o
wner thereof, give the receiver of wreck notice in writing of the finding 
thereof and of the marks by which such wreck is distinguished; 
 
 
(b) if he be not the owner of such wreck, deliver the same to the receiver of 
wreck.  
 
396. Whenever any vessel is wrecked, stranded or in dist ress as 
aforesaid, the receiver of wreck within the local limits of whose jurisdiction 
the vessel is wrecked, stranded or in distress may conduct an investigation 
into all or any of the following matters, that is to say,— 
 
(a) the name and description of the vessel;  
(b) the names of the master and of the 
owners; (c) the names of the owners of 
the cargo; 
 
18 
166

19  
 
(d) the ports from and to which the vessel was bound;  
 
(e) the occasion of the wrecking, stranding, or distress of 
the vessel; (f) the services rendered; and  
(g) such other matters or circumstances relating to t he vessel, the 
cargo or the equipment, as the receiver thinks nece ssary. 
 
*                               *                               *                               *                               
* 
 
398. A receiver of wreck may at any time sell any wreck in his 
custody if, in his opinion,—  
 
(a) it is under the value of five hundred rupees; or  
 
(b) it is so much damaged or of so perishable a nature that it 
cannot with advan- tage be kept; or  
 
(c) it is not of sufficient value for warehousing,  
 
and the proceeds of the sale shall, after defraying  the expenses thereof, be 
held by the receiver for the same purposes and subj ect to the same claims, 
rights and liabilities as if the wreck had remained unsold.  
399. (1 )                      *                      *                      *                      *                      
* ( 2) Where any articles belonging to or forming part o f a vessel 
other than an Indian  
vessel which has been wrecked or belonging to and f orming part of the 
cargo of such vessel,  
are found on or near the coasts of India or are bro ught into any port in 
India, the consular officer of the country in which the vessel is registered or, 
in the case of cargo, the country to which the owners of the cargo may have 
belonged shall, in the absence of the owner and of the master or other agent 
of the owner, be deemed to be the agent of the owne r, with respect to the 
custody and disposal of the articles.  
 
*                               *                               *                               *                               
* 
 
400.  No person 
shall— 
*                      *                      *                      *                      *                      
* (b) impede or hinder or attempt in any way to impede or hinder 
the saving of any  
vessel stranded or in danger of being stranded or o therwise in distress 
on or near the coasts of India or of any part of th e cargo or equipment 
of the vessel, or of any wreck; or  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Immediate 
sale of wreck 
by receiver in 
certain cases. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Claims of 
owners to 
wreck. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Prohibition 
of certain 
acts in 
respect of 
wreck. 
*                      *                      *                      *                      *                      
* (d) wrongfully carry away or remove any part of a vessel 
stranded or in danger  
of being stranded or otherwise in distress, on or near the coasts of India, or any part 
of  
the cargo or equipment of the vessel or any wreck.  
167

19 
 
* *                               *                               *                               
* SAL V AGE  
402. (1) Where services are rendered— 
 
(a) wholly or in part within the territorial waters of India in saving 
life from any vessel, or elsewhere in saving life from a vessel 
registered in India; or  
 
(b) in assisting a vessel or saving the cargo or equi pment of a 
vessel which is wrecked, stranded or in distress at any place on or 
near the coasts of India; or  
Salvage 
payable for 
saving life, 
cargo or 
wreck. 
168

20  
 
(c) by any person other than the receiver of wreck in saving 
any wreck,  
 
there shall be payable to the salvor by the owner o f the vessel, cargo, 
equipment or wreck, a reasonable sum for salvage ha ving regard to all the 
circumstances of the case.  
 
(2) Salvage in respect of the preservation of life wh en payable by the 
owner of the vessel shall be payable in priority to  all other claims for 
salvage.  
 
(3) Where salvage services are rendered by or on beha lf of the 
Government or by a vessel of the Indian Navy or of the Coast Guard or the 
commander or crew of any such vessel, the Government, the commander or 
the crew, as the case may be, shall be entitled to salvage and shall have the 
same rights and remedies in respect of those services as any other salvor. 
 
Explanation.—"Coast Guard" means the Coast Guard constituted 
under section 3 of the Coast Guard Act, 1978.  
 
(4) Any dispute arising concerning the amount due und er this section 
shall be deter- mined upon application made by eith er of the disputing 
parties— 
 
(a) to a Judicial Magistrate of the first class or a Metropolitan 
Magistrate, as the case may be, where the amount claimed does not 
exceed ten thousand rupees; or  
(b) to the High Court, where the amount claimed exceeds ten 
thousand rupees. (5) Where there is any dispute as to the persons 
who are entitled to the salvage  
amount under this section, the Judicial Magistrate of the first class or 
the Metropolitan  
Magistrate or the High Court, as the case may be, s hall decide the dispute 
and if there are more persons than one entitled to such amount, such 
magistrate or the High Court shall apportion the am ount thereof among 
such persons.  
 
(6) The costs of and incidental to all proceedings be fore a Judicial 
Magistrate of the first class or a Metropolitan Magistrate or the High Court 
under this section shall be in the discretion of su ch Magistrate or the High 
Court, and such Magistrate or the High Court shall have full power to 
determine by whom or out of what property and to wh at extent such costs 
are to be paid and to give all necessary directions  for the purpose 
aforesaid.  
 
*                               *                               *                               *                               
* 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
30 of 1978. 
169

 
 
 
loLOK 
SABHAL 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
——— 
— 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A 
 
BIL 
L 
 
further to amend the Merchant Shipping 
Act, 1958  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
——— 
— 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
170

20 
 
(Shri Nitin Gadkari, Minister of 
Shipping)  
 
 
 
 
GMGIPMRND—1980LS(S3)—03-08-2015.  
 
  
171

20 
 
  
172

20 
 
  
173

20 
 
Annexure-II 
 
 
 
174

20 
 
 
175

20 
 
 
176

20 
 
 
 
Annexure-III  
 
 
177

20 
 
Reply to the queries raised and remained unanswered  during the course of 
recording of oral evidence before the Department Re lated Parliamentary 
Standing Committee on 16.09.15.  
 
1.  Question 
:  In the presentation it has been shown that Bunke r 
Convention is a Convention of the year 2001, and In dia to become party 
after the enactment of the Bill. Why has there been a delay of 14 years? 
 
Answers/submissions 
: International Convention on Civil Liability for B unker oil 
Pollution Damage [Bunker Convention], 2001 was adop ted by the International 
Maritime Organisation [IMO] in 2001. However, it came into force internationally 
only at the end of the year 2008 i.e. after a gap o f nearly eight years, on 
21.11.2008. Therefore, there was no delay from 2001  till the end of 2008, as 
the Convention itself was not in force, and there w as no obligation to follow the 
Convention. 
 
The process for the accession and subsequent amendm ent to the Merchant 
Shipping Act, 1958 was initiated in early 2009. The  details of step wise process 
followed for the accession and necessary amendment to the Merchant Shipping 
Act, 1958 is as mentioned below; 
 
1. Directorate General of Shipping [DG (S)] sent th e proposal to 
accede to Bunker Convention and to seek in- princip le approval 
of the Cabinet to subsequently introduce amendments  to 
Merchant Shipping Act, 1958. 
28.04.2009 
2. The proposal was examined in the Ministry and ap proval of 
Hon’ble Minister was obtained to take up the matter  before the 
Union Cabinet.  
29.06.2009 
3. The proposal was suitably formulated as a draft Note for 
Cabinet. 
22.09.2009 
4. The draft Cabinet Note circulated for Inter-Mini sterial comments. 31.03.2010 
5. The Ministry of External Affairs while conveying  their comments 
suggested that instead of seeking in- principle app roval of the 
Cabinet to subsequently introduce amendments to Mer chant 
Shipping Act, 1958, the amendment to Merchant Shipp ing Act, 
1958 (Bill) should be first passed by the by the Pa rliament 
before taking up the proposal for becoming a party to Bunker 
Convention.   
05.05.2010 
6. The Ministry of Shipping sought the inputs of DG  (S) on the 
comments of M/o External Affairs along with the com ments 
received from various other Ministries. 
11.08.2010 
178

20 
 
7. Inputs of DG (S) were received.  19.08.2010 
8. The Hindi version of the draft Cabinet Note and the draft Bill 
were referred to the DG (S) for verification of the  technical terms 
used in the translated version.  
22.10.2010 
9. DG (S) sent the corrected Hindi version of draft  Cabinet Note 
and the draft Merchant Shipping Amendment Bill. 
29.10.2010 
10. The final Note for Cabinet was sent to Prime Mi nister’s Office 
(PMO). The PMO suggested the Ministry of External A ffairs has 
suggested that the Bill be passed before becoming a party to the 
Convention the matter may be taken up before a Comm ittee of 
Secretaries (CoS). 
29.11.2010 
11. DG (S) sent their inputs and a Note was prepare d for the 
Committee of Secretaries. 
10.01.2011 
12. Committee of Secretaries meeting was held and i t was decided 
that Merchant Shipping Act amendment should precede  India 
becoming party to the convention and a draft amendi ng Bill or 
Ordinance should be prepared.  Secretary, D/o Legal Affairs and 
Secretary, Legislative Department were asked to ass ist Ministry 
of Shipping in drafting the Ordinances. 
15.03.2011 
13. The draft Ordinance and a draft proposal for Ca binet seeking 
approval to introduce an Ordinance on the Bunker Co nvention 
and the Nairobi Wreck Removal Convention were prepared. 
18.04.2011 
14.  The proposal for Ordinance on the Nairobi Conv ention and the 
Bunker Convention was approved by Hon’ble Minister. 
17.06.2011 
15. The Prime Minister’s Office advised that instea d of an Ordinance 
Merchant Shipping (Amendment) Bill be introduced as  per 
normal legislative process. 
03.07.2011 
16. The Note for Cabinet on Ordinance was circulate d for inter-
ministerial comments. 
08.11.2011 
17. The Legislative Department prepared the draft M erchant 
Shipping Amendment Bill instead of an Ordinance.  
08.01.2012 
 
18. Since the Legislative Department had made modif ications to the 
Bill and suggested that the Bill be discussed with the Legislative 
Department, DG (S) was requested to examine the mod ified Bill 
and depute an officer for discussions. 
28.02.2012 
19. DG (S) sent their inputs on the modified Bill w ith further 
changes. 
11.07.2012 
20. The revised Bill was discussed with Ministry of  Law. 27.09.2012 
179

20 
 
21. The Legislative department sought further clari fications on the 
proposed Bill. 
19.10.2012 
22. Hon’ble Minister for Shipping directed that the  Merchant 
Shipping (Amendment) Bill should also include amend ing the 
provision contained in Section 356M regarding enhan cement of 
the oil pollution cess.  
04.11.2012 
23. In the course of discussions with Legislative D epartment the 
DDG, DG (S) incorporated the provisions of Salvage Convention 
in the Merchant Shipping (Amendment) Bill. 
04.01.2013 
24. The Bill was revised to incorporate provisions of Bunker 
Convention, Nairobi Convention, Salvage Convention and the 
amendment of Sec 356 M to enhance oil pollution cess. 
18.03.2013 
25. The revised draft Bill was again discussed with  Legislative 
Department. 
28.05.2013 
26. The fresh proposal for the Cabinet with the rev ised Bill 
containing Bunker Convention, Salvage Convention an d 
increase in oil pollution cess was approved by Hon.  Minister for 
Shipping. 
12.12.2013 
27. The revised draft Note for Cabinet Containing B ill for Bunker 
Convention, Salvage Convention, Nairobi Convention and 
increase of oil pollution cess was circulated for i nter-ministerial 
comments. 
16.12.2013 
28. The D/o Economic Affairs in their comments conv eyed that the 
amount of levy may be brought under the rules inste ad of 
quantifying it in the Bill and the financial implication arising in the 
freight charges as a result of the levy may be refl ected in the 
draft Note for Cabinet.  
07.02.2014 
29. Secretary, Legislative Department communicated that pre- 
legislative consultative policy should be followed for all 
legislative matters and therefore DG (S) was direct ed to upload 
the working draft of revised Merchant Shipping Amen dment Bill 
on the website of DG (S) and seek comments of stake holders 
and public. 
12.03.2014 
30. Before the Note for Cabinet and Bill could be f inalised election 
was declared and code of conduct came into force. 
 
--- 
31. The revised draft Merchant Shipping (Amendment)  Bill was 
loaded in the official website of the Directorate f or a period of 
one month seeking comments of all stakeholders i..e  on or 
before 02.06.2014, as per pre-legislative consultat ive policy 
02.5.2014 
180

20 
 
prescribed by the Legislative Department. 
32. Follow up with the comments received from stake holders DG (S) 
held meetings with all stakeholders to discuss thei r comments 
on the draft Bill. 
09.6.2014 
33. The draft Bill after pre-legislative consultati on by DG (S) was 
finalised. 
11.6.2014 
34. The proposal was placed before the Hon’ble Mini ster of Shipping 
on the assuming of office of the present Government .  It was 
decided to remove provisions to increase oil/marine  pollution 
cess. This revised note for Cabinet and the revised  Bill was 
circulated for inter-ministerial consultations. 
08.08.2014 
35. Comments of various Ministries were received an d these 
comments were consolidated and sent to Legislative 
Department requesting them to finalise the Bill and  convey their 
concurrence to the proposal with the approval of Ho n. Law 
Minister. 
02.01.2015 
36. Legislative Department conveyed their concurren ce to the 
proposal and provided the final Bill with the appro val of Hon. 
Law Minister. 
09.02.2015 
37. The final Note for Cabinet and the final Bill w as approved by the 
Hon. Minister  
02.03.2015  
38. Official language wing of the Legislative Depar tment was 
requested for Hindi translation of the Bill. 
11.03.2015 
39. Official language wing of the Legislative Depar tment provided 
the Hindi translation of the Bill. 
23.04.2015 
40. The final note for Cabinet and the final Bill ( bilingual version) 
sent to Cabinet Secretariat and PMO. 
21.05.2015 
41. Proposal approved by the Union Cabinet. 10.06.2 015 
42. DG (S) sent inputs for the draft Statement of O bjects and 
Reasons, Notes on Clauses and Memorandum on Delegat ed 
Legislation. 
01.07.2015 
43. Draft Statement of Objects and Reasons, Memoran dum on 
Delegated Legislation approved by Hon. Minister and  referred to 
Legislative Department for vetting. 
09.7.2015 
44. Statement of Objects and Reasons, Memorandum on  Delegated 
Legislation vetted and finalized by Legislative Department. 
24.7.2015 
45. The Merchant Shipping (Amendment) Bill, 2015 in troduced in 
Parliament by Hon’ble Minister of Shipping. 
10.08.2015 
181

20 
 
 
In light of the above mentioned circumstances, proc edures, inter-ministerial 
consultation, and pre-legislative consultations as well as combination of two 
more Convention [i.e. Nairobi and Salvage Conventio n] with the Bunker 
Convention, it may kindly be observed that the delay, if any is attributable to the 
difficulties faced in harmonization of the draft pr ovisions based on the three 
international Convention after starting the process  in the year 2009 onwards. 
Further, the fresh approval of the Union Cabinet, c onsequent upon the Change 
of the Union Government is also one procedure which  was required to be 
followed. 
 
2.  Question : In the presentation it has been shown that Intern ational 
Convention on Salvage is in force since 14.07.1996 and India is party 
since 18.10.1995. How do you correlate it? The delay to be explained. 
 
Answer/submission : Salvage Convention was adopted in the year 1989. 
However, having met the requirement of tonnage and the number of states, as 
per the requirement of the stated convention, it ac tually came into force 
internationally after nearly seven years i.e. on 14 .07.1996. India became a 
party to this Convention on 18.10.1995, as the provisions related to the Salvage 
Convention largely exist in the Merchant Shipping A ct ever since 1958 and 
continued to be part of the Act till date. Indian l aw makers [Hon’ble Parliament] 
in their great wisdom had provided the provisions r elated to salvage in the Act 
since from 1958 itself i.e. much before 1989 Salvag e Convention came into 
force. Therefore, the broad provisions on salvage a lready exist in the present 
Merchant Shipping Act.  
 
However, the significant improvement made by the Salvage Convention 1989 is 
that it has enabled compensation for unsuccessful s alvage efforts, and the 
salvor dealing with the salvage operation is free t o make a contract with the 
ship-owner whose ship is being salved by it, so as to cover the compensation 
even if the salvage operation is not fully successf ul. The salvage convention 
has done away with the old principle of “No cure No  pay “. It encourages the 
salvors to assist the distressed vessel and even if  the salvage may not be 
totally successful, the Salvor is compensated by in voking contract and the 
Special compensation scopic clause. 
 
It is submitted that as explained above, the provis ions related to salvage are 
already in existence in the present Merchant Shippi ng Act. However, the 
provisions related to the salvage Convention are be ing updated, as an 
opportunity to make Indian legislation fully compli ant with the Convention. 
Therefore, it may kindly be concluded that there is no delay in the legislation. 
 
182

20 
 
3.  Question 
: Name of any major country which is not a signator y to 
these three Conventions [like US UK or Germany]. Wh at would be the 
possible reason for them not signing and we are opt ing for that 
Convention? 
 
Answer/submission 
: United States of America [USA] and Japan are the two 
major maritime nations who are not a party to the B unker Convention. The 
United States has enacted the Oil Pollution Act 199 0. The Act covers all types 
of oil, from the ship, whether bunkers or Cargo. Th e compensations and the 
requirement are more stringent than the Bunker Conv ention and hence there 
was no need by US to adopt the Bunker Convention wh ich came into force at a 
much later stage in 2008. Similarly, the Japanese ' Act on Liability for ship oil 
pollution 1975' was amended in 2005 to cover bunker  pollution damage before 
the bunker convention came into force international ly in 2008,  and also the 
requirement under the local regulations were more s tringent, thus Japan never 
felt the need for the bunker convention. As regards  India, the provision related 
to pollution from oil [except bunker oil pollution damage] are existing in the 
Merchant Shipping Act, 1958, but there is a need to  make specific legislation 
for covering the pollution incidents caused by the bunker oil of the ships, hence 
the proposed Bill is introduced. 
 
Nairobi Convention : United States of America [USA], China and Japan, Italy, 
Norway, Republic of Korea, and Russian Federation a re the major maritime 
nations which are not party to the Convention. As of now the national legislation 
of the above countries provide adequate mechanism of direct action against the 
ship owners in their coastal waters hence there may  not be a need for them to 
be a party to this Convention. However, the Nairobi  Wreck removal convention 
has entered into force this year only [i.e. on 14.0 4.2015].  Hence, it is still early 
stages as most of the countries may still be evalua ting the convention from 
deciding to become party to the Convention. Moreove r, now the Convention 
extends its scope beyond coastal waters up to Exclu sive Economic Zone 
(EEZ), thus there may be reconsideration by other c ountries in due course to 
decide on being a party to this Convention. As rega rd India, the provisions 
related to the wreck removal are already existing in the Act. However, these are 
proposed to be updated, as an opportunity to make I ndian legislation fully 
compliant with the Convention. 
 
Salvage Convention : Japan, Panama, Republic of Korea, are few major 
maritime nations which are not party to the Convent ion. The prime reason for 
such maritime countries not becoming a party to the  Convention is that their 
national legislation has already made necessary pro visions for salvage and the 
courts have the sole jurisdiction of awarding the s alvage compensation. The 
salvage convention applies to judicial or arbitral proceedings pertaining to 
salvage.   Salvage is generally between private par ties and disputes between 
183

20 
 
them are generally decided by arbitration/judicial process. The local legislation 
of such countries also provides mechanism for Arbit ration and compensation 
for efforts of the salvor irrespective of degree of  success, thus such countries 
have not felt the need for adoption of the conventi on. As regard India, the 
provisions related to salvage are already existing in the Act. However, these 
are proposed to be updated, as an opportunity to ma ke Indian legislation fully 
compliant with the Convention. 
 
4.  Question : Give the list of nations which have signed and th e list of 
the nations which have not signed these three Conventions. 
 
Answer/submission 
: The list nations which are party to the Bunker Co nvention 
is enclosed [Appendix-I]. The list nations which ar e not party to this Convention 
is also enclosed [Appendix-II] 
 
The list of nations which are party to the Nairobi wreck removal Convention is 
enclosed [Appendix-III]. The list nations which are  not party to this Convention 
is also enclosed [Appendix-IV].   
 
The list of nations which are party to the Salvage Convention, 1989 is enclosed 
[Appendix-V]. The list nations which are not party to this Convention is also 
enclosed [Appendix-VI].   
 
  
184

20 
 
5. Question 
:  What will be the procedure for recovery in case of wreck 
[Page No. 6 of the document containing recorded oral evidence]? 
 
Answer/submission : Any claim for costs arising under the new provisi ons may 
be brought directly against the insurer or other pe rson who has provided the 
financial security for the liability of the registe red owner of the vessel. Hence 
even the direct action for claim against the insure rs or the person giving the 
financial security is possible, so as to compensate  the damage caused by the 
incident of a ship becoming a wreck and hazard to safe navigation. 
 
6. Question 
:  Dispute relating to claims shall be adjudicated by 
concerned High Court [where vessel is registered/vessel is situated/cause 
of action arise. Clarify the three jurisdiction pro vided there. Also clarify 
from which time the claim [i.e. limitation period of within 2 years] will start 
in case of Salvage Convention [Page No. 6 of the do cument containing 
recorded oral evidence]. 
 
Answer/submissions 
: The jurisdiction has been given based on the broa d 
principles as given in the Civil Procedure Code, 19 08 w.r.to jurisdiction of the 
courts. The case may not proceed in more than one c ourt, as the principle of 
res sub judice will apply. The case may proceed at one location based on the 
principle that where it is instituted first. The pe riod of limitation shall commence 
from date of completion of salvage operation. 
 
7.  Question 
: Whether there are statistics about the benefits/p ositive 
impacts which have occurred or may occur in future,  to the ocean 
ecology of those countries which are party to these  Conventions. Is there 
a financial or other loss to the country in absence  of following these 
Conventions [Page No. 6 of the document containing recorded oral 
evidence]? 
 
Answer/submission 
: No specific statistics is available for benefits/ positive 
impacts which have occurred or may occur in future,  to the ocean ecology of 
those countries which are party to these Convention s. However, the benefits 
intended from these Conventions, are as follows; 
 
Bunker Convention : This Convention is intended to ensure that adequa te, 
prompt, and effective compensation is available to persons who suffer damage 
caused by spills of oil, when carried as fuel in sh ips' bunkers. The Convention 
applies to damage caused on the territory, includin g the territorial sea, and in 
exclusive economic zones of countries which Party t o the Convention. A key 
requirement in the Bunker Convention is the need, for the registered owner of a 
vessel, to maintain a compulsory insurance cover. A nother key provision is the 
enabling provision for initiating direct action aga inst the insurer, which would 
185

20 
 
allow a claim for compensation for pollution damage  to be brought directly 
against an insurer. 
 
Nairobi wreck removal Convention:  This Convention provides a sound legal 
basis for coastal countries to remove, or have remo ved, from their coastlines, 
wrecks which pose a hazard to the safety of navigat ion or to the marine and 
coastal environments, or both. It will make ship-ow ners financially liable and 
require them to take out insurance or provide other  financial security to cover 
the costs of wreck removal. It will also provide St ates with a right of direct 
action against insurers. This Convention also inclu des an optional clause 
enabling States Parties to apply certain provisions  to their territory, including 
their territorial sea.  
 
Salvage Convention:  This Convention seeks to remedy the deficiency 
enshrined in the  “no cure, no pay" principle under  which a salvor is only 
rewarded for services, if the salvage operation is successful. Earlier the salvors 
were paid only if the salvage operation were succes sful. However, under this 
Convention the efforts of the salvors to prevent th e major pollution incident [for 
example, by towing a damaged tanker away from an en vironmentally sensitive 
area] have been recognized and now he may be reward ed even if he is not 
able to save the ship or the cargo. This will encou rage the salvors to come 
forwards for saving the environmental damage. 
 
As regards, financial or other loss to the country in absence of following these 
Conventions, it is submitted that Indian ships on i nternational voyage are 
already complying with the requirements of the Bunk er Convention & Nairobi 
Conventions. For salvage operations, & also to exte nt w.r.to the Nairobi 
Convention, the provisions are already in existence  in the Merchant Shipping 
Act, 1958 . As shipping is International in nature, Indian ship s trading worldwide 
had to abide by the requirements of the Conventions , therefore, Indian ships 
were issued certificates by other convention countr ies at a certain cost. Now, 
with above adoption, Indian ships can be issued cer tificates by the Indian 
Administration after enactment. Secondly with the e nactment, every ship 
entering Indian Coastal waters will be required to have necessary financial 
guarantee and a certificate being a proof of the sa me. In case of any pollution 
by way of bunker, or ship becoming a wreck direct a ction can be initiated 
against the owners / insurers through the process o f Arbitration instead of 
passing through the lengthy judicial process. Such compulsory carriage of 
certificate and the provision of direct action will  be an indirect method and 
deterrent thus giving indirect protection to the co astal marine environment.  
Financial or other loss to the country could occur if the provisions of the 
Conventions are not brought into force in India as owners of foreign flag 
vessels will not require to have insurance or finan cial security to deal with 
bunker oil spills or wrecks occurring in our waters , leading to environmental 
damage and consequential loss to the country. 
186

20 
 
****** 
  
187

20 
 
 
188

20 
 
 
 
 
189

20 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
190

20 
 
Appendix-II  
List of Nations not party to the Bunker Convention  
189 .  Algeria  
190.  Angola 
191.  Argentina 
192 .  Bahrain  
193 .  Bangladesh  
194.  Benin 
195.  Bolivia (Plurinational State of) 
196.  Bosnia and Herzegovina 
197 .  Brazil  
198.  Brunei Darussalam 
199.  Cambodia 
200 .  Cameroon  
201 .  Cabo Verde  
202.  Chile 
203.  Colombia 
204 .  Comoros  
205.  Costa Rica 
206.  Cuba 
207.  Democratic Republic of the Congo* 
208 .  Djibouti  
209.  Dominica 
210.  Dominican Republic 
211 .  Ecuador  
212 .  El Salvador  
213.  Equatorial Guinea 
214.  Eritrea 
215 .  Fiji  
216.  Gabon 
217.  Gambia 
218.  Georgia 
219 .  Ghana  
220 .  Grenada  
221.  Guatemala 
222.  Guinea 
223 .  Guinea -Bissau  
224 .  Guyana  
225.  Haiti 
226.  Honduras 
227.  Iceland 
228.  India 
229.  Iraq 
230.  Israel 
231 .  Japan  
232 .  Kazakhstan  
233.  Kuwait 
234.  Lebanon 
235 .  Libya  
236 .  Madagascar  
237.  Malawi 
238.  Maldives 
239.  Mauritania 
240.  Mexico 
241.  Monaco 
242.  Mozambique 
191

20 
 
243.  Myanmar 
244.  Namibia 
245.  Nepal 
246 .  Oman  
247 .  Pakistan  
248.  Papua New Guinea 
249.  Paraguay 
250 .  Peru  
251 .  Philippines  
252.  Qatar 
253.  Republic of Korea 
254.  Republic of Moldova 
255.  Romania 
256.  Saint Lucia 
257 .  San Marino  
258 .  Sao Tome and Principe  
259.  Saudi Arabia 
260.  Senegal 
261 .  Seychelles  
262 .  Solomon Islands  
263.  Somalia 
264.  South Africa 
265.  Sri Lanka 
266.  Sudan 
267.  Suriname 
268.  Thailand 
269 .  The former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia  
270 .  Timor -Leste  
271.  Trinidad and Tobago 
272.  Turkmenistan 
273 .  Uganda  
274 .  Ukraine  
275.  United Arab Emirates 
276.  United Republic of Tanzania 
277.  United States of America 
278 .  Uruguay  
279.  Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) 
280.  Yemen 
281 .  Zambia  
282 .  Zimbabwe  
 
**** 
 
192

20 
 
Annendix-III  
  
 
  
193

20 
 
 
Appendix-IV  
194

20 
 
List of nations not party to the Nairobi Wreck Removal Convention  
295.  Algeria 
296 .  Angola  
297.  Argentina 
298.  Australia 
299.  Austria 
300 .  Azerbaijan  
301 .  Bahrain  
302.  Bangladesh 
303.  Barbados 
304 .  Belgium  
305 .  Belize  
306.  Benin 
307.  Bolivia (Plurinational State of) 
308.  Bosnia and Herzegovina 
309.  Brazil 
310.  Brunei Darussalam 
311 .  Cambodia  
312 .  Cameroon  
313.  Canada 
314.  Cabo Verde 
315 .  Chile  
316 .  China  
317.  Colombia 
318.  Comoros 
319.  Costa Rica 
320.  Côte d'Ivoire 
321.  Croatia 
322.  Cuba 
323 .  Czech Republic  
324 .  Democratic People's Republic of Korea  
325.  Democratic Republic of the Congo* 
326.  Djibouti 
327 .  Dominica  
328 .  Dominican Republic  
329.  Ecuador 
330.  Egypt 
331.  El Salvador 
332.  Equatorial Guinea 
333.  Eritrea 
334.  Estonia 
335 .  Ethiopia  
336 .  Fiji  
337.  Finland 
338.  France 
339 .  Gabon  
340 .  Gambia  
341.  Georgia 
342.  Ghana 
343.  Greece 
344 .  Grenada  
345.  Guatemala 
346.  Guinea 
347 .  Guinea -Bissau  
348 .  Guyana  
349.  Haiti 
195

20 
 
350.  Honduras 
351.  Hungary 
352.  Iceland 
353 .  Indonesia  
354 .  Iraq  
355.  Ireland 
356.  Israel 
357 .  Italy  
358 .  Jamaica  
359.  Japan 
360.  Jordan 
361.  Kazakhstan 
362.  Kiribati 
363.  Kuwait 
364 .  Latvia  
365 .  Lebanon  
366.  Libya 
367.  Lithuania 
368 .  Luxembourg  
369 .  Madagascar  
370.  Malawi 
371.  Maldives 
372.  Mauritania 
373.  Mauritius 
374.  Mexico 
375.  Monaco 
376 .  Mongolia  
377 .  Montenegro  
378.  Mozambique 
379.  Myanmar 
380 .  Namibia  
381 .  Nepal  
382.  Netherlands 
383.  New Zealand 
384.  Nicaragua 
385 .  Norway  
386.  Oman 
387.  Pakistan 
388 .  Papua New Guinea  
389 .  Paraguay  
390.  Peru 
391.  Philippines 
392 .  Poland  
393 .  Portugal  
394.  Qatar 
395.  Republic of Korea 
396 .  Republic of Moldova  
397 .  Romania  
398.  Russian Federation 
399.  Saint Kitts and Nevis 
400 .  Saint Lucia  
401 .  Saint Vincent and the Grenadines  
402.  Samoa 
403.  San Marino 
404 .  Sao Tome and Principe  
405.  Saudi Arabia 
196

20 
 
406.  Senegal 
407.  Serbia 
408.  Seychelles 
409 .  Sierra Leone  
410 .  Singapore  
411.  Slovakia 
412.  Slovenia 
413 .  Solomon Islands  
414 .  Somalia  
415.  Spain 
416.  Sri Lanka 
417.  Sudan 
418.  Suriname 
419.  Sweden 
420 .  Switzerland  
421 .  Syrian Arab Republic  
422.  Thailand 
423.  The former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia 
424 .  Timor -Leste  
425 .  Togo  
426.  Trinidad and Tobago 
427.  Tunisia 
428.  Turkey 
429.  Turkmenistan 
430.  Uganda 
431.  Ukraine 
432 .  United Arab Emirates  
433 .  United Republic of Tanzania  
434.  United States of America 
435.  Uruguay 
436 .  Vanuatu  
437 .  Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of)  
438.  Viet Nam 
439.  Yemen 
440.  Zambia 
441 .  Zimbabwe  
**** 
  
197

20 
 
Appendix V 
List of nations Parties to Salvage Convention  
 
 
  
198

20 
 
 
199

20 
 
 
200

20 
 
Appendix-VI  
List of Nations not party to the Salvage Convention 
213 .  Angola  
214.  Antigua and Barbuda 
215.  Argentina 
216 .  Australia  
217 .  Bahamas  
218.  Bahrain 
219.  Bangladesh 
220.  Barbados 
221 .  Belize  
222.  Benin 
223.  Bolivia (Plurinational State of) 
224 .  Bosnia and Herzegovina  
225 .  Brunei Darussalam  
226.  Cambodia 
227.  Cameroon 
228 .  Cabo Verde  
229.  Chile 
230.  Colombia 
231.  Comoros 
232 .  Cook Islands  
233.  Costa Rica 
234.  Côte d'Ivoire 
235 .  Cuba  
236 .  Cyprus  
237.  Czech Republic 
238.  Democratic People's Republic of Korea 
239 .  Democratic Republic of the Congo*  
240.  Djibouti 
241.  Dominican Republic 
242.  El Salvador 
243 .  Equatorial Guinea  
244 .  Eritrea  
245.  Ethiopia 
246.  Fiji 
247 .  Gabon  
248 .  Gambia  
249.  Ghana 
250.  Grenada 
251.  Guatemala 
252.  Guinea-Bissau 
253.  Haiti 
254.  Honduras 
255 .  Hungary  
256 .  Indonesia  
257.  Iraq 
258.  Israel 
259 .  Japan  
260 .  Kazakhstan  
261.  Kuwait 
262.  Lebanon 
263.  Libya 
264.  Luxembourg 
265.  Madagascar 
266.  Malawi 
201

20 
 
267.  Malaysia 
268.  Maldives 
269.  Malta 
270 .  Mauritania  
271 .  Monaco  
272.  Morocco 
273.  Mozambique 
274 .  Myanmar  
275 .  Namibia  
276.  Nepal 
277.  Nicaragua 
278.  Pakistan 
279.  Panama 
280.  Papua New Guinea 
281 .  Paraguay  
282 .  Peru  
283.  Philippines 
284.  Portugal 
285 .  Qatar  
286 .  Republic of Korea  
287.  Republic of Moldova 
288.  Saint Lucia 
289.  Saint Vincent and the Grenadines 
290.  Samoa 
291.  San Marino 
292.  Sao Tome and Principe 
293 .  Senegal  
294 .  Serbia  
295.  Seychelles 
296.  Singapore 
297 .  Slovakia  
298 .  Solomon Islands  
299.  Somalia 
300.  South Africa 
301.  Sri Lanka 
302 .  Sudan  
303.  Suriname 
304.  Thailand 
305 .  The former Yugoslav Republic  of Macedonia  
306 .  Timor -Leste  
307.  Togo 
308.  Trinidad and Tobago 
309 .  Turkmenistan  
310 .  Tuvalu  
311.  Uganda 
312.  Ukraine 
313 .  United Republic of Tanzania  
314 .  Uruguay  
315.  Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) 
316.  Viet Nam 
317 .  Zambia  
318 .  Zimbabwe  
 
 
**** 
202

20 
 
  
203

20 
 
Supplementary submissions, for further clarity, on questions raised and replied 
during the course of recording of oral evidence before the Committee on 
16.09.15.  
  
1.  Question :  It is mentioned that liability of owner is exemp ted if the 
pollution damage is due to war, act intentional act /omission of third 
person, negligence/wrongful act of Government/ auth ority. Give some 
example of act of God and omission of third party. Who will decide on 
omission of third party Give some clarity on this a spect [Page No. 5 of 
document containing recorded oral evidence]. 
 
Answer/submissions 
: As was submitted by the DG Shipping, GoI, during the 
meeting, act of God or force majure is a condition of occurrence of a natural 
calamity. Such an act needs to be an act which is n ot foreseen and is beyond 
the control of the human beings. If the person want s an exemption from the 
liability, he has to prove that such an act is not caused by him or his employee 
or agent, but by a third person. Hence the third pe rson needs to be a totally 
external person not connected with the owner as emp loyee or agent. As 
regards, the act of God, there is a plethora of case laws which has now got very 
well adjudicated and now has got very well settled by the apex court, as to what 
constitute an act of God or the force majure situat ion. It is very well understood 
in terms of juristic principles, and there may not be any ambiguity for it during 
the adjudication proceedings. The court will decide , if it is an act of third party, 
in case there is a claim for an exemption from the liability. 
 
2.  Question 
:  Claims to be preferred within three years from t he date 
of damage or six years from the date of incident. E xplain the two 
limitations given in the Act [Page No. 5 of the doc ument containing 
recorded oral evidence]. 
 
Answer/Submissions 
: As was submitted by the DG Shipping,GoI, it is fu rther 
clarified that one may get the compensation if a cl aim is made within three 
years from the date of occurrence of damage. Howeve r, no claim can be made 
after six years from the date of incident which has  caused the damage.  In 
simple words, it is perceptible damage for which th ere is an actionable claim, 
then the maximum limitation is three years. However , if there is an incident 
which otherwise is not so significant but later on can be related to original 
cause of action and more by way of social cause, th en in such cases the 
limitation period shall be six years. It is in term s of graded impact on the 
environment and ecology which may occur immediately  on occurrence of the 
incident or may come out after passage of time. 
 
3.  Question 
:  There is mention of compulsory insurance & exemp tion 
to vessels owned or operated by the Government and used for the non 
204

20 
 
commercial service. Explain such exemption to Govt.  vessels [Page No. 5 
of the document containing recorded oral evidence]. 
 
Answer/submission 
: As was submitted by the Secretary (S), the vessel s owned 
or operated by the Government and used for the non commercial service, are 
exempted from the compulsory insurance, as the broa d principle is that the 
Government in case of accidents are funded sufficie ntly and if some 
compensation is to be paid to some person, the Gove rnment will be able to 
pay. Government is a kind of sovereign guarantee in  itself. Therefore most of 
the equipments in the Government are not insured.  
 
4.  Question 
: When does a Convention come into force i.e. how 
countries are required to be party to a Convention to put it into force 
[Page No. 16 of the document containing recorded oral evidence]? 
 
Answer/submissions 
: There are different criteria which are mentioned in the 
text of the respective Conventions itself. However,  following is the criteria for 
putting these three Conventions into force; 
 
Bunker Convention 
: Article 14 of this Convention stipulates that the  Convention 
shall enter into force one year following the date on which 18 states, including 5 
states each with ships whose combined gross tonnage  is not less than 1 
million, have either signed it without reservation as to ratification, acceptance or 
approval or have deposited the instruments of ratification, acceptance, approval 
or accession with the secretary General of the IMO.  Accordingly the Bunker 
Convention, 2001 came into force only on 21.11.08 
 
Nairobi Convention 
: Article 18 of this Convention stipulates that the  Convention 
shall enter into force twelve month following the d ate on which 10 states have 
either signed it without reservation as to ratifica tion, acceptance or approval or 
have deposited the instruments of ratification, acc eptance, approval or 
accession with the secretary General of the IMO. Ac cordingly the Nairobi 
Convention, 2007 came into force only on 14.04.15 [i.e. this year only] 
 
Salvage Convention 
: Article 29 of this Convention stipulates that the  
Convention shall enter into force one year following the date on which 15 states 
have expressed their consent to be bound by it. For  an state which expresses 
its consent to be bound by this Convention after th e conditions for entry into 
force thereof have been met, such consent shall tak e effect one year after the 
date of expression of such consent. Accordingly the  Salvage Convention, 1989 
came into force only on 14.07.96. 
5.  Question 
: Details of the around 30 wrecks already there in the 
Indian waters & what is happening to them may be gi ve [Page No. 19 of 
the document containing recorded oral evidence]. 
205

20 
 
 
Answer/submissions 
: The detail about the status of the wrecks already  there in 
the Indian waters, is enclosed [Appendix-VII]. 
 
6.  Question 
: Whether these Conventions are applicable to the f ishing 
and cruise vessels? 
 
Answer/submissions 
: The three conventions as mentioned do not make an y 
reference or differentiate its application to the t ype of vessel. The general 
principle of application adopted is the gross tonna ge of the vessel.  The criteria 
for application of Bunker Convention to a ship are that it should be above 1000 
GT. The Nairobi wreck removal Convention shall be a pplicable to ships which 
are of 300 GT and above. No such limit is mentioned  in the Salvage 
Convention. 
***** 
 
  
206

20 
 
 
207

20 
 
 
  
208

20 
 
 
209

20 
 
 
210

20 
 
 
 
 
 
211

20 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
212