 
       
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTAR 
ON TRANSPORT, TOURIS 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
THREE HUNDRED 
Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/ 
Observations of the Committee contained in its Three Hundred 
Twenty Sixth Report on the subject ‘ 
Globally for the growth of Tourism in India’ 
 (Presente 
(Laid on t 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA  
RAJYA SABHA 
 
RELATED PARLIAMENTAR Y STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON TRANSPORT, TOURIS M AND CULTURE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi  
March, 2023/ Chaitra, 1945 (Saka) 
 
THREE HUNDRED FORTY SEVENTH REPORT 
Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/ 
Observations of the Committee contained in its Three Hundred 
Report on the subject ‘ Role of Indian Missions 
Globally for the growth of Tourism in India’ 
 
resente d to the Rajya Sabha on 24 th  March, 2023 ) 
aid on t he Table of Lok Sabha on 24 th  March, 2023 ) 
 
Y STANDING COMMITTEE  
REPORT NO.  
347 
REPORT   
Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/ 
Observations of the Committee contained in its Three Hundred 
Role of Indian Missions 
Globally for the growth of Tourism in India’  

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Website:      https://rajyasabha.nic.in   
 E-mail:     rsc-tt@sansad.nic.in  

 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA  
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT,  
TOURISM AND CULTURE  
 
 
THREE HUNDRED FORTY SEVENTH REPORT  
Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/ 
Observations of the Committee contained in its Three Hundred 
Twenty Sixth Report on the subject ‘Role of Indian Missions 
Globally for the growth of Tourism in India’ 
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 24 th  March, 2023 ) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 24 th  March, 2023 ) 
 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
March, 2023/ Chaitra, 1945 (Saka) 
Hindi version of this publication is also available 

 
 
 
C O N T E N T S 
 
P A G E S  
 
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE     i 
2. INTRODUCTION       ii 
3. ACRONYMS               iii-iv 
4. REPORT                                1-24 
5. RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS-AT A GLANCE   25-27  
6. ANNEXURES         28-36 
    7. *MINUTES   
 
         
        
        
      
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
______________________________________ 
 
*To be appended  
37-39

i 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE  
 (2022-23) 
 
 (Constituted on 13 th  September, 2022) 
 
1. Shri V. Vijayasai Reddy   - Chairman 
 
Rajya Sabha 
2. Shri Mohammed Nadimul Haque 
3. Shrimati S. Phangnon Konyak 
4. Shri Jugalsinh Lokhandwala 
5. Shri Manas Ranjan Mangaraj 
6. Dr. Sonal Mansingh 
7. Shrimati Rajani Ashokrao Patil 
8. Shri A. A. Rahim 
9. Dr. C. M. Ramesh 
10. Shri Vinay Dinu Tendulkar 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
11.  Shri Anto Antony 
12.  Shri Ram Margani Bharat 
13.  Shri Tapir Gao  
14.  Shri Rahul Kaswan 
15.  Shri Ramesh Chandra Majhi 
16.  Shri Sunil Baburao Mendhe 
17.  Shri K. Muraleedharan 
18.  Shri S. S.Palanimanickam  
19.  Shri Chhedi Paswan   
20.  Shri Kamlesh Paswan  
21.  Shri Sunil Kumar Pintu 
22.  Shri Prince Raj 
23.  Shri Tirath Singh Rawat 
24.  Shrimati Mala Roy 
25.  Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
26.  Shri Dushyant Singh 
27.  Shri Rajbahadur Singh 
28.  Shri Ramdas Chandrabhanji Tadas 
29.  Shri Manoj Kumar Tiwari 
30.  Shri Krupal Balaji Tumane 
31. Shri Dinesh Lal Yadav "Nirahua"  
 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Sumant Narain, Joint Secretary 
Shri Swarabji B., Director 
Shrimati Monica Baa, Additional Director 
Shrimati Subha Chandrashekar, Deputy Secretary  
Shri Ranajit Chakraborty, Under Secretary 
Ms. Jahanvi, Assistant Committee Officer 

ii 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairman, Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport, 
Tourism and Culture, having been authorized by the Committee to present on its behalf, do 
hereby present this Three Hundred Forty Seventh Rep ort on the Action Taken by the 
Government on the recommendations/ observations of the Committee contained in its Three 
Hundred Twenty Sixth Report on the subject ‘Role of  Indian Missions Globally for the 
growth of Tourism in India’. 
2. The Three Hundred Twenty Sixth Report  of the Department-related Parliamentary 
Standing Committee on Transport, Tourism and Cultur e was presented to the Hon’ble 
Chairman, Rajya Sabha on 15 
th  June, 2022 and thereafter was presented to the Par liament on 
the 8th  December, 2022.  
3.  The Action Taken Replies on the recommendations  of the Committee contained in its 
Three Hundred Twenty Sixth Report were received fro m the Ministry of Tourism on 5 th  
January, 2023. 
4. The Committee considered and adopted the Report in its meeting held on the 23 rd  
March, 2023.   
 
 
(V. Vijayasai Reddy) 
NEW DELHI;                                                           Chairman,  
March 23, 2023                                                       Department-related Parliamentary Standing             
Chaitra 2, 1945 (Saka)                                       Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture,  
                                                                                                                                 Rajya Sabha 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

iii 
 
 
ACRONYMS  
3T  Trade, Technology and Tourism 
ASEAN  Association of Southeast Asian Nations 
ATM  Arabian Travel Market 
BIMSTEC  Bay of Bengal Initiative for Multi-Sectoral Technical and 
Economic Cooperation 
CBSP  Capacity Building for Service Providers 
COVID  Coronavirus Disease 
DG  Director General 
DO  Demi Official 
EOI  Embassy of India 
EXPO  Exposition (large-scale public exhibition) 
FAM  Familiarization 
FDI  Foreign Direct Investment 
FTA  Foreign Tourist Arrival 
HCI  High Commission of India 
IAS  Indian Administrative Services 
IATO  Indian Association of Tour Operators 
IC  International Cooperation 
IFS  Indian Foreign Services 
ITA  International Tourist Arrivals 
ITB  Internationale Tourismus-Börse Berlin 
ITMR  India Tourism Marketing. Representatives 
ITO  India Tourism Office 
KIP  Know India Programme 
LED  Light Emitting Diode 
MEA  Ministry of External Affairs 
MHA  Ministry of Home Affairs 
MICE  Meetings, incentives, conferences and exhibitions 
MRD  Market Research Division 
MoRTH  Ministry of Road Transport and Highways 
MoT  Ministry of Tourism 
MoU  Memorandum of Understanding 
NRI  Non-Residential Indians 
O&M/OM  Operations & Maintenance 
PMU  Project Management Unit 
PR  Public Relations 
PRASHAD  Pilgrimage Rejuvenation & Spiritual Augmentation Drive 
SAARC  South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation 
SD 2.0  Swadesh Darshan Scheme-2.0 
TTAA  Thai Travel Agents Association 
UAE  United Arab Emirates  
UK  United Kingdom  
UNWTO  United Nations World Tourism Organization 

iv 
 
USA  United States of America  
UT  Union Territory  
VAT  Value Added Tax 
WTM  World Travel Market 
 

Page 1 of 36 
 
 
REPORT  
The Report of the Committee deals with the Action T aken by the Ministry of Tourism on 
the recommendations/observations as contained in it s Three Hundred and Twenty Sixth Report 
on ‘Role of Indian Missions Globally for the growth  of Tourism in India’ which was presented 
to both the Houses of Parliament on 8th  December, 2022. 
2. The Action Taken Replies were received from the Min istry on 5th  January, 2023 in respect 
of all the recommendations/observations contained i n the Report. The replies have been 
categorized as follows:- 
 
Chapter-I:  
Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the Ministry: 
Paragraph Nos.: 68 
Total: 1 
 
Chapter-II:  
Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue in view of 
the replies of the Ministry: 
Paragraph Nos.: 8, 11.1, 11.4, 11.5, 11.6, 22, 40, 45, 46, 47, 52, 64, 67 
Total: 13 
 
Chapter-III:  
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which re plies of the Ministry have not been 
accepted by the Committee: 
Paragraph Nos.: 7, 11.2, 11.3, 11.9, 16, 23, 26, 61, 65, 66, 69, 70, 71 
Total: 13 
 
Chapter-IV: 
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which th e final replies of the Ministry are 
still awaited: 
Paragraph Nos.: Nil. 
Total: Nil. 
 
 
 

Page 2 of 36 
 
 
CHAPTER-I 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
MINISTRY 
 
OTHER RECOMMENDATIONS  
Recommendation/Observation 
1. The Committee observes that many of the tourist spots and places of religious importance 
are located near the National Highways yet the stat e of the last mile connectivity from the 
National Highways to the tourist spot leaves much t o be desired. The Committee feels that good 
quality last mile connectivity is important to ensu re a positive experience for tourists visiting a 
tourist destination in the country, which in turn, helps attract more tourists through word-of-
mouth publicity. The Committee therefore recommends  that Ministry may examine the 
state/quality of last mile connectivity roads at al l such tourist spots near the National Highways 
at the earliest and ensure their construction and m aintenance with the concerned 
Ministries/agencies to make the tourist places more  accessible to tourists, both domestic and 
international, which will invariably increase the number of tourists visiting such places. 
 (Para 68) 
Reply of the Ministry   
1.1 As far as PRASHAD Scheme is concerned “Last Mil e Connectivity” is one of the most 
important and admissible prime interventions under the Scheme, and the same has been provided 
in almost all approved PRASHAD projects. However, o bservations of the Committee have been 
noted in order to provide more thrust towards this intervention. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Page 3 of 36 
 
 
CHAPTER-II  
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES OF THE MINISTRY 
 
INDIA TOURISM STATISTICS 2019  
Recommendation/Observation 
1. The Committee notes that there is no dearth of s cenic places in India which are at par or 
even better than international locales but the latter draw more international footfalls. Kashmir 
for example has similar weather and terrain as Swit zerland but the latter is more famous and 
draws more international tourists. Similarly, Goa, Kochi, Kumarakom have beautiful beaches at 
par with international beaches. The Committee is of  the opinion that the Ministry should adopt a 
proactive policy to promote internationally such tourist places in India at par with those abroad. 
 (Para 8) 
Reply of the Ministry 
1.1 The suggestion of the Committee is noted. 
 
ROLE OF MINISTRY OF TOURISM  
Recommendation/Observation  
2. The Committee appreciates that the tourism strat egy has country-specific strategic plans 
and targets specific markets. Different countries h ave different social, economic and political 
situations and country-specific strategic plans would help to appeal to the general consciousness 
and expectations of the people of different countri es. The Committee notes that the general 
assessment of the earlier tourism promotional campa igns of India was that though impressive, 
they lacked focus on products and themes and failed  to convey a clear cut message about India 
and that not much publicity was given to the new an d urban India, its new developments and 
luxury properties. The Committee is pleased to note  that the new strategic approach addresses 
these shortcomings and is tailored to suit specific markets. 
(Para 11.1) 
 

Page 4 of 36 
 
Reply of the Ministry  
2.1 The Suggestions of the Committee are noted. 
Recommendation/Observation 
3. India is a hub of holistic streams of medicine such  as Ayurveda, Homeopathy, 
Naturopathy and the birthplace of Yoga. Yoga has ca ught the world’s imagination with 21 June 
being declared as Yoga Day. Yoga and wellness retre ats are now in great demand in the 
aftermath of the pandemic. India has huge wellness tourism potential and the Committee 
appreciates its inclusion in the tourism strategy. India receives most of its medical tourists from 
Afghanistan, Pakistan, Oman, Bangladesh, Maldives, Nigeria, Kenya and Iraq. There is a huge 
potential for India to realize and aggressively adv ance towards attracting medical tourists from 
other parts of the world, including Europe and America. 
(Para 11.4) 
Reply of the Ministry 
3.1 As conveyed by Ministry of Health and Family We lfare, the following initiatives have 
being taken by them to promote Medical Value Travel in the country:- 
(i) MOHFW has taken an initiative 'Heal in India' to pr ovide a boost to Medical Tourism in 
the country. 
(ii) A one step portal is under development for the conv enience and ease of credible 
information for those who intend to avail medical f acilities in India and experience of 
India's hospitality from abroad. 
(iii) A 'Medical Value Travel Council' has been formed to  create an institutional framework for 
streamlines integration of all stakeholders and build a roadmap to connect overseas patients 
with healthcare facilities in India to boost medical travel. 
(iv) Ministry of Tourism is also a member of the Council. 
Recommendation/Observation 
4. The Committee observes that South Asia is home to m any tourism-based economies such 
as Nepal, Maldives, Bhutan and tourists also use In dia as transit to other places in the South 
Asian region and South Asian nations are often mark eted as a part of a package tour and 
therefore connectivity between India and its South Asian neighbours is of utmost importance for 
Indian tourism sector. 
(Para 11.5) 

Page 5 of 36 
 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
4.1 This Ministry would also like to inform the Com mittee that as per the provisions of 
National Civil Aviation Policy, 2016, India has alr eady entered into open sky arrangements with 
Bhutan, Maldives and Sri Lanka.  
4.2 Further a very liberal bilateral policy is avai lable to the ASEAN countries (Singapore, 
Malaysia, Thailand, Brunei, Vietnam, Indonesia, Mya nmar, Cambodia, Philippines and Laos) 
allowing their designated airlines to operate seven  flights/week to four metros (Delhi, Mumbai, 
Kolkata and Chennai) and unlimited access to eighte en points of tourist interest in India 
(Ahmedabad, Amritsar, Aurangabad, Bhubaneswar, Cali cut, Cochin, Gaya, Goa, Guwahati, 
Jaipur, Khajuraho, Lucknow, Patna, Port Blair, Thir uvananthapuram, Tiruchi, Varanasi and 
Vishakhapatnam). 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
5. Apart from geographical proximity, the historical a nd cultural linkages between India 
and its South Asian neighbours offer great potentia l for development of regional tourism. The 
Committee is of the opinion that cooperation with o ther South Asian countries on joint tourism 
and advertising campaigns and steps to facilitate s eamless travel of tourists between India and 
its neighbourhood would promote Inbound Tourism in India. 
 (Para 11.6) 
Reply of the Ministry 
IC Division: 
5.1 The Ministry of Tourism regularly organizing an d participates in dialogues, meetings, 
consultations and negotiations with neighboring cou ntries in the South Asia and South East 
Asian regions. The Ministry of Tourism has also sig ned bilateral agreements/Memorandum of 
Understanding (MoUs) with neighbouring countries li ke Sri Lanka, Nepal, Maldives, Cambodia, 
Philippines etc. to enhance tourism cooperation and  strengthen ties in the sector. Apart from 
bilateral engagements, Ministry of Tourism also col laborate with multilateral for a like ASEAN, 
BIMSTEC, SAARC, etc. Ministry has signed a MoU with  ASEAN and under the framework of 
this MoU engages in government to government events , participates in ASEAN Tourism Forum, 
organizes activities with ASEAN countries for promoting tourism in the region. 
 

Page 6 of 36 
 
 
Overseas Marketing: 
5.2 The suggestions of the Committee are noted. 
 
OVERSEAS INDIA TOURISM OFFICES UNDER MINISTRY OF 
TOURISM  
Recommendation/Observation   
6. The Committee notes that out of the 31 posts in the  Overseas Tourism Offices, only 7 
have been filled while 24 lie vacant. More than 12 vacancies have been vacant for more than 5 
years. There are 6 vacancies in the local staff str ength of 19 also. The Committee is dismayed to 
note that three fourths of the posts in the Oversea s Tourism Offices are vacant, many of them for 
years altogether despite the fact that these offices were established specifically for the purpose of 
promotion of tourism and incur huge expenditure. Th e Committee notes that most Offices are 
manned by a single person and fails to see how the Overseas Tourism Offices could have 
functioned effectively with a bare minimum staff in  position. The Committee desires to be 
apprised of the reason for such delay in filling th ese vacancies and bottlenecks faced in this 
regard and recommend that necessary steps be taken to fill the positions lying vacant for more 
than 5 years. 
(Para 22) 
Reply of the Ministry 
Overseas Marketing: 
6.1 Offices have been closed vide order no. D-11011 /212021-(ADMIN I) – Annexure – II. 
 
ROLE OF INDIAN MISSIONS  
Recommendation/Observation 
7. The Committee notes that easy policies/regulations concerning visa for foreign nationals 
will make it easy for them to visit India. The Comm ittee is pleased to note the steps taken by the 
Ministries of External Affairs and Home Affairs to provide hassle free visa services. However 
ensuring that the information regarding visa polici es reaches the potential tourists is equally 
important. The Committee observes that the Overseas  Tourist Offices do not seem to have a Visa 

Page 7 of 36 
 
help desk for information and guidance of both tour ists and agents. Visa rules change from time 
to time and it is essential that the agents and tou rists are kept updated of the same. In many 
countries, the visa issuance has been outsourced an d tourists have to be informed clearly about 
any extra handling charges apart from the normal vi sa fees. The Committee recommends that a 
Visa guidance Helpdesk be present at all the Overse as Tourist Offices as well as the Indian 
Missions for effective guidance of tourists. 
 (Para 40) 
Reply of the Ministry 
Ministry of External Affairs (Economic Diplomacy Division): 
7.1 Information relating to visa services and instr uctions received from MHA and as 
available on the visa portal (Indianvisaonline.gov. in), are continually uploaded on the websites 
of the Indian Missions/Posts abroad and in the web portal of outsourcing agencies (currently visa 
services have been outsourced in 33 countries) for consumption of visa applications. Further, 
Indian Missions/Posts abroad also maintains 24X7 he lp desk for consular related issues, 
including visa services. It is further added that M issions/Posts have been sensitized about the 
Recommendation of the Parliamentary Standing Commit tee on Transport, Tourism and Culture 
to upload any changes in visa instructions received  from MEA in a timely manner on their 
respective websites and also on web portals of outs ourcing agencies. Overseas Tourist Office 
functions under the Ministry of Tourism. 
Overseas Marketing: 
7.2 The suggestions of the Committee are noted. 
7.3 The reply of the Embassy of India, Muscat is at tached in Annexure -I 
 
TOURISM OFFICERS IN INDIAN MISSIONS  
Recommendation/Observation 
8. The Committee observes that since the Overseas Indi a Tourism offices which were 
handling the responsibility of tourism promotions h ave now been consolidated to only 8 offices, 
the mandate of promotion of Indian tourism abroad i s now effectively with the Indian Missions. 
The Committee has been informed that Tourism Office rs, who are either IFS/MEA personnel 
have been designated in 20 Missions who will be res ponsible for the holistic promotion of India 
as a tourist destination, creating country-specific  strategies among others. The Committee feels 
that this is a cost saving measure which would enab le the Government to appoint dedicated 

Page 8 of 36 
 
Tourism Officers in as many countries as required w hile setting up an Overseas India Tourism 
Office would involve much expenditure and time and the returns did not seem to justify the 
expenditure. Further, only a certain number of Over seas Offices can be set up while the 
diplomatic network of embassies and consulates arou nd the world can be a more effective 
marketing model for promotion of tourism. 
(Para 45) 
Reply of the Ministry 
Ministry of External Affairs (Economic Diplomacy Division): 
8.1 No action/recommendation involved. 
Overseas Marketing: 
8.2 The suggestions of the Committee are noted. 
8.3 The replies of the Embassy of India, Muscat and  HCI, Singapore are attached in 
Annexure –I.  
 
Recommendation/Observation 
9. The Committee finds that hitherto, the promotional activities conducted by the Indian 
Missions appear to have been sporadic and irregular . For instance, the data provided for the 
last five years on Road shows reveals that there have been no Road Shows conducted in Dubai in 
the past five years and only one in Australia in th e same period of the time. The Committee 
would like to be informed of the reasons for the se emingly sporadic schedule of events. The 
Committee notes that GoI has laid emphasis on the 3 Ts– Trade, Technology and Tourism and 
MEA is working on creation of dashboard which will enable Missions to provide the data and 
progress related to trade, technology and tourism as well as the activities undertaken by Mission 
in pursuance to these objectives. To achieve the ta rget of US 400 billion in merchandise exports, 
the Ministry of External Affairs has directed all i ts missions abroad to evaluate all the officers 
only on basis of 3Ts– Trade, Technology and Tourism. 
 (Para 46) 
Reply of the Ministry 
Ministry of External Affairs (Economic Diplomacy Division): 
9.1 Comments- The updated data on road shows is as below: 

Page 9 of 36 
 
Consulate General of India, Dubai in association wi th India Pavilion organized a Road Show to 
showcase the “Opportunities in Tourism Sector in No rth East India” at the India Pavilion during 
EXPO 2020 Dubai on March 11, 2022, in which the vis iting delegation from 8 North East States 
participated. The North East delegation interacted with the stakeholders of manpower and 
skilling, hospitality, retail and medical sectors i n Dubai to understand the specific skill sets in 
demand in the UAE and also explored ways of collabo ration and tie-ups. The session showcased 
the tourism potential of the North East Region, hig hlighted the business opportunities, and 
offered an opportunity to interact with key decision makers in the Government. 
9.2 Two Road shows were held in Australia in the la st five years: 
(i) Incredible India Roadshow, Sydney, Australia on 15.04.2019; and 
(ii) Incredible India Roadshow, Melbourne, Australia on 16.04.2019. 
9.3 A delegation comprising 20 tour operators from India was led by Shri Suman Billa (IAS) 
Joint Secretary (Tourism) in the roadshows. Shri Aj ay Kumar Bansal, Director, Inland 
Waterways Authority of India also participated in t he Roadshows to showcase cruising in India. 
Roadshows in Australia were attended by the Tour Op erators from India, approximately 100 
from local trade, including major tour operators, travel agents, airlines, and others. 
9.4 Further, the events in some Missions have been sporadic due to the Covid-19 pandemic 
and related restrictions on gatherings, which did n ot offer conducive environment for road 
shows. 
Overseas Marketing: 
9.5 The Suggestions of the Committee are noted.  
9.6 The reply of the Embassy of India, Muscat has b een attached in Annexure -I 
 
Recommendation/Observation  
10. The Committee notes that the 3T strategy will serve  as a two-way funnel connecting 
Indian nationals, the states and businesses globall y which will enhance exports, attract foreign 
industries, and businesses to India. The Committee recommends the MoT in collaboration with 
Ministry of External Affairs formulate relevant gui delines to connect Indian businesses and 
investors seeking to conduct trade, investment and agricultural exports overseas. 
(Para 47) 
Reply of the Ministry  

Page 10 of 36 
 
Ministry of External Affairs (Economic Diplomacy Division): 
10.1 We take note of the recommendation and will co llaborate with Ministry of Tourism in 
this regard. 
10.2 The reply of the Embassy of India, Muscat has been attached in Annexure -I 
 
PRO GRAMMES AND SCHEMES  
Recommendation/Observation 
11. The Committee observes that several Nations continu e to develop “youth tourism” to 
foster diplomatic benefits; Israel’s “Birthright pr ogramme” tours for diasporic young Jews, has 
resulted in hundreds of thousands of young Jews tra velling to Israel for all-expenses-paid, ten-
day “heritage” tours intended to cultivate their Je wish self-identity with support for the Israeli 
state. The programme, funded by Jewish people acros s the world as well as the Israel 
government, has become a diplomatic success for Isr ael, which continues to grow while it has 
also inspired imitators such as Birthright Armenia,  Heritage Greece and Reconnect Hungary. 
The Committee pleased that India has also taken the  initiative in this regard through the “Know 
India Programme” but feels that the programme shoul d reach out to more number of youth as a 
total participation of 2061 youth in 59 editions of  the programme is meagre and as such will 
have a negligible impact. 
(Para 52) 
Reply of the Ministry 
Ministry of External Affairs (Economic Diplomacy Division): 
11.1 Comments: The Know India Programme provides fo r six editions in one year with each 
edition consisting of 40 diaspora youth members. Si nce 2016-17, the number of KIP editions has 
been increased from initial two editions per year t o six editions per year. The upper age limit of 
participants was also increased from 26 years to 30  years with a view to increase the outreach of 
the Know India Programme. It is felt that at presen t, we have reached the optimal balance of 
number of participants per edition so that the programme can remain attractive to diaspora youth. 
Considering the Covid-19 pandemic, large sized grou ps might not be advisable under prevailing 
circumstances. We believe that the KIP group should  be of a manageable number for both the 
Centre and State Governments for organizing the visit. 
Overseas Marketing : 

Page 11 of 36 
 
11.2 The suggestions of the Committee are noted.  
11.3 The reply of the Embassy of India, Muscat is a ttached in Annexure -I 
 
IMPEDIMENTS TO PROMOTION OF INDIA TOURISM ABROAD 
 
Recommendation/Observation  
12. The Committee notes that Embassies and Consulates a re important sources of 
information and help for people travelling abroad as these provide visa/passport assistance, safe 
travel advice and access to justice in foreign coun tries and despite the increase in amount of 
Financial resources spent by the Government on Indi an Missions as well as Overseas Tourism 
Offices, the Overseas Tourism Offices haven’t been able to increase the FTAs in the past two 
years. 
(Para 64) 
Reply of the Ministry 
Ministry of External Affairs (Economic Diplomacy Division): 
12.1 This pertains to Overseas Tourist Offices, whi ch function under the purview of Ministry 
of Tourism. 
Overseas Marketing Division: 
12.2 The suggestions of the Committee are noted. 
12.3 The replies of the Embassy of India, Muscat is  attached in Annexure -I 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
13. India's philosophy of 'Vasudhaiva Kutumbakam' (worl d is one family) and its traditions 
non-violence and pluralism give an unwavering belief in multilateralism, diversity and tolerance. 
The rise of Indian Diaspora to top echelons of prof essions across the world has given a great 
recognition to India. The Committee applauds the ef forts of the MEA in increasing international 
recognition of India’s cultural and civilizational heritage, yoga and ayurveda, bollywood and 
classical dances in the foreign countries through i ts schemes like “Know India Programme,” 
and “Know Pravasi Teerth Darshan Yojana.” 
(Para 67) 
Reply of the Ministry 

Page 12 of 36 
 
Publicity: 
13.1 The suggestions of the Committee are noted. 
 
 
CHAPTER-III  
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
THE MINISTRY HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE  
 
Recommendation/Observation 
1. The Committee observes that in concordance with UNWTO, International Tourist 
Arrivals (ITA) include both Foreign Tourist Arrival s (FTA) and NRIs and from 2014 onwards 
the Ministry of Tourism has started to compile the arrivals of NRIs on annual basis.  Proper 
segregation of data regarding number of NRIs visiting India to meet their families and the actual 
number of foreign tourists coming for tourism purposes needs to be separately maintained as this 
data will help in the formation of tourism policies . Since NRIs constitute a significant share of 
ITAs, there has been a rise in ITAs since 2014, per haps contributing to the rise of India to the 
23 
rd  rank in ITAs though still below even small countri es like Thailand, Austria and Poland The 
growth of FTAs however has been much slower taking a decade  to double from 5.78 million in 
2010 to 10.93 millions in 2019. Other developing na tions like Thailand reported higher 
international tourism receipts. The Committee recom mends that the promotional tactics of 
Thailand to utilize diplomacy and tourism promotion  to attract foreign tourists despite their 
small population and geographical area as compared to India may be  assessed, and may be 
applied in the Indian tourism sector, if found bene ficial for the growth of Inbound Tourism in 
India. 
(Para 7) 
Reply of the Ministry 
Market Research Division (MRD): 
1.1 MR Division maintains data on Foreign Tourist A rrivals (FTAs) and Non Resident 
Indians (NRIs) separately. However, the recommendat ion of the Committee may pertain to OM 
Division. 

Page 13 of 36 
 
1.2 The replies of the HCIs/EOIs of Australia, Otta wa (Canada), Bangkok, Berlin, London, 
Singapore, Moscow, Paris, Rome and Tokyo are attached in Annexure -I. 
 
Further Recommendations/Observations 
1.3 Status in the OM Division may be informed. The Ministry may also inform whether 
any study has been done on the promotional tactics of other nations especially developing 
ones which have higher tourism receipts than India and ways to apply them to promote 
inbound tourism in India. 
 
ROLE OF MINISTRY OF TOURISM  
Recommendation/Observation  
2. The Committee notes that various tourism circuit s such as “Buddhist Circuit,” 
“Ramayana Circuit” can provide tourists with enrich ing religious experiences. The Committee 
also observes that in the aftermath of the COVID pa ndemic, the importance of shorter distances 
in travel has become more pronounced and regional t ourism is likely to grow. India should 
therefore leverage its cultural similarities such a s the Buddha’s trail with its neighbhours. The 
Committee recommends that necessary steps be taken to revive circuit tourism by organizing 
FAM trips and Buddhist Circuit Family Tours and Con ferences with the help of Indian Overseas 
Tourism Offices and Missions to boost tourism in country. 
 (Para 11.2) 
Reply of the Ministry  
Swadesh Darshan: 
2.1 The Ministry of Tourism launched its Swadesh Da rshan scheme in the year 2014-15 and 
has sanctioned 76 projects under it for a revised s anctioned amount of Rs. 5399.15 Cr. under 
identified themes including 2 projects under Ramaya na theme sanctioned for an amount of Rs. 
196.66 Cr. and 5 projects under Buddhist theme for an amount of Rs. 311.46 Cr. 
2.2 The Ministry of Tourism has now revamped its Sw adesh Darshan Scheme as SD 2.0 in 
order to develop sustainable and responsible destin ations following a tourist & destination 
centric approach. The Guidelines for SD2.0 scheme have been issued. 
 
Overseas Marketing: 

Page 14 of 36 
 
2.3 The suggestions of the Committee are noted. 
 
Further Recommendations/Observations 
2.4 The Committee would like to know the status of the 2 projects under Ramayana 
circuit and 5 projects under Buddhist circuit in Sw adesh Darshan 1.0.  The Committee 
would also like to know details of the promotional campaigns with respect to these two 
circuits undertaken by the Ministry in those neighb ouring countries which share cultural 
similarities with India.  The Committee has been in formed that the Swadesh Darshan 2.0 
scheme will be destination centric instead of circu it centric. The Committee would like to 
know of the steps being taken by the Ministry for t he continued promotion in overseas 
markets of the Buddhist, Ramayana and other circuits in the Swadesh Darshan 1.0 scheme. 
 
ROLE OF MINISTRY OF TOURISM  
Recommendation/Observation 
3. The Committee appreciates that strategic promoti on of MICE tourism has been given 
importance. The Committee notes that there is a sur ge in business travel to India and promotion 
of MICE tourism would capitalize on the blossoming image of India as an important MICE 
destination. India already has many cities which ha ve good infrastructure for hosting 
conferences or are in the process of developing the  same. What is required is the connectivity 
between the cities to enable the growth of MICE tourism in India. 
(Para 11.3) 
Reply of the Ministry 
Overseas Marketing: 
3.1 The suggestions of the Committee are noted.  
 
Further Recommendations/Observations 
3.2 The Committee desires to know if the Ministry h as identified Indian cities which 
have good infrastructure for hosting conferences or  are in the process of developing the 
same. The Committee may also be informed whether th e Ministry has forwarded any 
proposals to   the MoRTH, M/o Railways and M/o Civi l Aviation regarding increasing the 
connectivity of such cities. 

Page 15 of 36 
 
 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
4. The Committee notes that the Incredible India Ca mpaign was the first campaign to 
promote India uniformly as a destination offering a  wide range of experiences and was hugely 
successful but marketing Campaigns are only part of  the challenge. Tourism requires easy visa 
clearances, hotels, flight, train and road connecti vity and above all the promise of a safe, secure 
and convenient travel. In order to build a successf ul brand, all aspects of tourism infrastructure 
and services and supply-demand gaps must be given utmost importance and this can be achieved 
only by coordinated efforts of all the stakeholders . The Committee appreciates the holistic and 
targeted approach of the Government for promotion o f Inbound Tourism and recommends that 
systematic monitoring of the coordinated efforts of  all the stakeholders may be done by the 
Programme Implementation Committee. 
(Para 11.9) 
Reply of the Ministry  
Overseas Marketing:  
4.1 The suggestions of the Committee are noted. 
 
Further Recommendations/Observations  
4.2 The Committee would like to know whether the pr oposed Digital Platform for all 
activities concerning Inbound Tourism is functional .  The Committee also desires to know 
whether all the members of the Steering Committee a nd Programme Implementation 
Committee have been nominated and the number of mee tings/interactions conducted by 
the two committees in the past year.  
 
FILM TOURISM  
Recommendation/Observation  
5. The Committee notes that countries offer various  types of incentives to encourage film 
producers to use beautiful locations to shoot films . Most countries offer tax sops in the form of 
VAT refunds ranging from 10-20% depending on the lo cation and the budget of the film. 
Sometimes the governments even bear some cost of the production as films act as advertisements 

Page 16 of 36 
 
for the country and huge benefits are accrued. The Spain Tourism Board partnered with the 
Bollywood film “Zindagi Na Milegi Dobara” for promo tions and got a huge influx of tourists 
that year. The incentives offered by the Indian gov ernment appear to be meager compared to the 
international norms and the considerable payoffs. T he Committee recommends that the Ministry 
of Tourism may review the incentives provided to fo reign film producers as per internationally 
competitive rates. 
 (Para 16) 
Reply of the Ministry  
5.1 The Ministry of Tourism has issued guidelines ( dated 25.07.2012) for extending financial 
support to State Governments/ Union Territory Administrations for promotion of ‘Film Tourism.’ 
The financial assistance is provided up to Rs.2.00 Lakh per film for component s such as Space 
Hiring/Filming charges, Facilitation Fee etc. 
 
Overseas Marketing : 
5.2 The suggestions of the Committee are noted. 
 
Further Observations/Recommendations 
5.3 The Committee would like to know how much Finan cial Assistance has been 
released to the State Governments for promotion of film tourism in the past year. The 
Committee may also be informed about the number of foreign film producers who have 
been granted incentives for shooting in Indian loca les under the scheme of the Ministry of 
Information and Broadcasting for reimbursement of u pto 30% on qualifying expenditure 
in India.  
 
OVERSEAS INDIA TOURISM OFFICES UNDER MINISTRY OF 
TOURISM  
Recommendation/Observation   
6. The Committee also observes that as per relevant  surveys, not many travellers to India 
were aware of the existence of an India Tourism Office in their country and even less felt that the 
information and guidance provided by the Office was  adequate. The Committee has been 
informed that the Indian employees appointed to the  Overseas India Tourism offices were not 

Page 17 of 36 
 
required to be proficient in the local language whi ch the Committee feels is an oversight. The 
first point of contact for a potential tourist is o ften the Overseas India Tourism office and it is 
essential that the employees of the Tourism office should be able to give their guidance in the 
local language. The brochures and website of India tourism should also be available in the local 
language. The Ministry has informed that the Incred ible India website is presently available in 8 
different foreign languages apart from English and Hindi and after revamp it would be available 
in 20 + vernacular and foreign languages. The Commi ttee urges that the brochures and website 
may be made available in as many languages as possi ble as language plays a crucial role in 
global industries like tourism. It is essential tha t potential tourists are given clear information in  
the language that they are familiar with to give th em the confidence to visit countries where they 
may encounter language barriers. 
(Para 23) 
Reply of the Ministry 
Overseas Marketing: 
6.1 Offices have been closed vide order no. D-11011 /212021-(ADMIN I) - Annexure – II. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
6.2 The Committee would like to be informed of the alternative methods of promotion 
of Indian tourism overseas consequent to the closin g of the Overseas Tourist Offices. The 
Committee desires to know the Ministry’s action on its recommendation that brochures 
and website should be made available in as many lan guages as possible.  The Committee 
notes that many Missions have suggested that brochures and pamphlets should be provided 
in local language for distribution to agencies.   
6.3 The Committee notes that the Incredible India w ebsite, presently available in 8 
foreign languages would, after revamp, be available  in 20+ vernacular and foreign 
languages.  The Committee would like to know the nu mber of foreign languages the 
website would be available in after revamp.  
 
INDIAN TOURISM MARKET REPRESENTATIVES  
Recommendation/Observation 

Page 18 of 36 
 
7. The Committee observes that hiring agencies whic h hold India’s interests Paramount in 
terms of tourism promotion and can provide professi onal and impartial service at all times will 
greatly impact the promotional campaigns, given the  untapped potential of Indian tourism 
sector. The Committee recommends the MoT to monitor the travel and tour trend of the countries 
through ITMRs where the Overseas Tourism Offices are operating. 
 (Para 26) 
Reply of the Ministry 
Overseas Marketing: 
7.1 The suggestions of the Committee are noted. 
 
Further Observations/Recommendations 
7.2 The Committee notes that in Phase-I, the Minist ry had proposed to hire ITMRs in 8 
countries, i.e. USA, Australia, Canada, France, Rus sia, Japan, Spain and Singapore to 
supplement the promotional efforts of the Ministry and the Overseas Tourism offices.  The 
Committee desires to know whether ITMRs are now fun ctional in these 8 countries as 
proposed and whether the Ministry has carried out i mpact evaluation of their activities. 
Some of the above countries also had Overseas Touri sm Offices which have now been shut 
down.  The Committee desires to know whether this h ad any effect on the functioning of 
the ITMRs.  
 
PROJECTING INDIA AS A SAFE TOURISM DESTINATION  
Recommendation/Observation  
8. The Committee notes that Safety and security of the tourists both domestic and foreign 
are Paramount importance for projecting the country  as a safe haven for tourism. The 
Committee notes that only 39 tourist sites spread a cross fifteen States and UTs have been 
identified for implementation of “Tourist Police Sc heme,” which is comparatively low. The 
Committee recommends that more Tourist Sites may be  identified and added to the Scheme and 
all states may be covered under the scheme. 
 (Para 61) 
Reply of the Ministry 
Travel Trade:  

Page 19 of 36 
 
8.1 The Suggestions of the Committee are noted. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation  
8.2 The Committee notes that safety and security ar e the most important travel 
consideration for many tourists and providing touri st police at all tourist destinations in 
India would improve tourist satisfaction and enhanc ing destination image. The Committee 
may be informed of the action taken by the Ministry in this regard.  
 
IMPEDIMENTS TO PROMOTION OF INDIA TOURISM ABROAD  
Recommendation/Observation   
9. The Committee observes that India has now only 8  Overseas Tourism Offices which is 
less compared to other countries but as the Committ ee has earlier observed, a country can open 
only a finite number of Overseas Tourist Offices wh ereas the diplomatic network stretches 
around the globe and would prove to be a more effec tive marketing model. Moreover having 
Offices with a bare minimum of staff who in most ca ses, cannot speak the local language and 
engage with the local population defeats the very p urpose of promoting Indian tourism in the 
target country. The general perception of the Overs eas Tourist Offices in the market has always 
been that the information provided by it was not ad equate or was outdated or not available in 
local languages. There was lack of sharing of infor mation about developments of tourism in 
India with the agents and tour operators who are cr itical intermediaries in the trade. The 
Committee observes that such perception was not sur prising since most of the Overseas Tourist 
Offices were functioning with a solitary or skeleta l staff. The Committee reiterates its 
recommendation that the vacancies in the Overseas T ourist Offices should be filled as quickly as 
possible and that the promotional materials should be made available in local languages The 
Committee recommends that the Ministry of Tourism n eeds to better engage and motivate both 
the Overseas Tourism Offices and the Indian Mission s to act as effective and dynamic tourism 
promoters and for this a regular and efficient comm unication network between all the 
stakeholders is essential. The Missions and Offices  should engage with the tour operators and 
agents on a regular weekly or fortnightly basis sha ring information and highlighting 
developments. 
 (Para 65) 
Reply of the Ministry 

Page 20 of 36 
 
Overseas Marketing: 
9.1 The suggestions of the Committee are noted. 
9.2 The replies of the Embassies of Beijing, Dubai,  London, Singapore and Tokyo are 
attached in Annexure -I 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation  
9.3 The Committee notes that some Missions had requ ested that the Overseas Offices 
may be kept open and the vacant posts filled.  The Committee wishes to know whether the 
decision had been taken in consonance with the Missions.  
9.4 Since the Overseas Tourist offices are closed, the onus of promoting Indian tourism 
is solely on the Indian Missions. The Committee not es however that the general feeling of 
the Indian Missions is that the role of tourism pro motion has been allocated to them 
without proper financial and human resource augment ation. Many Missions have 
indicated a lack of staff and funds for the Tourism  promotional activities. The Ministry 
may inform the Committee about the status on the sa me whether the vacancies in the 
Missions relating to tourism promotion have been fi lled up and adequate funds have been 
provided to the Missions to carry out promotional a ctivities. The Committee would also 
like to know details of how often Indian Missions a broad engage with tour operators or 
agents, whether weekly or fortnightly and the numbe r of such engagements made last year 
for at least the top five important source markets for India. The Ministry may also inform 
if a quarterly newsletter can be shared with all Mi ssions containing the important 
developments to be shared with all Tour operators/agents.   
 
Recommendation/Observation 
10. The Committee observes that the pandemic has br ought into sharp focus the importance 
of social media marketing and virtual events and th e Overseas Indian Offices and Indian 
Missions should fully embrace the new digital tools  for promotion of tourism along with the 
traditional methods. Virtual events, webinars, hybr id events and virtual resources can be 
provided by Missions to allow potential tourists to  explore India, its culture, food, destinations 
on its website. It is not enough to distribute brochures and promotional material, the information 
should be promoted on search engines for greater attention and awareness in the target groups. 
(Para 66) 

Page 21 of 36 
 
 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
Publicity : 
10.1 The suggestions of the Committee are noted. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation  
10.2 The Committee would like to know about the ste ps taken by the Indian Missions for 
promotion of digital tourism 
 
OTHER RECOMMENDATIONS  
Recommendation/Observation  
11. The Committee notes that with the advancement o f technology and modern policymaking, 
high percentage of women are employed in the global  tourism industry as compared to other 
sectors, i.e. women make up over 54% of the labour force in the tourism industry. Women have 
more opportunities for advancement and assuming rol es once dominated by men such as tour 
guides. However, Indian tourism industry still lags behind with only 12.1 percent share of female 
employment. The Committee desires to be apprised of  the coordinating mechanisms formulated 
by the MoT to generate employment opportunities for women in Indian tourism industry. 
(Para 69) 
Reply of the Ministry  
PMU (SD): 
11.1 The Ministry of Tourism conducts various short  terms skill development 
courses/programmes in Tourism and Hospitality Secto r through its various empanelled 
implementing agencies across the country under the scheme of Capacity Building for Service 
Providers (CBSP). 
11.2 These courses/programmes are conducted on the basis of first come first service for both 
the genders i.e., Male and Female etc. above the ag e of 18 years. Henceforth, the Ministry shall 
request the implementing agencies to enroll larger number of women trainees under the CBSP 
scheme. 

Page 22 of 36 
 
MRD: 
11.3 The observation of the Committee is related to  policy issues which are not dealt by MR 
Division. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation  
11.4 The Committee notes that the Indian tourism in dustry has a huge impact on the 
nation economically, environmentally and socially. Integrating gender perspectives in 
tourism planning and development is important as it  is one of the industries majorly 
employing women. The Committee desires to know if t he Ministry maintains data 
regarding placement of female trainees enrolled it its various short term skill development 
programmes. If such data is maintained, the same may be shared with the Committee.  
 
Recommendation/Observation 
12. Despite the availability of numerous creative p romotional ideas and vast amount of 
resources, several North-eastern Indian States have  failed to be in the list of top ten. The 
Committee recommends that the vast potential of Nor th-eastern States be tapped through 
extensive promotional campaigns focusing on their b eauty and variety of tribal population and 
culture. 
(Para 70) 
Reply of the Ministry 
Publicity : 
12.1 The suggestions of the Committee are noted. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation  
12.2 The Committee desires that the Ministry may fu rnish the action taken by it to 
include the north-eastern States in top ten tourist spots of India.   
 
Recommendation/Observation 
13. To realize the concept of ‘Atithi Devo Bhava,’ in our country, we have to prove ourselves 
as good hosts. But it is seen that experiences of f oreign tourists leaves much to be desired. There 

Page 23 of 36 
 
is need for behavioural change and Ministry of Tour ism has to work on many fronts like training 
of drivers, police, hoteliers, to improve the attit ude towards tourists, as well as improve social 
facilities etc. to bring a turnaround on this front. 
 (Para 71) 
Reply of the Ministry 
PMU (SD): 
13.1 The suggestions of the Committee are noted. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation  
13.2 The Committee would like to know if guidelines  on Code of Conduct for Safe and 
Honourable Tourism developed by the Ministry are gi ven wide publicity and circulation 
among tourist agencies, tour operators and included  in the curriculum in the short term 
programmes conducted by the Ministry.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Page 24 of 36 
 
 
 
CHAPTER-IV  
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE FINAL 
REPLIES OF THE MINISTRY ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
-Nil.- 
 
* * *  
 
 
  

Page 25 of 36 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/ OBSERVATIONS - AT A GLANCE  
 
CHAPTER-III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
THE MINISTRY HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
 
Status in the OM Division may be informed. The Mini stry may also inform whether 
any study has been done on the promotional tactics of other nations especially developing 
ones which have higher tourism receipts than India and ways to apply them to promote 
inbound tourism in India. 
(Para 1.3) 
The Committee would like to know the status of the 2 projects under Ramayana 
circuit and 5 projects under Buddhist circuit in Sw adesh Darshan 1.0.  The Committee 
would also like to know details of the promotional campaigns with respect to these two 
circuits undertaken by the Ministry in those neighb ouring countries which share cultural 
similarities with India.  The Committee has been in formed that the Swadesh Darshan 2.0 
scheme will be destination centric instead of circu it centric. The Committee would like to 
know of the steps being taken by the Ministry for t he continued promotion in overseas 
markets of the Buddhist, Ramayana and other circuits in the Swadesh Darshan 1.0 scheme. 
(Para 2.4) 
The Committee desires to know if the Ministry has i dentified Indian cities which 
have good infrastructure for hosting conferences or  are in the process of developing the 
same. The Committee may also be informed whether th e Ministry has forwarded any 
proposals to   the MoRTH, M/o Railways and M/o Civi l Aviation regarding increasing the 
connectivity of such cities. 
(Para 3.2) 
The Committee would like to know whether the propos ed Digital Platform for all 
activities concerning Inbound Tourism is functional .  The Committee also desires to know 
whether all the members of the Steering Committee a nd Programme Implementation 
Committee have been nominated and the number of mee tings/interactions conducted by 
the two committees in the past year. 
(Para 4.2) 
The Committee would like to know how much Financial  Assistance has been 
released to the State Governments for promotion of film tourism in the past year. The 
Committee may also be informed about the number of foreign film producers who have 
been granted incentives for shooting in Indian loca les under the scheme of the Ministry of 
Information and Broadcasting for reimbursement of u pto 30% on qualifying expenditure 
in India. 
(Para 5.3) 
The Committee would like to be informed of the alte rnative methods of promotion 
of Indian tourism overseas consequent to the closin g of the Overseas Tourist Offices. The 
Committee desires to know the Ministry’s action on its recommendation that brochures 
and website should be made available in as many lan guages as possible.  The Committee 

Page 26 of 36 
 
notes that many Missions have suggested that brochures and pamphlets should be provided 
in local language for distribution to agencies.   
(Para 6.2) 
The Committee notes that the Incredible India websi te, presently available in 8 
foreign languages would, after revamp, be available  in 20+ vernacular and foreign 
languages.  The Committee would like to know the nu mber of foreign languages the 
website would be available in after revamp.  
(Para 6.3) 
The Committee notes that in Phase-I, the Ministry h ad proposed to hire ITMRs in 8 
countries, i.e. USA, Australia, Canada, France, Rus sia, Japan, Spain and Singapore to 
supplement the promotional efforts of the Ministry and the Overseas Tourism offices.  The 
Committee desires to know whether ITMRs are now fun ctional in these 8 countries as 
proposed and whether the Ministry has carried out i mpact evaluation of their activities. 
Some of the above countries also had Overseas Touri sm Offices which have now been shut 
down.  The Committee desires to know whether this h ad any effect on the functioning of 
the ITMRs. 
(Para 7.2) 
The Committee notes that safety and security are th e most important travel 
consideration for many tourists and providing touri st police at all tourist destinations in 
India would improve tourist satisfaction and enhanc ing destination image. The Committee 
may be informed of the action taken by the Ministry in this regard. 
(Para 8.2) 
The Committee notes that some Missions had requeste d that the Overseas Offices 
may be kept open and the vacant posts filled.  The Committee wishes to know whether the 
decision had been taken in consonance with the Missions.  
(Para 9.3) 
Since the Overseas Tourist offices are closed, the onus of promoting Indian tourism 
is solely on the Indian Missions. The Committee not es however that the general feeling of 
the Indian Missions is that the role of tourism pro motion has been allocated to them 
without proper financial and human resource augment ation. Many Missions have 
indicated a lack of staff and funds for the Tourism  promotional activities. The Ministry 
may inform the Committee about the status on the sa me whether the vacancies in the 
Missions relating to tourism promotion have been fi lled up and adequate funds have been 
provided to the Missions to carry out promotional a ctivities. The Committee would also 
like to know details of how often Indian Missions a broad engage with tour operators or 
agents, whether weekly or fortnightly and the numbe r of such engagements made last year 
for at least the top five important source markets for India. The Ministry may also inform 
if a quarterly newsletter can be shared with all Mi ssions containing the important 
developments to be shared with all Tour operators/agents.   
(Para 9.4) 
The Committee would like to know about the steps taken by the Indian Missions for 
promotion of digital tourism. 
(Para 10.2) 
The Committee notes that the Indian tourism industr y has a huge impact on the 
nation economically, environmentally and socially. Integrating gender perspectives in 
tourism planning and development is important as it  is one of the industries majorly 

Page 27 of 36 
 
employing women. The Committee desires to know if t he Ministry maintains data 
regarding placement of female trainees enrolled it its various short term skill development 
programmes. If such data is maintained, the same may be shared with the Committee. 
(Para 11.4) 
The Committee desires that the Ministry may furnish  the action taken by it to 
include the north-eastern States in top ten tourist spots of India.  
(Para 12.2) 
The Committee would like to know if guidelines on C ode of Conduct for Safe and 
Honourable Tourism developed by the Ministry are gi ven wide publicity and circulation 
among tourist agencies, tour operators and included  in the curriculum in the short term 
programmes conducted by the Ministry. 
(Para 13.2) 
 
* * * * 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Page 28 of 36 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ANNEXURES 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Page 29 of 36 
 
 
Annexure - I 
 
Para 
No. 
Reply of the Indian Missions/Embassies 
7 High Commission of India, Australia 
(i) India Tourism Office Sydney be reopened; 
(ii) Adequate funds and resources be provided to Mission and posts to conduct the 
various activities proposed etc.; 
(iii) A weekly or fortnightly newsletter be shared for sharing with tour operators and 
agents on a regular basis. 
 
High Commission of India Ottawa, Canada 
(i) The Mission and two Consulates in Canada have been interacting with tour 
operators on regular basis and providing Indian promotion tourism material. 
The promotional materials provided by the MoT in English and French 
languages are regularly disseminated to tour operators and Indo-Canadian 
organisations. To attract more travellers from Canada to India, advertisement 
and branding is required. Mission has already provided its annual activities plan 
and the funds required to implement these plans to the Ministry of Tourism. We 
have so far not received any budget from the Ministry of Tourism to organize 
various activities. Though the Tourism Officer has been appointed at the High 
Commission of India, Ottawa to coordinate the tourism promotion activities in 
Canada, but there is no supporting staff available. The dedicated staff will be 
required in the Mission and two Consulates in Toronto and Vancouver to 
promote India tourism aggressively in the Canadian market. 
(ii) The Mission has also sent inputs for additional Paragraphs No. 40, 45, 46, 47, 
52 and 64 to Ministry of External Affairs (MEA), which would be made 
available to the Ministry of Tourism through MEA. 
 
Embassy of India, Bangkok 
(i) Mission has been holding interactions with the Thai Travel Agents Association 
(TTAA) and Tourism Authority of Thailand on a regular basis at different 
levels to promote tourism in India. Besides, tourism road shows and outreach 
events are being organised in different parts of Thailand to present India as a 
tourist-friendly destination. In the past one year, Mission has organized 18 
events in Thailand to promote tourism in India (list attached). 
 
Embassy of India, Berlin 
• The country-specific Tourism Promotion Strategy shared by this Mission with 
Ministry of Tourism in March, 2022 (enclosed in this email) incorporates the 
suggestions and recommendations for fostering tourism from Germany to India. 
In addition to that Mission would like to share the following views regarding 
observations made in the 326th report: 
(i) The 326th report mentioned greater support from India Tourism Office in 
facilitating and promoting tourism promotion activities in the host country. It 
would be great if more initiatives are taken by the India Tourism Office for 
organising such tourism promotion events and activities, this Mission and its 
posts would be happy to support and contribute to such initiatives. 
(ii) An Annual PR Plan may be created by the India Tourism Office in Frankfurt 
with the support of Mission and its Posts. This would help in advance planning 
of the promotional activities and social media campaigns. 

Page 30 of 36 
 
(iii) Regarding the Monthly Tourism Report started by MoT, the format of this 
report is very rigid and not free flowing, it accept only numbers and provides 
no place for additional comments. For instance, data protection laws prohibit 
our German counterparts from sharing details of their database of tour 
operators, travel agencies etc. Instead, India Tourism Office in Frankfurt could 
provide this input to MoT from their existing database. Moreover, trends and 
opportunities in the tourism market do not change very frequently, leading to 
repetitive information every month. We also suggest that frequency of the 
report could be made quarterly instead of monthly with a flexible format. 
(iv) Mission may not have the sufficient funds to organise the Tourism promotion 
events and other engagements every month. Mission has already conveyed that 
it will be able to organise 2-3 events in this Financial Year (including for ITB 
2023 and for the visit of DG (Tourism)) from the State Facilitation and Market 
Expansion Funds. Therefore, sufficient extra funds may be provided by MoT 
for organising events and engagements related to tourism promotion in the host 
country. 
 
High Commission of India London 
(i) Mission’s Reply: India Tourism Office London is looking after the work of 
tourism promotion in the region under its Jurisdiction. English is the main 
language for communication. The total strength of the staff in the ITO, London 
is as follows:- 
◊ India-based staff – 03 
a) Occupied - 1 (Tourist Information officer) 
b) Vacant - 2 (Director and Assistant Director) 
◊ Local Staff-03 
a) Occupied - 2 (Accountant and Secretary) 
b) Vacant - 1 (Receptionist). 
 
(ii) The Mission recommends that the vacancy posts be filled as quickly as possible 
to facilitate the promotion of Tourism effectively and to ensure smooth 
functioning of the ITO, London at all times. The Mission has made every effort 
to disseminate information to the tourists and promotes tourism through social 
media handles, presentations to various stakeholders and undertakes various 
outreach activities. The Mission also engages with the tour operators and agents 
on a regular basis sharing information and highlighting developments. The 
information is disseminated in the local language viz. English. 
(iii) Mission promoted tourism during the ‘8th International Day of Yoga 2022’, 
held on 17 & 22 June, 2022 branding through t-shirts/ visuals/ LEDs with no 
support from India Tourism. 
 
Embassy of India, Moscow 
(i) Ministry of Tourism vide letter DO Letter No. A-11017/01/2018-Admn.I had 
approved the opening of a dedicated tourism office in Moscow. Currently 
Mission is assisting the Tourism Ministry in finalization of office premises for 
India Tourism Office (ITO). Russia is among the top 10 source countries of 
Foreign Tourist Arrivals in India, hence expediting the process of finalization 
of property of ITO and its early functioning may be quite useful. 
(ii) Mission engages with the tour operators and agents on a regular basis. Recently 
Mission has submitted the Russia specific tourism strategy to the Ministry after 
consultation with major tour agencies. Apart from tour agencies, Mission is in 
regular touch with Rostourism and Moscow Tourism Committee. Recently on 

Page 31 of 36 
 
the occasion of celebration of Indian Yoga Day organized by the Mission, 
Chairperson of Moscow City Tourism Committee participated. 
(iii) Mission also believes that the promotional material should be designed in local 
languages i.e. Russian in this case. Further, states of India should also consider 
designing their promotional material in country-specific languages. 
 
EOI Paris 
(i) France is the 3rd largest source market for India from Europe and World’s 
foremost geography for International tourist arrivals. The Tourism Office, 
which Ambassador of India to France Sh. Jawed Ashraf requested for 
continuation and resource amplification, was instead closed down in October 
2020. A thorough review of geographies where Tourist offices are required 
should be carried out in consultation with the Missions. 
(ii) Tourism promotion role has been allocated to Missions without proportional 
financial or human resource-augmentation, which could repeat the same issues 
as seen with ‘solitary and skeletal’ staffing of tourist offices. The nominated 
Tourist officers have been handed over responsibilities in addition to their 
existing roles in the Missions which may lead to dilution of results if not 
supplemented with adequate resources. 
(iii) The strategy papers prepared by the Tourist officers should be considered for a 
tailored approach to promoting tourism in a particular geography. Feedback and 
discussion with the Missions in designing an effective marketing model should 
be intrinsic to tourism promotion in any country. A one way general approach 
without a resource augmentation should be discouraged. 
 
EOI Rome 
(i) Embassy of India Rome is in agreement with the recommendations made by the 
Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport, Tourism & Culture and 
strongly recommends reopening of India Tourism Office either in Milan or 
Rome for promotion of India Tourism in Italy. 
(ii) It is also worth implementing that tourism publicity materials (both online & 
paper print) could be prepared in local language and sent to the targeted country 
for maximum publicity and perceivable impact. 
EOI, Tokyo  
Embassy of India, Tokyo engages regularly with Travel Agents and Tour Operators 
in Japan to promote India as a tourist destination. The embassy promotes India 
tourism on virtual and physical platforms and also conducts promotional events for 
the same. The Embassy also extends its support to various events and initiatives of 
India Tourism office in Tokyo. 
The details with regard to India tourism Tokyo Office are as below:- 
India tourism Tokyo Office, based at Tokyo, is responsible for tourism promotion in 
the East Asian region - Japan, South Korea and Taiwan. This office has sufficient 
stock of publicity materials in the local languages, as per the requirement in these 
countries and also collaborates with the Missions while printing the language 
brochures. India tourism Tokyo Office has been making efforts to collect updated 
information from various Ministries and state government about the latest 
developments in the country and further to disseminate the information among the 
travel trade. This office has been maintaining regular contact with the leading Travel 
Agents and Tour Operators in the area and keeping them updated with the latest 
tourism development about India. As per the observation and recommendations of 
the Committee, India tourism Tokyo Office will enhance the effort to collaborate 
and work regularly along with the Tourism Officers in the respective Missions, 

Page 32 of 36 
 
Travel Agents and other stake holders for better tourism promotion on India in the 
East Asian region. 
High Commission of India, Singapore 
Para 28  of the Report of the Standing Committee states that the Committee was informed that 
Indian Missions will take ownership to promote Inbound Tourism where India Tourism 
Offices are not located. It may be noted that Singapore has a full-fledged functioning Tourism 
Office under the Ministry of Tourism, Government of India. 
40 Embassy of India, Muscat: 
(i) The applicant applies for the visa through outsourcing service provider BLS. 
The service provider has been suitably briefed to provide ease to the applicants. 
Mission grants visa within a day or two. Any changes in visa policy 
instructions being issued by MHA are uploaded on Missions website and 
briefed to the service provider. 
(ii) Embassy has a visa guidance help desk for providing information on updated 
visa rules and guidance to agents and tourists. If applicant approaches Embassy 
for any query, he is guided appropriately. In case of urgency, the visa is issued 
instantly without any extra fee charges. 
45 Embassy of India, Muscat: 
(i) Ministry had designated Tourism Officer in Embassy of India Muscat in 
October 2021. Embassy is actively engaging with the travel and tour operators 
in Oman for promotion of Incredible India. Embassy organsied the first 
Webinar on Tourism Promotion between India and Oman on 8th February 
2022. On 16th March 2022, Embassy organised the Ambassador's Roundtable 
on India-Oman Tourism. Embassy organised a virtual roadshow 'Incredible 
India Reconnect 2022- Oman' in partnership with Ministry of Tourism on 26 
April 2022. 
(ii) The Embassy extended all support to Kerala Tourism for organising Kerala 
road show and B2b Meeting on 17' May 2022 at Muscat which saw the 
presence of over 70 prominent tour operators from India and Oman.  
(iii) The Embassy keeps sharing Online publicity material with the travel and tour 
operators and is in close touch with them in addressing their concerns in respect 
of visas, etc. 
 
High Commission of India, Singapore 
(i) While the recommendation in Para 45 is noted, it may be seen that HCI, 
Singapore has not been allocated any budget or manpower for tourism 
promotion activities by Ministry of Tourism. In fact two posts of First Secretary 
(Economic) and First Secretary (Commerce) in the High Commission are 
already lying vacant for more than a year. This has made carrying out of even 
regular trade, economic and commercial work a challenge, leave alone handling 
an additional responsibility of tourism promotion. Singapore is the largest 
source of FDI into India and our sixth largest trade partner. In order to fulfil the 
potential of trade and investment, HCI had already projected to Ministry of 
Commerce and Industry the need to hire three additional local staff for trade 
and commerce work. 
(ii) Ministry of Tourism therefore urgently allocated staff and budgetary support to 
the Mission to undertake tourism promotion activities. In the meantime, the 
Mission stands ready to support the India Tourism Office in Singapore in 
carrying out its work. 
46 Embassy of India, Muscat  
(i) Post-pandemic, Embassy is making all efforts in promoting inbound tourism to 
India from Oman and connecting tour operators of both sides through webinars, 

Page 33 of 36 
 
meetings, virtual road shows, etc.  
(ii) Embassy will constructively participate in all roadshows virtual as well as 
physical and extend all support to MOT in organising it in Oman.  
(iii) As per Ministry's instructions, Embassy is evaluating all the officers on the 
basis of 3Ts-Trade, Technology and Tourism. 
47 Embassy of India, Muscat  
Mission is actively working in connecting Indian businesses and investors seeking 
to conduct trade, investment and agricultural exports in Oman with the local 
partners. Regarding relevant guidelines, MoT may provide more details. 
52 Embassy of India, Muscat  
Embassy will reach out to more number of diaspora youth for their participation in 
Know India Program in large number from Oman. 
64 Embassy of India, Muscat  
(i) Due to Covid pandemic and travel restrictions imposed by Government of 
Oman for a major period from April to September 2021, there was not much 
tourist outflow from Oman.  
(ii) Since the resumption of scheduled flights from 27th March, 2022 and lifting of 
travel restrictions, the tourist outflow from Oman to India is increasing, which 
is witnessed by increased number of tourist and medical visas issued by the 
Embassy. 
65 ITO Beijing  
(i) India Tourism, Beijing would like to suggest to have more India-based staff to 
run office properly. It’s very difficult to run office smoothly specially when 
there is lack of manpower. Only one India based officer is not justice with this 
office as China is very big region which is biggest outbound market for world. 
The work related to Tourism office is as following: - 
1. Participation in travel trade fairs/ Exhibitions 
2. Road shows- Organising Road shows 
3. Know India Seminar-Conducting Know India Seminar in the region 
4. Joint promotion with travel trade 
5. Hospitality 
6. Advertising and publicity 
7. Online promotion 
8. Promotional events with the Missions 
9. Other activities 
 
(ii) Keeping mind of above-mentioned high-volume work for ideal situation India 
Tourism Beijing should have one Director with one Assistant Director and 
Tourist Information Officer to manage work properly. 
(iii) India Tourism have print brochure in Chinese local language. 
(iv) India based officer who is selected to work in China, they should be 
encouraged to learn Chinese language to understand market or it can be 
mandatory to have full time language course. 
(v) India Tourism, Beijing engages, regularly work closely with travel agent to 
promote market. 
 
ITO DUBAI 
(i) India Tourism, Dubai is looking after Gulf and Middle East including Iran and 
Cyprus and Africa since 2018 after closure of ITO, Johannesburg. There is no 
language barrier in our region and the official and all staff has knowledge of 
English, Arabic and French. 
(ii) ITO, Dubai prints all the brochures in Arabic, Persian, Turkish and English and 

Page 34 of 36 
 
also distributed promotional and display material during Fairs/Exhibitions, 
know India Seminar and other promotional events. ITO, Dubai frequently sends 
promotional material along with Giveaways to all Indian Missions in Gulf, 
Middle East and African countries and also to travel agents regularly. 
(iii) ITO, Dubai is in touch with tour operators regularly during promotional events, 
travel fairs, Joint promotions and Know India Seminars and also updated 
database. 
(iv) Post of RD, Director (Johannesburg) and PS to Director (Johannesburg) are 
vacant and only Assistant Director looks after all the work. Posts have to be 
filled for more efficient promotion. 
(v) Since Pandemic, ITO, Dubai participated in ATM-2020 and WTM Africa 2020 
virtual and ATM 2022 physically and virtually. 
(vi) All the images and creative forwarded by MoT has been shared to all the Indian 
Missions and also have been regularly forwarding ‘Dekho Apna Desh’ webinar 
details to all the Indian Missions and tour operators requesting them to attend 
the Webinar. 
(vii) ITO Dubai liaises with State Governments to share tourism knowledge to tour 
operators in the region. 
(viii) ITO, Dubai in association with Indian Missions have organized Webinars and 
IATO officials were invited as speakers 
Note : Road Show of MoT in 2019 was cancelled at the last moment as few tour 
operators only had registered for the Road Shows because they had shown interest 
in other regions like USA, UK etc. 
 
India Tourism London 
(i) India tourism office London was relocated in HCI building in the year of 2018. 
The office is looking after the work of tourism promotion in the region under 
its Jurisdiction. The following countries are under its jurisdiction- 
◊ UK 
◊ Ireland 
◊ Luxembourg 
◊ Netherlands 
◊ Belgium  
 
(ii) English is the main language for communication, except in the Benelux 
countries, where Dutch and French are also among the most widely spoken 
languages. From the year of 2018 the Benelux countries came under the 
jurisdiction of ITO, London. Some local language literature was provided by 
the Paris and Frankfurt tourism offices for the fairs and exhibitions. 
◊ The total strength of the staff in the ITO, London: 
a) India based staff-03 
b) Occupied -1 (Tourist Information officer) 
◊ Vacant -2 (Director and Asst. Director) 
◊ Local Staff- 03 
a) Occupied -2 (Accountant and Secretary) 
b) Vacant -1 (Receptionist) 
(iii) For dissemination of information to the tourists, every effort is made to obtain 
information from the concerned Ministries, State Governments and other 
sources. Taking into account the comments and recommendations of the 
Committee, the India tourism, London will further synergize its efforts with the 
Missions, Nodal officers for tourism in the Missions, tour operators and other 
stakeholders for production of publicity material in local languages for the 

Page 35 of 36 
 
tourists and for the development and promotion of tourism in the countries 
under its jurisdiction. 
 
ITO Singapore 
India Tourism, Singapore is located in Singapore, where English is the main 
language for communication. The office is looking after the work of tourism 
promotion in the ASEAN and Australasia region and assisting the concerned 
Missions in the region with the production of brochures and other promotional 
material in local languages basically in the ASEAN region, where English is not the 
language of communication. For the dissemination of the information to the tourists, 
utmost efforts are made to source the information from the relevant Ministries, State 
Governments, and other sources. In view of the observations and recommendations 
of the Committee, the India Tourism, Singapore will further synergize its efforts 
with the Missions, Tourism Officers in the Missions, Tour Operators, and other 
stakeholders for the production of publicity material in local languages for the 
tourists and for development and promotion of tourism in the region. 
 
ITO Tokyo 
(i) India tourism Tokyo Office, based at Tokyo, is responsible for tourism 
promotion in the East Asian regions -Japan, South Korea and Taiwan. This 
office has sufficient stock of publicity materials in the local languages, as per 
the requirement in these countries and also collaborates with the Missions while 
printing the language brochures. India tourism Tokyo Office has been making 
efforts to collect updated information from various Ministries and state 
government about the latest developments in the country and further to 
disseminate the information among the travel trade. This office has been 
maintaining regular contact with the leading Travel Agents and Tour Operators 
in the area and keeping them updated with the latest tourism development about 
India. 
(ii) However, as per the observation and recommendations of the Committee, India 
tourism Tokyo Office will enhance the effort to collaborate and work regularly 
along with the Tourism Officers in the respective Missions, Travel Agents and 
other stake holders for better tourism promotion on India in the East Asian 
region. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Page 36 of 36 
 
 
Annexure - II 
 
* * * *  


37 
 
 
 
 
MINUTES 
  

38 
 
MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED 
PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM & 
CULTURE (2022-23) 
XIV 
FOURTEENTH MEETING 
  
The Committee met at 3:00 P.M. on Thursday, the 23rd March, 2023 in Committee Room 
„4‟, First Floor, Parliament House Annexe Extension, New Delhi. 
  
Members present: 
1. Shri V. Vijayasai Reddy             -             Chairman   
 
Rajya Sabha 
2. Shrimati S. Phangnon Konyak 
3. Shri Jugalsinh Lokhandwala 
4. Shri A. A. Rahim 
5. Dr. C. M. Ramesh 
6. Shri Vinay Dinu Tendulkar 
  
Lok Sabha 
7.  Shri Tapir Gao 
8.  Shri Sunil Baburao Mendhe 
9.  Shri K. Muraleedharan 
10. Shri Kamlesh Paswan 
11.  Shri Sunil Kumar Pintu 
12.  Shri Prince Raj 
13.  Shri Tirath Singh Rawat 
14.  Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
15.  Shri Dushyant Singh 
16.  Shri Ramdas Chandrabhanji Tadas 
17.  Shri Manoj Kumar Tiwari 
18.  Shri Dinesh Lal Yadav “Nirahua” 
  
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Swarabji B., Director 
Shrimati Monica Baa, Additional Director 
Shrimati Subha Chandrashekar, Deputy Secretary  
Shri Ranajit Chakraborty, Under Secretary 
 
 Shri Kaustubh Sudhakar Bhalekar, OSD to Hon‟ble Chairman  
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman extended a warm welcome to the Members of the 
Committee. He informed the Members that the agenda of the meeting was to consider and adopt 
four draft Action Taken Reports of the Committee   xxx    xxx    xxx. 
3. The Committee, thereafter, took up the first agenda for the meeting i.e., consideration and 
adoption of the following draft Action Taken Reports on:- 

39 
 
i. xxx    xxx    xxx; 
ii. xxx    xxx    xxx; 
iii. xxx    xxx    xxx; and 
iv. 326th Report on 'Role of Indian Missions Globally for the growth of Tourism in India' 
4.         The Committee considered the aforesaid draft Reports.  After a brief discussion, the 
Committee adopted the four draft Action Taken Reports and authorized the Chairma n to carry 
out minor modifications of typographical and factual errors and formatting in all the Reports. 
5.         The Committee authorized the Shri Jugalsinh Lokhandwala, M.P. and in his absence, 
Shri A. A. Rahim, M.P., to present the abovementioned Rep orts in Rajya Sabha on 24 th March 
2023. The Committee also authorized Shri Tapir Gao, M.P. and in his absence, Shri Kamlesh 
Paswan, M.P. to lay the Reports on the Table of Lok Sabha on the same date. 
WITNESSES 
xxx    xxx    xxx  
(The witnesses then withdrew) 
24.       A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept. 
25.       The meeting adjourned at 5:31 PM. 
 
New Delhi,                                                                                                  Swarabji B. 
23rd March, 2023                                                                                                            Director 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
_____________________ 
*Relates to other matters 
 