       
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
August, 2021/ Sravana, 1943 (Saka) 
 
  
REPORT NO. 
297
_ 
TWO HUNDRED NINETY SEVENTH REPORT  
Functioning of Airports Authority of India 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 2nd August, 2021) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 2nd August, 2021) 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Website :     https://rajyasabha.nic.in  
 E-mail :     rsc-tt@sansad.nic.in 
 

 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT,  
TOURISM AND CULTURE 
 
 
TWO HUNDRED NINETY SEVENTH REPORT  
 
Functioning of Airports Authority of India 
 (Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 2nd August, 2021) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 2nd August, 2021) 
 
 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 August, 2021/ Sravana, 1943 (Saka) 


C O N T E N T S 
 
P A G E S 
 
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE     (i)-(iii) 
2. INTRODUCTION       (iv) 
3. ACRONYMS                (v)-(viii) 
4. REPORT                                 1 - 42 
5. RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS-AT A GLANCE   43 - 56 
    6. MINUTES         57 - 66 
7.  ANNEXURES        67 - 69 
 
         
        
        
      
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE  
(2019-20) 
 (Constituted on 13th September, 2019) 
1. Shri T.G. Venkatesh   - Chairman 
Rajya Sabha 
s 
2. Shri Prasanna Acharya 
3. Shri Raj Babbar 
4. Shri Sambhaji Chhatrapati  
5. Dr. Sonal Mansingh 
6. Shri Derek O‟Brien 
7. *Kumari Selja 
8. **Shri Tiruchi Siva 
9. ***Shri K.C.Venugopal  
          10.   Shri Dharmapuri Srinivas 
 11. Shri Vinay Dinu Tendulkar 
Lok Sabha 
 
12.  Shrimati Sumalatha Ambareesh 
13.  Shri Anto Antony 
14.  Shrimati Veena Devi 
15.  Shri Tapir Gao  
16.  Shri Rahul Kaswan 
17.  Shri Saumitra Khan  
18.  Ms. Goddeti Madhavi  
19.  Shri Ramesh Chandra Majhi 
20.  Shri Sunil Baburao Mendhe 
21.  Shri K. Muraleedharan 
22.  Shri S.S. Palanimanickam  
23.  Shri Chhedi Paswan   
24.  Shri Kamlesh Paswan  
25.  Shri Tirath Singh Rawat 
26.  Shrimati Mala Roy 
27.  Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
28.  Shri Rajbahadur Singh 
29.  Shri Dushyant Singh 
30.  Shri Ramdas Chandrabhanji Tadas 
31.  Shri Krupal Balaji Tumane 
32.  Shri Dinesh Chandra Yadav  
___________________________________________________ 
*Kumari Selja ceased to be Member w.e.f. 10th April, 2020  
**Shri Tiruchi Siva ceased to be Member w.e.f. 3rd April, 2020 and re-nominated as Member w.e.f. 22nd  July, 
2020  
***Shri K.C. Venugopal nominated as Member w.e.f. 22nd July, 2020 
(i) 

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE  
 (2020-21) 
 (Constituted on 13th September, 2020) 
1. Shri T.G. Venkatesh                          - Chairman 
    Rajya Sabha 
2. Shri Prasanna Acharya 
3. *Shri Raj Babbar 
4. Shri Sambhaji Chhatrapati 
5. Dr. Sonal Mansingh 
6. Shri Derek O‟Brien 
7. Shri Tiruchi Siva 
8. Shri Dharmapuri Srinivas 
9. Shri Vinay Dinu Tendulkar 
10. Shri K.C.Venugopal 
11. **Shri Sushil Kumar Modi 
Lok Sabha 
12. Shri Anto Antony 
13. Shri Margani Bharat   
14. Shri Tapir Gao 
15. Shri Rahul Kaswan 
16. Shri Ramesh Chandra Majhi 
17. Shri Sunil Baburao Mendhe 
18. Shri K. Muraleedharan 
19. Shri S.S. Palanimanickam 
20. Shri Chhedi Paswan 
21. Shri Kamlesh Paswan 
22. Shri Sunil Kumar Pintu 
23. Shri Prince Raj 
24. Shri Tirath Singh Rawat 
25. Shrimati Mala Roy 
26. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
27. Shri Dushyant Singh 
28. Shri Rajbahadur Singh 
29. Shri Ramdas Chandrabhanji Tadas 
30. Shri Manoj Tiwari 
31. Shri Krupal Balaji Tumane 
32. Shri Dinesh Chandra Yadav 
_______________________________________________________  
*Shri Raj Babbar ceased to be a Member w.e.f. 25th November, 2020  
**Shri Sushil Kumar Modi was nominated to be a Member w.e.f. 23rd December, 2020 
(ii)  

SECRETARIAT 
 Dr. Shikha Darbari, Joint Secretary & Financial Advisor 
 Shri P. Narayanan, Director 
 Shri Dinesh Singh, Additional Director 
 Shri Rajendra Prasad Shukla, Additional Director 
Ms. Catherine John L., Under Secretary 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iii) 

INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairman, Department -related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport, 
Tourism and Culture, having been authorized by the Committee to present on its behalf, do 
hereby present this Two Hundred  Ninety Seventh Report on „Functioning of Airports Authority 
of India'.  
2. The Committee heard the views of the Secretary, Ministry of Civil Aviation; Director 
General, DGCA; Joint Director General, BCAS; CMD, Air India Ltd.; Chairman, Airports 
Authority of Indi a; Director General, Aircrafts Accident Investigation Bureau; and Chief 
Commissioner of Railway Safety, Commission of Railway Safety on the subject on 30 th 
December, 2020. The Committee heard the views of the Secretary, Ministry of Civil Aviation; 
Director General, DGCA; Joint Director General, BCAS; CMD, Air India Ltd.; CMD, Pawan 
Hans Ltd.; Chairman, Airports Authority of India; Chairman, Airports Economic Regulatory 
Authority of India; Director General, Aircrafts Accident Investigation Bureau; Director, Indira 
Gandhi Rashtriya Uran Akademy; and Chief Commissioner of Railway Safety, Commission of 
Railway Safety on the subject on 28th July, 2021. 
3.  The Committee wishes to express its thanks to the officers of Ministry of Civil Aviation; 
DGCA; BCAS;  Airports Authority of India; Air India Limited; Pawan Hans Ltd.; Aircrafts 
Accident Investigation Bureau; Commission of Railway Safety; and other stakeholders for 
placing before the Committee, the material and information desired in connection with the subject 
and for clarifying the points raised by the Members. 
4. The Committee considered and adopted the Report in its meeting held on the  30th July, 
2021.   
 
 
(T.G. Venkatesh) 
NEW DELHI;                                                                  Chairman, 
July 30, 2021                                                                  Department-related Parliamentary Standing            
Sravana 8, 1943 (Saka)                                           Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture, 
                                                                                                                                 Rajya Sabha 
 
 
 
 
 
(iv) 

ACRONYMS 
AAI : Airports Authority of India 
AAICLAS : Airports Authority of India Cargo Logistics and Allied Services 
Company Limited  
ACA : Airport Carbon Accreditation  
ACDM : Airport Collaborative Decision Making  
ACI : Airports Council International  
ACI-ACA  : Airports Council International -Airport Carbon Accreditation  
ADS-B : Automatic Dependent Surveillance-Broadcast 
AEL : Adani Enterprises Limited  
ANS : Air Navigation Services 
AOCC : Airports Operations Control Centre 
APV : Approach With Vertical Guidance 
ATCOS : Air Traffic Controllers  
ATM : Air Traffic Management  
ATO : Approved Training Organizations  
ATS  : Air Traffic Services 
ATSTO : Air Traffic Services Training  Organization 
BCAS : Bureau of Civil Aviation Security 
CAPEX : CAPital EXpenditure 
CAR  : Civil Aviation Requirements 
CARO : Civil Aviation Research Organization  
CAT : Category or Clear Air Turbulence 
CATC : Civil Aviation Training College  
C-ATFM  : Central - Air Traffic Flow Management 
CBI : Central Bureau Of Investigation 
CDR : Conditional Routes  
CFI : Chief Flying Instructors  
CHQ  : Corporate Headquarter  
CISF : Central Industrial Security Force 
CMD : Chairman and Managing Director 
                       (v) 

CNS/ATM : Communications, Navigation and Surveillance Systems for Air Traffic 
Management 
COVID : Corona Virus Disease 
CPI : Consumer Price Index 
CSMIA : Chhatrapati Shivaji Maharaj International Airport  
CSR : Corporate Social Responsibility 
CUTE : Common User Terminal Exchange 
CVC : Central Vigilance Commission 
CVD : Corporate Vigilance Department  
DCS  : Departure Control System 
DCVO : Dy.Chief Vigilance Officer 
DEPwD : Department of Empowerment of Persons with Disabilities 
DGCA : Directorate General of Civil Aviation 
DGR  : Dangerous Goods Regulations  
DIAL : Delhi International Airport Limited 
EESL : Energy Efficiency Services Limited 
FAQs : Frequently Asked Questions 
FDI : Foreign Direct Investment  
FI : Flying Instructors  
FIDS : Flight Information Display System  
FRT : Facial Recognition Technology  
FSTC : Fire Service Training Centre  
FTC : Fire Training Centre 
FTO : Flying Training Organizations 
FUA : Flexible Use of Airspace 
FY : Financial Year 
GAGAN : GPS Aided Geo Augmented Navigation  
GHG : Green House Gases  
GOMH : Govt. of Maharashtra  
GOUP : Govt. of Uttar Pradesh 
GST : Goods & Service Tax 
                               (vi) 

HHMD : Hand Held Metal Detector 
HTC  : Hyderabad Training Centre  
IAF : Indian Air Force 
ICAO : International Civil Aviation Organization 
IGIA : Indira Gandhi International Airport  
ILS : Instrument Landing System 
iOS : iPhone Operating System 
ISDP  : Integrated Disease Surveillance Programme 
ISRO : Indian Space Research Organization  
LCCs : Low-Cost Carriers 
LED : Light Emitting Diode 
MADC : Maharashtra Airport Development Company  
MAFI : Modernization of Military Airfields  
MHA : Ministry of Home Affairs 
MIAL : Mumbai International Airport Pvt. Ltd. 
MOCA : Ministry of Civil Aviation 
MOH&FW : Ministry of Health & Family Welfare  
MoU : Memoranda of Understanding 
MRO : Maintenance, Repair And Overhaul  
MSSR : Monopulse Secondary Surveillance Radar 
NAPCC : National Action Plan For Climate Change  
NCAP : National Civil Aviation Policy  
NFTI : National Flying Training Institute  
NIATAM  : National Institute Of Aviation Training And Management 
NPA : Non- Precision Approach  
NVVN : NTPC Vidhyut Vyapar Nigam 
OMD : Operation, Management and Development  
OMDA : Operations, Management and Development Agreement 
OPA : Operational Performance Assessment 
OTC :   Overtime Compensation 
PAPI : Precision Approach Path Indicator 
                                    (vii) 

PAX : Passengers 
PBN : Performance Based Navigation  
PPF : Per Passenger Fee  
PPP : Public Private Partnership 
PSUs : Public Sector Undertakings 
PV  : Photo Voltaic 
R & D  : Research & Development 
RCS : Regional Connectivity Scheme 
RETs : Rapid Exit Taxiways 
RFP : Request For Proposal  
RNAV : Area Navigation 
RNP   : Required Navigation Performance 
RWYs : Runway  
SBAS : Satellite-Based Augmentation System  
SHA : Security Hold Area  
SID : Standard Instrument Departures  
SOP : Standard Operating Procedure 
SOPs : Standard Operating Procedures 
STAR : Standard Terminal Arrivals  
STP :   Standardized Training Package 
T1 : Terminal-1 
TEC : Transshipment Excellence Centre  
TRA : Temporary Reserved Airspace 
UDAN : Ude Desh Ka Aam Nagrik 
UJALA : Unnat Jyoti by Affordable LED for All 
UV : Ultra-Violet 
VAW : Vigilance Awareness Week  
VFR to IFR : Visual Flight Rules to Instrument Flight Rules 
                           (viii) 
 

1 
 
REPORT 
 Airports Authority of India (AA I) came into existence on 1 st April, 1995. AAI has been 
constituted as a statutory authority under the Airports Authority of India Act, 1994. It has been 
created by merging the erstwhile International Airports Authority of India and National Airports 
Authority with a view to accelerate the integrated development, expansion and modernization of 
the air traffic services, passenger terminals, operational areas and cargo facilities at the airports 
in the country. AAI operates and maintains 136 airports includin g 30 Civil Enclaves at Defence 
airfields in the country. Out of the above 136 airports, 110 airports are operational, out of which 
24 are AAI International a irports including 3 International Civil Enclaves; 10 are AAI Customs 
airports including 4 Customs C ivil Enclaves; and 76 are AAI Domestic (Operational) airports , 
including 21 Domestic (Operational) Civil Enclaves.  
2. Keeping in view the tremendous growth registered in the Civil Aviation sector in the past 
few years and the vital role played by AAI  in creating a conducive atmosphere for such growth, 
the Department -related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture 
decided to take up the subject „Functioning of Airports Authority of India‟  for examination and 
Report.   
3. The Commi ttee heard the views of the Secretary, Ministry of Civil Aviation; Director 
General, DGCA; Joint Director General, BCAS; CMD, Air India Ltd.; Chairman, Airports 
Authority of India; Director General, Aircrafts Accident Investigation Bureau; and Chief 
Commissioner of Railway Safety on the subject on 30th December, 2020. The Committee heard 
the views of the Secretary, Ministry of Civil Aviation; Director General, DGCA; Joint Director 
General, BCAS; CMD, Air India Ltd.; CMD, Pawan Hans Limited ; Chairm an, Airpor ts 
Economic Regulatory Authority of India; Chairman, Airports Authority of India; Director 
General, Aircrafts Accident Investigation Bureau; and Chief Commissioner of Railway Safety on 
the subject on 28th July, 2021. A Questionnaire on the subject was sent to all the private airlines 
and Unions of AAI  and written replies were obtained.  Delhi International Airport Limited 
(DIAL) submitted their written views on the subject. 
4. The main functions of AAI are as under:- 
 Control and management of the Indian air space (excluding special user air space) 
extending beyond the territorial limits of the country as accepted by ICAO. 
 Provision of Communication, Navigational and Surveillance Aids. 

2 
 
 Expansion and strengthening of operational areas viz., Runways, Aprons, Tax iways, etc. 
and provision of ground -based landing and movement control aids for aircrafts & 
vehicular traffic in operational area. 
 Design, development, operation and maintenance of passenger terminals. 
 Development and management of cargo terminals at international and domestic airports. 
 Provision of passenger facilities and information systems in the passenger terminals. 
Mission 
5. “To be the FOUNDATION of an enduring Indian aviation network, providing high 
quality, safe and customer -oriented airport and ai r navigation services, thereby acting as a 
catalyst for economic growth in the areas we serve”. 
Vision 
6. AAI‟s vision till 2026 is: 
 To be the pre-eminent Air Navigation Service provider with Global Recognition; 
 To adopt state of art technology to drive safe navigation in the Indian airspace; 
 To maintain highest standards of excellence in providing modern, sustainable and robust 
airport infrastructure; 
 Support improving air connectivity at unserved and under-served airports; 
 Have an effective organization e quipped to face the emerging challenges from the 
exponential air traffic growth; 
 Focus on profitable operations at Major airports through continuing efforts on cost 
reduction and enhancing non-aeronautical revenue.  
Corporate Social Responsibility 
7. AAI a ims to achieve, consolidate and strengthen good corporate governance including 
socially and environmentally responsible business practices that balance financial  profit with 
social well-being. AAI‟s approach for Corporate Social Responsibility  (CSR) has been to bring 
empowerment opportunities for the underprivileged communities near its airports in order to 
create an environment of inclusive growth. 
7.1. In addition to recommending identified CSR programs for approval, AAI also manages 
the CSR programs and reports to the Board and CSR Committee for  the updates on approved 
CSR programs. 
8.   Some of the major points discussed during the deliberations of the Committee and the 
recommendations of the Committee thereon, are as follows: 

3 
 
Air Traffic Services 
9. With regard  to the steps taken by Airports Authority of India for the expansion and 
modernization of the air traffic services, the Ministry of Civil Aviation has stated that AAI is 
responsible for providing Air Navigation Services (ANS) over the Indian airspa ce and the Indian 
Ocean region covering around 9.6 million sq. km. The Indian air space is nearly thrice of India's 
land area of 3.3 million sq. km. 
9.1. AAI's coverage for provision of Air Navigation Services includes all civilian airports in 
India including: 
 Joint venture airports (e.g., Delhi, Mumbai, Nagpur) 
 Public airports 
 Greenfield airports (e.g., Bengaluru, Shamshabad, Cochin, etc.) 
 State Government airports (e.g., Lengpui) and 
 Private airports (e.g., Mundra, Durgapur etc.). 
a. The National Civil Aviation Policy (NCAP-2016) envisaged that AAI will provide a fully 
harmonized Air Navigation System considering ICAO‟s Global Air Navigation Plan, 
Aviation system Block Upgrade, Modern performance -based technologies and 
procedures. 
b. Indian Air Navigation Servic e is on the crossroads of modernization of aviation 
infrastructure. There is constant upgradation of existing systems along with introduction 
of state -of-the art technologies. The AAI air navigation system master plan envisaged 
significant investments in m odernization of airport infrastructure, upgradation of 
Communication Navigation Surveillance (CNS), Air Traffic Management and 
Meteorological Equipment, enhancing manpower and training infrastructure and 
harmonization with global initiatives and regional air navigation plans. 
c. AAI has undertaken steps for upgrading its Communication Navigation Surveillance 
(CNS) and Air Traffic Management (ATM) infrastructure. AAI has implemented 
integrated ATM automation systems at 44 airports, 13 MSSR Radars, 32 Terminal 
Radars, 32 ADS -B ground stations and Airport Surveillance Guidance Systems at 11 
airports across India. AAI is aggressively pursuing upgradation of CNS infrastructure in a 
phased manner. 
d. The implementation of Performance B ased Navigation (PBN) in India comm enced in 
2007 to achieve enhancements in air capacity, efficiency and safety. PBN-based RNAV-1 

4 
 
Standard I nstrument Departures (SID) and Standard T erminal Arrivals (STAR) 
procedures are being implemented at all operational airports in a phased manner. 
e. The G PS Aided Geo Augmented Navigation (GAGAN)  - a joint project of AAI and 
Indian Space Research Organization (ISRO), is a Satellite Based Augmentation 
System.  It makes India as one of only four regions to have an operational Satellite-Based 
Augmentation System (SBAS). GAGAN was developed by AAI and ISRO to provide 
enhanced navigation capabilities including RNP 0.1 and APV 1 services for en -route, 
terminal area, and Non -Precision Approach (NPA) operations. GAGAN is the first 
system developed in Equatorial Regi on making India the leader in Asia Pacific Region 
and is operational since May 2015.  GAGAN covers a very large area  airspace hitherto 
unserved by conventional technology. GAGAN is expected to minimize the occurrence 
of flight delays, diversions, and cancellations, and reduce the controlled flight into terrain 
incidents by almost 75 percent. 
f. As part of „AtmaNirbhar Bharat‟, IAF has agreed to release some of the reserved portions 
of airspace for civilian use, helping the aircraft to avoid circuitous route. Th e potential 
savings to the airlines will be to the tune of Rs.1000 crores per annum. The overall 
benefit to the aviation ecosystem will be potentially much higher. 
g. In January 2017, AAI launched the C -ATFM (Central Air Traffic Flow Management) 
System and fo rmally dedicated the Central Command Centre at the New Air Traffic 
Services Complex, thereby becoming the 7th country in the world to implement the Air 
Traffic Flow Control Measures across the country. The C -ATFM system is primarily 
meant to address the ba lancing of capacity against the demand to achieve optimum 
utilization of major resources, viz., airport capacity, airspace and aircraft at every Indian 
airport facing a capacity constraint. The introduction of C -ATFM has enhanced safety, 
fuel saving and on-time performance of airlines. 
h. AAI in -house team has developed and implemented Airport Collaborative Decision 
Making (ACDM) system at Mumbai Airport in 2016. Subsequently, ACDM has been 
implemented in Chennai, Kolkata, Trivandrum, Jaipur, Ahmedabad and Guw ahati 
airports by AAI. 
i. Air Navigation Services (ANS) require continu ous investment in human capital. ANS 
personnel not only have to be recruited, they should be constantly trained and retained. 
AAI ANS‟ training institutes, viz., CATC Allahabad, Training C entres at Hyderabad and 

5 
 
Gondia which are also Approved Training Organizations (ATO), are being developed 
into a world-class training centre for ANS professionals for the Indian and global market 
with modern training facilities. 
j. AAI has established a Civil Aviation Research Organization (CARO) at Hyde rabad to 
indigenously develop R& D capability in ATM. CARO is planned to address Aviation 
Infrastructure and ATM challenges. 
9.2. The Committee understands that improvements in Air Navigation Services benefit the  
Civil Aviati on sector by ensuring safety, operational efficiency, fuel saving, carbon emission 
reduction and cost effectiveness of aircraft operations.  
9.3. The Committee is of the considered opinion that keeping in view the exponential air 
traffic growt h witnessed in the country in the past few years, it is essential that  best 
international practices as regards the Air Navigation Services  are adopted and 
implemented in the country. The Committee strongly feels that a futuristic Master Plan for 
Air Naviga tion Services is inevitable so that substantial benefits are accrued to all the 
stakeholders. The Committee emphasizes the need to ensure strict adherence to the 
international standards of safety and security  in the civil aviation sector . The Committee 
recommends that t he Ministry should ensure that steps should be taken to upgrade  the 
ANS facilities  and procedures and to give  due emphasis on research, development and 
training. 
9.4. The Committee takes note of the issues faced, relating to landing/take off of flights 
during foggy weather and when runway visibility is poor. The Committee recognizes the urgent 
need for the upgradation of air navigation infrastructure in India and to provide the latest modern 
technology, to keep pace with the international standards.  
9.5. The Committee is disturbed to note that considerable delay in flight operations and 
cancellation of flights occur at various airports, due to non -availability of CAT-II or CAT-
III facility. The Committee takes serious note of the inconvenience  and delays faced by the 
flyers and  international & domestic tourists, due to the dearth of requisite navigation 
technology at the airports. The Committee fails to understand the reason  behind non -
installation of CAT-II/ CAT-III facilities in all airports in the country, in the present age of 
modern technology.  The Committee recommends that the Ministry should ensure that the 
upgration of air navigation infrastructure in the country should be given utmost priority 
and that the navigation facilities should be kept in line with international standards.  

6 
 
9.6. The Committee emphasizes the imminent need to employ modern technologically 
advanced navigational aids and facilities at all airports in the country. The Ministry should 
urgently chalk out an Action Plan to operate CAT -II/III(B) ILS in all airports, in a fixed 
time bound manner. 
9.7. The Committee hopes that Modernization of Military Airfields (MAFI) project 
which is a turn key project, would enhance the operational capability, by facilitating air 
operations of civilian aircrafts, even in poor visibility and adverse weather conditions, 
while enhancing aerospace safety. The Committee observes that  MAFI project of the 
Indian Air Force should decide and cull  out those activities which are primarily 
navigational equipment including approach landing systems, PAPI runway lights, 
threshold lights, instruments and equipment  etc., where AAI/ATS have a unique 
advantage, as they have been  handling these systems across the country, for over seven  
decades. Domestic civil aviation safety is the primary responsibility of the Ministry of Civil 
Aviation, DGCA and AAI. The utilization  of these navigational aids/approach landing 
systems/equipment etc., which have been installed across the country, is primarily done by 
the AAI, which has domain knowledge. They are also  familiar with the quality 
procurement processes, maintenance and  operational requirements of these instruments 
which they  have been using for Civil operations for over fifty years. The  Committee 
recommends that a  High Level Committee may  be created with the Indian Air Force , to 
cull out those activities  related to navigation and landing facilities which are, primarily, in 
the domain  knowledge, with the AAI for Civil operations. The Committee recommends 
that apart fr om this, the development of the rest of the infrastructure planned under the 
MAFI scheme may continue as envisaged, for a greater synergy between civil aviation 
requirements and operational requirements of Indian Air Force.  
9.8. The Committee takes note that apart from the MAFI initiative of the Indian Air Force, the 
number of Civil Enclaves across the country have several issues including exchange of land both 
by the Central Government and State Government and other issues as well. The Civil Enclaves 
which are carved out of a Defence Aerodrome have several administrative, technical and 
operational issues which should be examined and a High Powered Committee should be 
constituted to sort out the issues with the Ministry of Defence in general and Air Force i n 
particular. The Committee recommends that a High P owered Committee should be 

7 
 
constituted both for flexi air space management and issues related to Civil Enclaves to 
address these issues comprehensively.   
Development, Upgradation and Modernization of Airports 
10. The Secretary, Ministry of Civil Aviation while deposing before the Committee, stated 
that: 
“…….the Airports Authority of India has earmarked a sum of 
about Rs.25,000 crores for a period of five years, from 2019 to 
2024,  under which  we will be operationalising about 100 more 
airports, heliports and water dromes…”   
10.1. In respect of the number of airports taken up for development, upgradation and 
modernization by AAI, it has been stated  by the Ministry, in its written reply,  that the expansion 
and development of infrastructure facilities at the airports is a continuous process and is 
undertaken on the operational requirements for safety of aircraft operation and demand from 
airlines, depending upon availability of land and viability, as well as  other facilities with 
reference to intended aircraft operations. At present, major works are in progress and planning 
stage is at around 66 Airports. 
10.2. AAI is planning for expansion of airports which do not have facilities for landing of 
wider body ai rcrafts since modernization and development of infrastructure facilities at the 
airports is a continuous process and is undertaken on the operational requirements for safety of 
aircraft operation and demand from airlines.   Development works are taken up in  a phased 
manner depending upon availability of land and viability, as well as other facilities with 
reference to intended aircraft operations. 
10.3. Regarding the extent of investment requirements for airport infrastructure and in cargo 
terminals, the Ministry has submitted that the budget outlay for the period 2019 -20 to 2023-24 is 
Rs. 25,000  crores for AAI airports. The investment requirement for construction and 
operationalization of Air Cargo Terminal depends on its size/capacity, geographical location , 
extent of mechanization and provisioning of the facilities for handling of varied nature of Cargo. 
However, an investment of 12 to 14 crores (approx.) is required for construction and 
operationalization of an Integrated Air Cargo Terminal of 6500 sqm(app rox.) with facility to 
handle valuable, perishable, hazardous cargo (excluding land cost). 
10.4. The civil aviation industry in India has emerged as one of the fastest growing industries 
in the country. The Committee understands that rising working group a nd widening middle class 

8 
 
demography has given rise to a huge boost in demand for air travel. This, in turn, has resulted in 
air traffic congestion. The Committee understands that the rapid growth in passenger traffic has 
put enormous pressure on the existing airport infrastructure. The Committee recognizes the 
urgent need to provide adequate airport infrastructure in the country since at present, large 
airports are becoming slot constrained and smaller airports are facing terminal congestion issues. 
10.5. The Committee understands that AAI manages slots and night parking stand allocations 
at airports across India, except at airports owned or managed by private entities. The Committee 
takes note of the concerns raised by private airlines regarding capacity co nstraints faced in most 
of the larger airports in India, in terms of runway movement, parking stands and terminal 
capacity. The private airlines have also highlighted the issues existing in smaller airports such as 
watch hour restrictions, manpower issues and viable transportation for passengers.   
10.6. Airports play a vital role  in the economic growth of the country since they open the 
doors for tourism and trade . Despite India being the world’s fastest growing aviation 
market, its airports are grappling with serious capacity constraints because such a quick 
pace of growth in the aviation sector has resulted in a strain on the aviation infrastructure, 
resulting in traffic congestions and delays at many of the airports. If a high growth  rate in 
civil aviati on sector is to be sustained, it is imperative  that urgent steps be taken  to 
augment and modernize India’s aviation infrastructure.  
10.7. The Committee underscores the fact that our airports should be developed in such a 
way that they emerge as symbols of  national pride. The Committee highlights the urgent 
need to successfully manage the demand vs. traffic capacity of airports. The Committee 
urges upon the Ministry to develop a comprehensive, strategic and futuristic Master Plan 
for implementation of projects to provide world class airport infrastructure, by bringing in 
cutting edge technology and the global best pra ctices of the aviation industry . The 
Committee desires that the Ministry should address not only the existing capacity 
constraints in various airports, but also address infrastructural requirements in the context 
of growth scenario forecast for the next decade. The Committee emphasizes the need for 
the removal of the existing bottlenecks in order to enable the aviation infrastructure to 
keep up with the growing demand in the Civil Aviation sector. Further, it should be strictly 
ensured that the development/upgradation of airport projects are completed as per the 
prescribed timelines.  

9 
 
10.8. The Committee underlines the need for a well chalked out Master Plan with regard 
to aviation infrastructure , in order to ensure that the requirements of the growth in the 
civil aviation sector are properly catered to. The Committee urges the Ministry to ensure 
that adequate parking space and landing slots are available at the airports.  
10.9. The Committee notes that potential growth in the passenger and cargo traffic would 
require enormous investments in terms of construction of new airports and expansion & 
modernization of existing airports. The Committee under stands that lenders are cautious 
about issuing long -term debt to airport operators. The Committee, therefore, would like 
the Ministry to formulate necessary policies, schemes and guidelines, to attract  the 
requisite investment for airport projects.  
10.10. The Committee desires that the Ministry should ensure that amenities which match 
up to international standards are available at all the airports and that periodic 
maintenance is carried out efficiently. The Committee recommends that the Ministry 
should en sure sufficient space for commercial shops, while granting approval for new 
airports. The Committee recommends that the Ministry should consider mandatorily 
earmarking minimum 100 acres of land, while making plans for future airports. Further, 5 
Star/3 Sta r hotels and multiplexes should be constructed near the new airports. The 
Committee also desires that extra land, if any, that has been allocated for the airports 
should not be sold and should be kept for future aviation developmental activities. 
10.11. The Committee takes cognizance of the fact  that there is a need to look at the entire  
mechanism of development of airports and the way the airport concessions are given. At 
present, the rights to operate airports are given to individuals or entities who bid the 
highest with the Airports Authority of India. When those services are given to the highest 
bidder, the highest bidder charges the highest amount of money from the airlines, which 
has little or no bearing on the actual cost of the service. The Committee , therefore, 
recommends that the Ministry should seriously look into these issues and take urgent steps 
to ensure that such anomalies are rectified. 
10.12. The Committee has been given to understand that large number  of institutional 
clearances are require d for airport projects, which lead s to delays and cost escalation. 
Therefore, the Committee recommends  in this regard  that the Ministry should set up a 
single-window clearance mechanism in order to facilitate timely grant of institutional 

10 
 
clearances for airport projects and ensure completion of such projects within the stipulated 
time period. 
Privatization of Airports 
11. The Ministry, in its written reply,  has stated that privatization of airports was initiated 
since the increase in domestic and internatio nal air travels in India and strong Traffic growth in 
the past resulted in congestion at many of AAI airports. The PPP in airport infrastructure projects 
has brought efficiency in service delivery, expertise, enterprise and professionalism, apart from 
bringing the needed investments in the sector.  PPP model in airports sector has been a success 
story and the model has emerged as an effective way to harness the strengths of the private sector 
in the airport sector.  One of the gains of PPP is that G overnment is no longer required to spend 
huge resources in building airport facilities and with proper regulations and good concession 
agreement, it has already been established that the private sector could provide better airport 
management than the public sector. 
11.1. Further, international operators and investors prefer brownfield airport expansion 
opportunities with having more than 3 -4 million passenger capacity. At a point where there is 
pressure on the India‟s current account deficit and the Indian currency i s under pressure, 
attracting long-term capital in the form of foreign direct investment (FDI) is a key imperative. 
The airport sector may provide an immediate opportunity through the adoption of PPP approach.   
In view of the growing need for modernization  and efficient operation of airports, Public Private 
Partnership (PPP) models are increasingly being used to involve the private sector in the 
development and operation of airports. 
11.2. Prime examples of PPP in Indian aviation are new and redeveloped met ro airports in the 
past decade. The largest of these are  the Indira Gandhi International Airport (IGIA), New Delhi 
and Chhatrapati Shivaji Maharaj International Airport (CSMIA), Mumbai. Bangalore, 
Hyderabad, Cochin & Kannur are other Greenfield Airports wh ich are being managed under the 
PPP model. 
11.3. With an objective to build world class airports in the country, Airports Authority of India 
(AAI), in 2006, leased out the Delhi and Mumbai Airports under PPP model for operation, 
management and development of the airports on a revenue share basis. The partner was selected 
through Global competitive bidding. AAI signed OMDA with Delhi International Airport Pvt. 
Ltd. (DIAL) for Delhi airport and  with M/s Mumbai International Airport Pvt. Ltd. (MIAL) for 
Mumbai airport. AAI retained 26% equity in these airports. The PPP partners   incurred an 

11 
 
expenditure of more than Rs. 25000 cr. in upgradation and modernization of Delhi and Mumbai 
airports in first phase and in the second phase, an capital expenditure of more t han Rs10000 Cr. 
has been planned.    AAI receives revenue share from DIAL @45.99% of its annual Gross 
Revenue and from MIAL @38.7% of its annual Gross Revenue. 
11.4. Government of India has also  entered into  Concession Agreements with the respective 
PPP Partners of Bangalore and Hyderabad airports and therefore, receives Concession Fee from 
them @4% for their annual Gross Revenue. Cochin International Airport is a State Government 
of Kerala promoted airport wherein MoCA/AAI have no pecuniary interest.  
11.5. AAI has recently, awarded six of its airports viz., Ahmedabad, Jaipur, Lucknow, 
Guwahati, Thiruvananthapuram and Mangaluru for Operations, Management and Development 
to the highest bidder i.e. M/s Adani Enterprises Limited (AEL) under Public Private Partn ership 
(PPP) mode for a lease period of 50 years.   The above six airports have been awarded on the 
basis of Per Passenger Fee (PPF) payable to AAI by the Concessionaire. The PPF quoted by the 
highest bidder will increase year to year as it is indexed to th e Consumer Price Index (CPI).   In 
addition to this, AAI will get back their investment in these six airports to the tune of Rs. 
2299.26 Cr. as upfront payment, which can be used for development of Airport infrastructure by 
AAl at Tier-II and Tier-III cities. 
11.6. In response to a query of the Committee regarding how many airports are going to be 
privatized in the near future , the Ministry has stated that the AAI Board on 05.09.2019 has 
recommended proposal for undertaking Operations, Management and Develop ment through PPP 
of 06 airports viz.,  Trichy, Bhubaneswar, Indore, Varanasi, Raipur and Amritsar. A decision has 
been taken to club a main airport with a smaller airport for the PPP in next phase.   A uniform 
tariff will be fixed for both the airports and two airports will be treated as one for tariff 
determination. AAI is in the process of finalizing the modalities for way forward. 
11.7. As regards the financial outcome of the privatization of airports till date , the Ministry has 
stated that so far , PPP mo del has been introduced at eight  airports of AAI viz., Delhi, Mumbai, 
Ahmedabad, Lucknow, Mangaluru, Jaipur, Guwa hati and Thiruvananthapuram. Delhi and 
Mumbai airports were brought under PPP in 2006 under Revenue Share arrangement which has 
significantly c ontributed to t he Revenue of AAI resulting in  financial stability of AAI and 
enhanced focus on the development/upgradation of airports in backward regions. DIAL has 
alone paid total amount of Rs. 16,566.3 crores as revenue share to AAI till 31 st March, 2019. 
Through the PPP partners at Delhi and Mumbai, AAI could mobilise an investment of about Rs. 

12 
 
24,000 crores on one hand and on the other hand , AAI spent about Rs. 12,000 cr ores to develop 
about 60 airports in metro, non-metro and other town/cities. 
11.8. Besides, AAI has leased out six airports viz., Ahmedabad, Lucknow, Jaipur, Guwahati, 
Mangalore and Thiruvananthapuram  for Operation, Management & Development (OMD) 
through PPP mode 'Per Passenger Fee' basis payable to AAI. The PPF offered by the winning 
bidder will yield a profit of Rs 904.14 crores for the year 2020-21. Further per passenger fee will 
be indexed to the CPI. As a result, besides protecting the profitability of AAI as on date, the 
profitability goes on increasing year after year. 
11.9. In addition to this, AAI will get back its investment in these six airp orts to the tune of Rs 
2299.26 crores as upfront payment, which can be used for development of airport infrastructure 
by AAI at Tier II and Tier III cities. Therefore, the private investor ha s offered almost double the 
profit being earned by AAI today which will increase every year based on inflation index. 
Hence, there is a tangible gain to the AAI by leasing these airports to the winning bidder. 
11.10. The Committee realizes the huge demand for more airports in the country . The 
Committee recognizes the fact that it is not feasible for AAI to meet the investment 
requirements to develop and maintain all the airports in the country. The Committee 
appreciates the inevitable need for Public Privat e Partnership  in the development and 
maintenance of airports. The Committee endorses the provisions proposed in the Airports 
Economic Regulatory Authority of India (Amendment) Bill, 2021 which would facilitate the 
development of both high traffic volume an d low traffic volume airports together , in a 
holistic manner. 
11.11. The Committee emphasizes the need to ensure  absolute transparency in all PPP 
airport projects. The Committee desires that the Ministry should ensure that a proper 
policy and regulatory framework governing the PPP  airport projects, is put in place . The 
Committee underlines the need to ensure a proper auditing mechanism with regard to PPP 
projects. The Committee strongly recommends that the Ministry should ensure that the 
airport charges on the passengers are equitable  and commensurate with the operational 
costs. 
11.12. The Committee desires that the Ministry should ensure that the career interests of 
the employees of AAI are protected in case of privatization of airports.  
UDAN Scheme 

13 
 
12. As regards the vision of the Prime Minister to open 100 new airports in the country, the 
Ministry has stated that 100 airports/ heliports/ water aerodromes are to be developed by 2024 to 
support UDAN scheme. 09 airports have been developed in the year 2019 -20.26 airports are to 
be developed in the FY 2020 -21(out of which 14 Airports have been developed till the third 
quarter). Further, 20 airports each are to be developed in FY 2021 -22 and FY 2022-23 and 25 
airports to be developed in the FY 2023-24. 
12.1. Regarding the parameters adopted for identifying airports under the UDAN Scheme, 
Ministry of Civil Aviation has stated that it has launched Regional Connectivity Scheme (RCS) -
UDAN (Ude Desh ka Aam Nagrik) on 21 -10-2016 to stimulate regional air connectivity  and 
making air travel affordable to the masses. RCS -UDAN is market driven scheme. The interested 
airlines, based on their assessment of demand on particular routes , submit their proposals at the 
time of bidding under RCS -UDAN. An airport which is included in the awarded routes of RCS -
UDAN and requires upgradation/development for commencement of RCS operations, is 
developed under "Revival of unserved and underserved airports" scheme. 
12.2. The Committee takes note of the growing demand for regional air s ervices, which 
would make it possible for our country to emerge as a major player in the aviation 
industry. The Committee feels that UDAN Scheme will help in relieving the congestion at 
major airports and enable us to develop the much needed hub-and-spoke mechanism. The 
Committee notes that although the airlines industry got a huge fillip with the launch of 
RCS, air connectivity in the country  is largely confined to routes connecting State capitals 
and large towns ; and many parts of the country still remain  unconnected by air services. 
Therefore, the Committee recommends that the Ministry of Civil Aviation should take 
urgent effective steps to ensure adequate air connectivity in different parts of the country 
under RCS. The Committee also desires that the be nefits under the Regional Connectivity 
Scheme, currently restricted to three years, should be extended by another two years, to 
give airlines an opportunity to transform a fledgling route into a strong and revenue -
generating one. 
12.3. The Committee urges upon the Ministry to closely and meticulously, monitor the 
implementation and impact of the UDAN Scheme and formulate plans and guidelines to 
ensure that the benefits of the Scheme actually reach the passengers, as per the spirit of the 
Scheme.  

14 
 
12.4. The Committee observes that direct air connecti vity to tourist destinations and 
cultural sites in the country can massively promote the tourism industry which will lead to 
generation of more employment opportunities and fa ster economic growth. The 
Committee, therefore, observes that there is an imperative need for close co -ordination 
between the Ministry of Civil Aviation,  and the Ministries of Tourism &  Culture, in 
matters regarding air connectivity to important tourist destinations and cultural sites in the 
country. Hence, the Committee recommends the Ministry of Civil Aviation, to work in 
tandem with the Ministries of Culture and Tourism, who are vital stakeholders in this 
regard. 
12.5. The Committee takes note of the fact that  out of the 7 80  routes awarded  under the 
UDAN Scheme, only 359  routes have been operationalized so far, which is less than 50% of 
what were awarded. The Chairman, AAI informed the Committee that in all, 1000 routes are to 
be operationalized till 2024.  
12.5.1. The Committee desires that  the Ministry should examine the reasons for non -
commencement of the awarded routes; identify the bottlenecks in this regard; and chalk 
out strategic steps to timely address the issues involved.  
12.6. The Committee understands that there are many non-operational airstrips/airports 
owned by AAI and State Governments. The Committee is of the view that operationalizing 
these inactive AAI and State Government airstrips will ease out the pressure currently 
prevailing on the airport infrastructure in the country . The Committee recommends that 
unused airstrips and dormant airports  should be utilized for promoting regional/remote 
areas air connectivity under RCS.  
12.7. The Committee takes note of the issues  related to lack of adequate infrastructure of 
airports due to non -availability of land, delay related to compliance of the regul ations by 
the airport operators, lack of road connectivity to the airports etc. , that need to be 
addressed on priority . The Committee recommends that the Ministry should take urgent 
remedial steps to address these vital concerns. The Committee also notes that support from 
the State Governments in the shape of multimodal connectivity, utilities, land availability, 
security etc. are critical to the promotion of regional air connec tivity un der RCS. The 
Committee would, therefore, like to urge upon the Ministry of Civil Aviation to impress 
upon the State Governments , to form a dedicated mechanism mandated to offer one -stop 

15 
 
solutions to  airline and airport operators , with the objective of prom oting regional air 
connectivity under RCS. 
Development of Cargo Sector  
13. In its written reply, the Ministry has stated thus: 
Cargo Policy  
13.1 A comprehensive National Civil Aviation Policy (NCAP) was released by the Ministry of 
Civil Aviation in 2016,  which, inter alia, sets out the policy and measures for the promotion of 
both domestic and international air cargo and express delivery services. The Policy highlighted 
that growth of air cargo was a key objective of the Government, given its importance from 'Make 
in India', e-Commerce and exports perspectives. 
13.2. Subsequently, a comprehensive National Air Cargo Policy Outline 2019 was also 
released on 15.01.2019. It outlines a globally unique, holistic approach to achieve fundamental 
re-engineering in the air cargo ecosystem for the growth and development of air cargo sector in 
the country. The policy details out clear metrics on which the air cargo efficiencies will be 
measured, create key performance and indices that monitor the policy execution. The policy 
covers all three categories of air cargo transport: viz., domestic cargo to ensure efficient flow of 
goods across India; international cargo facilitating all indigenous export and import of goods; 
and transit international cargo by making India the transit cargo hub of choice to and from other 
parts of the globe. The policy covers development and growth of all types of cargo. 
Trans-shipment cargo hub 
13.3. Ministry of Civil Aviation had undertaken a study to establish "Trans -shipment Hub" at 
major Ai rports like Delhi, Mumbai, Chennai and Kolkata and further concluded with the 
feasibility of establishment of trans-shipment hub at Delhi and Chennai Airports. 
13.4. In pursuance thereof, Delhi International Airport Limited (DIAL) has operationalized a 
dedicated Transshipment Excellence Centre (TEC). Similarly, transshipment operations at 
Chennai airport have also been undertaken. 
13.5. AAI Cargo Logistics and Allied Services Company Limited (AAICLAS), a wholly -
owned subsidiary company of Airports Authority  of India (AAI) has also separately conducted 
feasibility study for establishment of transshipment hub and Special Economic Zone at Chennai 
International Airport. AAICLAS has earmarked one dedicated shed measuring 1,800 sqm in the 
air-side of the integrate d cargo terminal for handling all such transshipment cargo with X -ray 
screening and access control facility. 

16 
 
13.6. Simplified Customs procedures have separately been taken up for development for 
creating a trans-shipment cargo hub at Chennai Airport. 
13.7. The Committee recognizes the fact that India’s strategic geographical location, 
swelling economy and the growth registered in international & domestic trade in the last 
decade are congenial to the growth in the air cargo sector. The Committee is disappoin ted 
to note that despite these advantages, India has not fully realized its potential in terms of 
air cargo. The Committee  realizes the sad fact that inadequate infrastructure is a major 
bottleneck in developing the country’s air cargo sector. The Committe e, therefore, 
recommends that the Ministry should take effective steps to establish dedicated cargo 
airports in the country and to provide requisite facilities for the enhancement of air cargo 
facilities, while setting up new airports. 
13.8. Since automati on is cr ucial for an efficient air freight mechanism, the Committee 
recommends that the Ministry, in co-ordination with the stakeholders, should take effective 
steps to automate information systems and to streamline/ simplify the respective processes 
and regulations for faster, transparent and seamless movement of air cargo. 
13.9. The Committee takes serious note of the fact that due to the Open Sky Policy for 
cargo in India, foreign  carriers carry 90 %- 95% of the international cargo, to and from 
India, whi le Indian air cargo operators face many barriers when they go into other 
countries. The Committee, therefore, recommends that in order to provide  a level playing 
field for Indian air cargo operators, the Ministry of Civil Aviation should make 
appropriate changes in the Open Sky Policy for cargo. The Committee also recommends 
that Ministry/DGCA should take note of Indian cargo operators facing discriminatory and 
restrictive practices or regulatory impediments in operating international cargo flights in 
any of the foreign countries and take urgent steps to address/resolve them. The Committee 
may be apprised of the action taken and the outcome achieved in this regard.  
13.10. The Committee reiterates its recommendation made in  its 293 rd Report that the 
Ministry should take timely action to address the issues of congestion at the entry of 
terminal, inadequate screening, inadequate storage space, lack of temperature facility etc. 
at the cargo terminals. The Committee also recommends that the Ministry should take 
steps to ensure that attractive and uniform transit handling costs and procedures are 
implemented across all airports in the country.  
Maintenance, Repair and Overhaul (MRO) infrastructure 

17 
 
14. The Ministry, in its written reply, has informed the Committee that the Ministry has taken 
the following initiatives to encourage Maintenance, Repair and Overhaul (MRO) infrastructure 
to support the growth in the Indian aviation sector:- 
a. Under the Atmanirbhar Bharat A bhiyan, AAI has come up with an MRO policy with 
highly liberalized land rentals. Royalty (revenue share payment to AAI by MRO) has 
been abolished. This may lead to enhanced business for Indian MROs and help reverse 
the outflow of business, employment and foreign exchange to foreign MROs. 
b. GST on direct MRO c ontracts has been reduced from 18% to 5% with full Input Tax 
Credit from 1 April, 2020. 
c. Transactions sub -contracted by foreign MRO to a domestic MRO are now treated as 
exports with zero-rated GST. 
d. An online meeting was held under the chairmanship of Secretary, MoCA on 11th January, 
2021 with the representatives of MRO industry, officers of DGCA and AAI. Issues 
related to documentation, bilaterals, convergence of military and civil MROs and 
incentivisation were discussed. A follow -up meeting between MoCA, AA I and MRO 
industry was held on 12 th January, 2021 to apprise them of the key features of the AAI 
MRO policy. 
Rationalization of FTO and MRO charges  
14.1. In its Annual Report (2020 -21), the Ministry has stated that to encourage setting up of 
FTOs and MROs at AAI Airports in line with NCAP – 2016 and Hon‟ble PM‟s self-reliant India, 
the charges were rationalized. India has lot of potential to become global hub for FTOs and 
MROs and has the required resources to address the ever growing domestic and global d emand. 
The rationalization of charges will give impetus to provision of the required infrastructure for 
setting up of state of the art FTOs and MROs. The proposal for setting up of FTOs at AAI 
Airport has already been invited and has drawn lot of interest from the Industry. 
14.2. The Committee observes that there has been a tremendous growth in the MRO 
opportunities that can be exploited by our country, enabled due to the rapid growth in the 
Civil Aviation sector witnessed in the recent past. India has huge  potential to be an MRO 
hub which can accommodate the growing Civil Aviation needs  of the country and also 
other countries. Aircraft MRO services are critical in the aviation value chain and it would 
be of a huge loss for the country, if we do not tap the vast technical and skill ed personnel 

18 
 
available in this field in  the country. However, the Committee is disappointed to note that 
the country has not yet been able to fully exploit the opportunities available in this sector.  
14.3. The Committee understands  that a major deterrent for the growth of the MRO 
industry is high taxation of MRO components. The Committee strongly recommends that 
the Ministry should give necessary focus on the issues presently faced in the MRO sector in 
order to  ensure that India evo lves into a key international player in offering MRO 
facilities. The Committee recommends that the Ministry should take necessary steps to 
ensure that MRO workshops are set up in all the metro cities in the country, in order to 
attract international busine ss. The Committee also emphasizes the need for enhanced 
collaboration between defence and civil MROs. 
Pilot Training Institutes 
15. In response to a query as to whether the Government is planning to set up Pilot T raining 
Institutes to make use of unused airstrips, the Ministry has stated that: 
a. With a view to optimally utilise the unused infrastructure at AAI airports and enhance the 
number of license pilots in the country, 6 airports (Lilabari, Khajuraho, Belagavi, 
Kalaburgi, Jalgaon and Salem) have been pe rmitted to allow the FTOs to operate at their 
premises on the basis of payment of substantially rationalised concession fee by the 
FTOs. The concept of royalty (payment of revenue share by FTOs to AAI) has been 
abolished. 
b. The Request For Proposal (RFP) for  leasing of 06 airstrips has already been floated by 
AAI to invite bidders. Based on the outcome of this initiative, it might be replicated at 
other airports. 
c. DGCA CAR Section 7 Series I Part V is being modified to empower Flying Instructors 
(FI) to author ise flight operations at FTOs. This may help increase the flying hours at 
each FTOs significantly. Hitherto, this power has been granted only to Chief Flying 
Instructors (CFI) and Deputy CFIs. 
d. These initiatives will help enhance the flying hours and the tr aining infrastructure in the 
country. This will result in generation of employment opportunities and help in reversing 
the outflow of foreign exchange. 
15.1. The Committee emphasizes the imperative need to make available , state-of-the-art 
facilities for th e training of professionals in the aviation sector. Keeping in view the rapid 
growth in the Indian aviation industry and shortage of pilots faced in India, the Committee 

19 
 
recommends that the Ministry should set up new Institutes for Pilot Training and to 
revamp the existing ones by providing modern simulators and also augment the capacity 
intake of students in the existing Institutes. The Committee recommends that the Ministry 
should envisage setting up of Pilot Training Institute adjacent to the airport, at  least in one 
airport, in each State. The Committee strongly recommends that the training facilities 
offered to the various technical p rofessionals in the Civil Aviation sector, such as pilots, 
ATC controllers, technicians, safety inspectors  and engineers  should match up with 
standardized international training facilities. The Ministry should also take necessary steps 
to ensure that sufficient number of trainers are  made available, by offering incentives 
which would attract them to this field.  
Pollution Control 
Energy Conservation Measures: 
16. It has been stated in the Annual Report (2020 -21) of the Ministry of Civil Aviation that 
Airports Authority of India (AAI) is consistently endeavouring with all the required programs & 
SOPs in line with the Governmen t‟s directive & ICAO initiatives to meet the commitment to 
conserve environment/resources and to reduce the adverse impact on society, community and 
ecosystem, thus contributing to National Action Plan for Climate Change (NAPCC). AAI has 
mainly taken following steps: 
 Installation of Solar PV Plant at Airports: - AAI is focusing on energy conservation by 
exploring alternative solutions for generating green energy by installing and operating 
roof top & ground mounted solar power plants. AAI has installed aroun d 44.37 MWp 
capacity Solar Power Plants at its various Airports and 12 MWp Solar Energy is being 
procured through open access. Work is in progress for around 16.26 MWp capacity Solar 
Power Plants. AAI has generated 480 Lakh units and sourced 2.26 lakh unit s through 
open access, translating to benefit of Rs. 29 crore in the year 2 020. This has also resulted 
in reduction in Carbon Emission of 57,900 tCO2 per annum.  
16.1. Further, AAI has signed MoU with NVVN (NTPC Vidhyut Vyapar Nigam), wholly 
owned subsidia ry of NTPC Ltd, to establish Solar Power Plants and Purchase of Solar Power 
through Open Access to make 100% green powered airports in phased manner. 
16.2. AAI and NVVN will also jointly work towards supporting Govt. of India initiatives for 
adoption of electric vehicles by creation of public charging infrastructure and promoting usage of 

20 
 
electric vehicles at airports. A Plan will be developed for adoption of electric vehicles on city 
side and airside at various airports and provision of Electric Vehicle Charging Stations. 
Energy Audit at Airports: - 
16.3. As per Energy Conservation Act, 2001 issued by Ministry of Power, various energy 
saving measures have been taken up consistently under identified short term and long term 
measures through regular Energy Au dits by specialized agencies. The Review audits are 
mandated to be carried out after 3 years to assess the effectiveness of implementation measures 
of previous audits are already completed for 33 no. airports. Further, 11 airports are completed in 
the year 2020. 
National LED program (UJALA- Unnat Jyoti by Affordable LEDs for all): 
16.4. AAI has already completed replacement of conventional light fixtures with LED fittings. 
In phase I, 23 airports are completed with expenditure of Rs. 16 crores approx. In ph ase II, the 
work for expenditure of Rs. 24.41 crores at 62 airports has been taken up by M/s EESL - nodal 
agency implementing National LED program of Government of India. The replacement at 52 
airports has already been completed. Further, 06 airports are co mpleted in the year 2020 and 04 
airports under progress. 
ACI – Airport Carbon Accreditation (ACA) certification: 
16.5. AAI has participated voluntarily in the Airport Carbon Accreditation program launched 
by Airports Council International (ACI) and has ach ieved Accreditation of Level -2 ( i.e. 
“Reduction in Carbon Emission”) during December 2019 for 04 Airports – Kolkata, Trivandrum, 
Bhubaneswar & Varanasi by formulating Carbon Management Plan and reducing the direct 
Green House Gases (GHG) emissions, which s hows AAI‟s commitment towards fulfillment of 
environment obligations by reducing carbon footprints at its Airports. The Certi fication is valid  
up to Dec‟21. 
16.6. In respect of the pro-Environment steps taken by AAI in the construction of Airports, the 
Ministry has stated that in order to ensure that the contractors take all action for protection of 
Environment, a special condition  for compliance of Environmental Laws is made part of 
contract. These are implemented during execution of airport construction works. 
16.7. Regarding the details of the new benchmark set by AAI in reducing carbon footprint, the 
Ministry has underlined that AAI has set up new bench mark in carbon reduction by 
implementing ACI-ACA programme at its 04 Airports i.e. Kolkata, Trivandrum, Bhubaneswar & 
Varanasi and achieved Accreditation Level of “REDUCTION” (Level -2). The target set up for 

21 
 
reduction of carbon emission at these 04 AAI Airports is  75% reduction of direct emission per 
PAX upto year 2030 with respect to base year 2015 with r eduction of direct emission of 5% per 
PAX annually. 
16.8. In its endeavor to reduce carbon footprints, the Ministry has stated that AAI has achieved 
upgradation to next level of Airports Council International (ACI) - Airport Carbon Accreditation 
(ACA) progr am, i.e., level-2 reduction for four of its airports, viz., Kolkata, Trivandrum, 
Varanasi and Bhubaneswar by formulation of a Carbon emission reduction target. For these 
airports, AAI has set the target in reduction in direct GHG Emission (Scope 1 & 2) @ 5 % per 
pax per year over base year – 2015 benchmark value and 75% reduction in direct GHG Emission 
by 2030 over base year 2015. 
16.9. AAI is continuously striving for reduction of carbon footprints by focusing on renewable 
energy & other green initiatives. At present, total capacity of solar power plants installed at AAI 
airports is around 44MWp and works are in progress for around 16MWp capacity. This has 
resulted in achieving carbon emis sion reduction of approx. 57600 t CO2 per annum at AAI 
airports. AAI is further making efforts to enhance the total solar power capacity at its airports to 
80MWp by 2022. 
16.10. The Committee appreciates the steps taken by AAI to reduce c arbon footprints and 
desires that AAI should update its pollution control methods to meet  international best 
practices in this regard. 
COVID-19 pandemic 
17. With respect to the steps being taken by AAI to manage the COVID -19 pandemic crisis, 
the Ministry of Civil Aviation has stated, in its written reply, that following steps are being taken 
by AAI to manage the COVID-19 pandemic crisis:  
(i) Contactless movement of passengers: AAI has ensured contactless movement of 
passengers right from entry gate till the boarding gate at its airports.  
Glass shields have been provided at the entry gate and check-in-counters to avoid contact 
between passengers and Security/Airlines staff. Passengers are encouraged to web check -in and 
bring printout of boarding card. Also self drop baggage system has been provided. 
Security staff practis es minimum touch concep t during frisking. At boarding gates, passenger 
self scan his boarding card. 
a. Hygiene and Sanitisation : Cleanliness of every nook and corner of Terminal building 
and surrounding areas (including wash rooms, lifts, escalators, X -Ray machines, Chairs, 

22 
 
counters, railings, Security trays, doors, handles etc) is ensured at all AAI airports. Also 
Terminal building is sanitised on regul ar basis. Baggage and shoes of p assengers is 
sanitized at the entry gate. Sanitizer is being provided at strategic locations for passengers 
and airport staff. Proper ventilation is being ensured at Airports wherever it is possible. 
b. Social distancing norms: Social distancing norms as per directives of Ministry of Health 
& Family Welfare (MoH&FW) are followed at every meeting point and  in the queue at 
entry point, Check -in, security and boarding gates etc. Seating arrangement has been 
done so as to maintain sufficient distance among passengers. Also stickers/markings have 
been provided at the appropriate locations. Kerb Area/ City side traffic / Car parking area 
is being strictly monitored in coordination with traffic police/ DGR Staff to prevent 
congestion. Specific Identified Aerobridge is being provided to arriving International 
Passengers. Minimum passengers are permitted in Smoking lounge, Child care rooms to 
maintain social distancing norms. 
c. Other actions: Passengers wearing masks and with green status on Aarogyasetu app are 
allowed to enter the Terminal building. All airport staff handling flights have been 
provided with required p rotective gears for the safety. Use of baggage trolleys is 
minimized. Dedicated triage Area/ Isolation room has been provided for the suspected 
passengers. If any suspected passenger is detected, Health officials shift him to hospitals 
as per guidelines. Health information and do's and don‟ts as issued by Ministry of Health 
& Family Welfare has been displayed at Flight Information Display System (FIDS) and 
other prominent places. De -gowning area for medical personnel /crew to divest and 
dispose Personal Pro tective Equipment has been provided at airports. Bio hazardous 
garbage is being disposed as per norms. 
d. Extended Watch Hours: During COVID -19 crisis, operations are carried out for 
supporting essential flights without compromising the safety. In some of the  North 
Eastern airports, extended watch hours were being managed. Watch hours were modified 
at most airports as per operational requirement. 
e. To ensure social distancing and to protect personnel from exposure of pandemic 
deployment of staggered manpower pro visioned for sustainable Operations and 
Maintenance Management of CNS/ATM services and infrastructure. 
f. Reserve Manpower is ensured to provide continued ANS services  under pandemic 
condition. Clubbing of duties to minimize exposure during the crisis situation. 

23 
 
g. Work from Home, e-office, Video Conferencing for continuity of office framework. 
h. Creation and Establishment of Contingency ATC Centres to guard against building 
quarantine in case of COVID-19 detection. 
i. Continuous monitoring of equipment facilities thr ough software tools and social media 
groups. 
j. Flight Calibration scaled down and rescheduled as per requirement. Maintenance and 
ground calibration activities not compromised for ensuring safety of operations. 
k. It is pertinent to mention that based on variou s Government Guidelines issued from time 
to time, similar instructions have been issued by AAI as a preventive measure to contain 
the spread of COVID-19.  
17.1. The Committee appreciates the public safety measures adopted by the Ministry of 
Civil Aviation during the COVID -19 pandemic. The Committee desires that the Ministry 
should ensure that such measures are periodically updated in tune with international best 
practices in this regard. 
Impact of the COVID-19 pandemic 
18. With regard to the Revenue mix of AAI and the measures that have been taken/are being 
taken to mitigate the impact of the Covid -19 pandemic on AAI's revenue, the Minist ry has stated 
that the Revenue mix of AAI comprises of the following: - 
a. Revenue from ANS 
b. Revenue from Aeronautical Airport Services 
c. Revenue from Non-Aeronautical Airport Services 
d. Airport Lease Revenue 
e. Other Income 
18.1. The structural changes made by AAI to meet the challenges posed by the unprecedented 
crisis due to COVID-19 pandemic are as follows: 
a. Review of Planned CAPEX for feasible reduction in the CAPEX Targets 
b. Cost Reduction Measures for reducing the Employee Benefit, Operating and 
Administrative Expenses 
c. Moreover, AAI has already taken the Austerity Measures to reduce the expenditure on 
certain activities like Foreign/Inland Travel, Recruitment, Trainings, Leave Encashment, 
Annual Function, Conferences/Seminars, OPA/OTC, Sports Activities, Loan & 
Advances, etc.  

24 
 
18.2. In respect of the outlook for the airport sector in the aftermath of Covid -19 pandemic and 
whether any structural changes are to be made to meet the challenges posed by this 
unprecedented crisis, the Ministry has highlighted that the Novel C orona Virus Disease 2019 
(COVID-19) Health Pandemic outbreak has brought in extraordinary situa tion for the Aviation 
Industry w orldwide. With lockdown in force, scheduled international and domestic passenger 
flight operations remain suspended with effect from 22/03/2020 & 25/03/2020 respectively in 
India. The Airport Commercial Operations in India were also  stopped. Though the Domestic 
Passenger Flight Operations and Airport Commercial Operation have started in skeleton manner 
after the lockdown period, it will take time for the normalcy to come back for the Aviation 
Sector. Hence, there is going to be a sub stantial reduction in the scale of Airlines and Airport 
Operations in the FY 2020-21. 
18.3. Some of the structural changes to meet the challenges posed by the unprecedented crisis 
are noted below: - 
a. Review of Planned CAPEX for feasible reduction in the CAPEX Targets. 
b. Cost Reduction Measures for reducing the Employee Benefit, Operating and 
Administrative Expenses 
c. AAI has already taken the Austerity Measures to reduce the expenditure on certain 
activities like Foreign/Inland Travel, Recruitment, Trainings, Le ave Encashment, Annual 
Function, Conferences/Seminars, OPA/OTC, Sports Activities, Loan & Advances, etc.  
d. Initially operations of flights recommenced with 30% of Terminal capacity to maintain 
social distancing norms. 
e. From operations point of view, no structural changes have been made. 
f. HD camera has been installed at Pre -Security Check Area to capture Passenger Face & 
boarding Pass. 
g. Planning for “UV (Ultra-violet) tunnel” for sanitizing the passenger baggages. 
18.4. Regarding the issues being faced by Airpor ts Authority of India (AAI) at present and 
their possible solutions, the Ministry has informed that the  major issues being faced by the AAI 
are as under:  
a. The lockdown conditions prevailing due to COVID 19 have dented the financial state of 
AAI. It is  likely to impact Revenue and Revenue Realization for AAI in the coming 
months of FY 2020-21.  

25 
 
 Solution: For funding CAPEX during the pandemic, the Ministry of Civil Aviation has 
accorded approval for internal/external borrowing of Rs.2100 Crores. 
b. The pr esent hand -frisking of passengers in the Security Hold Area (SHA) is through 
HHMD, which is partially touch based and hence dangerous in the present circumstances.  
 Solution: In order to implement the touch less frisking, Body Scanner system to screen 
the passenger for concealed items on the body underclothing are being introduced. Body 
Scanner system shall reduce the hand frisking. 
18.5. The Committee is well aware of  the fact that the aviation sector has been  badly hit 
by the COVID -19 pandemic. The Commi ttee understands that the adverse effect of the 
COVID-19 pandemic on the airlines operating in the country, which were already reeling 
under heavy losses, was unprecedented. The Commit tee recommends that the Ministry 
should adopt relief measures  to help th e airlines tide over the adverse impact of the 
pandemic and that the Ministry should envisage immediate and long term measures, to 
enable the resurgence of the airlines in the country.  
18.6. The Committee desires that the Ministry should take necessary steps to ensure short 
term waiver or short term put off, in terms of aviation charges, for sustaining a viable 
aviation industry. The Committee is of the view that all airlines and aviation -related 
business must be treated as  priority sector lending. The Com mittee reiterates the 
recommendation made in its 293rd Report that  the Ministry should provide a sectoral 
fund, which is professionally  managed and which can provide structured debt to the 
airlines industry.  
Training Courses conducted by AAI 
19. Regarding the training courses conducted by AAI, the Ministry has enumerated  in its 
written reply, that:- 
a. AAI has been conducting various training courses for upgrading the skills and overall 
development of employees. AAI presently has 4 training institutes viz., Indian Aviation 
Academy, Civil Aviation Training College  (CATC) Prayagraj  (with campuses at 
Hyderabad and Gondia), Fire Training Centre  (FTC), New Delhi and Fire Service 
Training Centre (FSTC), Kolkata that cater to specific training requirements of AAI 
employees from all disciplines. 

26 
 
 Apart from above, there are 5 Regional Training Centres and CHQ Training Cell which 
are mainly catering the training requirements of employees posted in various regions and 
headquarters. 
b. The various training programs off ered by AAI and its Training Institutes/establishments 
are being updated as and when required, based on the job requirements. 
c. Trainings are essential on regulatory requirements for ANS Operations and Maintenance. 
Accordingly, Training and competency ass essment is ongoing continuously through 
online applications. Though Classroom Trainings and physical interactions  were 
suspended during COVID-19 crisis, online Applications have been adopted for imparting 
essential trainings related to operations. 
d. AAI is conducting training courses at the following three Air Traffic Services Training 
 Organizations (ATSTOs), duly approved by DGCA: 
i. CATC Prayagraj;  
ii. HTC Begumpet Airport, Hyderabad; and 
iii. NIATAM Gondia. 
 The DGCA approved courses are delivered at ATSTOs apart from other specialized 
 courses. 
e. The courses conducted by ATM Department at ATSTOs are updated regularly as per 
 National and International requirements. 
19.1. The Committee underlines the need for providing training courses to upgrade the 
skills of the employees of AAI. The Committee desires that the Ministry should ensure that 
the training courses conducted by AAI match up to international standards  and that they 
are tailor-made to suit the requirements of the Civil Aviation sector. 
Vacancies in AAI 
20. In response to a query of the Committee regarding the total number of posts sanctioned 
and posts lying vacant in AAI, the Ministry has furnished that the status of vacant Induction level 
posts are as below:- 
Cadre Sanctioned Strength Actual Strength Vacant Positions 
Group-A Executive 1445 1358 87 
Group-B Executive 3243 2595 648 
Group-C Non-Executive 1713 903 539 
Total 6401 4856 1274 

27 
 
 
20.1. As regards  the reasons and the steps taken by AAI to fill the vacant positions, the 
Ministry has st ated that in view of award of 06 select Airports to Private Operator under PPP 
model and another 06 being under process, the surplus manpower from these airports will need 
to be re-deployed to other Airports. Further, in view of decline in revenue position  due to Covid-
19 pandemic, the new recruitment has been kept in abeyance, except in cadres affecting the 
operational requirement. 
Vacancies in the posts of Air Traffic Controllers 
21. The Ministry has informed the Committee that following steps have been t aken to 
replenish the posts of Air Traffic Controllers (ATCOs) in AAI :- 
Recruitment 
21.1. Direct Recruitment for 264 posts of Jr. Executives (ATC) is currently in process for 
which the Computer Based Test has already been conducted on 24.03.2021. Further,  internal 
recruitment for filling up 158 Nos. of posts of Manager (ATC) through Departmental 
Examination is also in process. 
Creation of additional posts 
21.2. The proposal of AAI Board for creation of 340 posts of ATCOs is being  taken up with 
Department of Public Enterprises by this Ministry. 
21.3. The Committee takes serious note of the vacancies existing in AAI at various levels. 
The Committee strongly feels that a vital organization such as AAI cannot afford to have so 
many vacancies. The Committee is e specially perturbed to note the number of vacancies in 
the post of ATCOs . The Committee is apprehensive that such a situation will adversely 
affect the work output of ATCOs by putting them under immense stress, thereby , 
compromising the safety of flight op erations. The Committee recommends that the 
Ministry should take urgent concrete steps to fill up the vacancies existing in AAI.  
21.4. The Committee takes note of the fact that Child Care Leave is not granted to women 
ATCOs in AAI. The Committee desires t hat the Ministry may furnish the reasons therefor , 
to the Committee, in its Action Taken Report. 
21.5. The Committee is given to understand that AAI could not comply with the regulatory 
requirement of DGCA Watch Duty Time Limitation CAR . The Committee desi res that the 
Ministry may furnish the reasons therefor, to the Committee, in its Action Taken Report. 
21.6. The Chairman, AAI while making a presentation before the Committee, stated that 6403 
post of Non -Executives have been abolished . The Committee is ea ger to know about the 

28 
 
reasons for such abolition of posts and the impact thereof , on the functioning of the 
organization. The Committee desires that th is information may be furnished by the 
Ministry in its Action Taken Report.  
Digi Yatra  
22. As per the A nnual Report (2020-21) of the Ministry, considering the growth projections, 
its direct impact on the passenger journey, the cost of Infrastructure and the impact on the speed 
and efficiency of passenger processes, Ministry of Civil Aviation has taken up a key initiative to 
reimagine domestic air travel in India by looking beyond the conventional “build a bigger 
Airport to manage more Passengers” to look for Innovation and technology for better and cost -
effective solutions.  
22.1. One of the key initiatives in this direction is “Digi Yatra” which intends to give a 
seamless, hassle-free and paperless journey experience to every domestic air traveller in India. 
Using cutting edge Identity Management and “Face recognition” technologies, it aims to 
simplify the p assenger processes at various check points in the airport right from the terminal 
entry gate, check -in/ bag drop, security check and boarding gates. With respect to the 
implementation of Facial Recognition Technology (FRT) at all the airports, the Ministry  has 
stated that Facial Recognition System is part of the Digi Yatra initiative of the Government. Digi 
Yatra is a passenger processing system being implemented by airports in phased manner. The 
project is at trial stage and the first phase will be impleme nted by the end of year 2021 at 
Kolkata, Varanasi, Pune, Vijayawada, Bangalore and Hyderabad Airports. 
22.2. With Digi Yatra, passengers will no longer need to show their tickets/ boarding passes 
and their physical Identity cards at many of the check point s at the airport. This will lead to 
reduced waiting time in queues, faster processing times and simpler processes. 
22.3. The Committee hopes that Digi Yatra will enable seamless and paperless journey 
for the air travelers in the country.  The Committee desi res that the Ministry should 
implement more such initiatives which would benefit the passengers.   
Digital Sky  
23. In its Annual Report (2020-21), the Ministry has stated that this project is aimed to 
develop an IT platform to enable the Drone ecosystem i n India by enforcement of the DGCA 
CAR 1.0 digitally.  

29 
 
23.1. Digital Sky platform would provide features to bring different agencies on the same 
platform to enable the registration of Drones, flight planning, real time tracking, conflict 
management and flight log analysis to check for deviation from the approved flight plans.  
23.2. System is envisaged to divide the Indian airspace in red, yellow and green colour zones 
with respect to the no permission to fly drone, controlled permission to fly drones and a pproved 
zones for drone flying respectively. System would allow to add/ update the zones as per the 
requirements to address the dynamic need to permit or deny the drone flying in a specific air 
space. It is also planned that system would be able to capture  the real time telemetry information 
from drones and also provide the inputs for the conflict management of the Drone flights. 
23.3. The Committee appreciates th is initiative of the Ministry. The Committee hopes 
that Digital Sky would turn out to be beneficial to the drone ecosystem in the country. 
Air Sewa 
24. The Ministry, in its Annual Report (2020 -21), has stated that Air Sewa is an initiative of 
Ministry of Civil Aviation, launched in 2016, to offer passengers a convenient and hassle-free air 
travel experience.  
24.1. Air Sewa platform brings various aviation stakeholders like airports, airlines, DGCA, 
BCAS etc. on a common platform for redressal of air traveller‟s grievances thus integrating 
various stakeholders in aviation sector with whom an air traveller has to interact during air travel.  
24.2. It works through an interactive web portal (airsewa.gov.in) and mobile app for both 
Android and iOS platforms that includes a mechanism for grievance redressal, checking flight 
status/schedule information, airport Information and Frequently Asked Questions (FAQs).  
24.3. Air Sewa is planned to have additional features like escalation of the grievances, transfer 
of the grievances amongst stakeholders, mobile app for the nodal officer, maps for select airports 
and dashboards in future release. 
24.4. While appreciating the initiative of the Ministry, the Committee recommends that 
the Ministry should ensure that the grievances of passengers are addressed effectively in a 
time-bound manner. The Committee desires tha t the Air Sewa Platform should be 
upgraded periodically, so that it fulfills the dynamic requirements of the air passengers. 
The Committee underlines the need for formulating the desired SOP for the purpose.  
Making Airports Accessible to all under the ‘Accessible India Campaign’  
25. It has been stated in the Annual Report (2020 -21) of the Ministry of Civil Aviation that 
general guidelines as shared by Ministry of Social Justice and E mpowerment on the 10 features 

30 
 
of accessibility have been shared with all AAI airports for making the airports accessible, which 
include:  
1. Accessible Route/Approach  
2. Accessible Parking  
3. Accessible Entrance to the Building  
4. Accessible Reception (Helpdesk)  
5. Accessible Corridor/Tactile Flooring  
6. Accessible lift  
7. Staircase with Handrails (Main passenger movement zone)  
8. Accessible toilets  
9. Accessible Drinking Water Facility 
10. Signage   
 
 Accessibility features are being incorporated in all the AAI airports 
 Data for 54 airports has already been uploaded on t he MIS portal of AIC and data of 
other airports is being uploaded.   
 Presently 07 AAI Airports namely Ahmedabad, Jaipur, Calicut, Kolkata, Trivandrum, 
Trichy and Chennai are having Ambulift facility through Ground Handling agencies.35 
Airports of AAI already have aerobridge facility.   
 AAI has initiated the procurement process of Ambulifts at 20 Airports having Code C or 
above Aircraft Operation and doesn‟t have aerobridge facility to ensure seamless transfer 
of Divyang passengers. Tender has been invited for procurement of 20 Nos. Ambulift and 
the technical bid was opened on 10 th November, 2020. Tender shall be finalized by 
January, 2021 and expected date of completion of project in December, 2021.   
 AAI is conducting regular sensitization workshops with Ai rport Directors and other staff 
of AAI explaining the 10 points guidelines and standards requirements.   
 AAI also trains employees at Indian Aviation Academy on the special standardized 
training package created under ICAO Trainair Plus program on ICAO STP:  Passengers 
with reduced mobility.   
 Personnel on help desk are being given training to communicate efficiently with all 
Divyangjans including training on sign language for hearing impaired and mute (deaf and 
dumb) persons.   

31 
 
 As per RPwD act 2016, accessib ility standards/guidelines are required to be notified by 
Ministry of Civil Aviation. In this regard, „Guidelines for Accessible Airports in India‟ 
containing all the details on Accessible Airport Infrastructure including the above 10 
features of accessibi lity has been prepared by AAI and forwarded to MoCA. Further, 
MoCA advised that the points related to airlines and BCAS to also be incorporated to 
make comprehensive guidelines of Ministry of Civil Aviation.   
 This comprehensive handbook incorporating all the accessibility features of 
infrastructure, security services and a irlines would be forwarded by Mo CA to DEPwD 
for vetting, post which it will be published. 
25.1. The Committee appreciates the sensitivity and empathy shown by the Ministry, 
towards the ge nuine needs and concerns of the differently abled people. The Committee 
exhorts the Ministry to take similar steps to ensure a barrier free and conducive travel 
environment for differently abled people. 
Optimal Utilization of Airspace 
26. The Committee was  apprised by the Chairman, AAI during his deposition before the 
Committee that only 60% of the national airspace is available with AAI for civilian flights and 
that rest is with the Ministry of Defence.  He further stated that such restrictions cause higher  
travel distance, fuel burn, operational cost and carbon footprint.  He informed the Committee that 
under Flexible Use of Airspace (FUA), Upper airspace of 48 Restricted Areas under IAF have 
been converted into Temporary Reserved Airspace (TRA). Through the se TRA, Conditional 
Routes (CDR) were made available for civil flights.  
26.1. In respect of the latest update on the Coordination Committee between AAI and IAF, 
which was set up to enhance the airspace availability and optimize the use of airspace without  
compromising air security , the Ministry has clarified that as a result of the efforts of the 
Coordination Committ ee, 32 Conditional Routes were established by December, 2020. 
Additionally, proposal for 53 CDR has also been agreed by IAF and HAL for which safety 
assessment is being carried out by AAI. IAF is further examining the proposal for 15 CDR 
forwarded by AAI. 
26.2. The Committee understands that India’s airspace  is very complex  and that it gives 
rise to ma ny challenges . One such challenge is ensurin g optimal usage of the airspace , 
which requires comprehensive planning  and management. The Committee appreciates the 
steps taken by AAI to ensure optimal use of airspace. The Committee hopes that the 

32 
 
optimal utilization of Indian airspace will lead to redu ction in flight time, fuel consumption 
and carbon emission. The Committee desires that the Ministry should explore  more 
effective steps in this direction and implement the same. 
26.3. The Airport s Authority of India has envisaged saving of 1000 crores , with the 
rationalization of air space under the control of Air Force. This policy level discussion on Flexi 
Air Space has been going on for quite some time. The Committee feels that there are no 
empirical details or documentation or progress made in the air s paces released by the Indian Air 
Force for use of Civilian Operations across the country, resulting in reduction in flight time.  The 
Committee would like to know the  actual details of savings of the targeted 1000 crores by 
rationalization in the flexi air space. The Committee recommends  that a H igh Level 
Committee should be constituted by including stakeholders such as Airlines, Air Traffic 
Controllers i.e., Airports Authority of India and that a comprehensive exercise should be 
done in this regard. Also, a Road Map should be formulated for negotiation with the Indian 
Air Force, in order to achieve the targeted savings. 
Seaplane Operations 
27. The Ministry, in its Annual Report (2020 -21), has stated that Ministry of Civil Aviation 
has already directed Airpor ts Authority of India to identify locations of Tourist/Religious 
importance near water bodies for setting up Water Aerodromes to introduce Seaplane Operations 
in India under the prestigious UDAN Scheme. Acco rdingly, AAI requested several S tates to 
identify potential water bodies for conduct of Pre -Feasibility Study for seaplane operations. A 
Multi-Disciplinary Team with officials from AAI, DGCA and Spicejet was formed to conduct 
the Study. 
27.1. The current status of identification of water bodies for setti ng up Water Aerodromes to 
introduce Seaplane operations in India, under the  UDAN Scheme and the response of the 
respective State Governments in this regard is as under:- 
S.No. State Water Aerodrome being developed under 
UDAN 3.0, 3.1 & 4.0 
1. Gujarat Sardar Sarovar Dam (Statue of Unity) – 3.0 
Sabarmati Riverfront, Ahmedabad – 3.0 
Shatrunjay Dam – 3.0 
2. Andaman & Nicobar 
Islands 
Swaraj Dweep (Havelock Island) – 3.1 
Shaheed Dweep (Neill Island) – 3.1 

33 
 
Long Island – 3.1 
3. Assam Guwahati Riverfront – 3.0 
Umrangso, Dima Hasao – 3.0 
4. Telangana Nagarjuna Sagar Dam – 3.0 
5. Andhra Pradesh Prakasham Barrage – 3.1 
6. Lakshadweep Kavaratti Island – 4.0 
Minicoy Island – 4.0 
 
27.2. The first Seaplane Operations under this scheme was inaugurated by Hon‟ble Pr ime 
Minister of India on 31st October, 2020 for Sabarmati Riverfront - Statue of Unity route. 
27.3. After the successful commencement of the first Seaplane Service between Sabarmati 
Riverfront, Ahmedabad and Statue of Un ity, Kevadia, other State Government s/ MPs have 
shown interest to develop Water Aerodromes and have forwarded requests for conducting 
feasibility study at locations identified by them. The Sagarmala Seaplane Services has also 
proposed around 86 Seaplane Routes which have been listed in the r ecently concluded 4.1 
bidding under the UDAN. 
27.4. MoCA has also written letters t o Chief Secretaries of various S tates along with 
parameters for selecting suitable site, requesting them to identify and propose routes for 
development of Water Aerodromes a nd forward a consolidated proposal for development of 
Water Aerodromes in their State. Reply is awaited from State Governments. 
27.5. The Committee recognizes the immense potential available for seaplanes operations 
in the country.  However, it is disappoi nting to note that such potential has not yet been 
exploited fully. The seaplane services will hopefully revolutionize the nation’s regional 
connectivity. The Committee takes note of the steps taken by the Ministry to encourage 
seaplane operations. The Com mittee recommends that the Government should put in 
place, requisite policies and infrastructure , in order to enable more seaplane operations in 
India. The Committee desires that the Ministry should ensure that the necessary amenities 
keeping up with international standards for seaplane operations, such as terminal 
buildings, facilitation counters, check -in counters, modern ticketing methods, food 
counters, motels, shopping facilities etc. are provided, for the smooth operation of 
seaplanes. The Committee also underlines the urgent need to formulate a ‘Seaplane Policy’.  
Helicopter operations 

34 
 
27.A. The Committee is aware of the fact that t here exists an immense potential for  far more 
helicopter operations in India. The Committee understands that the major stumbling block in 
increasing the number of helicopter operations in India is that the regulations governing civil 
helicopters in India are very restrictive, making the operation of helicopters unviable. A nother 
vital concern in this area is building of heli ports, for which the support of State Governments is 
crucial.  
27.A.1.   The Committee is of the considered view that much more attention needs to be 
given to helicopter operations in the country. The Committee reiterates its 
recommendation in its 293 rd Report that the Ministry should address the issues of proper 
maintenance of helicopters, replacement of aged helicopters and training of the crew, on 
priority basis. The Committee emphasizes the need for simulator module training for 
helicopter pilots for of fshore landing. The Committee recommends that the Ministry 
should take urgent steps to ensure a network of heliports, in order to give necessary boost 
to the helicopter operations in the country. The Committee underlines the need for greater 
co-operation b etween the Ministry and State Governments for building heliports in the 
country. 
Adequate connectivity of airports with roads and railways 
28. Time and again, the Committee has been highlighting the vital issue of poor connectivity 
of airports with roads a nd railways. This shortcoming has proved to be a stumbling block in the 
connectivity domain of the logistics, created for hassle free and seamless movement of me n and 
goods, across the length and breadth of the country.  
28.1. The Committee emphasizes the invariable need to ensure that requisite synergy is 
achieved between/amongst the concerned Ministries/Departments, in order to make certain 
that airports are well connected w ith other means of transport  such as road and railways,  
so that  tourists/flyers re ach their destinations, from the airports , in a smooth and safe 
manner. Further, t he Ministry should collaborate with the State Governments and other 
stakeholders to ensure that adequate road and rail connectivity is available from the 
airports. 
Cancellation or delaying of flights 
28.A. The Ministry has informed the Committee  that Directorate General of Civil Aviation 
(DGCA) has issued Civil Aviation Requirements (CAR) Section 3, Series M, Part IV  on 
“Facilities to be provided to passengers by airlines due to denied boarding, cancellation of flights 

35 
 
and delays in flights”.  Copy of the CAR is enclosed herewith. However, in view of the 
observation of the Department related Parliamentary Standing C ommittee on Transport, Tourism 
and Culture, a meeting was held o n 04.12.2020 with airlines and airport operators, wherein 
airlines were sensitized to adequately facilitate the passengers in case of cancellation or delaying 
of flights and they should have pre -planned arrangements to assist passengers in such 
eventualities. All the participating airlines stated that they are strictly following the provisions of 
above-mentioned CAR and even go beyond it to assist passenger, wherever required. Airport 
operators also assured to extend necessary support to airlines in taking adequate care of the 
passengers. 
Moreover, a meeting was held under the C hairmanship of Secretary (Civil Aviation) on 
04.12.2020, where Chairman, Airports Authority of India, Director General, DGCA and other 
senior officers were present. DGCA has been dire cted to communicate to all the airlines/airports 
for extending necessary facilitation as per CAR. In cases where airlines are unable to provide 
such facilities, the airports should extend the necessary facilities as per CAR and collect the 
expenditure incurred in this regard from the airlines.  
28.A.1.    The Committee takes serious note of the inconvenience and trouble caused to the 
passengers in the event of rescheduling or cancellation of flights.  The Committee  
recommends that the Ministry should ensure that necessary assistance should be given to 
the air travelers, in case of rescheduling/ cancellation of flight or missing connecting flight. 
The Committee strongly recommends that designated holding area should be provided at 
all airports to accommodate passengers who are stranded at the airport due to either of the 
above mentioned event . The Committee impresses upon the Ministry to urge upon the 
airlines to make sure that facilities such as food, water, medical help and accommodation 
are available to stra nded passengers.  The Committee impresses upon the Ministry to 
ensure that its guidelines in this regard are scrupulously adhered to by the airlines.  
Vigilance Mechanism 
29. On a query of the Committee regarding the Vigilance mechanism existing in AAI, the  
Ministry has stated that:- 
1. The roles and functions of Vigilance Department are in conformity with CVC‟s special 
chapter on “Vigilance for the PSUs”. The Vigilance Directorate of AAI is headed by a 
Chief Vigilance Officer of the level of Additional Secr etary to Govt. of India. Corporate 
Vigilance Department (CVD)  of AAI is located at New Delhi office whereas it also has 

36 
 
its five regional offices viz., Northern, Eastern, Western, Southern & North -Eastern 
located at New Delhi, Kolkata, Mumbai, Chennai and Guwahati respectively. There are 
37sanctioned posts of Vigilance Officers in different ranks and the Vigilance set -up in 
Corporate Vigilance Department is divided into two parts, Investigation wing and a 
Technical Wing reporting to the ED (Vigilance) who u ltimately reports to CVO. The 
Investigation wing is headed by DCVO (I) whereas the Technical Wing is headed by 
DCVO (T). All the matters being looked after by the Vigilance Officers is confidential in 
nature, and it is also ensured that the files pertaini ng to Vigilance Directorate do  not 
move outside and as such , an environment has been created to ensure tr ansparency, 
impartiality and independency. 
2. All the VOs are provided proper training through CBI Academy and other reputed 
institutes and are also app rised of the latest CVC guidelines. Thus it is ensured that they 
have proper knowledge and can perform their work correctly within the stipulated 
guidelines. All the Vigilance Officers are being guided on case to case basis for ensuring 
effective and timel y conclusion of the cases being investigated by them. Monthly 
Vigilance Review Meeting of all the Vigilance Officers with CVO in line of CVC‟s 
guidelines is also held for keeping a proper track of the cases. In order to remove the 
bottlenecks in investigation, the issues requiring higher deliberations is taken up with the 
management, individually as well as collectively , through the Quarterly Vigilance 
Review Meetings. 
3. All the complaints received in Corporate Vigilance Department are perused by the Chief  
Vigilance Officer and accordingly , orders are given for verification/ detailed 
investigation/ administrative action / or filing as deemed fit. The Complaints ordered for 
verification/detailed investigation are normally regarding corrupt practices (demanding or 
acceptance of bribe) / misuse of official position for private gain/doubtful integrity 
related to the o fficials of AAI including stake holders. The complaints containing issues 
having serious irregularities by AAI employees which are criminal in natur e involving 
external agencies, are referred for investigation by CBI with the approval of Disciplinary 
Authority. While handling the complaints , CVC guidelines are followed and all the 
anonymous/pseudonymous complaints are invariably filed. 
4. On conclusio n of investigation , a Note is sent by the CVO to the Management, 
recommending appropriate action viz.,:- Departmental action under Major/Minor penalty, 

37 
 
Administrative Action, Systemic Improvement, Closure etc. and the same is regularly 
followed up with the  concerned Disciplinary Authority for deciding logically. CVD 
ensures that the Chargesheet/  Memorandum, etc. is drafted properly and subsequent to 
initiation of the Disciplinary proceedings , a monthly meeting is held with ED(HR) to 
remove bottlenecks and p rovide them assistance if any , for concluding the proceedings 
timely i.e. within the CVC stipulated time period. CVD also ensures that the First Stage 
and Second Stage Advice of CVC is understood in spirit by the concerned DA and is 
accordingly considered for implementation. 
5. Apart from it, in its Proactive Preventive role, CVD carries out awareness campaigns 
wherein it creates sensitivity towards day -to-day matters having scope for malpractices 
and corruption. These campaigns include  Vigilance Awareness Week (VAW), which is 
an yearly event and Vigil ance Awareness programmes like W orkshops, Lectures, 
Seminars etc. are being conducted throughout the year at different locations to achieve 
the objective of zero tolerance for corruption. CVD as a part of its p roactive role, urges 
various key departments to codify their work procedures and revise their manuals for 
bringing transparency at workplace and reducing the scope for discretion. CVD , on the 
basis of deliberations taking place in workshops and field inspe ctions, make suggestions 
to the management for systemic improvements on important issues. 
6. CVD is also timely preparing the list of Officers of Doubtful Integrity as well as Agreed 
lists in consultation with 30 branches of CBI and is ensuring that these officers are posted 
to Non-sensitive positions. 
29.1. The Committee takes note of the Vigilance mechanism existing in AAI  and desires 
that necessary periodic steps should be taken to strengthen the Vigilance mechanism in 
AAI. 
Various issues related to airports 
30. While deliberating upon the subject, the Members of the Committee raised various issues 
related to some airports in the country. The reply of the Ministry regarding these issues are given 
below:   
Kolhapur airport 
30.1. On the issue of providing n ight landing facility at Kolhapur airport, the Ministry has 
mentioned that presently, night landing is not permitted at Kolhapur airport. AAI has applied to 

38 
 
DGCA for conversion of license of Kolhapur airport from Day VFR to IFR (All weather 
operations) to enable night landing facility at the airport. 
30.2. Regarding the feasibility of starting a pilot training academy and a maintenance Centre at 
Kolhapur airport, the Ministry has underlined that: 
a. The airstrip at Kolhapur Airport is approx. 5000 feet long an d is suitable for setting up of 
FTOs. 
b. To operationalize any of the airfield for FTO purpose, any State Government or any 
operator can apply to DGCA as per the laid down rules. 
Thiruvananthapuram and Calicut airports 
30.3. In respect of the future of the Th iruvananthapuram and Calicut airports, the Ministry has 
submitted that the Trivandrum airport will be operated, maintained and developed by the 
concessionaire in accordance the master plan prepared by concessionaire. In order to monitor the 
performance of concessionaire, key performance indicators are defined in the concessionaire 
agreement which concessionaire has to satisfy. 
30.4. Regarding privatization of Calicut Airport, it is submitted that Calicut airport is not being 
considered in the next round of PPP transaction to be undertaken by AAI. 
Patna Airport 
30.5. In response to a query raised by the Standing Committee regarding shortage of CISF staff 
at Patna airport, the Ministry has highlighted that the existing sanctioned strength of Patna 
Airport is 3 43 and at present, the airport is operating at full strength. To meet the additional 
number of flights after extension and modification of terminal building, a proposal for post ing of 
40 more CISF personnel under ISDP at Patna airport is under consideration in MHA. 
 Jewar and Navi Mumbai Airports 
30.6. In respect of operationalization of Jewar and Navi Mumbai Airports, the Ministry has 
stated that both Jewar and Navi Mumbai airports are being developed by the respective State 
Governments i.e., Govt. of Uttar Pradesh (GoUP) and Govt. of Maharashtra (GoMh) under PPP 
mode and have awarded the projects to PPP Concessionaires. The State Governments have set a 
target to complete the construction work and operationalize both the airports during 2023-24. 
Gondia, Amravati and Chandrapur airports 
30.7. Regarding the plans of AAI for operations at the existing airports at Gondia & Amravati 
and the upcoming airport at Chandrapur, the Ministry has stated that Gondia Airport is already 

39 
 
being used for Flying training by Nat ional Flying Training Institute (NFTI). All facilities are 
available at airside and city side for commercial operation. 
30.8. Also under UDAN 4.0, a bid for Gondia airport connecting Indore & Hyderabad is under 
consideration. 
30.9. Amravati & Chandrapur ai rports belong to the State Govt. and MADC is the nodal 
agency for their operation and maintenance. 
30.10. In addition, “Mumbai -Amravati-Mumbai” RCS route was awarded to M/s Alliance Air 
under UDAN 3.0 and Amravati Airport is under upgradation by MADC. 
Bihta airport 
30.11. With regard to the status of the airport proposed at Bihta, AAI has proposed to develop 
Bihta Airport at a cost of Rs.  981 crore to the Ministry of Civil Aviation for appraisal of Public 
Investment Board. However, AAI has projected a deman d of 191.5 acre land for runway 
extension for accommodation of wide bodied aircraft. However, the response of State Govt. is 
awaited in the matter. 
30.12. The Committee takes note of the reply furnished by the Ministry on the issues raised 
by the Members o f the Committee . The Committee desires that the Ministry should take 
appropriate and timely follow-up action , to ensure that the concerns raised by the 
Members of the Committee are duly addressed.  
Suggestions given by private airlines 
31. A questionnaire on the Subject was forwarded to the private airlines and their written 
replies thereon were obtained. The private airlines, in their written replies furnished to the 
Committee, have made the following suggestions:-  
(i) Go Air 
a. AAI should start creating HUBS at tier 2 airports and create good transfer facilities 
for quick turnaround.  
b. More aerobridges, ideal ly internationally, its appx 95 % aerobridge boardings for all 
flights.  
c. Watch hours should be 24 x 7, especially at diversion airfields saving h uge fuel costs 
to airlines.  
d. More night parkings to be created. 
(ii) Indigo Airlines 
 

40 
 
Currently, Indian LCCs offer the bulk of capacity on domestic routes, and also a 
significant amount of capacity on international routes to/from India. However, in orde r to 
leverage their network s, Indian LCCs need integrated domestic -cum-international 
terminals at all major airports in India viz., Delhi, Mumbai, as well as other cities in 
India. We suggest that all ongoing development such as redevelopment of T1 at Delhi as 
well as all future international airport development in India plan for such integrated 
terminals. At the same time, the focus should be on keeping costs as low as possible, so 
as to enable Indian carriers to compete with global carriers.   
 (iii) Air Vistara 
New Green Field Airports may be planned a decade in advance based on anticipated 
demand. Existing airports‟ infrastructure may be similarly upgraded with 5 to 10 years 
advanced planning. Airport operating procedures to be in line with best internat ional 
practices. Costs to Airlines like landing/parking charges or other aeronautical levies must 
be closely monitored and kept to the minimum levels in order not to burden passengers 
with undue fares and to ensure viability of airlines. 
(iv)  Air Asia 
a. Establish Parallel RWYs (Runway) and adequate RETs (Rapid Exit Taxiways).  
b. Airlines can be given a Native DCS (Departure Control System) option and not be 
 bound to use CUTE (Common User Terminal Exchange) system which has 
 significantly higher price. 
c. ACDM (Airport Collaboration Decision Making) must be made available.  
d. Disabled Aircraft removal kit must be provided at all airports. 
e. Adequate Ramp/ Apron facilities including staff amenities must be provided.  
f. Transparency in post door closure clearance by ATS (Air Traffic Services). 
g. Proper place for Cargo Booking and Delivery, not in some nook and corner. 
h. Single token ID or Health passes to be initiated. 
i. Look at ways to reduce SHA (Security Hold Area), ATC, Terminal building and 
 airport Approach Road Congestions.  
j. Relaxation of Stringent Airport Environment and Streamlining of Multiple 
 checkpoints. 
k. Airports may have the concept of AOCC (Airports Operations Control Centre) at 
 all airports. 

41 
 
l. World Class Passenger Amenities to be available at all airports.    
(v) Spice Jet 
a. Access to the Airport- Expressway, metro connectivity, public transport till airport 
b. Interconnected  terminals  
c. Provision of assistance/assistive devices by airport operators for passengers with 
disability and reduced mobility 
d. Assistive aeronautical equipment /systems  eg.,  ILS at all airports where weather and 
environmental issues persist 
e. Introduction of Inline screening at more airports.  
f. Reduction of screening time at SHA through an automated resource augmentation. 
g. Augmentation of passengers transfer management at departure and arrival. 
h. Airport signage may be more visible as per international standards 
i. User-friendly self-check-in and baggage drop. 
j. Biometric access controls for staff  
k. Staff welfare resources - Rest areas, cafeteria etc. - Most airports lack these amenities 
making airport non-employee friendly 
l. Automation and use of technology like E gates etc. 
m. Free Wi -Fi to passengers and Link -based flight information system visible through 
passenger mobile phones 
n. Voice command based information help desk 
31.1. The Committee recommends that the Ministry should take note of the above-
mentioned suggestions given by the private airlines and take concrete steps to ensure that 
they are implemented timel y, so that the Ci vil Aviation sector is benefitted by the same. 
The Committee should be apprised of the specific action taken in this regard.  
Aero Club of India 
32. The Aero C lub of India (ACI) was established in 1927. It is one of the oldest 
organizations in the world, in the field of Aviation. The Aero Cl ub of India which was erstwhile  
„Royal Aero Club of India and Burma Ltd. ‟, was responsible for issuing flying licenses to pilots; 
to approve certified flight instructors ; and to issue licenses for arms and wireless facil ities to 
foreign aviators, during the pre -independence days. Two  former Prime Ministers of the c ountry 
have had an opportunity to be the President of Aero Club of India. Post independence, the Aero 
Club of India had the financial support of Government of I ndia and has been budgeted several 

42 
 
times to carry on the activities of Flying Training and also the promotion of Air Sports. The 
building of Aero Club of India  was initially allotted by the Ministry of Tourism. Then , the 
National Airports Authority of India was created and thereafter , the Airports Authority of India.  
The land and assets of Safdarjung Airport were  transferred to the Airport s Authority of India. It 
is pertinent to note that the building of Aero Club of India which was on a leased space for a 
period of 33 years , was made by the funds of Aero Club of India itself. The Aero Club of India 
had formally requested the Airport s Authority of India and the Ministry of Civil Aviation to 
extend the lease which came to end in the year 2013. However , no decision was taken on the 
extension of land lease of Aero Club of India and after a  period of 3 years , it was informed that 
Aero Club of India should be evicted since it did not get the formal approval of the Board of 
Airports Authority of India. Market rent was imposed on Aero Club of India after the lea se 
ended; thereafter eviction proceeding was initiated; fine was imposed on Aero Club of India; and 
subsequently, Aero Club of India was evicted. The Committee takes note that the Aero Club 
of India is an arm of the Government and the action taken by Airport s Authority of India 
has created disruption in the function ing of Aero Club of India. The C ommittee strongly 
recommends that Airports Authority of India should waive off the penalty and restore the 
original status of ACI building to Aero Club of India.  
Statutory provisions/ guidelines 
33. The Committee impresses upon the Ministry, the imperative need to ensure that the 
recommendations made by the Committee are given serious thought  and deliberation; and 
due consideration should be given to the facts and the issues involved therein.  Therefore, it 
is necessary that all possible steps are  taken to ensure that they are implemented in letter 
and spirit, within a designated time frame . Further, the Committee recommends that the 
statutory provisions/ guidelines, wherever needed and  necessary for the implementation of 
the recommendation s, should be  formulated by the Ministry  without any delay . The 
Committee desires that in case of any difficulty/ problems faced by th e Ministry in the 
implementation of the recommendations, the Committee may be apprised thereof.  
*** 

43 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/ OBSERVATIONS AT A GLANCE 
  
Air Traffic Services 
The Committee is of the considered opinion that keeping in view the exponential air traff ic 
growth witnessed in the country in the past few years, it is essential that best international 
practices as regards the Air Navigation Services are adopted and implemented in the 
country. The Committee strongly feels that a futuristic Master Plan for Ai r Navigation 
Services is inevitable so that substantial benefits are accrued to all the stakeholders. The 
Committee emphasizes the need to ensure strict adherence to the international standards of 
safety and security  in the civil aviation sector . The Commi ttee recommends that the 
Ministry should ensure that steps should be taken to upgrade the ANS facilities and 
procedures and to give due emphasis on research, development and training. 
(Para 9.3) 
The Committee is disturbed to note that considerable delay in  flight operations and 
cancellation of flights occur at various airports, due to non -availability of CAT-II or CAT-
III facility. The Committee takes serious note of the inconvenience and delays faced by the 
flyers and international & domestic tourists, due  to the dearth of requisite navigation 
technology at the airports. The Committee fails to understand the reason behind non -
installation of CAT-II/ CAT-III facilities in all airports in the country, in the present age of 
modern technology.  The Committee re commends that the Ministry should ensure that the 
upgration of air navigation infrastructure in the country should be given utmost priority 
and that the navigation facilities should be kept in line with international standards.  
(Para 9.5) 
The Committee emphasizes the imminent need to employ modern technologically advanced 
navigational aids and facilities at all airports in the country. The Ministry should urgently 
chalk out an Action Plan to operate CAT-II/III(B) ILS in all airports, in a fixed time bound 
manner. 
(Para 9.6) 
The Committee hopes that Modernization of Military Airfields (MAFI) project which is a 
turn key project, would enhance the operational capability, by facilitating air operations of 
civilian aircrafts, even in poor visibility and adverse weather conditions, while enhancing 
aerospace safety. The Committee observes that  MAFI project of the Indian Air Force 

44 
 
should decide and cull  out those activities which are primarily navigational equipment 
including approach landing systems, PAPI runway li ghts, threshold lights, instruments 
and equipment etc., where AAI/ATS have a unique advantage, as they have been  handling 
these systems across the country, for over seven  decades. Domestic civil aviation safety is 
the primary  responsibility of the Ministry of Civil Aviation, DGCA and AAI. The 
utilization of these navigational aids/approach landing systems/equipment etc., which have  
been installed across the country,  is primarily done by the AAI, which has domain 
knowledge. They are also  familiar with the qu ality procurement processes, maintenance 
and operational requirements of these instruments which they  have been using for Civil 
operations for over fifty years. The  Committee recommends that a  High Level Committee 
may be created with the Indian Air Force , to cull out those activities  related to navigation 
and landing facilities which are, primarily, in the domain  knowledge, with the AAI for 
Civil operations. The Committee recommends that apart from  this, the development of the 
rest of the infrastructure planned under the MAFI scheme may continue as envisaged, 
for a greater synergy between civil aviation requirements and  operational requirements of 
Indian Air Force.  
(Para 9.7) 
The Committee recommends that a High Powered Committee should be constituted both 
for flexi air space management and issues related to Civil Enclaves to address these issues 
comprehensively.   
(Para 9.8) 
Development, Upgradation and Modernization of Airports 
Airports play a vital role in the economic growth of the country since they ope n the doors 
for tourism and trade. Despite India being the world’s fastest growing aviation market, its 
airports are grappling with serious capacity constraints because such a quick pace of 
growth in the aviation sector has resulted in a strain on the avia tion infrastructure, 
resulting in traffic congestions and delays at many of the airports. If a high growth rate in 
civil aviation sector is to be sustained, it is imperative that urgent steps be taken to 
augment and modernize India’s aviation infrastructure.  
(Para 10.6) 
The Committee underscores the fact that our airports should be developed in such a way 
that they emerge as symbols of national pride. The Committee highlights the urgent need to 

45 
 
successfully manage the demand vs. traffic capacity of airports. The Committee urges upon 
the Ministry to develop a comprehensive, strategic and futuristic Master Plan for 
implementation of projects to provide world class airport infrastructure, by bringing in 
cutting edge technology and the global best practices of the aviation industry. The 
Committee desires that the Ministry should address not only the existing capacity 
constraints in various airports, but also address infrastructural requirements in the context 
of growth scenario forecast for the next decade. The Committee emphasizes the need for 
the removal of the existing bottlenecks in order to enable the aviation infrastructure to 
keep up with the growing demand in the Civil Aviation sector. Further, it should be strictly 
ensured that the development/upgradatio n of airport projects are completed as per the 
prescribed timelines.  
(Para 10.7) 
The Committee underlines the need for a well chalked out Master Plan with regard to 
aviation infrastructure, in order to ensure that the requirements of the growth in the civ il 
aviation sector are properly catered to. The Committee urges the Ministry to ensure that 
adequate parking space and landing slots are available at the airports.  
(Para 10.8) 
The Committee notes that potential growth in the passenger and cargo traffic wo uld 
require enormous investments in terms of construction of new airports and expansion & 
modernization of existing airports. The Committee understands that lenders are cautious 
about issuing long -term debt to airport operators. The Committee, therefore, w ould like 
the Ministry to formulate necessary policies, schemes and guidelines, to attract the 
requisite investment for airport projects.  
(Para 10.9) 
The Committee desires that the Ministry should ensure that amenities which match up to 
international stan dards are available at all the airports and that periodic maintenance is 
carried out efficiently. The Committee recommends that the Ministry should ensure 
sufficient space for commercial shops, while granting approval for new airports. The 
Committee recomm ends that the Ministry should consider mandatorily earmarking 
minimum 100 acres of land, while making plans for future airports. Further, 5 Star/3 Star 
hotels and multiplexes should be constructed near the new airports. The Committee also 

46 
 
desires that extr a land, if any, that has been allocated for the airports should not be sold 
and should be kept for future aviation developmental activities. 
(Para 10.10) 
The Committee takes cognizance of the fact that there is a need to look at the entire 
mechanism of dev elopment of airports and the way the airport concessions are given. At 
present, the rights to operate airports are given to individuals or entities who bid the 
highest with the Airports Authority of India. When those services are given to the highest 
bidder, the highest bidder charges the highest amount of money from the airlines, which 
has little or no bearing on the actual cost of the service. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that the Ministry should seriously look into these issues and take urgent st eps 
to ensure that such anomalies are rectified. 
(Para 10.11) 
The Committee has been given to understand that large number of institutional clearances 
are required for airport projects, which leads to delays and cost escalation. Therefore, the 
Committee re commends in this regard that the Ministry should set up a single -window 
clearance mechanism in order to facilitate timely grant of institutional clearances for 
airport projects and ensure completion of such projects within the stipulated time period. 
(Para 10.12) 
Privatization of Airports 
The Committee realizes the huge demand for more airports in the country. The Committee 
recognizes the fact that it is not feasible for AAI to meet the investment requirements to 
develop and maintain all the airports in the  country. The Committee appreciates the 
inevitable need for Public Private Partnership in the development and maintenance of 
airports. The Committee endorses the provisions proposed in the Airports Economic 
Regulatory Authority of India (Amendment) Bill, 2 021 which would facilitate the 
development of both high traffic volume and low traffic volume airports together, in a 
holistic manner. 
(Para 11.10) 
The Committee emphasizes the need to ensure absolute transparency in all PPP airport 
projects. The Committee  desires that the Ministry should ensure that a proper policy and 
regulatory framework governing the PPP airport projects, is put in place. The Committee 
underlines the need to ensure a proper auditing mechanism with regard to PPP projects. 

47 
 
The Committee s trongly recommends that the Ministry should ensure that the airport 
charges on the passengers are equitable and commensurate with the operational costs. 
(Para 11.11) 
The Committee desires that the Ministry should ensure that the career interests of the 
employees of AAI are protected in case of privatization of airports.  
(Para 11.12) 
UDAN Scheme 
The Committee takes note of the growing demand for regional air services, which would 
make it possible for our country to emerge as a major player in the aviation i ndustry. The 
Committee feels that UDAN Scheme will help in relieving the congestion at major airports 
and enable us to develop the much needed hub -and-spoke mechanism. The Committee 
notes that although the airlines industry got a huge fillip with the launc h of RCS, air 
connectivity in the country is largely confined to routes connecting State capitals and large 
towns; and many parts of the country still remain unconnected by air services. Therefore, 
the Committee recommends that the Ministry of Civil Aviation should take urgent effective 
steps to ensure adequate air connectivity in different parts of the country under RCS. The 
Committee also desires that the benefits under the Regional Connectivity Scheme, 
currently restricted to three years, should be exten ded by another two years, to give 
airlines an opportunity to transform a fledgling route into a strong and revenue -generating 
one. 
(Para 12.2) 
The Committee urges upon the Ministry to closely and meticulously, monitor the 
implementation and impact of the U DAN Scheme and formulate plans and guidelines to 
ensure that the benefits of the Scheme actually reach the passengers, as per the spirit of the 
Scheme.  
(Para 12.3) 
The Committee observes that direct air connectivity to tourist destinations and cultural 
sites in the country can massively promote the tourism industry which will lead to 
generation of more employment opportunities and faster economic growth. The 
Committee, therefore, observes that there is an imperative need for close co -ordination 
between the  Ministry of Civil Aviation, and the Ministries of Tourism & Culture, in 
matters regarding air connectivity to important tourist destinations and cultural sites in the 

48 
 
country. Hence, the Committee recommends the Ministry of Civil Aviation, to work in 
tandem with the Ministries of Culture and Tourism, who are vital stakeholders in this 
regard. 
(Para 12.4) 
The Committee desires that the Ministry should examine the reasons for non -
commencement of the awarded routes; identify the bottlenecks in this regard; an d chalk 
out strategic steps to timely address the issues involved.  
(Para 12.5.1) 
The Committee understands that there are many non -operational airstrips/airports owned 
by AAI and State Governments. The Committee is of the view that operationalizing these 
inactive AAI and State Government airstrips will ease out the pressure currently prevailing 
on the airport infrastructure in the country. The Committee recommends that unused 
airstrips and dormant airports should be utilized for promoting regional/remote a reas air 
connectivity under RCS.  
(Para 12.6) 
The Committee takes note of the issues related to lack of adequate infrastructure of 
airports due to non -availability of land, delay related to compliance of the regulations by 
the airport operators, lack of ro ad connectivity to the airports etc., that need to be 
addressed on priority. The Committee recommends that the Ministry should take urgent 
remedial steps to address these vital concerns. The Committee also notes that support from 
the State Governments in t he shape of multimodal connectivity, utilities, land availability, 
security etc. are critical to the promotion of regional air connectivity under RCS. The 
Committee would, therefore, like to urge upon the Ministry of Civil Aviation to impress 
upon the Stat e Governments, to form a dedicated mechanism mandated to offer one -stop 
solutions to airline and airport operators, with the objective of promoting regional air 
connectivity under RCS. 
(Para 12.7) 
Development of Cargo Sector  
The Committee recognizes the f act that India’s strategic geographical location, swelling 
economy and the growth registered in international & domestic trade in the last decade are 
congenial to the growth in the air cargo sector. The Committee is disappointed to note that 
despite these advantages, India has not fully realized its potential in terms of air cargo. The 

49 
 
Committee realizes the sad fact that inadequate infrastructure is a major bottleneck in 
developing the country’s air cargo sector. The Committee, therefore, recommends that t he 
Ministry should take effective steps to establish dedicated cargo airports in the country and 
to provide requisite facilities for the enhancement of air cargo facilities, while setting up 
new airports. 
(Para 13.7) 
Since automation is crucial for an effi cient air freight mechanism, the Committee 
recommends that the Ministry, in co-ordination with the stakeholders, should take effective 
steps to automate information systems and to streamline/ simplify the respective processes 
and regulations for faster, transparent and seamless movement of air cargo. 
(Para 13.8) 
The Committee takes serious note of the fact that due to the Open Sky Policy for cargo in 
India, foreign carriers carry 90%- 95% of the international cargo, to and from India, while 
Indian air cargo  operators face many barriers when they go into other countries. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends that in order to provide a level playing field for Indian 
air cargo operators, the Ministry of Civil Aviation should make appropriate changes in the 
Open Sky Policy for cargo. The Committee also recommends that Ministry/DGCA should 
take note of Indian cargo operators facing discriminatory and restrictive practices or 
regulatory impediments in operating international cargo flights in any of the foreign 
countries and take urgent steps to address/resolve them. The Committee may be apprised 
of the action taken and the outcome achieved in this regard.  
(Para 13.9) 
The Committee reiterates its recommendation made in its 293 rd Report that the Ministry 
should take t imely action to address the issues of congestion at the entry of terminal, 
inadequate screening, inadequate storage space, lack of temperature facility etc. at the 
cargo terminals. The Committee also recommends that the Ministry should take steps to 
ensure that attractive and uniform transit handling costs and procedures are implemented 
across all airports in the country.  
(Para 13.10) 
Maintenance, Repair and Overhaul (MRO) infrastructure 
The Committee observes that there has been a tremendous growth in the  MRO 
opportunities that can be exploited by our country, enabled due to the rapid growth in the 

50 
 
Civil Aviation sector witnessed in the recent past. India has huge potential to be an MRO 
hub which can accommodate the growing Civil Aviation needs of the coun try and also 
other countries. Aircraft MRO services are critical in the aviation value chain and it would 
be of a huge loss for the country, if we do not tap the vast technical and skill ed personnel 
available in this field in the country. However, the Comm ittee is disappointed to note that 
the country has not yet been able to fully exploit the opportunities available in this sector.  
(Para 14.2) 
The Committee understands that a major deterrent for the growth of the MRO industry is 
high taxation of MRO components. The Committee strongly recommends that the Ministry 
should give necessary focus on the issues presently faced in the MRO sector in order to 
ensure that India evolves into a key international player in offering MRO facilities. The 
Committee recommends that the Ministry should take necessary steps to ensure that MRO 
workshops are set up in all the metro cities in the country, in order to attract international 
business. The Committee also emphasizes the need for enhanced collaboration between 
defence and civil MROs. 
(Para 14.3) 
Pilot Training Institutes 
The Committee emphasizes the imperative need to make available, state-of-the-art facilities 
for the training of professionals in the aviation sector. Keeping in view the rapid growth in 
the Indian aviatio n industry and shortage of pilots faced in India, the Committee 
recommends that the Ministry should set up new Institutes for Pilot Training and to 
revamp the existing ones by providing modern simulators and also augment the capacity 
intake of students in the existing Institutes. The Committee recommends that the Ministry 
should envisage setting up of Pilot Training Institute adjacent to the airport, at least in one 
airport, in each State. The Committee strongly recommends that the training facilities 
offered to the various technical professionals in the Civil Aviation sector, such as pilots, 
ATC controllers, technicians, safety inspectors and engineers should match up with 
standardized international training facilities. The Ministry should also take necessa ry steps 
to ensure that sufficient number of trainers are made available, by offering incentives 
which would attract them to this field.  
(Para 15.1) 
Pollution Control 

51 
 
The Committee appreciates the steps taken by AAI to reduce c arbon footprints and desires 
that AAI should update its pollution control methods to meet international best practices in 
this regard. 
(Para 16.10) 
COVID-19 pandemic 
The Committee appreciates the public safety measures adopted by the Ministry of Civil 
Aviation during the COVID-19 pandemic. The Committee desires that the Ministry should 
ensure that such measures are periodically updated in tune with international best 
practices in this regard. 
(Para 17.1) 
Impact of the COVID-19 pandemic 
The Committee is well aware of the fact that the aviation sector has been badly hit by the 
COVID-19 pandemic. The Committee understands that the adverse effect of the COVID-19 
pandemic on the airlines operating in the country, which were already reeling under heavy 
losses, was unprecedented. The Committe e recommends that the Ministry should adopt 
relief measures to help the airlines tide over the adverse impact of the pandemic and that 
the Ministry should envisage immediate and long term measures, to enable the resurgence 
of the airlines in the country.  
(Para 18.5) 
The Committee desires that the Ministry should take necessary steps to ensure short term 
waiver or short term put off, in terms of aviation charges, for sustaining a viable aviation 
industry. The Committee is of the view that all airlines and a viation-related business must 
be treated as  priority sector lending. The Committee reiterates the recommendation made 
in its 293rd Report that the Ministry should provide a sectoral fund, which is professionally 
managed and which can provide structured debt to the airlines industry.  
(Para 18.6) 
Training Courses conducted by AAI 
The Committee underlines the need for providing training courses to upgrade the skills of 
the employees of AAI. The Committee desires that the Ministry should ensure that the 
training courses conducted by AAI match up to international sta ndards and that they are 
tailor-made to suit the requirements of the Civil Aviation sector. 
(Para 19.1) 

52 
 
Vacancies in AAI 
The Committee takes serious note of the vacancies existing in AAI at various l evels. The 
Committee strongly feels that a vital organization such as AAI cannot afford to have so 
many vacancies. The Committee is especially perturbed to note the number of vacancies in 
the post of ATCOs. The Committee is apprehensive that such a situati on will adversely 
affect the work output of ATCOs by putting them under immense stress, thereby, 
compromising the safety of flight operations. The Committee recommends that the 
Ministry should take urgent concrete steps to fill up the vacancies existing in AAI.  
(Para 21.3) 
The Committee desires that the Ministry may furnish the reasons therefor, to the 
Committee, in its Action Taken Report. 
(Para 21.4) 
The Committee desires that the Ministry may furnish the reasons therefor, to the 
Committee, in its Action Taken Report. 
(Para 21.5) 
The Committee is eager to know about the reasons for such abolition of posts and the 
impact thereof, on the functioning of the organization. The Committee desires that this 
information may be furnished by the Ministry in its Action Taken Report.  
(Para 21.6) 
Digi Yatra  
The Committee hopes that Digi Yatra will enable seamless and paperless journey for the 
air travelers in the country. The Committee desires that the Ministry should implement 
more such initiatives which would benefit the passengers.   
(Para 22.3) 
Digital Sky  
The Committee appreciates this initiative of the Ministry. The Committee hopes that 
Digital Sky would turn out to be beneficial to the drone ecosystem in the country. 
(Para 23.3) 
Air Sewa 
While appreciating the initiative of the Ministry, the Committee recommends that the 
Ministry should ensure that the grievances of passengers are addressed effectively in a 
time-bound manner. The Committee desires that the Air Sewa Platform should be 

53 
 
upgraded periodically, so th at it fulfills the dynamic requirements of the air passengers. 
The Committee underlines the need for formulating the desired SOP for the purpose.  
(Para 24.4) 
Making Airports Accessible to all under the ‘Accessible India Campaign’  
The Committee appreciate s the sensitivity and empathy shown by the Ministry, towards 
the genuine needs and concerns of the differently abled people. The Committee exhorts the 
Ministry to take similar steps to ensure a barrier free and conducive travel environment 
for differently abled people. 
(Para 25.1) 
Optimal Utilization of Airspace 
The Committee understands that India’s airspace is very complex and that it gives rise to 
many challenges. One such challenge is ensuring optimal usage of the airspace, which 
requires comprehensive planning and management. The Committee appreciates the steps 
taken by AAI to ensure optimal use of airspace. The Committee hopes that the optimal 
utilization of Indian airspace will lead to reduction in flight time, fuel consumption and 
carbon emission. Th e Committee desires that the Ministry should explore more effective 
steps in this direction and implement the same. 
(Para 26.2) 
The Committee would like to know the actual details of savings of the targeted 1000 crores 
by rationalization in the flexi air s pace. The Committee recommends that a High Level 
Committee should be constituted by including stakeholders such as Airlines, Air Traffic 
Controllers i.e., Airports Authority of India and that a comprehensive exercise should be 
done in this regard. Also, a Road Map should be formulated for negotiation with the Indian 
Air Force, in order to achieve the targeted savings. 
(Para 26.3) 
Seaplane Operations 
The Committee recognizes the immense potential available for seaplanes operations in the 
country.  However, it is disappointing to note that such potential has not yet been exploited 
fully. The seaplane services will hopefully revolutionize the nation’s regional connectivity. 
The Committee takes note of the steps taken by the Ministry to encourage seaplane 
operations. The Committee recommends that the Government should put in place, 
requisite policies and infrastructure, in order to enable more seaplane operations in India. 

54 
 
The Committee desires that the Ministry should ensure that the necessary amenities 
keeping up with international standards for seaplane operations, such as terminal 
buildings, facilitation counters, check -in counters, modern ticketing methods, food 
counters, motels, shopping facilities etc. are provided, for the smooth operation of 
seaplanes. The Committee also underlines the urgent need to formulate a ‘Seaplane Policy’.  
(Para 27.5) 
Helicopter operations 
The Committee is of the considered view that much more attention needs to be given to 
helicopter operations in the country. The Committee reite rates its recommendation in its 
293rd Report that the Ministry should address the issues of proper maintenance of 
helicopters, replacement of aged helicopters and training of the crew, on priority basis. The 
Committee emphasizes the need for simulator modu le training for helicopter pilots for 
offshore landing. The Committee recommends that the Ministry should take urgent steps 
to ensure a network of heliports, in order to give necessary boost to the helicopter 
operations in the country. The Committee underl ines the need for greater co -operation 
between the Ministry and State Governments for building heliports in the country. 
(Para 27.A.1) 
Adequate connectivity of airports with roads and railways 
The Committee emphasizes the invariable need to ensure that req uisite synergy is achieved 
between/amongst the concerned Ministries/Departments, in order to make certain that 
airports are well connected with other means of transport such as road and railways, so 
that tourists/flyers reach their destinations, from the a irports, in a smooth and safe 
manner. Further, the Ministry should collaborate with the State Governments and other 
stakeholders to ensure that adequate road and rail connectivity is available from the 
airports. 
(Para 28.1) 
Cancellation or delaying of flights 
The Committee takes serious note of the inconvenience and trouble caused to the 
passengers in the event of rescheduling or cancellation of flights. The Committee 
recommends that the Ministry should ensure that necessary assistance should be given to 
the air travelers, in case of rescheduling/ cancellation of flight or missing connecting flight. 
The Committee strongly recommends that designated holding area should be provided at 

55 
 
all airports to accommodate passengers who are stranded at the airport due t o either of the 
above mentioned event. The Committee impresses upon the Ministry to urge upon the 
airlines to make sure that facilities such as food, water, medical help and accommodation 
are available to stranded passengers. The Committee impresses upon t he Ministry to 
ensure that its guidelines in this regard are scrupulously adhered to by the airlines.  
(Para 28.A.1) 
Vigilance Mechanism 
The Committee takes note of the Vigilance mechanism existing in AAI and desires that 
necessary periodic steps should be taken to strengthen the Vigilance mechanism in AAI. 
(Para 29.1) 
Various issues related to airports 
The Committee takes note of the reply furnished by the Ministry on the issues raised by the 
Members of the Committee. The Committee desires that the Ministr y should take 
appropriate and timely follow -up action, to ensure that the concerns raised by the 
Members of the Committee are duly addressed.  
(Para 30.12) 
Suggestions given by private airlines 
The Committee recommends that the Ministry should take note of  the above -mentioned 
suggestions given by the private airlines and take concrete steps to ensure that they are 
implemented timely, so that the Civil Aviation sector is benefitted by the same. The 
Committee should be apprised of the specific action taken in this regard.  
(Para 31.1) 
Aero Club of India 
The Committee takes note that the Aero Club of India is an arm of the Government and 
the action taken by Airports Authority of India has created disruption in the functioning of 
Aero Club of India. The C ommittee strongly recommends that Airport s Authority of India 
should waive off the penalty and restore the original status of ACI building to Aero Club of 
India.  
(Para 32) 
Statutory provisions/ guidelines 
The Committee impresses upon the Ministry, the imperative  need to ensure that the 
recommendations made by the Committee are given serious thought and deliberation; and 

56 
 
due consideration should be given to the facts and the issues involved therein. Therefore, it 
is necessary that all possible steps are taken to e nsure that they are implemented in letter 
and spirit, within a designated time frame. Further, the Committee recommends that the 
statutory provisions/ guidelines, wherever needed and  necessary for the implementation of 
the recommendations, should be formu lated by the Ministry without any delay. The 
Committee desires that in case of any difficulty/ problems faced by the Ministry in the 
implementation of the recommendations, the Committee may be apprised thereof.  
(Para 33) 
*** 
  

57 
 
 
 
 
MINUTES 
  

58 
 
VIII 
EIGHTH MEETING 
The Committee met at 11:30 A.M. on Wednesday, the 30 th December, 2020 in Main 
Committee Room, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
Members present: 
1. Shri T.G. Venkatesh                   - Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Sambhaji Chhatrapati 
3. Shri Vinay Dinu Tendulkar 
4. Shri K.C. Venugopal 
LOK SABHA 
5. Shri Tapir Gao 
6. Shri Rahul Kaswan 
7. Shri Sunil Baburao Mendhe 
8. Shri K. Muraleedharan 
9. Shri Chhedi Paswan 
10. Shri Sunil Kumar Pintu 
11. Shri Prince Raj 
12. Shri Tirath Singh Rawat 
13. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
14. Shri Dushyant Singh 
15. Shri Manoj Kumar Tiwari 
16. Shri Krupal Balaji Tumane  
SECRETARIAT  
Shri J. Sundriyal, Joint Secretary 
Shri P. Narayanan, Director 
Shri Dinesh Singh, Additional Director 
Ms. Catherine John L., Under Secretary 
  
Witnesses   
11:30 A.M. 
MINISTRY OF CIVIL AVIATION 
1. Shri Pradeep Singh Kharola Secretary  
2. Ms. Rubina Ali Joint Secretary 
3. Shri Amber Dubey  Joint Secretary 
4. Shri Pranjol  Chandra Director (Parliament) 

59 
 
DIRECTORATE GENERAL OF CIVIL AVIATION (DGCA) 
5. Shri Arun Kumar Director  General 
BUREAU OF CIVIL AVIATION SECURITY (BCAS) 
6. Shri Jaideep Prasad Joint Director General 
AIR INDIA LTD. 
7. Shri Rajiv Bansal Chairman & Managing Director 
AIRPORTS AUTHORITY OF INDIA  
8. Shri Arvind Singh Chairman 
9. Shri Anuj Aggarwal Member (HR) 
10. Shri I.N. Murthy Member (Operations) 
11. Shri A.K. Pathak Member (Planning) 
12. Shri K. Vinayak Rao Member (Finance) 
13. Ms. Sangeeta Mahay Executive Director (Planning/RCS) 
AIRCRAFT ACCIDENT INVESTIGATION BUREAU  (AAIB) 
14. Shri Aurobindo Handa Director General 
COMMISSION OF  RAILWAY SAFETY (CRS) 
15. Shri Shailesh Kumar Pathak Chief Commissioner of Railway Safety 
16. Shri Rajiv Kumar Dy.  Commissioner of Railway Safety (G) 
17. Shri Rajmal Khoiwal Chief Signalling and Telecommunication Engineer 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the meeting of the Committee. He 
extended warm New Year greetings to the Members and their families. He informed the 
Members that the agenda of the meeting was to hear the Secretary, Ministry of  Civil Aviation on 
the subject 'Functioning of Airports Authority of India' and on updated status of the 
recommendations of the Committee made in its 276 th Report, regarding need  for effective co -
ordination mechanism among the Ministries of Civil Aviation,  Shipping, Road Transport and 
Highways, Culture, Tourism and Railways and the creation of Core Group on safety and 
security.  
(After the Secretary, Ministry of Civil Aviation took his seat) 
3. The Chairman welcomed Secretary, Ministry of Civil Aviation; Chair man, Airports 
Authority of India alongwith other senior officials from the Ministry to the meeting and directed 
him to make his presentation. The Secretary, Ministry of Civil Aviation in his presentation on the 
subject 'Functioning of Airports Authority of  India', mentioned that Airports Authority of India 

60 
 
(AAI), an unlisted Statutory Corporation constituted under the act of Parliament i.e., Airports 
Authority of India Act, 1994 is 100% owned by the Government of India as the sole air 
navigation service provider in India. The main functions of AAI are control and management of 
the Indian air space; provision of Communication, Navigational and Surveillance Aids; 
expansion and strengthening of operational areas; design, development, operation and 
maintenance o f passenger terminals; development and management of cargo terminals at 
international and domestic airports; and provision of passenger facilities in the passenger 
terminals.  
4. Chairman, AAI apprised the Committee that the vision of AAI is to be the pre -eminent 
Air Navigation Service provider with global recognition with its state of art technology to drive 
safe navigation in the Indian airspace; maintain highest standards of excellence in providing 
modern, sustainable and robust airport infrastructure; impr ove air connectivity at unserved and 
under-served airports;  effective management of the emerging challenges from the exponential 
air traffic growth and operations at Major airports through continuing efforts on cost reduction 
and enhancing non -aeronautical revenue. He also mentioned about the training establishments 
such as Indian Aviation Academy, New Delhi; Civil Aviation Training College, Allahabad, Fire 
Service Training Centres at New Delhi and Kolkata and Flying Training Institutes at Rae 
Bareilly and Gondia. Sharing the financial performance of AAI, he mentioned that the Revenue 
earned in 2019-20 was Rs. 12837.44 crores. 
5. As regards the Core group on safety and security, the Secretary informed the Committee 
that in pursuance of the Committee's recommen dation a Core Group has been formed for 
effective co -ordination among the Ministries concerned and that three meetings of the Group 
have been held till date. 
6. Members of the Committee raised various queries, some of which were replied to by the 
Secretary, M inistry of Civil Aviation. The Chairman then directed that written replies to the 
queries which remained unanswered may be sent to the Secretariat within a week.  
(The witnesses then withdrew) 
7. *     *     *. 
8. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept. 
9. The meeting adjourned at 1:33 P.M. 
 
  
New Delhi,                                                                                                         P. Narayanan 
30th December, 2020                                                                                         Director 

61 
 
XXIII 
TWENTY THIRD MEETING 
The Committee met at 4:00 P.M. on Wednesday, the 28 th July, 2021 in Committee Room 
„D‟, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
Members present: 
1. Shri T.G. Venkatesh                   - Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Derek O‟Brien 
3. Shri Vinay Dinu Tendulkar 
4. Shri K.C. Venugopal 
5. Shri Sushil Kumar Modi 
 
LOK SABHA 
6. Shri Tapir Gao 
7. Shri Rahul Kaswan 
8. Ramesh Chandra Majhi 
9. Shri Sunil Baburao Mendhe 
10. Shri Sunil Kumar Pintu 
11. Shri Prince Raj 
12. Shri Tirath Singh Rawat 
13. Shri Dushyant Singh  
14. Shri Manoj Tiwari 
15. Shri Krupal Balaji Tumane 
  
SECRETARIAT 
      
Dr. Shikha Darbai, Joint Secretary & Financial Advisor 
Shri P. Narayanan, Director 
Shri Dinesh Singh, Additional Director 
Shri Rajendra Prasad Shukla, Additional Director 
Ms. Catherine John L., Under Secretary 
  
Witnesses  
 
 Ministry of Civil Aviation 
1 Shri Pradeep Singh Kharola Secretary 
2 Ms. Rubina Ali Joint Secretary 
 
Air India 

62 
 
 Shri Rajiv Bansal CMD 
 
Directorate General of Civil Aviation 
 Shri Arun Kumar  Director General 
 
Bureau of Civil Aviation Security 
 Shri Jaideep Prasad Joint Director General 
 
Aircraft Accident Investigation Bureau 
 Shri Aurobindo Handa Director General 
 
Airports Economic Regulatory Authority of India 
 Shri B. S. Bhullar Chairman 
   
Airports Authority of India 
1 Shri Sanjeev Kumar Chairman 
2 Shri I.N. Murthy Member (Ops.) 
3 Shri A.K. Pathak Member (Planning) 
 
Commission of Railway Safety (CRS) 
1 Shri S. K. Pathak CCRS 
2 Shri Rajmal Khoiwal  CSTE 
3 Shri Rajiv Kumar Deputy CRS (G) 
 
Pawan Hans Limited 
 Shri Sanjeev Razdan CMD 
 
Indira Gandhi Rashtriya Uran Akademi (IGRUA) 
 Shri Krishnendu Gupta Director 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the meeting of the Committee. 
The Chairman informed the Members th at the agenda of the meeting was to hear the Secretary, 
Ministry of Civil Aviation on the subject „Functioning of Airports Authority of India‟.   
 
Oral Evidence of Secretary, Ministry of Civil Aviation 
3. The Chairman welcomed the Secretary, Ministry of Ci vil Aviation and other senior 
officials from the Ministry and its organizations to the meeting. 
4.  The Chairman, Airports Authority of India (AAI) then made a detailed presentation 
regarding the functioning of AAI. He stated that AAI functions under the M inistry of Civil 

63 
 
Aviation and is responsible for creating; upgrading; maintaining; and managing aviation 
infrastructure in India. He informed the Committee that AAI provides Communication 
Navigation Surveillance/ Air Traffic Management (CNS/ ATM) services over Indian airspace 
and adjoining oceanic areas. He explained that AAI operates and maintains 136 airports 
including 30 Civil Enclaves at Defence airfields in the country. Out of these 136 airports, 110 
airports are operational, out of which 24 are AAI In ternational airports including 3 International 
Civil Enclaves; 10 are AAI Customs airports including 4 Customs Civil Enclaves; and 76 are 
AAI Domestic (Operational) airports, including 21 Domestic (Operational) Civil Enclaves. 
5. He apprised the Committee that under the National Civil Aviation Policy 2016, Ministry 
of Civil Aviation launched Regional Connectivity Scheme (RCS) UDAN on 21 st October, 2016. 
He further stated that under RCS UDAN, 359 routes have been operationalized so far, out of a 
total of 780  awarded routes and that in all, 1000 routes are to be operationalized till 2024. He 
also informed the Committee that 59 RCS airports including 5 Heliports and 2 water aerodromes 
(19 Underserved and 40 Unserved) have been successfully developed and operationalized. 
6. He stressed upon the fact that only 60% of the national airspace is available with AAI for 
civilian flights and that the rest is with the Ministry of Defence. He further stated that such 
restrictions cause higher travel distance, fuel burn, op erational cost and carbon footprint. He 
informed the Committee that under Flexible Use of Airspace (FUA), Upper airspace of 48 
Restricted Areas under IAF have been converted into Temporary Reserved Airspace (TRA) and 
through these TRA, Conditional Routes (CDR) were made available for civil flights.  
7. He elaborated that AAI Cargo Logistics and Allied Services (AAICLAS), a 100% 
subsidiary Company of AAI, presently operates 30 Domestic Air Cargo Terminals, 20 
International Air Cargo Terminals and at 7 airpor ts, domestic air cargo movement through 
passenger terminal with BCAS approval. 
8. The Secretary, Ministry of Civil Aviation informed the Committee that eight new flying 
training schools are being set up in the private sector. He apprised the Committee abou t the 
present situation with regard to airports at Bihta, Calicut, Holongi, Darbhanga, Jharsuguda and 
Thiruvanathapuram airports. 

64 
 
9. Members of the Committee raised various queries, some of which were replied to by the 
witnesses. The Chairman then directed  that written replies to the queries which remained 
unanswered may be sent to the Secretariat within a week. 
 (The witnesses then withdrew) 
10. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept. 
11. The meeting adjourned at 6:15 P.M. 
 
 New Delhi,                                                                                                           P. Narayanan 
28th July, 2021                                                                                            Director 
  

65 
 
XXIV 
TWENTY FOURTH MEETING 
The Committee met at 10:30 A.M. on Friday, the 30th July, 2021 in Committee Room - 
B, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
Members present: 
1. Shri T.G. Venkatesh                   - Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Sushil Kumar Modi 
3. Dr. Sonal Mansingh 
4. Shri Vinay Dinu Tendulkar 
  
LOK SABHA 
5. Shri Ramesh Chandra Majhi 
6. Shri K. Muraleedharan 
7. Shri Sunil Kumar Pintu 
8. Shri Prince Raj 
9. Shri Tirath Singh Rawat 
10. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
11. Shri Dushyant Singh 
12. Shri Ramdas Chandrabhanji Tadas 
13. Shri Manoj Tiwari 
  
SECRETARIAT 
Dr. Shikha Darbari, Joint Secretary & Financial Advisor 
Shri P. Narayanan, Director 
Shri Dinesh Singh, Additional Director 
Shri Rajendra Prasad Shukla, Additional Director 
Ms. Catherine John L., Under Secretary 
 
2   At the outset, the Chairman ex tended a very warm welcome to the Members of the 
Committee. He informed the Members that the agenda of the meeting was to consider and 
adopt the draft Report of the Committee on the subject „Functioning of Airports Authority of 
India‟ and sought their views on the draft Report. 

66 
 
3.      The Committee, thereafter, considered the draft Report and after a brief deliberation, 
adopted the same with some changes. 
4.      The Committee then decided to present/lay the Report of the Committee on the subject 
„Functioning of Airports Authority of India‟ to both the Houses of Parliament on 2 nd August, 
2021. The Committee, accordingly, authorized Shri T.G. Venkatesh, Chairman and in his 
absence, Shri Sambhaji Chhatrapati, M.P. to present the Report in Rajya Sabha.  Shri Rajiv 
Pratap Rudy, M.P. and in his absence, Shri Kamlesh Paswan, M.P. was authorized to lay the 
above mentioned Report on the Table of Lok Sabha. 
5.      *     *     *. 
6.     *     *     *. 
7.         The meeting adjourned at 11:00 A.M. 
  
New Delhi,                                                                                               P. Narayanan 
30th July, 2021                                                                                             Director 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

67 
 
 
 
ANNEXURES 
  

68 
 
30th December, 2020 
LIST OF WITNESSES APPEARING BEFORE THE DEPARTMENT- RELATED 
PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON  
TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE 
11:30 A.M. 
 
 
MINISTRY OF CIVIL AVIATION 
1. Shri Pradeep Singh Kharola Secretary  
2. Ms. Rubina Ali Joint Secretary 
3. Shri Amber Dubey  Joint Secretary 
4. Shri Pranjol  Chandra Director (Parliament) 
DIRECTORATE GENERAL OF CIVIL AVIATION (DGCA) 
5. Shri Arun Kumar Director  General 
BUREAU OF CIVIL AVIATION SECURITY (BCAS) 
6. Shri Jaideep Prasad Joint Director General 
AIR INDIA LTD. 
7. Shri Rajiv Bansal Chairman & Managing Director 
AIRPORTS AUTHORITY OF INDIA  
8. Shri Arvind Singh Chairman 
9. Shri Anuj Aggarwal Member (HR) 
10. Shri I.N. Murthy Member (Operations) 
11. Shri A.K. Pathak Member (Planning) 
12. Shri K. Vinayak Rao Member (Finance) 
13. Ms. Sangeeta Mahay Executive Director (Planning/RCS) 
AIRCRAFT ACCIDENT INVESTIGATION BUREAU  (AAIB) 
14. Shri Aurobindo Handa Director General 
COMMISSION OF  RAILWAY SAFETY (CRS) 
15. Shri Shailesh Kumar Pathak Chief Commissioner of Railway Safety 
16. Shri Rajiv Kumar Dy.  Commissioner of Railway Safety (G) 
17. Shri Rajmal Khoiwal Chief Signalling and Telecommunication Engineer 

69 
 
28th July, 2021 
 
LIST OF WITNESSES APPEARING BEFORE THE DEPARTMENT- RELATED 
PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE 
4:00 P.M. 
Ministry of Civil Aviation 
1 Shri Pradeep Singh Kharola Secretary 
2 Ms. Usha Padhee Joint Secretary 
3 Ms. Rubina Ali Joint Secretary 
4 Shri Amber Dubey Joint Secretary 
 
Air India 
5 Shri Rajiv Bansal CMD 
 
Directorate General of Civil Aviation 
6 Shri Arun Kumar Director General 
   
Bureau of Civil Aviation Security 
7 Shri Jaideep Prasad Joint Director General 
 
Aircraft Accident Investigation Bureau 
8 Shri Aurobindo Handa Director General 
 
Airports Economic Regulatory Authority of India 
9 Shri B. S. Bhullar Chairman 
 
Airports Authority of India 
10 Shri Sanjeev Kumar Chairman 
11 Shri I.N. Murthy Member (Operations) 
12 Shri A.K. Pathak Member (Planning) 
 
Commission of Railway Safety (CRS) 
13 Shri S. K. Pathak CCRS 
14 Shri Rajmal Khoiwal CSTE 
15 Shri Rajiv Kumar Deputy CRS (G) 
 
Pawan Hans Limited 
16 Shri Sanjeev Razdan CMD 
 
Indira Gandhi Rashtriya Uran Akademi (IGRUA) 
17 Shri Krishnendu Gupta Director 
 