Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
February, 2014/Magha, 1935 (Saka)
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
RAJYA SABHA 
ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE
TWO HUNDRED TWELFTH REPORT
REPORT NO. 
212
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 19th February, 2014)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 19th February, 2014)
Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/
Recommendations of the Committee contained in its
One Hundred Ninetieth Report on Development of
Tourism in Darjeeling and Sikkim

Website: http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail: rsc-tt@sansad.nic.in

69
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE
TWO HUNDRED TWELFTH REPORT
Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/
Recommendations of the Committee contained in its
One Hundred Ninetieth Report on Development of
Tourism in Darjeeling and Sikkim
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 19th February, 2014)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 19th February, 2014)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
February, 2014/Magha, 1935 (Saka)
Hindi version of this publication is also available

CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ..................................................................................... (i)-(ii)
2. I NTRODUCTION ..................................................................................................................... (iii)
3. L IST OF A BBREVIATIONS ..................................................................................................... (iv)
4. R EPORT ................................................................................................................................ 1—37
5. O BSERV ATIONS/CONCLUSIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS — A T A G LANCE ................................. 38—42
6. A NNEXURES .......................................................................................................................... 43—46
7. M INUTES .............................................................................................................................. 4 7—49
8. L IST OF R EPORTS ............................................................................................................... 50—68

COMPOSITION OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE
(2013-14)
1. Shri Sitaram Yechury — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Shashi Bhusan Behera
3. Shri Kunal Kumar Ghosh
4. Shri Narendra Kumar Kashyap
5. Prof. Alka Balram Kshatriya
6. Shri Aayanur Manjunatha
7. Shri V . Hanumantha Rao
8. Shri Satish Sharma
9. Shrimati Bimla Kashyap Sood
10. Shrimati Vasanthi Stanley
LOK SABHA
11. Yogi Adityanath
12. Shri Sisir Kumar Adhikari
13. Shri Ghanshyam Anuragi
14. Shri Subrata Bakshi
15. Shri Haribhai Parthibhai Chaudhary
16. Shrimati Tabassum Hasan
17. Dr. Mahesh Joshi
18. Shri M. Krishnaswamy
19. Shri G.V . Harsha Kumar
20. Shri S. Pakkirappa
21. Shri Prabodh Panda
22. Shri Deoraj Singh Patel
23. Shri Adhalrao Shivaji Patil
24. Shri Nilesh N. Rane
25. Shri Modugula Venugopala Reddy
26. Shri Madan Lal Sharma
27. Shri Dushyant Singh
28. Shri Rakesh Singh
29. Shri Shatrughan Sinha
30. Shri K. Sudhakaran
31. Shri Dinesh Trivedi
(i)

(ii)
SECRETARIAT
Shri N.K. Singh, Joint Secretary
Shri Swarabji B., Joint Director
Dr. (Shrimati) Subhashree Panigrahi, Joint Director
Shrimati Catherine John L., Assistant Director
Shri T. Kennedy Jesudossan, Committee Officer
Shri P.P. Raumon, Committee Officer

(iii)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman, Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport,
Tourism and Culture, having been authorised by the Committee to present on its behalf, do hereby
present this Two Hundred and Twelfth Report on “Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee contained in its One Hundred and Ninetieth
Report on the Development of Tourism in Darjeeling and Sikkim.
2. The One Hundred and Ninetieth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture was presented on the 27
th February, 2013 to the
Parliament.
3. The Action Taken Replies on the recommendations of the Committee contained in its One
Hundred and Ninetieth Report were received from the Ministry of Tourism on the 13 th February, 2014.
4. The Committee considered and adopted the Report in its meeting held on the 18 th February, 2014.
SITARAM YECHURY
NEW D ELHI; Chairman,
February 18, 2014 Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Magha 29, 1935 (Saka) Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture

LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS
AAI – Airports Authority of India
IAF – Indian Air Force
ASI – Archaeological Survey of India
BRO – Border Roads Organisation
CA T – Critical Area Test
CFA – Central Financial Assistance
CoS – Committee of Secretaries
DGHC – Darjeeling Gorkha Hill Council
DoNER – Department of North-Eastern Region
EOI – Expression of Interest
FCI – Food Craft Institute
IHM – Institute of Hotel Management
ILS – Instrument Landing System
JWG – Joint Working Group
LPG – Liquified Petroleum Gas
LTC – Leave Travel Concession
MAFI – Modernisation of Air Force Infrastructure
MHA – Ministry of Home Affairs
MICE – Meetings Incentives Conferences and Exhibitions
MoD – Ministry of Defence
NGO – Non-Governmental Organisation
NH – National Highways
NHAI – National Highways Authority of India
NJP – New Jalpaiguri
NLC – National Level Consultant
PHHL – Pawan Hans Helicopter Limited
PWD – Public Works Department
RTH – Road Transport and Highways
RTO – Regional Transport Office
SARDP – Special Accelerated Road Development Programme
SNT – Sikkim Nationalised Transport
TCS – Tata Consultancy Services
(iv)

1
REPORT
The Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Government on the
observations/recommendations as contained in its One Hundred Ninetieth Report on Development
of Tourism in Darjeeling and Sikkim which was presented on the 27
th February, 2013 to the
Parliament.
2. Action Taken Replies were received from the Ministry of Tourism on the 13 th February, 2014.
3. On scrutiny of the Action Taken Replies, the Committee has made observations on each
item of Action taken/proposed to be taken by the Government. The recommendations of the
Committee contained in the One Hundred and Ninetieth Report, action taken thereon by the Ministry
and further recommendations/observations of the Committee on each item of action taken have
been given in the succeeding paragraphs.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
4. The Committee notes that various tourism development schemes have been proposed for the
development of Darjeeling and adjoining areas. The Committee was informed that approximately
4000 people visit Tiger Hill every morning to watch the sunrise. The Committee is of the view that
augmentation of facilities at the observation with latest telescopes and such aids will attract more
tourists to this place. To cater to the requirement of influx in tourists, the Committee recommends
that projects initiated for the promotion of tourism in Darjeeling and the adjoining areas may be
completed within the proposed time-frame.
(Para 12)
Reply of the Government
5. The Government of West Bengal has informed that the Tiger Hill facility is being leased out
with the provision that the lessee will reconstruct and restore the said facility with modern
amenities. Tender has been floated to reconstruct the road connecting the Tiger Hill. Parking
facilities for tourist vehicles is also being augmented.
6. Efforts have been taken by the Gorkhaland Territorial Administration (GTA) for the projects
promoting tourism in Darjeeling to complete on a war footing.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
7. The Committee notes the reply and hopes that the steps taken by the Government
of West Bengal would attract more tourists to Tiger Hill. The Committee further desires to
know the details of the efforts made by GTA for promoting tourism in Darjeeling and the
status thereon.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
8. Darjeeling Ropeway:  The Committee hopes that this may be connected to Singla as served
earlier and later it can be extended to the other side of the river to Jorethang in Sikkim and taking
it to Namchi, making this a Darjeeling-Sikkim Ropeway, which would be a major tourist attraction
in both the places.
(Para 14)

2
Reply of the Government
9. The Government of Sikkim has informed that the Engineering Section of Tourism and Civil
Aviation Department has been directed to immediately take up feasibility study for reopening of
“Singla Ropeway” once again to connect Darjeeling with Sikkim.
10. As per the information received from West Bengal the four ropeways/cable cars will be
constructed in the GTA area on a ‘Joint Venture’ with Damodar Ropeways and Infra Limited,
Kolkata. The cost of which will be to the tune of Rs.5296.00 lakhs and the GTA share will be
Rs.1959.52 lakhs. One of the Ropeways will connect Tukver to Jamuni (Goke) Tourist Resort
which is near Jorthang (Sikkim) and five kms. away from Singla. Efforts will be made to connect
the Jamuni (Goke) to Singla in the near future.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
11. The Committee is happy to note that the recommendation has evoked positive
response from the State Government.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
12. Darjeeling Himalayan Railway:  The Committee, therefore, recommends that renovation/
restoration of all stations from Siliguri station to Darjeeling Station should be taken up. Not only the
Railway Stations, but the adjoining areas with tea estates, old buildings, etc. should be brought under
‘Tourism and Heritage Park’. Siliguri Town, Sukna, Tindharia, Kurseong, Sonada, Ghoom and Darjeeling
station need to be provided with tourist information and felicitation centre and other amenities.
(Para 15)
Reply of the Government
13. The Ministry of Railways has informed that N.F. Railway has replied that over the last one
year, several steps have been taken to improve the facilities for tourists and for enrichment of their
experience. Some of these measures are –
(i) Introduction of an extra pair of trains between Darjeeling and Kurseong.
(ii) Reint roduction of Jungle Safari Special between Siliguri and Rongtong with panoramic
coaches.
(iii) Introduction of on board audio system for announcing special features of
surroundings while on run.
(iv) Introduction of fourth Joy Ride Special between Darjeeling and Ghum.
14. The Railway has further advised that originating passengers have gone up from 38,389 in
2011-12 to 61,300 in 2012-13 i.e. and increase of 60%. Also, the passenger earnings during
2012-13 have gone up to Rs.132.31 lakh as against Rs.69.67 lakh in 2011-12 i.e. an increase of
about 89.75%.
15. As regards renovation/restoration of Station buildings over DHR, regular maintenance is
being done to avoid any deterioration to the structures. All works of repair and maintenance are
being done keeping in mind the ‘Outstanding Universal Value of the Darjeeling Himalayan Railway
World Heritage Site in conformity to UNESCO guidelines. It is planned to spend about Rs.50 lakh
under revenue on regular maintenance of Station buildings during 2013-14 as against Rs.36 lakh
spent in 2012-13. In addition, following steps have been taken for development of Darjeeling
Himalayan Railway –

3
● A work of ‘Darjeeling – Heritage Preservation Project of DHR Phase-I at approx. cost
of Rs.147.60 lakhs was sanctioned in 2009-10. The work of restoration and
conservation of Ghum station has also been sanctioned. Ministry of Railways has also
initiated formulation of Fund-in-Trust agreement with UNESCO for consolidating the
Comprehensive Conservation and Management Plan for DHR World Heritage Site.
● A work of upgradation of maintenance facilities at Tindharia and Kurseong and
improving presentation of DHR rolling stock and traction costing Rs.8.95 crore has
been identified for inclusion in WP 2014-15.
16. Trains operations over a portion of DHR have been disrupted due to repeated landslides in
2010, 2011 and 2012. Truncated services are being run on both sides of the breached section viz.
between (a) Darjeeling to Kurseong and (b) Siliguri to Chunabhatti. Restoration work for the
adjacent highway having common formation has been awarded on 6.8.2013 by PWD/NH/West
Bengal at an approx. cost of Rs.60.45 crore with a completion period of 18 months. Railways has
also taken need based restoration works cost approx. Rs.3 crore in the section.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
17. The Committee notes the efforts made to improve the train service between Siliguri
and Darjeeling. The Committee hopes that the complete overhaul of this railway stretch
with beautification of stations will be able to attract more tourists in Darjeeling.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
18. Neighbouring Country Borders:  The Committee, therefore, takes the view that allweather;
single window facility like customs and immigration clearances, foreign exchange and other
information should be available to the tourists at these spots. Inter-country reciprocal arrangement
with Nepal and Bhutan with regard to taxis, permits, foreign exchange, etc. for tourists between
India-Bhutan and India-Nepal were demanded by the tour operators. The Committee recommends
that the matter may be taken up with the Ministry of External Affairs.
(Para 16)
Reply of the Government
19. The Ministry of External Affairs has informed that it supports the proposal for improving
the border infrastructure to facilitate tourism and people to people interaction in general. Nepal and
Bhutan share an open border with India and therefore there is a large movement of people between
India and Nepal and India and Bhutan. Provision of good infrastructure would facilitate better
people to people interaction.
20. The MEA has further informed as under:
A large number of Bangladesh nationals use the Changrabandha-Burimari border crossing to
go to India for tourism as well as business purposes. Changrabandha in Cooch Behar
district is a functioning Land Customs Station (LCS) on Indian side. Burimari in Bangladesh
is the 3rd largest land port of Bangladesh and it handles exports to and imports from India,
Nepal and Bhutan. However, infrastructure at Changrabandha-Burimari border, at present, is
not in a condition conducive for promotion of tourism. The immigration/customs facilities
are inadequate and in a primitive State. Condition of the roads on the Indian side is not good
and needs to be improved further, if tourism is to be promoted. Hotels, restaurants, facility
of payment in foreign currency and availability of foreign exchange brokers are required.
The Changrbandha-Burimari border crossing has high potential for promotion of incoming

4
tourist traffic from Bangladesh provided infrastructure is adequately developed. It may be
noted that from this border crossing, Siliguri, Darjeeling and Sikkim are easily accessible.
Developing tourist-friendly infrastructure at Chandrabhanga – Burimari will allow de-
congestion of the border crossing at Benapole-Petrapole which handles most of the
commercial and tourist traffic between India and Bangladesh.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
21. The Committee recommends that Border Road Organisation may take immediate
steps to improve the road condition at the Indian side of the Chandrabhanga – Burimari
Border. The Government also may provide adequate facilities for easy clearance by customs/
immigration departments. The foreign exchange facilities need to be provided with the
involvement of the nationalised banks operating in the area. The Committee also
recommends that Ministry of Tourism may take steps to improve the infrastructural
facilities at the Changrabandha-Burimari Border.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
22. The Committee, therefore, recommends that ‘Tourism day’ should be celebrated with
festivity to encourage tourism sector on regular basis and adequate allocation of funds should be
provided by the Government.
(Para 17)
Reply of the Government
23. The Government of West Bengal has informed that the ‘Tourism Day’ will be celebrated
with due festivity in Darjeeling this year.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
24. The Committee notes the reply.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
25. The Committee was informed by the stakeholders that they are not allowed to put
streetlights and build footpaths. The Committee, during the visit witnessed itself darkness on the
streets and lack of proper walking space in the roads. The Committee notes that such measure
would only enhance the market capacity of the place and recommends that efforts should be made
to put proper streetlights and build footpaths.
(Para 18)
Reply of the Government
26. The Government of West Bengal has informed that the Municipalities in the Darjeeling Hills
is aware of this fact. Efforts are being made by the municipality to put street lights. The footpaths
have also been constructed by Darjeeling Municipality by removing encroachers.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
27. The Committee desires to be apprised of the status of the efforts made to address
these issues.

5
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
28. The Committee notes that Bankim Chandra Park is an important component of tourism in
Kalimpong. For development of tourism in Darjeeling and adjoining region, the development of
Kalimpong is crucial. The Committee, therefore, recommends that immediate steps for the
development of Kalimpong and also Bankim Chandra Park should be taken. The Committee notes
that the Ministry of Tourism has proposed setting up of horticultural park, orchard garden and
creation of infrastructure facilities for gliding in Kalimpong. The Committee also recommends that
the State Government may be consulted and sensitized to submit new proposals in this regard.
(Para 21)
Reply of the Government
29. The Government of West Bengal has informed that various new tourism destinations are
being developed by the GTA with the help of Tourism Department, Government of West Bengal in
the Kalimpong Sub-Division. As such survey has already been done and the DPR will be submitted
to the Government of West Bengal.
30. Proposal to develop Bamkin Chandra Park in Kalimpong will be placed in the GTA Sabha
early.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
31. The Committee notes the reply. The Committee emphasises the need for the
development of Kalimpong as early as possible.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
32. The Committee recommends for the proper maintenance and upkeep of the park by the
concerned agencies.
(Para 22)
Reply of the Government
33. The Government of West Bengal has informed that the DPR is already prepared to develop
the Janmukti Park situated in the heart of Kalimpong town.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
34. The Committee notes the reply.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
35. The Committee takes a serious view of the utter neglect of Mirik Lake. The Committee,
therefore, recommends that there should be a proper sewage disposal mechanism for the area so
that the process of polluting the Mirik Lake could be checked. The Committee also recommends
that de-silting should be done in Mirik Lake and, therefore, proper maintenance work should be
carried out at regular intervals.
(Para 23)
Reply of the Government
36. The Government of West Bengal has informed that the de-silting of Mirik Lake is of
paramount importance which is already underway. De-silting is being done by pumping the dirt

6
and filth out from the Mirik Lake which is disposed off in a manner convenient to the local
populace.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
37. The Committee is happy to note that de-silting of Mirik Lake has been undertaken.
The Committee hopes that the new initiatives would check the problem of pollution of the
lake.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
38. The Committee recommends that telescopes and such facilities enabling the tourists to get
clear view of the mountain may be arranged at the Tiger Hills.
(Para 24)
Reply of the Government
39. The Government of West Bengal has informed that the GTA at present has only one
Telescope of International standard. The proposal for buying more will be made to the Tourism
Department, Government of West Bengal.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
40. The Committee recommends that Ministry of Tourism, Government of India may
extend financial grants for the installation of modern telescopes at Tiger Hills.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
41. Darjeeling is famous for its beautiful Tea Gardens spread far and wide having immense
potential for tourism. The concept of ‘Tea Tourism’ should be explored for tourism purposes. The
Committee was informed during the discussions with the stakeholders that for this purpose Lease
agreement is to be reviewed to include tourism in it. The Committee recommends that the State
Government may be consulted for taking necessary steps in this regard.
(Para 26)
Reply of the Government
42. The Government of West Bengal has informed that Five Tea Gardens had already applied
to GTA regarding starting Tea-Tourism in their respective gardens. The GTA had asked to submit
the DPR from the said Tea Gardens before issuing of permission to run the Eco-Tourism in the
said gardens. In the meanwhile survey is being conducted by GTA for fostering Eco-Tourism
within the entire GTA area.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
43. The Committee notes the reply.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
44. MICE tourism:  The Committee notes that these two places have immense potential for this
purpose. There are no facility for holding conference in Darjeeling, as such, the corporate sector
is not interested in visiting the place. In Sikkim also the situation is more or less the same. The
Committee therefore recommends that the State Governments of West Bengal and Sikkim should

7
take benefit from the above mentioned scheme as so far they have not sent any proposal for setting
up convention centres in these places.
(Para 28)
Reply of the Government
45. The Government of Sikkim has informed that the Engineering Section of Tourism and Civil
Aviation Department has been directed to submit feasibility report and Detail Project Report for
setting up Convention Centres for seeking approval and sanction of Ministry of Tourism,
Government of India.
46. The Government of West Bengal has informed that the GTA is also of the view that
conference facility is of imminent importance. Proposal will be sent early to construct/develop one
conference facility in Darjeeling.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
47. The Committee desires to know the feedback from the State Governments on how
far they have proceeded on the development of conference facilities at Darjeeling and
Sikkim.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
48. The Committee recommends that subsidy should be provided to smaller and Budget hotels
on priority basis. The Committee is of the strong view that there is need to give special status to
Darjeeling and keep it at par with NE States so that it can also get exemption in taxes, etc. If
timely action is not taken the tourist flow will gradually decrease and this will affect the economy
of the region as the major source of employment is tourism related services.
(Para 29)
Reply of the Government
49. The Ministry of Tourism has a voluntary scheme for granting approval for hotels at the
project stage based on documentation. The project approval is given in 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 Star and
Heritage (Basic) categories. Hotels after becoming operational can seek classification under 5
Star Deluxe, 5 Star, 4 Star, 3 Star, 2 Star 1 Star and Heritage categories (Grand, Classic and
Basic).
50. The Ministry of Tourism had a scheme “ Incentive to Accommodation Infrastructure”
under which financial incentives in the form of Interest Subsidy and Capital Subsidy to new budget
category of hotels were provided . While the Interest Subsidy scheme was available upto 31.3.2002,
the Capital Subsidy was available upto 31.3.2008 . The proposal for continuation of scheme
‘Incentives Scheme for Budget Hotels’ to provide subsidy to private sector for augmenting the
budget accommodation in the categories of 1, 2 and 3 star hotels was discussed with the Planning
Commission. The Planning Commission was of the view that the Ministry of Tourism need not
pursue this scheme.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
51. The Committee notes the reply. The Committee is of the view that Government of
India should chalk out a scheme suitable to the Darjeeling area to provide subsidy to
smaller and budget hotels.

8
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
52. The Committee also visited the West Bengal Tourism hotel at Mirik. The place is situated
atop a hill with scenic beauty and the rooms are very spacious. However, the facility was not
opened for visitors. The Committee noted that the place away from the crowd can be a good
staying option if properly maintained. The Committee recommends that the possibility of opening
the hotel for the public may be explored.
(Para 30)
Reply of the Government
53. The Government of West Bengal has informed that the proposal for opening the West
Bengal Tourism Hotel at Mirik to the public and the tourists, will be made by the Tourism
Department, Government of West Bengal.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
54. The Committee notes the reply .
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
55. The Committee recommends that scheme for subsidy to Home Stays should be included in
the subsidy scheme for building tourist accommodation in villages. The Committee recommends
that there is an immediate need to formulate a rural tourism policy and support for development
of some model tourism villages in the Darjeeling and Sikkim region.
(Para 31)
Reply of the Government
56. The Ministry of Tourism has a scheme for the approval of Home Stay known as “Incredible
India Bed and Breakfast /Home Stay Establishments” to supplement the availability of
accommodation in the Metros and tourist destinations in the country. The basic idea is to provide
a clean and affordable accommodation to international and domestic tourists along with experience
of Indian customs, traditions and cuisine.
57. Under this scheme, approval is given only in those cases where the owner/promoter of the
establishment along with his /her family is physically residing in the same establishment and letting
out minimum one room and maximum six rooms (12 beds).
58. The Ministry of Tourism provides CFA to States under Rural Tourism Scheme for
Infrastructure Development.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
59. The Committee recommends that “Incredible India Bed and Breakfast/Home Stay
Establishment” to be implemented in the Darjeeling and Sikkim region for promotion of
tourism there. The Government of India should guide the concerned authorities to
implement the Scheme in Darjeeling and Sikkim.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
60. The Committee was also informed of the towers which have been installed on the rooftops
and the hills which is an eyesore to the beauty of Darjeeling. There is urgent need for relocating
them. Further, there are BSNL cables lying all over the city in a haphazard manner. These cables

9
are potential danger and also destroy the beauty of the place. The Committee recommends that
local authorities should take corrective measure to solve the problem.
(Para 32)
Reply of the Government
61. The Government of West Bengal has informed that the GTA has already issued notice to
the respective mobile tower companies for removal of mobile towers situated at Tiger Hill,
Darjeeling and Deolo Tourist Lodge, Kalimpong immediately.
62. The Darjeeling Municipality will be asked to take appropriate measures to rearrange the
BSNL cables.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
63. The Committee is happy to note the initiatives taken by the GTA for removing the
eye-sores and potential hazards of Darjeeling.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
64. The Committee recommends that drinking water should be arranged on priority basis and
special schemes for the purpose should be formulated. The Committee hopes that the project will
be completed within a period of 1 and ½ year as informed to the Committee.
(Para 34)
Reply of the Government
65. The Government of West Bengal has informed that the Balasan project which is the project
to augment drinking water facility in Darjeeling is being undertaken by the PHE Department and
will be commissioned very early. The GTA has also undertaken measures to provide drinking water
in the other hill towns.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
66. The Committee hopes that drinking water problem in the area will be addressed
properly by the steps taken by GTA.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
67. Since Ministry of Tourism is already holding the “clean India” campaign, the Committee
recommends that Darjeeling should be included in the campaign. The Committee also recommends
that local bodies and NGOs may be involved the ‘Clean India’ campaign at the field levels.
(Para 35)
Reply of the Government
68. Mountain Railways of India in Darjeeling, West Bengal are one of the destinations identified
under Campaign Clean India. This Campaign is to be sustained through adoption of monuments/
destinations by PSU/Corporate sector for cleanliness and upkeep as part of their Corporate Social
Responsibility. The Adopter shall ensure 24X7 maintenance and upkeep of cleanliness of the site
through service providers for cleaning as per acceptable standards and ensure monitoring through
a credible NGO to be engaged by them.

10
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
69. The Committee desires to know details of the activities undertaken under the ‘Clean
India’ campaign in Darjeeling.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
70. Erratic supply of LPG:  The Committee recommends that the matter may be taken up with
concerned Ministries/agencies to ensure that hospitality sector does not face the shortage of LPG
cylinders.
(Para 36)
Reply of the Government
71. The Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas has informed that there is no problem for
supply of commercial LPG cylinders to Hospitality sector in Sikkim and Darjeeling. Further, Indian
Oil Corporation Limited (IOC) has advised their local officials to be more vigilant in the said
markets and regularly meet the various Hoteliers/officials of various Hospitality sector to give full
assurance about the regular supply of commercial cylinders to them as per requirement.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
72. The Committee takes note of the reply. The Committee hopes that the hospitality
industry would utilize the facility promptly.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
73. The Committee notes that at present, Sikkim primarily is seen as a standalone destination.
However, it can be a unique combination of various products of tourist interest. These include
culture, nature and adventure tourism products. The ultimate aim is to develop Sikkim as a part
of Buddhist Circuit and an eco-tourism destination in the country. The Committee recommends that
efforts should be made to integrate all the tourism products. The Committee hopes that these
adversities like poor connectivity, under developed roads, expensive travel costs, etc. should be met
with proper study on the actual problems and implementing modern technologies for the
construction works etc.
(Para 40)
Reply of the Government
74. The Government of Sikkim has informed that the Tourism Department is now geared up
to promote Sikkim as a unique destination which includes culture, nature and adventure tourism
products with the ultimate aim of developing Sikkim as a part of Buddhist Circuit and Eco-tourism
destination in the country. All efforts will be made to integrate all tourism products. Proper study
on actual problems and adversities like poor connectivity, under developed roads, expensive travel
costs etc. will be made.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
75. The Committee desires that it may be apprised of the outcome of the study made
on poor connectivity, under developed roads, expensive travel costs etc. and the action -
taken thereon.

11
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
76. The Committee has observed that many projects sanctioned during 2008-09 and 2009-10 are
still to be completed. The Committee recommends that efforts should be made to complete these
projects at the earliest.
(Para 42)
Reply of the Government
77. The Government of Sikkim has informed that the Engineering Section has been directed to
complete the project sanctioned during the 2008-09 and 2009-10 as early as possible and any short
falls or project hindrance are to be reported for immediate information and further action by the
Government of Sikkim.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
78. The Committee desires to know the progress made on each project as mentioned in
the reply.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
79. The Committee also recommends that ropeway between Namchi to Samdruptse may be
considered to take tourists from Namchi which will not only save time but will also to have a
panoramic view of the place. The Committee during its field visits to the Char-Dham temple
complex has seen the well organized facilities for the pilgrim tourists there. The Committee is also
impressed with the simulator aided film show which is a major tourist attraction there. The
Committee recommends that such initiatives need to be developed at other tourist locations in
Sikkim as these places will be on must visit places by a tourist once landed there.
(Para 43)
Reply of the Government
80. The Government of Sikkim has informed that the Engineering Section of tourism and Civil
Aviation Department has been directed to take up immediate feasibility study.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
81. The progress made on the feasibility study and its outcome may be informed to the
Committee.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
82. The Committee recommends for construction of steps for approaching the river and the
pathways. The sandy beach are below the bridge could be cleaned up and permanent picnic
spots could be set up. The drive down to Relli village is through picturesque villages. Suitable
viewing points should be constructed with facilities for drinking water, toilets and refreshment
kiosks.
(Para 44)
Reply of the Government
83. The Government of West Bengal informed that the maintenance works of existing roads/
pathway towards Relli river and Tourist Complex is under progress.

12
84. The GTA has already taken up the matters for further developmental works i.e. construction
of tourist resort at Relli in the following manner:
(1) Structural cost of Restaurant for the amount of Rs.36,77,572/-.
(2) Structural cost of changing room for the amount of Rs.37,82,769/-.
(3) Structural cost of ten nos. huts for the amount of Rs.2,07,93,078/-.
(4) Structural cost of ten nos. circular cluster for the amount of Rs.35,57,418/-.
(5) Structural cost of twenty nos. shops/Kiosk for the amount of Rs.1,04,94,557/-.
(6) Structural cost of ten nos. Gazibos for the amount of Rs.26,45,690/-.
(7) Cost of land development for the amount of Rs.17,51,462/-
(8) Cost of drain for the amount of Rs.10,75,235/-.
(9) Structural cost of ten nos. fishing decks for the amount of Rs.5,80,478/-.
(10) Structural cost of open air theater for the amount of Rs.48,35,299/-.
(11) Cost of internal pathway for the amount of Rs.21,71,319/-
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
85. The Committee is happy to know that its recommendations are at various stages of
implementation and hopes, all of them would be acted upon.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
86. Across the Relli bridge, a small hamlet is situated the Gorkha Village complex with cottage
and a restaurant maintained by DGHC Tourism. These facilities should be opened round the year
for the sake of the tourists.
(Para 46)
Reply of the Government
87. The Government of West Bengal informed that the GTA would like to mention here that the
Wayside Inn and Cottages situated at Relli, Kalimpong under Tourism Development of GTA always
remains open throughout the year for visiting tourists.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
88. The Committee notes the reply and recommends that adequate publicity/marketing
strategies need to be undertaken to popularise the Gorkha Village complex cottage and
restaurant of DGHC as the business there was not upto the mark when the Committee
visited there.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
89. The Committee recommends that development of Relli Village a potential tourist spot should
be initiated by the Ministry of Tourism and the wayside inn, situated in an excellent location on
a small hillock just beyond the bridge needs to be spruced up and remain open on all occasions
for the service of tourists and guests.
(Para 47)

13
Reply of the Government
90. The Government of West Bengal informed that the existing wayside inn of Reli remains
always open on all occasions for the service of tourists and guests.
91. Besides, the DPR for setting up of passenger ropeways from Deolo to Relli Tourist
Complex for the amount of Rs.2635.00 lakhs is with TFC, Government of India, New Delhi for
project appraisal and it is learnt that it is in final stage.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
92. The Committee appreciates the steps taken in this regard and hopes that the
ropeway would be able to attract more tourists to Relli Village. The Committee recommends
that Ministry of Tourism, Government of India, may apprise the Committee about the
present status of the ropeway project.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
93. The Committee also recommends that Institute of Travel and Tourism Management in
Sikkim on the lines of the Tourism Management Institute at Gwalior for serving the interest of
tourism industry of North East may be established.
(Para 49)
Reply of the Government
94. The State Institute of Hotel Management and a Food Craft Institute already exists in
Gangtok and Darjeeling, respectively. In addition, there is a proposal to set up an IITTM in the
North East during the 12th Plan. Once the IITTM is in position, it is felt that the manpower
requirement of the State would be taken care of.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
95. The Committee notes the reply and recommends that training facilities for tourist-
guides may also be introduced in these institutes.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
96. The Committee notes that Darjeeling district and Sikkim, both have the potential for
capacity building. They have huge manpower resources which should be tapped for the tourism
industry in the States and also for seeking placement outside the States. Trained manpower
presents positive image in the tourists mind and helps for flourishing the tourism industry. The
Committee recommends that the States should seek the benefit from the scheme of capacity
building to exploit human resources.
(Para 51)
Reply of the Government
97. Ministry of Tourism has been actively supporting Sikkim and Darjeeling District in West
Bengal for the purpose of Capacity Building by providing training in Hospitality trades to the
candidates as under:
(i) State Institute of Hotel Management, Gangtok (SIHM Gangtok):
Rs.14,04,710/- was released to SIHM Gangtok on 16.03.2012 for conduct of HSRT
training under CBSP scheme. SIHM Gangtok had completed the training of 140 candidates
by 31.03.2013 against the target of 300 candidates.

14
Rs.5,24,000/- was released to SIHM Gangtok on 08.03.2013 to conduct the Skill testing
and Certification programme for 100 candidates under HSRT Programme of CBSP Scheme.
(ii) FCI Namchi:
Rs.26,43,250/- was released to FCI Namchi on 15.03.2012 to conduct HSRT training for
500 candidates under CBSP scheme. FCI Namchi had completed the training of 250
candidates by 31.03.2013 through SIHM Gangtok.
A proposal from Sikkim Tourism Development Corporation Ltd. for providing training to
300 candidates under HSRT is under process for sanction of funds.
(iii) FCI Darjeeling:
Rs.9,52,000/- was released to FCI Darjeeling on 25.09.2011 to conduct HSRT training for
250 candidates under CBSP scheme.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
98. The Committee observes that there is an under-achievement of targets set for
‘Huner Se Rozgar Tak’ (HSRT) Scheme in three centres above. Only 50% or less of the
target has been the achievement during the period. The Committee recommends that proper
publicity of the scheme along with successful placement of the trained people should be
undertaken for success of the scheme.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
99. In the case of hospitality education, which is equally important for the tourism development
of Sikkim, the Committee has come to know that there is no proposal from the State Government.
The Committee recommends that Ministry of Tourism may consult the State Government for a
suitable location for establishment of an Institute of Tourism Studies and the project may be taken
up.
(Para 52)
Reply of the Government
100. There is at present no proposal for establishment of an Institute of Tourism Studies in
Sikkim.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
101. The Committee desires to know whether the Ministry of Tourism consulted the State
Government in pursuance of the Committee’s recommendation and if not, what are the
reasons therefor? The Government of Sikkim may be advised appropriately to start an
Institute of Tourism Studies.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
102. The Committee during deliberations noted that Mirik can be a potential tourist destination.
They should be made aware of the tourism potential in the area so that they could make a better
earning from it in the days ahead. There is also potential for Home stays in Mirik town which
can be explored. For exploiting the resources the local people should be trained under some
schemes.
(Para 53)

15
Reply of the Government
103. The Government of West Bengal has informed that the drinking water supply line, repair
of approach road and car park including fencing and drain work for Mirik tourist lodge for the
amount of Rs.13,31,632/- is under progress. The repair and renovation of Day Centre at Mirik for
the amount of Rs.35, 63, 779/- is under progress. The renovation works of 12 nos. Swiss cottages
including surface drain works, approach steps to basement, protection for restaurant, repair,
painting of fencing works, repair of approach road, repair of drinking water supply, repair of
GI pipes lines and construction of protection works near cottages nos. 6, 7 and 8 for the amount
of Rs.1,17,67,814 is under progress. The construction of ornamental grill fencing works including
two nos. gates and pathway for Mirik Lake side garden at Mirik for the amount of Rs.1,07,75,629/-
is under progress. The GTA has already sent the proposal to the State Government for introduction
of Home stay within eight blocks falling under its jurisdiction.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
104. The Committee hopes that the above mentioned steps would help in increasing the
number of tourists visiting the Mirik Lake.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
105. The Committee recommends that the studies/surveys should be completed in time and action
should be taken on the study to improve various aspects of tourism. The Committee also
recommends identifying the source markets and carrying out intensive market research through
qualified consultants. The Committee also recommends that collection of tourism data should also
be made for Darjeeling.
(Para 55)
Reply of the Government
106. The field work of the tourism survey for the State of Sikkim was completed in
December, 2012 and the draft report of the survey has been received. The Ministry of Tourism
is in the process of conducting tourism survey in the State of West Bengal including Darjeeling in
phase-III.
107. The Ministry of Tourism has conducted a research study during 2010-11 in the source
markets United Kingdom(UK), United Arab Emirates (UAE) and Australia and New Zealand. Out of
these countries, the UK and Australia feature in the top 15 source markets for Foreign Tourists
Arrivals (FTA) to India during 2010 and 2011.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
108. The Committee notes the reply.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
109. The Committee is of the view that the increased transport connectivity to the Sikkim would
be a major boost for attracting travelers to the region. The Committee recommends that Ministry
of Tourism may take up the issues with the Railway Board for introducing more trains, increasing
frequency of existing trains and introduction of new trains to this sector.
(Para 59)
Reply of the Government
110. The Ministry of Railways has informed that at present, 59 pairs of Mail/Express trains and

16
12 pairs of Passenger trains are available from New Jalpaiguri station to different parts of the
country. These include 3 pairs of Mail/Express trains for Mumbai, 10 pairs of Mail/Express trains
for Delhi, 21 pairs of Mail/Express trains for Kolkata, 2 pairs of Mail/Express trains for Bangalore
and 7 pairs of Mail/Express trains for Chennai.
111. Connectivity of New Jalpaiguri from prominent destinations, which would help boost
Tourism, would further be strengthened with the introduction/extension of the following services
announced in Railway Budget 2013-14.
Introduction:
Kamakhya-Bangalore AC Express (Weekly).
Rajendra Nagar- New Tinsukia Express (Weekly).
Kamakhya-Anand Vihar (T) Express (Weekly).
Kamakhya-Jodhpur Express (Weekly).
Howrah-New Jalpaiguri AC Express (Weekly).
Extension:
15715/15716 Ajmer-Kishanganj Express to New Jalpaiguri
15723/15724 New Jalpaiguri – Darbhanga Express to Sitamarhi.
112. Furthermore, introduction of new train services and extension of existing services is
ongoing process subject to traffic justification, operational feasibility, availability of resources,
competing demand, etc.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
113. The Committee notes the reply.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
114. Bagdogra Airport is the only airport which supports a large area, including the States of
West Bengal, Sikkim, Bihar and Assam. It also caters to countries like Bhutan, Nepal and
Bangladesh. This is the only profitable terminal for Northeast India. Bagdogra needs to be better
connected to the rest of the country with flights for Mumbai, Bangalore, Dibrugarh, Gaya etc.
Also, a facility to connect most of the South and Southeast Asian capitals.
(Para 64)
115. The Committee is also of the view that this sector has good tourist potential due to
Buddhist connection and that needs to be explored in a big way. The Travel Agents Association
also suggested for operating international flights from Bagdogra to Paro (Bhutan) and Bangkok
(Thailand). The Committee, therefore, recommends that the commercial viability may be assessed
in these sectors.
(Para 69)
116. The Committee hopes that the efforts in enhancement of the tourist’s to these areas, the
commercial viability will be improved and profitable flights could be operated in future.
(Para 70)

17
Reply of the Government
117. The Ministry of Civil Aviation has informed that Operations in domestic sector have been
deregulated and flights are being operated by concerned airlines on the basis of commercial viability
subject to adherence of Route Dispersal Guidelines (RDG). Government has laid down Route
Dispersal Guidelines with a view to achieve better regulation of air transport services taking into
account the need for air transport services of different regions of the country including North-East
region. It is, however, up to the airlines to provide airlines to provide air services to specific places
depending upon the traffic demand and commercial viability while complying with Route Dispersal
Guidelines.
118. As per the RDG , the airline has to deploy 10% of the capacity deployed on Cat-I route onto
Cat-II route which includes NER, J&K, A&N Island and Lakshadweep.
119. The traffic rights on international sector are regulated through bilateral Air Service
Agreement between the countries which is based on principles of sovereignty of nations, nationality
of carriers and reciprocity in terms of commercial opportunities for airlines of each side. Bagdogra
is available as a point of call to Bhutan and Druk Air, the designated carrier of Bhutan is operating
2 services per week on Paro-Bagdogra-Bangkok Sector. The operation of Indian carriers, within
available bilateral traffic rights, on international sector is guided by their commercial assessment/
judgment. No Indian carrier has, so far, shown interest to operate flights to international
destinations from Bagdogra.
120. The Ministry of Civil Aviation has informed that the traffic rights on international sector are
regulated through bilateral Air Service Agreement between the countries which is based on
principles of sovereignty of nations, nationality of carriers and reciprocity in terms of commercial
opportunities for airlines of each side. Bagdogra is available as a point of call to Bhutan and Druk
Air, the designated carrier of Bhutan is operating 2 services per week on Paro-Bagdogra-Bangkok
Sector. The operation of Indian carriers, within available bilateral traffic rights, on international
sector is guided by their commercial assessment/judgment. No Indian carrier has, so far, shown
interest to operate flights to international destinations from Bagdogra.
121. The Ministry of Civil Aviation has informed that the recommendation seeks connectivity
from Bagdogra to Paro (Bhutan) and Bangkok (Thailand). The comments may be read as given
against the recommendation No.69 above.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
122. The Committee takes note of the reply. However, the Committee desires that the
Ministry of Civil Aviation may further explore the possibility of operating international
flights from Bagdogra to Paro and Bangkok.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
123. The Committee, keeping in view the limitations for operating civil flights at a Defence
Airport, has suggested that Air India Flights need to be increased for linking Bagdogra with major
cities of the country. Since the LTC package is open to the North East region, the passenger rush
is peak during the summer holidays and so the Air India should make arrangements for getting
more passengers accommodated by ensuring extra flight/seat availability in the sector.
(Para 65)
Reply of the Government
124. The Ministry of Civil Aviation has informed that Air India currently operates flights to/from
Bagdogra with the routing and aircraft types as follows:–

18
Routing Frequency/week Aircraft type
Delhi-Bagdogra and vice versa Daily A321
Kolkata-Bagdogra and vice versa 4/week A320/A319
125. However, AI presently does not have the resources for introducing any additional operations
on these routes.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
126. The Committee notes the reply.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
127. The Committee recommends that the Ministry of Civil Aviation/Airports Authority of India
may take up with the Ministry of Defence and Indian Air Force in getting the airport facilities
upgraded as per the above proposal. The matter may also be taken up with Government of West
Bengal for making available additional land for expansion of the Bagdogra Airport.
(Para 74)
Reply of the Government
128. The Ministry of Civil Aviation has informed the following.
● Bagdogra Airport (belongs to IAF) is a Custom Airport. AAI maintains a Civil Enclave.
Limited international flights operate through this airport. Night operations are not
permitted by IAF. AAI had planned to install Cat.I ILS and Cat.1 Approach Lights in
coordination with IAF (airport operator), subject to handling over of land by State
Government. For this purpose, State Government has to hand over approximately 13
acres of land free of cost and free from all encumbrances. The land is yet to be
handed over by State Government after removing the encumbrances
● Meanwhile, IAF had informed vide  letter No.Air HQ/S 17705/1/1/ATS dated
22nd December, 2011 that they are taking up modernization of Airfield infrastructure for
30 major IAF bases including Bagdogra for installation of navigational aids and lighting
system i.e. CAT.II ILS with LPDME and RVR, DVOR/DME, TACAN and CAT.II
Airfield Lighting System and the expected date of installation of navigational aids at
Bagdogra is during March-Sept.2014.
● Meantime, Chairman AAI vide D.O. letter No.38/62/2013-ARII(P) dated 20 th February,
2013 had requested Chief of the Air Staff for installing and operatinalizing Night
Landing facility at Bagdogra with adequate manpower.
129. AAI has plans, as per growth in traffic, for expansion of Civil Enclave, which includes a
New Terminal Building, apron and city side development in phased manner. With this view,
Government of West Bengal has been requested to acquire and hand over total 118 acres of land
(79 acres required for Phase-I development). The response regarding availability/handling over of
this land has not been received from Government of West Bengal.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
130. The Committee desires that the matter of handing over of the land may be pursued
with the State Government and hopes that the action on this, will be taken on priority
basis.

19
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
131. The Committee desires that the Ministry of Civil Aviation may look into the possibility of
renaming the airport.
(Para 75)
Reply of the Government
132. The Ministry of Civil Aviation has informed that the Naming/Renaming of airports is
generally considered based on the recommendations of the State Governments. No request has been
received in this Ministry regarding Renaming of Bagdogra Airport from the concerned State
Government.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
133. The Committee notes the reply.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
134. The Committee was also informed that the Airport is suitable for smaller aircrafts. As such
the Committee desires that the frequency of the aircrafts is to be increased to be able to lift more
tourists. Keeping in view the density of international tourists, the airport should be made to
international standards with all the facilities. The Committee also came to know that two lane road
is to be constructed by State Government to connect Pakyong airport to Ranipool to Gangtok city
to facilitate smooth movement of traffic. The Committee recommends that the work on the road
should be completed before the airport becomes functional so that the passengers do not face
problems of congestion on the road.
(Para 76)
Reply of the Government
135. The Ministry of Civil Aviation has informed that the Airports Authority of India is
constructing a Greenfield airport at Pakyong near Gangtok; a brief about which is given below:–
● Runway 02/20 will have dimensions of 1700M x 30M (557ft x 100ft) and will be
suitable for the operation of ATR 72-5 type of aircraft in fair weather conditions.
Apron will be able to accommodate two ATR 72-5 type of aircraft. These works are
in progress.
● Constructions of Domestic Terminal Building (Non AC) for 100 passengers with
facilities like; Conveyor belt, car parking for 80 No. of cars and 07 nos. check-
incounters, is in process. Air Traffic Control Tower and Fire Station are in planning
stage. In addition, communication, navigation aids such as VHF, HF, NDB, DVOR,
PAPI (at both ends) will be installed.
● Due to site constraints (Hilly terrain), flight operators is not feasible during Night
and in Low Visibility conditions. The project is expected to be completed by
December, 2014.
136. As of now, Sikkim is not connected by Air in absence of any operational airports. However,
Bagdogra serves as entry point to Sikkim.
137. Operations in domestic sector have been deregulated and flights are being operated by
concerned airlines on the basis of commercial viability subject to adherence of Route Dispersal
Guidelines. Government has laid down Route Dispersal Guidelines with a view to achieve better

20
regulation of air transport services taking into account the need for air transport services of
different regions of the country including North-East region. It is, however, up to the airlines to
provide air services to specific places depending upon the traffic demand and commercial viability
while complying with Route Dispersal Guidelines.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
138. The Committee understands the constraints of the Airports Authority of India for
timely construction of the Pakyong airport because of the difficult terrain of the Region.
The Committee hopes that all out efforts made to make the airport ready by December,
2014 itself.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
139. Taxi operators have submitted many complaints as regards the tax structures, plying
of unauthorized vehicles, unjustifiable parking fee etc. at Bagdogra airport. The Committee
desires that the Government of West Bengal and Airport Authority of India should look into
the grievances and take remedial measures.
(Para 77)
Reply of the Government
140. The Government of West Bengal has informed that they are addressing the matter.
141. The Ministry of Civil Aviation has informed that the AAI had followed uniform structure of
levy of vehicles parking charges at the airports. The car parking fee is comparatively lesser than
other private operators. As regards unauthorized parking of vehicles, instructions are being issued
to the airport Director, Bagdogra to coordinate with the airport security/local policy to ensure that
no unauthorized vehicles are parked at the airport. However, AAI is further looking into the
grievances for further improvements.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
142. The Committee notes the reply.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
143. The Committee notes the various initiatives proposed by Ministry of Tourism and the
proposal of Government of Sikkim, Government which is trying to promote heli-tourism in the
State. However, the connectivity in Darjeeling is yet to be explored. As such the Committee
recommends that the Ministry of Tourism should make plan with the West Bengal Government to
cover the Darjeeling area also by heli services and provide financial assistance for the same. The
Committee recommends that adequate numbers of helicopters as per the requirement may be
procured or leased from Pawan Hans Ltd. for the purpose. Besides this the Army may also be
taken into confidence for the smooth functioning of helicopter operations in the region.
(Para 84)
Reply of the Government
144. The Government of West Bengal has informed that the GTA is aware of the fact that the
Tourism Department, Government of West Bengal is earnestly trying to facilitate heli-tourism in
Darjeeling.

21
145. The Ministry of Civil Aviation has informed that regular helicopter passenger services are
presently being run between Bagdogra and Gangtok and other places within Sikkim under the aegis
of the State Government Sikkim. Similar services could also be worked out for Darjeeling area
based on request of respective authorities/State Governments. PHL had carried out surveys in the
Darjeeling and nearby areas such as Kalimpong, Mirik etc. in association with Government of West
Bengal. It is brought out that an MOU has recently been signed on 18.3.2013 between Pawan Hans
and Government of West Bengal for Helicopter operations/Sea Plane/Small fixed wing operations by
Pawan Hans in the State.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
146. The Committee notes the reply and hopes that the helicopter service will be an
additional facility for promoting tourism in Sikkim and Darjeeling.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
147. T aking into consideration the extent of subsidy in Helicopter journeys being enjoyed by the
tourists, the Committee is of the opinion that tourism activities should be armed at bringing revenue
to the exchequer and not be made a burden on the tax payers. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that Pawan Hans Ltd. should make a detailed study on how the heli tourism can be
made a profitable business without seeking any subsidies, on the lines of the heli-taxi services
started by a private operator at nominal rates in Kerala recently.
(Para 85)
Reply of the Government
148. The Ministry of Civil Aviation has informed that the PHL has provided helicopters on Long
term lease basis (most of the contract taken through competitive tender basis) to various State
Governments for running regular passenger services under the aegis of respective State
Governments. Notwithstanding the above PHL have noted the recommendations of the Committee
and would endeavor to make study in association with the State Government for any commercially
viable heli tourist services.
149. PHL has also conducted feasibility study and prepared a draft Detailed Project Report (DPR)
for services of sea plane in Kerala. PHL has submitted the draft DPR to State Government as
desired by the State Government of Kerala.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
150. The Committee notes the reply and hopes that heli tourist services of Pawan Hans
Limited would become a reality soon.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
151. The Committee notes various steps taken to provide an alternative highway for Gangtok
which is very essential so that it is well connected with the country. Since it is surrounded by
international borders, the need is more also from the strategic point of view. The Committee,
therefore, recommends that keeping in view its strategic location the alternate highway should be
given top priority. The Committee hopes that the proposed highway will be completed as per
schedule overcoming all the shortcomings.
(Para 96)

22
Reply of the Government
152. The Ministry of Road Transport and Highways has informed that the proposal for
construction of an alternate highway to Gangtok was approved ‘in principle’ by the Cabinet
Committee on Economic Affairs (CCEA) on 20.11.2008. However, the proposed original alignment
was passing through wildlife sanctuaries and eco-sensitive area of West Bengal and wildlife/forest
and environmental clearance could not be obtained. In this connection, a meeting was taken by
Cabinet Secretary on 25.02.2011, and as per the direction of the Cabinet Secretary, DG(Forest),
MoEF along with officials from MoD/BRO and forest Department, West Bengal had visited the
proposed alignment for the Alternate Highway to Sikkim and the possible alternatives on 19
th to
21st April, 2011 and had recommended the route from Bagrakot-Lolegaon-Lava-Aritar as the
alternative route to be used by the Army alone. BRO has reported that the matter has been taken
up with the Army authorities at their end and it has been agreed that the road can also be used
by the public. The alignment proposal furnished by BRO is under consideration in the Ministry.
Efforts will be made to complete the road project within the contract period.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
153. The Committee recommends that the issue of using the road within the limit of
environmental regulations may be sorted out. Also, the traffic during night time may be
regulated with strict norms so that wildlife may not be disturbed there.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
154. The Committee notes the initiatives taken by the Ministry to get required clearances. The
Committee is, however, constrained to note that out of the 72 projects only 19 have got the
clearances and 49 projects are found to be under process at various stages. Maintenance and
development of NH is crucial not only for the economic development of Sikkim and Darjeeling and
surrounding region, but also for the security of the country. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that the Forests Departments of West Bengal and Sikkim may be impressed upon to
take strategic and economic interest of the region while considering the proposals received for
clearances. The Committee hopes that the projects will be cleared and started soon.
(Para 105)
Reply of the Government
155. The Government of Sikkim has informed that the State Forest Department has been
requested to take strategic and economic interest of the region for considering the proposal to
receive clearance. This report of Committee has been forwarded to them. The Government of West
Bengal has informed that it is addressing the issues.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
156. The Committee notes the reply and observes that, though one year has elapsed after
the recommendation of the Committee, nothing concrete has been done by the concerned
authorities to clear the projects.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
157. The Committee is aware of the constraints in proper maintenance of the road conditions
in the Darjeeling and Sikkim region. The Committee also recommends that the BRO should be
given modern equipment and adequate funds for the roads maintained by them. The Committee is
surprised to observe that BRO, in addition to its main work of construction and maintenance of

23
NH has to engage itself in the task of seeking clearance form the State Governments. The
Committee recommends that BRO should concentrate its efforts in the construction of roads and
the rest of the formalities should be completed by the Ministry in consultation with the concerned
State Governments.
(Para 106)
Reply of the Government
158. The Government of West Bengal has informed that it is addressing the issues along with
GTA.
159. The Ministry of Road Transport and Highways has informed that since BRO is involved in
the development and maintenance of roads entrusted to the organization, procurement of
equipments is being done through the Director General Border Roads within the funds available on
the basis of requirement of the projects on annual basis. With regards to the task of seeking
clearances from the State Governments, it may be mentioned that in most cases joint verification
of the site is required before clearances are given by the Concerned Departments of the State
Government Since, Officers of BRO are involved in the survey and preparation of DPR, they are
in a better position to assist the State Government in carrying out joint verification and to provide
any clarification sought by the State Government This is also as per the standard practice followed
by all implementing agencies, including BRO.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
160. The Committee recommends that the road construction should not suffer owing to
the long procedure mentioned above, as the actual working time in the NE Region is very
limited in a year, compared to other regions.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
161. The Committee has noted that the road connecting Bagdogra Airport to Darjeeling is in a
dilapidated State, which is a major bottleneck for the growth of tourism in Darjeeling and  Sikkim.
The Committee, therefore, recommends that since different authorities are involved in the
maintenance work at various stretches, a coordinated action is required to maintain the highway
from Bagdogra to Darjeeling.
(Para 107)
Reply of the Government
162. The Ministry of Road Transport and Highways has informed that the development and
maintenance of the section of NH-31C from Bagdogra Airport to Siliguri and the section of NH-
55 from Siliguri to Darjeeling has been entrusted entirely with the Public Works Department,
Government of West Bengal. The improvement of NH-31C from Bagdogra Airport to Siliguri has
been sanctioned by the Ministry and work is in progress. In respect of NH-55, it may be
mentioned that the NH is passing through fragile hills and is prone to landslide during the rainy
season. Restoration of major damages are being taken up under Annual Plan provision and emergent
restoration is taken up under Non plan provisions.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
163. The Committee notes the reply.

24
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
164. The Committee had witnessed the road damages at various places as a result of the recent
earth quake. The Committee finds that at many places, lack of water drains are causing over flow
of water on the roads and sliding of the sides. It, therefore, recommends that BRO/NHAI need to
take up the matter at the time of road design itself. The Committee has the opinion that all the
roads in the Sikkim and in the North East should be provided with proper culverts so that the rain
water and mud should not come to the roads a result of rain or for other reasons.
(Para 108)
Reply of the Government
165. The Ministry of Road Transport and Highways has informed that apart from the recent
earthquake in the area, it may also be mentioned that the major damages to the NH/roads is caused
by water due to improper drainage. Accordingly, suitable drains are provided for all road projects
in Sikkim and other North Eastern States of the Country. Further, the roads in hilly region of the
Country are being designed as per the specification contained in IRC-SP-48-1998-HIII. Road
Manual published by the Indian Road Congress, in which a minimum 5-6 Nos. of culverts per km
has been specified for Hill roads. Accordingly, culverts have been provided for roads in Sikkim and
the North East and in some cases depending on the volume of the surface runoff, addl. Culverts
in excess of the minimum requirement have been provided.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
166. The Committee notes the reply and hopes that the specifications as mentioned above
are strictly adhered to.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
167. The Committee recommends that at the entry point of Sikkim i.e. Rengpo Check post, the
concerned authorities and the transport officials should monitor the movement of trucks to ensure
that they do not carry extra load. Otherwise, they should be directed to move through roads which
can sustain extra load.
(Para 109)
Reply of the Government
168. The Ministry of Road Transport and Highways has informed that the problem of
overloading of motor vehicles has been drawing attention of the Government for a long time and
has also been discussed with State Governments/Union Territories at various fora, including
National Road Safety Council meetings. In order to curb overloading, adequate provisions have
been provided in the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988 to check overloading of motor vehicles. The Gross
Vehicle Weight of various categories of motor vehicles were notified vide SO 28(E) dated
18.10.1996 and 517(E) dated 26.5.2000. Every motor vehicle is required to adhere to the specified
load ceiling.
169. Transportation by road including overloading is the responsibility of the State Governments,
hence many States have tried to use applications and Intelligent Transport System (ITS). The
Ministry of Road Transport and Highways has been continuously writing to the State Governments/
Union Territories to curb the menace of overloading of motor vehicles. As per reports, 28 State/
UT Governments, namely, Arunachal Pradesh, Andhra Pradesh, Delhi, Bihar, Chandigarh, Goa,
Dadra and Nagar Haveli, Daman and Diu, Chhattisgarh, Jharkhand, Gujarat, Himachal Pradesh,
Karnataka, Kerala, Maharashtra, Meghalaya, Madhya Pradesh, Manipur, Mizoram, Odisha, Punjab,

25
Pondicherry, Rajasthan, Sikkim, Tripura, Uttarakhand, Uttar Pradesh and West Bengal have reported
to have initiated action for curbing overloading in their respective States/UTs. A brief note on action
taken on overloading issue is enclosed at Annexure.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
170. The Committee is aware that there are various provisions preventing overloading in
the vehicles under the Motor Vehicles Act. 1988. The Committee, however, is doubtful over
the effective adherence to the rules, and its monitoring mechanism. The Committee is not
satisfied with the reply given by the Ministry of Road Transport and Highways on its
recommendation above. The Committee desires that the specific measures taken to ensure
no-entry of over loaded vehicles through the Rengpo Check Post may be furnished to the
Committee.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
171. The Committee notes that the maintenance of roads is an expensive task in the hilly terrain
because of high rainfall and topographical conditions. It, therefore, recommends that some long-
term financial solutions be evolved to create a fund dedicated to the maintenance of roads for
Darjeeling and the North East including Sikkim so that modern technology may be better utilized
for improving the pace and quality of work.
(Para 110)
Reply of the Government
172. The Ministry of Road Transport and Highways has informed that maintenance of National
Highways in the Country is being taken up from fund placed under Non Plan Head. Funds under
this Head is being allocated to the various States depending upon the length of the National
Highways passing through the State and nature of damages subject to the funds allocated by the
Ministry of Finance under the Head. With regards to the creation of a fund dedicated to the
maintenance of roads, the matter will be examined separately in consultation with M/o Finance and
Planning Commission.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
173. The Committee notes the reply and observes that a blanket policy cannot be adopted
to all the regions of the country alike because of the variations on the topography and land
conditions, population etc. The policy makers may bear this factor in mind while dealing
with such issues.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
174. The Committee also recommends for strengthening of the existing bridges so that the
carrying capacity may be increased for higher loads. With these objectives in view, special
emphasis may be given to the improvement of low cost roads and bridges and construction of new
roads in new areas.
(Para 111)
Reply of the Government
175. The Ministry of Road Transport and Highways has informed that the strengthening/
replacement of the existing bridges will be examined/considered as and when specific proposal is
received from the executive agencies/State Governments.

26
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
176. The Committee notes the reply.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
177. Having regard to the importance of roads network in the overall economic development of
the State in general and the need for connectivity for the growth of tourism in particular, the
Committee recommends for granting adequate funds and timely release of the same, which will go
a long way in improving the construction/replacement/repair of roads at various stages/locations.
(Para 112)
Reply of the Government
178. The Ministry of Road Transport and Highways has informed that funds for the development
and maintenance of the roads under Plan and Non-Plan heads are placed at the disposal of BRO
at the start of the Financial Year for NHs under their jurisdiction. In respect of NHs entrusted with
the State PWD, funds under Plan head are placed with the Regional Pay and Account of this
Ministry and released to the Contractors on the basis of bills forwarded by the State PWDs. In
respect of funds under Non Plan Head, funds are placed at the disposal of the State Government.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
179. The Committee notes the reply.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
180. The Committee recommends that proper coordination with the two agencies may be ensured
so that the road maintenance and construction works should not be trapped in red tapes.
(Para 113)
Reply of the Government
181. The Ministry of Road Transport and Highways has informed that NH-55 was closed to
traffic due to the major landslide at Tindharia at km. 52.90 including other spots at km. 50.25 and
km. 53.48 of NH 55. The estimate for the restoration of the stretch has been sanctioned by the
Ministry and tendering is in progress.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
182. The Committee is not satisfied with the slow pace of road restoration at Tindharia.
The NH-55 which was closed down two years back is still trapped in redtapism and
Committee feels that the Ministry should speed up the process on priority basis.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
183. The Committee recommends that proper signage and road markings should be provided at
important points.
(Para 114)
Reply of the Government
184. The Ministry of Road Transport and Highways has informed that Road signage are being
sanctioned by the Ministry as part of the estimate for development/improvement of the NH.

27
Further, separate provision for road safety is also provided in the Annual Plan of the Ministry. This
programme will be enhanced in stages as recommended, subject to availability of funds.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
185. The Committee is not satisfied with the reply. The Committee views that proper
signage is as important as good quality roads, especially in a difficult terrain like the NE
Region. The Committee recommends that adequate funds should be earmarked for
installing signage and road markings.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
186. The Committee is of the view that there is a need to adopt the same approach for seamless
travel in Darjeeling and Sikkim in consultation with the Ministry of Road Transport and Highways.
The Committee recommends that the taxi fare and road taxes should be rationalized in consultation
with the stake holders concerned by the State Governments.
(Para 116)
Reply of the Government
187. The Ministry of Road Transport and Highways has informed that Implementation of a
uniform registration tax regime in all States/Union Territories would require consensus amongst
them as this issue falls within the domain of States/Union Territories. The issue of bringing
uniformity in the taxes levied on motor vehicles across States/UTs was discussed in the
34
th meeting of Transport Development Council (TDC) held on 13 th February, 2012 at New Delhi
which was attended by representatives of various State Government/Union Territories. As per the
decision taken in the TDC meeting, an Empowered Group of State Transport Ministers has been
constituted on the issue of rationalization of motor vehicle taxes. The taxi fare does not come
under the purview of the Central Government.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
188. The Committee notes the reply. The Committee desires to be informed of the details
of decisions taken by the Empowered Group of State Transport Ministers on this issue.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
189. The Committee recommends that the problem of road permit in Darjeeling should be
considered by the Ministry of Tourism on priority in consultation with the concerned Departments
to give them a level playing field. The State Government should also take the benefit from the
scheme for construction of modern, state-of-the-art, dedicated parking lots for which financial
assistance is provided by the Ministry of Tourism.
(Para 117)
Reply of the Government
190. The Government of West Bengal has informed that the issue of permit in Darjeeling will be
taken up by both the Transport Department of Government of West Bengal and the GTA.
191. The GTA has already started to construct four multilevel car parks (two in Darjeeling, one
in Kalimpong and one in Kurseong) where around twelve hundred to thirteen hundred vehicles will
be parked.

28
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
192. The Committee notes the reply.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
193. The Committee agrees with the State Government’s view on the importance of
strengthening the public transport facilities. The Committee is of the view that with new initiatives
for enhancing the tourist inflow to the State, immediate attention is required for proper road
connectivity and vehicles. Since the public transport is able to minimize the road congestions,
strengthening of the State transport facilities and passenger amenities should be taken up on priority
basis.
(Para 120)
Reply of the Government
194. The Ministry of Road Transport and Highways has informed that it is implementing a
scheme for providing one time central assistance to the extent of 50% of the project cost for IT
related projects such as introduction of GPS/GSM based vehicle tracking system, computerized
reservation system, electronic ticket vending machines etc. to States/State Road Transport
Undertakings (SRTUs) for strengthening their public transport system. The scheme has been made
effective from 15.3.2010. This scheme was made effective from 15.3.2010 and implemented during
the year 2010-11 and 2011-12 of Eleventh Plan. The Scheme has been continued for implementation
during Twelfth plan.
195. As per the above scheme, one time central assistance to States/UTs for bringing latest IT
related features in their road transport services covering rural/mofussil areas was processed and
central assistance amounting to Rs. 71.405 crore to 14 States covering 16 SRTCs/Organization
were sanctioned during 2010-11 and 2011-12. During the year 2012-13, central assistance to three
States namely, Sikkim, Nagaland and Rajasthan has been approved.
196. Proposals from other States/State Road Transport Undertakings are awaited. To sensitize the
States, a workshop was conducted in January, 2013 at CIRT, Pune. A model Detailed Project
Report (DPR) for preparing ITS project has also been prepared by this Ministry in consultation
with CIRT, Pune for guidance of States in preparing DPR for seeking central assistance.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
197. The Committee notes the reply. The Committee observes that proper monitoring of
the vehicles with GSM/GPRS is a welcome effort. However, the insufficiency of the number
of vehicles connecting various places should be addressed properly. The Government may
introduce proper schemes for this requirement. The Committee desires that the Ministry
may pursue with the States/State Road Transport Undertakings on the proposals for one-
time central assistance for bringing latest IT related features in their road transport
services.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
198. The Committee notes the initiatives taken by the ASI in restoring the monuments Dubdi
Monastery which was damaged by the earthquake in September, 2011 has been repaired. Since
these monuments are major tourist attractions, it is equally important that tourist amenities are also
made available in these sites. The Committee recommends that adequate funds and manpower
should be provided to these monuments as most of them do not have proper maintenance staff.

29
The Committee also recommends that illumination of monuments should also be considered by ASI
on priority in these places.
(Para 127)
Reply of the Government
199. The Archaeological Survey of India (Ministry of Culture) has informed that the conservation
work of protected monuments at Darjeeling and Sikkim is attended regularly as per available of
resources including funds earmarked for North-East and they are in a good State of preservation.
Tourist amenities such as toilets, drinking water, approach pathways, signage etc. has been
provided at these monuments. The essential gardening and landscaping work for the tombs in
Darjeeling and protected monuments in Sikkim is also attended. Electric light have been provided
to prayer-hall of the monastery, monks rooms etc. Illumination of these monuments from outside
requires permission from Forest Authorities since all these monuments of Sikkim falls in Reserve
Forest Area.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
200. The Committee notes the reply and recommends that the Forest Authorities may be
approached for granting permission for illumination of the monuments which falls in
Reserve Forest Area.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
201. As per the data provided by ASI, the Committee is constrained to note that the Horticulture
Department is almost absent in Sikkim and out of the 14 sanctioned posts at various levels
including Garden Attendant and Chowkidar, the man in position is NIL. At present the works are
being supervised by Horticulture Assistant Grade I, Cooch Behar. The Committee would like to
know the reasons accounting for utter neglect of the region and non-filling up of posts. The
Committee recommends that immediate steps be taken to fill up the vacant posts of the Horticulture
Branch cater to the need of Sikkim.
(Para 129)
Reply of the Government
202. The Archaeological Survey of India (Ministry of Culture) has informed that out of 115
sanctioned posts at various levels from Foreman (Horticulture) to Director(Horticulture), 11 posts
are lying vacant. Efforts are on to fill them up. Fresh recruitment for erstwhile Group ‘D’ posts
is held up owing revision of Recruitment Rules on their upgradation to Group ‘C’ and other
changes in their eligibility.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
203. The Committee notes the reply and hopes that the vacant posts will be filled up at
the earliest.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
204. The Committee recommends that the Visa-on-Arrival facility should be provided at Bagdogra
airport to facilitate international tourists. Extension of the ‘Visa-on-Arrival’ facility at the border
adjoining Darjeeling and Sikkim may also be considered.
(Para 132)

30
Reply of the Government
205. The Ministry of Home Affairs informed that to facilitate visa for foreign tourists an online
visa system has been set up by MHA. Under this new system, upto 85% visas are issued within
3 days of application. Visa-on-Arrival facility requires adequate strengthening of Immigration/Visa
infrastructure and manpower at ICP to ensure that security is not jeopardized.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
206. The Committee recommends that adequate steps for introducing Visa-on-Arrival
facility at Bagdogra airport, may be taken up by the concerned agencies.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
207. The Committee while going through different areas in and around Darjeeling and Sikkim,
could notice a strong sense of deprivation and discrimination amongst the people in Darjeeling. The
argument being that both the areas are adjacent and have same topography, etc. The Darjeeling area
is also affected by the same problems and has all the considerations based on which other adjoining
areas are getting special help, but same treatment is not being given to them. There are no special
projects either by the Union or the State Government to boost the economy of areas. Darjeeling
has had enjoyed traditional glory and has lot of memories of the past. There is a threat of loosing
the heritage status of the Darjeeling Himalayan railways. Besides this, the permit system for taxi
operators in Darjeeling is different from the rest of the State and the Operators have to make
unnecessary rounds of RTO office to get the permit. In fact the tourists in the earlier days only
talked about Darjeeling and were fascinated by the place. But with no developmental work taking
place in the region, the Darjeeling area has lagged behind other States and has been left to remain
only in our memories.
(Para 133)
Reply of the Government
208. The Ministry of Development of North Eastern Region informed that it monitors effective
utilization of 10% Gross Budgetary Support (GBS) earmarked for North Eastern States by non-
exempted Ministries. The unspent balance of 10% GBS accrues in Non-Lapsable Central Pool of
Resources (NLCPR) which is utilized for various development projects in NER. The Ministry has
further submitted that under NLCPR scheme, it does not prepare action plan for State and projects
are sanctioned by a committee under Chairmanship of Secretary, DoNER from list of annual
priority projects submitted by State Governments (which are prepared on the basis of gap analysis
of major sectors, in consonance with overall planning process within the States). Since West
Bengal is not a part of NER, therefore, projects related to tourism in West Bengal/Darjeeling cannot
be supported under NLCPR scheme.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
209. The Committee observes that concerned agencies did not take the recommendation
of the Committee seriously. The Committee reiterates its recommendation as given in
paragraph 134 of its 190th Report that Darjeeling may also be included in the list of the
NE Region for providing Budgetary Support as available to the North-Eastern States.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
210. The said resentment in the areas was also the exclusion of the Districts of Darjeeling,
Jalpaiguri and Coochbehar from the Northeast Tourism Development schemes. It was said to be

31
mainly due to regional discrimination meted out to them. The Committee also feels that the people
of Darjeeling are also facing the same vagaries of nature and difficulties of life as that of the
North-Eastern States. The Committee also feels that these arguments have merit that deserve to be
considered seriously as earlier as possible. Why not include Darjeeling Hills also in the category of
NE region so that it gets the benefit of 10% of the funds through the Ministry of DoNER. The
Committee recommends that for the integrated development of the NE region, benefits of the 10%
tourism budget for the NE Region should be extended to the three north eastern districts of the
West Bengal. These areas should be considered along with Sikkim for the purpose of development
of tourism facilities, subsidies, reorganization, tax benefits etc. of Ministry of DoNER. The
Committee also recommends that Darjeeling should be included in the ‘Incredible India” campaign.
The Ministry of tourism should take the desired steps and lay special emphasis on the publicity
campaign by including Darjeeling in all the campaigns.
(Para 134)
Reply of the Government
211. The Ministry of Development of North Eastern Region informed that North-Eastern Council
(NEC) was established in 1972 by an Act of Parliament, namely, the North-Eastern Council
Act, 1971, as apex level advisory body, for securing balanced and coordinated development and
effecting co-ordination among seven States of North Eastern Region i.e. Arunachal Pradesh, Assam,
Manipur, Meghalaya, Mizoram, Nagaland and Tripura, Sikkim was added as the eighth member-
State of the Council following the amendment of the NEC Act in December, 2002 (notified on
23
rd June, 2003). North eastern Council is, inter alia , a Council of Governors and Chief Ministers
of eight north-eastern States. The developmental projects are sanctioned under NEC scheme on the
basis of the Priority Lists received from the north-eastern States as well as the Five Year Plan
Working Group recommendations pertaining to the relevant sectors of the NEC and the techno-
economic scrutiny as per extant procedures. However, while formulating the regional plans for the
north-eastern area, the Council gives priority to schemes and projects which will benefit two or
more States-Provided that in case of Sikkim, the Council shall formulate specific projects and
schemes for that State including the review of implementation of such projects and schemes.
Development to tourism in Darjeeling is outside purview of NEC as Darjeeling falls in West Bengal,
which is not part of North Eastern Region.
212. Eight North Eastern States comprising forming part of North Eastern Region are ‘special
category States’ (unlike West Bengal). The smallest constituent unit of NER and their Council is State.
213. This Ministry supports the approach of Ministry of Tourism to develop regional circuits,
cutting across the States boundaries, in the country including NER. Development of Tourism sector
in Sikkim can be accomplished successfully only by integrating Darjeeling and other tourist
destinations of West Bengal in this endeavour.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
214. The Committee notes the reply. The Committee recommends that Government of
India may introduce a Bill to amend the NEC Act, 1971 so that the bottlenecks as
mentioned above, can be resolved for the inclusion of Darjeeling in the NEC.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
215. The Committee also notes that Darjeeling is excluded from the LTC facility in lieu of Home
Town granted to Central Government employees. The Committee recommends that the matter
should be taken up with the DoPT to grant the same status to Darjeeling.
(Para 135)

32
Reply of the Government
216. As per the recommendation of the Committee, the matter was taken up with Department
of Personnel and Training, Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions. DoPT requested
Ministry of Tourism to consult the State Government and to make their specific recommendations
to Department of Personnel and Training. The matter was taken up with the State Government and
the Government of West Bengal informed that the matter regarding status of granting LTC facility
to the Central Government employees for Darjeeling has been taken up with DoPT, Government
of India and the State Government is very much keen for implementation of this new proposal.
The Ministry of Tourism supports the same.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
217. The Committee takes note of the reply and would like to impress upon the Ministry
of Tourism to pursue the matter with the State Government and DoPT to include Darjeeling
as one of the destinations for the LTC facility in lieu of Home Town LTC granted to Central
Government Employees.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
218. The Committee recommends that there is need to create balance with the ongoing tourism
activities and the forest laws. The Ministry should take up the clearance of the projects on priority
basis.
(Para 136)
Reply of the Government
219. The Government of Sikkim has informed that the Forest Department, Government of Sikkim
will be duly informed and efforts will be made to create balance with on going tourism activities
and forest laws.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
220. The Committee emphasise upon the need for eco-friendly tourism development in the
North East Region.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
221. The Committee notes that Sikkim and Darjeeling lies in the seismic zone and are prone to
earthquakes. During the deliberations in Darjeeling the Committee was informed that there is no
framework/guidelines for construction activities in the area. The Committee recommends that strict
norms for construction and abiding the building rules in the Region should be followed in all the
projects involving concrete structures. The Committee is also of the view that keeping in view the
hill areas, there is need for a Technical Institute who can frame guidelines and help the hill people
in constructing in the area keeping in view the ecological balance.
(Para 137)
Reply of the Government
222. The Government of Sikkim has informed that action is being taken by concerned
Department of the Government of Sikkim.

33
223. The Government of West Bengal has informed that the point is noted. In fact, the GTA is
framing its own tourism policy and one of the point of the policy would be to construct Eco-
Friendly houses.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
224. The Committee notes that the Ministry of Tourism has not given any reply regarding
the need for a Technical Institute.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
225. To facilitate tourists to remain connected with their people, connectivity by
telecommunications and internet is very important. The internet service and mobile signals are very
weak in most of the places in Darjeeling and Sikkim. This may be causing difficulty in proper
communication especially at times where immediate assistance is required. The Committee
recommends that this matter may be taken on a priority basis with the concerned agencies i.e.
Ministry of Communications and IT.
(Para 138)
Reply of the Government
226. The Ministry of Communication and Information Technology informed as under:
(a) Information relating to connectivity:
The present status of existing Network of BSNL in the State of Sikkim and Darjeeling Distt.
of West Bengal is as given below:
Sikkim T otal GSM Fixed B B
(wireline)
DHQ 4 4 4 4
SDHQ 9 9 9 9
BHQ 26 26 19 19
Village 450 422 427 105
Darjeeling T otal GSM Fixed Broadband
(Mobile) Line (wireline)
SDHQ 4 4 4 4
BHQ 12 12 12 11
Village 107 96 71 32
227. In order to improve the coverage and expand the GSM network 32.5K (32BTSs) and
30K (38 BTSs) capacity has been planned in Sikkim and Darjeeling District respectively under
Phase-VII expansion plan of BSNL. Expansion of broadband network has also been planned. Further,
in order to provide reliable connectivity in these places microwave connectivity has been provided for
all DHQs and important locations, PGCIL connectivity has also been provided for Gangtok. However,
BSNL is facing problems of connectivity due to frequent damage to its optic fibre cable during road
widening/maintenance activities and natural/manmade disturbances and hilly terrain.

34
228. It is pointed out that Sikkim and Darjeeling are served by several private service providers
also. The CMTS and UAS License conditions including amendments issued to CMTS/UAS License
for respective services area licensees who were the successful bidders in the auction of 3G/BWA
spectrum conducted vide NIA dated 25.2.2010 inter-alia  provides that DHQ based roll out is
mandatory for licensees. The terms and conditions of license inter-alia provide that:–
(i) Roll-out obligation for 3G spectrum: The Licensee shall ensure compliance of the
following network roll-out obligations for 3G Spectrum for respective category of the
licensed service area(s):
➢ For Metro service area license(s): The licensee to whom the 3G spectrum is
assigned shall be required to provide street level coverage using the 3G Spectrum
in at least 90% of the service area within five years of the effective date.
➢ For Category A, B and C service area license(s): The licensee to whom the
spectrum is assigned shall ensure that at least 50% of the District Headquarters
(“DHQ”) in the service area will be covered using the 3G Spectrum, out of which
at least 15% of the DHQs should be rural Short Distance Charging Areas
(“SDCA”), within five years of the Effective Date. SDCA is defined as per the
definition used by the Census of India. Rural SDCA is defined as an area where
50% of the population lives in the rural areas. Further:
■ The operator shall be permitted to cover any other town in a District in lieu
of the DHQ;
■ Coverage of a DHQ/town would mean that at least 90% of the area bounded
by municipal/local body limit should get the required street level coverage;
■ The DHQ shall be taken as on the effective date;
■ The choice of DHQ/town to be covered and further expansion beyond 50%
of the DHQ/town shall lie with the operator.
229. The Effective Date shall be the date when the right to use awarded spectrum commercially
commences i.e. date of issue of amendment letter for respective licensed service area.
(ii) Roll-out obligation for BWA spectrum: The Licensee shall ensure compliance of the
following network roll-out obligations for BWA Spectrum for respective category of
the licensed service area(s):
➢ For Metro service area license(s): The licensee shall be required to provide street
level coverage using the BWA Spectrum in at lease 90% of the service area within
five years of the effective date.
➢ For Category A, B and C service area License(s): The licensee shall ensure that
at least 50% of the rural Short Distance Charging Areas SDCA are covered within
five years of the Effective Date using BWA Spectrum. Coverage of a rural SCDA
would mean that at least 90% of the area bounded by municipal/local body limit
should get the required street level coverage:
230. The Effective Date shall be the date when the right to use awarded spectrum commercially
commences i.e. date of issue of amendment letter for respective licensed service area.
(iii) The earliest date of issue of amendment letters for right to use of 3G/BWA spectrum
is 1.09.2010. Accordingly, in view of the above referred 3/G/BWA rollout obligation
conditions, the earliest date to meet the required rollout obligations is 31.08.2015.

35
231. Further, as per the latest report of TRAI on Quality of Service no inadequacy in service
has been noticed. However, if any specific location in the city/town is brought to notice, then
further necessary action in the matter can be initiated.
(b) Information related to land lines and Internet Services:
The status of DSLAM provided for broadband services in Sikkim and Darjeeling District is
as given below:
Place No. of DSLAM Wi-Max Wi-Max
DSLAM Planned BTSs BTSs
Installed Installed Planned
Sikkim 42 1 8 6
Darjeeling 12 5 3 –
Kalingpong 14 – 1 –
Kurseong 8 1 – –
232. Internet on dial-up can be accessed from all areas including rural and remote areas of the
country. However, there are 102 Category ‘A’ ISP Licencees having “all India” Service area, 7
Category ‘B’ ISP Licencees having Service area West Bengal (including Sikkim) and 1 Category ‘C’
ISP Licencee having Service area Darjeeling and 1 Category ‘C’ ISP Licensee having Service area
Gangtok for provision of Internet Service.
233. As per TRAI, there were 1.34 million Internet subscribers in West Bengal service area as
on January, 2013. Separate subscriber data base for Darjeeling and Gangtok is not being
maintained.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
234. The Committee notes the reply.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
235. The Committee also recommends for special holiday railway concession during festival seasons.
Permission should be give to use chartered flights for NE package tours. Special steps should be taken
to attract tourists through advertisements by tourist offices, travel agencies and airlines.
(Para 139)
Reply of the Government
236. The Ministry of Railway has informed that it already grants concessions to around 53
categories of persons like Students, Disabled persons, Senior citizens, Sports persons, Patients,
War windows, Awardees etc. throughout the year. Concession ranges from 10% to 100%. These
concessions are applicable round the year and are also granted on extra coaches attached and
special trains run during the rush and holiday season.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
237. The Committee is constrained to note that the reply furnished by the Ministry does
not cover all the issues reflected in the recommendation. The Committee desires that a
complete reply may be furnished incorporating all the issues raised in the recommendation.

36
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
238. To promote tourism in the region, the Cine producers may be invited and facility provided
for shooting in Darjeeling and Sikkim. The movies which are shot in these areas should be
screened in festivals also, to create awareness about the rich beauty of the place.
(Para 140)
Reply of the Government
239. The Ministry of T ourism has recognized film tourism as an important segment of
Tourism Industry in India, films being a powerful tool for the development and promotion of
destinations. The Ministry of Tourism has taken following steps to promote Film Tourism in
the country:
(i) The Ministry of Tourism has issued guidelines (dated 25
th July, 2012), for extending
financial support to various State Governments/Union Territory Administrations, for
promotion of “Film Tourism’. At present for promotion of Film Tourism, the
Ministry extends Central Financial Assistance of Rs.2.00 lakh per film, during each
financial year, to State Governments and UT Administrations for a maximum of five
films. The films are to be chosen/selected taking inputs from their Film Development
Corporations, based on the exposure provided by them to the tourism destinations
and locations in the respective State/UT. This Central Financial Assistance (CFA)
covers Feature Films, Documentaries, Tele-films and Television Serials including
Reality Television. The components of CFA may comprise Space Hiring/Filming
charges, Facilitation Fee etc., payable by the Filming Unit to various State
Governments, UTs, Government agencies etc. Additional support can be considered
for additional two (2) films based on justification for enhanced support. The
guidelines have been circulated to all States/Union Territories and have been uploaded
on the website of the Ministry.
(ii) The Hon’ble Minister of State for Tourism (I/C) has also written in January, 2012 to
all Chief Ministers/Administrators of all the State Governments/Union Territory
Administrations to recognize the potential of Film Tourism and constitute special
bodies/cells to facilitate film shooting. The States of Jammu and Kashmir, Madhya
Pradesh, Assam, Himachal Pradesh, Karnataka, Rajasthan, Nagaland, Chhattisgarh,
Uttar Pradesh, Kerala have acknowledged this letter.
(iii) In an endeavor to establish India as a film destination, the Ministry of Tourism and
the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting (I&B) entered into a Memorandum of
Understanding (MoU) on 16
th February, 2012, inter alia  to promote Cinema of India
as a sub brand of “Incredible India” at various international film festivals like IFFI
Goa, European Film Market, Cannes Film festival, to develop synergy between tourism
and the film industry and to provide a platform for enabling partnerships between the
Indian and global film industry.
(iv) The Ministry of Tourism has also instituted a National Tourism Award in 2012, namely
“Most Film Promotion Friendly State/UT”.
240. The Government of Sikkim has not instituted any mechanism to promote Film Tourism
through single window clearance system or providing facilities for film promotion as yet. However,
the State Government is working on modalities to be adopted for promotion of Film Tourism. The
Government of West Bengal has also not constituted any special body/cell to facilitate filming and
promote Film Tourism in the State.

37
241. The Ministry of Tourism, however, actively promotes the North Eastern States including
Sikkim and the State of West Bengal at festivals and events, including film festivals.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
242. The Committee notes the reply and desires that the modalities to be adopted for
promotion of Film Tourism may be finalized by the State Governments of West Bengal and
Sikkim at the earliest.

38
38
OBSERVATIONS/CONCLUSIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS — AT A GLANCE
The Committee notes the reply and hopes that the steps taken by the Government
of West Bengal would attract more tourists to Tiger Hill. The Committee further desires to
know the details of the efforts made by GTA for promoting tourism in Darjeeling and the
status thereon. (Para 7)
The Committee is happy to note that the recommendation has evoked positive
response from the State Government. (Para 11)
The Committee notes the efforts made to improve the train service between Siliguri
and Darjeeling. The Committee hopes that the complete overhaul of this railway stretch
with beautification of stations will be able to attract more tourists in Darjeeling.
(Para 17)
The Committee recommends that Border Road Organisation may take immediate
steps to improve the road condition at the Indian side of the Chandrabhanga - Burimari
Border. The Government also may provide adequate facilities for easy clearance by customs/
immigration departments. The foreign exchange facilities need to be provided with the
involvement of the nationalised banks operating in the area. The Committee also
recommends that Ministry of Tourism may take steps to improve the infrastructural
facilities at the Changrabandha-Burimari Border. (Para 21)
The Committee notes the reply. (Para 24)
The Committee desires to be apprised of the status of the efforts made to address
these issues. (Para 27)
The Committee notes the reply. The Committee emphasises the need for the
development of Kalimpong as early as possible. (Para 31)
The Committee notes the reply. (Para 34)
The Committee is happy to note that de-silting of Mirik lake has been undertaken.
The Committee hopes that the new initiatives would check the problem of  pollution of the
lake. (Para 37)
The Committee recommends that Ministry of Tourism, Government of India may
extend financial grants for the installation of modern telescopes at Tiger Hills. (Para 40)
The Committee notes the reply. (Para 43)
The Committee desires to know the feedback from the State Governments on how
far they have proceeded on the development of conference facilities at Darjeeling and
Sikkim. (Para 47)
The Committee notes the reply. The Committee is of the view that Government of
India should chalk out a scheme suitable to the Darjeeling area to provide subsidy to
smaller and budget hotels. (Para 51)
The Committee notes the reply. (Para 54)
The Committee recommends that “Incredible India Bed and Breakfast/Home Stay

39
Establishment” to be implemented in the Darjeeling and Sikkim region for promotion of
tourism there. The Government of India should guide the concerned authorities to
implement the Scheme in Darjeeling and Sikkim. (Para 59)
The Committee is happy to note the initiatives taken by the GTA for removing  the
eye-sores and potential hazards of Darjeeling. (Para 63)
The Committee hopes that drinking water problem in the area will be addressed
properly by the steps taken by GTA. (Para 66)
The Committee desires to know details of the activities undertaken under the
‘Clean India’ campaign in Darjeeling. (Para 69)
The Committee takes note of the reply. The Committee hopes that the hospitality
industry would utilize the facility promptly. (Para 72)
The Committee desires that it may be apprised of the outcome of the study made
on poor connectivity, under developed roads, expensive travel costs etc. and the action -
taken thereon. (Para 75)
The Committee desires to know the progress made on each project as mentioned  in
the reply. (Para 78)
The progress made on the feasibility study and its outcome may be informed to  the
Committee. (Para 81)
The Committee is happy to know that its recommendations are at various stages  of
implementation and hopes all of them would be acted upon. (Para 85)
The Committee notes the reply and recommends that adequate publicity/marketing
strategies need to be undertaken to popularise the Gorkha Village complex cottage and
restaurant of DGHC as the business there was not upto the mark when the Committee
visited there. (Para 88)
The Committee appreciates the steps taken in this regard and hopes that the
ropeway would be able to attract more tourists to Relli Village. The Committee recommends
that Ministry of Tourism, Government of India, may apprise the Committee about the
present status of the ropeway project. (Para 92)
The Committee notes the reply and recommends that training facilities for tourist-
guides may also be introduced in these institutes. (Para 95)
The Committee observes that there is an under-achievement of targets set for
‘Huner Se Rozgar Tak’ (HSRT) Scheme in three centres above. Only 50% or less of the
target has been the achievement during the period. The Committee recommends that proper
publicity of the scheme along with successful placement of the trained people should be
undertaken for success of the scheme. (Para 98)
The Committee desires to know whether the Ministry of Tourism consulted the State
Government in pursuance of the Committee’s recommendation and if not, what are the
reasons therefor? The Government of Sikkim may be advised appropriately to start an
Institute of Tourism Studies. (Para l0l)
The Committee hopes that the above mentioned steps would help in increasing  the
number of tourists visiting the Mirik Lake. (Para 104)
The Committee notes the reply. (Para l08)

40
The Committee notes the reply. (Para 113)
The Committee takes note of the reply. However, the Committee desires that the
Ministry of Civil Aviation may further explore the possibility of operating international
flights from Bagdogra to Paro and Bangkok. (Para 122)
The Committee notes the reply. (Para 126)
The Committee desires that the matter of handing over of the land may be pursued
with the State Government and hopes that the action on this, will be taken on  priority
basis. (Para 130)
The Committee notes the reply. (Para 133)
The Committee understands the constraints of the Airports Authority of India for
timely construction of the Pakyong airport because of the difficult terrain of the Region.
The Committee hopes that all out efforts made to make the airport ready by December,
2014 itself. (Para 138)
The Committee notes the reply. (Para 142)
The Committee notes the reply and hopes that the helicopter service will be an
additional facility for promoting tourism in Sikkim and Darjeeling. (Para 146)
The Committee notes the reply and hopes that heli tourist services of Pawan  Hans
Limited would become a reality soon. (Para 150)
The Committee recommends that the issue of using the road within the limit of
environmental regulations may be sorted out. Also, the traffic during night time may be
regulated with strict norms so that wildlife may not be disturbed there. (Para 153)
The Committee notes the reply and observes that, though one year has elapsed after
the recommendation of the Committee, nothing concrete has been done by the concerned
authorities to clear the projects. (Para 156)
The Committee recommends that the road construction should not suffer owing  to
the long procedure mentioned above, as the actual working time in the NE Region is very
limited in a year, compared to other regions. (Para 160)
The Committee notes the reply. (Para 163)
The Committee notes the reply and hopes that the specifications as mentioned  above
are strictly adhered to. (Para 166)
The Committee is aware that there are various provisions preventing overloading in
the vehicles under the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988. The Committee, however, is doubtful over
the effective adherence to the rules, and its monitoring mechanism. The Committee is not
satisfied with the reply given by the Ministry of Road Transport and Highways on its
recommendation above. The Committee desires that the specific measures taken to ensure
no-entry of over loaded vehicles through the Rengpo Check Post may be furnished to the
Committee. (Para 170)
The Committee notes the reply and observes that a blanket policy cannot be adopted
to all the regions of the country alike because of the variations on the topography and land
conditions, population etc. The policy makers may bear this factor in mind while dealing
with such issues. (Para 173)
The Committee notes the reply. (Para 176)

41
The Committee notes the reply. (Para 179)
The Committee is not satisfied with the slow pace of road restoration at Tindharia.
The NH-55 which was closed down two years back is still trapped in red-tapism and
Committee feels that the Ministry should speed up the process on priority basis.
(Para 182)
The Committee is not satisfied with the reply. The Committee views that proper sign
age is as important as good quality roads, especially in a difficult terrain like the NE
Region. The Committee recommends that adequate funds should be earmarked for
installing signage and road markings. (Para 185)
The Committee notes the reply. The Committee desires to be informed of the details
of decisions taken by the Empowered Group of State Transport Ministers on this issue.
(Para 188)
The Committee notes the reply. (Para 192)
The Committee notes the reply. The Committee observes that proper monitoring of
the vehicles with GSMlGPRS is a welcome effort. However, the in sufficiency of the number
of vehicles connecting various places should be addressed properly. The Government may
introduce proper schemes for this requirement. The Committee desires that the Ministry
may pursue with the States/State Road Transport Undertakings on the proposals for one-
time central assistance for bringing latest IT related features in their road transport
services. (Para 197)
The Committee notes the reply and recommends that the Forest Authorities may be
approached for granting permission for illumination of the monuments which falls in
Reserve Forest Area. (Para 200)
The Committee notes the reply and hopes that the vacant posts will be filled up at
the earliest. (Para 203)
The Committee recommends that adequate steps for introducing Visa-on Arrival
facility at Bagdogra airport, may be taken up by the concerned agencies. (Para 206)
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
The Committee observes that concerned agencies did not take the recommendation of
the Committee seriously. The Committee reiterates its recommendation as given in paragraph
134 of its 190
th Report that Darjeeling may also be included in the list of the NE Region for
providing Budgetary Support as available to the North-Eastern States. (Para 209)
The Committee notes the reply. The Committee recommends that Government of
India may introduce a Bill to amend the NEC Act, 1971 so that the bottlenecks as
mentioned above, can be resolved for the inclusion of Darjeeling in the NEC. (Para 214)
The Committee takes note of the reply and would like to impress upon the Ministry
of Tourism to pursue the matter with the State Government and DoPT to include Darjeeling
as one of the destinations for the LTC facility in lieu of Home Town LTC granted to Central
Government Employees. (Para 217)
The Committee emphasise upon the need for eco-friendly tourism development in the
North East Region. (Para 220)
The Committee notes that the Ministry of Tourism has not given any reply regarding
the need for a Technical Institute. (Para 224)

42
The Committee notes the reply. (Para 234)
The Committee is constrained to note that the reply furnished by the Ministry does
not cover all the issues reflected in the recommendation. The Committee desires that a
complete reply may be furnished incorporating all the issues raised in the recommendation.
(Para 237)
The Committee notes the reply and desires that the modalities to be adopted for
promotion of Film Tourism may be finalized by the State Governments of West Bengal and
Sikkim at the earliest. (Para 242)

43
ANNEXURE

45
ANNEXURE
(Vide para No. 9 of the Report)
ANNEXURE TO PARA-109 OF ACTION TAKEN REPLIES ON THE RECOMMENDATIONS/
OBSERV ATIONS CONTAINED IN THE 190 TH  REPORT OF THE DEPARTMENT
RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM
AND CULTURE ON “DEVELOPMENT OF TOURISM 
IN DARJEELING AND SIKKIM”
Brief note on Follow-up action taken by Ministry of Road Transport and Highways/National
Highways Authority (NHAI) on curbing overloading of motor vehicles on Highways.
As per Reports, overloading badly damages the precious road infrastructure, incurring huge
expenses on the exchequer to maintain the roads and is one of the major causes for increasing
number of road accidents. Suitable provisions have been made under Motor Vehicles Act, 1988 to
curb overloading. As per Section 114 of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988, in case a vehicle is found
to be overloaded, the excess load needs to be off-loaded at the cost of the driver/owner of the
vehicle in addition to penalty and compounding fee before allowing the vehicle to proceed further.
2. Hon’ble Supreme Court in its judgement dated 9.11.2005 in W.P. No.136/2003 in the
matter of Paramjit Bhasin and Ors vs. UOI & Ors has categorically held that the excess
load detected needs to be off-loaded, apart from levying find/compounding fee, before
allowing overloaded vehicle to proceed further.  High Courts of Bihar, Punjab and Haryana have
also passed judgements in favour of curbing overloading.
3. “Transportation by Road” being a State subject the responsibility for curbing the overloading
of vehicles primarily rests with the State Governments. However, realizing the seriousness of the
problem, the Ministry of Road Transport and Highways has been emphasizing States/UTs from time
to time for strict enforcement of the provisions of law to check the menace of overloading. The
judgements of Hon’ble Supreme Court and various other courts were also forwarded to States for
compliance. In response, 26 State/UT Governments namely Arunachal Pradesh, Andhra Pradesh,
Delhi, Bihar, Chandigarh, Goa, Dadra and Nagar Haveli, Daman and Diu, Chhattisgarh, Jharkhand,
Himachal Pradesh, Karnataka, Kerala, Maharashtra, Meghalaya, Madhya Pradesh, Manipur,
Mizoram, Odisha, Punjab, Puducherry, Rajasthan, Tripura, Gujarat, Uttarakhand and Uttar Pradesh
have reported to have initiated action for curbing overloading in their respective States/UTs.
4. Despite reports received from States that they have initiated action for curbing overloading
in their respective States/UTs., this Ministry is in receipt of references from various stakeholders
that the practice of overloading is still prevalent in most of the States. A reminder from Secretary
(RT&H) to Chief Secretaries of all States was sent on 06.09.2012. Last reminder to States/UTs on
overloading was issued on 18.12.2012 (from Joint Secretary - Transport to Principle Secretaries/
Commissioners).
5. A ‘Pilot Study on Effect of overloading on Road Infrastructure’ was also conducted by
Central Road Research Institute (CRRI) in the year 2008 at the instance of Ministry of Road
Transport and Highways. All the data and technical information furnished in the report are based
on the investigations carried out in the field and analysis done at CRRI, New Delhi. Based on the
findings, the report suggests following measures to control overloading:

46
(i) Law enforcement agencies should take stringent actions against the truck operators for
overloading and need for enforcement at source of loading (ports, industrial etc.) itself.
(ii) Setting up of weigh-in-motion stations and highways authorities should be empowered
to enforce the axle load limits and made the weighbridge stations.
(iii) Heavy penalties should be levied exceeding the legal limits at the rate per tone and
goods should be off-loaded.
(iv) Discourage modification in design (tyre size, no. of springs etc.) to suit overloading
by incorporating essential features in Registration Certificate.
(v) Encouraging the multi-axle vehicles to carry more goods, thereby reducing VDF and
its damages.
(vi) Installation of Vehicle Overloading Management System to minimize the damages to the roads.
(vii) Road auth orities should be advised to continue to design road pavements taking into
account axle load spectrum studies on actual basis.
A copy of the report alongwith Executive Summary was circulated to all States/UT’s
Government, ARAI, Roads Wing, NHAI etc., for information and implementing the measures as
suggested to control overloading in their respective States/Organisations.
6. The issue for curbing overloading on national highways has been examined in this Ministry
and NHAI was asked to take necessary action for installation of Weigh-in-motion bridges and other
necessary equipments near key Toll Plaza’s on a pilot basis. In response, NHAI has identified
following Six BOT/OMT projects for enforcement of overloading provisions of the concessions
agreement on pilot basis.
(i) Six laning of Belgaum – Dharwad Section on NH-4 km. 433.00 to km. 515.00 in the
State of Karnataka- BOT model.
(ii) Hyderabad – Yadgiri Section from km. 18.60 to km. 54.00 of NH-202 Andhra
Pradesh–BOT model.
(iii) Six laning of Dhankuni to Kharagpur Section of NH-6 from km. 17.60 to km. 129.00
in the State of West Bengal-BOT model
(iv) Porbabdar – Bhiladi-Jetpur Section-OMT model
(v) Swaroopganj – Pindwara-Udaipur on NH-14-OMT model
(vi) Baran – Shivpuri-Jhansi on NH-25-OMT model
Regional Officers of NHAI have been asked to ensure compliance of provisions of
overloading and to initiate necessary steps to have joint operation with the State authorities.
Chairman, NHAI has been requested again on 19.07.2012 to prepare a blue print for installation of
weigh-in-motion machines in States/UTs so that the menace of overloading could be tackled
effectively in coordination with the State authorities.
7. In a meeting held on 14.09.2012 by Hon’ble Minister (RT&H), NHAI was asked to take initiative
to ensure the implementation of weigh-in-motion bridges on national highways as per MCA provisions.
NHAI to hold internal meetings and analyse the specifications of weigh-in-motion bridges layout on toll
plazas of BOT/OMT  projects. As per follow of the meeting NHAI informed that according to decisions
arrived in the meeting, site visit to Shahjahapur toll Plaza on NH-8 at the border of Haryana-Rajasthan
has already been undertaken and a Work Plan finalized for the WIM pilot project at the location in
consultation with concessionaire. Shri Sanjay Bandopadhyaya, JS(T) also held a meeting with
representative of some Transport Departments, NIC, SIAM, NHAI and testing agencies on 02.04.2013
to explore and come up with a technological solution to detect and prevent overloading.

47
MINUTES

48

49
XI
ELEVENTH MEETING
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Tuesday, the 18 th February, 2014 in Room No. 63, First
Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Sitaram Yechury — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Shashi Bhusan Behera
3. Shri Narendra Kumar Kashyap
4. Prof. Alka Balram Kshatriya
5. Shri Aayanur Manjunatha
6. Shri V . Hanumantha Rao
7. Shri Satish Sharma
8. Shrimati Bimla Kashyap Sood
9. Shrimati Vasanthi Stanley
LOK SABHA
10. Shri Madan Lal Sharma
11. Shri Shatrughan Sinha
SECRETARIAT
Shri N.K. Singh, Joint Secretary
Shri Swarabji B., Joint Director
Dr. (Shrimati) Subhashree Panigrahi, Joint Director
Shrimati Catherine John L., Assistant Director
Shri T. Kennedy Jesudossan, Committee Officer
Shri P.P. Raumon, Committee Officer
2. The Chairman welcomed the Members to the meeting. Thereafter, the Committee considered
the following draft Reports:
(i) * * *
(ii) * * *
(iii) 212
th Report on the Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations
of the Committee contained in its One Hundred and Ninetieth Report on Development of
Tourism in Darjeeling and Sikkim; and
(iv) * * *
3. The Committee adopted the said reports without any modifications after some discussion and
decided to present/lay the Reports to Parliament on 19
th February, 2014.
4. The meeting adjourned at 4.00 P.M.
49
*** Relate to other matters.

50
50
LIST OF REPORTS OF DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE
Report
No.
1
1st
2nd
3rd
4th
5th
6th
7th
8th
9th
10th
11th
l2th
13th
Title of the Report
2
Demands for Grants (1993-94) of
Department of Tourism
Government Policy on Private Air Taxi
Operation and Matters connected
therewith
Inland Waterways Authority of India
(Amendment), Bill, 1992
Air Corporations (Transfer of
Undertakings and  Repeal) Bill, 1992 (with
evidence)
The Airports Authority of India Bill, 1993
(with evidence)
The Anti-Hijacking (Amendment) Bill, 1993
The Suppression of Unlawful Acts Against
Safety of Civil Aviation (Amendment)
Bill, 1993
Demands for Grants (1994-95) of
Department of Tourism
Demands for Grants (1994-95) of
Ministry of Civil Aviation
Demands for Grants (1994-95) of
Ministry of  Surface Transport
Merger of Vayudoot with Indian Airlines
Development of Tourism and Transport in
North-East
National Highway System
Date of
Presentation
4
30.04.1993
17.08.1993
08.12.1993 (RS)
09.12.1993 (LS)
08.12.1993 (RS)
09.12.1993 (LS)
16.03.1994
19.04.1994
19.04.1994
21.04.1994
22.04.1994
25.04.1994
24.08.1994
20.03.1995
25.04.1995
Date of
Adoption
3
29.04.1993
21.07.1993
08.09.1993
20.10.1993
14.02.1994
29.03.1994
29.03.1994
05.04.1994
12.04.1994
19.04.1994
28.06.1994
29.12.1994
21.02.1995
1993-94 (5 Reports)
1994-95 (8 Reports)

51
1
14th
15th
16th
17th
18th
19th
*20th
21st
22nd
23rd
24th
25th
26th
27th
28th
2
Demands for Grants (1995-96) of
Department of Tourism
Demands for Grants (1995-96) of
Department of Civil Aviation
Demands for Grants (1995-96) of
Ministry of Surface Transport
National Highways (Amendment) Bill,
1995 (with evidence)
Inland Waterways
Dock Workers (Regulation of Employment)
(Inapplicability to Major Ports) Bill, 1995
(with evidence)
Privatisation Policy in regard to Major
Ports
Seamen’s Provident Fund (Amendment)
Bill, 1995
Civil Enclaves in Defence Airfields
Demands for Grants (1996-97) of
Department of Tourism
Demands for Grants (1996-97) of
Ministry of Civil Aviation
Demands for Grants (1996-97) of
Ministry of Surface Transport
Demands for Grants (1997-98)
Department of Tourism
Demands for Grants (1997-98) of
Ministry of Civil Aviation
Demands for Grants (1997-98) of
Ministry of Surface Transport
4
26.04.1995
26.04.1995
10.05.1995
26.05.1995
25.08.1995
04.12.1995
27.02.1996 (LS)
28.02.1996 (RS)
28.02.1996 (RS)
29.02.1996 (LS)
07.03.1996
27.08.1996
04.09.1996 (RS)
06.09.1996 (LS)
09.09.1996
15.05.1997
15.05.1997
15.05.1997
3
18.04.1995
18.04.1995
04.05.1995
24.05.1995
22.08.1995
11.10.1995
04.01.1996
07.02.1996
29.02.1996
21.08.1996
29.08.1996
04.09.1996
08.05.1997
08.05.1997
08.05.1997
1995-96 (8 Reports)
1996-97 (8 Reports)
*Presented to Hon’ble Chairman on the 25 th January, 1996.

52
1
29th
30th
31st
32nd
33rd
34th
35th
36th
37th
38th
39th
40th
41st
42nd
43rd
2
Ship-building and Ship-repair Industry in
India
Functioning of Indian Airlines and Alliance
Air
Demands for Grants (1998-99) of
Department of Tourism
Demands for Grants (1998-99) of
Ministry of Civil Aviation
Demands for Grants (1998-99) of
Ministry of Surface Transport
Merchant Shipping Second (Amendment)
Bill, 1998 (with evidence)
Functioning of Air India
Major Port Trusts (Amendment) Bill, 1998
(with evidence)
Demands for Grants (1999-2000) of
Ministry of Tourism
Demands for Grants (1999-2000) of
Ministry of Civil Aviation
Demands for Grants (1999-2000) of
Ministry of Surface Transport
Problems faced by Tourists/Passengers at
the Airport in the country
Demands for Grants (2000-2001) of
Ministry of Tourism
Demands for Grants (2000-2001) of
Ministry of Civil Aviation
Demands for Grants (2000-2001) of the
Ministry of Surface Transport
4
24.07.1997
14.08.1997
03.07.1998 (RS)
06.07.1998 (LS)
06.07.1998
06.07.1998
04.12.1998
04.03.1999 (LS)
08.03.1999 (RS)
04.03.1999 (LS)
08.03.1999 (RS)
19.04.1999 (RS)
22.04.1999 (LS)
19.04.1999 (RS)
22.04.1999 (LS)
19.04.1999 (RS)
22.04.1999 (LS)
07.03.2000 (RS)
08.03.2000 (LS)
19.04.2000
19.04.2000
19.04.2000
3
08.07.1997
11.08.1997
29.06.1998
01.07.1998
01.07.1998
02.12.1998
01.02.1999
26.02.1999
07.04.1999
07.04.1999
08.04.1999
01.03.2000
03.04.2000
03.04.2000
13.04.2000
1997-98 (1 Report)
1998-99 (9 Reports)
1999-2000 (7 Reports)

53
1
44th
45th
46th
47th
48th
49th
50th
51st
52nd
53rd
54th
55th
56th
57th
58th
59th
2
Disinvestment of Air India
Functioning and Revival of Central Inland
Water Transport Corporation Ltd. (CIWTC)
Chartering and Management of flights for
Haj Pilgrims
Functioning of the Department of
Lighthouses and Lightships
Demands for Grants (2001-2002) of the
Department of Tourism
Demands for Grants (2001-2002) of
Department of Culture
Demands for Grants (2001-2002) of
Ministry of Civil Aviation
Demands for Grants (2001-2002) of the
Ministry of Road Transport and Highways
Demands for Grants (2001-2002) of the
Ministry of Shipping
The Aircraft (Exemption From Taxes and
Duties on Fuel and Lubricants) Bill, 2000
(with evidence)
Functioning of Border Roads Organisation
Demands for Grants (2002-2003) of the
Department of Tourism
Demands for Grants (2002-2003) of
Department of Culture
Demands for Grants (2002-2003) of the
Ministry of Shipping
Demands for Grants (2002-2003) of
Ministry of Civil Aviation
Demands for Grants (2002-2003) of the
Ministry of Road Transport and Highways
4
22.8.2000
13.12.2000 (LS)
15.12.2000 (RS)
14.12.2000 (LS)
15.12.2000 (RS)
21.03.2001 (LS)
23.03.2001 (RS)
26.04.2001
26.04.2001
26.04.2001
26.04.2001 (RS)
27.04.2001 (LS)
26.04.2001 (RS)
27.04.2001 (LS)
27.11.2001 (RS)
28.11.2001 (LS)
12.12.2001
23.04.2002 (LS)
24.04.2002 (RS)
23.04.2002 (LS)
24.04.2002 (RS)
23.04.2002 (LS)
24.04.2002 (RS)
23.04.2002 (LS)
24.04.2002 (RS)
23.04.2002 (LS)
24.04.2002 (RS)
3
17.08.2000
06.12.2000
06.12.2000
14.03.2001
11.04.2001
11.04.2001
11.04.2001
11.04.2001
11.04.2001
29.10.2001
28.11.2001
16.04.2002
16.04.2002
16.04.2002
18.04.2002
18.04.2002
2001 (8 Reports)
2002 (7 Reports)

54
1
60th
61st
62nd
63rd
64th
65th
66th
67th
68th
69th
70th
*71st
72nd
2
Development of Tourism in the Country
The Airports Authority of India
(Amendment) Bill, 2000 (with evidence)
The Major Port Trusts (Amendment)
Bill, 2001 (with evidence)
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its Fifty-eighth
Report on Demands for Grants 2002-03
of Ministry of Civil Aviation
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its Fifty-seventh
Report on Demands for Grants 2002-03
of Ministry of Shipping
Sale of Centaur Hotel Mumbai Airport
Demands for Grants (2003-04) of the
Department of Tourism
Demands for Grants (2003-04) of the
Ministry of Road Transport and Highways
Demands for Grants (2003-04) of
Department of Culture
Demands for Grants (2003-04) of
Ministry of Civil Aviation
Demands for Grants (2003-04) of the
Ministry of Shipping
Jallianwala Bagh National Memorial
(Amendment) Bill, 2003 (with evidence)
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its Sixtieth Report
on Development of Tourism in the
country
4
21.11.2002
21.11.2002
19.02.2003
25.02.2003
25.02.2003
10.03.2003
10.04.2003
10.04.2003
25.04.2003
25.04.2003
25.04.2003
11.11.2003
03.12.2003
3
06.08.2002
11.11.2002
03.02.2003
10.01.2003
20.02.2003
05.03.2003
08.04.2003
08.04.2003
23.04.2003
23.04.2003
23.04.2003
16.10.2003
29.10.2003
2003 (12 Reports)
*Presented to Hon’ble Chairman on the 11 th November, 2003.

55
1
73rd
74th
75th
76th
77th
78th
79th
80th
81st
82nd
2
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its Sixty-sixth
Report on Demands for Grants (2003-04)
(Demand No. 91) of Department of
Tourism
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its 67
th Report on
Demands for Grants (2003-04) of
Ministry of Road Transport and Highways
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its 70
th Report on
Demands for Grants (2003-04) of
Ministry of Shipping
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its 68
th Report on
Demands for Grants (2003-04) of
Department of Culture
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its 69
th Report on
Demands for Grants (2003-04) of
Ministry of Civil Aviation
Demands for Grants (2004-05) of
Ministry of Civil Aviation
Demands for Grants (2004-05) of
Ministry of Tourism
Demands for Grants (2004-05) of
Ministry of Culture
Demands for Grants (2004-05) of
Ministry of Shipping
Demands for Grants (2004-05) of
Ministry of Road Transport and Highways
4
03.12.2003
03.02.2004
03.02.2004
03.02.2004
03.02.2004
18.08.2004
26.08.2004
26.08.2004
26.08.2004
26.08.2004
3
29.10.2003
09.01.04
09.01.04
22.01.04
22.01.04
14.08.2004
23.08.2004
23.08.2004
25.08.2004
25.08.2004
2004 (4 Reports)
2004-05 (12 Reports)

56
1
83rd
84th
85th
86th
87th
88th
89th
90th
91st
92nd
93rd
94th
2
Functioning of the Commission of
Railway Safety
Demands for Grants (2005-06) of
Department of Road Transport and
Highways
Demands for Grants (2005-06) of
Ministry of Culture
Demands for Grants (2005-06) of
Department of Shipping
Demands for Grants (2005-06) of
Ministry of Tourism
Demands for Grants (2005-06) of
Ministry of Civil Aviation
The Merchant Shipping (Amendment)
Bill, 2004 (with evidence)
Development of Airport Sector with Special
Emphasis on New Modern Airports
Functioning on Archaeological Survey of
India
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its Eighty-fourth
Report on Demands for Grants (2005-06)
of Department of Road Transport and
Highways
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its Eighty-fifth
Report on Demands for Grants (2005-06)
of Ministry of Culture
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its Eighty-sixth
Report on Demands for Grants (2005-06)
of Department of Shipping
4
6.12.2004 (RS)
3.12.2004 (LS)
29.04.2005
29.04.2005
29.04.2005
29.04.2005
29.04.2005
27.07.2005
23.08.2005
25.11.2005
27.2.2006
27.2.2006
27.2.2006
3
17.11.2004
15.04.2005
15.04.2005
21.04.2005
21.04.2005
27.04.2005
06.06.2005
17.08.2005
19.9.2005
22.2.2006
22.2.2006
22.2.2006
2005-06 (18 Reports)

57
1
95th
96th
97th
98th
99th
100th
101st
102nd
103rd
104th
105th
106th
2
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its Eighty-seventh
Report on Demands for Grants (2005-06)
of Ministry of Tourism
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its Eighty-eighth
Report on Demands for Grants (2005-06)
of Ministry of Civil Aviation
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained In its Ninetieth
Report on the ‘Development of Airport
Sector with special emphasis on new
modern airports’
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained In its Eighty-third
Report on the ‘Functioning of the
Commission of Railway Safety’
The Admiralty Bill, 2005
The Inland Vessels (Amendment) Bill, 2005
The Carriage By Road Bill, 2005
Demands for Grants (2006-07) of the
Department of Road Transport and
Highways
Demands for Grants (2006-07) of the
Department of Culture
Demands for Grants (2006-07) of the
Department of Tourism
Demands for Grants (2006-07) of the
Department of Shipping
Demands for Grants (2006-07) of the
Ministry of Civil Aviation
4
27.02.2006
27.02.2006
27.02.2006
21.03.2006
21.03.2006
21.03.2006
21.03.2006
22.05.2006
22.05.2006
22.05.2006
22.05.2006
22.05.2006
3
22.02.2006
22.02.2006
22.02.2006
17.03.2006
17.03.2006
17.03.2006
17.03.2006
19.05.2006
19.05.2006
19.05.2006
19.05.2006
19.05.2006

58
1
107th
108th
109th
110th
111th
112th
113th
114th
115th
2
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its Ninety-first
Report on ‘Functioning of the
Archaeological Survey of India’
Functioning and Performance of India
Tourism Development Corporation Limited
(ITDC)
The Aircraft (Amendment) Bill, 2006
The Central Road Fund (Amendment)
Bill, 2006
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
and Second Report on Demands for
Grants (2006-07) of Department of Road
Transport and Highways
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
and Third Report on Demands for Grants
(2006-07) of Department of Culture.
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
and Fourth Report on Demands for Grants
(2006-07) of Ministry of Tourism
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred and
Fifth Report on Demands for Grants
(2006-07) of Department of Shipping
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred and
Sixth Report on Demands for Grants
(2006-07) of Ministry of Civil Aviation
4
22.05.2006
15.12.2006
13.03.2007
20.03.2007
14.05.2007
14.05.2007
14.05.2007
14.05.2007
14.5.2007
3
19.05.2006
12.12.2006
09.03.2007
19.03.2007
16.04.2007
16.04.2007
16.04.2007
16.4.2007
16.4.2007
2006-07 (13 Reports)

59
1
116th
117th
118th
119th
120th
121st
122nd
123rd
124th
125th
126th
2
Demands for Grants (2007-08) of the
Ministry of Civil Aviation
Demands for Grants (2007-08) of the
Department of Shipping
Demands for Grants (2007-08) of the
Department of Road Transport and Highways
Demands for Grants (2007-08) of the
Ministry of Tourism
Demands for Grants (2007-08) of the
Ministry of Culture
The National Waterway (Talcher-Dhamra
Stretch of Rivers Geonkhali-Charbatia
Stretch of East Coast Canal, Charbatia-
Dhamra Stretch of Matai River and
Mahanadi Delta Rivers) Bill, 2006.
The National Waterway (Kakinada-
Pondicherry Stretch of Canals and the
Kaluvelly Tank, Bhadrachalam –
Rajahmundry Stretch of River Godavari
and Wazirabad-Vijayawada Stretch of
River Krishna) Bill, 2006.
The Seamen’s Provident Fund
(Amendment) Bill, 2007
The Carriage by Air (Amendment) Bill, 2007
presented to Hon'ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha
on 17.10.2007
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred and
Sixteenth Report on Demands for Grants
(2007-08) of Ministry of Civil Aviation
The Action Taken by the Government on
the recommendations/observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
Nineteenth Report on Demands for Grants
(2007-08) of the Ministry of Tourism
4
14.5.2007
14.5.2007
14.5.2007
14.5.2007
14.5.2007
16.8.2007
16.8.2007
05.09.2007
17.10.2007
(Presented to Chairman)
20.11.2007
(Presented to House)
20.11.2007
20.11.2007
3
9.5.2007
9.5.2007
9.5.2007
9.5.2007
9.5.2007
18.07.2007
18.07.2007
31.08.2007
25.09.2007
02.11.2007
02.11.2007
2007-08 (19 Reports)

60
1
127th
128th
129th
130th
131st
132nd
133th
134th
135th
136th
137th
138th
139th
2
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
and Eighteenth Report on Demands for
Grants (2007-08) of the Department of
Road Transport and Highways
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
and Seventeenth Report on Demands for
Grants (2007-08) of Department of
Shipping
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
and Twentieth Report on Demands for
Grants (2007-08) of Ministry of Culture
The National Waterway (Lakhipur-Bhanga
Stretch of the Barak River) Bill, 2007
Closure of Bangalore and Hyderabad
Airports and matters related thereto
The Indian Maritime University Bill, 2007
The Airports Economic Regulatory
Authority of India Bill, 2007
Demands for Grants (2007-08) of the
Department of Shipping
Demands for Grants (2008-09) of the
Department of Road Transport and Highways
Demands for Grants (2008-09) of
Ministry of Tourism
Demands for Grants (2008-09) of
Ministry of Culture
Demands for Grants (2008-09) of
Ministry of Civil Aviation
The Motor Vehicle (Amendment) Bill, 2007
4
04.03.2008
04.03.2008
04.03.2008
04.03.2008
05.03.2008
17
.04.2008
17.04.2008
17.04.2008
28.04.2008
28.04.2008
28.04.2008
28.04.2008
28.04.2008
3
18.01.2008
18.01.2008
18.01.2008
31.01.2008
04.03.2008
15.04.2008
15.04.2008
15.04.2008
24.04.2008
24.04.2008
24.04.2008
24.04.2008
24.04.2008

61
1
140th
141st
142nd
143rd
144th
145th
146th
2
Promotion of tourism in Jammu and
Kashmir
Modernization of Airports
Functioning of Private Airports and the
related issues
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
and Thirty Fourth Report on Demands for
Grants 2008-2009 of the Department of
Shipping
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
and Thirty Fifth Report on Demands for
Grants 2008-2009 of the Department of
Road, Transport and Highways
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
and Thirty Sixth Report on Demands for
Grants 2008-2009 of the Ministry of
Tourism
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
and Thirty Seventh Report on Demands
for Grants 2008-2009 of the Ministry of
Culture
4
20.08.2008
(Presented to Hon’ble
Chairman and Hon’ble
Speaker)
Presented to Parliament
on 23.10.08
20.08.2008
(Presented to Hon’ble
Chairman and Hon’ble
Speaker)
Presented to Parliament
on 23.10.08
23.10.2008
19.12.2008
19.12.2008
19.12.2008
19.12.2008
3
11.08.2008
11.08.2008
20.10.2008
18.12.2008
18.12.2008
18.12.2008
18.12.2008
2008-09 (10 Reports)

62
1
147th
148th
149th
150th
151st
152nd
153rd
154th
155th
156th
157th
2
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
and Thirty Eighth Report on Demands for
Grants 2008-2009 of the Ministry of Civil
Aviation
The National Highways Authority of India
(Amendment) Bill, 2008
Development of Tourism Infrastructure
and Amenities for the Commonwealth
Games 2010
The National Commission for Heritage
Sites Bill, 2009
Merger of Indian Airlines and Air India: Its
Impact on The Civil Aviation Sector
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
and Fortieth Report on promotion of
Tourism in Jammu and Kashmir
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
and Forty Ninth Report on Development
of Tourism Infrastructure and Amenities
for the Commonwealth Games, 2010
Demands for Grants (2010-11) of
Ministry of Tourism
Demands for Grants (2010-11) of
Ministry of Road Transport and Highways
Demands for Grants (2010-11) of
Ministry of Shipping
Demands for Grants (2010-11) of
Ministry of Culture
4
19.12.2008
17.02.2009
24.02.2009
23.11.2009
21.01.2010
(Presented to Hon’ble
Chairman and Hon’ble
Speaker)
Presented to Parliament
on 03.03.2010
03.03.2010
03.03.2010
20.04.2010
20.04.2010
22.04.2010
22.04.2010
3
18.12.2008
13.02.2009
19.02.2009
13.11.2009
08.01.2010
09.02.2010
09.02.2010
07.04.2010
07.04.2010
20.04.2010
20.04.2010
2009-10 (11 Reports)

63
1
158th
159th
160tn
161st
162nd
163rd
164th
2
Demands for Grants (2010-11) of
Ministry of Civil Aviation
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
and Thirty First Report on Closure of
Bangalore and Hyderabad Airports; One
Hundred and Forty First Report on
Modernisation of Airports; and One
Hundred and Forty Second Report on
Functioning of Private Airports
The National Road Safety and Traffic
Management Board Bill, 2010
The Anti-Hijacking (Amendment)
Bill, 2010
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
Fifty Fourth Report on Demands for
Grants (2010-11) of the Ministry of
Tourism
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
Fifty Fifth Report on Demands for Grants
(2010-11) of the Ministry of Road
Transport and Highways
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
Fifty Sixth Report on Demands for
Grants (2010-11) of the Ministry of
Shipping
4
22.04.2010
06.05.2010
28.07.2010
(Rajya Sabha)
27.07.2010
(Lok Sabha)
18.10.2010
(Presented to Hon’ble
Chairman and Hon’ble
Speaker)
Presented to the Houses
of the Parliament
01.03.2011
04.03.2011
04.03.2011
04.03.2011
3
20.04.2010
05.05.2010
14.07.2010
08.10.2010
20.12.2010
20.12.2010
20.12.2010
2010-11 (12 Reports)

64
1
165th
166th
167th
168th
169th
170th
171st
172nd
173rd
174th
175th
176th
2
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
Fifty Seventh Report on Demands for
Grants (2010-11) Ministry of Culture
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
Fifty Eight Report on Demands for Grants
(2010-11) of the Ministry of Civil Aviation
Functioning of National Museum
Directorate General of Civil Aviation
(DGCA) – Issues and Challenges
Helicopter operations in India
Modernization of Major Port
Functioning of Sahitya Akademi, Lalit Kala
Akademi, Sangeet Natak Akademi and
National School of Drama
Development of Tourism in North-Eastern
Region
The National Highways Authority of India
(Amendment) Bill, 2011
Demands for Grants (2012-13) of Ministry
of Civil Aviation
Demands for Grants (2012-13) of Ministry
of Culture
Demands for Grants (2012-13) of Ministry
of Tourism
4
04.03.2011
04.03.2011
10.03.2011 (RS)
11.03.2011 (LS)
04.05.2011 (Presented to
Hon’ble Chairman and
Hon’ble Speaker)
Presented to the House of
the Parliament 11.08.2011
04.05.2011 (Presented to
Hon’ble Chairman and
Hon’ble Speaker)
Presented to the House
of the Parliament on
11.08.2011
11.08.2011
17.08.2011
17.08.2011
15.03.2012
02.04.2012
07.052012
07.05.2012
3
20.12.2010
20.12.2010
25.01.2011
13.04.2011
13.04.2011
02.05.2011
11.08.2011
11.08.2011
13.03.2012
26.04.2012
03.05.2012
03.05.2012
2011-12 (8 Reports)

65
1
177th
178th
179th
180th
181st
182nd
183rd
184th
185th
2
Demands for Grants (2012-13) of Ministry
of Shipping
Demands for Grants (2012-13) of Ministry
of Road Transport and Highways
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
Sixty Seventh Report on ‘Functioning of
National Museum’
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
and Seventy Second Report on Development
of Tourism in North-Eastern Region
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
Sixty eighth Report on Directorate General
of Civil Aviation (DGCA) – Issues and
Challenges
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
Sixty-ninth Report on Helicopter Operations
in India
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
Seventy-seventh Report on the Demands for
Grants of Ministry of Shipping (2012-13)
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
Seventy-sixth Report on the Demands for
Grants of Ministry of Tourism (2012-13)
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
Seventy-fourth Report on the Demands for
Grants of Ministry of Civil Aviation (2012-13)
4
07.052012
07.05.2012
21.05.2012
21.05.2012
04.12.2012
04.12.2012
04.12.2012
04.12.2012
04.12.2012
3
03.05.2012
03.05.2012
17.05.2012
17.05.2012
18.10.2012
18.10.2012
05.11. 2012
05.11.2012
18.10.2012
2012-13 (20 Reports)

66
1
186th
187th
188th
189th
190th
191st
192nd
193rd
194th
195th
2
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One
Hundred Seventy-fifth Report on the
Demands for Grants of Ministry of
Culture (2012-13)
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
Seventy-eighth Report on the Demands
for Grants of Ministry of Road Transport
and Highways (2012-13)
Functioning of Commission of Railway
Safety
Development of National Waterways-
Potential and Challenges
Development of Tourism in Darjeeling and
Sikkim
Demands for Grants (2013-14) of
Ministry of Civil Aviation
Demands for Grants (2013-14) of
Ministry of Culture
Demands for Grants (2013-14) of
Ministry of Road Transport and Highways
Demands for Grants (2013-14) of
Ministry of Shipping
Demands for Grants (2013-14) of
Ministry of Tourism
4
04.12.2012
04.12.2012
06.02.2013 (Presented to
Hon’ble Chairman)
Presented to the
Parliament
on 27.02.2013
06.02.2013 (Presented to
Hon’ble Chairman)
Presented to the
Parliament
27.02.2013
06.02.2013 (Presented to
Hon’ble Chairman)
Presented to the
Parliament
27.02.2013
03.05.2013
03.05.2013
03.05.2013
03.05.2013
03.05.2013
3
05.11. 2012
18.10.2012
03.01.2013
03.01.2013
03.01.2013
02.05.2013
02.05.2013
02.05.2013
02.05.2013
02.05.2013

67
1
196th
197th
198th
199th
200th
201st
202nd
203rd
204th
2
The National Waterway (Lakhipur-Bhanga
Stretch of the Barak River) Bill, 2013
The Merchant Shipping (Amendment)
Bill, 2013
Management of Road Transport in National
Capital Region: Issues and Challenges
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
and Eighty Ninth Report on the
Development of National Waterways-
Potentials and Challenges
Development of Tourism, National
Highways and Water Transport in Kerala
and Cochin Shipyard Limited
Functioning of National Akademis and
other Cultural Institutions: Issues and
Challenges
The Merchant Shipping (Second
Amendment) Bill, 2013
Privatization of Services at Airports
The Civil Aviation Authority of India
Bill, 2013
4
26.06.2013 (Presented to
Hon’ble Chairman)
Presented to the
Parliament on 07.08.2013
26.06.2013 (Presented
to Hon’ble Chairman)
Presented to the
Parliament on 07.08.2013
27.08.2013
27.08.2013
27.08.2013
l7.10.2013 (Presented to
Hon’ble Chairman)
Presented to the
Parliament on 17.12.2013
20.11.2013
(Presented to Hon’ble
Chairman)
Presented to the
Parliament on 17.12.2013
20.11.2013
(Presented to Hon'ble
Chairman)
Presented to the
Parliament on 17.12.2013
24.01.2014
(Presented to Hon'ble
Chairman)
Presented to the
Parliament on 06.02.2014
3
20.05.2013
17.06.2013
23.08.2013
23.08.2013
23.08.2013
01.10.2013
31.10.2013
31.10.2013
13.01.2014
2013-14 (7 Reports)

68
1
205th
206th
207th
208th
209th
210th
211th
2
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
and Ninety Two Report on the Demands
for Grants (2013-14) of the Ministry of
Culture
Action Taken by the Government on the
Observations/Recommendations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
and Ninety Third Report on Demands for
Grants (2013-14) of Ministry of Road
Transport and Highways
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
Ninety Fourth Report on the Demands for
Grants (2013-14) of the Ministry of
Shipping
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
and Ninety Fifth Report on the Demands
for Grants (2013-14) of the Ministry of
Tourism
Action Taken by the Government on the
Observations/Recommendations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
and Ninety First Report on the Demands
for Grants (2013-14) of the Ministry of
Civil Aviation
Action Taken by the Government on the
Observations/Recommendations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
and Eighty Eighth Report on Functioning
of Commission of Railways Safety
Upkeep of various Monuments in Delhi,
National Museum and other important
issues pertaining to the Ministry of Culture
4
06.02.2014
06.02.2014
06.02.2014
06.02.2014
06.02.2014
19.02.2014
19.02.2014
3
17.12.2013
17.12.2013
17.12.2013
17.12.2013
17.12.2013
18.02.2014
18.02.2014
(The above mentioned reports are available on the website of Rajya Sabha
http://rajyasabha.nic.in ➝Committees➝Department related RS-committee on Transport, Tourism and
Culture ➝Reports)

Printed at : Bengal Offset Works, 335 Khajoor Road, Karol Bagh, New Delhi-110005.