Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
December, 2012/Agrahayana, 1934 (Saka)
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
RAJYA SABHA 
ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE
ONE HUNDRED EIGHTY-THIRD REPORT
Action Taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee 
contained in its One Hundred Seventy-seventh Report on 
the Demands for Grants (2012-13) of Ministry of Shipping
 
REPORT NO. 
183
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 4th December, 2012)
(Laid on the Table of the Lok Sabha on 4th December, 2012)


Website:http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail:rsc-tt@sansad.nic.in

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE
ONE HUNDRED EIGHTY-THIRD REPORT
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
contained in its One Hundred Seventy-seventh Report on
the Demands for Grants (2012-13) of Ministry of Shipping
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 4th December, 2012)
(Laid on the Table of the Lok Sabha on 4th December, 2012)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
December, 2012/Agrahayana, 1934 (Saka)
Hindi version of this publication is also available

CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ......................................................................................... (i)-(ii)
2. I NTRODUCTION ........................................................................................................................ (iii)
3. L IST OF A BBREVIATIONS ......................................................................................................... (iv)
4. R EPORT ................................................................................................................................... 1—24
5. O BSERV A TIONS/CONCLUSIONS /RECOMMENDATIONS — A T A G LANCE .................................... 25—27
6. M INUTES ................................................................................................................................. 29—32

(i)
COMPOSITION OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE
(2012-2013)
1. Shri Sitaram Yechury – Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Satish Sharma
3. Prof. Alka Balram Kshatriya
4. Shri V . Hanumantha Rao
5. Shrimati Bimla Kashyap Sood
6. Shri Aayanur Manjunatha
7. Shri Narendra Kumar Kashyap
8. Shrimati Vasanthi Stanley
9. Shri Kunal Kumar Ghosh
10. Shri Thomas Sangma
LOK SABHA
11. Yogi Adityanath
12. Shri Ghanshyam Anuragi
13. Shri Subrata Bakshi
14. Shri Khagen Das
15. Shrimati Tabassum Hasan
16. Dr. Mahesh Joshi
@17. Dr. Kruparani Killi
18. Shri M. Krishnaswamy
19. Shri G.V . Harsha Kumar
@20. Shrimati Ranee Narah
21. Shri Prabodh Panda
22. Shri Deoraj Singh Patel
23. Shri Adhalrao Shivaji Patil
24. Shri Nilesh N. Rane
@25. Shri K.J.S.P. Reddy
26. Shri Modugula Venugopala Reddy
27. Shri Dushyant Singh
28. Shri Rakesh Singh
29. Shri Shatrughan Sinha
30. Shri K. Sudhakaran
31. Shri Dinesh Trivedi
@ Ceased to be a Member of the Committee consequent upon his/her inclusion in the Council of Ministers w.e.f. 28 th October, 2012.

(ii)
SECRETARIAT
Shri N.K. Singh, Joint Secretary
Shri Jagdish Kumar, Director
Shri Swarabji B, Joint Director
Shrimati Nidhi Chaturvedi, Assistant Director
Shri T. Kennedy Jesudossan, Committee Officer
Shri P.P. Raumon, Committee Officer
(ii)

(iii)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman, Department- related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport,
Tourism and Culture, having authorized by the Committee to present on its behalf, do hereby
present this One Hundred Eighty Third Report on Action Taken by the Government on the
recommendations/observations of the Committee contained in its One Hundred Seventy Seventh
Report on the Demands for Grants of Ministry of Shipping (2012-13).
2. One Hundred Seventy Seventh Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture was presented to the Parliament on the 7
th May,
2012 in Parliament.
3. The Action Taken Replies on the recommendations of the Committee contained in its One
Hundred Seventy Seventh Report were received from the Ministry of Shipping, on 24 th September,
2012.
4. The Committee considered and adopted the Report at its meeting held on the 5 th November
2012.
SITARAM YECHURY
NEW D ELHI; Chairman,
November 5, 2012 Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Kartika 14, 1934  (Saka) Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture.

(iv)
LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS
A & N – Andaman and Nicobar
ALHW – Andaman and Lakshadweep Harbour Work
CCA – Controller of Certifying Authorities
CIWTC – Central Inland Water Corporation Limited
CoS – Committee of Secretaries
DCI – Dredging Corporation of India
DGLL – Directorate General of Light Houses and Light Ships
GBS – Gross Budgetary Support
HDPEL – Hooghly Dock and Port Engineers Limited
IEBR – Internal and External Budgetary Resources
IMU – Indian Maritime University
IWAI – Inland Waterway Authority of India
IWT – Inland Water Transport
JNPT – Jawaharlal Nehru Port Trust
MCM – Million Cubic Meter
MoU – Memorandum of Understanding
MTPA – Million T ons Per Annum
PPP – Public Private Partnership
PSU – Public Sector Undertaking
R&D – Research and Development
SCI – Shipping Corporation of India
SMDR – School of Maritime Design and Research
VGF – Viability Group Funding
VRS – V oluntary Retirement Scheme

1
REPORT
The Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Government on
observations/recommendation as contained in its One Hundred and Seventy Seventh Report on
Demands for Grants (2012-13) of the Ministry of Shipping, which was presented to the Parliament
on 7
th May, 2012.
2. Action Taken replies were received from the Government on 24 th September, 2012, in
respect of all the observations/recommendations contained in the Report. The Replies have been
categorized as follows:–
(i) Recommendations/observations that have been accepted by the Government: Para Nos.
6, 7, 12, 13, 14, 15, 21, 32, 33, 34, 35, 36, 37, 38, 47, 48, 49, 55, 56, 62, 64, 73,
75, 83, 84, 93, 94, 95, 97, 103, 105, 110, 114, 115, 116, 117, 118, 119, 120 and 121.
(ii) Recommendations/observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue in
view of the Government replies:
Para Nos. 7, 14, 15, 21, 36, 62, 73, 84, 103, 105, 110, 114, 115, 116, 119, 120 and
121.
(iii) Recommendations/observations in respect of which replies of the Government have
not been accepted by the Committee:
Para Nos. 39.
(iv) Recommendations/observations in respect of which final replies of the Government are
still awaited:
Para Nos. Nil
The Recommendations of the Committee contained in the one hundred and Seventy Seventh
Report, Action Taken thereon by the Ministry and recommendations/Observations of the Committee
on each item of action taken has been given in the succeeding paragraphs.
PERFORMANCE DURING XI PLAN
Recommendation/Observation of the Committee
3. The Committee notes that in the absence of consolidated data for the Eleventh Plan period
with outlay, actual allocation and expenditure for both the Port and Shipping sector, and there being
no physical targets shown, comment on the performance cannot be made. However, as admitted
by Secretary, Ministry of Shipping, underutilizing the Budgetary support, due to any reason, in
Committee’s view, is acceptable only to a limited extent.
(Para No. 6 of 177
th Report)
Reply of the Government
4. In the Eleventh Plan, an outlay of Rs. 1301.00 crores and Rs. 13,725.00 crores as Gross
Budgetary Support (GBS) and IEBR were provided for shipping sector out of which Rs. 923.63
crores and Rs. 8864.76 crores have been utilized which works out to 71% of GBS and 64.58%
of IEBR respectively. Primarily, the shortfall of expenditure has been in two cases namely (i) Indian
Maritime University and (ii) Ship building and Ship repair Sector.

2
5. Insofar as Indian Maritime University (IMU) is concerned, it may be stated that for
implementation of OBC reservations, additional classrooms and hostel facilities were needed but
tender for construction of building in Mumbai campus could not be issued as necessary approval
of plan/design were not forthcoming from local bodies and as a result entire outlay could not be
utilized. Similarly, an outlay of Rs.224.56 crores were provided for carrying out new development
works but the Patta and land of Vizag campus has not been transferred and as a result construction
work could not started.
6. Shipbuilding and Ship Repair sector consist of (i) Hindustan Shipyard Limited (HSL)
(ii) Hooghly Dock and Port Engineers Limited (HDPE) and (iii) Ship Building and Repair (SBR).
The Government has transferred Hindustan Shipyard to Ministry of Defence in December, 2009
resulting the fund left unutilized. Owing to lack of Ship building orders, the activity of HDPEL was
restricted to Ship repair work resulting considerable erosion of working capital of the Company.
The Ministry started providing assistance to pay salary, wages and statutory benefit to its
employees. The Cabinet in its meeting held on 13.10.2011 has approved the Rehabilitation-cum-
Restructuring of HDPEL. In the case of SBR, the budgetary projections were made on the basis
of projections provided by IMU, Vizag which is executing a number of R&D projects in
shipbuilding. IMU had projected on the basis of ongoing projects as well as the new R&D Projects.
In the IMU there was shortage of technical staff hence, efforts were made for recruitment of
experienced staff but considerable time was lost in this process resulting R&D scheme could not
be taken up and fund left unutilized.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
7. The Committee is not satisfied with the reasons given for under-utilisation of funds
of IMU as that is due to non clearance of plan/design from local bodies and the Patta and
land of Vizag campus has not been transferred. The Committee observes that this delay in
construction work have deprived a number of eligible students from getting admission to
IMU.
8. The Committee notes with concern the delay in the recruitment of technical staff,
research and development activities in IMU could not be carried out and finally the funds
left unutilized.
9. The Committee recommends the Ministry of Shipping to expedite Rehabilitation-cum-
Restructuring of HDPEL which has already been delayed. This is a need to sensitize the
concerned agencies to ensure that necessary approved plan for execution of schemes is
obtained in time so that funds allotted for those schemes do not remain un-utilized.
Recommendation of the Committee
10. The Committee was also informed (in the working) group report) that only 1/3
rd of the Total
outlay of Rs.30305.16 crores during the Eleventh plans outlay, i.e. Rs. 10388.87 crores was
allocated to the Ministry of Shipping under the port sector. However, it is equally surprising that
the utilization stands at 59.62% (or Rs.7684.61 crores) only. The Committee finds that this under-
utilization was mainly due to reasons such as delay in clearances, approvals etc. These are, no
doubt, time-taking exercises but if taken up with proper procedure and formalities as prescribed,
it could be expedited easily and quickly. In view of urgent need to modernize and expand our port
facilities and stiff competition with Private Ports staring at them, we cannot afford to delay
projects at our Ports. The Committee recommends that thorough home work needs to be done
before approaching each plan year projects for optimum utilization of scarce fund allocation.
(Para No. 7 of 177
th Report)

3
Reply of the Government
11. The recommendation has been noted for compliance in future.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
12. The Committee notes the reply.
ANNUAL PLAN 2011-2012
Recommendation/Observation of the Committee
13. The Committee notes that the funds at BE 2011-12 was reduced to almost half at RE 2011-12
and the utilization was only 50% of BE. The reason submitted by Ministry of Shipping such as
delay in approval, non-submission of extension of dredging subsidy, non-receipt of proposal/
incomplete proposals from shipyards are of routine nature and not convincing.
(Para No. 12 of 177
th Report)
Reply of the Government
14. In the Annual Plan 2011-12 an outlay of Rs. 273.60 crores and Rs.812.92 crores under Plan
and Non-Plan head were provided at BE stage for the Shipping Sector which was reduced to
Rs.207.61 crores and Rs.414.86 crores respectively at RE stage. Against these allocations, the
expenditure were Rs.187.51 crores (68.53% of BE) and Rs.386.12 crores (47.50% of BE)
15. In the plan side, the major shortfall of expenditure has been under the following heads:
(a) Inland Water Transport (IWT)- North Eastern Area: In the North East Region, there
is only one National Waterways i.e. NW-2 hence, there was not much scope for
utilization of fund in the North East Region.
(b) R&D Grant: The budgetary projections were made on the basis of projections provided
by IMU, Vizag which is executing a number of R&D projects in shipbuilding. IMU had
projected on the basis of ongoing projects as well as the new R&D projects. In the
IMU there was shortage of technical staff hence, efforts were made for recruitment
of experienced staff but considerable time was lost in this process resulting R&D
scheme could not be taken up.
(c) Indian Maritime University: An outlay of Rs. 40.00 crores was provided in the BE but
seeing to the pace of expenditure, the requirement of fund were reduced to Rs.30.00
crores at RE stage which was fully utilized.
(d) Directorate General of Lighthouse and Lightships (DGLL): An outlay of Rs.78.60
crores for construction and development of Lighthouses was kept which was reduced
to Rs.45.00 crores at RE stage. But DGLL could utilize Rs. 31.86 crores only because
a few prime projects such as (i) Establishment of VTS-GoK (ii) Estt. of National AIS
net work (iii) Automation of Port Blair LH Distt and (iv) Automation of remaining
Lighthouses could not commissioned resulting there is saving in the outlay provided for
these schemes.
16. In the Non-Plan side, an outlay of Rs.542.11 crores as subsidy for private shipyard was
provided which was reduced to Rs.129.78 crores at RE stage out of which the utilization was
Rs.122.42 crores only. The entire amount could not be utilized because the shipyards had not
submitted complete documents as required by DG (Shipping) for issuing PRCs and Technical
Certificate. Further, the Shipyards could not deliver vessels as per contractual delivery schedule.

4
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
17. The Committee notes the reply and observes that the reasons for under utilization
of funds given are same as those given during submission of Demands for Grants’ detailed
note. The Committee notes with concern that provision for subsidy to private ship-yard was
being made continuously for many years but the same remains under utilized every year.
The Committee may be informed of the steps taken for utilization of non-plan outlay for
the subsidy for private shipyards.
Recommendation/Observation of the Committee
18. The Port Sector present really a gloomy picture in case of utilization of outlay for the year
2011-12 where only 55.16% of total allocation could be utilized upto December, 2011. It is just
0.58% in the case of R&D, 47.40% in IT. The post Tsunami works are still going and only
35.31% could be utilized during 2011-12 (upto December 2011). ALHW could utilize only Rs.9.87
crores out of Rs. 17.77 (upto December, 2011) which is just 55.54% of total allocation. A perusal
of the statement of expenditure incurred by ports reveals that there had been shortfall in utilization
of funds against the BE/RE during the plan.
(Para No. 13 of 177
th Report)
Reply of the Government
19. During 2011-12, a BE provision of Rs.96.00 crores was made for post Tsunami restoration
projects. At the RE stage, the allocation was reduced to Rs.43.75 crores. The entire 2011-12 RE
allocation for post Tsunami restoration projects was utilized.
20. It can therefore be seen that shortfall in expenditure for the post Tsunami restoration
projects has been with respect to BE allocation and not the RE allocation for the year 2011-12.
The reasons for shortfall in expenditure with respect to BE provision has been on account of
stoppage of all quarries in A&N Islands, re-tendering due to poor response of agencies in marine
works, downsizing of projects, non sanction of schemes due to non clearance from tribal council
etc.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/BSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
21. The Committee notes the reply with concern that all expects the Ministry to try to
obtain required sanctions/clearance in time for post Tsunami restoration projects.
Recommendation/Observation of the Committee
22. The Committee is perturbed to note that the spending pattern of the Ministry of shipping
is resulting is cuts in allocations by the Finance Ministry. The Committee recommends that the
Ministry should look into the reasons for low utilization and take remedial measure by way of
proper planning and implementation.
(Para No. 14 of 177
th Report)
Reply of the Government
23. In order to ensure optimum utilization of fund, a periodical monitoring and review of plan
and non plan expenditure is conducted at the highest level and hurdles, if any, are found in smooth
execution of any scheme/project, remedial measures are taken in consultation with the concerned
agencies so that pace of the expenditure is accelerated.

5
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
24. The Committee notes the reply.
Recommendation/Observation of the Committee
25. The Committee in its earlier reports had also recommended that there is need to formulate
plan and policies in a realistic manner. Besides, all the schemes/plans should be reviewed to see
as to why these are not picking up, particularly subsidy to Ship Yards for which no proposal
completed in all respects with proper documentation were received. The growth of shipping sector
is closely linked with the overall development of the country and therefore, deserves top priority
in implementation of plan/schemes by the Ministry of Shipping.
(Para No. 15 of 177
th Report)
Reply of the Government
26. The observation of the committee has been noted. This Ministry is impressing upon the
shipyards applying for subsidy to submit proposals with complete documentation so as to facilitate
expeditious processing of the proposals for release of shipbuilding subsidy. During the current
financial year i.e.  2012-13, there is a budget provision of Rs.400.00 crores for grant of
shipbuilding subsidy to shipyards. This Ministry has received 13 proposals from shipyards for
Rs. 160 cr approx as yet for release. We have already released Rs.28.90 crores and it is expected
that by the second quarter, all the proposals received so far, shall be finalised for release.  Complete
proposals as and when received from shipyards shall be dealt with urgently so that funds could
be released as per the parameters of the scheme during the current financial year.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
27. The Committee notes the reply.
ANNUAL PLAN 2012-13
Recommendation of the Committee
28. Committee notes that the Ministry of Shipping has got without any cut from the Finance
Ministry their projected demand for Rs.812 crores has been made. The Committee recommends
that the allocated funds should be utilized fully as many important projects, especially in the port
sector are to be completed within the scheduled time in order to cope up with the growing demand
and the competition posed by the private players of the country . The Committee also recommends
that periodic monitoring and review should be made for better utilization of funds as in the year
2011-12 the expenditure was only 50% of the BE allocation”.
(Para No. 21 of 177
th Report)
Reply of the Government
29. Mechanism for monthly review and monitoring of expenditure of all entities on both port
and shipping sectors has been set up in the Ministry and is being monitored regularly.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
30. The Committee notes the reply.

6
PORTS
Recommendation of the Committee
31. The Committee considers the ports as the back-bone of the trade and commerce thereby
is strongly linked to the economic growth of a country. The Committee observed the enhancement
of provisions to the port sector under Plan Head to Rs.380.98 crores in the 2012-13 compared to
Rs.246.59 crores in 2011-12. The expenditure during 2011-12 (upto December, 2011) is Rs.75.08
crores only. The Committee, however is of the opinion that already the port sector was far behind
from the projected targets of its capacity additions, modernization of equipments, deepening of
drafts and ship channels etc. And even then they were not able to utilize the allocation. The
Committee is not satisfied with the reasons for low utilization and expresses its concerns that on
the delayed projects, resulting in tow-fold loss-more spending due to cost overruns and loss of
revenue which otherwise would have been generated after completion of the extra capacity. The
Committee strongly recommends for prioritized action on the above.
(Para No. 32 of 177
th Report)
Reply of the Government
32. Regular Review mechanism has been put in place to ensure maximum utilization of allotted
funds.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
33. The Committee notes the reply. It however, emphasizes that the Government should
strictly monitor the efficacy of regular review mechanism.
Recommendation of the Committee
34. The Committee notes the targets of 675.25 MCM in the capital dredging and 429.99 MCM
in maintenance dredging activities during the XI Plan period wherein only 278.93 MCM and 291.63
MCM respectively could be achieved which constituted 41.31% and 67.82% of the targets. The
Committee would like to reiterate its recommendations contained in the para 142 of its 170
th Report
on the “Modernization of Major Ports”. The Committee recommended:–
“Both capital and maintenance is an important component for cargo handling capacity and
to increase the efficiency of the Indian Major Ports. The Committee recommends that
projects taken up/proposed to be taken up are executed in a time bound manner. ...The
Committee, therefore recommend that in view of the increase in the expenditure on
dredging, the Government of India should take their responsibility and prepare a long-term
plan for financing the dredging operations in all the Major Ports.”
(Para No. 34 of 177
th Report)
Reply of the Government
35. The observations of the Committee are noted. The Planning Commission has constituted an
Inter-Ministerial Committee on Capital dredging for Major Ports to suggest measure to improve
capital dredging in all Ports. Based on the recommendations of the Committee a long-term Plan to
undertake capital dredging and financing will be formulated for Major Ports. The Ministry of
Finance and Planning Commission have agreed in-principle that capital dredging projects are eligible
for Viability Gap Funding (VGF) support. Accordingly, Ministry of Finance has conveyed that as
a concept, PPP projects for Capital dredging in Ports is admissible for VGF support, subject to
the other conditions of the Scheme and guidelines being satisfied.

7
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
36. The Committee notes the reply. It would hasten to add that DCI needs to be
empowered/supported in a big way and its pending payments etc. should be settled. In the
face of PPP in capital dredging, it should not be allowed to be closed eventually.
Recommendation of the Committee
37. The Committee opined that adequate draft is an essential factor for a sea port to attract
modern/big Ships. Failure in achieving the target of dredging, affects the ports capacity expansion
get adversely affected which in turn leading to a great financial loss to the country
(Para No. 35 of 177
th Report)
Reply of the Government
38. The observations of the Committee are noted. Regular monitoring of dredging projects is
being done by the Ministry. Steps have been initiated to strengthen Dredging Corporation of India
by procuring 3 new dredgers and also by providing access to tax free infrastructure bonds.
39. The following two committees have been constituted to achieve the targets of dredging as
well as Port capacity expansion.
1. Inter Ministerial Committee on Capital Dredging for major Ports constituted by
Planning Commission under the chairmanship of B.K. Chaturvedi.
2. Inter Ministerial Committee on Port connectivity constituted by Planning Commission
under the chairmanship of B.K. Chaturvedi.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
40. The Committee has noted the reply but wishes to express serious apprehensions
about the future of DCI in the emerging scenario. The report of the Committee should be
expedited and implemented in right perspective.
Recommendation of the Committee
41. For expediting environmental and other administrative approvals/clearance, the Committee
recommends a common platform for inter ministerial coordination for all the ports to be set up at
the earliest.
(Para No. 36 of 177
th Report)
Reply of the Government
42. For expediting security clearance in respect of bidders a Security Clearance Cell has been
set up exclusively in the Ministry of Shipping for taking prompt action on the issue. To monitor
the progress of cases referred to Security Agencies, Secretary (Shipping) is taking monthly meeting
with all security agencies to expedite the inputs. Further, Cabinet Secretary is also taking quarterly
meeting with all security agencies to review the status of pending security clearance cases. To
streamline the security process, the Ministry of Shipping has formulated new guidelines which is
proposed to be placed before the CCA for approval. Similarly to expedite the approval process for
PPP projects, a proposal for enhanced delegation of financial powers has been moved.
43. As regards environmental clearances, the Ministry of Shipping takes up the issue with
Ministry of Environment and Forests on a case to case basis whenever there is delay.

8
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
44. The Committee notes the reply.
Recommendation of the Committee
45. In order to achieve its respective targets, the committee recommends that the fund
allocations should be utilized to the maximum because many of the expansion projects are time
taking ones and require continuous monitoring. The committee also recommends that the Major
Ports should identify projects for deepening of channel/berths, construction/reconstruction of
berths/jetties, procurement of equipment/floating craft, rail and road connectivity projects and other
schemes in order to meet the capacity requirement and necessary clearances should be obtained
well in time so that these projects are completed within specified period without cost overrun.
(Para No. 33 of 177
th Report)
Reply of the Government
46. Major ports have identified 42 projects to augment capacity by way of construction
of berths and mechanization including procuring equipments for handling the cargo for the year 2012-
13 (list enclosed). Repairs of existing old material handling facilities are being taken up to increase
their efficiency and reduce down-time. The obsolete equipments are condemned and are proposed for
replacement with new equipment. the major Ports are also pursuing rail and road connectivity projects
and Inter Ministerial committee has been constituted by the Planning Commission to look into the
requirements of Port connectivity and ways of financing the same. A shelf of projects for capacity
augmentation and mechanization of the Twelfth Plan period have been identified by the Major Ports.
Recommendation of the Committee
47. The Committee also shares the view of the working group for Twelfth plan wherein it is
stated that the flaw in the material handling facilities at major ports need to be rectified as the
utilization of equipment in the major ports are inadequate for handling the current rates of traffic.
(Para No. 37 of 177
th Report)
Reply of the Government
48. Major ports have identified 42 projects to augment capacity for the major ports by way of
construction of berths & mechanization including material handling facilities for the year 2012-13
(list enclosed at Annexure-I). Repairs of existing old material handling facilities are being taken
up to increase their efficiency and reduce down-time. The obsolete equipments are being replaced
with new equipment. For the remaining years of the Twelfth Plan period also, a shelf of projects
including mechanization projects have been identified by the Major Ports.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
(Para Nos. 33 and 37 of 177
th Report)
49. The Committee notes the reply. It, however, will take the issue separately while
reviewing the action taken replies received from the Ministry of Shipping in respect of
recommendations contained in its 170
th Report on “Modernization of Major Ports”.
Recommendation of the Committee
50. The Committee notes the projected cargo targets by the end of Twelfth Plan of about 1758
million tonnes as compared to 885 million tonnes during 2010-11 which is more than double. The

9
Committee recommends that the major ports may plan the capacity addition of 526.44 million
tonnes as projected by working group, on a fast track mode. The Committee therefore emphasizes
the need for monitoring of the progress in works as per the expenditure guidelines periodically.
(Para No. 38 of 177
th Report)
Reply of the Government
51. The Committee recommended for capacity addition of 526.44 MTPA for the Twelfth Five
Year Plan as projected by the Working Group. The Ministry of Shipping has fixed a target of 42
Projects with a capacity addition of 245.66 MTA with the cost of Rs.14353.08 crores for the year
2012-13, i.e., 1
st year of Twelfth Five Year Plan. Progress of each case is monitored in the Ministry
every week. Further, Planning Commission and PMO are also monitoring the progress in achieving
targets in every quarter. A shelf of projects for capacity augmentation and mechnisation for the
remaining years of the Twelfth Plan period has been identified by the Major Ports.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
52. The Committee notes the reply.
Recommendation of the Committee
53. The Committee had submitted 170
th report on ‘Modernization of Major Ports’ wherein
detailed analysis of major Ports was made. The Committee has received the Action Taken Note on
the report which is pending with the Committee for consideration. The Committee will take up
various issues raised in its report and action taken notes furnished by the Ministry of Shipping for
consideration separately.
(Para No. 39 of 177
th Report)
Reply of the Government
54. No action is pending at this stage.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
55. The Committee does not accept this reply. It will point out specific actions pending
in its subsequent report on the subject.
DREDGING CORPORATION OF INDIA (DCI)
Recommendation/Observation of the Committee:
56. The Committee is of the view that modern and better dredgers could have been procured
to complete the ground work well in advance. The Committee would like to know why the
procurement of dredges was deferred during the Eleventh Plan period. The Committee recommends
that fast track procurement should be done for the required dredgers and for that the Government
may extend further financial supports.
57. The Committee notes that maximum number of its barges of DCI are very old. The
Committee hopes that with addition of new barges into the fleet and upgradation of the existing
ones, the DCI may be able to meet the requirement of the Ports. The Committee recommends that
addition of barges may be done on a fast track keeping in view the additional dredging requirements
of 625.36 Million Cubic Meters as projected for the major ports and minor ports in the country
during the Twelfth Plan period.
(Para Nos. 47 and 48 of 177
th Report)

10
Reply of the Government
58. The DCI was making continuous efforts for procurement of new TSHDs since July, 2002.
The company was striving to obtain more competitive response from dredge builders by relaxing
pre-qualification criteria three times in the year 2002. The tenders floated from 2003 to 2007 were
cancelled for reasons beyond the control of the Company. However, the DCI has placed the order
for three barges (dredgers) during Eleventh Plan period (2007-2012).
59. Government approval was received by DCI on 09.04.2010 for procurement of 3 TSHDs at
a total project cost of Rs.1570.21 crores. Accordingly, the order for two dredgers was placed on
29.04.2010 and for the third dredger on 24.02.2011.
60. The delivery of the first of the three dredgers will be in end 2012 and the subsequent ones
in mid 2013 and early 2014 respectively. The financing pattern for these three dredgers is 20%
from internal resources and 80% from commercial borrowings. The financial closure for the first
two dredgers is complete through ECA facility from BNP Paribas, Paris. The selection of the
financing institution for the third dredgers is under process.
61. Further, DCI has proposals in the twelve plan for procurement of higher capacity dredgers
at an estimated cost of about Rs.1300 crore In order to arrange finance for the third dredger as
well as the proposed plan procurements in Twelfth Plan, discussions were held between the
Ministry and the DCI recently and it is being proposed to issue tax free long term infrastructure
bonds. DCI has also plans for retrofit/up gradation of some of the existing old dredgers which will
be taken up once the new dredgers join the fleet.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
62. The Committee notes the reply. The Committee however recommends that
Government may take up the assessment on requirement of new fleet addition sufficient
to carry out the dredging works of all the major ports.
Recommendation/Observation of the Committee:
63. The Committee also notes that trained manpower is one of the main sources of support of
any organization. If executives from DCI will be leaving in such a large number how the Company
will perform its work entrusted to it. The Committee recommends that the Ministry should take
corrective measures to stop exodus.
(Para No. 49 of 177
th Report)
Reply of the Government
64. The DCI is facing an acute shortage of skilled/trained manpower both on shore-side as well
as floating side. The Company being a PSU has limitations in increasing the remuneration packages
to its manpower as for the shore side executives, the same have to be within the limits prescribed
in the Department of Public Enterprises (DPE) Guidelines. For the Floating side, the remunerations
packages are determined by the INSA-MUI Agreement. However, the private companies are taking
advantage of the market correction clause in the said agreement and are luring away the trained
floating officers by offering them more lucrative pay packages.
65. In order to arrest the exodus of manpower to greener pastures, the company has taken a
number of morale building measures including adopting a structured promotion policy through which
the career growth of employees having prescribed qualification is put on fast track. With respect to
the floating certified officer, Board has approved payment of Market Correction Allowance so as to
bridge the gap between the pay packages offered by DCI and its private counterparts.

11
66. Further, DCI has taken steps to induct employees both in the floating and shore side at the
ground level as Management Trainees and Cadets so that they can be trained and absorbed at
appropriate levels. In view of the above measures taken by DCI, it is expected that the shortage
may come down in next few years.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
67. The Committee notes the reply. The Committee recommends that freshers may be
recruited and trained according to the requirement so that manpower shortage can be met
up to the optimum level.
ANDAMAN AND LAKSHADWEEP HARBOUR WORKS (ALHW)
Recommendation/Observation of the Committee
68. The Committee notes the fund allocation and utilization during the Eleventh Five Year Plan
for ALHW with a total Plan Outlay of Rs.541.82 crores and out of that Rs.425.58 crores is the
expected expenditure up to 31.03.2012. The Committee notes that ALHW has managed to spend
78.5% of the Plan Outlay. However, more prompt action is required to ensure that full amount is
expended and the projects are completed well in time.
(Para No. 55 of 177
th Report)
Reply of the Government
69. The contracts of defaulting agencies have been cancelled & fresh tenders have been invited
and works awarded for the construction of Jatties at Kavaratti and Amini. This shall accelerate the
progress of works and anticipated expenditure shall be utilized. Further matter is pursued
continuously for sanction of new schemes.
70. The scarcity of stones has been also looked into and on-site assessments have been carried
by DA Ports, MoS during his visit to A&N Islands from 24
th-27th May, 2012.
71. All out efforts are being taken to complete the works in time.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
72. The Committee notes the reply.
Recommendation/Observation of the Committee
73. The Committee has noted the statement of the Ministry that the Plan schemes proposed
under the Andaman & Nicobar Islands have been completed by the plan period itself. However, the
Committee found it contradictory to their claim as four major schemes i.e. replenishing damaged
breakwater and approach in Little Andaman, Construction of Additional jetty for mainland vessels
at Kamorta, Reconstruction of Office Building complex of ALHW at Port Blair and Development
of Junglighat Harbour are expected to spill over to the Twelfth Plan period. The Committee also
notes under utilization of funds during 2011-12 due to various reasons submitted by the Ministry.
The Committee recommends that special stress need to be given to the projects proposed for this
isolated area of the country and should be monitored/reviewed periodically so that development
takes place in the A&N Islands.
(Para No. 56 of 177
th Report)
Reply of the Government
74. The plan scheme proposed under A&N Islands has been completed, as indicated in para 54,

12
however following four projects, under implementation, were envisaged under Tsunami Restoration
Programme and hence the same were not mentioned:
1. Replenishing damaged breakwater and approach in Little Andaman,
2. Construction of Additional jetty for mainland vessels at Kamorta,
3. Reconstruction of Office Building complex of ALHW at Port Blair
4. Development of Junglighat Horbour
75. However, as per direction of Planning Commission (communicated vide letter of MoS
vide Ref: PD-25021/13/2008-Tsunami dated 02.12.2010), the schemes not completed in TRP by
March, 2011 were included in Twelfth Five Year Plan. Hence, these schemes are not spillover of
the plan.
76. Ministry is strictly monitoring these projects. Monthly review is done based on progress
reports and quarterly progress is reviewed by holding review meetings to sort out any issue in
effective implementation of the projects.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
77. The Committee hopes that these projects would be completed without much delay.
DG LIGHT HOUSE AND LIGHT SHIPS
Recommendation/Observation of the Committee:
78. The Committee notes that there has been the optimum utilization of funds during Eleven
Five Year Plan which is expected to be Rs.198.68 crores against the total outlay of Rs.150.00
crores. The achievements in targets have been found some positive trend as compared to other
sectors of the entire Ministry of Shipping. The Committee hope that enhanced allocation of
Rs.90.00 crores. In BE 2012-13 will be utilized by making early efforts for getting necessary
clearances at various levels for the projects.
(Para No. 62 of 177
th Report)
Reply of the Government
79. The Directorate will take corrective steps in utilizing its resources to meet physical and
financial targets as projects.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
80. The Committee notes the reply.
Recommendation/Observation of the Committee:
81. The Committee observed even Light Houses have history and some of them being very old
and located at beautiful places can be opened to the tourists. The Committee also feels the need
of more active Light Houses in view of the recent recommends that more funds as required for
completion of the above projects may be allocated.
(Para No. 64 of 177
th Report)
Reply of the Government
82. Factual Statement. In the first phase 13 Lighthouses have been proposed for promotion of

13
tourism at Lighthouses and work for consultancy is awarded to IL&FS Based on the experience
of Phase I, further Lighthouses based on the scenic beauty etc. shall be included in the II phase.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
83. The Committee emphasizes the need for exploiting tourism potential of our light
houses by providing necessary infrastructure/facilities there.
INLAND WATERWAYS AUTHORITY OF INDIA (IWAI)
Recommendation/Observation of the Committee
84. The Committee noted IWAI’s efforts to execute the projects proposed during 2012-13 out
of the allocation of Rs.130.02 crores and hopes that all the plans would be carried out in a time
bound manner. The Committee recommends that periodic monitoring of the physical achievements
vis-à-vis the financial sanctions need to be made throughout the plan period.
(Para No. 73 of 177 th Report)
Reply of the Government
85. The Committee’s recommendations that all the plans would be carried out in a time bound
manner has been noted for compliance. Ministry will monitor the physical achievements vis-à-vis
the financial sanctions on regular basis throughout the plan period.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
86. The Committee notes the reply.
Recommendation/Observation of the Committee:
87. The Committee notes that water transport has various advantages compared to road
transport. Water transport is cheap, can handle huge volumes of cargo and less impact on
environment. The Committee is of the view that a strong inland water transport system is able to
handle effective, cheap and environment friendly cargo transport mechanism. The Committee,
therefore strongly recommends that the available resources should be strengthened in order to have
a well connected water transport facility throughout the country.
(Para No. 75 of 177 th Report)
Reply of the Government
88. Ministry of Shipping/IWAI is taking efforts to create a strong Inland Water Transport
system, which could handle effective cheap and environment friendly cargo transportation. The
Committee’s recommendation that the available resources should be strengthened in order to have
a well-connected water transport-facility throughout the Country has been noted for compliance.
There are five National Waterways (NW’s) namely the River Ganga (NW-1), River Brahmaputra
(NW-2), West Coast Canal (NW-3), Kakinada to Puducherry Canal (NW-4), and East Coast Canal
(NW-5). River Barak is also proposed to be declared as the sixth National Waterway.
89. IWAI have been successful in developing fairway and navigation infrastructure on NW-1,
2 and 3 to a considerable degree. In order to have a well connected transport facility throughout
the country, Ministry of Shipping/IWAI is putting its efforts on Integrated Project Development
Approach by seeking long term cargo commitment to attract private investment.

14
90. In North Eastern states, IWAI is developing fairway from Dhubri to Neemati, Neemati to
Dibrugarh and Dibrugarh to Oriumghat on NW-2 (Brahmaputra). NW-2s navigational channel has
been marked with day navigation marks. Solar operated lights for night navigation and Differential
Global Positioning System (DGPS) have been set up. Pandu has been developed as a multimodal
river port. Temporary floating terminals have been established at Dhubri, Jogighopa, Tejpur,
Matmara, Sengajan, Oriumghat, Bogibil and Dibrugarh. Roll-on and Roll-off terminal at Dhubri is
being developed, while another Ro-Ro terminal at Hatsingimari is proposed to be constructed.
91. Thus, the Ministry of Shipping is taking all necessary steps to strengthen the available
resources in order to have a well connected water transport facility throughout the country.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
92. The Committee notes the reply and reiterates to take inland waterway development
by creating all facilities in big way during 12th Plan period to exploit maximum potential
in the area.
CENTRAL INLAND W ATER TRANSPORT CORPORATION LIMITED (CIWTC)
Recommendation/observation of the Committee
93. The Committee notes the various steps taken by Government in regard to CIWTC. The
Committee is of the opinion that main reason for non-performance of CIWTC is lack of working
capital and infusion of funds for modernization of construction/production techniques and no
recruitment of manpower and lack of new technology.
(Para No. 83 of 177
th Report)
Reply of the Government
94. The observations made by the Parliamentary Standing Committee are noted. Based on the
recommendations of the Board for Reconstruction of Public Sector Enterprises (BRPSE), the
Government had approved the disinvestment of CIWTC on 1.12.2005. Since the company is in the
process of being disinvested and its operations are unviable, no funds for working capital or
modernisation are presently being released. However, Government is providing grants-in-aid for
payment of salary/wages and statutory dues to the company.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
95. The Committee has time and again suggested to taken over of CIWTC by the IWAI.
While it has taken its assets, manpower issue is yet to be settled. The Committee still
believes that the manpower can be better utilized by IWAI in its future development.
Recommendation/Observation of the Committee
96. The Committee also notes the submission of the Secretary regarding the merger of CIWTC
with IWAI. The Committee has expressed its concern over the future of persons working in
CIWTC. The Committee hopes that the staff of CIWTC will not forced to opt VRS against
individual’s will and CIWTC will be merged with IWAI if the assets of CIWTC are taken over by
it. The Committee also recommends that till the merger process is completed adequate funds and
manpower be made available to CIWTC to carry out its operations. The Committee also
recommends the Government to allow the use of interest income by CIWTC, which otherwise have
to pay income tax on interest income.
(Para No. 84 of 177
th Report)

15
Reply of the Government
97. Regarding the concern over the future of persons working in CIWTC, it is submitted that
the VR scheme in CIWTC is purely voluntary in nature and no employee is being forced to opt
for VRS. As per the decision of the Government, CIWTC is in the process of being disinvested.
Government is providing grants-in- aid to CIWTC to meet expenditure towards salary/wages and
statutory dues. The proceeds on the sale of Rajabagan Dockyard to GRSE had been kept in an
“escrow account” which is earning interest and is taxable. The possibility of some employees being
taken over by IWAI is also under examination.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
98. The Committee notes the reply. The Committee hopes the matter of absorption of
CIWTC employees by IWAI may be solved at the earliest.
SHIPPING CORPORATION OF INDIA (SCI)
Recommendation/Observation of the Committee
99. The Committee notes that IEBR has gone down from Rs.2850.00 crores in RE 2011-12 to
Rs.2128.49 crores in BE 2012-13 which shows as declining trend. The Committee is constrained
to note that the SCI has lapsed a majority of funds as against Rs.13,100 crores in the entire
Eleventh Five Year Plan as they have utilized a little over Rs.7500 crores only. The Committee
views any kind of underutilization of funds seriously.
(Para No. 93 of 177
th Report)
Reply of the Government
100. The IEBR requirement for 2012-13 has been strategically reduced by SCI in view of the
prevailing downturn in the shipping markets. The difficulties in raising finance for vessel acquisition
at affordable rates and strained profitability of SCI are the other two reasons for keeping
expenditure low with a view to conserve cash. To tide over the current difficult phase, SCI Board
has taken a conscious decision of keeping the acquisition plan on hold. SCI Management would
be reviewing the situation on a quarterly basis to streamline its vessel acquisition plan and new
acquisition proposals could be considered on a case to case basis.
101. W ith regards to the utilization of outlay, it may be noted that there is no budgetary support
provided by Government to SCI. In view of the downturn of global economy in 2008 and its
severe adverse impact on shipping business, SCI had to curtail its acquisition plan, which was a
primary reason of shortfall in utilization of approved outlay. Informatively, SCI has utilized a total
of Rs.8,537.96 crores in the Eleventh Five Year Plan.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
102. The Committee notes the reply. The Committee, however, is desires to know whether
any financial implications are there to SCI in the form of penalty etc. while scrapping the
order or deferring the delivery of the vessels already ordered has been done.
Recommendation/observation of the Committee
103. The committee is concerned about the financial status of the SCI especially connected with
the ship acquisition programme. The committee notes that the ship acquisition programme during
Eleventh Plan could not materialize due to various reasons and it has even affected adversely its

16
revenue generation and SCI is in fear of depletion of reserves. The committee is also surprised to
see the “nil” new proposal during 2012-13 even though the targeted acquisition of the vessels are
incomplete. The Committee also agrees with the findings of CAG’s Audit which stated that SCI did
not pursue an ambitious acquisition policy to augment and modernize its fleet and recommends that
immediate corrective measures may be taken by SCI.
(Para No. 94 of 177
th Report)
Reply of the Government
104. The international shipping market is facing problem of oversupply of tonnage and Indian
shipping industry is not insulated from the same. The oversupply of tonnage is putting downward
pressure on the already depressed freight levels and is hampering any recovery of freight levels.
SCI’s revenue generation has been severely affected at present and the primary reason is the
prevailing depressed shipping markets. The freight levels are prevailing at very low levels resulting
in many of the ships not able to achieve even the break even rates. As a result, and to restrict
further depletion of its reserves, SCI has taken a decision to keep vessel acquisitions on hold till
such times the markets improve and new acquisitions are economically justified.
105. The CAG’s observations are appropriate in the case of rising markets, wherein addition of
fleet would result in improved revenue generation and profits. However, in a situation where the
supply of vessels is far exceeding demand resulting in vessels not fetching break even rates, it may
be risky to increase tonnage and thereby expose the company to further risks.
106. Further, the SCI’s vessel acquisition target was very ambitious at 62 vessels and Rs. 13,135
crores investment as compared to the Tenth Plan target of 39 vessels with Rs.5,800 crores
investment. SCI had placed an ambitious target for the company with an aim to increase the SCI’s
tonnage and thereby improving the National tonnage and was able to achieve 70% of its target
amongst the global uncertainties prevailing after 2008, which were not envisaged and were beyond
control of any organization. The SCI presently boasts of a modern fleet with an average age of
about 12 years and SCI Management would be continuously monitoring the situation and new
vessel acquisitions would be considered on a case to case basis till the markets improve.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/ BSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
107. The Committee, is surprised to note that the SCI has not been able to expand its
tonnage, particularly at a time when the Ministry/the Ports are projecting an upward trend
in the import and export volume of cargo. Also it has been observed that SCI is not able
to meet even 10% vessel requirement of the all PSUs taken together.
Recommendation/Observation of the Committee
108. The Committee strongly recommends that adequate review on the past policy and schemes
should be worked out and necessary measures should be taken to ensure the financial health of
SCI.
(Para No. 95 of 177
th Report)
Reply of the Government
109. SCI is a Navratna Company managed by a full fledged Board of Directors consisting of
Functional Directors, Independent Directors and Govt. nominee Directors. The Board has
constituted a Strategy Committee to particularly focus on performance and strategy issues. The
Strategy Committee reviews the industry related issues, performance under different segments,
future forecasts of the performance and guide the company by reviewing its policies and schemes

17
and recommending on future strategies. The SCI is also considering creation of a “Maritime
Research and Strategy Centre” to carry out research, develop strategy papers, prepare updates,
realign the business plans of the Company in a dynamic manner, issue out periodical reports and
make presentation to the Board & Strategy Committee and function as an ongoing interface with
the industry associations, regulatory authorities, Governments, trade blocks, trading partners and
joint venture partners.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
110. The Committee finds the lack of foresightedness on the part of SCI as it could not
sense the steep decline in the ship prices in the international markets thereby throwing SCI
in to deep trouble and huge financial loss in the form of ship purchase orders and as a
result, therefore, the SCI is now in a financial crisis. The Committee would like to know
how and under what circumstances such an ambitious project was initiated. Was any
responsibility fixed in this regard?
Recommendation/Observation of the Committee
111. The Committee recommends that SCI should take coordinated action with the PSUs to
ensure that the business opportunities emanating from the PSUs are not siphoned away by foreign
companies. SCI should be in a position to meet the requirements of PSUs by providing adequate
vessels. The Committee is of the view that the SCI is not able to make use of the favourable
situation in enhancing its business volume and sincere efforts on these lines are required.
(Para No. 97 of 177
th Report)
Reply of the Government
112. The following efforts are being taken by the SCI through its Bulk carrier and Liner Division
to ensure capturing business opportunities from PSUs:
Dry Bulk carrier and Tanker Division
113. SCI by and large participates and endeavors to pitch in with the vessels as and when
vessels are available in dates for any PSU cargo/Contract of Affreightments (COA) etc. SCI’s dry
bulk vessels are predominantly tramping, however any Transchart released PSU cargoes are always
worked and negotiated as long as the vessel can make the dates. Same applies for the cargoes/
COAs/time charter requirements offered by the PSU oil marketing companies (OMC). Also many
a time, the foreign tonnages competing for the cargoes offering at low level are being fixed by
Transchart/OMCs and when the Right of First Refusal (ROFR) is given, same are being picked up
by SCI tonnages, albeit at a much lower returns than expected.
114. These PSU cargoes are mostly opened on voyage basis in the market and a vessels revenue
return or the economic viability for a particular business also hinges on its proximity to the cargo
and being repositioned at a later date. However, it has remained a practice for SCI to participate
with her available tonnages and to cater to the Indian industries. Ironically, it has been observed
that many substandard tonnages participate in this globally open business opportunities who can
offer at much below market level rates with the ultimate motive to capture the business, whereas
SCI with her brand new fleet with much higher opex and capex cost may not be able to sustain
the onslaught of the poor rate offered by these foreign tonnages.
Container Services
115. The container services department has a service from Indian Sub Continent to Europe,

18
North West Continent, Far East, Gulf, Mediterranean and East Africa. SCI also has slot
arrangements for carriage of containers, from USA. SCI has a Coastal Service which currently
operates between Mundra and Pipavav to Cochin and Tuticorin.
116. SCI in close coordination with Transchart carries almost all the cargoes that have been
referred to them by the PSU’s through Transchart. Then SCI carries this cargo by quoting
competitive rates and in some cases where the PSU’s have a rate limit, then by matching the rates
that the PSU has received. In case, SCI do not have a service to a particular location then it tries
to arrange the shipment by purchasing slots with other liners. SCI have also entered into Annual
Rate Agreements with some of the major PSU’s like IOC, BRBNML, BPCL/KRL etc. These
agreements are entered into between the SCI, the PSU and the Transchart.
117. Further, SCI is trying to garner more PSU’s to enter into Annual Rate Agreement so that
there is seamless movement of cargoes.
Joint Ventures
118. In addition to the above efforts taken by the respective Operating Divisions, efforts have
been taken by SCI by way of entering into JVs with PSUs to capitalize on opportunities emerging
from them. Some of the steps taken by SCI include formation of Joint Venture with SAIL and that
proposed with Coal India Ltd. These JV companies would cater to the cargo transportation
requirements of SAIL and Coal India Ltd. by building on SCI’s expertise in this field and in-turn
ensure that emerging opportunities from these PSUs are covered by us and not by Foreign players.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
119. The Committee notes that the reply itself is a pointer to the lack of business
oriented approach in the SCI. The SCI should make efforts to ensure that at-least the PSU
orders should not slip from their hands. The Ministry of Shipping may take an inter
ministerial level MoU for the purpose.
RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT
Recommendation/Observation of the Committee:
120. R&D is a backbone of any industry to sustain and establish itself. R&D in shipping sector
is the need of the hour as India is one of the major economic powers in the world. The Committee
notes that the Ministry is not utilizing the funds allocated for R&D as only Rs. 0.60 crore could
be utilized out of the allocation of Rs.1.58 crores during the 2011-12. The Committee feels that
delay in R&D activities might be affected in the long run as one of the reasons for non utilization
of the funds is lack of technical personnel in the R&D projects. The Committee recommends that
fast track search process need to be initiated for deputing qualified persons.
(Para No. 103 of 177 th Report)
Reply of the Government
121. On subsuming NSRDC to IMU Visakhapatnam Campus on 20.3.2009, it was decided to set
up the School of Maritime Design and Research (SMDR) at IMU Visakhapatnam Campus so that
SMDR can continue R&D activities in the shipping sector. The SMDR was approved to be set up
by the Executive council of IMU only in its meeting on 08.12.2011. With infusion of R&D funds
through a number of projects from the Shipping Ministry, there is a change in the manpower
scenario in SMDR as given below:

19
Year Technical Personnel
Permanent Contract Projects
2009-10 6 4 7
2010-11 5 4 9
2011-12 5 3 18
2012-13 5 3 17+
recruitment in progress
With the recruitment of persons in SMDR, the R&D activities shall be strengthened
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
122. The Committee notes the reply.
TAX PROPOSALS
Recommendation/Observation of the Committee
123. The Committee feels that the tax benefits and other incentives in the shipping and port
sector will be able to make some relief to the SCI and DCI in their ship and dredger acquisition
projects.
(Para No. 105 of 177
th Report)
Reply of the Government
124. Hon’ble Minister of Shipping in his pre-budget memorandum to Finance Minister has
underlined the need for providing level playing field for Indian Shipping Industry. The Hon’ble
Minister has Inter-alia  drawn the attention to some of the issues facing the Maritime Sector and
requested for grant of certain direct and indirect tax incentives. Seeking Government’s support is
a continuous process and Secretary (Shipping) in his letter dated 28.12.2011 to Ministry of Finance
has highlighted some important tax related issues which were required to be addressed in the Union
Budget 2012-2013 to give the required Momentum for development of the Port Sector, Inland
Waterways, Shipping and Shipbuilding Industry. In the said letter, it was also suggested to arrange
a meeting where Maritime Industry could make a brief presentation on each of the tax related
issues. A pre-budget meeting was held on 10.1.2012 at the official level where an opportunity was
given to the Indian National Shipowners Association to make a presentation. As the Union Budget
has not addressed most of the demands of the Industry, another letter was written on 2.5.2012
by Hon’ble Minister of Shipping to Finance Minister drawing his attention to some of the priority
issues concerning the Shipping Industry and requested that same may be reconsidered. Such
measures focussing on tax incentives, if agreed to by the Ministry of Finance, will provide a boost
to ship and dredger acquisition.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
125. The Committee notes the reply.
PUBLIC-PRIV ATE-PARTNERSHIP
Recommendation/Observations of the Committee
126. The Committee is of the view that PPP model should not be treated as panacea to give

20
boost to develop all kinds of infrastructure. Role of the Government cannot be minimized in this
regard. The Committee feels that PPP model would be attractive only in the highly profitable areas,
not in non-profitable areas. As such, in Inland Waterways, no developer is coming forward and no
progress is taking place. The Committee, therefore, recommends that there is need to look into the
PPP mode in developing Inland Waterways.
(Para No. 110 of 177
th Report)
Reply of the Government
127. Government is taking all steps to develop and promote navigation on the National
Waterways in the country. In case of NW-1, NW-2 and NW-3, it has been done with complete
Government funding. However, in case of NW-4 and NW-5, a Public Private Partnership (PPP)
approach through Viability Gap Funding (VGF) is being followed. Under this, the VGF funding by
the Government may go up-to 40%. The collaborative partnership between the public and the
private sector can lead to a sustainable development of Inland Water Transport (IWT) related
infrastructure on the NWs.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
128. The Committee notes the reply.
PROJECT/SCHEME OF NORTH–EAST REGION AND SIKKIM
Recommendation/Observations of the Committee
129. The Committee notes that in view of the limited scope of work, the entire outlay of
Rs.78.00 crores could not be utilized in 2011-12 for the NW-2 (Dhubri to Sadiya) 891 kms which
only falls under NE region. The Committee wonders when there is no scope to utilize this allocation
why allocation has again been made in Annual Plan 2012-13. The Committee is of the view that
Planning Commission/Ministry allocations for NER from the outlay of Ministry of Shipping should
not remain unutilized. If possible, the above grants be utilized for growth of Tourism in the region.
(Para No. 114 of 177
th Report)
Reply of the Government
130. During 2011-12, the BE for NW-2 was Rs.78.00 crores, which at RE stage was reduced
to Rs.38.67 crores. Against this an expenditure of Rs.57.81 crores was made during 2011-12 which
included carryover of unspent balance of Rs.19.14 crores from the year 2010-11.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
131. The Committee notes the reply.
GENERAL OBSERV ATIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
Recommendation/Observation of the Committee
132. The Committee is worried about the track record of the Ministry in utilizing the allocation
in the previous years. It is a matter of concern that the underutilization of allocation is rampant
in the Ministry of Shipping. This shows the casual approach to the implementation of projects. The
Committee notes that the end result of such delay will be cost overruns as well as revenue losses
to the organisatons.
(Para No. 115 of 177
th Report)

21
Reply of the Government
133. In so far as per the Ministry of Shipping is concerned, it may please be seen from the table
below that during the last three years, the utilization of funds has been generally satisfactory.
However, efforts are being made to ensure that the initial projections are realistic and the allocated
amounts are fully utilised.
Details of Plan and Non-Plan Budgetary Allocation and Expenditure during 2009-10 to 2011-12
(Rs. in crores )
Plan Non Plan T otal % of
Expenditure
Y ear BE R E Actual BE R E Actual BE R E Actual w.r.t. w.r.t.
BE RE
2009-10 595.00 548.74 499.99 1355.53 1017.89 731.01 1950.53 1566.63 1231.00 63.11 78.57
2010-11 623.00 605.00 564.76 1549.89 1227.00 10 43.01 2172.89 1832.00 1607.77 73.99 87.76
2011-12 750.00* 454.00* 330.68 1328.60 1386.73 1333.02# 20 78.60 1840.73 1663.70 80.03 90.38
*Includes the provision of Rs. 7 crores for the Ministry of Urban Development.
# Includes a supplementary grant of Rs.638.56 crores towards writing off loans of HDPE.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
134. The Committee notes the reply.
Recommendation of the Committee
135. The Committee also recommends that the increased vessel traffic should be utilized for
generating more revenue from the shipping sector. Accordingly, the possibility of introducing entry/
exit toll for the foreign flagged vessels etc. should be worked out by the Ministry. Also the coastal
surveillance need to be strengthened to avoid the accidents and other such unfortunate mishaps
similar to some incidents reported recently.
(Para No. 16 of 177 th Report)
Reply of the Government
136. The recommendations of the Committee have been taken up with the organization concerned
i.e. DG(S) for further action on the same.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
137. The Committee notes the reply.
Recommendation/Observations of the Committee
138. The Committee is of the view that even though the Indian tonnage is growing as per the
projections, the India fleet are not gaining the momentum. Even the fleet acquisition plans of SCI
has been passing through a very difficult phase. At the same time Indian ship building industry and
ship repair sector are equally struggling to get enough business. This is happening at a time when
Ship Building Orders are given to foreign shipyard and Indian Ships and dredgers are looking

22
overseas destinations for the repair works. The Committee recommends that, the Ministry of
Shipping should make an assessment of the reasons for this contradictory situation and should
make remedies for the same.
(Para No. 117 of 177 th Report)
Reply of the Government
139. Absence of the significant domestic market and intense competition from foreign shipyards
have adversely affected the Indian shipbuilding industry. The Indian shipbuilding market is exposed
to threat of imports due to no protection of tariff barriers. In contrast, foreign markets are
projected by policy measures of their respective countries.
140. Governement of India introduced a shipbuilding subsidy scheme during 2002-07 which led
to unprecedented growth in Indian shipbuilding activity. Withdrawal of the scheme in August, 2007,
let to an immediate downturn in the shipbuilding industry.
141. A proposal was placed before the COS (Committee of Secretaries) in February, 2012 for
the following Policy measures for Indian shipbuilding industry:
(i) Provision of subsidy to Indian shipyards for construction of five years from 2012-13
to 2017-18.
(ii) Gr ant infrastructure status to shipbuilding industry.
(iii) Indian built-Indian flag vessels to be accorded first preference for movement of all
types of Government cargo, coastal cargo and cargo playing on Inland Waterways
Network.
(iv) Import duty exemption on import of capital equipment for ship building
(v) Service tax exemption to ship building and ship repair industry
(vi) Steel supplied by domestic steel companies to Indian shipyards to be treated as deemed
export for the purpose of duty concessions.
142. COS considered the above proposals on 17.2.2012 and inter alia directed that Ministry of
Shipping may take up the proposal for grant of infrastructure status for shipbuilding with Ministry
of Finance. A revised proposal may be submitted before the COS after carrying out a detailed study
on the policy support measures provided by the other countries like China, Japan and Korea, and
also data on investment likely to be generated by the shipbuilding industry. The Ministry is taking
necessary action as recommended by the COS and shortly shall again approach COS for policy
support measures to boost Indian shipbuilding industry.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
143. The Committee desire to know the latest development in this regard.
Recommendation of the Committee
144. The Committee is concerned over the environmental impact of the ship breaking activities
and frequent dumping of abandoned vessels and waste materials into the Indian territorial waters.
The Committee recommends for adequate steps to curb the malpractices in the ship breaking
business. The Government should also ensure that old and unused vessels are not dumped in the
Indian Waters.
(Para No. 118 of 177
th Report)

23
Reply of the Government
145. The observations/recommendations made by Parliament Standing Committee in this para
pertains to Ministry of Steel. Accordingly Ministry of Steel has been requested to take necessary
action in this regard as recommended by the Committee.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
146. The reply from the Ministry of Steel may be furnished for perusal of the Committee.
Recommendation of the Committee
147. The Committee also notes that Major Ports are getting a raw deal from Government in
many ways. They have to take clearances from both Central and States Government. In case of
Minor Ports, environmental clearances are taken only from concerned States. The Committee was
also informed that Kandla Port is facing delay in providing road connectivity for a small stretch
of about eight kilometres. This has put Kandla Port in disadvantageous position vis-à-vis  the
neighboring private Minor Port in developing their business. The Committee is of the view that the
interests of Major Ports are not made to languish at the cost of Private Ports, wherein tax payers
crores of Rupees have been invested. The Committee feels that the Major Ports are loosing
business to the Minor Ports; if we compare the growth rates of the two. The Committee strongly
recommends to look into these aspects and making level playing field for both the Major and Minor
Ports.
(Para No. 119 of 177
th Report)
Reply of the Government
148. The competent Authority has approved the rail connectivity project to existing TUNA Port
in Kandla at an estimated cost of Rs. 94 crores. The government has taken the following steps
to give a fillip to the Major Ports.
(i) Steps have been taken to streamline and expedite the security clearance and project
approval processes.
(ii) An Inter-Ministerial Committee has been constituted under Member, Planning
commission on “Capital Dredging” and follow up action will be taken on the
Committee’s recommendations.
(iii) Another Inter-Ministerial Committee on “Port Connectivity” has been constituted by the
Planning Commission.
(iv) Efforts have been made to access the Tax Free Infrastructure Bonds by Major Ports
so that they are able to raise financial resources at low cost.
(v) A mechanism for close monitoring of PPP and Non-PPP projects in Ports sector has
been put in place to expedite project implementation in Major Ports.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
149. The Committee notes the reply.
Recommendation of the Committee
150. The Committee came to know that in JNPT Port a scanner was setup to scan the
containers a few years back. However the same is not working now. On being asked about the

24
status of non-functioning of the scanner, the Committee was informed that the entire management
operation and installation of scanner is under the Customs Department and the Customs Department
will install the scanner and operate it. The Committee is of the view that JNPT and Ministry of
Shipping should take immediate action to make the scanner operational in consultation with the
Customs Department. The reasons for the non-operationlisation of the scanner, till now, may please
be furnished to the Committee.
(Para 120 of 177
th Report)
Reply of the Government
151. The Cobalt 60 Radiation Source at Mobile Gama Rays Detection System was installed and
operated by department of Customs in JNPT and it was made non operational from 17.7.2011 on
the advice of Atomic Energy Regulatory Board. “ECIL Rapiscan” who are maintaining the Scanners
are advised to repair/replace/test the same on priority . After repair/replacement and testing of AERB
Radio Safety Division vide letter dated 16.12.2011 granted permission for safe operation of Gama
Ray based cargo scanner (Mobile Gama Rays Detection System) at JNPT. The scanner at present
is fully operational since 22.12.2011.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
152. The Committee notes the reply.
Recommendation/Observations of the Committee
153. The Committee notes that the Inland Water Transport is not being regulated properly and
there are no Rules/Guidelines and if there exists some, it seems it is not being implemented. The
Committee notes one of the worst boat tragedies in Assam, in which hundreds of people died when
a packed streamer carrying over 300 passengers sank in the Brahmaputra river after being caught
in a severe storm mid stream on 30th April, 2012. The boat was overloaded, with passengers on
its roof. The Committee notes that, it seems, there is no mechanism in place check the
implementation of safety measures for Inland Waterway Transport. The Committee recommends
that strict enforcement of the Rules should be ensured by the Ministry to check the recurrence
of such accidents.
(Para No. 121 of 177
th Report)
Reply of the Government
154. The Operation of ferries on the waterway is a State Subject. In Assam, it is regulated under
control and Management of Ferries Rules 1968 (under Northern India Ferries Act 1878) by State
Government. The Ministry shares the concern of the committee regarding better enforcement of
regulation relating to navigation on waterways so that the accidents are averted.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
155. The Committee notes the reply.

25
OBSERV ATIONS/CONCLUSIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS — AT A GLANCE
PERFORMANCE DURING ELEVENTH PLAN
The Committee is not satisfied with the reasons given for under-utilisation of funds
of IMU as that is due to non clearance of plan/design from local bodies and the Patta and
land of Vizag campus has not been transferred. The Committee observes that this delay in
construction work have deprived a number of eligible students from getting admission to
IMU. (Para 7)
The Committee notes with concern the delay in the recruitment of technical staff,
research and development activities in IMU could not be carried out and finally the funds
left unutilized. (Para 8)
The Committee recommends the Ministry of Shipping to expedite Rehabilitation-
cum-Restructuring of HDPEL which has already been delayed. This is a need to sensitize
the concerned agencies to ensure that necessary approved plan for execution of schemes
is obtained in time so that funds allotted for those schemes do not remain un-utilized.
(Para 9)
The Committee notes the reply. (Para 12)
ANNUAL PLAN 2011-2012
The Committee notes the reply and observes that the reasons for under utilization
of funds given are same as those given during submission of Demands for Grants’ detailed
note. The Committee notes with concern that provision for subsidy to private ship-yard was
being made continuously for many years but the same remains under utilized every year.
The Committee may be informed of the steps taken for utilization of non-plan outlay for
the subsidy for private shipyards. (Para 17)
The Committee notes the reply with concern that all expects the Ministry to try to
obtain required sanctions/clearance in time for post Tsunami restoration projects. (Para 21)
The Committee notes the reply. (Para 24)
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
The Committee notes the reply. (Para 27)
ANNUAL PLAN 2012-13
The Committee notes the reply. (Para 30)
PORTS
The Committee notes the reply. It however, emphasizes that the Government should
strictly monitor the efficacy of regular review mechanism. (Para 33)
The Committee notes the reply. It would hasten to add that DCI needs to be
empowered/supported in a big way and its pending payments etc. should be settled. In the face
of PPP in capital dredging, it should not be allowed to be closed eventually. (Para 36)
25

26
The Committee has noted the reply but wishes to express serious apprehensions
about the future of DCI in the emerging scenario. The report of the Committee should be
expedited and implemented in right perspective. (Para 40)
The Committee notes the reply. (Para 44)
(Para Nos. 33 and 37 of 177 th Report)
The Committee notes the reply. It, however, will take the issue separately while
reviewing the action taken replies received from the Ministry of Shipping in respect
of recommendations contained in its 170
th Report on “Modernization of Major Ports”.
(Para 49)
The Committee notes the reply. (Para 52)
The Committee does not accept this reply. It will point out specific actions pending
in its subsequent report on the subject. (Para 55)
DREDGING CORPORATION OF INDIA (DCI)
The Committee notes the reply. The Committee however recommends that
Government may take up the assessment on requirement of new fleet addition sufficient
to carry out the dredging works of all the major ports. (Para 62)
The Committee notes the reply. The Committee recommends that freshers may be
recruited and trained according to the requirement so that manpower shortage can be met
up to the optimum level. (Para 67)
ANDAMAN AND LAKSHADWEEP HARBOUR WORKS (ALHW)
The Committee notes the reply. (Para 72)
The Committee hopes that these projects would be completed without much delay.
(Para 77)
DG LIGHT HOUSE AND LIGHT SHIPS
The Committee notes the reply. (Para 80)
The Committee emphasizes the need for exploiting tourism potential of our light
houses by providing necessary infrastructure/facilities there. (Para 83)
INLAND WATERWAYS AUTHORITY OF INDIA (IWAI)
The Committee notes the reply. (Para 86)
The Committee notes the reply and reiterates to take inland waterway development
by creating all facilities in big way during 12th Plan period to exploit maximum potential
in the area. (Para 92)
CENTRAL INLAND W ATER TRANSPORT CORPORATION LIMITED (CIWTC)
The Committee has time and again suggested to taken over of CIWTC by the IWAI.
While it has taken its assets, manpower issue is yet to be settled. The Committee still
believes that the manpower can be better utilized by IWAI in its future development.
(Para 95)

27
The Committee notes the reply. The Committee hopes the matter of absorption of
CIWTC employees by IWAI may be solved at the earliest. (Para 98)
SHIPPING CORPORATION OF INDIA (SCI)
The Committee notes the reply. The Committee, however, is desires to know whether
any financial implications are there to SCI in the form of penalty etc. while scrapping the
order or deferring the delivery of the vessels already ordered has been done. (Para 102)
The Committee, is surprised to note that the SCI has not been able to expand its
tonnage, particularly at a time when the Ministry/the Ports are projecting an upward trend
in the import and export volume of cargo. Also it has been observed that SCI is not able
to meet even 10% vessel requirement of the all PSUs taken together. (Para 107)
The Committee finds the lack of foresightedness on the part of SCI as it could not
sense the steep decline in the ship prices in the international markets thereby throwing SCI
in to deep trouble and huge financial loss in the form of ship purchase orders and as a
result, therefore, the SCI is now in a financial crisis. The Committee would like to know
how and under what circumstances such an ambitious project was initiated. Was any
responsibility fixed in this regard? (Para 110)
The Committee notes that the reply itself is a pointer to the lack of business
oriented approach in the SCI. The SCI should make efforts to ensure that atleast the PSU
orders should not slip from their hands. The Ministry of Shipping may take an inter
ministerial level MoU for the purpose. (Para 119)
RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT
The Committee notes the reply. (Para 122)
TAX PROPOSALS
The Committee notes the reply. (Para 125)
PUBLIC-PRIV ATE-PARTNERSHIP
The Committee notes the reply. (Para 128)
PROJECT/SCHEME OF NORTH–EAST REGION AND SIKKIM
The Committee notes the reply. (Para 131)
The Committee notes the reply. (Para 134)
The Committee notes the reply. (Para 137)
143. The Committee desire to know the latest development in this regard. (Para 143)
146. The reply from the Ministry of Steel may be furnished for perusal of the Committee.
(Para 146)
149. The Committee notes the reply. (Para 149)
152. The Committee notes the reply. (Para 152)
155. The Committee notes the reply. (Para 155)

MINUTES

30

31
III
THIRD MEETING
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Monday the 5 th November, 2012 in Committee
Room ‘E’, Basement, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Sitaram Yechury — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Prof. Alka Balram Kshatriya
3. Shri V . Hanumantha Rao
4. Shrimati Bimla Kashyap Sood
5. Shri Aayanur Manjunatha
6. Shri Narendra Kumar Kashyap
7. Shrimati Vasanthi Stanley
8. Shri Thomas Sangma
LOK SABHA
9. Shri Ghanshyam Anuragi
10. Dr. Mahesh Joshi
11. Shri M. Krishnaswamy
12. Shri G.V . Harsha Kumar
13. Shri Prabodh Panda
14. Shri Deoraj Singh Patel
15. Shri Rakesh Singh
16. Shri Shatrughan Sinha
17. Shri Dinesh Trivedi
SECRETARIAT
Shri Jagdish Kumar, Director
Shri Swarabji B., Joint Director
Shri T. Kennedy Jesudossan, Committee Officer
31

32
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee. Thereafter, the
Committee considered the draft Reports on the Action Taken by the Government on the
recommendations/observations of the Committee contained in its (a) One Hundred Seventy-fifth
Report on the Demands for Grants (2012-13) of Ministry of Culture; (b) One Hundred Seventy-
sixth Report on the Demands for Grants (2012-13) of Ministry of Tourism; and (c) One Hundred
Seventy-seventh Report on the Demands for Grants (2012-13) of Ministry of Shipping. The
Committee after some discussion adopted the reports.
3. * * *
4. * * *
5. * * *
6. * * *
7. * * *
8. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
9. The meeting adjourned at 12.00 Noon.
*** Relate with other matters.

Printed at : Bengal Offset Works, 335, Khajoor Road, Karol Bagh, New Delhi-110005.