 
       
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTAR 
ON TRANSPORT, TOURIS 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
THREE HUNDRED 
Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/ 
Observations of the Committee contained in its Three Hundred 
Nineteenth Report on the subject ‘ 
implementation of Sagarmala Projects 
 (Presente 
(Laid on t 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA  
RAJYA SABHA 
 
RELATED PARLIAMENTAR Y STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON TRANSPORT, TOURIS M AND CULTURE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi  
March, 2023/ Chaitra, 1945 (Saka) 
 
THREE HUNDRED FORTY FIFTH REPORT 
Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/ 
Observations of the Committee contained in its Three Hundred 
Report on the subject ‘ Progress made in 
implementation of Sagarmala Projects ’ 
 
resente d to the Rajya Sabha on 24 th  March, 2023 ) 
aid on t he Table of Lok Sabha on 24 th  March, 2023 ) 
 
Y STANDING COMMITTEE  
REPORT NO.  
345 
REPORT   
Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/ 
Observations of the Committee contained in its Three Hundred 
Progress made in 
 

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Website:      https://rajyasabha.nic.in   
 E-mail:     rsc-tt@sansad.nic.in  

 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA  
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT,  
TOURISM AND CULTURE  
 
 
THREE HUNDRED FORTY FIFTH REPORT  
Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/ 
Observations of the Committee contained in its Three Hundred 
Nineteenth Report on the subject ‘Progress made in 
implementation of Sagarmala Projects’ 
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 24 th  March, 2023 ) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 24 th  March, 2023 ) 
 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
March, 2023/ Chaitra, 1945 (Saka) 
Hindi version of this publication is also available 

 
 
 
C O N T E N T S 
 
P A G E S  
 
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE     i 
2. INTRODUCTION       ii 
3. ACRONYMS               iii-v 
4. REPORT                                1-40 
5. RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS-AT A GLANCE   41-44  
6. ANNEXURES        45-48   
    7. *MINUTES   
 
         
        
        
      
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
______________________________________ 
 
*To be appended  
49-51

i 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE  
 (2022-23) 
 
 (Constituted on 13 th  September, 2022) 
 
1. Shri V. Vijayasai Reddy   - Chairman 
 
Rajya Sabha 
2. Shri Mohammed Nadimul Haque 
3. Shrimati S. Phangnon Konyak 
4. Shri Jugalsinh Lokhandwala 
5. Shri Manas Ranjan Mangaraj 
6. Dr. Sonal Mansingh 
7. Shrimati Rajani Ashokrao Patil 
8. Shri A. A. Rahim 
9. Dr. C. M. Ramesh 
10. Shri Vinay Dinu Tendulkar 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
11.  Shri Anto Antony 
12.  Shri Ram Margani Bharat 
13.  Shri Tapir Gao  
14.  Shri Rahul Kaswan 
15.  Shri Ramesh Chandra Majhi 
16.  Shri Sunil Baburao Mendhe 
17.  Shri K. Muraleedharan 
18.  Shri S. S.Palanimanickam  
19.  Shri Chhedi Paswan   
20.  Shri Kamlesh Paswan  
21.  Shri Sunil Kumar Pintu 
22.  Shri Prince Raj 
23.  Shri Tirath Singh Rawat 
24.  Shrimati Mala Roy 
25.  Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
26.  Shri Dushyant Singh 
27.  Shri Rajbahadur Singh 
28.  Shri Ramdas Chandrabhanji Tadas 
29.  Shri Manoj Kumar Tiwari 
30.  Shri Krupal Balaji Tumane 
31. Shri Dinesh Lal Yadav "Nirahua"  
 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Sumant Narain, Joint Secretary 
Shri Swarabji B., Director 
Shrimati Monica Baa, Additional Director 
Shrimati Subha Chandrashekar, Deputy Secretary  
Shri Ranajit Chakraborty, Under Secretary 
Ms. Jahanvi, Assistant Committee Officer 

ii 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairman, Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport, 
Tourism and Culture, having been authorized by the Committee to present on its behalf, do 
hereby present this Three Hundred Forty Fifth Repor t on the Action Taken by the 
Government on the recommendations/ observations of the Committee contained in its Three 
Hundred Nineteenth Report on the subject ‘Progress made in implementation of Sagarmala 
Projects’. 
2. The Three Hundred Nineteenth Report  of the Department-related Parliamentary 
Standing Committee on Transport, Tourism and Cultur e was presented on the 28 
th  March, 
2022 to the Parliament.  
3.  The Action Taken Replies on the recommendations  of the Committee contained in its 
Three Hundred Nineteenth Report were received from the Ministry of Ports, Shipping and 
Waterways on 26 th  December, 2022. 
4. The Committee considered and adopted the Report in its meeting held on the 23 rd  
March, 2023.   
 
 
(V. Vijayasai Reddy) 
NEW DELHI;                                                           Chairman,  
March 23, 2023                                                       Department-related Parliamentary Standing             
Chaitra 2, 1945 (Saka)                                       Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture,  
                                                                                                                                 Rajya Sabha 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

iii 
 
 
ACRONYMS  
ARR  Annual Revenue Requirement 
BBCD  Bare Boat cum Charter Demise 
BIMSTEC  Bay of Bengal Initiative for Multi-Sectoral Technical and Economic 
Cooperation 
CAG  Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
CBIC  Central Board of Indirect Taxes & Customs (erstwhile CBEC) 
CEMS  Centre of Excellence in Maritime and Shipbuilding 
CEUs  Coastal Economic Units 
CEZ  Coastal Economic Zones 
CFS  Container Freight Station 
CKSRU  Cochin Shipyard Ltd.-Kolkata Ship Repair Unit 
CMSRU  Cochin Shipyard Ltd.-Mumbai Ship Repair Unit 
CoPT  Cochin Port Trust 
COVID  Coronavirus Disease 
CPSEs  Central Public Sector Enterprises 
CRZ  Coastal Regulation Zone 
CSL  Cochin Shipyard Limited 
DDU-GKY  Deen Dayal Upadhyaya Grameen Kaushalya Yojana 
DG (S)  Director General Shipping 
DPD  Direct Port Delivery 
DPE  Direct Port Entry 
DPIIT  The Department for Promotion of Industry and Internal Trade 
DPR  Detailed Project Report 
ECB  External Commercial Borrowing 
E-DO  Electronic Delivery Order 
EXIM  Export Import 
FACT  Fertilizers and Chemicals Travancore Limited 
GT  Gross Tonnage 
HCSL  Hooghly Cochin Shipyard Ltd. 
ICD  Inland Container Depots 
ICEGATE  Indian Customs Electronic Data Interchange Gateway 
IGM  Import General Manifest 
INR  Indian Rupees 
ISRF  International Ship Repair Facility 
IWAI  Inland Waterways Authority of India 
IWT  Inland Water Transport 
JNPT  Jawaharlal Nehru Port Trust 
KPL  Kamarajar Port Limited 
LLP  Limited Liability Partnership 
LNG  Liquified Natural Gas 
MbPT  Mumbai Port Trust 
MDF  Maritime Development Fund 

iv 
 
MIV  Maritime India Vision 
MMLP  Multi Modal Logistic Parks 
MPA  Major Port Authorities 
MoFAH&D  Ministry of Fisheries, Animal Husbandry and Dairying 
MoPS&W  Ministry of Ports, Shipping & Waterways 
MoR  Ministry of Railways 
MoRD  Ministry of Rural Development 
MoRTH  Ministry of Road Transport & Highways 
MoU  Memorandum of Understanding 
MPPR  Monitoring of Project Progress Report 
MRO  Maintenance Repair and Overhaul 
MSDC  Maritime Shipping Development Council 
MTPA  Million Tonnes Per Annum 
NHAI  National Highways Authority of India 
NER  North Eastern Region 
NGT  National Green Tribunal 
NICDIT  National Industrial Corridor Development and Implementation Trust 
NLP  National Logistics Portal 
NM  Nautical Miles 
NPG  Network Planning Group 
NPP  National Perspective Plan 
NRI  Non-Residential Indians 
NSD  Netaji Subhash Dock 
NSAC  National Sagarmala Apex Committee 
NTCPWC  National Technology Centre for Ports, Waterways and Coasts 
NW  National Waterways 
OCI  Overseas Citizen of India 
PCS  Port Community System 
PMC  Project Management Consultant 
PPP  Public Private Partnership 
RFID  Radio Frequency Identification Document 
RoFR  Right of First Refusal 
RO-
RO/ROPAX  Roll on/ Roll off passenger 
RSV  River Sea Vessels 
SEZ  Special Economic Zone 
SIOTL  Sical Iron Ore Terminals Limited 
SIPC  Smart Industrial Port City 
SOP  Standard Operating Procedure 
SoR  Scale of Rates 
TAMP  Tariff Authority for Major Ports 
TOS  Terminal Operating System 
ULIP  Unified Logistics Interface Platform 
USD/ US$  United States Dollar 
US  United States 

v 
 
UT  Union Territory 
VOCPT  V. O. Chidambaranar Port Trust 
VRC  Vessel-Related Charges 
 

Page 1 of 48 
 
 
REPORT  
 
The Report of the Committee deals with the Action T aken by the Ministry of Ports, 
Shipping & Waterways on the recommendations/observa tions as contained in its Three Hundred 
and Nineteenth Report on ‘Progress made in implemen tation of Sagarmala Projects’ which was 
presented to both the Houses of Parliament on 28 th  March, 2022. 
2. The Action Taken Replies were received from the Ministry on 26 th  December, 2022 in 
respect of all the recommendations/observations con tained in the Report. The replies have been 
categorized as follows:- 
  
Chapter-I: 
Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the Ministry: 
Paragraph Nos.: Nil. 
Total: Nil. 
 
Chapter-II: 
Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue in view of 
the replies of the Ministry: 
Paragraph Nos.: 19, 20, 21, 24, 30, 54, 64, 84, 85, 86, 91, 92 
Total: 12 
 
Chapter-III:  
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which re plies of the Ministry have not been 
accepted by the Committee: 
Paragraph Nos.: 18, 22, 23, 29, 32, 33, 53, 77, 87, 88, 89, 90, 93 
Total: 13 
  
Chapter-IV: 
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which th e final replies of the Ministry are 
still awaited: 
Paragraph Nos.: Nil. 
Total: Nil. 
 
 
 

Page 2 of 48 
 
CHAPTER-I 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
MINISTRY 
 
-Nil.- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Page 3 of 48 
 
CHAPTER-II  
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES OF THE MINISTRY 
SHIP REPAIRS  
Recommendation/Observation  
1. The Committee notes that only two Indian ports f eature in the top 40 Global Container 
Ports. It is obvious that there is significant pote ntial to develop port infrastructure in India and 
become competitive with other leading maritime nati ons by driving cost effectiveness. The 
Committee therefore recommends that overall capacit y augmentation of Indian ports should be 
done and cost competitiveness at Indian ports should be ensured in a manner that in the next 5-7 
years India has at least 5 of its ports by Container throughput in the top 40 ports. 
(Para 19) 
Reply of the Ministry  
1.1 Suggestion of the Committee has been noted. How ever, it is informed that capacity 
enhancement at Major Ports is a continuous process.  The Government is regularly monitoring 
the Port projects for development/expansion of the Major Ports. Port Projects such as 
construction of berths, installation of state-of-th e-art equipment, mechanization of cargo 
handling system and dredging projects to accommodat e large size vessels, etc. help in increasing 
the Capacity of Major ports. 
 
Recommendation/Observation  
2. The Committee also notes that the Ministry of Po rts, Shipping and Waterways had 
informed that as compared to the full capacity of t he major ports of 2,500 million metric tonnes, 
the total volume of cargo that was moved on all our  major ports was about 1,248 million metric 
tonnes. The Committee was informed that this was du e to the fact that most of India's ports were 
pretty old with less draft and old berths due to which big ships can not come in. The Indian Ports 
therefore have adequate capacity but there is a nee d to modernize them so that they are able to 
handle cargo on a larger scale. 
(Para 20)  
 

Page 4 of 48 
 
Reply of the Ministry  
2.1 Maritime transport activity is driven by develo pments in the world economy - growth in 
world output and trade. The volume of seaborne carg o traffic handled by ports is mainly shaped 
by the levels and changes in both global and domestic activity. 
2.2 The Sagarmala Programme, the flagship programme  of the Ministry of Ports, Shipping & 
Waterways lays great emphasis on modernization and mechanization. Ports are looking at setting 
up specialized high-capacity berths, supported by s tate-of-the-art equipment and skilled and 
trained manpower. 
2.3 To develop global standard ports in India, Mari time India Vision (MIV) 2030 has 
identified initiatives such as developing world-cla ss Mega Ports, transshipment hubs and 
infrastructure modernization of ports. MIV 2030 est imates the investments to the tune of INR 
1,00,000-1,25,000 Crores for capacity augmentation and development of world-class 
infrastructure at Indian Ports. 
2.4 All the above initiatives will help in the mode rnization of Indian Ports and enable them to 
handle cargo on a larger scale in the coming years. 
 
Recommendation/Observation  
3. The productivity of a Port mainly depends on the  turnaround time of the ships, pre-
berthing detention and average berth output. The Co mmittee observed that during the year 
2020-21, the average turnaround time of ships at ma jor ports was reported to be 55.99 hours, 
while the pre-berthing detention was 25.67 hours. I nternationally, the turnaround time of a ship 
is less than 24 hours and there is practically a ni l pre-berthing detention. The number of moves 
handled per hour per container vessel varies betwee n 200-300 at international ports as against 
50-200 moves in India, which clearly underlines the  fact of our capacity and it needs 
improvement. To be globally competitive, the Indian  Ports must drive mechanization and 
adoption of technology to improve productivity and establish ancillary services within port 
premises to improve evacuation time. 
(Para 21) 
Reply of the Ministry  
3.1 The Government has already given a strong push to port modernization, mechanization 
and digitalization, with a number of ease of doing business initiatives. Port modernization 

Page 5 of 48 
 
includes the introduction of web-based e-forms and direct port delivery, installation of container 
scanners and Radio-Frequency Identification-based systems for gate automation, digitalization of 
land records, the launch of a single-window interfa ce for facilitating trade, and integration of 
more seaports with the PCS. 
3.2 Improvement in efficiency at Major Ports is a c ontinuous process. Port Projects such as 
the installation of state of the art equipment, mec hanization of the cargo handling system, etc. 
help in increasing the efficiency at Major ports. T he Government is regularly monitoring the 
progress of Port modernization/mechanization projects. 
3.3 All these steps will ensure faster evacuation a t ports. 
Recommendation/Observation  
4. The Committee notes that in the past decade, pri vate investment into the Major Port 
sector was invited and several projects were awarde d on PPP basis for capacity augmentation 
in Major Ports across the country. The Committee is  pleased to note that 24 PPP projects have 
been completed and 33 are in the pipeline. The Comm ittee recommends that a dedicated 
mechanism should be put in place for effective coor dination and monitoring of PPP projects in 
the Sagarmala Programme. 
(Para 24) 
Reply of the Ministry  
4.1 There is a robust mechanism in the Ministry for  monitoring the port projects through 
various institutional arrangements. Port Chairman/S ecretary, MoPS&W/Minister level meetings 
are held with the objective of ensuring that the co ncessionaires of PPP projects provide efficient 
and cost effective services consistent with the pri nciples of good governance, accountability and 
efficiency. If there is any deviation from completi on date, suitable corrective measures are taken 
to address the bottlenecks along with instructions/ suggestions/ directions which are issued at the 
highest level to Major Ports for timely completion of the project. It is ensured that the appraisal 
of PPP projects under Sagarmala and their implementation is monitored on a regular basis and all 
action required for smooth implementation is being taken immediately, as and when required. 
4.2 A Public-Private-Partnership (PPP) Cell has bee n created in the Ministry for putting in 
place a dedicated mechanism for effective coordinat ion and monitoring of PPP projects as well 
as focusing on building infrastructure and attracti ng private investments in the Port sector. The 
primary functions of the PPP Cell are as under: 
(i) To effectively coordinate and monitor the PPP p rojects; 

Page 6 of 48 
 
(ii) To formulate and ensure implementation of poli cies, guidelines and procedures relating to 
PPP projects. For smooth and efficient implementati on, the standardized model documents 
are also formulated; 
(iii) To advise the Major Ports in structuring of P PP projects and also appraise the proposals; 
(iv) To engage in interaction with stakeholders inc luding Central and State Governments 
handling matters relating to PPP Projects; 
(v) To formulate the policies for PPP projects to g uide and monitor the resolution of issues 
with stakeholders, if any.  
4.3 Further there is a dedicated team under Sagarma la program for effective coordination and 
monitoring of PPP projects in the ‘Sagarmala Programme.’ 
4.4 The Ministry vide Letter No. 13/10/2020-PPP/e-3 38558 dated 12.2.2020 had circulated 
MPPR (Monitoring of Project Progress Report) formats to all the Major Ports to report the status/ 
progress of PPP as well as Non - PPP projects to th e Ministry on monthly basis in respect of the 
progress achieved during the previous month. 
4.5 The Port Authorities have also been advised tha t Boards of the Major Ports also regularly 
monitor the progress of the PPP projects at their level in Board Meetings. 
 
INITIATIVES TO EXPEDITE IMPLEMENTATION OF PORT 
CONNECTIVITY PROJECTS  
Recommendation/Observation  
5. The Committee cautioned the Ministry that throug h its study tours and meetings with 
various agencies involved in the Sagarmala programme, it was apparent that there was a lack of 
coordination among the different Departments and th at the Shipping Ministry did not have full 
information about the status of work being done by all agencies. This has led to a situation, 
though individual agencies were carrying out their work, there was no interlinking and 
coordination of the work done by all the stakeholde rs. The Committee gave an example of the 
Andaman & Nicobar Islands Administration where an i nternational airport is being built but 
there were no simultaneous tie-ups with hotels and transportation. The Committee therefore 
recommends that a coordination mechanism may be cre ated involving all the stakeholders/ 
implementation agencies to monitor the work on a we ekly basis to ensure that targets are 
achieved, aims and objectives are implemented, and time and cost overruns are avoided. 
(Para 30) 

Page 7 of 48 
 
Reply of the Ministry  
5.1 To address this issue all projects identified u nder the National Maritime Plan prepared 
vide March 2020, are being launched as PM Gati Shak ti projects. All the projects are mapped 
through the Gati Shakti portal which is monitored b y a Network Planning Group constituted by 
DPIIT which includes the MoPS&W. The Network Planni ng Group is supported by a team of 
professionals as technical support units. The netwo rk planning group will report to the 
Empowered Group of Secretaries. 
 
COASTAL ECONOMIC ZONE (CEZ)  
Recommendation/Observation  
6. The Committee observes that two important aspect s of port-led industrialization are 
acquisition of land and port connectivity. Integrat ion between port and the land beside the port 
is very important, therefore, procedures should be in place for acquisition of land in the first 
place and connectivity for development of industrie s. The Committee would also like to be 
apprised of the status of implementation of the pro visions of Policy Guidelines for Land 
Management. 
(Para 54) 
Reply of the Ministry  
6.1 The Ministry has entrusted Sagarmala Developmen t Company Limited for conducting a 
detailed study to suitably modify National Perspect ive Plan for CEZ keeping in view other 
initiatives of the Government of India such as Nati onal Industrial Corridor Programme, 
Bharatmala Connectivity Program and Dedicated Freig ht Corridors for achieving synergy and 
avoid duplication. 
6.2 Also, Major Ports have taken up the exercise of  industrialization of land available with 
them. More than 8000 Acres of land have been used f or Industrialization by Major Ports which 
has the potential to generate more than 2 lakh direct and indirect employment. 
 
COASTAL COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT:  
SKILL DEVELOPMENT 
Recommendation/Observation  

Page 8 of 48 
 
7. The Committee observes that the Ministry had inf ormed that it was funding skill 
development initiatives under DDU-GKY to train 10,0 00 persons annually for the next 3 years 
and notes that the actual number of persons trained  seems to fall well short of the number. The 
Committee notes that skill development is an essent ial objective for development of coastal 
communities under the Programme and would like to b e apprised of the policies developed by 
the Ministry with regard to employment generation i n the coastal communities. The Committee 
would also like to be apprised of the status of the  MSDC which had been planned at 
Visakhapatnam port and the status at other major po rts. The Committee takes note of the fact 
that the coastal community is one of the key stakeholders of the Sagarmala Programme and their 
socio-economic development is one of the objectives  of Sagarmala. A number of initiatives/ 
projects have been planned/ under implementation un der the pillar of Coastal Community 
Development. The Committee would like the Ministry to undertake third party evaluation of the 
projects included under the pillar of Coastal Community Development. 
(Para 64) 
Reply of the Ministry  
7.1 In the area of maritime skill development, base d on a skill gap study conducted in 2017, 
MoPS&W had entered into a MoU with Ministry of Rura l Development and this MoU is now 
being extended to 2023 where, till date more than 3 000 candidates have been trained and more 
than 1700 candidates have been placed.  
7.2 The progress of the collaboration has been affe cted by COVID-19 pandemic and lower 
interest of Project Implementing Agencies in conduc ting courses in the Maritime Sector. The 
Ministry is engaging with MoRD and stakeholders suc h as State Rural Livelihood Missions to 
encourage implementation of courses in the Maritime  Sector. The Ministry is also collaborating 
with the Ministry of Skill Development and Entrepre neurship to develop new training 
programmes in the sector. 
7.3 Centre of Excellence in Maritime and Shipbuildi ng (CEMS) has been set up with an aim 
to bridge the skill gap between academics and indus try requirements. Institute has two campuses 
and 24 state of the art laboratories in total (6 la boratories in Mumbai and 18 in Visakhapatnam). 
Institute has trained over 5000 candidates in 50+ courses since inception. 
7.4 Multi Skill Development Centers (MSDCs) for tra ining are already operational at 
Jawaharlal Nehru Port Authority and Chennai Port Au thority. More than 1500 candidates have 
been trained in these centers.  In view of the Skill Development Institute (CEMS), the Ministry is 

Page 9 of 48 
 
revaluating the need of MSDC at Visakhapatnam Port.  New Mangalore Port Authority has also 
issued Letter of Award to Operations and Maintenance Partner to operate MSDC at the Port. 
7.5 Further, More than 35,000 candidates have under gone training at Safety Training and 
Welfare Institution, Alang with the financial suppo rt of MoPS&W. This has resulted in better 
safety at Ship Breaking Yards. 
 
COASTAL SHIPPING AND INLAND WATER TRANSPORT  
Recommendation/Observation  
8. The Committee notes that the share of Coastal Sh ipping and IWT in freight movement is 
presently very less due to limited infrastructure availability, lack of adequate depth of waterways 
for commercial movement of cargo and shortage of in land vessels etc. In fact, Inland Waterways 
is the most effective and economical mode of transp ort which is least exploited in India. Once 
seamlessly integrated with other means of transport , IWT can provide significant relief to 
congestion on the road and rail infrastructure. It can act not only as a supplementing means of 
transportation but also has significant potential i n river and canal tourism which is yet to be 
tapped to its potential. Despite these distinct adv antages, Coastal Shipping and IWT in India 
have not been able to gain momentum. The Committee therefore desires to be apprised of the 
measures initiated for the accelerated growth of co astal shipping and IWT. The Committee also 
recommends that the Ministry should initiate concre te measures for integration of coastal 
shipping with other transport systems considering i t as a part of the logistics chain so that 
linkages necessary for seamless connectivity in the multi-modal chain could be built.  
(Para 84) 
Reply of the Ministry  
8.1 A major boost to the IWT sector has been provid ed by the Government, through 
enactment of the National Waterways Act. 2016 throu gh which 111 (106 new and 5 earlier 
existing) National Waterways (NWs) spread across 24  States in the country. Studies have been 
completed for these NWs and action plan formulated for 26 NWs for development of shipping 
and navigation. 
8.2 To integrate coastal shipping and enhance port connectivity with Inland Waterways, the 
Government declared 111 (5 pre-existing and 106 new ) National Waterways (NWs) of 24 States 
in the country vide National Waterways Act, 2016. 1 9 of these NWs provide hinterland 
connectivity with major ports which are likely to contribute to their development.  

Page 10 of 48 
 
8.3 Following are the steps taken for the developme nt of coastal shipping in India: 
i. Indo-Bangladesh Coastal Shipping Agreement and S tandard Operating Procedure (SOP) on 
the Agreement. 
• Agreement on Coastal Shipping between the Governmen t of the Republic of India and the 
Government of the People's Republic of Bangladesh s igned on Sixth day of June 2015 
desiring to secure harmonious development of the ma ritime commercial navigation 
between the Contracting Countries. Further, a SOP w as signed on 15 th  November, 2015 to 
promote and facilitate the day to day commercial op eration on the vessels plying between 
the two countries. This allows (River Sea Vessels) RSV III and RSV IV vessels to engage 
in coastal trade, 8 designated routes involving Ind ian and Bangladeshi ports have been 
covered, vessels up to the limit of 6000 GT are all owed to operate. Joint Shipping 
Committee mechanism provided for discussing any iss ues that may arise and the 
monitoring is done through Shipping Secretary or DG  Shipping Level Talks. The lack of 
vessels from the Indian side plying to Bangladesh i s attributed to the fact that there is very 
little or no return cargo. Further, efforts are und erway to include new ports of call under 
this SoP. A study for removal of restrictions of Ve ssels up to 6000 GT was conducted and 
brought to the notice of Bangladesh for removing th e restriction of the Vessels plying 
under this Agreement. 
ii. Integration of Inland and coastal shipping: 
• Inland Vessels have been allowed to operate within five (05) nautical miles of the baseline 
(inshore traffic corridor) in fair season and fair weather conditions vide DG (S) Order 08 of 
2018 dated 04.09.2018. It facilitated MS Class Vess els for engaging in riverine trade 
without changing the registration. 
iii. Introduction of River Sea Vessel concept: 
• Notification for Construction, Survey, Certificatio n and Operation of Indian River Sea 
Cargo ships (Types 1 to 4) vide DGS Order Nos. 18 o f 2013 dated 31.07.2013 and 
Notification for Construction, Survey, Certificatio n and Operation of Indian River Sea 
Passenger Vessels (Type 3 & 4) vide DG(S) Order No.  05 of 2017 dated 28.07.17 were 
issued. It permitted the vessel operations up to th e limit of territorial waters (12 NM) from 
the nearest coast. 
iv. Indian Coastal Vessel Notification: 

Page 11 of 48 
 
• Notification for Construction, Survey, Certificatio n and Operation of Indian Coastal 
Vessels vide DG(S) Order No. 01 of 2014 dated 04.03 .2014 was issued which permits the 
vessels operation up to limits of coastal waters (20 NM) from the nearest coast. 
v. Revision of Merchant Shipping Act is underway 
vi. Enactment of Coastal Shipping Bill is underway 
vii. BIMSTEC Agreement (Proposed) 
• This Agreement intends to allow all kinds of cargo vessels to operate between the ports of 
Bangladesh, India, Myanmar, Sri Lanka, Bhutan, Nepa l and Thailand opening all kind of 
ports and cargo and providing certain benefits like  concessional Port dues and light dues at 
par with domestic vessels, handling facilities on t he same terms and conditions as are 
applicable to local vessels .facilitating purchase of fuel and essential stores in freely usable 
currency, evolving uniform documentation for vessel s. The talks are going on for this 
agreement. 
8.4 Other Steps taken for growth of cargo transport ation on waterways are detailed at 
Annexure - I. 
8.5 The NWs on which development was taken up/propo sed linking the landlocked States 
with Ports in the coastal States are detailed at Annexure - II. 
 
Recommendation/Observation  
9. The Committee has been informed by stakeholders that more than 90% of Indian EXIM 
cargo and 40% coastal cargos are being carried by f oreign ships with an approximate freight 
bill exceeding US$ 52 billion in FY-19. The Committ ee takes note of the submissions of the 
Ministry of Ports, Shipping and Waterways in this r egard that the Merchant Shipping Act, 1958 
is under comprehensive reviews and once new legisla tion is enacted, all Merchant Shipping 
Rules related to registration of vessels under the Indian Flag and operations thereof will be 
revised in consultation with stakeholders. The Comm ittee observes that the net annual forex 
outgo of India by way of huge freight bill endanger s India's commercial security and therefore 
needs to be revised. The Committee therefore recomm ends that the Ministry while amending the 
Merchant Shipping Act, 1958 must establish a compre hensive and vibrant legal framework to 
reverse the trend of Indian cargos on foreign flag vessels and make proper safeguards and 
develop suitable frameworks to ensure that India ha s a healthy Indian flag fleet large enough to 
carry at least 50% of its EXIM and coastal cargos with special emphasis on coastal cargos. 

Page 12 of 48 
 
(Para 85) 
Reply of the Ministry  
9.1 Amendment of Merchant Shipping Law for more Ind ian cargo to be carried by Indian 
Flagship. 
i. The following legislative reforms have been prop osed under the draft Merchant Shipping 
Bill; 
(a) Ownership requirement for registration under In dian flag has been changed from 'wholly 
owned’ to the proportion as may be notified by the Central Government. This will encourage 
vessels owned jointly by Indian and foreign entities to be registered under Indian flag, and it will 
be easy for small ship-owners to acquire and register the vessels. It will facilitate development of 
tonnage under the Indian flag. 
(b) At present only citizens, companies and societi es can register the ships under the Indian 
flag. Provisions have been made to allow other pers ons or bodies as the Central Government 
may notify to register ships. This will enable regi stration of ships by other entities like LLP, 
NRIs, and OCI etc. 
(c) Provisions for registration of vessels chartere d on Bareboat Charter-cum-Demise 
(BBCD) contract have been made in the Bill. The obj ective is to promote an increase in the 
tonnage under Indian flag, as small ship-owners or entities who cannot invest a huge sum of 
money for purchase of vessel, may charter/hire the vessel on BBCD basis having an intention to 
transfer the ownership to an Indian owner, and register such vessel as an Indian vessel. 
9.2 Further, a draft Coastal Shipping Bill as a new  legislation has been proposed for the 
development of Indian shipping with the following important legislative reforms: 
a) The Ministry has proposed a draft Coastal Shipping Bill as a new and separate legislation 
for the development of coastal shipping and integration of coastal and inland shipping 
b) The Bill also seeks to regulate chartering of forei gn flag ships for export, import or other 
services. No requirement of license for Indian vessels will be there, for an ease of business,  
c) The Bill provides proper safeguards and includes pr ovisions to make suitable frameworks 
for development of coastal shipping, in the form of  enabling provisions for National 
Coastal and Inland Shipping Strategic Plan and National Database of Coastal Shipping,  
d) Also, certain powers have been proposed to be given  to the Central Government to protect 
the interests of Indian shipping 
ii. Shipbuilding Financial Assistance Policy (2016- 2026): 

Page 13 of 48 
 
a) The Government of India has approved the Financial Assistance Policy for Indian Shipyards 
on 9 th  December 2015, for grant of financial assistance t o 'Indian Shipyards'. Only those 
vessels shall be eligible for grant of financial as sistance, for which the construction 
commences subsequent to the signing of valid contra cts. Vessels which are constructed and 
delivered within a period of three years from the d ate of contract are eligible for availing 
financial assistance under the policy. For speciali zed vessels, the delivery period can be 
extended till six years. Financial assistance shall  be @ 20% of the contract price, actual 
receipts, fair price (whichever is least) to Indian  shipyards. Under the policy, the financial 
assistance extended would be reduced by 3% every three years 
b) Fifty (50) vessels have been constructed completely  which have benefited from the subsidy 
scheme. Consequently, it is expected that employmen t is generated due to ease of doing 
business. 
iii. Implementation of revised policy on Right of F irst Refusal: 
a) Based on the revised policy of the Government on Ri ght of First Refusal enshrined in the 
Ministry of Shipping (now MoPS&W) Notification date d 23 rd  October, 2020, the 
Directorate General of Shipping GoI, has issued a C ircular No. 02 of 2021 dated 14.01.2021 
on the hierarchy of Right of First refusal (RoFR) t o be followed by all kinds of tenders. The 
criteria for granting the Right of First Refusal in chartering of vessels through tender Process 
has been revised, for promoting tonnage under India n flag and ship-building in India, so as 
to make India an ‘Aatmanirbhar (self-reliant) Bhara t,’ in terms of tonnage and ship-building 
in India. The following is the revised hierarchy of RoFR; 
/octastar4 Indian built, Indian flagged (Indian owned);  
/octastar4 Foreign built, Indian flagged (Indian owned);  
/octastar4 Indian built, foreign flagged (foreign owned). 
b) This will promote demand for Indian built vessels a s the Indian built vessels will have the 
priority in chartering and will also provide additi onal market access and business support to 
ships built in India. This is in line with initiative 4.12 of the Maritime India Vision 2030. 
iv. Scheme for Promotion of flagging of merchant sh ips in India by providing subsidy 
support to Indian shipping companies in global tend er floated by Ministry/department/Central 
Public Sector Enterprises (CPSEs): 
a) In order to promote the objective of ‘Aatmanirbhar Bharat,’ the Government of India has on 
14.07.2021 approved a scheme to provide Rs. 1.624 C rore over a period of five years as 

Page 14 of 48 
 
subsidy support to Indian Shipping Companies in glo bal tender floated by Ministries/ 
Departments/ Central Public Sector Enterprises (CPSEs), for import of Government Cargo. 
v. Integration of Inland and coastal shipping: 
a) For development of Coastal trade, steps have also b een taken to integrate the inland and 
coastal shipping. Orders have been issued for allowing inland vessels to operate in 5 nautical 
mile corridors in the sea with certain conditions a nd compliances related to safety. Orders 
have been issued for the operations of the River Se a Cargo Vessels and River sea passenger 
vessel. 
 
Recommendation/Observation  
10. The Committee had been informed by the Ministry  that the initial list of projects in 
‘Sagarmala’ was part of the National Perspective Pl an (NPP) prepared alongwith Master 
Planning of Major Ports and additional projects wer e derived from subsequent meetings of 
National and State Steering Committees of Sagarmala  and in consultation with Major Ports and 
different State Agencies. Besides this, project pro posals were also received for funding from 
various implementing agencies and accordingly, proj ects aligned with Sagarmala objectives 
were made part of the ‘Sagarmala’ Programme. Up to March 2021, there were 505 projects at 
an investment of more than Rs. 3.59 lakh Crores which were being monitored for implementation 
under Sagarmala Programme. A further 294 projects w orth Rs. 1,44,562 Crores were identified 
for implementation by Major Port Trusts, various Mo PS&W agencies and State Maritime 
Boards and the same were added to the Programme. Th e Committee observes that out of the 
present 802 projects of Sagarmala identified for im plementation during 2015 to 2035, only 181 
have been completed and 223 are under implementatio n. The Ministry has attributed the delays 
to many reasons such as acquisition of land, EC clearance, CRZ clearance etc. The Committee is 
of the firm view that if pre-project activities lik e land acquisition, CRZ clearances etc. had been 
completed before award of projects, the pace of imp lementation of these projects would have 
been much faster. The Committee therefore recommend s that the Ministry should expeditiously 
resolve all pending issues including clearances rel ated to land acquisition, CRZ clearances etc. 
so that execution of Sagarmala projects is speeded up. 
(Para 86) 
 
 

Page 15 of 48 
 
Reply of the Ministry  
10.1 Currently there are 802 Sagarmala projects wor th Rs. 5 lakh crores, out of which 202 
projects worth Rs. 99 thousand crores have already been completed, while the remaining projects 
are under different stages of implementation and development.  
10.2 To identify the gaps and pace the implementati on of projects MoPS&W is continuously 
monitoring the processes of projects with the imple menting agencies. Meets such as MSDC and 
NSAC have been undertaken to put forth the issues r elated to delays due to EC, land acquisition, 
CRZ clearances etc. 
 
Recommendation/Observation  
11. The Committee notes that the Major Port Authori ties Act, 2021 has come into force with 
effect from 3rd November 2021 and as per the submis sion of the Ministry, the Act is aimed at 
reorienting the governance model in central ports i n line with the successful global practice 
where the core infrastructure is developed by the P ort Authority and the commercial operations 
are bid out to private players. The Committee welco mes the MPA Act, 2021 as it addresses a lot 
of issues of the port sector, but simultaneously ex horts the Ministry to ensure that there is 
healthy competition and private monopolies who can abuse their dominant market position are 
prevented in the port sector. 
(Para 91) 
Reply of the Ministry  
11.1 The Major Port Authorities Act, 2021 has been given effect from 03.11.2021. The Board 
of Major Port Authorities has been empowered to fra me Scale of Rates (SoR)/Tariff for use of 
Port assets under this legislation. Accordingly, th e role of Tariff Authority for Major Ports 
(TAMP) for fixation of Tariff/SoR has been dispense d with. The Tariff Policy for Major Port 
Authorities, 2021 along with Working Guidelines to Major Port Authorities for Determination of 
SoR have been issued on 03.11.2021. The said Tariff  Policy, 2021 provides full flexibility to 
Major Port Authorities to fix their Tariff within t he ceiling Annual Revenue Requirement (ARR) 
so as to react to the market forces and fix Tariff based on commercial judgment. The said policy 
provides that the Major Port Authorities may draw c omparison of Tariff items for their Ports and 
ascertain that the same are comparable and competit ive with neighbouring and competing ports. 
The Policy also requires the Major Port Authorities  to periodically review the SoR in order to 
effectively respond to dynamic market forces for op timal asset utilization. Such Tariff fixation 

Page 16 of 48 
 
by the Major Port Authorities shall not be inconsis tent with the provisions of the Competition 
Act, 2002 and with the provisions of any other law for the time being in force. This is expected 
to defuse cartelization by Port / Port operators an d usher in much desired level playing field and 
healthy competition in the Port sector within the country. 
Recommendation/Observation  
12. The Committee has been informed by the stakehol ders that high port tariffs make Indian 
ports uncompetitive as compared to global peers in their bid to attract more large size direct 
calls. Transshipment hubs of Colombo (Sri Lanka), J ebel Ali (United Arab Emirates) Singapore 
and Port Klang (Malaysia) apply substantially lower  marine charges than those at Jawaharlal 
Nehru Port Trust (JNPT), Cochin, Chennai and Visakh apatnam. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that Major Ports should consider suitabl e reduction in Vessel Related Charges and 
make them at par with the charges prevailing in neighboring foreign ports. 
(Para 92) 
Reply of the Ministry  
12.1 The Major Port Authorities Act, 2021 has been given effect from 03.11.2021. The Board 
of Major Port Authorities has been empowered to fra me Scale of Rates (SoR)/Tariff for use of 
Port assets under this legislation. Accordingly, th e role of Tariff Authority for Major Ports 
(TAMP) for fixation of Tariff/SoR has been dispense d with. The Tariff Policy for Major Port 
Authorities, 2021 along with working Guidelines to Major Port Authorities for Determination of 
SoR have been issued on 03.11.2021. The said Tariff  Policy, 2021 provides full flexibility to 
Major Port Authorities to fix their Tariff within t he ceiling Annual Revenue Requirement (ARR) 
so as to react to the market forces and fix tariff based on commercial judgment. The said policy 
provides that the Major Port Authorities may draw c omparison of tariff items for their Ports and 
ascertain that the same are comparable and competit ive with neighbouring and competing ports. 
The Policy also requires the Major Port Authorities  to periodically review the SoR in order to 
effectively respond to dynamic market forces for op timal asset utilization. Such Tariff fixation 
by the Major Port Authorities shall not be inconsis tent with the provisions of the Competition 
Act, 2002 and with the provisions of any other law for the time being in force. This is expected 
to defuse cartelization by Port/Port Operators and usher in much desired level playing field and 
healthy competition in the Port sector within the country. 
 
 

Page 17 of 48 
 
CHAPTER-III  
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
THE MINISTRY HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
SHIP REPAIRS  
Recommendation/Observation  
1. The Committee is concerned to note that in the l ast interaction on this subject in 2020-
2021, the Ministry had informed that 76 of the 242 projects under Ports Modernization had been 
completed resulting in port capacity addition for m ore than 200 MTPA and 59 were under 
implementation. The Committee had recommended that the Sagarmala Programme being a 
crucial step in the progress of India’s shipping se ctor needed to be speeded up and had desired 
to know whether there was any cost escalation and t ime overrun as compared to the original 
cost and timeline of the projects. However, nearly a year afterwards, only one more additional 
project has been completed leading to a total of 77  completed projects while 36 projects at 
Major Ports and 15 projects at Non-Major Ports are under implementation. No new projects 
appear to have been implemented. No progress appear s to have been made on the Vadhavan 
Port which as an “All weather all cargo” port would have considerable economic benefits to the 
nation. The Committee also notes that the cost unde r the pillar “Port Modernization” has 
escalated by Rs. 20,000 Crores from Rs. 2,59,817 Crores to Rs. 2,61,052 Crores. The Committee 
underlines the need for speedy implementation of th e projects under the Sagarmala Programme 
and reiterates its earlier recommendation that the Ministry may enumerate the precise reasons 
for delays, port-wise and steps being taken to address the delays. 
(Para 18) 
Reply of the Ministry  
1.1 Currently, 240 projects at a cost of Rs. 2,50,6 73 Cr. have been undertaken for 
implementation by 2035. Out of total 240 projects, 84 projects worth Rs. 29,666 Cr. have been 
completed and 54 projects worth Rs. 37,295 Cr. are under implementation. 
1.2 Further, there are 173 projects worth Rs. 73,43 3 Cr. being implemented at Major Ports in 
India. Out of 173, 82 projects worth Rs. 24,426 Cr.  have been completed. Additionally, 31 
projects worth Rs. 12,839 Cr. have been awarded and  currently under implementation. There are 
45 projects worth Rs. 47,180 Cr. identified under the Sagarmala Programme for modernization at 

Page 18 of 48 
 
Non-Major Ports. 2 projects worth Rs. 5240 Cr. have  been completed so far whereas 16 projects 
Rs. 15,492 Cr. are currently under implementation. It may be noted that 84 projects are now 
completed in port modernization. 82 of these projects are completed by Major ports. However, of 
the 45 projects in port modernization under the State Governments, only 2 are completed. 
1.3 The Ministry has been in regular consultation w ith all the Major Ports, State Maritime 
Boards and Line Ministries through Maritime States Development Council (MSDC) meetings 
held periodically that is chaired by Hon’ble Minist ers of Ports, Shipping & Waterways. Last 
meeting of MSDC was held on 24.06.2021. 
1.4 Regular realignment of projects is carried out based on monitoring and consultation with 
the implementing agencies, where new projects are a dded and duplicate/ inactive/ deferred 
projects are dropped. 
 
Further Recommendations/Observations  
1.5 The Committee notes that out of the total 240 p rojects under “Sagarmala”, 84 
projects worth Rs. 29,666 crores have been complete d and 54 projects worth Rs. 37,295 
crores are under implementation. The Committee woul d like to know about the status of 
the remaining 102 projects, the costs involved in t hese projects and their deadlines for 
completion.  
1.6 The Committee notes that the ‘Sagarmala Program me’ has been launched with the 
objective of port-led development and to enhance the performance of the country’s logistics 
sector. Only two port modernization projects under State Governments have been 
completed so far out of the total 45 projects. Also , out of the 173 projects being 
implemented at the Major ports, 91 projects are yet  to be implemented. The Committee 
would like to be apprised of the reasons for delay in implementation of these projects. The 
Ministry has stated that regular consultations are being done with all stakeholders through 
periodic MSDC meetings. However, the Committee note s that the last meeting of the 
MSDC has been held in June, 2021.  The Committee wo uld like to know the frequency of 
the MSDC meetings in a financial year. The Committe e would also like to know the 
number and details of duplicate/inactive/deferred p rojects which were dropped in the last 
financial year under the Port Modernization programme.  
1.7 The Committee notes that the Ministry in its re ply has not furnished any 
information regarding the projects under various pi llars of the Sagarmala Programme 

Page 19 of 48 
 
witnessing time overrun and cost escalation nor has  it provided any information or status 
on the progress of the Vadhavan port. The Ministry should provide the Action Taken with 
respect to the Vadhavan port and the details of Sag armala projects witnessing time 
overrun or cost escalation as of 2023-24.  
 
Recommendation/Observation  
2. The Committee observes that the handling capacit y of major Indian ports has risen only 
marginally in the years 2017-18 to 2019-20 and even  this marginal increase has been 
underutilized since there has been only a miniscule  increase in the traffic at these ports. The 
Committee observes that the efficiency of Indian po rts still falls much short of international 
standards and India has much room to further improv e upon the efficiency at ports. The 
Committee notes that port productivity and efficien cy can shape the trade competitiveness of a 
country. Minimal turnaround time means saving the p ort time, which translates into savings in 
port infrastructure expenditure for ports, ship cap ital costs for carriers, and inventory holding 
outlays for shippers. The Committee notes in shippi ng, the bigger the vessel, the lower is the 
freight cost for exporters and importers. However, due to low drafts most Indian ports are 
unable to handle Capesize ships which are preferred  due to economies of scale, as it can carry 
any type of cargo including iron ore and coal. The Committee reiterates its recommendations 
regarding draft availability according to cargo profile of Indian ports. The Committee notes that 
the Ministry has not put in its best efforts to improve the efficiency of Major Ports and urges it to 
take all necessary steps to bring them upto world s tandards. The Committee is disappointed to 
note that only a small fraction of the funds allott ed to Ports Modernization has been utilized so 
far which points to poor fiscal planning and would like to be apprised of the measures taken for 
effective utilization of funds. 
(Para 22) 
Reply of the Ministry  
2.1 It has been envisaged under Maritime India Visi on 2030 for the development of 3 Mega 
ports i.e. Vadhavan-JNPT Cluster, Paradip Port and Deendayal Port with more than 300 MTPA 
capacity and the evaluation of Kamarajar Port as an  additional Mega Port on the East Coast. All 
these ports will have more than 18m+ drafts and wil l be able to handle Capesize vessels in 
future. 

Page 20 of 48 
 
2.2 The Government has already given a strong push to port modernization, mechanization 
and digitalization, with a number of ease of doing business initiatives. Port modernization 
includes the introduction of web-based e-forms and Direct Port Delivery, installation of 
container scanners and radio frequency identificati on-based systems for gate automation, 
digitalization of land records, the launch of a sin gle-window interface for facilitating trade, and 
integration of more seaports with the PCS. 
2.3 The Major Port Authorities Act, 2021 has come i nto force w.e.f. 03.11.2021. This Act 
will give more autonomy and flexibility to Major Po rts in their functioning and to bring in a 
professional approach to their governance, which will bring more efficiency to Major Ports. 
2.4 Improvement in efficiency at Major Ports is a c ontinuous process. Port Projects such as 
the installation of state-of-the-art equipment, mec hanization of the cargo handling system, etc. 
help in increasing the efficiency at Major ports. T he Government is regularly monitoring the 
progress of Port modernization/mechanization projects. 
2.5 The steps elaborated above will ensure an incre ased level of efficiency at Major Ports. 
 
Further Recommendations/Observations  
2.6 The Committee appreciates the efforts of the Mi nistry in setting up the target of 
providing more than 18m draft at various Mega Ports , namely, Vadhavan-JNPT Cluster, 
Paradip, Deendayal, and Kamarajar, making it possib le for these ports to handle bigger 
cargo in near future. The Committee would like to b e apprised of the deadlines set by the 
Ministry to complete the work related to deepening of draft at these ports under the MIV, 
2030.  
2.7 The Committee may be informed of the reasons fo r the low utilization of funds 
under the Port Modernization Head.   
 
Recommendation/Observation  
3. The Committee is disappointed to note that thoug h the concept of Sagarmala programme 
was approved in 2015, and nearly eight years later only half of the projects for ship repairs are 
under implementation stage and not even one has bee n completed. The Committee notes that in 
its earlier interaction, the Ministry had informed that most Indian Yards are lacking in capacity 
and technological know-how in repair of niche and s ophisticated vessels and therefore the 

Page 21 of 48 
 
Ministry was concentrating on creating two major Cl usters for Ship Repairs, one on each coast 
and technology driven Ship Repairs to tap the huge potential of the Indian Ship Repair market. 
The Committee would like to be apprised of the step s taken by the Ministry on these fronts. The 
Committee notes that the Indian shipbuilding, ship repair and IWT sector have all been declared 
'Infrastructure' and are therefore entitled to long -term, low-cost funds and recommends that the 
Ministry may revisit its strategies to give a boost  to the Ship-Repairing Industry in India. The 
Committee recommends that the Ministry may take up the matter of implementation of all 
projects and completion of ongoing projects for ship repairs expeditiously. 
(Para 23) 
Reply of the Ministry  
3.1 With regard to setting up of ship repair cluste rs, it is stated that CSL is setting up a new 
lSRF facility at Kochi Shipping MRO Cluster. CSL ha s commenced operation of the Ship repair 
facility in MbPT. Consultancy tender has been float ed by CSL to prepare the initial feasibility 
report. The same is awaited from CSL for further action with the involvement of other concerned 
Ministries & stakeholders. 
3.2 The details of ongoing ship repair projects are  as follows: 
(i) New 310 M Dry-dock Project at Kochi, Kerala 
• Cochin Shipyard Limited is constructing New Dry Doc k at estimated cost of Rs.1799 
crores. This dry-dock is conceived with a length of 310 M and will  be a stepped dock with 
a width of 75 M at the wider part and 60 M at the n arrower part. It will have a depth of 13 
M and a drought of 9.S M. In terms of the size of t he dock and strength of the dock floor, 
this will be one of the biggest dry docks in India.  The new dry-dock, when commissioned, 
will help CSL to have a more diversified product pr ofile. This dual-purpose dry dock is 
planned essentially to tap the market potential of repairs/ construction of specialized and 
technologically advanced large vessels such as LNG vessels, Jack Up Rigs. Drill Ships, 
large dredgers, second Indigenous Aircraft carrier repair of offshore platforms and larger 
vessels. The new dry dock can comfortably handle Ai rcraft Carriers of 70,000 T docking 
displacement and Tankers and Merchant vessels of 55 ,000 T docking displacement. The 
dock floor is designed to take a loading 600T/m. Th e design caters for sufficient safety 
margins as per international codes. The new dock is  expected to be commissioned by July, 
2023. 
(ii) International Ship Repair Facility (ISRF) at K ochi, Kerala 

Page 22 of 48 
 
• Cochin Shipyard Limited had taken over on 30 years lease the existing ship repair facility 
of Cochin Port Trust (CoPT) located at Wellington I sland, Kochi and is in the process of 
developing it into a state-of the-art International  Ship Repair Facility (ISRF) by installing 
ship lift & transfer system associated facilities a t an estimated cost of RS.970 crore. The 
ISRF will modernize, expand and substantially augment the existing ship repair capacity of 
CSL. The ISRF includes 6000T shiplift for ships upt o 130 x 25 m with six workstations & 
allied facilities, and total outfitting berth of 15 00 meters approx. The facility is expected to 
be commissioned by January, 2023. 
(iii) CSL-Mumbai Ship Repair Unit (CMSRU), Mumbai, Maharashtra 
• CSL commenced operations of its Mumbai Ship Repair Unit in October, 2018 through an 
agreement with the Mumbai Port Trust to upgrade, op erate and manage Ship Repair 
Facility at Hughes dry-dock and berth nos. 5, 6, 7 and 8 of Indira Dock of Mumbai Port. 
Subsequent to the execution of the agreement, CSL h as commenced the ship repair 
operations in Mumbai. The facility undertakes repai rs of both Defence and Commercial 
Ships. 
(iv) CSL- Kolkata Ship Repair Unit (CKSRU), Kolkata , West Bengal 
• CSL commenced operations of its Kolkata Ship Repair  Unit in March 2019 through an 
agreement with Kolkata Port Trust for operations an d management of the ship repair 
facility at Netaji Subhash Dock (NSD) for a period of 30 years. The new venture is being 
managed by a separate unit of CSL known as CSL-Kolk ata Ship Repair Unit (CKSRU). 
The Honourable Prime Minister of India, Shri Narend ra Modi formally inaugurated the 
CKSRU facility on January 12, 2020. The facility un dertakes repairs to both Defence and 
commercial ships. 
3.3 Steps taken by Ministry to establish inland shi p repair facility are detailed here under: 
• To facilitate dry docking repair in NER, a project for construction of slipway at Pandu has 
been sanctioned at a cost of Rs. 72.6 cr. under the  Standing Finance Commission (SFC) 
appraised scheme for comprehensive development of N W-2 (river Brahmaputra from 
Dhubri to Sadiya) along with other sub-projects at a total cost of Rs. 461 cr. for the period 
2020-21 to 2024-25. 
• For construction of slipway for ship repair facilit y at Pandu (Guwahati). IWAI has 
approached Cochin Shipyard Ltd. (CSL) to take up wo rk on deposit work basis which will 
be carried out by Hooghly Cochin Shipyard Ltd. (HCS L). a subsidiary of CSL. For this CSL 
have further engaged National Technology Centre for  Ports, Waterways and Coasts 

Page 23 of 48 
 
(NTCPWC), IIT Madras. Chennai as Project Management  Consultant (PMC). For execution 
of above work, an Agreement between HCSL (a subsidiary of CSL) and IWAI was signed at 
Pandu, Guwahati on 26.08.2021. Work to be commenced  with scheduled completion by 
December, 2023. 
3.4 Further, in compliance to the recommendation of  the Committee, the Government may 
consider the ship-repairing industry for long-term,  low-cost funding to give a boost for creation 
of ship repair facilities in the country 
 
Further Observations/Recommendations 
3.5 The Committee recommends that the Ministry shou ld take measures and devise 
comprehensive plans for the Indian shipbuilding, sh ip-repair and IWT sectors to enable 
them to avail various tax-concessions/benefits and cheaper long-term capital etc. and also 
contribute towards furthering the objective of the “Make in India” initiative.  
 
INITIATIVES TO EXPEDITE IMPLEMENTATION OF PORT 
CONNECTIVITY PROJECTS  
Recommendation/Observation  
4. The Committee observes that the success of a por t project can be ensured only if careful 
planning is made at the formulation stage itself re garding evacuation and connectivity by 
involving Railway Authorities/ NHAI etc., addressin g all technical aspects. The Committee 
emphasizes that interconnectivity of roads, ports, airports, railways, waterways etc. should be 
part of the infrastructure planning process right f rom inception stage. Approach to a port from 
the hinterland can be critical enough to make or ma r a Terminal because it determines the 
turnaround time and evacuation time - vital to the functioning of a port. Evacuation is a vital 
component of any port project as the capacity and e fficiency of the port vitally depend on the 
rate at which the cargo can be evacuated from the t erminal. The efficiency, viability and 
business depend on how well connected the port is. The Committee therefore recommends that 
the measures to be taken for the connectivity of a port to the roads and railway networks, to 
airports, to service roads connecting nearby towns and villages should be an essential 
component of the project from its formulation stage itself and be a part of the Detailed Appraisal 
Report so that the integrated infrastructure can be  developed with proper connectivity and 
interlinking. Despite the enormous importance of th e connectivity of ports, the Committee feels 

Page 24 of 48 
 
that the pace of work under this head has been even  slower than that under modernization of 
ports since out of 208 projects only 56 have been c ompleted and 69 are under implementation. 
Out of the 1.36 lakh Crores funding under this head , only a paltry sum of Rs. 19,488 Crores has 
been utilized till date in completed projects. The Committee also notes that there appear to be 
very few connectivity projects relating to minor po rts. The Committee notes that the MMLPs 
planned at strategic locations in the country would  bring down logistics costs and boost the 
national economy. The parks will enable the shift f rom a point-to-point to a hub-and-spoke 
model in the logistics sector, eventually helping t o bring down logistics costs by at least half and 
enabling more efficient movement of new-generation vehicles. The Committee however is 
constrained to note that actual work has commenced in only one of the MMLPs at Jogighopa in 
Assam with construction of the Phase-I expected to be finished by December, 2023. In two 
MMLPs at Nagpur and Chennai, MoUs have been signed for development, in only six MMLPs 
land has been identified for development while pre- feasibility studies are still going on in the 
remaining MMLPs. The importance of a modern and eff icient logistics network can not be 
overemphasized. Poor connectivity across various lo gistic modes not only increases the wear 
and tear of transport means and damages to goods, b ut also leads to uncertainty in supply 
chains leading to further decrease in the route uti lization by trade and thus, increasing rates for 
the remaining users. Sagarmala aims at construction  of wider roads for connectivity of Ports to 
another point. However, unfortunately, the Committe e noticed that in some cases the Sagarmala 
Projects are undertaken only upto major cross roads  on the route and thereafter no effort is 
made to construct road upto “Point” envisaged in the Sagarmala Project. The Committee has no 
hesitation to point out that in such a situation the wider roads/ connectivity between the Port and 
the POINT envisaged in the Sagarmala Project beyond  the point of cross roads will remain 
unfulfilled. The Committee, therefore, recommends t hat the “point to point” Sagarmala 
connectivity envisaged may be implemented irrespect ive of the fact that there exist major cross 
roads in between. The Committee stresses that road connectivity under Sagarmala should not be 
only point to point but encompass the entire periph eral network of roadways interlinking nearby 
towns, villages, service roads, important tourist p laces, national monuments etc. for the overall 
development of the areas. The Committee emphasizes that service roads should be included in 
the DPR itself, and given as much importance and be  developed to the same quality as regular 
roads. 
(Para 29) 
 

Page 25 of 48 
 
 
Reply of the Ministry  
4.1 Currently there are 101 projects identified for  implementation under PM Gati Shakti 
National Master Plan. Out of which 57 projects are with Major Ports of India and 44 projects are 
with Non-Major Ports & State implementing agencies. To create a proactive project management 
practice, the PM Gati Shakti portal is developed, w here all the projects and its network linkages 
are marked. Accordingly, data has been sourced from  these ports and implementing agencies of 
these ports, by Bisag-N integrating with other infr astructure ministries such as MoRTH, MoR 
etc. on the MMLP, during last NPG meet held with al l the infrastructure ministries under 
chairmanship of Special Secretary, DPIIT it was inf ormed to direct all the Major ports to submit 
proposals for Multi-Modal Logistics Park in order to improve port connectivity. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
4.2 The Committee would like to know whether the Mi nistry has received any proposals 
from any Major Ports in the country regarding devel opment of Multi-Modal Logistics 
Parks (MMLPs) and the status of all the MMLPs which  are proposed to be developed or 
are under construction in the country. The Committe e also desires to know the details and 
progress status of all the port-rail and port-road projects connectivity projects under the 
PM Gati Shakti Master Plan.  The Committee would al so like to know if the Ministry has 
addressed the issues of point to point connectivity under the Sagarmala programme.   
 
PORT CONNECTIVITY  
Recommendation/Observation  
5. The Committee acknowledges that Gati Shakti brin gs all the existing infrastructure 
projects together on a single platform to ensure sy nchronized and integrated planning but 
emphasizes that the connectivity issues have to be taken up more seriously. The Committee 
pointed out to the Ministry that there is hardly an y port in India which has rail, road and air 
connectivity and last mile connectivity was an issu e in majority of the places. A Member gave an 
example of the RO-RO ferry between Ghogha and Hazir a where there was practically no last 
mile connectivity. 
(Para 32) 

Page 26 of 48 
 
 
Reply of the Ministry  
5.1 Through the ‘Sagarmala’ programme, the MoPS&W i s handling 92 road connectivity 
projects and 93 rail connectivity projects. In addition to these projects MoPS&W has identified 
52 new alignments for road connectivity and 28 new alignments for rail connectivity for last mile 
connectivity. These projects are reviewed in the MSDC and NSAC meetings 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
5.2 The Ministry has not given any information rega rding the last mile connectivity 
issues at Hazira. The Committee reiterates its   re commendation that last mile connectivity 
may be provided to the RORO fairway between Ghogha and Hazira.  
 
Recommendation/Observation  
6. The Committee further points out that the potent ial of augmenting tourism through 
Sagarmala Projects over and above the transportatio n of goods can’t be underestimated and 
recommends that Tourist Terminals should exist in e very port to promote transportation 
facilities for tourists. The Committee recommends t hat the Ministry should vigorously pursue the 
matters with the concerned Ministries/Departments a nd hold regular meetings with them in this 
regard to ensure that these connectivity projects are completed within a reasonable time frame. 
(Para 33) 
Reply of the Ministry  
6.1 Under the Sagarmala projects we are undertaking  various Ro-Ro & Ro-Pax projects for 
promoting transportation of people. Total 74 projec ts worth Rs. 2,977 Crores have been 
undertaken under Sagarmala programme, out of which 10 projects worth Rs. 439 Crores are 
already completed, while remaining 64 projects are under various stages of implementation and 
development. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
6.2 The Committee notes that RO-RO vessels and ferr ies contribute to shortening of 
shipment routes and lower transportation costs wher eas road transport takes longer time, 

Page 27 of 48 
 
distance and higher costs.  The Committee observes that only a meager 13% of the total 
RO-RO and Ro-Pax projects have been completed so fa r and recommends that the 
Ministry may try to  speed up the implementation pr ocess of the remaining 64 RO-RO and 
Ro-Pax ferry projects.   
 
COASTAL ECONOMIC ZONE (CEZ)  
Recommendation/Observation  
7. The Committee notes that Port-led development fo cuses on logistics intensive industries 
(where transportation either represents a high prop ortion of costs, or timely logistics are a 
critical success factor). These industries can be s tructurally competitive if developed proximate 
to coast/waterways. They would be supported by effi cient and modern port infrastructure and 
seamless multi-modal connectivity. The population i n adjoining areas would be sufficiently 
skilled to participate in economic opportunities on  offer. The synergistic and coordinated 
development of the above four components, namely lo gistics intensive industries, efficient ports, 
seamless connectivity and requisite skill-base lead s to unlocking of economic value. This is 
achieved through Industrial Clusters, Coastal Emplo yment Zones, Maritime Clusters, Smart 
Industrial Port Cities (SIPCs) and Port based Speci al Economic Zones (SEZs). The Committee 
notes that only 9 of the 33 projects identified und er the Pillar of Port-led Industrialization have 
been completed and 21 are under implementation. The  Committee observes that only 8 of the 12 
Major Ports have initiated industrialization on the  earmarked land and only 2 of the 8 Ports 
namely, the Visakhapatnam Port and Paradip Port hav e utilized/fully utilized the earmarked 
land. The remaining 6 Ports have barely utilized on e fourth of the land earmarked for 
industrialization. Only 2 SIPCs at Kandla and Gandh idham, one SEZ at JNPT and one CEU at 
VoCPT are under implementation and even major ports  like Chennai and Mumbai ports have no 
industrialization projects under them. No Coastal E mployment Zone projects have been 
developed at any of the ports. The Committee had be en informed by the Ministry that 30 
potential Port-linked industrial clusters across th ree sectors, namely - Energy, Materials and 
Discrete Manufacturing, had been identified, includ ing 9 bulk clusters for basic input industries. 
The Committee would like to be informed of the stat us of these projects and of the CEU which 
was proposed to be developed at Kamarajar Port Limi ted. The Committee is constrained to note 
that despite the importance of industrialization around the ports, not much work appears to have 
been done under this head. The Committee therefore recommends to expedite implementation of 
port-led industrialization projects and set globall y benchmarked targets to improve logistics 

Page 28 of 48 
 
efficiency and cost competitiveness. The Committee observes that land acquisition is one of the 
key things to facilitate the process of port-led in dustrialization because port-led industrialization 
cannot happen without land. Since port-led industri alization can be a game changer in times to 
come as it will boost port-linked industries by yie lding enormous benefits of economies of scale 
and enhancing trade and creating a lot of job oppor tunities in nearby areas, the Committee 
recommends that procedures should be in place for acquisition of land in the first place. 
 (Para 53) 
Reply of the Ministry  
7.1 Under the National Perspective Plan of the Saga rmala Programme, fourteen Coastal 
Economic Zones (CEZs) were envisaged. Subsequently, it was proposed to create an institutional 
framework and develop one CEZ project on a pilot ba sis for enabling Port-led Industrialization 
and incentivize employment generation. The proposal  was taken up with the Department of 
Expenditure which recommended that the Ministry of Ports, Shipping and Waterways should 
explore the possibility of development of a CEZ wit h land available with the Major Ports duly 
taking into consideration other initiatives of the Government of India. 
7.2 National Industrial Corridor Development and Im plementation Trust (NICDIT) under the 
administrative control of Department for Promotion of Industry and Internal Trade (DPIIT) in 
partnership with respective State Governments has planned to develop various industrial corridor 
projects as part of National Industrial Corridor Pr ogramme which is aimed at development of 
Greenfield industrial region/nodes in India. The Go vernment of India has accorded approval for 
development of 11 corridors (32 projects) in Four P hases as part of National Master Plan for 
providing multi-modal connectivity to economic zone s which are under various stages of 
conceptualization/ development/ implementation.  
7.3 Accordingly, the Ministry has entrusted Sagarma la Development Company Limited for 
conducting a detailed study to suitably modify Nati onal Perspective Plan for CEZ, keeping in 
view other initiatives of the Government of India s uch as National Industrial Corridor 
Programme, Bharatmala Connectivity Program and Dedi cated Freight Corridors for achieving 
synergy and avoid duplication. 
7.4 Also, Major Ports have taken up the exercise of  industrialization of land available with 
them. More than 8000 Acres of land have been used f or Industrialization by Major Ports which 
has the potential to generate more than 2 lakh dire ct and indirect employment. Mormugao Port, 
Kamarajar Port, New Mangalore Port, Chennai Port an d Mumbai Port have informed that they 
do not have land available for industrialization.  

Page 29 of 48 
 
7.5 In Chennai Port, though there is no unused land  or surplus land available within the Port, 
121.74 Acres leased land outside Custom Bond Area i s proposed for development of Multi-
Modal Logistics Park at Mappedu. 
 
Further Recommendations/Observations 
7.6 The Committee  would like to be apprised of the  number of Major Ports where the 
possibility for developing fourteen Coastal Economi c Zones (CEZs) has been explored 
under the “Sagarmala” Programme and the budgetary/f und allocation made to it in the 
B.E. 2023-24, if any, alongwith the proposed demand of the Ministry.   
7.7 The Committee notes in the Ministry’s reply tha t various Ports, namely, 
Mormugao, Kamarajar, New Mangalore, Chennai and Mum bai informed it about the 
unavailability of land for industrialization. The C ommittee observes that various issues 
regarding land acquisition, possession, management and utilization were raised by the 
CAG in its 2015 Performance Audit Report  ‘Land Man agement in Major Ports, and have 
still not been resolved in the past seven years as there seems to be a lack of proper policy 
guidelines. Land availability is crucial for facili tating the development of CEUs, CEZs and 
port-led industrialisation. The Ministry should not ignore this important aspect and should 
submit the action taken with regard to the developm ent of CEU at Kamarajar Port 
Limited. The Committee desires to be informed wheth er all the Major ports have 
computerized the land management system which was r ecommended as one of the 
administrative reforms measures in the Policy Guide lines, 2010. The Committee notes that 
the CAG in its Performance Audit Report had recomme nded that the Ministry should 
review the existing guidelines to formulate a compr ehensive policy on land issues in port 
management and desires to know whether the Ministry has carried out such a review.   
7.8 The Committee notes that the Ministry has not r esponded to Committee’s 
observation regarding 30 identified potential Port- linked industrial clusters across three 
sectors, namely – Energy, Materials and Discrete ma nufacturing, which also includes 9 
bulk clusters for basic input industries. The Commi ttee reiterates its recommendation and 
would like to know whether any Master Plans have be en devised to establish these clusters 
in various states.  
 
 

Page 30 of 48 
 
COASTAL COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT:  
COASTAL TOURISM 
Recommendation/Observation  
8. The Committee notes that out of the 88 projects identified under the pillar of Coastal 
Community Development with funding of Rs. 8,174 lak h Crores, only 18 projects amounting to 
Rs. 1,423 lakh Crores have been completed and 22 more amounting to Rs. 1,362 lakh Crores are 
under implementation. The Committee observes that n ot even one third of the projects under this 
head have been completed and less than half have be en completed/under implementation. Only 
about one-third of the funding under this head has been utilized which points to poor financial 
planning on part of the Ministry. The Committee the refore recommends that the Ministry should 
review various impediments in the implementation of  the above projects so that time and cost 
overrun is minimized. 
(Para 77) 
Reply of the Ministry  
8.1 The observation of the Committee is noted.  
8.2 It is also pertinent to mention that Coastal Co mmunity Development is an important 
objective of the Sagarmala Programme. For the welfa re of the fishermen community, MoPS&W 
is part-funding fishing harbour projects in converg ence with the Ministry of Fisheries, Animal 
Husbandry and Dairying (MoFAH&D).  
8.3 On the skill development front, skill gap study  of 21 coastal districts (spread across 9 
states and 3 UTs), has been completed. Domain Minis tries & concerned State Governments have 
been asked to implement the district action plans. In addition, MoPS&W is funding skill 
development under Sagarmala-DDU-GKY Convergence pro gramme Phase-I and II to enable 
skilling of coastal population to meet the needs of  growing maritime industry thereby leading to 
sustainable inclusive growth in the coastal areas under Sagarmala Programme.  
8.4 The Ministry has been in regular consultation w ith all the Major Ports, State Maritime 
Boards and Line Ministries through Maritime States Development Council (MSDC) meetings 
held periodically that is chaired by Hon’ble Minist ers of Ports, Shipping & Waterways. Last 
meeting of MSDC was held on 24.06.2021. However, mo re efforts will be made to meet the 
timelines of the projects under Coastal Community Pillar. 
 
 

Page 31 of 48 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
8.5 The Committee reiterates its recommendation tha t the progress in the projects 
identified in the Coastal Community Development is very slow and desires that the 
implementation of the 22 projects may be speeded up.  The Committee also desires to know 
the status of the remaining identified 48 projects which are yet to be implemented.   
8.6 The Committee notes that development of coastal  communities through marine 
sector related activities like fisheries, maritime tourism, skill development, cruise and 
lighthouse tourism is an essential objective of the  Sagarmala Programme which will prove 
beneficial for the Indian coastal communities.  The  Committee would like to be apprised of 
the outcome of the meeting of the MSDC held on 24 
th  June, 2021 and the number of 
domain Ministries/State Governments implementing/ag reeing to implement the district 
action plan for coastal community development.  
8.7 The Committee would also like to be apprised of  the amount of funding provided by 
the Ministry in the fishing harbor projects in conv ergence with the Ministry of Fisheries, 
Animal Husbandry and Dairying (MoFAH&D) and skill d evelopment projects under 
Sagarmala-DDU-GKY Convergence Programme Phase-I and II.  
 
Recommendation/Observation  
9. The Committee notes that under the Sagarmala Pro gramme, there are 175 projects worth 
Rs. 75,064 Crores being implemented at major ports.  Out of the 175 projects, 76 projects worth 
Rs 21,928 Crores have been completed and 36 project s worth Rs. 12,600 Crores are currently 
under implementation. The Committee desires to know  as to how many projects under the 
Sagarmala Programme have been delayed, what are the issues for the delay, and what is the cost 
escalation as a result of these delays. 
(Para 87) 
Reply of the Ministry  
9.1 Currently there are 171 major port projects und er port modernization worth 72,702 
crores. Out of which 82 projects worth 24,426 crore s are completed while remaining 89 projects 
are under various stages of implementation and development.  
9.2 9 projects mentioned below have delayed: 
1. Capital dredging phase 4 at KPL- delayed due to prolonged monsoon and cyclones 

Page 32 of 48 
 
2. Construction of container terminal at KPL- delay ed due to ongoing arbitration with M/S 
AECTPL 
3. Modification of existing Iron ore terminal to ha ndle coal (by SIOTL at KPL) - delayed 
due to termination of contract with SIOTL 
4. Development of new berth EQ 1A at Visakhapatnam-  delayed due to ongoing arbitration  
5. New deep draft coal import berth at Paradip- del ayed due to COVID pandemic 
6. Tank farm JD5 at MbPT- delayed due to Environmen tal clearances and defaulting of the 
dredging contractor 
7. Development of Oil jetty at 7 at Kandla- delayed  due to delay in Environmental 
Clearance and NGT resulting from COVID pandemic.  
8. Reconstruction of South coal berth at Cochin por t- delayed due to COVID pandemic, 
furnishing technical requirements, finalizing MoU with FACT 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
9.3 The Ministry has not given the details of cost escalation due to the delays in the 9 
projects.  The Committee may be informed of the same.  
 
COASTAL SHIPPING AND INLAND WATER TRANSPORT  
Recommendation/Observation  
10. Committee notes that even though under the Saga rmala Programme Major Ports' 
capacity has been enhanced to meet growing traffic needs in the last 5-6 years and their 
combined capacity as of now stands at 2,500 million  metric tonnes per year, traffic has not been 
proportional to the increase in capacity as is evid ent from the fact that the total volume of cargo 
that was moved on all major ports was 1,248 million  metric tonnes in 2020. Though the 
Government has taken a number of initiatives to mod ernize our ports under the Sagarmala 
Programme, a lot remains to be done to ensure deep-draft availability to handle mega-ships. The 
Committee observes that increased competition and e conomy of scale has fueled the 
development of bigger ships and to accommodate such  vessels, ports must have access channels 
of sufficient depth along with advanced and highly efficient terminal facilities. The Committee 
observes that the drafts at major ports, both in th e channel and berths, have been historically 
low and ranges from 7 meters in older ports up to 2 0 meters in newer ports and is not 

Page 33 of 48 
 
commensurate with change of ship sizes and changes in cargo trends such as containerization. 
Hence, there is an imperative need for Indian ports  to increase their draft availability according 
to their respective cargo profile The Committee is of the considered view that dredging, which 
can increase the draft in ports, is a must for deve lopment of port-led industrialization. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends that there is an urgent need to increase the draft of almost all 
the ports of the country under the Sagarmala Progra mme, for which, the requirement of 
dredging at Indian Ports should be assessed and dre dging plans should be formulated to 
accommodate larger ships. 
(Para 88) 
Reply of the Ministry  
10.1 Maritime Vision for 2030 has been finalized by  the Ministry of Ports, Shipping & 
Waterways. The vision will enable the preparation o f a roadmap for taking up projects including 
dredging projects. The vision also envisaged develo ping Major Ports as transshipment hubs 
wherever possible. The Major Ports would take up fu rther steps for deepening of ports for 
receiving higher parcel vessels for which requireme nt of capital dredging at Major Ports upto 
2030 has been assessed to 74 85 M Cum. 
10.2 The Major Ports based on the technical feasibi lity and financial viability would assess the 
requirement of capital dredging of the Ports. The d redging Plans are to be prepared by the Ports 
accordingly. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
10.3 The Committee observes that a deeper draft ena bles a port to accommodate large 
vessels and bigger cargo ships, which boosts the tr ansshipment of containers at the port. 
Indian importers are not able to clinch the big dea ls and export and import of coal, iron 
ore, steel and other heavy industry raw material ar e being stymied by draft limitations at 
various Indian ports. With the increasing need to e nable the Indian ports to accommodate 
bigger vessels, and to make India a transshipment h ub, it is crucial to prepare a roadmap 
for dredging and draft enhancement at various India n ports. The Committee desires to be 
apprised of the time required by the Ministry to pr epare the roadmap for taking up 
dredging projects. 
10.4 Carrying out the technical and financial feasi bility study on dredging at a port may 
provide insight into the potential of the dredged m aterial as well as the draft level of that 

Page 34 of 48 
 
port, since dredging not only deepens the draft lev el at a port, it also provides the 
construction material for buildings, recovers miner als and precious metals, and remove 
contaminants for the benefit of our environment. Th e Committee desires to know whether 
Minor Ports have been asked to frame dredging polic ies and whether any communication 
has been received on part of Major Ports in formula ting dredging plans/policies. The 
Committee would also like to be apprised of the tar get date given to the ports to prepare 
such plans/policies. 
 
Recommendation/Observation  
11. The Committee notes that dredging comprises cap ital dredging and maintenance 
dredging. Capital dredging is done to either create  new channels, basins, berths, etc. or to 
deepen the existing such infrastructure. Such dredg ing is highly capital intensive. Presently, 
most of the ports in India are meeting their expend iture towards maintenance and capital 
dredging through their internal resources. The Comm ittee has been informed that dredging 
constitutes a major portion of total project cost a s well as operating cost and if it is funded 
through internal resources and borrowings, it entai ls an increase in overall port cost and 
consequently tariff. The Committee has also been in formed by stakeholders that one of the 
reasons behind high Vessels Related Charges (VRC) i n India is the inclusion of dredging cost in 
computation of tariff and that is why Indian ports are touted as high cost ports. The Committee 
has further been informed by the stakeholders that the concept of full cost recovery from direct 
users/ beneficiaries is not followed in Canada, Jap an and most West European countries. 
Internationally, and especially in developed countries, port channels are used as a national asset 
and dredging projects are funded by local municipal ities or Governments, and not by ports 
themselves. One of the most comprehensive legislati ons on cost sharing in dredging is the US 
Water Resources Development Act, 1987 under which t he Federal Government meets 50% to 
90% of the dredging costs. Similarly, dredging is t he responsibility of the National Government 
at Colombo. Taking into account the above fact, the  Committee recommends that the 
Government should explore the possibility of treati ng the channels as a national asset and 
funding the entire dredging cost. The Committee wou ld also like the Ministry to study different 
practices in other countries for funding dredging, both capital and maintenance, and formulate a 
funding mechanism in respect of Indian ports. 
(Para 89) 
 

Page 35 of 48 
 
Reply of the Ministry  
11.1 Suggestion of the Committee has been noted. Wh ile the Major Ports have now been 
empowered through Major Ports Act 2021, to fix tari ffs including vehicle-related, cargo-related 
and other port-related charges, the standard practi ce being followed in other countries for 
funding dredging and its contribution in computation of port charges is also being studied.  
 
Further Recommendation/Observation  
11.2 The Committee notes the reply and desires to k now the details/information on the 
plans of the Ministry to explore the possibility of  treating the channel as a national asset 
and also examine the feasibility of funding the ent ire dredging cost, after studying the 
extant practices followed by the other countries in the world. 
 
Recommendation/Observation  
12. The Committee observes that "the vision of Saga rmala is to reduce logistics cost for both 
domestic and EXIM cargo with minimal infrastructure investment." The Committee observes that 
key financial resources are being consumed in the c onstruction of maritime infrastructure both 
movable as well as immovable. To be globally compet itive, the cost of financing has to be at par 
with the global rate for Indian companies to be abl e to provide freight at globally competitive 
prices and the port infrastructure has to be built with reasonable cost of financing. The 
Committee is of the view that considering the quant um of capital investment required for port 
infrastructure, a specialized institutional mechani sm for liberalized long term funding for PPP 
projects and setting up a Maritime Development Fund  with adequate funding is an imminent 
necessity. The Committee takes note of the submissi on of the Ministry that the concept of 
creation of Maritime Development Fund is under cons ideration in the Ministry and that apart 
from Government of India funding, the Maritime Deve lopment Fund may raise issue of bonds in 
domestic and offshore markets, External Commercial Borrowing (ECB) loans from banks and 
loans from multilateral and bilateral agencies, etc . The Committee would like the Ministry to 
take an expeditious decision on setting up the Mari time Development Fund. The Committee 
desires to be kept apprised of the decision taken in the matter. 
(Para 90) 
 

Page 36 of 48 
 
Reply of the Ministry  
12.1 The Indian Banking sector is currently unable to address the need of the shipping sector 
which is affecting the operational viability of the  sector. This makes it necessary to make 
available long-term funds at international competit ive rates to the Indian Maritime sector. Hence 
there is a need for developing a Maritime Developme nt Fund to provide competitive long-term 
financial assistance and supporting the growth of t he sector. In this regard, MoPS&W has 
conceived a Maritime Development Fund with majority  holding of 51% and above by 
multilateral institutions and funds, specialized in  the maritime sector. The balance amount is 
initially proposed to be held by MoPS&W directly or  through its affiliated company. Majority 
holding by the multilateral agencies is expected to  facilitate the fund to get a superior credit 
rating, enabling it to access funds at a lower rate  in the international market. In the Maritime 
India Vision Summit held in 2021, it is being envis aged that the corpus of the Maritime 
Development Fund is to be worked out, with industry stakeholders.  
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
12.2 The Committee would like to be apprised of the  objectives set under the Maritime 
Development Fund (MDF) as envisaged in the MIV, 202 1.  The Committee is aware that 
the creation of MDF will facilitate the growth of t he Indian maritime sector by easing the 
burden of high taxes, targeting manpower developmen t, providing long-term funding to 
maritime stakeholders and increasing productivity of the sector. The Committee would like 
to know the steps taken and coordination mechanisms  employed by the Ministry to engage 
the industry stakeholders to build MDF and gather their valuable suggestions on the same. 
 
Recommendation/Observation  
13. The Committee gathers from the submissions made  by stakeholders that the customs 
procedures adopted at some ports/ customs stations are not uniform. This not only increases 
transaction cost and time of clearance but also pro ves to be a hindrance for trade. It has also 
been submitted that documents providing the same in formation are sought by the Customs 
Department multiple times. The requirement of a lar ge number of copies of these documents 
leads to unnecessary escalation of compliance cost and time delay in clearance of the cargo. The 
Committee is seriously concerned to note that despite the fact that a number of initiatives such as 
Port Community System, Logistics data Bank, RFID So lutions, Direct Port Delivery, Direct Port 

Page 37 of 48 
 
Entry, Digitization in Services, etc., have been un dertaken for simplification and digitization of 
these processes, their implementation has been inef fective. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that the Ministry of Ports, Shipping and  Waterways in collaboration with the 
Ministry of Finance should take tangible steps to s implify the customs processes, standardize 
them across all ports, reduce human intervention to  the bare minimum and move towards a 
completely paperless regime within a specified time frame. The Committee would like to be kept 
apprised of the specific decision taken in this regard. 
(Para 93) 
Reply of the Ministry  
13.1 A centralized web-based Port Community System (PCS lx) has been operationalized 
across all Major Ports, which enables seamless data  flow between the various stakeholders 
through a common interface. 
13.2 To move towards a complete paperless regime, E -DO (Electronic Delivery Order) 
through PCS has been made mandatory along with e-in voicing and e-payment. Several 
functionalities, focused on ease of doing business,  like e-Delivery Order, e-Invoicing and e-
Payment have been added in PCS lx. 
13.3 Initially, e-DO through PCS lx was implemented  only for DPD containers, which has 
now been extended to deliveries made by all custodi ans like Terminals, CFS/ICDs and other 
Non-Major ports using PCS lx. 
13.4 Import General Manifest (IGM) filling system a nd other regulatory messages have been 
integrated with ICEGATE & CBIC and are being receiv ed through PCS lx. This has facilitated 
Direct Port Delivery which has reduced dwell time o f containers by cutting out the time spent at 
CFS. At Jawaharlal Nehru Port, DPD improved to 63.3 4% in 2021-22. DPE for the same period 
is 43.10%. 
13.5 Further, the process to bootstrap PCS lx into National Logistics Portal- Marine (NLP-
Marine) is already underway which will act as a Uni fied Digital Platform for all maritime 
stakeholders. NLP Marine is envisaged as the centra l hub for all interactions with various 
stakeholders viz . Port, Terminals Shipping Lines/Agents, CFS and Cu stoms Brokers, 
Importer/Exporter etc. The portal will be a single- window platform to help exporters, importers 
and service providers exchange documents seamlessly  and transact business. NLP mainly aims 
to function as a central system for electronic shar ing and exchange with interoperability across 
the Marine Landscape i.e. ocean, rail, inland water ways and coastal movement of goods. The 

Page 38 of 48 
 
work order for NLP-MARINE has been awarded to the selected bidder. It will be operationalized 
by December, 2022. 
13.6 Furthermore, ULIP has been integrated with PCS  lx/NLP for exchange of 16 messages 
and these have been made LIVE. After implementation  of NLP-Marine, the aforesaid 16 
messages will be migrated to NLP-M once it is made LIVE and PCS lx will be discontinued. 
Integration between TOS and ULIP has been completed  and made LIVE. The benefits on 
Integration of ULIP with NLP-Marine are as under:- 
(i) The user will be able to search the information  basis the unique identifier as a common 
data lake. 
(ii) Create the underlying infrastructure required to deliver services that will enable more 
efficient logistics in India. 
(iii) In the long term, the vision of the platform is to bring down the logistics cost and to 
integrate with all existing portals of various mode of transportation. 
(iv) Simplify data and information flow between tra de and various stakeholders including 
government agencies to achieve and create value chain in the logistics ecosystem. 
(v) Will facilitate smooth flow of information betw een government agencies and provide a 
one stop data lake for stakeholders in the logistics ecosystem. 
(vi) Will ensure improved trade compliance and yiel d revenue with effective and efficient 
process deployment. 
(vii) Help in standardization across all areas and provide simplification of trade across 
boundaries. 
(viii) Will facilitate and allow parties involved i n trade and transport to implement 
standardized information and documents with a view to fulfill all import, export, and transit-
related regulatory Requirements. 
(ix) Provides sustainability with an improved and c ompetitive edge to transact across borders 
with informed data in hand. 
(x) Will help in capacity building with improved tr ade facilitation and better infrastructure in 
logistics service and internationalization of trade facilitation. 
(xi) Helps in linking all trading communities to se amlessly exchange data with each other 
electronically with increased efficiency in the value chain. 
(xii) Increased usage of informed data and ICT (inf ormation communication and technology). 

Page 39 of 48 
 
(xiii) Will bring about increased and improved coor dination with the Port Community System 
and Trade 
 
Further Recommendations/Observations  
13.7 The Committee is aware that JNPT has been feat ured in the top 40 global ports and 
applauds the efforts of the Ministry in improving t he Direct Port Delivery (DPD) at the 
JNPT through Import General Manifest (IGM) filling system in close coordination with the 
Indian Customs Electronic Data Interchange Gateway (ICEGATE) and the Central Board 
of Indirect Taxes and Customs (CBIC). The Committee  desires to know whether a similar 
IGM system has been provided at other ports.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Page 40 of 48 
 
CHAPTER-IV  
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE FINAL 
REPLIES OF THE MINISTRY ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
-Nil.- 
 
* * *  
 
 
 
 
  

Page 41 of 48 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/ OBSERVATIONS - AT A GLANCE  
 
CHAPTER-III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
THE MINISTRY HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
 
The Committee notes that out of the total 240 proje cts under “Sagarmala”, 84 
projects worth Rs. 29,666 crores have been complete d and 54 projects worth Rs. 37,295 
crores are under implementation. The Committee woul d like to know about the status of 
the remaining 102 projects, the costs involved in t hese projects and their deadlines for 
completion.  
(Para 1.5) 
The Committee notes that the ‘Sagarmala Programme’ has been launched with the 
objective of port-led development and to enhance the performance of the country’s logistics 
sector. Only two port modernization projects under State Governments have been 
completed so far out of the total 45 projects. Also , out of the 173 projects being 
implemented at the Major ports, 91 projects are yet  to be implemented. The Committee 
would like to be apprised of the reasons for delay in implementation of these projects. The 
Ministry has stated that regular consultations are being done with all stakeholders through 
periodic MSDC meetings. However, the Committee note s that the last meeting of the 
MSDC has been held in June, 2021.  The Committee wo uld like to know the frequency of 
the MSDC meetings in a financial year. The Committe e would also like to know the 
number and details of duplicate/inactive/deferred p rojects which were dropped in the last 
financial year under the Port Modernization programme.  
(Para 1.6) 
The Committee notes that the Ministry in its reply has not furnished any 
information regarding the projects under various pi llars of the Sagarmala Programme 
witnessing time overrun and cost escalation nor has  it provided any information or status 
on the progress of the Vadhavan port. The Ministry should provide the Action Taken with 
respect to the Vadhavan port and the details of Sag armala projects witnessing time 
overrun or cost escalation as of 2023-24. 
(Para 1.7) 
The Committee appreciates the efforts of the Minist ry in setting up the target of 
providing more than 18m draft at various Mega Ports , namely, Vadhavan-JNPT Cluster, 
Paradip, Deendayal, and Kamarajar, making it possib le for these ports to handle bigger 
cargo in near future. The Committee would like to b e apprised of the deadlines set by the 
Ministry to complete the work related to deepening of draft at these ports under the MIV, 
2030. 
(Para 2.6) 
The Committee may be informed of the reasons for th e low utilization of funds 
under the Port Modernization Head.   
(Para 2.7) 

Page 42 of 48 
 
The Committee recommends that the Ministry should t ake measures and devise 
comprehensive plans for the Indian shipbuilding, sh ip-repair and IWT sectors to enable 
them to avail various tax-concessions/benefits and cheaper long-term capital etc. and also 
contribute towards furthering the objective of the “Make in India” initiative. 
(Para 3.5) 
The Committee would like to know whether the Ministry has received any proposals 
from any Major Ports in the country regarding devel opment of Multi-Modal Logistics 
Parks (MMLPs) and the status of all the MMLPs which  are proposed to be developed or 
are under construction in the country. The Committe e also desires to know the details and 
progress status of all the port-rail and port-road projects connectivity projects under the 
PM Gati Shakti Master Plan.  The Committee would al so like to know if the Ministry has 
addressed the issues of point to point connectivity under the Sagarmala programme.   
(Para 4.2) 
The Ministry has not given any information regardin g the last mile connectivity 
issues at Hazira. The Committee reiterates its   re commendation that last mile connectivity 
may be provided to the RORO fairway between Ghogha and Hazira. 
(Para 5.2) 
The Committee notes that RO-RO vessels and ferries contribute to shortening of 
shipment routes and lower transportation costs wher eas road transport takes longer time, 
distance and higher costs.  The Committee observes that only a meager 13% of the total 
RO-RO and Ro-Pax projects have been completed so fa r and recommends that the 
Ministry may try to  speed up the implementation pr ocess of the remaining 64 RO-RO and 
Ro-Pax ferry projects.   
(Para 6.2) 
The Committee  would like to be apprised of the num ber of Major Ports where the 
possibility for developing fourteen Coastal Economi c Zones (CEZs) has been explored 
under the “Sagarmala” Programme and the budgetary/f und allocation made to it in the 
B.E. 2023-24, if any, alongwith the proposed demand of the Ministry. 
(Para 7.6) 
The Committee notes in the Ministry’s reply that various Ports, namely, Mormugao, 
Kamarajar, New Mangalore, Chennai and Mumbai inform ed it about the unavailability of 
land for industrialization. The Committee observes that various issues regarding land 
acquisition, possession, management and utilization  were raised by the CAG in its 2015 
Performance Audit Report  ‘Land Management in Major  Ports, and have still not been 
resolved in the past seven years as there seems to be a lack of proper policy guidelines. 
Land availability is crucial for facilitating the d evelopment of CEUs, CEZs and port-led 
industrialisation. The Ministry should not ignore t his important aspect and should submit 
the action taken with regard to the development of CEU at Kamarajar Port Limited. The 
Committee desires to be informed whether all the Ma jor ports have computerized the land 
management system which was recommended as one of t he administrative reforms 
measures in the Policy Guidelines, 2010. The Commit tee notes that the CAG in its 
Performance Audit Report had recommended that the M inistry should review the existing 
guidelines to formulate a comprehensive policy on l and issues in port management and 
desires to know whether the Ministry has carried out such a review.   
(Para 7.7) 

Page 43 of 48 
 
The Committee notes that the Ministry has not respo nded to Committee’s 
observation regarding 30 identified potential Port- linked industrial clusters across three 
sectors, namely – Energy, Materials and Discrete ma nufacturing, which also includes 9 
bulk clusters for basic input industries. The Commi ttee reiterates its recommendation and 
would like to know whether any Master Plans have be en devised to establish these clusters 
in various states. 
(Para 7.8) 
The Committee reiterates its recommendation that th e progress in the projects 
identified in the Coastal Community Development is very slow and desires that the 
implementation of the 22 projects may be speeded up.  The Committee also desires to know 
the status of the remaining identified 48 projects which are yet to be implemented.   
(Para 8.5) 
The Committee notes that development of coastal com munities through marine 
sector related activities like fisheries, maritime tourism, skill development, cruise and 
lighthouse tourism is an essential objective of the  Sagarmala Programme which will prove 
beneficial for the Indian coastal communities.  The  Committee would like to be apprised of 
the outcome of the meeting of the MSDC held on 24th  June, 2021 and the number of 
domain Ministries/State Governments implementing/ag reeing to implement the district 
action plan for coastal community development.  
(Para 8.6) 
The Committee would also like to be apprised of the  amount of funding provided by 
the Ministry in the fishing harbor projects in conv ergence with the Ministry of Fisheries, 
Animal Husbandry and Dairying (MoFAH&D) and skill d evelopment projects under 
Sagarmala-DDU-GKY Convergence Programme Phase-I and II. 
(Para 8.7) 
The Ministry has not given the details of cost esca lation due to the delays in the 9 
projects.  The Committee may be informed of the same. 
(Para 9.3) 
The Committee observes that a deeper draft enables a port to accommodate large 
vessels and bigger cargo ships, which boosts the tr ansshipment of containers at the port. 
Indian importers are not able to clinch the big dea ls and export and import of coal, iron 
ore, steel and other heavy industry raw material ar e being stymied by draft limitations at 
various Indian ports. With the increasing need to e nable the Indian ports to accommodate 
bigger vessels, and to make India a transshipment h ub, it is crucial to prepare a roadmap 
for dredging and draft enhancement at various India n ports. The Committee desires to be 
apprised of the time required by the Ministry to pr epare the roadmap for taking up 
dredging projects. 
(Para 10.3) 
Carrying out the technical and financial feasibilit y study on dredging at a port may 
provide insight into the potential of the dredged m aterial as well as the draft level of that 
port, since dredging not only deepens the draft lev el at a port, it also provides the 
construction material for buildings, recovers miner als and precious metals, and remove 
contaminants for the benefit of our environment. Th e Committee desires to know whether 
Minor Ports have been asked to frame dredging polic ies and whether any communication 
has been received on part of Major Ports in formula ting dredging plans/policies. The 

Page 44 of 48 
 
Committee would also like to be apprised of the tar get date given to the ports to prepare 
such plans/policies. 
(Para 10.4) 
The Committee notes the reply and desires to know t he details/information on the 
plans of the Ministry to explore the possibility of  treating the channel as a national asset 
and also examine the feasibility of funding the ent ire dredging cost, after studying the 
extant practices followed by the other countries in the world. 
(Para 11.2) 
The Committee would like to be apprised of the obje ctives set under the Maritime 
Development Fund (MDF) as envisaged in the MIV, 202 1.  The Committee is aware that 
the creation of MDF will facilitate the growth of t he Indian maritime sector by easing the 
burden of high taxes, targeting manpower developmen t, providing long-term funding to 
maritime stakeholders and increasing productivity of the sector. The Committee would like 
to know the steps taken and coordination mechanisms  employed by the Ministry to engage 
the industry stakeholders to build MDF and gather their valuable suggestions on the same. 
(Para 12.2) 
The Committee is aware that JNPT has been featured in the top 40 global ports and 
applauds the efforts of the Ministry in improving t he Direct Port Delivery (DPD) at the 
JNPT through Import General Manifest (IGM) filling system in close coordination with the 
Indian Customs Electronic Data Interchange Gateway (ICEGATE) and the Central Board 
of Indirect Taxes and Customs (CBIC). The Committee  desires to know whether a similar 
IGM system has been provided at other ports. 
(Para 13.7) 
* * * * 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Page 45 of 48 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ANNEXURES 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
Page 46 of 48 
ANNEXURE-I 
 


 
Page 47 of 48 


Page 48 of 48 
 
ANNEXURE-II  
 
* * * * 


49 
 
 
 
MINUTES 
  

50 
 
MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED 
PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM & 
CULTURE (2022-23) 
XIV 
FOURTEENTH MEETING 
  
The Committee met at 3:00 P.M. on Thursday, the 23rd March, 2023 in Committee Room 
„4‟, First Floor, Parliament House Annexe Extension, New Delhi. 
  
Members present: 
1. Shri V. Vijayasai Reddy             -             Chairman   
 
Rajya Sabha 
2. Shrimati S. Phangnon Konyak 
3. Shri Jugalsinh Lokhandwala 
4. Shri A. A. Rahim 
5. Dr. C. M. Ramesh 
6. Shri Vinay Dinu Tendulkar 
  
Lok Sabha 
7.  Shri Tapir Gao 
8.  Shri Sunil Baburao Mendhe 
9.  Shri K. Muraleedharan 
10. Shri Kamlesh Paswan 
11.  Shri Sunil Kumar Pintu 
12.  Shri Prince Raj 
13.  Shri Tirath Singh Rawat 
14.  Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
15.  Shri Dushyant Singh 
16.  Shri Ramdas Chandrabhanji Tadas 
17.  Shri Manoj Kumar Tiwari 
18.  Shri Dinesh Lal Yadav “Nirahua” 
  
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Swarabji B., Director 
Shrimati Monica Baa, Additional Director 
Shrimati Subha Chandrashekar, Deputy Secretary  
Shri Ranajit Chakraborty, Under Secretary 
 
 Shri Kaustubh Sudhakar Bhalekar, OSD to Hon‟ble Chairman  
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman extended a warm welcome to the Members of the 
Committee. He informed the Members that the agenda of the meeting was to consider and adopt 
four draft Action Taken Reports of the Committee xxx    xxx    xxx. 
3. The Committee, thereafter, took up the first agenda for the meeting i.e., consideration and 
adoption of the following draft Action Taken Reports on:- 

51 
 
i. xxx    xxx    xxx; 
ii. 319th Report on 'Progress made in the implementation of Sagarmala Projects'; 
iii. xxx    xxx    xxx; and 
xxx    xxx    xxx  
4.         The Committee considered the aforesaid draft Reports.  After a brief discussion, the 
Committee adopted the four draft Action Taken Reports and authorized the Chairman to carry 
out minor modifications of typographical and factual errors and formatting in all the Reports. 
5.         The Committee authorized the Shri Jugalsinh Lokhandwala, M.P. and in his absence, 
Shri A. A. Rahim, M.P., to present the abovementioned Reports in Rajya Sabha on 24 th March 
2023. The Committee also authorized  Shri Tapir Gao, M.P. and in his absence, Shri Kamlesh 
Paswan, M.P. to lay the Reports on the Table of Lok Sabha on the same date. 
WITNESSES 
xxx    xxx    xxx  
(The witnesses then withdrew) 
24.       A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept. 
25.       The meeting adjourned at 5:31 PM. 
 
New Delhi,                                                                                                  Swarabji B. 
23rd March, 2023                                                                                                            Director 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
_____________________ 
*Relates to other matters 
 