123rd Report of Committee On Transport, Tourism & Culture
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/123rdreport.htm[22-10-2018 12:28:13]
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON
 TRANSPORT, TOURISM & CULTURE
ONE HUNDRED AND TWENTY THIRD REPORT
ON
THE SEAMEN’S PROVIDENT FUND (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2007
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 05.09.2007)
 (LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 05.09.2007)
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
AUGUST, 2007/ BHADRAPADA, 1929(SAKA)
E-mail:rsc-tt@sansad.nic.in
Website:http://rajyasabha.nic.in
C O N T E N T S
 
1.         COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE                                                                 
2.         INTRODUCTION                                                                                         
3.         REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE                                                                  
4.         OBSERVATIONS/CONCLUSIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS AT A GLANCE
5.         ANNEXURE                                                                                                  
6.         MINUTES                                                                                                                                                      
COMPOSITION OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE
(2007-2008)
 
1.   Shri Sitaram Yechury             - Chairman
 
RAJYA SABHA
2.         Prof. Ram Deo Bhandary
3.         Shri Naresh Gujral
4.         Shri Vedprakash P. Goyal
5.         Prof. Alka Balram Kshatriya
6.         Shri Janardhana Poojary
7.         Shri M.V. Mysura Reddy
8.
                  Shri Satish Kumar Sharma
9.                  Shri Shahid Siddiqui
10.              Shri Shatrughan Sinha
 
LOK SABHA
 
11.
              Shri Anandrao Vithoba Adsul
12.              Shri Sukhbir Singh Badal
13.              Shri Joachim Baxla
14.              Shri Sartaj Singh Chhatwal
15.              Shri N.S.V. Chitthan
16.              Shri Adhir Chowdhury
17.              Dr. K. Dhanaraju

123rd Report of Committee On Transport, Tourism & Culture
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/123rdreport.htm[22-10-2018 12:28:13]
18.              Smt. Priya Dutt
19.              Shri Dip Gogoi
20.              Shri P. Karunakaran
21.              Shri Vijay Kumar Khandelwal
22.              Dr. P.P. Koya
23.              Dr. Ramkrishna Kusmaria
24.              Shri Samik Lahiri 
25.              Shri Alok Kumar Mehta
26.              Shri Hemlal Murmu
27.              Shri Madan Lal Sharma
28.              Shri Akshay Pratap Singh
29.              Shri Dushyant Singh
30.              Shri Suraj Singh
31.              Shri Pralhad Joshi
 
SECRETARIAT
1.      Shrimati Agnes Momin George, Joint Secretary      
2.      Shri Jagdish Kumar, Joint Director
3.      Shri Swarabji B., Deputy Director,
4.      Shrimati Subhashree Panigrahi, Assistant Director
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport, Tourism and
 Culture, having been authorised by the Committee to present on its behalf, do hereby present this One Hundred and
 Twenty-Third Report of the Committee on the Seamen’s Provident Fund (Amendment) Bill, 2007*.
.
2.         The Bill was introduced in the Rajya Sabha on the 3 rd May, 2007.  In pursuance of rules relating to the
 Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committees, the Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha, referred** the Bill to the
 Committee on 10 th May, 2007 for examination and report within three months. On the request being made by the
 Chairman of the Committee, Hon’ble Chairman had granted extension of time till the first day of last week of the
 Monsoon Session of the Parliament for the presentation of the report of the Committee on the aforesaid Bill.
3.          The Committee took oral evidence of the representatives of the Department of Shipping, DG(Shipping),
 Commissioner, Seamen’s Provident Fund and Ministry of Law and Justice at its meetings held on the 29
th May, 2007.
4.         In order to get wider views on the subject, the Committee invited the views of individuals, organisations and
 institutions on the subject through advertisement in all major national dailies and vernacular newspapers all over the
 country.  The advertisement evoked response from the stakeholders and the Committee received memoranda on the
 subject for consideration of the Committee.  The Committee during its visit to Mumbai from 17
th to 20th June, 2007
 also heard the views of the representatives of the National Union of Seafarers of India (NUSI), Bhartiya Navik Sena,
 Maritime Seafarers Union of India and Seamen’s Welfare Fund Society on the provisions of the Bill.  Under the
 mandate, the Committee has examined the Bill and finalised the Report.
5.         The Committee also considered the draft Report on the subject and adopted the same with minor modifications
 on  31
st August, 2007.
6.          The Committee wishes to express its thanks to the Secretary and other officers of the Department of Shipping,
 Commissioner, Seamen’s Provident Fund and Ministry of Law and Justice for the assistance and inputs provided during
 deliberations on the provisions of the Bill. The Committee also acknowledges the contribution of Dr. Shanti Patel,
 President, National Union of Seafarers of India (NUSI) and other stakeholders who submitted their valuable
 suggestions on the provisions of the Bill.
 
NEW DELHI ;
August 31
st, 2007
Bhadrapada  9, 1929 (Saka)
SITARAM YECHURY
Chairman
Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Transport, Tourism & Culture.
      


123rd Report of Committee On Transport, Tourism & Culture
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/123rdreport.htm[22-10-2018 12:28:13]
  
*   Published in the Gazette of India Extraordinary Part II, Section-2, dated 3.5.2007
 **   Rajya Sabha Parliamentary Bulletin Part II, No.44095 dated 11.05.2007.
 
REPORT
 
            The Seamen’s Provident Fund (Amendment) Bill, 2007, was introduced in the Rajya Sabha on 3rd May 2007.
 On 10th May 2007, the Hon'ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha referred the Bill to the Committee for examination and Report. 
 Under the mandate, the Committee has examined the Bill and finalised the Report after hearing the views of the nodal
 Department, i.e., Department of Shipping, Commissioner, Seamen’s Provident Fund and the Stakeholders.  The
 Seamen’s Provident Fund (Amendment) Bill, 2007 proposes to incorporate a new section 4A in the Principal Act with a
 view to make the Board of Trustees responsible for any loss caused to the Seamen’s Provident Fund and to dissociate
 the Government from any responsibility with regard to compensation or indemnification of any loss caused to the
 Seamen’s Provident Fund by deposit in an approved Bank or investment in securities or due to mismanagement,
 misappropriation or otherwise by the Board, any of its trustees, its employees or any other person. Thus, the new
 provision makes the Board responsible for any loss caused to the Seamen’s Provident Fund. (Annxure-I)
 
2.         In the Statement of Objects and Reasons of the Bill, the Government has enumerated the objects to be achieved
 by this legislation.
 
3.         In order to have wider consultations, the views of individuals, organizations and institutions, on the subject matter
 of the Bill, were invited through advertisement in all major dailies and vernacular newspapers in the country. The
 advertisement evoked response from the Stakeholders and the Committee received memoranda on the subject for
 consideration of the Committee.  The Department of Shipping furnished various background notes on the subject matter
 of the Bill.  The Committee in its meeting held on 29
th May, 2007 heard the views of the Department of Shipping on the
 Bill.  The Committee during its visit to Mumbai from 17 th to 20th June, 2007 heard the views of various stakeholders on
 the Bill.
4.         In their background note, the Department of Shipping furnished the details of the constitution of the Seamen
 Provident Fund.
4.1       The Seamen’s Provident Fund Scheme, 1966 framed under the Seamen’s Provident Fund Act, 1966 was
 introduced retrospectively w.e.f. 1
st July, 1964 to provide for institution of a Provident Fund for all Seamen, in view of
 the obvious need to provide old age retirement benefit to all seamen engaged in the shipping industry (Merchant Navy)
 and their family members in the event of death.
 
BOARD OF TRUSTEES
4.2       The Seamen’s Provident Fund Organisation is governed by the tripartite Board of Trustees consisting of the
 Government appointed Chairman, three nominees of the Central Government, three representatives of Employers and
 three representatives of Seamen under Section 5 of the Seamen’s Provident Fund Act, 1966 to administer the Fund. 
 The Director General of Shipping is the Ex-officio Chairperson of the Board of Trustees.  The Seamen’s Provident
 Fund Commissioner, who is Chief Executive Officer of the Board, is the Secretary of the Board. All the trustees are
 appointed by the Government for a tenure of five years.
 
OFFICE OF SEAMEN’S PROVIDENT FUND COMMISSIONER
4.3.      To administer the Provident Fund Scheme, the Office of the Seamen’s Provident Fund Commissioner was
 established on the 9
th July, 1966 in Mumbai. In accordance with Section 7 of the Seamen’s Provident Fund (SPF) Act,
 1966 the Government shall appoint a Seamen’s Provident Fund Commissioner who shall be subject to the general
 control and superintendence of the Board.  The Government may also appoint as many Deputy Commissioners as it
 may consider necessary. As per Section 7(3) of the SPF Act, the Board may appoint such other officers and employees,
 as it may consider necessary for the efficient administration of the Scheme.
 
SEAMEN’S PROVIDENT FUND ORGANISATION (SPFO)
4.4.      The Seamen’s Provident Fund Organisation is self-supporting.  The Government provides no financial support. 

123rd Report of Committee On Transport, Tourism & Culture
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/123rdreport.htm[22-10-2018 12:28:13]
 The establishment expenditure of SPFO is met through the administrative charges, which are levied @ 4.5% w.e.f. 1 st
 April 2006 on Provident Fund contribution remitted by the employer and seaman.
PROVIDENT FUND CONTRIIBUTION
4.5.      Every seaman employed under the Article of Agreement, unless excluded by the definition of a ‘Seamen' under
 the Act or exempted by a specific order as provided under the Act, is entitled and is required to become a member of
 the Scheme.  This is a contributory Provident Fund and the employers are required to deposit the provident fund
 contribution in respect of seamen employed by them with their matching contribution with Seamen’s Provident Fund
 Organisation after termination of each voyage.  The prevailing rate of contribution is 12% of the wages w.e.f. 22.9.1997
 as laid down in the Seamen’s Provident Fund Scheme, 1966. 
RATE OF INTEREST
4.6.      The rate of interest on the provident fund account of members is to be determined by the Government in
 consultation with the Board.  As per para 51(4) of SPF scheme, 1966, in determining the rate of interest, the
 Government shall satisfy itself that there is no over-drawl on the interest suspense account as a result of the debit
 thereto of the interest credited to the accounts of the members.     
INVESTMENT PATTERN
4.7.      The investment pattern of SPFO is as per the guidelines prescribed by the Ministry of Finance as under:
(i)         The Central Government Securities       -           25%
(ii)        State Government                                 -           25%
 
 
 
(iii)       PSU Bonds                                          -           25%
(iv)       Discretion of Trustees                           -           30%
            (in any or to distribute among categories mentioned at (i) to (iii) above)
(v)        Equities / Mutual Funds             -           5%
 
4.8.      The Ministry of Finance has further decided to invest the 5% instruments earmarked for equities/mutual funds
 also in high yielding PSU bonds, so as to further reduce the risk to the capital. The present system for the discretionary
 quota of investment is being recommended by the Finance Sub Committee and is finally approved by the Board for
 investment.
IRREGULARITIES IN THE INVESTMENT OF SPF
4.9.      Giving the details for the scam, which led to loss amounting to approximately of Rs.92.78 crore to Seamen’s
 Provident Fund, the Department of Shipping informed the Committee that the RBI carried out the work relating to the
 investment of the accretion to the Fund from the beginning.  The Special Deposit Scheme Account of the Funds was
 also maintained in the RBI. During 1995-96, the Board decided to accede to the request of the RBI, to take over the
 work relating to investment of the money of the Fund and in the context passed a Resolution in November 1996 i.e.
 work of investment, to sell, purchase, transfer, negotiate, sign letter of indemnity and receive interest and principal,
 endorse, etc. shall be done by Seamen’s Provident Fund Commissioner. As authorised by this Resolution, Shri AK
 Gond, the then Commissioner, SPF had been carrying out the activities of investments, keeping in mind the directions
 of the Department of Economic Affairs in respect of pattern of investment to be maintained on the last day of the
 financial year.           To assist the Commissioner, Seamen’s Provident Fund in matters of investment, the organization
 took the advice of some Brokers, who provided advice in all matters of investment.  Initially, one M/s. Darashaw and
 Co., a Broker, registered with the Bombay Stock Exchange handled the portfolio.  Subsequently, sometime in 1998-99,
 Shri Ketan Seth, and Shri Sanjay Agarwal, two brokers listed on the Bombay Stock Exchange took over the same.  The
 Seamen’s Provident Fund investments comprised of Government Securities and Special Deposits Scheme Funds, which
 were pre–existing when Shri Ketan Seth and Shri Sanjay Agarwal started the investments of the Seamen’s
provident Fund.  In the process, existing securities, which had been transferred from the RBI, were being sold and fresh
 securities were bought with the objective of increasing the income.  During this period, Shri Ketan Seth and Shri Sanjay
 Agarwal introduced the  following four companies based in Kolkata, as brokers, for transaction in Government
 Securities:
(i)
                  M/s Dalhousie Securities Pvt. Ltd., Kolkata.
(ii)                Ms/ Hooghli Trading & Investment, Kolkata.
(iii)               M/s Pacific Finance, Kolkata.

123rd Report of Committee On Transport, Tourism & Culture
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/123rdreport.htm[22-10-2018 12:28:13]
Sr. No. Name of Accursed Persons.
1. Shri Sanjay Agarwal
2. Shri Ketan Seth
3. Shri Anup Kumar Gond
4. Shri Chandulal Thadani
5. Shri Nandkishore S.Trivedi
6. Shri Subodh Bhandari
7. Shri Mahendra Agarwal
8. Shri Jiterndra Agarwal
9. Shri Sriprakash Poddar
10. Shri Nandkishore Prasad
11. Shri Pallav Ved
12. Smt. Suman Prasad
13. Arunkumar Surekha
14. Shri Omprakash Salecha
15. Shri Vijayan Doshi
(iv)              M/s Poddar Trading Co., Kolkata.
5.         The Seamen’s Provident Fund Commissioner’s Office later learnt that 3 of the said companies were fictitious
 and did not exist at all.
5.1.      The Committee has been further informed that in the case of Government Securities, once a security is
 purchased, an entry is made in the Securities General Ledger (SGL) maintained by the Reserve Bank of India.  In this
 case alternatively, physical delivery was granted. In this case, Shri Ketan Seth and Shri Sanjay Agarwal, in conjunction
 with and in connivance with the then Commissioner, Shri A. K. Gond, purported to purchase Government securities,
 amounting to approximately Rs. 92.78 crore.  On receiving the brokers note for the said purchase, the then
 Commissioner issued a cheque for the said amount in the name of the concerned Broker, who would then purport to
 purchase the said security and at the end of the transaction, a computer generated statement was issued showing such
 alleged purchase of security.   Interest on the said securities were also purported to be credited to the said account.
 
5.2.      There was no physical delivery of Government securities or the PSU bonds to S.P.F.O.  Dealing in Government
 securities was kept within the prescribed pattern of investment.  But this was applicable only to the securities, which
 were not physically delivered.   The interest accruing on these securities was purported to have been credited to the SP
 Fund, but only in the form of fresh securities, which were not physically delivered. So, it turned out to be a vicious
 circle. On 4
th May 2002 Shri A.K. Gond,    
Ex- Commissioner (SPF) informed the Chairman of the Board and D.G. Shipping that Government securities and PSU
 bonds worth Rs.92.78 crore belonging to the SPF were not available because they were not physically delivered over a
 period of time. The DG (S) had ordered for immediate inquires and a special audit of S.P. Fund was conducted by M/s
 S.S. Nayak & Co. in consultation with M/s Wadia Gandhy & Co. and Ministry of Law, Branch Secretariat, Mumbai on
 07.05.02. The audit report dated 08.05.02 reveals that the total cost of the missing securities was Rs.90.15 crore, whose
 face value was Rs.91.07 crore.  It was also noticed that similar securities had also been purchased in the Forfeiture
 Account of the Provident Fund, the cost of such security was being Rs.1.69 crore and the face value of such securities
 was being Rs.1.71 crore.  The total cost of missing securities were therefore Rs.91.85 crore, and face value of such
 securities were Rs.92.78 crore.
 
ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT/CBI AGAINST SHRI A.K. GOND, EX- COMMISSIONER
5.3.      The DG Shipping filed a complaint on 10
th May, 2002 with the CBI.  The CBI arrested the then Commissioner,
 SPF in the night of 11/12 th May 2002 and was remanded to CBI custody. Shri Gond was released on bail after the
 expiry of mandatory custody period.  The Court has attached the property worth Rs.96,96,232.84 of Shri Gond. He was
 placed under suspension w.e.f. 12
thMay, 2002 i.e. the date of his detention.  Thereafter, he was repatriated to Ministry
 of Railways w.e.f. 5.9.2002.  The CBI has completed its enquiry on 10.11.03 and filed the charge sheet in the court at
 Mumbai against 15 persons.   The Case is pending in the Court of Special Judge (CBI, ACB) Greater Mumbai.  A Civil
 Suit No. 633 of 2004 for recovery of Rs.92.78 crore along with interest has been filed on 26.02.04.  The matter is
 pending before Mumbai High Court.  The following persons were named in Charge Sheet in CBI Case No. RC 4 (E)
 2002, CBI, BS & FC, Mumbai in the Hon’ble Court of Special Judge for CBI, Greater Mumbai:-
 
 

123rd Report of Committee On Transport, Tourism & Culture
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/123rdreport.htm[22-10-2018 12:28:13]
6.         The Committee in its meeting held on 29 th May, 2007 heard the views of the Department of Shipping on the
 Bill.   The representatives of the Department of Shipping submitted before the Committee that through the Amendment
 Bill it is sought to make an entry, Section 4A, to say that subject to the provisions of the Seamen’s Provident Fund Act,
 1966 and the scheme, the Board shall be responsible for management of the funds. Secondly, the Central Government
 shall not be liable to compensate or indemnify any loss caused to the fund by deposits in an approved bank or investment
 in securities or due to mismanagement, misappropriation or otherwise by the Board, any of its trustees, employees or any
 other person at any time.  The purpose of this Amendment is to make explicit what was already implicit in the Act when
 it was first promulgated. Because there in section 4, it says that the Fund shall vest in the Board and section 5 goes on to
 say that the Board is a body corporate with a separate seal and in perpetual existence. Basically, the direction of the
 Cabinet was that the whole scam or the defalcation occurred because there were no controls, and there were no systems
 in place. So, with the systems being introduced, with the reform process also in position and frequent checking and
 physical verifications, The Department is hopeful that this sort of a misdemeanour or a defalcation should not occur.
 That is why it is, in a sense, just making explicit what was already there.
 
7.         The Committee was informed that the Government is not linking the proposal for recoupment of Fund with the
 amendment of Seamen’s Provident Act.  The Government is certainly trying to dissociate one part of it, saying that it
 should not be held responsible, if the whole thing like the scam were to happen. It is not restricted to just Seamen’s
 Provident Fund. The Ministry of Finance in fact, advised all the Ministries and Departments which are operating or may
 be operating funds of this nature to have a clause like this. So, basically, it is that the Government recognises at one level
 its moral and fiduciary responsibilities but wants to distance direct responsibility because that is the function of the
 Board.
 
 
                          8.        The Department of Shipping identified the following shortcomings, which led to loss of fund:
(i)
                              Dealing with such companies whose credential was not verified.
(ii)                            Outflow of money without proper documentation.
(iii)                           After outflow of money physical deliveries of securities were not   received.
(iv)                          No follow up was done for non-receipt of such securities.
(v)                            Handing over of cheque to third party without proper authority.
(vi)                          Investment registers not maintained properly viz., detail of securities was not recorded.
(vii)                         No physical verification of securities was done during CAG audit.
(viii)                       Lack of internal/concurrent audit.
(ix)                          Securities not kept in Demat form.
 
9.         As regards, the remedial measures taken to remove the shortcomings in the future, the Department of Shipping
 informed that after these irregularities came to notice, the following steps to remove the shortcomings in future have
 been taken:
(i)                              The Resolution of 28.11.1996, authorizing the Commissioner as a sole authority to do the investment
 has been rescinded.
(ii)                            M/s S.S. Nayak & Co. (Chartered Accountants) has been appointed as Internal Auditors who submit
 quarterly report, which are placed before the Board in its subsequent meetings.  
(iii)                           All physical securities required to be converted into Demat form have been converted.  State Bank of
 Indore has been appointed as Depository Participants for the purpose.
(iv)                          A Finance sub-Committee has been constituted, consisting of Commissioner and 2 Trustees for
 considering investment proposals and recommendations.  The recommendations are placed before the
 Board subsequently for final approval. 
(v)                            The Commissioner and one of the Trustees have been made authorized signatory. 
(vi)             M/s IDBI Capital Services Ltd. has been appointed on 21.12.2004 as Portfolio    Manager of SPF.
 
10.       The Committee enquired from the representatives of the Department of Shipping whether these remedial
 measures set-up a foolproof mechanism to prevent such scam to recur in future in the functioning of the SP Fund. The
 representatives of the Department of Shipping submitted before the Committee that:
 

123rd Report of Committee On Transport, Tourism & Culture
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/123rdreport.htm[22-10-2018 12:28:13]
“The kind of scam that occurred is despite dealings in Government stocks and that of PSUs.  Actually those
 instruments were never physically present.  Now, since controls are in place, and have been in place for the last
 few years, we are seeing that investments are actually made, payments are being made out and the corpus is
 continuing to grow. So, we are hopeful that such events will not recur. That’s the only thing we can say at this
 stage.”
 
11.       The Committee wanted to know from the Department of Shipping whether the Principal Act made it obligatory
 for the Government to be responsible for any mis-appropriation. It was clarified to the Committee that the Government
 was not responsible because the whole money is invested in the Board.  The Government has moral responsibility to
 recoup the fund and the Board should also be held responsible for occurrence of irregularity.
 
 
12.       The Committee wanted to know the details of measures taken by the Department of Shipping for recoupment of
 shortage of Rs.92.78 crore in the Seamen’s Provident Fund. In response the Department of Shipping submitted that the
 money lost in the instant case belongs to the seamen.  Under the SPF Act, 1966, the seamen have no choice but to keep
 the money in this Fund.  It is difficult to make them suffer for a loss, which is not attributable to them.  The Cabinet in
 its meeting held on 22.12.2005 considered the
matter and decided that the matter may, in the first instance, be considered by a Group of Ministers (GoM). The GoM in
 its first meeting held on 3.1.06 desired that various alternatives should be worked out in order to select the best option
 to provide recoupment subsidy to SPF.  Accordingly, the Ministry of Finance recommended providing one time grant
 of Rs.92.78 crore. The GoM accordingly considered the proposal on 8.8.2006 and recommended that the exact amount
 of recoupment to be decided by the Ministry of Finance should be indicated in the note to be placed before the Cabinet
 for their consideration and approval.  GoM also recommended that the proposal to amend the Seamen’s Provident Fund
 Act, 1966 for dissociating the Government from any responsibility in regard to compensation or indemnification of any
 loss caused to the Seamen’s Provident Fund by investment in securities by mismanagement, misappropriation or
 otherwise by the Board, any of its Trustees, its employees or any other person at any time should also be placed before
 the Cabinet for their consideration and approval. Following the recommendation of GoM, Ministry of Finance
 considered the proposal and has supported the grant of a one time recoupment subsidy of Rs.92.78 crore to SPF
 provided the SPF Act, 1966 is amended to make the Board responsible and for dissociating the Government from any
 responsibility in regard to compensation or indemnification of any loss caused to the Seamen’s Provident Fund by
 investment in securities by mismanagement, misappropriation or otherwise by the Board, any of its Trustees, its
 employees or any other person, at any time. The Cabinet considered the proposal regarding recoupment of lost funds of
 SPFO, Mumbai to the extent of Rs.92.78 crore and amendment to the Seamen’s Provident Fund Act, 1966 on
 30.11.2006 and approved the Department proposals with the following directions:
§
         Drafting changes be carried out in section 4A of the Bill in consultation with the Ministry of
 Finance; and
 
§         Steps are taken by all concerned Ministries/Departments to prevent such mismanagement and
 ensure that Government does not incur any liability in such class of cases.
 
 
13.
              As per the Cabinet directions, drafting changes were carried out in section 4A of the Bill in consultation with the
 Ministry of Finance and the Ministry of Law.  The Bill has accordingly been introduced in Rajya Sabha on 3.5.2007.
 Further, to recoup the shortage of Rs.92.78 crore in the Seamen Provident Fund the Department of Economic Affairs has
 taken a view that the said grant could be released only after the proposed amendment of SPF Act, 1966 is introduced. In
 the meantime, the Forward Seamen’s Union of India (FSUI) had given a strike notice against lowering of interest rate
 and delay in recoupment of Seamen Provident Fund money. Indian National Ship-Owners’ Association (INSA) has filed
 a Writ Petition No. 2707 of 2005 in High Court of Mumbai praying inter-alia to restrain FSUI from going on strike.  The
 case was heard on 10 th April, 07. The Hon’ble High Court of Mumbai has granted time upto 31.8.2007 to credit entire
 amount of Rs.92.78 crore to Seamen Provident Fund.
 
14.       The Department of Shipping vide
 their OM dated 6 th July, 2007 informed the Committee that the Ministry of
 Finance, Department of Economic Affairs has granted an advance of Rs.92.78 crore from the Contingency Fund of India

123rd Report of Committee On Transport, Tourism & Culture
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/123rdreport.htm[22-10-2018 12:28:13]
 to be paid to the Seamen’s Provident Fund. Accordingly, the Funds to the extent of Rs.92.78 crore have been released to
 Seamen Provident Fund Organisation vide sanction NO.ST-14018/5/2002-MT dated 29.06.2007.
 
15.       The Committee during its visit to Mumbai from 17th to 20th June, 2007 heard the views of the DG (Shipping),
 Commissioner, Seamen’s Provident Fund and the representatives of the National Union of Seafarers of India (NUSI),
 Bhartiya Navik Sena, Maritime Seafarers Union of India and Seamen’s Welfare Fund Society on the provisions of the
 Bill in its meeting held on 18 th June, and 20 th June, 2007 respectively.  The stakeholders who have participated in the
 meeting of the Committee were Dr. Shanti Patel, President, NUSI, Sh. Abdul Ghani Serang, General Secretary, NUSI, 
 Sh. Ajit Yashwant Rao, Secretary, Bhartiya Navik Sena, Sh. C.C. Babu, CAO, Seamen’s Welfare Fund Society and Sh.
 L.B. Singh, President, Maritime Seafarer Union of India. The representatives of Unions opposed the Bill on the
 following grounds:
 
(i)                  The proposed amendment to the Seamen’s Provident Fund Act, 1966 changes completely the complexion
 and objective of the Bill. There was no consultation leave aside, the agreement with the National Welfare
 Board representing the Shipowners, Seamen and Government, a statutory body under the Indian Merchant
 Shipping Act, which, had originally suggested the enactment of the SPF Act, 1966.
(ii)                The same responsibility also exists under the Employees’ Provident Funds and Miscellaneous Provisions
 Act, 1952, applicable to any establishment onshore. Strangely, this original Act is not sought to be amended.
 Therefore, the Government’s move is highly discriminatory and is also unconstitutional.
(iii)               Even to our country, Government runs to the rescue of the people and helps them monetarily whenever there
 is natural calamity or any other similar situation and rightly so. The old age or death is also an identical event
 and hence the Government cannot get out of the direct responsibility of reimbursement of the loss due to
 mismanagement, misappropriation or otherwise by the Board, any of its trustees, employees or any person at
 any time.
(iv)              The appropriate action must be taken against any person or persons defaulting the non-recovery of lost
 amount. But it is not at all possible to recover the amount lost through fraud or scam or otherwise, and,
 particularly, when the amount is large. The Government should expedite action for reimbursement of lost
 funds to SPFO.
(v)                The recent amendment has been moved without any reference whatsoever or consultation with the National
 Welfare Board for Seafarers (NWBS). Thus, the introduction of Bill without even consultation with the
 NWBS is highly improper, unfair and likely to disturb the existing industrial harmony.
(vi)              The Seamen’s Provident Fund Bill, 2007 does not follow the pattern of the Employees’ Provident Funds and
 Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1952, which was followed in enacting the Seamen’s Provident Fund Act,
 1966. The present Seamen’s Provident Fund amendment is discriminatory and hence uncalled for.
(vii)             The non recoupment of loss by the Government will result in the penalty for the innocent seamen for no fault
 of theirs. The Government should be jointly held responsible in cases of frauds.
(viii)           The SPF Act should be amended to make it absolutely clear that the Government of India should reimburse
 the financial loss for the reasons stated in the Amendment Bill.
16.       The Committee enquired from the representatives of the Department whether there is any proposal for the option
 of merger of Seamen’s Provident Fund Organization  (SPFO) with the Employees Provident Fund Organization (EPFO).
 The Department of Shipping informed the Committee that Director General of Shipping had consulted Ship-Owners and
 Union’s representatives on 31.10.2002. Both Ship-Owners representative and Union’s representative agreed that per-se
 they did not have any reservation on restructuring of SPFO if this was being done at the time when other Provident
 Funds and especially EPFO also undergoes a change. The option of merger of SPFO with EPFO does not look feasible
 keeping in view the rationale for the establishment of separate Seamen’s Provident Fund. The Rule, Regulations and
 service conditions of seamen are totally different from those of workers covered by the Employees Provident Fund.  The
 Department further submitted that the seamen working on ships are engaged on contract basis.  The members of
 Employees Provident Fund Organization are on regular establishment of the industries (ANNEXURE-II).
 
Observations and Recommendations
17.       The Committee notes with great satisfaction that the Ministry of Finance has finally granted an advance of
 Rs.92.78 crore from the Contingency Fund of India to be paid to the Seamen’s Provident Fund and the amount has been
 released to Seamen’s Provident Fund Organization for payment to the Seamen.  The Committee also appreciates the role

123rd Report of Committee On Transport, Tourism & Culture
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/123rdreport.htm[22-10-2018 12:28:13]
 of the unions, which persistently pursued the matter of   recoupment of the losses to the Seamen Provident Fund.  The
 recoupment of shortage of funds will give relief to the Seamen by providing them their own dues.  
18.       The Committee is of the view that the proposed Bill is only a step to dissociate the Government from bearing
 any responsibility with regard to compensation or indemnification or any loss caused to the Seamen’s Provident Fund
 by deposit in an approved Bank or investment in securities or due to mismanagement, misappropriation or otherwise
 and therefore this legislation would indirectly aggravate the problems of Seamen’s instead of going deep into the roots
 of it.  The Committee does not approve the contention of the Department of Shipping that the whole scam or the
 defalcation occurred because there were no control or system in place.  The Committee feels that the Government
 cannot absolve its responsibility for the losses including misappropriation that took place in the Seamen’s Provident
 Fund and is bargaining in exchange of one time recoupment to avoid responsibility in future. The Committee  strongly 
 disapproves  the  idea  of  linking  the  proposal     for  recoupment  of  Rs.92.78  crore  with  the  amendment  of 
 the                   Seamen’s Provident Fund Act because misappropriation of the amount belonging to the seamen’s was
 due to faulty rules/policy of the Government due to which such a situation arose and the poor seaman was made to
 suffer because of no fault of him.
19.       The Committee notes that under Section 5 of the Seamen Provident Fund Act, 1966, the Government appoints the
 Chairman and three nominees of the Central Government to the Seamen’s Provident Fund Organisation.  Moreover, the
 Director General of Shipping is the ex-officio Chairperson of the Board of Trustees.  The Seamen’s Provident Fund
 Commissioner who is the Chief Executive Officer of the Board is the Secretary of the Board.  All these trustees are
 appointed by the Government for a tenure of five years.  The Committee notes that the Government has full control over
 the Seamen Provident Fund through its own nominees in the Board of Trustees and administrative set up.  All its
 functions are carried out according to the guidelines issued by the Government.   Therefore, the Committee finds no
 justification on the move of the Government to dissociate the Government from any responsibility with regard to
 compensation or indemnification of any loss caused to the Seamen’s Provident Fund by investment in Securities by
 mismanagement, misappropriation or otherwise by the Board, any of its Trustees, its employees or any other person. 
 This is simply not acceptable in a democratic set up.   The Government has the ultimate duty to save and secure a Fund,
 which is meant for  the welfare of a section of the society.  The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Government
 should withdraw the Bill in its present form.
 
20.       The Committee is distressed to note that the Seamen Provident Fund had lost Rs.92.78 crore due to the
 fraudulent investments made by some of the functionaries.  Now the matter is Sub-judice. The Committee, however,
 desires that the Government should take all possible steps to recover the money from the culprits and the Government
 may vigorously pursue the case in the court.
 
21.       The Committee notes that in order to ensure that such scams would not recur in future, the Government has
 initiated sufficient administrative controls in the system and as such quarterly audit and physical verification of the
 securities are taking place.  These safeguards have resulted into growth in the Corpus Fund.  However, the Committee
 is of the opinion that irregularity had happened due to improper system of investment of Seamen’s Provident Fund and
 the Government machinery i.e. the Commissioner, Director General (Shipping), Comptroller and Auditor General of
 India and internal auditor have failed to detect irregularities in the management of the fund in time.   The Committee,
 therefore, recommends that the Government should scrupulously follow the norms issued by the Ministry of Finance
 for investment of funds in the portfolios and under no circumstances the provident fund money should be exposed to
 risk or invested without considering the safety and security of the fund. 
 
22.       The Committee notes that the Provident Fund Scheme is essentially a welfare measure and it is the direct
 responsibility of State to ensure that the Seamen get their Provident Fund dues when they retire from the employment
 or when they become unfit for the job due to age or sickness. The Committee also notes that the Provident fund is the
 only reliable source of income for the Seamen or his family as there is no Pension Scheme for the Seamen. However,
 the Committee is constrained to note that the proposed Amendment Bill does not protect the interest of Seamen and
 Government is making them more vulnerable by dissociating itself from the obligations to recoup the money in case
 any future scam happens in the Seamen Provident Fund Organization.  The Committee feels that some Social Security
 Scheme should be introduced to protect the interests of the retired Seafarer and their families and recommends that the
 Government should amend the Seamen’s Provident Fund Act, 1966 in line with Employees Provident Fund and
 Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1952, which is applicable to any establishment onshore.

123rd Report of Committee On Transport, Tourism & Culture
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/123rdreport.htm[22-10-2018 12:28:13]
OBSERVATIONS/CONCLUSIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS/ -- AT A GLANCE
 
The Committee notes with great satisfaction that the Ministry of Finance has finally granted an advance of
 Rs.92.78 crore from the Contingency Fund of India to be paid to the Seamen’s Provident Fund and the amount has been
 released to Seamen’s Provident Fund Organization for payment to the Seamen.  The Committee also appreciates the role
 of the unions, which persistently pursued the matter of   recoupment of the losses to the Seamen Provident Fund.  The
 recoupment of shortage of funds will give relief to the Seamen by providing them their own dues.  
(Para 17)
            The Committee is of the view that the proposed Bill is only a step to dissociate the Government from bearing
 any responsibility with regard to compensation or indemnification or any loss caused to the Seamen’s Provident Fund
 by deposit in an approved Bank or investment in securities or due to mismanagement, misappropriation or otherwise
 and therefore this legislation would indirectly aggravate the problems of Seamen’s instead of going deep into the roots
 of it.  The Committee does not approve the contention of the Department of Shipping that the whole scam or the
 defalcation occurred because there were no control or system in place.  The Committee feels that the Government
 cannot absolve its responsibility for the losses including misappropriation that took place in the Seamen’s Provident
 Fund and is bargaining in exchange of one time recoupment to avoid responsibility in future. The Committee  strongly 
 disapproves  the  idea  of  linking  the  proposal     for  recoupment  of  Rs.92.78  crore  with  the  amendment  of 
 the                   Seamen’s Provident Fund Act because misappropriation of the amount belonging to the seamen’s was
 due to faulty rules/policy of the Government due to which such a situation arose and the poor seaman was made to
 suffer because of no fault of him.
(Para 18)
            The Committee notes that under Section 5 of the Seamen Provident Fund Act, 1966, the Government appoints the
 Chairman and three nominees of the Central Government to the Seamen’s Provident Fund Organisation.  Moreover, the
 Director General of Shipping is the ex-officio Chairperson of the Board of Trustees.  The Seamen’s Provident Fund
 Commissioner who is the Chief Executive Officer of the Board is the Secretary of the Board.  All these trustees are
 appointed by the Government for a tenure of five years.  The Committee notes that the Government has full control over
 the Seamen Provident Fund through its own nominees in the Board of Trustees and administrative set up.  All its
 functions are carried out according to the guidelines issued by the Government.   Therefore, the Committee finds no
 justification on the move of the Government to dissociate the Government from any responsibility with regard to
 compensation or indemnification of any loss caused to the Seamen’s Provident Fund by investment in Securities by
 mismanagement, misappropriation or otherwise by the Board, any of its Trustees, its employees or any other person. 
 This is simply not acceptable in a democratic set up.   The Government has the ultimate duty to save and secure a Fund,
 which is meant for  the welfare of a section of the society.  The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Government
 should withdraw the Bill in its present form.
(Para 19)
            The Committee is distressed to note that the Seamen Provident Fund had lost Rs.92.78 crore due to the
 fraudulent investments made by some of the functionaries.  Now the matter is Sub-judice. The Committee, however,
 desires that the Government should take all possible steps to recover the money from the culprits and the Government
 may vigorously pursue the case in the court.
(Para 20)
            The Committee notes that in order to ensure that such scams would not recur in future, the Government has
 initiated sufficient administrative controls in the system and as such quarterly audit and physical verification of the
 securities are taking place.  These safeguards have resulted into growth in the Corpus Fund.  However, the Committee
 is of the opinion that irregularity had happened due to improper system of investment of Seamen’s Provident Fund and
 the Government machinery i.e. the Commissioner, Director General (Shipping), Comptroller and Auditor General of
 India and internal auditor have failed to detect irregularities in the management of the fund in time.   The Committee,
 therefore, recommends that the Government should scrupulously follow the norms issued by the Ministry of Finance
 for investment of funds in the portfolios and under no circumstances the provident fund money should be exposed to
 risk or invested without considering the safety and security of the fund. 
(Para 21)
            The Committee notes that the Provident Fund Scheme is essentially a welfare measure and it is the direct
 responsibility of State to ensure that the Seamen get their Provident Fund dues when they retire from the employment
 or when they become unfit for the job due to age or sickness. The Committee also notes that the Provident fund is the
 only reliable source of income for the Seamen or his family as there is no Pension Scheme for the Seamen. However,

123rd Report of Committee On Transport, Tourism & Culture
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/123rdreport.htm[22-10-2018 12:28:13]
 the Committee is constrained to note that the proposed Amendment Bill does not protect the interest of Seamen and
 Government is making them more vulnerable by dissociating itself from the obligations to recoup the money in case
 any future scam happens in the Seamen Provident Fund Organization.  The Committee feels that some Social Security
 Scheme should be introduced to protect the interests of the retired Seafarer and their families and recommends that the
 Government should amend the Seamen’s Provident Fund Act, 1966 in line with Employees Provident Fund and
 Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1952, which is applicable to any establishment onshore.
(Para 22)
MINUTES
 
 
MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
 COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT,
TOURISM & CULTURE (2007-08)
 
I
 FIRST MEETING
            The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Friday, the 31
st August 2007 in Committee Room A, Ground Floor,
 Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
            MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Sitaram Yechury – Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Prof. Ram Deo Bhandary
3. Shri Naresh Gujral
4. Shri Vedprakash P. Goyal
5. Shri Janardhana Poojary
6. Shri M.V. Mysura Reddy
7. Shri Shahid Siddiqui
 
LOK SABHA
8. Shri Adhir Chowdhury
9. Shri Samik Lahiri
10. Shri Hemlal Murmu
11. Shri Madan Lal Sharma
SECRETARIAT
           
Shrimati Agnes Momin George, Joint Secretary
Shri Jagdish Kumar, Joint Director
            Shri Swarabji B., Deputy Director
            Shrimati Subhashree Panigrahi, Assistant Director         
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF LAW AND JUSTICE (LEGISLATIVE
 DEPARTMENT):
 
Shri S.R. Dhaleta, Joint Secretary & Legislative Counsel
Shri K.V. Kumar, Assistant Legislative Counsel
 
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE NATIONAL AVIATION COMPANY OF INDIA LTD. (NACIL):
Shri V. Thulasidas, CMD
Shri S. Mukherjee, Executive Director-Corporate Affairs
Shri D.S. Kohli, Executive Director-Northern Region
Shri S.K. Kundra, Executive Director (F)

123rd Report of Committee On Transport, Tourism & Culture
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/123rdreport.htm[22-10-2018 12:28:13]
Shri H.S. Grover, Executive Director (Coop.)
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THEJET AIRWAYS:
Capt. K. Mohan, Vice-President, Flight Operations
Shri A.K. Sivanandan, Senior General Manager, PR
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE 
TRAVEL AGENTS ASSOCIATION OF INDIA:
Shri Jagdeep Rikhy, Managing Committee Member
Shri Sanjay Nirula, Managing Committee Member
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE 
TRAVEL AGENTS FEDERATION ASSOCIATION OF INDIA:
Shri Praveen Chug, President
Shri P. Sampath Kumar, Committee Member
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE
 AIR CARGO AGENTS ASSOCIATION OF  INDIA:
Shri Vipin Vohra, President
Shri Deepak Dadlani, Past President
Shri Sunil Arora, Chairman, Northern Region
 
2.         At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee especially Shri Naresh Gujral M.P. who
 was nominated to the Committee first time. The Committee then took up for consideration and adoption of draft Report
 on the Seamen's Provident Fund (Amendment) Bill, 2007.  After some discussion, the Committee adopted the Report
 with minor modification.    The Committee also decided to present the Report to the Parliament on 5
th September, 2007
 and authorized the Chairman, and in his absence Shri Vedprakash P. Goyal and Shri Naresh Gujral to present the
 Report in the Rajya Sabha and S/Shri Samik Lahiri and Adhir Chowdhury in the Lok Sabha. 
3.         Thereafter, the Committee heard the views of the above-mentioned stakeholders on the Carriage by Air
 (Amendment) Bill, 2007.   The Members raised queries on various provisions of the Bill and the stakeholders explained
 their position thereon.
4.         A verbatim record of the proceedings of the Meeting was kept.
5.         The meeting of the Committee then adjourned at 4.15 p.m.
New Delhi
31
st August 2007
Swarabji B.
Deputy Director
 
                                                                                                             
                                                                                   
 
 