REPORT
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/51streport.htm[28-08-2018 12:52:11]
REPORT
 
 
            Demand No. 74 pertains to the Ministry of Road Transport and Highways.  The Ministry of Surface Transport
 has been bifurcated into two Ministries i.e. Ministry of Road Transport and Highways and Ministry of Shipping.  The
 Department of Road Transport and Highways which was part of the erstwhile Ministry of Surface Transport has been
 notified as a separate Ministry of Road Transport and Highways w.e.f. 7th November 2000.
 
2.         The Ministry of Road Transport and Highways is responsible for development, formulation and implementation
 of policies relating to road Transport, National Highways and Transport Research.  Its main function relates to road
 development and maintenance including Border Roads, planning and co-ordination and Road Transport. 
3.         The Ministry is administratively divided into two wings namely Road Transport wing and Highways Wing. 
4.         Road Transport Wing is concerned with the formulation of broad policies relating to Road Transport, Motor
 Vehicles Act, legislation relating to Road Transport Corporations, besides making arrangements for movement of
 motor vehicular traffic with the neighbouring countries. 
5.            Highways Wing is mainly concerned with the matters relating to:-
Advising Government on all general policy matters relating to road development;
Development & Maintenance of roads declared as National Highways;
Administration of Central Road fund;
Evaluation of standard of road and bridge and specification;
Performance of road research;
National Highways Authority of India and National Institute of Training of Highway Engineers and
All policy matters relating to India Road Construction Corporation. 
6.            Following are the autonomous bodies functioning under the administrative control of this Ministry:-
National Highways Authority of India and
National Institute of Training of Highway Engineers. 
7.         The Annual Plan 2001-02 envisages an outlay of Rs. 9337.49 crores in respect of Central and Centrally
 Sponsored Schemes in Transport Sector within the jurisdiction of this Ministry:-
(Rs. in Crores)
Sector Budgetary Support I.E.B.R Total
1 2 3 4
Roads 9045.00 3600.00 12645.00
Road Transport 10.34 - 10.34
Provision for NE &
 Sikkim Pool
282.15 - 282.15
TOTAL 9337.49 3600.00 12937.49
 
8.         The actual expenditure incurred/anticipated expenditure since 1996-97 is indicated in the statement given
 below:-
(Rs. in crores)
l.
 No.
Item Actual Expenditure 2000-01 2001-02
 1997-98 1998-99 1999-
2000
Budget
 Estimates
Revised
 Estimates
Budget
 Estimate
 (Budgetary
 Support)
2 3 4 5 6 7 8
Roads 1636.23 1513.00 4465.95 5563.00 9104.90 9045.00
Road
 Transport
8.36 6.25 6.76 11.35 9.25 10.34
Provision
 for NE &
 Sikkim
- - - - - 282.15

REPORT
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/51streport.htm[28-08-2018 12:52:11]
 Pool
Total 1644.59 1519.25 4472.71 5574.35 9114.15 9337.49
 
9.         Giving details of the requirement and availability of funds during 9th Plan period, the Ministry of Road
 Transport & Highways informed the Committee they have proposed an outlay of Rs. 23,000 crore for Ninth Plan Period
 on the basis of the recommendations of the working group on roads for Ninth Plan at 1996 price level.  However,
 Planning Commission approved only Rs.8862.02 crores as an outlay for the Ninth Plan for Central Sector Roads.
10.       The total allocation during the first 4 years of the Ninth Plan was Rs.11681.93 crore at the R.E. stage.  For the
 year 2001-2002 an amount of Rs.5116.00 crore has been provided.  Thus, total amount available for Central Sector
 roads is Rs.16697.93 crore.  However, NHAI has floated bonds during the current year and has also proposed issue of
 bonds in the next year.  It is expected that an amount of Rs. 4600 crore will be generated from these bonds.  Thus total
 amount earmarked for roads including funding from extra budgetary sources during the Ninth Plan is Rs. 21297.93
 crore.  There is also an additional provision in the budget for Rs.2052 crore available from the cess on petrol and diesel
 since 2000-2001, which will be utilized for development and maintenance of the State Roads.
11.       The Ministry will be able to achieve the physical targets as initially envisaged for the Ninth Plan for all the
 schemes except bypasses, which are being given comparatively lower priority.  In fact the present endeavour is to take
 up bypass projects on BOT basis. 
12.       The Committee is happy to note that since 2000-2001 the Ministry of Road Transport and Highways has been
 getting sufficient funds as a result of which Ministry is now in a position to achieve the physical targets as initially
 envisaged for the Ninth Plan.  Earlier the Ministry has not been able to exploit its potential due to paucity of funds. 
 Now there is no dearth of money for Road sector and so it is the turn of the Ministry to establish its expertise in the
 field of Road Sector.
CENRTAL ROAD FUND
 
13.       The Committee was informed that in recognition of the need of funds for road infrastructure sector, Union
 Budget for 1998-99 had provided for levy of additional excise duty and additional custom duty of Rs. 1 per liter of
 petrol.  Subsequently, in the Union Budget for 1999-2000, an additional duty of Rs. 1 per liter on imported and
 domestic high-speed diesel was levied.  The revenue from which would be used to finance for all categories of roads.  
 The Central Road fund has been given the statutory status by an Act of Parliament in December 2000. Large amount of
 allocation is coming into the road sector under Central Road Fund.  This is a three-tier development programme.  In
 India, State Highways and the major district roads were neglected due to paucity of funds.
 
14.            Allocation from this fund will be made in the following manner:-
50% of the cess on high-speed diesel oil for development of rural roads. 
50% of cess on HSD and the entire cess collected on petrol will be allocated as per the following:-
 An amount equal to 57.5% of such sum the development and maintenance of National Highways; 
The amount equal to 12.5% for the construction of road under or over bridges and safety works at unmanned railway
 crossings; and 
The balance 30% on development and maintenance of State roads and out of this amount, 10% i.e., 3% of the total share
 of the State Roads shall be kept as reserved by the Central Government for allocation to States for implementation of
 State Road Schemes of Inter-State and economic importance to be approved by the Central Government.
 15.       The allocation to the different States from the States’ share of Central Road Fund is now based on the
 consumption of petrol and diesel and geographical area of the State concerned.  Release of funds is project specific and
 further installments will be released subject to the receipt of the utilization certificates.  During the year 2000-01,
 allocation of Rs.990 crore has been made to the States and Union Territories.  One third of the allocated amount i.e. Rs.
 314.75 crore has been released to all the States as an advance. 
16.       The Committee is happy to note that with the setting up of the Central Road Fund, the Ministry of Road
 Transport & Highways has now been able to provide sufficient funds for the development and maintenance of
 State Highways and State Roads.  However, during the last year only an amount of Rs. 314.75 crores out of
 Rs.990 crores could be released to States for the purpose.  The Committee can understand this fact that within a
 short span of time, the States could not have been able to utilise whole amount of Rs. 990 crore allocated for the
 development of State Highways and State Roads.  The Committee hopes that in future the State Governments
 will be able to utilise the whole amount allocated to them in this regard.  However, the Committee wants the

REPORT
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/51streport.htm[28-08-2018 12:52:11]
 Ministry to impress upon the State Government that the State Highways and State roads should be developed in
 such a way that the entire State roads network would provide a feeder system to the rail network thereby
 avoiding development of parallel road network.  The Committee is aware that there have been instances of
 diversion of funds and are not utilised for the purpose for which they are allocated. Therefore, Committee
 recommends that Ministry of Road Transport and Highways should ensure proper and strict monitoring of the
 schemes for which the funds are allocated from the Central Road Funds so as to avoid cost escalation and time
 over run.
 
CHECK POINTS & SPEED BREAKERS AT NATIONAL HIGHWAYS
 
17.       The National highways are the major arterial roads which run through the length and breadth of the country
 connecting state capitals, industrial and business centres, ports, tourist centres and provide links with neighbouring
 countries.  In other words, these are lifeline of the country. 
18.       The Committee was informed that with the development of national highways inter state check points are
 growing up.  The Ministry stated that as per the guidelines, check posts are not allowed to be put up on National
 Highways.  But in spite of that, the State Governments and the local bodies are putting them up.  These check posts
 should be made on the separate road which lead to and from the National Highways Temporary posts i.e. police posts
 where an accident might have taken place are reasonably allowed.  The Ministry is regularly insisting to the State
 Governments for removal of it on National Highways. 
19.       It was further informed that there are no. of speed breakers on national highways which are also one of the
 reasons for road accidents.  Speed breakers are also not allowed on National Highways.  The Ministry has written
 letters to all State Governments regarding removal of Speed breakers.  Some of the State Government have taken steps
 in this regard. 
20.       The Committee is of the view that the check points on National Highways are illegal collection points for the
 local police and local bodies where traffic is stopped and harassed.  The Committee is also of the view that speed
 breakers on the National Highways are one of the reasons for accidents.  Therefore, it is much needed to remove all
 these speed breakers from National Highways.  The Committee is unable to understand why State Governments have
 not complied and implemented the directions of the Ministry of Road Transport & Highways in this regard.  The
 Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry should impose some financial penalty on those states who violate
 the guidelines and fail to remove check points and speed breakers from National Highways.
 
EXCISE DUTY ON MIXING OF CEMENT
 
21.       The Committee also came to know about the harassment of contractors working on National Highways by the
 personnel of the Central Excise Department.  On the query of the Committee, the Ministry informed that the Central
 Excise Department has deemed mixing of cement as a production activity and they are charging excise duty on it.  The
 Ministry has taken up the matter with the Revenue Department.  It is stated by the Ministry that the imposed excise
 duty on mixing of cement was not there earlier.  This is also not appreciable step and will increase the cost of
 construction of National Highways. 
22.       The Committee agrees to the view put forth by the Ministry that proposed excise duty on mixing of cement is
 likely to increase the cost of construction of National Highways and open the new way of the harassment.  The
 Committee is unable to understand as to what has made the Ministry of Finance to treat the mixing of cement as
 production activity.  The Committee is of the view that Central Excise Department is finding new ways and means to
 earn revenue and to impose excise duties. The mixing of cement is one of the such examples.  The Committee therefore
 recommends that the Ministry of Road Transport and Highways should take up the matter strongly with Ministry of
 Finance (Department of Revenue) to review the proposal.
 
DEVELOPMENT OF NATIONAL HIGHWAYS IN NORTH EASTERN REGION
 
23.       The Committee enquired about the development programme of National Highways in the North-East region. 
 The Ministry of Road Transport and Highways, while replying to query, informed that the Ministry is regularly in the
 previous years allocating 10% of the allocation to the North-Eastern region without under any separate head.  During
 the 2001-2002, under the head of “Provision for North East and Sikkim Pool”, an amount of Rs.282.15 crores are
 allocated for development of National Highways in this region.  The financial conditions of the States in the North-

REPORT
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/51streport.htm[28-08-2018 12:52:11]
Eastern region is so poor that they are not in a position to utilise their resources and claim reimbursement.  As a result,
 the Ministry took an initiative and direct payment system was introduced. In Assam, the Public Works Department
 which failed to spend even Rs. 15 to 16 crores earlier, has now spent Rs.58 crores because of Ministry’s intervention
 and direct payment.  The Ministry agreed that the condition in Assam with regard to this sector is not proper but has
 certainly improved to a reasonable extent. 
24.       The Committee was further informed that the reasons for poor development and bad conditions of National
 Highways in North East region are non-availability of hot mix plants, boilers and other related things. The Ministry
 assured the Committee that due to our direct payment system to these States, there will be definitely improvement in
 the conditions of the National Highways in the region.
 
25.       The Committee appreciates the steps taken by the Ministry of Road Transport and Highways for development
 and improvement in the poor condition of the National Highways in the North East region.  The Committee hopes that
 allocated amount of Rs.282.15 crores will be fully utilised by the North Eastern States with the help of direct payment
 system as introduced by the Ministry. The Committee, however recommends that the Ministry of Road Transport and
 Highways should frame some schemes for this region which will help the contractors or Public Works Departments of
 these states to procure hot mix plants, boilers and any other related thing which is needed in the construction of roads. 
 
GUIDELINES FOR DECLEARING NEW NATIONAL HIGHWAYS
 
26.       The length of National Highways for which the Government of India is constitutionally responsible stood at
 52010 kms at the end of March 2000.  During the last year, a further length of 5727 kms has been added to NH network
 and at present it stands at 57,737 kilometers. 
27.       During last year, the Ministry has added 5,694 kms. of State roads into the National Highway cover, which is
 causing procedural hurdles like getting no-objection certificates from States for transferring of land to the centre,
 rehabilitation and relocation in the case of road widening and four laning of National Highway.
28.       With regard to declaring National Highways the Committee wanted to know the criteria in this regard.  The
 Committee was informed that the following are criteria for declaration of state roads as new National Highways: -
Roads which run through the length or breadth of the country,
Roads connecting adjacent countries,
Roads connecting the national capital with state capital and roads connecting mutually the state capitals,
Roads connecting major ports, large industrial centres and tourist centres,
Roads meeting very important strategic requirements,
Arterial roads which enable very sizeable reduction in travel distance and achieve substantial economic growth thereby,
Roads which help opening up large tracts of backward areas and hilly regions,
National Highway grid of 100 km is achieved,
The declaration of National Highway is considered based on the requirements of the country as a whole and not with
 respect to any local requirements.
 
29.            Besides this, the Ministry has recently issued important guideline that if any particular road has to be declared
 as the National Highway, it should be a necessarily a state highway road and minimum road of 30 x 40 meters. 
30.       The Committee was further informed that after declaration of state roads as National Highways, the concerned
 State Government is required to send its ‘No Objection’ for transfer of land and other assets of the said road to the
 Central Government before Notification of entrustment of National Highway to the executive agency for development
 and maintenance is issued.  In the instant case, ‘No Objection’ from the 14 States have been received and the
 Notification for entrusting these National Highways to the respective State Public Works Departments for taking up
 development and maintenance works has been sent to Legislative Department, Ministry of Law, Justice & Company
 Affairs for their vetting before it is notified.
31.       The ‘No Objection’ is still awaited from Governments of Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, Jammu & Kashmir and
 Punjab.  Chief Secretaries of these four States have been reminded by the Secretary (RT&H) for sending their ‘No
 Objection’.
 
32.       The Committee notes that the Ministry of Road Transport &Highways  has been declaring State roads as
 National Highways in violation of the guidelines prescribed in this regard, frequently.  It has increased the burden of
 the Government for maintenance of National Highways.  The Committee therefore recommends that the guidelines

REPORT
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/51streport.htm[28-08-2018 12:52:11]
 issued in this respect should be adhered to strictly.  The problems relating to the transferring of land to the Centre,
 rehabilitation and relocation in the case of road widening and four laning of National Highway, should be taken care of
 well in advance and if possible, it should be the part of the guidelines.  The Committee hopes that this will check the
 delays in execution of plans for development of newly declared National Highways.
ROAD SAFETY
 
33.       Road Transport is the most dominant mode of transport both for movement of passenger and goods and will
 continue to enjoy this status increasingly in the coming years.  The users preference towards road transport is on
 account of its inherent advantages viz.  Easy availability, adaptability to individual needs, door-to-door service and
 reliability present around 80% of passengers and over 60% of freight is estimated to move by roads. The Ministry has
 taken massive programme for improvements of riding quality. As a result of which speed of the vehicle has gone up
 which is likely to lead in increase in road accidents .To meet the challenge, the Committee wanted to know the details
 of the schemes and programmes of the Ministry in this regard.
 
34.       The Committee was apprised that a Road Safety Cell was set up in the Ministry of Surface Transport in
 September 1986 to formulate policies for road safety so as to minimize road accidents in the country.  The Road Safety
 Cell Compiles road accidents data, prepares and implements Annual Road Safety Plan, draws up National Road Safety
 Policy and prepares schemes and programmes envisaging Road Safety.  The important schemes include publicity
 programmes, Grants-in-aid to voluntary organisations for organizing road safety programmes, National Highway
 Patrolling Scheme, Refresher Training to drivers in unorganized sector etc. 
 
35.       The Committee was further informed that as per the available information the number of Road Accidents during
 the year 1999-2000 was 33463 as compared to 385016 during the previous year.  To reduce minimise the road
 accidents the Ministry have special attention to the awareness campaigns, improvement of road geometric and strict
 enforcement of the traffic rules and provisions of the motor vehicles act.  Many of the powers rest with the State
 Governments.  Therefore, the Ministry has constantly been advising the State Governments on these three aspects. 
36.       The Roads Wing of the Ministry has taken steps to improve the geometric of the National Highways.  Widening,
 four laning, maintenance and upkeep of the National Highways have also helped in reducing the number of road
 accidents.   
37.       It was further apprised that after the mammoth efforts, the Ministry recently issued guidelines for introduction of
 ‘Smart Cards’.  They are nothing but microprocessor cards which can not be altered by any unauthorised person.  Every
 detail is fed in to the computer and subsequently entered in the microprocessor.  Any minute entry can be traced and
 found as to when and where and by whom it was made. It would also prevent issuances of bogus licenses.   
38.       The Committee is worried about the number of road accidents in the country.  The Committee is of the view that
 most of the accidents occurs due to the driver’s negligence, unawareness of the road safety norms and non-
implementation of the Rules and Regulations.  The efforts made for reducing the road accidents are not sufficient
 enough to reduce  the number of road accidents. 
 39.       The Committee thinks that refresher training programme for heavy vehicle drivers in the non-organised sector
 has not achieved the desired results.  The Ministry should not feel satisfied that the number of road accidents are
 decreasing as compare to previous year. However, they should make efforts to further decrease the number of road
 accidents that are taking lives of thousand of people every year.  Traffic sense in general is missing among the drivers. 
 Human aspects should be made important component for the training programme of drivers. The Committee
 recommends that drivers should be educated with regard to road safety rules and regulations, which will decrease the
 number of accidents. 
40.       The Committee appreciates the introduction of ‘Smart Card’ by the Ministry of Road Transport and Highways.
 The concept of smart card is an innovative step and will definitely minimise the cases of issuance of fake licenses.
 
GRANTS-IN-AID TO NON GOVERNMENT ORGANISATIONS
 
41.       The Committee apprised that the scheme for providing grants-in-aid to Non Governmental Organisations to
 undertake various types of road safety programmes to raise awareness is in operation since 1991-92.  Any Voluntary
 organisation registered under the Registration of Societies Act, 1860/Autonomous bodies/Educational institutions
 engaged in research activity or field programmes relating to road safety for a period of at least two years can apply for
 financial assistance from Road Safety Fund.  Applications under this Scheme are considered for raising road safety

REPORT
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/51streport.htm[28-08-2018 12:52:11]
 consciousness among the road users; publicity campaigns on road safety providing training facilities and medical aid to
 the victims of road accidents etc.  The total amount of assistance for any project shall not exceed Rs. 5 lakhs.  During
 the current financial year an overwhelming response from NGOs has been received. 
42.       The Ministry of Road Transport and Highways has provided Grants-in-aid to 89 Non-Government Organisations
 (NGOs) for conducting various road safety awareness programmes.  As for these NGOs, Ministry has a strict method of
 selection.  It is to be certified that by the State Government that the fund was properly utilised.    When utilisation
 certificate is given, an officer of the State Government goes and inspects and certifies that the fund utilised for the
 purpose.
 
43.       An amount of Rs. 50 lakhs has been kept under this scheme.
(Rs. in Lakhs)
BE 2000-2001 RE 2000-2001 BE 2001-2002
50.00 50.00 50.00
                                   
 
44.       The Committee is surprised to note that the Ministry of Road Transport and Highways does not have their own
 monitoring system to see how the Grants-in-aid given to Non-Government Organisation to undertake various types of
 road safety programmes are utilised.    The Committee is of the view that in the absence of proper monitoring system,
 funds are likely to be misused.  There is a possibility of the fake Non Government Organisation who can come forward
 to obtain grants with the purpose to undertake road safety programmes.  
45.       The Committee therefore recommends that the Ministry of Road Transport and Highways should set up its own
 monitoring system and should ensure that the grants, which have been allocated to Non Government Organisations,
 should be utilised for the purpose for which it is approved. The Ministry should also release the State-wise list of NGOs
 with their addresses for the information of general public. This will definitely increase the awareness of the public
 about the activities of Non Government Organisation which in turn will ensure proper utilisation of the allocated funds
 and reduce the chances of the corruption. 
 
VEHICULAR POLLUTION
 
46.       The Committee was informed that in order to curb the menace of vehicular pollution, this Ministry has taken
 several steps in this direction. Workshop-cum-training programmes are organised every year (ARAI Pune and Indian
 Institute of Petroleum, Dehradun).  In these workshops, officers of the State Transport Department are given training
 regarding checking of vehicular pollution more scientifically and effectively.  Further the Ministry has also made
 budget provision of Rs.1.00 crores during 2000-2001 for the re-imbursement of the actual cost of Pollution Testing
 Equipments to be purchased by the State/Union territories for the checking of vehicular pollution. 
47.       The Committee further informed that in order to reduce or control vehicular pollution, following legislative
 measures have been taken by the Ministry:-
Bharat Stage I norms have been brought into force with effect from 1-April 2000 for all categories of vehicles
 throughout the country.
Bharat Stage II norms have been brought into force on vehicles with gross vehicle weight less than 3500 kgs in Delhi. 
 Those have been further extended to Mumbai on 1-January 2001.  Notification has been issued extending these norms
 to Chennai and Kolkata from 1-July 2001.
Emission standards for vehicles using CNG as fuel have been notified vide GSR No.99 (E) dated 9-February 2000. 
 Emission standards for agricultural tractors have been notified vide GSR No.627 (E) dated 8-September 1999.  Use of
 LPG as auto fuel has also been notified vide GSR No.93 (E) dated 12-February 2001.
Discussions are held with the Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas and Central Pollution Control Board for vehicular
 norms for the future. 
48.       The Committee is not satisfied with the measures taken by the Ministry of Road Transport & Highways to check
 and control the pollution of the vehicles.  Thanks to the vehicular pollution, Delhi is known as one of the most polluted
 city in the world.  The Committee hopes that with the enforcement of use of CNG in public vehicle will reduce the
 level of vehicular pollution in Delhi and similar steps will be taken in respect of other polluted cities of the country. The
 Committee however recommends that Ministry of Road Transport and Highways should take up the matter of having
 more and more outlets in the country to provide CNG to vehicles to avoid wastage of time in standing in the long
 queues. 

REPORT
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/51streport.htm[28-08-2018 12:52:11]
49.       The Committee is aware of the fact that vehicle owners have to pay heavy charges for obtaining ‘Pollution under
 control Certificate’ for their vehicles. This has been proving as discouraging factor and public in general is less
 enthusiastic for having pollution check up of their vehicles.  The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry
 of Road Transport and Highways should take up the matter with the concerned agencies to create an environment
 where the vehicle owners may offer voluntarily first for testing their vehicles.
 
RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT ACTIVITIES
 
50.            Expansion, modernisation, upgradation and maintenance of highway network require research and
 development (R&D) inputs, which ensure optimum utilisation of resources and help in finding cost-effective solutions
 for various road-engineering problems.
51.       The Research and Development activity therefore were required to be taken up in all areas of road development. 
 In this connection the Committee wanted to know as to what has been the achievement of indigenous R&D
 organisations in solving road-engineering problems in comparison to international achievements and whether the
 achievements of the R&D organisation has been commensurate to the quantum of the investment made therein.   
52.       The Ministry in their reply submitted that based on the Ministry’s sponsored research schemes and other
 programmes, the indigenous R&D organisations have made significant achievement and contribution in solving road
 engineering problems such as introduction of new materials like rubber/polymer modified bitumen, use of fly ash in
 road construction and anti-corrosive techniques, road user cost study to access effect of road condition on vehicle
 operating cost, pavement deterioration models, aesthetical and environment friendly road side furniture, reinforced
 earth technology, development of computer software for analysis and design of highway bridge superstructure,
 instrumentation of simply supported bridges and cantilever bridges.  These organisations generally make their best of
 efforts to produce results commensurate with the investment made in the Research Schemes.  But due to indigenously
 non-availability of modern equipments & instruments, inadequate interaction between Indian and International
 technical/scientific community and lack of adequate fiscal incentives to promote R & D efforts in highway sector; the
 indigenous research and development could not be made at par with international levels.  At present there are 39
 ongoing schemes on R &D.   
53.       The Committee is not satisfied with the pace of development in the    Research & Development activities in the
 Road sector.  Till date, the indigenous Research & Development is not able to match the international level.  The
 Committee understands that the Ministry earlier facing the problem of shortage of funds.  However, now the Ministry is
 well satisfied with the availability of funds and hopes that the Ministry will now concentrate upon R&D activities on
 road sector and provide sufficient funds therefor. 
 
* * * * * * 
 
OBSERVATIONS/CONCLUSIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS AT A GLANCE
 
HIGHER ALLOCATION FOR ROAD SECTOR
 
The Committee is happy to note that since 2000-2001 the Ministry of Road Transport and Highways has been getting
 sufficient funds as a result of which Ministry is now in a position to achieve the physical targets as initially envisaged
 for the Ninth Plan.  Earlier the Ministry has not been to exploit its potential due to paucity of funds.  Now there is no
 dearth of money for Road sector and so it is the turn of the Ministry to establish its expertise in the field of Road Sector.
(Para 12)
 
CENRTAL ROAD FUND 
The Committee is happy to note that with the setting up of the Central Road Fund, the Ministry of Road Transport &
 Highways has now been able to provide sufficient funds for the development and maintenance of State Highways and
 State Roads.  However, during the last year only an amount of Rs. 314.75 crores out of Rs.990 crores could be released
 to States for the purpose.  The Committee can understand this fact that within a short span of time, the States could not
 have been able to utilise whole amount of Rs. 990 crore allocated for the development of State Highways and State
 Roads.  The Committee hopes that in future the State Governments will be able to utilise the whole amount allocated to
 them in this regard.  However, the Committee wants the Ministry to impress upon the State Government that the State
 Highways and State roads should be developed in such a way that the entire State roads network would provide a feeder

REPORT
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/51streport.htm[28-08-2018 12:52:11]
 system to the rail network thereby avoiding development of parallel road network.  The Committee is aware that there
 have been instances of diversion of funds and are not utilised for the purpose for which they are allocated. Therefore,
 Committee recommends that Ministry of Road Transport and Highways should ensure proper and strict monitoring of
 the schemes for which the funds are allocated from the Central Road Funds so as to avoid cost escalation and time over
 run.
(Para 16)
 
CHECK POINTS & SPEED BREAKERS AT NATIONAL HIGHWAYS
 
The Committee is of the view that the check points on National Highways are illegal collection points for the local
 police and local bodies where traffic is stopped and harassed.  The Committee is also of the view that speed breakers on
 the National Highways are one of the reasons for accidents.  Therefore, it is much needed to remove all these speed
 breakers from National Highways.  The Committee is unable to understand why State Governments have not complied
 and implemented the directions of the Ministry of Road Transport & Highways in this regard.  The Committee,
 therefore, recommends that the Ministry should impose some financial penalty on those states who violate the
 guidelines and fail to remove check points and speed breakers from National Highways.
(Para 20) 
 
EXCISE DUTY ON MIXING OF CEMENT
 
The Committee agrees to the view put forth by the Ministry that proposed excise duty on mixing of cement is likely to
 increase the cost of construction of National Highways and open the new way of the harassment.  The Committee is
 unable to understand as to what has made the Ministry of Finance to treat the mixing of cement as production activity. 
 The Committee is of the view that Central Excise Department is finding new ways and means to earn revenue and to
 impose excise duties. The mixing of cement is one of such the examples.  The Committee therefore recommends that
 the Ministry of Road Transport and Highways should take up the matter strongly with Ministry of Finance (Department
 of Revenue) to review the proposal.
(Para 22)
 
DEVELOPMENT OF NATIONAL HIGHWAYS IN NORTH EASTERN REGION
 
The Committee appreciates the steps taken by the Ministry of Road Transport and Highways for development and
 improvement in the poor condition of the National Highways in the North East region.  The Committee hopes that
 allocated amount of Rs.282.15 crores will be fully utilised by the North Eastern States with the help of direct payment
 system as introduced by the Ministry. The Committee, however recommends that the Ministry of Road Transport and
 Highways should frame some schemes for this region which will help the contractors or Public Works Departments of
 these states to procure hot mix plants, boilers and any other related thing which is needed in the construction of roads. 
                                                                                                                                                                (Para 25)
 
GUIDELINES FOR DECLEARING NEW NATIONAL HIGHWAYS
 
The Committee notes that the Ministry of Road Transport &Highways  has been declaring State roads as National
 Highways in violation of the guidelines prescribed in this regard, frequently.  It has increased the burden of the
 Government for maintenance of National Highways.  The Committee therefore recommends that the guidelines issued
 in this respect should be adhered to strictly.  The problems relating to the transferring of land to the Centre,
 rehabilitation and relocation in the case of road widening and four laning of National Highway, should be taken care of
 well in advance and if possible, it should be the part of the guidelines.  The Committee hopes that this will check the
 delays in execution of plans for development of newly declared National Highways.
(Para 32)
ROAD SAFETY
 
The Committee is worried about the number of road accidents in the country.  The Committee is of the view that most
 of the accidents occurs due to the driver’s negligence, unawareness of the road safety norms and non-implementation of
 the Rules and Regulations.  The efforts made for reducing the road accidents are not sufficient enough to reduce the

REPORT
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/51streport.htm[28-08-2018 12:52:11]
 number of road accidents.  
The Committee thinks that refresher training programme for heavy vehicle drivers in the non-organised sector has not
 achieved the desired results.  The Ministry should not feel satisfied that the number of road accidents are decreasing as
 compare to previous year. However, they should make efforts to further decrease the number of road accidents that are
 taking lives of thousand of people every year.  Traffic sense in general is missing among the drivers.  Human aspects
 should be made important component for the training programme of drivers. The Committee recommends that drivers
 should be educated with regard to road safety rules and regulations, which will decrease the number of accidents. 
The Committee appreciates the introduction of ‘Smart Card’ by the Ministry of Road Transport and Highways. The
 concept of smart card is an innovative step and will definitely minimise the cases of issuance of fake licenses.
(Paras 38, 39 and 40)
 
GRANTS-IN-AID TO NON GOVERNMENT ORGANISATIONS
 
The Committee is surprised to note that the Ministry of Road Transport and Highways does not have their own
 monitoring system to see how the Grants-in-aid given to Non-Government Organisation to undertake various types of
 road safety programmes are utilised.    The Committee is of the view that in the absence of proper monitoring system,
 funds are likely to be misused.  There is a possibility of the fake Non Government Organisation who can come forward
 to obtain grants with the purpose to undertake road safety programmes.  
The Committee therefore recommends that the Ministry of Road Transport and Highways should set up its own
 monitoring system and should ensure that the grants, which have been allocated to Non Government Organisations,
 should be utilised for the purpose for which it is approved. The Ministry should also release the State-wise list of NGOs
 with their addresses for the information of general public. This will definitely increase the awareness of the public
 about the activities of Non Government Organisation which in turn will ensure proper utilisation of the allocated funds
 and reduce the chances of the corruption.
(Paras 44 and 45)
VEHICULAR POLLUTION
 
The Committee is not satisfied with the measures taken by the Ministry of Road Transport & Highways to check and
 control the pollution of the vehicles.  Thanks to the vehicular pollution, Delhi is known as one of the most polluted city
 in the world.  The Committee hopes that with the enforcement of use of CNG in public vehicle will reduce the level of
 vehicular pollution in Delhi and similar steps will be taken in respect of other polluted cities of the country. The
 Committee however recommends that Ministry of Road Transport and Highways should take up the matter of having
 more and more outlets in the country to provide CNG to vehicles to avoid wastage of time in standing in the long
 queues.
 
The Committee is aware of the fact that vehicle owners have to pay heavy charges for obtaining ‘Pollution under control
 Certificate’ for their vehicles. This has been proving as discouraging factor and public in general is less enthusiastic for
 having pollution check up of their vehicles.  The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Road
 Transport and Highways should take up the matter with the concerned agencies to create an environment where the
 vehicle owners may offer voluntarily first for testing their vehicles.
(Paras 48 and 49)
 
RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT ACTIVITIES
 
The Committee is not satisfied with the pace of development in the    Research & Development activities in the Road
 sector.  Till date, the indigenous Research & Development is not able to match the international level.  The Committee
 understands that the Ministry earlier facing the problem of shortage of funds.  However, now the Ministry is well
 satisfied with the availability of funds and hopes that the Ministry will now concentrate upon R&D activities on road
 sector and provide sufficient funds therefor.
(Para 53)