65th report of Committee on Transport,Tourism and Culture
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/65threport.htm[28-08-2018 13:01:21]
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
                                                                                               
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM & CULTURE
 
SIXTY-FIFTH REPORT
ON
 
 SALE OF CENTAUR HOTEL MUMBAI AIRPORT
 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 10.03.2003)
 (LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 10.03.2003)
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
 
MARCH, 2003/PHALGUNA, 1924 (SAKA)
 
E-mail:rsc-tt@sansad.nic.in
Website: http://rajyasabha.nic.in
 
C O N T E N T S
           
1.         COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE                                                                
2.         INTRODUCTION                                                                                                     
3.         REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE                                                                             
4.         OBSERVATIONS/CONCLUSIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS AT A GLANCE 
5.         ANNEXURES                                                                                               
6.         MINUTES                  
                                           
COMPOSITION OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY       STANDING
 COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE
(2003)
1.      Shri Dipankar Mukherjee  - Chairman
 
         RAJYA SABHA
 
2.      Shri Ghulam Nabi Azad
3.      Prof. Ram Deo Bhandary
4.      Shri Suresh Bhardwaj
5.      Shri S.S. Chandran 
6.      Shri K. Rahman Khan
7.      Shri Bhagatram Manhar
8.      Shri Kalraj Mishra
9.      Shri K.B. Krishna Murthy
10.  Shri Satish Pradhan
11.  Shri K. Kalavenkata Rao

65th report of Committee on Transport,Tourism and Culture
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/65threport.htm[28-08-2018 13:01:21]
12.  Shri Ravula Chandra Sekar Reddy
13.  Shrimati Maya Singh 
14.  Shri S. Viduthalai Virumbi
15.  Chaudhary Harmohan Singh Yadav
 
LOK SABHA
 
16.  Shri Raj Babbar
17.  Shri G.M.  Banatwalla 
18.  Shri Anil Basu
    *19.Vacant
20.  Shrimati Reena Choudhary
21.  Shri T.T.V. Dhinakaran 
22.  Shri P.S. Gadhavi  
23.  Shri V. Dhananjaya Kumar
24.  Shri Vijay Kumar Khandelwal
25.  Dr. Ramkrishna Kusmaria
26.  Shri S.P. Lepcha
27.  Shri Shivaji Mane
28.  Shri K.H. Muniyappa 
29.  Shri Vilas Muttemwar
30.  Shri Ajit Kumar Panja
31.  Dr. Prasanna Kumar Patasani 
32.  Shri Sunder Lal Patwa
33.  Shri Braj Mohan Ram
34.  Shri Gunipati Ramaiah
35.  Shri Bishnu Pada Ray
36.  Shri Vijay Sankeshwar
37.  Capt. Satish Sharma
38.  Shri Th. Chaoba Singh
*Vacancy caused due to change in nomination of Shri Suresh Chandel to the Committee on Railways w.e.f. 24.1.2003.
 
(i)
39.  Shri Vinay Kumar Sorake
40.  Shri Kalava Srinivasulu
41.  Shri Kodikunnil Suresh
42.  Shri Sunder Lal Tiwari
43.  Shri Ram Naresh Tripathee
44.  Shri D. Venugopal
45.  Shri S.D.N.R.Wadiyar 
 
SECRETARIAT
 
Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary
Shrimati Agnes Momin George, Deputy Secretary
Shri Jagdish Kumar, Under Secretary
Shrimati Subhashree Panigrahi, Committee Officer
 
INTRODUCTION
 
         I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport, Tourism & Culture,
 having been authorised  by the Committee to present on its behalf, do hereby present this Sixty-fifth Report of the

65th report of Committee on Transport,Tourism and Culture
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/65threport.htm[28-08-2018 13:01:21]
 Committee on ‘Sale of Centaur Hotel Mumbai Airport.
2.      The Committee took up the subject in pursuance of the reports in the electronic/print media regarding the resale of
 the Centaur Hotel Mumbai Airport by M/s Batra Hostabitality Private Limited to the Sahara Group within 6 months of
 acquiring the hotel from the Government. 
3.      The Committee considered the subject and heard the Secretary and other officers of the Ministry of Civil Aviation
 in its meeting held on the 11 th December, 2002.  The Committee wishes to express its thanks to the officers of the
 Ministry of Civil Aviation for placing before the Committee the information desired in connection with the subject.
 
4.      The Committee considered and adopted the draft Report on the subject in its meeting held on the 5th March 2003.
 
NEW DELHI; 
March 5, 2003
Phalguna 14, 1924 (Saka)
DIPANKAR MUKHERJEE
Chairman,
     Department-related Parliamentary Standing ommittee
 on Transport, Tourism & Culture.
 
                                                                                                                                
R E P O R T
 
            The Hotel Corporation of India Limited (HCI), a public limited company wholly owned by Air India Limited
 and was incorporated on July 8, 1971, under the Companies Act, 1956.  It was established when Air India decided to
 enter the hotel industry in keeping with the then prevalent trend among world airlines.  Its main objective was to offer
 to the passengers a better product, both at the international airports and at other places of tourist interest, thereby also
 increasing tourism in India.  Air India also aimed to cater to the requirement of in-flight catering as well as to provide
 quality hotel accommodation to the passengers and crew.  Since then Hotel Corporation of India was operating four
 hotels, in Mumbai (two), Delhi (one) and Srinagar (one), one Hotel at Rajgir and two flight catering units in Mumbai
 and Delhi.
           
2.         The Annual Report 2001-2002 of Ministry of Civil Aviation contains a chapter on Hotel Corporation of India. 
 While highlighting the main functions/achievements of HCI, the chapter gives the following details with regard to the
 Centaur Hotel Mumbai Airport, Mumbai :-
 
            “The first hotel of the Company, namely the Centaur Hotel Bombay Airport was commissioned in
 May 1975.  The Hotel at Mumbai Airport has 288 rooms including 4 Deluxe Suites, a 24 hour Coffee
 Shop, 2 Speciality Restaurants, Bar, Shopping Arcade, Health Club, Swimming Pool, Beauty Parlour,
 Banquet and Conference facilities for the transit passengers etc.  The hotel right from its inception, was
 well received by the airlines, travel agents and business travellers and has had a high occupancy, the
 hotel is extremely popular and has a reputation for excellent food.  60 Guest Rooms alongwith its
 connected Shafts and corridors were renovated in December, 2000.
 
Additional 60 guest rooms alongwith its connected shafts and corridors are now under renovation
 and expected to be completed by the end of February, 2002.”
           
3.         During October 2002, there were reports in the electronic/print media that Centaur Hotel Mumbai Airport
 (CHMA), sold by the Government to Batra Hospitalities for Rs.83 crores had been later resold by the latter to the
 Sahara Group for Rs.115 crores.  Almost all national dailies and magazines covered articles in this regard.  The issue
 was also raised in the Parliament and a marathon debate on the subject was held in the Parliament during its Winter
 Session in the year 2002 wherein replying to a query on the subject, the Minister of Disinvestment, Shri Arun Shourie,
 stated* as under:-
 
“....... my first point is that this was not being handled by the Ministry of Disinvestment at all ......”
 

65th report of Committee on Transport,Tourism and Culture
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/65threport.htm[28-08-2018 13:01:21]
4.         On the basis of the reports in the newspapers, the Committee decided to obtain preliminary comments in the
 matter from the Ministry of Civil Aviation.  However, the information received from the Ministry was not found
 satisfactory.  In view of the fact that the hotels of HCI were covered in the Annual Report of the Ministry of Civil
 Aviation, the Committee felt that the examination of the subject was well within the functions** assigned to the
 Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committees in the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in the
 Council of States.  The Committee, therefore, decided to undertake an in-depth examination of the sale of Centaur
 Hotel Mumbai Airport, Mumbai.
 
5.         Accordingly, the Committee heard the Secretary and other officers of the Ministry of Civil Aviation on the
 subject in its meeting held on the 11
th December 2002.  The Committee also directed the Ministry of Civil Aviation to
 furnish a detailed status note on the subject for its consideration.  The Ministry of Civil Aviation, vide their O.M.
 No.13/2/2002-F.I dated the 18th December 2002, furnished a status note on the sale of Centaur Hotel Mumbai Airport,
 indicating chronology of the events from the start of the sale process, its resale and the present status of the property
 including its ownership.  The extracts of the status note submitted by the Ministry of Civil Aviation is at Annexure-I.
 
6.         On going through the detailed status note furnished by the Ministry of Civil Aviation, the Committee felt that
 there were many grey areas which did not seem to be above board.  Also, there appeared to be lack of transparency in
 various activities involved in the transaction which called for detailed examination
 
 
_________________________________________________________________
*          Parliamentary Debates, Rajya Sabha Part II dated 4
th December 2002.
 
**        Rule 270 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in the Council of States reads as follows:-
 
            Each of the Standing Committees shall have the following functions, namely :-
(a)
                to consider the Demands for Grants of the related Ministries/Departments and Report thereon.  The
 report shall not suggest anything of the nature of cut motions;
(b)               to examine Bills, pertaining to the related Ministries/Departments, referred to the Committee by the
 Chairman or the Speaker, as the case may be, and report thereon;
(c)                to consider the annual reports of the Ministries/Departments and the report thereon, and
(d)               to consider national basic long term policy documents presented to the House, if referred to the
 Committee by the Chairman or the Speaker, as the case may be, and report thereon”
            Provided that the Standing Committees shall not consider matters of day-to-day administration of the related
 Ministries/Departments.
 
SELECTION CRITERIA 
 
7.         The Committee noticed that among the 19 parties which submitted Expression of Interest (EOI) in response to
 the Advertisement (copy at Annexure-2) issued by Air India, 17 parties had been short-listed for sale of Centaur Hotel
 Mumbai Airport.  The Committee desired to know the selection criteria and parameters set for shortlisting of EOIs. 
 The Committee was informed by Ministry of Civil Aviation that the selection criteria for short listing of EOIs were
 fixed by the Sub-Committee of Air India, which were looking after the process of disinvestment of properties of HCI. 
 The following three criteria were used for rejecting EOIs:-
 
(i)
                  Incomplete/Delayed/Invalid EOI Package.
(ii)                Financial strength – should demonstrate financial strength commensurate with business offer.
 
(iii)               Relevant experience in 5 star hotel and air catering businesses.
 

65th report of Committee on Transport,Tourism and Culture
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/65threport.htm[28-08-2018 13:01:21]
8.         The Committee also enquired about the credentials of M/s. A.L. Batra in compliance of the requirement as to
 “relevant operating experience of the Interested Party either in India and/or overseas” as required in item no.3 of the
 advertisement inviting the EOI.  In response, vide O.M. No.H-11017/40/2002-Air India (pt) dated 30 th January 2003,
 the Committee was informed by the Ministry of Civil Aviation that M/s. A. L. Batra Group of Companies were
 operating A. B. Hotels – Radisson in Delhi and as such were having relevant experience of the hotel industry.  The
 Committee was further informed that the financial strength in respect of A. B. Hotels Limited (Radisson) was only
 taken into consideration for short listing M/s. A. L. Batra.
           
9.         Shri A. L. Batra had submitted the EOI as CMD of Batra Group of Companies.  Further, since the submission of
 EOI, Shri A. L. Batra had participated in the process without any reference of any appropriate set-up, which will be the
 purchaser of Centaur Hotel Mumbai Airport.  In view of the above, the Committee enquired from the Ministry of Civil
 Aviation as to why the application of Shri A. L. Batra had been accepted at all. The Ministry of Civil Aviation, vide
 O.M. No. H-11017/40/2002-Air India (pt) dated 30
th January 2003, stated that Shri A. L. Batra submitted the EOI on
 behalf of A. L. Batra Group of Companies.  Shri A. L. Batra’s EOI did not include a proposal to form a joint venture
 for the purpose of acquiring CHMA.  As per the EOI requirements, it was not mandatory for any of the interested
 parties to submit details of the joint venture for the purposes of acquiring the business of HCI at the time of submission
 of EOI.  The EOI of Shri A. L. Batra was valid as per the selection criteria for short listing the parties for disinvestment
 of HCI and was, therefore, accepted.
 
10.       A perusal of the advertisement inviting EOI reveals the following clause :
 
“Where any EOI includes a proposal to form a joint venture for the purpose of this investment, details of
 the members of the proposed joint venture and the extent of their respective interests therein are also
 required to be given as a part of the EOI package submitted.  AI is willing to consider proposals on
 changes to the membership of such joint venture by Interested Parties up to the stage of the submission
 of a financial bid.  AI has the sole discretion to determine the impact of such change in membership on
 the quality of the Joint Venture and reject a proposal for such reason.”
           
11.       The Committee further observed that the letter dated 1
st January 2002, addressed to ‘qualified interested parties’
 including Shri A.L. Batra ‘Chairman & Managing Director, AL Batra Group’ inviting the financial re-bidding for the
 properties of Hotel Corporation of India contains the condition that “the offer will be treated as final, unconditional and
 non-negotiable.”  Further the same letter also asked from the parties’ confirmation of bidder identity as under:
 
“Confirmation that the Bidder is acting as principal on its own account or in the case of a consortium, detailed
 information on each of its members, details of consortium and individual letters of participation.” 
 
The Committee also observed that Shri A. L. Batra had disclosed the Special Purpose Vehicle (SPV) i.e. Batra
 Hospitality Private Limited that will take over the Centaur Hotel Mumbai Airport only on 9
th March 2002 i.e. after
 receiving the information that he had succeeded as bidder.  The Committee felt that the acceptance of the financial bid
 of Shri A. L. Batra was, therefore, in violation of the condition prescribed in the advertisement inviting EOI.  The
 Committee, therefore, enquired from the Ministry of Civil Aviation as to why, in the light of the above conditions, the
 letter of Shri A. L. Batra dated 18.1.2002 (copy at Annexure-3), submitted along with the offer stating “In the hopeful
 situation of success of the bid, appropriate structure will be adopted’ was not treated as an incomplete and conditional
 bid.
 
12.       The Ministry of Civil Aviation, in their reply submitted vide O.M. No. H-11017/40/2002-Air India (pt) dated
 30
th January 2003, stated that the letter dated 18.1.2002 (copy at Annexure-4) which was submitted by Shri A. L. Batra
 states that Shri A. L. Batra submitted the financial bid as A. L. Batra, Chairman of A L Batra Group and confirmed that
 “we are acting as principal on our own account”.  Since Shri A. L. Batra’s financial bid did not express the intention to
 form a joint venture and mentioned that the bid was being submitted as a “principal on our own account”.  Therefore,
 the requirement to submit details of a joint venture is not relevant in this regard.
 
13.       Ministry of Civil Aviation further stated that the financial bid submitted by Shri A. L. Batra also clearly states

65th report of Committee on Transport,Tourism and Culture
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/65threport.htm[28-08-2018 13:01:21]
 that the “Financial Bid is an unconditional and irrevocable offer, which is valid and may be accepted by the
 Government of India until April 30, 2002, irrespective of any events that may occur until date”.  The financial bid was
 determined to be valid as per the requirements of the financial bid, and was, therefore, accepted.  Further since Shri A.
 L. Batra had bid as “principal on our own account”, he had to intimate the SPV, which is a part of the A. L. Batra
 Group, to complete the transfer the business of CHMA.  In his letter dated March 9, 2002, Shri A. L. Batra informed
 that Batra Hospitality Private Limited (BHPL), a company of the A. L. Batra Group will be the SPV through which A.
 L. Batra Group will acquire the business of CHMA.  At no point of time, Shri A. L. Batra mentioned that BHPL was a
 joint venture.
 
14.       The Committee notes that the financial strength in respect of A B Hotels Limited (Radisson) was only taken into
 consideration for short listing M/s. A. L. Batra.  However, in the subsequent process Batra Hospitality Private Limited
 (erstwhile Batra Nibgo India Private Ltd.)  has been used as SPV.  The list of companies of AL Batra Group, as given
 in the details submitted, does not include the name of M/s. Batra Nibgo India Private Ltd. name of which has been
 changed to Batra Hospitality Private Limited. While AB Hotels Ltd. does have the relevant experience of running 5 star
 hotel and the financial strength of A.B. Hotels Ltd. has only been taken into consideration for short listing, use of
 BHPL as SPV raises serious questions regarding the intention of the buyer.  BHPL has been brought into the picture as
 SPV for acquiring the CHMA which appears to be a pre-motivated objective to dispose of the same flouting the
 provisions/conditions of sale, since the transfer of 100 per cent holding in BHPL will automatically lead to the transfer
 of the property and not sale of the property.  This would not have been possible if AB Hotels Ltd. had acquired
 CHMA.  The Committee is of the view that the above issue requires a detailed investigation.
 
15.       The Committee does not agree with the reasons advanced by the Ministry of Civil Aviation for treating the bid
 of Shri A L. Batra as a valid bid.  The Committee is of the view that Shri A. L. Batra had participated in the bidding
 process without any reference of any appropriate set up as to which will be the purchaser of Centaur Hotel.  Even at the
 stage of rebidding, the letter of Shri A. L. Batra dated 18.1.2002 states, “In the hopeful situation of success of the bid,
 appropriate structure will be adopted”.  The contention of the Ministry that the offer was unconditional also becomes
 untenable in view of the fact that the SPV was formed only after the bid was accepted.
 
16.       Again, the Committee observes that Shri A. L. Batra had disclosed the SPV i.e. BHPL would take over Centaur
 Hotel Mumbai Airport after receiving the information that Shri A. L. Batra had succeeded as bidder i.e. on 9.3.2002. 
 The Committee, therefore, feels that Shri A. L. Batra had acted on behalf of the undisclosed principal till the financial
 bid had been accepted.  Further, the step-in of BHPL after the acceptance of financial bid violates the conditions laid
 down in the advertisement inviting EOI.  The Committee is, therefore, of the view that the entire deal needs thorough
 investigation.
 
17.       Further Shri A. L. Batra signed the letter dated 18
th January 2002 as Chairman & Managing Director of A.L.
 Batra Group.  It may be pointed out that Managing Director designation is associated with any particular company or a
 holding company and not a group.  The Committee is surprised that this fact did not come to the notice of the Global
 Advisor.  Again the letter dated 30.10.2002 has been signed by Shri A. L. Batra as Chairman & Managing
 Director/Managing Partner of AL Batra Group of Companies.  Since there was no holding company for the AL Batra
 Group of Companies, the designation used appears to be misleading.  This is even evident from the list of the group of
 companies under the AL Batra Group (copy at Annexure-5) since it contains some of the units which are partnership in
 nature (Associated Trading Co., Batra Car Care Centre, Pathankot Gas Service).  So it is not at all clear from the
 documents whetherShri A. L. Batra was acting as bonafide principal for acquiring the property.
 
REDUCTION OF TURNOVER LEVY
 
18.       The Committee observed that Centaur Hotel Mumbai Airport was located on the land taken on lease from the
 Airports Authority of India.  The Committee brought to the notice of Ministry of Civil Aviation that turnover levy
 payable to Airports Authority of India was reduced from 6 per cent to 2 per cent on the direction of the Ministry of
 Disinvestment with a plea that such remission will fetch attractive price of the property even when Ministry of Civil
 Aviation was not in favour of such decision.  The Committee enquired from the Ministry of Civil Aviation as to what
 was the impact of such reduction to the revenue of Airports Authority of India and how the loss of such revenue of

65th report of Committee on Transport,Tourism and Culture
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/65threport.htm[28-08-2018 13:01:21]
 Government was compensated by increase in reserve price.  The Committee also highlighted that the reserve price had
 been re-fixed by the Global advisor as per the decision of Cabinet Committee on Disinvestment (CCD) taken on
 26.12.2001 and enquired about the reserve price fixed before and after the reduction of turnover levy.
 
19.       In their reply furnished vide O.M. No. H-11017/40/2002-Air India (pt) dated 30 th January 2003, the Ministry of
 Civil Aviation informed that the rate of turnover levy charged by the AAI for the leased land affects the bid amount
 payable by the bidder.  The idea behind reduction in turnover levy was to make the transaction more attractive as in the
 first round not many bidders submitted their financial bids.  There will be reduction in revenue to Airports Authority of
 India by reduction of turnover levy but, on the other hand, there will be gain to Air India as the buyer will be ready to
 pay more in the beginning (upfront) for the hotel as he will have to pay less to AAI on account of reduced levy.  That’s
 why the reserve price was re-determined and increased accordingly to account for the reduction in turnover levy.
 
20.       As regards refixing of the reserve price, the Committee was informed that J.P. Morgan (India) Private Limited
 (formerly Jardine Fleming India Securities Limited) had submitted separate valuation reports before and after reduction
 of the levy.  The valuation reports for CHMA were submitted to Ministry of Disinvestment on November 5, 2001 and
 January 18, 2002 before the submission of first and second round of financial bids for CHMA.  The lease rentals were
 reduced from 6 per cent to 2 per cent of the turnover prior to the invitation of the second round of financial bids.  This
 was the only parameter that was altered between the first and second valuation reports and the valuations were modified
 accordingly.  These reports are available with the Ministry of Disinvestment.  On both occasions, the reserve price was
 determined by the Valuation Committee constituted by Government of India and the valuation reports formed a part of
 consideration for determination of the reserve price.  Reserve price with 6 per cent turnover levy was Rs.76.2 crores
 and with 2 per cent, turnover levy Rs.78.3 crores. 
 
21.       The Committee observes that the reduction of turnover levy from 6 per cent to 2 per cent which entails the
 reduction of revenue of Airports Authority of India, has been aimed to ensure better price of CHMA.  To get a better
 price for the benefit of AI, the Government has taken a route which leads to a loss of revenue to another Government
 company.  The loss to AAI for this reduction of rate of turnover levy from 6 per cent to 2 per cent has been reported to
 be approximately Rs.17 crores.  Applying the Net Present Value method (with IRR factor 7 per cent which was higher
 than the bank rate), the loss comes to Rs.5.58 crores.   To compensate such a loss the reserve price has been increased
 by Rs.2.1 crores only from Rs.76.2 crores to Rs.78.3 crores.  The Committee is of the view that the issue required
 further clarification and investigation.
 
REBIDDING PROCESS
 
22.       The Committee noted that Ministry of Disinvestment vide their letter dated 11.11.2001, had informed the
 Ministry of Civil Aviation that the properties of Centaur Hotel Mumbai Airport and Centaur Hotel Delhi Airport were
 to be offered for re-bidding by exploring ways and means to secure better response for reinvited bids.  On the
 recommendation of the Core Group of Secretaries on Disinvestment(CGD), the CCD at its meeting held on 26.12.2001
 approved the following :-
i)
                    Inviting of bids for Centaur Hotel Airport Mumbai, Centaur Hotel Airport Delhi (including Chefair
 Delhi) and Chefair Mumbai from the existing Qualified Interested Parties.  Valuation of these properties
 to be done afresh by the Advisors in view of reduction in the turnover levy.
ii)                   The turnover levy to be paid to AAI for the leased land to be reduced to 2 per cent of Annual Turnover
 subject to the prescribed Minimum Guaranteed Annual Payment (MGAP), both for the past and future. 
 The liabilities of HCI to be re-worked and payments to be made by HCI to AAI accordingly.
 
23.       As a consequence, bids were re-invited on 1 st January 2002 from the four existing Qualified Interested Parties
 only i.e. M/s. A. L. Batra, Chairman and Managing Director, A. L. Batra Group, M/s. ITC Group, Morepan Hotels Ltd.
 and M/s. Indian Hotels Ltd.   In respect of CHMA, the last date for submission of bid was 18th January 2002.
 
24.       The Committee inquired from the Ministry of Civil Aviation as to why instead of going in for the process of
 inviting bids from the beginning, why a decision was taken to restrict the re-bidding only among the four parties only,
 when even at the time of the financial bid three parties other than Shri A.L. Batra had abstained from the financial

65th report of Committee on Transport,Tourism and Culture
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/65threport.htm[28-08-2018 13:01:21]
 bidding process after due diligence.  In response, the Ministry of Civil Aviation stated that the decision taken by CCD
 to re-invite bids from all the Qualified Interested Parties was to ensure complete fairness.  The parties who did not bid
 in the 1st round were needed to be given equal opportunity to bid after reduction in the turnover levy and they could not
 be left out simply on the technical ground that their EMDs have been forfeited.  These four parties were the only
 Qualified Interested Parties (QIP) i.e.
(a)                They met the shortlisting criteria following an open advertisement; and
(b)               They deposited earnest money.
 
25.       Only after shortlisting, the bidders were supplied information memorandum giving detailed terms and conditions
 of transaction like 6 per cent turnover levy etc. and were asked to submit their bids after depositing the requisite amount
 of earnest money.  However, only one bidder out of four submitted financial bid.  Unless the shortlisting criteria were
 changed, it was unlikely that any new bidder would have shown interest.
 
26.       The Committee also took note of copy of the letter dated 4
th January 2002 from Shri R.C. Aggarwal, Managing
 Director, HCI addressed to Shri Sanat Kaul, Joint Secretary, Ministry of Civil Aviation which was authenticated and
 laid on the table of Rajya Sabha by Shri Sanjay Nirupam, M.P., on 5
th December 2002, which is reproduced below:-
 
“For reinviting bids, since the EMD was forfeited of the parties who did not respond to the financial bids, it is
 not known whether legally it would be appropriate to invite bids from those parties who had not responded to
 the financial bids and their EMD was forfeited or the bid needs to be reinvited from 28 parties who had fulfilled
 criteria as suggested by the Global Advisors to whom the Information Memorandum was provided.  A view in
 this regard needs to be essentially taken in view of the fact that there has been a substantial reduction in the
 lease rentals and the Minimum Guaranteed Amount has also been reduced almost to 1/3rd, whether it will be fair
 to have the bids of all the parties, or restrict to 2 parties who submitted the financial bids or allow to the parties
 whose EMD has been forfeited because of no response for submission of financial bids at the time of bidding or
 to go altogether for inviting of fresh bids as there has been a substantial change in the terms of the lease .  A
 considered view in this regard may be taken by the Government to avoid any confusion/legal complications at a
 later stage”.  
 
27.       The Committee is not convinced with the reply furnished by the Ministry of Civil Aviation that “Unless the
 shortlisting criteria were changed, it was unlikely that any new bidder would have shown interest”.  It may be pointed
 out that initially there were 17 parties who were short listed out of 19 parties who submitted EOI and subsequently 4
 parties have participated in due diligence.  Hence, there was a qualitative change in the offer by reducing the turnover
 levy from 6 per cent to 2 per cent.  The contention of the Ministry of Civil Aviation that it was unlikely that any new
 bidder would have shown interest is, therefore, not tenable.
 
28.       The Committee is of the view that the idea of reduction in turnover levy was to go for re-bidding by exploring
 ways and means to secure better response for re-invited bid.  But, by restricting the invitation of the 2
nd round bid
 among the four parties only, the very purpose of reduction in turnover levy was defeated as only one bidder, that too the
 same for the earlier bid, remained in picture. Also, no thought was given to the views expressed by Shri R. C.
 Aggarwal.  The second round of bidding was, therefore, clearly a case of considering a ‘single bid’.
 
29.       The Committee feels that the ground rules for participating in the bidding process, as prescribed in the original
 advertisement inviting EOI for the properties of HCI, were framed in such a restrictive manner that it allowed hoteliers
 only in the bidding process.  As a result, the market for the properties of HCI could not be fully explored and several
 other interested parties, who were interested in offering better prices for the properties of HCI, could not enter the
 bidding process.  The Committee also feels that the 100 per cent shareholding of BHPL, which took over CHMA has
 been acquired by Sahara Group with the sole intention of taking over the business of CHMA within a short span of just
 6 months of taking over of CHMA by Shri A. L. Batra.  This clearly shows that there were interested parties for CHMA
 which were not properly explored, disproving the contention of the Ministry of Civil Aviation that it was unlikely that a
 new bidder would have shown interest.  The Committee feels that the reason why only a single bid was considered even
 after reducing the turnover levy, needs to be investigated.

65th report of Committee on Transport,Tourism and Culture
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/65threport.htm[28-08-2018 13:01:21]
 
TRANSFER OF THE PETROL PUMP
 
30.       The Committee also took note of a controversy that arose over the actual ownership of a petrol pump, which was
 located in the premises of Centaur Hotel Mumbai Airport.  The Committee enquired from the Ministry of Civil
 Aviation regarding the details of the assets considered for physical valuation and whether the petrol pump was also
 included in the valuation.
 
31.       The Ministry of Civil Aviation replied that all the assets of HCI were valued by the Asset Valuer.  The petrol
 pump and its equipments did not belong to HCI which only had dealership of the petrol pump. Therefore, the Asset
 Valuer did not value the petrol pump.  The revenue from the petrol pump dealership was taken into account by the
 Advisors for determining the value of CHMA under different methods.
 
32.       However, the Committee noted that in the status note furnished vide  their O.M. No.13/2/2002-F.I dated the 18
th
 December, the Ministry of Civil Aviation stated that at the time of transfer of business of Centaur Hotel Mumbai
 Airport on 5.6.2002, the petrol pump, which was also a part of the transaction, was transferred to M/s Batra Hospitality
 Pvt. Ltd. (BHPL) on ‘as is where is’ basis.  The Joint Secretary, Ministry of Civil Aviation  (Shri Sanat Kaul) requested
 the Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas for transferring of the dealership of I.O.C. for the said petrol pump to M/s.
 Batra Hospitality Pvt. Ltd.  The petrol pump was operated by M/s BHPL till 4.10.2002 when IOC informed HCI vide
 letter No.MSO/R/4340 dated 27.9.2002 that the dealership agreement dated 16.3.1975 executed between HCI and IOC
 stands terminated with immediate effect.  Since HCI had already effected the physical transfer of the petrol pump
 alongwith the hotel w.e.f. 5.6.2002, BHPL were requested to take up the matter with India Oil Corporation. 
 
33.       From the position furnished by the Ministry of Civil Aviation, it is quite clear that the petrol pump was owned
 by the IOC, another PSU under the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas.  The Committee is unable to understand as
 to how the Ministry of Civil Aviation could get the valuation done and also proceed to transfer the ownership of the
 petrol pump without the consent of the concerned PSU and the Ministry.  The Committee is of the view that neither the
 Ministry of Disinvestment nor the Hotel Corporation of India had the right to transfer the petrol pump to M/s. Batra
 Hospitalities Pvt. Ltd. since neither of them were the owners of the petrol pump.  This clearly reflects that no proper
 thought was given to the selling process by the Government before inviting the Expression of Interest for the properties
 of HCI.
 
ASSIGNMENT CLAUSE
 
34.       On being enquired about the re-sale of CMHA, the Ministry of Civil Aviation vide their O.M. No.13/2/2002-F.I
 dated the 18
th December 2002 informed the Committee that in response to a query of Ministry of Disinvestment, Shri
 A.L. Batra informed on 18 th October 2002 that 100 per cent shares of CHMA had been transferred to Sahara Group. 
 The Committee noted that clause no.13.4 of the agreement, namely Assignment clause provides “Neither this
 Agreement nor any benefits or burdens under this Agreement shall be assigned by either Party without the prior written
 consent of the other Party”.  The Committee, therefore, enquired from the Ministry whether the transfer of 100 per cent
 shareholding of BHPL to Sahara Group was an assignment in disguise, the legality of the transfer of shareholding to the
 Sahara Group and whether there has been any breach of Agreement on part of M/s. BHPL.  Vide  their O.M. No. H-
11017/40/2002-AI (pt.) dated 26
th February 2003, the Ministry of Civil Aviation have forwarded the legal opinion of
 the Attorney General of India (copy at Annexure-6) on the matter which inter-alia brings out that there was no
 obligation on BHPL to obtain any prior consent as contemplated by Article 13.4 of the Agreement to Sell and hence,
 there has been no breach of the Lease Agreement. 
 
35.       The Committee takes note of the advice of the Attorney General of India that there has been no breach of the
 Lease Agreement with regard to the re-sale of CHMA.  However, keeping in view the experience and to stop such
 quick change of hands at a premium, necessary provisions may be incorporated in the Agreement to Sell in respect of
 resale/transactions of this nature to be made in future.  The Committee recommends that in light of the discrepancies
 brought out with regard to the selection criteria, reduction of turnover levy, rebidding process and the transfer of petrol
 pump in paras 14, 15, 16, 17, 21, 27, 28, 29 and 33 of the Report, the Government should order an enquiry into the

65th report of Committee on Transport,Tourism and Culture
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/65threport.htm[28-08-2018 13:01:21]
 entire transaction relating to Centaur Hotel Mumbai Airport by the Central Vigilance Commission. 
OBSERVATIONS/CONCLUSIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS
AT A GLANCE
 
SELECTION CRITERIA 
The Committee notes that the financial strength in respect of A B Hotels Limited (Radisson) was only taken into
 consideration for short listing M/s. A. L. Batra.  However, in the subsequent process Batra Hospitality Private Limited
 (erstwhile Batra Nibgo India Private Ltd.)  has been used as SPV.  The list of companies of AL Batra Group, as given
 in the details submitted, does not include the name of M/s. Batra Nibgo India Private Ltd. name of which has been
 changed to Batra Hospitality Private Limited. While AB Hotels Ltd. does have the relevant experience of running 5 star
 hotel and the financial strength of A.B. Hotels Ltd. has only been taken into consideration for short listing, use of
 BHPL as SPV raises serious questions regarding the intention of the buyer.  BHPL has been brought into the picture as
 SPV for acquiring the CHMA which appears to be a pre-motivated objective to dispose of the same flouting the
 provisions/conditions of sale, since the transfer of 100 per cent holding in BHPL will automatically lead to the transfer
 of the property and not sale of the property.  This would not have been possible if AB Hotels Ltd. had acquired
 CHMA.  The Committee is of the view that the above issue requires a detailed investigation.
(Para 14)
 
 
The Committee does not agree with the reasons advanced by the Ministry of Civil Aviation for treating the bid of Shri A
 L. Batra as a valid bid.  The Committee is of the view that Shri A. L. Batra had participated in the bidding process
 without any reference of any appropriate set up as to which will be the purchaser of Centaur Hotel.  Even at the stage of
 rebidding, the letter of Shri A. L. Batra dated 18.1.2002 states, “In the hopeful situation of success of the bid,
 appropriate structure will be adopted”.  The contention of the Ministry that the offer was unconditional also becomes
 untenable in view of the fact that the SPV was formed only after the bid was accepted.
  (Para 15)
 
 
Again, the Committee observes that Shri A. L. Batra had disclosed the SPV i.e. BHPL would take over Centaur Hotel
 Mumbai Airport after receiving the information that Shri A. L. Batra had succeeded as bidder i.e. on 9.3.2002.  The
 Committee, therefore, feels that Shri A. L. Batra had acted on behalf of the undisclosed principal till the financial bid
 had been accepted.  Further, the step-in of BHPL after the acceptance of financial bid violates the conditions laid down
 in the advertisement inviting EOI.  The Committee is, therefore, of the view that the entire deal needs thorough
 investigation.
(Para 16)
 
Further Shri A. L. Batra signed the letter dated 18
th January 2002 as Chairman & Managing Director of A.L. Batra
 Group.  It may be pointed out that Managing Director designation is associated with any particular company or a
 holding company and not a group.  The Committee is surprised that this fact did not come to the notice of the Global
 Advisor.  Again the letter dated 30.10.2002 has been signed by Shri A. L. Batra as Chairman & Managing
 Director/Managing Partner of AL Batra Group of Companies.  Since there was no holding company for the AL Batra
 Group of Companies, the designation used appears to be misleading.  This is even evident from the list of the group of
 companies under the AL Batra Group (copy at Annexure-5) since it contains some of the units which are partnership in
 nature (Associated Trading Co., Batra Car Care Centre, Pathankot Gas Service).  So it is not at all clear from the
 documents whether Shri A. L. Batra was acting as bonafide principal for acquiring the property.
(Para 17)
 
REDUCTION OF TURNOVER LEVY
The Committee observes that the reduction of turnover levy from 6 per cent to 2 per cent which entails the reduction of
 revenue of Airports Authority of India, has been aimed to ensure better price of CHMA.  To get a better price for the
 benefit of AI, the Government has taken a route which leads to a loss of revenue to another Government company.  The
 loss to AAI for this reduction of rate of turnover levy from 6 per cent to 2 per cent has been reported to be

65th report of Committee on Transport,Tourism and Culture
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/65threport.htm[28-08-2018 13:01:21]
 approximately Rs.17 crores.  Applying the Net Present Value method (with IRR factor 7 per cent which was higher
 than the bank rate), the loss comes to Rs.5.58 crores.   To compensate such a loss the reserve price has been increased
 by Rs.2.1 crores only from Rs.76.2 crores to Rs.78.3 crores.  The Committee is of the view that the issue required
 further clarification and investigation.
(Para 21)
 
REBIDDING PROCESS
 
The Committee is not convinced with the reply furnished by the Ministry of Civil Aviation that “Unless the shortlisting
 criteria were changed, it was unlikely that any new bidder would have shown interest”.  It may be pointed out that
 initially there were 17 parties who were short listed out of 19 parties who submitted EOI and subsequently 4 parties
 have participated in due diligence.  Hence, there was a qualitative change in the offer by reducing the turnover levy
 from 6 per cent to 2 per cent.  The contention of the Ministry of Civil Aviation that it was unlikely that any new bidder
 would have shown interest is, therefore, not tenable.
(Para 27)
 
The Committee is of the view that the idea of reduction in turnover levy was to go for re-bidding by exploring ways and
 means to secure better response for re-invited bid.  But, by restricting the invitation of the 2
nd round bid among the four
 parties only, the very purpose of reduction in turnover levy was defeated as only one bidder, that too the same for the
 earlier bid, remained in picture. Also, no thought was given to the views expressed by Shri R. C. Aggarwal.  The
 second round of bidding was, therefore, clearly a case of considering a ‘single bid’.
(Para 28)
 
The Committee feels that the ground rules for participating in the bidding process, as prescribed in the original
 advertisement inviting EOI for the properties of HCI, were framed in such a restrictive manner that it allowed hoteliers
 only in the bidding process.  As a result, the market for the properties of HCI could not be fully explored and several
 other interested parties, who were interested in offering better prices for the properties of HCI, could not enter the
 bidding process.  The Committee also feels that the 100 per cent shareholding of BHPL, which took over CHMA has
 been acquired by Sahara Group with the sole intention of taking over the business of CHMA within a short span of just
 6 months of taking over of CHMA by Shri A. L. Batra.  This clearly shows that there were interested parties for CHMA
 which were not properly explored, disproving the contention of the Ministry of Civil Aviation that it was unlikely that a
 new bidder would have shown interest.  The Committee feels that the reason why only a single bid was considered even
 after reducing the turnover levy, needs to be investigated.
(Para 29)
 
TRANSFER OF THE PETROL PUMP
 
33.       From the position furnished by the Ministry of Civil Aviation, it is quite clear that the petrol pump was owned
 by the IOC, another PSU under the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas.  The Committee is unable to understand as
 to how the Ministry of Civil Aviation could get the valuation done and also proceed to transfer the ownership of the
 petrol pump without the consent of the concerned PSU and the Ministry.  The Committee is of the view that neither the
 Ministry of Disinvestment nor the Hotel Corporation of India had the right to transfer the petrol pump to M/s. Batra
 Hospitalities Pvt. Ltd. since neither of them were the owners of the petrol pump.  This clearly reflects that no proper
 thought was given to the selling process by the Government before inviting the Expression of Interest for the properties
 of HCI.
(Para 33)
 
ASSIGNMENT CLAUSE
 
The Committee takes note of the advice of the Attorney General of India that there has been no breach of the Lease
 Agreement with regard to the re-sale of CHMA.  However, keeping in view the experience and to stop such quick
 change of hands at a premium, necessary provisions may be incorporated in the Agreement to Sell in respect of
 resale/transactions of this nature to be made in future.  The Committee recommends that in light of the discrepancies

65th report of Committee on Transport,Tourism and Culture
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/65threport.htm[28-08-2018 13:01:21]
 brought out with regard to the selection criteria, reduction of turnover levy, rebidding process and the transfer of petrol
 pump in paras 14, 15, 16, 17, 21, 27, 28, 29 and 33 of the Report, the Government should order an enquiry into the
 entire transaction relating to Centaur Hotel Mumbai Airport by the Central Vigilance Commission. 
(Para 35)
                                    ANNEXURE – 1
(Vide para 5 of the Report)
 
Status Note -  Sale of Centaur Hotel Mumbai Airport
(indicating chronology of the events from start of sale process, its re-sale and
the present status of the property including its ownership).
 
1                    INTRODUCTION
 
1.1      Hotel Corporation of India Limited ("HCI") is a wholly owned subsidiary of Air India. Air India entered the hotel
 business in order to promote tourism in the country and to cater to the requirement of in-flight catering as well as to
 provide quality hotel accommodation to the passengers and crew. HCI was incorporated on July 8, 1971 with the
 objective of carrying on business of operating hotels and flight kitchens. HCI was operating four hotels, in Mumbai
 (two), Delhi (one) and Sringar (one), one hotel at Rajgir and two flight-catering units in Mumbai and Delhi.
2          RECOMMENDATION OF DISINVESTMENT COMMISSION
2.1      The Disinvestment Commission, in its 6
th Report published in December 1997, presented its recommendations in
 respect of disinvestment of Hotel Corporation of India (HCI).  It recommended that hotels at Mumbai and Delhi be sold
 as separate units through a transparent and competitive bidding process after undertaking a proper valuation through a
 Financial Adviser.
2.2      For hotel at Srinagar, the management of Air India may initiate dialogue with J&K Government in order to exit
 from its ownership. It was suggested that since lands on which the two airport hotels at Mumbai and Delhi are located
 belong to the AAI, Air India would need to negotiate and settle the terms of transfer with AAI prior to the sale.
2.3      It further suggested that Air India may decide whether the flight catering services should continue to be provided
 by HCI or whether it should be sold as independent units through a transparent competitive bidding process like the
 process of sale of Hotels.
2.4      The Commission in its 5
th Report had clarified that disinvestment in a subsidiary company of a PSU should be
 decided by the Board of Management of the concerned PSU.
 
3.         Follow-up Action on the Recommendations of Disinvestment Commission:
3.1      Air-India in its Board Meeting held in July 1998 considered the recommendation of the Disinvestment
 Commission and decided to accept in principle the dis-investment in HCI. However, the actual modalities of
 disinvestment were to be decided on the receipt of the report of a Consultant which was to be appointed by the Air
 India Board. The Department of Disinvestment, in its note dated 12.2.2000 regarding disinvestment of Government
 equity in Air India inter-alia, sought the approval of the Cabinet Committee on Disinvestment (CCD) so that the
 revenue realized accrues to Air India. The CCD, in its meeting held on 26.5.2000 took note of the proposal.
3.2      It was also decided to sort out the long pending issues of settlement of lease terms for the lease of AAI land at
 Mumbai and Delhi Airports for which there were no formal agreements. Shri Sanat Kaul, Joint Secretary, Ministry of
 Civil Aviation was appointed as sole Arbitrator in September, 1999 and after going through the records and hearing
 both AAI and AI/HCI gave his award in end November 1999 and suggested for execution of fresh lease deeds for a
 period of about 30 years. In the said award, he suggested that HCI should settle the dues with AAI and also pay the
 turnover levy of 2% for the years HCI made profits (for the past) and AAI should also agree for sub-letting in view of
 the disinvestment of these properties to the prospective buyers or entering into fresh lease on the terms like the case of
 Radisson in Delhi and Leela hotels in Mumbai on market terms.

65th report of Committee on Transport,Tourism and Culture
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/65threport.htm[28-08-2018 13:01:21]
 
4.                  PROCESS OF DISINEVSTMENT
Constitution of Board Sub-committee
4.1      The following Sub-Committee on the pattern of Inter Ministerial Group (IMG) was constituted by Air India, in
 its Board Meeting of ' 1.4.1999, to oversee the process of the sale of the units of HCI :
 
i)                    Chairman, Air India Ltd.
ii)                   Managing Director, Air India Ltd.
iii)                 CMD, Indian Airlines Ltd.
iv)                 JS FA, Ministry of Civil Aviation.
v)                  Chairman, Airports Authority of India.
vi)                 Shri N. Vaghul, Chairman, ICICI Ltd.
 
4.2      It was also decided that the Joint Secretary dealing with Air India and HCI in the Ministry, the Managing
 Director-HCI and a representative of Ministry of Finance would also be co-opted on the Sub-Committee.
 
5          APPOINTMENT OF GLOBAL ADVISERS
5.1      The Air India Board in its Meeting held at Delhi on 10.7.1998 approved the appointment of Consultants/Advisors
 to propose and undertake the restructuring/disinvestment/privatization of its wholly owned subsidiary, Hotel
 Corporation of India (HCI). Advertisements were released in all national newspapers in the month of September 1999.
 Pursuant to this, M/s IFCI-Financial Services (I-Fin) were appointed as the Expert/Consultant to advise Air India for
 selection of Global Advisor for the purpose of disinvestment of various units of HCI. Subsequently advertisements
 were released for the selection of Global Advisors in leading newspapers by IFCI. The ground rules for presentation by
 potential bidders and laying down of criteria for evaluation of technical and financial bids for the selection of Global
 Advisor were also laid down by them. Pursuant to the presentations made by the short listed parties, M/s Jardine
 Flemming India Securities Ltd. were appointed as Global Advisor by Air India Board in its meeting held on 7.2.2000
 and a formal agreement laying down the scope of work was entered into by the parties thereafter.
5.2      Subsequently, M/s Jardine Flemming India Securities Ltd. undertook the entire task of disinvesting HCI advising
 Air India on the various processes involved in the disinvestment of the units of HCI and the Boards of AI/HCI were
 purely guided by the recommendations made by the Global Advisors since they were chosen based on their relevant
 experience and expertise on the subject.    M/s Jardine Flemming India Securities Ltd. was subsequently renamed as
 M/s J.P. Morgan as a consequence of a change in the ownership pattern.
5.3                   *                                              *                                              *
6.         METHODOLOGY OF DISINVESTMENT
6.1   There were two options suggested by the Global Advisers i.e. 100%  sale in the equity of HCI or the sale of
 individual business units namely. Centaur Hotel Airport Mumbai, Centaur Hotel Juhu Beach Mumbai, Centaur Hotel
 Airport Delhi (including Chefair Delhi), Chefair Mumbai and Centaur Lakeview Hotel, Srinagar (on slump sale basis).
 It was also decided that disinvestment of Indo Hokke Hotels Limited (Centaur Rajgir), a subsidiary of HCI would be
 through sale of entire equity of HCI on spot delivery basis.
 
7          BIDDING PROCESS
7.1       Advertisement inviting Expressions of Interest (EOI) from the prospective bidders was issued on October 11-12,
 2000. Copy of the advertisement appeared in this regard is enclosed as per Annexure 2. The bidders were requested to
 submit their technical bids directly to the Global Advisors. The last date for submission of bids was fixed as
 31.10.2000.
8         SHORT LISTIING
8.1      Thirty seven parties  (List at * * *  Appendix-I and II) submitted Expression of Interests to the Global
 Advisors, out of which, 28 parties (List at * * * Appendix-II)  fulfilling the criteria were short listed by the Global

65th report of Committee on Transport,Tourism and Culture
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/65threport.htm[28-08-2018 13:01:21]
 Adviser. This was accepted by the Board's Sub-Committee of Air India in its meeting held on 9 th December and 12th
 December, 2000. Out of the aforesaid 28 parties, 17 parties expressed interest (List at * * * Appendix-II  under
 column Centaur Mumbai) for acquisition of Centaur Hotel Mumbai Airport.
8.2                  *                                              *                                              *
9          INFORMATION MEMORANDUM
9.1      Thereafter detailed Information Memorandum was prepared by the Global Advisors compiling the information
 received from the various units of HCI which was approved by the Board of HCI through resolution by circular on 5 th
 Feb. 2001 and the same was circulated among the short listed bidders through the Global Advisors. The Board of
 Directors of HCI in its 168 th meeting held in March 2001 took note of the same and Ministry of Disinvestment was
 accordingly informed.
 
10        DEPOSIT OF EARNEST MONEY BY BIDDERS
10.1 The bidders were also requested to submit Earnest Money Deposit together with details of businesses interested in
 by 16th February 2001 so that only the genuinely interested bidders are considered. The bidders were asked to show
 interest for buying the entire equity of HCI/IHHL or the option of buying any one of the units of HCI.
10.2    None of the parties showed interest for buying HCI as a whole, However,13 parties (Appendix-III ) expressed
 interest in the various units and deposited the requisite amount of Earnest Money. In respect of Centaur Hotel Mumbai
 Airport four bidders namely M/s A.L.Batra of Batra Group of Companies, The Indian Hotels Company Ltd., Morepen
 Hotels Ltd. and ITC Group deposited earnest money.  All the EOls were submitted to the Global Advisors directly and
 AI/HCI Boards were advised from time to time accordingly.
 
10.3   Subsequently, one of the bidders namely M/s SATS who had expressed interest for Chefair Mumbai withdrew
 the interest and requested for considering their EOI alongwith the EOI of Indian Hotels and as such, only 12 bidders
 were left.
11        DUE DILIGENCE
11.1    Thereafter Due Diligence was carried out by those 12 bidders along with their financial and legal advisors by
 having access to the Data Rooms and visit to the properties as well as interaction with the senior officials of the
 company. The Global Advisors closely co­ordinated with the short listed bidders in providing the necessary
 information during the due diligence process. The process of Due Diligence was over by mid May 2001. Two Data
 Rooms were created, at the offices of Global Advisors both at Mumbai and Delhi separately and one at Air India office
 at Nariman Point, Mumbai, one at Centaur Hotel Mumbai Airport and one at Air India office, Delhi.
12        DRAFT TRANSACTION DOCUMENTS
12.1    Draft transaction documents comprising of the Agreement to Sell, Business Transfer Deed and Indenture of Sale
 for each of the individual Business of HCI and Share Purchase Agreement for Indo Hokke Hotels Ltd. were prepared
 by the Global Advisors in consultation with their legal advisors M/s Desai and Diwanji and the same were approved by
 the Board of HCI/AI on the recommendations of the Global Advisors.
 
13        APPOINTMENT OF ASSET VALUERS
13.1    Air India was asked to also carry out the physical valuation of the properties.  In this connection, Air India had
 received a list of valuers from the Ministry of Disinvestment, which was forwarded by Air India to M/s Jardine
 Flemming, the Global Advisors and on their advice invitations to bid were sent by Air India only to Mumbai and Delhi
 based valuers. A Committee comprising of the following officials was constituted :
 
Managing Director, HCI
Director, GSD, Air India
Director, P & F, Air India - Convenor

65th report of Committee on Transport,Tourism and Culture
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/65threport.htm[28-08-2018 13:01:21]
 
13.2   The objective of the Committee was to evaluate the technical and financial bids received from the interested
 valuers, hold negotiations with the valuers to finalise the terms & conditions of appointment and negotiate and
 conclude an agreement with the selected valuers. The Committee held meetings on 21.5.2001 and 23.5.2001 to decide
 on the criteria of selection.   * * *  The Committee prepared its report on 1.6.2001 * * * and accordingly, Air India
 appointed M/s Minocha & Associates as the Valuers for Centaur Delhi, Chefair Delhi, Centaur Rajgir and Centaur
 Sringar and appointed M/s Kanti Karamsi Co. as valuers for Centaur Mumbai, Centaur Juhu and Chefair Mumbai. Both
 the valuers submitted the valuation reports of the properties in sealed envelopes which were sent to the Secretary,
 Ministry of Civil Aviation in the first week of October 2001. These were sent to the Global Advisors (unopened) by the
 Joint Secretary vide his DO No.7159/JSK/2001 as per the advice of Ministry of Disinvestment * * *.
14.      TAKING OVER THE PROCESS OF DISINVESTMENT BY MINISTRY OF DISINVESTMENT.
14.1   In September 2001, Ministry of Civil Aviation, proposed that the balance process of disinvestment may be taken
 over by the Ministry of Disinvestment as the said Ministry has the expertise. After September 2001, the Ministry of
 Disinvestment took over the entire Disinvestment process. The Cabinet Committee on Disinvestment met on 27.9.01
 and approved the proposal of Ministry of Civil Aviation as follows :-
 
             (i)        Hotel corporation of India would continue to remain as subsidiary of Air            India and the revenue
 accrued from its disinvestment would flow into Air        India.
(ii)       The Ministry of Disinvestment would take over the process of the disinvestment of the Hotel
 Corporation of India in accordance with the established procedures. On completion of the process,
 directive would be issued to Air India for finalizing the deal in accordance with the decision taken by the
 Government.
14.2                 *                                              *                                              *
 
15        CONSTITUTION OF INTER MINISTERIAL GROUP
15.1    The Ministry of Disinvestment vide Office Memorandum No.7(37)/2001-MOD dated 19
th Sept.2001 informed
 that the Department of Disinvestment has taken over the process of disinvestment in HCI and the same would be
 handled by the Ministry of Disinvestment. The following members on the IMG were constituted to look after the
 disinvestment in HCI Ltd.
1.    Shri Pradip Baijal, Secretary -Disinvestment - Chairman.
2.    Shri.A.H.Jung, Secretary Ministry of Civil Aviation, or his representative not below the level     of Joint Secretary
 dealing with Hotel Corporation of India Ltd. - Member.
3.    Shri.O.P.Nahar, Additional Secretary andLA, Department of Legal Affairs. - Member.
4.    Shri.Sanat Kaul, Joint Secretary, Ministryof Civil Aviation -Member.
5.    Shri.V.Subramanian, Joint Secretary Ministry of Civil Aviation - Member.
6.  Shri.S.Behura, Joint Secretary Departmentof Economic Affairs, Ministry of Finance - Member.
7.    Shri.A.K.Rath, Joint Secretary Departmentof Economic Affairs -Member.
8.    Shri.S.Ramaswamy, Joint Secretary, Department of Company Affairs.
9.    Shri.K-K.Gupta, Joint Secretary, Ministryof Disinvestment -Member.
10.   Joint Secretary - Department of Revenue (dealing with Income tax matters) - Member.
11.  Shri.P.P.S.Brar, Joint Controller General of Accounts Department of Expenditure - Member.
12.  Managing Director/Director Finance - Air-India, Member.
13.  Shri.R.C.Aggarwal, Managing Director HCI - Member.
15.2    It was also decided that the representation of Global Advisors viz Jardine Flemming (J.P.Morgan) would be co-
opted in the meetings of IMG.
16        MEETINGS OF IMG
16.1     FIRST MEETING

65th report of Committee on Transport,Tourism and Culture
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/65threport.htm[28-08-2018 13:01:21]
The IMG in its first meeting held on 21.9.01, discussed and took note of the process of disinvestment and also
 otherissues arising thereto. The transaction" document so finalized by theGlobal Advisors were forwarded to
 Department of Company Affairswith a request that the same may be scrutinized and vetted andplaced before the next
 meeting of the IMG to be held on 4.10.01.
 
16.2
        SECOND MEETING
The IMG in its second meeting considered the transaction documents vetted by the Department of Company Affairs and
 recommended for approval of the same by Cabinet Committee on Disinvestment.
17        INVITATION OF FINANCIAL BIDS
17.1    After freezing of the transaction documents, as finalized by Global Advisors, financial bids in respect of Centaur
 Hotel Airport Mumbai, Centaur Hotel Juhu Beach Mumbai, Centaur Hotel Airport Delhi (Including Chefair Delhi),
 Chefair Mumbai and Indo Hokke Hotels Ltd (Centaur Rajgir), were invited on 24.10.2001 by the Global Advisors, to
 be submitted on November 5-8, 2001, by the Global Advisors. The case of Centaur Lake View Hotel, Srinagar was not
 taken up because of certain issues requiring resolution.
 
17.2    Bids were received for Centaur Hotel Airport Mumbai (one), Centaur Hotel Juhu Beach Mumbai (one). Centaur
 Hotel Airport Delhi (including Chefair Delhi) (one) & Indo Hokke Hotels Ltd. (Centaur Rajgir) (one) by a Committee
 comprising of Secretary, Ministry of Civil Aviation and the Secretary, Disinvestment. There was no bidder for Chefair
 Mumbai. Only M/s A.L.Batra of Batra Group of Companies submitted financial bid in respect of Centaur Hotel
 Mumbai Airport.
18        EVALUATION COMMITTEE
18.1    Meanwhile the Ministry of Disinvestment constituted an Evaluation Committee for the properties of Hotel
 Corporation of India Ltd. vide their letter no.7(37)2001-MOD dated 1.11.2001, * * *. The Evaluation Committee met
 on 8.11.01, and determined the reserve prices in respect of each of the properties on the basis of the valuation reports
 prepared and presented by the Global Advisors. The Committee finalized its recommendations for submission before
 the Inter Ministerial Group (IMG).
 
19        THIRD MEETING of IMG
19.1    The recommendations of the Evaluation Committee were also considered and accepted by the IMG in its meeting
 held on 9.11.2001 as far as the reserve price was concerned. The IMG also gave its recommendations regarding the
 financial bids.
20        Meeting of Core Group of Secretaries
20.1    The recommendations of the Evaluation Committee/IMG were considered by the Core Group of Secretaries on
 Disinvestment (CGD) in its meeting held on 09.11.2001, who recommended the same for acceptance of the Cabinet
 Committee on Disinvestment (CCD).
21        ACCEPTANCE/REJECTION OF BIDS
21.1    The Cabinet Committee on Disinvestment in its meeting held on 10.11.01, accepted the bids submitted by M/s
 Tulip Hospitality Services Pvt. Ltd for Centaur Hotel Juhu Beach Mumbai for Rs. 153.00 crores and the bid submitted
 by M/s Impac Travels (India) P Ltd. for Indo Hokke Hotels Limited for Rs.6.51 crores. The bids for Centaur Hotel
 Airport Mumbai (Rs.65 crores submitted by M/s A.L.Batra) and Centaur hotel Airport Delhi (including Chefair Delhi)
 (Rs.51 crores submitted by Bharat Hotels) were not accepted as conveyed by Ministry of Disinvestment vide D.O. letter
 No.7/37/2001-MOD (Vol.II) dated 11.11.01, * * * as the bids were less than the respective reserve  prices * * *.
 
22.
        DECISION OF CABINET COMMITTEE ON DISINVESTMENT FOR RE-   CALLING OF BIDS.
22.1    Ministry of Disinvestment vide their letter dated 11.11.01 while conveying the decision of CCD for acceptance of
 bids of Centaur Hotel Juhu Beach Mumbai and Indo Hokke Hotels, Rajgir also informed that the properties of Centaur
 Hotel Mumbai Airport and Centaur Hotel Dethi Airport (including Chefair Delhi) to be offered for re-bidding by

65th report of Committee on Transport,Tourism and Culture
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/65threport.htm[28-08-2018 13:01:21]
 exploring ways and means to secure better response for re-invited bids. It was also informed that the process in respect
 of Chefair Mumbai Airport may be restarted.
 
23.       REDUCTION IN TURNOVER LEVY
23.1     The businesses of HCI namely. Centaur Hotel Airport Mumbai, Centaur Hotel Airport Delhi (including Chefair
 Delhi) and Chefair Mumbai are located on lands taken on lease from the Airports Authority of India.  The total
 consideration paid by HCI to AAI comprises of two parts. The fixed portion, is lease rental and the variable portion is
 turnover levy subject to a minimum guaranteed annual payment. There was a dispute between HCI and AAI regarding
 the payment of the same and after negotiations, the lease rentals were agreed at Rs.163 per sq.mt. per year and the
 turnover levy was fixed at 6% of the turnover (based on prevailing rates agreed with other private sector hotels by
 AAI.)
23.2    As per the Memorandum of Understanding entered into between AAI and HCI, out of the monies received from
 the disinvestments, HCI was to pay the following dues (as of March 31, 2001) to AAI within one month of receiving
 the money for the respective property :
Centaur Hotel Airport Mumbai             :           Rs.10.17 crores 
Centaur Hotel Airport Delhi                  :           Rs.7.54 crores 
(including Chefair Delhi)
Chefair Mumbai                                    :           Rs. 3.14 crores
Total :             Rs.20.85 crores
23.3     The same amount of consideration, i.e., Rs.163 per sq.mt. per year as lease rent and turnover levy @ 6% of
 annual turnover subject to the prescribed minimum guaranteed annual payment (MGAP) was prescribed while inviting
 bids in the 1
st round for these three businesses.
 
23.4    The rate of turnover levy charged by the AAI for the leased land affects the bid amount payable by the bidder. It
 was felt that if the percentage of turnover levy payable to AAI were reduced, the transaction would become more
 attractive and the higher upfront payment would improve the financial position of Air India to whom the proceeds of
 HCI sales would accrue.
 
23.5     VIEWS OF MOCA - In reply to a suggestion for reduction of the turnover levy from 6% to 2%, the Ministry of
 Civil Aviation maintained the earlier stand of AAI to levy 6% turnover levy in addition to the Lease Rent
23.6     Options considered : Thereafter, the following three options were submitted for consideration of the CGD :
Option I- The turnover levy may be totally waived and only prescribed Lease Rent of Rs.163/- per sq.mt. of built up
 area with the existing provisions for revision/ceiling may be imposed. If this option is accepted, the upfront payment
 would be substantially higher improving the financial position of Air India whereas AAI could do without the accruals
 from the turnover levy. It would be paradoxical to reduce the accruals to Air India by having turnover levy (for AAI) on
 the one hand and considering infusion of funds by way of equity or grant to improve prospects of disinvestments in Air
 India which, after withdrawal by Tatas, has for the moment come to a standstill. Further, the higher accruals in the form
 of upfront payment would be a far better option for the Government than the annual payments in the form of turnover
 levy receivable over a long period of time.
Option II- The turnover levy payable to AAI may be reduced to 2% subject to the prescribed MGAP, both for the past
 and future.
 
Option III- Accept the opinion of MOCA. In such a case, the bidders interest will continue to be limited and upfront
 payments to HCI/AI will be low.
 
23.7    For Option II, the MGAP was reduced but the lease rent of Rs.163/- per sq. mt. Of built up are was not changed.
 
23.8    It was also proposed that financial bids may be re-invited from the existing Qualified Interested Parties only for

65th report of Committee on Transport,Tourism and Culture
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/65threport.htm[28-08-2018 13:01:21]
 the above mentioned three businesses of HCI.   In case changes to lease charges are accepted, the valuations will be
 done afresh by the Advisors.
 
23.9     CGD/CCD  -  The CGD in its meeting held on 14.12.01 recommended Option II above for acceptance. The
 CCD at its meeting held on 26.12.01 approved the following:
i)          Inviting of bids for Centaur Hotel Airport Mumbai, Centaur Hotel Airport Delhi (including Chefair
 Delhi) and Chefair Mumbai from the existing Qualified Interested Parties. Valuation of these properties
 to be done afresh by the Advisors in view of reduction in the turnover levy.
    ii)         The turnover levy to be paid to AAI for the leased land to be reduced to 2% of Annual Turnover subject
 to the  prescribed Minimum Guaranteed Annual Payment (MGAP), both for the past and future. The
 liabilities of HCI to be re-worked and payments to be made by HCI to AAI accordingly.
23.10              *                                              *                                              *
24.      2
ND ROUND OF BIDDING
24.1    In accordance with the decision of the CCD, on the basis of the revised turnover levy, bids from the existing
 Qualified Interested Parties were re-invited on January 1.1.2002 for Centaur Hotel Airport Mumbai, Centaur Hotel
 Airport Delhi (Including Chefair Delhi) and Chefair Mumbai.  * * *  Last date of submission of financial bid was
 January 18, 2002 in respect of Centaur Hotel Mumbai Airport.
 
25      RECEIPT OF FINANCIAL BIDS
25.1  Only one bidder namely M/s A.L. Batra submitted the bid in respect of Centaur Hotel Mumbai Airport, which
 was received by a Committee of two Secretaries viz. Secretary-Civil Aviation and Secretary-Disinvestment. There
 were no bidders for other businesses.
25.2  At the time of submitting the financial bids, M/s A.L. Batra indicated that in the hopeful situation of success of
 the bid, appropriate structure will be adopted. Copy of the letter is at Annexure-3.
 
26      REDETERMINITION OF RESERVE PRICE
26.1    The Evaluation Committee met on 18.1.02 and arrived at a modified reserve price in respect of Centaur Hotel
 Mumbai Airport on the basis of the revised valuation report prepared and presented by the Global Advisors in view of
 the change in turnover levy.
27       ACCEPTANCE OF BID
27.1     Since the bid of M/s A.L. Batra was higher than the reserve price, the same was recommended for acceptance by
 the IMG in its meeting held on 19.1.2002. The CGD in its meeting held on 4.2.02 recommended the same for
 acceptance of the same by the CCD. The CCD in its meeting held on 5.2.02 accepted the recommendation of the CGD.
 
27.2     The Ministry of Disinvestment vide their letter No.7(37)/2001-MODI(Vol.II) dated 6.2.02,* * *, advised the
 Ministry of Civil Aviation regarding the decision of Cabinet Committee for acceptance of the bid submitted by M/s
 A.L. Batra for Centaur Hotel Mumbai Airport for Rs.83 crores and execution of related transaction documents between
 Hotel Corporation of India Ltd. and the said purchaser in consultation with the Global Advisor after completing of the
 required formalities under the Companies Act 1956 as well as the Articles & Memorandum of Associations of both Air
 India and Hotel Corporation of India Ltd.
27.3     The Board of Directors of HCI met on 26.02.02 and passed necessary resolution as per the decision conveyed by
 the Government for effecting the transaction of Centaur Hotel Mumbai Airport. Similar formalities were also
 completed by Air-India and thereafter M/s A. L. Batra Chairman and Managing Director, A.L.Batra Group vide Air-
India's letter No.HO/12-103(17)A/8079 dated 04.03.02 was advised regarding the acceptance of the bid as per the
 decision of the Government and to deposit of the said amount of Rs.83 crores within a maximum stipulated period of
 30 days from the receipt of the said letter.

65th report of Committee on Transport,Tourism and Culture
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/65threport.htm[28-08-2018 13:01:21]
27.4    Shri A.L.Batra took up the matter with the Global Advisors as well as the Ministry of Disinvestment for affecting
 the transaction in the name of M/s Batra Hospitality Pvt. Ltd. as part of A.L.Batra Group of Companies vide their letter
 dated 09.03.2002. * * *
27.5    On 1 st April, 2002, the Ministry of Disinvestment vide its letter no.7/37/2001-MODI Vol.II dated 1 st April,
 2002,* * *, advised the Global Advisors and marked a copy to Hotel Corporation of India Ltd. stating that the
 Government has approved closure of the transaction of Centaur Hotel Mumbai Airport on 18.04.02, with M/s Batra
 Hospitality Pvt. Ltd. being a Special Purpose Vehicle (SPV) formed by M/s A.L. Batra, subject to his making of
 payment of 10% of the purchase consideration to HCI and balance 90% in the escrow account and signing of the
 Agreement to Sell and escrow agreement.
 
28        SIGNING OF AGREEMENT TO SELL
28.1    Agreement to Sell for Centaur Hotel Airport Mumbai was signed on 18.4.2002.     * * *  Since HCI was informed
 subsequently about the new SPV by the Global Advisors/Ministry of Disinvestment i.e. M/s Batra Hospitality Pvt Ltd.
 in place of M/s A.L.Batra, this fact was apprised to the Board of Directors of HCI at its next meeting and accordingly
 the matter was placed before the Board of Directors of HCI in its meeting held on 22.5.02, and a modified resolution as
 per the approval given by the Department of Disinvestment was passed and the Agreement to Sell with M/s Batra
 Hospitality Pvt. Ltd., was ratified by the Board of HCI as well as Air-India.
29        TRANSFER OF BUSINESS
29.1    The business of Centaur Hotel Mumbai Airport was transferred effective 5
th June, 2002 after fulfillment of the
 terms and conditions as set out in the Agreement to Sell both by the buyers and the vendors.
30        POST DISINVESTMENT ISSUE
30.1    HCI provided necessary letters/applications for transferring various licenses for Centaur Hotel Mumbai Airport
 in the name of purchaser and resolved pending issues requiring deliberations by HCI and transfer of records etc. barring
 the issue of Net Current Assets which requires verification by the Transaction  Auditors. The Transaction Auditors have
 been requested to expedite the same.
30.2    At the time of transfer of business of Centaur' Hotel Mumbai Airport on 5.6.2002, the, petrol pump, which was
 also a part of the transaction, was transferred to M/s Batra Hospitality Pvt. Ltd. (BHPL) on 'as is where is' basis.   The
 Joint Secretary, Ministry of Civil Aviation (Shri Sanat Kaul) requested the Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas for
 transferring of the dealership of I.O.C for the said petrol pump to M/s Batra Hospitality Pvt. Ltd. The petrol pump was
 operated by M/s BHPL till 4.10.2002 when IOC informed HCI vide letter no.MSO/R/4340 dated 27.9.2002 that the
 dealership agreement dated 16.3.1975 executed between HCI and IOC stands terminated with immediate effect. Since
 HCI had already effected the physical transfer of the petrol pump alongwith the hotel effective 5.6.2002, BHPL were
 requested to take up the matter with Indian Oil Corporation.
 
 
31        RE-SALE OF CENTAUR HOTEL MUMBAI AIRPORT
31.1     In Oct. 2002 the newspapers reported that Centaur Hotel Mumbai Airport has been taken over by Sahara India
 Group. A reference was made by the Department of Disinvestment vide letter no. 7(37)/2001-MODI Vol-II of 16.10.02
 inquiring whether BHPL has sold off the Hotel, which was replied by M/s A.L.Batra stating that they have sold the
 entire share holding of M/s BHPL to Sahara India Group and the ownership right, title and interest in the entire
 business of Centaur Hotel Mumbai Airport rests with BHPL. * * *
31.2    In this regard it has been further informed by Sahara India vide their letter dated 3.12.02, that the name of BHPL
 has been changed as Sahara Hospitality Pvt. Ltd. effective 15
th Nov.2002. * * *
 
32        LEGAL OPINION:

65th report of Committee on Transport,Tourism and Culture
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/65threport.htm[28-08-2018 13:01:21]
32.1     Regarding the issue of re-sale about M/s Batra Hospitality Pvt. Ltd. to Sahara Group, the matter is being
 examined by the Government in consultation with Ministry of Law and Justice whether any breach of the provisions of
 the transaction document executed by HCI and BHPL has been committed.
32.2          The Ministry of Civil Aviation has directed the AAI and HCI to take a legal opinion on this issue.
MINUTES
 
TWENTY FIRST MEETING
 
            The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Wednesday, the 11 th December 2002, in Room No. 63, Parliament House,
 New Delhi.
 
            MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Dipankar Mukherjee   - Chairman
 
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri S.S. Chandran
3. Shri K.B. Krishna Murthy        
4. Shri Satish Pradhan
5. Dr.C.Narayana Reddy
 
LOK SABHA
6. Shri G.M. Banatwalla
7. Shri Anil Basu
8. Shri Suresh Chandel
9. Shri S.P. Lepcha
10. Shri Shivaji Mane
11. Shri K.H. Muniyappa
12. Shri Vilas Muttemwar
13. Shri Gunipati Ramaiah
14. Shri Th. Chaoba Singh
15. Shri Vinay Kumar Sorake
16. Shri Kalava Srinivasulu
17. Shri Kodikunnil Suresh
18. Shri Sunder Lal Tiwari  
 
SECRETARIAT
            Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary
            Shrimati Agnes Momin George, Deputy Secretary
            Shri Jagdish Kumar, Under Secretary
            Shrimati Subhashree Panigrahi, Committee Officer
 
  
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF CIVIL AVIATION
Shri K.Roy Paul, Secretary
Shri Raghu Menon, Joint Secretary
Shri V. Subramanian, Joint Secretary
Shri Anurag Goel, Joint Secretary
Shri Sunil Arora, CMD, Indian Airlines

65th report of Committee on Transport,Tourism and Culture
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/65threport.htm[28-08-2018 13:01:21]
Shri S.K. Narula, Chairman, Airports Authority of India
Shri V.K. Verma, Commercial Director, Air India
 
 
 
 
2.         *                                                          *                                                          *
 
3.         Thereafter, the Committee pointed out that the information furnished by the Ministry to the Committee with
 regard to the resale of Hotel Centaur, Mumbai Airport had not been satisfactory.  The Committee therefore, directed the
 Ministry to furnish a status note on the sale of Hotel Centaur, Mumbai Airport indicating chronology of the events from
 the start of the sale process, its re-sale and present status of the property including its ownership.
 
4.         *                                                          *                                                          *
 
5.         *                                                          *                                                          *
 
6.         The audio record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept as the services of the Reporters were not available
 for the meeting.
 
7.         The meeting of the Committee then adjourned at 4.05 P.M.
 
 
_____________________________________________________
* * *    Relates to other matters.
 
I
FIRST MEETING
 
            The Committee met at 12.00 noon on Friday, the 10
th January 2003 in Committee Room ‘A’, Parliament House
 Annexe, New Delhi.
 
            MEMBERS PRESENT
1.
            Shri Dipankar Mukherjee     -     Chairman
 
RAJYA SABHA
2.            Shri Suresh Bhardwaj
3.            Shri S.S. Chandran
4.            Shri K.Rahman Khan
5.            Shri Bhagatram Manhar
6.            Shri K.B.Krishna Murthy
7.            Shri Satish Pradhan
8.            Shri S. Viduthalai Virumbi
 
LOK SABHA
9.
            Shri G.M.  Banatwalla
10.        Shri Anil Basu  
11.        Shri Suresh Chandel
12.        Shrimati Reena Choudhary
13.        Shri P.S. Gadhavi
14.        Shri V. Dhananjaya Kumar
15.        Shri Vijay Kumar Khandelwal

65th report of Committee on Transport,Tourism and Culture
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/65threport.htm[28-08-2018 13:01:21]
16.        Shri Shivaji Mane
17.        Shri K.H. Muniyappa
18.        Dr. Prasanna Kumar Patasani
19.        Shri Sunder Lal Patwa
20.        Shri Gunipati Ramaiah
21.        Shri Bishnu Pada Ray
22.        Shri Th. Chaoba Singh
23.        Shri Vinay Kumar Sorake
24.        Shri Kalava Srinivasulu
25.        Shri Kodikunnil Suresh
 
SECRETARIAT
            Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary
            Shrimati Agnes Momin George, Deputy Secretary
            Shri Jagdish Kumar, Under Secretary
            Shrimati Subhashree Panigrahi, Committee Officer
2.         Chairman welcomed the Members of the newly constituted Committee and sought their cooperation in the
 smooth functioning of the Committee’s business.  The Members also reciprocated and assured the Chairman of their
 full cooperation for the purpose.
3.         The Committee then considered its future programme.  The Chairman informed the Members that four subjects
 viz. * * * (iv) Sale of Centaur Hotel Mumbai Airport are presently under consideration of the Committee.
4.         *                                                          *                                                          *
5.         *                                                          *                                                          *
6.         The Chairman informed the Members that the status note on the sale of Centaur Hotel, Mumbai Airport, had
 been received from the Ministry of Civil Aviation and, on that basis, a questionnaire had also been framed.  After some
 discussion, the Chairman directed the Secretariat to forward the questionnaire to the Ministry of Civil Aviation and
 seek replies thereon by 20
th January, 2003.  Chairman further informed the Members that the status note furnished by
 the Ministry of Civil Aviation, alongwith the replies to the questionnaire, will be circulated to the Members as soon as
 the replies are received from the Ministry of Civil Aviation.
7.         *                                                          *                                                          *
7.1       *                                                          *                                                          *
7.2       *                                                          *                                                          *
 
8.         The meeting of the Committee then adjourned at 12.50 P.M.
 
 
_____________________________________________________
* * *    Relates to other matters.
 
V
FIFTH MEETING
 
            The Committee met at 3.00 p.m. on Thursday, the 20
th February 2003 in Room No.‘63’, Parliament House, New
 Delhi.
 
            MEMBERS PRESENT

65th report of Committee on Transport,Tourism and Culture
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/65threport.htm[28-08-2018 13:01:21]
1.      Shri Dipankar Mukherjee   -     Chairman
 
RAJYA SABHA
2.      Prof. Ram Deo Bhandary
3.      Shri Bhagatram Manhar
4.      Shri K.B.Krishna Murthy
5.      Shri Ravula Chandra Sekar Reddy
6.      Shri S. Viduthalai Virumbi 
 
LOK SABHA
7.      Shri P.S. Gadhavi
8.      Shri V. Dhananjaya Kumar
9.      Shri Vijay Kumar Khandelwal
10.    Shri S.P. Lepcha
11.
        Shri K.H. Muniyappa
12.        Shri Ajit Kumar Panja
13.        Dr. Prasanna Kumar Patasani
14.     Shri Vinay Kumar Sorake
15.     Shri Kodikunnil Suresh
16.     Shri Ram Naresh Tripathee 
 
SECRETARIAT
 
            Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary
Shrimati Agnes Momin George, Deputy Secretary
            Shri Jagdish Kumar, Under Secretary
            Shrimati Subhashree Panigrahi, Committee Officer
 
2.         *                                                          *                                                          *
3.         *                                                          *                                                          *
4.         The Committee then decided to meet next on the 5
th March 2003 to consider and adopt draft report on Sale of
 Centaur Hotel, Mumbai Airport.
5.         The meeting of the Committee then adjourned at 3.40 P.M.
 
 
_____________________________________________________
* * *    Relates to other matters.