; 
• 
COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT AND TOURISM 
TWENTY·SECOND REPORT 
ON 
CIVIL ENCLAVES lN DEFENCE AIRFIELDS 
(Presented on the 7th March, 1996) 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARiAT 
NEW DELHI 
February, 1990/Phalguna, 1917 (Saka) 

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT AND TOURISM 
TWENTY-SECOND REPOllT 
ON 
CIVIL ENCLAVES IN DEFENCE AIRFIELDS 
(Presented on the 7th March, 1996) 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
February, 1996/Pilalguna, 1917 (Saka) 

CONTENTS 
1. CoMt•osiTION OF THE CoMMITTEE ............. . . ... . . .. . . .... .... . .. . ...... . .. . .. .. . 
2. I NT!{00UCI'IQN ..... ...... ..... . .. .. . . ... " .... ... . ..... " .. . . " .. . " ..... .. . .. .. " .. .... . 
3. R£l'O~'f . ...... .. , . , ..... . ... .... . .... , .. . . . ... . . ....... . . . . ... .. , . . . . ....... . .. . . . .. ... . , .. 
4 . MINIJI'US .. .... . .. .......... .. ........ .. . . .... .. . ....... . ... ... ... " ... . .. .. ... " .. . " . .. " 
PAGES 
(i)-(ii) 
(ii i) 
1-5 
7 

COMPOSlTION OF THE COMMITTEE 
(1~95-96) 
RAJYA SABRA 
I. Shri Pramod Mahajan -- Chairman 
2. Shri S. Austin 
3. Shri Ghufran Azam 
4. Shri Jagir Singh Dard 
5. Shri John F. yemandes 
6. Shri Bhadreswar Buragohain 
7. Shri Narain Prasad Gupta 
8. Shri Ram Jethmalani 
9. Shri Satya Prakash Malaviya 
10. Shri Raghavji 
11. Shri Ratna Bahadur Rai 
12. Shrimati Basanti Sarma 
13. Shri Iqbal Singh 
•14. Vacant 
15 Shri Naresh Yadav 
LOK SABRA 
16. Shri Vilasrao Nagnathrao Gundewar 
17. Shri K. Muraleedharan 
18. Shri Shivendra Bahadur Singh 
19. Shri A. Charles 
20. Shri L. Adailcalaraj 
21. Shri Gurcharan Singh Dadhahoor 
22. Shri K.M. Mathew 
23. Shri Peter G. Marbaniang 
24. Shri Swarup Upadhyay 
'':>. Shn C . .IC Kuppuswamy 
26. Shri R. Surender Reddy 
27. Shri Imchalemba 
28. Shri Manphool Singh 
29. Shri K.D. Suhanpuri 
30. Shri Jangbir Singh 
31. Shri Santosh Kumar Gangwar 
32. Prof. Prem Dhun1al 
33. Shri Chattrapal Singh 
34. Shri Kalka Das 
35. Shri Arvind Trivedi 
36. Shri Vishwanath Das Shastri 
37. Shri Sivaji Patnaik: 
38. Shri Suk.hendu Khan 
39. Shri Lok:aoatb Choudhury 
40. Shri Ram Naresh Singh 
41. Shri Ram Sunder Das 
.. 42. Sbri Rajesh Ranjan alia$ Pappu Yadav 
43. Shri S.M. Lal Jan Bash a 
44. Shri Krishna Marandi 
45. Shri Uday Pratap Singh 
•vacancy c:~.used w.e.f. 26.11.95 dut to expiry of Slui Shanbr Dayal Singh. 
••NootiMted oo the 29th Aug,u.st, 1995 vic~ Shri Anndi Charan Oas resigned from the Comm.iuee on 1st June, 1995. 
(i) 

(ii) 
SECRETARIAT 
I. Shri Ashok Tomar, Director 
1. ~ h f; Raj? Ram, Deput y Secre t:u·y 
3. Shri Syecl Ausaf Husain, Unde r Secretary 
4. Slu i K.P. Singh, Committe e Officer 

I 
INT ROD UCT ION 
l. the Ch:oirman. Standin!: Comminee on Transport and Tourism having been 
authori,cd hy the Commillec tn prc,e nt the Report on their behalf, pre•ent thi' tlu:ir 
Twcnty-set·ond Rcpon t>n 'Civil End:oVC'> in D~fence Airfields' . 
2. The Committee considered the subject und took the evidence of Se~rcwry . 
Department of Civil Aviation and the Secretary, Ministry of Defence in the mHtter . Th.: 
Committee "i'h to cxpr~ their th:mks to the officers of the Department of Civil Aviation 
and Minbt~· of Defence for placing before the Com mittee mater ial and infonnation <lt-,irt·d 
in connection with the subject and for giving evidence before the Com mille e. 
3. The Comminc c considered and adopted the report :or their meeting ltcld on the 29th 
February. I 991\. 
Nt-.w Dt, J JJI: 
Ft'brtttll) ' 29. 19% 
- --
1'/wlgww 10. 1917 (Saka) 
(ii i) 
PRAMOO MAIIAJAN . 
C!rnirmnn. 
Stmulin~ (onunitl<'l' 
011 T rnnspnrr & Tourism. 

REPORT 
1l1ere He prese ntly 28 defence airfields with 'civil enclaves' within them , utiUsed by the 
Airpor ts Authority of India (A .A.l .) for civil aviation purposes . These enclaves, co nsist of 
terminal buildings, aprons, taxiways and have been established in such a way that they do 
not interfere with the operational and security requirements of the defence airfields within 
which they are located .. Such enclaves were created at these 28 airfields, as no separate civil 
airport/ infrastructure was considered feasible at that statio n because of the land intensive 
and cost intensive nature of deve lopment, aodl also because these did not lend themselves to 
regulatory requirements of air space, given the existence of the defe nce airfields. The No 
Ojection Certificate from defence authorities could not be obtained under such compulsions . 
The following is the Jist of the defence airfields with civil enclaves : 
1. Bbuj 
2 . Goa 
3. Jamnagar 
4. Jodhpur 
5. Pune 
6. Along 
7. Gorakhpur 
8. Pon Blair 
9. Agra 
10. Allahabad 
11. Bikaner 
12. Chandigarh 
13. Gwalior 
14. Jaisalmer 
15. Jammu 
16. Kanpur 
17. Sri nagar 
18. Leh 
19. Bangalore 
20. Cochin 
21. Vishakhapatnam 
22. Bagdogra 
23. Jorhat 
24. Silchar 
25. Tezpur 
'" Te ?-tJ 
27. Zero 
28. Daparizo 
2. Not all lbe 28 airfields were originally oonstructed for defence purposes. Six of these 
viz., Bbuj, Bagdogn, Vi.ba!cbapatnam, Silcbar, Port Blair and Gwalior were initially civil 
airports, but were Jatu oouverted into defence airfields. 
1 

2 
3. The Department of Civil Aviation in their note submitted to the Committee bas 
stated that the civil enclaves operate under a number of constraints which may be 
summarised tts under:-
(a) Owing to sbonage of space at almost all defence airpons where civil enclaves are 
operating , a lim.ited area has been given for creating civil infrastructure . 
Expansion I modification of already created terminal buildings poses considerable 
problems, since there is no additional space available for modular expansion. 
(b) Because of space constraints, AAJ is unable to create cargo/ commercial 
infrastructure. 
(c) Air Traffic control is managed by the defence authorities on these airfields. 
Therefore, the entire watch-hour is dependent upon the requirements of defence 
force. 
(d) Time slots for the civil aviation is dictat ed by the defence requirements and civil 
aviation has to accept this constraint. In most cases, defence has been very 
cooperative in their endeavour to care to civil requirements. 
(e) The radio navigational aids, lighting system, etc. provided at defence airfields are 
commensurate with the defence requirements and their operational standards. 
However, these mostly fall below ICAO norms. AAJ bas therefore to provide 
these facilities at their expense. 
(f) Given defence requirements , often, expansion of watch hours becomes a great 
problem. 
(g) The radio navigational aids provided by the AA1 have to be serviced and 
maintained. While doing so, technical personnel have to face some problems on 
account of security constraints. 
(h) Despite heavy investments by the AAI in the defence airfields, returns to them are 
negligible, as air traflic control is handled by defence authorities and the tanding 
fee is collected by the de'fence authorities and deposited in the Consolidated Fund 
of India. 
(i) Power supply at defence airfields, at times, is not sufficient to cater to the needs of 
the civil enclave. Wherever possible, AAI has created independent power sources 
to cater to its own needs. 
(j) Administration and Coordination : The command and control of the defence 
airports are under their respective commanders. Control over civil enclave,s is 
exercised by the Airport Directors nominated by AAl. The latter have been 
advised, and maintain very close administrative coordination with the defence 
commanders in all matters. Usually all help is provided by the defence 
commanders. 
(k) Legal problems : Any dispute over land or legal requiremenu are referred to AAl 
Headquarters who in turn take it up with Defence Headquarters for their 
indulgenc~ and help. Most of the difficulties are sorted out through coordination 
meetings at appropriate levels with mutual cooperation. 
4. The Conimittee at its meeting held on the 20th February. 1996 heard the views of the 
Secretary, Department of Civil Aviation, and also the Defence Secretary in the matter . 
. )YJ!jler.deposing before the Gornrnittee, Secretary. Department of Civil Aviation has stated 
miiJ tJi.e problep~s at these c!,yil enclaves have incrl}a.SC#, during> ~e, last fiv~ years a~ th~re has 
been rapid growth in air traffic. The COI\~trairlts have been . felt more at such places C!.S 
• 

3 
Bangalore, Goa, Pune and Cochin. When aslced about the long term plans/scientific studies 
for these civil enclaves, the Secretary informed the Committee that there were no such long 
term plans for the development of these enclaves. However, Department of Civil Aviation 
has identified plans for new airports keeping in view growing traffic requirements. Airports 
at Cochin, Bangalore and Goa have been given top priority. Separate airports at Cochin and 
Bangalore are being set up. An alternative site for new airport at Goa is yet to be identified. 
There are seven airports viz., Jodhpur, Pune, Agra, Allahabad, Chandigarh, Bagdogra and 
Gwalior which would acquire importance within the next five years or so and problems in 
these airports are proposed tO be tackled in a similar manner. 
5. As regards the investment made by the Airport Authority of India, the Committee 
has been informed by the Secretary that so far an investment of Rs. 251 crores has been 
made in these civil enclaves. This includes expenditure on (i) aerodrom works such as 
pavements, terminal and ancillary buildings, (ii) navigational aids and (iii) ground safety 
services. The revenue from these enclaves was however not commensurate with the 
investment made therein . Sources of revenue earning from these enclaves include Radio 
Navigational Facility Charges (RNFC) and non-traffic revenue. The major chunk of revenue 
i.e. landing charges collected ther efrom goes. to the Consolidated Fund of India and is then 
allocated to defence in the following year. The revenue so collected does not come back to 
the Airport Authority for investment in the development of aviation infrastructure. The AAl 
also does not get budgetary support from the Government. 
6. The Committe e has been informed by the Secretary that these enclave s also face 
severe constraints on account of shor tages of space which does not allow them to create 
additional cargo I commercial infrastructure and instal navigational aids such as DVOR ILS 
ere. Consequently, these enclaves do not meet lCAO specifications for civil operations. The 
maintenance staff at times is also not allowed to maintain the facilities. 
7. The Committee was .informed that Air Traffic Control (ATC) watch hours of defence 
airfields are controlled by the Defence For\OCS according to their own requirements. The civil 
flights are by and large restricted between 10.00 a.m. to 8.00 p.m. and not adjusted in case 
of delay due to bad weather or technical reasons. 
8. The Committee also heard the Defence Secretary on the matter. The Defence 
Secretary informed the Committee that there had been maximum possible cooperation from 
their side to accommodating civi.l aviation operation at these civil enclaves . On being asked 
whether Ministry of Defence have ever given a thought about separating civil enclaves from 
defence airfields or shifting of some of their airfields which are located in the cities, the 
Defence Secretary informed the Committee that keeping in view the high use of these 
airports, separate airfields at Goa (international) & Agra are under consideration. A 
Committee has been set up to examine the issue and the report is expected very shortly. As 
regards the shifting of defence airfields fro m its existing location, the Secretary stated that 
location of an airfield is important from the point of view of the operational plans of the 
armed forces. 
Recommendations 
9. The Committee noted the const raints being faced by the Department .of Civil 
Aviation at the Civil enclaves in the defence airfields. These constraints have adversely 
affected the operation of civil flights during the last 4-5 years due to the considerable 
increase in air traffic. Th~ 'problem has been more acute particularly at the places such as 
Bangalore, Cochin, Goa and. Agra wherc; .,~xpansion of infrastructural facilities is needed, 
given the tourist as well as commercial traffic. These places are now attracting more 
international Oighl$. The Committee has noted that there has been full cooperation from the 

4 
Defence authorities in the matter of civil aviation at the existing airports, and beyond that it 
does not seem feasible for the defence to serve the operation al com mitm ents of the civil 
authoritie s. The ColllDllttee, theref ore, recommend s that some altogether separate places for 
civil airports be provided to meet the growing demands or civil aviation. 
10. The Com mittee notes that Department of Civil Aviat ion is developing the 
infrastructure to meet ICAO specifications but the results are far from satisfactory owing to 
restrictions on the civil enclaves in the defence airfields. The Comminee is, however, 
astonished 1.0 note that the Department of Civil Avi ntion & Airports Authority of Indi a have 
not carried out any long term ~t udies on the subject of civil enclaves, their future 
requi rement, the need for expansion given the growing air traffi c etc. The Committee 
observes that problems arc being atte nded to on ad hoc and sho rt time basis. The Committee 
recommends that the Department of Civil Aviation and the AAI should carry out a stu dy/ 
survey to assess the futur e requirements and pr10pare a time bound action plan. 
11. The Comm illee tak es note of the fact that revenue from these civil enclaves is very 
low comparing the expenditure incurred on these civil enclaves by the Airport Authority of 
India. A large portion of reve nue at an airport com es from lhe landing charg es collec ted by 
the Airp ort Authori ty. In the C<Jse of civil enclaves, landing charg es are collected by the 
Defence authorities and deposited in the Consolidated Fund of India. It has been the 
considered opinion of the Commiu cc that reve nu e generated from the civil aviation sector 
be recycled for the development of aviation infrastruct ure. The Comm ittee in its 91h and 
14th Reports on the Demands Cor Grants for 1994-95 and 1995-96 respectively while 
examining the matter regarding recycling of Inland Air Travel Tax (IATI) and Foreign 
Trave l Tux (FIT) had recommende d that proceeds (rom these taxes be recycled for the 
development of aviat ion infrastructure as that would create more business which would 
ultimately lead to a higher collection of taxes by the Central exchequ er. The Committ ee-bad 
then desir ed that both the Ministry of Finance a nd Planning Commission should to take 
stock o( the situation and review their positions. ln their Action Taken Report , the 
Department of Civil Aviation had stated that the matte r was under consideration and a 
paper for considerat ion of Cabi nc l was in process. On the same analogy , the Committee 
observes tha t the landing fee collecte d from these enclaves be recycled for the development 
of aviation infrastructure. The Comm ittee recommends to the Gilvernment that keeping io 
view the expenditure incurrtd by the Authority , the landing charges should be cost shared by 
them with the Derence in a proportionate manner. The Committee therefore, wants the 
Ministries of Finan ce and Defence, and the Planning Com.missioo to review their policies and 
make available substantial percentage of !be landing fee for further investment in the aviation 
sector. 
12. As regards the problem$ being experience d on account of land con straints for the 
development of termin al facili tic~. constru ction and upgradation of civil aprons etc. and 
installation of navigational aids. the Comminee observes that the construc tion of separate 
civil airports in close proximit y of Defence ai rfields is cost intens ive and State Government 
may not be able to acquir e land for anoth er airport. The Committee recommends that the 
Ministry of Defence should explore the pos:~ibility of providing the necessary tand to the AAI 
so that infrastructure could be developed as per the ICAO specifications for civil operation at 
these airfields. 
13. The Committee is aware that A TC watch bows at rbe defei\Cle airf&elds are controlled 
according to dc:Cence requirement~. The Committee is pleased t<1 note that the defence 

5 
autho rities extend their fullest cooperation in accommodating the civil flights. However , it is 
observed that civil flights face difficulties when the flights are delayed due to bad weather or 
for some technical reason~. At some of the places ther e is a need for availability of air space 
for the civil flights in the morning and late in evening hours. Tbe Committee, therefore , 
desires that the Ministry of Defence may look iDto tht matter and accommodate a gr~ter 
num~r of civil nights in thtse enclaves without hampering defeo~ operations. 
14. Attention of the Committee has been drawn to the fact that at Goa Airport, 
reside ntial quart ers for defenc.;e personnel have been located along the airstrip and peopl e 
oc-casionally cross the runway of the airport. At Bhuj, passengers face a lot of 
mconveniences as they have to wait at least o ne kilometre away from the Bhuj Airport. 1t 
has also been brought to the notice of the Committee that at some airports , e.g. Jorbat, 
hardly any civil aircrafts are allowed to land on account of lAF exercises. fhe Committee 
feels that there is a need of a permane.nt Central Co-«dinalioo Committee having 
representatives of the Department of Civil Aviation, Mlnbtry of Defence and others to look 
into such prob lems being faced in the operation of civil nights . The Committee desires that 
such a Comm ittee shou ld ~ constituted at the earliest. 
I 

-
·:xvn 
SEVENTEENTH MEETING 
The Committee met at 3.00 P. M . on Wednesday, the 7th February , 1996 in Room No . 63, 
First Floor , Parliament House , New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
1. Shri Pramod Mahajan-C hairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Jagir Singh Dard 
3. Shri Bhadreswar Buragohain 
4. Shri Nara in Prasad Gupta 
5. Shri Satya Prakash Malav iya 
6. Shri Raghavji 
7. Shrimati Basanti Sarma 
8. Shri Iqba l Singh 
LOK SABHA 
9. Shri Vilasrao Nag nathrao Gundewar 
10. Shri K. Muraleedharan 
ll. Shri A. Char les 
12. Shri K.M . Mathew 
11. Shri Peter G . Marbaniang 
14. Shri C .K. Kuppu swamy 
15. Shri K.D. Sultanpu ri 
16. Shr i Jangbir $ingh 
17. Prof. Prem Dhuma l 
!8. Shri Chattrapal Singh 
19. Snr i Kalka O:ts 
20. Shr i Ram Sunder Das 
21. Shri Rajcsh Ranjan alias Pappu Yaclav 
22. Shr i S ivaji Patna ik 
23. Shri Sukhendu Khan 
24. Shri S.M. La l Jan Basha 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri Ashok Tomar, Direc tor 
2. Shri Rap Ram. Depu ty Secretary 
3. Sbri Syed 
4. Shri K.P. 
Ausaf llusain. Under Secretary 
Singh , Comm iucc Officer 
2. t • 
' . , ). • 
4 . • • 
5. T he Committee decided 10 hold it~ next meet ing on Tuesday, the 20th February. 
1996 to hear the views of the Secretary , M inistry of Defence · and the, Secretary, Department 
of Civil Aviation on mailers perl~ i ni ng w Defence Airports with Civil Enclaves. 
The Comm illee then adjou t11ed at 3.30 ~ ·"· 
•t to XVI mccun,es of 1111: Comm incc rd;1tc w m.attcrs not included m this Repor t. 
• ··Rehucs w n1a1t~.! r ncu tnduclcd 111 th1o: l<ep1>n 
9 

xvm 
EIGHTEENT H MEETING 
The Committ ee met at 3.00 P.M. "" Tuesday, the 20th February , 1996 m Committee 
Room '8', Gro und A oor. Parliament House Annexe, New Delht. 
PRESENT 
I. Shri Pramod Mabajan -Chairman 
RAJYA SABRA 
2. Shri S. Austir , 
3. Shri John F. Fernand es 
4. Sbri Narain Prasad Gupta 
5. Sbri Raghavji 
6. Shri Naresb Yadav 
LOK SABRA 
7. Shri Vilasr&o Nagnathr ao Gundewar 
8. Shri A. Charle s 
9. Shri Peter G. Marbani ang 
10. Shri R. Surende r Redd y 
11. Shri K. D. Suhanpu ri 
12. Shri Jangbir Sing h 
13. Prof. Prem D hum al 
14. Sbri Chat trap al Singh 
15. Shri Kalka Das 
16. Shri Ram Sunde r Das 
17. Shri Sivaji Patnaik 
18. Shri Uday Pratap Singh 
SF:CRETARIA'J' 
I. Shri Raja Ram. Deputy Secretary 
2. Shri K.P. Singh, Commiuec Officer 
WITNESSES 
Department of Civil Aviation 
I. Shri Yogesh Cha ndr a, Secretary 
2. A.V.M. H.M Shahul. Chairman. A.A.!. 
3. Shri S.P. Singh, E.D. (Finance), A.A.!. 
4. Shri Jagann a th. Dir~t: t or, Atr routes and Aerodrome (!'). A.A.I. 
Ministr y of Defence 
I. Shn K.A. Nambiyar. Defence Secretar) 
2. Air Marshal V. K. Bhatia, I.G. Airport Safety 
3. Cmde. G. Sharma . Dtrcctor (Naval Airport and Service) 
4. Group Captain T. l'annu , 
5. Air Cmde . V. Parvanaosam , Jt. Dirctor (AI: Works) 
2. The committee took up for consideration the matter relaltng to the Civil Encluves at 
the Defence Airport.~ and heard the view~ of the Secretary, Department of Civil Avia tion. 
and also the Secretary. Ministry of Defence . on the subject. 
Verh;ttim rcwrd of the proceedtnj!S wa• kept 
3. Th~ Commi ttee then ;tdjouJned at 5.15 J'.M· 
10 J 

I 
XIX 
NlNTEE NTH MEETING 
The Comrniuc e met at 10.00 P. M. on Thursday, the 29th February, 1996 in Room No. 63, 
First l·loor, Parliam ent House, New Delh i. 
PRESEN'r 
RAJYA SABHA 
I. Shri Prarnod Mahajan- CI!atmlllll 
2. Shri Jagir Singh Dard 
3. Shri John. F. Fernandes 
4. Shri Narain J>rn~ ad G upta 
5. Shri Satya Prakash M~ lit viv<~ 
6. Shri Raghavji 
7. Shrimati Hasanti Sarma 
LOK SA.BHA 
8. Shri A. Chari"' 
9. Shri K.M. Math <.:ll' 
Ill. Shri Pete r G \I •rh;~nia ng 
II Shri K.D. Sultanpl>lo 
12. Shri S:mtosh Kum .• r G~ng"a' 
13. Shri Sivaji l'atn:1ik 
14. Shri Sukht:ntlu l'h.In 
b Shn Lid"" 1'"""1 'iingh 
St:CIUiTAt<fA 1 
I Shri A:..h'~ I mcsr 0;; .. · ... •r 
2. Shn Raj<• " llfl n .. ,)u1:· '\ ..... c.ltlf) 
~. Shd Syed \I ... tt JIU"-.'•U l nd .. 1 '!)(- ~1 
'-hri K.. !' ,., ,ll, l i·mmiith. c.• l>]lto<:l 
t.Jf \ 
) .,.h"'· Cott t I"" 1.. \B'td•• ~J lad "'"· ,, J th..: (lrtt. 22!'d ~tt: · 
[) ~ r !:• me> I fa , • 
'· li:L elm· l .-. ... tJ 11\l!l!-1~ ll ai ........ c.1lll Ia~ :.P' t•;·h .... : .• ! '\,Jl ,JUlll~~.JJ CtUpl .. l. 
tu prc,cnt the Report 10 the Rajya Sabha and Shri K.M. Mathew and in his absence 
Shri Sukhendu Khan to Jny lhe report o.n the table of Lok Sabha. 
4. • • 
The Commiuee rhen adjourned at 1 1.00 A.M. 
I I 