PA R L IAM E N T  O F IND IA
R A JY A  SA B H A 148
D E PA R T M E N T -R E L A T E D P A R L IA M E N T A R Y  S T A N D IN G
C O M M IT T E E O N T R A N S P O R T , T O U R IS M A N D C U L T U R E
ONE HUNDRED AND FOR TY -EIGHTH REPOR T
ON
THE NATIONAL HIGHWAYS AUTHORITY OF INDIA
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 2008
TH 
(PRESENTED T O THE RAJY A  SABHA  ON 17 FEBRUAR Y , 2009)
TH 
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF  THE LOK SABHA  ON 17 FEBRUAR Y , 2009)
TH 
(PRESENTED T O THE RAJY A  SABHA  ON 17 FEBRUAR Y , 2009)
TH 
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF  THE LOK SABHA  ON 17 FEBRUAR Y , 2009)
R A JY A  SA B H A  SE C R E TA R IA T
N E W  D E L H I
R A JY A  SA B H A  SE C R E TA R IA T
N E W  D E L H I
FE B R U A R Y, 2009/M A G H A , 1930 (SA K A )FE B R U A R Y, 2009/M A G H A , 1930 (SA K A )

Website:http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail:rsc-tt@sansad.nic.in

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA  SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE
ONE HUNDRED AND FORTY-EIGHTH REPORT
ON
THE NATIONAL HIGHWAYS AUTHORITY OF INDIA
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 2008
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 17 TH FEBRUARY , 2009)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 17 TH FEBRUARY , 2009)
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
FEBRUARY , 2009/MAGHA, 1930 (SAKA)


CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ......................................................................................... (i)-(ii)
2. I NTRODUCTION ........................................................................................................................ (iii)
3. R EPORT OF THE C OMMITTEE .................................................................................................. 1—5
4. O BSERV A TIONS/CONCLUSIONS /RECOMMENDATIONS — A T A G LANCE .................................... 6
5. A NNEXURE ............................................................................................................................... 7—14
6. M INUTES ................................................................................................................................. 15—19

(i)
COMPOSITION OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE
(2008-09)
1. Shri Sitaram Yechury — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Satish Kumar Sharma
3. Shrimati Jayanthi Natarajan
4. Prof. Alka Balram Kshatriya
5. Shri Shanta Kumar
6. Shrimati Hema Malini
*7. Shri Shahid Siddiqui
8. Shri Naresh Gujral
9. Shri Birendra Prasad Baishya
10. Shri Biswajit Daimary
LOK SABHA
11. Shri Anandrao Vithoba Adsul
12. Shri Sukhbir Singh Badal
13. Shri Joachim Baxla
**14. Shri Sartaj Singh Chhatwal
15. Shri N.S.V. Chitthan
16. Shri Adhir Chowdhury
17. Dr. K. Dhanaraju
18. Shrimati Priya Dutt
19. Shri Dip Gogoi
20. Shri Prahlad Joshi
21. Shri P. Karunakaran
$22. Dr. P . P . Koya
$$23. Dr. Ramkrishna Kusmaria
24. Shri Samik Lahiri
25. Shri Alok Kumar Mehta
26. Shri Hemlal Murmu
27. Shri Madan Lal Sharma
28. Shri Akshay Pratap Singh
29. Shri Dushyant Singh
30. Shri Rakesh Singh
31. Shri Suraj Singh
*Ceased to be a Member of the Committee w.e.f.  26th November, 2008.
**Ceased to be a Member of the Committee w.e.f.  18th December, 2008.
$Ceased to be a Member of the Committee w.e.f.  9th January, 2009.
$$Ceased to be a member of the Committee w.e.f.  19th December, 2008.

(ii)
SECRETARIAT
Shri N.K. Singh, Joint Secretary
Shri Jagdish Kumar, Joint Director
Shri Swarabji B., Deputy Director
Shrimati Nidhi Chaturvedi, Committee Officer
(ii)

(iii)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport,
Tourism and Culture, having been authorised by the Committee to present on its behalf, do hereby
present this One Hundred and Forty-eighth Report of the Committee on the National Highways
Authority of India (Amendment) Bill, 2008*.
2. The Bill, was introduced in the Lok Sabha on the 22nd December, 2008. In pursuance of
rules relating to the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committees, the Hon'ble Chairman,
Rajya Sabha, referred** the Bill to the Committee on the 31st December, 2008 for examination and
report on or before 15th February, 2009.
3. The Committee took oral evidence of the Secretary, Department of Road Transport and
Highways and Chairman, National Highways Authority of India at its meeting held on the
19th January, 2009.
4. The Committee considered the draft Report on the subject and adopted the same on
13th February, 2009.
6. The Committee wishes to express its thanks to the Secretary and other officers of the
Department of Road Transport and Highways, Chairman, National Highways Authority of India and
Ministry of Law and Justice for the assistance and inputs provided during deliberations on the
provisions of the Bill.
SITARAM YECHURY
N
EW D ELHI; Chairman,
February 13, 2009 Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Magha 24, 1930  (Saka) Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture.
*Published in the Gazette of India Extraordinary Part II, Section-2, dated 22nd December, 2008.
**Rajya Sabha Parliamentary Bulletin Part II, No. 45652 dated 31st December, 2008.

1
REPORT
The National Highways Authority of India (Amendment) Bill, 2008 was introduced in the
Lok Sabha on the 22nd December, 2008. The Bill was referred to the Department-related
Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture for examination and report.
Under the mandate, the Committee has examined the Bill and finalised the Report after hearing the
views of the nodal Department i.e. Department of Road Transport and Highways. The Bill seeks
to further amend the National Highways Authority of India Act, 1988.
2. The reasons for introduction of the Bill, as informed by the Department of Road Transport
and Highways have been enumerated in the succeeding paragraphs.
3. The National Highways Authority of India was established as a statutory body under the
National Highways Authority of India (NHAI) Act, 1988, and was operationalized in February, 1995
with the appointment of a fu ll-time Chairman . NHAI’s initial mandate in 1996 was the projects
undertaken with the assistance of Asian Development Bank (ADB) and Japan Bank for International
Cooperation (JBIC). Subsequently in 1998, the Government of India announced the National
Highways Development Project (NHDP) comprising mainly the Golden Quadrilateral and other
projects in Phase-I and the North-South and East-West corridors in Phase-II. The Government of
India (GoI) has now entrusted NHAI the responsibility of implementing a greatly expanded National
Highways Development Project (additional Phases III to VII) with an investment of about
Rs.2,20,000 crore. The new phases of NHDP are to be implemented mainly through Public Private
Partnership (PPP), either as Build, Operate and Transfer (BOT) (Toll) projects or as BOT (Annuity)
projects.
4. The proposed Bill focuses on building up the institutional capacity of the NHAI by
expanding its membership to ensure focused attention to all PPP policy issues, appraisal and
implementation of PPP projects.
5. The Committee on Infrastructure (COI) under the chairmanship of the Prime Minister had
taken following decision in respect of the institutional strengthening of NHAI in its meeting held
on 13.01.2005:
“In order to provide autonomy and delegate more powers to NHAI for approval of
individual projects within the overall programme including the financing structure approved
by CCEA, it is necessary to build institutional capacity of NHAI by making it a
multidisciplinary professional body with high quality financing management and contract
management expertise.”
6. In pursuance to the decisions of the COI as mentioned above and suggestions of the
Planning Commission, an Inter-Ministerial Committee (IMC) was constituted under the
Chairmanship of Secretary, Road Transport and Highways and members from Department of
Economic Affairs, NHAI, Planning Commission and experts in the field of highways. IMC
considered various drafts prepared by NHAI as well as by Planning Commission and carefully
examined the need of restructuring, in view of the mandate being given to NHAI particularly in the
context of paradigm shift in project implementation from civil works contract with full Government
funding to project implementation mainly through Public Private Partnership (PPP).
7. IMC recognized that within the broad policy framework set by the Government of India,
NHAI has to act as a professional, commercially-oriented organization and has to focus on cost-
effective and timely delivery. For this, the key approaches and underlying considerations for the
new organizations structure are:

2
• A structure designed to improve decision making efficiency in a transparent manner
ensuring responsiveness to changes taking place in the environment.
• A lean organization structure continuing the tradition of significant outsourcing and
leveraging the skills and resources available from the private sector.
• An organization with high dependency on technology and a proper system of ensuring
accountability.
• Achieving improved retention of experience and staff within the organization so as to
maintain the level of expertise and organizational competence.
• Inculcating multidisciplinary skills within the organization for better project appraisal
and monitoring.
8. IMC recommended following vision statement for NHAI:
“To meet the nation’ s need for the provision and maintenance of National Highways
network to global standards and to meet user’ s expectations in the most time-bound and
cost-effective manner, within the strategic policy framework set by the Government of
India and thus promote economic well being and quality of life of the people.”
9. NHAI has adopted a business model that rests on outsourcing of specific tasks related to
design, construction and supervision of works and the subsequent management of corridors. IMC
was of the view that for managing such a large programme within the prescribed time-frame, there
is no alternative to the model of outsourcing. NHAI should, therefore, continue with the
outsourcing model which also has the advantages of keeping the organisation relatively lean,
harnessing private sector efficiencies, and providing flexibility in execution of works.
10. NHAI, nevertheless, remains accountable to the NH users and the Government of India for
the quality of service/output provided by contracted service providers, hence, NHAI need to have
in-house capacity for efficient procurement and monitoring of contract outputs and services.
11. IMC considered strengthening of the NHAI Board, its organizational structure, the human
resources management and strengthening of systems and processes as the key areas for
strengthening NHAI.
12. Currently, Chairman, NHAI is nominated by Government of India, from among serving civil
servants. IMC has recommended that the selection of candidates for the post of Chairman, NHAI
should be done by a search committee chaired by the Cabinet Secretary comprising the Secretary,
Department of Road Transport and Highways; Secretary, Planning Commission and one of the
Directors of the IIMs and one CMD/MD of a financial institution. To ensure continuity of the
Chairman for effective management, the Chairman should be given a minimum tenure of three years
extendable by another two years. The age limit may also be relaxed upto 62 years in case it is
necessary to provide the minimum tenure of three years.
13. As per the provisions of the NHAI Act, 1988, the Authority consists of a Chairman, not
more than five full time members; and not more than four part time members. At present, the full
time Members include Member (Administration), Member (Finance) and three Members (Technical),
while the four part time Members include Secretary, Department of Road Transport and Highways;
Secretary, Planning Commission; Secretary, Department of Expenditure and Director General (Road
Development), Department of Road Transport and Highways.
14. Keeping in view the vastly increased mandate for NHAI and also the greatly enhanced
participation envisaged for the private sector, it is proposed to increase the full time Members from
five to six and part-time Members from four to six, to allow induction of professionals of repute

3
in the fields of financial management, transportation planning and other relevant areas. Induction
of outside professionals will enhance the capacity of the Authority to take strategic decisions,
widen its perspective, bring in best management practices, and assist in achieving the goal of
higher private participation.
15. The Cabinet in its meeting held on 5th July, 2007 approved the proposal for restructuring
of NHAI which includes:—
(i) NHAI to have six full time members (against five at present) – one each for finance,
administration, public private partnership (PPP), two Members (Projects) and one
Member (Technical).
(ii) Increase in the number of part-time Members by two (from 4 to 6), who would be
from the non-Government sector, one from IITs/IIMs and the other from financial
institutions.
(iii) Amendment to NHAI Act, 1988 (to effect the revis ed strength of the Board).
16. Amendment will be required in sub-section (3) of section 3 of the NHAI Act, 1988 for
increasing the number of full-time Members from five to six and part-time Members from four to
six. Subsequent to the amendment in the NHAI Act, 1988, the National Highways Authority of India
(the term of office and other conditions of service of Members) Rules, 2003 will be amended
accordingly.
17. The expenditure on salary, allowances, other remuneration and facilities provided to the
members will be met from the National Highways Authority of India Fund as provided under
Section 18 of the Act.
18. The Committee in its meeting held on the 19th January, 2009 heard the views of the
Secretary and other officials of the Department of Road Transport and Highways, Chairman,
National Highways Authority of India and Ministry of Law and Justice on the Bill and sought replies
to the queries on the subject. The Committee in its meeting held on 13th February, 2009 considered
the Bill and the Committee’s consideration/recommendations have been given in the succeeding
paragraphs.
19. Clause 2 of the Bill reads – In the National Highways Authority of India Act, 1988, in
section 3, for sub-section (3), the following shall be substituted, namely:—
“(3) The Authority shall consist of:-
(i) a Chairman;
(ii) not more than six full-time members; and
(iii) not more than six, but at the least four, part-time members,
to be appointed by the Central Government by the notification in the Official Gazette:
Provided that the Central Government shall, while appointing the part-time members, ensure
that at least two of them are non-government professionals having knowledge or experience
in financial management, transportation planning or any other relevant discipline”.
20. When the Committee specifically asked about the need for induction of additional members
through the amendment, the Secretary replied that
“...sometime in 2006, the Committee on Infrastructure had reviewed the capacity of the
NHAI to implement such a large programme. It was felt that the institutional capacity of
NHAI needs to be strengthened, both by way of giving additional manpower and also by

4
creating posts for experts. The areas which were found to be strengthened, particularly
were the areas of say financial management, legal expertise and, of course, managerial
expertise, in general...”
21. The Department while submitting the detailed background note to the Committee as
mentioned in earlier paragraphs of the report substantiated the need for this amendment. The
Department has further stated that the NHAI which was operationalized in February, 1995 with the
appointment of full-time Chairman has come a long way from implementing projects with the
assistance of international agencies to have the responsibility of implementing the greatly expanded
National Highways Development Project (additional phases III to VII) with a large investment of
about Rs. 2,20,000 crore at present. The National Highways Development Project announced by
the Government of India in the year 1998 has really changed the functioning of the NHAI. The
NHAI started off with only ten projects in certain stretches of the Golden Quadrilateral in its earlier
days, has now projects spread all over the country. Funding pattern of the projects undertaken by
NHAI has also changed during the course of time. Earlier the projects were financed through
Government funding and aid from international financial institutions, but the new phases of NHDP
are to be implemented mainly through Public Private Partnership (PPP), either as Build, Operate and
Transfer (BOT) (Toll) projects or as BOT (Annuity) projects.
22. The institutional strengthening process of NHAI which started in the year 2005 by the
decision of Committee on Infrastructure (COI) under the chairmanship of the Prime Minister was
finally approved by the cabinet in its meeting held on the 5th July, 2007. During the deliberations
of the Committee, the Secretary, Department of Road Transport and Highways and the Chairman,
National Highways Authority of India placed their views on the necessity to bring this amendment.
23. The Committee is of the view that this Bill appears to be a piece-meal effort on the
part of the Government that does not really address the basic issues highlighted in the
decision of the Committee on Infrastructure (COI) particularly those relating to greater
autonomy and delegation of more powers to NHAI for approval of individual projects. The
Committee feels that the Bill has been used as a contingent legislative tool. The
Government should avoid such attempt so that the dignity and importance of the Parliament
is maintained. The Committee appreciates the Government’s attempt for strengthening the
NHAI by adding professionals of repute in the fields of financial management and
transportation planning, it, however, feels that merely by adding numbers in the Board will
not yield the desired results as expected in the new vision statement of NHAI. The
Committee is of the opinion that having road projects worth Rs. 2,20,000 crore, NHAI would
certainly require much more than that, such as delegation of more powers to NHAI for
approval of individual projects; strengthening of its organization structure; improving its
human resource management and systems and processes of NHAI.
24. The Committee also finds that the amendment is silent on the issue of fixed tenure
for the Chairman, NHAI. The Committee notes the recommendation of the Inter-Ministerial
Committee (IMC) that to ensure continuity of the Chairman for effective management, the
Chairman should be given a minimum tenure of three years extendable by another two
years. The IMC also recommended that the age limit may also be relaxed up to 62 years
in case it is necessary to provide the minimum tenure of three years. The Committee
expresses its disappointment over the non-inclusion of such important recommendations
which will have a longstanding effect on the functioning of NHAI in this amendment.
25. The Committee finds discrepancy in this amendment on the inclusion of additional
part-time members. The Statement of Objects and Reasons of the Amendment Bill states
that in order to increase the efficiency, the number of part-time members of the Board has
been increased from four to six but the formulation of the Bill in Clause 2 reads ‘not more

5
than six but not less than four’ thus defeating the objective of increasing the numbers from
four to six. Section 8 of the original Act and Section 3 of the present Bill are not in
harmonious construction. Section 8 says no vacancy will invalidate the decisions of NHAI
Board, whereas Section 3 says there will be minimum four and maximum six part time
members in the Board of NHAI. It means, if the number is less than four, the Board cannot
take any decisions. This might create confusion which needs to be looked into for removing
possible ambiguity. The Committee therefore, urges upon Government to carefully consider
all the points mentioned above and recommends that the Government should come up with
a comprehensive legislation incorporating all the suggestions made by IMC and covering all
the issues concerned with the strengthening of NHAI.
26. The Committee adopted the Clause of the Bill without any amendments.
27. The enacting formula and the title are adopted with consequential changes.
28. The Committee recommends that the Bill may be passed after incorporating the
suggestions made by it.

OBSERV ATIONS/CONCLUSIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS — AT A GLANCE
The Committee is of the view that this Bill appears to be a piece-meal effort on the
part of the Government that does not really address the basic issues highlighted in the
decision of the Committee on Infrastructure (COI) particularly those relating to greater
autonomy and delegation of more powers to NHAI for approval of individual projects. The
Committee feels that the Bill has been used as a contingent legislative tool. The
Government should avoid such attempt so that the dignity and importance of the Parliament
is maintained. The Committee appreciates the Government's attempt for strengthening the
NHAI by adding professionals of repute in the fields of financial management and
transportation planning, it, however, feels that merely by adding numbers in the Board will
not yield the desired results as expected in the new vision statement of NHAI. The
Committee is of the opinion that having road projects worth Rs.2,20,000 crore, NHAI would
certainly require much more than that, such as delegation of more powers to NHAI for
approval of individual projects; strengthening of its organization structure; improving its
human resources management and systems and processes of NHAI. (Para 23)
The Committee also finds that the amendment is silent on the issue of fixed tenure
for the Chairman, NHAI. The Committee notes the recommendation of the Inter-Ministerial
Committee (IMC) that to ensure continuity of the Chairman for effective management, the
Chairman should be given a minimum tenure of three years extendable by another two years.
The IMC also recommended that the age limit may also be relaxed upto 62 years in case it
is necessary to provide the minimum tenure of three years. The Committee expresses its
disappointment over the non-inclusion of such important recommendations which will have a
longstanding effect on the functioning of NHAI in this amendment. (Para 24)
The Committee finds discrepancy in this amendment on the inclusion of additional
part-time members. The Statement of Objects and Reasons of the Amendment Bill states
that in order to increase the efficiency, the number of part-time members of the Board has
been increased from four to six but the formulation of the Bill in Clause 2 reads ‘not more
than six but not less than four’ thus defeating the objective of increasing the numbers from
four to six. Section 8 of the original Act and Section 3 of the present Bill are not in
harmonious construction. Section 8 says no vacancy will invalidate the decisions of NHAI
Board, whereas Section 3 says there will be minimum four and maximum six part time
members in the Board of NHAI. It means, if the number is less than four, the Board cannot
take any decisions. This might create confusion which needs to be looked into for removing
possible ambiguity. The Committee therefore, urges upon Government to carefully consider
all the points mentioned above and recommends that the Government should come up with
a comprehensive legislation incorporating all the suggestions made by IMC and covering all
the issues concerned with the strengthening of NHAI. (Para 25)
The Committee adopted the Clause of the Bill without any amendments.
(Para 26)
The enacting formula and the title are adopted with consequential changes.
(Para 27)
The Committee recommends that the Bill may be passed after incorporating the
suggestions made by it. (Para 28)
6

ANNEXURE

9
AS INTRODUCED  IN THE L OK S ABHA
22 DEC., 2008
Bill No. 77 of 2008
THE NATIONAL HIGHWAYS AUTHORITY OF INDIA
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 2008
A
BILL
further to amend National Highways Authority of India Act, 1988.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-ninth Year of the
Republic of India as follows:—
1. ( 1) This Act may be called the National Highways
Authority of India (Amendment) Act, 2008.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In the National Highways Authority of India Act, 1988, in
section 3, for sub-section ( 3), the following shall be substituted,
namely:—
“(3) The Authority shall consist of:—
(i) a Chairman;
(ii) not more than six full-time members;
and
(iii) not more than six, but at the least four,
part-time members,
Short title, and
commencement.
68 of 1988. Amendment of
section 3.

10
to be appointed by the Central Government by
notification in the Official Gazette:
Provided that the Central Government shall, while
appointing the part-time members, ensure that at least two of
them are non-government professionals having knowledge or
experience in financial management, transportation planning or
any other relevant discipline.”.

11
11
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Section 3 of the National Highways Authority of India Act, 1988
provides for constitution of the National Highways Authority of India. As
per sub-section (3) of the said section, the authority shall consist of
(i) a Chairman; (ii) not more than five full-time members; and (iii) not
more than four part-time members. Keeping in view the vastly increased
mandate for National Highways Authority of India and also the greatly
enhanced participation envisaged for the private sector, it is proposed to
amend sub-section ( 3) of section 3 to increase the strength of full-time
members from five to six and part-time members from four to six to
allow induction of professionals of repute in the fields of financial
management, transportation planning and other relevant areas. Induction of
outside professionals will enhance the capacity of the Authority to take
strategic decisions, widen its perspective, bring in the best management
practices, and assist in achieving the goal of higher private participation.
2. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects.
N
EW D ELHI; T.R. BAALU
The 5th December, 2008.

12
12
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Sub-section ( 3) of section 3 of the National Highways Authority of
India Act, 1988 provides for a Chairman, not more than five full-time
Members, and not more than four part-time Members. Clause 2 of the Bill
seeks to amend sub-section ( 3) of section 3 of the said Act to provide for
not more than six full-time Members and not more than six, but at the
least four, part-time Members.
2. The salaries and allowances of additional full-time and part-time
Members of the Authority shall be paid by the National Highways Authority
of India (NHAI).
3. The Bill does not involve any other expenditure of a recurring or
non-recurring nature.

13
ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE N ATIONAL A UTHORITY OF I NDIA A CT, 1988.
68 OF 1988
** * * *
CHAPTER II
THE N ATIONAL H IGHWAYS A UTHORITY OF I NDIA
3. (1)* * * * *
(3) The Authority shall consist of—
(i) a Chairman;
(ii) not more than five full-time members; and
(iii) not more than four part-time members,
to be appointed by the Central Government by notification in the
Official Gazette.
** * * *
Constitution of
the Authority.
13

14
14
LOK SABHA
A
BILL
further to amend the National Highways Authority of India Act, 1988.
(Shri T.R. Baalu, Minister of Shipping, Road Transport and Highways)

15
MINUTES

16

17
IX
NINTH MEETING
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Monday, the 19th January, 2009 in Committee Room
‘A’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Sitaram Yechury — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Naresh Gujral
3. Shri Shanta Kumar
4. Shri Birendra Prasad Baishya
LOK SABHA
5. Shri Anandrao Vithoba Adsul
6. Shri Adhir Chowdhury
7. Dr. K. Dhanaraju
8. Shri P. Karunakaran
9. Shri Alok Kumar Mehta
10. Shri Madan Lal Sharma
11. Shri Dushyant Singh
SECRETARIAT
Shri N.K. Singh, Joint Secretary
Shri Jagdish Kumar, Joint Director
Shri Swarabji B., Deputy Director
Shrimati Nidhi Chaturvedi, Committee Officer
REPRESENTATIVES OF DEPARTMENT OF ROAD TRANSPORT AND HIGHWAYS
Shri Brahm Dutt, Secretary
Shri Saroj Kumar Dash, Joint Secretary
Ms. S. Narendra, Director
Dr. R.K. Agrawal, Deputy Secretary
REPRESENTATIVES OF NHAI
Shri Brijeshwar Singh, Chairman
Shri K.S. Money, Member (A)
Dr. A. Didar Singh, Member (F)
Shri S.K. Puri, Member (T)
17

18
REPRESENTATIVES OF MINISTRY OF LAW AND JUSTICE
Shri N.L. Meena, Additional Secretary
Shrimati Sudha Rani Relangi, Deputy Legislative Counsel
****
2. At the outset, the Chairman briefed the Members about “The National Highways Authority
of India (Amendment) Bill, 2008” which has been referred to the Committee for examination and
report. Thereafter, the Committee heard the views of the Secretary and other senior officers of
the Department of Road Transport and Highways on the reasons for bringing an amendment in
the Bill. The Committee sought to know, if increasing the number of NHAI members both full/
part time, was the only requirement for restructuring/strengthening it as was suggested by the
Committee on Infrastructure in the year 2005? No convincing explanation for this could be given.
The Secretary replied to various other queries raised by the Members, during the meeting. To
several other queries raised by the Members, the Ministry representatives were requested to give
written replies within a week.
The witnesses then withdrew.
3 . ****
4 . ****
5 . ****
6 . ****
7. The Committee then adjourned at 5.30 
P.M.
**** Relates to matters not included in this report.

19
X
TENTH MEETING
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Friday, the 13th February, 2009 in Committee Room
‘A’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Sitaram Yechury — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Naresh Gujral
3. Shri Birendra Prasad Baishya
4. Shri Biswajit Daimary
LOK SABHA
5. Shri Anandrao Vithoba Adsul
6. Shri N.S.V . Chitthan
7. Shrimati Priya Dutt
8. Shri P. Karunakaran
9. Shri Alok Kumar Mehta
10. Shri Madan Lal Sharma
11. Shri Dushyant Singh
SECRETARIAT
Shri N.K. Singh, Joint Secretary
Shri Jagdish Kumar, Joint Director
Shri Swarabji B., Deputy Director
2. The Committee considered the draft 148th Report on the National Highways Authority of
India (Amendment) Bill, 2008. After some discussion, the Committee adopted the report without
any modifications.
3. Thereafter, the Committee authorized its Chairman and in his absence Shri Naresh Gujral to
present the report to the Rajya Sabha and Shri Anandrao Vithoba Adsul and Shri N.S.V . Chitthan
to lay the report on the Table of the Lok Sabha on 17th February, 2009.
4. The Committee then adjourned at 3.40 
P.M.
19

Printed at : Bengal Offset Works, 335 Khajoor Road, Karol Bagh, New Delhi-110005.