 
 
22 COAL, MINES AND STEEL (202
 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in 
the Eight Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Coal, Mines 
and Steel on 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MARCH
i 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON  
COAL, MINES AND STEEL (2025-2026) 
EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA 
MINISTRY OF STEEL 
 
 
 
Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in 
Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Coal, Mines 
and Steel on the subject ‘Steel Scrap Recycling Policy’
 
 
TWENTY SECOND REPORT 
  
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
MARCH, 2026/ CHAITRA, 1948(Saka) 
 
 
Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in 
Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Coal, Mines 
the subject ‘Steel Scrap Recycling Policy’] 
  

 
COAL
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in 
the Eight Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Coal, Mines 
and Steel on 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MARCH
  
ii 
TWENTY SECOND REPORT 
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
COAL, MINES AND STEEL (2025-2026) 
 
 
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF STEEL 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in 
Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Coal, Mines 
and Steel on the subject ‘Steel Scrap Recycling Policy’
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 27.03.2026 
      Laid in Rajya Sabha on 27.03.2026 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI  
MARCH, 2026/ CHAITRA, 1948 (Saka) 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in 
Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Coal, Mines 
the subject ‘Steel Scrap Recycling Policy’] 

iii 
 
 
CM&S No.  208 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
©2026 by Lok Sabha Secretariat Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of 
Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha (___ Edition) and printed by 
_________ 
  

iv 
 
 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
                                                                                                Page No. 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2024-25) 
 
V 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2025-26) 
 
VI 
INTRODUCTION 
 
VII 
Chapter – I 
 
Report 1 
Chapter – II 
 
Observations/Recommendations which 
have been accepted by Government. 
5 
Chapter – III 
 
Observations/Recommendations which 
the Committee do not desire to pursue 
in view of Government's replies. 
26 
Chapter – IV 
 
Observations/Recommendations in 
respect of which replies of Government 
have not been accepted by the 
Committee. 
27 
Chapter – V 
 
Observations/Recommendations in 
respect of which final replies of 
Government are still awaited. 
28 
 
ANNEXURES 
 
I Minutes of the sitting of the Standing 
Committee on Coal, Mines and Steel 
(2025-26) held on 24.03.2026. 
 
29 
II Analysis of Action Taken by the 
Government on the Recommendations 
contained in the 8th Report of the 
Standing Committee on Coal, Mines 
and Steel (Eighteenth Lok Sabha).  
 
30 

v 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON COAL, MINES AND STEEL       
(2024-2025) 
Chairperson – Shri Anurag Singh Thakur  
 
Lok Sabha 
2.  Shri Sukhdeo Bhagat  
3.  Dr. Raj Kumar Chabbewal  
4.  Smt. Roopkumari Choudhary 
5.  Shri Vijay Kumar Hansdak  
6.  Smt. Kamlesh Jangde 
7.  Shri Govind Makthappa Karjol  
8.  Shri Selvaganapathi T.M.  
9.  Smt. Jyotsna Charandas Mahant  
10.  Shri Bidyut Baran Mahato 
11.  Shri Harish Chandra Meena  
12.  Shri Ananta Nayak 
13.  Smt. Bharti Pardhi 
14.  Shri B.K. Parthasarathi 
15.  Dr. Manna Lal Rawat 
16.  Dr. Rajkumar Sangwan  
17.  Shri Kali Charan Singh  
18.  Shri Shatrughan Prasad Sinha 
19.  Smt. Dhanorkar Pratibha Suresh 
20.  Shri S. Venkatesan 
21.  Shri Aditya Yadav 
 
 
Rajya Sabha  
 
22.  Shri Subrata Bakshi 
23.  Smt. Mahua Maji  
24.  Shri Anil Kumar Yadav Mandadi 
25.  Shri Manas Ranjan Mangaraj 
26.  Shri Rwngwra Narzary 
27.  Shri Deepak Prakash 
28.  Shri Aditya Prasad 
29.  Shri Devendra Pratap Singh 
30.  Shri Pradip Kumar Varma 
31.  Dr. Fauzia Khan 
 
 
  

vi 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON COAL, MINES AND STEEL      
(2025-2026) 
Chairperson –Shri Anurag Singh Thakur 
 
Lok Sabha 
32.  Shri Sukhdeo Bhagat 
33.  Dr. Raj Kumar Chabbewal 
34.  Smt. Roopkumari Choudhary 
35. Shri Vijay Kumar Hansdak 
36.  Smt. Kamlesh Jangde 
37. Shri Govind MakthappaKarjol 
38. Shri Selvaganapathi T.M. 
39.  Smt. Jyotsna Charandas Mahant 
40.  Shri Bidyut Baran Mahato 
41.  Shri Harish Chandra Meena 
42.  Shri Ananta Nayak 
43.  Smt. Bharti Pardhi 
44. Shri B.K. Parthasarathi 
45.  Dr. Manna Lal Rawat 
46.  Dr. Rajkumar Sangwan 
47. Shri Kali Charan Singh 
48. Shri Shatrughan Prasad Sinha 
49.  Smt. Dhanorkar Pratibha Suresh 
50. Shri S. Venkatesan 
51. Shri Aditya Yadav 
 
 
Rajya Sabha  
 
52.  Dr. Sarfraz Ahmad 
53. Shri Subrata Bakshi 
54. Smt. Mahua Maji 
55. Shri Anil Kumar Yadav Mandadi 
56.  Shri Deepak Prakash 
57.  Shri Aditya Prasad 
58.  Shri Devendra Pratap Singh 
59. Shri Pradip Kumar Varma 
60. Shri Milind Murli Deora* 
61. Shri Sajjad Ahmad Kichloo# 
 *nominated w.e.f. 16.10.2025 vide Bulletin – Part-II, Para No. 3329 dated 17.10.2025  
# nominated w.e.f. 05.12.2025 vide Bulletin – Part-II, Para No. 3767 dated 08.12.2025 
 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri Harish Chandra Bist Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Reena Gopalakrishnan Director 
3. Smt. Sunanda Chatterjee Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri Sachin Kumar Saini Senior Secretariat Assistant 
  

vii 
 
  
INTRODUCTION 
 
 I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Coal, Mines and Steel (2025-26) having 
been authorised by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present this Twenty 
Second Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Eighth Report of the Committee on the 
subject ‘Steel Scrap Recycling Policy’ pertaining to the Ministry of Steel.  
 
2.  The Eighth Report was presented to Lok Sabha on 04.08.2025. Replies of the 
Government to all the Observations/Recommendations contained in the Report were 
received on 25.11.2025. 
3. The Committee considered and adopted this Action Taken Report at their sitting held 
on 24.03.2026. The Minutes of the sitting of the Committee has been given at Annexure -I to 
the Report. 
4. An analysis on the action taken by the Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in the Eighth Report of the Committee is given at Annexure-II. 
5. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations/ recommendations of the 
Committee have been printed in bold letters in Chapter-I of the Report. 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;  ANURAG SINGH THAKUR 
24 March, 2026 Chairperson, 
03 CHAITRA, 1948 (Saka) 
 
Standing Committee on Coal, 
Mines and Steel 
 
 

1 
 
 
CHAPTER I 
 
REPORT 
 
 
This Report of the Committee deals with Action Taken by the Government on the 
observations/recommendations contained in the Eight Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) of the 
Standing Committee on Coal, Mines and Steel on the subject ‘Steel Scrap Recycling Policy’ 
of the Ministry of Steel which was presented to Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya Sabha on  
04.08.2025 & 05.08.2025, respectively. 
2. The Report contained 18 Observations/Recommendations. The Action Taken Replies 
have been received from the Ministry of Steel in respect of all the 18 
observations/recommendations contained in the Report on 25.11.2025. These have been 
categorized as follows: 
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the Government 
 
Sl. Nos. 1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9,10,11,12,13,14,15,16,17,18     
     
             Total : 18 
                      Chapter-II 
 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in view 
 of the replies of the Government  
  
NIL 
     Total : 0  
                      Chapter-III 
 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the Government have 
not been accepted by the Committee: 
 
NIL            
              Total : 0 
                     Chapter-IV 
 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the Government 
are still awaited : 
  
NIL            
              Total: 0 
                       Chapter-V 
 
 
 

2 
 
 
3. The Committee trust that utmost importance may be accorded to the 
implementation of the Observations/Recommendations accepted by the Government. 
In case, where it is not feasible for the Ministry to implement the recommendations in 
letter and spirit for any reason, the matter may be reported to the Committee along 
with reasons for non-implementation. The Committee desire that final Action Taken 
Notes on the Observations/ Recommendations contained in Chapter-I of this Report 
may be furnished to the Committee within three months of the presentation of this 
Report.  
 
4. The Committee will now deal with the Action Taken by the Government on some 
recommendations made in the Report. 
 
 
Quality of scrap & need for R&D support 
 
(Recommendation  No. 16) 
 
5. The Committee in their Report had observed/recommended as under: 
 
“MoS may kindly recall that the Committee’s recommendations on the R&D schemes 
of the MoS, as contained in the Demands for Grants (2025-26), where in the Committee 
observed the not so encouraging performance in carrying out R&D- as out of 19 projects 
sanctioned by them with a budget of Rs. Five crores to different R&D projects carried out in 
various institutes, only three could be completed and the rest are at different stages of 
implementation.   In this context, the Committee would like to be apprised of the number of 
R&D projects funded in the field of steel scrap to improve sorting, refining quality, etc. of the 
steel scrap and their status at the earliest.” 
 
6. In its Action Taken Reply furnished to the Committee, the Ministry of Steel had stated 
as under: 
“Four projects of Metal recovery / utilization of have been sanctioned under the R&D 
scheme of Ministry of Steel with Government funding of Rs. 5.12 Crore. Progress of 
these projects are monitored periodically and outcome is expected to promote the 
circular economy by using metals recovered from slag in steel making”. 
 
 

3 
 
7. With regard to the quality of scrap and need for R&D support, the Committee in 
their original report had noted that out of 19 projects sanctioned under the relevant 
scheme, only three had been completed while the remaining were at different stages of 
implementation. The Committee had therefore sought details about R&D projects 
funded in steel scrap processing to improve sorting and refining quality and wanted  
to know the current status of these projects. The Ministry, in its action taken reply has 
stated that four projects of metal recovery/utilization have so far been sanctioned 
under the R&D schemes with Government funding of Rs. 5.12 Crore and the projects 
are monitored regularly, with the goal of promoting circular economy by recovering 
metals from slag in steel production. The Committee wish to be apprised of the 
present status of such projects so far been sanctioned under the R&D projects in the 
field of Steel Scrap.  
 
Occupational safety and Health hazards 
 
(Recommendation  No. 18) 
 
8.   The Committee in their Report had observed/recommended as under: 
 
“The steel scrap sector, which at present is predominantly an informal sector, employs 
unskilled and semi-skilled workers to process the scrap.  The sector is being transitioned to a 
formal sector in the very near future, with large number of people engaged in collection, 
processing, sorting, refining, etc., of the steel scrap.  The Committee, therefore, feel it is 
imperative to formulate policy, regulations and rules on the “Occupational Safety and Health 
hazards” of the people working in the Steel scrap sector and put them in place at the earliest.” 
 
9. In its Action Taken Reply furnished to the Committee, the Ministry of Steel had stated 
as under: 
 
“Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change (MoEF&CC) has issued 
Hazardous & Other Wastes (Management & Transboundary Movement) Rules to 
ensure the safe storage, treatment, and disposal of hazardous waste in an 
environmentally sound manner and to promote safety and health of workers involved 
in recycling units. 
 
The Motor Vehicles (Registration and Functions of Vehicle Scrapping Facility) Rules, 
2021 (as amended) lay down provisions for environmentally sound management of 
End-of-Life Vehicles (ELVs) and prescribe safety and environmental safeguards to be 
followed by RVSFs”.  
 

4 
 
10. The Committee in their Original Report had observed that the steel scrap sector 
in India is mostly informal as it employs many unskilled and semi-skilled workers who 
process the metal scraps and was also of the view that the sector in near future is 
being transitioned to a formal sector, with large participation of people in collection, 
processing, sorting, refining, etc., of the steel scrap. The Committee, had felt it 
imperative to formulate policy, regulations and rules on the occupational safety and 
health hazards of the people working in the Steel scrap sector. 
The Ministry, in its action taken reply, has submitted that the Ministry of 
Environment, Forest and Climate Change has introduced rules to safely manage 
hazardous waste through proper storage, treatment, and disposal. The Ministry also 
submitted that these guidelines ensure environmental protection while also 
safeguarding the well-being of workers involved in recycling processes. The Ministry 
further submitted that The Motor Vehicles (Registration and Functions of Vehicle 
Scrapping Facility) Rules, 2021 lay down provisions for scrapping End-of-Life Vehicles 
(ELVs) safely and ensure environmental protection by scrap facilities. The Committee, 
while observing that policies, rules and regulations for safeguarding workers are 
crucial for the development of steel scrap sector, desire that the Ministry of Steel may 
align and strengthen its initiatives regarding occupational safety and health hazards in 
steel scrap recycling units with the rules of the aforesaid Ministries. 
 
  
 
 
  

5 
 
CHAPTER  II 
 
OBSERVATIONS / RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT 
 
 
Policy initiatives taken and action taken by different Ministries on steel scrap 
 
(Recommendation No. 1) 
 
The Committee observe that the Govt of India (Ministry of Steel) has notified Steel Scrap 
Recycling Policy (SSRP) in November, 2019. The objectives of the policy include Promoting 
circular economy in the steel sector, promoting – 
 
(a)  six Rs - Reduce, Reuse, Recycle, Recover, Redesign and Remanufacture 
(b)  formal & scientific collection, dismantling & processing activities for end-of-life 
products, in safe and environmentally friendly manner, that are sources of recyclable ferrous, 
nonferrous & metallic scraps, thus minimizing the dependency on imports   
(c)    creation of Mechanism for treating waste streams and residues produced from 
dismantling and shredding facilities, etc.   
 
In pursuance of the SSRP 2019, the Committee note, different ministries have formulated 
ministry specific policies. For instance, Ministry of Road Transport and  Highways (MoRTH)  
Vehicle Scrapping Policy to phase out older, unfit polluting vehicles; Ministry of Mines (MoM)  
has brought out ‘National Non-ferrous Metal Scrap Recycling Framework, 2020’ for 
developing a formal and well-organized recycling ecosystem; Ministry of Environment, Forest 
& Climate Change (MoEF&CC) has brought in the Environment Protection (End-of-Life 
Vehicles) Rules, 2025, establishing a framework for managing End-of-Life Vehicles (ELVs) in 
an environmentally sound manner and mandates Extended Producer Responsibility (EPR), 
etc. Ministry of Shipping has notified Recycling of Ships Act, 2019 to regulate and promote 
the safe and environmentally sound recycling of ships. While appreciating the afore 
mentioned ministries for taking path breaking policy initiatives and the concrete steps taken to 
implement these initiatives in pursuance of SSRP, 2019 of the Steel Ministry, the outcome of 
these actions appears to be muted and sub optimal after nearly six years of their 
implementation and hence require further steps and course correction in their implementation 
as dealt in the succeeding suggestions / recommendations. 
 
  

6 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
India’s steel consumption has witnessed a significant uptrend in recent years, largely fueled 
by sustained growth in core sectors such as infrastructure, construction, real estate, and 
manufacturing. The government’s continued emphasis on large-scale infrastructure projects 
ranging from highways and railways to urban development initiatives has created robust 
demand for steel across multiple value chains. Reflecting this momentum, the country’s per 
capita steel consumption has grown from 61 kg in FY 2014-15 to 108 kg in FY 2024-25, 
marking a strong annual growth rate of around 11 to 13 percent. 
 
Despite this remarkable rise, India’s steel consumption per capita remains lower than the 
global average of 215 kg as recorded in Calendar Year 2024. This gap, however, presents 
substantial growth potential as India continues to urbanize and industrialize at a rapid pace. 
Given steel’s long service life, it is expected that end-of-life (EoL) ferrous scrap generation 
and the steel recycling ecosystem will expand considerably in the coming years. 
 
Recognizing this opportunity, various ministries have initiated strategic measures to 
formalize and strengthen the ferrous scrap recycling sector. These efforts include the 
development of regulatory frameworks, technological adoption, and incentives aimed at 
improving scrap collection, segregation, and processing efficiency. The initiatives are acting 
as catalysts for channelizing idle scrap resources into productive recycling streams. 
Furthermore, based on continuous stakeholder engagement, feedback, and on-ground 
experiences, ministries are reviewing and refining existing policies to address operational 
challenges, remove bottlenecks, and ensure a more sustainable and circular steel economy 
for the future. 
 
Ministry of Steel O.M. No. H-11013/19/2025-Parl dated 25.11.2025 
                                                 
  
Lack of comprehensive  data base on steel scrap sector- Need to have one. 
 
(Recommendation No. 2) 
 
As per the Government of India (Allocation of Business) Rules, 1961 (as amended up to 05 
May, 2025) the Ministry of Steel (MoS) has been allocated the ‘Scrap Steel’ subject. MoS has 
submitted that at present the mandate of the Ministry pertains to ‘processing and 
consumption of steel scrap’ only. In response to the Committee’s request, as mentioned at 
para 4 of part I of the Report for ‘year wise and sector wise steel scrap generation’ data since 
2020-21, MoS, submitted the data for the year 2023-24 only that too from multiple secondary, 

7 
 
indicative sources/ publications, without mentioning any reasons for not furnishing data for 
three years (from 2019-20 to 2022-23) from its very own steel sector of which it is the 
administrative Ministry.   Responding to Committee’s subsequent request (as stated at para 6 
of part I of the Report) for data on industry wise steel scrap generation, usage, imports, 
exports, etc across ministries / departments for the last five years, MoS could furnish the data 
from multiple secondary and indicative sources/publications/different departments /task 
forces/ study groups, etc. The written replies and the depositions made before the Committee 
amply make it clear that:- 
 
(i) There is no Centralised data base available as of now, even after formulation and 
implementation of Steel Scrap Recycling Policy (SSRP), since 2019. The data is 
spread across different ministries / organisations.  
(ii)    MoS is not maintaining data base of even steel scrap being generated from steel 
sector of which it is the administrative Ministry leave alone data from other ministries/ 
departments concerned 
(iii)  MoS is supervising and monitoring the implementation of SSRP, 2019 without even 
primary database, an essential prerequisite for any meaningful and effective policy 
formulation and implementation. 
(iv)   No concrete efforts seem to have been made by MoS to realise the importance of 
centralised data for effective implementation of the policy.  The representatives of the 
MoS during their deposition before the Committee and in subsequent written replies, 
repeatedly referred not only about the absence of mandate to maintain database, but 
also conspicuously silent on the need of the same and also the efforts made by them 
to bring steel scrap database management under their mandate. The Committee feel 
that approach of the MoS towards data management is not pro active.   
 (v)   Even the mandate of MoS – ‘steel scrap processing and consumption’ appears to have 
been interpreted in a way that it does not include data collection and maintenance on 
the subject as is borne by the fact that data on steel scrap consumption, mentioned at 
para 6 of part I of the Report, is also collected from different sources. 
 
  
The Committee are of the considered view that data-based decisions leads to improved 
outcomes, enables public to appreciate and understand the issues, muster support for 
policies framed by the Govt and allow them to respond effectively in tackling emerging 
challenges.  The Committee are also of the view that the steel scrap sector in India is in its 

8 
 
incipient stage and there exist huge potential to generate and use of scrap in India. In view of 
the afore mentioned and also in view the committee’s conclusions at para 3 above, they 
suggest and recommend that: - 
 
(i) A robust database of steel scrap be developed.  For the purpose, an exclusive web 
site/portal be created, developed and maintained containing data on every aspect of steel 
scrap such as steel scrap generation and its usage across various sectors, up dation of data 
at regular intervals, policies, programmes, benefits of steel scrap usage for general public, 
comparative performance of steel scrap recycling in India  vis-a- vis other countries, etc. 
(ii)   The proposed ferrous (steel) scrap recycling website be linked to the websites of 
Ministries concerned such as Ministries of Railways, shipping, Road transport and Highways, 
MoEF&CC , heavy Industries, etc.  Any changes made in the data and details  by these 
ministries may also be  reflected in the comprehensive data base on the Steel Scrap  
(iii)   The website site may also be linked to all the States and Union Territories (UT)  to 
enable them to upload the data State/UT wise on the subject . This will enable the Central 
govt / concerned Ministry to monitor the steel scrap related data and other related matters 
and the State Governments may also be requested to have the data and details of steel 
scrap generated in that State/ UTs included/uploaded in the website.    
(iv)  The afore mentioned   database mechanism / website will replace the current system of 
disaggregated mode of collection and compilation of data on steel scrap.  The website/ portal 
should become a source of comprehensive, reliable, credible, authentic and effective 
database management of steel scrap in India which is essential for formulating policies, 
implementing them in an effective manner and enabling the Govt to arrive at informed 
decisions.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
To effectively maintain a comprehensive database of steel scrap generated from various 
sectors, the Ministry of Steel has undertaken several key initiatives. The Ministry is currently 
conducting a detailed study to understand the ferrous scrap ecosystem in India, covering 
multiple dimensions such as scrap generation, availability, consumption, and overall 
utilization trends. In addition, efforts have been initiated to collect data aimed at assessing 
the untapped potential of scrap resources and developing future projections for sustainable 
supply. 
 

9 
 
Furthermore, the Ministry has taken note of the suggestions to establish a centralized 
database through a dedicated web portal for tracking steel scrap generated across different 
sectors. A final decision on this proposal will be taken in consultation with the concerned 
Ministries, Departments, State Governments, and other relevant stakeholders to ensure an 
integrated and efficient data management framework.  
Ministry of Steel O.M. No. H-11013/19/2025-Parl dated 25.11.2025 
 
Need to designate Nodal Ministry in r/o Steel scrap matters 
 
(Recommendation No. 3) 
 
The Committee note that MoS in their depositions and in subsequent written replies have 
repeatedly stated that so far, no Govt organisation has been made responsible for collecting 
and maintaining database on steel scrap in India.  They further note that MoS is the primary 
user of steel scrap, generates 50 % (approx.) of the entire steel scrap and is also the 
implementing Ministry of the SSRP, 2019. The Committee, considers it appropriate to 
recommend that: - 
 
(i) Ministry of Steel (MoS) may be designated as the nodal agency for capturing, 
collecting, compiling, updating, sharing, disseminating, etc. of the data on steel scrap 
generation, usage, imports, exports, (state wise, sector wise), etc. In other words, the MoS 
will act as data base manager and also a one stop solution for  all data related queries 
/issues in steel scrap sector. The ultimate objective is to evolve the database as a primary 
source of data on steel scrap in India.  Necessary systems and procedures including the 
website/portal as mentioned at sl no. 3(i) above, may be put in place with defined timelines to 
give effect to the recommendation enabling informed policy decisions.   
(ii)  The responsibility for collection of data on steel scrap and creating and maintaining 
comprehensive data base on steel scrap as recommended at above para (i)  may be included 
in the ‘MANDATE’ of the Ministry of Steel.    
(iii)   Necessary changes to the Govt of India (Allocation of Business) Rules, 1961 may be 
effected empowering the Ministry of Steel with the mandate mentioned at (ii) above at the 
earliest.    
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Ministry of Steel can monitor the data of scrap consumption in steel production. However, as 
far as scrap generation is concerned, it is possible only by sampling through periodic study. 

10 
 
Presently ferrous scrap is generated from multiple sources mostly unorganized such as 
household goods, constructions & demolition and picking up from home, landfill etc. by 
Kabariwala. A major chunk of this scrap is sold for secondary use and only a part becomes 
end of life and used in steel production. It is pertinent to mention that ferrous scrap is 100% 
recyclable and whatever comes to end of life finds its way to further steel production, except 
small percentage, which may get lost in handling being very small product.  Therefore, scrap 
consumption in steel generation can give a fair idea of scrap generation too. 
 
Ministry of Steel O.M. No. H-11013/19/2025-Parl dated 25.11.2025 
 
Steel scrap consumption, generation and imports in India 
 
(Recommendation No. 4) 
 
The data furnished by MoS and as mentioned at para 6 of part I of the report shows that the 
total scrap consumption in India over a period of five years has grown from 26.22 Million Tons 
(MTs) in 2019-20 to 33.36 MTs in 2023-24, a growth of 27 % during the period.  The domestic 
generation of steel scrap which stood at 19.65 MTs in 2019-20 has gone upto 24.67 MTs in 
2023-24, an increase of 25%.  The imports which stood at 6.57 MTs in 2019-20, has 
however, gone up to 8.69 MTs in 2023-24, showing an increase of 32% in the same period.  
This shows the domestic generation of scrap is not enough to meet the growing demand for 
steel scrap in India. 
 
While the Committee are glad to note that the rising demand for steel scrap in India is a sign 
of increased importance given to scrap based steel making, they apprehend that increasing 
reliance on imports may not augur well for the domestic scrap-based steel industry. It is 
because many developed and developing countries namely   Japan USA, Italy, Spain, Iran 
and Mexico whose steel production through secondary route stood at 25%, 68%, 81.5%, 
65.7%, 90.8% and 75.8% respectively in 2018 has gone up to 26.4%, 71.8%, 87.9%, 69.2%, 
92% and 93.5 % respectively of their total steel production in 2024.   
 
The above trend and preference for steel making through secondary route , the Committee 
believe, is  due to decarbonisation of steel making process  which primarily involves 
replacement of  natural resources such as iron ore with scrap as raw material that  offers 
immense benefits in terms of savings in Energy ( 74%) , raw material (90%,)  and water 
(40%)  in addition to reduction in (a)  GHG emissions ( 76%);   (b) air pollution    ( 85%); and,  
(C) mining waste (97%).   
  

11 
 
In the light of the above, the Committee are of the view that India can’t offer to miss the 
opportunity   and want the MoS to lead the initiatives in coordination with other ministries 
concerned in enhancing the scrap-based steel production in India without any further loss of 
time. The Committee are further of the view that bureaucratic hurdles should not be allowed 
to come in the way of implementing policy initiatives to move towards decarbonisation of steel 
in defined timelines.   
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Ministry of Steel is actively coordinating with key Ministries e.g. Ministry of Road, Transport & 
Highways (MoRTH), Ministry of Ports, Shipping and Waterways (MoPSW), Ministry of 
Housing & Urban Affairs (MoHUA) etc. for scrap and Ministry of Environment, Forests and 
Climate Change (MoEF&CC) for Extended Producer Responsibilities (EPR) policies.  The 
committee has rightly pointed out that developed nation use 70% to 90% scrap in their steel 
production by replacing natural resources iron ore. This is because they have industrialized 
early and steel used therein is now coming to end of life in form of scrap. India will take some 
time to reach this stage as explained in reply of observation / recommendation no.1. 
 
Ministry of Steel O.M. No. H-11013/19/2025-Parl dated 25.11.2025 
 
Exports of steel scrap 
 
(Recommendation No. 5) 
 
Data at para 6 of part I of the report shows that a small quantity of steel scrap worth Rs. 100 
crore (approx.)  was also exported in 2023-24.   In written reply to   queries (i) why are the 
exports allowed, however limited quantities, when there is a scarcity of scrap in domestic 
market? (ii)  do the exports fetch more prices than the domestic prices; and, (iii) the value of 
the steel scrap has gone up despite the quantum of steel scrap generated in 2020-21 has 
gone down vis-a- vis that of the previous year 2019-20 , MoS  in a written reply submitted that 
the export and import of steel scrap are governed by market dynamics, techno-commercial 
issues taken by the individual companies and other concerned authorities. The Committee, in 
view of the shortage of scrap, may like to consider reviewing exports of steel scrap.  
  
Reply of the Government 
 
The steel sector operates as a deregulated industry, meaning it is not directly controlled or 
restricted by the government in terms of production, pricing, or distribution. Decisions related 
to the export and import of steel scrap are primarily influenced by prevailing market 

12 
 
dynamics such as global demand, supply conditions, and price fluctuations. In addition, 
individual companies make techno-commercial decisions based on factors like production 
requirements, cost efficiency, quality standards, and technological processes. This allows 
companies the flexibility to operate in a competitive environment, optimize resource 
utilization, and align their trade practices with both domestic and international market trends. 
 
Ministry of Steel O.M. No. H-11013/19/2025-Parl dated 25.11.2025 
 
 
Steel production through EAF and IF secondary routes - Comparison with                
other countries. 
 
(Recommendation No. 6) 
 
An analysis of the data on steel production through primary routes (Blast Furnace / Basic 
Oxygen Furnace), Electric Arc Furnace (EAF) and Induction Furnace (IF)  mentioned at para  
21  of part I of the Report shows that from 2017-18 to 2024-25,steel production through 
BF/BOF and EAF route has come down by 5% each and corresponding increase in 
production by 10% through Induction Furnace (IF) route. The Committee also note that steel 
making through EAF and IF routes use coal and gas based DRI (Direct reduced Iron) and the 
average percent of scrap used as raw material stood at 21% in India as compared to 22%, 
57%, 34% 68%, 39% and, 85% in China, EU, Japan, USA, Russia and Turkey respectively in 
2022. The  data shows India has  to do a lot to catch up with the developed countries in 
usage of scrap. As suggested elsewhere in the report, necessary, enabling and facilitating 
systems, procedures, processes and their implementation at the ground level be taken up 
with the authorities at regular intervals to create an ecosystem where scrap value is 
appreciated / recognised and used in the steel making process.   
 
 
                                       Usage of scrap in crude steel production 
 
(Recommendation No. 7) 
 
Analysis of the data on crude steel production and the usage of scrap, both in absolute and 
percentage terms, since 2019-20 reveals that though scrap consumption in making crude 
steel has gone up continuously from 26.22 MTs in 2019-20 to 33.37 MTs in 2023-24 in 
absolute terms (except in 20-21), the scrap consumption in percentage terms of the total 
crude steel production has witnessed a decline of 1% during the same period. Such a 

13 
 
declining trend, the Committee observe, is diametrically opposite to the increasing trend in 
usage of steel scrap prevalent in advanced countries such as the US (69.7 to 71.8%), Italy 
(81.5 to 87.9%), Spain (68.8 to 69.2%) and developing countries namely Iran (90-92%) and 
Mexico (76.9 to 93.5%). The MoS attributed the decline due to EAF/IFproduction in India 
which still relies significantly on sponge iron (DRI) along with scrap, due to economics and 
the limited availability of clean, segregated, and high-quality domestic scrap.    The 
Committee, therefore, are of the view that such a declining trend of scrap usage despite 
favourable policy environment shows the lack of implementation of the policies at the ground 
level in an effective way making available required quantities of scrap in an organised and 
formal way and accordingly recommend the corrective steps may be taken in a defined 
timeline. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Steel is a long-lasting material that takes around 40 to 50 years to reach to the end of life 
stage where it can be recycled. In developed countries, the availability of end-of-life steel 
products is high because of their early industrialization and the large volume of goods that 
have already completed their life cycles. In contrast, India’s relatively late industrialization 
means that steel products here will take time to reach the recycling stage in large quantities. 
To address the current shortage of scrap, Direct Reduced Iron (DRI) is being used as a 
substitute metallic input, particularly in the Electric Arc Furnace (EAF) route of steelmaking, 
to meet the growing demand of steel driven by infrastructure, housing, and manufacturing 
sectors. However, as steel consumption continues to rise rapidly in India, the availability of 
scrap is also expected to increase in the coming years, gradually leading to the development 
of a robust scrap recycling ecosystem similar to that of developed nations. 
 
Recognizing this opportunity, various ministries have initiated strategic measures to 
formalize and strengthen the ferrous scrap recycling sector. These efforts include the 
development of regulatory frameworks, technological adoption, and incentives aimed at 
improving scrap collection, segregation, and processing efficiency. The initiatives are acting 
as catalysts for channelizing idle scrap resources into productive recycling streams. 
Furthermore, based on continuous stakeholder engagement, feedback, and on-ground 
experiences, ministries are reviewing and refining existing policies to address operational 
challenges, remove bottlenecks, and ensure a more sustainable and circular steel economy 
for the future. 
Ministry of Steel O.M. No. H-11013/19/2025-Parl dated 25.11.2025 
 

14 
 
 
Scrap steel production - Achievement of target set under Steel Policy, 2017 
 
(Recommendation No. 8) 
 
The Committee note that Steel Policy 2017, targeted to achieve 35-40% of the projected steel 
out put of 300 Million tons by 2030 through scrap-based steel.  The Committee, in view of the 
existing lack of adequate supporting structures, policies, programmes for scrap collection and 
its usage, in a formal way, believe that it seems a tall order to achieve the 35-40% of total 
steel production using scrap by 2030 and accordingly suggest to ramp up the supporting 
systems, processes and mechanism to realise the targets set.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The National Steel Policy (NSP), 2017 has no such target to achieve 35-40% of the 
projected steel output of 300 Million tons by 2030 though scrap –based steel. However, NSP, 
2017’s projection is that 60-65% of steel production in 2030-31 shall be coming through BF-
BOF route and rest (35-40%) through EAF/IF route. EAF/IF units uses scrap alongwith DRI 
as inputs in steel productions. At present, IF and EAF units charge around 38% and 12% 
scrap respectively blended with DRI. 
 
The Committee’s suggestions to ramp up the scrap based production have been duly noted. 
In addition to implementing the Scrap Recycling Policy, the Ministry of Steel is actively 
coordinating with key ministries to promote the recycling of idling scrap. However, 
maximizing the use of scrap in steelmaking will take time, as end-of-life steel products are 
currently not available in sufficient quantities in India. As the country’s steel-intensive goods 
gradually reach the end of their life cycle in the coming years, the availability of scrap will 
increase. Consequently, scrap-based steel production is expected to grow steadily, 
contributing to a more sustainable and resource-efficient steel industry. Various measures 
taken by Ministry of Road, Transport & Highways, Ministry of Ports, Shipping & Waterways 
and Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change will also accelerate the scrap 
availability. 
Ministry of Steel O.M. No. H-11013/19/2025-Parl dated 25.11.2025 
 
 

15 
 
Need for developing informal scrap markets into formal scrap markets in         
organised sector 
 
(Recommendation No. 9) 
 
 The Committee also observe that both IF and EAF can use upto 100% scrap in steel 
production.  However, MoS stated that based on economics and availability, currently scrap is 
used partially. For the rest, sponge iron /DRI is used.  The Committee, therefore, are of the 
view that it is lack of availability of scrap in required quantities, hampering the ramp of steel 
production using scrap and hence  suggest that specific  steps be taken to ensure the 
availability of scrap in required quantities in defined timelines, which the Committee believe is 
possible only when the informal scrap markets transition to  formal scrap markets are  duly 
recognised and encouraged by the State and Central Govts. The Committee also want the 
Ministry to put in place a road map along with timelines, to formalise the sector. As a first step 
towards formalisation, ‘Kabadiwallahs’ and scrap dismantlers /dealers in informal sector may 
be considered for organising themselves into cooperatives due to advantage it offers in terms 
of formation, operations, economic and social benefits, etc.   
Reply of the Government 
 
The Ministry of Steel recognizes that formalizing the informal scrap market can significantly 
enhance scrap availability for steel production. The informal sector, currently plays a 
dominant role in scrap collection and distribution, but its nature poses challenges for 
formalization, including tax evasion and operational opacity. Scrap dealers in the informal 
sector frequently avoid paying GST, making transactions less transparent and reducing 
government revenue while undermining fair competition in the market. To address these 
issues, Government of India has taken following steps: - 
 
(i)         Introduction of the Reverse Charge Mechanism (RCM) to enable the collection of 
GST directly from registered buyers of scrap, ensuring greater tax compliance and improved 
transparency in transactions. 
(ii)        Ministry of Road, Transport and Highways has taken initiatives to create network of 
RVSFs across the country.  
(iii)       Ministry of Environment, Forest & Climate Change issued Extended Producers 
Responsibility (EPR) mandates for the recovery and recycling of end-of-life vehicles, 
construction and demolition waste, and other recyclable materials. 

16 
 
(iv)       Time to time, Ministry of Steel through various campaigns on social media platforms 
encourages citizens of the country to dispose of idling scrap and household scrap.   
     
Effective formalization not only curtails the grey market but also improves accountability, 
price discovery, and ensures tax compliance through mechanisms like GST. Bringing more 
scrap dealers into the formal sector will help create a reliable supply chain, foster efficient 
recycling practices, and facilitate better policy enforcement to support sustainable steel 
production. Despite the complexities and resistance from entrenched informal systems, 
continued efforts and stakeholder engagement are on to achieve a transparent, organized, 
and GST-compliant scrap market in India. 
In this endeavor, State Governments also play crucial role to organize the informal scrap 
market. Hence, efforts are being to involve Stakeholder Ministries and State Governments to 
define their roles towards formalization of the informal scrap market in India. 
 
Ministry of Steel O.M. No. H-11013/19/2025-Parl dated 25.11.2025 
 
 
Economics of routes of steel making 
 
(Recommendation No. 10) 
 
The Committee  while noting that  (i) Blast Furnace / -Basic OF route is the most efficient and 
cost effective, with an average of 15-20%of EBIDTA margin; (ii)  EAF&IF routes has on an 
average of 3-7% EBIDTA margin with the present charge mix  (25% scrap mix) ; (iii)  
Significantly, lower capital intensity for EAFs/IFs(-INR73,100/t) ; (iv) lower installation time for 
capacity – for EAFs/IFs(1-2 years) as compared to BF -BOF (4-5 years) ; and, (v)   High 
flexibility on the capacity and thus investment required-EAFs/ IFs, especially small capacity 
EIFs (-10kt/year), can be installed quickly due to smaller modular capacities. In contrast, BF-
BOFs set ups typically exceed 1mt/year, requiring higher capital and longer lead times,  
sought clarification from MoS  whether  the above-mentioned economics  take into 
consideration the  energy savings, raw material and water consumption savings  and 
reduction in GHG emissions, air pollution and  Mining waste  and its  extended impact on the 
environment and health of the population, MoS in a reply merely stated that the cost of crude 
steel  with present mix of 25% scrap+ 58% DRI+ 17%  Pig iron, is cheaper by 10% in case of 
increased use of scrap ( 80% scrap +20% DRI) due to availability of coal based DRI at 
competitive rates. The impact of Green House Gas (GHG) has, however not been considered 
in such an assessment. As the Govt itself is emphasizing the production of decarbonized 

17 
 
steel (green steel) the Committee, considers fit to recommend that impact of GHG emissions 
should be taken into consideration while calculating cost of scrap steel. The reply of the 
Ministry is also silent whether the cost includes savings in energy savings.  The Committee, 
therefore, want MoS to clarify this aspect.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
During the meeting held on 24.06.2025, a scenario analysis was shown to the Committee 
highlighting that the cost of crude steel production especially in EAF/IF route with the current 
charge mix (25% scrap + 58% DRI + 17% Pig iron) with respect to the target of increased 
usage of scrap (80% scrap + 20% DRI) is cheaper by 10% approximately especially due to 
the availability of coal based DRI at competitive prices.  It is pertinent to mention that impact 
of energy savings thus GHG emission have been taken into consideration in such 
comparison.  
  
Moreover, steel industry is deregulated sector where the selection of specific routes as well 
as use of raw materials as charge mix by an individual company is governed by market 
dynamics, techno-commercial issues and other relevant factors. As explained in forgoing 
paragraphs, scrap generation and ecosystem will evolve with time, more scrap will be 
available at cheaper rate and transition can be seen in line with the developed nations. 
 
Ministry of Steel O.M. No. H-11013/19/2025-Parl dated 25.11.2025 
 
Emission intensity and the need for decarbonisation 
 
(Recommendation No. 11) 
 
The Committee note that steel industry accounts for 12% of India’s total emissions, 
necessitating its decarbonization crucial for meeting the country’s climate goals.  The data on 
the emission intensity of India’s steel industry as furnished at para 30 of part I  of the report 
shows that currently, the average emission intensity of the steel sector in India is 2.54 tonnes 
CO2/tonne of crude steel (tCO2/tcs). The Committee note that   emissions intensity varies 
widely due to volume of production, proportion of scrap used, the type of fuel utilized and the 
technology used. The data shows that Indian steel industry’s average emission intensity at 
2.54 t CO2/ tcs is  (i) more than double that of Europe, Turkey, USA which is in the range of 
0.79 to 1.06 tCO2/tcs, (ii) far higher than that of south Korea , Japan and Russia ( whose 
intensity is in the range of 1.35 to 1.65 tCO2/tcs) (iii) higher than that of China (at 2.01 

18 
 
tCO2/tcs). The afore mentioned data underscores the need for faster shift to scrap based 
steel production. This further necessitates the urgency of collecting, processing, sorting, 
refining   and developing scrap markets in an organized way.  
 
As the policy and legal frameworks for steel scrap have already been put in place about few 
years back, the Committee recommend that necessary administrative structures, clearly 
defining the mandate of the ministry/ dept concerned, to avoid turf wars stymying and stifling 
the development of scrap sector, should be set up and made operational without any further 
delay.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The suggestions of the Committee has been noted. As far as mitigation of GHG emission in 
steel sector is concerned,  Ministry of Steel is taking multipronged approach in addition to 
promoting scrap. Following are few major activities taken by Ministry of Steel in this regard: - 
 
(i)         On 23.12.2024, India became the first country to notify the ‘Taxonomy of Green Steel’. 
Green Steel Taxonomy provides a framework for production of green steel, creation of market 
for green steel and seeking financial support.  
(ii)        A report titled "Greening the Steel Sector in India: Roadmap and Action Plan" has 
been released on 10.09.2024, based on the recommendations of the 14 Task Forces 
constituted by this Ministry for this purpose. This report provides a comprehensive overview 
of steel sector and discusses the various pathways for the decarbonization of the steel sector 
and sets up short term, mid-term and long-term strategy to reduce the GHG emission. 
(iii)       Ministry of Steel has also awarded 05 pilot projects for use of hydrogen in steel sector 
under National Green Hydrogen Mission. These projects are being implemented in key focus 
areas such as - partial hydrogen injection in vertical shaft based DRI to substitute natural gas 
and use of hydrogen in existing blast furnace to reduce coal and coke consumption. 
 
Ministry of Steel O.M. No. H-11013/19/2025-Parl dated 15.11.2025 
 
 
Preference for green steel in public procurement 
 
(Recommendation No. 12) 
 
The Committee also want the Ministry to explore the possibility of giving preference to green 
steel (steel made of scrap) at least for a specific period (say 5 years) in public procurement to 
incentivize and encourage the manufacturers to adopt scrap-based steel making.  

19 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Ministry of Steel has made efforts to formulate a Green Steel Public Procurement Policy, 
aiming to mandate preference for green steel in public purchases. However, during 
consultations with stakeholder Ministries, concerns were raised that this policy could 
increase government’s present expenditure and pose cost challenges for the consumers and 
its downstream industries. Such added costs may adversely affect micro and small 
enterprises (MSEs), potentially impacting the broader economy as well. Therefore 
Government of India is working with a comprehensive approach to achieve net zero by 2070 
without compromising the progress of the nation. 
 
Ministry of Steel O.M. No. H-11013/19/2025-Parl dated 25.11.2025 
 
 
Industry status to steel scrap recycling sector 
 
(Recommendation No. 13) 
 
The Committee note that the issue of according ‘Industry status’ to scrap recycling was 
referred to Ministry of Finance (Dept of Revenue) way back in 2020. The Dept of Revenue 
took a stand that setting up of a scrapping centre may not qualify as a manufacturing activity/ 
industry under section 35AD of the Income Tax Act,1961.   The Committee view that 
according ‘industry status’ to scrap recycling sector is not merely for the purpose of tax 
exemptions / benefits. ‘Industry status’ to recycling sector, which at present is predominantly 
in unorganised sector, the Committee believe, would hasten its transition to ‘organised sector’ 
with huge attendant benefits such as attracting investments, both domestic and foreign, 
generation of employment, skill development and training, etc.  They view that granting 
‘industry status’ to the recycling sector would be a transformative step towards harnessing the 
full potential of the sector. Such a step would also enable the entrepreneurs to avail bank 
loans to fund setting up of scrap collection and dismantling Centers and accordingly 
recommend MoS to take up the matter with the authorities concerned at the earliest.  
  
Reply of the Government 
 
Scrap processing has not been given the status of 'Industry' under section 35D of the Income 
Tax Act, 1961, mainly because most scrap operations are considered part of recycling or 
waste management activities rather than manufacturing, and often fall under categories 
related to essential environmental services or service sectors rather than industrial ones. 
Traditionally, for an activity to receive industry status and related tax benefits under section 

20 
 
35D, it must be involved in manufacturing, production, or industrial operations as classified by 
Indian industrial regulations, such as the National Industrial Classification (NIC) and other 
statutory norms. 
 
Scrap processing, while crucial for the steel sector, is typically regulated under environmental 
and waste management laws and is categorized apart from manufacturing industries in 
various policy documents and classification schemes. Environmental concerns, informal 
sector prevalence, and the historical treatment of scrap as a secondary input contribute to 
this classification gap. As a result, scrap processing activities are not always recognized for 
the capital expenditure deduction benefits allowed to industries under section 35D, unless 
they are proven to undertake manufacturing processes or fall under the designated industrial 
sector definitions. 
 
Under section 35D of the Income Tax Act, 1961, an eligible "industry" is generally defined as 
one that is engaged in manufacturing or producing articles, goods, or things, or in the 
business specified as “industrial” under Indian statutory and regulatory norms. The criteria 
often reference the definitions provided under the Industries (Development and Regulation) 
Act, 1951, which classify activities considered as industry for tax deduction and other fiscal 
benefits. 
  
Eligible industries typically must: - 
 
 Undertake manufacturing, production, or processing activities. 
 Fall under the categories listed as “industry” in official Indian industrial policies or the 
National Industrial Classification (NIC) codes. 
 Operate as entities engaged in business activities not excluded by relevant 
government notifications, circulars, or negative lists under Indian law. 
 
Activities such as trading, services without manufacturing, or waste management not 
classified as manufacturing may not qualify for “industry” status under section 35D. 
 
Ministry of Steel O.M. No. H-11013/19/2025-Parl dated 25.11.2025 
  

21 
 
 
Awareness campaigns about steel / ferrous recycling 
 
(Recommendation No. 14) 
 
The Committee are of the view that presently households dispose of old/ worn out/ unused 
household consumer durables such as refrigerators, washing machines, and other consumer 
durables commonly referred to as ‘white goods’ to the unorganised ‘kabadiwallahs’ relies on 
manual dismantling and segregation of scrap components, which may increase the price of 
the scrap. Further, the unorganised and informal scrap dismantling entities may not be able to 
segregate the scrap in safe and ecofriendly manner. This underscores the need for 
formalisation of the steel scrap sector. The Committee believe that creation of awareness 
campaigns goes a long way in encouraging public participation in organised recycling of the 
steel scrap. The awareness campaigns may include (a) introducing recycling of scrap and its 
benefits in the school curriculum (ii) media campaigns in print, electronic and social media 
about recycling, circular economy and its positive impact on conservation of natural resources 
and protection of environment, etc. (iii) engaging with Civil Society Organisations (CSOs) to 
strengthen education and outreach initiatives.  
 
The Committee also recommend that after setting up of scrap dismantling, processing sorting 
centres, a campaign may be carried out on the lines of ‘Swatchhata Abhiyaan’ to collect the 
old/ worn out/ unused household consumer durables such as refrigerators, washing 
machines, and other consumer durables commonly referred to as ‘white goods’ construction 
and building material, ferrous waste   lying with households, offices , institutions, commercial  
and industrial establishments  to dispose of the scrap items to the nearby  scrap dismantling 
Centres. High decibel campaigns may be carried out to ensure maximum impact in terms of 
disposing of the ferrous scrap. Further such campaigns may be carried out in different media 
- print, electronic, social media in all the local languages to ensure maximum reach and to 
have impact to such an extent that it brings attitudinal change towards disposal of ferrous 
scrap in a safe and ecofriendly manner.    
 
The Committee also, in view of the huge number of unused vehicles involved in committing 
crimes, accidents, thefts, etc. for years together gathering dust, lying with law enforcement 
authorities/ police stations, may be considered for dismantling as part of campaign suggested 
above. To realise this, the Committee recommend that a supporting legal framework be put in 
place with in defined timelines.   
 
  

22 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The suggestions of the Committee have been noted. Ministry of Steel has been making 
efforts through social media for nationwide awareness campaigns to promote recycling of 
ferrous scrap in a safe and organized manner. This also includes the appeal to every 
household for disposal of their ferrous waste in an organized and environment friendly 
manner. 
 
The suggestions of the Committee was taken up with Ministry of Road Transport and 
Highways (MORTH). MORTH has informed that a discussion on this issue was held on 11th 
June 2025 at NITI Aayog. It was decided that MoRTH will engage with MHA regarding 
disposal of impounded e vehicles which are lying in police stations as per Rule 8 of the Motor 
Vehicles (Registration and Functions of Vehicle Scrapping Facility) Rules, 2021 which 
provides that auctioned, impounded, or abandoned vehicles may be offered for scrapping to 
RVSF by any enforcement agency. Therefore, MoRTH vide DO letters dated 12.09.2025 from 
Secretary, RT&H to DGPs/IGPs/CPs States/UTs has requested for identification and 
scrapping of impounded/abandoned vehicles and to scrap such motor vehicles lying in police 
stations at RVSFs, after following due legal process. 
 
 Ministry of Steel O.M. No. H-11013/19/2025-Parl dated 25.11.2025 
 
 
Skill Development and Certification for the Scrap Workforce 
 
(Recommendation No. 15) 
 
The Govt of India has launched ‘National Skill Development Mission’ in 2015, a 
comprehensive framework to enhance skill development. The launch of the Mission   is 
accompanied by the implementation of the National Policy on Skill Development and 
Entrepreneurship, 2015. National Skill Development Council (NSDC), a not-for-profit 
Company u/s  8 of the Companies Act, 2013, is responsible for creating training initiatives for 
future ready skilled workforce. The Courses offered under Skill India Mission does not include 
‘Scrap handling which involve collection, segregation, sorting, refining, processing, disposing 
in safe and ecofriendly manner etc, probably due to informal nature of the scrap markets in 
India.   
 
Many Ministries of the Govt of India such as Ministries of (i) Steel, (ii) Ports, (iii)  Environment 
, Forests, & Climate Control, (iv) Road transport and Highways during the last six years have 
formulated Rules, Regulations, Guidelines for dealing with the scrap right from collection to 

23 
 
utilisation in a safe and ecofriendly manner and also setting up of scrap dismantling Centres. 
The Committee believe that these initiatives will go a long way in enabling the transition of 
scrap sector to a formal sector in the near future contributing immensely the development of 
the economy and also conserve natural resources.  Such transition to ‘formal sector’ and also 
to realise the objectives of the Committee’s recommendation to accord ‘Industry status’ ( sl 
no. 15 above ),  require  huge number of skilled scrap manpower. The Committee accordingly 
recommend that NSDC should  introduce certification courses on ‘Scrap in general and steel 
scrap handling ‘in particular covering the various aspects – collection, segregation, sorting, 
refining, processing, disposing in safe and ecofriendly manner. Such certification Courses will 
cater to the Human resources’ requirements of formal scrap / steel scrap sector’ in the near 
future both for the work force and also for the entrepreneurs who wants to set up scrap 
processing and dismantling plants.     
 
Reply of the Government 
 The suggestions given by the Committee was taken up with Ministry of Skill Development 
and Entrepreneurship (MSDE). MSDE informed that two Sector Skill Councils (SSC) — the 
Indian Iron & Steel Sector Skill Council (IISSSC) and the Skill Councilfor Green Jobs (SCGJ) 
— have undertaken initiatives to develop training programs focused on waste management 
and recycling within their respective industry domains. The courses offered by these SSC's 
are as below: 
• Indian Iron & Steel Sector Skill Council (IISSSC): 
Launched a nano credit course titled “Basics of Solid Waste Management (Iron and Steel 
Industry)”, with a duration of 4 hours. 
Planning to introduce new job roles in scrap recycling within iron and steel plants, including 
Safety & Housekeeping Technician, Manager/Supervisor – Material Recovery and Operator – 
Scrap Handling and Eco-friendly Disposal. 
 • Skill Council for Green Jobs (SCGJ): 
Material Recovery Facility (MRF) Micro–Entrepreneur — 420 hours 
Waste Optimization Professional — 510 hours 
Additionally, the Electronics Sector Skills Council of India (ESSCI) is currently engaging in 
consultations with industry stakeholders to identify essential skill sets for the e-waste 

24 
 
management sector. In contrast, the Automotive Skill Development Council (ASDC) had 
earlier developed qualifications for vehicle scrapping (around four years ago); however, these 
did not receive industry support due to limited interest from relevant stakeholders at the time. 
Ministry of Steel O.M. No. H-11013/19/2025-Parl dated 25.11.2025 
 
Quality of scrap & need for R&D support 
 
(Recommendation No. 16) 
 
MoS may kindly recall that the Committee’s recommendations on the R&D schemes of the 
MoS, as contained in the Demands for Grants (2025-26), where in the Committee observed 
the not so encouraging performance in carrying out R&D-  as  out of 19 projects sanctioned 
by them with a budget of Rs. Five crores to different R&D projects carried out in various 
institutes, only three could be completed and the rest are at different stages of 
implementation.   In this context, the Committee would like to be apprised of the number of 
R&D projects funded in the field of steel scrap to improve sorting , refining quality, etc. of the 
steel scrap and their status at the earliest.  
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Four projects of Metal recovery / utilization of have been sanctioned under the R&D scheme 
of Ministry of Steel with Government funding of Rs. 5.12 Crore. Progress of these projects are 
monitored periodically and outcome is expected to promote the circular economy by using 
metals recovered from slag in steel making. 
Ministry of Steel O.M. No. H-11013/19/2025-Parl dated 25.11.2025 
 
(For comments of the Committee, please see para 7 of Chapter 1) 
 
 
                         Scrap Processing Centres - adoption of latest technology 
 
(Recommendation No. 17) 
 
The scrap processing Centres may be incentivised by non-fiscal means to enable them to 
adopt modern technologies like AI powered optical sensors, block chain for scrap traceability 
to ensure quality and prevent theft and digital platforms to connect scrap aggregators directly 
with steel mills.                                              

25 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
At present there is no incentivizing program for this, however, EPR systems (SAP) and 
internal lead management system (LMS) are already operational for tracing and reporting. 
 
Ministry of Steel O.M. No. H-11013/19/2025-Parl dated 25.11.2025 
 
 
Occupational safety and Health hazards. 
 
(Recommendation No. 18) 
 
The steel scrap sector, which at present is predominantly an informal sector, employs 
unskilled and semi-skilled workers to process the scrap.  The sector is being transitioned to a 
formal sector in the very near future, with large number of people engaged in collection, 
processing, sorting, refining, etc., of the steel scrap.  The Committee, therefore, feel it is 
imperative to formulate policy, regulations and rules on the “Occupational Safety and Health 
hazards” of the people working in the Steel scrap sector and put them in place at the earliest.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change (MoEF&CC) has issued Hazardous & 
Other Wastes (Management & Transboundary Movement) Rules to ensure the safe storage, 
treatment, and disposal of hazardous waste in an environmentally sound manner and to 
promote safety and health of workers involved in recycling units. 
 
The Motor Vehicles (Registration and Functions of Vehicle Scrapping Facility) Rules, 2021 
(as amended) lay down provisions for environmentally sound management of End-of-Life 
Vehicles (ELVs) and prescribe safety and environmental safeguards to be followed by RVSFs 
 
Ministry of Steel O.M. No. H-11013/19/2025-Parl dated 25.11.2025 
 
(For comments of the Committee, please see para 10 of Chapter 1) 
 
  

26 
 
CHAPTER-III 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO 
PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-NIL- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

27 
 
CHAPTER-IV 
 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-NIL- 
 
 
 
 
 
  

28 
 
CHAPTER-V 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES OF 
THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
 
 
 
-NIL- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;  ANURAG SINGH THAKUR 
24 March, 2026 Chairperson, 
03 CHAITRA, 1948 (Saka) 
 
Standing Committee on Coal, 
Mines and Steel 
 
  

29 
 
ANNEXURE-I 
MINUTES OF THE NINETEENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON COAL, 
MINES AND STEEL (2025-26) HELD ON  24MARCH, 2026 FROM 1700 HRS TO 1720 HRS 
IN COMMITTEE ROOM ‘B’, PARLIAMENT HOUSE ANNEXE, NEW DELHI 
 
PRESENT 
                   Shri Anurag Singh Thakur  - Chairperson 
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Shri Sukhdeo Bhagat 
3. Smt. Roopkumari Choudhary 
4. Shri Vijay Kumar Hansdak 
5. Smt. Kamlesh Jangde 
6. Smt. Jyotsna Charandas Mahant 
7. Shri Bidyut Baran Mahato 
8. Shri Harish Chandra Meena 
9. Smt. Bharti Pardhi 
10. Shri B.K. Parthasarathi 
11. Dr. Manna Lal Rawat 
12. Dr. Rajkumar Sangwan 
13. Shri Kali Charan Singh 
14. Shri Shatrughan Prasad Sinha 
15. Smt. Pratibha Suresh Dhanorkar 
 
Rajya Sabha  
 
16. Dr. Sarfraz Ahmad 
17. Smt. Mahua Maji 
18. Shri Anil Kumar Yadav Mandadi 
19. Shri Aditya Prasad 
20. Shri Pradip Kumar Varma 
21. Shri Sajjad Ahmad Kichloo 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri Harish Chandra Bist  - Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Reena Gopalakrishnan - Director 
3. Smt. Sunanda Chatterjee  - Deputy Secretary 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of the Committee. 
The Committee, thereafter, considered and adopted the following draft Reports without any 
amendments: 
(i) Consideration and adoption of theDraft Report on the subject ‘Organisational 
Structure and Performance of Steel Authority of India Limited (SAIL)- A 
Review.’; 
(ii) Consideration and adoption of the Draft Action Taken Report on Eighth Report 
on the subject ‘Steel Scrap Recycling Policy.’ 
 
3. The Committee then authorized the Chairperson to finalise the Reports and 
present/lay the same in both the Houses of Parliament.  
 
4. xxx                      xxxxxxxxxxxx. 
 
The Committee, then, adjourned. 

30 
 
ANNEXURE-II 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE OBSERVATIONS/ 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE EIGHTH  REPORT OF THE STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON COAL, MINES AND STEEL 
 
Total No. of Recommendations made:                                                                                  18 
 
Observations / Recommendations that have been accepted by the Government   
SI. Nos. 1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9,10,11,12,13,14,15,16,17,18 
   18 
Percentage of Total: 100% 
 
Observations / Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in view of 
the Government’s replies      
NIL 
 
 
Percentage of Total : 0% 
 
Observations / Recommendations in respect of which replies of the Government have not 
been accepted by the Committee 
NIL 
 
Percentage of Total : 0% 
 
Observations / Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the Government are still  
awaited   
NIL 
 
Percentage of Total : 0% 
 
 
 
 