 
 
7       STANDING COMMITTEE ON  
COAL, MINES AND STEEL  
(2024-2025) 
 
 
EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
MINISTRY OF MINES 
 
 
 
ON THE SUBJECT 
IMPLEMENTATION AND UTILIZATION OF DISTRICT MINERAL 
FOUNDATION (DMF) FUND AND PRADHAN MANTRI KHANIJ 
KSHETRA KALYAN YOJANA (PMKKKY) –  
A REVIEW  
 
 
SEVENTH REPORT 
 
 
 
       
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
APRIL, 2025/CHAITRA, 1947 (SAKA) 
  


 
 
SEVENTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON COAL,  
MINES AND STEEL  
(2024-2025) 
 
EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
MINISTRY OF MINES 
 
ON THE SUBJECT 
IMPLEMENTATION AND UTILIZATION OF DISTRICT MINERAL 
FOUNDATION (DMF) FUND AND PRADHAN MANTRI KHANIJ 
KSHETRA KALYAN YOJANA (PMKKKY) –  
A REVIEW  
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on  03.04.2025 
       Laid in Rajya Sabha on  03.04.2025 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
APRIL, 2025/CHAITRA, 1947 (SAKA) 
  


 
 
CM&S No. 194 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
©2025 by Lok Sabha Secretariat  
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of 
Business in Lok Sabha (___ Edition) and printed by _________ 
 

i 
 
 
 
CONTENTS 
Page 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE …………………………………………. (i) 
 
 
INTRODUCTION ……………………………………………………………………    (ii) 
 
PART-I 
 
CHAPTER I  DMF - Objectives, Provisions, Structure    1 
PMKKKY Objectives, Provisions, Structure 
 
 
CHAPTER II  Legal Framework and MMDR Act……………………  9 
 
CHAPTER III  Compliance Mechanism      14 
I. Role of Public representatives in decision making of DMF 14 
II. State Level Monitoring Committee (SLMC)  14 
 
III. Role of Gram Sabha     15 
IV. Third Party Assessment     16 
V. Impact assessment studies      16 
VI. Demarcation of affected areas      16 
VII. DMF information in public domain   17 
VIII. Sustainability and Maintenance of Projects  17 
 
CHAPTER IV Financial Performance of DMF     19 
(a) Source of funding to DMF     19 
(b) Fund accrual and utilization     19 
(c) DMF Utilization Index      20 
(d) Diversion of funds      20 
(e) Default in payment to DMF     21 
(f) Audit of DMF by C&AG     21 
(g) Perspective Plan      21 
 
CHAPTER V Projects Sanctioned/Implemented/Not Implemented  
by DMFs         23 
 

ii 
 
(a) Categorization of the Projects/Sectors – ‘High priority’  
and ‘other priority’       23 
(b) Delay in implementation of projects taken up under DMF 24 
(c) Projects Sanctioned and Completed   24 
(d) Incomplete data on the website regarding DMF/PMKKKY 25 
 
PART II 
Recommendations        26 
 
 
ANNEXURES 
 
I. Priority to Aspirational Districts      36 
 
II. Aspirational Districts (106 of 112 Aspirational  
             Districts are also DMF Districts)      39 
 
III. Details of notification of all 23 the State Governments and UTs   
     who have framed State DMF Rules      43 
 
IV. District Mineral Foundation Trust Deed     44 
 
V. Data on fund accrual and utilization      52 
 
VI. Priority category under DMF/PMKKKY     53 
 
VII. Minutes of the Eleventh Sittings of the Standing Committee  
on Coal, Mines and Steel (2024-2025) held on 03.03.2025 ……………  96 
 
VIII. Minutes of the Fifteenth sitting of the Standing Committee on Coal,  
Mines and Steel (2025-2026) held on 02.04.2025 ………………        99        
 
 
 
  

iii 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON COAL, MINES AND STEEL (2024-2025) 
Chairperson – Shri Anurag Singh Thakur  
 
Lok Sabha 
 
2.  Shri Sukhdeo Bhagat  
3.  Dr. Raj Kumar Chabbewal  
4.  Smt. Roopkumari Choudhary 
5.  Shri Vijay Kumar Hansdak  
6.  Smt. Kamlesh Jangde 
7.  Shri Govind Makthappa Karjol  
8.  Shri Selvaganapathi T.M.  
9.  Smt. Jyotsna Charandas Mahant  
10.  Shri Bidyut Baran Mahato 
11.  Shri Harish Chandra Meena  
12.  Shri Ananta Nayak 
13.  Smt. Bharti Pardhi 
14.  Shri B.K. Parthasarathi 
15.  Dr. Manna Lal Rawat 
16.  Dr. Rajkumar Sangwan  
17.  Shri Kali Charan Singh  
18.  Shri Shatrughan Prasad Sinha 
19.  Smt. Dhanorkar Pratibha Suresh 
20.  Shri S. Venkatesan 
21.  Shri Aditya Yadav 
 
 
Rajya Sabha  
 
22.  Shri Subrata Bakshi 
23.  Smt. Mahua Maji  
24.  Shri Anil Kumar Yadav Mandadi 
25.  Shri Manas Ranjan Mangaraj 
26.  Shri Rwngwra Narzary 
27.  Shri Deepak Prakash 
28.  Shri Aditya Prasad 
29.  Shri Devendra Pratap Singh 
30.  Shri Pradip Kumar Varma 
31.  Dr. Fauzia Khan 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Srinivasulu Gunda Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Jagriti Tewatia Director 
3. Smt. Sunanda Chatterjee Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri Lalit Sharma Executive Officer 
 
  

iv 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
 I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Coal, Mines and Steel having been auth orized by 
the Committee to present the Report on their behalf, present this Seventh Report (Eighteenth Lok 
Sabha) on the subject “Implementation and Utilization of District Mineral Foundation (DMF) Fund, 
Pradhan Mantri Khanij Kshetra Kalyan Yojana (PMKKKY) – A Review” relating to the Ministry of Mines. 
2. The Standing Committee on Coal, Mines and Steel (2024 -25) had selected the subject for 
detailed examination and report to the Parliament. The Committee had oral evidence of representatives 
of the Ministry of Mines, Chief Secretary of Jharkhand and Chief Secretary of Odisha on 3 rd March, 
2025. Based on the oral and written testimony submitted to the Committee, a report on the subject was 
prepared.  
3. The Committee considered and adopted the Report at their sitting held on 01.04.2025. 
4. The Committee wish to express their thanks to the officials of the Ministry of Mines, Chief Secretary 
of Jharkhand and Chief Secretary of Odisha for placing before them and in furnishing  
material/information from time to time as desired by the Committee. 
5. The Committee place on record their profound appreciation for the valuable assistance rendered to 
them by the officials of the Lok Sabha Secretariat attached to the Committee. 
6. For facility of reference and convenience, t he observations and recommendations of the 
Committee have been printed in bold letters in Part-II of the Report.   
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;  ANURAG SINGH THAKUR 
01 April, 2025 Chairperson, 
11 Chaitra, 1947 (Saka) 
 
Standing Committee on Coal, 
Mines and Steel 
 
 
 

1 
 
 
CHAPTER I 
DMF & PMKKKY  
DMF - OBJECTIVES, PROVISIONS, STRUCTURE 
PMKKKYOBJECTIVES, PROVISIONS, STRUCTURE 
Mining has benefitted mining companies, individual miners and governments, not the 
communities living there.  The mining-affected communities struggled w ith the issues of 
displacement, lack of adequate compensation, pollution, etc.  and thus most of the mining 
affected districts in the country remain socio -economically poor and environmentally 
dilapidated. Mining areas have been found to mainly suffer from environmental degradation, 
loss of livelihoods, health hazards due to pollution and lack of infrastructure and basic services.  
The Government of India recognized the challenges posed by mining activities in mineral-rich 
regions and enacted national legislation to ensure equitable opportunities and foster inclusive 
global growth. In March 2015, District Mineral Foundation (DMF) was instituted through an 
amendment under India’s central mining law  — the Mines and Minerals (Development and 
Regulation) Act (1957). 
1.2 The DMF is a non -profit statutory ‘Fund’ for every Indian district affected by mining -
related operations, which should “work for the interest and benefit of persons and areas 
affected by mining-related operations”. It is aligned with the  Pradhan Mantri Khanij Kshetra 
Kalyan Yojana (PMKKKY),  to ensure effective and equitable utilization of these funds to 
address the challenges of communities inhabiting the mining regions and for their sustainable 
development. 
A. Objective, Structure and Funding of DMF  
1.3  As informed by the Ministry of Mines, so far, DMFs have been set up in 645 districts of 
23 States in the country.  Till January 2025, Total amount collected under DMF is ₹104250.74 
crore and sanctioned a total of 3.69 lakh projects worth ₹88483.24 crore wherein a total of 2.08 
lakh projects have been completed spending ₹55923.65 crore.  
 

2 
 
 
Objective 
1.4 The objective of the District Mineral Foundation is to work for the interest and benefit of 
persons, and areas affected by mining related operations in such manner as may be prescribed 
by the State Government. The key goals of DMFs include: 
- Ensuring that communities and areas affected by mining related operations reap 
benefits from resource extraction, inclusive of shared financial benefits.  
- Mitigating the impacts of mining activities on environment and socio-economic fronts 
- Implementing developmental and welfare projects in areas of healthcare, safe drinking 
water, education, welfare of women and children, infrastructure development, 
sustainable livelihood initiatives and skill development, among others.   
- Ensuring long term sustainable livelihood opportunities for aff ected people after mine 
closure. 
Structure 
1.5 As per sub-section (2) and (3) of Section 9B of the MMDR Act, 1957 State Government 
are empowered to make rules prescribing composition and functions of the District Mineral 
Foundation.  
1.6 Further, the Ministry has also submitted that, to ensure effective implementation of the 
schemes in transforming the living standards/social upli ftment of people and development of 
areas affected by mining related operations, DMFs function through a 2 tier administrative set 
up comprising of a Governing Council (GC) and a Managing Committee (MC). The model DMF 
Trust deed of the Union Ministry of Mi nes had clearly outlined this structure. However, what 
was left for the state governments to decide on were the members of these bodies. 
DMF Funding 
1.7 The DMF is funded by the statutory contributions from holders of mining lease in terms 
of the fixed per centage of royalty prescribed by the Central Government.  In the exercise of 
the powers conferred by sub -sections (5) and (6) of Section 9B of the Mines and Minerals 

3 
 
(Development and Regulation) Act, 1957 (67 of 1957), the Central Government made rules 
specifying the amount to be paid by lease holder as per the Mines and Minerals (Contribution 
to DMF) Amendment Rules,2021. The rate of contribution to DMF – 
i. Ten per cent of the royalty in respect of mining le ases or prospecting licence -cum 
mining lease granted on or after 12.01.2015. 
ii. Thirty per cent of the royalty in respect of mining leases granted before 12.01.2015. 
The contribution of mine lease holders to DMF differ from mineral to mineral as it is 
charged as percentage of royalty and royalty differ from m ineral to mineral but not 
mine to mine. The funds accrued under DMF is spent by the concerned DMF under 
PMKKKY as per the rules framed by the relevant State Governments 
 The fund shall be accrued and spent only at the district level.  The works and project s 
implemented by DMFs as per the rules framed and also the PMKKKY guidelines. 
B. Pradhan Mantri Khanij Kshetra Kalyan Yojana (PMKKKY) – Provisions, Objectives 
and Mandate 
 
Objectives 
1.8 Central Government on 17.09.2015 announced the launch of the Pradhan Mantri Khanij 
Kshetra Kalyan Yojana (PMKKKY) meant to provide for the welfare of areas and people 
affected by mining related operations, using the funds generated by District Mineral 
Foundations (DMFs)  from the funds accruing to them in terms of the MMDR A ct, 1957. 
Accordingly, Central Government in exercise of the powers conferred under Section 20A of 
the MMDR Act, 1957, in the national interest directed the concerned State Governments to 
incorporate the PMKKKY into the rules framed by them for the DMF and to implement the said 
Scheme.  
 
 
 

4 
 
Revised PMKKKY Guidelines 
1.9 Under the proviso of sub -section (3) of section 9B of the Mines and Minerals 
(Development and Regulation) Act, 1957, Ministry of Mines issued the revised PMKKKY 
guidelines o n 15/01/2024, to a mplify the reach of the scheme and to ensure sustainable 
comprehensive development of the mining affected areas. The key features of the revised 
guidelines are as follows: 
i. At least 70% of the DMF funds shall be spent only in the directly affected area.  
 
Ii Clear demarcation of directly affected areas (up to 15 kms from the boundary of the 
mines) and indirectly affected areas (up to 25 kms from the boundary of the mines).  
 
iii.  At least 70% utilisation in high priority sectors. (Increased from earlier 60%) 
 
iv.  New sectors of Housing, Agriculture and Animal Husbandry included in High Priority 
Sectors.  
 
v. Provides for convergence of schemes, transparency & accountability, inclusion of 
Central Government orders.  
 
vi Introduction of a three-level grievance redressal mechanism at District administration, 
State Government and Central Government level to ensure time -bound resolution of 
complaints on DMFs and PMKKKY.  
 
vii Provision for State Level Monitoring Committee (SLMC) to monitor performance of 
DMFs and compliance of transparency norms, audit and annual report of DMFs;  
 
The SLMC shall meet at least twice in a year:  
a. Chief Secretary of the State as Chairperson  
b. Secretaries of all executing Departments as members  
c. Finance and Planning Department as member  
d. One representative of Ministry of Mines as member  
e. Secretary of Geology and Mining Department  or any other Department as the 
Member Secretary.  
 
viii The Directorate of Geology and Mining or any Directorate to constitute State Level 
Nodal DMF Cell for necessary Secretarial support to SLMC.  
 
ix Introduction of Compliance Mechanism with provision for suspension of sanction of 
works or execution works; and/or suspension of release of funds, in the case a DMF:  
 

5 
 
a) fails to maintain an endowment fund  
b)  transfers any fund in violation of rules  
c) fails to comply with transparency provisions  
d) fails to get the accounts audited  
e) fails to prepare and publish annual report  
f) fails to follow directions of State Government or Central Government 
 
1.10 The revised PMKKKY guidelines 2024 encourage DMFs to prioritize achieving targets 
under the Aspirational Districts Programme and Aspirational Blocks Programme, focusing 
efforts and allocating funds towards developmental projects in these identified districts and 
blocks. The following orders issued by Ministry of Mines under Mines and Minerals  
(Development and Regulation) Amendment Act, 2021 which came into effect on 28.03.2021 
have been incorporated in the revised guidelines: 
a. Order dated 23.04.2021 to include MPs, MLAs and MLCs in the Governing Council in the 
larger public interest.  
 
b. Order dated 12.07.2021 to ensure that no fund shall be transferred in any manner from the 
District Mineral Foundations to the State exchequer or State level fund or Chief Minister's 
Relief Fund or any other funds or schemes and no sanction or approval of any expenditure 
out of the fund of the District Mineral Foundation shall be done at the State level.  
 
c. Order dated 24.06.2022 for the preparation of a five -year Perspective Plan for 
implementation of works using DMF funds to ensure systemic development of the mining-
affected area and people.  
 
1.11 The revised PMKKKY guidelines mandates that a reasonable sum not exceeding 10%of 
the annual receipts should be kept as endowment fund for pr oviding sustainable livelihood. 
The districts having annual collection of ₹10 crore or more shall maintain an endowment fund. 
The endowment fund may be invested in government securities/bonds and FDs of scheduled 
banks and other instruments as are permitted by the State Government. The endowment fund 
should be used for creating & sustaining livelihoods in areas where mining activity has stopped 
due to any reason including exhaustion of mineral. 
1.12 Also, special provisions guided by the clauses contained i n Article 244 read with 
Schedule V and Schedule VI to the Constitution relating to administration of the Scheduled 

6 
 
Areas and Tribal Areas and the Provisions of the Panchayats (Extension to the Scheduled 
Areas) Act, 1996 and the Scheduled Tribes and Other Traditional Forest Dwellers (Recognition 
of Forest Rights) Act, 2006 have been included for utilization of PMKKKY funds in the 
scheduled areas. 
1.13 As regards implementation of the revised guidelines  by all Districts in all States , the 
Ministry in a written response submitted as follows:  
“.........Further, as per information received from the State Governments, 4 States viz. 
Gujarat, Goa, Jharkhand and Maharashtra have incorporated the revised PMKKKY 
Guidelines 2024 into the rules framed by them for the DMF.”  
 
1.14 On being asked about the steps being taken by the Ministry to expedite implementation 
of the same by all States/UTs, the Ministry in their post evidence replies submitted as under:- 
“The Ministry of Mines had issued an order to the States on 12. 02.2024 to incorporate 
PMKKKY revised guidelines, 2024 into the State rules for DMF. Subsequently, reminders 
were sent to the States. The Ministry regularly conduct mining review meetings with the 
State Governments where the incorporation of PMKKKY guideli nes 2024 in State DMF 
rules is an agenda for review. Further, the Ministry also takes up this issue through zonal 
council meetings. 
 
Additionally, few States like Chhattisgarh had raised some concerns regarding new 
guidelines and based on that and some other inputs, a Committee was formed for review 
of revised PMKKKY guidelines, 2024.The report of the committee is in the final stages 
of completion.”  
 
Priority to Aspirational districts   
1.15 Launched by the Hon’ble PM in January 2018, the Aspirational Dist ricts Programme 
(ADP) aims to quickly and effectively transform 112 most under-developed districts across the 
country. The broad contours of the programme are Convergence (of Central & State 
Schemes), Collaboration (of Central, State level Nodal Officers &  District Collectors), and 
Competition among districts through monthly delta ranking; all driven by a mass movement.  
ADP began with the selection of the least developed districts in the country. The selection of 
the districts was based on a composite index consisting of challenges faced by the districts in 

7 
 
terms of the poverty , relatively poor health and nutritional outcomes, educational statu s, and 
deficient infrastructure. 
1.16  Revised PMKKKY guidelines mandate DMFs to prioritize achieving targets under ADP, 
focusing efforts and allocating funds towards developmental projects in these identified 
districts.  Sharing with the Committee the details of the efforts made in this regard and their 
impact along with the relevant data, Ministry of Mines submitted as follows:  
“Till date, DMFs have been constituted in 645 districts in 23 mining States. 106 
Aspirational districts out of 112 are also DMF districts.  
 
In this regard, Ministry of Mines issued a letter no. 16/7/2015 -M-VI dated 23/09/2019 
for Utilization o f DMF funds for Sustainable Development Goals (EAP -SDG) for 
Aspirational District Programme.  
 
A D.O. no. 16/7/2015 -M.VI (part) dated 29/08/2022 by the Ministry of Mines gave 
impetus to the Aspirational Districts Programme and advised District Collectors of those 
Aspirational districts which have DMF trust to explore the possibilities to supplement 
ongoing Central and State schemes for achieving the SDGs KPIs as many of the target 
sectors of Aspirational districts programme are similar to high priority sect ors of 
PMKKKY.  
 
The status of DMF that are also Aspirational Districts is provided as Annexure I. 
 
1.17 The Committee desired to be apprised of the details of the projects undertaken and the 
impact that it has made to the lives of the people, affected by mining in Aspirational districts. 
In response the Ministry in their written reply submitted as under- 
“In the 106 aspirational districts, total collection in DMFs fund is ₹31058.31 Cr, out of 
which ₹22796.49 Cr is allocated. The total spent amount is ₹15356.28 Cr. Total 96419 
projects have been sanctioned so far and 57833 projects completed so far. The details 
of the same are provided in Annexure II.”  
1.18 Elaborating further on the matter, a representative of Ministry of Mines appearing before 
the Committee on 03 March, 2025 submitted before the Committee as under- 
“... Sir, this is a part of our guidelines कि  जिन -जिन  एजपिरेशनल  डिजपिक्ट्स में िीएमएफ  िा  
प्रावधान है , वहाां िर  एजपिरेशनल  डिजपिक्ट्स प्रोग्राम और  एजपिरेशनल  ब्लॉि प्रोग्राम िी  िो  

8 
 
प्राथममिताएां हैं, वे िीएमएफ  िी  भी प्राथममिताएां होनी  चाहहए।  हमने  इसिी  मैपिांग िी  है  कि  िो  112 
एजपिरेशनल  जिले  हैं, उनमें से 106 जिले  िीएमएफ  िे  तहत  िवर  होते  हैं। 500 एजपिरेशनल  ब्लॉक्टस हैं, 
उनमें से 473 ब्लॉक्टस िीएमएफ  में िवर  होते  हैं। वह  प्रेिेंटेशन में भी था, लेकिन  उसे हम  बता  नह ां िाए। 
But this is part of our guidelines, and we are also working in close coordination of  the 
NITI Aayog to ensure that िो  एजपिरेशनल  डिजपिक्टट प्रोग्राम है  और  हमारा  िो  िीएमएफ  फ ां ि है , 
उनमें िन्विजन्स रहे  हैं। छत्तीसगढ़ िे  दोनों माननीय  साांसदों ने  पिेमसकफि  िु छ िानिाररयाां माांगी हैं। 
वे िानिार  हम  आििो  अलग से दे देंगे। हम  यह  भी बताना  चाहेंगे कि  ि ुलाई, 2024 से हमने  एि  
िीएमएफ  िोटजल लॉन्च किया  है , जिसमें 3 लाख 60 हिार  िायों िे  नम्बर  हदख रहे  हैं, उन  नम्बरों में 
एि -एि  िौन  सा िायज है , वह  उस िीएमएफ  िोटजल में उिलब्ध है।   
  

9 
 
CHAPTER II 
Legal Framework and MMDR Act 
 
2.1 The legal framework governing m ining activities in India has evolved significantly over 
the decades, with the Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation) Act, 1957 (MMDR 
Act) serving as the cornerstone legislation. This Act has undergone several transformative 
amendments, particularly in recent years, to address emerging challenges and opportunities 
in the mining sector. The most significant amendment with respect to community welfare came 
in 2015, when the MMDR Amendment Act established the District Mineral Foundation as a 
statutory mechanism to address the long-standing issue of mining-affected communities being 
excluded from the benefits of mineral development. 
2.2 Section 9(B) of the MMDR Act provides for establishment of DMF as a non -profit body 
in all districts affected by mining as reproduced below- 
“9B. District Mineral Foundation ―(1) In any district affected by mining related 
operations, the State Government shall, by notification, establish a trust, as a non-profit 
body, to be called the District Mineral Foundation.  
(2) The object of the District Mineral Foundation shall be to w ork for the interest and 
benefit of persons, and areas affected by mining related operations in such manner as 
may be prescribed by the State Government.  
(3) The composition and functions of the District Mineral Foundation shall be such as 
may be prescribed by the State Government.  
 Provided that the Central Government may give directions regarding composition 
and utilisation of fund by the District Mineral Foundation.  
(4) The State Government while making rules under sub -sections (2) and (3) shall be 
guided by the provisions contained in article 244 read with Fifth and Sixth Schedules 
to the Constitution relating to administration of the Scheduled Areas and Tribal Areas 
and the Provisions of the Panchayats (Extension to the Scheduled Areas) Act, 1996 
(40 of 1996) and the Scheduled Tribes and Other Traditional Forest Dwellers 
(Recognition of Forest Rights) Act, 2006 (2 of 2007).  
(5) The holder of a mining lease or a composite licence granted on or after the date of 
commencement of the Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation) Amendment 
Act, 2015 , [other than those covered under the provisions of sub-section (2) of section 
10A], shall, in addition to the royalty, pay to the District Mineral Foundation of the district 
in which the mining operations ar e carried on, an amount which is equivalent to such 
percentage of the royalty paid in terms of the Second Schedule, not exceeding one -

10 
 
third of such royalty, as may be prescribed by the Central Government.  
 
 
(6) The holder of a mining lease granted before the date of commencement of the 
Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation) Amendment Act, 2015  [other than 
those covered under the provisions of sub-section (2) of section 10A], shall, in addition 
to the royalty, pay to the District Mineral Foundatio n of the district in which the mining 
operations are carried on, an amount not exceeding the royalty paid in terms of the 
Second Schedule in such manner and subject to the categorisation of the mining 
leases and the amounts payable by the various categories of lease holders, as may be 
prescribed by the Central Government.” 
 
Constitutional and Legal Foundation of DMFs 
2.3 District Mineral Foundations derive their legal authority from Section 9B o f the MMDR 
Act, which empowers State Governments to establish these trusts in mining-affected districts. 
The constitutional basis of DMFs is further strengthened by their alignment with provisions of 
the Fifth and Sixth Schedules of the Constitution of India, which govern administration in tribal 
areas. This alignment  ensures that DMF operations respect and enhance the constitutional 
safeguards provided to tribal communities, who often bear a disproportionate burden of mining 
activities. 
2.4 Section 15(4) of the MMDR Act empowers the State Government to frame rules for  
DMFs in respect of minor minerals. Section 15(4) is reproduced below- 
“….(4) Without prejudice to sub -sections (1), (2)  and sub -section (3), the State 
Government may, by notification, make rules for regulating the provisions of this Act 
for the following, namely:--
 
(a) the manner in which the District Mineral Foundation shall work for the interest 
and benefit of persons and areas affected by mining under sub -section (2) of 
section 9B; 
(b) the composition and functions of the District Mineral Foundation un der sub-
section (3) of section 9B; and 
(c) the amount of payment to be made to the District Mineral Foundation by 
concession holders of minor minerals under section 15A.” 
 
2.5 Further, Section 15A of the Act empowers the States to collect funds for DMF in case 
of minor minerals. Section 15A is reproduced below: 

11 
 
 “15A.  The State Government may prescribe the payment by all holders of concessions 
related to minor minerals of amounts to the District Mineral Foundation of the district in 
which the mining operations are carried on”  
 
2.6 The legal framework governing DMFs also incorporates  provisions of the Panchayats 
(Extension to Scheduled Areas) Act (PESA), 1996, and the Scheduled Tribes and Other 
Traditional Forest Dwellers (Recognition of Forest Rights) Act,  2006 (FRA). In scheduled 
areas, the utilization of DMF funds must be guided by these legislative frameworks to ensure 
that tribal communities maintain their customary rights and decision -making authority over 
local resources. The revised PMKKKY guidelines  issued in January 2024 explicitly reinforce 
this requirement, stating that DMF fund utilization in scheduled areas shall be guided by 
provisions contained in Article 244 read with Schedule V and Schedule VI to the Constitution, 
along with PESA and FRA provisions. 
2.7 In written response to a query whether Rules have been framed by all States and UTs 
as per  the powers conferred by sub -sections (2) and (3) of Section 9B of the Mines and 
Minerals (Development and Regulation) Act, 1957, the Ministry submitted as under- 
“As per sub-section (2) and (3) of Section 9B of the MMDR Act State Government are 
empowered to make rules prescribing composition and functions of the District Mineral 
Foundation. As per the information received from the state governments, all 2 3 mining 
States and UTs have framed State DMF Rules. The details of notification is provided as 
Annexure III.”  
 
2.8  In written reply to a query why no State has notified the Composition of DMF Trust and 
it’s governing council in violation to the above pr ovision including utilization of funds, the 
Ministry submitted as under- 
“Through the MMDR Amendment Act 2021, Central Government has been empowered 
to issue direction to State on composition and functions of DMF. Consequently, the 
Central Government regul arly reviews the scheme and has periodically issued 
directives to the State Governments to ensure the efficient execution of the scheme. 
......”  
 
2.9 DMFs in every mining district are required to have a two -tier administrative structure 
comprising of a Go verning Council (GC) and a Managing Committee (MC). The model DMF 

12 
 
Trust deed of the Union Ministry of Mines had clearly outlined this structure (Annexure-IV). 
However, what was left for the state governments to decide on the members of these bodies. 
2.10 A random examination of the Rules, as found uploaded on the States/Distt. Web page, 
it is observed that , there is no uniform approach in the rules framed by different States  as 
Districts in various S tates (and even within a state) have registered the DMF Tr ust under 
various laws, which can potentially create confusion in their obligations and the discharge of 
functions depending on the law under which they have registered. For example:  
 In districts of Madhya Pradesh, DMF Trusts are being registered under th e Indian 
Trust Act (1882), as the state DMF Rules specifies so.  
 In Gujarat under rule 3(2) of Gujarat District Mineral Foundation Rules, 2016 
establishment of DMF has been mentioned as- Upon issuance of notification under 
sub-rule (1) the District Mineral  Foundation shall be registered as a society for 
charitable purpose under the Societies Registration Act, 1860 and shall be a public 
trust under sub-section (13) of section 2 of the Gujarat Public Trusts Act, 1950. 
  In Karnataka, the State Rules require d DMF Trusts to register first under the 
Karnataka Societies Registration Act (1960).  Subsequently, vide Notification dated 
06.05.2020 vide District Mineral Foundation Trust (Amendment) Rules, 2020 
following amendment was notified - 
“3. Amendment of rule 4. -In rule 4 of the said rules, for sub -rule (4), the 
following shall be substituted namely: - "(4) Every District mineral 
Foundation Trust constituted under these rules may be registered as per 
the provisions of the Registration Act, 1908 (Central Act 16 of 1908)." 
2.11 Whereas in the model DMF Trust deed of the Ministry of Mines ‘ The Trust’ definition 
has been clearly given as under - 
“ix) ‘The Trust’ mean the (name of the District) District mineral Foundation Trust created 
by the SETTLOR.”  
 
2.12 Further it is also observed that since DMFT is a non-profit trust, it is obligated to identify 
and notify its beneficiaries. Also in the model DMF Trust deed of the Ministry of Mines , has 
clearly given the definition of ‘Beneficiaries’ as under - 

13 
 
‘Beneficiaries’ mean the persons and areas affected  by mining related operations 
undertaken in the area’ 
 
 2.13 On examination of the DMFT Rules framed by the States , selected randomly,  it has 
been noticed that some States  have identified directly -affected areas and consider p eople 
falling within the area as the beneficiaries a nd few States like Chhatisgarh, Odisha, Madhya 
Pradesh, Maharashtra have not defined “Beneficiaries” in their respective DMFT Rules notified 
by them. Whereas few States have given random definition for eg. - 
 Jharkhand District Mineral Foundation (Trust) Rules, 2024, under rule 4 of the Rules 
Beneficiaries is defined as – “4) “beneficiaries” mean the affected persons as 
identified by the Management Committee.” 
 
 Assam District Mineral Foundation (Trust) Rule s, 2020, under Rule 2(4)(e) 
'beneficiary" is defined as - the person who sustain injury in person or sustain 
damage of his property by mining related operation undertaken in that area; 
 
 Rajasthan District Mineral Foundation Trust Rules, 2016 under rule 2. of the Rules 
“Beneficiaries” means the area and persons affected by mining related operations 
undertaken in the area and includes the eligible patients and their legal heirs for ex-
gratia payments under provision of Rajasthan Environment and Heal th 
Administrative Board (REHAB); 
 
 Gujarat District Mineral Foundation Rules, 2024 under rule 2(f) "Beneficiaries" has 
been defined as those Affected people who have been identified, as beneficiaries of 
plans, programmes or projects, in the manner specified in rule 14; Rule 14 reads as 
under- 
 
“14. Identification of Beneficiaries - With respect to each plans, programmes 
and projects to be implemented as a part of the Annual Plan, the Monitoring 
Committee shall prepare a list of Beneficiaries. Such Beneficiaries may be:  
(a) specified individuals in case of plans, programmes or projects targeted at 
individuals; or  
(b) a class of population - in case of plans, programmes or projects targeted 
for general welfare of a particular class of populations, such a people residing 
in a specified area.  
2.In case of a Scheduled Area, approval of the Gram Sabha shall be required 
for identification of Beneficiaries as specified in rule 19.” 
  

14 
 
CHAPTER III 
COMPLIANCE MECHANISM 
I. Role of Public representatives in decision making of DMF  
3.1 The Central Govt as per MMDR Amendment Act 2021, issued directions to the State 
Governments and Union Territories on composition of DMF. Accordingly, the Chairman of the 
Governing Council and Managing Committee shall be District Magistrate/ Deputy 
Commissioner/ District Collector of the district. MP (Lok Sabha & Rajya Sabha)/ MLA/ MLC 
shall be a member of the Governing Council. 
3.2 The Ministry in a written reply submitted to the Committee that: 
  “As per information received from state governments, all  the 23 mining States have 
complied with the ministry’s order and have included MPs, MLAs and MLCs into their 
Governing Council of their DMFs.”  
 
3.3 The representatives of the M inistry of Mines appearing before the Committee on 03 
March , 2025 elaborated the role of  public representatives as follows :  
“  The PMKKKY guidelines provide for the inclusion of  public representatives – 
Hon’ble  MPs, MLAs, and MLCs in the Governing Council of the DMF.  
Hon’ble MP, Lok Sabha/ MLAs shall be a member of the Governing Council of all such 
districts where Mining affected area is a part of his/her constituency Hon’ble MP (s), 
Rajya Sabha/MLC shall be a member of the Governing Council of one District selected 
by him /her. MPs/ MLCs shall intimate name of the district sel ected to the Secretary in 
-charge of the State mining department who in turn shall inform the District Magistrate 
concerned.  
The Governing Council shall meet at least twice in a year”. 
 
3.4 The Secretary, Ministry of Mines during the course of oral evidence on 03 March, 2025 
have submitted before the Committee that:-  
“Unfortunately, there is very negative feedback that we got today. We will request the 
State Level Monitoring Committee िो  राज्यों में उनि े  सचचव  िे  द्वारा इसिो  मॉननटर  किया  िाता  
है , वे सभी िलेक्टटसज िो  नन देश देंगे और  हमार  गाइिलाइन  में हदया ह ुआ है  कि  माननीय  सदपयगण  से 
िूछ िर  ह  आि िेट तय िरेंगे। हम  इसिो  सुनन जच च त िरेंगे।”  
 
II. State Level Monitoring Committee (SLMC) 
 
3.5  As mentioned at para 1.10 of the report revised PMKKKY guidelines provides for State 

15 
 
Level Monitoring Committee (SLMC) with Chief Secretary of the State as Chairperson to 
monitor performance of DMFs and compliance of transparency norms, audit and annual report 
of DMFs. The guidelines direct that the Directorate of Geology and Mining or any Directorate 
is to constitute State Level Nodal DMF Cell for necessary Secretarial support to SLMC and 
SLMC shall meet at least twice in a year.  
3.6 With regard to the s tatus on setting up of SLMCs , Ministry of Mines i n a written reply 
submitted as under:  
“ …12 States viz. Odisha, Chhattisgarh, Jharkhand, Rajasthan, Madhya Pradesh, 
Karnataka, Telangana, Gujarat, Goa, Punjab, Meghalaya, Haryana have set up State 
Level Monitoring Committees which reviews the implementation of scheme regularly 
in the State.”  
III. Role of Gram Sabha 
3.7 Furnishing in brief about the role of Gram Sabha in the projects taken up under DMF , 
the Ministry in their written reply submitted as under- 
“As per the PMKKKY Guidelines 2024, the Five -Year Perspective Plan and 
Annual Plans, as outlined in Section 5 of the guidelines, mandate a baseline survey 
conducted by districts through academic institutions, renowned organizations, or 
agencies to guide t he planning process wherein the Gram Sabhas may aid in the 
preparation of need assessment reports.  Additionally, Gram Sabhas are involved in 
identifying affected people in both directly and indirectly impacted areas. Further, as per 
the special provisions  for scheduled areas in Section 7 of PMKKKY Guidelines 2024, 
the approval of Gram Sabha is mandatory for all plans, programs, and projects 
undertaken under PMKKKY. Furthermore, at the end of each financial year, a report on 
works completed under PMKKKY within a village must be furnished to the Gram Sabha 
for review and transparency. 
 
3.8 On being asked about the existence of a provision for uploading proposed projects on 
website for seeking written views from the public, by Gram Sabha/Panchayats/local affec ted 
Groups required to be undertaken in the mining affected areas for better utilization of funds, 
the Ministry, in a written response, submitted as under- 
“Currently, as per PMKKKY guidelines, there is no provision for seeking written 
views from the publi c by uploading proposed projects on a website for feedback from 
Gram Sabha, Panchayats, or local affected groups regarding projects in mining-affected 
areas. However, implementing such a provision may have practical difficulties as 
villagers may have limited access to, or familiarity with online portals and may struggle 

16 
 
to express their views effectively through such a platform. Instead, their participation 
should be ensured through Gram Sabha consultations, particularly during the Five-Year 
Perspective Planning process, which forms the basis for project planning.  
 
IV.  Third Party Assessment 
 
3.9 In written reply to a specific whether there is a provision in the rules/regulations 
governing DMF to have third party impact assessment of the DMF projects, the Ministry 
submitted as under- 
“.…The guidelines do not explicitly mention third -party impact assessments. However, 
they do allow for up to 5% of the DMF's annual revenue to be allocated for 
administrative, supervisory, and overhead expenses, which can be ut ilized for impact 
assessment study by individual DMFs. 
 
V. Impact assessment studies   
3.10 In response to a query whether any impact assessment studies have been carried 
out to assess the impact of the projects undertaken, for the welfare of the mining af fected 
people and areas, funded by DMF, Ministry of Mines in a written reply submitted as under: 
“Due to decentralized nature of scheme implementation at individual 645 DMF 
districts, the status and/or monitoring of impact assessment studies carried out by DMF 
districts is not tracked by the Ministry.” 
 
VI. Demarcation of affected areas   
3.11  As mentioned at para 1.10, revised PMKKKY Guidelines stipulate that clear 
demarcation of affected areas, up to 15 Kms from the boundary of the mines and in directly 
affected areas (up to 25 kms from the boundary of the mines).  Ministry of Mines, in written 
reply to a query whether this provision is strictly implemented across all the States including 
north-east and the details there of, shared the following with the Committee:  
“Ministry of Mines issued the revised PMKKKY guidelines in January 2024 to amplify 
the reach of the scheme and to ensure sustainable comprehensive development of the 
mining affected areas. The State Governments and Union Territories have been 
directed to incorporate revised guidelines into the rules framed by them for the District 
Mineral Foundations and implement the said Scheme. Currently 4 States (Jharkhand, 
Gujarat, Maharashtra and Goa) have revised their State DMF rules incorporating the 
revised guidelines, others are in various stage of preparation of New DMF rules.” 

17 
 
3.12 A representative of the state Govt of Jharkhand appearing before the Committee on 
03 March, in this context, submitted as under:  
“Sir our only concern is the fixing of the radius when it comes to deciding between 
what is directly affected area and indirectly affected area. It is because 15 kms 
for a district like Chaibasa, the size is very big it is one of the biggest districts of 
Jharkhand. So , the distance between tribal  hamlets is quit e far. As you have 
already seen , 75 perc ent is our sanctioned allotment . So we require more 
flexibility to accord more sanctions to benefit more people…”  
VII.  DMF information in public domain  
3.13 The Pradhan Mantri Khanij Kshetra Kalyan  Yojana (PMKKKY) specifies mechanisms 
that DMF should follow for ‘compliance of transparency’. A key measure of such compliance 
is putting all DMF related information in the public domain through a district specific website. 
The website should provide clearly the details of composition of the DMF/bodies, a list of areas 
and people affected by mining, details of all contribution received, all meeting agenda, minutes 
and action taken reports (ATRs) of the DMF, annual plans and budget, work orders, annual 
report, status of ongoing works including description of work, progress and implementation 
status, details of beneficiaries, estimated cost, name of implementing agency, expected date 
of commencement, and completion of work etc. However, information available in the public 
domain on DMFs is extremely poor.  
3.14 Furthermore, to enhance effectiveness and transparency of DMF the Ministry informed 
that the Ministry has launched a National DMF portal for nationwide DMF administration and 
monitoring, promoting accountability and systematic fund and project management. The portal, 
which links to existent state and district DMF portals, allows for uploading annual and audit 
reports and provides DMF status for districts that lack individual webpages.  
VIII. Sustainability and Maintenance of Projects 
3.15 On being asked about the specific rules and regulations that ensures sustainability of 
the outcomes of the initiatives taken with funding from DMF and for maintenance of the assets 
created. In response the Ministry submitted as under- 

18 
 
“The PMKKKY guidelines provides framework for implementation of works by DMFs. 
The projects are taken up after approval from Governing Council (GC). The initiatives 
taken up may differ within the ambit of respective DMF rules, which may incl ude 
initiatives to drive sustainability of the assets created. The DMF project may also have 
a provision to create sustainability of the maintenance of the assets. 
 
Usually, it is witnessed that once project is approved by GC, it comes under the purview 
of the line department responsible for that sector, mainly in the case of projects which 
have physical assets created. It is the responsibility of the concerned departments to 
assure long-term maintenance and sustainability of the assets integrating them into their 
standard maintenance routines.”  
 
3.16 Secretary, Ministry of Mines, appearing before the Committee on 03 march, 2025 
further submitted that: 
”.…So, on maintenance, sustainability, and impact assessment, very good 
comments and suggestions have been  received. We will sensitise the State 
Governments on this point, as is suggested by the hon. Chairperson, that whenever 
they make a project, they should plan from the beginning itself like, यहद इस प्रोिेक्टट में 
िीएमएफ  से िैसा आ रहा  है , यहद प िू ल बन  रहा  है  तो ट चर  िौन  से पवभाग से आएगा, उसिी  तनख्वाह 
िहाां से आएगी, बबज्िांग िी  मेंटेनेंस िे  मलए िैसे क्टया हर  साल िीएमएफ  िे  िैसे से आएांगे या पटेट  िे  
बिट  से आएांगे? So, convergence is part of our guidelines. We will impress upon the 
States and through the State-level Monitoring Committees that convergence is ensured 
so that there is sustainability and there is good impact. 
 
सर , ब ह ुत सारे  पिेमसकफि  ि े सेज़ और  मशिायतें आई हैं. Some of the things are related to the 
two States present here. They have noted it also. For the rest, through the State 
Governments, we will have them enquired into.”                                 
 
 
  

19 
 
CHAPTER IV 
FINANCIAL PERFORMANCE OF DMF 
I.  Source of funding to DMF:- 
4.1  As per the MMDR Amendment Act, 2015, the holder of the mine lease, in add ition to 
royalty, is required to pay an amount not exceeding one third of such royalty to DMF of the 
district where mining operations are carried out.  
4.2.  In written reply to a query as to the idea behind prescribing a ceiling instead of specific 
percentage of royalty to fund DMF, the Ministry of Mines, in a written reply, submitted as follows 
:  
“ In the exercise of the powers conferred by sub -sections (5) and (6) of Section 
9B of the Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation) Act, 1957 (67 of 1957 ), 
the Central Government made rules specifying the amount to be paid by lease holder 
as per the Mines and Minerals (Contribution to DMF) Amendment Rules,2021. 
Following fixed (within the ceiling defined in the Act) rates have been prescribed.    
 
The rate of contribution to DMF  
 
Ten per cent of the royalty in respect of mining leases or prospecting licence -cum-
mining lease granted on or after 12.01.2015. ii. Thirty per cent of the royalty in respect 
of mining leases granted before 12.01.2015.”  
 
4.3  In response to a clarification as to whether the contribution of mine lease holders to 
DMF differ from mineral to mineral and mine to mine, Ministry of Mines submitted as follows: 
“The contribution of mine lease holders to DMF differ from mineral to mineral as  it is 
charged as percentage of royalty and royalty differ from mineral to mineral but not mine 
to mine.  The funds accrued under DMF is spent by the concerned DMF under PMKKKY 
as per the rules framed by the relevant State Governments.”   
 
II.  Fund accrual and utilization:- 
4.4 Furnishing the data on number of districts which have set up DMF, amounts collected, 
accrued, allocated and the amounts remaining in DMF accounts since 2015 -16, Ministry of 
Mines, submitted as follows:  

20 
 
“The State Governments notifi ed DMFs and released the State DMF Rules 
during the 2015 to 2018 period. The DMF status as reported by the State Governments 
is available with the ministry since 2018 Annexure-V.  
 
III. Utilization Index: - 
4.5  The Ministry of Mines, in response to a quer y whether there is any utilization index 
operational/ available with them to monitor the DMF fund utilization across all the States, the 
Ministry submitted as under:  
“It is submitted that as such no Utilization Index is available with ministry to 
monitor the DMF fund utilisation. 
However, in a bid to enhance the effectiveness and transparency of the DMF 
operations, the Ministry of Mines, launched the National DMF Portal. This portal serves 
as a centralized system for the administration and monitoring of DM Fs across the 
country. The portal provides a dynamic dashboard for project oversight, and a repository 
of best practices, which facilitates cross -learning and public viewing. The ministry is 
continuously working to enhance the Portal by introducing new fea tures to ensure its 
more effective use in monitoring and managing DMF projects.” 
4.6  Referring to the absence of utilization Index of the utilization of funds by the States 
and the desirability of having such  index to have a comprehensive view of the DMF fund 
utilization, the Secretary, Ministry of Mines , appearing before the Committee on 03 March, 
2025 submitted as under :  
“….Actually, right now we are only saying utilization percentage  but utilization 
index  is a good monitoring tool which we will examine in terms of how to do this.   
 
IV. Diversion of Funds - 
4.7  In written reply to a specific query whether there are any cases of diversion of funds 
from DMF for purposes other th an the stipulated ones and the details there of including the 
corrective action taken to prevent such recurrences, Ministry of Mines submitted as under:  
“The Ministry of Mines have not been notified of any diversion of fund from DMF 
for purposes other than the stipulated use of DMF. However, it has come to the notice 
of the Cen tral Government that there are instances where a part of the funds of the 
District Mineral Foundations have been transferred to the State treasury/ consolidated 
fund of the State or State level funds (by whatever name called) or Chief Minister's 
Relief Fun d or other funds or schemes .  Therefore, as corrective measures to 
discourage any such future diversions, the Central Government in exercise of powers 
under Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation) Amendment Act, 2021 which 

21 
 
came into effect on 28.03.2021 issued following directions to all the States for effective 
utilization of DMF funds:  
 
‘Order dated 12.07.2021 to ensure that no fund shall be transferred in any 
manner from the District Mineral Foundations to the State exchequer or State level fund 
or Chief Minister's Relief Fund or any other funds or schemes and no sanction or 
approval of any expenditure out of the fund of the District Mineral Foundation shall be 
done at the State level.’  
 
The said directions were further incorporated into the rev ised PMKKKY 
guidelines 2024 under Section 6 Restriction on fund transfer from DMF. “  
 
V. Default in payment to DMF 
4.8 When asked if all the mine lease holders are regularly paying the royalty at prescribed 
rates and at specified intervals and the details there of and if not, the reasons there for along 
with the details of such defaulters and the action taken or proposed to be taken, Ministry of 
Mines in a written reply submitted as under:-   
“The compliance towards ensuring the mine lease holders are regu larly paying 
the royalty at prescribed rates and at specified intervals is a State subject. Ministry of 
Mines have not been notified of any defaults.” 
 
VI. Audit of DMFs by C&AG:- 
 4.9  As per PMKKKY Guidelines 2015, the accounts of the DMF shall be audite d every 
year by the Chartered Accountant appointed by the DMF, or in such other manner as the 
Government may specify, and the report thereof shall be placed in the public domain.  
4.10 PMKKKY Guidelines issued in 2024 provides for audit of DMF accounts by the C&AG 
audit since their inception.  In written reply to a query on details of C&AG audit of DMFs 
conducted so far, the Ministry submitted that:  
“As per the information received from the CAG office, dt. 22nd January, 2025, the 
CAG has started performance audit in 12 States/UT namely, Assam, Andhra Pradesh, 
Chhattisgarh, Gujarat, Himachal Pradesh, Karnataka, Jammu & Kashmir, Odisha, 
Rajasthan, Maharashtra, Telangana, and Tamil Nadu.”  
 
VII.  Perspective plan for use of DMF funds:- 
4.11   In written reply to a query whether the Ministry of Mines have issued any 
directive/advisory in June, 2024 to States/UTs were directed to prepare a five-year perspective 

22 
 
plan taking into account current balance available and likely accrual to the DMF over the period 
of five years, the Ministry of Mines in a written reply submitted as follows :  
“The Ministry of mines issued order dated 24.06.2022 for the preparation of a 
five-year Perspective Plan for implementation of works using DMF funds to ensure 
systemic development of the mining-affected area and people. 
The said directions were further incorporated into the revised PMKKKY 
guidelines 2024 under Section 5 Five years perspective planning and yearly plan.” 
 
 
  

23 
 
Chapter –  V 
Projects Sanctioned/Implemented/Not Implemented by DMFs 
Categorization of the Projects/Sectors – ‘High priority’ and ‘other priority’  
 
5.1 As stated earlier, the Government of India introduced provision for establishment of 
District Mineral Fund (DMF) though amendment in MMDR Act 1957 in 2015 and the Pr adhan 
Mantri Khanij Kshetra Kalyan Yojana (PMKKKY) for addressing the developmental challenges 
faced by regions affected by mining operations.  The Ministry of Mines issued the revised 
PMKKKY guidelines in January 2024.   
5.2 Prior to the revision, the PMK KKY guidelines mandated utilization of at least 60% of 
funds in high priority areas and up to 40% in other priority areas. After revision of the guidelines 
in 2014, the PMKKKY provides for utilization of at least 70 per cent of the funds for high 
priority areas like: drinking water supply, environment preservation and pollution control 
measures, health care, education, welfare of women and children, welfare of aged and 
differently abled, skill development, sanitation, and includes new sectors of Housing, 
Agriculture and Animal Husbandry. While, up to 30 percent of the funds shall be utilized for 
other priority areas  viz. physical infrastructure, irrigation, energy and watershed 
development; and any other measures for enhancing environmental quality in mining district.  
After issue of Revised Guidelines, 2024 
 
5.3 Revised PMKKKY Guidelines, 2024 sti pulate that 70% and 30 % of the DMF funds 
should be spent for identified priority and non -priority sectors respectively.  In written reply to 
a query whether it is followed in letter and spirit and whether the projects under DMF 
complements various schemes and all these schemes / projects of State and Central 
Government, the Ministry of Mines stated inter alia as follows:  
“…Currently 4 States have revised their DMF rules according to the revised 
guidelines, rest of the States are in various stages of preparation of new DMF rules.”   
 

24 
 
5.4 On being asked to furnish the data on projects undertaken under Priority category (on 
which Minimum 70% of DMF has to be spent) the Ministry furnished the information as 
shown at Annexure VI.  
Delay in implementation of projects taken up under DMF  
5.5 The Committee observed from the data furnished by the Ministry that there are many 
major projects which have not completed even after long time and desired to be apprised of 
the reasons for such long gestation period in implementation of projects.  In response , the 
Ministry stated that data submitted at Annexure VI provides count of projects sanctioned and 
completed in a given Financial Year.  They have submitted that the inference on completion 
time for individual projects may not be precisely determined from the data format prescribed, 
as the projects sanctioned under DMF may include short duration projects as well as long term 
initiatives that span multiple years.  Collectively, the DMFs have undertaken 3.69 lakh projects, 
out of which 2.08 lakh have been completed.  
State wise Projects Sanctioned and Completed   
5.6 Regarding the State wise project details till January 2025, the website of the Ministry of 
Mines under information about DMF/PMKKKY shows as under:- 
 


25 
 
 
 
Incomplete data on the website regarding DMF/PMKKKY 
 
5.7  The Committee observe that data on the website of the Ministry is not complete.  On 
being inquired regarding the reasons and the steps taken to ensure that same is provided, the 
Ministry in their written reply have informed as under: 
“The DMF data is prepared by the respective DMFs and shared with the States to be 
collated, approved and shared with the Ministry. The i ssues often encountered in the 
data received from States are omissions in Sector -wise bifurcation of the 
cancelled/scrapped projects by DMFs. The Ministry of mines continually monitors the 
data and in regular intervals notify the concerned States to furnish the missing data from 
DMFs in their State.  
 
Additionally, the Ministry of Mines has launched the National DMF Portal in a bid to 
enhance the effectiveness and transparency of the DMF operations. This portal serves 
as a centralized system for the adminis tration and monitoring of DMFs across the 
country. The regular updation of project data by DMFs will mitigate erroneous omission 
in data reporting”. 
 
 
  


26 
 
PART II 
Recommendations 
Review of Guidelines 
 
1. The Committee note that the Ministry in their initial reply (dt. 28 February, 2025) 
had submitted before the Committee that out of 23 States cSoncerned, only four States 
viz.  Gujarat, Goa, Jharkhand and Maharashtra, have incorporated the revised PMKKKY 
guidelines in the DMF rules. However, just after 17 days  the Ministry updated their 
submission, by submitting in their post evidence reply (dt. 17th March, 2025) that ‘few 
States like Chhattisgarh had raised some concerns regarding new guidelines and 
based on that and some other inputs, a Committee was formed f or review of revised 
PMKKKY guidelines, 2024.  The report of the Committee is in the final stages of 
completion.’ 
2. The Committee take a very serious note of the fact that the Ministry, on their own, 
didn’t bring to the knowledge of the Committee that the revised PMKKKY guidelines, 
2024 are being reviewed and want the Ministry to take a serious note of the same and 
in future complete and updated information be furnished to the Parliamentary 
Committee. The Committee while expressing concern at the   slow pac e of 
implementation of the revised guidelines by the States even after a year of their issue, 
suggest that report of the Committee, formed to review revised PMKKKY guidelines, be 
submitted at the earliest and also implemented by all the States/UTs within a stipulated 
time frame.  As the revised PMKKKY guidelines have a bearing on the efficient and 
transparent compliance mechanism of DMF, the Committee may be apprised of the final 
action taken in this regard. 
Aspirational Districts Programme 
3. The Committee  while noting that out of 112 least developed districts selected 
under the Country’s Aspirational Districts Programme, launched in January, 2018, 106 

27 
 
districts are under DMF Districts, they  express concern  that even after seven years 
since the launch of ADP, the main objectives of the PMKKKY viz. to minimize/mitigate 
the adverse impacts, during and after mining, on the environment, health and socio -
economics of people in mining districts and to ensure long-term sustainable livelihoods 
for the affected peo ple in mining areas, remained unachieved in these 112 ADP 
districts.  The Committee, however, note with satisfaction that the Ministry of Mines 
have taken initiative by giving impetus to the Aspirational Districts Programme and has 
issued the revised PMKKK Y guidelines in January, 2024, mentioning that DMFs may 
accord priority to achieving targets under Aspirational Districts and Blocks programme 
and expect that such concrete actions if implemented in letter and spirit will help to 
achieve not only the objec tives of PMKKKY but also will support ADP. The Committee 
would like to be apprised of such initiatives taken in recent past and the outcome of the 
same. 
Legislative framework 
4. The Committee Note that,  Section 9B(1) of the MMDR Amendment Act (2015), 
clearly mentions that DMFs should be established as a “Trust”. Also as per the model 
DMF Trust deed, circulated to all States and UTs by the Ministry of Mines ‘The Trust’ 
means – ‘the (name of the District) District Mineral Foundation Trust created by the 
SETTLOR.’ The Committee, however, observe that there is no uniform approach in the 
rules framed by different States as Districts in various States have registered the DMF 
Trust under various laws, which can potentially create confusion in their obligations 
and the discharge of functions depending on the law under which they have been 
registered.  
5. The Committee note that the DMF Trust has been created by a statute – the Mines 
and Minerals Development and Regulation Amendment Act (MMDR), 2015. It is , 

28 
 
therefore, important that DMF Trusts should be registered under the appropriate Trust 
Act, for securing rights of its beneficiaries. Registration will make the Trust a legal 
entity, ensure financial accountability and transparency of operations. The Committee 
are of the firm view that it is important for DMF Trusts to register under one particular 
Act, so that they are obligated by the same clauses. The Committee, would therefore, 
like the Ministry to issue necessary directions to all State Government’s, to ensure that 
for each mining district the DMF Trust is established broadly on the lines as defined in 
the model DMF Trust deed circulated to all States and UTs, by the Ministry of Mines, to 
ensure standardized formation of the DMF Trust, pan India in all mining Districts. 
6. The Committee further note that ‘Beneficiaries’ constitute the primary object of 
the Trust. It is, therefore, imperative for a Trust to define and identify its beneficiaries, 
as a Trust cannot be without its beneficiaries. As per the model DMF Tr ust deed 
circulated by the Ministry of Mines, ‘Beneficiaries’ mean the persons and areas affected 
by mining related operations undertaken in the area’.  Thus, for DMF Trusts, only 
‘mining-affected people’ should be considered as the beneficiaries. The Committee are 
therefore of the view that,  the mining affected community and mining affected areas 
should be concretely defined in the DMF rules by all the States because identifying 
‘Beneficiaries’ - is essential for proper functioning of the DMF  as this will also help in 
targeted investments such as addressing issues of women and children residing in core 
mining affected areas.  
Steps to strengthen the Important role of public representatives 
7. As the public representatives play an important role in shaping an d in 
implementing the policies for larger public good, the Committee suggest that:–  
(i) The public representatives invariably be invited to the meetings of the Governing 
Council of DMFs 

29 
 
(ii) Invitation be sent to the public representatives by all modes of communic ation 
viz. email, SMS, WhatsApp, and calls to mobile and landlines 
(iii) DMF portal may be created and the communications about the Governing 
Council may also be sent through the portal  
(iv)  Communications about the Governing Council meetings may be sent at-least 10 
days in advance to enable the public representatives to attend the meetings.   
(v) Governing Council meetings may not be held during Parliament/ state assembly 
sessions as the public representatives will be busy in attending the sessions. 
Role of public representatives in the governance of DMF  
 
8. The mandate of the Governing Council of DMF, the Committee note, is to manage 
the DMF Trust. The Governing Council is headed by District Magistrate/Collector and it 
mainly consists of District officials such as Additional D istrict Magistrate, District 
Superintendent of Police, Chief Executive Officer of Zila Panchayat and line Department 
Officials.  Public representatives of public , such as MPs, MLAs, MLCs, selected 
panchayati raj institution are also members.    It may, therefore, be seen that Governing 
Council is predominantly, a bureaucratic set up.  
9. The role of the Governing Council is to lay down the broad policy framework for 
the Trust, review activities, participate in annual planning, approve annual plans and 
budgets, conduct audits of schemes and works, reviewing annual reports and accounts, 
ratifying appointments of officers and auditors etc.  
10. The Committee are of the view that elected Members of Parliament, being 
representatives of the public, are in  a better position to appreciate the needs and 
aspirations of the people of the area and hence are eminently qualified to lead the policy 
making Governing Councils instead of career bureaucrat.  Presently, the Dist. 
Magistrate heads both the policy formulating   Governing Councils and also the Policy 
implementing Managing Committees. The Committee are of the considered opinion that 

30 
 
this arrangement of the same official s heading both the Policy making and policy 
implementing bodies is not in tune with the se paration of power of policy making  and 
policy implem entation.  In view of the afore mentioned, the Committee suggest that 
elected members of Parliament representing the mining affected areas may be 
considered for heading the Governing Councils of DMF Trusts. In case a mining affected 
area falls under two different Lok Sabha constituencies  – the Minister who is incharge 
of the affected area or the MP of the majority area which is affected or the senior MP, in 
that order, may be made the Chairperson of the Council and the other MP may be made 
a member; District Magistrate may be a member of the Governing Council and also the 
Chairperson of the Managing Committee.   
Setting up of State Level Monitoring Committees (SLMCs) 
11. The Committee note that even after a lapse of more than a year of issuing revised 
PMKKKY guidelines in January, 2024, 12 out of 23 States are yet to set up SLMCs. They 
therefore want Ministry of Mines to issue directions to set up SLMCS in the remaining 
States without further delay. Further, the reply of M inistry of Mines is silent as to 
whether the States which have set up SLMCs have met twice as stipulated in revised 
guidelines of PMKKKY. The Committee want the Ministry to apprise them on this aspect 
also.  
Role of Gram Sabha in implementation of DMF/PMKKKY 
12. The Committee note that the S tate DMF Rules and the Pradhan Mantri Khanij 
Kheshtra Kalyan Yojana (as aligned to DMF), clearly mentions the power and role of the 
Gram Sabha in mining-affected areas for identification of beneficiaries, DMF planning, 
and review of works and schemes. The Committee feel that engagement of State 
officials is limited to reach out to the people in mining -affected areas to know about 
their priorities and for optimizing benefits for them and ensuring equitable a nd 

31 
 
sustainable development of the mining-affected areas. The Committee are, thus, of the 
view that their participation should not only be restricted to give suggestions through 
Gram Sabha consultations and that too during the Five -Year Perspective Planning  
process only, as submitted by the Ministry. The Committee, therefore, recommend that 
Gram Sabhas may be involved for engaging the affected communities in DMF decision-
making, and improving the scope and effectiveness of DMF investments by engaging 
local c ommunities/Gram Sabha members in DMF planning and monitoring. The 
Committee may be apprised of the action taken in this regard. 
Assessment by Third Party 
13. To ensure utmost accountability and effective operation of the DMFs, the 
Committee are of the view  that an independent social audit involving stakeholders, 
particularly from mining affected areas, is also extremely important to provide an 
opportunity to the ultimate users or beneficiaries to scrutinize development initiatives. 
The Committee are of the view that this will also ensure the involvement of Gram Sabhas 
in monitoring and reviewing works and schemes undertaken by DMF funds as the DMF 
rules and PMKKKY envisages. The audit can include review coverage of beneficiaries, 
timeliness of developmental schemes/works undertaken, work completion rates, and 
any such related issues. The Committee would like to be apprised about the action taken 
in this regard. 
Assessment studies regarding impact of projects under DMF/PMKKKY 
 
14. The Committee are of the view  that as huge amounts are spent on various 
projects funded by DMF for the welfare of mining affected areas and the people, thus it 
will be appropriate to suggest that impact assessment studies by third parties may be 
conducted to have objective view on the outcome and output of the amounts spent.  The 

32 
 
Committee are of the view that third party assessment by Civil Society, NGO, 
independent organizations, research bodies/Universities etc. may be conducted to 
assess the impact of these projects on improving th e quality of life of the mining 
affected persons. 
Demarcation of affected areas   
15. The Committee note that one of the Key features of the revised guidelines under 
DMF/PMKKKY is Clear demarcation of directly affected areas (up to 15 kms from the 
boundary of the mines) and indirectly affected areas (up to 25 kms from the boundary 
of the mines).  
16. During examination of the subject, it was brought to the notice of the Committee 
that some States found this restrictive which may make it difficult for them to utilize the 
funds effectively and were in favour of revising or to expand the demarcation.  However, 
as informed by the Ministry to the Committee , impact assessment is yet to be done to 
support such views. The Committee, therefore, suggest that in the first instance impact 
assessment should be undertaken to see what changes have been brought to the lives 
of the local people of those areas and also whether saturation point has been reached 
on various aspects like education, healthcare, rural livelihood, heritage, water sanitation 
and other infrastructure.  The Committee also recommend that a saturation assessment 
of the areas most affected by mining i.e. adjoining areas should be conducted to ensure 
that the basic developmental facilities have been provided  for before seeking revision 
of the demarcated areas. The Committee further suggest that 70% of the funds may be 
spent specifically in the radius of 15 kms. affected area and remaining 30% of funds on 
the other areas of the District. 
DMF information in public domain  
17. The Committee are of the view that DMF Trust is deemed to be a public authority, 

33 
 
open to the government as well as public scrutiny for the purposes of the Right to 
Information Act, 2005. Also the Trust is implementing many Central and State Schemes, 
thus, it should function with utmost transparency and accountability. The Committee 
are therefore of the view that disclosure of all DMF related information should be in 
public domain through a DMF website, to ensure public accountability and transparency 
of operations.  
Sustainability and Maintenance of Projects  
18. The Committee note that the sustainability of completed DMF projects represents 
a critical dimension of long -term development impact that extends beyond initial 
implementation. The s ubstantial completed projects faces various sustainability 
challenges spanning multiple dimensions including financial viability as it would incur 
recurrent costs for their operations and maintenance, clarity on post -completion 
ownership and management, du rability of infrastructure and adaptability to changing 
conditions etc. The Committee while acknowledging the creation of endowment fund 
for ensuring long term sustainable development of projects suggest that in the audit 
report of DMF a mention about the creation, operation and financial performance of 
endowment fund may be made.   
Accrual of funds and its utilization 
19. The data on the amount collected/ accrued since 2018-19 shows that in the years 
2018-19, 2020-21 & 2023-24, the amount collected and accrued in DMF stood at ₹8,095, 
9,258.71 and ₹13,459.41 crore and out of these amounts, allocations stood at ₹12,118, 
₹12,603.11 and ₹14,019 crore respectively.   It is not clear as to how amounts which were 
higher than the amounts accrued in the DMF fund, were allocated in the said years. The 
Committee, therefore, want the Ministry to clarify the same. Further, they also want the 
Ministry to furnish the cumulative data by incorporating the extra column, after col 2 of 

34 
 
the above table, for furnishing details on - “the amounts of u nspent balances brought 
forward form the previous years’’ to have a meaningful conclusions on the allocations 
and spending from the DMF fund. 
Utilization Index 
20. The Committee find that presently, there is no index of utilization of funds 
available on DMF website operated by Ministry of Mines. An index of utilization of funds 
from DMFs, t he Committee believe, will go a long way in infusing competitive spirit 
among the S tates and will also impart transparency to the functioning of DMF s. The 
index may also contain the ranking of the States on the extent of utilization of the funds 
from the DMF for the purposes for which the fund is meant for.   
Benchmarking and Performance Ranking 
21. With a view to infuse healthy competition among the DMFs to perform better, the 
Committee suggest the Ministry to devise ‘DMF District Ranking Index’ taking into 
consideration various parameters such as utilization of funds, number of  projects taken 
up and completed, timely execution of the projects, transparency, carryout impa ct 
assessment studies by third parties, etc.  Such an index should be prominently 
displayed in the national DMF portal managed by the Ministry of Mines and also the 
state portals of DMFs.  Further such an Index should be devised and made operational 
with in the timelines. 
Diversion of funds 
22. The Committee are concerned to note that there are many cases of   diversion 
of the funds of DMFs or purposes other than the stipulated ones, in many States as 
informed by the Ministry of Mines.  Such diversions, the Committee note, took place in 
the form of transfers to State treasury/consolidated fund of the State or State level funds 
(by whatever name called) or Chief Minister's Relief Fund or other funds or schemes. 

35 
 
The Committee believe that such transfers are violative of letter and spirit of the MMDR 
(Amendment) Act, 2015 which facilitated the setting up of DMF and defeat the purpose 
of the creation of the fund. The Committee while noting the orders dated 12.07.21 issued 
by Ministry of Mines  to prev ent such unau thorized transfer of funds from DMF for 
purposes other than the stipulated ones, strongly recommend that: 
(i)  structures/ systems may be created for regular monitoring of fund us age at 
state level. 
(ii)   diversions may be disincentivized by imposing penalties on DMFs 
(iii) they may be apprised of any diversion of funds even after issue of the afore 
mentioned orders by Ministry of Mines 
(iv) as suggested elsewhere in the report, auditors - statutory/C&AG, may be     
mandated to disclose such diversions in their audits  
(v)    amount of such diversions took place so far to the state treasuries (State wise) 
and/or to purposes other than the stipulated ones may be furnished to the 
Committee. 
Default in payment to DMF 
23. The Committee are of the view that to im part transparency and accountability 
in the operations of DMF, the annual reports of the DMF should invariably mention the 
compliance or otherwise, of the mine lease holders about the contributions made to 
DMF at stipulated rates. Rules may be formulated to ensure that Statutory auditors and 
also C&AG auditors be requested to comment on this aspect in their audits of DMFs. 
Audit of DMF by C&AG 
 
24. The Committee while appreciating the initiative of the Ministry to get the 
accounts of the DMFs audited by C&A G to impart transparency and accountability in 
the operations of DMF and to ensure that funds are utilized for the in tended purposes, 
note that C&AG has commenced the performance audit of DMFs in 12 out of 23 States 
where DMFs are in operation.   In this context, the Committee suggest and recommend 
that: 

36 
 
(i) the audit of C&AG may be commenced in the remaining 11 States also at the 
earliest, 
(ii) the audit may cover various aspects of the functioning of the DMFs such as 
their functioning as per the objectives, divers ion of the funds, if any, 
including the nature, extent and magnitude of such diversion, supervision 
and monitoring of DMFs, preparation and laying of Annual repor ts of DMFs 
on the table of the State legislature, etc.  
(iii)C&AGs audit is in addition to statutory audit conducted/being conducted by 
State Govts.  
 
Perspective plan for use of DMF funds 
 
25. The Committee note that the reply furnished by Ministry of Mines shows that in 
2022 itself they have issued an order for the preparation of a five-year Perspective Plan 
for implementation of works using DMF funds to ensure systemic development of the 
mining-affected area and people. The Committee note that the said directions were 
further incorporated in the revised PMKKKY guidelines 2024 under Section 5 - Five 
years perspective planning and yearly plan. The reply of Ministry of Mines, however, is 
silent on the status of compliance of these orders. In view of the afore mentioned, the 
Committee recommend that (i) Ministry of Mines may furnish the Committee the state  
wise compliance of the afore mentioned orders; and,  (ii) timelines may be prescribed 
for compliance of the orders w.r.t preparation of five -year perspective plan by DMFs . 
(iii) Social impact report may be submitted. 
Category wise projects/sectors to enhance ongoing schemes 
  
26. DMF/PMKKKY aims to create sustainable development in mining affected 
districts by channeling funds into critical sectors. According to the 2024 revised 
guidelines, at least 70% of DMF funds must be utilized in high -priority sectors.  The 
Committee appreciate that this represents an increase from the earlier requirement of 

37 
 
60%, demonstrating enhanced commitment to address immediate mining impacts. The 
high-priority sectors, where this 70% allocation must be directed include drinking water 
supply; environment preservation and pollution control measures; healthcare; 
education; welfare of women and children; welfare of aged and differently -abled 
persons; skill development and livelihood generation; sanitation; housing, agriculture 
and animal husbandry. The remaining 30% of funds can be allocated to other priority 
areas including physical infrastructure; irrigation; energy and watershed development 
and any other measures enhancing environmental quality in mining districts. The 
Committee feel that as these developmental and welfare projects will be complementing 
the existing ongoing schemes, the Ministry should ensure that the DMF/PMKKKY 
projects enhance/converge rather than duplicate ongoing government initiatives . The 
Committee also feel that if they are aligned well, a better impact on the ground can be 
seen, which can actually bring some change in the lives of the affected people.  
Gap in Implementation – need to address incomplete projects 
 
27. The Committee observe that there are many major projects under DMF/ PMKKKY 
which have not completed and display long gestation period in implementation of 
projects. Collectively, the DMFs have undertaken 3.69 lakh projects, out of which 2.08 
lakh have been completed which is around 56% completion.  The Committee feel 
concerned that the absolute number of incomplete projects is substantial which 
indicates a considerable backlog in the DMF implementation and raises questions about 
the appropriateness of project selection. The Committee suggest that immediate steps 
be taken to identify the bottlenecks, with adequate moni toring and follow -up 
mechanisms to address the implementation gap. 
NEW DELHI;  ANURAG SINGH THAKUR 
01_April, 2025 Chairperson, 
 11   Chaitra, 1947 (Saka) 
 
Standing Committee on Coal, 
Mines and Steel 

38 
 
Annexure I 
Priority to Aspirational districts  
S.No State District Collection in 
Cr 
Amount 
Allocated in 
Cr. 
Amount 
Spent in Cr. 
Projects 
Sanctione
d 
Projects 
Complete
d 
1 Andhra Pradesh Alluri Sitharama Raju 1.23 0.00 0.00 0 0 
2 Andhra Pradesh Parvathipuram Manyam 1.72 1.06 0.00 8 1 
3 Andhra Pradesh YSR District, Kadapa 432.00 450.69 191.71 6180 2165 
   434.95 451.75 191.71 6188 2166 
4 Arunachal Pradesh Namsai No DMF     
5 Assam Goalpara 1.07 0.96  5 0 
6 Assam Barpeta 0.48 2.10 2.08 10 10 
7 Assam Hailakandi 0.96 0.98 0.79 10 8 
8 Assam Baksa 0.71 3.37 1.64 34 2 
9 Assam Darrang 0.10 0.10 0.10 19 19 
10 Assam Udalguri 0.68     
11 Assam Dhubri 2.85 1.39 1.39 8 8 
   6.86 8.90 6.01 86 47 
12 Bihar Sitamarhi 0.29 0.02 0.02 1 1 
13 Bihar Araria 0.26 0.04 0.04 3 3 
14 Bihar Purnea 0.17 0.03 0.03 1 1 
15 Bihar Katihar 0.29 0.22 0.20 2 2 
16 Bihar Muzaffarpur 0.44 0.08 0.08 1 1 
17 Bihar Begusaria 0.19 0.04 0.04 2 2 
18 Bihar Khagaria 0.21 0.02 0.02 1 1 
19 Bihar Banka 7.85 10.10 1.98 12 4 
20 Bihar Sheikhpura 7.54 0.39 0.00 6 0 
21 Bihar Aurangabad 22.08 19.23 9.07 49 0 
22 Bihar Gaya 14.73 4.25 3.96 5 4 
23 Bihar Nawada 7.79 6.40 4.97 33 17 
24 Bihar Jamui 3.88 0.04 0.04 2 2 
   65.72 40.86 20.45 118 38 
25 Chhattisgarh Korba 4908.36 2956.78 2151.76 9988 6871 
26 Chhattisgarh Rajnandgaon 55.73 206.23 154.28 2042 1598 
27 Chhattisgarh Mahasamund 12.50 141.64 103.51 1305 1178 
28 Chhattisgarh Kanker 466.55 555.98 415.09 4183 2986 
29 Chhattisgarh Narayanpur 71.69 335.72 245.07 2152 1103 
30 Chhattisgarh Dantewada 4699.29 2315.61 1324.63 10990 6338 
31 Chhattisgarh Bijapur 0.63 845.35 643.00 4078 2239 
32 Chhattisgarh Bastar 23.48 1069.99 692.63 8070 4569 
33 Chhattisgarh Kondagaon 1.93 286.58 195.45 787 383 
34 Chhattisgarh Sukma 0.66 483.84 374.78 1415 1069 
   10240.82 9197.71 6300.20 45010 28334 
35 Gujarat Dahod 3.77 11.07 2.20 237 110 
36 Gujarat Narmada 3.48 5.42 2.56 162 42 
   7.25 16.50 4.76 399 152 
37 Haryana Mewat 0 0 0 0 0 

39 
 
38 Himachal Pradesh Chamba 13.73 0.21 0.13 5 4 
39 Jammu & Kashmir Kupwara 0.93 0.38 0.30 5 3 
40 Jammu & Kashmir Baramulla 3.30 0.31 0.31 4 4 
   4.23 0.69 0.61 9.00 7.00 
41 Jharkhand Garhwa 5.45 1.70 1.46 14 13 
42 Jharkhand Chatra 1443.56 876.68 425.37 1319 429 
43 Jharkhand Giridih 48.61 33.23 16.75 239 134 
44 Jharkhand Godda 618.38 635.21 348.43 2624 1556 
45 Jharkhand Sahebganj 208.45 158.47 54.14 955 208 
46 Jharkhand Pakur 456.98 396.42 23.37 1896 36 
47 Jharkhand Bokaro 1089.00 916.47 798.94 812 483 
48 Jharkhand Lohardaga 47.75 34.02 24.81 389 296 
49 Jharkhand PurbiSinghbhum(Jamsh
edpur) 
119.22 112.10 84.41 459 258 
50 Jharkhand Palamu 140.95 120.66 79.11 446 327 
51 Jharkhand Latehar 391.65 301.36 92.95 1251 780 
52 Jharkhand Hazaribagh 838.42 835.01 540.97 897 143 
53 Jharkhand Ramgarh 1317.36 1173.95 957.71 1439 853 
54 Jharkhand Dumka 48.42 40.62 21.29 83 26 
55 Jharkhand Ranchi 183.42 125.63 96.70 582 423 
56 Jharkhand Khunti 17.73 16.43 8.65 43 23 
57 Jharkhand Gumla 82.94 112.27 84.93 619 386 
58 Jharkhand Simdega 10.00 5.46 4.68 878 878 
59 Jharkhand PashchimiSinghbhum 
(Chaibasa) 
3200.37 1612.37 1367.70 2348 2107 
   10268.64 7508.07 5032.36 17293 9359 
60 Karnataka Raichur 82.56 54.17 36.78 199 81 
61 Karnataka Yadgir 4.06 0.50 0.41 12 11 
   86.62 54.67 37.19 211 92 
62 Kerala Wayanad 0.70 - - - - 
63 Madhya Pradesh Chhatarpur 49.72 46.41 36.03 17 4 
64 Madhya Pradesh Damoh 85.32 92.76 91.55 579 541 
65 Madhya Pradesh Barwani 1.88 15.08 10.84 10 0 
66 Madhya Pradesh Rajgarh 2.95 0.50 0.2 1 0 
67 Madhya Pradesh Vidisha 3.67 1.83 1.6593 12 8 
68 Madhya Pradesh Guna 2.62 3.68 1.58 28 8 
69 Madhya Pradesh Singrauli 5098.93 1301.02 1058.5 1283 868 
70 Madhya Pradesh Khandwa 3.95 0.00 0 0 0 
   5249.03 1461.29 1200.36 1930 1429 
71 Maharashtra Nandurbar 11.13 0.66 0.66 28 28 
72 Maharashtra Washim 16.46 6.55 6.55 30  
73 Maharashtra Gadchiroli 427.56 81.81 20.81 553 50 
74 Maharashtra Osmanabad 21.34 20.06 9.29 276 184 
   476.49 109.08 37.31 887 262 
75 Manipur Chandel No DMF     
76 Meghalaya Ri-Bhoi 0.89 0 0.00 0 0 

40 
 
77 Mizoram Mamit No DMF     
78 Nagaland Kiphire No DMF     
79 Odisha Dhenkanal 99.75 65.30 65.30 824 602 
80 Odisha Gajapati 2.12 1.28 1.01 44 36 
81 Odisha Kandhamal 1.11 0.18 0.18 3 3 
82 Odisha Bolangir 4.92 0.96 0.92 52 48 
83 Odisha Kalahandi 113.49 90.07 56.77 699 522 
84 Odisha Rayagada 343.05 271.05 181.71 1427 708 
85 Odisha Koraput 536.76 423.90 302.58 3159 2328 
86 Odisha Malkangiri 7.12 0.54 0.25 9 7 
87 Odisha Nawarangpur 3.37 1.35 1.35 11 11 
88 Odisha Nuapada 2.36 1.31 1.31 28 23 
   1114.05 855.94 611.39 6256 4288 
89 Punjab Moga 6.34 0.15 0.15   
90 Punjab Ferozepur 7.37 1.32 1.32   
   13.70 1.48 1.48 0.00 0.00 
91 Rajasthan Dholpur 17.05 12.53 11.28 12 4 
92 Rajasthan Karauli 18.06 14.45 13.22 4 2 
93 Rajasthan Jaisalmer 95.31 107.77 13.28 364 60 
94 Rajasthan Sirohi 283.57 395.18 183.49 298 59 
95 Rajasthan Baran 6.16 1.53 1.39 49 47 
   420.15 531.46 222.67 727 172 
96 Sikkim Soreng No DMF     
97 Tamil Nadu Virudhunagar 40.81 29.19 19.68 130 87 
98 Tamil Nadu Ramanathapuram 3.76 0.99 0.86 53 52 
   44.57 30.19 20.54 183 139 
99 Telangana Kumrambheem Asifabad 228.83 263.28 166.78 4868 2599 
100 Telangana Jayashankar 
Bhoopalapally 
280.87 472.98 293.95 1157 361 
101 Telangana Bhadradri-Kothagudem 759.10 918.60 579.62 4683 2448 
   1268.80 1654.86 1040.36 10708 5408 
102 Tripura Dhalai No DMF     
103 Uttar Pradesh Chitrakoot 22.41 5.71 3.97 12  
104 Uttar Pradesh Fatehpur 12.43 6.24 5.35 22 8 
105 Uttar Pradesh Bahraich 2.71 1.10 0.92 2  
106 Uttar Pradesh Shrawasti 0.97 0.70 0.70 9 7 
107 Uttar Pradesh Balrampur 0.99 0.63 0.63 3 1 
108 Uttar Pradesh Siddharthnagar 3.49 1.40 1.40 7  
109 Uttar Pradesh Chandauli 2.52 1.01 1.01 3 2 
110 Uttar Pradesh Sonbhadra 1239.06 820.27 603.04 6293 5896 
   1284.58 837.06 617.02 6351 5914 
111 Uttarakhand Udham Singh Nagar 37.74 33.20 9.18 54 18 
112 Uttarakhand Haridwar 19.48 2.57 2.57 4 4 
   57.22 35.77 11.75 58 22 
TOTAL 31058.31 22796.49 15356.28 96419 57833 

41 
 
Annexure II 
Aspirational Districts (106 of 112 Aspirational Districts are also DMF Districts) 
 
S.No. State District 
Collection in 
Cr 
Amount Allocated 
in Cr. 
Amount Spent in 
Cr. 
Projects 
Sanctioned 
Projects 
Completed 
1 Andhra Pradesh Alluri Sitharama Raju 1.23 0.00 0.00 0 0 
2 Andhra Pradesh Parvathipuram Manyam 1.72 1.06 0.00 8 1 
3 Andhra Pradesh YSR District, Kadapa 432.00 450.69 191.71 6180 2165 
4 
Arunachal 
Pradesh 
Namsai No DMF 
5 Assam Goalpara 1.07 0.96   5 0 
6 Assam Barpeta 0.48 2.10 2.08 10 10 
7 Assam Hailakandi 0.96 0.98 0.79 10 8 
8 Assam Baksa 0.71 3.37 1.64 34 2 
9 Assam Darrang 0.10 0.10 0.10 19 19 
10 Assam Udalguri 0.68         
11 Assam Dhubri 2.85 1.39 1.39 8 8 
12 Bihar Sitamarhi 0.29 0.02 0.02 1 1 
13 Bihar Araria  0.26 0.04 0.04 3 3 
14 Bihar Purnea 0.17 0.03 0.03 1 1 
15 Bihar Katihar 0.29 0.22 0.20 2 2 
16 Bihar Muzaffarpur 0.44 0.08 0.08 1 1 
17 Bihar Begusaria 0.19 0.04 0.04 2 2 
18 Bihar Khagaria 0.21 0.02 0.02 1 1 
19 Bihar Banka 7.85 10.10 1.98 12 4 
20 Bihar Sheikhpura 7.54 0.39 0.00 6 0 
21 Bihar Aurangabad 22.08 19.23 9.07 49 0 
22 Bihar Gaya 14.73 4.25 3.96 5 4 
23 Bihar Nawada 7.79 6.40 4.97 33 17 
24 Bihar Jamui 3.88 0.04 0.04 2 2 
25 Chhattisgarh Korba 4908.36 2956.78 2151.76 9988 6871 
26 Chhattisgarh Rajnandgaon 55.73 206.23 154.28 2042 1598 
27 Chhattisgarh Mahasamund 12.50 141.64 103.51 1305 1178 
28 Chhattisgarh Kanker 466.55 555.98 415.09 4183 2986 
29 Chhattisgarh Narayanpur 71.69 335.72 245.07 2152 1103 
30 Chhattisgarh Dantewada 4699.29 2315.61 1324.63 10990 6338 
31 Chhattisgarh Bijapur 0.63 845.35 643.00 4078 2239 
32 Chhattisgarh Bastar 23.48 1069.99 692.63 8070 4569 
33 Chhattisgarh Kondagaon 1.93 286.58 195.45 787 383 

42 
 
34 Chhattisgarh Sukma 0.66 483.84 374.78 1415 1069 
35 Gujarat Dahod 3.77 11.07 2.20 237 110 
36 Gujarat Narmada 3.48 5.42 2.56 162 42 
37 Haryana Mewat 0 0 0 0 0 
38 
Himachal 
Pradesh 
Chamba 
13.73 
0.21 0.13 
5 
4 
39 
Jammu & 
Kashmir 
Kupwara  0.93 0.38 0.30 5 3 
40 
Jammu & 
Kashmir 
Baramulla  3.30 0.31 0.31 4 4 
41 Jharkhand Garhwa 5.45 1.70 1.46 14 13 
42 Jharkhand Chatra 1443.56 876.68 425.37 1319 429 
43 Jharkhand Giridih 48.61 33.23 16.75 239 134 
44 Jharkhand Godda 618.38 635.21 348.43 2624 1556 
45 Jharkhand Sahebganj 208.45 158.47 54.14 955 208 
46 Jharkhand Pakur 456.98 396.42 23.37 1896 36 
47 Jharkhand Bokaro 1089.00 916.47 798.94 812 483 
48 Jharkhand Lohardaga 47.75 34.02 24.81 389 296 
49 Jharkhand PurbiSinghbhum(Jamshedpur) 119.22 112.10 84.41 459 258 
50 Jharkhand Palamu 140.95 120.66 79.11 446 327 
51 Jharkhand Latehar 391.65 301.36 92.95 1251 780 
52 Jharkhand Hazaribagh 838.42 835.01 540.97 897 143 
53 Jharkhand Ramgarh 1317.36 1173.95 957.71 1439 853 
54 Jharkhand Dumka 48.42 40.62 21.29 83 26 
55 Jharkhand Ranchi 183.42 125.63 96.70 582 423 
56 Jharkhand Khunti 17.73 16.43 8.65 43 23 
57 Jharkhand Gumla 82.94 112.27 84.93 619 386 
58 Jharkhand Simdega 10.00 5.46 4.68 878 878 
59 
Jharkhand PashchimiSinghbhum 
(Chaibasa) 
3200.37 1612.37 1367.70 2348 2107 
60 Karnataka Raichur 82.56 54.17 36.78 199 81 
61 Karnataka Yadgir 4.06 0.50 0.41 12 11 
62 Kerala Wayanad 0.70 - - - - 
63 Madhya Pradesh Chhatarpur 49.72 46.41 36.03 17 4 
64 Madhya Pradesh Damoh 85.32 92.76 91.55 579 541 
65 Madhya Pradesh Barwani 1.88 15.08 10.84 10 0 
66 Madhya Pradesh Rajgarh 2.95 0.50 0.2 1 0 
67 Madhya Pradesh Vidisha 3.67 1.83 1.6593 12 8 
68 Madhya Pradesh Guna 2.62 3.68 1.58 28 8 
69 Madhya Pradesh Singrauli 5098.93 1301.02 1058.5 1283 868 

43 
 
70 Madhya Pradesh Khandwa 3.95 0.00 0 0 0 
71 Maharashtra Nandurbar 11.13 0.66 0.66 28 28 
72 Maharashtra Washim 16.46 6.55 6.55 30   
73 Maharashtra Gadchiroli 427.56 81.81 20.81 553 50 
74 Maharashtra Osmanabad 21.34 20.06 9.29 276 184 
75 Manipur Chandel No DMF 
76 Meghalaya Ri-Bhoi 0.89 0 0.00 0 0 
77 Mizoram Mamit No DMF 
78 Nagaland Kiphire No DMF 
79 Odisha Dhenkanal 99.75 65.30 65.30 824 602 
80 Odisha Gajapati 2.12 1.28 1.01 44 36 
81 Odisha Kandhamal 1.11 0.18 0.18 3 3 
82 Odisha Bolangir 4.92 0.96 0.92 52 48 
83 Odisha Kalahandi 113.49 90.07 56.77 699 522 
84 Odisha Rayagada 343.05 271.05 181.71 1427 708 
85 Odisha Koraput 536.76 423.90 302.58 3159 2328 
86 Odisha Malkangiri 7.12 0.54 0.25 9 7 
87 Odisha Nawarangpur 3.37 1.35 1.35 11 11 
88 Odisha Nuapada 2.36 1.31 1.31 28 23 
89 Punjab Moga 6.34 0.15 0.15 0 0 
90 Punjab Ferozepur 7.37 1.32 1.32 0 0 
91 Rajasthan Dholpur 17.05 12.53 11.28 12 4 
92 Rajasthan Karauli 18.06 14.45 13.22 4 2 
93 Rajasthan Jaisalmer 95.31 107.77 13.28 364 60 
94 Rajasthan Sirohi 283.57 395.18 183.49 298 59 
95 Rajasthan Baran 6.16 1.53 1.39 49 47 
96 Sikkim Soreng No DMF 
97 Tamil Nadu Virudhunagar 40.81 29.19 19.68 130 87 
98 Tamil Nadu Ramanathapuram 3.76 0.99 0.86 53 52 
99 Telangana Kumrambheem Asifabad 228.83 263.28 166.78 4868 2599 
100 Telangana Jayashankar Bhoopalapally 280.87 472.98 293.95 1157 361 
101 Telangana Bhadradri-Kothagudem 759.10 918.60 579.62 4683 2448 
102 Tripura Dhalai No DMF 
103 Uttar Pradesh Chitrakoot 22.41 5.71 3.97 12   
104 Uttar Pradesh Fatehpur 12.43 6.24 5.35 22 8 
105 Uttar Pradesh Bahraich 2.71 1.10 0.92 2   
106 Uttar Pradesh Shrawasti 0.97 0.70 0.70 9 7 
107 Uttar Pradesh Balrampur 0.99 0.63 0.63 3 1 
108 Uttar Pradesh Siddharthnagar 3.49 1.40 1.40 7   

44 
 
109 Uttar Pradesh Chandauli 2.52 1.01 1.01 3 2 
110 Uttar Pradesh Sonbhadra 1239.06 820.27 603.04 6293 5896 
111 Uttarakhand Udham Singh Nagar 37.74 33.20 9.18 54 18 
112 Uttarakhand Haridwar 19.48 2.57 2.57 4 4 
TOTAL 31058.31 22796.49 15356.28 96419 57833 
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
  

45 
 
Annexure III 
Pradhan Mantri Khanij Kshetra Kalyan Yojana (PMKKKY) 
S. No. State Notifications 
1 Andhra Pradesh Andhra Pradesh State DMF Rules 2016  
2 Assam Assam State DMF Rules 2016 
3 Bihar Bihar DMF Rules 2018 
4 Chhattisgarh Chhattisgarh DMF Rules 2015  
5 Goa Goa DMF Rules 2016 & Goa DMF Rules 2025 
6 Gujarat Gujarat DMF Rules 2016 & Gujarat DMF Rules 2024 
7 Haryana Haryana DMF Rules, 2017  
8 Himachal Prade
sh 
Himachal Pradesh District Mineral Foundation Trust 
Rules  
2016 
9 Jharkhand Jharkhand DMF Rules 2016 & Jharkhand DMF Rules 
2024 
10 Karnataka Karnataka DMF Rules, 2016  
11 Kerala Kerala DMF Rules 2018 
12 Maharashtra Maharashtra DMFT Rules 2016 & Maharashtra DMFT 
Rules  
2024 
13 Madhya Prades
h 
Madhya Pradesh DMF Rules 2016 
14 Meghalaya Meghalaya DMF Rules 2017 
15 Odisha Odisha DMF Rules 2015 
16 Punjab Punjab DMF Rules 2018 
17 Rajasthan Rajasthan DMF Trust Rules 2016 
18 Tamil Nadu Tamil Nadu District Mineral Foundation Rules 2017 
19 Telangana Telangana DMF Rules 2015 
20 Uttar Pradesh Uttar Pradesh D istrict Mineral Foundation Trust Rules 
2017 
21 Uttarakhand Uttarakhand DMF Rules, 2017  
22 West Bengal West Bengal DMF Rules 2016 
23 Jammu & 
Kashmir  
J&K DMF Rules 2017  

46 
 
ANNEXURE IV 
 
DRAFT 
DISTRICT MINERAL FOUNDATION TRUST DEED 
 
THIS DEED OF TRUST EXE CUTED AT ------------ONTHIS THE ------DAY OF  
_____________IN THE YEAR TWO THOUSAND FIFTEEN. 
 
BY 
 
THE STATE GOVERNMENT OF -------------, represented by the______  Secretary, 
Department of Mines, Government of______ having its Headquarter at  
_____________, herein after called “the SETTLOR”, OF THE ONE PART. 
 
IN FAVOUR O F 
 
The following TRUSTEES o f the OTHER PART which expression shall, unless  
repugnant to or inconsistent with the context, mean and include the successors  
occupying the posts by designation: 
 
Sl. No. Name Designation in the Governing 
Council 
 
To be decided by the State Government 
 
WHEREAS Section 9B of the Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation)  
Act, 1957 provides for establishment of a District Mineral Foundation Trust by the  
State Gove rnment, a non -profit body, with an objective to work for the interest and  
benefit of persons, and areas affected by mining related operations in such manner  
as may be prescribed by the State Government, and 
 
WHEREAS the SETTLOR for this purpose has decided  to set up a trust as an entity  
under the State Government for “no profit” and for playing an important role for  
common good of the community and for using the fund of the trust for the interest  
and benefit of persons, and areas affected by mining related operations in such  
manner as may be prescribed by the State Government, and WHEREAS the  
SETTLOR being desirous of establishing the District Mineral Foundation Trust has  
placed under the control of the TRUSTEES a sum of Rs.1,000/ -(Rupees one  
thousand only), which sum is hereinafter referred to as the “INITIAL SETTLEMENT”. 
 
NOW THIS DEED OF TRUST WITNESSETH AS FOLLOWS: 
 
1. INTERPRETATION & DEFINITIONS; 
 
(1) IN THIS DEED OF TRUST wherever the context permits, the following  
word shall have the meaning mentioned herein: 
 
(i) 'Act' means the Mines and Minerals (Development & Regulation) Act, 1957 

47 
 
(ii) “Auditors” the Auditor/Chartered Accountant appointed by  
the Trustees, and include the Accountant General of the  
State or other Auditors nominated by the Settlor. 
(iii) “Beneficiaries” mean the persons and areas affected by mining  
related operations undertaken in the area. 
(iv) “Contribution” means the contribution to be collected from the  
holders of: 
(a) mining lease or a prospecting licence -cum-mining lease  
under the provisions of sub -section (5) of section 9B of the  
Act; 
(b) mining lease under the provisions of sub -section (6) of  
section 9B of the Act; and 
 
(c) minor mineral concession under the provisions of section  
15A of the Act  
in the District as may be prescribed by the Central G overnment or  State 
Government, as the case may be; 
 
(v)  “Contribution Fund” means the Contribution Fund to be collected  
from the holders of 
 
(a) mining lease or a prospecting licence -cum-mining lease under  
the provisions of sub-section (5) of section 9B of the Act; 
(b) mining lease under the provisions of sub -section (6) of section  
9B of the Act; and 
(c) minor mineral concession under the provisions of section 15A  
of the Act 
in the District as may be prescribed by the Central Government or  
State Government, as the case may be; 
 
(vi) ‘District Magistrate’ means the Head of the Revenue Administration  
at the District level whether designated as Deputy Commissioner or  
Collector. 
(vii) 'District Panchayat' means and includes District Council or any  
other authority entrusted with the simila r functions in the areas under  
the Schedule-V and Schedule-VI of the Constitution of India. 
(viii) “Governing Council “means all the trustees of the District  
Mineral Foundation Trust. 
(ix) “The Trust” means the (name of the District) District Mineral  
Foundation Trust created by the SETTLOR. 
(x) “Year” means a financial year beginning April1 and ending March  
31 of the following year or part period there of ending on March 31. 
(2)  Words in the singular shall include words in the plural and words in the plural shall include 
the singular. 
(3) Words importing the masculine gender shall include female and  
neutral gender. 
(4) The headings and sub -headings to this Deed are inserted only for  
reference to the provisions here of and shall not affect the  
construction of such provisions. 

48 
 
 
2.  NAME OF THE TRUST: The Trust shall be known as the (name of the  District) District Mineral 
Foundation Trust, and it's office would be located in  
the office of the District Panchayat of the District. 
 
3.  OBJECTS OF THE TRUST:  The object of the Dis trict Mineral Foundation  
Trust shall be to work for the interest and benefit of persons, and areas  
affected by mining related operations in the District in such manner as may  
be prescribed by the State Government. 
 
4. APPOINTMENT AND DECLARATION: 
 (1) The SETTLOR hereby appoints the TRUSTEES as the trustees of  
The Trust which is hereby created and the TRUSTEES accept such  
appointment on the terms and conditions mentioned herein. 
 
(2) The TRUSTEES hereby appointed by official designation shall  
continue as TR USTEES during the period they are holding the post  
and the designation and would be deemed to have ceased to be the  
TRUSTEES once they cease to hold the office by virtue of which they  
were so appointed and their successors in office shall be deemed to  
have been appointed as TRUSTEES in their place with effect from the  
date of their acquiring such official designation. 
 
(3) The term of appointment for the nominated trustees shall be for  
three years with effect from the date of their appointment as  
TRUSTEES a nd the nominating authority may thereafter renew their  
appointment for another term or may nominate other persons in their  
place. 
 
Provided that the term of such nominated trustees shall in no case  
exceed three terms of three years each. 
 
(4) The SETTLOR m ay at any time increase the number of Trustees in  
any of the categories and for such term as might be deemed fit by the  
SETTLOR. 
 
(5) The SETTLOR may at any time remove any of the trustees and may  
appoint any other person as the TRUSTEE at its sole discret ion. The  
trustee so removed by the SETTLOR, shall cease to be a TRUSTEE  
with effect from the date of such removal. 
 
(6) The TRUSTEES shall stand possessed of the Trust Fund upon  
which and subject to the powers and provisions herein declared and  
contained c oncerning the same and the TRUSTEES shall have the  
power at any time or times during the Trust Period to accept any  
Property from any person or persons by the provisions of any other  
trust or otherwise to the intent that the same shall be held by or on  
behalf of the TRUSTEES as an accretion to the Trust Fund. 
 

49 
 
 
5. MANAGEMENT OF THE TRUST : The Management of the Trust shall  
vest in a Governing Council, which shall consist of all the members of the  
Trust. However, the day to day management of the Trust shall b e 
managed by a Managing Committee, as defined in paragraph 9 below.  
The SETTLOR may however decide to alter the composition of the  
Managing Committee at any time. The powers and functions of the  
Governing Council and of the Managing Committee shall be as c ontained 
herein. 
6. DECISIONS OF THE TRUSTEES: 
 
(1) All decisions by the TRUSTEES shall be taken in the meeting of the  
Governing Council and every meeting of the Governing Council shall be  
deemed to be a meeting of the TRUST. 
 
(2) All decisions of the Gove rning Council shall be taken by the majority  
of the members present and voting. In case of tie the Chairman of the  
meeting shall have a casting vote. 
 
(3) Unless agreed to by the SETTLOR the TRUSTEES shall not amend  
any part of this TRUST DEED. 
(4) TRUSTEE S, Governing Council and the Managing Committee shall  
act in accordance with the directions, guidelines etc. issued by the  
SETTLOR from time to time.  
 
7. POWERS & FUNCTIONS OF THE GOVERNING COUNCIL : The  
Governing Council, consisting of all the TRUSTEES sha ll be responsible  
for,— 
(1) Laying down the broad policy framework for the functioning of Trust  
and review its working from time to time. 
 
(2) Drawing up and approving of Annual Action Plan and the Annual  
Budget for Trust. The Annual Action plan must be pr epared and  
approved by the Governing Council at least one month before  
commencement of the year. The Annual Action Plan shall contain the  
list of schemes and projects with the tentative provisions thereof. 
Provided that if for any reason whatsoever, the Go verning Council  
does not prepare and accord approval to the Annual Plan and the  
Budget within the specified time, the Chairman shall have Annual  
Action Plan and the Budget of the Trust prepared to approve the same.  The Budget so 
prepared shall be deemed to  have been duly prepared  and approved by the Governing 
Council. 
 
Provided also that while preparing the annual plan for the next financial  
year, the sum total of the past commitment and liabilities spilling over  
shall be assessed. To maintain financial dis cipline and timely  
completion of project, the sum total of the past liabilities and  
commitments and the new schemes being proposed should not in any  case exceed three 
times the expected inflows for the next financial year. 

50 
 
 
(3) Approving such other expendi ture, in furtherance of the  
objects of the Trust from the available Trust Fund in such manner as  
may be prescribed by the SETTLOR. 
(4) Approving the recommendations of the Managing Committee; 
(5) Approving the annual reports and audited accounts of the Tru st 
within 60 days of the close of the previous year; 
 
8. MEETINGS OF THE GOVERNING COUNCIL: 
(1) The Governing Council shall meet as often as necessary but at least  
once every quarter. 
(2) The Meeting of Governing Council shall be convened as desired by the  
Chairman. 
 
(3) The Quorum for such meeting shall be one third of the total  
membership. 
 
9.  MANAGING COMMITTEE: 
1. The affairs of the Trust shall be managed by a Managing Committee,  
which shall consist of – 
 
To be decided by the State Government 
 
10. MEETINGS OF MANAGING COMMITTEE: The Meeting of the Managing Committee shall 
be held at least six times in a financial year  
and it shall be convened as decided by the Chairman of the Managing  
Committee. 
 
11. POWERS AND FUNCTIONS OF THE MANAGING COMMITTEE:  The Managing Committee 
shall 
 
(1) Exercise due diligence in carrying out its duties for protecting the  
interests of the Trust. 
(2) Ensure timely collection of Contribution Fund from the concerned  
Mining Lease Holders in accordance with the provisions of the  
Act. 
(3) Prepare the Master Plan / Vision Document for the activities of the  
Trust. 
(4) Assist in the preparation of the Annual Plan and the Annual  
Budget of the Trust alongwith the proposed Schemes and  
Projects. 
(5) Supervise and ensure the execution of the Annual Plan and the  
approved Schemes and Projects. 
(6) Accord sanction to the projects, release and disburse the Trust  
Fund for the purpose. 
(7) Operate the TRUST FUND and to invest the same in a diligent  
manner and to open Bank Accounts in the Name of the  Trust and  
operate such accounts and investments. 
(8) Monitor the progress of the utilization of Trust funds. 

51 
 
(9) Place the audited accounts alongwith an Annual Report before the  
Governing Council for its approval within 60 days of close of  
financial year. 
(10) Do all other things which are necessary for smooth functioning  
and management of the Trust. 
(11) Lay down and /or approve rules and procedures for the functioning of  
the Trust. 
12. TRUST FUND: The Trust Fund of the District Mineral Foundation Trust  
would include the following:- 
(1) The Initial Settlement made by the SETTLOR, 
(2) Any grant, contribution or other monies received from the SETTLOR or  
from any other Agency, Institution or Person, 
(3) The Contribution Fund to be collected from the holders of 
 
(a) mining lease or a prospecting licence -cum-mining lease under the  
provisions of sub-section (5) of section 9B of the Act; 
 
(b) mining lease under the provisions of sub -section (6) of section 9B of  
the Act; and 
 
(c) minor mineral concession under the p rovisions of section 15A of the  
Act in the District as may be prescribed by the Central Government or State  
Government, as the case may be, 
 
(4) Investments and other deposits and the interest accrued thereon and any  
other income derived therefrom, 
 
(5) al l other Properties of the Trust and the Income derived therefrom or  
appreciation thereof.  
 
13. OPERATION OF THE TRUST FUND:  The Trust Fund shall be kept in  
one or more scheduled commercial Nationalized Banks only in the name of  
the Trust and all accounts shall be operated under the joint signatures of the  
Member-Secretary and another member of the Managing Committee to be  
authorized by the Managing Committee. The Trust shall maintain the books of  
accounts of this Fund. 
 
14. EXPENDITURE FROM OF THE TRUST FU ND: The Funds available  
with the Trust shall be used for:- 
(1) the overall development of the area affected by mining related `operations  
in the District in accordance with the Annual Action Plan prepared by the  
trustees of the Foundation for the purpose; 
(2) Creation of local infrastructure for socio-economic purposes; 
(3)Providing, maintaining or upgrading of community assets and services for  
local population in the area affected by mining related operations; 
(4) Organising or conducting training programm es for skill development and  
capacity building for creating employment and self-employment capabilities. 
Provided that a sum not exceeding 6% of the total funds received by the  
Trust in the year may be spent by the Trust for meeting its administrative or  
establishment expenses. 

52 
 
Provided further that the trust fund or any part thereof shall not be used for  
advancement of any loan or grants in cash to any of the beneficiaries. 
15. CHARGING OF EXPENSE S: The TRUSTEES shall be entitled to  
charge the Trust Fund with the following expenses: 
(1). all expenses properly incurred in the operation or execution of the  
Trust and for the realisation, preservation or benefit of the investments  
and assets comprising the Trust Fund and for the protection of the  
interests of the Trust; 
(2). all expenses(including expenses incidental to execution and/or  
registration of any agreement or other deeds) incurred by the  
TRUSTEES for obtaining the Contributions and or any other  
resources; which may accrue. 
(3). all expenses in connecti on with any legal proceedings by or against  
the Trustor concerning the affairs of the Trust including professional  
fees and costs of any legal adviser;  
(4). all legal and statutory expenses incurred in the operation or execution  
of the Trust including all  levies, duties and other charges paid/ payable  
in connection with the affairs of the Trust ;and 
(5). all expenses in connection with the holding of its meetings, and  
other proceedings. 
16. ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT: 
(1) (i)The Managing Committee shall maintain a nd /or cause to  
be maintained proper books of accounts, documents and records  
with respect to the Trust Fund to give a true and fair picture of the  
affairs of the Trust. 
 
(ii)The accounts of the Trust shall be audited at least on completion  
of year by a qualified auditor. 
 
(iii)The auditors of the Trust shall be appointed by the TRUSTEES  
from the List of approved auditors notified by the Accountant General of the State in the 
meeting of the Governing Council, on  such terms and conditions as decided by the 
Trustees. 
 
(iv)The auditors may be removed and replaced by the TRUSTEES. 
 
(2) Notwithstanding the provisions of clause (1) above, the Settlor may  
appoint an auditor or auditors or may request the A.G. for audit of a  
particular year or period on such terms as the Settlor may so decide. 
 
(3) The Trust shall forward the approved Budget and Annual Plan  
alongwith Schemes and Projects for the next financial year, to the  
District Panchayat, District Administration and the State Government  
for publication on their respective websites. 
 
(4) The Trust shall prepare a quarterly progress report in physical and  
financial terms in respect of the approved Schemes and Projects  
within 45 days of the close of the quarter and forward it to the District  
Panchayat and District Ad ministration, immediately thereafter for  
publication on their respective websites. 

53 
 
 
(5) The Trust shall forward the approved Annual report and the approved  
Audit Report immediately after their approval by the Governing  
Council within 60 days of close of Fi nancial Year to the District  
Panchayat, District Administration, and to the State Government along  
with Audit Report for publication on their respective websites. 
 
17. ADMINISTRATIVE ARRANGEMENTS 
(1)The State Governments shall provide services of the perso nnel 
under their control including employees working in the District  
Panchayat for management of the Trust and for execution of the  
Annual Plan as may be required for the purpose. 
(2)The Trust may request the SETTLOR/State Government to provide  
required nu mber of core personnel from its departments or from regular  
employees of the Zila Parishad or such other cadre, for providing  
administrative and technical assistance to the Trust. Services of such  
personnel shall continue to remain in their own respective cadres. The  
Trust may bear expenditure upto 3% of its accrued funds for this  
purpose. {This 3% would be within 6% given at para 14(4)} 
(3) The Trust may also ask services providers to provide such  
services as may be needed for smooth functioning of the Tru st and  
may provide for incurring contingent expenditure for its functioning. 
 
18. LIABILITY OF TRUSTEES : 
 
(1) The TRUSTEES shall not be liable on account of anything done in  
good faith, bonafide with due diligence. The TRUSTEES shall al so not be liable or  
responsible for any banker, broker, custodian or other person  
in whose hands the same may, in good faith, be deposited or placed nor  
for the deficiency or insufficiency in the value of any investments of the  
Trust Fund nor otherwise for any involuntary loss. 
(2) The TRUSTEES and every attorney or, agent appointed by the  
TRUSTEES shall be entitled to be indemnified out of the Trust Fund in  
respect of all liabilities, losses and expenses incurred in execution of the  
Trust or any of the powers, authorities, a nd discretions vested in or  delegated to 
them other than those arising out of gross negligence and/or  
wilful misconduct, provided however, that, such indemnity shall not in any  
event exceed the total of the Contributions. 
 
19. TRUSTEES REMUNE RATION: The TR USTEES shall not be  entitled to any 
remuneration for their services. 
 
20. AMENDMENT: This Trust deed may be amended from time to time  
by the TRUSTEES only with the prior concurrence of the  
SETTLOR and not otherwise. 
 
21. THE SEAL OF THE TRUST: The TRUSTEES, in a meeting of the Governing Council 
may decide to provide a Seal for the purpose of the  
Trust and shall have power from time to time to destroy the same and  
substitute a new seal in lieu thereof. The Seal of the TRUST shall remain  

54 
 
in the custody of the  Chairman of the Managing Committee and the  
Chairman shall have the authority to use the same for and on behalf of  
the TRUST. 
 
22. REVOCABILITY: This Trust is revocable at the discretion of the  
SETTLOR. The Trust shall continue to exist till such time as m ay be  
decided by the SETTLOR. At the time of extinguishment of the trust, all  
the assets and liabilities of the Trust shall be transferred to the State  
Government. 
IN WITNESS whe reof the parties hereto have executed th is deed on   
the day and year first hereinbefore appearing. 
 
Signed and Delivered on behalf of the SETTLOR. 
 
(__________________________________) 
_______________ Secretary,  
Department of Mines, Government of_______________. 
  

55 
 
Annexure V 
 
Data on fund accrual and utilization 
Financial 
Year 
No of dists 
which 
have set 
up DMF 
Amount 
collected  
(Rs.in 
crore) 
Amount 
accrued in 
(Rs.in 
crore) 
DMF 
Amount 
allocated out 
of DMF (Rs.in 
crore) 
Amount 
spent(Rs.i
n crore) 
Amount 
Remaining 
In DMF 
(Rs.in crore) 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 
2018-19 557 8,095  8,095   12,118  3,448  4,647  
2019-20 557                 
10,331.22  
                
10,331.22  
                      
8,390.18  
                       
7,124.54  
                                 
3,206.69  
2020-21 574                   
9,258.71  
                  
9,258.71  
                    
12,603.11  
                       
8,279.47  
                                    
979.24  
2021-22 600                 
14,748.00  
                
14,748.00  
                      
9,276.56  
                       
8,630.31  
                                 
6,117.69  
2022-23 622                 
15,402.74  
                
15,402.74  
                    
13,931.95  
                       
9,898.99  
                                 
5,503.75  
2023-24 631                 
13,459.41  
                
13,459.41  
                    
14,019.02  
                       
8,733.44  
                                 
4,725.96  
2024-25 645 12511.98 12511.98                       
5,926.56  
                       
5,483.12  
                                 
7,028.86  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

56 
 
Annexure VI 
Priority categories  
1. Andhra Pradesh 
Ye
ar  
Project
s  
Drinki
ng 
water 
Health
care  
Educa
tion  
Agricul
ture  
Sanita
tion  
Skill 
Devp  
Hous
ing 
WWC
* 
OA&D
A@ 
AH^ EP&P
M** 
Othe
rs  
16
-
17 
Taken 
up 360   9                   
Compl
eted      7                   
Amou
nt 
sancti
oned 
(Rs)  11.4   3.25               
    
Amou
nt 
Spent 
(Rs) 
7.828
025   
1.980
72               
    
17
-
18 
Taken 
up 570 23 349 4 206 24   984   4     
Compl
eted  351 22 214 4 202 7   584         
Amou
nt 
sancti
oned 
(Rs)  
84.41
135 3.58 
16.78
906 0.8248 4.64 
5.339
756   
27.63
33   
0.350
805 
    
Amou
nt 
Spent 
(Rs) 
24.97
903 
3.0638
43 
15.28
255 
0.4061
37 
0.404
087 
1.795
055 
  11.66
026 
  0.347
883 
    
18
-
19 
Taken 
up 2027 38 1386   239 75   383   2 6   
Compl
eted  361 23 805   94 28   91         
Amou
nt 
sancti
oned 
(Rs)  
83.62
445 6.5661 
30.59
771 
  
11.99
57 
15.97
32 
  
13.05
838 
  
0.225 0.3 
  
Amou
nt 
Spent 
(Rs) 
47.30
714 
3.9225
2 
21.00
958 
  4.839
344 
3.704
9 
  1.395
471 
  0.179
3 0 
  
19
-
20 
Taken 
up 0 19 357   0 0   49 0   0 0 
Compl
eted  362 32 908 3 1 2   5         
Amou
nt 
sancti
oned 
(Rs)  
        
54.65  
           
3.78  
        
23.11    0 0   
3.166
3 0.005   0 0 
Amou
nt 
Spent 
(Rs) 
           
7.18  
           
1.85  
        
17.36    0 0   0 0   0 0 
20
-
21 
Taken 
up 146 830 93   0 0   3 0   0 0 
Compl
eted  41 20 87   1 2   3         

57 
 
Amou
nt 
sancti
oned 
(Rs)  
        
12.39  
      
139.44  
        
14.09    0 0   1.1 0   0 0 
Amou
nt 
Spent 
(Rs) 
        
20.64  
      
133.83  
           
5.52    
2.129
8 0   1.365 0   0 0 
21
-
22 
Taken 
up 634 37 1308   0 0   49 0   0 437 
Compl
eted  127 6 8 4 5 2             
Amou
nt 
sancti
oned 
(Rs)  
        
71.31  
        
14.84  
        
13.44    1.392 0   0.993 0   0 
18.5
622 
Amou
nt 
Spent 
(Rs) 
        
30.44  
      
148.90  
           
8.51    0 0   0.503 0   0 
5.43
72 
22
-
23 
Taken 
up 17 1 42   345 92   0 0   2 0 
Compl
eted  116 118 5   5 19             
Amou
nt 
sancti
oned 
(Rs)  6.104 
           
0.49  
           
0.74    
0.773
2 
17.78
9   0 0   0.7 0 
Amou
nt 
Spent 
(Rs) 1.125 
                 
-    
           
1.40    
4.467
2 1.7   0 0   0 0 
23
-
24 
Taken 
up 231 85 112   51 46   57 0   2 0 
Compl
eted  9 4 1   16           1   
Amou
nt 
sancti
oned 
(Rs)  
        
26.31  19.19 
        
11.84    
7.837
8 
19.92
1   6.183 0   0.45 0 
Amou
nt 
Spent 
(Rs) 
        
46.63  20.02 
           
9.74    
1.632
8 2.38   0 0   0.12 0 
 
2. Assam 
Ye
ar  
Project
s  
Drinki
ng 
water 
Health
care  
Educat
ion  
Agricul
ture  
Sanita
tion  
Skill 
Devp  
Hous
ing 
WWC
* 
OA&D
A@ 
A
H^ 
EP&P
M** 
Oth
ers  
17
-
18 
Taken 
up 3 2 8                   
Compl
eted  3 2 8                   
Amoun
t 
sanctio
ned 
(Rs)  1.5645 0.8992 2.6827         
          

58 
 
Amoun
t Spent 
(Rs) 1.4349 
0.0899
1 
2.6816
2       
            
18
-
19 
Taken 
up 6 2 21   1 5   1 1       
Compl
eted  5 2 21   1 5   1 1       
Amoun
t 
sanctio
ned 
(Rs)  
3.4545
3 
0.5131
41 
1.2764
98 
  
0.0326
9 
1.943
6 
  
0.062
73 0.7 
      
Amoun
t Spent 
(Rs) 2.7498 
0.5131
41 
1.2764
98 
  0.0326
9 0.265 
  0.062
73 
0.683
967 
      
19
-
20 
Taken 
up 0 8 9   0 0   8 1   0   
Compl
eted  5 3 16     2   2         
Amoun
t 
sanctio
ned 
(Rs)  
             
-    
         
0.20  
             
-      
             
-    
             
-      
             
-    
             
-      0   
Amoun
t Spent 
(Rs) 
             
-    
         
0.45  
         
0.23    
         
0.00  
             
-      
         
0.15  
         
0.06    
                 
-      
20
-
21 
Taken 
up 2 3 37   10 10   14 0   2   
Compl
eted  11 5 12   1 4   1 2       
Amoun
t 
sanctio
ned 
(Rs)  
         
2.08  
         
0.34  
         
5.46    
         
0.64  
         
1.75    
         
0.62  
             
-      
         
0.54    
Amoun
t Spent 
(Rs) 
         
4.20  
         
1.16  
         
6.89    
         
0.08  
         
3.06    
         
0.22  
         
0.32    
         
1.18    
21
-
22 
Taken 
up 1 2 7   1 5   1 0   4   
Compl
eted  2   18   3 1     1   2   
Amoun
t 
sanctio
ned 
(Rs)  
         
0.18  
         
0.30  
         
4.01    
         
0.03  
         
0.40    
         
0.07  
             
-      
         
0.78    
Amoun
t Spent 
(Rs) 
         
2.49  
         
1.26  
         
3.93    
         
0.09  
         
1.15    
         
0.18  
         
0.39    
         
0.67    
22
-
23 
Taken 
up 14 6 20   7 5   5 1   4   
Compl
eted  2 10 29         3     1   
Amoun
t 
sanctio
ned 
(Rs)  
         
5.00  
         
1.44  
         
4.99    
         
0.41  
         
3.10    
         
0.29  
         
0.45    
         
1.87    
Amoun
t Spent 
(Rs) 
             
-    
         
1.01  
         
1.08    
         
0.21  
         
1.20    
         
0.10  
         
0.30    
         
0.23    
Taken 
up 9 8 38   1 0   16 0   0   

59 
 
23
-
24 
Compl
eted    1 3         1         
Amoun
t 
sanctio
ned 
(Rs)  
           
5.11  
         
1.67  
         
3.91    
         
0.03  
             
-      
         
0.20  
             
-      
             
-      
Amoun
t Spent 
(Rs) 
           
7.70  
         
1.15  
         
1.85    
             
-    
         
1.67    
             
-    
             
-      
             
-      
 
3. Bihar 
Ye
ar  
Project
s  
Drinki
ng 
water 
Health
care  
Educat
ion  
Agricul
ture  
Sanita
tion  
Skill 
Devp  
Hous
ing 
WWC
* 
OA&D
A@ 
A
H^ 
EP&P
M** 
Oth
ers  
18
-
19 
Taken 
up                 1       
Compl
eted                  1       
Amou
nt 
sanctio
ned 
(Rs)        
  
    
  
  0.3966 
      
Amou
nt 
Spent 
(Rs)       
  
    
  
  0.3966 
      
19
-
20 
Taken 
up 0 0 0   0 0   0 0   0   
Compl
eted      1                   
Amou
nt 
sanctio
ned 
(Rs)  0 0 0   0 0   0 0   0   
Amou
nt 
Spent 
(Rs) 
                 
-    
                 
-    
                 
-      
                 
-    
                 
-      
                 
-    
                 
-      
                 
-      
20
-
21 
Taken 
up 0 35 12   1     17 1   4   
Compl
eted  3 11 3   1     3       1 
Amou
nt 
sanctio
ned 
(Rs)  
           
4.29  
        
12.10  
           
1.81    
           
0.72      
           
0.03  
           
0.08    
           
1.51    
Amou
nt 
Spent 
(Rs) 
           
0.06  
           
2.06  
           
0.62    
           
0.03      
           
0.81  
           
0.08    
           
1.23    
21
-
22 
Taken 
up 0 0 0   0 0   0 0   0   
Compl
eted    4 1                   
Amou
nt 
sanctio
ned 
(Rs)  0 0 0   0 0   0 0   0   

60 
 
Amou
nt 
Spent 
(Rs) 
                 
-    
                 
-    
                 
-      
                 
-    
                 
-      
                 
-    
                 
-      
                 
-      
22
-
23 
Taken 
up 0 9 2   1     0 0   4   
Compl
eted    4 10   1             1 
Amou
nt 
sanctio
ned 
(Rs)  
                 
-    
                 
-    
           
1.64    
           
0.10      
                 
-    
           
0.00    
           
2.78    
Amou
nt 
Spent 
(Rs) 
           
0.00  
           
0.82  
           
1.23    
           
0.12      
           
0.16  
           
0.00    
           
2.67    
23
-
24 
Taken 
up 1 32 24   0 2   0 0   1   
Compl
eted  1 1 3   2               
Amou
nt 
sanctio
ned 
(Rs)  
           
0.65  
           
0.73  
        
16.36    
           
4.75  
           
1.44    
           
9.19  
                 
-      
           
0.72    
Amou
nt 
Spent 
(Rs) 
           
0.00  
        
15.56  
        
15.18    
           
0.57  
           
0.19    
           
5.82  
                 
-      
           
0.73    
 
4. Chhattisgarh 
Ye
ar  
Projec
ts  
Drinki
ng 
water 
Health
care  
Educa
tion  
Agricul
ture  
Sanita
tion  
Skill 
Devp  
Hous
ing 
WWC
* 
OA&D
A@ 
AH^ EP&P
M** 
Other
s  
16
-
17 
Taken 
up 1476 638 2898 300 240 155   454 49 6 123 328 
Compl
eted  1302 604 2584 286 181 134   435 41 6 110 269 
Amou
nt 
sancti
oned 
(Rs)  
259.9
768 114.38 
288.2
179 
176.60
3 
199.5
144 
46.80
144   
24.41
56 
19.91
182 
6.15
7 
52.71
424 
112.1
281 
Amou
nt 
Spent 
(Rs) 
71.66
615 
63.945
46 
152.6
169 
37.143
96 
38.15
864 
22.36
834   
11.60
379 
5.707
425 
0.60
448 
34.01
368 
60.59
667 
17
-
18 
Taken 
up 1260 1036 4116 1508 314 236   2189 45   223 643 
Compl
eted  1091 952 3779 1178 277 203   2103 34     436 
Amou
nt 
sancti
oned 
(Rs)  
145.2
298 
147.12
58 
530.1
264 
101.48
43 
31.19
429 
46.71
065   
53.28
641 
5.344
681   
41.93
025 
80.50
656 
Amou
nt 
Spent 
(Rs) 
87.10
681 
101.07
85 
405.6
596 
76.964
51 
18.56
53 
30.02
265 
  32.63
245 
3.308
564   
25.62
542 
49.93
916 
Taken 
up 689 401 1559 721 171 360   328 42 13 428 456 

61 
 
18
-
19 
Compl
eted  605 283 1166 587 155 266   264 32 13 307 317 
Amou
nt 
sancti
oned 
(Rs)  
85.45
846 
113.25
57 
308.0
605 
57.027
55 
14.84
57 
51.44
666 
  
35.86
041 
5.118
301 
0.48
758 
33.27
965 
118.0
021 
Amou
nt 
Spent 
(Rs) 
46.02
755 
58.477
42 
218.2
093 
38.836
69 
12.62
974 
36.25
434 
  29.15
356 
1.697
83 
0.49
522 
21.31
405 
63.75
498 
19
-
20 
Taken 
up 1297 411 1126   31 85   226 31   110 1673 
Compl
eted  1229 318 818   255 89   235 32   65 260 
Amou
nt 
sancti
oned 
(Rs)  
        
69.89  
      
125.95  
        
49.13    
        
17.96  
                 
-      
      
108.4
2  
           
6.46    
        
11.15  
      
147.0
4  
Amou
nt 
Spent 
(Rs) 
        
52.87  
        
92.90  
      
191.9
1    
        
12.04  
        
11.46    
        
59.01  
           
7.21    
        
19.86  
        
97.12  
20
-
21 
Taken 
up 1582 1086 2205   264 204   473 38   275 3673 
Compl
eted  1382 875 1334 2945 165 257   385 47   220 1828 
Amou
nt 
sancti
oned 
(Rs)  
        
93.07  
      
225.07  
      
408.6
5    
        
41.27  
        
46.10    
      
111.0
7  
        
16.00    
        
32.94  
      
270.6
8  
Amou
nt 
Spent 
(Rs) 
        
69.90  
      
171.61  
      
243.3
6    
        
22.04  
        
27.90    
        
87.58  
           
7.81    
        
16.02  
      
233.0
6  
21
-
22 
Taken 
up 763 1002 1649   142 472   286 58   97 2352 
Compl
eted  688 728 1255 1097 120 499   213 56   46 543 
Amou
nt 
sancti
oned 
(Rs)  
        
64.16  
      
306.16  
      
355.5
2    
        
10.63  
        
77.99    
      
114.8
7  
        
15.92    
        
23.45  
      
345.1
1  
Amou
nt 
Spent 
(Rs) 
        
63.12  
      
257.76  
      
301.0
0    
        
20.70  
        
48.84    
        
96.13  
        
16.00    
        
21.23  
      
244.5
2  
22
-
23 
Taken 
up 900 704 3123   252 754   556 82   163 2921 
Compl
eted  685 478 1747 913 152 494   210 30   101 991 
Amou
nt 
sancti
oned 
(Rs)  
        
66.83  
      
223.72  
      
822.9
0    
        
28.97  
      
120.4
5    
      
179.7
5  
        
19.20    
        
25.77  
      
516.4
9  
Amou
nt 
Spent 
(Rs) 
        
63.63  
      
177.52  
      
503.9
0    
        
22.78  
      
103.9
3    
      
144.3
5  
        
10.88    
        
21.59  
      
379.6
8  
Taken 
up 652 473 2662   334 227   123 42   298 980 

62 
 
23
-
24 
Compl
eted  358 101 696 236 130 55   20 8 5 49 197 
Amou
nt 
sancti
oned 
(Rs)  
        
52.26  
      
184.67  
      
551.4
6    
        
24.17  
        
66.58    
        
84.85  
           
7.71    
        
50.05  
      
251.3
4  
Amou
nt 
Spent 
(Rs) 
        
38.32  
      
114.74  
      
416.2
4    
        
17.81  
        
52.61    
        
60.32  
           
7.61    
        
23.65  
      
223.5
9  
 
5. Goa 
Ye
ar  
Project
s  
Drinki
ng 
water 
Health
care  
Educat
ion  
Agricul
ture  
Sanita
tion  
Skill 
Devp  
Hous
ing 
WWC
* 
OA&D
A@ 
A
H^ 
EP&P
M** 
Oth
ers  
18
-
19 
Taken 
up 4   3   1     1         
Compl
eted  4   3         1         
Amoun
t 
sanctio
ned 
(Rs)  
1.7514
42   
1.3374
6 
  
0.2812
87   
  
0.171
195   
      
Amoun
t Spent 
(Rs) 
1.7080
37   
1.0874
08 
  
0   
  
0   
      
19
-
20 
Taken 
up 1 22     1               
Compl
eted  1 22                     
Amoun
t 
sanctio
ned 
(Rs)  
0.0164
48 
69.151
87     
0.2922
69               
Amoun
t Spent 
(Rs) 
0.0164
48 
37.767
67     0               
20
-
21 
Taken 
up 1   1   1               
Compl
eted  1   1                   
Amoun
t 
sanctio
ned 
(Rs)  
0.1024
51   5   1.91               
Amoun
t Spent 
(Rs) 
0.1024
51   
2.3318
72   0               
21
-
22 
Taken 
up 2 1 2   1 1     1   1   
Compl
eted  2 1 2           1   1   
Amoun
t 
sanctio
ned 
(Rs)  
14.176
4 
0.5238
63 
2.0520
38   
0.3123
45 1.91     
0.094
825   
1.723
126   
Amoun
t Spent 
(Rs) 
7.7667
14 
0.5238
63 
1.0963
03   0 0     
0.094
825   
1.418
844   

63 
 
22
-
23 
Taken 
up 3 2 3   2               
Compl
eted  3 1     1               
Amoun
t 
sanctio
ned 
(Rs)  
0.5705
35 
0.2588
68 
0.1523
63   
0.3520
38               
Amoun
t Spent 
(Rs) 
0.4847
54 
0.2325
7 0   
0.0812
75               
23
-
24 
Taken 
up 0 1 4   4 1   0 0   0   
Compl
eted    1                     
Amoun
t 
sanctio
ned 
(Rs)  
                 
-    
           
0.21  
           
1.16    
           
0.64  
           
2.95    
                 
-    
                 
-      
                 
-      
Amoun
t Spent 
(Rs) 
           
0.35  
                 
-    
           
0.11    
           
0.08  
                 
-      
                 
-    
                 
-      
                 
-      
 
 
 
 
6. Gujarat 
Ye
ar  
Project
s  
Drinki
ng 
water 
Health
care  
Educa
tion  
Agricul
ture  
Sanita
tion  
Skill 
Devp  
Hous
ing WWC* OA&D
A@ 
A
H^ 
EP&P
M** 
Oth
ers  
16
-
17 
Taken 
up 110 91 339   29 5   111         
Compl
eted  66 91 329   22 3   109         
Amoun
t 
sanctio
ned 
(Rs)  2.695 0.1141 
10.95
834   1.0627 0.87   3.4203     
    
Amoun
t Spent 
(Rs) 1.1813 
0.1082
61 
10.52
204   0.7084 0.5098   3.3164     
    
17
-
18 
Taken 
up 600 446 1982   110 322   1568 21   397   
Compl
eted  347 59 1388   86 306   850     59   
Amoun
t 
sanctio
ned 
(Rs)  
39.579
87 
7.6420
25 
96.79
71   2.0235 
11.876
83   
47.572
14 
0.1332
2   
2.2288
2 
  
Amoun
t Spent 
(Rs) 
34.029
12 9.7185 
58.51
472   
1.3673
67 
11.001
87 
  36.518
26 0 
  
0.8304 
  
18
-
19 
Taken 
up 829 657 3273   215 395   1933 22   412   
Compl
eted  169 52 616   115 43   96 1   13   
Amoun
t 
sanctio
           
20.36  
                 
-    
                 
-              
56.78  
                 
-    
               
3.07  
           
30.94            
161.63    

64 
 
ned 
(Rs)  
Amoun
t Spent 
(Rs) 
             
3.83  
                 
-    
                 
-              
29.60  
                 
-    
               
1.27  
           
12.17               
45.91    
19
-
20 
Taken 
up 382 132 1157   201 234   429 1   0   
Compl
eted  237 83 910   126 76   71         
Amoun
t 
sanctio
ned 
(Rs)  
        
14.70  
        
62.84  
      
187.3
8    
                 
-    
        
93.69    
        
63.74  
                 
-      
                 
-      
Amoun
t Spent 
(Rs) 
        
12.49  
           
9.43  
        
78.38    
                 
-    
        
23.33    
        
44.92  
                 
-      
                 
-      
20
-
21 
Taken 
up 170 340 727   270 323   0 0   2   
Compl
eted  165 213 464   106 27   71     2   
Amoun
t 
sanctio
ned 
(Rs)  
        
18.55  
        
23.40  
      
171.3
2    
           
5.49  
        
49.05    
        
10.17  
           
0.01    
           
0.18    
Amoun
t Spent 
(Rs) 
           
5.03  
        
11.82  
        
26.43    
           
3.40  
        
19.93    
           
2.74  
           
0.08    
           
0.36    
21
-
22 
Taken 
up 493 257 715   88 18   119 2   6   
Compl
eted  138 295 640   49 21   74     1   
Amoun
t 
sanctio
ned 
(Rs)  
        
16.45  
        
46.17  
        
48.63    
           
4.00  
           
8.66    
           
4.52  
           
0.08    
           
0.68    
Amoun
t Spent 
(Rs) 
           
8.53  
        
15.92  
        
36.82    
           
2.78  
           
7.53    
           
4.82  
           
0.00    
           
0.07    
22
-
23 
Taken 
up 470 528 2183   208 59   311 11   74   
Compl
eted  208 353 983   101 30   143 1   57   
Amoun
t 
sanctio
ned 
(Rs)  
        
25.37  
        
35.80  
      
127.5
4    
        
15.00  
           
5.46    
        
15.53  
           
0.71    
        
15.00    
Amoun
t Spent 
(Rs) 
        
16.59  
        
21.67  
        
49.50    
           
5.65  
           
6.72    
           
8.76  
           
0.00    
           
6.06    
23
-
24 
Taken 
up 198 151 1401   155 63   644 0   0   
Compl
eted  7 13 629 2 33 36   112         
Amoun
t 
sanctio
ned 
(Rs)  
           
8.87  
        
13.34  
        
75.62    
           
6.10  
        
13.22    
           
9.01  
           
0.00    
                 
-      

65 
 
Amoun
t Spent 
(Rs) 
           
7.41  
        
10.06  
        
37.04    
           
5.88  
        
11.69    
           
5.20  
           
0.19    
           
1.25    
 
7. Himachal Pradesh 
Ye
ar  
Project
s  
Drinki
ng 
water 
Health
care  
Educat
ion  
Agricul
ture  
Sanita
tion  
Skill 
Devp  
Hous
ing WWC* OA&D
A@ 
A
H^ 
EP&P
M** 
Oth
ers  
18
-
19 
Taken 
up 15 1 3   2           1   
Compl
eted  5 1 2   1           1   
Amoun
t 
sanctio
ned 
(Rs)  8.303 0.03 0.318 
  
0.04   
  
    
  
0.1 
  
Amoun
t Spent 
(Rs) 1.434 0 0.298 
  
0   
  
    
  
0 
  
19
-
20 
Taken 
up 0 1 7   2               
Compl
eted  10   7               1   
Amoun
t 
sanctio
ned 
(Rs)  
           
5.75  
           
0.06  
           
0.31  
  
           
0.09  
              
Amoun
t Spent 
(Rs) 
           
1.00  
                 
-    
           
0.02  
             
0.09  
              
20
-
21 
Taken 
up 7 1 2         3     2   
Compl
eted  7 24       1   3     1   
Amoun
t 
sanctio
ned 
(Rs)  
           
0.17  
           
0.52  
           
0.74  
        
           
0.16  
    
           
0.04  
  
Amoun
t Spent 
(Rs) 
                 
-    
           
0.55  
                 
-    
                         
-    
                     
-    
  
21
-
22 
Taken 
up 0 46 12   2     1     15   
Compl
eted  11 5 1   3 1         1   
Amoun
t 
sanctio
ned 
(Rs)  
           
2.09  
        
11.47  
           
0.60  
  
           
0.12  
    
           
0.08  
    
           
0.97  
  
Amoun
t Spent 
(Rs) 
           
1.54  
        
10.65  
           
1.20  
             
0.11  
               
0.17  
               
0.85  
  
22
-
23 
Taken 
up 54 13 68   8     2     12   
Compl
eted  4 2 9     1   1     1   
Amoun
t 
sanctio
           
4.57  
           
6.35  
           
8.42  
             
1.47  
               
0.27  
               
0.34  
  

66 
 
ned 
(Rs)  
Amoun
t Spent 
(Rs) 
           
1.17  
           
0.59  
           
2.52  
             
0.03  
               
0.10  
               
0.10  
  
23
-
24 
Taken 
up 68 4 63   9 0   1 0   2   
Compl
eted  1 1 3   1               
Amoun
t 
sanctio
ned 
(Rs)  
        
13.43  
           
1.42  
        
13.30    
           
7.24  
                 
-      
           
0.13  
                 
-      
           
2.58    
Amoun
t Spent 
(Rs) 
           
7.74  
           
1.82  
           
1.62    
           
2.13  
                 
-      
           
0.28  
                 
-      
           
0.08    
 
 
 
 
8. Jharkhand 
Ye
ar  
Project
s  
Drinki
ng 
water 
Health
care  
Educat
ion  
Agricul
ture  
Sanita
tion  
Skill 
Devp  
Hous
ing 
WWC
* 
OA&D
A@ 
A
H^ 
EP&P
M** 
Oth
ers  
16
-
17 
Taken 
up 316 1 217   21 1   1     2   
Compl
eted  313 1 217   21 1   1     2   
Amou
nt 
sanctio
ned 
(Rs)  
        
27.14  
           
0.05  
           
0.11    
      
148.69  
           
0.01    
           
0.03      
           
0.04  
  
Amou
nt 
Spent 
(Rs) 
           
5.80  
           
0.05  
           
0.09    
        
93.96  
           
0.01    
           
0.01      
           
0.03  
  
17
-
18 
Taken 
up 181 1 23   39 1             
Compl
eted  172 1 22   37 1             
Amou
nt 
sanctio
ned 
(Rs)  
 
1,086.
43  
           
1.80  
           
3.30    
      
108.02  
           
0.86          
    
Amou
nt 
Spent 
(Rs) 
      
694.78  
                 
-    
           
0.07    
        
38.66  
           
0.86  
  
  
        
18
-
19 
Taken 
up 655 31 114   1102 19   238     3   
Compl
eted  550 29 114   1042 19   237     3   
Amou
nt 
sanctio
ned 
(Rs)  
      
513.66  
        
28.87  
           
8.53    
           
6.41  
           
1.05    
        
12.52      
           
1.20    
Amou
nt 
      
215.58  
        
26.47  
           
1.08    
           
3.67  
           
0.08    
           
2.88      
                 
-      

67 
 
Spent 
(Rs) 
19
-
20 
Taken 
up 
                 
-    158 201   0 13   425 2   1   
Compl
eted  1199 286 39   30 19   78         
Amou
nt 
sanctio
ned 
(Rs)  
 
1,043.
05  
                 
-    
        
30.11    
        
29.21  
           
8.23    
           
9.37  
           
0.31    
           
0.30    
Amou
nt 
Spent 
(Rs) 
 
1,422.
53  
           
6.91  
        
16.77    
                 
-    
           
2.94    
           
1.65  
                 
-      
           
0.30    
20
-
21 
Taken 
up 459 0 93   2 18   1061 0   0   
Compl
eted  698 59 64   1 13   1     4 8 
Amou
nt 
sanctio
ned 
(Rs)  
                 
-    
        
31.06  
           
4.57    
        
29.30  
           
6.25    
        
16.61  
                 
-      
                 
-      
Amou
nt 
Spent 
(Rs) 
      
180.24  
        
31.18  
           
7.00    
           
1.84  
           
1.89    
           
6.71  
                 
-      
                 
-      
21
-
22 
Taken 
up 0 134 65   1 13   0 0   12   
Compl
eted  104 212 296 2 4 14   128     1 8 
Amou
nt 
sanctio
ned 
(Rs)  
      
251.63  
      
186.63  
        
43.40    
                 
-    
           
3.25    
        
15.27  
           
0.36    
           
6.72    
Amou
nt 
Spent 
(Rs) 
      
769.39  
      
166.83  
        
27.57    
           
0.52  
           
3.56    
           
5.43  
           
0.06    
           
5.52    
22
-
23 
Taken 
up 965 231 1008   1349 36   0 0   88   
Compl
eted  215 103 824 4 21 25 1 73 3 1 58 8 
Amou
nt 
sanctio
ned 
(Rs)  
        
86.28  
      
119.42  
      
380.57    
                 
-    
        
43.54    
        
52.63  
                 
-      
        
55.58    
Amou
nt 
Spent 
(Rs) 
      
319.03  
        
71.09  
      
190.07    
                 
-    
        
12.27    
        
23.55  
                 
-      
        
46.75    
23
-
24 
Taken 
up 1824 452 2689   4665 219   1627 7   117   
Compl
eted  1307 63 174 6 12 11   49 3   4 11 
Amou
nt 
sanctio
ned 
(Rs)  43.18 148.66 757.57   12.79 75.89   202.06 3.35   46.19   
Amou
nt 0 83.27 309.33   0 26.84   81.8 0.4   15.56   

68 
 
Spent 
(Rs) 
 
9. Karnataka 
Ye
ar  
Project
s  
Drink
ing 
water 
Health
care  
Educa
tion  
Agricul
ture  
Sanita
tion  
Skil
l 
Dev
p  
Hous
ing 
WW
C* 
OA&D
A@ 
A
H^ 
EP&P
M** 
Oth
ers  
16-
17 
Taken 
up 0 2 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 0 
Compl
eted  0 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
Amou
nt 
sanctio
ned 
(Rs)  
0.00 35.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.0
0 6.49 0.00 
Amou
nt 
Spent 
(Rs) 
0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
17-
18 
Taken 
up 316 111 440 0 107 54 0 142 19 0 44 0 
Compl
eted  179 73 272 0 71 12 0 65 15 0 11 0 
Amou
nt 
sanctio
ned 
(Rs)  
324.8
4 383.05 805.72 0.00 135.35 126.
59 0.00 460.
06 48.20 0.0
0 54.43 0.00 
Amou
nt 
Spent 
(Rs) 
225.5
9 331.18 538.31 0.00 93.47 58.7
7 0.00 111.
64 24.65 0.0
0 40.25 0.00 
18-
19 
Taken 
up 128 75 347 0 31 11 0 347 21 0 32 0 
Compl
eted  72 32 194 0 15 8 0 273 18 0 13 0 
Amou
nt 
sanctio
ned 
(Rs)  
124.7
7 162.55 237.09 0.00 29.77 7.17 0.00 122.
08 27.68 0.0
0 141.81 0.00 
Amou
nt 
Spent 
(Rs) 
81.04 93.87 140.95 0.00 16.92 4.76 0.00 91.5
2 14.70 0.0
0 71.99 0.00 
19-
20 
Taken 
up 494 136 681 0 105 199 0 121 29 0 111 0 
Compl
eted  236 44 348 0 20 169 0 38 8 0 24 0 
Amou
nt 
sanctio
ned 
(Rs)  
1,585.
87 
1,700.0
9 
1,271.
98 0.00 633.62 136.
71 0.00 183.
27 52.58 0.0
0 186.11 0.00 
Amou
nt 
Spent 
(Rs) 
549.6
4 998.51 546.29 0.00 163.29 110.
21 0.00 66.5
2 28.23 0.0
0 135.94 0.00 
20-
21 
Taken 
up 314 277 1436 0 220 29 0 247 110 0 53 0 
Compl
eted  96 99 825 0 69 11 0 162 21 0 24 0 
Amou
nt 
sanctio
2,889.
92 
1,778.9
5 
2,803.
95 0.00 824.45 215.
34 0.00 406.
51 201.57 0.0
0 496.74 0.00 

69 
 
ned 
(Rs)  
Amou
nt 
Spent 
(Rs) 
544.6
8 937.48 1,520.
46 0.00 387.04 126.
39 0.00 229.
66 78.10 0.0
0 241.03 0.00 
21-
22 
Taken 
up 245 52 328 0 152 374 0 82 8 0 18 0 
Compl
eted  186 31 228 0 107 4 0 49 6 0 16 0 
Amou
nt 
sanctio
ned 
(Rs)  
313.5
9 340.37 341.53 0.00 295.53 56.5
5 0.00 39.3
2 5.40 0.0
0 28.85 0.00 
Amou
nt 
Spent 
(Rs) 
175.8
8 142.31 283.09 0.00 138.93 36.8
4 0.00 27.2
7 4.91 0.0
0 26.66 0.00 
22-
23 
Taken 
up 131 74 676 0 130 25 0 86 60 0 14 0 
Compl
eted  23 44 483 0 64 15 0 41 13 0 5 0 
Amou
nt 
sanctio
ned 
(Rs)  
213.2
6 428.33 1,230.
79 0.00 165.54 123.
58 0.00 118.
14 19.97 0.0
0 96.42 0.00 
Amou
nt 
Spent 
(Rs) 
65.65 402.81 667.01 0.00 116.22 84.6
1 0.00 67.5
1 3.24 0.0
0 62.56 0.00 
23-
24 
Taken 
up 62 46 356 0 26 1 0 10 2 0 2 0 
Compl
eted  4 9 227 0 16 0 0 5 2 0 1 0 
Amou
nt 
sanctio
ned 
(Rs)  
267.3
5 256.41 623.06 0.00 28.06 0.00 0.00 35.7
6 5.00 0.0
0 9.50 0.00 
Amou
nt 
Spent 
(Rs) 
12.33 38.10 261.03 0.00 6.25 0.00 0.00 23.4
7 4.50 0.0
0 9.50 0.00 
 
10. Jammu & Kashmir 
Ye
ar  
Project
s  
Drinki
ng 
water 
Health
care  
Educa
tion  
Agricul
ture  
Sanita
tion  
Skill 
Devp  
Hous
ing 
WWC
* 
OA&D
A@ 
A
H
^ 
EP&P
M** 
Other
s  
18
-
19 
Taken 
up 33 1                 1   
Compl
eted  32 1                 1   
Amou
nt 
sancti
oned 
(Rs)  
1.561
8 0.7767     
  
    
  
    0.13 
  
Amou
nt 
Spent 
(Rs) 2.01 7.77     
  
    
  
    1.3 
  
19
-
20 
Taken 
up 0 18 23   0 2         6   
Compl
eted  23 14 20   8 2         4   

70 
 
Amou
nt 
sancti
oned 
(Rs)  
           
0.06  
           
0.93  
           
1.65  
  
           
0.05  
           
0.18  
        
           
0.17  
  
Amou
nt 
Spent 
(Rs) 
           
1.35  
           
0.79  
           
0.23  
             
0.19  
                 
-    
                         
-    
  
20
-
21 
Taken 
up 0 9 19     1         17   
Compl
eted  16 8 2   5 1   1 1   3   
Amou
nt 
sancti
oned 
(Rs)  
           
0.25  
           
1.24  
           
1.30  
    
           
0.46  
        
           
1.44  
  
Amou
nt 
Spent 
(Rs) 
                 
-    
           
0.54  
           
1.08  
               
0.64  
                   
0.79  
  
21
-
22 
Taken 
up 20 6 0   4 1   11     9   
Compl
eted  10 7 1   1 1       3 25 1 
Amou
nt 
sancti
oned 
(Rs)  
           
1.94  
           
0.64  
                 
-    
  
           
0.12  
                 
-    
  
           
2.02  
    
                 
-    
  
Amou
nt 
Spent 
(Rs) 
           
3.17  
           
1.68  
           
0.03  
             
0.08  
                 
-    
             
1.23  
               
0.10  
  
22
-
23 
Taken 
up 25 1 12   3 3   3 0   4   
Compl
eted  28 23 11   5 4     14 1 7 1 
Amou
nt 
sancti
oned 
(Rs)  
           
1.40  
           
0.06  
           
0.99  
  
           
0.15  
           
0.24  
  
           
0.34  
                 
-    
  
           
0.27  
  
Amou
nt 
Spent 
(Rs) 
           
0.18  
           
0.05  
           
0.12  
                   
-    
           
0.24  
             
0.33  
                 
-    
             
0.21  
  
23
-
24 
Taken 
up 23 7 20   3 11   2 5   0 17 
Compl
eted  8 28 6 1   4     1   1 5 
Amou
nt 
sancti
oned 
(Rs)  
           
1.02  
           
0.35  
           
0.43    
           
0.23  
           
1.04    
                 
-    
           
0.63    
                 
-    
           
1.44  
Amou
nt 
Spent 
(Rs) 
                 
-    
                 
-    
           
0.96    
           
0.19  
           
0.79    
                 
-    
           
0.40    
                 
-    
           
1.22  
 
 
 
 

71 
 
11. Maharashtra 
Ye
ar  
Project
s  
Drinki
ng 
water 
Health
care  
Educat
ion  
Agricul
ture  
Sanita
tion  
Skill 
Devp  
Hous
ing 
WWC
* 
OA&D
A@ 
A
H^ 
EP&P
M** 
Oth
ers  
15
-
16 
Taken 
up 1                       
Compl
eted                          
Amou
nt 
sanctio
ned 
(Rs)  
             
0.05                        
Amou
nt 
Spent 
(Rs) 
             
0.05                        
16
-
17 
Taken 
up 93 47 192   40 3   75 1   7   
Compl
eted  10   2   1       1     1 
Amou
nt 
sanctio
ned 
(Rs)  
        
10.85  
           
4.36  
        
19.06  
  
           
5.64  
           
2.52  
  
           
8.71  
           
0.64  
  
           
1.22  
  
Amou
nt 
Spent 
(Rs) 
           
8.53  
        
10.41  
        
12.77  
             
3.55  
           
2.32  
             
4.27  
                 
-    
             
1.19  
  
17
-
18 
Taken 
up 446 73 260   74 93   24 15   75   
Compl
eted  110 108 11   2 1   28 755   5   
Amou
nt 
sanctio
ned 
(Rs)  
        
23.63  
        
12.87  
        
22.81  
  
           
0.57  
        
11.01  
  
           
1.52  
           
3.99  
  
           
7.01  
  
Amou
nt 
Spent 
(Rs) 
        
35.62  
        
19.47  
        
29.69  
          
18.44  
           
9.22  
             
2.49  
           
4.00  
          
18.23  
  
18
-
19 
Taken 
up 1699 56 310   10 8   4 42   32   
Compl
eted  430 45 479   112 107   1 4   25   
Amou
nt 
sanctio
ned 
(Rs)  
      
777.43  
        
38.33  
        
24.58  
  
           
1.93  
           
0.53  
  
           
0.32  
           
1.31  
  
           
5.52  
  
Amou
nt 
Spent 
(Rs) 
        
29.28  
        
27.80  
        
31.34  
             
1.96  
           
0.46  
             
0.32  
           
1.53  
             
5.32  
  
19
-
20 
Taken 
up 319 25 164   7 8   431 0   38   
Compl
eted  306 51 591   42 11   161 2   37   
Amou
nt 
sanctio
        
44.10  
        
57.71  
        
41.13    
           
0.91  
        
45.04    
           
5.88  
           
1.52    
        
11.54    

72 
 
ned 
(Rs)  
Amou
nt 
Spent 
(Rs) 
        
49.69  
        
56.57  
        
34.17    
                 
-    
        
37.98    
           
5.60  
           
1.83    
           
7.69    
20
-
21 
Taken 
up 31 132 6   20 14   2 0   87   
Compl
eted  82 148 209   7 91   2     41   
Amou
nt 
sanctio
ned 
(Rs)  
        
23.63  
      
116.35  
           
3.55    
                 
-    
        
47.98    
           
2.99  
                 
-      
           
5.09    
Amou
nt 
Spent 
(Rs) 
        
18.10  
      
119.72  
           
5.14    
           
3.13  
        
34.58    
           
3.03  
           
0.01    
           
5.73    
21
-
22 
Taken 
up 146 207 177   11 15   3 3   9   
Compl
eted  433 216 150   59 51     2   89   
Amou
nt 
sanctio
ned 
(Rs)  
        
29.39  
      
149.97  
        
40.32    
           
6.33  
        
76.46    
        
29.86  
           
2.75    
        
24.32    
Amou
nt 
Spent 
(Rs) 
        
21.84  
      
117.74  
        
17.81    
           
6.66  
        
50.84    
        
19.20  
           
0.86    
        
11.40    
22
-
23 
Taken 
up 640 187 672   8 15   730 0   0   
Compl
eted  2 33 7           1   114   
Amou
nt 
sanctio
ned 
(Rs)  
        
12.20  
        
26.87  
        
45.34    
        
10.71  
        
25.69    
        
25.75  
           
2.26    
        
18.65    
Amou
nt 
Spent 
(Rs) 
        
25.90  
        
43.58  
        
49.90    
           
7.39  
        
35.99    
        
26.15  
           
1.83    
        
14.14    
23
-
24 
Taken 
up 83 25 22   4 15   0 0   5   
Compl
eted    22 6     9         6   
Amou
nt 
sanctio
ned 
(Rs)  
        
30.45  
      
101.69  
        
17.55    
           
0.46  
        
11.41    
                 
-    
           
0.01    
           
1.64    
Amou
nt 
Spent 
(Rs) 
           
8.90  
        
87.56  
        
14.99    
           
3.37  
           
2.80    
           
3.97  
           
0.03    
           
2.19    
 
12. Madhya Pradesh 
Ye
ar  
Project
s  
Drinki
ng 
water 
Health
care  
Educa
tion  
Agricul
ture  
Sanita
tion  
Skill 
Devp  
Hous
ing WWC* OA&D
A@ 
A
H^ 
EP&P
M** 
Oth
ers  

73 
 
15
-
16 
Taken 
up 1                       
Compl
eted  1                       
Amoun
t 
sanctio
ned 
(Rs)  
           
0.05  
                      
Amoun
t Spent 
(Rs) 
           
0.05  
                      
16
-
17 
Taken 
up 93 47 192   40 3   75 1   7   
Compl
eted  70 47 154   38 3   69 1   7   
Amoun
t 
sanctio
ned 
(Rs)  
        
10.85  
           
4.36  
        
19.06    
           
5.64  
           
2.52    
           
8.71  
           
0.64    
           
1.22  
  
Amoun
t Spent 
(Rs) 
           
8.15  
        
10.21  
        
12.94    
           
3.51  
           
0.20    
           
4.27  
                 
-      
           
1.18  
  
17
-
18 
Taken 
up 446 73 260   74 93   24 15   75   
Compl
eted  430 59 200   60 57   15 9   63   
Amoun
t 
sanctio
ned 
(Rs)  
        
23.63  
        
12.87  
        
22.81    
           
0.57  
        
11.01    
           
1.52  
           
3.99    
           
7.01  
  
Amoun
t Spent 
(Rs) 
        
36.04  
        
19.40  
        
28.87    
        
18.30  
           
8.97    
           
2.41  
           
4.01    
        
16.81  
  
18
-
19 
Taken 
up 409 207 191   20 25   95 6   1   
Compl
eted  393 42 259   10 6   4 42   29   
Amoun
t 
sanctio
ned 
(Rs)  
                 
-    
                 
-    
                 
-                 
14.88  
             
1.24                 
1.99  
             
1.36                 
7.33    
Amoun
t Spent 
(Rs) 
           
49.75  
             
9.53  
           
20.57               
11.53  
           -
0.61                 
1.19  
             
0.97                 
5.07    
19
-
20 
Taken 
up 224 0 158   31 111   137 0   37   
Compl
eted  64 60 68   7 37   66 3   30   
Amoun
t 
sanctio
ned 
(Rs)  
        
32.38  
      
455.22  
      
428.8
7    
           
3.69  
        
68.45    
        
19.34  
           
3.50    
        
10.30    
Amoun
t Spent 
(Rs) 
        
45.28  
        
38.39  
        
33.74    
           
1.81  
        
25.09    
        
12.30  
           
2.92    
        
11.16    
20
-
21 
Taken 
up 153 105 66   7 7   24 0   0   
Compl
eted  2 39 28     9   1     8   

74 
 
Amoun
t 
sanctio
ned 
(Rs)  
        
18.57  
        
39.44  
        
38.64    
           
0.94  
           
8.26    
           
1.59  
           
0.03    
                 
-      
Amoun
t Spent 
(Rs) 
        
18.08  
        
35.62  
        
27.61    
           
2.90  
        
39.26    
           
4.63  
           
0.20    
                 
-      
21
-
22 
Taken 
up 2 107 164   26 89   0 4   20   
Compl
eted  11 88 86   4 24   38 4   75   
Amoun
t 
sanctio
ned 
(Rs)  
      
207.91  
        
19.60  
        
19.24    
           
6.88  
        
20.05    
           
1.60  
           
3.16    
           
6.57    
Amoun
t Spent 
(Rs) 
      
207.84  
        
17.67  
        
17.01    
           
3.56  
        
13.65    
           
2.10  
           
1.13    
           
3.81    
22
-
23 
Taken 
up 64 30 130   11 8   151 3   21   
Compl
eted  167 34 67   1 28   104 4   42   
Amoun
t 
sanctio
ned 
(Rs)  
           
9.63  
           
3.13  
        
21.38    
           
2.20  
           
4.39    
           
5.79  
           
4.73    
           
2.27    
Amoun
t Spent 
(Rs) 
           
4.79  
      
422.57  
      
382.5
1    
           
2.83  
           
6.92    
           
3.02  
           
1.19    
           
1.39    
23
-
24 
Taken 
up 409 82 661   69 115   205 8   188   
Compl
eted  2 15 164   24 14   5 4   24 4 
Amoun
t 
sanctio
ned 
(Rs)  
                 
-    
                 
-    
      
151.9
3    
        
10.42  
        
62.27    
        
12.47  
           
0.65    
      
101.90    
Amoun
t Spent 
(Rs) 
           
1.25  
           
7.11  
        
97.30    
           
8.15  
        
13.68    
           
6.24  
           
0.37    
        
41.79    
 
 
 
 
13. Odisha 
Ye
ar  
Project
s  
Drinki
ng 
water 
Health
care  
Educa
tion  
Agricul
ture  
Sanita
tion  
Skill 
Devp  
Housi
ng 
WWC
* 
OA&D
A@ 
A
H^ 
EP&P
M** 
Oth
ers  
15
-
16 
Taken 
up   2 5       3           
Compl
eted    2 5       3           
Amou
nt 
sanctio
ned 
(Rs)    
                 
-    
                 
-    
      
                 
-    
          
Amou
nt   
           
0.06  
           
0.44                   
0.03            

75 
 
Spent 
(Rs) 
16
-
17 
Taken 
up 405 72 385   5 7   228 4   140   
Compl
eted  362 61 356   5 7   218 4   138   
Amou
nt 
sanctio
ned 
(Rs)  
      
180.7
6  
        
66.55  
        
73.98  
  
           
0.14  
           
8.70  
  
        
21.41  
           
0.57  
  
        
15.68    
Amou
nt 
Spent 
(Rs) 
      
158.4
4  
        
62.56  
        
55.38  
             
0.12  
           
3.00  
          
17.98  
                 
-    
             
2.88    
17
-
18 
Taken 
up 2223 98 186   9 17 61 70 8   208   
Compl
eted  2196 86 154   6 6 60 61 7   206   
Amou
nt 
sanctio
ned 
(Rs)  
      
422.1
1  
      
482.80  
        
65.99  
  
        
15.11  
        
25.26  
           
4.59  
        
18.94  
        
35.30  
  
           
5.34    
Amou
nt 
Spent 
(Rs) 
      
248.9
2  
      
389.95  
        
40.35  
             
1.41  
        
16.07  
           
3.41  
        
15.21  
        
19.84  
             
4.33    
18
-
19 
Taken 
up 1812 112 548   83 65 2 146 18   189   
Compl
eted  1376 86 418   71 40 2 106 18   166   
Amou
nt 
sanctio
ned 
(Rs)  
 
2,481.
96  
      
378.25  
      
453.09  
  
        
17.76  
        
70.88  
           
0.76  
        
21.33  
           
5.27  
  
        
60.05    
Amou
nt 
Spent 
(Rs) 
 
1,912.
07  
      
153.16  
      
271.35  
             
3.03  
        
24.75  
                 
-    
        
15.26  
           
2.02  
             
6.90    
19
-
20 
Taken 
up 255 162 169   18 8   211 0   95   
Compl
eted  517 108 89   5 9   40 16   6   
Amou
nt 
sanctio
ned 
(Rs)  
      
426.1
4  
      
206.44  
      
248.94    
           
6.85  
        
54.77    
        
96.98  
                 
-      
      
105.79    
Amou
nt 
Spent 
(Rs) 
      
841.6
4  
      
232.44  
      
170.69    
           
9.10  
        
25.99    
        
21.42  
                 
-      
        
33.42    
20
-
21 
Taken 
up 599 149 1694   96 30 4 0 0   0   
Compl
eted  201 80 223   98 105 1 10 6   6   
Amou
nt 
sanctio
ned 
(Rs)  
 
1,446.
54  
      
232.07  
      
445.90    
        
82.36  
        
38.35  
29.574
99 
      
480.2
2  
                 
-      
                 
-      

76 
 
Amou
nt 
Spent 
(Rs) 
      
780.1
7  
      
229.11  
      
179.30    
        
10.15  
        
37.13  
14.457
6 
        
76.84  
                 
-      
                 
-      
21
-
22 
Taken 
up 329 282 2007   263 50 4 120 0   60   
Compl
eted  123 111 447   26 56 3 16 13   32   
Amou
nt 
sanctio
ned 
(Rs)  
                 
-    
      
414.99  
 
1,735.
52    
        
72.99  
        
45.04  0.1535 
        
98.18  
                 
-      
      
132.79    
Amou
nt 
Spent 
(Rs) 
      
599.6
0  
      
503.91  
      
769.23    
        
51.96  
        
41.91  0 
      
127.3
6  
                 
-      
        
38.02    
22
-
23 
Taken 
up 95 271 1161   12 47 11 74 0   138   
Compl
eted  107 374 1408   41 88 3 103 24   10   
Amou
nt 
sanctio
ned 
(Rs)  
      
137.3
3  
      
338.69  
 
1,510.
86    
        
64.80  
        
79.23  
           
0.28  
        
50.41  
                 
-      
        
47.84    
Amou
nt 
Spent 
(Rs) 
      
465.9
8  
      
343.74  
 
1,226.
77    
        
65.30  
        
66.56  
                 
-    
      
222.1
7  
                 
-      
        
53.63    
23
-
24 
Taken 
up 171 225 1821   29 59   816 0   96   
Compl
eted  14 97 160   3 40   12 12   8   
Amou
nt 
sanctio
ned 
(Rs)  
        
17.04  
      
666.46  
 
1,235.
56    
                 
-    
      
118.40    
      
161.2
9  
                 
-      
        
67.91    
Amou
nt 
Spent 
(Rs) 
      
134.7
3  
      
280.53  
 
1,116.
66    
        
19.79  
        
49.58    
      
197.5
8  
                 
-      
        
72.52    
 
14. Rajasthan 
Ye
ar  
Projec
ts  
Drinki
ng 
water 
Health
care  
Educa
tion  
Agricu
lture  
Sanita
tion  
Skill 
Devp  
Hou
sing 
WWC
* 
OA&D
A@ 
AH^ EP&P
M** 
Other
s  
16
-
17 
Taken 
up 2 4 52   7     1   1 2 3 
Compl
eted  1 2 36               2   
Amou
nt 
sancti
oned 
(Rs)  
           
0.19  
           
0.05  
           
1.53               
0.25                 
0.06               
0.10  
           
0.05  0.23 
Amou
nt 
Spent 
(Rs) 
           
0.15  
           
0.02  
           
0.89               
0.15                 
0.03                     
-    
           
0.04  0 
Taken 
up 266 727 1949 23 36 3   90 8   26 139 

77 
 
17
-
18 
Compl
eted  150 644 1376 23 4 3   17     8 101 
Amou
nt 
sancti
oned 
(Rs)  
        
49.34  
        
12.20  
      
212.0
9  
           
0.68  
           
4.65  
           
0.16               
1.60  
           
0.24               
2.58  
129.9
966 
Amou
nt 
Spent 
(Rs) 
        
28.00  
           
3.45  
      
135.7
6  
                 
-    
           
2.95  
           
0.01               
1.11  
                 
-                 
1.28  
104.2
452 
18
-
19 
Taken 
up 995 489 898 2 2833     136 62 2 401 91 
Compl
eted  1104 599 1300   18 3   6 1   177 29 
Amou
nt 
sancti
oned 
(Rs)  
      
150.1
3  
        
19.83  
      
125.3
6  
                 
-    
      
165.7
7  
            
33.56  
           
0.91  
                 
-    
        
28.96  
55.72
63 
Amou
nt 
Spent 
(Rs) 
        
51.67  
        
13.41  
        
87.87  
                 
-    
        
27.97                 
4.50  
           
2.01  
                 
-    
        
12.81  
24.53
075 
19
-
20 
Taken 
up 109 258 48     123   85 0   141 918 
Compl
eted  282 388 58   1       1   1 1 
Amou
nt 
sancti
oned 
(Rs)  
                 
-    
        
51.45  
           
0.86              
41.58               
5.37  
                 
-              
24.01  
      
152.7
7  
Amou
nt 
Spent 
(Rs) 
           
7.42  
        
63.88  
           
3.13              
23.21            
50.06  
                 
-              
10.37  
      
196.4
9  
20
-
21 
Taken 
up 921 2144 612     200   0 7   15 142 
Compl
eted  363 284 123   2 1   5 1   6 24 
Amou
nt 
sancti
oned 
(Rs)  
        
97.29  
      
276.82  
      
359.3
4  
                     
-                       
-    
                 
-                 
5.00  
105.7
123 
Amou
nt 
Spent 
(Rs) 
           
9.55  
      
167.93  
      
149.7
3  
            
26.43               
2.00  
                 
-                       
-    
46.70
909 
21
-
22 
Taken 
up 893 4243 0 1 0     179 0 2 0 397 
Compl
eted  235 219 191 1 2         2 24 42 
Amou
nt 
sancti
oned 
(Rs)  
      
227.8
1  
      
145.00  
                 
-    
           
0.47  
        
97.40                       
-    
                 
-    
           
5.15  
        
35.51  
157.7
193 

78 
 
Amou
nt 
Spent 
(Rs) 
      
148.9
8  
      
159.68  
                 
-    
           
0.42  
                 
-                         
-    
                 
-    
           
2.99  
        
19.15  
106.5
95 
22
-
23 
Taken 
up 2331 304 0 5 0     0 3 13 233 127 
Compl
eted  80 175 144 1 3 2   5   4 12 9 
Amou
nt 
sancti
oned 
(Rs)  
      
588.0
4  
      
772.28  
      
123.6
1  
           
2.02  
      
141.8
1  
            
29.37  
        
26.23  
        
55.58  
        
14.73  
218.6
585 
Amou
nt 
Spent 
(Rs) 
        
82.97  
        
78.81  
        
41.28  
           
2.01  
        
45.68              
18.79  
           
1.01  
        
17.67  
           
6.55  
92.74
4 
23
-
24 
Taken 
up 743 1695 1507 1 763     67 45 1 190 1548 
Compl
eted  27 13 36 1       24 1   5 6 
Amou
nt 
sancti
oned 
(Rs)  
      
175.0
6  
      
181.37  
      
232.3
7  
           
1.64  
      
263.1
1  
            
24.43  
        
43.54  
                 
-    
        
15.77  
253.0
136 
Amou
nt 
Spent 
(Rs) 
        
92.88  
        
71.23  
        
81.70  
           
1.33  
      
165.7
6  
            
12.51  
           
4.87  
                 
-    
           
5.33  
82.30
507 
 
15. Tamil Nadu 
Ye
ar  
Project
s  
Drinki
ng 
water 
Health
care  
Educa
tion  
Agricul
ture  
Sanita
tion  
Skill 
Devp  
Hous
ing 
WWC
* 
OA&D
A@ 
A
H
^ 
EP&P
M** 
Other
s  
17
-
18 
Taken 
up   3                     
Compl
eted    3                     
Amou
nt 
sancti
oned 
(Rs)  
             
0.13                      
Amou
nt 
Spent 
(Rs) 
             
0.13                      
18
-
19 
Taken 
up 234 194 252   120 15   50 87   12 6 
Compl
eted  183 175 191   113 15   48 87   12   
Amou
nt 
sancti
oned 
(Rs)  
      
138.2
6  
        
13.73  
        
13.06               
5.58  
           
2.26               
4.69  
           
0.95               
1.16  
           
0.23  
Amou
nt 
Spent 
(Rs) 
      
127.7
7  
        
11.92  
           
7.91               
4.86  
           
1.76               
4.68  
           
0.95               
1.16  
           
0.22  
Taken 
up 92 88 8   101 0   30 85   0   

79 
 
19
-
20 
Compl
eted  30 45 26   11     2       2 
Amou
nt 
sancti
oned 
(Rs)  
        
89.18  
           
7.25  
           
1.66               
4.89  
                 
-                 
3.71  
           
0.77                     
-      
Amou
nt 
Spent 
(Rs) 
      
106.1
8  
           
7.39  
           
0.05               
0.30  
           
1.73               
3.77  
           
0.73                     
-      
20
-
21 
Taken 
up 159 253 84   28 5   0 19   6   
Compl
eted  59 226 47   4 5     4   5   
Amou
nt 
sancti
oned 
(Rs)  
        
99.70  
        
34.26  
        
13.30               
4.72  
           
0.54                     
-    
           
0.63               
2.83    
Amou
nt 
Spent 
(Rs) 
        
97.48  
        
22.25  
           
7.83               
3.90  
           
0.50                     
-    
           
0.26                     
-      
21
-
22 
Taken 
up 2 45 2   0 1   6 2   0   
Compl
eted  3 26 3         6         
Amou
nt 
sancti
oned 
(Rs)  
           
0.24  
           
5.88  
           
0.17                     
-    
           
0.06               
0.53  
           
0.03                     
-      
Amou
nt 
Spent 
(Rs) 
        
24.36  
        
15.17  
           
4.66               
1.42  
                 
-                 
0.04  
           
0.09               
1.48    
22
-
23 
Taken 
up 59 22 72   6 8   6 6   2   
Compl
eted  8 11 24     9   6 6     1 
Amou
nt 
sancti
oned 
(Rs)  
        
35.17  
        
12.17  
        
26.23               
0.33  
           
0.65               
0.42  
           
0.10               
0.49    
Amou
nt 
Spent 
(Rs) 
        
18.66  
           
3.36  
           
3.16               
0.90  
           
0.59               
0.91  
           
0.13               
0.88    
23
-
24 
Taken 
up 59 72 93   2 3   9 0   19   
Compl
eted  13 4 2         1         
Amou
nt 
sancti
oned 
(Rs)  
        
30.62  
        
20.89  
        
41.39               
0.30  
           
0.62               
1.25  
                 
-              
11.59    
Amou
nt 
Spent 
(Rs) 
        
31.69  
        
14.07  
        
23.79               
0.18  
           
0.53               
0.12  
           
0.17               
0.10    
 
 

80 
 
16. Telangana  
Ye
ar  
Project
s  
Drinki
ng 
water 
Healthc
are  
Educat
ion  
Agricult
ure  
Sanitat
ion  
Skill 
Dev
p  
Housi
ng 
WW
C* 
OA&D
A@ 
AH
^ 
EP&P
M** 
Oth
ers  
17-
18 
Taken 
up 2311 43 374   354 307   28 2   34   
Comple
ted  2194 21 256   312 129   10 2   27   
Amoun
t 
sanctio
ned 
(Rs)  
22.46 20.04 49.88   11.40 34.6
2   9.05 0.10   19.58   
Amoun
t Spent 
(Rs) 
19.76 16.86 38.88   9.49 13.4
9   6.85 0.10   12.68   
18-
19 
Taken 
up 1093 266 1804   1727 143
1   240 22   35 55 
Comple
ted  832 137 1340   1100 375   78 18   27 21 
Amoun
t 
sanctio
ned 
(Rs)  
22.55 38.19 113.95   136.08 103.
26   16.8
9 1.29   12.41 6.83 
Amoun
t Spent 
(Rs) 
14.70 22.22 76.85   63.82 41.3
0   6.38 0.90   5.02 4.28 
19-
20 
Taken 
up 419 172 1482   1664 883   378 11   957 48 
Comple
ted  200 79 708   351 13   44 4   742 44 
Amoun
t 
sanctio
ned 
(Rs)  
31.89 36.77 111.76 
  
136.67 61.0
9 
  
37.6
0 0.86 
  
67.54 1.72 
Amoun
t Spent 
(Rs) 
21.25 5.32 53.38 
  
66.15 6.47 
  
16.6
0 0.00 
  
9.21 1.35 
20-
21 
Taken 
up 884 282 1100   728 122   0 16   309 11 
Comple
ted  53 266 85   324 18   0 0   261 10 
Amoun
t 
sanctio
ned 
(Rs)  
3.46 63.13 121.27 
  
47.59 7.98 
  
0.00 0.15 
  
7.90 1.00 
Amoun
t Spent 
(Rs) 
9.95 56.20 68.31 
  
49.24 11.3
0   
2.97 0.44 
  
28.82 0.96 
21-
22 
Taken 
up 274 271 69   578 123   36 18   211 6 
Comple
ted  207 223 113   485 36   3 1   148 2 
Amoun
t 
sanctio
ned 
(Rs)  
7.86 28.87 15.60 
  
24.41 12.7
5 
  
2.96 0.00 
  
9.05 0.37 
Amoun
t Spent 
(Rs) 
9.07 38.50 48.48 
  
48.40 19.1
9   
2.77 0.48 
  
23.33 0.15 

81 
 
22-
23 
Taken 
up 372 161 228   345 297   51 3   37 94 
Comple
ted  81 134 132   133 30   18 2   35 26 
Amoun
t 
sanctio
ned 
(Rs)  
14.41 14.69 23.96 
  
50.86 29.6
0 
  
5.80 0.20 
  
13.76 5.82 
Amoun
t Spent 
(Rs) 
5.69 22.75 56.06 
  
26.19 13.4
5   
2.72 0.23 
  
7.39 0.49 
23-
24 
Taken 
up 288 112 380   421 273   0 4   220 106 
Comple
ted  46 80 365   122 12   9 0   47 10 
Amoun
t 
sanctio
ned 
(Rs)  
15.91 8.95 44.58 
  
29.27 31.8
0 
  
0.00 0.86 
  
46.64 4.85 
Amoun
t Spent 
(Rs) 
11.43 10.73 18.77 
  
30.76 11.4
1   
0.00 0.81 
  
22.62 0.56 
 
17. Uttarakhand 
Ye
ar  
Project
s  
Drinki
ng 
water 
Healthc
are  
Educat
ion  
Agricult
ure  
Sanitat
ion  
Skil
l 
De
vp  
Housi
ng 
WW
C* 
OA&D
A@ 
AH
^ 
EP&P
M** 
Oth
ers  
17-
18 
Taken 
up                       1 
Comple
ted                        1 
Amoun
t 
sanctio
ned 
(Rs)  
                      0.47 
Amoun
t Spent 
(Rs) 
                      0.47 
18-
19 
Taken 
up 5 8 130     1   1     3   
Comple
ted  3 8 130     1   1     3   
Amoun
t 
sanctio
ned 
(Rs)  
0.32 0.48 3.13     0.2
6   0.02     0.23   
Amoun
t Spent 
(Rs) 
0.26 0.27 3.04     0.2
6   0.00     0.23   
19-
20 
Taken 
up 14 11 14         4 42     1 
Comple
ted  15 7 10                 1 
Amoun
t 
sanctio
ned 
(Rs)  
1.22 0.82 1.65         0.33 0.28     2.50 

82 
 
Amoun
t Spent 
(Rs) 
0.00 0.00 0.02         0.00 0.00     2.48 
20-
21 
Taken 
up 15 24 67 3 5 13   10 3 1 2 7 
Comple
ted  46 55 80 0 5 1       1   7 
Amoun
t 
sanctio
ned 
(Rs)  
1.55 0.46 3.72 3.13 0.37 0.5
1   0.20 0.28 0.9
9 0.17 2.00 
Amoun
t Spent 
(Rs) 
0.00 0.23 0.00 0.65 0.37 0.0
0   0.00 0.25 0.0
0 0.00 1.99 
21-
22 
Taken 
up 72 48 78 3 1 15   0 43   5 19 
Comple
ted  30 20 103 1 7 7   2 2   2 15 
Amoun
t 
sanctio
ned 
(Rs)  
7.08 18.30 1.99 0.66 0.16 8.1
0   0.19 0.33   0.22 2.98 
Amoun
t Spent 
(Rs) 
3.26 10.70 0.00 0.66 0.00 0.4
6   0.00 0.00   0.07 1.71 
22-
23 
Taken 
up 102 62 89   4 17   1 1   1 162 
Comple
ted  6 10 26   1     5 1   1 23 
Amoun
t 
sanctio
ned 
(Rs)  
8.73 15.70 11.65   0.45 0.8
3   0.00 0.01   0.05 10.1
4 
Amoun
t Spent 
(Rs) 
7.07 14.95 15.26   0.24 0.2
1   2.88 0.05   0.03 0.46 
23-
24 
Taken 
up 23 38 175   9 13   0 1 5 6 93 
Comple
ted  7 9 28   2     1   1   13 
Amoun
t 
sanctio
ned 
(Rs)  
2.31 13.44 14.11 
  
0.40 1.1
3 
  
0.16 0.03 5.3
6 0.37 5.57 
Amoun
t Spent 
(Rs) 
4.41 13.15 12.67 
  
0.53 1.0
8   
0.00 0.02 0.1
0 0.35 1.57 
 
18. Uttar Pradesh 
Ye
ar  
Projec
ts  
Drinki
ng 
water 
Health
care  
Educa
tion  
Agricu
lture  
Sanita
tion  
Skill 
Devp  
Hou
sing 
WWC
* 
OA&D
A@ 
AH^ EP&P
M** 
Other
s  
17
-
18 
Taken 
up 1 1 4   2         1 1   
Compl
eted  1 1 4   1         1 1   
Amou
nt 
sancti
           
0.04  
           
0.08  
           
0.31  
             
0.50  
                   
0.12  
           
0.32  
  

83 
 
oned 
(Rs)  
Amou
nt 
Spent 
(Rs) 
           
0.04  
           
0.07  
           
0.31  
             
0.50  
                   
0.12  
           
0.30  
  
18
-
19 
Taken 
up 51 12 30   150 5   1     9 10 
Compl
eted  36 3 27   149 1   1     5 8 
Amou
nt 
sancti
oned 
(Rs)  
      
113.0
2  
           
3.00  
        
13.05  
  
        
26.26  
           
1.36  
  
           
0.24  
    
           
0.47  
           
1.32  
Amou
nt 
Spent 
(Rs) 
        
94.20  
           
1.19  
        
12.12  
             
1.90  
           
0.12  
             
0.24  
               
0.26  
           
1.44  
19
-
20 
Taken 
up 182 106 15   1 0   1 1   1   
Compl
eted  41 10 9 1 3     1826   1     
Amou
nt 
sancti
oned 
(Rs)  
        
23.54  
        
10.22  
           
2.79    
           
0.66  
                 
-      
           
0.03  
           
0.14    
           
0.66    
Amou
nt 
Spent 
(Rs) 
        
22.85  
           
6.12  
           
2.67    
           
0.58  
                 
-      
           
0.11  
                 
-      
           
0.58    
20
-
21 
Taken 
up 45 26 2930   3 0   5 2   3   
Compl
eted  7 92 3456   6 1   8 1 1 8 11 
Amou
nt 
sancti
oned 
(Rs)  
        
28.66  
           
1.87  
      
110.6
0    
           
0.17  
                 
-      
           
0.97  
           
0.30    
           
0.17    
Amou
nt 
Spent 
(Rs) 
        
51.68  
           
1.89  
        
67.02    
           
0.39  
                 
-      
           
0.83  
           
0.26    
           
0.39    
21
-
22 
Taken 
up 2 30 8   0 0   0 0   0   
Compl
eted  2 45 28   1 1   614     4 21 
Amou
nt 
sancti
oned 
(Rs)  
           
0.30  
        
14.18  
           
7.15    
                 
-    
                 
-      
                 
-    
                 
-      
                 
-      
Amou
nt 
Spent 
(Rs) 
        
21.75  
        
16.48  
           
2.57    
                 
-    
                 
-      
                 
-    
                 
-      
                 
-      
22
-
23 
Taken 
up 7 30 16   32 2   0 0   3   
Compl
eted  5 32 14 1 8     536   1 247   

84 
 
Amou
nt 
sancti
oned 
(Rs)  
           
1.80  
        
11.87  
        
48.09    
        
20.26  
           
0.76    
           
0.01  
                 
-      
           
0.17    
Amou
nt 
Spent 
(Rs) 
           
7.05  
           
8.72  
        
11.86    
           
5.82  
           
0.38    
                 
-    
                 
-      
           
0.39    
23
-
24 
Taken 
up 67 27 1288   27 10   569 11   1   
Compl
eted  1 8 12   2     2   1 8 12 
Amou
nt 
sancti
oned 
(Rs)  
        
18.15  
        
20.25  
                 
-      
           
7.80  
           
2.62    
        
24.96  
           
2.75    
           
0.66    
Amou
nt 
Spent 
(Rs) 
        
12.83  
           
7.62  
           
6.44    
        
11.52  
           
2.58    
        
21.24  
           
1.53    
           
0.58    
 
 
19. West Bengal 
Ye
ar  
Projec
ts  
Drinki
ng 
water 
Health
care  
Educat
ion  
Agricu
lture  
Sanitat
ion  
Skill 
Devp  
Hou
sing WWC* OA&D
A@ 
A
H
^ 
EP&P
M** 
Oth
ers  
18
-
19 
Taken 
up 4 2 2   6     2     0   
Compl
eted                          
Amou
nt 
sancti
oned 
(Rs)  0.08 0.1 0.14 
  
0.24 
    
0.04 
    
  
  
Amou
nt 
Spent 
(Rs) 0 0 0 
  
0 
    
0 
    
0 
  
19
-
20 
Taken 
up 13 1 0   1 0         4   
Compl
eted                          
Amou
nt 
sancti
oned 
(Rs)  0.57 0.09 0.01 
  
0.08 0.01 
        
0.43 
  
Amou
nt 
Spent 
(Rs) 0.3 0.08 0 
  
0.05 0 
        
0.37 
  
20
-
21 
Taken 
up 89 24 158   1 10   638 1   3   
Compl
eted                          
Amou
nt 
sancti
oned 
(Rs)  
           
2.23  
           
1.29  
           
2.21  
  
           
0.13  
           
0.16  
  
           
2.08  
           
0.02  
  
           
0.85  
  

85 
 
Amou
nt 
Spent 
(Rs) 
           
0.85  
           
1.25  
           
2.31  
             
0.19  
           
0.07  
             
2.09  
           
0.02  
             
0.18  
  
21
-
22 
Taken 
up 3 35 30   1 1   26 0   1   
Compl
eted                          
Amou
nt 
sancti
oned 
(Rs)  
           
0.15  
           
2.44  
           
2.70  
  
           
0.08  
           
0.08  
  
           
0.39  
                 
-    
  
           
0.05  
  
Amou
nt 
Spent 
(Rs) 
           
0.11  
           
2.45  
           
2.59  
                   
-    
                 
-    
             
0.39  
                 
-    
                   
-    
  
22
-
23 
Taken 
up 23 4 15   5 14   3 10   0   
Compl
eted                          
Amou
nt 
sancti
oned 
(Rs)  
           
1.38  
           
0.39  
           
1.08  
  
           
0.35  
           
1.39  
  
           
0.19  
           
0.49  
  
                 
-    
  
Amou
nt 
Spent 
(Rs) 
           
1.46  
           
0.18  
           
0.84  
             
0.08  
           
1.31  
             
0.13  
           
0.20  
             
0.05  
  
23
-
24 
Taken 
up   
               
18  
                 
-            
                 
-    
                  
9    
                 
-      
Compl
eted                          
Amou
nt 
sancti
oned 
(Rs)    
           
1.29  
                 
-            
           
0.29  
                 
-      
                 
-      
Amou
nt 
Spent 
(Rs)   
           
0.18  
                 
-            
           
0.07  
           
0.44    
           
0.05    
 
20. Meghalaya 
Ye
ar  
Project
s  
Drinki
ng 
water 
Health
care  
Educat
ion  
Agricul
ture  
Sanita
tion  
Skill 
Devp  
Hous
ing WWC* OA&D
A@ 
A
H^ 
EP&P
M** 
Oth
ers  
19
-
20 
Taken 
up 3 1 6     1         2   
Compl
eted  3   6     1         2   
Amoun
t 
sanctio
ned 
(Rs)  
           
1.68  
           
0.02  
           
2.52      
           
0.02          
           
1.65    
Amoun
t Spent 
(Rs) 
           
1.68  
           
0.00  
           
2.52      
           
0.02          
           
1.65    
20
-
21 
Taken 
up 2   4   2 2   3     3   
Compl
eted  1   4   2 2   3     3   

86 
 
Amoun
t 
sanctio
ned 
(Rs)  
           
0.33    
           
0.30    
           
1.29  
           
0.41    
           
0.51      
           
0.51    
Amoun
t Spent 
(Rs) 
           
2.11    
           
0.30    
           
1.27  
           
0.41    
           
0.51      
           
0.51    
21
-
22 
Taken 
up   2 6   2           1   
Compl
eted    1 5   1               
Amoun
t 
sanctio
ned 
(Rs)    
           
1.05  
           
2.32    
           
0.17            
           
0.05    
Amoun
t Spent 
(Rs)   
           
0.05  
           
0.71    
           
0.17            
                 
-      
22
-
23 
Taken 
up 2 4 11   2     1     2   
Compl
eted    1 5                   
Amoun
t 
sanctio
ned 
(Rs)  
           
0.68  
           
0.24  
           
1.66    
                 
-        
           
0.06      
           
0.17    
Amoun
t Spent 
(Rs) 
           
0.60  
           
0.24  
           
1.65    
                 
-        
           
0.06      
           
0.17    
23
-
24 
Taken 
up 2 5 18   2 1         1   
Compl
eted    3       1         1   
Amoun
t 
sanctio
ned 
(Rs)  
           
0.15  
           
0.61  
           
2.91    
           
0.04  
           
0.02          
           
0.00    
Amoun
t Spent 
(Rs) 
           
0.15  
           
0.61  
           
2.30    
           
0.04  
           
0.02          
           
0.00    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

87 
 
MINUTES OF THE THIRTEENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
COAL, MINES AND STE EL HELD ON 03 rd MARCH, 2025 IN COMMITTEE ROOM 2, 
PARLIAMENT HOUSE ANNEXE EXTN. BUILDING, BLOCK A, NEW DELHI. 
 The Committee sat from 1115 hrs. to 1415 hrs.  
PRESENT 
Shri Anurag Singh Thakur- Chairperson 
Lok Sabha 
 
32.  Shri Sukhdeo Bhagat 
33.  Smt. Roopkumari Choudhary 
34.  Smt. Kamlesh Jangde 
35.  Shri Selvaganapathi T.M. 
36.  Shri Harish Chandra Meena  
37.  Shri Ananta Nayak 
38.  Dr. Manna Lal Rawat 
39.  Shri Kali Charan Singh  
40.  Shri Shatrughan Prasad Sinha 
41.  Smt. Pratibha Suresh Dhanorkar 
 
Rajya Sabha  
 
42.  Shri Anil Kumar Yadav Mandadi 
43. Shri Aditya Prasad 
44. Shri Pradip Kumar Varma 
45. Dr Fauzia Khan 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri  Srinivasulu Gunda  - Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Jagriti Tewatia  - Director 
3. Smt. Sunanda Chatterjee  - Deputy Secretary 
 
WITNESSES 
MINISTRY OF MINES 
 
1. Shri V.L. Kantha Rao, Secretary, Ministry of Mines 
2. Shri Dinesh Mahur, Joint Secretary, Ministry of Mines 
      REPRESENTATIVES OF THE STATE GOVERNMENTS 
1. Shrimati Alka Tiwari, Chief Secretary, Government of Jharkhand 
2. Shri Manoj Ahuja, Chief Secretary Government of Odisha 
3. Shri Arava Rajkamal, Director Mines, Govt. of Jharkhand 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Secretary, other representatives of 
the Ministry of Mines and Chief Secretaries of State Governments of Jharkhand and 
Odisha to the sitting of the Committee convened for Oral evidence regarding examination 
of the subject “Implementation and Utilization of District Mineral Foundation (DMF) Fund, 
Pradhan Mantri Khanij Kshetra Kalyan Yojana (PMKKKY) – A Review. During the course 

88 
 
of his welcome speech the Chairperson pointed  out about t he main concern before the 
Committee is not only about low spending of the fund, but also other matters such as 
transparency in their operations, monitoring and audit mechanism and desired to know 
about the impact and outcomes of the DMF on the lives of the affected communities. The 
Chairperson, then drew their attention to Direction 55(1) of the Directions by the Speaker, 
Lok Sabha regarding confidentiality of the proceedings. Thereafter, he directed the 
representatives to introduce themselves.  
3. The Secretary, Ministry of Mines , thereafter, gave a Power Point Presentation 
regarding DMF/PMKKKY which was launched in 2015 through amendment in the MMDR 
Act, 1957 and apprised the Committee in detail regarding the guidelines/objectives to 
implement various developmental and welfare projects; how these projects/programs are 
complementing the existing ongoing schemes; initiatives taken to minimize/mitigate the 
adverse impact on the environment and society; and to ensure long -term sustainable 
development in the area etc.  The Committee were also apprised of the revised guidelines 
issued in 2024 wherein some new important initiatives were taken viz.  Pre Level 
Grievance Redressal Mechanism, State Level Monitoring Committee and Compliance 
Mechanism with Provision for Suspension of Works and Funds etc.  
4.  The Committee then sought certain clarifications from Chief Secretaries of 
Government of Odisha and Jharkhand on various issues related to implementation of .  
DMF and also newly enacted guidelines  under DMF/PMKKKY. Thereafter, the Chief 
Secretaries or Odisha and Jharkhand also presented a brief PPT before the Committee 
apprising therein about collection of DMF, utilization status, projects sanctioned and 
completed etc.  
5. The representatives of Ministry of Mines also replied to some of the queries of the 
Members. The Chairperson then directed the representatives of the Ministry of Mines and 

89 
 
Chief Secretaries of Jharkhand and Odisha to furnish written replies to the queries raised 
by the Members which remained unanswered during the Sittings of the Committee. 
6. Hon’ble Chairperson thanked the Members of the Committee and Officials of the 
Ministry and Chief Secretaries of State Governments of Jharkhand and Odisha for their 
active participation in the Sittings of the Committee. 
7. The witnesses then withdrew. 
 A copy of verbatim record of the Sittings of the Committee has been kept 
separately. 
  The Committee then adjourned. 
 
  
  

90 
 
MINUTES OF THE SIXTEENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON COAL, 
MINES AND ST EEL HELD ON 01st APRIL, 2025 IN COMMITTEE ROOM B, 
PARLIAMENT HOUSE ANNEXE, NEW DELHI. 
 The Committee sat from 1615 hrs. to 1700 hrs.  
PRESENT 
Shri Anurag Singh Thakur- Chairperson 
Lok Sabha 
 
46. Smt. Roopkumari Choudhary 
47. Shri Vijay Kumar Hansdak 
48. Smt. Kamlesh Jangde 
49. Shri Govind Makthappa Karjol 
50. Shri Vidyut Baran Mahato 
51. Shri Harish Chandra Meena  
52. Shri Ananta Nayak 
53. Smt. Bharati Pardhi 
54. Dr. Manna Lal Rawat 
55. Dr. Rajkumar Sangwan 
56. Shri Kali Charan Singh  
57. Shri Shatrughan Prasad Sinha 
58. Smt. Pratibha Suresh Dhanorkar 
 
Rajya Sabha  
 
59. Shri Anil Kumar Yadav Mandadi 
60. Shri Rwngwra Narzary 
61. Shri Deepak Prakash 
62. Shri Aditya Prasad 
63. Shri Devendra Pratap Singh 
64. Dr Fauzia Khan 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri  Srinivasulu Gunda  - Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Jagriti Tewatia  - Director 
3. Smt. Sunanda Chatterjee  - Deputy Secretary 
 
2. At the outset, Chairperson welcomed the Member to the Sitting of the Committee. 
3. The Committee thereafter took up for consideration Draft Report on the subject 
‘Implementation and Utilization of District Mineral Foundation ( DMF) Fund and Pradhan 
Mantri Khanij Kshetra Kalyan Yojana (PMKKKY) – A Review’- pertaining to the Ministry of 
Mines. 
4. After due deliberations, the Committee adopted the Draft Report with slight 
modifications as shown in the Annexure. 
5.  The Committee also decided to change the title of the report from ‘Implementation 
and Utilization of District Mineral Foundation (DMF) Fund, Pradhan Mantri Khanij Kshetra 
Kalyan Yojana (PMKKKY) – A Review and, Social Security for contract workers and their 

91 
 
relief and reha bilitation’ to ‘Implementation and Utilization of Distric t Mineral 
Foundation (DMF) Fund and  Pradhan Mantri Khanij Kshetra Kalyan Yojana 
(PMKKKY) – A Review’ as they have confined to DMF and it’s functioning only. 
6. The Committee then authorized the Chairperson to finalize the Reports in the light 
of the factual verification received from the concerned Ministries and present and lay the 
same in the Lok Sabha and Rajya Sabha respectively.  
  The Committee, then, adjourned. 
**** 
 
  

92 
 
Annexure 
Modifications Made in the Draft Report on the subject ‘Implementation and Utilization of 
District Mineral Foundation (DMF) Fund and Pradhan Mantri Khanij Kshetra Kalyan Yojana 
(PMKKKY) – A Review’ 
 
SN. Para Nos. Recommendation 
Portion of the 
Draft Report 
Revised Recommendation Portion of the Draft Report After 
Changes Suggested by the Committee 
1. After 
Recommend
ation Para 
No.7 
 
After 
Recommendation 
Para No.7 
 
New 
Recommendation 
Para Nos. 8, 9 
and 10 added  
(and subsequent 
recommendatio
ns will be 
numbered 
accordingly) 
 
Added: Role of public representatives in the governance of 
DMF  
8. The mandate of the Governing Council of DMF, the 
Committee note, is to manage the DMF Trust. The Governing 
Council is headed by District Magistrate/Collector and it mainly 
consists of District officials such as Additional District 
Magistrate, District S uperintendent of Police, Chief Executive 
Officer of Zila Panchayat and line Department Officials.  Public 
representatives of public, such as MPs, MLAs, MLCs, selected 
panchayati raj institution are also members.    It may, therefore, 
be seen that Governing  Council is predominantly, a 
bureaucratic set up.  
9.   The role of the Governing Council is to lay down the broad 
policy framework for the Trust, review activities, participate in 
annual planning, approve annual plans and budgets, conduct 
audits of scheme s and works, reviewing annual reports and 
accounts, ratifying appointments of officers and auditors etc.  
10.   The Committee are of the view that elected Members of 
Parliament, being representatives of the public, are in a better 
position to appreciate th e needs and aspirations of the people 
of the area and hence are eminently qualified to lead the policy 
making Governing Councils instead of career bureaucrat.  
Presently, the Dist. Magistrate heads both the policy 
formulating   Governing Councils and also the Policy 
implementing Managing Committees. The Committee are of 
the considered opinion that this arrangement of the same 
officials heading both the Policy making and policy 
implementing bodies is not in tune with the separation of power 
of policy making and policy implementation.  In view of the 
aforementioned, the Committee suggest that elected members 
of Parliament representing the mining affected areas may be 
considered for heading the Governing Councils of DMF Trusts. 
In case a mining affected area falls under two different Lok 
Sabha constituencies – the Minister who is in-charge of the 
affected area or the MP of the majority area which is 
affected or the senior MP, in that order, may be made the 
Chairperson of the Council and the other MP may be made 
a member; District Magistrate may be a member of the 
Governing Council and also the Chairperson of the 
Managing Committee.   
 
2. Recommend
ation No. 11 
Line No. 02 
For the words 
‘…they feel it 
appropriate to 
suggest that…’ 
Read as ‘….thus it will be appropriate to suggest that…’  
 
3. Recommend
ation No. 11 
After the words 
‘…and output of 
Added …‘ The Committee are of the view that third party 
assessment by Civil Society, NGO, independent 
organizations, research bodies/Universit ies etc. may be 

93 
 
Line No. 04 
the amounts 
spent.’ 
conducted to assess the impact of these projects on 
improving the quality of life of the mining affected persons.’ 
 
4. Recommend
ation Para 
No.13 
At the end of the 
recommendation  
Added : 
The Committee further suggest that 70% of the funds may 
be spent specifically in the radius of 15 kms. affected area 
and remaining 30% of funds on the other areas of the 
District. 
 
5. Recommend
ation No. 15 
Line No. 07 
After the words 
‘…durability of 
infrastructure and 
adaptability to 
changing 
conditions etc.’ 
Added …‘ The Committee while acknowledging the creation 
of endowment fund for ensuring long term sustainable 
development of projects suggest that in the audit report of 
DMF a mention about the creation, operation and financial 
performance of endowment fund may be made.’ 
 
6. New 
Recommend
ation add 
after 
Recommend
ation No. 17 
 
After the last 
words ‘…DMF for 
the purposes for 
which the fund is 
meant for’ of the 
Recommendation 
No. 17 
Added ‘Benchmarking and Performance Ranking  
 With a view to infuse healthy  competition among the 
DMFs to perform better , the Committee suggest the Ministry 
to  devise  ‘DMF District Ranking Index’ taking into 
consideration various parameters  such as  utilization of funds, 
number of  projects taken up and completed, timely exec ution 
of the projects, transparency, carryout impact assessment 
studies by third parties, etc.  Such an index should be 
prominently displayed in the national DMF portal managed by 
the Ministry of Mines and also the state portals of DMFs.  
Further such an Index should be devised and made operational 
within the timelines.’  
7. Recommend
ation No. 21 
Line No. 11 
After the words 
‘…preparation of 
five-year 
perspective plan 
by DMFs’ 
Added ‘…(iii) Social impact report may be submitted.’  
 
 
8. Recommend
ation No. 22 
Line No. 15 
 
After the words 
‘…the Ministry 
should ensure 
that the 
DMF/PMKKKY 
projects 
enhance 
rather…’ 
Read as … ‘the Ministry should ensure that the 
DMF/PMKKKY projects enhance/converge rather’… 
 
 