23 
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON WATER RESOURCES 
(2022-23) 
 
 
SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
MINISTRY OF JAL SHAKTI  
 DEPARTMENT OF WATER RESOURCES, RIVER DEVELOPMENT & GANGA 
REJUVENATION 
 
 
Glacier Management in the Country- Monitoring of Glaciers/Lakes including 
Glacial Lake Outbursts leading to Flash-floods in the Himalayan Region 
 
TWENTY THIRD REPORT 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
March, 2023 /Chaitra,1945 (Saka) 
 
 
 


TWENTY THIRD REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON WATER RESOURCES 
(2022-23) 
 
(SEVENTEENTH  LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF JAL SHAKTI  
DEPARTMENT OF WATER RESOURCES, RIVER DEVELOPMENT & GANGA REJUVENATION 
 
Glacier Management in the Country- Monitoring of Glaciers/Lakes including 
Glacial Lake Outbursts leading to Flash-floods in the Himalayan Region. 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on  29.03.2023 
Laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on  29.03.2023 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
March, 2023 /Chaitra,1945 (Saka) 
 
 
 


W. R. C.  No.78 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price :  Rs.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
        © 2021 By Lok Sabha Secretariat 
  
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha  (Sixteenth 
Edition) and Printed by  
 
 
 
 

CONTENTS 
 Page 
Nos. 
Composition of the Committee (2022-23) (iv) 
Introduction (vi) 
Abbreviations (vii) 
REPORT  
PART I 
 
 
I. (i) Introductory 1 
 (ii) Definition of Glacier 1 
 (iii) Glacier vis-a-vis  Himalayan Cryosphere 2 
 (iv) Glaciers located in the Indian Himalayan region 
 
2 
II MELTING AND RETREATING OF HIMALAYAN GLACIERS 
 
 
(i) Black Carbon and its impact on Himalayan Glaciers 
 
4 
4 
III LEGISLATIVE FRAMEWORK FOR GLACIER MANAGEMENT 
(i)  
(ii)  
 (i)      Agencies involved in monitoring and management of the  
          Himalayan Glaciers 
9 
9 
 (ii) Studies/findings of some of the Departments/ 
Agencies/Institutions with regard to the spatial movement 
and behaviour of the Himalayan glaciers 
10 
 (iii) Solutions/Suggestions by various 
Departments/Agencies/Institutions for effective ‘Glacier 
Management in the country 
11 
 (iv) Utilization of funds for Conservation and Management of 
Glaciers 
 
15 
IV MONITORING OF GLACIAL LAKES AND GLACIAL LAKE 
OUTBURST FLOODS (GLOFS) IN THE HIMALAYAN REGION 
 
(i) Incidents of Glacial lake outburst floods in the Himalayan 
Region in the recent past 
17 
 
17 
 (ii) Sharing of Data/Information in respect of Glaciers 19 
 (iii) Landslide Lake Outburst Flood (LLOF) and Lake Shore 
Drive (LSD) Breach induced Flash Floods 
20 
 (iv) Monitoring of Glacial Lakes 21 
 (v) Flood Forecasting/Monitoring Stations in the Indian Himalayan 
Region 
 
24 

V GLACIER DISASTER MANAGEMENT 
 
28 
 (i) Role of NDMA 28 
 (ii) Role of National Disaster Response Force (NDRF) 30 
 (iii) Public Awareness to prevent Glacier Disasters 
  
31 
 PART II 
 
 
 OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS 33 
 ANNEXURES  
 (i) Minutes of the Ninth Sitting (2020-21)  of the Committee 
held on 23.03.2021 
46 
 (ii) Minutes of the Tenth Sitting (2020-21)  of the Committee 
held on 08.04.2021 
49 
 (iii) Minutes of the Eleventh Sitting (2020-21)  of the 
Committee held on 21.06.2021 
52 
 (iv) Minutes of the Seventh Sitting (2022-23) of the Committee 
held on 23.03.2023 
 
55 
 (v) Annexure I - Details of Glaciers studied by GSI for 
recession/ advancement 
 
57 
 (vi) Annexure II - Loss of Human Lives due to  Flood in 
Himachal Pradesh, J&K, Sikkim And Uttarakhand During The Year 2002 TO 2018 
 
60 
 

STANDING COMMITTEE ON WATER RESOURCES (2022-23)   
COMPOSITION 
 
 Shri Parbatbhai Savabhai Patel      -            Chairperson 
 
 LOK SABHA   
2.  Shri Vijay Baghel  
3.  Shri Nihal Chand Chauhan   
4.  Shri Bhagirath Choudhary 
5.  Shri Chandra Prakash Choudhary  
6.  Shri Guman Singh Damor  
7.  Dr. Heena Vijaykumar Gavit  
8.  Dr. K. Jayakumar  
9.  Shri Dhanush M. Kumar  
10.  Shri Sunil Kumar  
11.  Shri Mohammad Akbar Lone  
12.  Shri Kuruva Gorantla Madhav  
13.  Shri Hasmukhbhai Somabhai Patel  
14.  Shri Sanjay (Kaka) Ramchandra Patil  
15.  Shri P. Ravindhranath  
16.  Ms.  Nusrat Jahan Ruhi  
17.  Smt.  Agatha K. Sangma  
18.  Shri Pratap Chandra Sarangi  
19.  Shri Chandan Singh  
20.  Shri D.K. Suresh  
21.  Shri Shivkumar C. Udasi  
 RAJYA SABHA  
22.  Shri H.D. Devegowda 
 
(iv) 
 
 
 
 

 
23.  Shri Aneel Prasad Hegde  
24.  Dr. Kirodi Lal Meena  
25.  Smt. Mausam Noor  
26.  Shri Sharad Pawar  
27.  Shri V. Vijayendra Prasad  
28.  Shri Arun Singh  
29.  Sant Balbir Singh  
30.  Shri Pramod Tiwari  
31.  Vacant  
  
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Chander Mohan - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Ajay Kumar Sood - Director 
3. Shri Ram Lal Yadav  -  Additional Director 
4. Shri Gaurav Jain  - Assistant Committee Officer 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 (v)  

INTRODUCTION 
I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Water Resources (2022-23) having been 
authorised by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present the Twenty Third 
Report on “Glacier Management in the Country- Monitoring of Glaciers/Lakes including 
Glacial Lake Outbursts leading to Flash-floods in the Himalayan Region".  
2.  The Standing Committee on Water Resources (2020-21) had taken up the subject 
“Glacier Management in the Country- Monitoring of Glaciers/Lakes including Glacial Lake 
Outbursts leading to Flash-floods in the Himalayan Region" for examination and report. As 
the Report could not be finalized during the tenure of the Committee (2020-21), this subject 
was again selected by the Committee in their successive tenures i.e. 2021-22 and 2022-23 
for detailed examination and Report. The Committee took evidence of the representatives of 
the Ministry of Jal Shakti – Department of Water Resources, River Development & Ganga 
Rejuvenation; Ministry of Home Affairs - National Disaster Management Authority and 
National Disaster Response Force; Ministry of Environment, Forest & Climate Change; 
Ministry of Earth Sciences; Department of Science and Technology - Wadia Institute of 
Himalayan Geology; Geological Survey of India (GSI); National Institute of Hydrology (NIH); 
and Defence Research & Development Organisation - Defence Geoinformatics Research 
Establishment (DGRE) on 23 March, 2021; 08 April, 2021; and 21 June, 2021.  
3.  The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their sitting held on 
23.03.2023. 
4.  The Committee wish to express their thanks to the representatives of the Ministry of 
Jal Shakti – Department of Water Resources, River Development & Ganga Rejuvenation; 
Ministry of Home Affairs - National Disaster Management Authority and National Disaster 
Response Force; Ministry of Environment, Forests & Climate Change; Ministry of Earth 
Sciences; Department of Science & Technology - Technology - Wadia Institute of Himalayan 
Geology; Geological Survey of India (GSI); National Institute of Hydrology (NIH); and 
Defence Research & Development Organisation (DRDO) - Defence Geoinformatics 
Research Establishment (DGRE)  for providing the requisite written information as also for 
depositions made before the Committee in connection with the detailed examination of the 
subject.  
5. The Committee would also like to place on record their sense of deep appreciation for 
the assistance rendered to them by the officials of the Lok Sabha Secretariat attached to the 
Committee.  
NEW DELHI;      Parbatbhai Savabhai Patel 
28 March, 2023     Chairperson, 
 07 Chaitra, 1945 (Saka)            Standing Committee on Water Resources  
(vi) 

ABBREVIATIONS 
AWiFS  Advanced Wide Field Sensor 
AWS  Automatic Weather Stations 
BIS  Bureau of Indian Standards 
CEA  Central Electricity Authority 
CGRSM  Centre for Glacial Research, Studies and Management 
CGWB  Central Ground Water Board 
CMP  Crisis Management Plan 
CPCB  Central Pollution Control Board  
CWC  Central Water Commission 
DGRE  Defence Geoinformatics Research Establishment 
DM  Disaster Management 
DMP  Disaster Management Plan 
DRDO  Defence Research and Development Organisation 
DoS  Department of Space 
DoWR, RD & GR  Department of Water Resources, River Development & Ganga 
Rejuvenation 
 
DST  Department of Science and Technology 
EAC  Expert Appraisal Committee 
EB  Expert Body 
EIA  Environmental Impact Assessment 
EMP  Environment Management Plan 
ENVIS  Environmental Information System 
EO  Earth Observation 
EPR : Extended Producer Responsibility 
 
GBP-NIHE  G.B. Pant National Institute of Himalayan Environment 
 
 
(vii)  

 
GIS  Geographical Information System 
 
 
Gt  Gigatonnes  
 
GLOFs : Glacial Lake Outburst Floods 
 
 
GLs/WBs  Glacial Lakes /Water Bodies 
 
GSI : Geological Survey of India 
HEP  Hydro Power Projects 
HFL  Highest Flood Level 
H-K  Himalayan-Karakoram 
 
HKH  Hindu Kush Himalaya 
 
HNBGU  H.N.B Garhwal University 
IAF  Indian Air Force 
 
IASH  International Association of Scientific Hydrology  
 
ICIMOD  International Centre for Integrated Mountain Development 
 
IHR : Indian Himalayan Region 
 
IMD  India Meteorological Department 
 
IISc  Indian Institute of Science 
 
IITI  Indian Institute Technology Indore 
 
IITR  Indian Institute of Technology Roorkee 
 
IPCC  Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change 
 
ISRO  Indian Space Research Organization 
 
LIA  Little Ice Age 
 
LLOF  Landslide Lake Outburst Flood 
 
LSD  Lake Shore Drive 
 
MMC  Mountain Metrological Centre 
 
MoEF& CC  Ministry of Environment, Forests and Climate Change 
 
MoES  Ministry of Earth Sciences 
 
MoJS  Ministry of Jal Shakti 
 
MW  Mega Watt 
 
NBC  National Building Code of India 
 
NCAP : National Clean Air Programme 
 

NCPOR  National Centre for Polar and Ocean Research 
 
NDMA : National Disaster Management Authority 
 
NDMP : National Disaster Management Plan 
 
 
NDRF  National Disaster Response Force 
 
NGOs  Non-Governmental Organizations 
 
NHP  National Hydrology Project 
 
NIH  National Institute of Hydrology 
 
NITI Ayog  National Institution for Transforming India Ayog 
 
NLCs  Nature Learning Centres 
 
NMNH  National Museum of Natural History 
 
NMSHE  National Mission on Sustaining Himalayan Ecosystem 
 
NRSC  National Remote Sensing Centre 
 
NSCS  National Security Council Secretariat  
 
PCCs  Pollution Control Committees 
 
PM-STIAC  Prime Minister’s Science, Technology and Innovation Advisory 
Council 
 
QRTs : Quick Response Teams 
 
SDMP  State Disaster Management Plan 
 
SEIAA  State or Union Territory Level Environment Impact Assessment 
Authority 
 
SERB : Science & Engineering Research Board 
 
SFISAR : Swiss Federal Institute for Snow and Avalanche Research 
 
SITREP : Situation Reports 
 
SPCBs : State Pollution Control Boards 
 
SoI : Survey of India 
 
SOP : Standard Operating Procedure 
 
ULBs : Urban Local Bodies  
 
UNFCCC : United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change 
 
USGS : United States Geological Survey  
 
WIHG : Wadia Institute of Himalayan Geology 
 
WRF : Weather Research and Forecasting 
 

1 
 
Report  
 
Part – I 
 
 NARRATION  
 
CHAPTER - I 
 
 
Introductory  
 
1.1 Glaciers are important components of the hydrological cycles of the Indian 
Himalayan region as these are the source of three large river systems, i.e. the Indus, 
Ganges, and Brahmaputra, which provide water for millions of people in the country and 
accordingly, the Hindu Kush Himalayan Region (HKH) is also known as ‘Water Towers of 
Asia’. Thus, the river systems and associated groundwater forms a significant water 
resource for the country. The Himalayan glaciers ensure water availability even in post-
monsoon period as the base flow of the glacial stream, besides ground water contribution 
in the river system of perennial rivers. As such, glacier is very important for water security 
of the country. 
 
 
1.2 Taking note of the frequent disasters in the Himalayan region viz. Landslides, 
cloudburst, Landslide Lake Outburst Floods, Glacial Lake Outburst Flood  in the recent 
past and recent flashflood that occurred in Chamoli District of Uttrakhand in February, 
2021 due to glacial lake outburs leading to loss of lives and properties, the Committee 
have taken up the subject “Glacier Management in the Country- Monitoring of 
Glaciers/Lakes including Glacial Lake Outbursts leading to Flashfloods in the Himalayan 
Region” for detailed examination and report to understand the impact of glacier 
melting/retreat and their outburst and the significant risks it has posed not just to the 
people who live at foothills but also to the stability of water resources in the region. In this 
Report, the Committee have dwelled on such issues as melting and retreating of 
Himalayan Glaciers, Black Carbon and its impact on Himalayan Glaciers, Glacier 
Management and Glacial Lake Outburst Floods (GLOFs). The views of the Ministry and 
related aspects have been dealt with in succeeding paragraphs in Part – I of this Report. 
The Observations/Recommendations have been included in Part – II of this Report. 
 
 
Definition of Glacier 
 
1.3 A glacier is a multi-year accumulation of snowfall in excess of snowmelt on land, 
resulting in a mass of ice, at least 0.1 Km2 in area that exhibits some evidence of 
movement in response to gravity. As per United States Geological Survey (USGS) 
Climate Change in Mountain Ecosystems Program, minimum size of a glacier should be 
0.1 Km2. There is no specific size to differentiate between major glaciers and minor 
glaciers. The classification of individual glaciers has been provided in six-digit form as 
specified in UNESCO / International Association of Scientific Hydrology (IASH) which has 
been used by Geological Survey of India (GSI) while compiling inventory of the 
Himalayan glaciers (Published in 2009). 
Table-1: Classification of the glaciers (UNESCO / IASH) 
  Digit 1  Digit 2  Digit 3  Digit 4 Digit 5 Digit 6 
 Primary 
Classification 
 Form  Frontal 
characteristics 
 Longitudinal 
profile 
 Major source of 
nourishment 
 Activity of 
tongue 
 0  Uncertain or 
misc. 
 Uncertain 
or misc. 
 Normal or misc.  Uncertain or 
misc. 
 Uncertain or misc.  Uncertain. 
 1  Continental ice 
sheet 
 Compound 
basins 
 Piedmont  Even; regular  Snow and/or drift 
snow 
 Marked retreat 

 
 
2 
 
 2  Ice-field  Compound 
basin 
 Expanded foot  Hanging  Avalanche ice and/or 
avalanche snow 
 Slight retreat. 
 3  Ice cap  Simple 
basin 
 Lobed  Cascading  Superimposed ice  Stationary 
 4  Outlet glacier  Cirque  Calving  Ice-fall    Slight advance 
 5  Valley glacier  Niche  Confluent  Interrupted    Marked advance 
 6  Mountain 
glacier 
 Crater        Possible surge. 
 7  Glacieret and 
snow field 
 Ice apron        Known surge 
 8  Ice shelf  Group        Oscillating 
 9  Rock glacier  Remnant         
 
 
 
Glacier vis-a-vis  Himalayan Cryosphere 
 
1.4 A glacier is a large mass of ice formed by compaction and re-crystallization of 
snow and moving slowly by creep down slope due to the stress of its own weight. 
Whereas, Cryosphere is an all-encompassing term for those portions of Earth’s surface 
where water is in solid form, including sea ice, lake ice, river ice, snow cover, glaciers, ice 
caps, ice sheets and frozen ground. Himalayan Cryosphere plays an important role as 
most of the major river system of Asia originate in the Himalayas and is a sensitive 
indicator of climate change. Melt water from Himalayan snow and glaciers is perennial 
source for irrigation, hydropower, domestic water requirements and sustainability of bio-
diversity & environment in particular. They are vast reservoirs of snow and glaciated ice. 
The major river systems of North India, namely, the Indus, the Ganges, the Brahmaputra 
and their tributaries originate in the Himalayas. The contribution of the snow and glacier 
melt to these snowfed rivers of India is well recognized and most of it is received in the 
summer months of April to June. 
 
As per the inventory published by the Geological Survey of India (GSI), which is the nodal 
government agency on survey and monitoring of glaciers in the country, there are as 
many as 9775 glaciers in the Indian Himalayan Region (IHR). Glaciers are important 
components of the hydrological cycles and are sensitive to changes in the regional and 
global climate. Melting glaciers due to any impact of Climate Change will not only 
severely affect the flow in Himalayan river system but will also give rise to disasters like 
Glacier Lake Outburst Flood (GLOF), Glacier avalanche, Landslide etc. 
 
 
Glaciers located in the Indian Himalayan region 
 
1.5 As per Inventory of Himalayan Glaciers maintained by Geological Survey of India 
(GSI) (GSI Spl. publication no 34, 2009), information / data regarding glaciers 
located in the Indian Himalayan region is as follows:-  
 
 Basin Name  Indus*  Ganga  Brahmaputra  Total 
 Basin Identification  5Q  5O1  5O2   
 No. of glaciers  7462  968  610  9040 
 Glacierised area (sq km)  14714.48  2884.40  928.91  18527.79 
 Total ice volume (cubic km)  1042.78  213.75  49.57  1306.10 
 Largest glacier         
 Identification Number  5O103 02 003  5O131 06 029  5O103 04 015   
 Length (km)  73  30.20  9.8   
 Area (sq km)  541.78  143.58  18.08   
 Volume (cubic km)  108.36  28.72 1.446  
* Data on 535 glaciers of Gilgit sector not included as data is based on regional assessment. 
 

 
 
3 
 
Since inception of Glaciology Division in 1974, GSI has conducted studies on 
melting of the glaciers by assessment of mass balance studies on nine glaciers and 
also carried out field observation on recession/ advancement of 76 glaciers. Majority 
of Himalayan glaciers are observed melting/ retreating at varying rates in different 
regions as per the details given at Annexure-I. 
 
 
1.6 On being asked about the total quantum of glacial water stored in Himalayas and 
the proportion of ice/snow water therein, the DoWR, RD & GR in its reply stated as 
follows:- 
 
“As per the inventory of Himalayan Glaciers, a total of 1306.1 cubic km of ice 
volume (about 1110 cu. km of water) is locked up in glacierised basins of Indus, 
Ganga and Brahmaputra (Spl. Publication No. 34, GSI, 2009). Specific information 
about separate volume of ice and snow water is not available”.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
4 
 
CHAPTER - II 
 
MELTING AND RETREATING OF HIMALAYAN GLACIERS 
 
2.1 Ground based studies on estimation of mass balance and retreat of glaciers in the 
Indian Himalayan Region indicate that the glaciers are retreating and losing their mass 
(negative mass balance), except for some glaciers in the Karakoram, which are gaining 
mass or advancing. A recent study spreading across India, China, Nepal and Bhutan 
states that glaciers melted at a rate of 0.25 m per year during 1975 to 2000 and have 
been melting at ~double the rate (0.5m) since 2000. Therefore, the retreating and melting 
of Himalayan glaciers poses a significant threat to the water security of the country. There 
is no comprehensive information about the volume loss of glaciers in the Indian 
Himalayan Region.  
  
2.2 Explaining the problem of incessant melting and retreating of Himalayan Glaciers 
and the estimated volume loss of glaciers between the year(s), the Department in its 
written reply stated as follows: 
 
“Geological Survey of India (GSI) has not conducted specific studies on estimated 
volume loss of glaciers between 1950 and 2020 and also not projected any estimate 
of loss by the year 2100. Since inception of Glaciology Division in 1974, GSI has 
conducted studies on melting of the glaciers by assessment of mass balance 
studies on nine glaciers and also carried out monitoring the recession/ advancement 
of 76 glaciers. Majority of Himalayan glaciers are observed melting/ retreating at 
varying rates in different regions.”  
 
2.3 On being asked about the impact of melting of glaciers on the sea-level rise both in 
short term and long term, the DoWR, RD & GR replied as under:- 
“According to the IPCC report 2021, the glaciers of Hindu Kush Himalaya (HKH) are 
shrinking and the snow cover has been reducing since the early 21st century and 
glaciers have also been thinned, retreated and lost mass since the 1970s. Further 
the global mean sea level is rising at a rate of around 3.7 mm/yr, according to 
estimates made between 2006 and 2018. In the long term, the melting of glaciers 
also contributes to the sea level rising and threatens to submerge some coastal 
cities in the country. In the short term, the sea level rise may cause the change in 
rainfall pattern and seasonal flooding in the coastal areas”. 
 
2.4 When asked about the other adverse consequences of melting of glaciers 
especially on the ecology of the Himalayans, the Departement in their written reply stated 
as under:- 
“Melting of glaciers may lead to shift of tree line in the Himalaya and may also cause 
change in phonological behaviour of plants. It may impact the livelihoods of 
mountain people and downstream populations. Such changes may lead to negative 
impact on biodiversity conservation and ecosystem services of the Himalaya”. 
Black Carbon and its impact on Himalayan Glaciers 
 
2.5 The Committee desired to know about the impact of black carbon and the threat it 
poses to Himalayan Glaciers. In response, the DoWR, RD & GR in their written reply 
stated as under:- 
 
“Black carbon particles consist of nearly pure elemental carbon with some oxygen 
and hydrogen bound into layered, hexagonal structure which corresponds to a 

 
 
5 
 
somewhat disordered graphitic crystal structure.Black carbon is formed by the 
incomplete combustion of fossil fuels, wood and other fuels.  
Formation of atmospheric aerosol layers consisting of black carbon particles up to 5 
km elevation near mid and alpine Himalaya results in the so-called ‘elevated heat 
pump effect’ inevitably forcing the current state of Himalayan climate dynamical 
system to substantially change the mean variability.Black carbon absorbs more light 
and emits infra-red radiation that increases the temperature. Therefore, an increase 
in black carbon in the high Himalayas contribute to the faster melting of glaciers”. 
 
 
2.6 When asked further, if any study has been conducted by the Government to 
assess the adverse impact of black carbon on Himalayan Glaciers, the Departement in its 
written reply stated as follows:- 
 
“Some studies have been conducted by different organizations/ institutes in the 
country on the effect of pollution in Himalayas. The study conducted by H.N.B 
Garhwal University at Satopanth Glacier in the Central Himalayas indicates that 
black carbon is majorly transported through air mass from Indo Gangetic Plains.  
The G.B. Pant National Institute of Himalayan Environment and Wadia Institute of 
Himalayan Geology (WIHG) have also conducted studies on two glaciers i.e., 
Parbati in Himachal Pradesh and Gangotri in Uttarakhand. The observations 
showed moderate presence of carbonaceous aerosols viz. organic, elemental and 
black carbon. 
 
Also, studies conducted by National Centre for Polar and Ocean Research 
and Space Physics Laboratory under Ministry of Earth Sciences at their Himansh 
station in Lahaul-Spiti region have revealed that the total suspended particulate 
matter showed significant variations having dominance of mineral dust components 
(~67%). The black carbon contributes ~ 4% to near surface composite aerosol mass 
concentrations.  
 
However, in this regard, detailed research is required for complete understanding of 
the black carbon emissions in the Himalayas”. 
 
2.7 On being further asked about the steps taken to limit the perilous impact of black 
carbon on Himalayan Glaciers and with what result, the Department in written reply 
stated as under:- 
 
“Government of India has taken several steps to curb environmental pollution in 
Himalayan States which, inter alia, includes leapfrogging from BS-IV to BS-VI norms 
for fuel and vehicles from 1stApril, 2020; Introduction of cleaner/alternate fuels like 
CNG, LPG, ethanol blending in petrol; Faster Adoption and Manufacturing of 
Electric Vehicles (FAME) -2 scheme; shifting of Brick kilns to zig-zag technology; 
setting up of waste processing plants; Extended Producer Responsibility (EPR) for 
plastic and e-waste management, etc. 
 
The Central Government launched National Clean Air Programme (NCAP) as a 
comprehensive plan to tackle air pollution problem across the country including the 
States of Himalayan region in a focused manner to achieve 20% to 30% reduction in 
PM10 and PM2.5 levels by 2024 from 2017 levels. Ambient air quality is being 
monitored through a network of manual and real time air quality monitoring stations 
in 394 cities/ towns. 
 
City Specific Clean Air Action Plans have been prepared and rolled out for 
implementation in 132 non-attainments and million plus population cities, which 

 
 
6 
 
include 02 non-attainment cities in Jammu & Kashmir (Jammu, Srinagar), 03 non-
attainment cities in Uttarakhand (Kashipur, Rishikesh and Dehradun) and 07 non-
attainment cities in Himachal Pradesh (Baddi, Damtal, Kala Amb, Nalagarh, Paonta 
Sahib, Parwanoo and Sunder Nagar). 
 
Ministry of New and Renewable Energy is giving financial assistance to States for 
setting up of waste to energy plants. Scheme like ‘Pradhan Mantri UjjwalaYojana’ is 
promoting use of cleaner household cooking fuels. 
 
Under Central Sector Scheme of Ministry of Agriculture ‘Promotion of Agricultural 
Mechanization for in-situ management of crop residue practices has been 
introduced in the States of Punjab, Haryana, Uttar Pradesh and NCT of Delhi’. 
 
The States and Union Territories of the Indian Himalayan Region have taken 
several steps to curb environmental pollution which inter-alia includes banning of 
burning of plastic and garbage, establishment of compactors to compact segregated 
recyclables (plastic, rubber, cardboard, jute bags etc.). Government of Himachal 
Pradesh has also regulated the number of vehicles plying to Rohtang pass to 1200 
(800 diesels and 400 petrol) in a day”. 
 
2.8 When asked about the impact of melting of glaciers which are literally the water 
towers of the country, on the water security in the country both in terms of water 
availability and the extreme changes in the flow of rivers thus destabilizing Himalayan 
rivers, the Department in its written reply stated as under:- 
 
“The presence of the Himalayan glaciers ensures water availability even in post-
monsoon period as the base flow of the glacial stream, besides ground water 
contribution in the river system of perennial rivers. 
 
Presently, hydrological observations are being carried out by CWC at 1543 sites on 
all major rivers in India including Himayayan river system. Analysis of hydrological 
data observed at Rishikesh site on Ganga river,Tutingsite on Brahmaputra river and 
Premnagar site on Chenab river located at foothills of Himalayas for the period from 
2010 to 2020, indicates that there are fluctuations in average annual discharge of 
these rivers. However, there is no specific trend of variations as far as annual 
discharge is concerned.” 
 
2.9 When asked about the average rate of warming of Himalayan glaciers vis-a-vis 
global parameters as also the impact of their warming on local changes in hydrology and 
threatening the infrastructure, the Department stated as under:- 
 
“As per information given by DST, it has been indicated that the Himalayan-
Karakoram region is warming faster than global mean by 0.5 0C. This warming will 
lead to local changes in hydrology by changes in rainfall and snowfall patterns, 
increased melting from glaciers and threaten the infrastructure by increase in 
extreme events leading to disasters.  
 
The MoEF&CC has not conducted any study or awarded any project on warming of 
Himalayan glaciers.  
 
Notwithstanding, it may be noted that the glaciers and their characteristics may 
exhibit complex changes in specific locations such as various sub-regions in the 
Himalaya. There are stable, retreating, or even advancing glaciers in the Himalaya, 
thereby emphasizing the complex geographical and cyclical nature of the glacial 
dynamics. The impact of an increase in the melting rate of glaciers on the lives of 

 
 
7 
 
people in adjoining States is a complex and evolving subject studied through 
investigations, data collection and analysis of various case studies by scientists in 
India and all over the world.  
 
Further, as per the World Meteorological Organization, average global temperature 
for 2015-2019 is estimated to be 1.1 degree Celsius above pre-industrial (1850-
1900) level. According to the Ministry of Earth Sciences, in line with rising 
temperatures across the globe, all India mean temperature has risen by nearly 
0.7degree Celsius during 1901 to 2018”. 
 
 
 
2.10 When asked whether Smaller Himalayan glaciers are more sensitive to climate 
change and have lost their substantial volume in the last 50 years, the Department 
furnished in writing the information as under:- 
 
“As informed by MoEF&CC, the smaller Himalayan glaciers are more sensitive to 
climate change and their shrinkage rate is higher than the larger glaciers. 
 
GSI has conducted studies on melting of the glaciers by assessment of mass 
balance studies on nine glaciers and also carried out field observation on recession/ 
advancement of 76 glaciers. The majority of the glaciers irrespective of size are 
retreating at varying rates across the Himalaya. The advancing and retreating 
pattern of glaciers in Himalayan region depends upon number of factors viz. type of 
glacier, orographic disposition, orientation, size, debris cover, ablation/ 
accumulation, accumulation area ratio and climatic parameters etc. 
 
As such, comprehensive study in this regard needs to be carried out”. 
 
 
 
2.11  On being asked about the veracity of the fact that over the past 50 years, the 
Himalayas have become less cold with substantiated decline in number of extreme cold 
days and cold nights due to global warming and climate change, the DoWR,RD &GR in 
their written reply stated as under:- 
 
“As per information given by MoEF&CC, the climate change studies exclusively over 
the Himalayas reported a consistent warming in the present climate. Trend analysis 
of cold days and cold nights of 16 stations across J&K and Himachal Pradesh has 
revealed that for most of the stations percentage number of warm days is increasing 
and number of cold days is decreasing. Also, similar pattern of increase /decrease 
in percentage number of warm /cold nights is seen. The reduction of cold days is 
noted to be approximately 2 to 6% within a 30-year period. However, MoEF&CC has 
not conducted any study or awarded any project on extreme cold days and cold 
nights attributable to climate change in the Himalaya”. 
 
2.12 Further, asked about target date set as per the 2015 Paris Agreement for limiting 
global warming, the Department in its written reply stated as under:-  
 
“The Paris Agreement does not specify any target date for limiting global warming. It 
may be noted that the temperature goals of the Paris Agreement are two in number, 
namely 1.5o C and "well below 2o C". Further in Article 4.1, these temperature goals 
of Article 2 are described as the "long-term temperature goal". In order to achieve 
the long-term temperature goal set out in Article 2 "Parties aim .....to achieve 
balance between anthropogenic emissions by sources and removals by sinks in the 
second half of the century....". It may be noted here that no specific date is indicated 
but only a broad period of 50 years. It may also be noted that providing a specific 
date is not feasible due to many uncertainties including those arising from climate 
science as well as the inherent variability of climate. Further, the contribution to 

 
 
8 
 
mitigation by individual countries are made through their Nationally Determined 
Contributions. As these are commitments given by individual Parties by their own 
decision, and their compatibility with the temperature goal was not a requirement 
under the Agreement, setting a target date to limit global warming to the goals of the 
Paris Agreement, therefore, is not feasible. 
Climate change is a global collective action problem. India’s contribution to the 
problem of climate change is limited but its actions are fair and ambitious. India 
firmly believes in global cooperation to deal with the challenge through multilateral 
processes. India is a Party to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate 
Change (UNFCCC), and its Kyoto Protocol and the Paris Agreement.  
The central aim of the Paris Agreement is to strengthen the global response to the 
threat of climate change, in the context of sustainable development and efforts to 
eradicate poverty, by keeping global temperature rise from pre-industrial levels to 
well below 2 degree Celsius and pursing efforts to limit the temperature increase to 
1.5 degrees Celsius. It is well established scientifically that cumulative global 
emissions have to stay within a global carbon budget from pre-industrial levels, with 
such budget being determined by the appropriate probability of not exceeding the 
desired temperature goal. India has always emphasized that the global carbon 
budget should be equitable and fairly shared, based on the foundational principles 
of equity and common but differentiated responsibilities and respective capabilities 
laid down in the UNFCCC and reiterated in the Paris Agreement”. 
 
 
2.13 The Committee’s attention was drawn to the 2018 Niti Aayog report (Report of 
Working Group I Inventory and Revival of Springs in the Himalayas for Water Security) 
wherein it has been cautioned that almost 60 per cent of water sources in the Indian 
Himalayan region are on the verge of drying up and recommended launching of National 
Spring Water Management Programme for the Himalayan Region. 
 
 
2.14 When asked about the steps taken on the recommendation of Niti Aayog for 
launching of National Spring Water Management Programme for the Himalayan Region, 
the DoWR, RD & GR in its written submission stated as under:- 
 
“The NITI Aayog has submitted a ‘Report of Working Group I Inventory & Revival of 
springs in the Himalayas for Water Security’ during 2018. The objectives of the 
report including (i) to take stock of the magnitude of the problem (drying of springs & 
spring water quality), (ii) to review related policies across Indian Himalayan Region 
(IHR). 
 
 In compliance with the suggestions in the report, an inter-departmental committee 
was constituted by the Ministry to collect / compile Metadata of all Springs in Hilly 
States pan- India including Central Ground Water Board (CGWB). Accordingly, a 
database was created for springs existing in mountainous regions of India, 
especially in Indian Himalayan region (total 12 states) by compiling all information 
already available with SoI, CGWB, NRSC, State Governments, NGO’s and other 
organizations. The compiled database was analyzed to create a Spring 
Geographical Information System(GIS) which is available as web based service in 
Survey of India G2G portal”. 
 
 

 
 
9 
 
CHAPTER - III 
LEGISLATIVE FRAMEWORK FOR GLACIER MANAGEMENT 
 
3.1 The Committee have been informed that details of the Legislative Framework in 
regard to management of glaciers are not available in CWC. However, National Disaster 
Management Authority (NDMA), MHA has issued Guidelines titled "Management of 
Glacial Lake Outburst Floods (GLOFs)" in October 2020. As per the NDMA Guidelines, 
Ministry of Jal Shakti (MoJS) has been proposed as the nodal Ministry and Central Water 
Commission (CWC) as the nodal agency for management of Glacial Lake Outburst Flood 
(GLOF). 
 
 
3.2 On being asked about the opinion of the Department on the adequacy of the 
existing Legislative Framework to achieve the intended objectives of conservation of 
Himalayan Glaciers and whether the Government is contemplating for any new legislation 
in this regard, the DoWR, RD & GR in its written reply stated that they have no comments 
to offer.  
 
 
 
3.3 During the sitting held on 8.4.2021, Secretary, Ministry of Jal Shakti apprised the 
Committee that the 'Himalayan Cryosphere' is not specifically mentioned in the Allocation 
of Business Rules. When asked, whether any proposal has been mooted by the 
Department of Water, Resources, River Development & Ganga Rejuvenation for 
allocating the subject “Himalayan cryosphere” to any particular Ministry/Department, the 
Department stated that they have no comments to offer. 
 
 
Agencies involved in monitoring and management of the Himalayan Glaciers 
 
 
3.4 Elaborating the details of various agencies involved in monitoring and managing 
the Himalayan Glaciers, the DoWR, RD & GR stated as under:-  
 
“The Government of India, has a number of Ministries/ Departments/ 
Organizations/Agencies which have mandates for handling different hydro-
meteorological and hydro-geological hazards.   
 For example, GSI carries out Glacier Mass Balance Studies, Glacier Regimen 
Studies, Glaciers & Climate Variability Studies for selected glaciers besides Societal 
& related Studies in Himalayan Belt. 
 However, scientific research is coordinated and supported by several ministries and 
departments like the Department of Science and Technology (DST); Ministry of 
Environment, Forests and Climate Change (MoEF& CC); Ministry of Earth Sciences 
(MoES); Defence Research and Development Organisation (DRDO), etc.  
 Department of Space (DoS) has the mandate to monitor glaciers using remote 
sensing techniques. A large number of researchers belonging to various research 
and academic institutions in the country carry out research in glaciology and other 
cryospheric research areas.  
 As per the NDMA Guidelines on Management of Glacial Lake Outburst Flood 
(GLOF) - October, 2020, Ministry of Jal Shakti (MoJS) has been proposed as the 
nodal Ministry and Central Water Commission (CWC) as the nodal agency for 
management of GLOF. Presently, CWC is monitoring 477 GLs/WBs (above 50 ha 
size) in Indian Himalayan Region. 
 
 
 

 
 
10 
 
Some other agencies involved in monitoring and studies of the Himalayan Glaciers 
are given as under:  
i. National Centre for Polar and Ocean Research (NCPOR) 
ii. Indian Institute of Science (IISc) 
iii. National Institute of Hydrology (NIH) 
iv. Indian Institute of Technology Roorkee (IITR) 
v. G.B. Pant National Institute of Himalayan Environment (GBP-NIHE) 
vi. H.N.B Garhwal University (HNBGU) 
vii. Indian Institute Technology Indore (IITI) 
viii. University of Kashmir”. 
 
 
Studies/findings of some of the Departments/ Agencies/Institutions with regard to 
the spatial movement and behaviour of the Himalayan glaciers: 
 
(i)   “Important Results from recent Studies supported by Department of Science and 
Technology on ‘Glaciology’ : 
 
 As per inventory prepared by GSI there are as many as 9575 glaciers in IHR. 
 Glaciers are retreating as part of natural phenomenon and also due to climate and 
topography of the region. 
 Annual rate of retreat of glaciers in IHR ranges from 5-20 m per year. 
 The total glaciated area in the entire Himalayan range (including karakoram) is 
40,000 Km2.. Out of this, Indian Himalayan Region contributes nearly 
23,000Km2and stores 3,651 Gigatonnes (Gt) of glacier water.  
 Himalayan glaciers are losing mass at the rate of 6.6±1 Gt per annum (nearly 0.2% 
per year).  
 As per satellite based estimate, Himalaya has lost 13% of glacier area over the 
period of 40 years (1960-2000) (nearly 0.3% per year). 
 66.4% of total number of glaciers have area less than 1 km2. They occupy 4% of 
total area and 12.8% of ice volume 
 Just 3% of total number of glaciers have area more than 10 km2 . They occupy  
65% of Ice volume and cover 45% of area.   
 Under climate change impact, large glaciers with area more than 10 km2 are less 
likely to be impacted appreciably in near future. However, small glaciers of less 
than 1 km2 area may show rapid changes 
 
 
(ii) Results of study carried out by ISRO: ISRO has monitored the glacier advance 
and retreat of 2018 glaciers across the Indian Himalayan region using satellite data of 
2000-01 to 2010-11. The study shows that 87% of glaciers showed no change, 12% of 
glaciers retreated, and 1% of glaciers have advanced. Further, net change in glaciated 
area varies from one region to another. In another   study by ISRO, 5234 glaciers were 
monitored between the years 2001 and 2017-18 across Himalayan-Karakoram (H-K) 
region from Kashmir to Sikkim using satellite data. In Karakoram region (north of Indus 
river) gain in area (0.056%) has been observed in the area coverage of 17903 Km2. The 
loss is obverved in rest of Himalayan region which varies from 0.751% to 2.32%. 
 
 
3.5 When asked about the opinion of the Department with regard to involvement of 
multifarious agencies/institutes resulting in overlapping and duplication of efforts as well 
as lack of coherence in achieving the aims / objectives of different agencies, the 
Department in its written reply stated as under: -  
 
“Involvement of multiple agencies/institutions results in overlapping of efforts. No 
demarcation of responsibilities amongst different Ministries/Departments with regard 

 
 
11 
 
to Glacier Management in the country has been made till date. As mentioned in 
reply to LoP-1 above, there are 9575 glaciers in the Indian Himalayan Region. 
Monitoring of such a large number of glaciers requires a coordinated effort with 
huge manpower and logistics. Hence, a nodal agency is very much essential for 
inter-agency coordination to streamline the efforts of different agencies for Glacier 
Management in the country. 
Department of Sceince& Technology (DST) has suggested that Wadia Institute of 
Himalayan Geology (WIHG), an autonomous institute of DST may be considered to 
act as a nodal agency. 
MoEF has suggested that the responsibility for the co-ordination of all activities on 
the Himalayan glaciers should rest with National Security Council Secretariat, Govt. 
of India”.  
 
Solutions/Suggestions by various Departments/Agencies/Institutions for effective 
‘Glacier Management in the country’ 
3.6 The Committee desired that all the Departments/Agencies/Institutions dealing with 
the subject may furnish solutions/suggestions for effective ‘Glacier Monitioring and 
Management in the country’. In response, the concerned Departments/Agencies offered 
following suggestions:- 
(a) Suggestions by Department of Science and Technology: 
(i) Need for a single coordinating agency to coordinate with various other agencies 
having mandates to handle different hydro-meteorological and hydro-geological 
hazards: The Government of India, has a number of ministries/departments/ 
organizations/agencies which have mandates for handling different hydro-meteorological 
and hydro-geological hazards.  For example, the Geological Survey of India under 
Ministry of Mines is mandated to undertake survey and monitoring of glaciers. However, 
scientific research is coordinated and supported by several ministries and departments 
like the Department of Science and Technology (DST); Ministry of Environment, Forests 
and Climate Change (MoEF&CC); Ministry of Earth Sciences (MoES); Defence Research 
and Development Organisation (DRDO), etc. Department of Space (DoS) has the 
mandate to monitor glaciers using remote sensing techniques. A large number of 
researchers belonging to various research and academic institutions in the country carry 
out research in glaciology and other cryospheric research areas. While, the agencies and 
organizations may continue to have their individual mandates for monitoring different 
hazards, there is a need to have a single agency which can coordinate with various other 
agencies especially for operational work, such as providing early warnings and alerts, etc. 
(ii) Need for a multi-hazard alert and warning system for the Indian Himalayan 
Region: Several of recent hazards such as 2013 Uttarakhand disaster, recent Chamoli 
floods are found to have characteristics of a combination of more than one hazard. Most 
of present alert and warning systems that exist today deal with individual disasters. For 
example, India Meteorological Department has a system of providing alert and warnings 
for heavy rainfall and cloudbursts but they do not have any warning systems for other 
disasters such GLOF, Avalanches, Landslides, etc. These disasters are either dealt with 
by other agencies or there exist no warning systems for them. To deal with these 
disasters in an integrated manner, a Multi-Hazard Warning System may be put in place 
through a real-time coordinated mechanism wherein one agency may be entrusted with 
the responsibility of continuously monitoring and issuing warnings and alerts to 
authorities, stakeholders and public.  

 
 
12 
 
(iii) Need for State Governments to work in tandem with Central agencies in the 
monitoring, research and warning system for Hazards: Many of the State 
Governments do not participate directly as stakeholders and partners in the monitoring, 
research and warning system for hazards impacting them, especially in the Indian 
Himalayan Region. There are good examples of several coastal States in India taking 
proactive roles in monitoring and warming of Tropical Cyclones. Because of such close 
partnership with Central Government, there has been considerable saving on lives and 
property in these states in recent years. There is a need to have States working in 
tandem with Central agencies in monitoring, predicting and issuing of warnings. 
 
(b) Suggestions by Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change 
 
(i) Glaciers are a strategic national resource; they need to be protected accordingly. 
Glaciers of the Himalayas are difficult to access due to various obstacles like the rugged 
terrain, the high snow-covered elevations, and the hostile weather conditions. Hence the 
support of the military and the para-military forces are necessarily required for 
accessibility to the glaciers to study and do scientific research. Understandably, the 
National Security Council Secretariat (NSCS) is coordinating with various Government 
Agencies in various studies, including impacts of geo-engineering technologies on the 
glaciers. DGRE of DRDO is also working on the Himalayan glaciers. We in India have a 
substantial  DRDO establishment. It will be of considerable value if our IITs, Indian 
Institute of Science Education & Research (IISER), Universities, National Institutions etc. 
urgently collaborate with DRDO on areas of strategic national importance in the true 
letter and spirit of achieving an ‘Aatmanirbhar Bharat’.   
 
(ii) In this context, it may further be mentioned that the 17th meeting of the Prime 
Minister’s Science, Technology and Innovation Advisory Council (PM-STIAC) was 
convened on 31st March, 2021 under the chairmanship of the Principal Scientific Adviser 
to the Government of India on ‘Trans-Himalayan Research for Informed Decision making 
to predict and mitigate disasters’.  A copy of the minutes of the meeting is attached.  The 
meeting summarized that a nodal agency is required to bring all stakeholders together to 
communicate the scientific advice effectively to predict and mitigate disasters in the 
Trans Himalayan region.   
 
(iii) In view of the above, and keeping in mind the scope of the work involved, the 
responsibility for the co-ordination of all activities on the himalayan glaciers should rest 
with  a single, identified nodal co-ordinating agency within Govt. of India (say, e.g. 
NSCS). Such an agency would need to be given an appropriate mandate (war-time 
mandate--because of recurrence glacier breakages, lake-bursts, cloud bursts, landslides 
etc. which are even happening in unison, compounding the damage to life and property)  
by allocating the subject through Allocation of Business Rules.  However, it may be noted 
that it will also be the responsibility of this agency to pay particular attention to bring all 
providers of scientific information together for the said purpose of scientific mitigation of 
disaster risk due to glaciers in the Trans Himalayan region. The inter-departmental and 
inter-agency co-ordination may in practice by facilitated by a Inter-Ministerial Permanent 
Committee for Glacier-related Matters that will assist and guide the nodal co-ordinating 
agency in its task. The rules of business of this committee should particularly clarify the 
liberal and unrestricted exchange of data, except where it specifically and directly  
impinges on national security information. 
 

 
 
13 
 
Apart from above, the representative of the Ministry of Environment, Forest and 
Climate Change during the course of oral evidence on the subject, apprised the 
Committee as follows:-  
 
“There is enormity of the issue because we have 34,919 glacials in the Indian 
Himalayan region. Of that, 87 per cent are in status quo and 12 per cent are 
receding and one per cent is even increasing. So, we have on one side the enormity 
of the issue and on the other side, there is complexity. It is because glacials are 
stable, retreating, advancing and also we have the cyclic nature in a very complex 
system. So, we have this enormous and complex situation. How are we dealing with 
it? We are dealing through research project. That is what Sir, you have hit the nail 
on the head in your first question. Our method of dealing with such an enormous 
problem, such a complex problem is done by frittered research projects. This does 
not lead to any actionable points. Sir, the second point which hon. Members made 
and you seconded it and Secretary also pointed out the same is that there is neither 
synergy nor linkage nor coordination. So, everybody is doing everything and we are 
not casting any aspersions on the good research done by the Indian scientists. We 
may be even world leaders in that research. But it does not lead to any actionable 
point because you ask that why did the alarm bell did not sound. So, for cyclones, 
we have very advance warning systems. For this, we have nothing at the moment. 
Everywhere you touch, you will find gap areas. ....But Sir, after all these discussions, 
the matter gets precipitated on one point that ISRO does the research from the top, 
GSI does research on field and DST has research projects. So, MoES has a field 
station. But this research is not for that kind of management which you people have 
asked. That is the moot point”.  
 
 
(c) Suggestions given by Ministry of Earth Sciences 
 
(i) Monitoring the Himalayan glaciers and glacier-bound hazards require a network of 
fully equipped and integrated monitoring systems, supported by a set of field 
stations in critically important glaciered basins. An excellent role model that could be 
replicated and/or strengthened is the ongoing activities undertaken at the Himalayan 
station ‘Himansh’ by the National Centre for Polar and Ocean Research (NCPOR), 
under Ministry of Earth Sciences (MoES). The observation systems to be created 
should be automated, with real time access to data to modelers to create a potential 
early warning system on glacio-hydrological hazards from to time, based on the 
hazard potential, coupled with geographical information system tools downstream 
activities and population vulnerability coupled with. Open access to ground-based 
meteorological, hydrological, and glaciological data from the entire region is 
necessary to achieve the target. 
 
(ii) Glacier volume loss will likely cause formation of new glacier lakes and existing 
ones to expand in area and volume. Some of glacial lakes are critical and highly 
prone to create a Glacial lake outburst flood (GLOF), flash flood etc. which may 
cause a disaster in downstream. Development of a reliable data base on the 
Himalayan glaciers and of glacial lakes require continuous mapping and monitoring 
of these dynamic system. ISRO can make huge contribution in using high-resolution 
and near real-time satellite remote sensing to monitor the glacial lake and water 
bodies. 
 
(iii) It is recommended to initiate a mission-based approach to have a consistent and 
reliable mechanism for project organization, implementation of uniform techniques 
and methodology, consistent and complimentary data collection, development and 

 
 
14 
 
implementation of coupled atmospheric-cryospheric-hydrological models through 
networking of the knowledge institutions, linking human resources and creation of 
institutional capacity. It is important to have a target oriented “Himalayan 
Cryosphere Mission” modelled on the lines of the highly successful “Monsoon 
Mission” implemented by MoES. To make the above mission a success, it is crucial 
to make it a continuing scheme of a Ministry. While the mission could have multiple 
projects, all of them should be part of a coordinated mission directed to address 
clear deliverable objectives with multiple institutions contributing to coordinated 
objectives. This requires not only the technical advancement, but also require skilled 
human resources dedicated to glacier monitoring and management. 
Institutionalization of research in glaciers and glacier hazards is a critical need of the 
hour. 
 
(iv) Fostering meaningful collaborations with international institutions in the major gap 
areas are also required. 
 
(d) Suggestion given by Defence Geoinformatics Research Establishment (DGRE) 
on Glacial Lake Outburst Flood (GLOF) Identification, Monitoring and 
Vulnerability analysis: 
 
An integrated approach for debris flow and GLOF risk management is the need of the 
hour. Systematic risk assessment study in the region is imperative to curtail the risks of 
glacial hazards. An inclusive approach with all the stakeholders is recommended to 
understand the GLOF phenomenal behavior by creating ground and remote sensing 
based inventory of benchmark moraine dammed lakes and monitoring the changes on a 
regular basis. An effective early warning mechanism to monitor GLOF hazrads shall go a 
long way in minimizing the risk out of such hazards.  In order to analyze the adverse 
effects from the GLOF, DGRE has commenced work in the following areas: 
a. Identification of potential glaciers and unstable glacier lakes in J&K and Ladakh UT 
area using remote sensing and ancillary data in consultation with Armed Forces. 
b. Modelling & Simulation of Glacier outburst and movement of debris mass. 
c. Vulnerability study as per flow simulation and future development plan in the 
affected area. 
 
(e) Suggestions given by Wadia Institute of Himalayan Geology 
The Director, Wadia Institute of Himalayan Geology during the course of oral evidence on 
the subject held on 21.06.2021 made the following submission:- 
“Because glaciology is a very diversified field and it needs data from different 
aspects and also from different sources/institutes/agencies. All this data need to be 
collated at one place for effective mitigation of disasters, and sharing to many 
resarchers to meet their stated objectives of research. Therefore, one common 
sharing platform is necessary besides putting one nodal agency for proper decision-
making”. 
(f) Suggestions given by the Ministry of Jal Shakti – Department of Water 
Resources, River Development & Ganga Rejuvenation: 
 
The Secretary of the Ministry of Jal Shakti – Department of Water Resources, River 
Development & Ganga Rejuvenation during the course of oral evidence on the subject 
held on 8.4.2021, made the following suggestions:- 

 
 
15 
 
“The Himalayan cryosphere is something which is not specifically 
mentioned in the Allocation of Business Rules. It is my opinion that the 
Himalayan cryosphere should find a mention specifically in the Allocation of 
Business Rules so that the attention of Ministries and Departments concerned 
with it, is directed towards it. Now, it has two aspects. One is the effect of 
Himalayan cryosphere on our water resources, including floods. That is 
something which the Department of Water Resources should be looking at. We 
are already looking at it in a substantive manner but we need to get deeper into 
these issues. On the other hand, the multi-level hazards created by various 
parameters because of the changes in the glacier system, are something which 
should be studied more deeply under the overall leadership of the Ministry of 
Home Affairs under which the National Disaster Management Authority 
functions. All these institutions should lend their support in such studies to 
enable us to get a better picture”. 
3.7 To a specific query as to whether proposal of setting up a separate dedicated 
institution dealing with mountain hazards and landslides in view of the increasing 
mountain hazards is under consideration, the Department in its written submission 
furnished as under:-  
 
“There is no specific information available on setting up of a separate dedicated 
institution dealing with mountain hazards. 
However, as per NDMA Guidelines, “Management of Landslides and Snow 
Avalanches – 2009”and “National Landslide Risk Management Strategy, 
September-2019”, mapping of landslide Hazard, Landslide Early warning System, 
monitoring activity and mitigation etc. has be to carried out by Ministry of Mines/GSI 
in consultation with other related agency/stakeholder including NDMA. The 
responsibility of dealing with snow avalanches including identification and 
monitoring lies with SASE (DGRE) and BRO. 
 
As per the NDMA Guidelines on Management of Glacial Lake Outburst Flood 
(GLOF) - October, 2020, Ministry of Jal Shakti (MoJS) has been proposed as the 
nodal Ministry and Central Water Commission (CWC) as the nodal agency for 
management of GLOF. It also proposes that a national level Centre for Glacial 
Research, Studies and Management (CGRSM) will be established by the MoJS 
under the umbrella of the National Institute of Hydrology (NIH), Roorkee as a 
premier centre with state-of-the art facilities, which would eventually grow into a 
national centre of excellence”. 
 
Utilization of funds for Conservation and Management of Glaciers 
 
3.8 On being asked to furnish the details of the funds allocated, expenditure incurred, 
projects approved and projects completed during the last five years for conservation and 
management of glaciers, the Department of Water Resources, River Development & 
Ganga Rejuvenation  submitted the following information:- 
 
 
a) “ISRO has carried out following projects in the last 5 years for monitoring of 
Himalayan snow and glaciers: 
 
Project Title Duration Amount Sponsoring Agency 
Monitoring of Himalayan 
snow and glaciers (Phase-II)  
(Multiple objective) 
2010-15 426 lakh Jointly funded by 
MoEF&CC and 
Department of Space 

 
 
16 
 
Integrated studies of 
Himalayan glaciers   
(Multiple objective) 
2016-20 295 lakh Funded by Department of 
Space 
Cryosphere Sciences and 
Applications Program    
(Multiple objective) 
2002-25 40 lakh Funded by Department of 
Space 
 
 
b) As per information given by DST, the total investment for the research carried out 
by the Centre for Glaciology at the Wadia Institute of Himalayan Geology, 
Dehradun was Rs. 20 crore during the last five years. In addition, DST spent 
another Rs. 20 crore during last 7 years (2014 onwards) for supporting three 
centres of Excellence on each at Kashmir University, Srinagar; Sikkim University, 
Gangtok and Divecha Centre for Climate Change, Bangalore, One National 
Programme on Cryosphere and an InterUniversity consortium on glaciology”. 
 
3.9 When further asked about the details of funds allocated by the Government for 
management of glaciers in the country including field-based studies on glaciers and for 
imparting training to budding glaciologists, the DoWR, RD & GR replied as under:-  
 
“DST has funded Rs. 1460.50 lakhs over a period of 12 years to Wadia Institute of 
Himalayan Geology for Centre for Glaciology with the objective of strengthening 
field-based studies that created trained manpower (Scientific & Technical staff, 
Ph.D. Scholars, Post-doctoral Fellows and RAs). In addition, DST has been 
supporting 3 Centres of Excellence one  each  at  Kashmir  University, Srinagar;  
Sikkim  University,  Gangtok  and Divecha Centre for Climate Change, Bangalore, 
One National Network Programme on Cryosphere and an Inter-University 
consortium on glaciology. 
 
GSI has organised seven training courses on Glaciology for field-based studies on 
glaciers and to impart training to the budding glaciologists. These training courses 
were sponsored by Department of Science & Technology (DST) and Science & 
Engineering Research Board (SERB)”. 
 
3.10 Explaining the constraints/bottlenecks being faced by the GSI in monitoring the 
glaciers in the country, the Department stated as follows:- 
 
“GSI carries out Glacier Mass Balance Studies, Glacier Regimen Studies, Glaciers& 
Climate Variability Studies for selected glaciers besides Societal & related Studies in 
Himalayan Belt. The major constraints faced by GSI in execution of the glaciological 
studies mainly inaccessibility and remoteness in the area of operation, challenging 
work assignment, limited availability of different kinds of capacities and logistics”. 
 

 
 
17 
 
CHAPTER – IV 
 
MONITORING OF GLACIAL LAKES AND GLACIAL LAKE OUTBURST FLOODS 
(GLOFS) IN THE HIMALAYAN REGION 
 
4.1 The Committee have been informed that climate variability has brought a 
significant impact on the glacier movements in the Indian Himalayan region. In general, 
the glaciers are shrinking and retreating faster in the recent decade with the proliferation 
of moraine-dammed lakes, which might impose GLOF danger in future. The new 
strategies with renewed action is the need of the hour, especially during present times 
when climate change is adding another dimension to the problems of glacier 
management especially glacier movement, glacier surge, GLOF, LLOF and cloud burst in 
mountainous regions. Identification of critical glacial lakes is imperative so that planners, 
scientists, academicians and community at large can develop and implement appropriate 
measures such as monitoring, early warning and mitigation measures to reduce the 
potential risks. 
 
4.2 Glacial lake is a natural water body originated from glacial activity. They are 
formed when a retreating glacier erodes the land, filling the melt water in the depression 
created by the glacier. In the event of glacier melting, the melt water accumulates in 
glacial lakes located behind loose naturally formed glacial/moraine dams made of glacial 
sediments.  
 
 
4.3 On being asked about the phenomenon of Glacial Lake Outburst Floods (GLOFs) 
and the factors triggering them, the DoWR, RD & GR stated as under:- 
 
“A GLOF is a type of flood occurring when water dammed by a glacier or a moraine 
is released suddenly. When glaciers melt, the water in these glacial lakes 
accumulates behind loose naturally formed 'glacial/moraine dams' made of 
boulders, gravels, pebbles, sand, clay and ice residue. Unlike earthen dams, the 
weak structure of the moraine dam leads to the abrupt failure of moraine dam 
bounding the glacial lake. The various triggering causes of GLOFs are: 
 High/extreme surface runoff from the upstream catchment resulting from heavy 
precipitation/cloud burst, 
 Cascading flood from upstream lakes, 
 Failure/break open of temporary moraine dam due to water pressure or long-term 
degradation 
 Landslide/Earthquake/Geological activity 
 
With the receding glaciers and rising temperature, the probability of their 
occurrences has risen in many mountain ranges, particularly on the debris covered 
glaciers.Since majority of the such lakes in Himalaya are located in remote regions, 
the people living in the downstream caught unaware of the approaching catastrophe 
resulting loss of life, besides damages”. 
 
 
Incidents of Glacial lake outburst floods in the Himalayan Region in the recent past 
 
 
4.4 Elaborating on the incidents of Glacial lake outburst floods that took place in 
Himalayan Region in the recent past along with advisories issued and remedial measures 
taken by CWC, the Department in its written submission stated as follows: 
 
“The recent incident of glacial lake outburst flood is the Kedarnath flash flood in 
June, 2013. Kedarnath area was subjected to two consecutive flood disasters at an 
interval of about 12 hours. As per the Wadia Institute of Himalayan Geology (WIHG) 

 
 
18 
 
scientific correspondence published in Current Science Journal, the first flood event 
occurred on 16thJune 2013 at 5:15PM when the torrential rains flooded the 
Saraswati river and Dudh Ganga catchment area, resulting in excessive flow across 
all the channels. Due to heavy downpour, the town of Rambara was completely 
washed away on 16 June evening. The second event occurred on 17thJune 2013 at 
6:45a.m., after overflow and collapse of the moraine dammed Chorabari Lake which 
released large volume of water that caused another flash flood in the Kedarnath 
town leading to heavy devastation downstream viz. Gaurikund, Sonprayag, Phata, 
etc. 
Chorabari lake outburst occurred in early morning of 17th June 2013. The lake was 
emptied in less than 15 minute resulting devastating flood in Kedarnath temple 
complex and huge loss of lives. The Chorabari lake was located at an elevation 
3960 m, about 2.1 km upstream of Kedarnath temple complex.  
The flooding pattern in river Ganga and its tributaries viz. Alaknanda, Mandakini, 
Bhagirathi etc during 16-18th June 2013 was due to unprecedented early, prolonged 
and heavy to very heavy wide spread rainfall in the catchments of these river. The 
continuous heavy rainfall coupled with the Chorabari lake outburst generated the 
flood wave with very high magnitude and velocity causing erosion of river banks and 
subsequent slope failure.  
The Tehri dam played a very important role in flood mitigation in the downstream 
area. It attenuated the flood peak at Hardwar by about 7000 cumec, resulting a flood 
peak of about 14500 cumec, which would otherwise had been about 21500 cumec. 
No advisory was issued by CWC in case of above mentioned GLOF event.  
However, it is informed that during appraisal of Hydro-electric / Multipurpose 
projects, the project authorities are advised to carry out GLOF studies if any 
potential Glacial lake falls in the catchment area of the project”. 
 
4.5 During the examination of the subject, “Flood Management in the Country 
including International Water Treaties in the field of Water Resource Management with 
particular reference to Treaty/Agreement entered into with China, Pakistan And Bhutan”, 
the Committee were apprised by the Ministry of Jal Shakti – Department of Water 
Resources, River Development and Ganga Rejuvenation that the following incidents 
occurred during last few years with significantly damaging consequences and/ or 
potentially damaging consequences:- 
(i) Blockade of waterway of river Parechu due to landslide in Chinese territory on 
28.6.2004 and 8.7.2004 resulting in creation of artificial lake on upstream and 
accumulation of huge volumes of water 
(ii) Flooding phenomenon of Kedarnath, Uttarakhand during 16 - 18th June 2013 
(iii) Blockade of waterway of river Bhote Kosi, a tributary of Sun Kosi in Nepal due to 
landslide on 2.8.2014 resulting in creation of artificial lake on upstream and 
accumulation of huge volumes of water 
(iv) Flooding phenomenon of Jhelum & Chenab basin in J&K during September 3-7, 
2014 
(v) Landslide on the Phutkal River in Zanskar Valley in Kargil district in Jammu and 
Kashmir during December 2014 

 
 
19 
 
(vi) Landslide Dam (LSD) on Kanka river, a tributary of Teesta in North Sikkim during 
August 2016 
(vii) Landslide Dam (LSD) in Great Bend Area on river Yarlung Tsangpo in China during 
16 - 19 October, 2018 
(viii) Recent Chamoli incident on 7th February 2021 
Sharing of Data/Information in respect of Glaciers 
4.6 The Committee have been informed that for flood management, international 
treaties have been entered into with neighbouring countries with regard to transboundary 
rivers.  
4.7 To a query as to whether India has any data sharing policy with the Himalayan-
Karakoram countries so that large-scale modelling of future glacier and runoff evolution 
can be done with improved accuracy, the DoWR, RD & GR in its written reply stated as 
under:- 
 
“The Karakoram is a mountain range spanning the borders of China, India, and 
Pakistan, with the northwest extremity of the range extending to Afghanistan and 
Tajikistan. So far as data sharing policy with the Himalayan-Karakoram countries is 
concerned, no specific information is available in respect of data sharing policy so 
that large-scale modelling of future glacier and runoff evolution can be done with 
improved accuracy.  
However, presently India is having following treaties with the neighbouring 
countries: 
1. Indus Water Treaty-1960 for sharing of Indus water between India and 
Pakistan 
2. Memorandum of Understanding with China 
 
a. Memorandum of Understanding upon provision of Hydrological Information of the 
River Brahmaputra / Yaluzangbu 
b. Memorandum of Understanding on Hydrological Data Sharing on River Sutlej / 
Langqen Zangbo 
Further, as per information received from MoEF&CC, India is a Regional Member 
Country of the International Centre for Integrated Mountain Development (ICIMOD) 
which is a learning and knowledge-sharing centre for sustainable and resilient 
mountain development serving the eight Regional Member Countries (Afghanistan, 
Bangladesh, Bhutan, China, India, Myanmar, Nepal, and Pakistan) of the Hindu 
Kush Himalaya (HKH). From time-to-time ICIMOD come out with reports on the 
various subjects related to the HKH Region”.  
 
 
4.8 When asked whether any data has been made available to State Governments / 
local authorities in respect of avalanches / cloudbursts landslides in Himalayan region 
during the last decade and advisories, if any, issued by CWC in anticipation of the floods, 
the Department replied in negative. 
 
  

 
 
20 
 
4.9 With regard to data sharing, the Director, Wadia Institute of Himalayan Geology 
during the course of oral evidence on the subject held on 21.06.2021 made the following 
submission:- 
 
“We get some data sometimes and are unable to procure some data due to certain 
constraints or restrictionson data sharing. Immediately, people cannot utilize some 
of the high-resolution data because they need some permission before use. 
However, some data are freely available to a scientist working in this field. Different 
ministries have different protocols for data collection and their sharing”.... 
 
“Effective implementation of early warning system and sensitization of local people 
can reduce the disaster and loss of lifves in potentially vulnerable areas, especially 
in catchments that have dams, infrastructure, and large populations downstream. 
 
The early warning system should compose of remote Automatic Water Level 
Monitoring Stations and Automatic Weather Stations (AWS) with the ability to 
communicate and transmit the data from remote stations to the control room for 
operation and monitoring in real-time. It should also have several Sirens to warn 
vulnerable communities along the river valley downstream. Control station operators 
should be able to view the latest data from any of the stations using custom-
developed software for decision making.The first step to disseminate early warnings 
to the local people is by sensitizing and generating awareness to the local 
communities about such disasters and the standard operating procedures to be 
followed. Further, the information from early warning systems should be directly 
monitored by the administrative and disaster response agencies like district 
administration, State disaster relief force for rapid response. Also, the early warning 
system should be equipped with sirens along the river valleys to alert the vulnerable 
communities downstream”. 
 
 
Landslide Lake Outburst Flood (LLOF) and Lake Shore Drive (LSD) Breach induced 
Flash Floods 
 
4.10 When asked in what way the Landslide Lake Outburst Flood (LLOF) are different 
from Lake Shore Drive (LSD) Breach induced Flash Floods, the DoWR, RD & GR stated 
as follows:-   
“The Landslide Lake Outburst Flood (LLOF) is one type of flood whose water source 
lies in a temporary lake formed due to the damming of debris from a large landslide 
or avalanches. When the abutment of a steep and narrow valley fails due to a large 
landslide/ avalanche, the debris flows rapidly downstream, and accumulates on the 
river bed, ultimately blocking the river course through temporarily damming by the 
accumulated debris. Generally, the accumulated landslide debris is highly 
unconsolidated, non-cohesive, and always has the potential to breach if the 
upstream water pressure crosses the thresholds. The breaching of dam and 
outburst of lake may take place under different geo-morphological set up having the 
rocks with varying geotechnical characteristics.  
Lake Shore Drive (LSD) breaching-induced floods are different from the LLOF. Any 
LSD is generally constructed on top of an artificial levee or dyke constructed at the 
boundary of a shoreline or lake. If that artificial levee/ dyke breaches, then such a 
type of flooding suddenly occurs. In the case of LLOF there are a sequence of 
incidents – mega landslides/ avalanches in a narrow mountainous valley, damming 
of a river by landslide debris, and then flash flood due to breaching of such artificial 
landslide dam”. 

 
 
21 
 
 
Monitoring of Glacial Lakes 
 
 
4.11 On being asked about the details of number of glaciers and glacial lakes         
(States-wise) present in the Indian Himalayan Region and whether all of them are 
presently being monitored so as to observe any abnormal behaviour in them, the 
Department in its written reply stated as follows:-  
 
“As per Inventory of Himalayan Glaciers (GSI Spl publication no 34, 2009, updated 
edition), Indian Territory contains a total of 9575 glaciers. Presently GSI has taken 
up a project for preparation of an updation of the Inventory of the Himalayan 
Glaciers based on Remote Sensing Multi-Spectral Data. The work is in progress.  
Under National Hydrology Project (NHP) ISRO has taken up GLOF risk assessment 
of glacial lakes in the Himalayan Region of Indian River Basins. As part of this 
activity, an updated inventory of glacial lakes of size greater than 0.25ha has been 
prepared for entire catchment areas of Indian Himalayan rivers using high resolution 
satellite data. Based on process of lake formation, location, and type of damming 
material, glacial lakes are grouped into four categories viz., Moraine dammed, Ice-
dammed, Glacier Erosion, and Other glacial lakes. A total of 6,921 glacial lakes of 
size more than 0.25 ha are inventoried within Indian Territory. The State-wise these 
glacial lakes are as under: 
 
Sl. State/UT No. of Glacial 
Lakes 
Total Lake 
Area (ha) 
1 Jammu & Kashmir 
(UT) 
546 2550.79 
2 Ladakh (UT) 3219 9965.34 
3 Himachal Pradesh 513 983.73 
4 Uttrakhand 347 560.61 
5 Sikkim 694 3153.27 
6 Arunachal Pradesh 1602 10735.18 
Total 6921 27948.92 
A total of 26,655 glacial lakes (GT 0.25 ha) have been mapped in the entire 
catchment area of Indian Himalayan rivers spreading in and outside the Indian 
trans-boundary”. 
 
 
4.12 When asked about the role of the Ministry of Jal Shakti – Department of Water 
Resources, River Development and Ganga Rejuvenation in the monitoring and 
management of glacial lakes in the Himalayan region, the Department in its written reply 
submitted as follows:- 
 
“Glacier monitoring and management in the country is presently not in the scope of 
Central Water Commission. However, the work of monitoring of Glacial Lakes 
/Water Bodies (GLs/WBs) was taken up by Central Water Commission, 
DoWR,RD&DR, Ministry of Jal Shakti, during XI plan period in the year 2009 under 
DWRIS Plan scheme. The inventory of GLs/WBs was published in June, 2011 in 
association with National Remote Sensing Centre (NRSC), Hyderabad based on the 
satellite imageries data of Advanced Wide Field Sensor (AWiFS) of the Indian 
Remote Sensing Satellite, Resourcesat-2 collected from May-Nov, 2009. As per this 
inventory, there are 2028 GLs/WBs having size more than 10 ha including 477 
GLs/WBs having size more than 50 ha in Himalayan Region of Indian River Basins.  

 
 
22 
 
The monitoring of 477 GLs/WBs having size more than 50 ha is being carried out 
since 2011 during monsoon season (June to October) every year out of which 95 
GLs/WBs are in India. The monitoring had been carried out till 2015 in association 
with NRSC, Hyderabad using satellite data provided by NRSC. From the year 2016 
onward, the above-mentioned work of monitoring of 477 GLs/WBs is being carried 
out by CWC using Advanced Wide Field Sensor (AWiFS) Satellite imageries 
procured/ downloaded from NRSC. The study area extends across different 
countries namely India, Nepal, Bhutan and China.  
The monitoring report is being shared with concerned field offices of CWC, 
concerned Himalayan States and other Stakeholders”. 
 
 
4.13 In this regard, the representative of the DoWR, RD & GR during the course of oral 
evidence held on 8.4.2021, apprised the Committee as follows:- 
 
“So far, we were monitoring glacial lakes of more than fifty hectares in area. Our 
assessment was that those big bursts -- which will cause damage or risk 
downstream -- need to be monitored. This incident has shown that even a smaller 
mass of ice or water can create problems. So, in this case, they have created 
problems for all the hydel projects which were being constructed in the upper region. 
Therefore, the Central Water Commission has reviewed its strategy and it has 
prepared a proposal where it will start monitoring glacial lakes of ten hectares and 
above. It will start monitoring even the smaller bodies”.  
 
 
4.14 On being asked as to whether Geological Survey of India (GSI) has any proposal 
under consideration to prepare an inventory of glacial lakes lying in other regions of 
Himalayas specifically in the Indian Himalayan Region, the Department of WR, RD & GR 
in its reply stated as under:- 
 
“Being an attached office of Ministry of Mines (MoM), GSI is primarily mandated to 
carry out survey and mapping followed by mineral resource assessment. 
Further,GSI carries out specialized investigation including Glaciological study, and 
fundamental research in various fields of earth sciences. 
Presently, under glaciological studies, GSI carries out assessment of glacier 
resources and associated studies for selected glaciers in northwest Himalayan Belt. 
At present, GSI has no proposal for preparation of inventory of glacial lakes lying in 
other regions of Himalayas”. 
 
 
4.15 To a query as to whether those stretches of the Himalayas where the danger of 
melting of glaciers and consequent GLOF incidents are most severe have been identified, 
the DoWR, RD & GR in its written reply submitted as below:- 
 
“There is no specific information on stretches of the Himalayans where the danger 
of melting of glaciers and consequent GLOF are most severe. However, as 
mentioned in reply to LoP-47 above, ISRO has taken up GLOF risk assessment of 
glacial lakes in the Himalayan Region of Indian River Basins under National 
Hydrology Project (NHP). A total of 26,655 glacial lakes (having size more than 0.25 
ha) have been mapped in the entire catchment area of Indian Himalayan rivers 
spreading in and outside the Indian boundary. Out of total inventoried glacial lakes, 
the lakes with size more than 1 ha are ranked for GLOF risk considering 
glaciological, terrain and associated characteristics. The set of parameters used for 
prioritization of glacial lakes are Lake type, Lake area, Glacier association, Distance 
between glacier snout and glacial lake inlet, Slope between glacier snout and glacial 

 
 
23 
 
lake inlet, Distance between glacial lake outlet and the nearest 
settlement/infrastructure, Slope between glacial lake outlet and the nearest 
settlement/infrastructure etc. The details of prioritized ranked Glacial lakes for GLOF 
Risk are as follows: 
a) Indus basin = 614 lakes 
b) Ganga basin = 864 lakes 
c) Brahmaputra basin is under preparation”. 
 
4.16 As regards, identification of potentially dangerous glacial lakes based on field 
observations, records of past events, geomorphologic and geotechnical characteristics of 
the lake/dam and surroundings, and other physical conditions, the Department in its 
written reply stated as under:- 
 
 “During 2012, a detailed survey was carried out by GSI to assess the GLOF risk on 
Gepang Gath Glacier lake, Sissu, Lahaul&Spiti, Himachal Pradesh. The GLOF-risk 
probability was assessed by high precision field surveys and high-resolution Earth 
Observation data. Other potential triggering factors like earthquakes, cloud bursts, 
landslides and glacier calving were also taken into account for the overall risk-
evaluation. It was concluded that under normal circumstances, there is no threat of 
GLOF, but unusual natural calamities may lead to devastating flood downstream. 
During the study, a site has been identified for creation of a “safety breach” to 
eliminate the GLOF threat to Manali-Leh National Highway and Sissu village 
downstream. A detailed report of the investigation had been submitted to the Civil 
Authorities in Himachal Pradesh for further necessary action. 
 
 A field based investigation was taken up by GSI during 2016-18 to evaluate the 
potentiality for GLOF risk and three glacial lakes viz., Vasudhara Tal, Mabang and 
Pyungru Lakes were identified as potential lake in terms of GLOF 
vulnerability.Final report of the same has been shared with Wadia Institute of 
Himalayan Geology, Dehradun for further studies as requested by State Disaster 
Management Authority, Uttarakhand.  
 
 ISRO has taken up GLOF risk assessment of glacial lakes in the Himalayan 
Region of Indian River Basins under National Hydrology Project (NHP). As part of 
the study, the inventoried glacial lakes are ranked for GLOF risk considering 
glaciological, terrain and associated characteristics. The set of parameters used 
for prioritization of glacial lakes are - Lake type, Lake area, Glacier association, 
Distance between glacier snout and glacial lake inlet, Slope between glacier snout 
and glacial lake inlet, Distance between glacial lake outlet and the nearest 
settlement/infrastructure, Slope between glacial lake outlet and the nearest 
settlement/infrastructure”. 
 
 
4.17 When asked to furnish details of those Glacial lakes which are increasing not only 
in numbers but also in size in the Himalayan region because of retreating glaciers, the 
Department in its written submission stated that as informed, no such study on temporal 
changes in glacial lake number and their extent has been carried out by ISRO and GSI.  
 
4.18 To a specific query as to whether the formation and expansion of glacial lakes 
increase the melting of the glaciers, and in turn cause negative mass balance to the 
glaciers, the DoWR, RD & GR replied as follows:- 
 
“As informed by GSI, they have not carried out any specific study to establish the 
relation between expansion of glacial lakes and melting of glacier or negative 
mass balance. It is to be mentioned that the retreat or the advance of the glacier is 
the net result of the negative or positive mass balance. In other words, the change 

 
 
24 
 
in mass balance is finally reflected in the glacier retreat or advance, though after a 
significant time lag depending on the response time of the glacier. This response 
time depends on several factors including the morphometric characteristic of the 
catchment. ISRO has also informed about no such study by them”. 
 
4.19 On being asked whether any study has been conducted to analyse the 
enlargement and origin of those glacial lakes which are located near human settlements 
and their potential for causing critically lake outburst, the Department in its written 
submission stated that no such study has been carried out by GSI, ISRO and DST. 
 
 
Flood Forecasting/Monitoring Stations in the Indian Himalayan Region 
 
4.20 On being asked to furnish details of number of high altitude meteorological and 
discharge stations set up by the Government for covering glaciers and watersheds in the 
Indian Himalayan region and whether these stations are equipped with modern 
technology, the Department in its written submission stated as under:- 
 
 “DGRE has three Mountain Metrological Centre (MMC) located at Sasoma in 
Laddakh, Srinagar in J&K and Auli in Uttarakhand for avalanche study.  
 As explained in reply to LoP-56, CWC has 46 Nos. existing metrological 
observations stations in the Himalyan region (1000m above msl). Apart from the 
above, 16 Nos. metrological observations stations have also been proposed 
(1000m above msl) in the Himalyan region, which is under various stages of 
implementation by CWC.  
 WIHG has five meteorological and discharge stations in the high altitude regions 
(~3800 m asl).  
 
 DGRE is using state-of-art sensors and technologies available word over for 
mitigating the avalanche hazards. The data received from observatory and 
weather stations at MMC is used in avalanche and weather forecasting for armed 
forces. DGRE is working on latest model for forecasting and snowpack model 
jointly developed with Swiss Federal Institute for Snow and Avalanche Research 
(SFISAR). 
 Out of 46 Nos. existing and 16 Nos. proposed metrological observations stations 
of CWC, 35 Nos. and all 16 Nos respectively are the satellite based telemetry 
stations.  
 As informed by DST, most of thestations of WIHG are of conventional type”. 
 
4.21 When asked about the number of flood forecasting stations set up by the CWC in 
the Indian Himalayan Region (States-wise), the DoWR, RD & GR in its written submission 
stated as under:- 
 
“CWC is issuing level forecasts at identified locations and inflow forecasts for 
identified Dams/ Reservoirs/ Barrages for providing advance information about the 
flow into these structures based on the request from the respective State 
Government. 
In the Himalayan Region including foothills in the States of Uttar Pradesh, Bihar, 
West Bengal and Assam, State-wise details of flood forecasting stations are as 
given below: 
 
 

 
 
25 
 
Sl. 
No.  
Name of State/UT Number of flood forecasting Stations 
Level Inflow Total 
1 Jammu & Kashmir 3  0 3 
2 Himachal Pradesh 1  0 1 
3 Uttarakhand 4  2 6 
4  Sikkim 3  5 8 
5 Arunachal Pradesh 3  0 3 
6 Uttar Pradesh (along foothills) 4 1 5 
7 Bihar (along foothills) 5  2 7 
8 West Bengal (along foothills) 7  0 7 
9 Assam (along foothills) 5  0 5 
Total 35 10 45 
 
 As informed by DST, WIHG has five meteorological and discharge stations in the 
high altitude regions (~3800 m asl). Most of these stations are of conventional 
type”. 
 
4.22 Elaborating the reasons for meagre number of flood forecasting stations set up in 
the State of Uttrakhand which is very vulnerable to landslide induced and global lake 
outburst floods, the Department in its written reply submitted as under:- 
 
“CWC is issuing level forecasts at identified locations and inflow forecasts for 
identified Dams/ Reservoirs/ Barrages for providing advance information about the 
flow into these structures based on the request from the respective State 
Government. Hence, based on request from Govt. of Uttarakhand, at present there 
are only 6 flood forecasting stations (2 Inflow Forecast Stations + 4 Level Forecast 
Stations) in the State of Uttarakhand. Depending on the request from Govt. of 
Uttarakhand, CWC can further expand its flood forecasting network in the State. 
The rivers in Uttarakhand are flashy in nature and swell up pretty quickly. The steep 
slopes of rivers give very less response time to issue a conventional gauge-to-
gauge statistical-correlation based (level) forecast for any station and hence, 
effective level based forecast is very difficult to make. For flood forecasting by 
rainfall-runoff mathematical modelling, sufficiently representative areal and temporal 
distribution of real-time rainfall would be required from IMD. Thus in Uttarakhand, 
constraints of terrain and short time of concentration are a limitation for a worthwhile 
forecast by conventional system and in case of mathematical model based flood 
forecasting, the non-availability of real time rainfall data for sufficient number of 
locations have been major limitations”. 
 
4.23 To a query as to whether any protocol has been developed by the Department to 
predict the ever increasing incidents of disasters due to occurrence of extreme kind of 
natural events, the Department in its written submission stated as under:-  
 
 “NDMA has published a “Guidelines on Management of Glacial Lake Outburst 
Flood (GLOF)” in October, 2020 for management of GLOF, wherein an integrated 
strategy is elaborated for risk reduction related to GLOF. 
(https://ndma.gov.in/sites/default/files/PDF/Guidelines/Guidelines-onManagement-
of-GLOFs.pdf). Section 7.8, page no. 51-54 of the said guidelines indicates the 
activities needs to be done by the concerned agencies during pre and post phases 
of disaster. 

 
 
26 
 
 CWC is the nodal organisation for providing information on riverine flooding. The 
flood forecasting process of CWC has a Standard Operating Procedure (SOP) 
which is scrupulously followed.  This SOP is updated twice every year during April 
and September. Also, for handling the crisis related to and to forewarn the 
appropriate administrative authority for responding to a flood emergency due to 
heavy rainfall, dam break, glacial lake outbursts, landslide dam break, releases 
from dams etc., Crisis Management Plan (CMP) of the Union Ministry of Jal Shakti 
(Department of Water Resources, RD&GR) has been formulated. In case of any 
such crisis, the protocols given in CMP are strictly followed. The CMP is updated 
annually. 
 Further, DGRE has a mandate for snow/avalanche forecasting of strategic area. 
DGRE takes the inputs of Global models from India Meteorological Department 
(IMD) for Weather Research and Forecasting (WRF) to generate mountain 
weather forecast for 06 days which further uses it in assessment of avalanche 
danger. DGRE is sharing the avalanche advisories information to the Armed 
Forces through a special network provided by the Indian Army. The information is 
further disseminated through Army channel to Brigade/Units. The communication 
in this regard is in restricted domain. For civil populated area DGRE is also sharing 
the avalanche advisory information through National Disaster Management 
Authority (NMA)/DRDO, which is hosted by them on their website for the benefits 
of civilian population”. 
 
4.24 Explaining the details of the early warning systems put in place by the CWC, the 
DoWR, RD & GR replied as under:-  
 
 “ Central Water Commission has developed a network of flood forecasting stations 
and issues Daily Flood Bulletins including forecasts, if issued, to all designated 
Authorities/ Agencies of the Central Government and State Governments/ District 
Administration during the South West and North East Monsoon seasons for all the 
major river basins in the following categories: 
 
 a)  Above Normal: Water level between Warning Level and Danger Level 
 b)  Severe: Water level between Danger Level to the Highest Flood 
Level (HFL) (The highest flood level of the river ever 
recorded at the place) attained at that location 
 c)  Extreme: Water level equal or higher than the HFL at that 
location 
 
Alert Categorization 
 
Category Description Stage Alerts to be transmitted to 
Above 
Normal 
Water level 
between Warning 
Level and Danger  
Level 
Yellow  JS (DM) & AS (DM). 
 Nodal Officers of NDMA & NDRF. 
 On instruction of JS (DM), be 
transmitted to HS. 
Severe Water level 
between Danger 
Level to the HFL* 
attained at that 
location 
Orange  HS / AS (DM) / JS (DM)/PS to HM/PS 
to MOS. 
 Nodal Officers of NDMA & NDRF. 
 All designated officers in 
PMO/Cabinet Secretariat. 
 Concerned State/UT Governments 
Extreme Water level equal 
to higher than the 
Red  HS/AS (DM)/ JS (DM)/PS to HM/PS to 
MOS. 

 
 
27 
 
HFL* at that 
location 
 Nodal officers of NDMA& NDRF. 
 All designated officers in 
PMO/Cabinet Secretariat. 
 ESF Ministries / Departments &    
concerned States / UTs.  
* Highest Flood Level: The highest flood level of the river ever recorded at the place. 
 
 Alerts messages will be followed by Situation Reports (SITREP). 
 Alerts falling in Orange stage will be communicated with 06 hourly updates. 
Alerts falling in Red stage will be communicated with 03 hourly updates or at more 
frequent intervals as warranted by the situation. 
 
 Also, DGRE provides avalanche warning for 24 hours in advance, which remains 
valid from 17:00 Hrs of present day to 17:00 Hs of next day. Sometimes, in 
extreme bad situations and rapid increase in instability of snowpack, the outlook 
for next 72 hours is also issued”. 
 
 
 
 

 
 
28 
 
CHAPTER – V 
 
GLACIER DISASTER MANAGEMENT 
 
5.1 Studies/collection of data is basic to glacier management. Monitoring of Himalayan 
Cryosphere is critical to study of impact of climate change, disaster vulnerability etc. 
Under climate change scenario resulting in loss of ice cover will lead to large scale 
environmental changes.  
 
Role of NDMA 
 
5.2 National Disaster Management Authority (NDMA)’s mandate is to lay down the 
policies, plans and guidelines for disaster management for ensuring timely and effective 
response to disaster. As per the provision of DM Act 2005, Section (6), (1) & (2)  National 
Authority shall have the responsibility for laying down the policies, plans and guidelines 
for disaster management for ensuring timely and effective response to disaster; without 
prejudice to generality of the provisions contained in sub-section (1), the National 
Authority may — 
 
a. lay down policies on disaster management; 
b. approve the National Plan; 
c. approve plans prepared by the Ministries or Departments of the 
Government of India inaccordance with the National Plan; 
d. lay down guidelines to be followed by the State Authorities in drawing up 
the State Plan; 
e. lay down guidelines to be followed by the different Ministries or 
Departments of theGovernment of India for the purpose of integrating the 
measures for prevention of disaster or the mitigation of its effects in their 
development plans and projects; 
f. coordinate the enforcement and implementation of the policy and plan for 
disastermanagement; 
g. recommend provision of funds for the purpose of mitigation; 
h. provide such support to other countries affected by major disasters as may 
be determined by the Central Government; 
i. take such other measures for the prevention of disaster, or the mitigation, or 
preparedness andcapacity building for dealing with the threatening disaster 
situation or disaster as it may consider necessary; 
j. lay down broad policies and guidelines for the functioning of the National 
Institute of Disaster Management”. 
 
5.3 The Committee asked as to whether there is any Disaster Management Plan in 
place for the Himalayan States in general and in particular for the State of Uttarakhand 
and if so, how effective that plan was in combating the unprecedented tragedy which 
occurred on 7thFebruary in Chamoli district of Uttarakhand. In response, the DoWR, RD & 
GR in its written submission stated as follows:- 
 
“As informed by NDMA, there is no specific Disaster Management (DM) Plan for the 
Himalayan States. NDMA prepared the revised National Disaster Management Plan 
(NDMP) in November, 2019 which, inter-alia, addresses the disasters likely to 
happen in Himalayan region like Landslides, Earthquake, Glacial Lake Outburst 
Flood (GLOF), Cloudburst, Forest Fire etc. for which roles and responsibilities of 
various stakeholders, including actions to be taken by them for management of 
these disasters have been mentioned in the NDMP-2019. 

 
 
29 
 
In the NDMP 2019, Himalayan region has been identified as one of the regions 
involving multiple States requiring special attention. As per the Disaster 
Management Act, 2005, all States/UTs are mandated to prepare their DM Plan, 
which should focus on State specific disasters. Accordingly, the States/UTs in the 
Himalayan region are expected to focus on disasters specific to that region in their 
DM Plan. 
As informed by the State Government, Uttrakhand has developed its own State 
Disaster Management Plan (SDMP) and the updation of the same is in progress. 
The SDMP is effective for all disasters and the response, relief and rehabilitation 
activities were carried out as per the SDMP after the tragedy of 7 February in 
Chamoli district of Uttrakhand”. 
 
5.4 When asked whether any detailed Manual / Standard Operating Procedures have 
been prepared to deal with the emergent situations arising out of floods including flash 
floods, Cloudburst, Glacier Outburst and Avalanches, the NDMA in its written submission 
stated as follows:- 
 
“No manual and Standard Operating Procedure (SOP) has been developed by 
NDMA to deal with the emergent situations arising out of floods including flash 
floods Cloudburst, Glacier Outburst and Avalanches. Only guidelines in reference to 
the subject and disaster management for Management of floods (2008), Urban 
floods (2008), Glacial Lake Outburst and Floods (GLOFs) (2020) &Landslide & 
Snow Avalanche (2009) is issued with necessary roles, responsibilities of different 
Ministries & States. All the SOP & Manual to tackle hazards/ disaster are prepared 
by their concerned nodal agencies”. 
 
5.5 On being asked whether the uniform codes for excavation, construction and 
grading are in place in India in the even of disasters, as prevalent in other countries, the 
NDMA in its written submission stated as under:- 
 
“Uniform code for the construction practices is contained in National Building Code 
of India (NBC 2016) published by the Bureau of Indian Standards (BIS) which 
comes under the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution. In 
regards to excavation, a Policy on Sediment Management Ministry of Jal Shakti is in 
drafting stage”. 
 
 
5.6 When asked whether there are well laid down procedures / regulations for land 
use planning in the GLOF/ Landslide Lake Outburst Flood (LLOF) prone areas, the 
NDMA replied as under:- 
 
“In the NDMA Guidelines on Management of GLOFs released on 13th October, 2020 
it was mentioned that there are no widely accepted procedures or regulation in India 
for land use planning in the GLOF/LLOF prone areas. It has been recommended in 
the Guideline to constitute a committee to formulate specific land use zoning, 
development control and building construction regulations under aegis of MoJS”. 
5.7 Regarding occurrence of higher casualties due to changes in the architecture of 
the houses in the hills (the increasing use of brick and concrete instead of the traditional 
mud and wood), the Department in its written submission stated as follows:-  
 
“State wise damage due to floods/heavy rains are being compiled by CWC. As per 
data compiled by CWC, loss of human lives in Himachal Pradesh, J&K, Sikkim and 
Uttrakhand during the year 2001 to 2018 is given at Annex-II. The Specific 
information about higher casualty figure due to changes in the architecture of the 

 
 
30 
 
houses in the hills (i.e. the increasing use of brick and concrete instead of the 
traditional mud and wood) is not available”. 
Role of National Disaster Response Force (NDRF) 
  
5.8 Elaborating on the role of National Disaster Response Force (NDRF) in disaster 
management and in what way it is different from NDMA, the NDMA in its written reply 
stated as follows:- 
“NDRF is a specialised rescue and response force, mandated to respond to Natural 
& Man-made Disasters. The Role of NDRF is as under:- 
i) To provide specialized response for rescue and relief in case of disasters-natural 
and man-made. 
ii) Deployment in case of impending disasters. 
iii) Assistance to civil authorities in distribution of relief material during/after disaster. 
iv) Co-ordination with other agencies engaged in rescue/relief work. 
 
NDMA is an apex body to lay down Policies, Plans and Guidelines for Disaster 
Management for ensuring timely and effective response to disasters. 
 
 
5.9 When asked about deployment/stationing of Quick Response Teams (QRTs) at 
critical locations in Himalayan States  to tackle the eventualities of floods including flash 
floods, glacier bursts etc, the NDMA replied as under:  
“DM Division, MHA undertakes pre-positioning of NDRF teams before Monsoon 
Season or before any threatening disaster situation or disaster on receipt of Early 
Warning”. 
 
 
5.10 On being asked as to whether NDRF has in their possession all types of modern 
equipments and other gadgets as also transportation facilities etc. at its disposal so as to 
respond and undertake swift rescue operations, the NDMA in their written reply stated as 
under:- 
 
“NDRF teams are well equipped to undertake the mandated assignments. However, 
heavy equipment like earthmovers/ heavy drilling machines/ JCBs etc, are not part 
of equipment profile of NDRF and provided by the local authorities with handlers at 
the incident site.  
 
Normally NDRF moves in own unit vehicles. However, during emergencies, 
IAF/state authorities are requisitioned for airlifting of troops”. 
 
5.11 When asked whether NDRF has adequate number of modern muck cleaning 
instruments/equipment so as to deal with emergent situations, the NDMA replied as 
under:-  
 
“NDRF is not authorised/equipped with such equipment and same is provided by the 
local authorities at disaster site”. 
 
5.12 Enquired whether NDRF has its own aircrafts/choppers for quick transportation as 
well as rescue purposes, the NDMA replied as under:- 
 
“There is no dedicated air service available with NDRF. For airlifting NDRF is 
dependent on IAF/ private choppers provided by States”. 
 

 
 
31 
 
5.13 In response to a query regarding the delay by NDRF in reaching Reni in Chamoli 
District Uttarakhand where the disaster struck due to Glacial Outburst, the representative 
of NDRF during the course of oral evidence on 23.3.2021, stated as follows:- 
 
“Sir, unfortunately, this time it took long time for NDRF teams to 
reach the place of incident. Although, the roads were fine, but the 
distance was too much, as such there was a delay in reaching there. 
We will try to improve further”. 
 
  
 
Public Awareness to prevent Glacier Disasters 
 
5.14 The Committee asked about the awareness programme initiated by the 
Government to create awareness among the public on the perilous impact of global 
warming particularly in Himalayan region. In response, the Department in its written 
submission stated as under:-  
 
 “For the purpose of enhanced understanding of the Himalayan ecosystem in 
context of climate change, the National Mission on Sustaining Himalayan 
Ecosystem (NMSHE) has taken up several initiatives in partnership with various 
Himalayan States and institutions. Under NMSHE, State Climate Cells/Centres 
have been established in 12 out of 13 Himalayan States/UTs for building institution 
capacity of Himalayan States in the area of climate change adaptation. These 
centres are working on areas of climate vulnerability assessment, raising public 
awareness, training and capacity building for climate change adaptation planning. 
Several tens thousands of people have been trained as part of this mission in the 
Indian Himalayan region. 
 The Government of India has launched the National Mission on Himalayan Studies 
in 2015-16, a Central Sector Scheme, to support the sustenance and 
enhancement of the ecological, natural, cultural, and socio-economic capital 
assets and values of the Indian Himalayan Region. Under this Mission, Nature 
Learning Centres (NLCs) have been set-up with an objective to educate and 
empower people for environment conservation and sustainable practices through 
trainings, demonstrations and dissemination material in the Indian Himalayan 
Region. In first phase of the Mission, NLCs have been set-up in Assam, Manipur, 
Tripura, Nagaland, Himachal Pradesh and Sikkim. 
 The G.B. Pant National Institute of Himalayan Environment (GBP-NIHE) through 
its Integrated Eco-Development Research Programme is also conducting various 
awareness activities in socio-economic development, forestry and biodiversity 
conservation, and pollution control, etc.  
 Further, Environmental Information System (ENVIS) Scheme of MoEF&CC, 
regularly brings out value-added information products relating to environment, 
forest, wildlife and climate change which include theme-based newsletters, special 
publications, thematic bulletins, technical reports, information products developed 
on parks and sanctuaries, etc.  
 The National Museum of Natural History (NMNH) of MoEF&CC and its regional 
centres, are undertaking environmental awareness programmes/ activities like 
poster, painting, slogan and essay competitions, debates, seminars/ workshops for 
all sections of the society. Summer vacation programmes and winter nature camps 
are also organized for school children. 
 Central Pollution Control Board (CPCB) organize awareness programmes through 
mass media, on prevention, control or abatement of water, air and noise pollution 
in different parts of the country including the states of Himalayan region. Further, 

 
 
32 
 
trainings/workshops/skill developments programmes for the stake- holders such as 
State Pollution Control Boards (SPCBs) / Pollution Control Committees (PCCs) / 
Urban Local Bodies (ULBs) on prevention, control or abatement pollution are also 
organized. Stake-holders including States/SPCBs/PCCs are consulted while 
formulating Environmental Standards, Guidelines etc”. 
 
 
 
 
*** 

 
 
33 
 
PART II 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS 
 
 
NEED TO MONITOR INDIAN HIMALAYAN REGION 
2.1 Glaciers are important components of the hydrological cycles of the Indian 
Himalayan region as these are the source of three large river systems, i.e. the 
Indus, the Ganges, and the Brahmaputra, which provide water for millions of 
people in the country and accordingly, the Hindu Kush Himalayan Region (HKH) is 
rightly described as ‘Water Towers of Asia’. Thus, the river systems and associated 
groundwater form a significant water resource for the country. The Himalayan 
glaciers ensure water availability even in post-monsoon period as the base flow of 
the glacial stream, besides ground water contribution in the river system of 
perennial rivers. As such, glaciers are very important for water security of the 
country. The Committee were informed that as per the inventory published by the 
Geological Survey of India (GSI), there are as many as 9775 glaciers in the Indian 
Himalayan Region (IHR).  Further, a total of 1306.1 cubic km of ice volume (about 
1110 cu. km of water) is locked up in glacierised basins of Indus, Ganga and 
Brahmaputra, although specific information about separate volume of ice and 
snow water is not available. It has also been informed that the thinning of 
Himalayan glaciers has been accelerated in the recent years, resulting in a 
significant rise in glacier melt, including sediment load, in yearly runoff and altered 
hydrological behaviour in the mountain region and downstream.  The Committee 
observe that close and frequent monitoring of glaciers, glacier discharge, glacial 
lakes and prospective glacial lake outburst floods in the Himalayan region have 
become vital and critically important as never before for not only determining the 
current status as well as future responses of glaciers and glacial lakes, but also for 
predicting and mitigating the potential hazard disasters that may arise in future. 
 
WARMING OF THE HIMALAYAN-KARAKORAM REGION 
 
2.2 The Committee note that as per the information furnished by the Department 
of Science and Technology (DST), the Himalayan-Karakoram region is becoming 
warmer at a  faster rate than global mean by 0.5 0C which will lead to local changes 
in hydrology in terms of rainfall and snowfall patterns, increased melting from 
glaciers and threat to the infrastructure due to increase in extreme events leading 
to disasters. The Committee are further informed by the Ministry of Environment, 
Forest & Climate Change (MoEF&CC) that smaller glaciers in the Himalayan region 
are more sensitive to climate change and their shrinkage rate is stated to be higher 
than those of larger glaciers.  Further, as per the World Meteorological 
Organization, average global temperature for 2015-2019 is estimated to be 1.1 
degree Celsius above pre-industrial (1850-1900) level. According to the Ministry of 
Earth Sciences, in line with rising temperatures across the globe, all India mean 
temperature has risen by nearly 0.7 degree Celsius during 1901 to 2018.                      

 
 
34 
 
The Committee further note that as per the IPCC report 2021, the glaciers of Hindu 
Kush Himalayas (HKH) are shrinking and the snow cover has been getting reduced 
since the early 21st century and glaciers have also been thinned, retreated and lost 
mass since the 1970s.  According to estimates made between 2006 and 2018, the 
global mean sea level is rising at a rate of around 3.7 mm/yr. Further in the long 
term, the melting of glaciers will also contribute to rising of the sea level and 
threaten to submerge some coastal cities in the country and in the short term, the 
sea level rise may cause the change in rainfall pattern and seasonal flooding in the 
coastal areas.  The Committee while observing cataclysmic changes that are 
occurring in the Himalayan region / cryosphere, call for urgent, coherent and 
coordinated response to the evolving challenges posed by global warming & 
climate change. 
 
NEED TO CHECK EMISSION OF BLACK CARBON 
 
2.3 The Committee learn that very few studies have been conducted by different 
organizations/ institutes in the country to assess the adverse effects of 
atmospheric pollution on the Himalayan glaciers.  A study conducted by National 
Centre for Polar and Ocean Research and Space Physics Laboratory at their 
Himansh station in Lahaul-Spiti region have revealed that the total Suspended 
Particulate Matter (SPM) showed significant variations with dominance of mineral 
dust components therein (~67%). It has also been stated that the black carbon 
reportedly contributes (~4%) to near surface composite aerosol mass 
concentrations and also absorbs more light and emits infra-red radiation that 
increases the temperature.  Hence, an increase in Black Carbon in the high 
Himalayas is stated to contribute to the faster melting of glaciers. The Committee 
recommend that with a view to assess the extent and scope of adverse impact of 
atmospheric pollution including black carbon on the fragile and sensitive 
Himalayan glacier system, the Department of Water Resources, River Development 
& Ganga Rejuvenation in consultation with the Ministry of Environment, Forest & 
Climate Change and other concerned Ministries/Departments/Agencies should 
commission a research work/project for comprehensive examination of this aspect 
and submit the research findings within a time-bound period.  
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 1) 
 
NEED FOR OVERARCHING APEX BODY FOR GLACIER MANAGEMENT 
 
2.4 The Committee note that Glaciers are important components of the 
hydrological cycles of the Indian Himalayan region as they are the source of the 
three large river systems of India i.e. the Indus, the Ganges, and the Brahmaputra, 
which provide water for millions of people in the country. However, they note that 
there are plethora of Ministries/Departments/Institutions with different mandates 
for dealing with hydro-meteorological and hydro-geological hazards of Himalayan 
glaciers. While the glaciers are surveyed and their detailed inventory is maintained 

 
 
35 
 
by the Geological Survey of India, Ministry of Mines; the Ministry of Environment, 
Forest and Climate Change looks into all matters related to climate change 
including its impact on the glaciers. The Department of Science & Technology is 
involved in conducting research on glaciers and the National Centre for Polar and 
Ocean Research (NCPOR) under the Ministry of Earth Sciences has done some 
studies on the Himalayan cryosphere. Besides, the Defence Geo-Informatics 
Research Establishment under aegis of Defence Research & Development 
Organisation (DRDO) carries out work on avalanche forecasting, and the Indian 
Space Research Organization coming under the Department of Space, looks after 
the National Natural Resources Management System and provides valuable inputs 
by way of remote sensing. Further, the Department of Water Resources, River 
Development & Ganga Rejuvenation is tasked with flood-control management and 
the Central Water Commission has been mandated for monitoring glacial lakes.  
Apart from different Ministries/Departments/Agencies, glaciological studies and 
other cryospheric research is carried out by a number of researchers from various 
research and academic institutes across the country. 
The Committee are of the considered view that given the strategic role and 
importance of glaciers as a vital national resource, there is a critical and imperative 
need as never before, to formulate new strategies for combating the challenges 
posed by the climate change and global warming in the glacier management 
especially glaciers movement, glaciers surge, Glacial Lake Outburst Flood (GLOF), 
Landslide Lake Outburst Flood (LLOF) and cloud burst in mountainous regions. In 
this regard, the role of planners, scientists and academicians assumes critical 
importance in devising, developing and implementing suitable measures for 
studying, monitoring and providing early warning response to reduce the potential 
glacier related risks. Fragmented research and studies by various 
Departments/Institutions/Agencies in this regard will not yield desired results / 
outcomes and also may not necessarily convert into actionable steps. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that there is need to set up a single nodal 
agency for bringing out synergies among various Government 
Departments/Ministries involved in glaciological research and monitoring to 
achieve desirable results. Such an agency should be entrusted with the 
responsibility of coordinating the activities of all the Departments/Agencies 
involved in Himalayan Glaciers monitoring and research work. Besides, this 
agency should be given well-defined and delineated mandate by suitably amending 
the Allocation of Business Rules. The Committee urge upon the Department of 
Water Resources, River Development & Ganga Rejuvenation to play a lead role in 
this regard so as to take the matter to its logical conclusion for setting up of the 
institution and apprise the Committee about the steps taken by it within three 
months of presentation of this Report. 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 2) 
 
 
 
 

 
 
36 
 
NEED TO SET UP SEPARATE DEDICATED MOUNTAIN HAZARD AND RESEARCH 
INSTITUTE 
2.5 The Committee observe gaps and deficiencies in glaciology research and 
monitoring of the glacial lakes and water Bodies in the Himalayan region. The 
Committee note that Geological Survey of India (GSI) has not conducted specific 
studies on estimated volume loss of glaciers between 1950 and 2020 and also not 
projected any estimate of loss by the year 2100. Further, there is no comprehensive 
information about the volume loss of glaciers in the Indian Himalayan Region.  The 
Committee further note that the Ministry of Environment, Forest & Climate Change 
has not conducted any study or awarded any project on warming of Himalayan 
glaciers. The Committee were informed by the DoWR, RD & GR that Central Water 
Commission (CWC) has not issued any advisory to the concerned local 
Governments regarding the anticipation of floods caused by 
avalanches/cloudburst landslides in the Himalayan region. Further, there is also no 
specific information available on stretches of the Himalayans where the danger of 
melting of glaciers and consequent GLOF are most severe. Moreover, no study on 
temporal changes in glacial lake number and their extent has been carried out by 
Indian Space Research Organization (ISRO) and GSI.  The Committee also took 
cognizance of the fact that no study has been carried out by GSI, ISRO and DST to 
critically analyse the enlargement and origin of glacial lakes near human 
settlements and their potential cause for a lake outburst. 
Taking into consideration the aforestated gaps / deficiencies in the 
glaciological, hydro-materiological and hydro-geological research relating to 
Himalayan glacier system, the Committee are of the considered view that there is 
an need for setting up an over arching organisation at the national level which can 
coordinate  with various Ministries / Departments / Agencies/ Research Institutes 
engaged in handling different hydro-geological and hydro-materiological hazards 
including glacier related hazards for having an integrated approach in collecting 
and collating information / data on Himalayan glaciers and also the research 
findings at one place and to maintain a reliable database that can be accessed 
easily by all agencies and also for issuing early warnings and alerts regarding 
potential multi hazards to the stake holders and public.  In this regard, at the 
behest of the Committee, various Ministries/ Departments/ research agencies have 
given their suggestions and offered solutions for effective management and 
monitoring of glaciers in the country in a coordinated manner as under:- 
 
(i) The Department of Science and Technology has suggested that there 
is a need for single coordinating agency to coordinate with various 
other agencies having mandates to handle different 
hydrometerological and hydrogeological hazards.  It has also 
suggested that to deal with the disasters like cloudburst, GLOF, 
landslides etc. in an integrated manner, a multi hazard warning system 
may be put in place through a real-time coordinating mechanism 
wherein one agency may be entrusted with the responsibility of 

 
 
37 
 
continuously monitoring and issuing warnings and alerts to 
authorities, stakeholders and public; 
 
(ii) The MoEF&CC has suggested that the responsibility for coordination 
of all activities on the Himalayan glaciers should rest with a single 
identified nodal coordinating agency within Government of India, such 
as for e.g. National Security Council Secretariat (NSCS), which is 
already coordinating with various Government agencies in various 
studies, including impact of engineering technologies on the glaciers. 
Such an agency would need to be given an appropriate war time 
mandate because of recurrence of GLOF, Cloudburst, landslides etc. 
by allocating the subject through allocation of business. 
 
(iii) The Ministry of Earth Sciences has suggested that a network of fully 
equipped and integrated monitoring systems supported by a set of 
field stations in critically important glaciered basins is required for 
monitoring glaciers and glacier bound hazards.  The systems should 
be automated with real-time access to data to modelers to create a 
potential early warning system on glacio-hydrological hazards from 
time to time, based on hazard potential coupled with geographical 
information system tools downstream activities and population 
vulnerability along with open access to ground-based meteorological, 
hydrological and glacilogical data from the entire region to achieve the 
target.  ISRO can contribute by using high resolution and near real 
time satellite remote sensing to monitor glacial lake and water bodies 
in development of a reliable database. 
 
(iv) Defence Geoinformatics Research Establishment set up under agegis 
of DRDO has suggested that an integrated approach for debris flow 
and GLOF risk management coupled with systematic risk assessment 
study of the region is imperative to curtail risks of glacial hazards. An 
inclusive approach with all stakeholders is recommended to 
understand GLOF phenomenal behaviour by creating ground and 
remote sensing based inventory of benchmark moraine dammed lakes 
and monitoring changes on a regular basis along with an effective 
early warning mechanism to monitor GLOF hazards in order to 
minimize the risk of such hazards.  
 
Apart from above suggestions / solutions offered by various 
Ministries/Departments/organisations, the NDMA “Guidelines on Management of 
Glacial Lake Outburst Flood (GLOF)” has proposed that the Ministry of Jal Shakti 
(MoJS) be designated as the nodal Ministlry and Central Water Commission (CWC) 
as the nodal agency for management of GLOF.  These Guidelines further propose 
that a national level Centre for Glacial Research, Studies and Management 
(CGRSM) be established by the MoJS under the umbrella of the National Institute of 

 
 
38 
 
Hydrology (NIH), Roorkee as a premier centre with state-of-the art facilities, which 
would eventually grow into a national centre of excellence. Keeping in view the 
suggestions / solutions offered by various Ministries / Departments / Agencies, the 
Committee urge upon the Department of WR, RD&GR to carefully study the same 
and prepare a comprehensive concept paper / cabinet note subsuming the 
solutions/suggestions in consultation with all the Ministries / Departments / 
Agencies, so as to evolve a consensus on the structure mandate and modalities of 
the proposed national level apex research organisation viz. CGRSM for placing 
before the Union Cabinet for their consideration.  The Committee would like to be 
apprised of the action taken in this regard within three months of presentation of 
the Report.  
(Recommendation Sl. No. 3) 
 
NEED TO PROVIDE SUFFICIENT BUDGETARY ALLOCATIONS FOR GLACIER 
RESEARCH  
 
2.6 The Committee learn from the written submission of the Department of Water 
Resources, River Development & Ganga Rejuvenation that various 
Ministries/Departments dealing with the subject of glacier management / 
monitoring have allocated and spent a meagre amount for conducting 
research/studies in the field in the last 5 years. While on the one hand, the 
Committee find that studies such as temporal change in glacier origin and 
enlargement of glacier area are required for proper assessment and management 
of glaciers, on the other hand, the fund allocation is not sufficient to encourage 
such studies. The Committee believe that there is an urgent need to conduct 
various field-based studies on glaciers which may need adequate 
funding/budgetary support. As the challenges of managing and monitoring the 
glaciers movement / behaviour and mitigation of hazards arising therefrom are 
enormous, the Committee recommend the Government to allocate adequate 
budgetary resources to the concerned Ministries/Departments involved in the 
research in the field so as to meet their financial requirements and for ensuring 
that the activities related to research and monitoring of glaciers do not suffer due 
to shortage of funds. 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 4) 
 
 
NEED FOR REVIVAL OF SPRINGS IN THE HIMALAYAS 
 
2.7 The Committee note that the Niti Aayog Report of 2018 (Report of Working 
Group-I on Inventory and Revival of Springs in the Himalayas for Water Security) 
had warned that almost 60 per cent of water sources in the Indian Himalayan 
region are on the verge of drying up.  The Ayog has proposed launching a National 
Spring Water Management Programme for the Himalayan Region. The Committee 
are happy to note that in compliance with the suggestions of the NITI Ayog, the 
Department of Water Resources, River Development & Ganga Rejuvenation has 

 
 
39 
 
created a database of springs existing in the mountainous regions of India, 
especially in Indian Himalayan region (total 12 states) by compiling all information 
already available with Survey of India (SoI), Central Ground Water Board (CGWB), 
National Remote Sensing Centre (NRSC), State Governments, Non-Governmental 
Organizations (NGO’s) and other organizations. The database compiled was 
analyzed to create a Spring Geographical Information System (GIS) which is 
available as web based service in Survey of India G2G portal.  While appreciating 
the steps taken for creation of database, the Committee urge upon the Department 
to take necessary steps for the revival of springs in the Himalayan region as 
millions of people depend only on Springs for their drinking, domestic, and 
agricultural water needs. The Committee would like to be apprised of the steps 
taken by the Department in this regard within three months of the presentation of 
this Report.  
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 5) 
 
 
NEED TO HAVE DATA SHARING AGREEMENTS 
 
2.8 The Committee note that though India has entered into treaty / agreement for 
water sharing / sharing of hydrological information with its neighbouring countries, 
however, there is no specific Agreement/Treaty with neighbouring countries for 
sharing of glacier related data for large-scale modeling and runoff evolution. The 
Committee are of the view that in order to design / devise a comprehensive and 
coordinated strategy that could effectively address both the risk of glacier related 
outburst floods and water management challenges, regional cooperation is the 
need of the hour. Since the threat posed by the melting/retreating of Himalayan 
glaciers transcends the national boundries of the Himalayan nations, the 
Committee are of the considered view that in order to formulate / devise an 
effective and comprehensive response to the threat posed by melting of glaciers 
and for mitigating potential hazard situations, regional cooperation for seamless 
sharing of hydrological information / data on glacier movement / behaviour is very 
much warranted. The Committee, therefore recommend the Department of Water 
Resources, River Development & Ganga Rejuvenation to take up the matter with 
the Ministry of External Affairs so as to have some kind of bilateral/multilateral 
Agreement with neighbouring Himalayan countries for sharing of information / data 
on the changing state of glaciers and the threats posed by them. The Committee 
would like to be apprised of the steps taken by the Department in this regard within 
three months of the presentation of this Report.  
(Recommendation Sl. No. 6) 
 
2.9 The Committee observe that there are various constraints / problems even at 
the national level in data-sharing relating to glaciological research. The Committee 
understand from the submissions of the Director, Wadia Institute of Himalayan 
Geology, that there are many obstacles in using the data especially the high-
resolution data because they need specific permission from concerned authorities 

 
 
40 
 
before their use. Besides, different Ministries have different protocols for data 
collection and their sharing. The Committee are of the view that since glaciology is 
a wide ranging and diverse field, research in this area necessitates requirement of 
data from a wide range of sources, institutions, and authorities. All information 
pertaing to glaciers need to be gathered at one place so as to enable its easy 
access and sharing by researchers and other stakeholders so that they accomplish 
their stated research goals. The Committee, therefore, recommend the Department 
to take up this issue with concerned Ministries/Department/Agencies/Institutes for 
setting up a common data sharing platform under the aegis of a single nodal 
agency so as to enable seamless exchange of data by various researchers / stake 
holders. 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 7) 
 
NEED TO STRENGTHEN NETWORK OF MONITORING STATIONS 
 
2.10 The Committee note that there is a severe shortage of meteorological and 
monitoring stations in the Indian Himalayan region. Presently the Defence 
Geoinformatics Research Establishment (DGRE) has set up three Mountain 
Metrological Centres (MMC) for avalanche study and the Wadia Institute of 
Himalayan Geology (WIHG) has five meteorological and discharge stations located 
in the high altitude regions (~3800 m asl), most of them being of conventional type. 
The Central Water Commission (CWC) has set up 46 meteorological observation 
stations in the Himalyan region (1000m above msl) and out of these, only 35 are 
telemetry based stations. Apart from the above, 16 new telemetry based 
meteorological observation stations are proposed (1000m above msl) to be set up 
in the Himalyan region, which is under various stages of implementation.  As 
regards Uttarakhand, which is very vulnerable to landslide induced and glacial lake 
outburst floods, the Committee find that CWC has only 6 (4 Level + 2 Inflow) flood 
forecasting stations. Explaining the reason for this, DoWR, RD & GR  has stated 
that CWC issues level forecasts at identified locations and inflow forecasts for 
identified Dams/ Reservoirs/ Barrages for providing advance information based on 
the request from the respective State Governments. Hence, based on request from 
Government of Uttarakhand at present there are only 6 flood forecasting stations. 
While citing the constraints in making accurate and timely forecast by conventional 
systems due to tough terrain and flashy nature of rivers in Uttarakhand, the 
Department stated that for flood forecasting by rainfall-runoff mathematical 
modelling, sufficiently representative and temporal distribution of real-time rainfall 
would be required from Indian Meteorological Department (IMD).  
 
The Committee further note that Himalayan glaciers and glacial lakes are not 
being monitored / observed on a scale on which they should have been due to their 
remote location and difficulty in accessing them. The strategic importance of 
glaciers in ensuring water security and the frequent occurrence of several extreme 
hydro-meteorological events in the recent past due to climate change resulting in 
abnormal flood like situations damaging human lives and infrastructure, has 
underlined as never before, the urgency of constant monitoring of the glaciers and 

 
 
41 
 
glacial lakes. The Committee believe that in order to have effective and seamless 
monitoring of Himalayan glaciers and glacier-bound risks, a comprehensive 
network of field stations in highly important glaciered basins supplemented by 
integrated monitoring systems is the need of the hour. The Committee thus urge 
upon the Department to make concerted efforts to set up a network of high altitude 
meteorological and discharge stations covering more glaciers and watersheds in 
the Himalayan region. Besides, the Committee call upon the Department to work in 
close liason with the WIHG and explore the technical feasibility of converting their 
meteorological and discharge stations in the high altitude regions into Automatic 
Stations which will be of great use in enabling observation at a high time resolution 
to be received in real time.  The Department should also work in close 
collaboration with the IMD with a view to ensuring real time rainfall forecast 
systems for a State like Uttarakhand which frequently becomes victim of various 
mountainous hazard events. Further, the Committee call upon the Department to 
reconsider its extant policy of setting up flood forecasting station only on the 
request from the concerned State Governments, and should become proactive and 
itself identify the vulnerable locations in collaboration with the respective State 
Governments, where Forecasting Stations are needed to be set up.  
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 8) 
 
 
NEED TO BRING SMALLER GLACIERS UNDER THE PURVIEW OF MONITORING  
 
 
2.11 The Committee note that as per the inventory of GLs/WBs prepared in 2011, 
there are 2028 GLs/WBs having size more than 10 ha including 477 GLs/WBs 
having size more than 50 ha in Himalayan Region of Indian River Basins. Presently, 
Central Water Commission is monitoring 95 GLs/WBs lying in India having size 
more than 50 Ha on monthly basis during monsoon season (June to October) every 
year.  The Committee are of the view that it is just not enough to cover only large 
water bodies/glacial lakes as the smaller glaciers are also more vulnerable to 
climate change which accelerates their melting and thereby pose potent threat, the 
fact  which has been corroborated by the statement of the representative of the 
DoWR, RD & GR during the course of oral evidence, wherein he has stated that 
even a smaller mass of ice or water can be troublesome as witnessed in Chamoli 
incident which occurred in the State of Uttarakhand in early months of the year 
2021 which was non monsoon period. The Committee, therefore, recommend the 
Department of Water Resources, River Development & Ganga Rejuvenation to take 
necessary steps to bring smaller water bodies/glacial lakes under their purview for 
monitoring not only during monsoon period but throughout the year. They also 
urge upon the Department to collaborate with National Remote Sensing Centre 
(NRSC) for updation of their 2011 inventory of GLs/WBs which was based on the 
satellite imageries data of Advanced Wide Field Sensor (AWiFS) of the                         
Indian Remote Sensing Satellite, Resourcesat-2 collected during the period                   
May-Nov, 2009. 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 9) 

 
 
42 
 
NEED TO HAVE ROBUST EARLY WARNING SYSTEM 
 
2.12 The Committee observe that the recent spike in incidents of mountainous 
hazards / disasters viz. GLOF, LLOF, snow avalanches, cloud bursts and landslides 
have underlined the paramount importance of having a robust early warning 
system. The Committee understand that these mountainous hazards should not be 
viewed in isolation as single and stand alone incidents but should be seen as  
interconnected to potential multiple disasters having a cascading impact. However,  
most of the present day warning systems are not capable of dealing with these 
kinds of disasters as these are designed for making forecasts only for single 
disaster. The Committee recommend that the Department should take initiative in 
this regard and in consultation with other Government agencies like NDMA, Indian 
Meteorological Department and respective State Governments, particularly the 
State Government of Uttrakhand for evolving a multi-hazard risk assessment 
approach so that a Multi-Hazard Early Warning System coupled with real-time 
coordinated mechanism be set up under the aegis of a single nodal agency for 
regular monitoring and issuing of hazards / disasters warnings to all stakeholders 
in respect of potential mountainous hazards. 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 10) 
 
 
2.13 Considering the strategic role and paramount importance of Himalayan 
glaciers which are literally known as “Water Towers of Asia” and owing to the fact 
that three major Indian river system are glacier fed which provide water security to 
the country for various uses like drinking water requirements, hydropower, 
industry, agriculture etc., the Committee are of the considered view that since 
green cover in the valleys adjacent to the glaciers is critical and acts as a buffer 
and would help in reducing the impact of climate change, the same should be 
protected / conserved.  For this purpose, the Committee urge upon the Department 
of Water Resources, River Development & Ganga Rejuvenation to work in close 
cooperation with the Ministry of Environment, Forest & Climate Change and other 
concerned Ministries for evolving a comprehensive policy response so as to 
preserve the sensitive Himalayan glacier system.  
(Recommendation Sl. No. 11) 
NEED TO EVOLVE LAND USE REGULATIONS 
2.14 The Committee are of the considered view that well laid down procedure / 
regulations for land use planning / zoning in the Himalayan States especially those 
area which are more prone and susceptible to landslides, LLOFs, GLOFs etc. will 
go a long way in mitigating the eventualities that arise in the event of disasters.  
The Committee were informed by NDMA that in their guidelines on management of 
GLOFs, they have inter alia recommended for constitution of a Committee to 
formulate specific land use zoning and building construction regulations under 
aegis of Ministry of Jal Shakti (MoJS).  Further, the Committee note that while a 
Uniform Code for the construction practices is contained in National Building Code 
of India (NBC 2016) published by the Bureau of Indian Standards (BIS) which 

 
 
43 
 
comes under the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution, as 
regards excavation, a policy on Sediment Management is at  drafting stage under 
aegis of the Ministry of Jal Shakti. The Committee are of the view that regulating 
construction activities in GLOF/LLOF prone areas will go a long way in averting 
disasters and saving precious human lives. They, therefore, recommend that as 
suggested by the NDMA, the Department of WR, RD&GR should constitute a 
Committee to formulate specific land use zoning and building construction 
regulations expeditiously. They also recommend that the Department of WR, 
RD&GR should work in close coordination with BIS, so that NBC norms are 
adhered to strictly by all the people while constructing buildings in the region.  The 
Committee would like to be apprised of the steps taken by the Department in this 
regard within three months of the presentation of this Report.  
(Recommendation Sl. No. 12) 
 
NEED TO STRENGTHEN FUNCTIONING OF NATIONAL DISASTER RESPONSE 
FORCE (NDRF) 
 
2.15 The Committee note that NDRF is specialized rescue and response force 
mandated to respond to national and man-made disasters. However, they were 
apprised of the fact that heavy equipments like earthmovers/ heavy drilling 
machines/ JCBs etc, do not form part of the equipment profile of NDRF and these 
equipments are provided by the local authorities with handlers at the incident site. 
Further, NDRF is also not equipped with modern muck cleaning 
instruments/equipments to deal with emergent situations such as the one that 
arose in Chamoli District in the State of Uttarakhand in the month of February 2021. 
The Committee are surprised to learn from the deposition of the representative of 
the NDRF that though roads were fine there was considerable delay on the part of 
rescue team in reaching the site at Reni in Chamoli District Uttarakhand where the 
disaster took place on 7th February, 2021, because of distance. The Committee note 
that there is no dedicated air craft service available with NDRF for airlifting NDRF 
personnel and they are dependent on IAF/ private choppers provided by the States.  
The Committee find that notwithstanding the fact that NDRF is a specialized 
rescue and response force, however, the constraints / problems such as 
mentioned above are required to be removed as they hamper the rescue efforts of 
NDRF at critical times. Since the State Governments many a time lack specialized 
skills and resources required to deal with the different kind of calamities either 
natural or man-made, so, reliance of NDRF on the State Governments on delivery 
of various kinds of equipments may not serve the purpose and even may hamper 
the timely and much needed rescue operations. The Committee are of the view that 
instead of depending on State Governments, it would be more advisable for NDRF 
to have its own dedicated inventory of modern search and rescue equipment. 
Further, for ensuring timely arrival of NDRF rescue teams at disaster struck 
locations and avert delays as witnessed in Chamoli incident, it should have its own 
fleet of aircraft and should not be dependent on the IAF/State Governments to 

 
 
44 
 
provide choppers. Besides, recognizing the role of local community as a first 
responder during any calamity, the Committee feel that the NDRF should organize 
extensive training programmes for local people in all States in general and in 
particular for the States which are more vulnerable to natural calamities. The 
Committee are of the view that NDRF should work closely with the States and 
render them all possible assistance in raising and training their State Disaster 
Response Teams. The Committee urge upon the Department of Water Resources, 
River Development & Ganga Rejuvenation to take up the above-mentioned 
suggestions with the Ministry of Home Affairs/NDMA to streamline the working of 
NDRF.  
(Recommendation Sl. No. 13) 
 
NEED FOR BOTH UNION AND STATES TO WORK IN TANDEM 
 
2.16 The Committee observe that though a revised National Disaster Management 
Plan has been prepared for addressing the disasters likely to happen in Himalayan 
region like landslides, cloudburst, GLOF etc., no specific Disaster Management 
(DM) Plan has been prepared by the NDMA for the Himalayan States, though the 
State of Uttrakhand has developed its own State Disaster Management Plan 
(SDMP) and the updation of the same is in progress. Further, the Committee note 
that no manual and Standard Operating Procedure (SOP) has been developed by 
NDMA to deal with the emergent situations arising out of floods including flash 
floods Cloudburst, Glacier Outburst and Avalanches. It has been informed by 
NDMA that only guidelines in respect of the subjects viz. disaster management for 
Management of floods (2008), Urban floods (2008), Glacial Lake Outburst and 
Floods (GLOFs) (2020) & Landslide & Snow Avalanche (2009) have been prepared 
and issued defining the roles, responsibilities of different Ministries & States, while 
the SOPs & Manuals to tackle hazards/ disaster are to be prepared by the 
concerned nodal agencies.The Committee are of the view that preparation of 
guidelines by NDMA with regard to various calamities is a welcome step, but the 
need of the hour is that it should be ensured that these guidelines are implemented 
in true spirit and in the right earnest by all the concerned stakeholders at the 
ground level.  The Committee are of the considered opinion that it is high time that 
role of State Governments particularly in the Indian Himalayan Region need to be 
adequately recognized and they should be made active partners and engaged 
proactively in monitoring and research of glaciers and issuance of warning in the 
wake of disasters.  Thus, the Union Ministries/Department should work in close 
cooperation and coordination with the State Governments in order to strengthen 
their efficacy, capacity building and implementation of the SDMP.  The Committee 
also urge upon the Ministry of Home Affairs/NDMA to improve and streamline their 
functioning and tone up their Disaster Management Apparatus, so as to anticipate 
and provide quick response to the impending glacier related and other disasters in 
the Himalayan region.   
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 14) 
 

 
 
45 
 
PUBLIC AWARENESS PROGRAMME 
2.17 The Committee are pleased to note that various Government 
Departments/Agencies have taken a number of steps to educate and empower 
people in environment conservation and adoption of sustainable practices through 
trainings, demonstrations and dissemination of information in the Indian 
Himalayan Region. The Committee expect that the various training programmes 
initiated by the Ministry should not be a one time affair but should be sustained 
and held at regular intervals so that the momentum generated by these 
Programmes remains intact and do not lose the steam. It is not an exaggeration to 
mention that the natural calamities caused by climate change will exacerbate the 
livelihoods of the communities residing in mountains as well as downstream 
populations. Hence, there is a greater need not only to make people aware about 
the deleterious impact of global warming particularly in the Himalayan region but 
also launch programmes to impart knowledge and encourage them in adopting 
environmentally sustainable practices and support the local participatory planning 
for the development of this sensitive region. The Committee recommend that the 
Department should make all out efforts to launch a blitzkreig by involving print, 
electronic and popular  media as well as social media and also the academia on a 
larger scale in creating public awareness about the consequences of global 
warming resulting in threat to the ecosystem, communities and infrastructure.  
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 15) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;     Parbatbhai Savabhai Patel 
  28 March, 2023    Chairperson, 
 07 Chaitra, 1945 (Saka)   Standing Committee on Water Resources 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
*** 

 
 
46 
 
 
MINUTES OF THE NINTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON WATER 
RESOURCES HELD ON TUESDAY, 23 MARCH, 2021 
  
The Committee sat from 1500 hours to 1550 hours in Committee Room 'B', 
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
 
                         Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal – Chairperson 
 
MEMBERS 
 
 LOK SABHA  
 
 
2. Shri Vijay Baghel 
3. ShriBhagirathChaudhary 
4. ShriNihal Chand Chauhan 
5. ShriGuman Singh Damor 
6. Dr.HeenaVijaykumarGavit 
7. Dr. K. Jayakumar 
8. Shri Hasmukhbhai Somabhai Patel 
9. Shri Sanjay(Kaka) Ramchandra Patil 
  
RAJYA SABHA 
 
10. SardarBalwinder Singh Bhunder 
11. ShriHarshvardhan Singh Dungarpur 
12. Dr. Kirodi Lal Meena  
13. ShriArun Singh 
14. ShriSubhash Chandra Singh 
15. Shri Pradeep Tamta  
 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri Manoj K. Arora   - OSD (LSS) 
2. Shri M.K. Madhusudhan  - Director 
3. Shri R.C. Sharma   - Additional Director 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
47 
 
WITNESSES 
Ministry of Jal Shakti - Department of Water Resources, River Development & 
Ganga Rejuvenation 
 
1. Shri S. K. Haldar Chairman, CWC 
2. Shri Atul Jain Commissioner (FM), DoWR, RD & GR 
3. Shri Reading Shimrey Chief Engineer, CWC 
4. Shri Sharad Chandra Director, CWC 
5. Shri Rakesh Toteja Sr. Joint Commissioner (FM), DoWR, RD & 
GR 
 
Ministry of Home Affairs - National Disaster Management Authority 
 
1. Lt Gen (Retd) Syed Ata Hasnain Member, NDMA 
2. Dr V Thiruppugazh Additional Secretary (Policy & Plan) 
3. Brig Ajay Gangwar Advisor (Operations) 
4. Shri Vijay Singh Nemiwal Joint Advisor (Mitigation Projects) 
5. Shri Ravinder Singh Senior Consultant (Landslides & 
Avalanches) 
6. Shri Prasoon Singh Consultant (Flood) 
 
Ministry of Home Affairs - National Disaster Response Force 
 
 Shri Amarendra Kumar Sengar Inspector General 
 
2. At the outset, the Hon’ble Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee convened to have briefing by the representatives of the Ministry of Home 
Affairs - National Disaster Management Authority and Ministry of Jal Shakti –Department 
of Water Resources, River Development & Ganga Rejuvenation on the topic 
'Preparedness to tackle Floods including Flash floods, Cloudburst, Glacier Outburst and 
Avalanches' in connection with the examination of the subject 'Flood Management in the 
country including international water treaties in the field of water resource 
management/flood control with particular reference to treaty / agreement entered into with 
Nepal, China, Pakistan and Bhutan’. 
 

 
 
48 
 
[The representatives of the Department of Water Resources, River Development & 
Ganga Rejuvenation and National Disaster Management Authority were, then, 
ushered in] 
 
3. After welcoming the representatives of the National Disaster Management 
Authority and Department of Water Resources, River Development & Ganga 
Rejuvenation, the Chairperson drew their attention to Direction 55(1) of the Directions by 
the Speaker regarding the confidentiality of the proceedings of the Committee and asked 
them to express their views on the subject and explain the measures taken in relation to 
'Preparedness to tackle Floods including Flash floods, Cloudburst, Glacier Outburst and 
Avalanches'.  Then, the representative of the NDMA briefed the Committee of the various 
aspects of the disaster management and programmes being undertaken by them in this 
regard.  
 
4. Thereafter, the Members of the Committee raised queries and sought clarifications 
on the following issues pertaining to the subject:- 
 
(i) Organization structure of NDMA.  
(ii) Approval of disaster plans of various Ministries and Departments by NDMA.  
(iii) Strength of National Disaster Response Force (NDRF).  
(iv) Reasons for Glacial Lake Outburst Floods (GLOF) at Chamoli district, 
Uttrakhand.  
(v) Lessons learnt by NDMA from Kedarnath tragedy of 2013. 
(vi) Need to have SoPs to face Chamoli like disasters.  
(vii) Excessive time taken by NDRF in reaching the affected area. 
(viii) Issue of lack of necessary equipment like muck cleaning tools at the 
disposal of NDRF.  
(ix) Issues of not having Early Warming System at the power projects 
extensively damaged by GLOF.  
(x) Criteria of appraisal of power projects by Central Water Commission (CWC) 
from hydrological and technological point of view.  
(xi) Issue of small and micro power projects presently not scrutinized by the 
CWC.  
(xii) Surveillance of glaciers through satellites and sensors.  
 
5. The Chairperson then thanked the representatives for the presentation made by 
them and expressing their views in a free and frank manner. The Chairperson asked the 
representatives of the National Disaster Management Authority and Department of Water 
Resources, River Development and Ganga Rejuvenation to furnish written replies to 
those queries raised by the Members, which could not be readily replied by them within 
two weeks. 
 
[The witnesses, then, withdrew] 
 
 
6. A copy of the verbatim record of the proceedings of the sitting of the Committee 
has been kept. 
 
 
The Committee, then, adjourned. 
*** 

 
 
49 
 
 
MINUTES OF THE TENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON WATER 
RESOURCES HELD ON THURSDAY, 8 APRIL, 2021 
  
The Committee sat from 1500 hours to 1640 hours in Committee Room 'D', 
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
            Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal – Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
  LOK SABHA  
 
2. ShriBhagirathChaudhary 
10. ShriNihal Chand Chauhan 
11. Dr. K. Jayakumar 
12. Shri M. Dhanush Kumar 
13. Shri Sanjay(Kaka) RamchandraPatil 
14. Shri Sunil Kumar 
 
  RAJYA SABHA 
 
8. SardarBalwinder Singh Bhunder 
9. Shri N. R. Elango 
10. ShriSubhash Chandra Singh 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Manoj K. Arora  - OSD (LSS) 
2. Shri R.C. Sharma  - Additional Director 
 
WITNESSES 
Ministry of Jal Shakti - Department of Water Resources, River Development & 
Ganga Rejuvenation 
 
1. ShriPankaj Kumar Secretary, DoWR, RD & GR 
2. Shri S. K. Haldar Chairman, CWC 
3. ShriSharad Chandra Director, CWC 
4. ShriRakeshToteja Sr. Joint Commissioner-II 
5. Shri N. N. Rai Director, CWC 
 
DEPARTMENT OF SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY 
1. Dr. Akhilesh Gupta Head, Strategic Programs, Large Initiatives 
and Coordinated Action Enabler (SPLICE) 
 
 

 
 
50 
 
GEOLOGICAL SURVEY OF INDIA (GSI) KOLKATA 
 
1. ShriSatyaPrakashShukla Deputy Director General 
 
NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF HYDROLOGY (NIH) ROORKEE 
 
1. Dr. Sanjay Kumar Jain Scientist-G 
 
MINISTRY OF EARTH SCIENCE 
 
1. Dr. Vijay Kumar  Scientist-G 
 
MINISTRY OF ENVIRONMENT, FORESTS & CLIMATE CHANGE 
1. Dr. J. R. Bhatt Advisor  
 
2. At the outset, the Hon’ble Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee convened to have briefing by the representatives of the Ministry of Jal Shakti - 
Department of Water Resources, River Development and Ganga Rejuvenation on the 
subject "Glacier Management in the country – Monitoring of Glaciers/Glacial Lakes 
including Glacial Lake Outburst leading to flashfloods in the Himalayan region". The 
Hon'ble Chairperson, then welcomed Shri Sunil Kumar the newly elected Member from 
Lok Sabha who has been nominated to serve on the  Committee. Thereafter, he informed 
the Members about the sudden demise of Shri A. Mohammedjan, MP (RS) and Member 
of the Committee. The Committee, then, passed a condolences resolution expressing 
their heartfelt grief and offered condolence to the bereaved family. The Committee also 
observed two minutes silence for paying homage to the departed soul. 
[The representatives of the Department of Water Resources, River Development & 
Ganga Rejuvenation Authority were, then, ushered in] 
 
3. After welcoming the representatives of the Ministry of Jal Shakti - Department of 
Water Resources, River Development and Ganga Rejuvenation, to the sitting the 
Chairperson drew their attention to Direction 55(1) of the Directions by the Speaker 
regarding the confidentiality of the proceedings of the Committee. He then asked them to 
make their submission/presentation on various aspects of the topic "Glacier Management 
in the country – Monitoring of Glaciers/Glacial Lakes including Glacial Lake Outburst 
leading to flashfloods in the Himalayan region". Thereafter, the representative of the 
Department made a power point presentation highlightingthe work done by different 
Ministries/Departments in the field of monitoring glaciers and glacial lakes and issues 
faced in undertaking this work, etc.  
 
4. Thereafter, the Members raised queries and sought clarifications on the following 
issues pertaining to the subject:- 
 
(xiii) Process of formation of glaciers. 
 
(xiv) Role of Hydro Electric Projects (HEPs) in causing flash floods.  
 

 
 
51 
 
(xv) Need to monitor smaller glaciers as they are more vulnerable to climate 
change leading to their melting.  
 
(xvi) Lack of coordination among different Ministries/Departments/Agencies 
involved in glacier monitoring and research work.  
(xvii) Reason for withdrawal of controversial paragraph of IPCC Report which 
stated that glaciers would vanish by 2035. 
 
(xviii) Effect of Himalayan Cryosphere on water resources, including floods and 
need to incorporate Himalayan Cryosphere in the Allocation of Business 
Rules.  
 
(xix) Proposal of Central Water Commission (CWC) to monitor glacial lakes of 10 
hectare and above in view of recent tragedy at Chamoli district in 
Uttarakhand.  
 
(xx) Need to make efforts to give sufficient warning time to different agencies 
including State Governments for rescue purpose.  
 
(xxi) Effect of black carbon on the health of glaciers.  
 
5. Thereafter, with the permission of the Hon'ble Chairperson of the Committee, ShriNihal 
Chand, MP, (LokSabha) and Member of the Committee raised the issue of polluted water 
released in the canals of the State of Rajasthan.   
6. The Chairperson then thanked the representatives for the presentation made by 
them and expressing their views in a free and frank manner. He then directed the 
representatives of all the Ministries/Departments who attended the sitting to furnish a 
brief note separately spelling out the solutions to the various problems discussed during 
the sitting to the Secretariat within 10 days. He also asked the representatives of the 
respective Ministries/Departments to furnish their written replies to those queries raised 
by the Members, which could not be readily replied by them within two weeks. 
[The witnesses, then, withdrew] 
 
7. A copy of the verbatim record of the proceedings of the sitting of the Committee 
has been kept. 
 
The Committee, then adjourned. 
*** 

 
 
52 
 
 
MINUTES OF THE ELEVENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
WATER RESOURCES HELD ON MONDAY, 21 JUNE, 2021 
  
The Committee sat from 1400 hours to 1600 hours in Main Committee Room, 
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
 
            Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal – Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
 LOK SABHA  
 
2. Shri Vijay Baghel 
15. Shri Bhagirath Chaudhary 
16. Shri Chandra Prakash Choudhary 
17. Dr. Heena Vijay Kumar Gavit 
18. Shri  Kaushal Kishore 
19. Shri M. Dhanush Kumar 
20. Shri Hashmukhbhai Somabhai Patel 
21. Shri Sunil Kumar 
22. Shri A. Narayana Swamy 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
11. Sardar Balwinder Singh Bhunder 
12. Dr.Kirodi Lal Meena 
13. Shri Subhash Chandra Singh 
14. Shri PradeepTamta 
 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri Manoj K. Arora  - OSD (LSS) 
2. Shri M. K. Madhusudhan - Director 
2. Shri R.C. Sharma  - Additional Director 
 
WITNESSES 
MINISTRY OF ENVIRONMENT, FORESTS & CLIMATE CHANGE 
 
1. Shri R. P. Gupta Secretary 
2. Shri Ravi Agarwal Additional Secretary 
3. Shri Jigmet Takpa Joint Secretary 
4. Dr. J. R. Bhatt Advisor  

 
 
53 
 
 
DEPARTMENT OF SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY 
 
 
1. 
2. 
Dr. Akhilesh Gupta 
Dr. Kalachand Sain 
Scientist & Head, Climate Change Programme 
Director, Wadia Institute of Himalayan Geology, 
Dehradun 
 
DEFENCE RESEARCH & DEVELOPMENT ORGANISATION (DRDO) 
 
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
Dr. L.K. Sinha 
Dr. P.K. Satyawali 
Dr. Amod Kumar 
Dr. Ravindra Singh 
Director, DGRE & Scientist 
Scientist 
Scientist 
Director, DPARO&M & Scientist 
MINISTRY OF JAL SHAKTI (DEPARTMENT OF WATER RESOURCES, RIVER 
DEVELOPMENT & GANGA REJUVENATION) 
 
1. Shri R.K. Sinha Member, CWC 
2. ShriSharad Chandra Director, CWC 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee convened to have briefing by the representatives of (i) Ministry of 
Environment, Forests & Climate Change; (ii) Department of Science & Technology (DST)-
Wadia Institute of Himalayan Geology; (iii) Defence Research Development Organization 
(DRDO)-Defence Geo Informatics Research Establishment (DGRE) in connection with 
examination of the subject “Glacier Management in the country-Monitoring of 
Glaciers/Glacial Lakes including Glacieral Lake Outbursts leading to flashfloods in the 
Himalayan region”.  
 
3. XXX  XXX  XXX  XXX  XXX  XXX 
 XXX  XXX  XXX  XXX  XXX  XXX 
 XXX  XXX  XXX  XXX  XXX  XXX 
 XXX  XXX  XXX  XXX  XXX  XXX 
 
[The representatives of the Ministries/Departments/Agencies were then, ushered 
in] 
 
4. Thereafter, Chairperson welcomed the representatives of the 
Ministries/Department/ agencies concerned and read out Direction 55(1) of the Directions 
by the Speaker regarding confidentiality of the proceedings of the Committee.  The 
Chairperson then asked the representatives to make a brief presentation on various 
aspects of the subject “Glacier Management in the country-Monitoring of Glaciers/Glacial 

 
 
54 
 
Lakes including Glacial Lake Outbursts leading to flashfloods in the Himalayan region”. 
Thereafter, the representatives of the Ministry of Environment, Forests & Climate Change 
and Department of Science & Technology (DST) made a power point presentation 
highlighting the work done by them in the field of monitoring glaciers and glacial lakes 
and issues faced in undertaking this work, etc. The representatives of DGRE and 
Department of Water Resource, River Development & Ganga Rejuvenation also 
explained the work being done by them in the field. Thereafter, the Members raised 
queries and sought clarifications on issues concerned with the subject matter.  
 
5. The important issues/ topics raised during the discussion on the subject, amongst 
others, included the following: 
(i) Need for a single agency to coordinate with various other agencies having 
mandates to handle different hydro-meteorological and hydro-geological 
hazards; 
 
(ii) Setting up of a multi-hazard alert and early warning system to predict GLoFs 
in the Indian Himalayan Region; 
(iii) Need for State Governments to work in tandem with Central Agencies in 
monitoring, research and warning system for hazards; 
 
(iv) Measures to mitigate impact of global warming on Glaciers; 
(v) Identification of critical/sensitive Glacial lakes; 
(vi) Need for proper study of solid based water available in upper Himalayan 
region; and 
(vii) Need for coordination among different Ministries/Departments/Agencies for 
exchange of Data and research findings. 
 
6. The Chairperson, thanked the representatives of the Ministries/Departments/ 
Agencies for their presentation and for replying to the queries raised by the Members. He 
asked the representatives to furnish written replies to those queries raised by the 
Members which could not be readily replied and on which detailed statistical replies are 
required, to the Secretariat within a fortnight. 
[The witnesses, then, withdrew] 
7. A copy of the verbatim record of the proceedings of the sitting of the Committee 
has been kept. 
 The Committee, then adjourned. 

 
 
55 
 
MINUTES OF THE SEVENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON WATER 
RESOURCES (2022-23) HELD ON THURSDAY, 23 MARCH 2023 
  
The Committee sat from 1500 hours to 1530 hours in Chairperson’s Chamber 
(Room No. 203), Second Floor, Parliament House Annexe Extension, B-Block, New 
Delhi. 
PRESENT 
 
 
 
Shri Parbatbhai Savabhai Patel      -   
 
MEMBERS 
Chairperson 
 
 
 LOK SABHA  
 
 
2.  Shri Vijay Baghel  
3.  Shri Nihal Chand Chauhan   
4.  Shri Bhagirath Choudhary 
5.  Shri Guman Singh Damor  
6.  Dr. K. Jayakumar  
7.  Dr. Heena Vijaykumar Gavit  
8.  Shri Dhanush M. Kumar  
9.  Shri Sunil Kumar  
10.  Shri Kuruva Gorantla Madhav  
11.  Shri Hasmukhbhai Somabhai Patel  
12.  Smt.  Agatha K. Sangma  
13.  Shri Pratap Chandra Sarangi  
14.  Shri Shivkumar C. Udasi  
15.  Shri Sanjay Kaka Patil  
 RAJYA SABHA  
16.  Shri Aneel Prasad Hegde  
17.  Shri Arun Singh  
18.  Sant Balbir Singh  
19.  Shri Pramod Tiwari  
 
 

 
 
56 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Chander Mohan - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Ajay Kumar Sood - Director 
3. Shri R.L. Yadav  - Additional Director 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee.   Thereafter, the Committee took up for consideration draft Report on the 
subject “Glacier Management in the Country- Monitoring of Glaciers/Lakes including 
Glacial Lake Outbursts leading to Flash-floods in the Himalayan Region”. After due 
deliberation, the Committee adopted the aforesaid draft Report, without any modification.   
3. The Committee then authorized the Chairperson to present the Report on their 
behalf to both the Houses of Parliament in the current Budget Session. 
 
4. Thereafter, the Committee decided to undertake an on the spot Study visit in           
May, 2023. 
 
 
The Committee then adjourned 
 
*** 

 
 
57 
 
 
Annexure - I 
 
Details of Glaciers studied by GSI for recession/ advancement 
 
In Geological Survey of India, glacier monitoring has been done both by assessment of glacier 
mass balance and as well as monitoring the change in glacier length using ground based 
glaciological techniques in parts of Indus catchment. During 1974-75 to 2020-21 period, the 
assessment of glacier mass balance, on nine glaciers, viz. Neh Nar, Rulung (Union Territory of 
Jammu & Kashmir); Gara, GorGarang, ShauneGarang, Hamtah (Himachal Pradesh), Dunagiri, 
Tipra bank (Uttarakhand) and ChangmeKhangpu (Sikkim) have been undertaken. The studies 
have revealed overall negative average annual specific balance ranging from 0.11 to 1.47 m of w. 
eq. indicative of a considerable mass wastage of Himalayan glaciers.  
In addition, monitoring of 76 glaciers by GSI has revealed that the majority of Himalayan glaciers 
are passing through a marked phase of recession, which is a worldwide phenomenon.  
 
List of the Glaciers studied by GSI for recession/ advancement 
 
S.N. Name of glacier Basin Identification No. Period Average 
annual 
retreat 
(m/year) 
1. DurungDrung Indus IN5Q13205  582 1971-2013  13.1 
2. Hagshu Indus IN5Q13205  559 1975-2015  11.4 
3. Pensilungpa Indus IN5Q13202  263 1962-2015 7.4 
4. Shafat Indus IN5Q13202  080 1975-2015 22.0 
5. Parkhachik Indus IN5Q13202  094 1962-2015 3.2 
6. ChhotaShigri Chenab IN5Q21212 159 1962-1995 6.8 
7. Bara Shigri Chenab IN5Q21212  152 1962-2015 32.4 
8. Hamtah Chenab IN5Q21212  180 2000-2010 12.5 
9. Triloknath Chenab IN5Q21209  019 1968-1996 17.9 
10. YocheLungpa Chenab IN5Q21211  179 1963-2006 19.5 
11. Mulkila Chenab IN5Q21211  170 1963-2006 14.8 
12. Panchinala – I Chenab IN5Q21211 146 1963-2007 10.6 
13. Panchinala - II Chenab IN5Q21211 148 1963-2007 11.9 
14. Tingal Goh Chenab IN5Q21211  188 1963-2008 16.0 
15. Miyar Chenab IN5Q21210  045 1961-1996 16.4 
1962-2017 21.90 
16. Sonapani Chenab IN5Q21212  028 1906-2014 17.6 
17. Gangstang Chenab IN5Q21211  007 1963-2008 29.7 
18. Gepang Gath Chenab IN 5Q21212  014 2003-2012 45.0 
19. SamundarTapu Chenab IN5Q21212  074 1962-2013 24.8 
20. Batal Chenab IN5Q21212  054 1962-2014 7.2 
21. Man Talai (Gl. No. 115) Beas IN5Q22109  115 1989-2004 23.3 
22. Beas Kund Beas IN5Q22108 015 1963-2003 18.8 
23. Gl. No. 30 Beas IN5Q22108  030 1963-2003 13.8 
24. Jobri Beas IN5Q22108  036 1963-2003 2.5 
25. Sara Umga Beas IN5Q22109  025 1963-2004 41.5 
26. Tal Ravi IN5Q21106  047 1963-2005 39.9 
27. Manimahesh Ravi IN5Q21106  059 1968-2005 29.1 
28. Gara-I Satluj IN5Q22214  050 1979-2010 25.6 
29. ShauneGarang Satluj IN5Q22213  084 1963-1984 31.1 
30. BilareBange Satluj IN 5Q22213  082 1963-2011 65.2 
31. NaraduGarang Satluj IN 5Q22213  078 1963-2011 34.1 

 
 
58 
 
32. Pin Satluj IN5Q22219  095 1965-2014 12.7 
33. Nisti Satluj IN5Q22219  089 1965-2014 14.5 
34. Parang Satluj IN5Q22219  485 1962-2013 11.0 
35. Padma Satluj IN5Q22219  478 1962-2013 7.0 
36. NagpoTokpo Satluj IN 5Q22219  259 1962-1998 6.4 
37. Bandarpunch Yamuna IN 5O12301  045 1960-1999 25.5 
38. JhajjuBamak Yamuna IN 5O12301 029 1960-1999 27.6 
39. JaundarBamak Yamuna IN 5O12301  033 1960-1999 37.3 
40. Tilku Yamuna IN 5O12301  025 1960-1999 21.9 
41. Bhrigupanth Bhagirathi IN 5O13106  041 1962-1995 16.7 
42. Gangotri Bhagirathi IN 5O13106  029 1935-1996 18.8 
43. Glacier No. 3 Alaknanda IN 5O13206  069 1932-1956 8.3 
44. Chorabari Alaknanda IN5O13202  003 1992-1997 11.0 
45. Bhagirathi Kharak Alaknanda IN 5O13206  028 1962-2001 14.7 
46. Dunagiri Alaknanda IN 5O13209  044 1992-1997 3.0 
47. Pindari Alaknanda IN 5O13203 048 1958-2001 9.4 
48. Milam Ghaghra IN 5O10303  034 1906-2011 20.6 
49. Burphu Ghaghra IN 5O10303  063 1963-2011 69.7 
50. Jhulang Ghaghra IN 5O10304  024 1962-2012 9.4 
51. Nikarchu Ghaghra IN 5O10305  024 1962-2002 9.1 
52. Poting Ghaghra IN 5O10303  008 1963-2011 29.0 
53. Adikailash Ghaghra IN 5O10305  028 1962-2002 13.1 
54. Sankalpa Ghaghra IN 5O10303  074 1881-1957 6.8 
55. Meola Ghaghra IN 5O10304  010 1912-2012 18.6 
56. Chipa Ghaghra IN 5O10304  007 1961-2012 24.9 
57. Zemu Tista IN5O20105  032 1907-2012 9.0 
58. ChangmeKhangpu Tista IN5O20104 022 1983-2012 13.4 
59. East Rathong  Tista IN 5O20101 006 1966-2015 20.0 
60. KedarBamak Bhagirathi  IN 5O131 06 63  1976-2016 30.8 
61. Raykana Dhauliganga IN 5O132 08 25  1968-2016 7.19 
62. Mabang Dhauliganga IN 5O103 04 30  1962-2017 6.96 
63. Pyungru Dhauliganga IN 5O103 04 73  1962-2017 4.45 
64. Takdung Chenab IN 5Q21210 051) 1989-2017 9.64 
65. Uldhampu Chenab IN 5Q21210 075) 1989-2017 4.66 
66. Menthosa Chenab IN 5Q21210 021) 1965-2018 4.32 
67. Gumba Chenab IN 5Q21210 078 1971-2018 10.38 
68. Gangpu Chenab IN 5Q21210 058 1989-2018 2.79 
69. Sagtogpa Rongdo IN 5Q13106 1973-2018 7.4 
70. Sagtogpa East Rongdo IN 5Q13106 1973-2018 8.13 
71. TharaKangri Rongdo IN 5Q13106 1973-2018 +11.13 
(Surged) 
72. GaramPani Rongdo IN 5Q13106 1973-2018 4.96 
73. Rassa I Rangdo IN 5Q131 06  1973-2019 8.13 
74. Rassa II Rangdo IN 5Q131 06  1973-2019 2.63 
75. Arganglas Glacier Rangdo IN 5Q131 06  1973-2019 18.86 
76. Phunangma Rangdo IN 5Q131 06  1973-2019 11.65 
 
As per the available information in published domain, the predicted effects of climate 
change include loss of glacier resources, changes in the hydrology of the Himalayan rivers 
including some water problems in the dry/lean season, enhanced debris production, sea level 
rise, increased intensity and frequency of extreme weather events, impacts on agriculture, spread 
of disease etc. Regarding the water-availability in a glacier fed river basin, it is dependent on 
glacier-melting, seasonal snow-melt, the amount of rainfall and the release of ground water.  
Various studies have indicated that under climate change scenario, the continuous 
recession of glaciers, particularly debris covered glaciers, will lead to formation of glacial lakes. 

 
 
59 
 
The further recession of glaciers may lead to increase in size of such lakes which may ultimately 
lead to Glacial Lake Outburst Floods (GLOF). In view of the above, GSI has undertaken 
compilation of inventory of glacial lakes in northwest Himalaya. A total of 486, 533 and 925 glacial 
lakes located in lower reaches of ablation zone have been demarcated in Uttarakhand, Himachal 
Pradesh, and Jammu & Kashmir (including Ladakh) respectively.Similarly, an updated inventory 
of the Himalayan glaciers is also in the process of preparation. 
The recession of glacier is a natural cyclic process. Throughout the history of the earth there have 
been number of glacial and inter-glacial periods. The last period of glaciation ceased at about 
10,000 years B.P. Since then, a period of de-glaciation has set in with some small fluctuations in 
between. During this interglacial phase (Holocene period), pulses of minor glacial advancements, 
commonly referred as ‘Little Ice Age’ (LIA), have been reported by various workers in different 
parts of the World, including Indian Himalaya. 

 
 
60 
 
Annex – II 
 
LOSS OF HUMAN LIVES DUE TO  FLOOD IN HIMACHAL PRADESH, J&K, SIKKIM AND UTTARAKHAND DURING THE YEAR 2002 TO 2018  
Sl. Year H.P. J&K Sikkim Uttarakhand  
1 2001 45 0 0 78 
2 2002 0 0 0 0 
3 2003 89 0 0 2 
4 2004 8 0 0 0 
5 2005 8 0 0 0 
6 2006 48 0 0 0 
7 2007 98 0 0 0 
8 2008 148 0 0 0 
9 2009 0 0 0 87 
10 2010 62 0 0 196 
11 2011 51 0 0 54 
12 2012 27 0 41 135 
13 2013 73 0 16 580 
14 2014 45 281 0 66 
15 2015 133 3 N.A. 33 
16 2016 40 3 N.A. 114 
17 2017 75 7 10 59 
18 2018 343 6 N.A. 101 
 
Note: N.A. = Not available 
 