 
25 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON WATER RESOURCES 
(2023-24) 
                 
         
SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA 
                  
         
                 
MINISTRY OF JAL SHAKTI – DEPARTMENT OF WATER RESOURCES, 
RIVER DEVELOPMENT AND GANGA REJUVENATION 
 
         
         
‘Groundwater: A Valuable but Diminishing Resource’ 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations / 
Recommendations contained in the Twenty Second Report 
(Seventeenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Water 
Resources] 
         
         
         
TWENTY FIFTH REPORT 
  
          
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
         
December, 2023 / Agrahayana, 1945 (Saka) 
 

TWENTY FIFTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON WATER RESOURCES 
(2023-24) 
          
(SEVENTEENTH  LOK SABHA) 
         
         
         
MINISTRY OF JAL SHAKTI – DEPARTMENT OF WATER RESOURCES, 
RIVER DEVELOPMENT AND GANGA REJUVENATION 
 
                 
         
‘Groundwater: A Valuable but Diminishing Resource’ 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations / 
Recommendations contained in the Twenty Second Report 
(Seventeenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Water 
Resources] 
         
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on    11.12.2023 
Laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on   11.12.2023 
  
 
  
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
                 
         
December, 2023 / Agrahayana, 1945 (Saka) 

 
W. R. C.  No. 80 
         
         
         
         
         
         
 
 
         
         
         
Price :  Rs.  
         
         
         
         
         
 
 
 
         
     
                     
 
 
 
         
        © 2023 By Lok Sabha Secretariat 
  
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok 
Sabha  (Sixteenth Edition) and Printed by  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iii)

 
CONTENTS 
 
  Page 
 
Composition of 
the Committee 
 
……………………………………………………………… (vi) 
 
 
 
INTRODUCTION ……………………………………………………………… 
 
(viii) 
 
CHAPTER - I Report……………………………………………………… 
 
1 
CHAPTER – II Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by 
the Government…………………………… 
 
 
19 
CHAPTER - III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the Government’s 
replies……………………………………………………… 
 
 
 
58 
CHAPTER - IV Observations/Recommendations in respect  of   which the 
replies of the Government have not been accepted by the 
Committee……………...................................... 
 
 
 
59 
CHAPTER - V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final 
replies of the Government are still 
awaited…………………………………………………….. 
 
 
 
66 
 ANNEXURES 
 
 
I Minutes of the  Third Sitting of the Committee held on 
06.12.2023**  
 
- 
 
 
 
II 
 
Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Twenty 
Second Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee 
 
 
67 
III Compliance Status of 17 category of industries 
 
68 
IV Sector-Wise Waste Water Discharge and Compliance Status in 
Ganga and Yamuna Main Stems States  
 
69 
V Details of Storm Water drainage projects in AMRUT Cities 
 
76 
 
** Minutes not enclosed 
 
(iv)

 
VI Status of Research Schemes on Climate Change Funded 
under Research & Development Scheme of DoWR, RD & GR 
 
 
78 
VII Jal Jeevan Mission: Central fund allocated, drawn by the State 
and reported utilization in 2019-20, 2020-21, 2021-22 and 
2022-23 
 
79 
VIII State/ UT-wise status of tap water connections in rural 
households (as on 27.04.2023) 
 
83 
IX State-wise number of quality–affected rural habitations (as on 
27.04.2023) 
 
85 
x Group wise sanctioned and Vacancy post details of 
SPCBs/PCCs 
86 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(v)

COMPOSITION OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON WATER RESOURCES 
(2023-24) 
  
 
 
 
Shri Parbatbhai Savabhai Patel      -            Chairperson 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA  
2.  Shri Vijay Baghel  
3.  Shri Nihal Chand Chauhan   
4.  Shri Bhagirath Choudhary 
5.  Shri Chandra Prakash Choudhary  
6.  Shri Guman Singh Damor  
7.  Dr. Heena Vijaykumar Gavit  
8.  Dr. K. Jayakumar  
9.  Shri Dhanush M. Kumar  
10.  Shri Sunil Kumar  
11.  Shri Mohammad Akbar Lone  
12.  Shri Kuruva Gorantla Madhav  
13.  Shri Hasmukhbhai Somabhai Patel  
14.  Shri Sanjay (Kaka) Ramchandra Patil  
15.  Shri P. Ravindhranath  
16.  Ms.  Nusrat Jahan Ruhi  
17.  Smt.  Agatha K. Sangma  
18.  Shri Pratap Chandra Sarangi  
19.  Shri Chandan Singh  
20.  Shri D.K. Suresh  
21.  Shri Shivkumar Chanabasappa Udasi 
 
 
 RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
22.  Shri H.D. Devegowda  
23.  Shri Aneel Prasad Hegde  
24.  Smt. Mausam Noor  
25.  Shri Sharad Pawar  
26.  Shri V. Vijayendra Prasad  
27.  Shri Arun Singh  
28.  Sant Balbir Singh  
29.  Shri Pramod Tiwari  
30.  Dr. Anbumani Ramadoss*  
31.  Vacant**  
 
*  Dr. Anbumani Ramadoss, MP (Rajya Sabha) has been nominated to the Committee w.e.f. 24 November, 2023. 
 
** Consequent upon his resignation from Rajya Sabha, Dr. Kirodi Lal Meena, ceased to be Member of the Committee 
w.e.f. 6th December, 2023 
 
 
 
(vi) 

SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Smt. Suman Arora   - Additional Secretary 
2. Shri Ajay Kumar Sood  - Director 
3. Shri P. Ashok   - Deputy Secretary 
4. Smt. Shanta B. Datta  - Under Secretary 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(vii)

INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Water Resources (2023-24) having 
been authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present the 
Twenty Fifth - Report on the Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in their Twenty Second Report (Seventeenth 
Lok Sabha) on ‘Groundwater: A Valuable but Diminishing Resource’. 
 
2.  The Twenty Second Report of the Committee was presented to Lok Sabha on                   
20 March, 2023 and laid in Rajya Sabha on 17 March 2023. The Action Taken replies of 
the Government to all the recommendations contained in the Report were received in this 
Secretariat on 19 June, 2023. 
 
3.  The replies of the Government were examined and the Report was considered and 
adopted by the Committee at their sitting held on 06.12.2023. 
 
4. An analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Twenty Second Report (Seventeenth 
Lok Sabha) of the Committee is given in Annexure-II. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi Parbatbhai Savabhai Patel  
 06 December,  2023 Chairperson  
 15Agrahayana, 1945 (Saka) Standing Committee on Water Resources 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(viii) 

1 
 
CHAPTER I 
REPORT 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Water Resources deals with the Action Taken 
by the Government on the observations / recommendations contained in their Twenty 
Second Report (17th Lok Sabha) on the subject ‘Groundwater: A Valuable but Diminishing 
Resource” of the Ministry of Jal Shakti (Department of Water Resources, River 
Development & Ganga Rejuvenation), which was presented to Parliament on 20 March, 
2023. Action Taken Notes received from the Government in respect of all the 31 
observations / recommendations of the Committee, have been categorized as under:  
(i) Observations / Recommendations which have been accepted by the Government 
(Chapter II):  
Recommendation Sl. Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 19, 20, 21, 
22, 23, 24, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30 and 31    
                                      (Total – 26) 
 
(ii) Observations / Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue 
in view of the Government’s replies (Chapter III):  
Recommendation Sl. Nos. NIL                     
 (Total – NIL) 
  
(iii) Observations / Recommendations in respect of which replies of the Government 
have not been accepted by the Committee (Chapter IV):  
Recommendation Sl. Nos. 8, 16, 17, 18 and 25 
                                                                   (Total – 05)  
 
(iv) Observations / Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited (Chapter V):  
Recommendation Nos. NIL             
                                                                                                       (Total – NIL)  
2. The Committee desire that replies to recommendations made in the Chapter-I 
of this Report may be furnished to the Committee expeditiously.  
3. The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the Government on some of 
the observations / recommendations in the succeeding paragraphs.  
A.  Water use eﬃciency in agriculture – Funding pattern under PMKSY-Per Drop 
More Crop (PDMC) 
 
Recommendation Sl. No. 8 (Para No. 9) 
4. The Committee noted that micro irrigation was being promoted by the 
Department of Agriculture & Farmers’ Welfare through their PMKSY-Per Drop More Crop 

2 
 
(PDMC) scheme, using Drip and Sprinkler Irrigation system. The scheme also supports 
micro level water storage or water conservation/ management activities to supplement 
Micro Irrigation. The Committee noted that ﬁnancial assistance under PMKSY-Per Drop 
More Crop (PDMC) was being provided by the Centre on 60:40 basis to States based on 
their demand, submitted through States’ Annual Action Plans (AAP) except the States in 
the North Eastern parts and Himalayan States, in whose case the funding pattern was 
90:10 while it was 100% in case of Union Territories. However, in view of the Committee, 
this had created contradiction since States such as Punjab and Haryana which had 
severe Ground water crisis had been allocated meager amount of funds for implementing 
micro irrigation system. Since funding pattern for micro irrigation should be on the basis 
of water deﬁciency in the area rather than on the basis of principles of Centrally 
Sponsored Schemes, the Committee were of the considered view that more Central 
assistance should be given for micro irrigation in those areas which were water starved 
and had Ground water depletion. The logic of North Eastern States requiring more 
Central support (90:10) due to topographical and socio-economic conditions which h ers 
utilization of full potential of the rain fall and Ground water resource and hence requiring 
micro irrigation for increasing the water use eﬃciency at farm level to enhance the 
production & productivity of the crops and increase the income of the farmers does not 
hold good in case of assistance for micro irrigation as these States have abundant water 
supply and actual problem is to harness it so as to reduce the ﬂood menace. The 
Committee, therefore, were of the opinion that the existing policy of giving more ﬁnancial 
assistance to such States appeared to be in contradiction with the objectives. They, 
therefore, recommended the Ministry of Jal Shakti to take up this matter with the Ministry 
of Finance in consultation with the Department of Agriculture & Farmers’ Welfare 
(DA&FW) and impress upon the need to change the funding pattern in the ratio of 90:10 
for States suﬀering from water shortage and 60:40 for water abundant States. Although 
the allocation under the scheme is based on the principle of inclusivity and are released 
on the basis of demand, the Committee were of the view that the DA&FW had to play a 
more proactive role. The DoWR, RD & GR should impress upon the DA&FW to strive to 
release funds under the scheme to those States which cultivate water intensive crops 
but have not been actively implementing micro irrigation methods, the need for utilizing 
funds under PDMC on the basis of approved Annual Action Plan (AAP) and clear 
previous unspent balances, so as to reduce dependence on Groundwater. 
5. The Department of Water Resources, River Development & Ganga Rejuvenation, in 
their action taken note have replied as follows: - 
“Per Drop More Crop Scheme, operational from 2015-16 which mainly focuses on 
enhancing water use eﬃciency at farm level through precision/micro irrigation (Drip 
and Sprinkler Irrigation,) is providing more focus in Himalayan and North-Eastern 
region since there is substantial shortages of water during winter and summer 
seasons due to topographical reasons though they encounter high rainfall during 
monsoon. 
In this regard, it is further mentioned that: 

3 
 
 
One of the objectives of PDMC is to increase area of coverage of micro irrigation in 
water intensive crops. The Department is taking various initiatives for increasing 
coverage of area under micro irrigation in water intensive crop to increase water 
use efficiency. 
So far, 77.90 lakh ha. Area has been covered under micro irrigation in the country 
since 2015-16 till now. Out of this, area under water intensive crops i.e. cotton, 
sugarcane, banana etc. is 7.33 lakh ha. 
Besides, Union Finance Minister in the Union Budget 2017-18 announced setting up 
of a dedicated Micro Irrigation Fund (MIF) to be instituted with NABARD with an 
initial corpus of Rs. 5,000 crore. The objective of the fund is to facilitate the States 
in mobilizing resources for expanding coverage of micro irrigation by taking up 
special and innovative projects and also for incentivizing micro irrigation beyond the 
provisions available under PDMC to encourage farmers to install micro irrigation 
systems. MIF has to be augmented by additional amount of Rs.5,000 crore. 
Further, the funding pattern under Centrally Sponsored Schemes is largely guided 
by NITI Aayog vide its O.M No. 011013/02/2015-CSS & CMC dated 
17thAugust,2016 which has been issued based on the recommendations of the 
Sub-Group of Chief Ministers and in consultation with various Ministries/ 
Departments and other Stakeholders, with the approval of  the Cabinet. The 
arrangements in these OMs are in force since 2016-17. In lieu of the Jammu & 
Kashmir Reorganization Act, 2019, clause 4 and 11 of the NITI Aayog’s OM were 
modiﬁed and were communicated vide NITI Aayog’s OM dated 26.10.2019. In 
addition to the above, scheme under reference in PMKSY-Per drop more crop was 
approved by the Cabinet/Competent authority which also included the fund sharing 
pattern.” 
 
6. The Committee note from the replies that Per Drop More Crop Scheme, 
operational from 2015-16 which mainly focuses on enhancing water use eﬃciency 
at farm level through precision/micro irrigation (Drip and Sprinkler Irrigation) is 
providing more focus in Himalayan and North-Eastern region since there is 
substantial shortages of water during winter and summer seasons due to 
topographical reasons though they encounter high rainfall during monsoon. They 
further note that the funding pattern under Centrally Sponsored Schemes is largely 
guided by NITI Aayog O.M which was issued based on the recommendations of the 
Sub-Group of Chief Ministers and in consultation with various Ministries/ 
Departments and other Stakeholders, with the approval of the Cabinet. However, in 
view of the Committee, the Centrally Sponsored Per Drop More Crop scheme 
should be viewed differently as far as financial assistance for encouraging micro 
irrigation is concerned, since as suggested by them earlier, priority for giving 
incentive to micro irrigation should be those areas which have over exploitation of 

4 
 
Ground water and also have surface water scarcity. Though, as informed by the 
Department, Himalayan and North-Eastern region also suffer from substantial 
shortages of water, the Committee are of the opinion that equal emphasis needs to 
be given to those States where Ground water reserves have depleted substantially 
due to agriculture of water intensive crops.  The Committee  would,  therefore, 
reiterate their earlier recommendation to the Ministry of Jal Shakti to take up the 
matter of increasing Central assistance under PDMC scheme to severely water 
starved States also, with the Ministry of Finance in consultation with the DA&FW 
and impress upon the need to change the funding pattern to the ratio of 90:10 for 
those States which have substantial consumption of water in agriculture but are 
suﬀering from water shortage. More funds under the PDMC would give impetus to 
those States to actively implement micro irrigation methods, thereby reducing 
water footprint in agriculture, i.e. amount of freshwater needed for cultivation of 
crops. The Committee would like to be apprised of the details of measures taken in 
this regard within three months of presentation of the Report. 
 
B. Ground Water use in industries 
 
Recommendation Sl, No. 13 (Para No. 14) 
 
7. The Committee noticed that Central Ground Water Authority (CGWA) grants 
NOC/renews NOC for Ground water withdrawal for commercial purposes, after ensuring 
that recharge is done as per the quantity of Ground water drawn and stage of their 
development. Further, as per the direction of Hon’ble NGT vide OA no. 176/2015 dated 
11.09.2019, any industry drawing Ground water illegally is liable to pay Environmental 
Compensation to the respective State Pollution Control Boards. Also, CGWA, in their 
latest Guidelines issued in September 2020, had ﬁxed Environmental compensation for 
Groundwater withdrawal by industries, infrastructure units and mining projects without a 
valid NOC from appropriate authority. Environmental Compensation Rate (ECRGW) had 
been based on the approved norms prescribed by CPCB. In addition, deterrent factor 
had also been introduced to compensate for the losses and environmental damages, 
based on the duration of illegal Groundwater extraction. However, the Committee were 
surprised to note that a large number of industries were operating without taking the 
NOCs due to a lack of mandatory linkage between the SPCBs/PCCs and CGWA, as 
pointed out by CAG. They further noticed that though CGWA had imposed penalty of Rs. 
one lakh/ industry under Section 15 of the Environment (Protection) Act 1986 for non-
compliance of NOC conditions on 20 Industries, only 5 industries/companies had paid 
Environmental Compensation to CGWA/District Magistrate. Also, no compensation had 
been paid to CPCB/SPCBs as directed by NGT in their 11.9.2019 order. They also found 
that out of the 21 packaged drinking water units, located in 6 States, which were studied 
by CPCB, only 4 had obtained NOC from CGWA for abstraction of Ground water 
resources for manufacturing package drinking water. Further, only 10 out of 21 units had 
obtained Consent under Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1974 from 
respective State Pollution Control Boards. While the regulations are in place to ensure 

5 
 
that Ground water is not extracted without adequate measures for recharge, the lack of 
eﬀective implementation and supervision has made the regulations toothless. The 
Committee were, therefore, of the view that to stop unrestricted use of Ground water for 
commercial uses, strict enforcement of the Regulations/Guidelines was required along 
with stringent vigil and appropriate penalties. They, therefore, recommended the CGWA 
and CPCB to work in unison so that projects using Ground water were issued Consent to 
establish and Consent to operate only after issuance of NOC by CGWA. Further, 
vigilance capacity and inspections should be enhanced to ensure compliance with 
stipulated provisions which could act as an eﬀective deterrent against misuse of Ground 
water. Keeping in view the essential aspect of recycle and reuse of water in bringing 
down the water use, the Committee desired to be apprised of the details of total quantity 
of recycled/reused water used by diﬀerent categories of industries in the country along 
with total number of industries ﬂouting these norms and measures taken to remedy the 
situation. 
 
8. The Department of Water Resources, River Development & Ganga Rejuvenation, in 
their action taken note have replied as follows: - 
“Central Ground Water Authority (CGWA) was constituted under sub-section(3) of 
section 3 of the Environment (Protection)Act, 1986 for the purposes of regulation 
and control of ground water management and development and has been regulating 
ground water development and management by way of issuing “No Objection 
Certiﬁcate (NOC)” for ground water extraction to industries or infrastructure projects 
or mining projects etc. and framed guidelines in this connection from time to time in 
19 States & UTs, where ground water development is not being regulated by the 
State Government/ UT administration concerned. 
Ministry of Jal Shakti, CGWA notiﬁcation dated 20.09.2020 has empowered District 
Collectors/ Deputy Commissioners (DCs) /District Magistrates (DMs) to take 
enforcement measures like sealing of unauthorized ground water abstraction 
structures, disconnection of electricity, launching of prosecution against those 
violating the No Objection Certiﬁcate conditions and taking action for imposition of 
environmental compensation. 
 
It is further submitted that some of the SPCBs/PCCs are issuing Consent to 
Establishment /Operate to the industry after verifying the NOC issued by CGWA. 
Also, some SPCBs are issuing consent to establishment / operate with a condition 
to obtain NOC from CGWA/SGWA. 
Further, CPCB has intimated that they are not maintaining the details of total 
quantity of effluent generated / treated / recycled and reused by different categories 
of industries. However, CPCB monitors the compliance of 17 categories of highly 
polluting industries, common facilities etc., on real time basis through Online 
Continuous Eﬄuent Monitoring Systems (OCEMS) and in case of exceedance to 

6 
 
standards, SMS alerts are generated and sent to industries and SPCBs/PCCs for 
appropriate follow-up action for the compliance of discharge norms.” 
 
9. The Committee note that some of the State Pollution Control Boards 
(SPCBs)/ Pollution Control Committees (PCCs) are issuing Consent to 
Establishment /Operate to the industries after verifying the NOC issued by CGWA. 
Also, some SPCBs are issuing consent to establishment / operate with a condition 
to obtain NOC from CGWA/SGWA.  While appreciating this, the Committee are of 
the opinion that all SPCBs/PCCs need to be urged to follow the same practice for 
better enforcement of CGWA restrictions on Ground water withdrawal. For this, 
there is a need for better coordination between CPCB and CGWA for synergetic 
policy approach to ensure effective deterrence and suitable action against 
violators. Further, though an Online Continuous Eﬄuent Monitoring Systems 
(OCEMS) has been put in place which generates SMS alerts in case of exceedance 
to standards, and sends to industries and SPCBs/PCCs for appropriate follow-up 
action for the compliance of discharge norms, the Committee feel that maintaining 
a proper record of effluents generated, treated and discharged will further 
strengthen monitoring mechanism to monitor the amount of effluents being 
generated and treated and water being reused by  industries to reduce Ground 
water depletion and contamination. The Committee would, therefore, recommend 
the Department of Water Resources, River Development and Ganga Rejuvenation 
to take initiative in consultation with the Ministry of Environment, Forest and 
Climate Change, in establishing a mechanism to create a record of effluent 
generation and discharge by each of the industries using Ground water and 
apprise them of the details in this regard within three months of presentation of 
this Report.  
 
 C. Collection of data on Ground water pollution and contamination 
Recommendation Sl. No. 14 (Para No. 15) 
10. The Committee noticed that Ground water contamination occured through both 
natural and anthropogenic sources. Contamination through various sources such as 
salinity, ﬂuoride, nitrate, arsenic, iron, etc. were reported from a large number of partly 
aﬀected districts in Assam, Bihar, Karanataka, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Punjab, 
Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu, Odisha and Uttar Pradesh with other remaining States also 
having a few aﬀected districts. They further noted that Central Ground Water Board 
(CGWB) had been monitoring Groundwater levels through a network of 22,730 
observation wells, four times a year and the information was being disseminated to the 
concerned State agencies in the form of reports and maps. Ground water quality was 
also being monitored by CGWB at regional level once every year through their network 
of about 15000 observation wells located all over the country. Further Ground water 
management studies, Groundwater exploration, Industrial/pollution cluster studies, etc. 

7 
 
is also undertaken to ﬁnd out the extent of contamination. However, they noted that 
CPCB along with SPCBs and PCCs, also were monitoring Ground water quality at 1231 
locations throughout the country under National Water Quality Monitoring Programme 
(NWMP) except Andaman & Nicobar Islands, Arunachal Pradesh and Sikkim on a half 
yearly frequency. Under NWMP, Groundwater quality monitoring stations were selected 
considering the criteria such as Drinking water sources located in sanitary conditions 
and prone to sewage contamination, preferably in shallow aquifer in the vicinity of septic 
tanks; sewage treatment plant; oxidation pond, cess pools, garbage dump sites, tube-
wells, hand pumps or dug-wells located in industrial areas prone to contamination and 
were in use as well as Groundwater sources in residential areas. The Committee were 
not able to comprehend the rationale for involving two agencies, entrusted with the same 
task of monitoring contamination in Groundwater. Since Groundwater is basically under 
the domain of CGWB with CGWA being regulatory authority, monitoring and data 
collection on its quality should primarily be dealt with by CGWB which could be shared 
with CPCB to enable adoption of suitable remedial measures. They therefore, 
recommended the Department to appropriately address the issue and take measures for 
convergence of activities relating to better management of Ground water under the aegis 
of a single, Centralised body/Agency. 
11. The Department of Water Resources, River Development & Ganga Rejuvenation, in 
their action taken note have replied as follows: - 
“National Water Informatics Centre (NWIC) has developed the Water Information 
Management System (WIMS), which is an online database for water related data 
including groundwater quality data. There is provision in WIMS for entering ground 
water quality data of State and Central Agencies including CPCB and CGWB. The 
WIMS application has been recently rolled out for CGWB. CGWB is updating the 
data in WIMS portal. This integrated database will be available for use by all the 
concerned agencies. India-WRIS is a platform to share data in public domain, which 
is developed by NWIC. Letter from CGWB to CPCB and Department of Drinking 
Water & Sanitation has been sent for integrating the groundwater quality data. 
CPCB under National Water Quality Programme (NWMP) is monitoring 
groundwater quality with a limited number of 1,235 locations, based on the criteria 
stipulated for selection of locations to regulate contamination due to industrial 
discharges. The generated data from the year 2012 to 2021 is shared with NWIC 
for integration on India-WRIS portal, developed by MoJS. 
Further, a common format is being developed by the CGWB and shall be shared with 
CPCB /States /NWIC for convergence and ease of uploading in the NWIC server for 
use by various stake-holders.” 
12. The Committee note that that an online database namely, Water Information 
Management System (WIMS) has been created, wherein water related data 
including Ground water quality data will be uploaded by both State and Central 
Agencies including CPCB and CGWB. The WIMS application has been recently 

8 
 
rolled out for CGWB and they are updating the data in WIMS portal. Further, CGWB 
has issued letter to CPCB and Department of Drinking Water & Sanitation for 
integrating the Ground water quality data. The integrated database will be available 
in public domain in India-Water Resource Information System (India-WRIS) 
platform. The Committee further note that CGWB is also developing a common 
format which will be shared with CPCB /States / National Water Informatics Centre 
(NWIC) for convergence and ease of uploading in the NWIC server for use by 
various stake-holders. While commending the above efforts, the Committee 
however, would like to be apprised of the rationale for involving both CGWB and 
CPCB in monitoring of Ground water quality through their own networks. They 
further desire that the integrated data sharing should be expedited to enable 
seamless exchange of information by the agencies/departments involved and 
better monitoring and synergy of policies amongst all the implementing agencies 
and accessible in public domain. They, therefore, recommend the CGWB to 
complete this work within a prescribed period and intimate the same to the 
Committee at the earliest. 
 
D. Ground Water pollution by industries – Need for a unified approach 
 
Recommendation Sl. No. 16 (Para No. 17) 
13. The Committee noted that CGWB had found contaminated Ground water in most 
of the 88 industrial clusters identiﬁed by CPCB. Further, 38 industrial clusters had been 
identiﬁed by CPCB as Critically Polluted Areas (CPAs) with Comprehensive 
Environmental Pollution Index (CEPI), [which is a rational number (ranging from 0 to 
100) to characterize environmental quality at a given industrial area following algorithm 
of pollution source, pathway and receptor], score of 70 and above and 31 industrial 
clusters had been identiﬁed as Severely Polluted Areas (SPAs) in the CPCB’s 
assessment of CEPI scores in 2018 at 100 identiﬁed industrial clusters (including 88 
industrial clusters above) in 21 States across the country. They were particularly 
concerned to note that out of 72,314 industries requiring Eﬄuent Treatment Plants 
(ETPs), only 70,555 industries had functional ETPs, of which 1040 industries did not 
comply with environmental standards. The Committee observed that CPCB had taken 
following measures for preventing industrial pollution of Groundwater : (i) Industry 
Speciﬁc Standards and General Standards for discharge of eﬄuents notiﬁed under the 
Environment (Protection) Act, 1986, (ii) Time-Targeted Action Programme under 
Corporate Responsibility on Environment Protection (CREP),(iii) Establishment of 
Common Eﬄuent Treatment Plants (CETPs) for cluster of Small Scale Industries, (iv) 
Installation of Online Continuous Eﬄuent / Emission Monitoring System (OCEMS) with 
real time data connectivity to CPCB, and (v) Zero Liquid Discharge (ZLD) to protect the 
water quality in view of lean ﬂow situation in rivers and streams in a larger non monsoon 
period. However, they noted that little progress seemed to be made in reducing Ground 
water pollution, a fact, admitted by the CPCB itself attributing it to unabated growth of 

9 
 
population and resultant waste water generation along with uncontrolled abstraction of 
Surface and Groundwater causing reduction in recharge potential. In this regard they 
noted the submission made by the MoEF&CC that (i) absence of a policy on water 
pollution, (ii) preponderance of State Government agencies in implementation of policy 
as Water is a State subject, (iii) diﬃculty in implementation of policy due to sharing of 
aquifers by a number of States and (iv) involvement of multiple agencies at Central and 
State level had further compounded the problem. Further, lack of proper monitoring of 
NOC conditions while permitting abstraction of Ground water under The Water 
(Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1974, no data on water consumption by the 
municipalities, local bodies and industrial units post repeal of Water Cess Act, etc. 
reﬂected the dire state of aﬀairs in policy implementation regarding Groundwater. The 
Committee were therefore of the opinion that water being most important resource for 
survival of life, its governance could not be left scattered over multiple jurisdictions. 
Further, there was an imperative need for chalking out a Scheme/Programme speciﬁcally 
to control Ground water pollution. Therefore, in addition to the need for urgent measures 
for setting up a Nodal agency/Centralised body, the Committee further recommended 
that immediate steps should be taken to formulate programme to prevent Ground water 
pollution. Besides, monitoring of compliance by the industries needed to be done 
scrupulously to reduce violations. Also, quarterly physical inspections of all the 
functional ETPs were prerequisite to ensure that untreated water was not discharged. 
Accordingly, the Committee recommended the Department to take appropriate measures 
and apprise them about their details within three months of presentation of the Report. 
14.  The Department of Water Resources, River Development & Ganga Rejuvenation, in 
their action taken note have replied as follows: - 
“For strengthening monitoring mechanism and eﬀective compliance through self-
regulatory mechanism, CPCB directed all 17 categories of highly polluting 
industries, Grossly Polluting Industries (GPIs) of Ganga basin, CETPs, biomedical 
waste management facilities and common hazardous waste facilities to install 
Online Continuous Eﬄuent/Emission Monitoring Systems (OCEMS) for constant 
vigil on pollution levels. From these OCEMS, real-time values of environmental 
pollutants of trade eﬄuent and emissions, discharged from industrial units are 
transmitted online to CPCB and concerned SPCB/PCC on 24x7 basis. Central 
software processes the data and incase value of pollutant parameter exceeds 
prescribed environmental norms, an automatic SMS alert is generated and sent to 
industrial unit, SPCB and CPCB, so that corrective measures can be taken by the 
industry immediately and appropriate action can be taken by concerned 
SPCB/PCC. 
Industrial pollution (Compliance of discharge / emission norms) of about 6,500 
industries including about 950 Grossly Polluting Industries in catchment of river 
Ganga is monitored on real time basis through Online Continuous Eﬄuent 
Monitoring Systems (OCEMS). 

10 
 
 
In addition to above, the steps/measures taken for the compliance of norms are: 
i.         The Ministry of Environment Forest and Climate Change (MoEF&CC), 
Government of India notiﬁes industry speciﬁc discharge standards under Schedule-
I: ‘Standards for Emission or Discharge of Environmental Pollutants from various 
Industries’ of Environment Protection Act, 1986. So far, industry speciﬁc 
environmental standards, for 81 industrial sectors (including eﬄuent standards for 
47 sectors), have been notiﬁed. Industrial sectors, for which speciﬁc standards are 
not available, general standards as notiﬁed under Schedule-VI of Environment 
Protection Rules, 1986 shall be applicable. In order to ensure conservation of 
water, load-based standards have also been prescribed for water consumption and 
wastewater generation for about 15 water-intensive industries, namely, thermal 
power plant, jute processing industry, integrated iron and steel, sugar, pulp and 
paper, fermentation, caustic soda, man-made ﬁbre, starch, dairy, fertilizer, natural 
rubber processing, coal washeries, edible oil and vanaspati, tanneries, petroleum 
oil reﬁnery and paint industry. Industries must meet these prescribed environmental 
standards. The State Pollution Control Boards (SPCBs)/Pollution Control 
Committees (PCCs) issue consent to establish/consent to operate and authorization 
to the industries in the States. SPCBs/PCCs monitor the compliance of industrial 
emissions/eﬄuent according to the prescribed standards. In case of non-
compliance, action against industry is taken under provisions of Water Act, 1974, 
Air Act, 1981 and Environment (Protection) Act, 1986. 
ii.          In order to prioritize pollution control and environmental surveillance 
programs, CPCB has identiﬁed seventeen industrial sectors, having high potential 
to pollute the environment. The seventeen categories (of high pollution potential) 
industries include (i) Aluminum Smelters, (ii) Chlor-Alkali Plant, (iii) Cement Plant, 
(iv) Copper  Smelter, (v) Distillery Industry, (vi) Dyes& Dye-Intermediate Industry, 
(vii) Fertilizer Industry, (viii) Iron & Steel Plant, (ix)Tanneries, (x) Pesticide (basic) 
Manufacturing, (xi) Petro-Chemical Industry, (xii) Pharmaceuticals (basic) Plant, 
(xiii) Pulp & Paper Industry, (xiv)Oil Refinery, (xv) Thermal Power Plant (xvi) Sugar 
and (xvii) Zinc Smelter. 
iii. CPCB classiﬁes industrial sectors into red, orange, green and white 
categories, on the basis of pollution index (PI) which is a function of water pollution, 
air pollution, hazardous waste generation, fuel consumption and amount of waste 
water generation. Further, in order to prioritize environmental management and 
surveillance programs, CPCB has also classiﬁed as industries under 17 categories 
of highly polluting industries and grossly polluting industries (water polluting 
industries). So far, CPCB has categorized 254 industrial sectors i.e. 61 under red, 
90 under orange, 65 under green and 38 under white category, and directed 
SPCBs/PCCs to adopt the same. 

11 
 
The recommended environmental surveillance frequency and Consent to Operate 
(CTO) validity for different categories of industries are: 
 
 
Industrial 
Category 
Potential 
of 
Pollution 
PollutionI
ndex (PI) 
No of Sectors 
Categorizedb
y CPCB 
CTO validity 
period 
recommended 
by CPCB 
Minimum 
EnvironmentalS
urveillance 
Frequency 
Red High ≥60 61 5 years 6months 
Orange Moder
ate 
41 
to59 
90 10 years 1year 
Green Low 21 
to40 
65 15 years 2 years 
White Nil ≤20 38 Not 
required* 
- 
Total   254   
Note: *White category of industries, which are considered as practically non-polluting, are 
not required to obtain consent to operate from SPCBs/PCCs and an intimation to 
concerned SPCB/PCC shall suffice. 
 
As per the information received from SPCBs/PCCs, there are total 4,572 industries 
under 17 categories, in the country. Out of which, 3,880 units are operational and 
692 units are self-closed. Number of complying and non-complying units are 3,429 
and 451, respectively. Show cause notice to 315 units and closure directions to 68 
units were issued for non-compliance. Legal actions were initiated against 7 units 
and action is under process against 61 units. State-wise status of 17 categories of 
industries is given at Annexure-III. 
The above measures are being scrupulously implemented by CPCB in consultation 
with SPCBs and infrastructure to improve the monitoring & surveillance measures 
are being implemented through various Central/State government schemes.” 
15. The Committee notice that for strengthening monitoring mechanism and 
eﬀective compliance through self-regulatory mechanism, Online Continuous 
Eﬄuent Monitoring Systems (OCEMS) has been installed which enables real time 
monitoring of compliance of discharge / emission norms by the industries. 
Besides, several measures such as industry specific discharge standards, 
classification of industrial sector into red, orange, green and white categories on 
the basis of pollution index, classification of highly polluting industries and 
grossly polluting industries in 17 categories have been taken by the Ministry of 
Environment, Forest and Climate Change to improve the monitoring and 
surveillance measures. However, no reply has been furnished with regard to a 
formulation of a specific programme for controlling water pollution including 
Ground water. Though several measures have been taken with an aim to reduce 
pollution of Ground water, the Committee feel that in absence of a cohesive policy 
on water pollution, the problem of Ground water pollution will continue to exist. In 
their view, there is a need for convergence amongst inter ministerial/departmental 

12 
 
schemes and programmes in coordination with State Government so that unified 
approach could be adopted for water pollution control. The Committee further note 
that as per the information furnished by the Department, there are 3,429 complying 
and 451 non-complying industrial units respectively under 17 categories of grossly 
polluting industries. While show cause notices have been issued to 315 units, 
closure directions have been issued to 68 units for non-compliance. Also legal 
actions have been initiated against 7 units and in case of 61 industrial units, action 
is under process, which is alarming. While closing down of industrial units may 
not be the best solution to tackle Ground water pollution, in view of the 
Committee, effective monitoring of compliance norms along with incentive for 
efficient working of Effluent Treatment Plants is the need of the hour. The 
Committee  therefore, believe that till the time a Centralised/ nodal agency is 
created, the CGWA needs to play a greater role in coordination with CPCB/SPCBs 
to persuade industries to have state of the art Effluent Treatment Plants including 
measures for ensuring quarterly physical inspection of all the functional Effluent 
Treatment Plants. They desire to be apprised of the details of the measures taken 
in this regard within three months of presentation of this Report. 
 
E. Amendment to the Water Pollution and Prevention Act, 1974 empowering 
SPCBs for imposition of penalties 
Recommendation Sl. No. 17 (Para No. 18) 
 
16. The Committee noted that Grossly Polluting Industries on the main stem of Ganga 
and Yamuna were being monitored through Third Party veriﬁcation since 2017 and 
violators were being issued closure orders by SPCBs and also levied environmental 
compensation. The Committee further noted that CPCB was mainly concerned with 
framing of Guidelines without any role in their enforcement as most of these powers 
were vested with the SPCBs under the Water Pollution and Prevention Act, 1974 except 
the authority to impose ﬁnes, for which Courts had to be approached. Therefore, 
direction for closure is more convenient option for SPCBs to enforce violators to abide 
by the Guidelines. Admitting the existing gap in enforcement powers, the Secretary, 
MoEF& CC informed that the Act will be amended to bridge the gap. While agreeing to 
the need for enforcement of the environmental norms/standards for ensuring industrial 
development in a sustainable way, the Committee, however, did not approve of closure 
notices as a widely used option. Since industrial development is also a necessity for 
employment generation and prosperity, the Committee were of the considered view that 
a balanced approach needed to be adopted. While strict penalties needed to be 
imposed for ﬂouting environmental norms, direction for closure should be resorted to as 
a last option. Further, there should be a mechanism to check that the ‘Consent of 
establishment and Consent to operate’ granted to industries, are in accordance with the 
norms ﬁxed and in case of any change/revision in existing norms, after Consent to 
establish is issued, closure notices on grounds of non compliance with changed norms 

13 
 
should be avoided. The Committee desired that such cases should be studied and 
appropriate time frame should be ﬁxed to ensure compliance with the new norms. Also, 
the SPCBs needed to be vested with power to impose monetary penalties to help them 
take appropriate action for minor violations without straight away going for closing the 
violating industrial unit. They, therefore, recommended the DoWR, RD & GR to urge the 
MoEF& CC to bring the necessary amendments to Water Pollution and Prevention Act, 
1974 urgently to suﬃciently empower SPCBs to impose fines for violations of minor 
nature. 
17. The Department of Water Resources, River Development & Ganga Rejuvenation, in 
their action taken note have replied as follows: - 
Central Pollution Control Board (CPCB), State Pollution Control Boards(SPCBs)/ 
Pollution Control Committees (PCCs) are performing its duties mentioned in Water 
(Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1974, Air (Prevention and Control of 
Pollution) Act, 1981 and Environment (Protection) Act, 1986 and its Rules from 
time to time and taking action against defaulters responsible for increase in all 
types of pollution (non-compliance to the eﬄuent/emission norms, waste 
management etc.). Also based on the ‘Polluter Pays Principle’ the defaulters are 
impounded upon Environmental Compensation (EC) for contaminating / damaging 
the environment. 
CPCB has initiated penal action in the form of imposing EC and has evolved a 
methodology for levying such EC against the industries /facilities not-complying 
with the norms. Accordingly, action being taken against the violators are: 
 
S.No. Actions Under the provisions of Acts & Policies 
1. Issuing     of     directions     for 
correction/remedial/closure depending 
upon severity of the case. 
Under Section 5 of the Environment 
(Protection) Act,1986 
2. Issuing of  directions  towards 
Construction projects for 
correction/remedial / closure depending 
upon severity of the case. 
Under  Section 31A of the Air 
(Prevention & Control of Pollution) Act,1981 
3. Imposing of Environmental 
Compensations on the 
construction projects. 
Methodology       developed        for 
Assessing Environmental Compensation 
and Action Plan to Utilize the Fund by 
CPCB as per Hon’ble NGT order. 
 
18. The Committee find that replies furnished by the Department are repetitive. 
They note that no information has been furnished with regard to the mechanism 
developed for persuading industries to comply with the environmental norms in the 

14 
 
form of monetary penalties, etc. In case of construction projects only, the CPCB has 
stipulated Environmental Compensation for damaging the environment. The existing 
loophole in the Water Pollution and Prevention Act, 1974 Act which neither 
empowers CPCB to enforce environmental norms nor SPCBs to impose monetary 
fines, etc. for penalizing violations of minor nature, for which they have to resort to 
courts making it a cumbersome process, have not been addressed in the replies. 
The Committee find that to ensure compliance with the extant norms, SPCBs take 
recourse to easier option of issuing closure notices, as the Act empowers the 
SPCBs in this regard. Taking note of this loophole, the Secretary, MoEF& CC had 
also informed the Committee that the Act will be amended to bridge the gap in 
enforcement powers. Since the replies are silent on this aspect, the Committee 
reiterate their earlier recommendation that a mechanism should be developed to 
ensure that the ‘Consent of establishment and Consent to operate’ granted to 
industries, are in accordance with the norms ﬁxed and in case of any 
change/revision in existing norms, after Consent to establish is issued, proper time 
should be allowed to ensure compliance with changed norms, rather than serving 
closure notices outrightly. They further reiterate their recommendation to the DoWR, 
RD & GR to urge the MoEF& CC to bring the necessary amendments in Water 
Pollution and Prevention Act, 1974 urgently to suﬃciently empower SPCBs to 
impose fines for violations of minor nature and suitably empower CPCB to ensure 
compliance with its norms. The Committee desire to be apprised of the measures 
taken in this regard within three months of presentation of this report. 
F. Study of eﬄuent discharge by industries 
Recommendation Sl. No. 18 (Para No. 19) 
19. The Committee observed that CPCB had directed all the 17 category of highly 
polluting industries to install Online Continuous Eﬄuent/emission Monitoring System 
(OCEMS) with real time data connectivity to CPCB which conducts regular inspection 
and takes action on exceedance alerts of OCEMS or oﬄine OCEMS. Although industry 
Speciﬁc Standards and General Standards for discharge of eﬄuents were notiﬁed under 
the Environmental (Protection) Rules, 1986, the Committee observed that Ministry of Jal 
Shakti also, was in the process of ﬁnalizing policy by bringing out standards/limit for 
treated or used water to utilize/recycle in various sectors including agriculture wherein 
use of untreated water for irrigation purposes had emerged as a big issue, especially in 
cities posing health risk for city dwellers. Further, they observed that CPCB is monitoring 
ETPs regarding discharge of treated water on the basis of computer generated SMS 
alerts received on violation of eﬄuent and emission standards and recorded in OCEMS. 
Having noted that despite all the above measures, industrial pollution of Ground water 
remained a burning problem, the Committee were of the view that stricter vigil of Effluent 
Treatment Plants (ETPs) was required to ensure that untreated water did not get 
discharged in any way into water bodies, especially by the industries operating on the 
banks of rivers and canals. In their view, besides inspection of industries, study of water 
quality of rivers and canals having industries on their banks also needed to be 

15 
 
conducted to ﬁnd out how eﬀectively the Eﬄuent Treatment Plants were working. They, 
therefore, recommended the DoWR, RD & GR to conduct such a study in coordination 
with CPCBs and SPCBs and furnish the details of number of industries situated on the 
banks of rivers, numbers of such industries with functional ETPs, volume of water 
treated by the ETPs before discharge, number of violators and action taken against 
violators during the last 5 years. 
20. The Department of Water Resources, River Development & Ganga Rejuvenation, in 
their action taken note have replied as follows: - 
 “ Inspection of all Grossly Polluting Industries (GPIs) located in ﬁve Ganga 
mainstem States i.e. Uttarakhand, UttarPradesh, Bihar, Jharkhand and West Bengal 
is being carried-out by CPCB authorized third party technical institutes since 2017 
to verify the eﬀectiveness of eﬄuent treatment plant and compliance vis-à-vis 
eﬄuent discharge standards  and as certain speciﬁc fresh water 
consumption, waste water discharge and pollution load etc. Since 2020, the GPIs  
located in Yamuna main stem States i.e. Uttarakhand, Uttar Pradesh, Haryana, 
Delhi, Bihar, Jharkhand and West Bengal are also considered for inspection. The 
Year-wise inventory of GPIs, sector-wise waste water discharge and compliance 
status in Ganga and Yamuna mainstem States is given in Annexure-IV.” 
 
21. The Committee find that replies merely state the existing inspection 
mechanism to ascertain the quality of water being discharged by the Effluent 
Treatment Plants in Grossly Polluting Industries (GPIs) situated on the banks of 
river Ganga in five Ganga mainstem States by way of third party verification by 
CPCB authorized third party technical institutes. No information has been 
furnished with regard to undertaking any study by the DoWR, RD & GR on quality 
of water in rivers and canals, which have many industries located on their banks. 
As this information is vital to know the impact of industrial operations on water 
quality of rivers and canals with associated potential to create health hazard, the 
Committee reiterate their recommendation to conduct a study in coordination with 
CPCBs and SPCBs and furnish the details of number of industries situated on the 
banks of rivers, numbers of such industries with functional ETPs, volume of water 
treated by the ETPs before discharge, number of violators and action taken against 
violators during the last 5 years within three months of presentation of this report. 
 
G. Need for extending the coverage of the Atal Bhujal Yojana (ATAL JAL) Scheme  
 
Recommendation Sl. No. 21 (Para No. 22) 
 
22. The Committee observed that Atal Bhujal Yojana (ATALJAL), being implemented 
from 1.04.2020 for a period of 5 years, is the only scheme of the Government of India 
which has been launched with a view to augment Ground water by managing their 

16 
 
demand side. The Scheme is being implemented on pilot basis in 80 districts of seven 
States, viz. Haryana, Gujarat, Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Rajasthan and 
Uttar Pradesh with an outlay of Rs 6000 crore. Selection of States was done on the 
basis of the criticality of Ground water situation, willingness and degree of 
preparedness. The Committee, however, noticed that several States with acute Ground 
water shortage such as Himachal Pradesh, Punjab, Delhi and Tamil Nadu had not been 
included in the pilot scheme. They, therefore, desired to be apprised of the reasons for 
excluding these States where Ground water situation is equally critical. The Committee 
were given to understand that the feasibility of upscaling the Scheme to other parts of 
the Country would be considered only after ﬁve years, based on the lessons learnt from 
implementation of the Scheme and their eﬃcacy/ outcome in improving the long-term 
sustainability of Ground water resources in the selected 80 districts under the pilot 
scheme. However, keeping in view the urgency for implementation of such scheme in 
States having large number of over exploited blocks, the Committee recommended that 
Scheme should be extended in all States which are suﬀering from Ground water scarcity 
and have substantial number of over exploited and critical blocks. 
23. The Department of Water Resources, River Development & Ganga Rejuvenation, in 
their action taken note have replied as follows: - 
“Atal Jal was started as Pilot Program in certain identiﬁed water stressed areas of 7 
States viz. Uttar Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh, Gujarat, Rajasthan, Karnataka, 
Haryana and Maharashtra with an aim to demonstrate the community led ground 
water management so that later on all the States can take up this approach further 
to remaining areas. A proposal for extension of Atal Bhujal Yojana to certain other 
water stressed States has been initiated.” 
 
24. The Committee are happy to note that the Department has initiated a proposal 
to extend Atal Bhujal Yojana to certain other water stressed States. However, the 
Committee would like to know the details of specific water stressed States where 
this programme is proposed to be extended along with the time period envisaged to 
implement this programme in the newly covered States. They would also 
recommend to expedite the approval process to implement the scheme in remaining 
States. Further, the benefits of the programme, if any, identified so far, may be 
furnished to the Committee within three months of the presentation of this report.  
 
H. Rejuvenation of water bodies in urban areas – Strengthening of Urban Local         
Bodies (ULBs) 
 
Recommendation Sl. No. 25 (Para No. 26) 
 
25. The Committee noticed that 63 water bodies in cities had been taken up for 
rejuvenation under Atal Mission for Rejuvenation and Urban Transformation (AMRUT) and 
151 under Smart Cities Mission (SCM), while rest of the water bodies would be taken up 
under Jal Jeevan Mission (Urban) of the Ministry of Housing and Urban Aﬀairs (MoHUA). 

17 
 
However, no speciﬁc information was provided about water bodies in major cities of Delhi, 
Mumbai, Chennai and Bengaluru where encroachment and pollution of water bodies 
remained a big issue. They further noted that in cities and urban areas, Urban Local 
Bodies (ULBs) were primarily responsible for maintenance of water bodies. However, they 
were concerned to note that ULBs were unable to ensure proper maintenance of water 
bodies as these were severely starved of funds both at State and local level. The 
Committee therefore recommended that the DoWR, RD& GR should urge the MoHUA and 
State Governments to take steps for strengthening ULBs. They also desired to be 
apprised of the measures taken in this regard within three months of presentation of the 
report. Further, they desired that total number of water bodies in urban areas along with 
the details of the status of encroachment, extinct, etc. along with measures 
taken/contemplated to restore the water bodies especially in metro cities like Delhi, 
Chennai, Mumbai, Hyderabad, Kolakata and Bengaluru be furnished to them within three 
months of presentation of the report. 
26. The Department of Water Resources, River Development & Ganga Rejuvenation, in 
their action taken note have replied as follows: - 
“Under AMRUT mission, ULBs /States may take up projects related to new/ 
augmentation /rehabilitation of water supply system; rejuvenation of water bodies 
for water supply including in Metro cities and recharge of ground water etc. So far 
1,342 projects worth Rs 42,760.91 crore have been grounded including  963 
completed projects worth Rs 18,749.57 crore. 
As per ﬁrst Census report 2023 on water bodies, total number of water bodies in 
Urban areas falling in 33 States are 69,485. Total number of encroached water 
bodies in these States are 1,760. The information collected through the Census are 
being shared with States/UTs for taking corrective action as per extant guidelines 
through relevant Central/State schemes. 
As far as sharing of the information collected in census with States/UTs is concerned, 
it is informed that letters from Secretary, D/o Water Resources, RD & GR have been 
sent to the States/UTs for taking measures to remove the encroachment and revival 
of defunct water bodies”. 
 
27. From the replies it is seen that out of 69,485 of water bodies in Urban areas 
in 33 States, 1760 water bodies are encroached as per the first Census of water 
bodies held in 2023. Further, ULBs /States have been entrusted with the task of 
taking up projects for new/ augmentation /rehabilitation of water supply system; 
rejuvenation of water bodies for water supply including in Metro cities and 
recharge of Ground water etc. under Atal Mission for Rejuvenation and Urban 
Transformation (AMRUT). However, no reply has been furnished about the 
measures taken to strengthen ULBs, which are stated to be financially weak, as 
informed to the Committee earlier. Also, the replies lack information on measures 
taken/proposed to be taken to restore the encroached water bodies in urban areas 

18 
 
especially in metro cities like Delhi, Chennai, Mumbai, Hyderabad, Kolakata and 
Bengaluru, etc. The Committee, would therefore, again recommend the DoWR, RD 
& GR to urge the Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs (MoHUA) and State 
Governments to take steps for strengthening ULBs and apprise them of the details. 
Further, they would also like to be apprised of the measures taken to revive and 
restore encroached water bodies of urban areas within three months of 
presentation of this report. 
  

19 
 
CHAPTER – II 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY 
THE GOVERNMENT 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO.1 
Ground water, a diminishing resource 
Ground Water resources of India has become an important source for catering to drinking 
water and irrigation needs of the country, with 80 percent of rural drinking water, 50 per 
cent of urban drinking water and 2/3rd of irrigation water being met from Ground water. 
The Committee observe that despite being endowed with sufficient Surface water sources, 
the growing dependence on Ground water is due to its decentralized availability, 
increasing demands for fresh water, vagaries of rainfall, increased population, 
industrialization and urbanization, etc. resulting in severe depletion in Ground water 
levels. The Committee note that as per the 2020 assessment, out of the total annual 
extractable Ground water resource of 398 Billion Cubic Metre (BCM), 245 BCM of Ground 
water is being extracted in the country and the stage of Ground water development which 
is a measure of annual Ground water extraction for all uses over annual extractable 
Ground water resource, in the country is 61.6 per cent. They observe that out of the total 
6965 assessment units (Block/ Taluks/ Mandals/ Watersheds/ Firkas) in the country, 1114 
units have been categorized as ‘Over-exploited’ while 270 units have been categorized as 
‘Critical' and 1057 units as ‘Semi- critical’. They further observe that more assessment 
units have reported deterioration in Chattisgarh, Gujarat, Haryana, Madhya Pradesh and 
Rajasthan in 2020 assessment as compared to those improved. Although a marginal 
improvement in overall Ground water situation in 2020 assessment as against in 2017 has 
shown a ray of hope, the Committee still believe that concerted actions are needed for 
conservation and judicious use of Ground water. The Committee find that the Central 
Water Commission, in their June 2019 report stated that availability of free power supply 
has resulted in the excess drawal of Ground water through more than 20 million pumps 
and is getting wasted. Continued extraction has resulted in further deepening of water 
levels as reflected in the comparison of depth to water level of Pre-monsoon 2020 with 
mean of last 10 years (2010-2019) wherein 37 per cent of the observation wells registered 
a decline of Ground water table by 0-2 metres. A decline of more than 4 metres was 
observed in 10 per cent of the wells in Andhra Pradesh, Chandigarh, Delhi, Haryana, 
Punjab, and Rajasthan and in isolated pockets of most of the other States/ UTs except 
Arunachal Pradesh, Bihar, Daman & Diu, Himachal Pradesh, Jharkhand, Meghalaya, 
Nagaland and Tripura. Depth to water level in the country ranged between less than 2 to 
more than 40 metres Below Ground Level during the pre-monsoon period of 2020 with 
major parts of North-Western and Western States having water level in the range of 10 to 
40 metre Below Ground Level. This calls for a relook at the policy measures being 
adopted for Ground water management in both deficient and surplus areas for their 
balanced and judicious use in order to fulfill various water demands of the country in most 

20 
 
harmonious way. The Committee are of the opinion that management of Ground water 
resources should be given topmost priority in areas where the underground water reserves 
are seriously threatened while at the same time ensuring judicious use of Ground water 
resources in areas where there is significant reserve, as a complement to Surface water. 
Need for holistic and centralized management of Ground water 
The Committee find that regional distribution of Ground water is also varied, with Northern 
mountainous terrain of Himalaya (from Kashmir to Arunachal Pradesh) being major source 
of recharge for the vast Indo Gangetic and Brahmaputra alluvial plains. The States of 
Uttar Pradesh, Bihar, Assam and West Bengal falling in this region has sub optimal 
Ground water development except in Haryana and Punjab. They observe that Peninsular 
Shield located south of Indo-Gangetic-Brahmaputra plains has limited Ground water 
potential while coastal tracts have potential multi-aquifer systems in the States of Gujarat, 
Kerala, Tamil Nadu, Andhra Pradesh and Orissa. However, inherent quality problems and 
the risk of seawater ingress impose severe constraints in Ground wat er development from 
these aquifers. The Committee observe that a number of measures such as Atal Bhujal 
Yojana, water harvesting and conservation works under Mahatma Gandhi National Rural 
Employment Guarantee Scheme (MGNREGS) and Pradhan Mantri Krishi Sinchayee 
Yojana – Watershed Development Component (PMKSY-WDC) have been taken by the 
Central Government. The problem of Ground water contamination is being handled by 
Central Pollution Control Board (CPCB) and State Pollution Control Board (SPCB). 
Various initiatives have also been taken at the State level such as ‘Mukhyamantri Jal 
Swavlamban Abhiyan’ in Rajasthan, ‘Jalyukt Shibar’ in Maharashtra, ‘Sujalam Sufalam 
Abhiyan’ in Gujarat, ‘Mission Kakatiya’ in Telangana, and 'Neeru Chettu’ in Andhra 
Pradesh to enable judicious use and conservation of Ground water. However, the actual 
results, till now, both in terms of regulating quantity and quality of Ground water have 
shown only marginal improvement since Ground water governance is widely scattered with 
Center, State, local bodies and civil groups, all having their role in it. The Committee 93 
find that the regulatory role is strewn over the domain of many Ministries and State 
Governments making implementation of corrective steps/measures a tedious process. The 
Committee are of the opinion that water resource management being their primary 
jurisdiction, the Ministry of Jal Shakti should play a bigger role in coordinated 
implementation of programmes for Ground water conservation by way of not only 
providing inputs and suggesting appropriate measures but also monitoring their status and 
outcome. Keeping in view the diverse Ground water situation across the length and 
breadth of the country, the Committee are of the view that instead of standalone 
approach, scattered over the jurisdiction of multifarious agencies/departments under the 
administrative control of a number of Ministries, for addressing each dimension of the 
problem of diminishing reserves of Ground water and deterioration in their quality, focus 
should shift towards their holistic management by a Centralised body/agency under the 
aegis of the Ministry of Jal Shakti, since this is the nodal Ministry assigned with the 
responsibility to manage the overall water resources of the country. Formation of such an 
agency would, on the one hand, help deal with the issues with unified approach along with 

21 
 
the responsibility for lapses and on the other hand, enable taking of required timely 
measures to reddress the situation. They, therefore, recommend the Ministry of Jal Shakti 
to accordingly form a body with inter-ministerial representation as well as representation 
from State Government Departments, which would be entrusted with the responsibility to 
regulate Ground water in a cohesive and holistic manner.                                                          
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
Ground Water Resource Assessment for the year 2022 for the entire country has been completed 
by the CGWB in collaboration with States/UTs. Comparison of information collected with 
assessment of 2017 indicates that the ‘groundwater recharge ’has increased by 5.7 BCM and 
‘groundwater extraction’ has reduced by 9.5 BCM. Further, percentage of’over exploited’ 
assessment units decreased from 17 % in 2017 to reduced from 63.3 % (in 2017) to 60.08 % (in 
2022). 
CGWB monitors groundwater levels throughout the country on a regional scale, four times every 
year during the months of March to May, August, November and January. During the November 
2022, about 67.2% of the wells monitored in the country have   registered the water level upto 5 
mbgl. Further, in order to assess the long term ﬂuctuation in ground water level, the water level 
data collected by CGWB during November  been compared with the decadal mean of November 
(2012-2021). Analysis of water level data indicates that about 61.1% of the wells monitored have 
registered rise in ground water level. 
Further, water being a State subject, eﬀective rainwater harvesting groundwater for   increasing its 
levels in the country falls under States’ mandate however, a number of steps have been taken by 
central government which can be accessed through web-link through web.  Some of them are 
listed below: 
i. Government of India is implementing Jal Shakti Abhiyan (JSA) in the country including urban 
areas. First JSA was launched in 2019 in water stressed blocks of 256 districts which continued 
during the year and 2022 2021 (across entire country both rural and urban areas) with the primary 
aim to eﬀectively harvest   the monsoon rainfall through creation of artiﬁcial recharge structures, 
watershed management, recharge and reuse structures, intensive aﬀorestation and awareness 
generation etc. JSA for the year 2023 have been launched by Hon’ble President of India on 04 Mar 
2023 with the theme “Source Sustainability for Drinking Water”. 
ii. Hon’ble Prime Minister has launched Amrit Sarovar Mission on 24th April 2  The Mission is 
aimed at developing and rejuvenating 75 water bodies in each district of the country as a part of 
celebration of Azadi ka Amrit Mahotsav. 
iii. The Central Government is implementing Atal Bhujal Yojana with an outlay of Rs.6,000 crore, in 
collaboration with States, in certain water stressed areas of Gujarat, Haryana, Karnataka, Madhya 
Pradesh, Maharashtra, Rajasthan and Uttar Pradesh. The primary aim of the scheme is demand 
side management through scientiﬁc means involving the local communities at village levels leading 
to sustainable groundwater management in the targeted areas. 

22 
 
iv. Central Ground Water Authority (CGWA) has been constituted under section 3(3)of the 
‘Environment (Protection) Act, 1986’; for the purpose of regulation and   control of ground water by 
industries, mining projects, infrastructure projects etc in the country. The latest guideline in this 
regard with pan-India applicability was notiﬁed by the Ministry on 24 September 2020 with certain 
amendments on 29 Mar2023. CGWA and States issue No Objection Certiﬁcate (NOC) for 
extraction of groundwater to various industries/project proponents as per their jurisdiction and as 
per the extant guidelines. Further, water being a State subject, the guideline advocates a 
participatory approach for sustainable ground water management in agriculture sector, including 
working towards crop rotation, diversiﬁcation, reviewing free/subsidized electricity and other 
initiatives to reduce over-dependence on groundwater. 
v. CGWB is implementing National Aquifer Mapping Program (NAQUIM) in the country and an 
area of 25.15 lakh sq km (the available mappable area) has been covered under the NAQUIM 
studies. The NAQUIM study report along-with management plans are shared with States/UTs for 
suit interventions. 
vi. Master Plan for Artiﬁcial Recharge to Groundwater - 2020 has been prepared by the CGWB 
with States/UTs providing a broad outline of the project and investments. The Master Plan 
envisages construction of about 1.42 crore rain water harvesting and artiﬁcial recharge structures 
in the country to harness 185 B Cubic Metre (BCM) of water.The Master plan has been shared 
with States/UTs for suitable intervention 
vii. Ministry of Housing & Urban Aﬀairs (MoHUA) has formulated Model Building  Bye Laws 
(MBBL), 2016 for the States/UTs, wherein adequate focus has been  given on requirement of 
rainwater harvesting and water conservation measures. As per MBBL, all buildings having a plot 
size of 100 sq.m. or, more shall mandatorily include the complete proposal of rainwater harvesting. 
35 States/ UTs, including  Karnataka, have adopted the features of the Bye Laws. 
viii. Further, this Department implemented the PMKSY-Groundwater irrigation scheme till Mar 2023 
to utilize the surplus groundwater available in Safe assessment units (blocks/ Firkas / Mandals etc) 
for irrigation purposes. The extension of the scheme beyond 2023 is under active consideration. A 
committee in this regard under the chairmanship of Secretary (WR) comprising stake-holder 
Ministries/Departments/ Organisations and States is under formulation. 
(OM No. T-12019/3/2023/-GW Section-MOWR dated 19/6/2023) 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO.2 
Real time monitoring of Ground water resource 
The Committee note that at present manual monitoring of Ground water level is done four times a 
year and water quality s les are collected once a year to obtain background information of Ground 
water quality change on regional scale. They further note that Ground water monitoring networks 
are being enhanced by Central and State implementing agencies across the country for improving 
real time monitoring of Ground water, for which Digital Water Level Recorder (DWLR) along with 

23 
 
GPRS/GSM based Telemetry system are being installed at representative piezometer locations 
across the country under National Hydrology Project (NHP) to enable collection of data on six 
hourly basis, with transmission once a day. However, the installation of DWLR is expected to be 
completed by March, 2024. The Committee are of the view that though the current estimates of 
Ground water has enabled us to give a picture of overall situation in the country, it is, at times, not 
clearly representative of actual condition, since Ground water regime shows wide variation 
depending upon the type of aquifers and specific local conditions. Therefore, collection of data and 
dissemination on real time basis will greatly help in formulation of appropriate strategy and 
adoption of measures by both the Government and user communities, suitable to the local 
requirements. The Committee, would therefore, recommend the Department to upgrade the 
required number of piezometers with latest technology and equipments and ensure simultaneous 
availability of real time data in public domain at the earliest. 
                                                    REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
This Department has planned installation of around 31,000 DWLRs including telemetry system in 
the country by 2026 under NHP, GWMR and Aal Jal schemes. 
Under National Hydrology Project (NHP) around 16,200 hydro-network monitoring stations are 
being established by the Ministry to monitor ground water levels with GPRS/GPM based telemetric 
system in collaboration with States/UTs and CGWB. The digital water level recorder (DWLR) along 
with GPRS/GSM latest technology based  telemetric system with high frequency are being 
installed at representative piezometer locations or hydro-network monitoring stations across the 
country through States/UTs and CGWB to monitor ground water level on six hourly basis with 
transmission once in a day. The commissioning of all DWLR are under progress and is set to be 
completed by March,2024. CGWB, under NHP, has initiated the work for installation of 5,260 
DWLRs with telemetry system in the existing monitoring stations; 2,000 DWLRs in this regard have 
already been installed and balance DWLRs installation are in progress. 
In addition to above, CGWB has also been given approval for installation of 9,000 DWLRs with 
9,000 piezometers under the Ground Water Management and Regulation Scheme through Public 
Investment Board (PIB) mode for which the tenders are under processing/ ﬁnalization. Real time 
data from these DWLR locations would be transmitted to centralized database as well as State 
level data centres and shall be accessible to general public through India-WRIS web-site. Further, 
around 6,200 DWLRs are being installed in certain water stressed areas in identified States under 
Atal Bhujal Yojana. In addition, various State Governments have taken up installation of DWLRs 
under their funding arrangement. 
(OM No. T-12019/3/2023/-GW Section-MOWR dated 19/6/2023) 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO.3 
Depleting Ground water in Urban areas – Monitoring of land use pattern in cities 
The Committee note with utmost concern the findings of the pre monsoon 2020 analysis of 923 
wells in 51 urban areas of the country showing dip in water level by more than 40 metres in 61 

24 
 
wells (7%), water level in the depth range of 20-40 m Below Ground Level (BGL) in 159 wells 
(17%) and water level in the depth range of 10-20 m BGL in 208 wells (23%). They further note 
that water level in major cities such as Delhi, Kolkata, Hyderabad, Ahmedabad, Gwalior, 
Ludhiana, Amritsar, Faridabad, Chandigarh, Coimbatore, Vijaywada, Vishakhapatnam, 
Vadodara, Jaipur, Jodhpur, Allahabad, Ghaziabad, Kanpur, Agra, Lucknow, Meerut, Varanasi 
and Dehradun has gone down by more than 20 metres BGL. As per the submission of the 
Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs, reasons for the sharp drop in water level in the above 
cities are increasing population, urbanization, concretization (preventing water seepage in the 
ground and causing floods during rainy season) and lack of Surface water sources for drinking 
purposes. Increasing reliance on Ground water to meet water needs of the cities was reported 
by CGWB in the Report of the Ground Water Resource Estimation Committee, 2015 according to 
which 50% of urban water usage was sourced from Ground water. Use of Ground water has 
increased further in recent years as cities like Ludhiana, Amritsar and Faridabad are totally 
dependent on Ground water with 100 per cent of their water supply being met from Ground water 
sources. Cities like Ghaziabad and Dehradun are also on the verge of becoming totally 
Ground water dependent as 71% and 80% of their respective water needs are being met from 
Ground water. As brought out further in the recent assessment held in 2020, out of 67 urban 
assessment units, change has been observed only in 34 assessment units of  Delhi  where 
number of over Exploited category assessment units has come down from 20 to 17 while  showing  
an increase 5 assessment units in critical category. In this regard, the Committee find that in spite 
of well established fact that changing land use pattern in cities and metros with increasing 
concretization has reduced potential to recharge Ground water and pose serious threat of floods 
during rainy season, so far no study has been conducted/ initiated by either the MoHUA or CGWB 
regarding the extent of change in land use in cities and their repercussion on water balance. Since 
encroachment of river beds and catchment areas of water bodies in cities is a big threat to 
sustainable water management, the Committee recommend the Ministry of Jal Shakti to study this 
aspect and devise suitable measures with penal provisions in consultation with State Governments 
and MoHUA to prevent further encroachments. The Committee believe that a Central body, 
entrusted with Ground water management and governance, as recommended by them, can very 
effectively ensure regular monitoring so that local water bodies are preserved and Surface and 
Ground Water  resources are used harmoniously to meet growing water needs of expanding cities. 
The Committee would like to be appraised of the action taken in this regard within three months of 
presentation of this Report. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
CGWB has been entrusted with the responsibility of taking up the study in collaboration with 
Ministry of Housing & UA and submit a report in this regard. CGWB has taken up the studies in 
three cities viz. Ahmedabad, Guwahati and Bengaluru. 
(OM No. T-12019/3/2023/-GW Section-MOWR dated 19/6/2023) 
 

25 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO.4 
Early implementation of Projects under Atal Mission for Rejuvenation and Urban 
Transformation (AMRUT) 
The Committee appreciate that several measures with desirable objectives have been taken by 
the MoHUA to reduce dependence on Ground water in urban areas. However, in their view, 
implementation mechanism needs to be refurbished for achievement of desirable goals.  They find 
that Atal Mission for Rejuvenation and Urban Transformation (AMRUT), launched in 2015 in 500 
selected cities across the country envisaged development of basic urban infrastructure in the 
sectors of Water Supply; Sewerage & Septage Management; Storm Water Drainage; Non-
Motorised Public Transport and Permeable Green Spaces & Parks. However, the Mission is 
yet to complete and grounded projects are likely to be implemented by March 2023. Principal 
reasons for delay in accomplishment of Mission objectives are stated to be due to long gestation 
nature of water supply projects, monsoons and floods, delay in getting required clearances from 
other departments such as NHAI and Railways and national and local lockdowns imposed due to 
COVID-19 pandemic. Since, in view of the Committee, since majority of projects are still under 
implementation stage, no visible impact could be seen in water management in cities. From the 
submissions of the MoHUA, the Committee notice that besides 500 cities covered under AMRUT, 
there are other 3,878 ULBs approximately, which are in dire need of similar programme and are 
being covered under SBM(U). The Committee would therefore emphasise early implementation of 
water sector projects under AMRUT to realize the potential goal of judicious use of water in the 
cities and effective management of Ground water. They would further like to be apprised of the 
details of physical and financial progress of projects sanctioned under both AMRUT and SBM(U) 
along with targeted dates of their completion. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT  
AMRUT was launched on June 25, 2015, in 500 selected cities across the country covering around 
60% of the Urban Population. AMRUT focuses on development of basic urban infrastructure in the 
selected cities in the sectors of Water Supply, Sewerage & Septage Management, Storm Water 
Drainage, Non- Motorised Urban Transport, and Permeable Green Spaces &  Parks. 
In Water Supply sector, ULBs/State may take up projects related to 
new/augmentation/rehabilitation of water supply system; rejuvenation of water bodies for water 
supply and recharge of ground water etc. So far 1,342 projects worth Rs 42,760.91 crore have 
been grounded including 963 completed projects worth Rs 18,749.57 crore. Through these 
projects &  in convergence with other programmes, 137 lakh household water tap connections 
have been provided so far. Further, water treatment plants (WTP) worth 3,348 MLD capacity has 
been created &; another 3,385 MLD capacity of WTP are under development. 
To reduce contamination of water resources, State/UTs have taken up sewerage projects including 
that of Sewage Treatment Plants (STPs) under AMRUT. Against the approved plan size of Rs 
77,640 crore, a signiﬁcant amount of Rs 32,456 crore (~42%) has been allocated for sewerage & 

26 
 
septage management, Against the allocation, 859 projects have been grounded with worth Rs 
34,155 crore including 
542 completed projects worth Rs 13,405 crore. Through these projects in convergence with other 
programmes, 104 lakh sewar connections/septage coverage have been provided so far. 2,840 
MLD STP capacity created & ; another 3,468 MLD STP capacity is in progress. 
Further, 809 storm water drainage projects worth Rs 3,016 crore have been grounded of which 
691 projects worth Rs 1,426 crore have been completed, with 971 kms or drains constructed & ; 
2,959 water-logging points eliminated preventing urban ﬂooding. (Sector wise projects grounded &; 
completed in attached at (Annexure-V). In order to fast track, the implementation of AMRUT, the 
progress is periodically reviewed and monitored through regular video conferences, webinars, 
workshops etc. by MoH&;UA with the States/UTs &; their ULBs. There is a dedicated AMRUT 
portal for tracking the progress of projects. States are required to update data on the portal on 
regular basis. Mission Directorate is also providing hand holding support to the States and their 
cities from time to time to resolve issues and eliminate bottlenecks for timely completion of 
projects. This has also resulted in capacity building of States/UTBs and thus achieved signiﬁcant 
progress under the AMRUT Scheme. 
For assessment and monitoring of work done in the States, dedicated Independent Review and 
Monitoring Agencies (IRMA) have been setup in all the Mission States/ UTs. 
Similarly, the IRMA will do a half-yearly appraisal of reform implementation in the States. These is 
APEX committee at MoHUA which periodically conduct meetings to review/approve the projects 
under AMRUT and AMRUT 2.0 mission. 
AMRUT 2.0: 
To carry forward the momentum of AMRUT and saturate entire urban-scape having about 4,902 
statutory towns of the country, to ensure universal coverage of water supply & make 4,902 
statutory towns of the country, to ensure universal coverage of water supply & make cities ‘water 
secure’ AMRUT 2.0 was launched on 1st October 2021 for a period of ﬁve years. On-going 
AMRUT Mission-1.0 has been subsumed under AMRUT 2.0 So far, SWAPs have been approved 
by MoHUA comprising 6,527 projects worth Rs 1,29,636 crore (incl. O&M). These included water 
supply projects including water conservation, sewerage & septage management projects including 
recycle/reuse, water bodies rejuvenation & development of parks &  green spaces. So far, 2,996 
water supply projects worth Rs 87,896 crore, 447 Sewerage/Septage Management projects worth 
Rs37,636 crore & 982 Parks/ Green Spaces Development projects worth Rs 439 crore have been 
approved by Apex Committee at MOH&UA. 148 lakh new tap connections and 33.42 lakh new 
sewer connections are planned to be provided through these projects. Further, 8,435 MLD water 
treatment plant capacity & 2,795 MLD sewage treatment plant capacity is proposed to be 
added/augmented. To give impetus to ‘Amrit Sarovar’, under Azadi ka Amrit Mahotsav and to 
connect citizens to connect to water bodies around them, projects on rejuvenation of water bodies 
have been taken up under AMRUT 2.0 in a special tranche. So far, 2,102 water bodies 
rejuvenation projects worth Rs 3,664 crore have been approved covering area of 205 sq. km. 

27 
 
AMRUT 2.0 is a paperless Mission and monitored on a robust technology-based monitoring & 
evaluation platform. The achievement of Mission objectives will be monitored through an online 
module. This module will directly be the precursor for availing funds. The progress reported on 
portal will be randomly veriﬁed through citizen/third party feedback, implementing agencies and 
community stakeholders who are required to access the portal and upload the progress and 
feedback. 
(OM No. T-12019/3/2023/-GW Section-MOWR dated 19/6/2023) 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO.5 
 
Need for effective strategies to deal with the climate change implications on water 
balance 
 
The Committee observe that changing global climate with rise in temperature has serious 
implications on water availability due to associated spurt in natural calamities such as floods and 
droughts. Combined with rising population and urbanization, extreme climate events have already 
started having serious repercussion on water balance in the form of excessive rainfall within a 
short span of time causing floods and increasing runoff without enough water getting seeped into 
the ground causing fall in the water table beneath ground. Long spells of summer with rising 
temperature, on the other hand, leaves the land parched without enough water storage in the 
face of disappearing water bodies due to human encroachments. Another big threat looming 
large is the problem of melting Himalayan glaciers causing havoc in the form of heavy floods and 
landslides. In the face of such challenges, the Committee are apprehensive that the measures 
taken so far to deal with this problem may not be adequate. They find that it took almost 9 years 
for the Ministry to set up full fledged National Water Mission in 2020, which is still not well 
equipped with adequate funds and autonomy. The Mission still needs expertise as consultants 
and advisors are yet to be appointed in the NWM. Further, adequate studies are required to be 
undertaken to assess the impact of climate change on the total water availability to enable 
formulation of appropriate policies to handle their effects. The Committee would, therefore, 
recommend the Government to give required financial powers and autonomy to the Mission to 
enable it to fulfill their objective under National Action Plan on Climate Change. They also desire 
that NWM should be entrusted with the task of taking all the Ministries/Departments, State 
Governments on board for devising strategies for water management in a cohesive manner. 
They also recommend the Department to initiate a study to evaluate the role of climate change in 
aggravating the water scarcity and required changes in strategies to reduce their effects. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 National Action Plan on Climate Change (NAPCC) was approved by the Government of India and 
released by the Hon’ble Prime Minister of India on 30th June,2008. NAPCC laid down the 
principles and identiﬁed the approaches to be adopted to meet the challenges of the impact of 
climate change through institutionalization of 8 national missions, one of which was the “National 

28 
 
Water Mission” Functioning of National Water Mission has picked after the appointment of a full 
time Additional Secretary level Mission Director in 2019. Presently, apart from the Mission 
Director, Technical Advisor and oﬃcers have been posted including 5 Consultants/ Young 
Professionals and 2 Senior Software Developers have been appointed on contract basis.These 
human resources have contributed to the greater pace of activities. Further, process for 
engagement of more Consultants & ; Young Professionals is also going on. 
It is also informed that the Year-on-Year (YoY) budget of NWM has been increasing consistently 
commensurate to the rise in activities taken up by this Mission. A task force has been constituted 
to prepare the framework for implementation of the Bureau of Water Use Eﬃciency (BWUE). The 
task force will prepare a Vision Document with timelines for short & ; long term goals to fulﬁl the 
mandate of BWUE. In respect of recommendation to initiate a study to evaluate the role of climate 
change in aggravating the water scarcity, Research & Development (R&D) Division under the 
NWM has undertaken various studies to gauge the impact of the climate change on water. The 
status of research schemes on climate change funded under Research & ; Development Scheme 
of DoWR, RD & GR is at Annexure-VI. 
In order to bring focus on water management with active participation of concerned  Central 
Ministries/Departments and State Governments, National Water Mission has organized the 1st 
ever All India Annual State Ministers’ Conference on Water at Bhopal on 5-6th January, 2023. The 
primary objective of the workshop was to seek and strengthen the partnership with the States and 
stakeholder Ministries and to achieve a shared vision in order to manage water as a precious 
resource in an integrated manner with holistic and inter disciplinary approach to water related 
issues. A total of 300+ delegates from 33 States/UTs participated in the Conference and 22 key 
recommendations emerged out of the conference. A task- force has been constituted under the 
chairpersonship of Special Secretary, DoWR, RD & GR for formulating an integrated and 
comprehensive strategy for implementation of the recommendations made during the above said 
conference. 
Further, for climate change adaptation the Government is promoting augmentation of water 
resources through eﬀective rainwater harvesting, strengthening/ rehabilitating the existing dams 
and taking demand side management like use of micro-irrigation techniques, mulching, crop 
rotation/ diversiﬁcation etc. In addition, the Government has also passed Dam Safety Act in the 
Parliament, which shall help in ensuring utility and safety of reservoirs in view of extreme climatic 
conditions. Further, the NWM has initiated some of the important steps/strategies to help address 
the adverse eﬀects of climate change on water resources and to promote sustainable water 
management. The other key initiatives undertaken by the NWM in the recent years are as follows: 
(i) “Jal Shakti Abhiyan: Catch the Rain” c aign - Government of India is implementing Jal Shakti 
Abhiyan (JSA) in the country. First JSA was launched in 2019 in water stressed blocks of 256 
districts which continued during the year 2021 (across entire country both rural and urban areas) 
also with the primary aim to eﬀectively harvest the monsoon rainfall through creation of artiﬁcial 
recharge structures, watershed management, recharge and reuse structures, intensive 
aﬀorestation and awareness generation etc. JSA for the year 2021 and 2022 were launched by 
Hon’ble Prime Minister and Hon’ble President on 22.03.2021 and 29.03.2022 respectively. 
Further, the JSA for the year 2023 has been launched by hon’ble President of India on 04th Mar 

29 
 
2023 with the theme ;Source Sustainability for Drinking Water The Abhiyan this year will have 
special focus on 150 Water Stressed Districts (WSDs) of the country, identified by Jal Jeevan 
Mission. 
(ii) Setting up of Bureau of Water Use Efficiency (BWUE)To achieve the target of one of the goals 
of NWM i.e. improvement in WUE by 20%, a dedicated organization has been set up as Bureau of 
Water use Eﬃciency (BWUE) under National Water Mission during October, 2022 to work on 
mission mode. BWUE will act as a facilitator for promotion of improving water use eﬃciency 
across various sectors namely irrigation, drinking water supply, power generation, industries, etc. 
in the country, for promotion, regulation and control of eﬃcient use of water in irrigation, industrial 
and domestic sectors. 
(iii) Water Talks: A monthly ‘WATER TALK’ lecture series is an important activity undertaken by 
NWM with the aim to stimulate awareness, thinking, build capacities of stakeholders and 
encourage people to become active participants sustains life by saving water on earth. ‘WATER 
TALK’, the lecture series, wherein leading water experts are invited to present inspiring and 
broadening perspectives on current water issues in the country. NWM has organized ‘Water-
Talks’ on the range of topics dominating the sector. So far, 46 Water Talks have been held. 
(iv) Dialogue series with District Collectors/ District Magistrates/Commissioners A weekly dialogue 
series on “Catch the Rain” has also been started in which Collectors/District Magistrates/ 
Commissioners and water activists have been invited to share their commendable work in their 
districts to address water related issues. So far, 38 such webinars have been organized.    
 
(OM No. T-12019/3/2023/-GW Section-MOWR dated 19/6/2023) 
         
RECOMMENDATION NO. 6 
 
Excessive use of Ground water in irrigation 
 
The Committee notice that over extraction of Ground water for meeting irrigation needs is 
prevalent mainly in Northern States, particularly in Punjab, Haryana and Rajasthan which are 
extracting 97%, 90% and 86% of Ground water respectively for this purpose. Other States such 
as Karnataka, Tamil Nadu and Uttar Pradesh are also significant users of Ground water for 
irrigation as they are using approximately 89%, 92% and 90% respectively of their total Ground 
water extraction for agricultural purposes. They further note that percentage share of Ground 
water extraction for irrigation with respect to total Ground water extraction for all uses in 11 major 
States of Punjab, Haryana, Uttar Pradesh, Rajasthan, Gujarat, Maharashtra, Madhya Pradesh, 
Tamil Nadu, Karnataka, Andhra Pradesh and Telengana varies between 80% to 90% or more 
than 90%. Main reason for such over exploitation of Ground water is due to wide cultivation of 
water guzzler paddy and sugarcane crops which are heavily incentivized by way of highly 
subsidized pricing of water, power, fertilizers on one hand and assured markets for their outputs 
through procurement of rice in Punjab-Haryana belt and of sugarcane by sugar factories at 
Government determined prices. However, this has aggravated the problem and encouraged 

30 
 
inefficient agricultural practices with low water use efficiency in rice cultivation which is 1000 
mm to 1200 mm in India as against 550 mm to 650 mm in Asia where China, India, 
Indonesia, Bangladesh and Vietnam are major producers. Similarly in case of Sugarcane, 
it is 1800 mm to 2400 mm in India vis a vis 1059 mm to 1640 mm in Brazil which is a 
major producer of sugarcane crop. While there is an urgent need to address the overuse 
of Ground water in agriculture, the Committee find that prevalence of a large number of 
Ground water abstraction structures of around 20.46 million in agriculture of which 
87.86% of wells (as per minor irrigation census of 2013-14) are owned by marginal, small 
and semi-medium farmers, primarily growing food for their own sustenance, gives little 
scope for outright stopping of Ground water use in agriculture. However, they note that in 
accordance with CGWA Guidelines, Punjab and Haryana have come up with innovative 
schemes such as ‘Pani Bachao Paisa Kamao’ and ‘Jal Hi Jeevan/Mera Pani Meri Virasat’ 
etc. respectively to motivate farmers towards water conservation. The Committee further 
notice that DA&FW has taken a litany of measures to reduce Ground water consumption 
in agriculture, such as:PMKSY-Per Drop More Crop (PDMC), Mission for Integrated 
Development of Horticulture (MIDH), Cultivation of pulses and coarse cereals under 
National Food Security Mission (NFSM) and oilseeds under National Mission on 
Oilseeds and Oil Palm (NMOOP),latest crop production and protection techniques like 
System of Rice Intensification (SRI), Direct Seeded Rice (DSR), line Transplanting, 
stress/drought tolerant/ climate resilient varieties, bio-fortified varieties, Integrated 
Nutrient Management (INM),Integrated Pest Management (IPM) techniques, Crop 
Diversification Programme (CDP) is being implemented in original Green Revolution 
States of Punjab, Haryana and Western Uttar Pradesh to diversify cropping pattern away 
from water guzzling paddy However, the progress made in terms of bringing down the 
Ground water use is minimal. While accepting Ministry’s submission that participation, 
involving consultations with farmers and other stakeholders through a bottom up 
approach instead of ‘Command and Control Strategy’ will be a better strategy in dealing 
with the problem of Ground water depletion in agriculture, the Committee do not concur 
with the Ministry’s contention that it is only the responsibility of concerned State 
Departments (Agriculture/ Irrigation/ Water Resources) to undertake suitable demand and 
supply side measures to ensure sustainability of Ground water sources. Keeping in view 
the pivotal role of the Central Ministry and the need for a congruent approach in policy 
measures, the Committee recommend that a Central body (with representation from 
concerned Ministries and State Governments), as recommended by them earlier, should 
be entrusted with the responsibility to implement measures in a cohesive manner to wean 
away farmers from water intensive crops in areas with severe Ground water shortage and 
incentivize them in areas which have enough Ground water recharge with adequate 
annual replenishment to ensure sustainable use of Ground water. Further mass 
sensitisation at local level needs to be encouraged to ensure active community 
participation in decision making process at each level for better implementation of 
agricultural practices in accordance with water conservation measures. The Committee 
therefore, recommend, devising integrated measures for adoption in agriculture, to reduce 
dependence on Ground water in agriculture. 

31 
 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
A committee in this regard under the chairmanship of Secretary (WR) comprising  stake-
holder Ministries/Departments/Organisations and States is under formulation Atal Bhujal 
Yojana, a Central Sector Scheme with an outlay of Rs 6,000 crore (being implemented in 
certain water stressed areas of 7 States viz. Uttar Pradesh, Haryana, Rajasthan, Gujarat, 
Maharashtra, Madhya Pradesh and Karnataka) is targeted at sustainable ground water 
management, mainly through strengthening of the capacity of States to manage their 
ground water on the one hand, while improving ground water  management with 
community participation through convergence of various on-going schemes on the other. 
The scheme lays emphasis on reducing demand of ground water for various uses through 
appropriate means. Through wide-ranging awareness creation and capacity building 
initiatives, it also envisages to bring about behavioural changes in the long run towards 
more responsible use of ground water among various stakeholders. 
Under Atal Bhujal Yojana, adoption of practices for eﬃcient water use is one of 5 
Disbursement Linked Indicators used to measure the progress made. This indicator 
incentivizes demand side measures that reduce water consumption. The fund allocated 
under this incentive is around 31% (Rs. 1,840 crore) of the total cost of the scheme. 
Micro-irrigation practices such as drip/sprinkler systems, crop diversiﬁcation from high 
water consuming crops to low water consuming crops, piped distribution network and 
other water saving techniques in irrigation are encouraged in the scheme. A target to bring 
4.5 lakh hectares of area under eﬃcient water use practices has been set to be achieved 
by 2025 under this scheme. Atal Bhujal Yojana lays emphasis on behavioural change for 
taking up demand side interventions. 
Further, groundwater regulation guidelines dated 24 Sep 2020 (with pan India 
applicability) advises States/UTs for crop rotation/ diversiﬁcation, review of 
free/subsidized electricity policy and also to bring suitable water pricing policy to reduce 
over-use of groundwater in agriculture sector. 
(OM No. T-12019/3/2023/-GW Section-MOWR dated 19/6/2023) 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO.7 
 
Need for shift in focus from ‘land productivity’ to ‘water productivity’ 
 
The Committee find that while there is an acceptance for the need to reduce water consumption in 
agriculture by discouraging unsuitable crops and change in cropping pattern, the commitment 
towards the same goal is yet not firm as reflected by continued cultivation of water intensive 
crops in water scarce areas. Therefore, they are of the view that there is an urgent need for a 
shift in policy stance encompassing changes, ranging from suitable cropping pattern, restricting 
free electricity, modification of incentive structure for crop production, spreading awareness 

32 
 
among farmers to reduce use of Ground water in irrigation and subsidizing micro irrigation 
methods etc. to realize the objective of judicious use of water resource which is becoming scarce 
day by day. The Committee, would therefore, recommend the Ministry of Jal Shakti   to work out 
a policy to ensure judicious water use not only to reduce dependence on Ground water but to 
reduce its footprint in agriculture. In this regard, the Committee would like to emphasise that in 
addition to land productivity, water productivity i.e. production per cubic meter of water should 
be a major criteria in decisions relating to crop production. They therefore recommend the 
DoWR, RD & GR to engage with the DA&FW and emphasise this point to enable formulation of 
appropriate policy decisions relating to crop production in the country. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
Department of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare (DA&FW) is implementing National Food Security 
Mission (NFSM) in the country to enhance production & productivity of food grains. The following 
initiatives have been taken under NFSM to promote less water requiring crops and judicious use 
of water Fund allocation for water intensive crop viz., rice, sugarcane and wheat has been 
restricted to less than 10% of the total allocation whereas allocation towards rain fed crops viz., 
Pulses and Nutri – cereals has been kept at 85%. Demonstrations based on improved water 
saving cropping system such as System of Rice Intensification (SRI), Direct Seeded Rice (DSR), 
climate resilient varieties are already being promoted under NFSM. 
Further, DA&FW is implementing Per Drop More Crop (PDMC) Scheme which is operational from 
2015-16 in the Country. PDMC focuses on water use eﬃciency at farm level through micro 
irrigation, mainly drip and sprinkler irrigation system. In addition, under Atal Bhujal Yojana, the 
focus is on demand side management of the ground water and accordingly water saving 
interventions such as use of micro irrigation (drip/sprinkler system), shifting of cropping pattern 
from high water intensive crops to low water intensive crops, use of pipe in irrigation to reduce 
losses, mulching etc. are being encouraged and incentivised. The National level Steering 
Committee headed by Secretary, DoWR, RD & GR for reviewing implementation of Atal Bhujal 
Yojana has diﬀerent Central Line Ministries as members including D/o Agriculture & FW and 
eﬀorts are being made to converge the activities of various Departments in order to utilize water 
efficiently. 
(OM No. T-12019/3/2023/-GW Section-MOWR dated 19/6/2023) 
 
RECOMMENDATION  No. 9 
 
Opening the market for supply of drip irrigation machinery and need for                                                                                                                              
further reduction in GST 
 
The Committee notice that small and marginal farmers face a lot of problems such as need for high 
initial investment, lack of water storage, pumps and pipes, lack of awareness of the benefit and 
incentives of the micro-irrigation system, quality and after sales service of equipment, etc. in 
respect of installation of Drip and Sprinkler Irrigation system. The DA&FW has taken several 

33 
 
initiatives to address these problems which include: 
Financial assistance @ 55% for small and marginal farmers and @ 45% for other farmers for 
installation of Drip and Sprinkler Irrigation systems  
ii) 25% higher unit cost have been taken into calculation of subsidy for the North Eastern and 
Himalayan States and 15% higher for States with low penetration of Micro Irrigation for larger 
adoption of systems by the farmers   
iii) Setting up of a dedicated Micro Irrigation Fund (MIF) with NABARD with objective to 
facilitate the States in mobilising the resources 
iv) Micro level water storage or water conservation/management activities under PDMC 
scheme to ensure water supply 
v) Publicity campaigns through press, print and digital media, publication of leaflets/booklets, 
organization of workshops, exhibitions, farmer fairs, information on State/Government of India web 
portals  
vi Imparting of training to farmers by ICAR 
vii Supply of only BIS marked systems/components with free after sales service to the 
beneficiary for a period of at least three years from the date of installation of the system with 
provision of penalty including de- registration with the approval of SLSC are provided. 
Further the Committee note that GST rate on Micro irrigation equipments currently stands at 12%. 
While applauding the steps taken by the DA&FW to incentivize micro irrigation techniques, the 
Committee feel that existing system of supply of drip irrigation equipments by only registered 
companies have limited the access to good quality equipments, thereby discouraging farmers to 
adopt drip irrigation. They are of the opinion that micro irrigation techniques can be widely 
practiced if all companies engaged in manufacturing drip irrigation equipments are made 
eligible and given subsidy to supply equipments, as it would infuse competitive spirit and 
encourage supply of better equipments to farmers. They, therefore, recommend the DoWR, RD 
& GR to impress upon the Department of Agriculture & Farmers’ Welfare, the need for opening 
the market for supply of subsidized micro irrigation equipments in order to propagate micro 
irrigation techniques which would help save water. Further, they would also urge the 
Department to take up the matter of further reducing GST levels on drip and sprinkler equipments 
with the Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers’ Welfare as a further incentive to increase micro 
irrigation. 
REPLY BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
DA&FW is implementing Per Drop More Crop Scheme. As per the scheme Guidelines, only BIS 
marked equipment is allowed for availing subsidy so that farmers get quality equipment. Further, 
farmers are free to choose any equipment supplier which is empanelled by State Govt. and the 
empanelment of equipment suppliers is open round the year to facilitate the farmers in availing 
competitive services. Besides, GST on micro-irrigation (MI) equipment was 18% earlier. With 
constant follow up and persuasion by Ministry of Agriculture &  Farmers Welfare, this has been 
brought down to 12% by GST Council. 
(OM No. T-12019/3/2023/-GW Section-MOWR dated 19/6/2023) 

34 
 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 10 
 
Power supply in agriculture 
 
The Committee note that as per the provisions of Electricity Act 2003, respective State Electricity 
Regulatory Commissions (SERCs) determine the electricity tariff for retail supply of electricity to 
end consumers including Agricultural consumers. Section 65 of the Electricity Act, 2003 
provides that State Government can provide subsidy to any class of consumers in the tariff 
determined by the SERCs. States like Punjab, Haryana, Telangana and Tamil Nadu offer 
completely free power, while other States have provision for collection of token charges. They 
further observe that while accepting the fact that subsidized electricity provided by State 
Governments has led to the over-extraction of Ground water as farmers use it extensively to 
run pumps that draw up Ground water and restricting free electricity to the farmers will certainly 
reduce the misuse of Ground water, both the DoWR, RD & GR and DA &FW   have expressed 
inability to persuade States to reduce/stop subsidy for power given in agriculture as Electricity is a 
concurrent subject and SERCs determine the electricity tariff for retail supply of electricity to end 
consumers under the extant provisions of Electricity Act, 2003. The Committee however note 
that Punjab introduced a scheme by way of which farmers were refunded money if they consumed 
less electricity. They further note that under Deendayal Upadhyay Gram Jyoti Yojana of Ministry 
of Power, separate component of agriculture and non-agriculture feeders have been created 
for facilitating judicious rostering of supply to agriculture & non- agriculture consumers in 
rural areas. However Ground water continues to be used excessively for catering to irrigation 
demands. Therefore, the Committee are of the view that use of electric pumps need to be further 
discouraged by way of devising such measures as introduction of pre-paid cards for power supply, 
restricting it for a few hours in the day, etc. They, therefore, recommend DoWR, RD & GR to take 
initiative by urging both the Ministry of Power and DA & FW along with State Governments to 
take steps on the suggested lines and apprise them about the details of action taken in this 
regard. 
 
REPLY BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Ministry of Power vide Resolution dated 28th January 2016 notiﬁed the Tariﬀ Policy which 
stipulates that the Central Electricity Regulatory Commission and State Regulatory Commissions 
(SERCs) are to be guided by the provisions of the said Tariﬀ Policy while discharging their 
functions including framing the regulations. Para 8.3 of the Tariﬀ Policy clearly bring out that 
rational and economic pricing of electricity can be one of the major tools for energy conservation 
and sustainable use of groundwater resources. It states that while ﬁxing tariﬀ for agricultural use, 
the imperatives of the need of using ground water resources in a sustainable manner would also 
need to be kept in mind in addition to the average cost of supply. Tariﬀ for agricultural use may be 
set at diﬀerent levels for diﬀerent parts of a State depending on the condition of the ground water 
table to prevent excessive depletion of ground water. It further states that a higher level of subsidy 
could be considered to support poorer farmers of the region where adverse ground water table 

35 
 
condition requires larger quantity of electricity for irrigation purposes subject to suitable restrictions 
to ensure maintenance of ground water levels and sustainable groundwater usage. It clearly 
states that extent of subsidy for diﬀerent categories of consumers can be decided by the State 
Government keeping in view various relevant aspects, but provision of free electricity is not 
desirable as it encourages wasteful consumption of electricity. Besides in most cases, lowering of 
water table in turn creating avoidable problem of water shortage for irrigation and drinking water 
for later generations. The subsidized rates of electricity should be permitted only up to a pre-
identiﬁed level of consumption beyond which tariﬀs reﬂecting eﬃcient cost of service should be 
charged from consumers. It suggests that if the State Government wish to reimburse part of cost 
of electricity to poor category of consumers the amount can be paid in cash or any other suitable 
way. Use of prepaid meters has also been suggested which can facilitate the transfer of subsidy 
to poor consumers. This Department has issued the groundwater guidelines dated 24 Sep 2020 
with pan India applicability which advises States to review the policy to free/subsidised electricity 
to farmers Matter is being pursued further with States/UTs to implement the provisions of Tariff 
Policy 2016 for better groundwater management for benefits to all. 
(OM No. T-12019/3/2023/-GW Section-MOWR dated 19/6/2023) 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO.11 
 
Pradhan Mantri Kisan Urja Suraksha evam Utthaan Mahabhiyan (PM-KUSUM) 
 
The Committee note that with a view to increase farmers’ income, provide them with reliable 
source for irrigation and de-dieselise the farm sector, Pradhan Mantri Kisan Urja Suraksha evam 
Utthaan Mahabhiyan (PM- KUSUM) Scheme was launched. However, solar pumps under the 
scheme are preferably being provided in areas where micro irrigation is practiced. While 
encouraging solar pumps for micro irrigation in water scarce areas will help economic use of 
water, the Committee think that this policy may not be appropriate for areas with high water table 
since installation of solar pumps will facilitate extraction of water and use for cultivation of water 
intensive crops, which would, in turn, help in mitigating the intensity of floods. Therefore, in their 
view, the existing policy of encouraging installation of solar pumps only in areas practicing 
micro irrigation needs to be redesigned to promote use of solar pumps for drawal of water in 
water surplus areas as well without necessarily linking it to installation of micro irrigation 
methods. The Committee, therefore, recommend the DoWR, RD & GR to impress upon the 
need for revisiting the policy in this respect in consultation with the DA & FW and the Ministry of 
New and Renewable Energy and incentivize micro irrigation only in water stressed areas and 
delink use of solar pumps. They would like to be apprised of the action taken in this regard. 
 
REPLY BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
The primary objective of Component-B of PM KUSUM, under which stand- alone solar pumps are 
installed, is to de-dieselize agriculture sector by replacing existing diesel pumps with solar pumps. 
Farmers are already using diesel pumps of high capacity in arid/semi-arid areas. Diesel pumps not 

36 
 
only result in increased air pollution but are also one of the key reasons of over exploitation of the 
water resources. Monitoring and regulation of water resources is governed by the Central Ground 
Water Board (CGWB). As per the scheme, new pumps are not going to be installed in dark/ over-
exploited areas notiﬁed by CGWB. In such areas only existing standalone diesel pumps, can be 
converted into standalone solar pumps provided they use micro irrigation techniques to save 
water. Under PM KUSUM Component B, individual farmers will be supported to install standalone 
solar agriculture pumps of capacity up to 7.5 HP for replacement of existing diesel agriculture 
pumps / irrigation systems in oﬀ-grid areas, where grid supply is not available. Installation of new 
pumps shall also be permitted under this scheme except in dark zone areas. New solar agriculture 
pumps would not be covered under this component in dark zones/black zones. However, existing 
standalone diesel pumps, can be converted into standalone solar pumps in these areas provided 
they use micro irrigation techniques to save water. The size of pump would be scientiﬁcally 
selected on the basis of water table in the area, land covered and quantity of water required for 
irrigation. 
The criteria of prioritizing installation of solar pumps in micro irrigation covered area is to ensure 
that over drawal of water doesn’t take place in water stressed areas. This condition of 
necessitating micro irrigation with solar pumps exists only in the dark zone/over- exploited areas to 
avoid rapid depletion of already stressed aquifers. However, in other areas, there is no necessary 
requirement of micro irrigation. The solar pumps are promoted in water surplus areas and farmers 
are free to install solar pumps without micro irrigation systems. 
Further, various initiatives are being taken up for linking of solar water pumps under PM- KUSUM 
with MI under Per Drop More Crop for ensuring enhanced water use efficiency through micro 
irrigation system. 
(OM No. T-12019/3/2023/-GW Section-MOWR dated 19/6/2023) 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO.12 
 
Need for encouraging cultivation of crops in accordance with existing                                                                                                                              
climatic conditions 
 
The Committee observe the NABARD’s finding that growing paddy and sugarcane is still preferred 
in States with Ground water scarcity which consumes 60 per cent of irrigation water in the country 
since these are lucrative crops due to high Minimum Support Price given by the Government. 
The policy of encouraging production of these crops till now, though, assured food security 
post Green Revolution, caused serious depletion of Ground water reserve as it continued despite 
fulfillment of objectives of Green Revolution. Now, the grim water situation in the States of 
Punjab, Haryana and Western Uttar Pradesh has urgently necessitated shifting of crops from 
high water intensive crops to low water intensive crops. Though several steps such as 
introduction of Direct Seeded Rice (DSR) and System of Rice Intensification (SRI) for judicious 
use of water in paddy cultivation, alternative crops demonstrations in an area of 5,01,257 hectare 
over the years from 2013-14 to 2019-20 and adoption of schemes like Mera Pani Meri Virasat in 

37 
 
Haryana, etc. have been taken to diversify crop production and cultivation of alternative crops 
with low water intake, farmers are yet to be properly discouraged from growing these crops as 
they continue to enjoy high MSP on these crops. The Committee would, therefore recommend 
the DoWR, RD & GR to engage more actively with the DA&FW and State Governments for  
taking appropriate steps for growing less water consuming crops especially in the Northern 
States where depleting Ground water has assumed alarming proportions.      
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Department of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare (DA&FW) is implementing the Crop Diversiﬁcation 
Programme (CDP) under Rashtriya Krishi Vikas Yojana (RKVY) scheme in the original green 
revolution States Haryana, Punjab & ; Western Uttar Pradesh since 2013-14 to divert the area of 
water intensive paddy crop to alternative crops, which require less water such as pulses, oilseeds, 
coarse cereals, nutri-cereals, cotton etc. The aim of the programme is to demonstrate and promote 
improved production technologies of alternate crops for diversion of paddy cultivation and to 
restore soil fertility through cultivation of leguminous crops that generate heavy biomass and 
consume lesser nutrients. 
Under CDP, assistance is given for alternative crops demonstration, farm mechanization and value 
addition, site speciﬁc activities and contingency for awareness and capacity building. The 
allocation of Rs. 85 crore as Central Share for Original Green Revolution States has been made 
for implementation of the programme during 2023-24. 
Besides, this Department is taking various other initiatives viz. Mission for Integrated Development 
of Horticulture (MIDH), National Food Security Mission (NFSM), Millets (Shree Anna) promotion 
activities, organic farming, promotion, etc with view to promote crop diversification. 
(OM No. T-12019/3/2023/-GW Section-MOWR dated 19/6/2023) 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO.13 
 
Ground water use in industries 
 
The Committee notice that CGWA grants NOC/renews NOC for Ground water withdrawal for 
commercial purposes, after ensuring that recharge is done as per the quantity of Ground water 
drawn and stage of their development. Further, as per the direction of Hon’ble NGT vide OA no. 
176/2015 dated 11.09.2019, any industry drawing Ground water illegally is liable to pay 
Environmental Compensation to the respective State Pollution Control Boards. Also, CGWA, in 
their latest Guidelines issued in September 2020, has fixed Environmental compensation for 
Ground water withdrawal by industries, infrastructure units and mining projects without a valid 
NOC from appropriate authority. Environmental Compensation Rate (ECRGW) has been based on 
the approved norms prescribed by CPCB. In addition, deterrent factor has also been introduced 
to compensate for the losses and environmental damages, based on the duration of illegal 
Ground water extraction. However, the Committee are surprised to note that a large number of 
industries are operating without taking the NOCs due to a lack of mandatory linkage between 

38 
 
the SPCBs/PCCs and CGWA, as pointed out by CAG. They further notice that though CGWA had 
imposed penalty of Rs. one lakh/industry under Section 15 of the Environment (Protection) Act 
1986 for non-compliance of NOC conditions on 20 Industries, only 5 industries/companies have 
paid Environmental      Compensation   to  CGWA/ District Magistrate. Also no compensation 
has been  paid to projects using Ground water are issued Consent to establish and Consent 
to operate only after NOC is issued by CGWA. Further, vigilance capacity and inspections should 
be enhanced to ensure compliance with stipulated provisions which can act as an effective 
deterrent against misuse of Ground water. Keeping in view the fact that recycle and reuse of 
water is an essential CPCB/SPCBs as directed by NGT in their 11.9.2019 order. They also find 
that out of the 21 packaged drinking water units, located in 6 States, which were studied by 
CPCB, only 4 have obtained NOC from CGWA for abstraction of Ground water resources for 
manufacturing package drinking water. Further, only 10 out of 21 units have obtained Consent 
under Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1974 from respective State Pollution 
Control Boards. While the regulations are in place to ensure that Ground water is not extracted 
without adequate measures for recharge, the lack of effective implementation and supervision has 
made the regulations toothless. The Committee are, therefore, of the view that to stop unrestricted 
use of Ground water for commercial uses, strict enforcement of the Regulations/Guidelines is 
required along with stringent vigil and appropriate penalties. They, therefore, recommend the 
CGWA and CPCB to work in unison so that aspect in bringing down the water use, the 
Committee would like to be apprised of the details of total quantity of recycled/reused water used 
by different categories of industries in the country along with total number of industries flouting 
these norms and measures taken to remedy the situation. 
 
REPLY BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Central Ground Water Authority (CGWA) was constituted under sub- section (3) of section 3 of the 
Environment (Protection) Act, 1986 for the purposes of regulation and control of ground water 
management and development and has been regulating ground water development and 
management by way of issuing “No Objection certiﬁcate (NOC)” for ground water extraction to 
industries or infrastructure projects or mining projects etc. and framed guidelines in this 
connection from time to time in 19 States &UTs, where ground water development is not being 
regulated by the State Government,UT administration concerned. 
Ministry of Jal Shakti, CGWA notiﬁcation dated 20.09.2020 has empowered 
DistrictCollectors/Deputy Commissioners (DCs) /District Magistrates (DMs) to take enforcement 
measures like sealing of unauthorized ground water abstraction structures, disconnection of 
electricity, launching of prosecution against those violating the No Objection Certiﬁcate conditions 
and taking action for imposition of environmental compensation. 
It is further submitted that some of the SPCBs/PCCs are issuing Consent to 
Establishment/Operate to the industry after verifying the NOC issued by CGWA. Also, some 
SPCBs are issuing consent to establishment / operate with a condition to obtain NOC from 
CGWA/SGWA. Further, CPCB has intimated that they are not maintaining the details of total 
quantity of effluent generated / treated / recycled and reused by different categories of industries. 

39 
 
However, CPCB monitors the compliance of 17 categories highly polluting industries, common 
facilities etc., on real time basis through Online Continuous Eﬄuent Monitoring Systems (OCEMS) 
and in case of exceedance to standards, SMS alerts are generated and sent to industries and 
SPCBs/PCCs for appropriate follow-up action for the compliance of discharge norms. 
(OM No. T-12019/3/2023/-GW Section-MOWR dated 19/6/2023) 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO.14 
 
Collection of data on Ground water pollution and contamination 
 
The Committee notice that Ground water contamination occurs through both natural and 
anthropogenic sources. Contamination through various sources such as salinity, fluoride, nitrate, 
arsenic, iron, etc. have been reported from a large number of partly affected districts in Assam, 
Bihar, Karanataka, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Punjab, Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu, Odisha and 
Uttar Pradesh with other remaining States also having a few affected districts. Central Ground 
Water Board (CGWB) is monitoring Ground water levels through a network of 22,730 observation 
wells, four times a year and the information is disseminated to the concerned State agencies in 
the form of reports and maps. Ground water quality is also monitored by CGWB at regional 
level once every year through their network of about 15000 observation wells located all over the 
country. Further Ground water management studies, Ground water exploration, Industrial/ 
pollution cluster studies, etc. is also undertaken to find out the extent of contamination. However, 
they note that CPCB along with SPCBs and PCCs, also monitors Ground water quality at 1231 
locations throughout the country under National Water Quality Monitoring Programme (NWMP) 
except Andaman & Nicobar Islands, Arunachal Pradesh and Sikkim on a half yearly frequency. 
Under NWMP, Ground water quality monitoring stations are selected considering the criteria 
such as Drinking water sources located in sanitary conditions and prone to sewage contamination, 
preferably in shallow aquifer in the vicinity of septic tanks; sewage treatment plant; oxidation 
pond, cess pools, garbage dump sites, tube-wells, hand pumps or dug-wells located in industrial 
areas prone to contamination and are in use as well as Ground water sources in residential areas. 
The Committee are not able to comprehend the rationale for collection of data on Ground water 
pollution and contamination 
The Committee notice that Ground water contamination occurs through both natural and 
anthropogenic sources. Contamination through various sources such as salinity, fluoride, nitrate, 
arsenic, iron, etc. have been reported from a large number of partly affected districts in Assam, 
Bihar, Karanataka, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Punjab, Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu, Odisha and 
Uttar Pradesh with other remaining States also having a few affected districts. Central Ground 
Water Board (CGWB) is monitoring Ground water levels through a network of 22,730 observation 
wells, four times a year and the information is disseminated to the concerned State agencies in 
the form of reports and maps. Ground water quality is also monitored by CGWB at regional 
level once every year through their network of about 15000 observation wells located all over the 
country. Further Ground water management studies, Ground water exploration, Industrial/ 
pollution cluster studies, etc. is also undertaken to find out the extent of contamination. However, 

40 
 
they note that CPCB along with SPCBs and PCCs, also monitors Ground water quality at 1231 
locations throughout the country under National Water Quality Monitoring Programme (NWMP) 
except Andaman & Nicobar Islands, Arunachal Pradesh and Sikkim on a half yearly frequency. 
Under NWMP, Ground water quality monitoring stations are selected considering the criteria 
such as Drinking water sources located in sanitary conditions and prone to sewage contamination, 
preferably in shallow aquifer in the vicinity of septic tanks; sewage treatment plant; oxidation 
pond, cess pools, garbage dump sites, tube-wells, hand pumps or dug-wells located in industrial 
areas prone to contamination and are in use as well as Ground water sources in residential areas. 
The Committee are not able to comprehend the rationale for involving two agencies, entrusted 
with the same task of monitoring contamination in Ground water. Since Ground water is basically 
under the domain of CGWB with CGWA being regulatory authority, monitoring and data collection 
on its quality should primarily be dealt with by CGWB which could be shared with CPCB to 
enable adoption of suitable remedial measures. They would, therefore, recommend the 
Department to appropriately address the issue and take measures for convergence of activities 
relating to better management of Ground water under the aegis of a single, Centralised 
body/Agency. 
REPLY  BY  THE  GOVERNMENT 
 
National Water Informatics Centre (NWIC) has developed the Water Information Management 
System (WIMS), which is an online database for water related data including groundwater quality 
data. There is provision in WIMS for entering ground water quality data of State and Central 
Agencies including CPCB and CGWB. The WIMS application has been recently rolled out for 
CGWB. CGWB is updating the data in WIMS portal. This integrated database will be available for 
use by all the concerned agencies. India-WRIS is a platform to share data in public domain, which 
is developed by NWIC.Letter from CGWB to CPCB and Department of Drinking Water & 
Sanitation has been sent for integrating the groundwater quality data. 
CPCB under National Water Quality Programme (NWMP) is monitoring groundwater quality with a 
limited number of 1,235 locations, based on the criteria stipulated for selection of locations to 
regulate contamination due to industrial discharges. The generated data from the year 2012 to 
2021 is shared with NWIC for integration on India-WRIS portal, developed by MoJS. Further, a 
common format is being developed by the CGWB and shall be shared with CPCB/States/NWIC 
for convergence and ease of uploading in the NWIC server for use by various stake-holders. 
(OM No. T-12019/3/2023/-GW Section-MOWR dated 19/6/2023) 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO.15 
 
Early Implementation of water supply schemes in areas affected with                                           
Ground water contamination 
 
Early Implementation of water supply schemes in areas affected with Ground water 
contamination .They further note that many cities and metros such as Agartala, Ahmedabad, 

41 
 
Bhubaneshwar, Guwahati, Hyderabad, Jaipur, Delhi, Lucknow, Nagpur, Patna, Ranchi, Shillong, 
Srinagar, etc. have reported high amount of geogenic contamination while Ahmedabad, 
Bengaluru, Chennai, Lucknow, Nagpur, Delhi, Dehradun, Guwahati, Hyderabad, Jaipur, Kolkata, 
Patna, Panaji, Pondicherry and Trivandrum suffer from anthropogenic contamination of Ground 
water. Having noted that contamination problem is almost everywhere in the country with as many 
as 249 districts in 18 States affected with high salinity problem, 370 districts in 23 States having 
Fluoride contamination beyond permissible limit, 423 districts in 23 States suffering from Nitrate , 
152 districts in 21 States having Arsenic problem, 341 districts in 27 States having Iron in 
excess quantity, 92 districts in 14 States having Lead, 24 districts in 9 States having Cadmium 
and 29 districts in 10 States reporting Chromium in their Ground water, the Committee believe 
that measures taken by the Government so far have not been able to produce desired results. The 
anthropogenic causes, such as excessive use of fertilizers and pesticides and emission of 
effluents from industries have contributed in aggravating the problem to a large extent. Punjab has 
got the sobriquet of ‘Cancer capital of India’ due to excessive use of chemical fertilizer and 
pesticides. The Committee, particularly note the high level of uranium found in few pockets of 
Rajasthan and Bihar where Ground water is used for drinking purposes. They observe that under 
Jal Jeevan Mission (JJM) 10 percent weightage has been given to the population residing in 
habitations affected by chemical contaminants while allocating the funds to States/UTs. Keeping 
in view the widespread problem of Ground water contamination in the country which is an 
important source of drinking water and thus posing health hazard, the Committee desire that 
alternative arrangements should be made to provide safe drinking water in areas affected with 
contamination. The Committee recommend the CGWB to urge both the Department of Drinking 
water and Sanitation and State Governments to take urgent steps for utilising funds under JJM 
in all the areas affected with chemical/metals/ions/radioactive elements/organic contaminants. 
They would like to be apprised of the details of such areas, (State wise) and allocation of funds 
under JJM in such areas along with the water supply schemes implemented /proposed to be 
implemented for provision of safe drinking water. 
 
REPLY BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Government of India is implementing Jal Jeevan Mission (JJM) – Har Ghar Jal, since August, 
2019, in partnership with States, to make provision of potable tap water supply in adequate 
quantity, of prescribed quality and on regular &long- term basis to every rural households. 
In 2019-20, a sum of Rs. 10,000.66 crore was allocated for the mission and the entire amount was 
utilized. Similarly, in 2020-21, Rs. 11,000 crore was allocated and utilized. In 2021-22, out of 
allocation of Rs. 45,011 crore, 40,125.64 crore has been utilized for implementation of the mission. 
In 2022-23, an amount of Rs.55,000 crore was allocated and Rs. 54,839.79 crore was utilized. 
Further, in 2023-24 an amount of Rs. 70,000 crore has been allocated for implementation of JJM. 
Details are at Annexure-VII.  
At the time of announcement of JJM on 15th August 2019, out of total 18.93 crore rural 
households, 3.23 crore rural households (17%) of the country had tap water connections. Since 
then, around 8.61 crore (44%) families living in rural areas have been provided with tap water 

42 
 
connections in their homes. Now, out of total 19.44 crore rural households, around 11.84 crore 
(60.9%) rural families of the country have assured potable tap water supply in their homes, 
improving their quality of life and enhancing ‘ease of living’. Details are at Annexure-VIII. 
Providing potable drinking water to quality-aﬀected habitations is one of the priorities under Jal 
Jeevan Mission. States/UTs have been advised to plan and implement piped water supply 
schemes of bulk water transfer based on safe water sources such as surface water sources or 
alternative safe ground water sources for the villages with water quality issues. All States/UTs 
have been advised to ensure expeditious implementation of piped water supply projects to provide 
potable tap water to every household in all quality-affected habitations. 
As reported by States, the number of habitations having water quality issues in drinking water 
sources during last four years and current year is as under: 
 
Year Number of affected habitations 
As on 01.04.2019 57,539 
As on 01.04.2020 54,166 
As on 01.04.2021 30,704 
As on 01.04.2022 23,711 
As on 01.04.2023 19,915 
As on 27.04.2023 19,613 
 
As reported by the States/ UTs, as on 27.04.2023, 19,613 rural habitations are quality-aﬀected in 
the country. Contaminant-wise number of these habitations is as follows:- 
 
S.No. Major Contaminants Habitations as on date 
1 Fluoride* 428 
2 Arsenic* 600 
3 Iron 9,043 
4 Salinity 8,973 
5 Nitrate 483 
6 HeavyMetal 86 
 
             All Arsenic and Fluoride aﬀected habitations are covered with Community Water 
Purification Plants. State-wise number of quality- aﬀected rural habitations is at Annexure-IX. As 
reported by States, as on date, provision of potable drinking water for cooking and drinking 
requirements has been made in all the 600 Arsenic- aﬀected and 428 Fluoride-affected 
habitations. 
Other measures taken by the Department under JJM to provide safe drinking water in quality 
affected rural habitations in the country: 
a. In March 2017, to provide potable drinking water to identiﬁed 27,544 Arsenic/ Fluoride- aﬀected 
habitations in the country, National Water Quality Sub- Mission(NWQSM) was launched as part of 

43 
 
National Rural Drinking Water Programme (NRDWP) which was subsequently subsumed under 
JJM. The NWQSM has been closed on 31st March, 2022. As reported by States, safe drinking 
water has become available in all these identiﬁed 27,544 Arsenic / Fluoride-affected habitations. 
b. While allocating the funds to States/ UTs in a particular ﬁnancial year, 10% weightage is given to 
the population residing in habitations aﬀected by chemical contaminants as on 31st March of the 
preceding ﬁnancial year. Besides, the coverage fund provided to the States/ UTs can be utilized for 
taking up schemes in water quality-affected areas on priority. 
c. Under Jal Jeevan Missions, as per existing guidelines, Bureau of India Standards’ BIS:10500 
standards is to be adopted for ensuring safe drinking water supply. States/UTs have been advised 
to carry out testing of water quality on a periodic basis, i.e. once in a years for chemical and 
Physical parameters, to ensure that the water supplied to households is of prescribed quality. 
d. In consultation with various stakeholders, ‘Handbook on Drinking Water Treatment 
Technologies’ has been released for guidance of oﬃcials of States/UTs presenting  therein 
consolidated details about various technologies available in market for treating diﬀerent type of 
contaminations to provide safe drinking water to rural households. This is only suggestive in nature 
and may serve as a ﬁeld reference manual. The States may take up appropriate water treatment 
technology depending upon techno-economic feasibility. 
(OM No. T-12019/3/2023/-GW Section-MOWR dated 19/6/2023) 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO.19 
 
Strengthening of CPCB and SPCBs 
 
The Committee observe that CPCB and SPCBs which were formed with an important mandate of 
monitoring and controlling water pollution under the Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) 
Act, 1974 have inadequate manpower at their disposal to carry out their activities. The need for 
recruiting 207 more officials in CPCB was recommended by Indian Institute of Public 
Administration (IIPA) way back in 2016, however, still, the Board is struggling to execute their 
functions with lesser manpower. They notice that manpower in CPCB has not increased since 
last two decades despite manifold increase in work load, as submitted by CPCB. Similar 
situation is noticed in case of SPCBs as well, whereby monitoring activities under National 
Water Quality Monitoring (NWMP) / State Water Quality Monitoring (SWMP) / Real Time Water 
Quality Monitoring (RTWQM) and Ground Water (GW) have been outsourced in many 
States/UTs such as Andaman and Nicobar   islands,   Andhra   Pradesh,   Arunachal   
Pradesh,   Assam,   Bihar, Chandigarh, Chattisgarh, Daman & Diu and Dadra & Nagar 
Haveli, Goa, Gujarat, Haryana, Himachal Pradesh, Jammu and Kashmir, Lakshadweep, 
Maharashtra, Manipur, Meghalaya, Mizoram, Nagaland, Puducherry, Punjab, Rajasthan, Sikkim 
and Tripura. Besides manpower, financial resource crunch is also a major problem faced by 
CPCB, crippling their power further to implement their programmes. Keeping in view the 
increasing deterioration of environment in general and water in particular, the Committee 

44 
 
recommend that immediate measures be taken to address the shortage of manpower and 
resource crunch in both CPCB and SPCB. The Ministry of Jal Shakti, being the nodal Ministry 
for management of water resource, the Committee recommend the Ministry to take initiative and 
urge the MoEF &CC to take necessary action for strengthening both CPCB and SPCBs at the 
earliest and furnish the details of measures taken within three months of presentation of this 
Report. 
REPLY GIVEN BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
The staﬀ strength of Central Pollution Control Board (CPCB) is 601 where Group A: 217, Group B: 
177 and Group C:207 Nos. CPCB is in the process of recruiting 163 posts i.e. Group A – 62; 
Group B – 29; Group C - 72. 
 
S.No.Board/CommitteeNumber of Posts 
Sanctioned Filled Vacant Deemed 
Abolished 
1. CPCB 601 384 191 26 
2 SPCBs/PCCs 9,438 5,096 4,342 - 
 
The data in respect to CPCB is as on 30.01.2023, whereas the data provided for SPCBs/PCCs is 
based on the Performance Audit of SPCBs/ PCCs carried out by CPCB during 2019-20. The 
details of sanctioned &; Vacant position of SPCBs/ PCCs as per Performance Audit report is 
attached as Annexure X. MoEF&CC is being advised to direct States to fill up the existing 
vacancies on priority. 
(OM No. T-12019/3/2023/-GW Section-MOWR dated 19/6/2023) 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO.20 
 
National Aquifer Mapping and Management Programme (NAQUIM) 
 
The Committee note that under the NAQUIM launched in 2012, CGWB had identified 24.8 lakh 
sq km area of the Country for aquifer mapping. However, up to December 2020, only 14.78 lakh 
sq km area was covered under Aquifer Mapping. Remaining area is envisaged to be covered 
by 2022-23. However, the Committee are apprehensive that the target of covering remaining 
area of 10.02 lakh sq. km will be accomplished within a span of next few years as the 
implementation of this programme has been very slow paced since it was launched in the year 
2012. Although the factors causing initial delays are stated to have been addressed now 
successfully, the Committee, taking cognizance of CAG’s apprehension too in this regard, 
concur that the Department should adopt a time bound approach to finish mapping of aquifers 
within the targeted period. The Committee would, therefore, recommend the Department to 
prepare a time bound strategy for completing aquifer mapping by the stipulated period so as to 

45 
 
initiate measures for their management at the earliest. They would also like to be apprised of the 
details of aquifers (which have been mapped so far) showing Ground water depletion and 
measures taken to arrest the depletion and recharge them, both at the Centre and State level. 
 
REPLY GIVEN BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
As per the target, the entire 25.15 lakh sq km area identiﬁed for aquifer mapping (mappable area) 
in the country, has been covered. Aquifer mapping studies have revealed horizontal and vertical 
extents of aquifers in all the States and UTs. The mapped aquifers are grouped into 42 major 
categories comprising 14,000 aquifer units. Based on the properties of aquifers and existing 
status of ground water resources, management plans have been prepared. Disposition of 
aquifers, characteristics of aquifers and management plans are detailed in the reports. The 
reports are available on the website of CGWB. The ﬁndings are also being shared with the District 
Authorities. 
Further, the ﬁndings of NAQUIM studies are being used for planning and implementation of 
ground water management interventions by the States and Central Govt Agencies through 
MGNREGA, PMKSY-WDC and relevant State Govt . schemes. 
Some of the speciﬁc uses for recharge/groundwater management and extraction in water surplus 
areas undertaken by the CGWB are listed below. 
Interventions as per recommendation 
based on NAQUIM studies 
State 
Artificial Recharge Interventions 
 Demonstrative Projects in 
Aspirational Districts 
 Artificial Recharge in convergence 
with MGNREGS 
 Construction of Bridge cum Bhandara 
Andhra Pradesh, Maharashtra, 
Telangana, Haryana, Karnataka, 
Madhya Pradesh, Rajasthan, 
Tamil Nadu 
Rejuvenation of RajgirHotsprings  Bihar 
Regulation of ground water draft in coastal 
areas to contain sea water ingress 
Tamil Nadu 
Arsenic safe well construction for supply of 
safe drinking water 
Uttar Pradesh, West Bengal 
New areas with ground water potential for 
irrigation under PMKSY-HKKP-GW 
Assam, Arunachal Pradesh, 
Manipur, Mizoram, Nagaland, 
Tripura, Gujarat, Tamil Nadu, 
Uttar Pradesh, Uttarakhand 
Water security Plan (WSP) preparation 
under Atal Bhujal Yojana 
Gujarat, Haryana, Karnataka, 
Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, 
Rajasthan and Uttar Pradesh 
 
(OM No. T-12019/3/2023/-GW Section-MOWR dated 19/6/2023) 

46 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO.21 
Need for extending the coverage of the Atal Bhujal Yojana (ATAL JAL) Scheme 
 
The Committee observe that Atal Bhujal Yojana (ATAL JAL), being implemented from 1.04.2020 
for a period of 5 years, is the only scheme of the Government of India which has been launched 
with a view to augment Ground water by managing their demand side. The Scheme is being 
implemented on pilot basis in 80 districts of seven States, viz. Haryana, Gujarat, Karnataka, 
Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Rajasthan and Uttar Pradesh with an outlay of Rs 6000 crore. 
Selection of States was done on the basis of the criticality of Ground water situation, willingness 
and degree of preparedness. The Committee, however, notice that several States with acute 
Ground water shortage such as Himachal Pradesh, Punjab, Delhi and Tamil Nadu have not been 
included in the pilot scheme. They, therefore, desire to be apprised of the reasons for excluding 
these States where Ground water situation is equally critical. The Committee have been given 
to understand that the feasibility of up scaling the Scheme to other parts of the Country will be 
considered only after five years, based on the lessons learnt from implementation of the Scheme 
and their efficacy/outcome in improving the long-term sustainability of Ground water resources 
in the selected 80 districts under the pilot scheme. However, keeping in view the urgency for 
implementation of such scheme in States having large number of over exploited blocks, the 
Committee would recommend that Scheme should be extended in all States which are suffering 
from Ground water scarcity and have substantial number of over exploited and critical blocks. 
 
REPLY GIVEN BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Atal Jal was started as Pilot Program in certain identiﬁed water stressed areas of 7 States viz. 
Uttar Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh, Gujarat, Rajasthan, Karnataka, Haryana and Maharashtra with 
an aim to demonstrate the community led ground water management so that later on all the States 
can take up this approach further to remaining areas. A proposal for extension of Atal Bhujal 
Yojana to certain other water stressed States has been initiated. 
(OM No. T-12019/3/2023/-GW Section-MOWR dated 19/6/2023) 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO.22 
 
Artificial recharge to Ground water 
 
The Committee note that to facilitate artificial recharge to Ground water, CGWB prepared 
Master Plan for artificial Recharge to Ground water in the year 2013 which has been revised in 
2020 based on inputs from the State agencies. They are happy to note that States have given due 
consideration to Master Plan, 2013 besides identifying other areas for artificial recharge under 
Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme (MGNREGS). They also 
observe that artificial recharge to Ground water is supported through MGNREGS and Pradhan 
Mantri Krishi Sinchayee Yojana – Watershed Development Component (PMKSY-WDC). They find 
that the Ministry of Rural Development (MoRD) in consultation and agreement with the DoWR, 

47 
 
RD & GR and the Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers’ Welfare has developed an actionable 
framework for Natural Resources Management (NRM), titled “Mission Water Conservation” to 
ensure gainful utilization of funds by ensuring synergy in MGNREGS, PMKSY, Integrated 
Watershed Management Programme (IWMP) and Command Area Development & Water 
Management (CAD&WM), given their common objectives. They note that as on    30.09.2020,    
5,90,638    Water    harvesting    structures    (WHS)    were  created/rejuvenated under 
PMKSY-(WDC) during the period from 2015-16 to 2020-21. However they think that instead of 
construction of new artificial recharge structures, focus should be given on revival of existing 
village ponds/lakes/water bodies under MGNREGA which will, on the one hand ensure 
employment and on the other hand ensure maintenance of the WHS created so far with less 
capital expenditure than needed for constructing new structures. This will also encourage mass 
participation in upkeep and maintenance of WHS crucial for fast recharge of Ground water. The 
Committee would, therefore, recommend the DoWR, RD & GR to accordingly advice MoRD for 
more emphasis on rejuvenation and revival of water harvesting structures under MGNREGA. 
Further, the Committee recommend that the DoWR, RD & GR should play a more proactive role 
by ensuring coordination in implementation of programmes and monitor the outcome of works to 
achieve multiple goals simultaneously and effectively. In this regard, the Committee would like to 
know the steps taken by the Department for sharing of information available under their National 
Aquifer Management Programme with District and Block administration entrusted with execution of 
works under MGNREGA and how effective they have been in facilitating conservation and 
recharge of Ground water. 
 
REPLY GIVEN BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
A multi-tiered approach is followed for sharing of the outputs of aquifer mapping studies. The 
ﬁndings of NAQUIM are shared with the State Governments through Ground Water Coordination 
Committees. At district level, ﬁndings are shared with District Authorities (DM/DC). So far reports in 
respect of 551 districts have been shared. 
 Further, ﬁndings of National Aquifer mapping studies are disseminated through Public Interaction 
Programs (PIP) at grassroots level, which is a continuous process. So far 1,347 public interaction 
programmes in which nearly 1,18,000 persons have participated. Regional Workshops were also 
organised in 6 diﬀerent cities across the country for sharing of the NAQUIM studies. In addition to 
above, NAQUIM reports are also placed on CGWB website for wider dissemination and access by 
stake-holders. 
Further, CGWB are continuously interacting with State government oﬃcials including district 
administration to convey the ﬁndings of NAQUIM studies for their gainful utilization in recharge 
related activities/demand side management etc. In addition, the Department of Rural Development 
(MGNREGA) have been approached to utilise the information created through NAQUIM reports for 
use in their scheme. 
Further to mention here that this Department is implementing the Jal Shakti Abhiyan under which 
the water harvesting/recharge activities, repair/rejuvenation of water bodies and other similar 

48 
 
activities are being monitored very closely. The deliverables under MGNREGA, PMKSY-WDC 
schemes related to water harvesting/recharge are also being monitored closely through a team of 
Central Nodal Oﬃcers and Technical Oﬃcers. Further, this Department reviews the progress 
periodically under Jal Shakti Abhiyan at the level of Mission Director, National Water Mission and 
Secretary, DoWR, RD & GR. 
In addition to this, the States/UTsincluding district administration are being regularly pursued at the 
level of Regional Directors/CGWB HQs to implement the recommendations of NAQUIM findings. 
As informed by Department of Rural Development, Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment 
Guarantee Scheme (Mahatma Gandhi NREGS) is a demand driven wage employment Scheme, 
with an objective to provide not less than one hundred days of unskilled manual work as a 
guaranteed employment in every ﬁnancial year to every household in rural areas as per demand, 
resulting in creation of productive assets of prescribed quality and durability. 
As per Schedule I of Mahatma Gandhi NREGA, Section 4 (3), Para 4 (1), I. Category: A Public 
works relating to Natural Resource Management: (i) Water Conservation and water harvesting 
structures to augment and improve ground water like underground dykes , earthen dams, stop 
dams, check dams and roof top rain water harvesting structures in Government or Panchayat 
buildings with special focus on recharging ground water including drinking water sources; and (iv) 
Renovation of traditional water bodies including desilting of irrigation tanks and other water bodies 
and conservation of old step well/baolis are permissible activities. 
MGNREGA is also giving due attention for renovation of traditional water bodies apart from other 
activities as per scheme guidelines. Since inception of the Scheme, the following are the details of 
works completed, works taken up and expenditure made on Water Conservation and water 
harvesting and Renovation of traditional water bodies works under Mahatma Gandhi NREGS so 
far is given below: 
Name of the work category Number of works Completed 
Number of  works Ongoing 
    Total Expenditure              
(in Rs.crore) 
Water Conservation and water harvesting 55,18,509 10,55,698 1,37,858.12 
Renovation of traditional water bodies 16,75,505 1,95,629 59,003.34 
 
(OM No. T-12019/3/2023/-GW Section-MOWR dated 19/6/2023) 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO.23 
Ground water recharge measures in Urban areas 
 
The Committee note that in Urban areas, Ground water recharge is being taken up mainly 
through Roof Top Rainwater Harvesting Structures. They note that 106.14 lakh Roof Top 
Rainwater Harvesting Structures for an estimated cost of Rs 36,794.23 crore is proposed to be 
implemented through existing scheme  only. Further under AMRUT scheme, 9 States/ UTs have 

49 
 
taken up 773 storm water drainage projects worth ₹2,845 crore in 101 cities to address the 
problem of flooding, out of which 498 projects worth ₹738 crore have been completed and 492 
water logging points have been eliminated from these projects. However among major cities, 
Storm water drainage projects have been taken up only in Delhi (South Delhi Municipal 
Corporation) and Patna. While descending Ground water table along with floods and water logging 
in monsoons have become a recurrent feature in major cities and metros, no significant progress 
have been noticed in channelizing and harvesting excess rainwater. They are concerned to find 
that storm water drainage projects are yet to be taken up in metro cities like Mumbai and Chennai 
where shortage of water supply and water logging in monsoons are a regular feature. Further 
such projects taken up in cities like Delhi are also under construction stage. Since mere taking 
up of projects without proper execution and maintenance will not result in actual benefit, the 
Committee believe that such projects need to be speeded up to actually see their effects 
transformed into results. In their view, absence of a nodal body at the Central level and lack of a 
coordinated approach has hindered the fast execution of projects delaying achievement of 
objectives. They, therefore, recommend the Ministry of Jal Shakti to take urgent steps to dovetail 
all the measures taken by different agencies/Departments/Ministries to complete the works so as 
to better manage Ground water and at the same time reducing flood/waterlogging in cities like 
Mumbai and Chennai as an additional benefit. The Committee would also like to be apprised of 
the details of the cities where storm water drainage projects have been installed along with the 
total number of cities where such projects are yet to be taken up and time period by which such 
projects are likely to be installed in all the metro cities. 
 
REPLY GIVEN BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Under AMRUT mission, 809 storm water drainage projects worth 3,016 crore have been grounded 
of which 691 projects worth 1,426 crore have been completed with 971 km of drains constructed 
and 2,959 water logging points eliminated preventing urban ﬂooding. The details of storm water 
drainage projects in AMRUT cities can be seen at Annexure V. 
In order to fast track, the implementation of AMRUT, the progress is periodically reviewed and 
monitored through regular video conferences, webinars, workshops etc. by MoH& UA with the 
States/UTs & ; their ULBs. There is a dedicated AMRUT portal for tracking the progress of 
projects. States are required to update data on the portal on regular basis. Mission Directorate is 
also providing hand holding support to the States and their cities from time to time to resolve 
issues and eliminate bottlenecks for timely completion of projects. This has also resulted in 
capacity building of States/UTBs and thus achieved signiﬁcant progress under the AMRUT 
Scheme. 
For assessment and monitoring of work done in the States, dedicated Independent Review and 
Monitoring Agencies (IRMA) have been setup in all the Mission States/ UTs. Similarly, the IRMA 
will do a half-yearly appraisal of Reform implementation in the States.  
These is APEX committee at MoH&UA which periodically conduct meetings to review/approve the 
projects under AMRUT and AMRUT 2.0 mission. 
(OM No. T-12019/3/2023/-GW Section-MOWR dated 19/6/2023) 

50 
 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 24 
 
Physical verification of works completed under MGNREGA 
 
The Committee observe that rejuvenation of water bodies (crucial for Ground water recharge and 
alternative water source) is being done under the Repair, Renovation and Restoration (RRR) of 
Water Bodies Scheme component of PMKSY, covering rural water bodies having minimum water 
spread area of 5.0 hectare and urban water bodies having water spread area from 2.0 hectare to 
10.0 hectare. Further, water bodies are also being rejuvenated/created by the Ministry of Rural 
Development through MGNREGA. They notice that all assets, created under Mahatma Gandhi 
NREGA are being geo-tagged along with 2 photographs each in Geo Mahatma Gandhi NREGA 
which includes water conservation works/ structures/ assets also. So far, around 4.22 Cr. assets 
created under Mahatma Gandhi NREGS are geo-tagged. Further, under Geo Mahatma Gandhi 
NREGA Phase II, launched on 1st November 2017, the works under MGNREGA are now geo- 
tagged along with 2 photographs each in three stages: (i) Before start of the work (ii) During the 
work, (iii) On completion of the work. However, keeping in view the instances wherein repetitive 
works have been undertaken under MGNREGA, the Committee would emphasise physical 
verification of MGNREGA works by the Central Government officials. They, therefore, recommend 
the DoWR, RD & GR to impress upon the Ministry of Rural Development, the need for physical 
inspection of works in the final stage for better upkeep of assets created and judicious use of 
MGNREGA funds. 
REPLY GIVEN BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Ministry of Rural Development (MoRD) has intimated that 5.19 crore assets have been geo tagged 
so far under Mahatma Gandhi NREGS. The observation of the Committee has been noted by 
them for compliance. 
However, MoRD, Government of India has taken various steps for strengthening of Mahatma 
Gandhi NREGS. The important elements of the above framework are listed below: 
i . The Ministry regularly reviews the performance of the implementation of Mahatma Gandhi 
NREGS in States/UTs through various fora viz., Mid-Term Review, Labour Budget determination 
and Labour Budget revision meetings, and Programme Review meetings. Central Employment 
Guarantee Council and State Employment Guarantee Councils also periodically monitor the 
implementation of the Scheme. 
ii. National Level Monitors, Common Review Missions and Oﬃcers of the Ministry visit States/UTs 
at regular intervals to review the implementation of the scheme. After the ﬁeld visits, the 
ﬁndings/shortcomings and recommendations are shared with the States/UTs for appropriate action 
at their end. 
iii. Auditing Standards for Social Audit have been issued and States/UTs have been advised to 
establish independent Social Audit Units, conduct Social Audit as per Audit of Scheme Rules, 

51 
 
2011 and training of village resource persons for conducting Social Audit etc. As per the Audit of 
the Scheme Rules, the audit of the works in a Gram Panchayat has been made mandatory. 
Internal Audit Teams of the Department also conduct regular audits. 
iv. Steps have been taken to strengthen transparency and accountability which include geo-
tagging of assets, Direct Beneﬁt Transfer (DBT), National electronic Fund Management System 
(NeFMS), Aadhar Based Payment System (ABPS), Software for Estimate Calculation using rural 
rates for Employment (SECURE) and appointment of Ombudsperson in every districts of 
States/UTs. 
v. Steps have been taken for establishment of State Technical Cell at various levels for qualitative 
monitoring and supervision of works under Mahatma Gandhi NREGS.In order to ensure a higher 
level of monitoring and oversight, National Mobile Monitoring System (NMMS) App and Area 
Oﬃcer App have been introduced. In the former, attendance of workers on all work sites (except 
individual beneﬁciary works) is taken daily along with a geo-tagged & time-stamped photograph of 
theirs. The latter has been designed to ensure that field officials conduct inspections in the 
requisite numbers and look into all the relevant aspects of the scheme. 
vi. Transparency and accountability measures like an Ombudsperson for each district, an 
independent Director for the Social Audit Unit, and timely compliance of Internal Audit Paras are 
some of the conditions for the funds release. 
vii. NMMS Whats app groups have been created at every Gram Panchayat for dissemination of 
real-time attendance to Public Representatives for vigilant monitoring. 
(OM No. T-12019/3/2023/-GW Section-MOWR dated 19/6/2023) 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 26 
 
Legislation for management of Ground Water 
 
The Committee note that a model Bill was circulated to States and Union Territories to enable 
them to enact suitable law for management of Ground water in 1970 which was subsequently 
revised in 1992, 1996 and 2005 to give effect to proper regulation of development and 
management of Ground water. However only 19 States have enacted legislation on Ground water, 
based on model Bill. Further, the Committee note that CAG, in its report has observed that lack 
of clear guidelines from the Department impacted the legislations implemented by the States. 
Taking into account the delay in enacting a law in the States, the Committee are of the view that 
urgent action need to be taken by States by enacting laws to prevent misuse of Ground water 
and their extraction beyond recharge. They find that as of December 2019, the Model Bill was 
under review as per the suggestions of NITI Aayog. Since specific instructions/guidelines need to 
be spelled out for implementation of Model Bills in States to enable them to enact suitable 
legislation in accordance with their local requirements, the Committee recommend that urgent 
action need to be taken by the Department for the same. In this regard, the Committee would 
like to be apprised of the outcome of the review by NITI Aayog. They would also like to be 

52 
 
apprised of the main problems/challenges being faced by the State Governments which are 
coming in the way of effective management of Ground water and steps taken to address them 
both at the Central and State levels. 
 
REPLY GIVEN BY THE  GOVERNEMENT 
 
As of now 21 States have enacted legislation on Ground water, based on model Bill. Further, to 
tackle all water related matters in a holistic and uniﬁed manner a draft model bill i.e. “Model State 
Integrated Water Resource Management Bill 2023” incorporating all the major provisions of six 
water related model bills including model ground water (sustainable management) bill is under 
finalization in Ministry of Jal Shakti. 
Further, India is a vast country with a large number of distinct hydro-geological settings.The 
occurrence and movement of ground water in various aquifer systems are highly complex due to 
the occurrence of diversiﬁed geological formations with considerable litho-logical and chronological 
variations, complex tectonic framework, climate-logical dissimilarities and various hydro-chemical 
conditions. Considerable variations in rainfall both temporally and spatially have been observed 
which has compounded the water problem. In addition, in some of the States the groundwater 
subject is not being dealt by a dedicated Department and also some States are facing the 
deﬁciency of manpower to handle the groundwater matters. Inspite of these limitations, both 
Central and State Governments are taking all out eﬀorts for sustainable groundwater management 
and constantly working in this direction through various schemes and policy initiatives. Further, 
States are also being actively pursued to create dedicated groundwater departments and fill up the 
existing vacancies. 
(OM No. T-12019/3/2023/-GW Section-MOWR dated 19/6/2023) 
 
RECOMMENDATION  NO.  27 
 
Amendment to India Easement Act, 1882 
 
While there is an urgent need to prevent Ground water depletion to an alarming level, the 
Committee find that archaic law of 1882 relating to extraction of Ground water by owner of the 
land is still in place. This aberration was highlighted by the Committee in their 23rd Report (16 
LS) and 15th Report (17 LS) and the Department had submitted in their reply that the issue was 
being referred to the concerned Ministry for appropriate action. The Committee would, therefore, 
recommend the Department to take steps to bring amendment to the said Act, so as to make 
Ground water, a 'community resource'. 
 
REPLY GIVEN BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Water being a State subject, taking suitable initiatives to augment groundwater resources for its 
sustainable management fall under the purview of the States/UTs. Further, the savings clause of 
the India Easement Act, 1882 is mentioned below: 

53 
 
“2. Savings.—Nothing herein contained shall be deemed to aﬀect any law not hereby expressly 
repealed; or to derogate from— 
(a) any right of the [Government] to regulate the collection, retention and distribution of the water of 
rivers and streams ﬂowing in natural channels, and of natural lakes and ponds, or of the water 
ﬂowing, collected, retained or distributed in or by any channel or other work constructed at the 
public expense for irrigation;” 
Hence, it is submitted that section 2 (Savings) in the Easement Act 1882 adequately empowers 
Government to appropriately regulate the groundwater extraction through Acts/Gazette 
notiﬁcations etc in the country for its sustainable management. Further, the rights under section 7 
of the Act are subject to any law for the time being in force.In view of the above, it is felt that there 
appears no compelling necessity to amend the para 7(b)(g) of the said Act. 
(OM No. T-12019/3/2023/-GW Section-MOWR dated 19/6/2023) 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 28 
 
Shortage of manpower at CGWB and CGWA 
 
The Committee note the issue of staff crunch at CGWB, which has become more pronounced due 
to additional burden of carrying out activities of CGWA. The shortage of both technical and non-
technical personnel incapacitate CGWB and CGWA in discharging their respective mandates. The 
Committee would, therefore, recommend taking up urgent measures for filling up the vacancies. 
They would also recommend filling up of vacancies in CGWA separately to enable it to carry out 
their regulatory role more effectively. 
 
REPLY GIVEN BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
A comprehensive cadre review proposal for the ﬁrst time has been prepared for CGWB 
considering the evolving responsibilities and challenges. Various defunct posts have been 
abolished simultaneously additional posts have been created as per requirement. The Cadre 
Review Proposal is being ﬁnalized in consultation with DOP&T. Further, Recruitment Rules are 
being further streamlined for various categories of posts to improve the career prospects of oﬃcers 
and also to ﬁll up certain posts without expeditiously. Recruitment in Mission Mode has also been 
taken up to ﬁll up the existing vacancies. In the meantime, suitable number of Young Professionals 
and Consultants have been engaged on a temporary basis to fulfill the immediate requirements of 
CGWB and CGWA. 
(OM No. T-12019/3/2023/-GW Section-MOWR dated 19/6/2023) 
 
 
 
 

54 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 29 
 
Separation of CGWB and CGWA 
 
The Committee further note that CGWB has been entrusted with the task of assessment, 
augmentation, management and regulation of country’s Ground water resources by way of 
scientific studies, exploration aided by drilling and monitoring of Ground water regime while Central 
Ground Water Authority (CGWA) has been constituted under Section 3 (3) of the Environment 
(Protection) Act, 1986 to regulate and control development and management of Ground water 
resources in the country. Thus, development and management of Ground water resources is 
primarily under the jurisdiction of CGWB whereas CGWA's main role is regulation and 
control. However, the Committee find that CGWB and CGWA are not functioning as separate 
entities and there is no distinct division of mandate with regard to regulation of Ground water. They 
further find that despite highlighting this fact in the Committee's Report on Demands for Grants 
in 2017, the issue still lingers on and is yet to be approved by the Competent Authority. Since 
overlapping of operations cannot do justice in the matters of development of Ground water on the 
one hand and their control on the other, the Committee recommend the Government to take 
immediate steps to separate the two with clear jurisdiction and administration to oversee the 
management of Ground water in a better way. 
 
REPLY GIVEN BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
A proposal for delinking CGWA from CGWB and creating additional manpower for CGWA with 
separate verticals has already been submitted in Department of Expenditure for their 
consideration. 
Further, Water being a State subject States are being pursued to directly undertake the regulation 
of the groundwater in their jurisdiction themselves. With active persuasion of this Department as 
on now 17 States/UTs are now regulating groundwater on their own, others are being constantly 
reminded to place in position their own ground water regulation system. 
(OM No. T-12019/3/2023/-GW Section-MOWR dated 19/6/2023) 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO.30 
 
Need for strengthening Ground water departments at State level 
 
They further find that although policy framework, guidelines and manuals, etc. of the Central 
Government and the findings of various technical studies and pilot studies of CGWB are 
circulated to all States and UTs for their consideration/implementation but ineffective/lack of 
implementation in States/UTs have led to the reckless use of Ground water. In this regard, the 
Committee's attention has been drawn to the fact that 'Water' being a State subject, initiatives on 
water management including preventing the misuse/overuse of Ground water in the Country is 

55 
 
primarily States’ responsibility which has not been very well carried out, due to less effective 
functioning of Ground water departments in the States. As submitted by the Department itself, 
strengthening of Ground water departments in the States at various levels appears to be one of 
the pre-requisites for attaining better regulation and management of Ground water resources. 
While agreeing that State Governments need to play a decisive role in addressing the problem 
of severe depletion of Ground water, as the subject of 'Water' primarily falls into their domain, in 
view of the Committee, State Governments need to be supported by the Central Government in 
the endeavour to take appropriate measures for effective monitoring and regulation of Ground 
water extraction. They would also like to be apprised of the State wise details of manpower 
available in respective State Ground Water Boards including total number of Staff at various levels, 
their technical competency, adequacy, etc. and measures taken to address the same within 
three months of presentation of the Report. 
 
REPLY GIVEN BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
As per the information collected, 16 States/ UTs (5 regulated by CGWA and 11 by States/ UTs 
themselves) have Ground Water Department. 20 States/ UTs (14 regulated by CGWA and 6 by 
States/ UTs themselves) do not have Ground Water Department. In these States/ UTs 
groundwater related matters are looked after by WRD/ PHED/ PWD/ MI departments. Ministry of 
Jal Shakti has been pursuing with the States for strengthening of the ground water organisations. 
Ministry of Jal Shakti is also helping the State governments in capacity building of ground water 
professionals in the States through training through Rajiv Gandhi National Ground Water Training 
and Research Institute. 
(OM No. T-12019/3/2023/-GW Section-MOWR dated 19/6/2023) 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 31 
 
Role of Communities in sustainable development of Ground water resources 
 
As observed in previous paragraphs, management and development of Groundwater in India is at 
present scattered with many Departments/ Ministries dealing with different aspects of their 
management. However, the Committee are pleased to note that equally important role is being 
played by the communities/civil society organisations in both rural and urban areas in saving and 
conserving this precious resource. The Committee observe that many commendable local efforts 
have been made by groups/communities to conserve Ground water in various States/Districts and 
utilize it in self sustainable manner. But as the problem of depletion and contamination of aquifers 
is spreading almost all over the country, a participatory approach in management of Ground water 
will go a long way in ensuring their sustainable utilization. While creation of a centralised 
body/agency in the Ministry of Jal Shakti, as recommended earlier, will help fill the institutional 
vacuum, close cooperation with the user groups and communities is the key to better management 
of Ground water. In view of the Committee, participation of user groups is necessary to make 
Government’s efforts to conserve, augment and manage Ground water resources successful. 

56 
 
Further aquifer based management of Ground water is the need of the hour with focus on recycling 
and reuse of Ground water and participatory recharge and demand- management. The Committee 
believe that participatory Ground water management should be integrated in agriculture, 
watershed development and employment generation activities such as MGNREGA to make it 
successful. Not only conservation efforts but also maintenance and monitoring of water storage 
structures could be assigned to user groups/ beneficiaries who are best suited to the purpose. 
Accordingly, Ground water management practices should be adopted as guiding principle for all 
the works under taken by local administration in both urban and rural areas. The Committee 
would, therefore, recommend the Department to take appropriate measures in this regard and 
apprise them of the actions taken within three months of presentation of this Report. They would 
further recommend the Department to adopt such measures as to replicate the successful 
models in Ground water management in remaining States/ areas of the country by encouraging 
the local communities and providing them with institutional support to use best practices for water 
management on a wider scale. 
 
REPLY GIVEN BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
This Department is issuing advisories to States/UTS periodically for implementation of participatory 
groundwater management in the country by involving the communities at village level. The 
groundwater regulation notiﬁcation dated 24 Sep 2020 talks about implementation of participatory 
groundwater management. Further, Atal Bhujal Yojana (Atal Jal) is being implemented by the 
Ministry for sustainable management of ground water resources in collaboration with 07 
States/UTs in participatory mode by involving communities at village level. The scheme is 
implemented in select areas that include 80 districts, 229 administrative blocks and 8,220 water 
stressed Gram Panchayats of seven States, viz. Haryana, Gujarat, Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh, 
Maharashtra, Rajasthan and Uttar Pradesh from 01.04.2020 for a period of 5 years. Further, the 
process of extension of the scheme in some other water stressed states of the country is under 
consideration of this Department. Under the scheme, the focus is on active involvement of 
communities and through their participation implementation of demand side measures including 
water saving interventions such as use of micro irrigation, shifting of cropping patter from high 
water intensive crops to low water intensive crops, use of pipe in irrigation, mulching etc are being 
implemented. The water security plan at Gram Panchayat levels are prepared and discussed and 
after detailed deliberations with the members of communities the plan is ﬁnalised and are 
implemented through convergence by various line departments. 
In addition, Mahatma Gandhi NREGS is a demand driven wage employment scheme with bottom-
up planning. The works are identiﬁed, approved and prioritized out of shelf of work by the Gram 
Panchayat, recommended by Gram Sabha in each State/UT as per the provision of the Act. 
Accordingly, the works are approved and taken up by Panchayat as per the demand. The planning 
of works is done as per the estimated person days to be generated for the work in a  ﬁnancial year 
at the time of assessment of Labour Budget. 
The Ministry of Rural Development has undertaken implementation of Geographic Information 
System (GIS) &  Remote Sensing (RS) based planning of works since FY 2018-19 under Mahatma 

57 
 
Gandhi NREGS. Advances in GIS and supporting technologies have led the preparation of Gram 
Panchayat (GP) development plan following ridge to valley approach in a saturation mode for 
creation of assets with enhanced impact on ground. It has also provided the scientiﬁc input to the 
community based participatory planning process at the grass root level. 
(OM No. T-12019/3/2023/-GW Section-MOWR dated 19/6/2023) 
 
  

58 
 
CHAPTER –III 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NIL 
  

59 
 
CHAPTER –IV 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT  OF   WHICH 
THE REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED                            
BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
RECOMMENDATION  NO.8 
Water use efficiency in agriculture – Funding pattern under PMKSY- Per Drop                               
More Crop (PDMC) 
The Committee note that micro irrigation is being promoted by the Department of Agriculture & 
Farmers’ Welfare through their PMKSY-Per Drop More Crop (PDMC) scheme, using Drip and 
Sprinkler Irrigation system. The scheme also supports micro level water storage or water 
conservation/management activities to supplement Micro Irrigation. The Committee note that 
financial assistance under PMKSY-Per Drop More Crop (PDMC) is being provided by the Centre 
on 60: 40 basis to States based on their demand, submitted through States’ Annual Action Plans 
(AAP) except the States in the North Eastern parts and Himalayan States, in whose case the 
funding pattern is 90:10 while it is 100% in case of Union Territories. However, in view of the 
Committee, this has created contradiction since States such as Punjab and Haryana which have 
severe Ground water crisis have been allocated meager amount of funds for implementing micro 
irrigation system. Since funding pattern for micro irrigation should be on the basis of water 
deficiency in the area rather than on the basis of principles of Centrally Sponsored Schemes, the 
Committee are of the considered view that more Central assistance should be given for micro 
irrigation in those areas which are water starved and have Ground water depletion. The logic of 
North Eastern States requiring more Central support (90:10) due to topographical and socio-
economic conditions which    hampers utilization of full potential of the rain fall and Ground water 
resource and hence requiring micro irrigation for increasing the water use efficiency at farm level to 
enhance the production & productivity of the crops and increase the income of the farmers does 
not hold good in case of assistance for micro irrigation as these States have abundant water 
supply and actual problem is to harness it so as to reduce the flood menace. The Committee 
therefore think that the existing policy of giving more financial assistance to such States appears to 
be in contradiction with the objectives. They, therefore, recommend the Ministry of Jal Shakti to 
take up this matter with the Ministry of Finance in consultation with the DA&FW and impress upon 
the need to change the funding pattern in the ratio of 90:10 for States suffering from water 
shortage and 60: 40 for water abundant States. Although the allocation under the scheme is based 
on the principle of inclusivity and are released on the basis of demand, the Committee are of the 
view that the Department of Agriculture & Farmers’ Welfare has to play a more proactive role. The 
DoWR, RD & GR should impress upon the Department of Agriculture & Farmers’ Welfare to strive 
to release funds under the scheme to those States which cultivate water intensive crops but have 
not been actively implementing micro irrigation methods, the need for utilizing funds under PDMC 
on the basis of approved AAP and clear previous unspent balances, so as to reduce dependence 
on Ground water. 

60 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
Per Drop More Crop Scheme which is operational from 2015-16 which mainly focuses on 
enhancing water use eﬃciency at farm level through precision/micro irrigation (Drip and Sprinkler 
Irrigation) is providing more focus in Himalayan and North-Eastern region since there is substantial 
shortages of water during winter and summer seasons due to topographical reasons though they 
encounter high rainfall during monsoon.In this regard, it is further mentioned that: 
One of the objectives of PDMC is to increase area of coverage of micro irrigation in water intensive 
crops. The Department is taking various initiatives for increasing coverage of area under micro 
irrigation in water intensive crop to increase water use efficiency. So far, 77.90 lakh ha. area has 
been covered under micro irrigation in the country since 2015-16 till now. Out of this, area under 
water intensive crops i.e. cotton, sugarcane, banana etc. is 7.33 lakh ha. Besides, Union Finance 
Minister in the Union Budget 2017-18 announced setting up of a dedicated Micro Irrigation Fund 
(MIF) to be instituted with NABARD with an initial corpus of Rs. 5,000 crore. The objective of the 
fund is to facilitate the States in mobilizing resources for expanding coverage of micro irrigation by 
taking up special and innovative projects and also for incentivising micro irrigation beyond the 
provisions available under PDMC to encourage farmers to install micro irrigation systems. MIF has 
to be augmented by additional amount of Rs. 5,000 crore. 
Further, the funding pattern under Centrally Sponsored Schemes is largely guided by NITI Aayog 
vide its O.M No. 011013/02/2015-CSS & ; CMC dated 17th August, 2016 which has been issued 
based on the recommendations of the Sub-Group of Chief Ministers and in consultation with 
various Ministries/ Departments and other Stakeholders, with the approval of the Cabinet. The 
arrangements in these OMs are in force since 2016-17. In lieu of the Jammu &  Kashmir 
Reorganization Act, 2019, clause 4 and 11 of the NITI Aayog’s OM were modiﬁed and were 
communicated vide NITI Aayog’s OM dated 26.10.2019. In addition to above the scheme under 
reference in PMKSY-Per drop more crop was approved by the Cabinet/Competent authority which 
also included the fund sharing pattern. 
(OM No. T-12019/3/2023/-GW Section-MOWR dated 19/6/2023) 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 16 
Ground Water pollution by industries – Need for a unified approach 
 
The Committee note that CGWB has found contaminated Ground water in most of the 88 
industrial clusters identified by CPCB. Further, 38 industrial clusters have been identified by CPCB 
as Critically Polluted Areas (CPAs) with Comprehensive Environmental Pollution Index (CEPI), 
[which is a rational number (ranging from 0 to 100) to characterize environmental quality at a 
given industrial areas following algorithm of pollution source, pathway and receptor], score of 70 
and above and 31 industrial clusters have been identified as Severely Polluted Areas (SPAs) in 
the CPCB’s assessment of CEPI scores in 2018 at 100 identified industrial clusters (including 
88 industrial clusters above) in 21 States across the country. They are particularly concerned to 
note that out of 72,314 industries requiring Effluent Treatment Plants (ETPs), only 70,555 

61 
 
industries have functional ETPs, of which 1040 industries do not comply with environmental 
standards. The Committee observe that CPCB has taken following measures for preventing 
industrial pollution of Ground water : 
Industry Specific Standards and General Standards for discharge of effluents notified under the 
Environment (Protection) Act, 1986,Time-Targeted Action Programme under Corporate 
Responsibility on Environment Protection (CREP),Establishment of Common Effluent Treatment 
Plants (CETPs) for cluster of Small Scale Industries,Installation of Online Continuous Effluent / 
Emission Monitoring System (OCEMS) with real time data connectivity to CPCB, and Zero Liquid 
Discharge (ZLD) to protect the water quality in view of lean flow situation in rivers and streams in 
a larger non monsoon period.However, they note that little progress seems to be made in 
reducing Ground water pollution, a fact, admitted by the CPCB itself attributing it to unabated 
growth  of population  and resultant waste water  generation  along  with uncontrolled 
abstraction of Surface and Ground water causing reduction in recharge potential. In this regard 
they note the submission made by the MoEF &CC that (i) absence of a policy on water 
pollution, (ii) preponderance of State Government agencies in implementation of policy as Water is 
a State subject, (iii) difficulty in implementation of policy due to sharing of aquifers by a number 
of States and (iv) involvement of multiple agencies at Central and State level has further 
compounded the problem. Further, Lack of proper monitoring of NOC conditions while permitting 
abstraction of Ground water under The Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1974, no 
data on water consumption by the municipalities, local bodies and industrial units post repeal of 
Water Cess Act, etc. reflect the dire state of affairs in policy implementation regarding Ground 
water. The Committee are therefore of the opinion that water being most important resource for 
survival of life, its governance cannot be left scattered over multiple jurisdictions. Further, there is 
an imperative need for chalking out a Scheme/Programme specifically to control Ground water 
pollution. Therefore, in addition to the need for urgent measures for setting up a nodal 
agency/Centralised body, the Committee further recommend that immediate steps should be 
taken to formulate programme to prevent Ground water pollution. Besides, monitoring of 
compliance by the industries needs to be done scrupulously to reduce violations. Also, quarterly 
physical inspections of all the functional ETPs are prerequisite to  ensure that untreated water is 
not discharged.  Accordingly, the Committee recommend the Department to take appropriate 
measures and apprise them about their details within three months of presentation of this Report. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
For strengthening monitoring mechanism and eﬀective compliance through self- regulatory 
mechanism, CPCB directed all 17 categories of highly polluting industries, GPIs of Ganga basin, 
CETPs, biomedical waste management facilities and common hazardous waste facilities to install 
Online Continuous Eﬄuent/ Emission Monitoring Systems (OCEMS) for constant vigil on pollution 
levels. From these OCEMS, real-time values of environmental pollutants of trade eﬄuent and 
emissions, discharged from industrial units are transmitted online to CPCB and concerned 
SPCB/PCC on 24x7 basis.Central software processes the data and in case of value of pollutant 
parameter exceeds prescribed environmental norms, an automatic SMS alert is generated and 

62 
 
sent toindustrial unit, SPCB and CPCB, so that corrective measures can be taken by the industry 
immediately and appropriate action can be taken by concerned SPCB/PCC. 
Industrial pollution (Compliance of discharge / emission norms) of about 6,500 industries including 
about 950 Grossly Polluting Industries in catchment of river Ganga is monitored on real time basis 
through Online Continuous Eﬄuent Monitoring Systems (OCEMS). 
In addition to above, the steps / measures taken for the compliance of norms are: 
i. The Ministry of Environment Forest and Climate Change (MoEF & CC), Government of India 
notiﬁes industry speciﬁc discharge standards under Schedule- 
I: ‘Standards for Emission or Discharge of Environmental Pollutants from various Industries’ of 
Environment Protection Act, 1986. So far, industry speciﬁc environmental standards, for 81 
industrial sectors (including eﬄuent standards for 47 sectors), have been notiﬁed. Industrial 
sectors, for which speciﬁc standards are not available, general standards as notiﬁed under 
Schedule-VI of Environment Protection Rules, 1986 shall be applicable. In order to ensure 
conservation of water, load-based standards have also been prescribed for water consumption 
and wastewater generation for about 15 water-intensive industries, namely, thermal power plant, 
jute processing industry, integrated iron and steel, sugar, pulp and paper, fermentation, caustic 
soda, man-made ﬁbre, starch, dairy, fertilizer, natural rubber processing, coal washeries, edible oil 
and vanaspati, tanneries, petroleum oil reﬁnery and paint industry. Industries must meet these 
prescribed environmental standards. The State Pollution Control Boards (SPCBs)/Pollution Control 
Committees (PCCs) issue consent to establish/ consent to operate and authorization to the 
industries in the States. SPCBs/PCCs monitor the compliance of industrial emissions/eﬄuent 
according to the prescribed standards. In case of non- compliance, action against industry is taken 
under provisions of Water Act, 1974, Air Act, 1981 and Environment (Protection) Act, 1986 
 
Industrial    
Category 
Potential of 
 Pollution 
Pollution  
Index (PI) 
No of Sectors 
 Categorized  
by CPCB 
CTO  
validity period 
 recommended by
CPCB 
Minimum  
Environmental   
Surveillce 
Frequency 
Red High ≥60     61  5 years 6months 
Red High ≥60     61  5 years 6months 
Orange Moderate 41 to59  90  10 years 1year 
Green Low 21 to40         65 15 years 2 years 
White Nil ≤20          38 Not required* - 
 
(OM No. T-12019/3/2023/-GW Section-MOWR dated 19/6/2023) 
RECOMMENDATION NO.17 
Amendment to the Water Pollution and Prevention Act, 1974 empowering SPCBs for 
imposition of penalties 
The Committee note that Grossly Polluting Industries on the main stem of Ganga and Yamuna are 
being monitored through Third Party verification since 2017 and violators are being issued closure 
orders by SPCBs and also levied environmental compensation. The Committee further note that 

63 
 
CPCB is mainly concerned with framing of Guidelines without any role in their enforcement as 
most of these powers are vested with the SPCBs under the Water Pollution and Prevention Act, 
1974 except the authority to impose fines, for which Courts have to be approached. Therefore, 
direction for closure is more convenient option for SPCBs to enforce violators to abide by the 
Guidelines. Admitting the existing gap in enforcement powers, the Secretary, MoEF & CC informed 
that the Act will be amended to bridge the gap. While agreeing to the need for enforcement of the 
environmental norms/standards for ensuring industrial development in a sustainable way, the 
Committee, however, do not approve of closure notices as a widely used option. Since industrial 
development is also a necessity for employment generation and prosperity, the Committee are of 
the considered view that a balanced approach needs to be adopted. While strict penalties need to 
be imposed for flouting environmental norms, direction for closure should be resorted to as a last 
option. Further, there should be a mechanism to check that the ‘Consent of establishment and 
Consent to operate’ granted to industries, are in accordance with the norms fixed and in case of 
any change/revision in existing norms, after Consent to establish is issued, closure notices on 
grounds of non compliance with changed norms should be avoided. The Committee desire that 
such cases should be studied and appropriate time frame should be fixed to ensure compliance 
with the new norms. Also, the SPCBs need to be vested with power to impose monetary penalties 
to help them take appropriate action for minor violations without straightaway going for closing the 
violating industrial unit. They, therefore, recommend the DoWR, RD & GR to urge the MoEF & CC 
to bring the necessary amendments to Water Pollution and Prevention Act, 1974 urgently to 
sufficiently empower SPCBs to impose fines for violations of minor nature. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
Central Pollution Control Board (CPCB), State Pollution Control Boards (SPCBs)/ Pollution Control 
Committees (PCCs) performing its duties mentioned in Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) 
Act, 1974, Air (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1981 and Environment (Protection) Act, 
1986 and its Rules from time to time and taking action against defaulters responsible for increase 
in all types of pollution (non-compliance to the eﬄuent / emission norms, waste management etc.). 
Also based on the ‘Polluter Pays Principle’ the defaulters are impounded upon Environmental 
Compensation (EC) for contaminating/ damaging the environment. 
S.No. Actions Under the provisions of Acts & 
Policies 
1. Issuing     of     directions     for 
correction/remedial / closure            
Depending upon severity of the case. 
Under  Section5 of  the  
Environment 
(Protection) Act,1986 
2. Issuing of  directions  towards 
Construction projects for 
correction/remedial/closure 
depending upon severity of the case. 
Under Section 31A of the 
(Prevention & Control of 
Pollution)Act,1981 
3. Imposing of Environmental 
Compensations on the construction 
projects. 
Methodology       developed        for 
Assessing Environmental 
Compensation and Action Plan to 
Utilize the Fund by CPCB as per 
Hon’ble NGT order. 

64 
 
CPCB has initiated penal action in the form of imposing EC and has evolved a methodology for 
levying such EC against the industries /facilities not- complying the norms. Accordingly, action 
being taken against the violators are: 
(OM No. T-12019/3/2023/-GW Section-MOWR dated 19/6/2023) 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 18  
Real time monitoring of effluent discharge by industries 
The Committee observe that CPCB has directed all the 17 category of highly polluting industries to 
install Online Continuous Effluent / Emission Monitoring System (OCEMS) with real time data 
connectivity to CPCB which conducts regular inspection and takes action on exceedance alerts of 
OCEMS or offline OCEMS. Although industry Specific Standards and General Standards for 
discharge of effluents have been notified under the Environment (Protection) Rules, 1986, the 
Committee observe that MoJS also, is in the process of finalizing policy by bringing out 
standards/limit for treated or used water to utilize/recycle in various sectors including agriculture 
wherein use of untreated water for irrigation purposes has emerged as a big issue, especially in 
cities posing health risk for city dwellers. Further, they observe that CPCB is monitoring ETPs 
regarding discharge of treated water on the basis of computer generated SMS alerts received on 
violation of effluent and emission standards and recorded in OCEMS. Having noted that despite all 
the above measures, industrial pollution of Ground water remains a burning problem, the 
Committee are of the view that stricter vigil of ETPs is required to ensure that untreated water does 
not get discharged in any way into water bodies, especially by the industries operating on the 
banks of rivers and canals. In their view, besides inspection of industries, study of water quality of 
rivers and canals having industries on their banks should also be conducted to find out how 
effectively the Effluent Treatment Plants are working. They, therefore, recommend the DoWR, RD 
& GR to conduct such a study in coordination with CPCBs and SPCBs and furnish the details of 
number of industries situated on the banks of rivers, number of such industries with functional 
ETPs, volume of water treated by the ETPs before discharge, number of violators and action taken 
against violators during the last 5 years. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
Inspection of all Grossly Polluting Industries (GPIs) located in ﬁve Ganga main stem states i.e. 
Uttarakhand, Uttar Pradesh, Bihar, Jharkhand and West Bengal is being carried-out by CPCB 
authorised third party technical institutes since 2017 to verify the eﬀectiveness of eﬄuent treatment 
plant and compliance vis-à-vis eﬄuent discharge standards and ascertain speciﬁc fresh water 
consumption, waste water discharge and pollution load etc. Since 2020, the GPIs located in 
Yamuna main stem states i.e. Uttarakhand, Uttar Pradesh, Haryana, Delhi, Bihar, Jharkhand and 
West Bengal are also considered for inspection. The Year-wise inventory of GPIs, sector-wise 
waste water discharge and compliance status in Ganga and Yamuna main stems states is given in 
Annexure-IV. 
(OM No. T-12019/3/2023/-GW Section-MOWR dated 19/6/2023) 

65 
 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 25 
Rejuvenation of water bodies in urban areas 
The Committee notice that 63 water bodies in cities have been taken up for rejuvenation under 
Atal Mission for Rejuvenation and Urban Transformation (AMRUT) and 151 under Smart Cities 
Mission (SCM), while rest of the water bodies will be taken up under Jal Jeevan Mission (Urban) of 
the Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs (MoHUA). However, no specific information has been 
provided about water bodies in major cities of Delhi, Mumbai, Chennai and Bengaluru where 
encroachment and pollution of water bodies is a big issue. They further note that in cities and 
urban areas, Urban Local Bodies (ULBs) are primarily responsible for maintenance of water 
bodies. However, they are concerned to note that ULBs are unable to ensure proper maintenance 
of water bodies as these are severely starved of funds both at State and local level. The 
Committee therefore recommend that the DoWR, RD & GR should urge the MoHUA and State 
Governments to take steps for strengthening ULBs. They would also like to be apprised of the 
measures taken in this regard within three months of presentation of this report. Further, they 
desire that total number of water bodies in urban areas along with the details of the status of 
encroachment, extinct, etc. along with measures taken/contemplated to restore the water bodies 
especially in metro cities like Delhi, Chennai, Mumbai, Hyderabad, Kolkata and Bengaluru be 
furnished to them within three months of presentation of this report. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
Under AMARUT mission, ULBs/States may take up projects related to 
new/augmentation/rehabilitation of water supply system; rejuvenation of water bodies for water 
supply including in Metro cities and recharge of ground water etc. So far 1,342 projects worth Rs 
42,760.91 crore have been grounded including 963 completed projects  worth Rs 18,749.57 crore. 
As per ﬁrst Census report 2023 on water bodies, total number of water bodies in Urban areas 
falling in 33 States are 69,485. Total number of encroached water bodies in these States are 
1,760. The information collected through the Census are being shared with States/UTs for taking 
corrective action as per extant guidelines through relevant Central/State schemes.  
As far as sharing of the information collected in census with States/UTs is concerned, it is 
informed that letters from Secretary, D/o Water Resources, RD & GR have been sent to 
the States/UTs for taking measures to remove the encroachment and revival of defunct 
water bodies. 
 
[OM No. T-12019/3/2023/-GW Section-MOWR dated 19/6/2023 and V-52012/1/2022-MI 
(Stat) dated 03/11/2023] 
  

66 
 
CHAPTER –V 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL 
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWATED 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NIL 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI              Shri Parbatbhai Savabhai Patel 
06 December, 2023                                 Chairperson,                                                                      
15 Agrahayana,1945(Saka)   Standing Committee on Water Resources 
 
  

67 
 
Annexure II 
ANNEXURE 
[Vide Para 4 of the Introduction] 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS/ OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN THE TWENTY SECOND 
REPORT (SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
(i) Total number of Recommendations/Observations                                          
31  
 
(ii) Recommendation/Observations which have been accepted by the Government 
Recommendation Sl. Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 19, 20, 21, 
22, 23, 24, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30 and 31    
   
                   Total - 26  
      
                Percentage -83.87% 
 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in 
 view of the Government’s replies 
          Recommendation Sl. Nos. NIL         
                                                          Total - NIL  
            Percentage- 0%  
 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Government   
have not been accepted by the Committee 
 
Recommendation Sl. Nos. 8, 16, 17, 18 and 25 
           
 
Total – 05 
       
                Percentage - 16.13 %  
                                         
(v) Recommendation/Observation in respect of which final reply of the Government is 
still awaited  
 
 Recommendation Sl. Nos. NIL                                                   
 
                Total - NIL 
               
                        Percentage - 0% 
  

68 
 
Annexure III 
Compliance status of 17 category of industries  
Sl. 
No. 
SPCB/PCC Total no. 
of 
industries 
No. of 
industries 
closed  
by their 
own 
No. of 
industries 
operational 
No. of 
industries 
complying 
with 
environmental 
standards  
No. of 
industries 
non-
complying 
with 
environmental 
standards  
No. of industries against which 
action is  taken for non-
complying with environmental 
standards 
Show 
cause 
notice 
issued 
Closure 
directions 
issued 
Legal 
cases 
filed 
Action 
under 
process 
1 Andaman & 
Nicobar  
0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
2 Andhra 
Pradesh 
299 35 264 246 18 8 4 1 5 
3 Arunachal 
Pradesh 
5 0 5 5 0 0 0 0 0 
4 Assam 51 11 40 36 4 2 2 0 0 
5 Bihar 43 26 17 17 0 0 0 0 0 
6 Chandigarh 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
7 Chhattisgarh 163 20 143 137 6 5 1 0 0 
8 Daman & Diu 3 0 3 3 0 0 0 0 0 
9 Delhi 3 0 3 3 0 0 0 0 0 
10 Goa 10 2 8 8 0 0 0 0 0 
11 Gujarat 502 78 424 325 99 87 7 0 5 
12 Haryana 101 7 94 92 2 0 2 0 0 
13 Himachal 
Pradesh 
22 3 19 18 1 1 0 0 0 
14 Jammu and 
Kashmir 
55 0 55 52 3 3 0 0 0 
15 Jharkhand  81 2 79 54 25 13 1 0 11 
16 Karnataka  296 66 230 207 23 18 3 2 0 
17 Kerala 25 5 20 20 0 0 0 0 0 
18 Lakshadweep 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
19 Madhya 
Pradesh 
96 5 91 88 3 1 0 1 1 
20 Maharashtra 668 52 616 475 141 76 27 3 35 
21 Manipur 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
22 Meghalaya  24 1 23 23 0 0 0 0 0 
23 Mizoram 2 2 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
24 Nagaland 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
25 Odisha 187 31 156 126 30 28 2 0 0 
26 Puducherry 7 3 4 4 0 0 0 0 0 
27 Punjab  88 8 80 69 11 11 0 0 0 
28 Rajasthan 224 13 211 205 6 5 1 0 0 
29 Sikkim 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
30 Tamil Nadu 233 43 190 181 9 8 1 0 0 
31 Telangana  347 48 299 270 29 24 3 0 2 
32 Tripura 5 1 4 4 0 0 0 0 0 
33 Uttar 
Pradesh 
855 196 659 646 13 6 5 0 2 
34 Uttarakhand 46 0 46 42 4 4 0 0 0 
35 West Bengal 131 34 97 73 24 15 9 0 0 
  Total 4572 692 3880 3429 451 315 68 7 61 
 
 
 
 

69 
 
Annexure-I V 
SECTOR-WISE WASTE WATER DISCHARGE AND COMPLIANCE STATUS IN GANGA AND YAMUNA MAIN 
STEMS STATES  
 
 During 2017, total 1109 GPIs were inventoried in river Ganga main stem states, 961 GPIs in 2018, 1072 GPIs in 
2019, 1080 GPIs in 2020, 1051 GPIs in 2021 and 1231 GPIs in 2022 were inventoried in consultation with 
concerned SPCBs. Year-wise and state-wise number of GPIs in river Ganga main stem states is as follows: 
  
State 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 
Uttarakhand 68  57 54 55 58 56 
Uttar Pradesh 955  812 908 913 867 1036 
Bihar 40  48 56 53 66 78 
Jharkhand 0  0 6 5 5 5 
West Bengal 46  44 48 54 55 56 
 Total  1109 961 1072 1080 1051 1231 
  
 GPIs in river Yamuna main stem were included for inspection during year 2020. During 2020, 1660 GPIs, during 
2021, 1655 GPIs and during 2022, 1963 GPIs were inventoried. Year-wise and state-wise number of GPIs is as 
follows: 
  
State 2020 2021 2022 
Delhi 267 210 196 
Haryana 832 924 1145 
Uttar Pradesh 551  510 611 
Uttarakhand 10  11 11 
 Total  1660 1655 1963 
  
 All the industries have installed effluent treatment plant for treatment of waste water generated during the 
industrial processes.  
 
 During 2017, the discharge of about 349.13 MLD waste water after appropriate treatment was estimated from 888 
operational GPIs (out of 1109 GPIs) in Ganga main stem states.  During 2018, around 314.86 MLD waste water 
discharged by 683 operational GPIs (out of 961 GPIs); during 2019, around 302 MLD waste water discharged by 
595 operational GPIs (out of 1072 GPIs); during 2020, about 281.7 MLD waste water discharged by 890 GPIs (out 
of 1080 GPIs); during 2021, about 266.85 MLD waste water discharged by 879 operational GPIs (out of 1051 
GPIs). Sector-wise wastewater discharge are as follows: 
 
S. No Sectors Wastewater discharge, MLD 
2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 
1.        Sugar 65.72  63.18 71.73 86.1 91.4 
2.        Paper 92.9  101.8 84.8 75.8 81.17 
3.        Food, dairy & 
Beverage 21.4 14.68 19.6 17.95 20.75 
4.        Textile 5.18  10.19 12 15.07 10.36 
5.        Tannery 13.45  10.77 17 5.71 10.49 
6.        Chemicals* 116  53 57.13 35.3 35.5 
7.        Others# 27  55.57 34.58 42.35 13.64 
8.        Slaughter house 7.48  5.67 4.9 3.42 3.54 
9.        Distillery ZLD  ZLD ZLD ZLD ZLD 
 Total 349.13 314.86 302 281.7 266.85 
*Chemicals include, Oil & refinery, Pesticide, Petrochemicals, Pharmaceuticals, Fertilizer and chemical. # Others 
include Automobile, Electroplating, Galvanized Iron structure, Hair Oil Manufacture, Manufacturing & Repair of 
aircraft, Paint, Telephone sets, Diesel locomotive units. ** including 09 CETPs, ZLD: Zero liquid discharge; MLD: 
million liter per day  

70 
 
 During 2020, the discharge of about 104.07 MLD waste water after appropriate treatment was estimated from 
1219 operational GPIs (out of 1660 GPIs) in Yamuna main stem states and during 2021, 144.4 MLD waste water 
was discharged by 1319 operational GPIs (out of 1655 GPIs). Sector-wise wastewater discharge are as follows:  
  
S. No Sectors Wastewater discharge, MLD 
2020 2021 
1.        Sugar 15.28  18.05 
2.        Paper 23.67  23.52 
3.        Food, dairy & Beverage 8.29 13.7 
4.        Textile 29.66  46.76 
5.        Tannery 0.26  0.73 
.        Chemicals* 15.98  27.86 
7.        Others# 7.34  9.2 
8.        Slaughter house 3.59  4.58 
9.        Distillery ZLD  ZLD 
 Total 104.07 144.4 
  
*Chemicals include, Oil & refinery, Pesticide, Petrochemicals, Pharmaceuticals, Fertilizer and chemical,** 
including 33 CETPs,,# Others include Automobile, Electroplating, Galvanized Iron structure, Hair Oil 
Manufacture, Manufacturing & Repair of aircraft, Paint, Telephone sets, Diesel locomotive units. ZLD: Zero 
liquid discharge; MLD: million liter per day 
 
 Concerned SPCBs/PCC take necessary action on the basis of inspection reports provided by third party technical 
institutes by issuing either closure direction or show cause notices along with environmental compensation as 
deemed-fit. Year-wise compliance status and action taken against the non-complying GPIs are depicted below:  
Year-wise compliance status of GPIs in river Ganga: 
 
 
Year No. 
GPIs 
Complying 
GPIs 
Non-Complied GPIs Self-Closed GPIs Show Cause Notice issued Closure directions issued 
2017 1109 350 180 358 221 
2018 960 474 96 113 278 
2019 726 487 99 9 131 
2020 1080 722 159 9 190 
2021 1051 692 174 13 172 
 
 
 
Year-wise compliance status of GPIs in river Yamuna: 
  
Year No. GPIs Complying GPIs Non-Complied GPIs Self-Closed GPIs Show Cause Notice issued Closure directions issued 
2020 1660 787 406 26 441 
2021 1655 965 323 31 336 
  
  

71 
 
 As per the information received from SPCBs/PCC, the details of environmental compensation (EC) levied by 
SPCBs/PCC based on annual inspections are as follows: 
  
S. 
No. 
Component 2020-21 2021-22 
1 Number of units on which environmental 
compensation (EC) levied 
222 265 
2 Amount of environmental compensation imposed 
(Rs.) 
39,30,00,800/- 94,52,72,400/- 
3 Amount of environmental compensation deposited 
(Rs.) 
14,59,62,875/- 9,53,52,000/- 
4 Number of units for which bank guarantee 
imposed/forfeited and amount 
49 units for total amount Rs. 
2,35,00,000/- 
07 units for total amount Rs. 
72,00,000/- 
5 Bank Guarantee (BG) forfeited 2 units for total amount Rs. 
20,00,000/- 
1 unit for total amount Rs. 
10,00,000/- 
  
State wise details are as follows: 
  
Annual inspections (2020-21) 
  
S. 
No. 
Component Uttarakhand Uttar 
Pradesh 
Bihar West Bengal Delhi Haryana Total 
1 Number of units 
on which 
environmental 
compensation 
(EC) levied 
2 198 1 9 1 11 222 
2 Amount of 
environmental 
compensation 
imposed (Rs.) 
2,68,800 34,11,00,000 22,72,500 77,00,000 2,80,000 4,13,79,500 39,30,00,800 
3 Amount of 
environmental 
compensation 
deposited (Rs.) 
24,000 11,40,00,000 22,72,500 47,00,000 2,80,000 2,46,86,375 14,59,62,875 
4 Number of units 
for which bank 
guarantee 
imposed and 
amount 
02 units. BG of 
Rs. 5 lacs from 
each unit 
0 0 
15 units for 
total amount 
Rs. 
2,09,00,000/- 
0 
32 units for 
Rs. 
16,00,000/- 
49 units for 
total amount 
Rs. 
2,35,00,000/- 
5 Bank Guarantee 
(BG) forfeited and 
amount 0 0 0 
2 units for total 
amount Rs. 
20,00,000/- 
0 0 
2 units for total 
amount Rs. 
20,00,000/- 
*Jharkhand did not levy any EC 
  
 
Annual inspections (2021-22) 
  
S.No Component Uttarakhand Uttar 
Pradesh 
Bihar West 
Bengal 
Delhi Total 
1 Number of units on 
which environmental 
compensation (EC) 
levied 
1 259 3 0 2 265 
2 Amount of 
environmental 
compensation imposed 
(Rs) 
3,90,400 93,33,00,000 1,03,82,000 0 12,00,000 94,52,72,400 
3  Amount of 
environmental 
compensation 
deposited (Rs) 
 
0 9,33,00,000  8,52,000 0 12,00,000 9,53,52,000 

72 
 
4 
Number of units for 
which bank guarantee 
imposed and amount 
0 0 0 
07 units 
for total 
amount 
72,00,000 
0 07 units for total 
amount 72,00,000 
5 Bank Guarantee (BG) 
forfeited and amount 0 0 0 
1 unit for 
total 
amount Rs 
1000000 
0 
1 unit for total 
amount Rs 
10,00,000/- 
*Jharkhand & Haryana did not levy any EC 
  
 Inspection of all Grossly Polluting Industries (GPIs) located in five Ganga main stem states i.e. Uttarakhand, Uttar 
Pradesh, Bihar, Jharkhand and West Bengal is being carried-out by CPCB authorised third party technical 
institutes since 2017 to verify the effectiveness of effluent treatment plant and compliance w.r.t. effluent discharge 
standards and ascertain specific fresh water consumption, waste water discharge and pollution load etc. Since 
2020, the GPIs located in Yamuna main stem states i.e. Uttarakhand, Uttar Pradesh, Haryana, Delhi, Bihar, 
Jharkhand and West Bengal are also considered for inspection.  
 
 During 2017, total 1109 GPIs were inventoried in river Ganga main stem states, 961 GPIs in 2018, 1072 GPIs in 
2019, 1080 GPIs in 2020, 1051 GPIs in 2021 and 1231 GPIs in 2022 were inventoried in consultation with 
concerned SPCBs. Year-wise and state-wise number of GPIs in river Ganga main stem states is as follows: 
  
State 2017 2018 2019  2020 2021 2022 
Uttarakhand 68 57 54 55 58 56 
Uttar Pradesh 955 812 908 913 867 1036 
Bihar 40 48 56 53 66 78 
Jharkhand 0 0 6 5 5 5 
West Bengal 46 44 48 54 55 56 
 Total  1109 961 1072 1080 1051 1231 
 GPIs in river Yamuna main stem were included for inspection during year 2020. During 2020, 1660 GPIs, 
during 2021, 1655 GPIs and during 2022, 1963 GPIs were inventoried. Year-wise and state-wise number of 
GPIs is as follows: 
State 2020 2021 2022 
Delhi 267 210 196 
Haryana 832 924 1145 
Uttar Pradesh 551 510 611 
Uttarakhand 10 11 11 
 Total  1660 1655 1963 
  
 All the industries have installed effluent treatment plant for treatment of waste water generated during the 
industrial processes.  
 During 2017, the discharge of about 349.13 MLD waste water after appropriate treatment was estimated from 
888 operational GPIs (out of 1109 GPIs) in Ganga main stem states.  During 2018, around 314.86 MLD 
waste water discharged by 683 operational GPIs (out of 961 GPIs); during 2019, around 302 MLD waste 
water discharged by 595 operational GPIs (out of 1072 GPIs); during 2020, about 281.7 MLD waste water 
discharged by 890 GPIs (out of 1080 GPIs); during 2021, about 266.85 MLD waste water discharged by 879 
operational GPIs (out of 1051 GPIs). Sector-wise wastewater discharge are as follows: 
S. No Sectors Wastewater discharge, MLD 
2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 
1.        Sugar 65.72 63.18 71.73 86.1 91.4 
2.        Paper 92.9 101.8 84.8 75.8 81.17 
3.        Food, dairy & Beverage 21.4 14.68 19.6 17.95 20.75 
4.        Textile 5.18 10.19 12 15.07 10.36 
5.        Tannery 13.45 10.77 17 5.71 10.49 
6.        Chemicals* 116 53 57.13 35.3 35.5 

73 
 
7.        Others# 27 55.57 34.58 42.35 
13.64 
 
 
8.        Slaughter house 7.48 5.67 4.9 3.42 3.54 
9.        Distillery ZLD ZLD ZLD ZLD ZLD 
 Total 349.13 314.86 302 281.7 266.85 
 
*Chemicals include, Oil & refinery, Pesticide, Petrochemicals, Pharmaceuticals, Fertilizer and chemical. # Others 
include Automobile, Electroplating, Galvanized Iron structure, Hair Oil Manufacture, Manufacturing & Repair of 
aircraft, Paint, Telephone sets, Diesel locomotive units. 
** including 09 CETPs, ZLD: Zero liquid discharge; MLD: million liter per day 
  
 During 2020, the discharge of about 104.07 MLD waste water after appropriate treatment was estimated from 
1219 operational GPIs (out of 1660 GPIs) in Yamuna main stem states and during 2021, 144.4 MLD waste 
water was discharged by 1319 operational GPIs (out of 1655 GPIs). Sector-wise wastewater discharge are as 
follows: 
 
S. No Sectors Wastewater discharge, MLD 
2020 2021 
1.        Sugar 15.28 18.05 
2.        Paper 23.67 23.52 
3.        Food, dairy & Beverage 8.29 13.7 
4.        Textile 29.66 46.76 
5.        Tannery 0.26 0.73 
6.        Chemicals* 15.98 27.86 
7.        Others# 7.34 9.2 
8.        Slaughter house 3.59 4.58 
9.        Distillery ZLD ZLD 
 Total 104.07 144.4 
*Chemicals include, Oil & refinery, Pesticide, Petrochemicals, Pharmaceuticals, Fertilizer and chemical. ** including 
33 CETPs, # Others include Automobile, Electroplating, Galvanized Iron structure, Hair Oil Manufacture, 
Manufacturing & Repair of aircraft, Paint, Telephone sets, Diesel locomotive units. ZLD: Zero liquid discharge; MLD: 
million liter per day 
  
 Concerned SPCBs/PCC take necessary action on the basis of inspection reports provided by third party 
technical institutes by issuing either closure direction or show cause notices along with environmental 
compensation as deemed-fit. Year-wise compliance status and action taken against the non-complying GPIs 
are depicted below: 
  
Year-wise compliance status of GPIs in river Ganga: 
 
 
Year No. GPIs Complying 
GPIs 
Non-Complied GPIs 
Self-Closed GPIs Show Cause 
Notice issued 
Closure 
directions 
issued 
2017 1109 350 180 358 221 
2018 960 474 96 113 278 
2019 726 487 99 9 131 
2020 1080 722 159 9 190 
2021 1051 692 174 13 172 
  
 

74 
 
Year-wise compliance status of GPIs in river Yamuna: 
  
Year No. GPIs Complying 
GPIs 
Non-Complied GPIs 
Self-Closed 
GPIs Show Cause 
Notice issued 
Closure 
directions 
issued 
2020 1660 787 406 26 441 
2021 1655 965 323 31 336 
  
 As per the information received from SPCBs/PCC, the details of environmental compensation (EC) levied by 
SPCBs/PCC based on annual inspections are as follows: 
  
S. No. Component 2020-21 2021-22 
1 Number of units on which environmental compensation (EC) 
levied 
222 265 
2 Amount of environmental compensation imposed (Rs.) 39,30,00,800/- 94,52,72,400/- 
3 Amount of environmental compensation deposited (Rs.) 14,59,62,875/- 9,53,52,000/- 
4 Number of units for which bank guarantee imposed/forfeited and 
amount 
49 units for total 
amount Rs. 
2,35,00,000/- 
07 units for total 
amount Rs. 
72,00,000/- 
5 Bank Guarantee (BG) forfeited 2 units for total 
amount Rs. 
20,00,000/- 
1 unit for total 
amount Rs. 
10,00,000/- 
  
State wise details are as follows: 
 
 Annual inspections (2020-21): 
  
S. 
No. 
Component Uttarakhand Uttar 
Pradesh 
Bihar West Bengal Delhi Haryana Total 
1 Number of 
units on which 
environmental 
compensation 
(EC) levied 
2 198 1 9 1 11 222 
2 Amount of 
environmental 
compensation 
imposed (Rs.) 
2,68,800 34,11,00,000 22,72,500 77,00,000 2,80,000 4,13,79,500 39,30,00,800 
3 Amount of 
environmental 
compensation 
deposited 
(Rs.) 
24,000 11,40,00,000 22,72,500 47,00,000 2,80,000 2,46,86,375 14,59,62,875 
4 Number of 
units for which 
bank 
guarantee 
imposed and 
amount 
02 units. BG 
of Rs. 5 lacs 
from each 
unit 
0 0 
15 units for 
total amount 
Rs. 
2,09,00,000/- 
0 
32 units for 
Rs. 
16,00,000/- 
49 units for 
total amount 
Rs. 
2,35,00,000/- 
5 Bank 
Guarantee 
(BG) forfeited 
and amount 
0 0 0 
2 units for 
total amount 
Rs. 
20,00,000/- 
0 0 
2 units for 
total amount 
Rs. 
20,00,000/- 
*Jharkhand did not levy any EC 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 

75 
 
Annual inspections (2021-22) 
  
S.No Component Uttarakhand Uttar 
Pradesh 
Bihar West 
Bengal 
Delhi Total 
1 Number of units on 
which environmental 
compensation (EC) 
levied 
1 259 3 0 2 265 
2 Amount of 
environmental 
compensation imposed 
(Rs) 
3,90,400 93,33,00,000 1,03,82,000 0 12,00,000  94,52,72,400 
3  Amount of 
environmental 
compensation 
deposited (Rs) 
0 9,33,00,000  8,52,000 0 12,00,000  9,53,52,000 
4 
Number of units for 
which bank guarantee 
imposed and amount 
0 0 0 
07 units for 
total 
amount 
72,00,000 
0 
07 units for 
total amount 
72,00,000 
5 Bank Guarantee (BG) 
forfeited and amount 0 0 0 
1 unit for 
total 
amount Rs 
1000000 
0 
1 unit for 
total amount 
Rs 
10,00,000/- 
*Jharkhand & Haryana did not levy any EC 
  

76 
 
Annexure - V 
Details of Storm Water drainage projects in AMRUT Cities 
S. 
No. 
States/UTs AMRUT Cities Grounded 
Projects 
Details of Completed Projects 
No. Cost  
(in Cr) 
No. Cost  
(in Cr) 
Length of 
Drainage 
Constructed 
(in Kms) 
No. of Water 
logging points 
eliminated 
1 Andaman and 
Nicobar Islands 
Post Blair 8 4.02 8 4.02 2.96 11 
2 Andhra Pradesh Anantapur 2 21.37     
3 Kakinada 2 88.62 2 88.62 56.50 - 
4 Machilipatnam 2 19.02     
5 Nellore  2 82.02     
6 Rajahmundry 2 80.67     
7 Srikakulam 2 38.83     
8 Tirupati 2 12.19     
9 Arunachal 
Pradesh 
Itanagar 3 40.37 1 13.12 6.70 2 
10 Bihar Bhagalpur  1 32.66     
11 Muzaffarpur 1 158.78     
12 Patna 1 46.55     
13 Delhi South DMC 3 5.38 3 5.38 7.01 17 
14 Gujarat Amreli 1 7.26 1 7.26 12.94 11 
15 Anand 2 27.06     
16 Bharuch 1 2.81 1 2.81 2.00 4 
17 Bhavnagar 4 8.86 4 8.86 4.55 13 
18 Bhuj 2 3.12 2 3.12 2.42 10 
19 Botad 1 4.53     
20 Deesa 1 9.26 1 9.26 5.17 13 
21 Dwarka 1 4.89     
22 Gandhidham 1 12.43 1 12.43 13.64 9 
23 Gandhinagar 1 6.26 1 6.26 - 51 
24 Godhra 1 1.40 1 1.40 1.26 2 
25 Gondal 2 6.64 1 4.28 2.56 5 
26 Kalol 1 6.30     
27 Mahesana 1 4.10 1 4.10 1.56 3 
28 Morvi 1 4.25     
29 Nadiad 1 15.62 1 15.62 9.45 2 
30 Navsari 3 29.71 1 9.68 9.49 23 
31 Palanpur 1 3.00 1 3.00 2.99 3 
32 Patan 1 3.76 1 3.76 8.30 12 
33 Prbandar 2 11.41 1 6.83 8.71 2 
34 Rajkot 3 11.68 3 11.68 7.20 23 
35 Surendranagar 1 3.67 1 3.67 6.50 6 
36 Vadodara 2 36.63 2 36.63 4.45 5 
37 Valsad 1 3.29 1 3.09 3.13 3 
38 Vapi 1 6.48 1 6.48 2.40 6 
39 Veraval 1 4.48     
40 Haryana Ambala 2 44.92 1 5.00 5.00 25 
41 Bhiwani 2 54.67 1 23.00 11.48 15 
42 Faridabad 2 21.68 2 21.68 2.26 25 
43 Jind 2 24.62 2 24.62 8.01 20 
44 Kaithal 1 11.26 1 11.26 5.60 15 
45 Karnal 2 92.47 1 17.00 3.96 20 
46 Sirsa 2 9.87 1 6.00 2.43 15 
47 Sonipat 2 149.11 1 20.00 5.62 15 
48 Thanesar 2 30.42 2 30.42 18.88 27 
49 Yamunanagar 2 13.35 2 13.35 4.50 11 
50 Himachal Pradesh Kullu 3 11.27     
51 Shimla 7 20.64 7 20.64 56.42 244 

77 
 
52 Jammu and 
Kashmir 
Anantnag 5 11.05 5 11.05 4.68 4 
53 Jammu 22 96.89 20 80.37 26.97 57 
54 Srinagar 9 76.79 8 65.22 24.34 64 
55 Karnataka Badami 4 2.54 4 2.54 1.11 4 
56 Bagalkot 5 4.06 5 4.06 4.99 20 
57 Bhadravati 2 35.18 2 35.18 13.41 10 
58 Chikmagalur 5 9.98 4 6.68 3.36 7 
59 Chitradurga 7 19.39 7 19.39 5.72 5 
60 Gadag-Betigeri 1 9.25     
61 Gangawati 5 19.86 4 9.34 2.98 - 
62 Hospet 5 6.87 5 6.87 4.24 22 
63 Kolar 19 37.85 16 27.72 14.39 - 
64 Mangalore 1 3.66 1 3.66 0.66 4 
65 Robertson Pet 11 20.58 11 20.58 8.73 - 
66 Shimoga 15 68.46 11 32.38 25.06 31 
67 Tumkur 4 5.70 4 5.70 3.35 9 
68 Kerala Alppuzha 145 48.41 137 41.87 45.02 161 
69 Guruvayur 12 13.85 10 1.22 3.50 29 
70 Kannur 12 39.35 4 3.09 15.70 5 
71 Kochi 49 53.86 48 37.86 36.69 103 
72 Kollam 21 29.94 18 22.99 16.32 27 
73 Kozhikode 10 42.20 9 31.53 15.99 17 
74 Plakkad 83 35.44 76 32.66 33.20 186 
75 Thiruvananthapura
m 
103 40.35 100 36.93 55.34 552 
76 Thrissur 67 37.25 58 31.79 29.38 50 
77 Madhya Pradesh Bhopal 15 146.08 15 146.08 131.70 154 
78 Damoh 1 8.66 1 8.66 7.31 4 
79 Dewas 1 2.49 1 2.49 4.95 5 
80 Gwalior 1 21.44     
81 Hoshangabad 1 11.17     
82 Mandsaur 1 6.38 1 3.38 2.95 7 
83 Ratlam 1 13.53 1 13.53 4.55 4 
84 Rewa 1 20.78     
85 Satna 1 17.79 1 17.79 7.50 5 
86 Maharashtra Mira Bhayandar 1 94.06     
87 Mizoram Aizawl 3 57.20 2 34.53 26.91 - 
88 Nagaland Dimapur 4 37.58     
89 Kohima 4 42.17 2 18.35 6.92 - 
90 Rajasthan Baran 1 1.00 1 1.00 0.90 3 
91 Churu 1 4.58 1 4.58 2.09 1 
92 Jhunjhunun 1 6.99 1 6.99 5.00 3 
93 Jodhpur 2 39.00     
94 Udipur 1 11.50 1 11.50 2.25 6 
95 Sikkim Gangtok 25 14.90 21 7.14 4.79 643 
96 Uttarakhand Dehradun 7 13.96 7 13.96 9.58 57 
97 Hardwar 5 10.49 2 4.19 2.94 6 
98 Nainital 2 7.03     
99 Rudrapur 2 3.43 2 3.43 3.70 4 
100 West Bengal Baharampur 1 24.00     
101 Bhatpara 1 72.50     
102 Halisahar 2 125.60 1 60.00 30.00 12 
103 Madhyamgram 1 24.99     
104 Panihati 1 29.99 1 29.99 15.50 10 
105 Sanipur 1 24.42     
  Total 809 3,015.93 691 1,425.60 971.14 2,959 
 
 
  

78 
 
Annexure-VI 
 
STATUS OF RESEARCH SCHEMES ON CLIMATE CHANGE FUNDED UNDER RESEARCH & DEVELOPMENT 
SCHEME OF DOWR, RD & GR 
  
  
Name of the Scheme Status 
Impact Assessment of Climate Change on Hydro-meteorological processes and 
Water Resources of Mahanadi River Basin 
Completed 
Climate change impact studies for Rajasthan Area of inland drainage and Mahi 
basin 
Completed 
Impact of Climate Change on Water Resources of Tapi Basin Completed 
Effects of Climate Change and land arse/land cover changes on spatial and 
temporal water availability in Subarnarekha Basin 
Completed 
Impact of Climate Change on Water Resources of Sabarmati Basin Completed 
Impact of Climate Change on Water Resources in River Basins from Tadri to 
Kanyakumari 
Completed 
Statistical Downscaling for Hydro-climatic Projections with CMIP5 Simulations to 
Assess Impact of Climate Change 
Completed 
Dynamic Downscaling to study Climate Change Impacts on Water Resource in 
India 
Partially Completed 
Hydrogeological Assessment and Socio-Economic Implications of Depleting 
Water Resources in tourist towns of Uttarakhand 
Ongoing 
Irrigation Efficiency Improvement throw On–farm Water Management Ongoing 
 
  

79 
 
Annexure - VII 
Jal Jeevan Mission: Central fund allocated, drawn by the State and  
reported utilization in 2019-20 
(Amount in Rs. Crore) 
S. 
No. State/ UT 
Central share Expenditure 
under State 
share Opening 
Balance 
Fund 
allocated 
Fund 
drawn by 
the State 
Available 
fund 
Reported 
utilization 
1. A & N Islands 0.00    1.78   0.50   0.50   NR   NR   
2. Andhra Pradesh  25.74   372.64   372.64   398.38   121.62   54.80  
3. Arunachal Pradesh  6.22   132.55   177.47   183.69   126.14   13.35  
4. Assam  359.35   694.95   442.36   811.32   358.87   29.01  
5. Bihar  313.16   787.31   417.35   730.51   473.33   150.34  
6. Chhattisgarh  31.58   208.04   65.82   97.40   39.23   37.55  
7. Goa 0.00    7.57   3.08   3.08   3.08   6.17  
8. Gujarat  0.00    390.31   390.31   390.31   384.61   394.74  
9. Haryana  10.13   149.95   149.95   160.08   69.29   73.80  
10. Himachal Pradesh  0.00    148.67   205.83   205.83   197.87   15.46  
11. Jammu & Kashmir  27.14   322.03   322.03   349.17   200.25   24.01  
12. Jharkhand  75.79   267.69   291.19   382.97   114.58   119.71  
13. Karnataka  26.61   546.06   546.06   572.67   492.24   297.87  
14. Kerala  2.58   248.76   101.29   103.87   62.69   57.23  
15. Ladakh  8.10   166.65   67.86   75.96   NR    0.65  
16. Madhya Pradesh  1.26   571.60   571.60   572.86   326.65   288.75  
17. Maharashtra  248.12   847.97   345.28   593.40   308.04   428.14  
18. Manipur 0.00    67.69   91.17   91.17   28.20   6.60  
19. Meghalaya  0.80   86.02   43.01   43.81   26.35   0.77  
20. Mizoram  0.14   39.87   68.05   68.19   37.41   1.81  
21. Nagaland  0.00    56.49   56.49   58.44   23.54   4.67  
22. Odisha  0.78   364.74   364.74   365.52   275.02   255.02  
23. Puducherry  1.27   2.50  0.00    1.27   0.97   NR   
24. Punjab  102.91   227.46   227.46   330.37   73.27   78.20  
25. Rajasthan  313.67   1,301.71   1,301.71   1,615.38   620.31   698.54  
26. Sikkim  0.84   15.41   26.15   27.02   14.71   1.48  
27. Tamil Nadu  1.49   373.87   373.10   378.67   114.58   99.14  
28. Telangana  4.48   259.14   105.52   119.43   88.33   74.46  
29. Tripura  48.94   107.64   145.37   195.90   59.45   6.46  
30. Uttar Pradesh  58.33   1,206.28   1,513.14   1,571.47   639.32   380.10  
31. Uttarakhand  6.12   170.53   170.53   176.65   110.04   23.02  
32. West Bengal  760.82   995.33   994.75   1,755.57   609.00   445.03  
Source: JJM - IMIS  ND: Not Drawn  NR: Not Reported 

80 
 
Jal Jeevan Mission: Central fund allocated, drawn by the State and 
reported utilization in 2020-21 
 (Amount in Rs. Crore) 
S.  
No. State/ UT 
Central share Expenditure 
under State 
share Opening 
Balance 
Fund 
allocated 
Fund drawn 
by the State 
Available 
fund 
Reported 
utilization 
1. A & N Islands  0.50   2.93   1.46   1.96   1.45   NR   
2. Andhra Pradesh  276.76   790.48   297.62   574.38   427.73   180.97  
3. Arunachal Pradesh  57.56   254.85   344.85   402.41   392.43   32.05  
4. Assam  452.45   1,608.51   551.77   1,004.22   880.44   90.02  
5. Bihar  257.18   1,839.16   353.60   610.78   551.82   374.42  
6. Chhattisgarh  58.17   445.52   334.14   392.31   223.80   221.10  
7. Goa  0.00    12.41   6.20   6.20   2.99   13.49  
8. Gujarat  5.70   883.08   983.08   988.78   838.50   883.43  
9. Haryana  90.80   289.52   72.38   163.18   130.94   120.17  
10. Himachal Pradesh  7.95   326.20   547.48   555.43   329.01   42.25  
11. Jammu & Kashmir  148.92   681.77   53.72   202.64   88.69   5.17  
12. Jharkhand  268.39   572.24   143.06   411.45   286.62   177.73  
13. Karnataka  80.42   1,189.40   446.36   526.78   349.62   416.38  
14. Kerala  41.18   404.24   303.18   344.36   304.29   311.25  
15. Ladakh  75.96   352.09   ND    75.96   9.43   NR   
16. Madhya Pradesh  246.21   1,280.13   960.09   1,206.30   1,014.70   875.99  
17. Maharashtra  285.35   1,828.92   457.23   742.58   473.59   324.16  
18. Manipur  62.96   131.80   141.80   204.76   189.14   18.52  
19. Meghalaya  17.46   174.92   184.92   202.48   188.30   20.44  
20. Mizoram  30.77   79.30   104.30   135.07   107.90   10.13  
21. Nagaland  34.90   114.09   85.57   120.47   91.95   10.00  
22. Odisha  90.50   812.15   609.11   699.61   688.69   673.00  
23. Puducherry  0.30   4.64   1.06   1.38   0.20   1.00  
24. Punjab  257.10   362.79   ND    257.10   146.74   104.95  
25. Rajasthan  995.07   2,522.03   630.51   1,625.58   762.04   789.05  
26. Sikkim  12.30   31.36   39.36   51.66   43.43   3.75  
27. Tamil Nadu  264.09   921.99   690.36   954.45   576.97   399.57  
28. Telangana  31.10   412.19   82.71   116.32   61.17   133.98  
29. Tripura  136.46   156.61   117.46   256.52   195.00   22.26  
30. Uttar Pradesh  932.16   2,570.94   1,295.47   2,227.63   1,761.06   886.94  
31. Uttarakhand  66.60   362.58   271.93   338.53   227.32   20.02  
32. West Bengal  
1,146.58  
 1,614.18   807.08   1,953.66   1,196.07   641.17  
 Source: JJM - IMIS  ND: Not Drawn  NR: Not Reported 

81 
 
Jal Jeevan Mission: Central fund allocated, drawn by the State and  
reported utilization in 2021-22 
 (Amount in Rs. Crore) 
S. No. State/ UT 
Central share 
Expenditure 
under State 
share Opening 
Balance 
Fund 
allocated 
Fund 
drawn by 
the State 
Available 
fund 
Reported 
utilization 
1.  A & N Islands  0.52   8.26   2.06   2.58   1.05  NR   
2.  Andhra 
Pradesh 
 146.65   3,182.88   791.06   937.71   234.76   235.39  
3.  Arunachal 
Pradesh 
 9.98   1,013.53   1,555.53   1,565.51   1,114.29   106.62  
4.  Assam  123.78   5,601.16   4,200.87   4,324.65   2,505.44   312.89  
5.  Bihar  58.95   6,608.25  ND    58.95   4.00   340.45  
6.  Chhattisgarh  168.52   1,908.96   477.24   645.76   498.69   488.63  
7.  Goa  3.21   45.53   22.77   25.98   14.03   17.98  
8.  Gujarat  150.28   3,410.61   2,557.96   2,708.24   2,124.85   2,226.25  
9.  Haryana  32.24   1,119.95   559.98   592.22   434.74   431.27  
10.  Himachal 
Pradesh 
 226.42   1,262.78   2,012.78   2,239.20   1,420.94   146.73  
11.  Jammu & 
Kashmir 
 113.96   2,747.17   604.18   718.14   112.43   8.31  
12.  Jharkhand  124.83   2,479.88   512.22   637.05   437.21   510.99  
13.  Karnataka  177.16   5,008.80   2,504.40   2,681.56   1,418.56   1,557.92  
14.  Kerala  40.07   1,804.59   1,353.44   1,393.51   957.44   1,059.57  
15.  Ladakh  66.52   1,429.96   340.68   407.20   144.96   NR   
16.  Madhya 
Pradesh 
 191.61   5,116.79   3,837.59   4,029.20   2,262.78   2,479.33  
17.  Maharashtra  268.99   7,064.41   1,666.64   1,935.63   377.98   477.98  
18.  Manipur  15.62   481.19   601.19   616.81   474.78   52.80  
19.  Meghalaya  14.18   678.39   1,078.39   1,092.57   672.05   76.55  
20.  Mizoram  27.17   303.89   303.89   331.06   250.98   32.31  
21.  Nagaland  28.52   444.81   333.61   362.13   345.14   27.88  
22.  Odisha  10.93   3,323.42   2,492.56   2,503.49   1,306.20   1,289.71  
23.  Puducherry  1.18   30.22   7.47   8.66   2.32   0.10  
24.  Punjab  110.36   1,656.39   402.24   512.60   247.83   175.81  
25.  Rajasthan  863.53   10,180.50   2,345.08   3,208.61   1,920.16   1,664.02  
26.  Sikkim  8.23   124.79   194.79   203.02   90.12   11.57  
27.  Tamil Nadu  377.48   3,691.21   614.35   991.83   457.55   496.23  
28.  Telangana  55.15   1,653.09   ND    55.15   17.70   68.88  
29.  Tripura  61.51   614.09   714.09   775.60   599.82   65.13  
30.  Uttar Pradesh  466.56   10,870.50   5,435.25   5,901.81   2,930.07   3,525.40  
31.  Uttarakhand  111.22   1,443.80   1,082.85   1,194.07   597.97   67.40  
32.  West Bengal  757.58   6,998.97   1,404.61   2,162.19   1,547.52   725.77  
 Source: JJM- IMIS  ND: Not Drawn  NR: Not Reported 
 

82 
 
Jal Jeevan Mission: Central fund allocated, drawn by the State and  
reported utilization in 2022-23 
 (Amount in Rs. Crore) 
S. No. State/ UT 
Central share 
Expenditure 
under State 
share Opening 
Balance 
Fund 
allocated 
Fund drawn 
by the State 
Available 
fund 
Reported 
utilization 
1.  A & N Islands  1.53   9.15   2.16   3.69   0.60   NR   
2.  Andhra Pradesh  702.95   3,458.20   ND    702.95   305.08   98.75  
3.  Arunachal Pradesh  451.21   1,116.35   1,116.35   1,567.56   1,278.44   153.40  
4.  Assam  1,819.21   6,117.61   4,588.21   6,407.42   3,959.31   442.58  
5.  Bihar  54.95   4,766.90   ND    54.95   NR    35.02  
6.  Chhattisgarh  147.06   2,223.98   2,223.98   2,371.04   2,082.53   2,065.56  
7.  Goa  11.95   49.98   ND    11.95   11.04   20.14  
8.  Gujarat  583.39   3,590.16   3,590.16   4,173.55   3,074.37   3,261.30  
9.  Haryana  157.47   1,157.44   463.00   620.47   519.76   447.45  
10.  Himachal Pradesh  818.27   1,344.94   1,344.94   2,163.21   1,613.73   179.96  
11.  Jammu & Kashmir  605.71   3,039.11   1,439.50   2,045.21   1,142.08   153.81  
12.  Jharkhand  199.83   2,825.52   2,119.14   2,318.97   1,758.89   1,585.64  
13.  Karnataka  1,263.00   5,451.85   2,725.93   3,988.93   2,718.57   3,129.60  
14.  Kerala  436.08   2,206.54   2,206.54   2,642.62   1,741.93   1,741.68  
15.  Ladakh  262.25   1,555.77   382.76   645.01   364.32   NR   
16.  Lakshadweep  -    36.99   9.25   9.25   NR    NR   
17.  Madhya Pradesh  1,766.42   5,641.02   2,820.51   4,586.93   3,516.09   3,506.72  
18.  Maharashtra  1,557.65   7,831.25   3,915.62   5,473.27   3,093.82   2,960.59  
19.  Manipur  142.03   512.05   256.03   398.06   231.53   25.63  
20.  Meghalaya  420.52   747.76   1,047.00   1,467.52   1,098.04   122.85  
21.  Mizoram  80.08   333.91   448.58   528.66   407.40   45.74  
22.  Nagaland  17.00   484.28   484.28   501.28   481.71   52.71  
23.  Odisha  1,197.29   3,608.62   1,768.73   2,966.02   2,165.71   2,149.28  
24.  Puducherry  6.34   17.83   ND    6.34   0.90   0.21  
25.  Punjab  264.78   2,403.46   ND    264.78   264.54   208.74  
26.  Rajasthan  1,288.46   13,328.60   6,081.80   7,370.26   3,889.92   3,993.96  
27.  Sikkim  112.90   136.17   188.92   301.82   222.53   20.63  
28.  Tamil Nadu  534.29   4,015.00   872.96   1,407.25   594.61   665.19  
29.  Telangana  37.44   1,657.56   ND    37.44   11.39   13.52  
30.  Tripura  175.78   666.97   849.91   1,025.69   798.67   82.64  
31.  Uttar Pradesh  2,971.74   12,662.05   9,496.54   12,468.28   9,990.16   9,444.81  
32.  Uttarakhand  596.09   1,612.50   1,209.38   1,805.47   1,502.63   156.34  
33.  West Bengal  614.67   6,180.25   3,090.12   3,704.79   1,953.71   3,203.48  
 Source: JJM- IMIS  ND: Not Drawn  NR: Not Reported

83 
 
Annexure - VIII 
State/ UT-wise status of tap water connections in rural households 
(as on 27.04.2023) 
(Number in lakhs) 
S. 
No. State/ UT 
Total rural 
HHs as on 
15.08.2019  
Rural HHs with 
tap water 
connection as on 
15.8.2019 
Total 
rural 
HHs as 
on date 
Rural HHs given tap water connections  Rural HHs with tap 
water supply 
No. In % 19-20 20-21 21-22 22-23 23-24 Total In % No. In% 
1. A & N Islands 0.65  0.29 43.92 0.62  -    0.33   -    -    -    0.33   53.98   0.62   100.00 
2. Andhra Pradesh 95.66  30.74 32.14 95.55  1.19   12.77   9.59   12.12   0.15   35.82   37.49   66.56   69.66 
3. Arunachal  2.18  0.23 10.46 2.30  0.13   0.65   0.42   0.34   0.00   1.55   67.11   1.77   77.01 
4. Assam 63.35  1.11 1.76 67.70  0.49   5.07   16.52   8.79   0.52   31.39   46.37   32.51   48.02 
5. Bihar 1,83.54  3.16 1.72 166.30  28.97   103.46   19.86   3.63   0.16   156.07   93.85   159.24   95.75 
6. Chhattisgarh 45.48  3.20 7.03 50.09  0.96   1.51   4.45   10.81   0.88   18.62   37.17   21.81   43.55 
7. DNH and D&D 0.6  0.00 0.00 0.85  -    0.25   0.61   -    -    0.85   100.00   0.85   100.00 
8. Goa 2.63  1.99 75.70 2.63  0.31   0.33   -    -    -    0.64   24.30   2.63   100.00 
9. Gujarat 93.03  65.16 70.04 91.18  1.06   10.95   8.99   5.03   -    26.02   28.54   91.18   100.00 
10. Haryana 28.94  17.66 61.04 30.41  1.35   7.91   3.49   -    -    12.75   41.92   30.41   100.00 
11. Himachal Pradesh 17.04  7.63 44.76 17.09  1.59   3.79   2.87   0.93   0.00   9.17   53.69   16.80   98.33 
12. J&K 18.17  5.75 31.67 18.68  2.07   2.16   0.58   0.40   0.17   5.38   28.81   11.13   59.62 
13. Jharkhand 54.09  3.45 6.38 61.20  0.95   3.00   4.19   8.77   0.57   17.48   28.56   20.93   34.20 
14. Karnataka 89.61  24.51 27.35 101.17  0.21   3.43   18.70   20.57   0.97   43.89   43.38   68.40   67.61 
15. Kerala 67.15  16.64 24.78 70.72  0.85   4.04   6.64   5.29   0.29   17.12   24.20   33.76   47.73 
16. Ladakh 0.44  0.01 3.21 0.43  0.01   0.02   0.09   0.18   0.00   0.29   68.86   0.31   72.19 
17. Lakshadweep -  - - 0.13  -    -    -    -    -    -    -    -    -   
18. Madhya Pradesh 1,21.24  13.53 11.16 119.88  4.19   19.87   10.89   9.07   0.48   44.50   37.12   58.03   48.41 
19. Maharashtra 1,42.36  48.44 34.03 146.73  5.45   37.09   10.66   8.22   0.88   62.29   42.45   110.73   75.46 
20. Manipur 4.52  0.26 5.73 4.52  0.04   1.96   0.70   0.49   0.00   3.20   70.78   3.46   76.52 
21. Meghalaya 5.9  0.05 0.77 6.52  0.02   0.87   1.34   0.80   0.04   3.07   47.07   3.11   47.76 
22. Mizoram 1.27  0.09 7.24 1.33  0.16   0.34   0.21   0.30   0.03   1.04   78.11   1.13   85.03 

84 
 
S. 
No. State/ UT 
Total rural 
HHs as on 
15.08.2019  
Rural HHs with 
tap water 
connection as on 
15.8.2019 
Total 
rural 
HHs as 
on date 
Rural HHs given tap water connections  Rural HHs with tap 
water supply 
No. In % 19-20 20-21 21-22 22-23 23-24 Total In % No. In% 
23. Nagaland 3.86  0.14 3.60 3.70  0.02   0.48   0.92   0.87   0.03   2.32   62.61   2.45   66.36 
24. Odisha 83.06  3.11 3.74 88.59  4.37   15.47   17.47   12.22   0.39   49.93   56.36   53.04   59.86 
25. Puducherry 1.15  0.94 81.31 1.15  0.06   0.08   0.07   0.00   -    0.21   18.67   1.15   100.00 
26. Punjab 35.07  16.79 47.86 34.26  0.76   8.18   8.40   0.13   -    17.47   51.00   34.26   100.00 
27. Rajasthan 1,01.32  11.74 11.59 107.91  1.02   6.81   5.38   14.13   1.40   28.74   26.64   40.49   37.52 
28. Sikkim 1.05  0.70 67.00 1.32  -    0.10   0.08   0.19   0.01   0.39   29.50   1.09   82.84 
29. Tamil Nadu 1,26.89  21.76 17.15 125.53  0.17   16.13   14.90   26.52   1.27   58.99   46.99   80.75   64.33 
30. Telangana 54.38  15.68 28.84 53.98  20.18   18.20   -0.19   0.11   -    38.30   70.95   53.98   100.00 
31. Tripura 8.01  0.25 3.06 7.42  0.46   1.42   1.65   0.81   0.03   4.37   58.94   4.62   62.24 
32. Uttar Pradesh 2,63.39  5.16 1.96 265.67  4.66   19.16   5.81   60.33   10.52   100.48   37.82   105.64   39.76 
33. Uttarakhand 14.62  1.30 8.91 14.94  0.87   4.32   2.75   2.24   0.04   10.22   68.37   11.52   77.09 
34. West Bengal 1,63.26  2.15 1.31 183.71  0.05   12.48   23.31   20.77   1.28   57.88   31.51   60.03   32.68 
 Total 18,93.91 3,23.62 17.07 19,44.20  82.62   3,22.62   2,01.34   2,34.07   20.12   8,60.77   44.27   11,84.40   60.92 
Source: JJM – IMIS   HH: Household 
 
  

85 
 
Annexure-IX 
State-wise number of quality–affected rural habitations (as on 27.04.2023) 
 
S. 
No. State 
Number of quality–affected habitations 
Total 
quality-
affected  
habitations 
Fluoride Arsenic 
Iron Salinity Nitrate 
Heavy Metal 
Total 
Covered with 
short term 
measures/ 
CWPP 
Total 
Covered with 
short term 
measures/ CWPP 
Total 
Covered with 
short term 
measures/ 
CWPP 
1.  Arunachal Pradesh    -  - -   - 46   - -  -  - 46 
2.  Assam    -  - -   -  6,951   - -  -  -  6,951 
3.  Bihar    -  - -   - 66   - -  -  - 66  
4.  Chhattisgarh    -  - -   -   2   - -  -  - 2  
5.  Jharkhand   2   2  -   -   3   - -  -  -   5  
6.  Kerala   4   4  -   - 58  17    8   -  - 87  
7.  Lakshadweep    -  - -   -  - 10  -  -  - 10  
8.  Madhya Pradesh    -  - -   -  -   0  -  -  -  0  
9.  Maharashtra    -  - -   -   6  29    5   -  - 40  
10.  Odisha    28    28  -   -  1,332  16    6   -  -  1,382  
11.  Punjab  176  176   428    428    3   - 17   86   58   710  
12.  Rajasthan  151  151  -   -   4   8,840   436   -  -  9,431  
13.  Tripura    -  - -   -  334   - -  -  -  334  
14.  Uttar Pradesh    27    27  89   89   233  61  10   -  -  420  
15.  Uttarakhand    -  - -   -   2   -   1   -  -   3  
16.  West Bengal    40    40  83   83    3   - -  -  -  126  
Total 428  428   600    600   9,043   8,973   483   86   58    19,613  
         Source: JJM-IMIS 
 
  

86 
 
Annexure X 
Group wise sanctioned and Vacancy post details of SPCBs/PCCs 
 
 Group A Group B Group C Total 
Name of the SPCBs / 
PCCs 
Sanctioned  In 
Place 
Vacancy  Sanctioned  In 
Place 
Vacancy  Sanctioned  In 
Place 
Vacancy  Sanctioned  In 
Place 
Vacancy  
Andaman & Nicobar 1 1 0 3 3 0 1 1 0 5 5 0 
Andhra Pradesh 23 20 3 125 78 47 141 21 120 289 119 170 
Arunachal Pradesh 5 5 0 2 2 0 49 49 0 56 56 0 
Assam 102 80 22 35 24 11 74 53 21 211 157 54 
Bihar 23 7 16 56 30 26 119 30 89 198 67 131 
Chandigarh 2 1 1 0 0 0 7 6 1 9 7 2 
Chhattisgarh 31 18 13 37 25 12 181 80 101 249 123 126 
D,D&DH 2 2 0 2 2 0 6 6 0 10 10 0 
Delhi 96 29 67 114 11 103 133 65 68 343 105 238 
Goa 12 6 6 24 20 4 75 72 3 11 98 13 
Gujarat 65 45 20 248 219 29 160 131 29 473 395 78 
Haryana 35 15 20 80 66 14 136 49 87 251 130 121 
Himachal Pradesh 61 30 31 25 11 14 241 159 82 327 200 127 
Jammu & Kashmir 2 2 0 1 1 0 7 6 1 10 9 1 
Jharkhand 11 0 11 24 6 18 178 34 144 213 40 173 
Karnataka 147 104 43 217 75 142 318 118 200 682 297 385 
Kerala 33 32 1 149 32 117 201 24 177 283 88 295 
Lakshadweep 0 0 0 0 0 0 5 1 4 5 1 4 
Madhya Pradesh 314 108 206 115 52 63 899 340 559 1,328 500 828 
Maharashtra 103 83 20 250 189 61 372 226 146 725 498 227 
Manipur 6 3 3 7 5 2 82 42 40 95 50 45 
Meghalaya 24 15 9 9 6 3 50 33 17 83 54 29 
Mizoram 3 3 0 0 0 0 8 8 0 11 11 0 
Nagaland 2 2 0 2 2 0 10 10 0 14 14 0 
Odisha 82 49 33 114 80 34 58 39 19 254 168 86 
Puducherry 1 0 1 5 3 2 6 6 0 12 9 3 
Punjab 165 124 41 126 80 46 211 100 111 502 304 198 
Rajasthan 89 63 26 123 101 22 155 82 73 367 246 121 
Sikkim 2 2 0 4 4 0 13 13 0 19 19 0 
Tamil Nadu 87 77 10 425 244 181 407 191 216 919 512 407 
Telangana 20 13 7 107 81 26 103 48 55 230 142 88 
Tripura 6 5 1 10 7 3 6 5 1 22 17 5 
Uttar Pradesh 55 46 9 106 69 37 525 355 170 686 470 216 
Uttarakhand 12 6 6 17 12 5 56 7 49 85 25 60 
West Bengal 127 96 31 67 51 16 67 3 64 261 150 111 
Total 1,749 1,092 657 2,629 1,591 1,038 5,060 2,413 2,647 9,438 5,096 4,342 
 