 
26 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON WATER RESOURCES 
(2023-24) 
                 
         
SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA 
                  
         
                 
MINISTRY OF JAL SHAKTI – DEPARTMENT OF WATER RESOURCES, 
RIVER DEVELOPMENT AND GANGA REJUVENATION 
 
         
         
‘Glacier Management in the Country – Monitoring of Glaciers / Lakes 
Including Glacial Lake Outbursts leading to Flash-Floods in the 
Himalayan Region’ 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations / 
Recommendations contained in the Twenty Third Report (Seventeenth 
Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Water Resources] 
         
         
         
TWENTY SIXTH REPORT 
  
          
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
         
December, 2023 / Agrahayana,1945 (Saka) 

TWENTY SIXTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON WATER RESOURCES 
(2023-24) 
          
(SEVENTEENTH  LOK SABHA) 
         
         
         
MINISTRY OF JAL SHAKTI – DEPARTMENT OF WATER RESOURCES, 
RIVER DEVELOPMENT AND GANGA REJUVENATION 
 
                 
         
‘Glacier Management in the Country – Monitoring of Glaciers / Lakes 
Including Glacial Lake Outbursts leading to Flash-Floods in the 
Himalayan Region’ 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations / 
Recommendations contained in the Twenty Third Report (Seventeenth 
Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Water Resources] 
         
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on    11.12.2023 
Laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on   11.12.2023 
  
 
  
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
                 
         
December, 2023 / Agrahayana,1945 (Saka) 

 
W. R. C.  No. 81 
         
         
         
         
         
         
 
 
         
         
         
Price :  Rs.  
         
         
         
         
         
 
 
 
         
     
                     
 
 
 
         
        © 2023 By Lok Sabha Secretariat 
  
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok 
Sabha  (Sixteenth Edition) and Printed by  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iii)

 
CONTENTS 
 
  Page  
 
Composition of 
the Committee 
 
……………………………………………………………… (v) 
 
 
 
INTRODUCTION ……………………………………………………………… 
 
(vii) 
 
CHAPTER - I Report……………………………………………………… 
 
01 
CHAPTER – II Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted 
by the Government…………………………… 
 
 
 
15 
CHAPTER - III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do 
not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s 
replies……………………………………………………… 
 
 
 
43 
 
CHAPTER - IV Observations/Recommendations in respect  of   which the 
replies of the Government have not been accepted by the 
Committee……………...................................... 
 
 
 
44 
 
CHAPTER - V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final 
replies of the Government are still 
awaited…………………………………………………….. 
 
 
 
50 
 ANNEXURES 
 
 
I Minutes of the  Third Sitting of the Committee held on 
06.12.2023**  
 
- 
 
 
 
II 
 
Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Twentieth 
Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee 
 
 
51 
III Office Order of Constitution of Steering Committee 
 
52 
IV Minutes of First Meeting of Steering Committee 54 
 
** Minutes not enclosed 
 
(iv)

COMPOSITION OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON WATER RESOURCES 
(2023-24) 
  
 
 
 
Shri Parbatbhai Savabhai Patel      -            Chairperson 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA  
2.  Shri Vijay Baghel  
3.  Shri Nihal Chand Chauhan   
4.  Shri Bhagirath Choudhary 
5.  Shri Chandra Prakash Choudhary  
6.  Shri Guman Singh Damor  
7.  Dr. Heena Vijaykumar Gavit  
8.  Dr. K. Jayakumar  
9.  Shri Dhanush M. Kumar  
10.  Shri Sunil Kumar  
11.  Shri Mohammad Akbar Lone  
12.  Shri Kuruva Gorantla Madhav  
13.  Shri Hasmukhbhai Somabhai Patel  
14.  Shri Sanjay (Kaka) Ramchandra Patil  
15.  Shri P. Ravindhranath  
16.  Ms.  Nusrat Jahan Ruhi  
17.  Smt.  Agatha K. Sangma  
18.  Shri Pratap Chandra Sarangi  
19.  Shri Chandan Singh  
20.  Shri D.K. Suresh  
21.  Shri Shivkumar Chanabasappa Udasi 
 
 
 RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
22.  Shri H.D. Devegowda  
23.  Shri Aneel Prasad Hegde  
24.  Smt. Mausam Noor  
25.  Shri Sharad Pawar  
26.  Shri V. Vijayendra Prasad  
27.  Shri Arun Singh  
28.  Sant Balbir Singh  
29.  Shri Pramod Tiwari  
30.  Dr. Anbumani Ramadoss*  
31.  Vacant**  
 
*  Dr. Anbumani Ramadoss, MP (Rajya Sabha) has been nominated to the Committee w.e.f. 24 November, 2023. 
 
** Consequent upon his resignation from Rajya Sabha, Dr. Kirodi Lal Meena, ceased to be Member of the Committee 
w.e.f. 6th December, 2023 
 
 
 
(v) 

 
 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Smt. Suman Arora   - Additional Secretary 
2. Shri Ajay Kumar Sood  - Director 
3. Smt. Shanta B. Datta  - Under Secretary 
4. Shri Gaurav Jain   - Assistant Committee Officer 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(vi)

INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Water Resources (2023-24) having 
been authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present the 
Twenty Sixth - Report on the Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in their Twenty Third Report (Seventeenth Lok 
Sabha) on ‘Glacier Management in the Country – Monitoring of Glaciers / Lakes Including 
Glacial Lake Outbursts leading to Flash-Floods in the Himalayan Region’. 
 
2.  The Twenty Third Report of the Committee was presented to Lok Sabha and laid in 
Rajya Sabha on 29 March 2023. The Action Taken replies of the Government to all the 
recommendations contained in the Report were received in this Secretariat on 01 August, 
2023. 
 
3.  The replies of the Government were examined and the Report was considered and 
adopted by the Committee at their sitting held on 06.12.2023. 
 
4. An analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Twenty Third Report (Seventeenth                 
Lok Sabha) of the Committee is given in Annexure-II. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi Parbatbhai Savabhai Patel  
06 December,  2023 Chairperson  
15 Agrahayana, 1945 (Saka) Standing Committee on Water Resources 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(vii) 

 
1 
 
CHAPTER I 
REPORT 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Water Resources (2023-24) deals 
with the action taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Twenty Third Report on ‘Glacier Management in the Country – 
Monitoring of Glaciers / Lakes Including Glacial Lake Outbursts leading to Flash-
Floods in the Himalayan Region’. 
 
2.  The Twentieth Report was presented to Lok Sabha on 29.03.2023 and was 
laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 29.03.2023. The Report contained                                     
15 Observations/Recommendations.  
 
3. Action Taken Notes in respect of all the 15 Observations/Recommendations 
of the Committee have been received from the Government. These have been 
examined and categorized as follows: - 
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government (Chapter II):  
 
Recommendation Nos. 2,5,6,7,8,9,10,12,13,14 and 15 
       (Total – 11) 
 
(ii) Observations / Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government’s replies (Chapter III):  
 
Recommendation Nos. NIL       
     (Total – NIL) 
 
(iii) Observations / Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee (Chapter IV):  
 
Recommendation Nos. 1,3, 4 and 11       
(Total – 04)  
 
(iv) Observations / Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited (Chapter V):  
 
Para Nos. NIL        
      (Total – NIL) 
4.  The Committee desire that replies to recommendations made in the Chapter-I 
of this Report may be furnished to the Committee expeditiously.  
 
5.  The Committee will now deal with action taken by the Government on some of 
their Observations/Recommendations that require reiteration or merit comments.   
  

 
2 
 
A.    Need to Check Emission of Black Carbon 
 
(Recommendation No. 1) (Para No. 2.3) 
 
6. The Committee had learnt that very few studies had been conducted by different 
organizations/ institutes in the country to assess the adverse effects of atmospheric pollution 
on the Himalayan glaciers.  A study conducted by National Centre for Polar and Ocean 
Research and Space Physics Laboratory at their Himansh station in Lahaul-Spiti region had 
revealed that the total Suspended Particulate Matter (SPM) showed significant variations 
with dominance of mineral dust components therein (~67%). It had also been stated that the 
black carbon reportedly contributes (~4%) to near surface composite aerosol mass 
concentrations and also absorbs more light and emits infra-red radiation that increases the 
temperature.  Hence, an increase in Black Carbon in the high Himalayas is stated to 
contribute to the faster melting of glaciers. The Committee recommended that with a view to 
assess the extent and scope of adverse impact of atmospheric pollution including black 
carbon on the fragile and sensitive Himalayan glacier system, the Department of Water 
Resources, River Development & Ganga Rejuvenation in consultation with the Ministry of 
Environment, Forest & Climate Change and other concerned 
Ministries/Departments/Agencies should commission a research work/project for 
comprehensive examination of this aspect and submit the research findings within a                     
time-bound period.  
 
7. The Department in its action taken note has replied as follows: 
“Black carbon (B.C.) aerosols accelerate glacier melting in the Himalayas. Black materials 
absorb more light and emit infrared radiation that increases the temperature. So, an increase 
in black carbon in the high Himalayas will contribute to the faster melting of Himalayan 
glaciers. National Centre for Polar and Ocean Research (NCPOR) has informed that several 
studies in the Himalayan region have focused on observations and the character of B.C. 
particles in the ambient air. However, though there are many B.C. observatories in low 
altitudes (<2000 masl) and the plains, only a few studies have characterized B.C. at high 
altitudes in the Himalayas, particularly in India. The deposition of light-absorbing aerosols on 
snow or ice can lead to the darkening of the surface, which would enhance the absorption of 
solar radiation and significantly reduce the surface albedo. Such phenomena could result in 
positive forcing that can accelerate snow and ice melt in high altitudes. One of the 
measurements in the high Himalayan glacier (Chandra) basin shows a significant 
concentration of B.C. (mean BC ~ 168  ng m−3). It contributes nearly 4% to near surface 
composite aerosol mass. A recent study shows that the concentration of black carbon 
increases in summer(0.01-4.62 µg / m3) drastically. However, in the foothill, the black carbon 
concentration is much higher 796 µg / m3 (Parbati), 416 µg / m3 (Hamata) and 432 µg / m3 
(Beas). A multi-layer simulation of snow albedo demonstrated significant changes in snow 
albedo (2.5–9.0%) due to light-absorbing aerosols in this region. In the long run, changes in 
the atmospheric composition of the high Himalayas will affect rain and snow precipitation 
patterns. However, the sources of B.C. reaching in the Himalayan region are complex and 
remain uncertain due to a lack of field and reliable data.  
WIHG has two (02) observational sites for black carbon monitoring near the glacierized 
basins (Gangotri Glacier). Further, WIHG is also looking at aerosols and dust in the snow 
and ice samples from glacier sites to understand their impact on snow and glacier melting 
and albedo changes”. 

 
3 
 
8. The Committee having noted during the examination of the subject 
‘Glacier Management in the Country – Monitoring of Glaciers / Lakes Including 
Glacial Lake Outbursts leading to Flash-Floods in the Himalayan Region, that 
Black Carbon in the Himalayas is stated to contribute to the faster melting of 
glaciers, categorically recommended that a research work / project for 
comprehensive examination to assess the extent and scope of adverse impact 
of atmospheric pollution including black carbon on the fragile and sensitive 
Himalayan glacier system be commissioned. However, the Department 
through its Action Taken Replies has apprised the Committee that though 
there are many Black carbon observatories in low altitudes (<2000 masl) and 
the plains, only a few studies have characterized Black Carbon at high 
altitudes in the Himalayas, particularly in India. Furthermore, the Department 
has itself stated that the sources of Black Carbon reaching in the Himalayan 
region are complex and remain uncertain due to a lack of field and reliable 
data. Taking into account the Department’s own admission that there is a lack 
of field and reliable data on Black Carbon concentration in ambient air of 
Himalayas which can affect rain and snow precipitation, the Committee 
reiterate their recommendation that Department of Water Resources, River 
Development and Ganga Rejuvenation in consultation with other concerned 
Ministries/Departments should commission a comprehensive research 
programme to understand the problem of Black Carbon in the Himalayas 
including its sources of origin and submit the research findings within a time-
bound  period. The Committee would like to be apprised of measures taken in 
this regard within three months of presentation of this Report. 
 
B.  Need to set up Separate Dedicated Mountain Hazard and Research Institute  
(Recommendation No.3) (Para No. 2.5) 
9. The Committee observed gaps and deficiencies in glaciology research and 
monitoring of the glacial lakes and water Bodies in the Himalayan region. The 
Committee noted that Geological Survey of India (GSI) had not conducted specific 
studies on estimated volume loss of glaciers between 1950 and 2020 and also not 
projected any estimate of loss by the year 2100. Further, there was no 
comprehensive information about the volume loss of glaciers in the Indian Himalayan 
Region.  The Committee further noted that the Ministry of Environment, Forest & 
Climate Change had not conducted any study or awarded any project on warming of 
Himalayan glaciers. The Committee were informed by the DoWR, RD & GR that 
Central Water Commission (CWC) had not issued any advisory to the concerned 
local Governments regarding the anticipation of floods caused by 
avalanches/cloudburst landslides in the Himalayan region. Further, there was also 
no specific information available on stretches of the Himalayans where the danger of 
melting of glaciers and consequent Glacial Lake Outburst Flood (GLOF) are most 
severe. Moreover, no study on temporal changes in glacial lake number and their 

 
4 
 
extent had been carried out by Indian Space Research Organization (ISRO) and 
GSI.  The Committee also took cognizance of the fact that no study has been carried 
out by GSI, ISRO and DST to critically analyse the enlargement and origin of glacial 
lakes near human settlements and their potential cause for a lake outburst. 
Taking into consideration the aforestated gaps / deficiencies in the 
glaciological, hydro-materiological and hydro-geological research relating to 
Himalayan glacier system, the Committee were of the considered view that there is 
an need for setting up an over arching organisation at the national level which could 
coordinate  with various Ministries / Departments / Agencies/ Research Institutes 
engaged in handling different hydro-geological and hydro-materiological hazards 
including glacier related hazards for having an integrated approach in collecting and 
collating information / data on Himalayan glaciers and also the research findings at 
one place and to maintain a reliable database that could be accessed easily by all 
agencies and also for issuing early warnings and alerts regarding potential multi 
hazards to the stake holders and public.  In this regard, at the behest of the 
Committee, various Ministries/ Departments/ research agencies had given their 
suggestions and offered solutions for effective management and monitoring of 
glaciers in the country in a coordinated manner as under:- 
(i) The Department of Science and Technology had suggested that there 
is a need for single coordinating agency to coordinate with various 
other agencies having mandates to handle different hydrometerological 
and hydrogeological hazards.  It had also suggested that to deal with 
the disasters like cloudburst, GLOF, landslides etc. in an integrated 
manner, a multi hazard warning system may be put in place through a 
real-time coordinating mechanism wherein one agency may be 
entrusted with the responsibility of continuously monitoring and issuing 
warnings and alerts to authorities, stakeholders and public; 
(ii) The MoEF&CC had suggested that the responsibility for coordination of 
all activities on the Himalayan glaciers should rest with a single 
identified nodal coordinating agency within Government of India, such 
as for e.g. National Security Council Secretariat (NSCS), which is 
already coordinating with various Government agencies in various 
studies, including impact of engineering technologies on the glaciers. 
Such an agency would need to be given an appropriate war time 
mandate because of recurrence of GLOF, Cloudburst, landslides etc. 
by allocating the subject through allocation of business. 
(iii) The Ministry of Earth Sciences had suggested that a network of fully 
equipped and integrated monitoring systems supported by a set of field 
stations in critically important glaciered basins is required for monitoring 
glaciers and glacier bound hazards.  The systems should be 
automated with real-time access to data to modelers to create a 
potential early warning system on glacio-hydrological hazards from 

 
5 
 
time to time, based on hazard potential coupled with geographical 
information system tools downstream activities and population 
vulnerability along with open access to ground-based meteorological, 
hydrological and glacilogical data from the entire region to achieve the 
target.  ISRO can contribute by using high resolution and near real time 
satellite remote sensing to monitor glacial lake and water bodies in 
development of a reliable database. 
(iv) Defence Geoinformatics Research Establishment set up under agegis 
of DRDO had suggested that an integrated approach for debris flow 
and GLOF risk management coupled with systematic risk assessment 
study of the region is imperative to curtail risks of glacial hazards. An 
inclusive approach with all stakeholders is recommended to 
understand GLOF phenomenal behaviour by creating ground and 
remote sensing based inventory of benchmark moraine dammed lakes 
and monitoring changes on a regular basis along with an effective early 
warning mechanism to monitor GLOF hazards in order to minimize the 
risk of such hazards.  
Apart from above suggestions / solutions offered by various 
Ministries/Departments/organisations, the NDMA “Guidelines on Management of 
Glacial Lake Outburst Flood (GLOF)” had proposed that the Ministry of Jal Shakti 
(MoJS) be designated as the nodal Ministry and Central Water Commission (CWC) 
as the nodal agency for management of GLOF.  These Guidelines further proposed 
that a national level Centre for Glacial Research, Studies and Management 
(CGRSM) be established by the MoJS under the umbrella of the National Institute of 
Hydrology (NIH), Roorkee as a premier centre with state-of-the art facilities, which 
would eventually grow into a national centre of excellence. Keeping in view the 
suggestions / solutions offered by various Ministries / Departments / Agencies, the 
Committee urged upon the Department of WR, RD&GR to carefully study the same 
and prepare a comprehensive concept paper / cabinet note subsuming the 
solutions/suggestions in consultation with all the Ministries / Departments / Agencies, 
so as to evolve a consensus on the structure mandate and modalities of the 
proposed national level apex research organisation viz. CGRSM for placing before 
the Union Cabinet for their consideration.  The Committee would like to be apprised 
of the action taken in this regard within three months of presentation of the Report.  
10. The Department in its action taken note has replied as follows: 
“A Steering Committee under the chairmanship of Secretary, DOWR, RD & GR, 
Ministry of Jal Shakti has recently been formed to look into all these issues. The 
Steering Committee would act as an over arching organisation at the national level 
which can coordinate  with various Ministries / Departments / Agencies/ Research 
Institutes engaged in handling different hydro-geological and hydro-meteriological 
hazards including glacier related hazards for having an integrated approach in 
collecting and collating information / data on Himalayan glaciers and also the 

 
6 
 
research findings at one place and to maintain a reliable database that can be 
accessed easily by all agencies and also for issuing early warnings and alerts 
regarding potential multi hazards to the stake holders and public”.   
11. The Committee note from the Action Taken Replies of the Department 
that a Steering Committee under the Chairmanship of Secretary, Department of 
Water Resources, River Development and Ganga Rejuvenation (Ministry of Jal 
Shakti) has recently been formed which would act as an arching organization 
for Glacier Management. However, the Committee are of the view that it is way 
short of what the National Disaster Management Authority (NDMA) “Guidelines 
on Management of Glacial Lake Outburst Flood (GLOF)” have proposed. The 
said Guidelines have suggested that a national level Centre for Glacial 
Research, Studies and Management (CGRSM) be established by the Ministry of 
Jal Shakti under the umbrella of the National Institute of Hydrology (NIH), 
Roorkee as a premier centre with state-of-the art facilities, which would 
eventually grow into a national centre of excellence. Considering the vast 
mandate suggested by the Guidelines of NDMA for comprehensive 
management of Glaciers, the Committee urge the Department to take note of 
these Guidelines and make concerted efforts for establishment of CGRSM. The 
Committee would like to be apprised of the steps taken by the Department in 
this regard.  
C. Need to provide sufficient budgetary allocations for Glacier Research 
(Recommendation No. 4) (Para No. 2.6) 
12. The Committee learnt from the written submission of the Department of Water 
Resources, River Development & Ganga Rejuvenation that various Ministries/Departments 
dealing with the subject of glacier management / monitoring had allocated and spent a 
meagre amount for conducting research/studies in the field in the last 5 years. While on the 
one hand, the Committee found that studies such as temporal change in glacier origin and 
enlargement of glacier area were required for proper assessment and management of 
glaciers, on the other hand, the fund allocation is not sufficient to encourage such studies. 
The Committee believed that there was an urgent need to conduct various field-based 
studies on glaciers which may need adequate funding/budgetary support. As the challenges 
of managing and monitoring the glaciers movement / behaviour and mitigation of hazards 
arising therefrom are enormous, the Committee recommended the Government to allocate 
adequate budgetary resources to the concerned Ministries/Departments involved in the 
research in the field so as to meet their financial requirements and for ensuring that the 
activities related to research and monitoring of glaciers do not suffer due to shortage of 
funds. 
13. The Department in its action taken note has replied as follows: 
“As suggested by Committee, there is need to provide sufficient budgetary 
allocations for glacier research, to the concerned Ministries/ Departments. This is 
important as the study of Glaciers, its dynamics and associated hazards have 
implications on sustainable development, disaster risk reduction and strategizing 

 
7 
 
climate change adaptation measures. The budgetary support for carrying out studies 
has to be met through allocated budgets to different Organisations/Department. 
Any requirement of additional funds for carrying out any specific studies in the field of 
glacier monitoring and management by the concerned Institutions may be placed 
before the Steering Committee which in turn would request for enhancement of 
budget to specific Department/Organisations.  
In above context, MoES has informed that in view of the importance of glacier 
research in the country, an amount of ~ Rs. 30 crore has been earmarked for it by 
the Ministry of Earth Sciences during 2021-2026”. 
14. Regarding the recommendation of the Committee for providing 
sufficient budgetary allocations for Glacier research, the Department has 
apprised the Committee that any requirement of additional funds for carrying 
out any specific studies in the field of glacier monitoring and management 
may be placed before the Steering Committee which in turn would request for 
enhancement of budget to specific Departments/Organizations. However, the 
Committee find this whole process cumbersome and time consuming. In view 
of the challenges of managing and monitoring the glaciers, the Committee 
urge the Department to take steps for suitably amending the Allocation of 
Business Rules in order to empower the Steering Committee [pending the 
establishment of Glacial Research, Studies and Management (CGRSM)] with 
its own exclusive budgetary allocations so that the Steering Committee may 
itself provide necessary budgetary provisions to the agencies involved in 
glacier research and management work.  
 
D. Need to preserve Green Cover in the Himalayan Region 
Recommendation No.- 11 (Para No. 2.13) 
 
15. Considering the strategic role and paramount importance of Himalayan glaciers 
which are literally known as “Water Towers of Asia” and owing to the fact that three major 
Indian river system are glacier fed which provide water security to the country for various 
uses like drinking water requirements, hydropower, industry, agriculture etc., the Committee 
were of the considered view that since green cover in the valleys adjacent to the glaciers is 
critical and acts as a buffer and would help in reducing the impact of climate change, the 
same should be protected / conserved.  For this purpose, the Committee urged upon the 
Department of Water Resources, River Development & Ganga Rejuvenation to work in close 
cooperation with the Ministry of Environment, Forest & Climate Change and other concerned 
Ministries for evolving a comprehensive policy response so as to preserve the sensitive 
Himalayan glacier system.  
 
16. The Department in its action taken note has replied as follows: 
 

 
8 
 
“The Steering Committee for Monitoring of Glaciers under the chairmanship of Secretary, 
DoWR, RD& GR has been constituted with an aim to develop a coordination mechanism 
among various ministries (viz., Ministries of Jal Shakti; Environment, Forest & Climate 
Change, Department of Space, Ministry of Earth Sciences, Ministry of Mines and 
Department of Science and Technology etc.) for efficient mobilization of resources for glacier 
related studies”. 
17. Having taken note of the importance of green cover in the valleys adjacent to 
the glaciers which acts as a buffer and help in reducing the impact of climate change, 
the Committee in their recommendation in the Twenty Third Report urged upon the 
Department to work in close cooperation with other concerned Ministries for evolving 
a comprehensive policy response so as to preserve the sensitive Himalayan glacier 
system. However, no specific reply has been furnished on the aspect of maintenance 
of green cover, though, it has stated that a Steering Committee for Monitoring of 
Glaciers with an aim to develop a coordination mechanism among various Ministries 
for efficient mobilization of resources for glacier related studies has been formed. The 
Committee, thus, once again, urge the Department to take necessary steps in 
coordination with other Ministries to protect the green cover in the valleys adjacent to 
the glaciers. The Committee would like to be informed of the steps taken by the 
Department in this regard within three months of presentation of this Report.  
 
E.  Need to Evolve Land Use Regulations 
(Recommendation No. - 12) (Para No. 2.14)   
18. The Committee were of the considered view that well laid down procedure / 
regulations for land use planning / zoning in the Himalayan States especially those area 
which are more prone and susceptible to landslides, LLOFs, GLOFs etc. would go a long 
way in mitigating the eventualities that arise in the event of disasters.  The Committee were 
informed by NDMA that in their guidelines on management of GLOFs, they had inter alia 
recommended for constitution of a Committee to formulate specific land use zoning and 
building construction regulations under aegis of Ministry of Jal Shakti (MoJS).  Further, the 
Committee noted that while a Uniform Code for the construction practices is  contained in 
National Building Code of India (NBC 2016) published by the Bureau of Indian Standards 
(BIS) which comes under the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution, as 
regards excavation, a policy on Sediment Management is at  drafting stage under aegis of 
the Ministry of Jal Shakti. The Committee were of the view that regulating construction 
activities in GLOF/LLOF prone areas would go a long way in averting disasters and saving 
precious human lives. They, therefore, recommended that as suggested by the NDMA, the 
Department of WR, RD&GR should constitute a Committee to formulate specific land use 
zoning and building construction regulations expeditiously. They also recommended that the 
Department of WR, RD&GR should work in close coordination with BIS, so that NBC norms 
are adhered to strictly by all the people while constructing buildings in the region.  The 
Committee would like to be apprised of the steps taken by the Department in this regard 
within three months of the presentation of this Report. 
19. The Department in its action taken note has replied as follows: 

 
9 
 
“The Department of Water Resources, RD &GR has formulated "National Framework for 
Sediment Management (NFSM) which was launched by the Hon'ble Minister for Jal Shakti 
during the 1st All India Annual State Ministers Conference on Water held in Bhopal, Madhya 
Pradesh on 5th – 6th January 2023. The NFSM is available on the website of the Ministry for 
reference. 
Indian Institute of Technology Roorkee (IIT, Roorkee) and the Water Resources Department, 
Bureau of Indian Standards (BIS), New Delhi, jointly organized a National Hybrid Seminar on 
“Glacial Lake Outburst Floods (GLOFs) and Landslide Lake Outburst Floods (LLOFs) 
Disasters in Himalayan Regions” on June, 2022, at IIT Roorkee. The seminar provided an 
opportunity for the exchange of ideas and knowledge between diverse groups of the 
scientific community concerned with the current issues related to Glacial and landslide lake 
outburst flood-related hazards and the development of standard codes for its mapping and 
modeling.  
BIS is an apex organization in the field of National Standardization which is carried out 
through 16 Division Councils covering various areas of Standardization. Water Resources 
Department is one of such 17 Departments in BIS, and it deals with standardization and 
standards formulation in the area related to River Valley Projects and Ground Water. A 
committee has been formed in BIS on GLOF related matters. 
Water Resources Division Council chaired by Chairman CWC in its 21st meeting on 
6th March 2023 agreed to constitute a new Sectional Committee on the subject "GLOFs and 
LLOFs" and requested BIS to constitute Search Committee to define and propose the scope 
of the newly constituted Sectional Committee on Glacial Lakes Outburst Floods (GLOFs) 
and Landslides Lakes Outburst Floods (LLOFs).  
  
In this direction, a Search Committee was constituted by BIS and the first meeting was held 
on 12 July 2023 to discuss scope and composition of the constituted Sectional Committee”. 
 
20. The Committee had recommended to the Department of Water Resources, 
River Development and Ganga Rejuvenation that they should constitute a Committee 
to formulate specific land use zoning and building construction regulations 
expeditiously. In this connection, the Committee have come to know from the Action 
Taken Replies of the Department that Bureau of Indian Standards (BIS) is an apex 
organization in the field of National Standardization which is carried out through 16 
Division Councils covering various aspects of standardization. Water Resources 
Department is one of such 17 Departments in BIS. Furthermore, a Committee has 
been formed in BIS on GLOF related matters. The Committee further observe that 
Water Resources Division Council chaired by Chairman, Central Water Commission 
has agreed to constitute a new Sectional Committee on the “GLOFs and LLOFs” and 
requested Bureau of Indian Standards (BIS) to constitute a Search Committee to 
define and propose the scope of the newly constituted Sectional Committee on 
Glacial Lakes Outburst Floods (GLOFs) and Landslides Lakes Outburst Floods 
(LLOFs). In this direction, a Search Committee was constituted by BIS and a meeting 
was also held to discuss scope and composition of the Constituted Sectional 
Committee. The Committee welcome this step and at the same time urge the 
Department to come up with the regulations regarding the land use in the Himalayan 
States within a fixed timeframe.  

 
10 
 
F.  Need to Strengthen Functioning of National Disaster Response Force (NDRF) 
(Recommendation No.-13)  (Para No. – 2.15) 
21. The Committee noted that NDRF is specialized rescue and response force mandated 
to respond to national and man-made disasters. However, they were apprised of the fact that 
heavy equipments like earthmovers/ heavy drilling machines/ JCBs etc, do not form part of 
the equipment profile of NDRF and these equipments are provided by the local authorities 
with handlers at the incident site. Further, NDRF was also not equipped with modern muck 
cleaning instruments/equipments to deal with emergent situations such as the one that arose 
in Chamoli District in the State of Uttarakhand in the month of February 2021. The 
Committee were surprised to learn from the deposition of the representative of the NDRF 
that though roads were fine there was considerable delay on the part of rescue team in 
reaching the site at Reni in Chamoli District Uttarakhand where the disaster took place on 7th 
February, 2021, because of distance. The Committee noted that there is no dedicated air 
craft service available with NDRF for airlifting NDRF personnel and they are dependent on 
IAF/ private choppers provided by the States.  
The Committee found that notwithstanding the fact that NDRF is a specialized rescue 
and response force, however, the constraints / problems such as mentioned above are 
required to be removed as they hamper the rescue efforts of NDRF at critical times. Since 
the State Governments many a time lack specialized skills and resources required to deal 
with the different kind of calamities either natural or man-made, so, reliance of NDRF on the 
State Governments on delivery of various kinds of equipments may not serve the purpose 
and even may hamper the timely and much needed rescue operations. The Committee were 
of the view that instead of depending on State Governments, it would be more advisable for 
NDRF to have its own dedicated inventory of modern search and rescue equipment. Further, 
for ensuring timely arrival of NDRF rescue teams at disaster struck locations and avert 
delays as witnessed in Chamoli incident, it should have its own fleet of aircraft and should 
not be dependent on the IAF/State Governments to provide choppers. Besides, recognizing 
the role of local community as a first responder during any calamity, the Committee feel that 
the NDRF should organize extensive training programmes for local people in all States in 
general and in particular for the States which are more vulnerable to natural calamities. The 
Committee were of the view that NDRF should work closely with the States and render them 
all possible assistance in raising and training their State Disaster Response Teams. The 
Committee urged upon the Department of Water Resources, River Development & Ganga 
Rejuvenation to take up the above-mentioned suggestions with the Ministry of Home 
Affairs/NDMA to streamline the working of NDRF.  
22. The Department in its action taken note has replied as follows: 
“National Disaster Response Force (NDRF) has been authorized 315 different kinds of 
equipment by GoI since its raising for attending various disasters. The equipment profile is 
presently in the process of upgradation/ review to meet the latest technology available world-
wide for enhancing operational efficiency. This is a constant process.  
However, heavy equipment like earth movers/ heavy drilling machines/ JCBs have not been 
consciously kept part of the inventory as these would be difficult to maintain on account of 
rare use and also cumbersome to carry at large distances thereby hampering quick 
movement of teams. Hence, it is desirable that such equipment are worked out for specific 

 
11 
 
contingency requirements and catered for by the district administration. Further, details of all 
such equipment are required to be updated on the web based India Disaster Resource 
Network (IDRN) for identification at the time of occurrence of disaster. 
Under the present organizational set-up of NDRF, it is not feasible to maintain a dedicated 
fleet of aircraft which entails a huge paraphrenalia of manpower and resources. It is felt that 
the present arrangement of making air requisition to IDS and IAF through MHA is working 
very well and actions are well coordinated at all levels to ensure rapid deployment.  
To improve upon the present system, it is proposed that more helipads may be identified in 
vulnerable areas for landing of bigger helicopters like MI-17 which can carry more number of 
Rescuers with equipment in a single sortie and operate in harsh weather conditions as 
well.  Further, airlifting of NDRF Rescuers in case of mountain rescue and forest fire by IAF 
may be catered for. Besides, Airforce aviation may be made available for training exercise of 
NDRF personnel in mountain rescue and forest fire.  
NDRF is regularly organizing extensive Disaster Management training programmes for local 
people, community volunteers, School staff/students & other stakeholders as per 
vulnerability profile by conducting following programmes:- 
1. Community Awareness Program (CAP) 
2. School Safety Program (SSP) 
3. DM training for SDRFs, Community volunteers i.e. JNVs, Nehru Yuva Kendra 
Sangathan (NYKS), AapdaMitra, National Cadet Corps (NCC), National Service 
Scheme (NSS), AkhilBhartiyaTerapanthYuvakParishad (ABTYP) & other 
stakeholders. 
4. Mock Exercises on various themes as per vulnerability profile. 
5. Promotion of weather-based Govt. forecast application (06) apps. 
The details of personnel trained by NDRF since its raising is mentioned below: 
SN Event No of Beneficiary 
1 CAP 59,90,048 
2 SSP 15,76,469 
3 MEx 15,44,371 
4 NCC 31,865 
5 AapdaMitra 24,834 
6 NYKS 12,345 
7 JNVs 68,416 
8 ABTYP 559 
NDRF is now developing e-content for imparting DM training to NSS Volunteers so as to 
expand the awareness level. 
a. Training: 
 NDRF is working closely with States/ UTs for capacity building of State Disaster 
Response Force. 
 NDRF conducts Basic Disaster Management Course for SDRFs at NDRF BNs as per 
their area of responsibility. 

 
12 
 
 So far, NDRF has trained 22,371 personnel (Basic-19,830 & Advance- 2,541). Apart 
from this 252 (Chhattisgarh- 53, Bihar- 79 & Gujarat – 120) personnel are undergoing 
training in Basic DM Course. 
 NDRF circulates Annual Training Calendar (Advance Courses) every year for SDRFs. 
 In 2023, following courses are planned for SDRF (Details enclosed as Appendix-A):- 
i. Training of Trainers of Chemical, Biological, Radiological and Nuclear(TOT 
CBRN) 
ii. Master Trainers in Chemical, Biological, Radiological and Nuclear(MT in CBRN) 
iii. Training of Trainers in Medical First Response and  Collapsed Structure Search 
& Rescue(TOT in MFR & CSSR) 
iv. Master Trainers in Medical First Response and  Collapsed Structure Search & 
Rescue(MT in MFR & CSSR) 
v. Borewell Rescue Course 
vi. Training of Trainers Cadre(TOT CADRE) 
b. Raising: 
 NDRF is constantly in touch with States/ UTs, where SDRF not yet raised. 
 NDRF Unit Commandants remain in coordination with the authorities of States/ UTs 
and provide them all needful assistance. 
 Recently NDRF has assisted A&N authorities for raising of SDRFs in terms of 
equipping, training and deployment. 
 A “Vision Document” has been prepared by NDRF for SDRFs covering all important 
aspects reg. vulnerability, infrastructure development, HR strength, training, 
equipping, deployment & future vision for States. This document is helping the SDRFs 
as guide tool in capacity building. 
It is felt that the raising, training and equipping of SDRFs needs to be taken up in a timeline 
under the supervision of the SDMAs so that they are in a position to take up L1 & L2 
disasters on their own and NDRF can focus on developing specialized skills”. 
23. The Committee have been apprised that under the present organizational setup 
of NDRF, it is not feasible to maintain a dedicated fleet of aircraft and the present 
arrangement of making air requisition to Integrated Defence Staff (IDS) and Indian Air 
Force (IAF) through Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA) is working very well and actions 
are well coordinated at all levels to ensure rapid deployment. However, it has been 
further stated that in order to improve the present system, more helipads may be 
identified in vulnerable areas for landing of bigger helicopters like MI-17 which can 
carry more number of rescuers with equipment in a single sortie and operate in harsh 
weather conditions as well. Further, airlifting of NDRF rescuers in case of mountain 
rescue and forest fire by IAF may be catered for. Besides Air Force aviation may be 
made available for training exercise of NDRF personnel in mountain rescue and forest 
fire. Further regarding the raising, training and equipping of State Disaster Response 
Forces (SDRFs), it has been proposed that it needs to be taken up in a timeline under 
the supervision of the State Disaster Management Authorities (SDMAs). Having taken 
into account the above suggestions, the Committee once again urge the Department 
to take up the above-mentioned suggestions with the Ministry of Home Affairs to 
improve the functioning of NDRF.  
 
 

 
13 
 
Appendix-A 
 
ADVANCE COURSES PLANNED FOR SDRFs IN TRAININGCALENDARFORTHEYEAR-2023 
 
 
S
/
N 
NAME 
OFTHE
COURS
E 
B
O
R
E
W
EL
L 
Rescu
e 
MT 
inMF
R 
&CS
SR 
TOTCBRN TOT
CAD
RE 
ToTin 
MFR&C
SSR 
TOTCBRN ToTin 
MFR&C
SSR 
BOREWELL 
Rescue 
MT in 
MFR&C
SSR 
TOTCADRE MT in 
MFR&C
SSR 
TOTCADRE ToTin 
MFR&C
SSR 
BOREWELL 
Rescue 
BOREWELL 
Rescue 
ToT 
inMF
R 
&CS
SR 
MT 
inC
BR
N 
BOREWELL 
Rescue 
Duration (Weeks) 03days 01 Week 04Weeks 01 Week 05Weeks 04Weeks 05Weeks 03days 01 Week 01 Week 01 Week 01 Week 05Weeks 03days 03days 05Weeks 02Weeks 03days 
Schedule 09.01.
23 
to 11.01.23 
06.02.2
3 
to 11.02.23 
20.02.23 
to 18.03.23 
20.02.2
3 
to 04.03.23 
27.02.2
3 
to 01.04.23 
01/05/23 
to 27/05/23 
01/05/2
3 
to 03/06/23 
08/05/23 
to 10/05/23 
08/05/2
3 
to 13/05/23 
19/06/23 
to 24/06/23 
10/07/23 
to 15/07/23 
21/08/23 
to 26/08/23 
04/09/23 
to 07/10/23 
04/09/23 
to 06/09/23 
09/10/2
3 
to 11/10/23 
06/11/23 
to09/1
2/23 
04/12/23 
to16/1
2/22 
18/12/2
3 
to 20/12/23 Institute 10TH 
BN
ND
RF 
NDRF, Academy 
05 
BNN
DRF 
NDRF, Academy 
07TH 
BNN
DRF 
05 
BNN
DRF 
07TH 
BNN
DRF 
10TH 
BNN
DRF 
NDRF, Academy 
NDRF, 
Academ
y 
NDRF, 
Academ
y 
NDRF, 
Academ
y 
07TH 
BNN
DRF 
06THB
NND
RF 
10TH 
BNN
DRF 
07TH 
BNN
DRF 
05THB
NND
RF 
05TH 
BNN
DRF 
1. WestBenga
l 
- - - - - - 6 - - 7 5 - 5 4  5 - - 
2. Uttarakhan
d 
6 2 3 0 3 1 - - - - - - - - - - 2 - 
3. Rajasthan      - - 7 8 - - - - - - - 8 - 
4. Maharashtra 2 6 4 4 6 6 6 4 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 4 6 
5. Jammu& Kashmir 0 2 2 2 2 2 2 - 2 2 2 2 2 - - 2 2 - 
6. Punjab 2 - - - - - - 4 - - - - - 5 - - - 5 
7. Bihar 2 - 5 5 5 - 3 - - 3 - - 3 - - 3 - - 
8. Himachal Pradesh 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 

 
14 
 
9. Tamilnadu 2 5 4 2 5 5 5 3 - - 3 5 5 - 5 5 3 - 
1
0. 
Andhra 
Pradesh 
- - - - - 10 10 7 9 10 10 10 12 10 13 12 7 13 
11. Karnataka 2 5 5 2 2 9 1 4 4 1 2 6 - 4 5 - 3 5 
12. Uttar Pradesh 10 5 10 10 10 - - - - - 4 3 6 3 2 6 4 3 
1
3. 
Tripura - - - - - - - 1 1 2 - 1 - 1 2 - - 1 
14. Assam 4 4 4 - 4 - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
15. Arunachal Pradesh 2 - - 2 - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
1
6. 
Jharkhand 4 4 4 4 4 - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
1
7 
Haryana 3 4 4 4 4 - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
18. Ladakh - - 2 2 2 - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
19. A&N - 2 - 2 - - - - - -- - - - - - - - - 
Total 
Allotment 
42 42 50 42 50 36 40 33 33 34 35 36 42 36 36 42 36 36 
 Totalallotment-701Seatsareallotted 

 
15 
 
CHAPTER II 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY 
THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Para No. 2.1 
NEED TO MONITOR INDIAN HIMALAYAN REGION 
Glaciers are important components of the hydrological cycles of the Indian 
Himalayan region as these are the source of three large river systems, i.e. the Indus, the 
Ganges, and the Brahmaputra, which provide water for millions of people in the country and 
accordingly, the Hindu Kush Himalayan Region (HKH) is rightly described as ‘Water Towers 
of Asia’. Thus, the river systems and associated groundwater form a significant water 
resource for the country. The Himalayan glaciers ensure water availability even in post-
monsoon period as the base flow of the glacial stream, besides ground water contribution in 
the river system of perennial rivers. As such, glaciers are very important for water security of 
the country. The Committee were informed that as per the inventory published by the 
Geological Survey of India (GSI), there are as many as 9775 glaciers in the Indian 
Himalayan Region (IHR).  Further, a total of 1306.1 cubic km of ice volume (about 1110 cu. 
km of water) is locked up in glacierised basins of Indus, Ganga and Brahmaputra, although 
specific information about separate volume of ice and snow water is not available. It has also 
been informed that the thinning of Himalayan glaciers has been accelerated in the recent 
years, resulting in a significant rise in glacier melt, including sediment load, in yearly runoff 
and altered hydrological behaviour in the mountain region and downstream.  The Committee 
observe that close and frequent monitoring of glaciers, glacier discharge, glacial lakes and 
prospective glacial lake outburst floods in the Himalayan region have become vital and 
critically important as never before for not only determining the current status as well as 
future responses of glaciers and glacial lakes, but also for predicting and mitigating the 
potential hazard disasters that may arise in future. 
 
Reply of the Government 
Monitoring of Glaciers in the Himalayan region is important for formulating climate 
change adaptation strategies, as its dynamics manifests the impact of climate change at 
regional and global scales. It also provides inputs on glacial mass balance which is crucial 
for sustainable water resources management. 
Several initiatives have been taken by various Department and Organisation as 
mentioned below with an aim to monitor glaciers, glacier discharge, glacial lakes and 
prospective glacial lake outburst floods in the Himalayan region. 
Ministry of Earth Sciences (MoES) through its autonomous Institute, the National 
Centre for Polar and Ocean Research (NCPOR) has been monitoring six glaciers in the 
Chandra basin (2,437 km2 area) in western Himalaya since 2013. A state-of-the-art field 
research station ‘Himansh’ established in Chandra basin and operational since 2016 for 
conducting field experiment and expeditions to glaciers. The glacier inventory prepared by 
NCPOR for the Chandra basin shows that it has lost about 6% of its glacial area during last 

 
16 
 
20 years and 2.4 to 9 meter water equivalent (m.w.e.) ice mass during 2013-2021. Annual 
rate of retreat of Chandra basin glaciers vary from 13 to 33 meter/year during last decade. 
NCPOR through various studies have found that the Indian Himalayan region is one of the 
climate change hotspots, showing more significant warming than the global average due to 
the elevation-dependent warming phenomenon. Glaciers have shown significant retreat and 
mass loss in the past few decades due to the warming climate. 
Waldia Institute of Himalayan Geology (WIHG) has been engaged in glacier 
research over the past 30 years. The research activities for glaciology require a two-phase 
operational strategy. In the 1stphase, recognizing the crunch of trained manpower, special 
focus is placed on training young researchers, establishment of field stations equipped with 
the latest instruments and technologies to comprehend several aspects in this specialised 
field of glaciology at tough terrain. 2nd phase would bring out continuous long-term 
observations on representative Himalayan glaciers and utilize the generated data for 
management, planning, and policy-making for the societal benefit and sustainable 
development. 
As part of the first phase, WIHG has developed a basic infrastructure over ten (10) 
glaciers spread across Uttarakhand, Ladakh and expertise on different aspects of 
glaciology for monitoring glaciers throughout the year. WIHG has produced over 100 
research articles on different aspects of glaciology and more than 15 PhDs in different 
disciplines of glaciology. WIHG has sustained long-term multifaceted observations on 
representative glaciers and has established inter-linkages and dependence of glacier 
dynamics on climatic, hydrologic, environmental factors through integration. Glacier-
seismicity linkages have also been established, with an integrated approach for the 
assessment of different hazards in the Himalaya-Karakoram. 
Considering that the IHR has ~10000 glaciers, WIHG aims to have a holistic 
approach for integrated long-term research throughout the year on representative glaciers, 
create manpower through training programs in glaciology to fill the void of human 
resources in this specialized field. In the ongoing phase WIHG will move towards latest 
technologies including up gradation to automated instrumentation, expansion of 
observatories with real-time connectivity, implementation of artificial intelligence and 
machine learning for faster and accurate data assimilation and dissemination. 
Further, a basin wise and basin wide approach will be adopted to monitor the 
glaciers, glacial lakes and associated hazards downstream using a network of automated 
weather stations, water level recorders, broadband seismometers, high-resolution satellite 
data and sirens for warning in real-time.  For this purpose WIHG has already been awarded 
projects to develop early warning systems by DST for Dhauliganga Basin, Uttarakhand 
State Disaster Management Authority (USDMA), Uttarakhand Jal Vidyut Nigam (UJVNL) 
limited for Bhagirathi Basin at the initial stage.  
This can be adopted by other knowledge partners, institutes and organisations for 
long-term monitoring under the glaciological program of the Department of Science and 
Technology (DST). Besides, the WIHG is also equipped with ultra-modern laboratory 
facilities, which are being upgraded for glacier research. This would help institutionalize 
glaciological research in the country. 

 
17 
 
Indian Space Research Organisation has informed that satellite data and its 
expertise could be made available, as required by the nodal agencies, for monitoring/ 
modeling purposes. 
Geological Survey of India (GSI) carries out the glaciological studies of GSI include 
Glacier Mass Balance Studies, Glacier Regimen Studies, Glaciers& Climate Variability 
Studies for selected glaciers in the Himalayan Belt. GSI has conducted mass balance 
studies on 09 glaciers to assess volumetric changes on the glacier surface, and carried out 
secular movement studies on 81 glaciers to assess the recessional and advancement 
pattern of the glacier. Majority of Himalayan glaciers are observed melting/ retreating at 
varying rates in different regions. In the Indian Himalayan Region, studies indicate that the 
glaciers are retreating and losing their mass, except for some glaciers in the Karakoram.  
 
Ministry of Environment & Forest & Climate Change has informed that under the National 
Action Plan for Climate Change (NAPCC), the Government is implementing the National 
Mission for Sustaining Himalayan Eco-system (NMSHE). The Mission aims to 
a. understand scientifically the complex processes affecting this eco-system, 
b. evolve suitable management and policy measures for sustaining and safeguarding 
theHimalayan eco-system including Himalayan glaciers; and 
c. work with the states in the Indian Himalayan region in the implementation of 
scientifically derived policy measures. 
Recognizing the scientific and technological inputs required for sustaining the fragile 
Himalayan eco-system, DST has been charged with the responsibility of implementing 
NMSHE. 
In addition, the G.B. Pant National Institute of Himalayan Environment (GBPNIHE), an 
autonomous institute under MoEF&CC, is involved in strengthening local knowledge of 
environment; evolve and demonstrate suitable technological packages in the Indian 
Himalayan Region with a focus on improved livelihood options including socio-economic 
development of the Himalayan communities along with biodiversity conservation etc. 
 
(O.M. NO. Z-17013/1/2022-FM dated 01.08.2023) 
 
Para No. 2.2 
WARMING OF THE HIMALAYAN-KARAKORAM REGION 
 
The Committee note that as per the information furnished by the Department of 
Science and Technology (DST), the Himalayan-Karakoram region is becoming warmer at a  
faster rate than global mean by 0.5 0C which will lead to local changes in hydrology in terms 
of rainfall and snowfall patterns, increased melting from glaciers and threat to the 
infrastructure due to increase in extreme events leading to disasters. The Committee are 
further informed by the Ministry of Environment, Forest & Climate Change (MoEF&CC) that 
smaller glaciers in the Himalayan region are more sensitive to climate change and their 

 
18 
 
shrinkage rate is stated to be higher than those of larger glaciers.  Further, as per the World 
Meteorological Organization, average global temperature for 2015-2019 is estimated to be 
1.1 degree Celsius above pre-industrial (1850-1900) level. According to the Ministry of Earth 
Sciences, in line with rising temperatures across the globe, all India mean temperature has 
risen by nearly 0.7 degree Celsius during 1901 to 2018.    The Committee further note that 
as per the IPCC report 2021, the glaciers of Hindu Kush Himalayas (HKH) are shrinking and 
the snow cover has been getting reduced since the early 21st century and glaciers have also 
been thinned, retreated and lost mass since the 1970s.  According to estimates made 
between 2006 and 2018, the global mean sea level is rising at a rate of around 3.7 mm/yr. 
Further in the long term, the melting of glaciers will also contribute to rising of the sea level 
and threaten to submerge some coastal cities in the country and in the short term, the sea 
level rise may cause the change in rainfall pattern and seasonal flooding in the coastal 
areas.  The Committee while observing cataclysmic changes that are occurring in the 
Himalayan region / cryosphere, call for urgent, coherent and coordinated response to the 
evolving challenges posed by global warming & climate change. 
 
Reply of the Government 
National Centre for Polar and Ocean Research (NCPOR) has informed that in the 
context of global warming, most glaciers are melting and receding. However, in contrast, the 
glaciers of central Karakoram have surprisingly remained unchanged or slightly increased in 
the last few decades, known as the "Karakoram Anomaly". Studies show that the central and 
west Karakoram glaciers gained ice mass, while the eastern Karakoram glaciers lost ice 
mass in the past two decades. The increasing precipitation trend is leading to mass gains in 
the western and central Karakoram glaciers, whereas increasing temperature is causing ice 
mass loss in the eastern Karakoram glacier. 
Snow during winter covers a large area (1.59 ± 0.15 million km2) in the HKH region 
and  ranges from 85% in the winter to approximately 10% in the summer. There is no 
significant trend in the mean Snow Cover Area for the HKH region. However, decreasing 
trends in Jhelum, Kosi, Gandaki, Manas and Chandra river basins were reported, with a 
statistically significant negative correlation with temperature. 
Further, the future projections indicate that glacier melt contribution will increase at 
first as the glacier mass loss accelerates, followed by a decrease resulting from a significant 
reduction in the glacier volumes. Further, changing climate indicates more precipitation in 
the form of rainfall instead of snowfall. In general, the warming climate will lead to the 
increasing contribution of rainfall-runoff, long-term decrease in snowmelt and ice melt and 
early melting seasonal snow, which will alter the trend and timing of the hydrological regime 
of Himalayan rivers. 
Wadia institute of Himalayan Geology (WIHG) has informed that most of the 
studies over central and western Himalayan glaciers indicate that the glaciers are in a 
general state of retreat/thinning. However, several glaciers in the Karakoram are reported 
to be advancing/thickening/surging. Several studies have reported the 
advancement/retreating of glacier snouts, changes in area-elevation as well as the velocity 
of glaciers based on remotely sensed data. These do not provide any insight on 
understanding the processes responsible for these heterogeneities.  

 
19 
 
Therefore, to comprehend the processes governing the dynamics and hydrology of 
glaciers in the Himalaya-Karakoram, utilisation of advanced techniques in conjunction with 
the real-time in-situ observations is need of the hour to gain scientific knowledge on better 
understanding by simulating the glaciological processes at different spatio-temporal scales. 
For this purpose, WIHG has carried out several expeditions to the Karakoram region 
and initiated hydro-meteorological monitoring in Nubra Basin, Ladakh Himalaya and also in-
situ monitoring of two (02) glaciers within the basin, apart from in-situ monitoring of two (02) 
glaciers of Zanskar Basin in Ladakh and eight (08) glaciers of Bhagirathi and Alaknanda 
Basins in Uttarakhand. Also, WIHG has also been pursuing studies for larger basins using 
remote sensing data in Himalaya-Karakoram region through various glacial and glacial-lake 
inventories and their temporal changes. 
Ministry of Environment & Forest & Climate Change has stated that in August 2022, 
India has submitted its updated Nationally Determined Contribution (NDC) to United Nations 
Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC). The mitigation targets in terms of 
reduction of emission intensity and share of non-fossil fuels in total electricity generation 
installed capacity have been enhanced. Subsequently in November, 2022, India has 
submitted its Long-term Low Carbon Development Strategy to reach net-zero by 
2070.India’s action on climate change is guided by the National Action Plan on Climate 
Change, (NAPCC), which is the overarching policy framework and comprises national 
missions in specific areas of solar energy, enhanced energy efficiency, water, agriculture, 
Himalayan ecosystem, sustainable habitat, green India, human health and strategic 
knowledge on climate change. The implementation of these national missions is being 
anchored by concerned Ministries and Departments with each mission having its own sector 
specific action plan. The National Mission on Sustaining Himalayan Eco-system (NMSHE), 
inter-alia, aims for strengthening of research and capacity building in thematic areas viz. 
Himalayan glaciology, hydrology, biodiversity, sustainable agriculture, wild life protection and 
conservation, etc. At the State level, 34 States/ Union Territories (UTs) have prepared their 
State Action Plans on Climate Change (SAPCC) in line with NAPCC taking into account the 
State specific issues relating to climate change.  
In addition, the Department of Science and Technology (DST) has also set-up 
Centres of Excellence at various institutions under NMSHE and National Mission on 
Strategic Knowledge for Climate Change (NMSKCC) for studying the impact of climate 
change across country including Himalayan Region.  
In the context of sea-level rise, MoEF&CC under the Integrated Coastal Zone 
Management Project (ICZMP) has demarcated the hazard line along the entire coastal belt 
of the country, including the intertidal areas. The hazard line is indicative of the shoreline 
changes, including the sea level rise due to climate change and is a projection of impact due 
to sea level rise, and shoreline changes over a long period of time viz. over 100 years. This 
line is to be used by the Coastal State agencies concerned as a tool for disaster 
management for the coastal environment, including planning of adaptive and mitigation 
measures. The Government also seeks to conserve and enhance mangroves and corals 
through promotional and legal measures. The mangrove cover in the country is rising and 
has increased between 2017 and 2021. 
(O.M. NO. Z-17013/1/2022-FM dated 01.08.2023) 

 
20 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 2 (Para No. 2.4) 
Need for Overarching Apex Body for Glacier Management 
 
The Committee note that Glaciers are important components of the hydrological 
cycles of the Indian Himalayan region as they are the source of the three large river systems 
of India i.e. the Indus, the Ganges, and the Brahmaputra, which provide water for millions of 
people in the country. However, they note that there are plethora of 
Ministries/Departments/Institutions with different mandates for dealing with hydro-
meteorological and hydro-geological hazards of Himalayan glaciers. While the glaciers are 
surveyed and their detailed inventory is maintained by the Geological Survey of India, 
Ministry of Mines; the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change looks into all 
matters related to climate change including its impact on the glaciers. The Department of 
Science & Technology is involved in conducting research on glaciers and the National 
Centre for Polar and Ocean Research (NCPOR) under the Ministry of Earth Sciences has 
done some studies on the Himalayan cryosphere. Besides, the Defence Geo-Informatics 
Research Establishment under aegis of Defence Research & Development Organisation 
(DRDO) carries out work on avalanche forecasting, and the Indian Space Research 
Organization coming under the Department of Space, looks after the National Natural 
Resources Management System and provides valuable inputs by way of remote sensing. 
Further, the Department of Water Resources, River Development & Ganga Rejuvenation is 
tasked with flood-control management and the Central Water Commission has been 
mandated for monitoring glacial lakes.  Apart from different 
Ministries/Departments/Agencies, glaciological studies and other cryospheric research is 
carried out by a number of researchers from various research and academic institutes 
across the country. 
 
The Committee are of the considered view that given the strategic role and 
importance of glaciers as a vital national resource, there is a critical and imperative need as 
never before, to formulate new strategies for combating the challenges posed by the climate 
change and global warming in the glacier management especially glaciers movement, 
glaciers surge, Glacial Lake Outburst Flood (GLOF), Landslide Lake Outburst Flood (LLOF) 
and cloud burst in mountainous regions. In this regard, the role of planners, scientists and 
academicians assumes critical importance in devising, developing and implementing suitable 
measures for studying, monitoring and providing early warning response to reduce the 
potential glacier related risks. Fragmented research and studies by various 
Departments/Institutions/Agencies in this regard will not yield desired results / outcomes and 
also may not necessarily convert into actionable steps. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that there is need to set up a single nodal agency for bringing out synergies 
among various Government Departments/Ministries involved in glaciological research and 
monitoring to achieve desirable results. Such an agency should be entrusted with the 
responsibility of coordinating the activities of all the Departments/Agencies involved in 
Himalayan Glaciers monitoring and research work. Besides, this agency should be given 
well-defined and delineated mandate by suitably amending the Allocation of Business Rules. 
The Committee urge upon the Department of Water Resources, River Development & 
Ganga Rejuvenation to play a lead role in this regard so as to take the matter to its logical 
conclusion for setting up of the institution and apprise the Committee about the steps taken 
by it within three months of presentation of this Report. 

 
21 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Department of Water Resources, River Development & Ganga Rejuvenation has 
constituted a Steering Committee for monitoring of glaciers(a copy of order of constitution of 
the committee attach at Annexure-III). The objective of Steering Committee is – 
i. To initiate systematic mapping of glaciers/glacial lakes, monitoring glacial changes/melting 
and glacial lake outburst floods. 
ii. To consolidate the glacier and glacial lake information collected by different agencies of 
the Government and make it available on GIS based web-portal. 
iii. To develop a coordination mechanism among various ministries (viz., Ministries of Jal 
Shakti; Environment, Forest & Climate Change, Department of Space, Ministry of Earth 
Sciences, Ministry of Mines and Department of Science and Technology etc.) for efficient 
mobilization of resources for glacier related studies. 
iv. To help building bridges among other research groups and academia for studies on 
glaciers. 
v. To develop trends and predictions for behaviour of Himalayan glaciers in the context of 
climate change and their likely impact on hydrology. 
vi. To develop capacity through workshops, awareness and trainings programs on snow and 
glacier aspects. 
The Committee will meet quarterly to advise and review the progress on the 
methodologies suggested for monitoring of glaciers. 
The first meeting of the Steering Committee for Monitoring of Glaciers was held in the 
National Institute of Hydrology, Roorkee on May 02, 2023. The meeting was chaired by 
Secretary, WR, RD & GR, Ministry of Jal Shakti, Gort. of India. Minutes of the meeting is 
attached at Annexure-IV 
The above constituted Steering Committee under the chairmanship of Secretary, 
DoWR, RD & GR will act as an overall Arching Apex Body for Glacier Management.   
(O.M. NO. Z-17013/1/2022-FM dated 01.08.2023) 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO.5 (Para No. 2.7) 
Need for Revival of Springs in the Himalayas 
 
 The Committee note that the Niti Aayog Report of 2018 (Report of Working Group-I 
on Inventory and Revival of Springs in the Himalayas for Water Security) had warned that 
almost 60 per cent of water sources in the Indian Himalayan region are on the verge of 
drying up.  The Ayog has proposed launching a National Spring Water Management 
Programme for the Himalayan Region. The Committee are happy to note that in compliance 
with the suggestions of the NITI Ayog, the Department of Water Resources, River 
Development & Ganga Rejuvenation has created a database of springs existing in the 

 
22 
 
mountainous regions of India, especially in Indian Himalayan region (total 12 states) by 
compiling all information already available with Survey of India (SoI), Central Ground Water 
Board (CGWB), National Remote Sensing Centre (NRSC), State Governments, Non-
Governmental Organizations (NGO’s) and other organizations. The database compiled was 
analyzed to create a Spring Geographical Information System (GIS) which is available as 
web based service in Survey of India G2G portal.  While appreciating the steps taken for 
creation of database, the Committee urge upon the Department to take necessary steps for 
the revival of springs in the Himalayan region as millions of people depend only on Springs 
for their drinking, domestic, and agricultural water needs. The Committee would like to be 
apprised of the steps taken by the Department in this regard within three months of the 
presentation of this Report.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
NITI Aayog's report on "Inventory and revival of springs in Himalayas for water 
security" highlighted the urgent need to take up a national level initiative focused on 
rejuvenation, restoration and management of Himalayan springs. On the 
recommendations of NITI Aayog, rejuvenation of springshed, in the lines of management 
of watershed, has been incorporated as a new activity in the Watershed Development 
Component under Pradhan Mantri Krishi Sinchayee Yojana (WDC-PMKSY). The 
continuation of Watershed Development Component (WDC-PMKSY) has been allowed 
by Government of India on 15.12.2021 as ‘WDC-PMKSY 2.0’ for the project period of 
2021-2026..  
Further, Guidelines for New Generation Watershed Development Projects (WDC-
PMKSY 2.0) published by Dept. of Land Resources, Ministry of Rural Development covers 
implementation strategy and road map for springshed rejuvenation. 
 
The steps being taken by Central Ground Water Board on springs revival and management 
in the country are - 
1. “Spring Cell” has been created in 11 Regional offices of CGWB, where springs form a 
major source of drinking water supply. 
 
2. CGWB has prepared a draft policy on “The Protection of Catchment Area of Springshed 
/ Watershed”. 
 
3. Springshed Management in the Hilly areas of North Eastern Region has been 
deliberated during the State level workshop held on Success Stories of NAQUIM 
Studies and PMKSY-HKKP-GW Schemes in NER, organized on 24 January 2023. 
 
4. Under National Aquifer Mapping 2.0, the revival of Springshed have been undertaken in 
AAP 2023-24. 
Springshed Mapping in Dalai District, Tripura, 
Kohima District, Nagaland, 
Imphal East District, Manipur, 
and Aizwal District, Mizoram 

 
23 
 
 
5. A Pilot study is being taken up by CGWB in association with NIH aiming to ascertain the 
efficacy of use of State-of-the-art technologies for spring mapping and sustainability of 
springs through suitable interventions in Pratapnagar, Bilangana blocks of TehriGarhwal 
district and Ukhimath block of Rudraprayag district, Uttarakhand (2023-24). By using 
DEM, Point cloud and ORI of Manu Project in Bilangana CD block of TehriGarhwal 
District and Ukhimath CD block of Rudraprayag District and drone mounted LiDAR data 
of Pratapnagar Block, TehriGarhwal district, spring identification and demarcation of 
springshed will be carried out by SoI and will be shared with CGWB. 
 
6. CGWB in association with National Institute of Hydrology (NIH), Roorkee will carry out 
validation of SoI data, identification of vulnerable spring and suggest implementable 
plans for rejuvenation of springs, which will be executed by concerned State 
department. 
 
NRSC/ ISRO has informed that available relevant thematic geospatial datasets can be 
shared for springshed management by concerned departments. 
 
(O.M. NO. Z-17013/1/2022-FM dated 01.08.2023) 
RECOMMENDATION NO.-6 (Para No. 2.8) 
Need to have Data Sharing Agreements 
 
 The Committee note that though India has entered into treaty / agreement for water 
sharing / sharing of hydrological information with its neighbouring countries, however, there 
is no specific Agreement/Treaty with neighbouring countries for sharing of glacier related 
data for large-scale modeling and runoff evolution. The Committee are of the view that in 
order to design / devise a comprehensive and coordinated strategy that could effectively 
address both the risk of glacier related outburst floods and water management challenges, 
regional cooperation is the need of the hour. Since the threat posed by the melting/retreating 
of Himalayan glaciers transcends the national boundaries of the Himalayan nations, the 
Committee are of the considered view that in order to formulate / devise an effective and 
comprehensive response to the threat posed by melting of glaciers and for mitigating 
potential hazard situations, regional cooperation for seamless sharing of hydrological 
information / data on glacier movement / behavior is very much warranted. The Committee, 
therefore recommend the Department of Water Resources, River Development & Ganga 
Rejuvenation to take up the matter with the Ministry of External Affairs so as to have some 
kind of bilateral/multilateral Agreement with neighboring Himalayan countries for sharing of 
information / data on the changing state of glaciers and the threats posed by them. The 
Committee would like to be apprised of the steps taken by the Department in this regard 
within three months of the presentation of this Report.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
There exists an Expert-Level Mechanism with China on trans-border rivers since 
2006. Various issues relating to trans-border rivers are discussed with China under the ambit 

 
24 
 
of this Institutionalised Expert-Level Mechanism as well as through diplomatic channels. It 
has been informed by Ministry of External Affairs that India intends to remain engaged with 
China on the issue of trans-border rivers to safeguard our interests. A separate agreement 
on glacier data involving China is not recommended at the current juncture. 
(O.M. NO. Z-17013/1/2022-FM dated 01.08.2023) 
RECOMMENDATION NO.-7  (Para No. 2.9) 
The Committee observe that there are various constraints / problems even at the 
national level in data-sharing relating to glaciological research. The Committee understand 
from the submissions of the Director, Wadia Institute of Himalayan Geology, that there are 
many obstacles in using the data especially the high-resolution data because they need 
specific permission from concerned authorities before their use. Besides, different Ministries 
have different protocols for data collection and their sharing. The Committee are of the view 
that since glaciology is a wide ranging and diverse field, research in this area necessitates 
requirement of data from a wide range of sources, institutions, and authorities. All 
information pertaining to glaciers need to be gathered at one place so as to enable its easy 
access and sharing by researchers and other stakeholders so that they accomplish their 
stated research goals. The Committee, therefore, recommend the Department to take up this 
issue with concernedMinistries/Department/Agencies/Institutes for setting up a common data 
sharing platform under the aegis of a single nodal agency so as to enable seamless 
exchange of data by various researchers / stake holders. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Department of Water Resources, River Development & Ganga Rejuvenation has 
constituted a Steering Committee for monitoring of glaciers. The objective of Steering 
Committee is  to initiate systematic mapping of glaciers/glacial lakes, monitoring glacial 
changes/melting and glacial lake outburst floods and to consolidate the glacier and glacial 
lake information collected by different agencies of the Government and make it available on 
GIS based web-portal. 
The objective of setting up a common data sharing platform under the aegis of a 
single nodal agency so as to enable seamless exchange of data by various researchers / 
stake holders would be fulfilled by above constituted Steering Committee. 
(O.M. NO. Z-17013/1/2022-FM dated 01.08.2023) 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO.-8 (Para No. 2.10) 
Need to strengthen Network of Monitoring Stations 
 
 The Committee note that there is a severe shortage of meteorological and monitoring 
stations in the Indian Himalayan region. Presently the Defence Geoinformatics Research 
Establishment (DGRE) has set up three Mountain Metrological Centres (MMC) for avalanche 
study and the Wadia Institute of Himalayan Geology (WIHG) has five meteorological and 
discharge stations located in the high altitude regions (~3800 m asl), most of them being of 

 
25 
 
conventional type. The Central Water Commission (CWC) has set up 46 meteorological 
observation stations in the Himalyan region (1000m above msl) and out of these, only 35 are 
telemetry based stations. Apart from the above, 16 new telemetry based meteorological 
observation stations are proposed (1000m above msl) to be set up in the Himalyan region, 
which is under various stages of implementation.  As regards Uttarakhand, which is very 
vulnerable to landslide induced and glacial lake outburst floods, the Committee find that 
CWC has only 6 (4 Level + 2 Inflow) flood forecasting stations. Explaining the reason for 
this, DoWR, RD & GR  has stated that CWC issues level forecasts at identified locations and 
inflow forecasts for identified Dams/ Reservoirs/ Barrages for providing advance information 
based on the request from the respective State Governments. Hence, based on request 
from Government of Uttarakhand at present there are only 6 flood forecasting stations. While 
citing the constraints in making accurate and timely forecast by conventional systems due to 
tough terrain and flashy nature of rivers in Uttarakhand, the Department stated that for flood 
forecasting by rainfall-runoff mathematical modelling, sufficiently representative and 
temporal distribution of real-time rainfall would be required from Indian Meteorological 
Department (IMD).  
The Committee further note that Himalayan glaciers and glacial lakes are not being 
monitored / observed on a scale on which they should have been due to their remote 
location and difficulty in accessing them. The strategic importance of glaciers in ensuring 
water security and the frequent occurrence of several extreme hydro-meteorological events 
in the recent past due to climate change resulting in abnormal flood like situations damaging 
human lives and infrastructure, has underlined as never before, the urgency of constant 
monitoring of the glaciers and glacial lakes. The Committee believe that in order to have 
effective and seamless monitoring of Himalayan glaciers and glacier-bound risks, a 
comprehensive network of field stations in highly important glaciered basins supplemented 
by integrated monitoring systems is the need of the hour. The Committee thus urge upon the 
Department to make concerted efforts to set up a network of high altitude meteorological and 
discharge stations covering more glaciers and watersheds in the Himalayan region. Besides, 
the Committee call upon the Department to work in close liason with the WIHG and explore 
the technical feasibility of converting their meteorological and discharge stations in the high 
altitude regions into Automatic Stations which will be of great use in enabling observation at 
a high time resolution to be received in real time.  The Department should also work in close 
collaboration with the IMD with a view to ensuring real time rainfall forecast systems for a 
State like Uttarakhand which frequently becomes victim of various mountainous hazard 
events. Further, the Committee call upon the Department to reconsider its extant policy of 
setting up flood forecasting station only on the request from the concerned State 
Governments, and should become proactive and itself identify the vulnerable locations in 
collaboration with the respective State Governments, where Forecasting Stations are 
needed to be set up.  
Reply of the Government 
 
Indian Meteorological Department has informed that IMD is already having a well 
established weather monitoring network. To enhance the same for Himalayan Region, a 
Project ‘Integrated Himalayan Meteorology Programme (IHMP) is being implemented in the 
Western & Central Himalayan region covering four States/UTs namely, Jammu  Kashmir 
&Ladakh, Himachal Pradesh, Uttarakhand and Sub Himalayan West Bengal to augment the 
observational network and fill the data gap areas in the region. Under this program, state of 

 
26 
 
art meteorological systems are to be deployed over the mountainous region to establish the 
dense observational network through commissioning of 10 Doppler Weather Radars (DWRs) 
in the Himalayan region. Out of ten (10) radars, nine (9) DWRs have been installed each at 
Kufri, Jot &Murari Devi in Himachal Pradesh, at Mukteshwar&Surkanda Devi in Uttarakhand, 
at Leh&Sonmarg in Ladakh and at Jammu and Banihal Top in Jammu & Kashmir. 
Installation of DWR at Lansdowne in Uttarakhand is under process. 
The details of the same are given in Table below; 
S.No. Name of Station DWR type Commissioned on 
1 Srinagar (Jammu & Kashmir) X-Band, Polarimetric 01-05-2015 
2 Mukteshwar (Uttarakhand) X-Band 30.09.2020 
3 Sonmarg (Ladakh) Transportable X-Band 26.10.2020 
4 Kufri (Himachal Pradesh) X-Band 07.12.2020 
5 Leh (Ladakh) Transportable X-Band 28.10.2021 
6 Jammu (Jammu & Kashmir) X-Band 24.08.2021 
7 Surkanda Devi (Uttarakhand) X-Band 28.03.2022 
8 Banihal Top (Jammu & Kashmir) X-Band 01.09.2022  
9 Jot (Himachal Pradesh) X-Band 31.12.2022 
10 Murari Devi (Himachal Pradesh) X-Band 21.01.2023 
11 Lansdowne (Uttarakhand) X-Band To be Commissioned  
 
Existing observational network AWS/Agro-AWS/ARG in Himalayan States are given in the 
Table below; 
S.No. State AWS ARG Agro-AWS 
 Jammu & Kashmir 23 14 4 
 Ladakh 10 - - 
 Himachal Pradesh 22 66 4 
 Uttarakhand 25 21 3 
 Sub-Himalayan West Bengal & Sikkim 10 11 2 
 
 
The details of future plan for enhancement of observational network under ACROSS 
Project (2021-2026) are given in Table below; 
S.N
o. State AWS  ARG ASG Agro-
AWS 
Surface 
Observatory 
 Jammu & Kashmir 11 20 14 4 - 
 Ladakh 10 1 10 1 - 
 Himachal Pradesh 20 24 21 4 - 
 Uttarakhand 42 22 11 6 15 
 Sub-Himalayan West Bengal & Sikkim 06 06 03 4 - 
(AWS: Automated Weather Station,  ARG: Automated Rain Gauge,  ASG: Automated Snow 
Gauge) 

 
27 
 
In addition to these, action for further enhancement of observational network for 
Himalayan regions under Integrated Himalayan Meteorology Project is in progress. Under 
this scheme installation and commissioning of AWS/ARG/HAWOS will be carried out over 
Himalayan Region for betterment of weather monitoring. Details of the same are given in 
Table below. 
The Proposed Observational Network for Himalayan Region and North-eastern States 
In Western Himalayan Region, following is the proposed network: 
State CSWDRS HAWOS AWS/ARG/SG M-AWS SFO 
J & K  4 5 75 5 NIL 
HP  4 0 65 5 NIL 
UK  4 3 75 5 15 
SHWB  NIL 1 15 NIL NIL 
TOTAL  12 09 230 15 15 
CSWDRS: Compact Severe Weather Detection Radar Systems, HAWOS: Heliport 
Automated Weather Observation Systems 
Proposed Observational Network Integrated Meteorological Services for Northeastern 
Region 
 State  DWR AWS/ARG/SG MR WL AWOS/HAWOS 
Arunachal Pradesh 2  35  NIL  NIL  8  
Assam 2  50  3  3  2  
Meghalaya 0  30  NIL  NIL  1  
Nagaland 1  30  1  1  1  
Manipur 1  30  0  0  1  
Mizoram 1  30  0  0  1  
Tripura 0  30  1  1  2  
Sikkim 1  35  0  0  2  
TOTAL 8 270 5 5 18 
MR-Microwave Radiometer, WL-Wind Lidar, HAWOS-Heliport Automated Weather 
Observation Systems. 
(O.M. NO. Z-17013/1/2022-FM dated 01.08.2023) 
RECOMMENDATION NO.-9 (Para No. 2.11) 
Need to bring Smaller Glaciers under the purview of Monitoring  
 
 
 The Committee note that as per the inventory of GLs/WBs prepared in 2011, there 
are 2028 GLs/WBs having size more than 10 ha including 477 GLs/WBs having size more 
than 50 ha in Himalayan Region of Indian River Basins. Presently, Central Water 

 
28 
 
Commission is monitoring 95 GLs/WBs lying in India having size more than 50 Ha on 
monthly basis during monsoon season (June to October) every year.  The Committee are of 
the view that it is just not enough to cover only large water bodies/glacial lakes as the 
smaller glaciers are also more vulnerable to climate change which accelerates their melting 
and thereby pose potent threat, the fact  which has been corroborated by the statement of 
the representative of the DoWR, RD & GR during the course of oral evidence, wherein he 
has stated that even a smaller mass of ice or water can be troublesome as witnessed in 
Chamoli incident which occurred in the State of Uttarakhand in early months of the year 
2021 which was non monsoon period. The Committee, therefore, recommend the 
Department of Water Resources, River Development & Ganga Rejuvenation to take 
necessary steps to bring smaller water bodies/glacial lakes under their purview for 
monitoring not only during monsoon period but throughout the year. They also urge upon the 
Department to collaborate with National Remote Sensing Centre (NRSC) for updation of 
their 2011 inventory of GLs/WBs which was based on the satellite imageries data of 
Advanced Wide Field Sensor (AWiFS) of the  Indian Remote Sensing Satellite, Resourcesat-
2 collected during the period  May-Nov, 2009. 
Reply of the Government 
 
The number of Glacial Lakes/ Water Bodies being monitored by CWC has been 
increased from 477 to 902 from June 2022 onwards. The size of these 902 GL/WBs being 
monitored now covers those with areas more than 10 ha whereas earlier the minimum size 
covered was 50 ha. A few lakes of size less than10 ha have also been included. The details 
of the same is as under:- 
• 477 Glacial Lakes and Water Bodies, having water spread area greater than 50ha which 
have been included from the inventory of Glacial Lakes & Water Bodies in the Indian 
Himalayan region using satellite data of the year 2009 prepared by NRSC 
• 385 Glacial Lakes, having spatial extent greater than 10 ha, which have been taken from 
the inventory of Glacial Lakes & Water Bodies in the Indian Himalayan region using satellite 
data of the year 2009 prepared by NRSC. 
• 57 Glacial Lakes, which have been listed as high priority lakes, as per Synthesis report on 
GLOF hazard and risk across the Indian Himalayan Region prepared by Swiss Agency for 
Development and Cooperation (SDC) for NDMA. 
High resolution multi-spectral and microwave (SAR) images at 10 m resolution from 
foreign satellites have been used. The use of Microwave (SAR) images have helped in 
detecting Lakes even in cloud conditions. Initiative has also been taken up to utilise Indian 
satellite data. The data of RISAT 1-A has also been utilised. Open-source cloud computing 
platform, has been used for processing and analysing of these large satellite imageries. 
Processing &analysing of these satellite images and computation of water spread area has 
been automized. 
2. First Order Hazard Assessment 
To assess the potential impact of the lakes in the downstream area, a First order 
hazard assessment has been undertaken by CWC. The methodology adopted is similar to 
that recommended in the NDMA Guidelines on GLOF. Initially, 8 lakes have been identified 
by CWC for first order assessment in 4 States/UTs (HP, Uttarakhand, Ladakh, J&K). These 
were common, in the 3 studies i.e. firstly 56 lakes identified by SDC as high priority lakes in 

 
29 
 
6 States/UTs in their "Synthesis report on GLOF hazard and risk", secondly, report of 
Ranking Studies of Lakes by NRSC (Ganga & Indus Basin) in the Indian Himalayan Region 
and thirdly, monitoring reports of 902 lakes monitored by CWC every month from June to 
October. The results of the same have been shared with NDMA for their 
observations/assessment. 
The detailed report for First Order Hazard Assessment is under preparation which 
will be shared with expert agencies like NIH, NRSC and other stakeholders for deciding 
collaborative future course of action on few high prioritized lakes. 
Further, as a part of National Hydrology Project (NHP), NRSC/ISRO has prepared 
inventory of 28,043 glacial lakes (greater than 0.25 ha) using resources at LISS-IV satellite 
data for entire catchment areas of Indian Himalayan river basins (Indus, Ganga and 
Brahmaputra). Basin-wise glacial lake atlases and consolidated atlas were prepared and 
web published for download (https://www.nrsc.gov.in/Atlas_Glacial_Lake). The glacial lakes’ 
database for Indus, Ganga and Brahmaputra basins are shared with CWC/ MoJS, and will 
be useful for CWC to monitor even smaller sized glacial lakes. 
(O.M. NO. Z-17013/1/2022-FM dated 01.08.2023) 
RECOMMENDATION NO.-10 (Para No. 2.12) 
Need to have robust Early Warning System 
 
 The Committee observe that the recent spike in incidents of mountainous hazards / 
disasters viz. GLOF, LLOF, snow avalanches, cloud bursts and landslides have underlined 
the paramount importance of having a robust early warning system. The Committee 
understand that these mountainous hazards should not be viewed in isolation as single and 
stand alone incidents but should be seen as  interconnected to potential multiple disasters 
having a cascading impact. However,  most of the present day warning systems are not 
capable of dealing with these kinds of disasters as these are designed for making forecasts 
only for single disaster. The Committee recommend that the Department should take 
initiative in this regard and in consultation with other Government agencies like NDMA, 
Indian Meteorological Department and respective State Governments, particularly the State 
Government of Uttrakhand for evolving a multi-hazard risk assessment approach so that a 
Multi-Hazard Early Warning System coupled with real-time coordinated mechanism be set 
up under the aegis of a single nodal agency for regular monitoring and issuing of hazards / 
disasters warnings to all stakeholders in respect of potential mountainous hazards. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
IMD is already having a well established Early Warning System which comprises of 
surface and upper air observational network including satellite and radars, high resolution 
numerical models, forecast decision support systems and advanced disseminations tools.  
IMD follows a seamless forecasting strategy. The long-range forecasts (for the whole 
season) issued are being followed with extended range forecast issued on every Thursday 
with a validity period of four weeks. To follow up the extended range forecast, IMD issues 
short to medium range forecast and warnings daily valid up to next five days with an outlook 

 
30 
 
for subsequent two days. The short to medium range forecast and warning at district and 
station level are issued by State level Meteorological Centres (MCs)/Regional Meteorological 
Centres (RMCs) with a validity of next five days and are updated twice a day. The short to 
medium range forecast is followed by very short range forecast of severe weather up to 
three hours (nowcast) for all the districts and 1,171 cities and towns. These nowcasts are 
updated every three hours. 
Forecast is issued for 36 meteorological sub-divisions from National Weather 
Forecasting Centre, IMD HQ and is updated four times a day.  The forecasts and nowcasts 
are issued at District Level and Station Level by State Level Meteorological Centres and 
Regional Meteorological Centres. 
Accordingly, forecast and warning services for Western Himalayan Region are 
covered by Meteorological Centre(MC) Srinagar (for Jammu Kashmir &Ladakh), MC Simla 
(for Himachal Pradesh), MC Dehradun (for Uttarakhand), MC Gangtok (for Sub Himalyan 
West Bengal  &Sikkim) and Regional Meteorological Centre (RMC) Guwahati (for North East 
India). 
IMD is implementing Impact Based Forecast (IBF) which gives details of what the 
weather will do rather than what the weather will be. It contains the details of impacts 
expected from the severe weather elements and guidelines to general public about do's and 
don'ts while getting exposed to severe weather. These guidelines are finalised in 
collaboration with National Disaster Management Authority (NDMA) and is already 
implemented successfully for cyclone, heat wave, thunderstorm and heavy rainfall. Work is 
in progress to implement the same for other severe weather elements. 
While issuing the warning suitable colour code is used to bring out the impact of the 
severe weather expected and to signal the Disaster Management about the course of action 
to be taken with respect to impending disaster weather event.  Green color corresponds to 
no warning hence no action is needed, yellow color corresponds to be watchful and get 
updated information, orange colour to be alert and be prepared to take action whereas red 
colour signals to take action. 
In addition to this, from National Weather Forecasting Centre (NWFC) two bulletins 
are issued on daily basis based on 0830  1430 HRS observations respectively for supporting 
mountain weather services. These bulletins are disseminated to MC Srinagar, MC Simla, 
MC Dehradun & SASE Joshimath through Email and are uploaded in the IMD website also. 
These bulletins contain the synoptic situation responsible for the weather activities as well as 
forecast and warning for seven days for  Kashmir, Ladakh and Gilgit& Jammu divisions of 
J&K Ladakh, High hills as well as lower hillls regions of Himachal Pradesh and Garhwal as 
well as Kumaon regions of Uttarakhand. 
  To upgrade the forecasting capabilities throughout the country including Himalayan 
Region, various programs are being implemented in IMD under the umbrella scheme 
“Atmosphere &Climate Research-Modelling Observing Systems & Services (ACROSS)” of 
the Ministry of Earth Sciences (MoES) namely viz. Atmospheric Observation Network (AON), 
Upgradation of Forecast System (UFS), Weather & Climate Services (WCS) and 
Commissioning of Polarimetric Doppler Weather Radars (PDWR). 
 

 
31 
 
Atmospheric Observations Network (AON) 
 Sustenance and Augmentation of observational networks comprising of Doppler 
Weather Radars (DWRs), Automatic Rain Gauges (ARGs), Automatic Weather Stations 
(AWSs), Upper Air, Surface and Environmental Observatories etc. Improve upon the 
spatial and temporal density of Radar observational network, particularly over the 
regions with large data gaps in the country. 
 To improve and upgrade weather and climate services over north-eastern region by 
establishing additional state of art surface and upper air observatories for real time 
observations. 
 Sustenance & Establishment of Multi processing, computing and communication 
facilities for Satellite Meteorological Applications. 
 
Upgradation of Forecast System (UFS) 
 
 Upgradation and sustenance of Communication Systems for Data and Product 
transmission. 
 Development of an advanced Operational Forecast System, Delivery System for 
Forecast and other services. 
 Conduct of special campaign for improving Cyclone, Thunderstorm and Fog forecasting 
through provision of additional observations. 
 Integrated Himalayan Meteorological Programme for Western & Central Himalayas. 
 Capacity Building, Outreach, Planning and sustenance of specific process related 
observing systems over India. 
 
Weather & Climate Services (WCS) 
 
 Setting up of District Agro-Met Units (DAMUs) at all the districts complimentarily with 
existing AMFUs in the country for extension of Agromet Advisory Services (AAS).  
 Major upgradation of Meteorological facilities at all airports through commissioning of 
State-of-art Integrated Aviation Weather Observing Systems (AWOS), HAWOS, 
Microwave Radiometers, Doppler LIDARs, Wind Profilers etc to support Aeronautical 
MET Services. 
 Establishment of a state-of the-art Climate Data Centre with integrated advanced 
Climate Data Services portal for rendering national and regional climate services.  
 To upgrade the training infrastructure and facilities to enhance the capacity of the 
training establishment. 
 
This project covers the services for the country as a whole including Himalayan regions. 
Major plans along with expected outcome from this programme follow: 
Future Plans 
i. Development of an advanced operational forecast system. 
ii. Upgradation and sustenance of communication systems for weather services. 
iii. Capacity building & outreach etc. 

 
32 
 
Expected Outcome 
 Upgradation of the existing Visualisation Platform & Decision Support System, which 
would enable the weather forecasters in India Meteorological Department to analyse a 
huge volume of data and various other products and inputs more efficiently and within 
the given time frame.  
 The proposed system is planned to incorporate all the latest technological 
developments available in the field of Information Technology as well as 3-dimensional 
visualization capability.  
 A forecast dissemination tool which will enable the inclusion of more user friendly 
textual & graphical products as well as videos are also envisaged to be procured under 
this programme. 
 
(O.M. NO. Z-17013/1/2022-FM dated 01.08.2023) 
RECOMMENDATION NO.-12 (Para No. 2.14) 
Need to evolve Land Use Regulations 
The Committee are of the considered view that well laid down procedure / regulations 
for land use planning / zoning in the Himalayan States especially those area which are more 
prone and susceptible to landslides, LLOFs, GLOFs etc. will go a long way in mitigating the 
eventualities that arise in the event of disasters.  The Committee were informed by NDMA 
that in their guidelines on management of GLOFs, they have inter alia recommended for 
constitution of a Committee to formulate specific land use zoning and building construction 
regulations under aegis of Ministry of Jal Shakti (MoJS).  Further, the Committee note that 
while a Uniform Code for the construction practices is  contained in National Building Code 
of India (NBC 2016) published by the Bureau of Indian Standards (BIS) which comes under 
the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution, as regards excavation, a policy 
on Sediment Management is at  drafting stage under aegis of the Ministry of Jal Shakti. The 
Committee are of the view that regulating construction activities in GLOF/LLOF prone areas 
will go a long way in averting disasters and saving precious human lives. They, therefore, 
recommend that as suggested by the NDMA, the Department of WR, RD&GR should 
constitute a Committee to formulate specific land use zoning and building construction 
regulations expeditiously. They also recommend that the Department of WR, RD&GR should 
work in close coordination with BIS, so that NBC norms are adhered to strictly by all the 
people while constructing buildings in the region.  The Committee would like to be apprised 
of the steps taken by the Department in this regard within three months of the presentation 
of this Report. 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Department of Water Resources, RD &GR has formulated "National Framework 
for Sediment Management (NFSM) which was launched by the Hon'ble Minister for Jal 
Shakti during the 1st All India Annual State Ministers Conference on Water held in Bhopal, 
Madhya Pradesh on 5th – 6th January 2023. The NFSM is available on the website of the 
Ministry for reference. 

 
33 
 
Indian Institute of Technology Roorkee (IIT, Roorkee) and the Water Resources Department, 
Bureau of Indian Standards (BIS), New Delhi, jointly organized a National Hybrid Seminar on 
“Glacial Lake Outburst Floods (GLOFs) and Landslide Lake Outburst Floods (LLOFs) 
Disasters in Himalayan Regions” on June, 2022, at IIT Roorkee. The seminar provided an 
opportunity for the exchange of ideas and knowledge between diverse groups of the 
scientific community concerned with the current issues related to Glacial and landslide lake 
outburst flood-related hazards and the development of standard codes for its mapping and 
modeling.  
BIS is an apex organization in the field of National Standardization which is carried 
out through 16 Division Councils covering various areas of Standardization. Water 
Resources Department is one of such 17 Departments in BIS, and it deals with 
standardization and standards formulation in the area related to River Valley Projects and 
Ground Water. A committee has been formed in BIS on GLOF related matters. 
Water Resources Division Council chaired by Chairman CWC in its 21st meeting on 
6th March 2023 agreed to constitute a new Sectional Committee on the subject "GLOFs and 
LLOFs" and requested BIS to constitute Search Committee to define and propose the scope 
of the newly constituted Sectional Committee on Glacial Lakes Outburst Floods (GLOFs) 
and Landslides Lakes Outburst Floods (LLOFs).  
  
In this direction, a Search Committee was constituted by BIS and the first meeting 
was held on 12 July 2023 to discuss scope and composition of the constituted Sectional 
Committee. 
 
(O.M. NO. Z-17013/1/2022-FM dated 01.08.2023) 
Comment of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 20 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO.-13 (Para No. 2.15) 
Need to strengthen functioning of National Disaster Response Force (NDRF) 
 The Committee note that NDRF is specialized rescue and response force mandated 
to respond to national and man-made disasters. However, they were apprised of the fact that 
heavy equipments like earthmovers/ heavy drilling machines/ JCBs etc, do not form part of 
the equipment profile of NDRF and these equipments are provided by the local authorities 
with handlers at the incident site. Further, NDRF is also not equipped with modern muck 
cleaning instruments/equipments to deal with emergent situations such as the one that arose 
in Chamoli District in the State of Uttarakhand in the month of February 2021. The 
Committee are surprised to learn from the deposition of the representative of the NDRF that 
though roads were fine there was considerable delay on the part of rescue team in reaching 
the site at Reni in Chamoli District Uttarakhand where the disaster took place on 7th 
February, 2021, because of distance. The Committee note that there is no dedicated air craft 
service available with NDRF for airlifting NDRF personnel and they are dependent on IAF/ 
private choppers provided by the States.  
The Committee find that notwithstanding the fact that NDRF is a specialized rescue and 
response force, however, the constraints / problems such as mentioned above are required 

 
34 
 
to be removed as they hamper the rescue efforts of NDRF at critical times. Since the State 
Governments many a time lack specialized skills and resources required to deal with the 
different kind of calamities either natural or man-made, so, reliance of NDRF on the State 
Governments on delivery of various kinds of equipments may not serve the purpose and 
even may hamper the timely and much needed rescue operations. The Committee are of the 
view that instead of depending on State Governments, it would be more advisable for NDRF 
to have its own dedicated inventory of modern search and rescue equipment. Further, for 
ensuring timely arrival of NDRF rescue teams at disaster struck locations and avert delays 
as witnessed in Chamoli incident, it should have its own fleet of aircraft and should not be 
dependent on the IAF/State Governments to provide choppers. Besides, recognizing the role 
of local community as a first responder during any calamity, the Committee feel that the 
NDRF should organize extensive training programmes for local people in all States in 
general and in particular for the States which are more vulnerable to natural calamities. The 
Committee are of the view that NDRF should work closely with the States and render them 
all possible assistance in raising and training their State Disaster Response Teams. The 
Committee urge upon the Department of Water Resources, River Development & Ganga 
Rejuvenation to take up the above-mentioned suggestions with the Ministry of Home 
Affairs/NDMA to streamline the working of NDRF.  
Reply of the Government 
 
National Disaster Response Force (NDRF) has been authorized 315 different kinds 
of equipment by GoI since its raising for attending various disasters. The equipment profile is 
presently in the process of upgradation/ review to meet the latest technology available world-
wide for enhancing operational efficiency. This is a constant process.  
However, heavy equipment like earth movers/ heavy drilling machines/ JCBs have 
not been consciously kept part of the inventory as these would be difficult to maintain on 
account of rare use and also cumbersome to carry at large distances thereby hampering 
quick movement of teams. Hence, it is desirable that such equipment are worked out for 
specific contingency requirements and catered for by the district administration. Further, 
details of all such equipment are required to be updated on the web based India Disaster 
Resource Network (IDRN) for identification at the time of occurrence of disaster. 
Under the present organizational set-up of NDRF, it is not feasible to maintain a 
dedicated fleet of aircraft which entails a huge paraphrenalia of manpower and resources. It 
is felt that the present arrangement of making air requisition to IDS and IAF through MHA is 
working very well and actions are well coordinated at all levels to ensure rapid deployment.  
To improve upon the present system, it is proposed that more helipads may be 
identified in vulnerable areas for landing of bigger helicopters like MI-17 which can carry 
more number of Rescuers with equipment in a single sortie and operate in harsh weather 
conditions as well.  Further, airlifting of NDRF Rescuers in case of mountain rescue and 
forest fire by IAF may be catered for. Besides, Airforce aviation may be made available for 
training exercise of NDRF personnel in mountain rescue and forest fire.  
NDRF is regularly organizing extensive Disaster Management training programmes for 
local people, community volunteers, School staff/students & other stakeholders as per 
vulnerability profile by conducting following programmes:- 

 
35 
 
6. Community Awareness Program (CAP) 
7. School Safety Program (SSP) 
8. DM training for SDRFs, Community volunteers i.e. JNVs, Nehru Yuva Kendra 
Sangathan (NYKS), AapdaMitra, National Cadet Corps (NCC), National Service 
Scheme (NSS), AkhilBhartiyaTerapanthYuvakParishad (ABTYP) & other 
stakeholders. 
9. Mock Exercises on various themes as per vulnerability profile. 
10. Promotion of weather-based Govt. forecast application (06) apps. 
The details of personnel trained by NDRF since its raising is mentioned below: 
SN Event No of Beneficiary 
1 CAP 59,90,048 
2 SSP 15,76,469 
3 MEx 15,44,371 
4 NCC 31,865 
5 AapdaMitra 24,834 
6 NYKS 12,345 
7 JNVs 68,416 
8 ABTYP 559 
NDRF is now developing e-content for imparting DM training to NSS Volunteers so as to 
expand the awareness level. 
c. Training: 
 NDRF is working closely with States/ UTs for capacity building of State Disaster 
Response Force. 
 NDRF conducts Basic Disaster Management Course for SDRFs at NDRF BNs as per 
their area of responsibility. 
 So far, NDRF has trained 22,371 personnel (Basic-19,830 & Advance- 2,541). Apart 
from this 252 (Chhattisgarh- 53, Bihar- 79 & Gujarat – 120) personnel are undergoing 
training in Basic DM Course. 
 NDRF circulates Annual Training Calendar (Advance Courses) every year for SDRFs. 
 In 2023, following courses are planned for SDRF (Details enclosed as Appendix-A):- 
vii. Training of Trainers of Chemical, Biological, Radiological and Nuclear(TOT 
CBRN) 
viii. Master Trainers in Chemical, Biological, Radiological and Nuclear(MT in CBRN) 
ix. Training of Trainers in Medical First Response and  Collapsed Structure Search 
& Rescue(TOT in MFR & CSSR) 
x. Master Trainers in Medical First Response and  Collapsed Structure Search & 
Rescue(MT in MFR & CSSR) 
xi. Borewell Rescue Course 
xii. Training of Trainers Cadre(TOT CADRE) 
d. Raising: 
 NDRF is constantly in touch with States/ UTs, where SDRF not yet raised. 
 NDRF Unit Commandants remain in coordination with the authorities of States/ UTs 
and provide them all needful assistance. 

 
36 
 
 Recently NDRF has assisted A&N authorities for raising of SDRFs in terms of 
equipping, training and deployment. 
 A “Vision Document” has been prepared by NDRF for SDRFs covering all important 
aspects reg. vulnerability, infrastructure development, HR strength, training, 
equipping, deployment & future vision for States. This document is helping the SDRFs 
as guide tool in capacity building. 
It is felt that the raising, training and equipping of SDRFs needs to be taken up in a 
timeline under the supervision of the SDMAs so that they are in a position to take up L1 & L2 
disasters on their own and NDRF can focus on developing specialized skills. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
37 
 
Appendix- 
 
ADVANCE COURSES PLANNED FOR SDRFs IN TRAININGCALENDARFORTHEYEAR-2023 
 
 
S
/
N 
NAME 
OFTHE
COURS
E 
B
O
R
E
W
EL
L 
Rescu
e 
MT 
inMF
R 
&CS
SR 
TOTCBRN TOT
CAD
RE 
ToTin 
MFR&C
SSR 
TOTCBRN ToTin 
MFR&C
SSR 
BOREWELL 
Rescue 
MT in 
MFR&C
SSR 
TOTCADRE MT in 
MFR&C
SSR 
TOTCADRE ToTin 
MFR&C
SSR 
BOREWELL 
Rescue 
BOREWELL 
Rescue 
ToT 
inMF
R 
&CS
SR 
MT 
inC
BR
N 
BOREWELL 
Rescue 
Duration (Weeks) 03days 01 Week 04Weeks 01 Week 05Weeks 04Weeks 05Weeks 03days 01 Week 01 Week 01 Week 01 Week 05Weeks 03days 03days 05Weeks 02Weeks 03days 
Schedule 09.01.
23 
to 11.01.23 
06.02.2
3 
to 11.02.23 
20.02.23 
to 18.03.23 
20.02.2
3 
to 04.03.23 
27.02.2
3 
to 01.04.23 
01/05/23 
to 27/05/23 
01/05/2
3 
to 03/06/23 
08/05/23 
to 10/05/23 
08/05/2
3 
to 13/05/23 
19/06/23 
to 24/06/23 
10/07/23 
to 15/07/23 
21/08/23 
to 26/08/23 
04/09/23 
to 07/10/23 
04/09/23 
to 06/09/23 
09/10/2
3 
to 11/10/23 
06/11/23 
to09/1
2/23 
04/12/23 
to16/1
2/22 
18/12/2
3 
to 20/12/23 Institute 10TH 
BN
ND
RF 
NDRF, Academy 
05 
BNN
DRF 
NDRF, Academy 
07TH 
BNN
DRF 
05 
BNN
DRF 
07TH 
BNN
DRF 
10TH 
BNN
DRF 
NDRF, Academy 
NDRF, 
Academ
y 
NDRF, 
Academ
y 
NDRF, 
Academ
y 
07TH 
BNN
DRF 
06THB
NND
RF 
10TH 
BNN
DRF 
07TH 
BNN
DRF 
05THB
NND
RF 
05TH 
BNN
DRF 
1. WestBenga
l 
- - - - - - 6 - - 7 5 - 5 4  5 - - 
2. Uttarakhan
d 
6 2 3 0 3 1 - - - - - - - - - - 2 - 
3. Rajasthan      - - 7 8 - - - - - - - 8 - 
4. Maharashtra 2 6 4 4 6 6 6 4 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 4 6 
5. Jammu& Kashmir 0 2 2 2 2 2 2 - 2 2 2 2 2 - - 2 2 - 
6. Punjab 2 - - - - - - 4 - - - - - 5 - - - 5 
7. Bihar 2 - 5 5 5 - 3 - - 3 - - 3 - - 3 - - 
8. Himachal Pradesh 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 

 
38 
 
9. Tamilnadu 2 5 4 2 5 5 5 3 - - 3 5 5 - 5 5 3 - 
1
0. 
Andhra 
Pradesh 
- - - - - 10 10 7 9 10 10 10 12 10 13 12 7 13 
11. Karnataka 2 5 5 2 2 9 1 4 4 1 2 6 - 4 5 - 3 5 
12. Uttar Pradesh 10 5 10 10 10 - - - - - 4 3 6 3 2 6 4 3 
1
3. 
Tripura - - - - - - - 1 1 2 - 1 - 1 2 - - 1 
14. Assam 4 4 4 - 4 - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
15. Arunachal Pradesh 2 - - 2 - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
1
6. 
Jharkhand 4 4 4 4 4 - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
1
7 
Haryana 3 4 4 4 4 - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
18. Ladakh - - 2 2 2 - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
19. A&N - 2 - 2 - - - - - -- - - - - - - - - 
Total 
Allotment 
42 42 50 42 50 36 40 33 33 34 35 36 42 36 36 42 36 36 
 Totalallotment-701Seatsareallotted 
 
Comment of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 23 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
(O.M. NO. Z-17013/1/2022-FM dated 01.08.2023) 

39 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO.-14 (Para No. 2.16) 
Need for both Union and States to work in tandem 
    The Committee observe that though a revised National Disaster Management Plan 
has been prepared for addressing the disasters likely to happen in Himalayan region like 
landslides, cloudburst, GLOF etc., no specific Disaster Management (DM) Plan has been 
prepared by the NDMA for the Himalayan States, though the State of Uttrakhand has 
developed its own State Disaster Management Plan (SDMP) and the updation of the same is 
in progress. Further, the Committee note that no manual and Standard Operating Procedure 
(SOP) has been developed by NDMA to deal with the emergent situations arising out of 
floods including flash floods Cloudburst, Glacier Outburst and Avalanches. It has been 
informed by NDMA that only guidelines in respect of the subjects viz. disaster management 
for Management of floods (2008), Urban floods (2008), Glacial Lake Outburst and Floods 
(GLOFs) (2020) & Landslide & Snow Avalanche (2009) have been prepared and issued 
defining the roles, responsibilities of different Ministries & States, while the SOPs & Manuals 
to tackle hazards/ disaster are to be prepared by the concerned nodal agencies.The 
Committee are of the view that preparation of guidelines by NDMA with regard to various 
calamities is a welcome step, but the need of the hour is that it should be ensured that these 
guidelines are implemented in true spirit and in the right earnest by all the concerned 
stakeholders at the ground level.  The Committee are of the considered opinion that it is high 
time that role of State Governments particularly in the Indian Himalayan Region need to be 
adequately recognized and they should be made active partners and engaged proactively in 
monitoring and research of glaciers and issuance of warning in the wake of disasters.  Thus, 
the Union Ministries/Department should work in close cooperation and coordination with the 
State Governments in order to strengthen their efficacy, capacity building and 
implementation of the SDMP.  The Committee also urge upon the Ministry of Home 
Affairs/NDMA to improve and streamline their functioning and tone up their Disaster 
Management Apparatus, so as to anticipate and provide quick response to the impending 
glacier related and other disasters in the Himalayan region.   
Reply of the Government 
 
In order to to improve and streamline the functioning of NDMA and tone up their 
Disaster Management Apparatus, so as to anticipate and provide quick response to the 
impending glacier related and other disasters in the Himalayan region, several initiatives as 
mentioned below have been taken-.   
(i) National Disaster Management Authority (NDMA) prepared the revised National Disaster 
Management Plan (NDMP)-2019 as per provisions under the Disaster Management (DM) 
Act, 2005. Further, State Disaster Management Plan (SDMP) is to be prepared by the State 
Executive Committee (SEC) and shall be approved by the State Authority. Therefore, NDMA 
is not required to prepare State Disaster Management Plan (SDMP).  
(ii)    As per the provisions under the DM Act, 2005 NDMA already prepared Guidelines on 
management of disasters like floods, Glacial Lake Outbursts etc. However, manual and 
Standard Operating Procedures (SOP) are to be prepared by the concerned stakeholders 
taking into account the Guidelines issued by NDMA.  

 
 
40 
 
(iii)    Members and Officers of NDMA visit States/UTs from time to time and interact with 
them to ensure that these guidelines are implemented at ground level. The same is also 
reiterated during various Regional conclaves, Workshops, Seminars, Review meetings etc. 
 
(O.M. NO. Z-17013/1/2022-FM dated 01.08.2023) 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO.-15 (Para No. 2.17) 
Public Awareness Programme 
 The Committee are pleased to note that various Government Departments/Agencies 
have taken a number of steps to educate and empower people in environment conservation 
and adoption of sustainable practices through trainings, demonstrations and dissemination 
of information in the Indian Himalayan Region. The Committee expect that the various 
training programmes initiated by the Ministry should not be a one time affair but should be 
sustained and held at regular intervals so that the momentum generated by these 
Programmes remains intact and do not lose the steam. It is not an exaggeration to mention 
that the natural calamities caused by climate change will exacerbate the livelihoods of the 
communities residing in mountains as well as downstream populations. Hence, there is a 
greater need not only to make people aware about the deleterious impact of global warming 
particularly in the Himalayan region but also launch programmes to impart knowledge and 
encourage them in adopting environmentally sustainable practices and support the local 
participatory planning for the development of this sensitive region. The Committee 
recommend that the Department should make all out efforts to launch a blitzkreig by 
involving print, electronic and popular  media as well as social media and also the academia 
on a larger scale in creating public awareness about the consequences of global warming 
resulting in threat to the ecosystem, communities and infrastructure.  
Reply of the Government 
 
Various Organisations/ Departments regularly conduct training Programmes to impart 
knowledge and encourage stake holders in adopting environmentally sustainable practices 
in the emerging challenges of climate change and its impact on glaciers. For glacier 
monitoring and management, different kinds of capacities, including scientific, management, 
engineering and institutional skills are required. A comprehensive training in the 
understanding of natural processes and their complex interactions in glaciated high-
mountain regions is required, including knowledge of the past and future developments at 
different temporal scales. Local mountain communities are not much aware about glacier 
hazard and its disastrous effects. Electronic and print media including social media will also 
be useful in the endeavour to create greater public awareness about climate change and 
related environmental issues. Some of the initiatives taken in this direction are-  
WIHG is already involved in creating public awareness about different hazards in the 
Himalaya-Karakoram through lectures and mock drills at various public schools, colleges 
and vulnerable villages. Apart from this, WIHG encourages the visit of students from various 

 
 
41 
 
schools to its museum and laboratories to understand the orogeny of the Himalaya and 
related processes and hazards. A large number of master’s students are also being trained 
and made aware of Himalayan Geology, Glaciers and related hazards through dissertations, 
summer and winter trainings. 
 
MoEF&CC through its Environment Education Division Implements Environment 
Education Programme (EEP) under Environment Education Awareness, Research and Skill 
Development (EEARSD) Scheme to sensitize children/ youth, on issues related to 
environment and to motivate them to adopt sustainable lifestyle, through varied pedagogical 
initiatives like workshops, projects, exhibitions, campaigns, competitions, nature camps, 
summer vacation programmes, etc. This programme leverages on the key sectoral strength 
of Eco-clubs already formed under National Green Corps programme, in addition to targeting 
Youth Clubs and other such clubs/ units/groups formed under various programmes/ 
schemes of the Government. In addition, GBPNIHE has also been actively engaged in 
organizing public awareness programmes across the Himalayan States/UTs. These 
initiatives are also being synergized with the Mission Lifestyle for Environment (LiFE)." 
List of Centre of Excellences under NMSHE and NMSKCC set-up by DST 
S. No. Title of the project  Name and address of PI Mission 
1 Vulnerability and Risk Assessment due 
to various Environmental drivers in a 
Climate Change Scenario over eastern 
India  
Indian Institute of 
Technology (IIT), 
Kharagpur 
NMSKCC 
2 Mahamana Centre of Excellence in 
Climate  Change Research 
Institute of Environment 
&  Sustainable 
Development, Banaras 
Hindu University  
NMSKCC 
3 DST's Centre of Excellence in Climate 
Modeling 
IIT, New Delhi  NMSKCC 
4 Centre of Excellence for Climate Change 
and vector borne diseases 
National Institute of 
Malaria Research,  New 
Delhi 
NMSKCC 
5 DST- Centre of Excellence in Climate 
Studies,  
IIT, Bombay NMSKCC 
6 Climate Change Impacts on Coastal 
Infrastructure and the Adaptation 
Strategies 
IIT, Madaras NMSKCC 
7 DST- ICRISAT Centre of Excellence on 
Climate Change Research for Plant 
Protection (CoE-CCRPP): Pest and 
disease management for climate change 
adaptation 
International Crops 
Research Institute for the 
Semi-Arid Tropics, 
Telangana 
NMSKCC 
8 Strengthening the Existing Centre of 
Excellence in Climate Change: 
Divecha Centre for Climate Change 
Prof. S.K. Satheesh, 
Divecha Centre for 
Climate Change, Indian 
Institute of Science, 
Bengaluru-560012, 
Karnataka State. 
NMSKCC 

 
 
42 
 
9 Climate change impact mitigation for a 
climate resilient habitat 
Dept. of Environmental 
Science, Tezpur 
University  
NMSHE 
10 Centre for Excellence in Climate Change Department Earth 
Sciences, University of 
Kashmir, Hazratbal 
Srinagar, Jammu and 
Kashmir 
NMSHE 
11 DST’s Centre of excellence on  Water 
resources, Cryosphere and climate 
Change studies 
Sikkim University, 
Gangtok, Sikkim 
NMSHE 
12 DST Centre of Excellence CoE on 
Climate Change Research DST-CoE-
CCR 
CSIR- NEERI, 
Nagpur,  Maharashtra 
NMSKCC 
   
DGRE is imparting the awareness training on snow and avalanches to the Indian 
army, paramilitary forces, BRO etc. through various print and electronic media. The similar 
awareness programmes may be conducted for civil population residing in snow bound 
mountainous regions. Also an international training on mountain geohazard management 
was conducted in 2022 by DGRE, the similar training programmes be conducted in future to 
spread awareness in the society. 
 
(O.M. NO. Z-17013/1/2022-FM dated 01.08.2023) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
43 
 
CHAPTER III  
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NIL 
  

 
 
44 
 
CHAPTER IV  
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BYTHE COMMITTEE 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 1 (Para No. 2.3) 
 
Need to check emission of Black Carbon 
 
 The Committee learn that very few studies have been conducted by different 
organizations/ institutes in the country to assess the adverse effects of atmospheric pollution 
on the Himalayan glaciers.  A study conducted by National Centre for Polar and Ocean 
Research and Space Physics Laboratory at their Himansh station in Lahaul-Spiti region have 
revealed that the total Suspended Particulate Matter (SPM) showed significant variations 
with dominance of mineral dust components therein (~67%). It has also been stated that the 
black carbon reportedly contributes (~4%) to near surface composite aerosol mass 
concentrations and also absorbs more light and emits infra-red radiation that increases the 
temperature.  Hence, an increase in Black Carbon in the high Himalayas is stated to 
contribute to the faster melting of glaciers. The Committee recommend that with a view to 
assess the extent and scope of adverse impact of atmospheric pollution including black 
carbon on the fragile and sensitive Himalayan glacier system, the Department of Water 
Resources, River Development & Ganga Rejuvenation in consultation with the Ministry of 
Environment, Forest & Climate Change and other concerned 
Ministries/Departments/Agencies should commission a research work/project for 
comprehensive examination of this aspect and submit the research findings within a time-
bound period.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Black carbon (B.C.) aerosols accelerate glacier melting in the Himalayas. Black 
materials absorb more light and emit infrared radiation that increases the temperature. So, 
an increase in black carbon in the high Himalayas will contribute to the faster melting of 
Himalayan glaciers. National Centre for Polar and Ocean Research (NCPOR) has informed 
that several studies in the Himalayan region have focused on observations and the character 
of B.C. particles in the ambient air. However, though there are many 
B.C. observatories in low altitudes (<2000 masl) and the plains, only a few studies have 
characterized B.C. at high altitudes in the Himalayas, particularly in India. The deposition of 
light-absorbing aerosols on snow or ice can lead to the darkening of the surface, which 
would enhance the absorption of solar radiation and significantly reduce the surface albedo. 
Such phenomena could result in positive forcing that can accelerate snow and ice melt in 
high altitudes. One of the measurements in the high Himalayan glacier (Chandra) basin 
shows a significant concentration of B.C. (mean BC ~ 168  ng m−3). It contributes nearly 4% 
to near surface composite aerosol mass. A recent study shows that the concentration 
of black carbon increases in summer(0.01-4.62 µg / m3) drastically. However, in the foothill, 
the black carbon concentration is much higher 796 µg / m3 (Parbati), 416 µg / m3 (Hamata) 
and 432 µg / m3 (Beas). A multi-layer simulation of snow albedo demonstrated significant 
changes in snow albedo (2.5–9.0%) due to light-absorbing aerosols in this region. In the long 

 
 
45 
 
run, changes in the atmospheric composition of the high Himalayas will affect rain and snow 
precipitation patterns. However, the sources of B.C. reaching in the Himalayan region are 
complex and remain uncertain due to a lack of field and reliable data.  
WIHG has two (02) observational sites for black carbon monitoring near the 
glacierized basins (Gangotri Glacier). Further, WIHG is also looking at aerosols and dust in 
the snow and ice samples from glacier sites to understand their impact on snow and glacier 
melting and albedo changes. 
 
Comment of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 8 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
(O.M. NO. Z-17013/1/2022-FM dated 01.08.2023) 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO.3 (Para No. 2.5) 
Need to set up separate Dedicated Mountain Hazard and Research Institute 
 The Committee observe gaps and deficiencies in glaciology research and monitoring 
of the glacial lakes and water Bodies in the Himalayan region. The Committee note that 
Geological Survey of India (GSI) has not conducted specific studies on estimated volume 
loss of glaciers between 1950 and 2020 and also not projected any estimate of loss by the 
year 2100. Further, there is no comprehensive information about the volume loss of glaciers 
in the Indian Himalayan Region.  The Committee further note that the Ministry of 
Environment, Forest & Climate Change has not conducted any study or awarded any project 
on warming of Himalayan glaciers. The Committee were informed by the DoWR, RD & GR 
that Central Water Commission (CWC) has not issued any advisory to the concerned local 
Governments regarding the anticipation of floods caused by avalanches/cloudburst 
landslides in the Himalayan region. Further, there is also no specific information available on 
stretches of the Himalayans where the danger of melting of glaciers and consequent GLOF 
are most severe. Moreover, no study on temporal changes in glacial lake number and their 
extent has been carried out by Indian Space Research Organization (ISRO) and GSI.  The 
Committee also took cognizance of the fact that no study has been carried out by GSI, ISRO 
and DST to critically analyse the enlargement and origin of glacial lakes near human 
settlements and their potential cause for a lake outburst. 
Taking into consideration the aforestated gaps / deficiencies in the glaciological, 
hydro-materiological and hydro-geological research relating to Himalayan glacier system, the 
Committee are of the considered view that there is an need for setting up an over arching 
organisation at the national level which can coordinate  with various Ministries / Departments 
/ Agencies/ Research Institutes engaged in handling different hydro-geological and hydro-
materiological hazards including glacier related hazards for having an integrated approach in 
collecting and collating information / data on Himalayan glaciers and also the research 
findings at one place and to maintain a reliable database that can be accessed easily by all 
agencies and also for issuing early warnings and alerts regarding potential multi hazards to 
the stake holders and public.  In this regard, at the behest of the Committee, various 

 
 
46 
 
Ministries/ Departments/ research agencies have given their suggestions and offered 
solutions for effective management and monitoring of glaciers in the country in a coordinated 
manner as under:- 
(i) The Department of Science and Technology has suggested that there is a 
need for single coordinating agency to coordinate with various other agencies 
having mandates to handle different hydrometerological and hydrogeological 
hazards.  It has also suggested that to deal with the disasters like cloudburst, 
GLOF, landslides etc. in an integrated manner, a multi hazard warning 
system may be put in place through a real-time coordinating mechanism 
wherein one agency may be entrusted with the responsibility of continuously 
monitoring and issuing warnings and alerts to authorities, stakeholders and 
public; 
 
(ii) The MoEF&CC has suggested that the responsibility for coordination of all 
activities on the Himalayan glaciers should rest with a single identified nodal 
coordinating agency within Government of India, such as for e.g. National 
Security Council Secretariat (NSCS), which is already coordinating with 
various Government agencies in various studies, including impact of 
engineering technologies on the glaciers. Such an agency would need to be 
given an appropriate war time mandate because of recurrence of GLOF, 
Cloudburst, landslides etc. by allocating the subject through allocation of 
business. 
 
(iii) The Ministry of Earth Sciences has suggested that a network of fully equipped 
and integrated monitoring systems supported by a set of field stations in 
critically important glaciered basins is required for monitoring glaciers and 
glacier bound hazards.  The systems should be automated with real-time 
access to data to modelers to create a potential early warning system on 
glacio-hydrological hazards from time to time, based on hazard potential 
coupled with geographical information system tools downstream activities and 
population vulnerability along with open access to ground-based 
meteorological, hydrological and glacilogical data from the entire region to 
achieve the target.  ISRO can contribute by using high resolution and near 
real time satellite remote sensing to monitor glacial lake and water bodies in 
development of a reliable database. 
 
(i) Defence Geoinformatics Research Establishment set up under agegis of 
DRDO has suggested that an integrated approach for debris flow and GLOF 
risk management coupled with systematic risk assessment study of the region 
is imperative to curtail risks of glacial hazards. An inclusive approach with all 
stakeholders is recommended to understand GLOF phenomenal behaviour by 
creating ground and remote sensing based inventory of benchmark moraine 
dammed lakes and monitoring changes on a regular basis along with an 

 
 
47 
 
effective early warning mechanism to monitor GLOF hazards in order to 
minimize the risk of such hazards.  
 
Apart from above suggestions / solutions offered by various 
Ministries/Departments/organisations, the NDMA “Guidelines on Management of Glacial 
Lake Outburst Flood (GLOF)” has proposed that the Ministry of Jal Shakti (MoJS) be 
designated as the nodal Ministry and Central Water Commission (CWC) as the nodal 
agency for management of GLOF.  These Guidelines further propose that a national level 
Centre for Glacial Research, Studies and Management (CGRSM) be established by the 
MoJS under the umbrella of the National Institute of Hydrology (NIH), Roorkee as a premier 
centre with state-of-the art facilities, which would eventually grow into a national centre of 
excellence. Keeping in view the suggestions / solutions offered by various Ministries / 
Departments / Agencies, the Committee urge upon the Department of WR, RD&GR to 
carefully study the same and prepare a comprehensive concept paper / cabinet note 
subsuming the solutions/suggestions in consultation with all the Ministries / Departments / 
Agencies, so as to evolve a consensus on the structure mandate and modalities of the 
proposed national level apex research organisation viz. CGRSM for placing before the Union 
Cabinet for their consideration.  The Committee would like to be apprised of the action taken 
in this regard within three months of presentation of the Report.  
Reply of the Government 
 
A Steering Committee under the chairmanship of Secretary, DOWR, RD & GR, 
Ministry of Jal Shakti has recently been formed to look into all these issues. The Steering 
Committee would act as an over arching organisation at the national level which can 
coordinate  with various Ministries / Departments / Agencies/ Research Institutes engaged in 
handling different hydro-geological and hydro-meteriological hazards including glacier 
related hazards for having an integrated approach in collecting and collating information / 
data on Himalayan glaciers and also the research findings at one place and to maintain a 
reliable database that can be accessed easily by all agencies and also for issuing early 
warnings and alerts regarding potential multi hazards to the stake holders and public.   
Comment of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 11 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
(O.M. NO. Z-17013/1/2022-FM dated 01.08.2023) 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 4 (Para No. 2.6) 
Need to provide sufficient budgetary allocations for Glacier Research  
 
The Committee learn from the written submission of the Department of Water 
Resources, River Development & Ganga Rejuvenation that various Ministries/Departments 
dealing with the subject of glacier management / monitoring have allocated and spent a 

 
 
48 
 
meagre amount for conducting research/studies in the field in the last 5 years. While on the 
one hand, the Committee find that studies such as temporal change in glacier origin and 
enlargement of glacier area are required for proper assessment and management of 
glaciers, on the other hand, the fund allocation is not sufficient to encourage such studies. 
The Committee believe that there is an urgent need to conduct various field-based studies 
on glaciers which may need adequate funding/budgetary support. As the challenges of 
managing and monitoring the glaciers movement / behaviour and mitigation of hazards 
arising therefrom are enormous, the Committee recommend the Government to allocate 
adequate budgetary resources to the concerned Ministries/Departments involved in the 
research in the field so as to meet their financial requirements and for ensuring that the 
activities related to research and monitoring of glaciers do not suffer due to shortage of 
funds. 
Reply of the Government 
 
As suggested by Committee, there is need to provide sufficient budgetary allocations 
for glacier research, to the concerned Ministries/ Departments. This is important as the study 
of Glaciers, its dynamics and associated hazards have implications on sustainable 
development, disaster risk reduction and strategizing climate change adaptation measures. 
The budgetary support for carrying out studies has to be met through allocated budgets to 
different Organisations/Department. 
Any requirement of additional funds for carrying out any specific studies in the field of 
glacier monitoring and management by the concerned Institutions may be placed before the 
Steering Committee which in turn would request for enhancement of budget to specific 
Department/Organisations.  
In above context, MoES has informed that in view of the importance of glacier 
research in the country, an amount of ~ Rs. 30 crore has been earmarked for it by the 
Ministry of Earth Sciences during 2021-2026. 
Comment of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 14 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
(O.M. NO. Z-17013/1/2022-FM dated 01.08.2023) 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO.- 11 (Para No. 2.13) 
 
Considering the strategic role and paramount importance of Himalayan glaciers 
which are literally known as “Water Towers of Asia” and owing to the fact that three major 
Indian river system are glacier fed which provide water security to the country for various 
uses like drinking water requirements, hydropower, industry, agriculture etc., the Committee 
are of the considered view that since green cover in the valleys adjacent to the glaciers is 
critical and acts as a buffer and would help in reducing the impact of climate change, the 
same should be protected / conserved.  For this purpose, the Committee urge upon the 

 
 
49 
 
Department of Water Resources, River Development & Ganga Rejuvenation to work in close 
cooperation with the Ministry of Environment, Forest & Climate Change and other concerned 
Ministries for evolving a comprehensive policy response so as to preserve the sensitive 
Himalayan glacier system.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Steering Committee for Monitoring of Glaciers under the chairmanship of 
Secretary, DoWR, RD& GR has been constituted with an aim to develop a coordination 
mechanism among various ministries (viz., Ministries of Jal Shakti; Environment, Forest & 
Climate Change, Department of Space, Ministry of Earth Sciences, Ministry of Mines and 
Department of Science and Technology etc.) for efficient mobilization of resources for glacier 
related studies. 
 
Comment of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 17 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
(O.M. NO. Z-17013/1/2022-FM dated 01.08.2023) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

 
 
50 
 
CHAPTER V  
OBSERVATION/RECOMMENDATION IN REPSECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLY OF 
THE GOVERNMENT IS STILL AWAITED 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NIL 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI                                       Shri Parbatbhai Savabhai Patel 
06 December, 2023                                                             Chairperson,                                                                      
15 Agrahayana,1945 (Saka)              Standing Committee on Water Resources 
 
 
  

 
 
51 
 
ANNEXURE – II 
 
[Vide Para 4 of the Introduction] 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN THE TWENTY THIRD 
REPORT (SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) OF THE COMMITTEE 
(i) Total number of Recommendations/Observations 
 
          15 
(ii) Recommendation/Observations which have been accepted by the 
Government  
 
Recommendation Nos.  2,5,6,7,8,9,10,12,13,14 and 15 
 
 
 
 
Total – 11 
Percentage– 73.33 % 
 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies 
Recommendation Nos. NIL 
 
 
 
 
Total – 00 
Percentage – Nil 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee 
 
Recommendation Nos. Recommendation Nos. 1,3, 4 and 11  
 
 
 
 
Total – 4 
Percentage –  26.66% 
(v) Recommendation/Observation in respect of which final reply of the 
Government is still awaited 
Para Nos. NIL 
 
 
 
Total – 00 
Percentage – Nil 
 
  

  
52 
Annexure-III Office Order of Constitution of Steering Committee 
`  


  
53        


  
54 
Annexure-IV Minutes of first Meeting of Steering Committee  
     


  
55        


  
56 
       


  
57  
