 
28 
 
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON WATER RESOURCES 
(2023-24) 
                 
         
SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA 
                  
         
                 
MINISTRY OF JAL SHAKTI – DEPARTMENT OF DRINKING WATER AND SANITATION 
 
         
         
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2023-24) 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations / Recommendations contained in the 
Twenty-First Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Water Resources] 
         
         
         
TWENTY EIGHTH REPORT 
  
          
            
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
         
February, 2024/Magha, 1945 (Saka) 
  


TWENTY EIGHTH REPORT 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON WATER RESOURCES 
(2023-24) 
 
          
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
         
         
         
MINISTRY OF JAL SHAKTI 
(DEPARTMENT OF DRINKING WATER AND SANITATION) 
 
 
                 
         
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2023-24) 
 
 (Action Taken by the Government on the Observations / Recommendations contained in the 
Twenty-First Report on ‘Demands for Grants (2023-24) of the Ministry of Jal Shakti - 
Department of Drinking Water and Sanitation 
 
         
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on   06.02.2024 
Laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 06.02.2024 
  
 
  
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
                 
         
February, 2024/Magha, 1945 (Saka) 
  


 
 
W. R. C.  No. 83 
         
         
         
         
         
         
 
 
         
         
         
Price :  Rs.  
         
         
         
         
         
 
 
 
         
     
                     
 
 
 
         
        © 2024 By Lok Sabha Secretariat 
  
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha  
(Sixteenth Edition) and Printed by  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

CONTENTS 
 
  Page  
 
Composition of 
the Committee 
……………………………………………………………… (iii) 
 
 
INTRODUCTION ……………………………………………………………… 
 
(v) 
 
CHAPTER - I Report……………………………………………………… 
 
1 
CHAPTER – II Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government…………………………… 
 
9 
CHAPTER - III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government’s 
replies……………………………………………………… 
 
23 
CHAPTER - IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of   which the replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the 
Committee……………...................................... 
 
24 
CHAPTER - V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still 
awaited…………………………………………………….. 
 
29 
 ANNEXURES 
 
 
I Minutes of the Fourth Sitting of the Committee held on 02.02.2024. 
 
30 
II Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations/Observations contained in the                    Twenty-
First Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee 
 
31 
III State-wise details of eligible amount as State's share of JJM and the 
capital expenditure approved towards State's share of JJM under Part-I 
of the Scheme for Special Assistance to States for Capital Investment 
for 2022-23. 
 
32 
IV State/ UT-wise number of water quality–affected rural habitations (as 
on 15.06.2023) 
 
33 
V State-wise, reasons for delay in transfer of funds from Treasury to SNA 
 
34 
VI State/UT-wise, Total block and no. of blocks with Plastic Waste 
Management Unit (PWMU) 
35 

COMPOSITION OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON WATER RESOURCES 
(2023-24) 
 
 
 Shri Parbatbhai Savabhai Patel                  - Chairperson 
 
 LOK SABHA  
2.  Shri Vijay Baghel  
3.  Shri Nihal Chand Chauhan  
4.  Shri Bhagirath Choudhary  
5.  Shri Chandra Prakash Choudhary  
6.  Shri Guman Singh Damor  
7.  Dr. Heena Vijaykumar Gavit  
8.  Dr. K. Jayakumar  
9.  Shri Dhanush M. Kumar  
10.  Shri Sunil Kumar  
11.  Shri Mohammad Akbar Lone  
12.  Shri Kuruva Gorantla Madhav  
13.  Shri Hasmukhbhai Somabhai Patel  
14.  Shri Sanjay (Kaka) Ramchandra Patil  
15.  Shri P. Ravindhranath   
16.  Ms.  Nusrat Jahan Ruhi  
17.  Smt.  Agatha K. Sangma  
18.  Shri Pratap Chandra Sarangi  
19.  Shri Chandan Singh  
20.  Shri D. K. Suresh  
21.  Shri Shivkumar Chanabasappa Udasi  
  
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
22.  Shri H. D. Devegowda  
23.  Shri Aneel Prasad Hegde  
24.  Smt. Mausam Noor  
25.  Shri Sharad Pawar  
26.  Shri V. Vijayendra Prasad  
27.  Shri Arun Singh  
28.  Sant Balbir Singh  
29.  Shri Pramod Tiwari  
30.  Dr. Ambumani  Ramadoss  
31.  Vacant  
  
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Smt. Suman Arora  -  Additional Secretary 
2. Shri Ajay Kumar Sood  - Director 
3. Shri P. Ashok   - Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri K. P. Kashyap  - Assistant Committee Officer  
 
 
 
 
(iii)  

 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Water Resources (2023-24) having been 
authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present the Twenty Eighth Report 
on the Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ Recommendations contained in their 
Twenty-First Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2023-24) of the Ministry of Jal 
Shakti - Department of Drinking Water and Sanitation. 
 
2.  The Twenty-First Report of the Committee was presented to Lok Sabha on 20 March 2023 and 
laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 17 March 2023. The Action Taken replies of the Government to 
all the recommendations contained in the Report were received in this Secretariat on 11 July, 2023. 
 
3.  The replies of the Government were examined and the Report was considered and adopted by 
the Committee at their sitting held on 02.02.2024. 
 
4. An analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Twenty First Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee is given in 
Annexure-II. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi  
 
2 February,  2024, 
13 Magha, 1945 (Saka) 
Parbatbhai Savabhai Patel 
Chairperson 
Standing Committee on Water 
Resources 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(v) 

1 
 
 
   CHAPTER I 
 
REPORT 
 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Water Resources (2023-24) deals with the action 
taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in their Twenty-First 
Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Jal Shakti (Department of 
Drinking Water & Sanitation) for the year 2023-24. 
 
2. The Twenty-First Report was presented to Lok Sabha on 20.03.2023 and was laid on the Table 
of Rajya Sabha on 17.03.2023. The Report contained 17 Observations/Recommendations. 
 
3. Action Taken Notes in respect of all the Observations/Recommendations contained in the 
Report have been received from the Government.  These have been examined and categorized as 
follows:  
 
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government: 
 
Serial Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 6, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 14, 15 and 16 
 
Total:13 
Chapter-II 
 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of replies of the Government: 
 
Serial No. NIL 
Total: NIL 
Chapter-III 
 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee: 
 
Serial Nos. 5, 7, 13 and 17                                                  
Total:04 
Chapter-IV  
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited: 
 
Serial No. NIL 
Total: NIL 
Chapter-V 
 
4. The Committee desire that replies to recommendations made in the    Chapter- I of this 
Report may be furnished to the Committee expeditiously. 
 
5. The Committee will now deal with action taken by the Government on some of their 
Observations/Recommendations that require reiteration or merit comments.  

2 
 
 
A. Special assistance to address resource crunch in States  
 
Recommendation No. 5 (Para No. 2.5) 
 
6. The Committee noted that one of the principal reasons for under utilization of funds was delay 
in release of matching State share. They found that five States viz. Haryana, Rajasthan, Maharashtra, 
Tamil Nadu and Odisha had utilized less than 25% of Central funds while three States of West 
Bengal, Karnataka and Manipur had utilized exactly 25% of the Central allocation for implementation 
of JJM. Lesser utilization of Central funds allocated under JJM had been attributed to States’ inability 
in arranging funds during pandemic and associated lockdowns. The Committee believed that besides 
financial crunch, additional burden due to cost overrun has also handicapped States in releasing 
matching share timely for speedy implementation of projects/works under JJM, a pre requisite to 
achieve 100 percent coverage of Functional Household Tap Connection in rural areas. They noted 
that in order to provide financial support to State Governments, Special Assistance from the Ministry 
of Finance (Department of Expenditure) was extended to States for Capital Expenditure with an 
allocation of                 Rs. 1 lakh crore as 50-year interest free loan, out of which Rs. 4,000 crore had 
been earmarked for works under JJM in 2022-23. They further noted that the Department of 
Expenditure was the nodal agency in the matter and the States submitted requisite proposals directly 
to them and as such no data for fund utilization under the scheme was maintained in the Department 
of Drinking Water and Sanitation. While praising the much needed step to provide financial succour to 
States, the Committee observe that so far noticeable impact on States’ fund release had not been 
seen. The Committee therefore, recommended the Department to furnish the details of States availing 
the special assistance along with the size of the loan available under this scheme, the amount 
demanded, received and utilized for JJM by each of them since its launch, reasons for not availing, 
etc. They also recommended that Department should urge the States to avail this assistance to 
enable them to implement the JJM works expeditiously.  
 
7. The Department in their action taken reply have stated as under :- 
 
“Department of Expenditure, Ministry of Finance is the nodal Department for releasing of 
special assistance to the States. As informed by D/o Expenditure, in 2022-23, an amount of 
Rs. 1289.80 Crore has been drawn by 13 States as assistance for Capital Investment under 
JJM. The details are at Annexure-II.   
 
In 2023-24, Ministry of Finance earmarked 20% of funds allocated under Part-I of the 
Scheme (Rs. 1 lakh Crore) for Jal Jeevan Mission (JJM) and Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak 
Yojana. States are being encouraged to avail this special assistance for creating rural water 
supply infrastructure.” 
  
8. The Committee are given to understand that the Department of Expenditure, Ministry of 
Finance has provided an amount of Rs. 1289.80 crore to 13 States as assistance for capital 
investment under JJM during the year 2022-23. However, the Committee find that amongst the 
States of Haryana, Rajasthan, Maharashtra, Tamil Nadu, Odisha, West Bengal, Karnataka and 
Manipur, where so far Central funds under JJM could be utilised only upto the extent of 25 per 
cent due to inadequate funds under the States’ share, only Rajasthan, Maharashtra and 
Manipur have availed this assistance. The Committee, therefore, believe that there is an urgent 
need to urge the remaining States too to avail of the capital investment assistance from the 
Ministry of Finance to enable them to finish the JJM works expeditiously. The Committee 

3 
 
would also like to know the progress of implementation of JJM works in each of the above 
three States as on date.  
 
B. Supply of safe drinking water in quality affected habitations 
 
Recommendation No.7 (Para 2.7) 
 
9. The Committee noted that out of 57,539 water quality affected habitations spread over 11 
States, as reported on 15 August, 2019, quality of water supplied, had improved in 35,659 habitations 
as on 15 February, 2023. However, 21,880 habitations, out of which 652 habitations were affected 
with arsenic, 461 with Fluoride, 10,325 with Iron, 9,909 with Salinity, 509 with Nitrate and 89 with 
Heavy Metals, were yet to be provided with safe drinking water.  While majority of habitations in 
arsenic and fluoride affected water supply areas have been covered with temporary arrangement of 
safe drinking water supply, no such measure had been taken in case of other contaminants. Since 
other contaminants could also cause health hazard, the Committee felt that these areas too needed to 
be covered by temporary measures to provide immediate relief to the remaining population living in 
50% of quality affected habitations. They, therefore recommended the Department to impress upon 
the States the need to take measures which could provide immediate solution such as mobile water 
vans/tankers carrying safe and clean drinking water or installation of small water purification 
dispensers till all such habitants were provided piped drinking water from a good quality source 
besides taking measures for permanent solution of contamination problem under JJM. The 
Committee also desired to be apprised of the details of progress in coverage of quality affected 
habitations with permanent good quality functional tap water supply as on date. 
 
10. The Department in their action taken reply have stated as under :-  
 
“Providing potable drinking water to quality-affected habitations is one of the priorities under Jal Jeevan Mission. States/ UTs have been advised to plan and implement piped water supply schemes of bulk water transfer based on safe water sources such as surface water sources or alternative safe ground water sources for the villages with water quality issues. As suggested, all States/ UTs have been advised from time to time to ensure expeditious implementation of piped water supply projects to provide potable tap water to every household in all quality-affected habitations. In Annual Action Plan for 
2023-24 held in the month of February & March, 2023, all States/ UTs have planned to cover 
all the remaining water quality habitations. A weekly progress report for monitoring coverage 
of water quality affected habitations is reviewed and shared with States for expeditious 
coverage of the remaining habitations. 
As planning, implementation and commissioning of piped water supply scheme based on a safe water source may take time, purely as an interim measure, States/ UTs have been advised to install community water purification plants (CWPPs) especially in Arsenic and Fluoride affected habitations to provide potable water to every household at the rate of 8–10 litre per capita per day (lpcd) to meet their drinking and cooking requirements.  As reported by the States/ UTs, the water quality affected habitations have reduced from 21,880 in February, 2023 to 19,085 rural habitations as on 15.06.2023. Further, provision of CWPP has been made in all reported 582 Arsenic–affected and 420 Fluoride-affected habitations. The details of Water quality – affected habitations and their coverage with CWPP as on date is as under and the State/ UT wise details is at Annex-III: 

4 
 
 
S. No.   Major 
Contaminants  
 No of quality–affected 
rural habitations   
 Covered with short 
term measures/ 
CWPP  
 1.  Fluoride  420  420 
 2.   Arsenic  582  582 
 3.   Iron  8,593  4 
 4.   Salinity  8,929  9 
 5.   Nitrate  475  9 
 6.   Heavy Metal  86  58 
Total 19,085  1,123 
 
  
11. The Committee observe that as on 15.06.23, 19085 habitations are affected with water 
quality issues, out of which all 582 arsenic and 420 fluoride affected habitations have been 
covered by Community Water Purification Plans (CWPPs). However, a large number of 
habitations with other water contaminants are yet to be given alternate sources of good 
quality water. The replies have not indicated any effective measure to address water quality 
issue in the other affected habitations i.e. Iron, Salinity and Nitrate. The Committee would, 
therefore, like to be apprised of the detail of plan, if any, to cover these affected settlements 
with good quality functional tap water supply as soon as possible. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend the Department to coordinate with States/UTs for taking effective measures for 
reducing the number of habitations affected with Iron, Salinity and Nitrate contamination 
including setting up of CWPPs within three months of presentation of this report.   
 
C. Timely preparation of Annual Implementation Plans (AIPs) 
 
Recommendation No. 11 (Para 2.11) 
  
12.     The Committee found that Annual Implementation Plans (AIPs) were the blueprints for 
impending works to be undertaken in the next financial year. They noted that consolidated AIPs of the 
States/UTs were discussed in the meetings of Plan Appraisal Committee with individual States in 
February-March of previous financial year. Thereafter, National Scheme Sanctioning Committee of 
SBM(G) approved the AIP by the commencement of the concerned financial year for allocation of 
funds to the States. They noted that the process of considering Annual Implementation Plans (AIPs) 
for 2023-24 had been started and States had been requested to submit AIPs for 2023-24 under 
SBM(G). However, taking note of the fact that there was a big deviation in the activities/projects/works 
to be undertaken as envisaged under AIPs and actual progress of works, the Committee found that 
these plans were not in tune with ground reality. As a result, these plans lost their sanctity, since the 
initial commitment to take up the proposed works visualised during preparation of AIPs, was not 
realised. Since, these plans were an amalgamation of Village/Block/District Action Plans, following 
bottom up approach, the Committee believe that monitoring of progress at these levels should be 
ensured and reasons for deviation, if any, should be recorded and redressed at each level. Another 
important factor in realisation of goals as planned under AIPs was timely preparation and approval of 
AIPs, preferably before the closing of financial year so that funds could be released with the 
commencement of new financial year and the projects could be implemented as planned. The 
Committee therefore, recommended the Department, to review the process of AIP formulation to 
enable release of funds from first week of April.                                                       
 
  

5 
 
13. The Department in their action taken reply have stated as under :- 
 
“Meetings of Plan Appraisal Committee to discuss the SBM(G) Annual Implementation Plans 
(AIPs) 2023-24 of all States/UTs were held under the chairmanship of Secretary, DDWS from 
28th February, 2023 to 27th March, 2023 at DDWS, New Delhi. Meeting of National Scheme 
Sanctioning Committee (NSSC) of Phase-II of SBM(G) was held on 28th March, 2023 under 
the Chairmanship of Secretary (DWS) to consider the AIPs of the States/UTs under SBM(G) 
for             2023-24 for approval. The AIPs of all the States/UTs were discussed and approved 
in the meeting held on 28.03.2023. Hence, the Department has been in the position for 
releasing funds to the States/UTs from the month of April, 2023 onwards. However, release of 
funds also requires fulfillment of various others conditions as per the instruction issued by 
Ministry of Finance such as meeting requisite percentage of expenditure, release of funds from 
State Treasury to State Nodal Agency, compliances of various data entry in PFMS, etc. and 
conditions given in the scheme guidelines. For this, DDWS is regularly pursuing with the States 
to expedite expenditure and fulfill the requisite conditions for release so that the funds can be 
released to the States at the earliest.” 
  
14. The Committee have been informed that the National Scheme Sanctioning Committee 
met on 28 March, 2023 wherein AIPs of all the States/UTs were discussed and approved. They 
however, notice from the Department’s submission that release of funds also requires 
fulfillment of various others conditions as per the instruction issued by Ministry of Finance 
such as meeting requisite percentage of expenditure, release of funds from State Treasury to 
State Nodal Agency, compliances of various data entry in Public Financial Management 
System (PFMS), etc. and conditions given in the scheme guidelines. In view of the Committee, 
the AIPs need to be approved well ahead i.e. by beginning of March, so that other conditions 
stipulated  for fund release as stated above could be complied with. The Committee , 
therefore, reiterate their  recommendation that the Department of Drinking Water and 
Sanitation should review the process of AIP formulation so as to finalise and approve it well in 
time to enable release of funds from first week of April. 
 
D. Financial performance under SBM(G) II 
 
Recommendation No.12 (Para No. 2.12) 
 
15.     The Committee found that the trend of under utilisation during the last three years, highlighted 
by them in their earlier reports on Demands for Grants, had continued to be noticed in 2022-23 as 
well. They noted that during the last three years, the Department had not been able to utilise the 
revised budget allocation despite reduction by approximately 60% in the years 2020-21 and 2021-22 
and 69% in 2022-23 at RE stage, while the utilisations were stated to be 82.47% in 2020-21, 51.86% 
in 2021-22 and 57.53% in 2022-23 (till 9 February, 2023). However, around 15 to 17% of this 
utilisation had been towards interest payment for Extra Budgetary Resources (EBR) which was to the 
tune of Rs. 1031.03 (17.18%) in 2020-21, Rs. 1032.89 (17.21%) in 2020-21 and                Rs. 771.99 
(15.44%) in 2022-23 till 9 February, 2023. This showed the effective utilisation of funds had been 
even lesser. Keeping in view the physical and financial performance of phase II of the Scheme, the 
Committee recommended the Department to intensify their efforts on issues/challenges withholding 
the execution of works/activities and pursue more vigorously with the concerned agencies and State 
Governments for accomplishment of goals within the targeted period. 
                                                                              
  

6 
 
16. The Department in their action taken reply have stated as under :- 
 
“In order to ensure that funds allocated under the programme are utilized by the States/UTs 
efficiently and effectively, detailed discussions were held in March, 2023 with all the States/UTs 
individually on their Annual Implementation Plans (AIPs) for the year 2023-24.  States were 
advised to ensure that the targets set by them are in line with achieving the goal of the 
programme by the set timelines.  Suggestions were also given to the States/UTs for 
expeditious implementation of the AIP.  Regular review meetings are also being held regularly 
with Chief Secretaries and Principal Secretaries of the nodal departments in the States/UTs  
for expeditious implementation of the programme and effective utilization of funds.”. 
 
17. The Committee note that regular review meetings  are  being held with the Chief 
Secretaries and Principal Secretaries of the  nodal Departments to expedite implementation of 
programmes under SBM(G) II and utilization of allocated funds efficiently and effectively by 
the States/UTs. However, the Committee would like to be apprised of the result of such 
engagements with the States in terms of improvement in utilization of funds allocated under 
SBM(G) II. They would also like to apprised of the details of funds allocated and utilized till 
date during the current financial year. 
 
E. Release of State share of funds for various activities under SBM (G) II 
                                                                              
Recommendation No.13 (Para No. 2.13) 
 
18.     The Committee noticed that as per the guidelines of the Ministry of Finance regarding 
procedure for release of funds under Centrally Sponsored Schemes, Centre share funds were to be 
released from Treasury to Single Nodal Account (SNA) of the schemes within 21 days of its receipt in 
the Treasury and corresponding State share funds were to be released within 40 days of receipt of 
Centre share. However, as per the facts submitted by the Department, 10 States such as Arunachal 
Pradesh, Bihar, Kerala, Manipur, Mizoram, Nagaland, Sikkim, Rajasthan, Uttar Pradesh, West Bengal 
had reported delays in releasing funds, varying for a period of 67 to 165 days in the year 2022-23, 
affecting execution of projects. Since, timely release of funds from both Central and State 
Governments can only ensure timely utilisation, the Committee recommended the Department to 
apprise them about the reason and the steps taken to address them including addressing the issue of 
resource crunch of the States. 
 
19. The Department in their action taken reply have stated as under :- 
 “The delay for releasing the funds from Treasury to SNA account was taken up with the 
concerned States. So far 5 states have communicated the reason for delay in transfer of funds 
from Treasury to SNA. Details are attached at Annexure-IV 
 
Further,  this department has time and again issued advisory for releasing of funds from 
Treasury to SNA. Now, Ministry of Finance has  decided to charge interest with effect from  
01/04/2023 on the number of days of delay beyond 30 days in transfer of central share to the 
SNA account   @ 7% p.a. No further funds will be released from Centre to States until the 
earlier released funds are transferred from State Treasury to SNA. The instructions of MoF has 
been communicated to Chief Secretaries/ State Finance Secretaries for strict compliance”  
  
  
  

7 
 
20. The Committee observe that out of 5 States submission regarding reasons for delay in 
transfer of funds from treasury to Single Nodal Account (SNA)  problem of resource and 
crunch has been cited by Nagaland while law and order situation has been cited by Manipur. 
Other States such as West Bengal has stated the procedural delays at finance department to 
be the reason and Kerala has stated the reason to be re-appropriation of the State budget 
allocation for the financial year 2022-23. The Committee further note that to ensure timely 
release of funds from Treasury to Single Nodal Account (SNA), Chief Secretaries / State 
Finance Secretaries have been informed about the recent instructions of the Ministry of 
Finance that  interest will be charged at the rate of 7% per annum in case of delay of more than 
30 days in transfer of Central share to the SNA account with effect from 01/04/2023. Since, the 
delay in transfer of funds to SNA is a major problem in fund utilization, affecting the work, the 
Committee would, however, recommend to the Department to further analyse the problem and 
help  States to better utilize the available Central assistance. The Committee believe that while 
levying of 7 percent interest would certainly create a deterrence to deliberate delays on 
smaller grounds, genuine resource constraints with States may further be aggravated due to 
this arrangement. Instead of penal provision, sincere efforts at utilization of funds should be 
encouraged as an incentive. The Committee would, therefore, recommend to the Department 
to devise ways to incentivize States to ensure timely release of funds so that central 
assistance under JJM could be utilized  fruitfully. The Committee desire to be apprised of the 
amount of funds transferred to SNA by each of the States since April, 2023 along the number 
of States in whose case funds have been released, stopped or interest recovered. 
 
F. Plastic waste management in villages 
 
Recommendation No. 17 (Para 2.17) 
  
21. The Committee noted that one of the objectives of phase II of SBM(G) is to make villages 
‘visually clean’ by ensuring minimal littering, minimal stagnation of water and no accumulation of 
plastic waste in the form of a dump. The Committee were of the view that plastic waste disposal is 
one of the important dimensions in bringing about cleanliness. They noted that to fulfill this objective, 
Gram Panchayatas (GPs) have been assigned the task of arrangement for door-to-door collection of 
plastic waste along with other waste, segregation & storage of plastic waste at the common village 
shed constructed/available in the village, selling recyclable plastic waste to vendors and sending 
remaining plastic waste to the block level Plastic Waste Management Units (PWMUs). They further 
noted that funding support of Rs. 16 lakhs per block was provided for setting up PWMUs. However, 
so far 7% of all the blocks in the country had been equipped with PWMUs. The Committee were 
happy to note that amongst all the States/UTs, Odisha, Tamil Nadu and Ladakh had made good 
progress in creating plastic waste management facility with 72%, 42% and 48% of the blocks covered 
respectively in these States. In view of the growing menace of plastic wastes which create 
environmental hazards and also create a filthy look in the form of heaps, the Committee 
recommended for expediting establishment of PWMUs in all the blocks of the country to realize the 
objective of visually clean villages. Also, facility for door to door collection of waste and its 
segregation, being the first step, the Committee recommended for creating monitoring mechanism 
including physical verification of such facility at block/ district level officers in those villages which had 
been certified as ODF plus villages. They desired to be apprised of the details of existing ODF plus 
villages where door to door facility of waste creation and segregation had been created, frequency of 
such collection and verification mechanism for the same. 
 
 
  

8 
 
22. The Department in their action taken reply have stated as under :- 
 
“As per the Swachh Bharat Mission (Grameen) Phase-II operational guideline, there 
must be one Plastic Waste Management Unit in each block, if clustering is not possible. 
This was again reiterated during the Annual Implementation Plan (AIP) meeting for all 
States and UTs to have Plastic Waste Management Units at the Blocks levels. In AIP of 
FY 2023-24, States and UTs have planned to setup PWMUs/linkages of blocks with 
urban facilities in over 3700 Blocks. As reported by States on IMIS, over 950 blocks in 
the country have been equipped with Plastic Waste Management Unit (PWMU) or linked 
with Urban Plastic Waste Management Facilities.  State/UT-wise, Total blocks and no. of 
blocks with Plastic Waste Management Unit (PWMU) are at Annexure-V.  
  
States/UTs have been advised via letter no. S-11011/20/2022-SBM-DDWS(Part-4) 
dated 21st June 2022 to carry out mandatory third-party verification for ODF Plus (Model 
category) villages. The States can also undertake supervisory verifications for the ODF 
Plus villages across all categories (Aspiring/Rising/Model) by the officer responsible in 
the chain of command at Block/District/State level. 
 
As reported by States/UTs on IMIS of SBM(G), over 1,32,027 ODF Plus villages are 
having Vehicle for Collection of Waste in the country, where solid waste is being 
collected from all households/common points/community bins at regular intervals. 
States/UTs have been advised to carry out mandatory third-party verification for ODF 
Plus (Model category) villages.” 
  
23. The Committee note that out of approximately 3700 blocks in which Plastic Waste 
Management Units (PWMUs), have been planned to be set  up, so  far only 950 blocks have 
been equipped  with Plastic Waste Management Unit (PWMU) or linked with Urban Plastic 
Waste Management Facilities which shows that much of the installation work is yet to be taken 
up. Further, in many big States such as Assam, Bihar, Chattisgarh , Gujarat, Jammu & 
Kashmir , Karnataka, Uttar Pradesh, Telangana, Rajasthan, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, 
PWMUs have been established in very few blocks. Since Plastic waste is a serious threat to 
the environment with a great potential to risk public health, the Committee would like to be 
apprised of the reasons for slow progress in installing PWMUs in these States and the steps 
taken by the Department to impress upon the States the need to set up and operationalise 
PWMUs expeditiously.   
 
  

9 
 
CHAPTER – II 
 OBSERVATIONS / RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT  
 
Recommendation No. 1 (Para No. 2.1)  
 
Bedget Analysis of the Department of Drinking Water and Sanitation 
  
Jal Jeevan Mission  
 
The Committee observe that “Drinking Water Supply” and “Sanitation” being State subjects, the 
Department of Drinking Water and Sanitation of the Ministry of Jal Shakti has been mainly assigned 
the role of supplementing the efforts of the State Government to improve the rural drinking water 
supply and sanitation. The Department is providing technical and financial support through the 
Centrally sponsored schemes of Jal Jeevan Mission (JJM) and Swachh Bharat Mission (Grameen) 
[SBM(G)]. They note that the overall Budget allocation of the Department for the year 2023-24 has 
increased by Rs 10,001.88 crore (14.88%) over BE of 2022-23 (Rs 67,221.12) and by Rs. 17,193.88 
crore (28.64%) over RE of 2022-23 (Rs 60,029.12). The Committee note that the Department’s actual 
utilization of funds has remained lower than RE allocation under both the flagship schemes during the 
last three fiscal years indicating that the projections of anticipated expenditure could not be realized 
on ground. However, the Department has continued to increase allocations at BE stage which has 
been subsequently revised downwards at RE stage and the actual releases were less than the 
anticipations. The Committee, therefore, are of the opinion that there is a need for more pragmatic 
analysis of future projections of activities to be undertaken and expenditures to be incurred based on 
States’ ability to utilize the funds. Besides, the underlying factors which have hampered the progress 
of implementation of the schemes so far, also need to be addressed to complete the schemes 
expeditiously. While appreciating the Government’s commitment to make provision of tap water for 
19.36 crore households and sustainable sanitation in 5,97,399 villages, which indeed is a behemoth 
task and require both the partners, i.e. States and Centre to work together, the Committee are of the 
view that the specific constraints/hindrances which have impeded the implementation till now, need to 
be addressed for smooth implementation of both the schemes further. They, therefore, recommend 
the Department to apprise them of the specific action taken to expedite the implementation of 
schemes and improvement made in actual expenditure to make the laudable schemes of JJM and 
SBM (G), a success. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
The details of fund allocated and utilized since inception of JJM in 2019 is as under: 
(Amount in Rs. Crore) 
Year BE RE Fund drawn by 
States 
Total Fund 
utilized* 
2019-2020 10,000.66 10,000.66 9,951.81 10,000.44 
2020-2021 11,500.00  11,000.00 10,917.86 10,999.94 
2021-2022 50,011.00  45,011.00 40,009.77 40,125.64 
2022-2023 60,000.00  55,000.00 54,742.30 54,839.79 
 Total 1,21,011.66  1,15,621.74 1,15,965.81 
(96%) 
*including Department Level Activities 
From the table, it is evident that the fund allocated for implementation of the JJM was almost 
utilized every year except in the year 2021-22.  

10 
 
 
To give impetus to the Mission for its time bound mission mode implementation, several 
meetings including conferences, workshops/ conferences/ webinars for capacity building and 
knowledge sharing, review meetings through video conferences, field visits, etc. at highest levels 
are being held by the Department from time to time with States/ UTs, wherein they have been 
advised to plan and expedite the implementation of the programme.  
 
Further, Department has also identified 13 major States having more than 6.91 Crore (96%) of 
the remaining households (HHs) across the Country and has been regularly impressing upon 
them to prioritize the coverage of remaining HHs.  Almost every month review meetings are 
being held at the level of Secretary (DDWS) with the Chief Secretaries, Addl. Chief Secretaries 
and Secretaries in-charge in these 13 States to review & expedite the progress under JJM, 
identify challenges being faced, sharing experiences and best practices, etc. Also Hon’ble 
Minister (Jal Shakti) is also taking up the matter with the Chief Ministers to review the 
implementation of mission in their respective States, make provision of requisite State share, 
inter-department coordination whenever required, etc. to implement the mission at speed and 
scale for achieving the goal in time bound manner. 
 
Swachh Bharat Mission (Grameen) 
 
Allocation and utilization during last year and current year under SBM(G) are as under :- 
Rs. In 
crore 
Year BE RE Release 
2022-23 7192.00 5000.00 4925.15 
2023-24 7192.00 7192.00 166.80 
 
The following steps have been taken to expedite the implementation of SBM(G): 
 
 Based on the inputs received from the States/UTs regarding challenges faced by them in 
implementation of the programme, scheme guidelines have been amended and clarifications 
have been issued to the States from time to time for smooth implementation of the programme. 
 Recognizing the need to create a pool of competent human resources at the State and district 
levels to cater to Capacity Building, technical and managerial support needs of GPs, DDWS has 
started an initiative for creation of Master Trainers (MTs). The MTs further train 
Sarpanch/Swachhagrahi/Panchayat Secretaries on ODF plus and handhold GPs and villages to 
prepare their ODF plus village sanitation plans and implementing them.  Till date a pool of 2901 
Master Trainers (MTs) has been created in 26 States. 
 DDWS is regularly updating and refreshing the knowledge of State level officials dealing with the 
programme through orientation programmes. Training programmes ondifferent verticals have 
also been organised.   
 A VC to discuss the progress on Phase- I of Light House Initiative was held on 15.03.2023 under 
the chairmanship of Joint Secretary & Mission Director, SBM(G) with the State Mission Directors 
and Corporate partners. Discussion was held to review the progress under the Light House 
Initiative with 15 States, challenges in the process of implementation and way forward for 
completing Phase I. 
 Secretary (DWS) chaired Panel discussion on “Achieving ODF Plus Villages and Drinking Water 
in Rural Areas” in Consultative meeting of Aspirational districts and blocks organised by NITI 

11 
 
Aayog on 28th April, 2023 at Dr.Ambedkar International Centre, New Delhi. AS & MD, JJM and 
JS and MD, SBM  also made presentation. An exhibition on ODF Plus Model village was also 
organised. 
 Ministry of Jal Shakti  organised an event “Swachh Sujal Shakti Samman” on 4th March, 2023 at 
Vigyan Bhawan, New Delhi. Hon’ble President of India, Smt. DroupadiMurmu presented awards 
to women champions from the rural water and sanitation sector, recognising their contributions 
to the Swachh Bharat Mission Grameen (SBM-G), the Jal Jeevan Mission (JJM) and the Jal 
Shakti Abhiyan.   The event was graced by Union Minister of Jal Shakti, Sh. Gajendra Singh 
Shekhawat, Sh. DevusinhJesingbhai Chauhan, Minister of State for Communications, Sh. 
Prahlad Singh Patel, Minister of State for Jal Shakti, Food Processing Industry; Sh. 
BishweswarTudu, Minister of State for Jal Shakti, Tribal Affairs. 
 Department of Drinking Water and Sanitation organised a review VC meeting on 06.03.2023 with 
the State Ministers in charge of Panchayati Raj, Rural Development and Rural Sanitation of all 
States/UTs to review the progress under SBM(G) Phase II. The VC was chaired by Hon’ble 
Minister, Ministry of Jal Shakti. The progress on ODF Plus was reviewed in details.  
 Joint Review Meeting on the implementation of Swachh Bharat Mission (Grameen) and the Jal 
Jeevan Mission (JJM) in Kerala was organised on 19th April 2023 at Thiruvananthapuram, 
Kerala. The meeting was jointly chaired by the Hon’ble Minister, Jal Shakti and Chief Minister of 
Kerala. Team also visited some villages to get feedback from villages.  
 Review Meeting on the implementation of Swachh Bharat Mission (Grameen) and the Jal 
Jeevan Mission (JJM) in Jammu & Kashmir was organised on 24th April 2023 at Jammu. The 
meeting was chaired by the LG, Jammu & Kashmir. Another meeting with District Collectors was 
chaired Secretary, Department of Drinking Water & Sanitation (DDWS), Government of India. 
 Review Meeting on the implementation of Swachh Bharat Mission (Grameen) and the Jal 
Jeevan Mission (JJM) in NE States was organised on 1st May 2023 at Guwahati, Assam. The 
meeting was chaired by the Hon’ble Minister, Jal Shakti.   
 Joint Review Meeting chaired by the Secretary, Department of Drinking Water & Sanitation 
(DDWS), Government of India and Chief Secretary of following States. The details are  as under: 
 
Date State 
5th April 2023 Karnataka 
11th April 2023 Tamil Nadu 
2nd May, 2023 Manipur 
5th May 2023 Bihar 
20th May 2023 Odisha 
6th June 2023 Andhra Pradesh  
 
 Orientation of Newly joined Addl. Chief Secretaries/Principal Secretaries/Secretaries in-charge of 
Rural Sanitation, Mission Directors and State Coordinators, SBM(G) was organised on 17th 
April, 2023 at DDWS, New Delhi through VC. Total 20 participants have attended the orientation.  
 Besides, meetings with Addl. Chief Secretaries/Principal Secretaries/Secretaries in-charge of 
SBM(G) and Mission Directors of SBM-G of all States/UTs are organized on regular basis 
 
(OM No.H.11020/1/2023-Parliament-DDWS  Dated: 11thJuly, 2023) 
 
  

12 
 
Recommendation No. 2 (Para No. 2.2)  
 
Physical achievement of targets under Jal Jeevan Mission 
 
The Committee note that Jal Jeevan Mission (JJM), being implemented in the States/UTs on a 
Mission Mode since August, 2019, has been successful in providing tap water supply in the homes of 
more than 11.15 crore (57.5%) rural households out of 19.36 crore rural households, as on date. They 
laud the achievement of 100 per cent coverage of all the rural households in the States/Union 
Territories of Haryana, Gujarat, Telangana, Goa, Puducherry, Andaman & Nicobar Islands, Dadra & 
Nagar Haveli and Daman & Diu with functional tap water connections. They also appreciate that the 
States of Bihar, Punjab and Himachal Pradesh have been successful in providing functional tap water 
supply in more than 95 % households and hope that soon these States will also reach the milestone 
of complete coverage under JJM. The Committee note that still a major part of the work remains to be 
completed in the 13 focused States which include big States such as Andhra Pradesh, Uttar Pradesh, 
West Bengal, Jharkhand, Rajasthan and Chhattisgarh having achieved only 29.56%, 30.21%, 
30.30%, 30.53%, 31.58% and 38.81% coverage so far. They find that long gestation period of Multi 
Village Schemes, presence of contaminants in ground water, lack of dependable ground water 
sources in drought-prone & desert areas, terrain challenges in hilly & forested areas, nation-wide 
CoVID-19 pandemic, associated lockdown, etc. have substantially affected the pace of 
implementation of JJM in these States. The Department has informed that they have taken several 
steps such as joint discussion and finalization of Annual Action Plan (AAP) of States/ UTs, regular 
review of implementation, organising workshops/ conferences/ webinars for capacity building and 
knowledge sharing, field visits by multi-disciplinary team to provide technical support, regular review 
meetings at highest level for executing agencies/ Gram Panchayat and other stakeholders and 
provision for professional manpower augmentation at different levels including project management 
units, etc. the outcome in expediting the works is yet to be seen in majority of the States. The 
Committee are of the view that since States are the equal partners in successful implementation of 
the scheme, the specific problems in each of the States which are lagging behind, need to be 
examined. The Committee, therefore, recommend the Department to look into the State specific 
problems and devise suitable measures to fast track implementation of JJM to realise the objectives 
at the earliest. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
As stated above, 13 focused States have been identified where more than 96% of the 
remaining households (HHs) are to be covered. The Department is giving special focus on these 
States and regular follow-up is being held up with these States at the highest level to look into the 
State specific problems and devise suitable measures to fast track implementation of JJM. Further, 
National WASH Experts (NWEs) have been engaged for ground truthing, are visiting these focused 
States regularly and 345 field visits have been undertaken so far for handholding the States in the 
implementation of the programme. Through concerted efforts from the States, State Level Scheme 
Sanctioning Committees have already approved the works for providing tap water connections and 
States/ UTs are being repeatedly advised to award all the remaining works by 30.06.2023.  
 
Further, to provide financial support to State Governments, Government of India through 
Ministry of Finance (Department of Expenditure) is implementing a Scheme for Special Assistance to 
States for Capital Investment with allocation of an amount of Rs. 1.30 lakh Crore for 2023-24, out of 
which an amount of Rs. 1 lakh Crore has been earmarked for Part-1 and 20 percent of the funds 
allocated under Part-I may be utilized by the States for contributing State's share for Jal Jeevan 
Mission (JJM) and Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak Yojana for 2023-24.  

13 
 
 
With concerted efforts, so far, as reported by States/ UTs as on 15.06.2023, out of 19.46 Crore 
rural households in the country, more than 12.29 Crore (63%) households are reported to have tap 
water supply in their homes. 
 
(OM No.H.11020/1/2023-Parliament-DDWS  Dated: 11thJuly, 2023) 
 
Recommendation No. 3 (Para No. 2.3)  
 
Implementation of JJM - Some practical issues 
  
The Committee note that in some States such as Maharashtra, where actual work started in 
2021, surveys were conducted hastily without actually visiting households/physical survey done and 
uploading information through google images which has resulted in exclusion of many households in 
the villages, leading to faulty reporting of data on Integrated Management Information System (IMIS). 
Further, in many places, water supply schemes have been launched without proper assessment of 
the water supply source, causing practical difficulties in execution of piped supply of water. Similarly, 
though 87.46% of schools and 82.63% Anganwadi Centres are reported to have been provided with 
tap connections, actual availability of water through these taps needs to be verified on ground through 
physical verification. Though district nodal officers have been given the responsibility to enter district 
level data, which is further approved by State nodal officers and at national level, National WASH 
Experts (NEW) have been appointed since August, 2022, the Committee believe that the scheme 
could be successfully implemented only when local officials are given the verification work. Local 
monitoring on real time basis and reporting of functional piped water infrastructure would be a great 
step in preventing not only inconsistency in factual information but also provide a genuine feedback 
for adoption of corrective measures. For this, officers may be designated for each district on the lines 
of Area officers (designated for each State/UT) to facilitate monitoring of work at the ground level and 
ensure actual reporting of works undertaken. The Committee are of the opinion that in order to 
achieve the target of 100 percent coverage of village households with regular assured water supply 
within the prescribed period, these practical issues in implementation, if sorted out, would certainly 
make JJM a fruitful mission. The Committee, therefore, recommend the Department to look into these 
issues and take corrective steps in consultation with State Governments to redress these problems 
and apprise them of the details of such measures within three months of presentation of this Report.  
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
For accuracy and consistency of the data reported by the States, the data entered by field level 
officers are verified/ authenticated by States at three levels viz., at the district level, State level and 
finally approved by the administrative Secretary in-charge of PHED/RWSS. 
 
To holistically address the challenges being faced by the States, as suggested by the 
Committee, the Department has already nominated State/UT-wise area officers who are addressing 
the day to day issues being faced by the respective States. Further, Department has also nominated 
a nodal Officer for coordinating with Central nodal Ministries/ Departments/ agencies viz. M/o EF&CC, 
M/o RTH, NHAI, M/o Railways etc. to facilitate the States in obtaining Statutory/ other clearances. In 
addition, State Programme Management Units (SPMUs) and District Programme Management Units 
(DPMUs) have been set up to bridge the gap in the availability of technical skill sets and of HR for 
programme management, a network of Civil Society Organizations working in the water sector, the 
Rural WASH Partner Forum, has also been set up to extend support to states for time-bound 
implementation, the Jal Jeevan Survekshan 2023, a year-round programme, has also been launched 

14 
 
to focus on implementation and foster a spirit of healthy competition among States and Districts. 
Further, all sorts of technical and financial assistance are being extended to the States for expeditious 
implementation of the Mission. 
Further, Secretary (DWS) has also reviewed the progress of the mission with Chief Secretaries of the 
States of Manipur, Bihar, Odisha, J&K, Tamil Nadu, Karnataka, Kerala and Andhra Pradesh in last 5 
months, wherein State and district officials were also sensitized for expeditious implementation and 
corrective action, wherever required. 
 
(OM No.H.11020/1/2023-Parliament-DDWS  Dated: 11thJuly, 2023) 
 
Recommendation No. 4 (Para No. 2.4)  
 
Budget Allocation and Utilisation of funds under Jal Jeevan Mission 
 
The Committee find that an amount of Rs. 70,000 crore has been allocated under JJM at BE 
stage for 2023-24 which is an increase of Rs 10,000 crore (16.66%) over the Budget Estimate of 
2022-23 and Rs. 15,000 crore (27.27%) over the Revised Estimate of 2022-23. However, till 13 
February, 2023, the Department has been able to utilise only Rs. 34,628.52 crore by way of releases 
to the eligible States in 2022-23 which is 63% of the amount of Rs. 55000 crore allocated at RE 2022-
23. On one hand, the target date for completion of implementation of JJM is approaching fast, 
continuous shortfall in actual expenditure is being observed since the fiscal year 2021-22 despite 
reduction in allocation at RE stage subsequently. While noting the submission of the Department that 
the pace of work under JJM will catch up in the next financial year, the Committee believe that unless 
the remaining works are executed on war footing, the target of bringing all rural households under the 
network of functional tap water in adequate quantity (55 lpcd) of prescribed quality on regular basis 
may not be achieved by 31.12.2024. The Committee, therefore, recommend the Department to take 
immediate steps to enable maximum utilisation of funds allocated under JJM.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The details of fund allocated and utilized since inception of JJM in 2019 is as under: 
 
    (Amount in Rs. Crore) 
 
Year Budget 
Allocated 
Fund 
utilized 
2019-2020 10,000.66 10,000.44 
2020-2021 11,000.00 10,999.94 
2021-2022 45,011.00 40,125.64 
2022-2023 55,000.00 54,839.79 
 
From the table, it is evident that almost entire budget (RE) was utilized in 2022-23, for 
implementation of the Mission. 
 
(OM No.H.11020/1/2023-Parliament-DDWS  Dated: 11thJuly, 2023) 
 
  
  

15 
 
Recommendation No.6 (Para No. 2.6) 
 
Provision of funds for operation and maintenance of water supply infrastructure  
 
 The Committee are given to understand that under Jal Jeevan Mission, Gram Panchayats 
(GPs) or its sub-committees have to ensure collection of user charges and plan utilization of funds 
available from other sources for operation & maintenance (O&M) of water supply infrastructure. They 
note that for sustainable operation & maintenance of water supply schemes, provision has been made 
under JJM to reward/ incentivize the community in a phased-manner after the commissioning of the 
scheme to the tune of 10% of the capital expenditure on their respective in-village water supply 
scheme. This would serve as a 'revolving fund' to meet expenses on O&M of the scheme. While 
appreciating the intent of entrusting a sense of ownership and responsibility through the provision of 
collection of user charges for sustainable O&M of water supply infrastructure, the Committee take 
note of the fact that in reality, Village Water and Sanitation Committees are not empowered to collect 
user charges and the authority designated to levy and collect user charges being not clear, GPs are 
not collecting user charges at all. Moreover, they note that standard mechanism for transfer of assets 
to GPs, especially in case of new assets created under single village system for supply of water 
through pipeline has not been prescribed. In such state of affairs, there is no perpetual source of 
funds available to take care of repairing and maintenance works. The Committee would, therefore, 
recommend the Department to chalk out a standard handing over/ delivery procedure to GPs after the 
infrastructure/asset for supply of piped water is created to enable efficient service delivery and 
maintenance.  
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Through operational guidelines for the implementation of the Mission, State Government have 
been advised to issue a notification under Panchayati Raj (PR) Act, to empower Gram Panchayat 
and/ or its sub-committee, i.e. VWSC/ Paani Samiti/ User Group, etc. to plan, implement, manage, 
operate and maintain in-village water supply system inter alia which includes powers, responsibilities, 
internal processes, composition of VWSC/ Paani samiti, etc., power to decide, levy, collect water 
service charges, etc.  
Further, standard mechanism for transfer, operation and maintenance of rural water supply 
infrastructure after successful commissioning of the scheme has already been devised and 
communicated through a special Margdarshika for Gram Panchayats & VWSCs to provide safe 
drinking water in rural households. 
Further, considering the importance of comprehensive operation and maintenance policy for long term 
operationalization of rural water supply infrastructure created under the Mission, States are being 
encouraged to frame an O&M policy. As reported, O&M Policy has so far been notified in 10 States/ 
UTs.  
(OM No.H.11020/1/2023-Parliament-DDWS  Dated: 11thJuly, 2023) 
 
Recommendation No. 8  (Para No. 2.8) 
  
Separating water supply service and quality check 
  
 The Committee note that Water Supply/ Water & Sanitation/ Public Health Engineering 
Departments and/or parastatal organization of respective State Government/ UT Administration are 
responsible for making provision of water supply and ensuring quality of water supplied in their 
respective State/ UT. They further note that as per the Drinking Water Quality Monitoring & 
Surveillance Framework, the States need to decouple the functions of the water service delivery and 

16 
 
water quality testing to develop trust, transparency and accountability. In this regard, the Committee 
also note the submission of the Department regarding existing challenges in providing good quality 
drinking water such as no regular water quality testing of drinking water sources, unhygienic 
environment around public water supply delivery point, lack of innovative technology to monitor quality 
of water supplied, etc. Though water quality testing laboratories have been established and Field Test 
Kits (FTKs) are being used for monitoring water quality, these are still not sufficient to meet the testing 
requirements. The Committee are, therefore, of the view that entrusting the task of water supply and 
monitoring of water quality supplied to separate agencies would be a big advantage in ensuring 
availability of good quality water. They, therefore, recommend the Department to reinforce this aspect 
and urge the State Governments to take steps for separation of water supply service and its 
monitoring. The Committee would like to be apprised of the action taken in this regard at the earliest.  
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
  In consultation with various stakeholders, ‘Drinking Water Quality Monitoring & Surveillance Framework’ has been released for guidance of officials of States/ UTs and local village level functionaries to expand the water quality testing and reporting, surveillance of drinking water sources, sanitary surveys, setting up of laboratories, etc. The framework inter alia includes institutional framework that can strengthen laboratories, roles and responsibilities of PHED/ RWS departments and laboratories, monitoring framework for quality, accreditation/ recognition process, etc.  As per the framework, State is to set up Drinking Water Quality Commissionerate, with Chief Chemist of the State/ UT as its nodal officer for separation between water supply delivery and water quality testing services.  As reported, 62.79 lakh samples in 4.77 lakh villages and 107.83 lakh samples using FTKs from 3.72 lakh (61.92%) villages have been tested during 2022-23. Further, 5.39 lakh (90%) villages have been tested for chemical parameters and 4.47 lakh (75%) villages have been tested for bacteriological parameters (post monsoon).  Moreover, as water quality monitoring and surveillance is a continuous process that require sustained efforts, Swachh Jal se Suraksha (SJSS) Campaign was organized from 2nd October, 2022 to 31st March 2023 to ensure quality of drinking water by taking up various water quality monitoring and surveillance activities. The findings during the campaign have been shared with States/ UTs for taking further necessary action. 
 
(OM No.H.11020/1/2023-Parliament-DDWS  Dated: 11thJuly, 2023) 
 
Recommendation No. 9  (Para No. 2.9) 
 
Increasing the network of National Accreditation Board for testing and calibration Laboratories 
(NABL) accredited water quality testing laboratories  
 
The Committee note that accreditation/recognition of drinking water quality testing laboratories 
at least for parameters of basic water quality as per ISO/IEC 17025 has been emphasised under JJM. 
They note that as on 13.02.2023, there are 2,076 drinking water quality testing laboratories at State, 
District, sub-division and/ or block levels out of which 1,067 laboratories are accredited/ recognized. 
However, they find that in some of the States, such as in Jharkhand, Punjab, Rajasthan and Uttar 
Pradesh, compared to district level, very few water quality testing laboratories have been set up at 

17 
 
Block level. Also approximately 50% of the laboratories are accredited by NABL so far. Although, 2% 
of the allocations can be utilized by States for Water Quality Monitoring & Surveillance, the Committee 
find that creation of state of the art water quality testing laboratories is yet to achieve a momentum for 
ensuring good quality potable water in villages. The Committee would, therefore, recommend the 
Department to take utmost measures in this regard so that the network of recognised/accredited 
water quality testing laboratories is spread across the country.  
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 The recommendations of the Committee are well noted and the Department, in partnership 
with States, is committed to provide safe drinking water of prescribed quality (BIS:10500) to every 
rural household. Accordingly, for setting up and strengthening of water quality testing laboratories, 
States/ UTs can utilize upto 2% of their annual allocation of funds for WQM&S activities inter alia which includes procurement of equipment, instruments, chemicals, glassware, consumables, hiring of skilled manpower, accreditation/ recognition of laboratories, etc. This fund can now also be used by States towards building cost for setting up a new laboratory at regional, district, sub–divisional/ block levels, NABL accreditation of laboratories engaged under Public-Private Partnership (PPP) or public–public partnership.   All States/ UTs have also been advised that all district must have district level laboratory. In bigger States, at the regional level, district level lab should be upgraded into State level lab in different regions of the State.   States/ UTs are encouraged to explore the Public-Private Partnership (PPP) or public–public partnership involving laboratories from different institutions. Under Public-Private Partnership, the PHE/ RWS Department may collaborate with NABL/ ISO/ other suitably accredited water quality testing private laboratories, as support organizations. Under the Public-Public Partnership, PHE/ RWS Department may collaborate with water quality testing laboratories of other/ similar State/ UT/ Central Government agencies, i.e., Central Pollution Control Board/ Central Water Commission/ Central Ground Water Board, State Pollution Control Boards/ laboratories under Public Health Centres/ Community Health Centres.   Also, ‘Drinking Water Quality Monitoring & Surveillance Framework’ has been firmed up in consultation with various stakeholders and has been released as a guiding tool for setting up/ strengthening the drinking water quality testing laboratories and providing technical support to implementing agencies for labs institutional framework; required infrastructure, manpower/ experts, equipment, staff qualification & experience; roles & responsibilities of laboratory personnel; laboratory gap assessment & improvement plan; NABL accreditation/ recognition process etc. In order to ensure that the labs are equipped with facilities, States have been advised for accreditation of Drinking Water Quality Testing Laboratories as per IS/ISO/IEC:17025 at least for parameters of basic water quality importance and gradually upgrading to other parameters as per local conditions.  As reported by States/UTs, as on 15.06.2023, there are 2,086 drinking water quality testing laboratories at different levels viz. State, regional/ district, sub-division and/ or block level, mobile level in the country. Out of these, 1,253 laboratories are accredited/ recognized. State/ UT wise list is at Annex-III.  
(OM No.H.11020/1/2023-Parliament-DDWS  Dated: 11thJuly, 2023) 

18 
 
 
Recommendation No. 10  (Para No. 2.10) 
 
Physical performance of SBM(G) II 
 
The Committee note that Open Defecation Free (ODF) sustainability and Solid and Liquid 
Waste Management (SLWM) in the rural areas apart from construction of Individual Household 
Latrines (IHHLs) and Community Sanitary Complexes (CSCs) as per the demand are the main pivots 
of SBM(G) II. However, so far, the performance of phase II of SBM(G) has been lackluster due to 
reasons such as initial planning, not having the required technical competence and prevalence of 
pandemic, etc. As a result, goals in terms of improvement in quantitative (SLWM and construction of 
IHHLs and CSCs) and qualitative (ODF sustainability) indicators, remains to be far from achievement, 
as so far, out of 5,97,399 villages, solid waste management facility has been created in 1,40,213 
villages, liquid waste management facility in 1,50,107 villages and 1,95,647 villages have achieved 
ODF plus status. The Committee note that particularly 10 States/UTs viz. Manipur, Assam, Arunachal 
Pradesh, West Bengal, Punjab,Tripura, Meghalaya, Jharkhand, Maharashtra and Ladakh have 
registered very slow progress under the scheme due to above factors as well as State specific issues 
such as remote areas, difficult terrain, hydro geological conditions, etc. Though the Department has 
taken several steps such as provision of 3% of the programme funds allocated for Information 
Education and Communication (IEC) and capacity building, joint advisories for effective convergence 
at ground level, creation of Master Trainers (MTs) to train on ODF plus and handhold GPs and 
villages to prepare their ODF plus village sanitation plans and implementing them, training and 
orientation programme for State level officials and manual for utilization of 15th Finance Commission 
tied grants, etc. to enable States to implement works for sustainable management of waste and 
maintenance of ODF status, the Committee are of the opinion that there is a need for more proactive 
engagement with States and implementing agencies to speed up the progress for yielding desired 
results. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
DDWS is continuously pursuing with the States and supporting them so that implementation of 
the programme can be speeded up at ground level. Regular review meetings, technical workshops 
with the States/UTs are being conducted. For each State/UT, an officer (at Deputy Secretary and 
Director levels) have been made area officer who regularly gets in touch with the States to review the 
programme and to know the issues being faced by the State/UT in implementation of the programme. 
Secretary (DDWS), Joint Secretary & Mission Director (SBM-G) and area officers in the Department 
regularly undertake visits to the States to see the progress at ground level. The engagement with the 
Stats/UTs is being continuous and vigorous review of implementation of the programme is being done 
through review meetings, reports, MIS etc. 
(OM No.H.11020/1/2023-Parliament-DDWS  Dated: 11thJuly, 2023) 
 
Recommendation No. 11  (Para No. 2.11) 
 
Timely preparation of Annual Implementation Plans (AIPs) 
 
The Committee find that AIPs are the blueprints for impending works to be undertaken in the 
next financial year. They note that consolidated AIPs of the States/UTs were discussed in the 
meetings of Plan Appraisal Committee with individual States in February-March of previous financial 
year. Thereafter, National Scheme Sanctioning Committee of SBM(G) approves the AIP by the 
commencement of the concerned financial year for allocation of funds to the States. They note that 

19 
 
the process of considering Annual Implementation Plans (AIP) for 2023-24 has been started and 
States have been requested to submit AIPs for 2023-24 under SBM(G). However, taking note of the 
fact that there is a big deviation in the activities/projects/works to be undertaken as envisaged under 
AIPs and actual progress of works, the Committee find that these plans are not in tune with ground 
reality. As a result, these plans loose their sanctity, since the initial commitment to take up the 
proposed works visualised during preparation of AIP, is not realised. Since, these plans are an 
amalgamation of Village/Block/District Action Plans, following bottom up approach, the Committee 
believe that monitoring of progress at these levels should be ensured and reasons for deviation, if 
any, should be recorded and redressed at each level. Another important factor in realisation of goals 
as planned under AIPs is timely preparation and approval of AIPs, preferably before the closing of 
financial year so that funds could be released with the commencement of new financial year and the 
projects could be implemented as planned. The Committee therefore, recommend the Department, to 
review the process of AIP formulation to enable release of funds from first week of April. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Meetings of Plan Appraisal Committee to discuss the SBM(G) Annual Implementation Plans 
(AIPs) 2023-24 of all States/UTs were held under the chairmanship of Secretary, DDWS from 
28thFebruary, 2023 to 27th March, 2023 at DDWS, New Delhi. Meeting of National Scheme 
Sanctioning Committee (NSSC) of Phase-II of SBM(G) was held on 28th March, 2023 under the 
Chairmanship of Secretary (DWS) to consider the AIPs of the States/UTs under SBM(G) for 2023-24 
for approval. The AIPs of all the States/UTs were discussed and approved in the meeting held on 
28.03.2023. Hence, the Department has been in the position for releasing funds to the States/UTs 
from the month of April, 2023 onwards. However, release of funds also requires fulfillment of various 
others conditions as per the instruction issued by Ministry of Finance such as meeting requisite 
percentage of expenditure, release of funds from State Treasury to State Nodal Agency, compliances 
of various data entry in PFMS, etc. and conditions given in the scheme guidelines. For this, DDWS is 
regularly pursuing with the States to expedite expenditure and fulfill the requisite conditions for 
release so that the funds can be released to the States at the earliest. 
 
(OM No.H.11020/1/2023-Parliament-DDWS  Dated: 11thJuly, 2023) 
 
Comment of the Committee  
(Please see Para No 14 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
 
Recommendation No. 12  (Para No. 2.12) 
 
Financial performance under SBM(G) II 
 
 The Committee find that the trend of under utilisation during the last three years, highlighted 
by them in their earlier reports on Demands for Grants, has continued to be noticed in 2022-23 as 
well. They note that during the last three years, the Department has not been able to utilise the 
revised budget allocation despite reduction by approximately 60% in the years 2020-21 and 2021-22 
and 69% in 2022-23 at RE stage, while the utilisations were stated to be 82.47% in 2020-21, 51.86% 
in 2021-22 and 57.53% in 2022-23 (till 9 February, 2023). However, around 15 to 17% of this 
utilisation has been towards interest payment for Extra Budgetary Resources (EBR) which was to the 
tune of Rs. 1031.03 (17.18%) in 2020-21, Rs. 1032.89 (17.21%) in 2020-21 and Rs. 771.99 (15.44%) 
in 2022-23 till 9 February, 2023. This shows the effective utilisation of funds has been even lesser. 
Keeping in view the physical and financial performance of phase II of the Scheme, the Committee 
recommend the Department to intensify their efforts on issues/challenges withholding the execution of 

20 
 
works/activities and pursue more vigorously with the concerned agencies and State Governments for 
accomplishment of goals within the targeted period. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
In order to ensure that funds allocated under the programme are utilized by the States/UTs 
efficiently and effectively, detailed discussions were held in March, 2023 with all the States/UTs 
individually on their Annual Implementation Plans (AIPs) for the year 2023-24.  States were advised to 
ensure that the targets set by them are in line with achieving the goal of the programme by the set 
timelines.  Suggestions were also given to the States/UTs for expeditious implementation of the AIP.  
Regular review meetings are also being held regularly with Chief Secretaries and Principal 
Secretaries of the nodal departments in the States/UTs  for expeditious implementation of the 
programme and effective utilization of funds. 
 
(OM No.H.11020/1/2023-Parliament-DDWS  Dated: 11thJuly, 2023) 
 
Comment of the Committee  
(Please see Para No 17 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation No. 14  (Para No. 2.14) 
 
Review of unit assistance for construction of Individual Household Latrines (IHHLs) 
 
The Committee note that for achievement of ODF sustainability, provision for construction of 
IHHLs for left out and new households and construction of CSCs for households who do not have 
adequate space for construction of IHHLs,for floating and migrant population and in places of large 
congregation, has been made in SBM-G Phase-II. They further note that new eligible households (all 
BPL households and identified APL households viz SC/ST households, households with physically 
disabled person, landless labourers with homestead, small and marginal farmers and women headed 
households) are provided incentives up to Rs.12000 for construction of one unit of Individual 
Household Latrine (IHHL). However, in their view, the amount of incentive needs to be increased 
keeping in view the rising input costs and poor economic condition of the targeted beneficiaries as 
stated above, especially after the pandemic when many of them had to suffer economic hardship. In 
this connection, while welcoming the step taken by the Department to ascertain the cost estimation of 
twin pit toilets at present from States across different regions in the country, the Committee hope that 
the Department will review the cost as assured and revise it appropriately to encourage all the above 
categories of Households to build and use their own toilets and bring about behavioural change. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
The department is in process for revision of incentive amount for IHHL.  States were also 
consulted to assess the actual cost of construction of IHHL in their States. Based  on the assessment, 
a proposal for revision of of incentive amount for IHHL will be moved for approval of the Cabinet.  
 
 
(OM No.H.11020/1/2023-Parliament-DDWS  Dated: 11thJuly, 2023) 
 
  

21 
 
Recommendation No. 15  (Para No. 2.15) 
 
Retrofitting of toilets from single pit to Twin Pit 
 
The Committee note that SBM(G) Phase-I emphasised on safe technology choice for 
sanitation. They also note that use of twin-pit technology has been encouraged wherever suitable 
along with the option given to States to choose from other safe technologies as well. The Department 
has informed that there are 73.1 % Twin Pits, 13.5% Septic Tanks and 12.4% Single Pits. Out of 
1,62,237 toilets that have been retrofitted, 97,951 are Single Pits retrofitted to Twin Pits and 64,286 
Septic Tanks have been fitted with Soak Pits. However, the Committee find that there are still many 
States/UTs where majority of the toilets are Single Pits and need to be retrofitted, such as Arunachal 
Pradesh (6.53%), Goa (40.25%), Haryana (28.4%), Himachal Pradesh (0.68%), Karnataka (5.30%), 
Ladakh (2.36%), Meghalaya (34.86%), Mizoram (13.50%), Nagaland (29.49%), Puducherry (32.19%), 
Punjab (16.43%), Rajasthan (36.98%), Sikkim (3.61%) and Uttarakhand (26.87%). They further note 
that funds for this purpose can be utilised from the 15th Finance Commission tied grants and from 
MGNREGS funds which was allowed recently vide order dated 18 January, 2023. The Committee 
hope that with the funding assistance made available through Tied grants and MGNREGS funds, 
retrofitting of the remaining toilets and Septic Tanks will be completed within the stipulated time frame. 
They would like to be apprised of the State/UT wise details of retrofitting work completed within the 
three months of the presentation of this Report. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
The ‘Retrofit to Twin Pit’ Campaign which was launched in a Mission mode by the Department 
of Drinking Water and Sanitation under Swachh Bharat Mission (Grameen) on 2nd October, 2022 for 
onsite and safe treatment of faecal sludge, has now been extended till 30th June, 2023 to enable the 
States/UTs to maximize their outcomes in this regard.   
 
The Campaign has a specific focus on promotion of onsite and safe disposal of faecal sludge 
in rural areas.  The States/UTs have been advised to prioritize the Campaign activities in their 
respective States/UTs viz., retrofitting of single pit toilets into twin pit toilets and constructing a soak 
pit with the septic tank type toilets for safe management of the effluent. 
 
The States/UTs have achieved considerable retrofitting conversion [6,52,765 – Total of Column 
(G) & (I) of Annexure-V] and are likely to achieve the targets under the Campaign in the extended 
period.  It is also encouraging to observe that States have taken initiatives to expedite the progress in 
the campaign mode and have included retrofitting targets in their respective Annual Implementation 
Plan (AIP) for 2023-24. The State/UT wise retrofitting targets achieved as on 31.5.2023 are at 
Annexure-V. 
 
(OM No.H.11020/1/2023-Parliament-DDWS  Dated: 11thJuly, 2023) 
 
Recommendation No. 16  (Para No. 2.16) 
 
Status of Solid and Liquid Waste Management (SLWM) facilities 2.16 The Committee note that 
as on 20th January, 2023, there were 1,08,764 ODF Plus – ‘Aspiring’ villages having arrangements 
for either Solid Waste Management or Liquid Waste Management and 67,071 ODF Plus villages 
(including ‘Rising’ and ‘Model’) which have both solid and liquid waste management facility. However, 
they observe that in terms of targeted number of villages to be covered with SLWM infrastructure, 
only 37.62% of the villages could be equipped with solid waste management facilities, while 51.12 % 

22 
 
of the villages could be covered under liquid waste management facilities. They further note that in 
some States such as Chhattisgarh, Haryana, Jharkhand, Maharashtra, Manipur, Meghalaya, Odisha, 
Punjab, Rajasthan and West Bengal, both Solid and Liquid management works have been 
progressing at a snail’s pace since the year 2020-21. The Department have informed the Committee 
that the projected targets could not be accomplished due to focus on planning during the initial years 
and lack of technical knowhow at the initial stage. Prevalence of Covid-19 pandemic during 2020 and 
2021 also affected the progress ofimplementation. However, as assured, the Committee expect that 
regular engagement, follow up and coordination with the States will be undertaken extensively to 
create the SLWM facilities in all the villages so that the targets of ODF Plus could be achieved by the 
States/UTs by 2024-25. 
 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
DDWS is continuously pursuing with the States and supporting them so that implementation of 
the programme can be speeded up at ground level. Regular review meetings, technical workshops 
with the States/UTs are conducted. For each State/UT, an officer (at Deputy Secretary and Director 
levels) have been made area officer who regularly gets in touch with the States to review the 
programme and to know the issues being faced by the State/UT in implementation of the programme. 
Secretary (DDWS), Joint Secretary & Mission Director (SBM-G) and area officers in the Department 
regularly undertaking visits to the States to see the progress at ground level. The engagement with 
the Stats/UTs is being continuous and vigorous review of implementation of the programme is being 
done through review meetings, reports, MIS etc. 
As reported by the States, till 1stJune, 2023, 1,77,771 (29.97%) villages have been covered with Solid 
Waste Management and 2,64,677 (44.62%) villages have been covered with Liquid Waste 
Management.  Further 3,26,905 (55.11%) villages have declared themselves ODF Plus (Aspiring–
2,29,540; Rising–36,140; Model–61,225).   
 
(OM No.H.11020/1/2023-Parliament-DDWS  Dated: 11thJuly, 2023) 
 
 
  

23 
 
CHAPTER – III 
 RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO 
PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES 
 
 
 
 
 
 NIL 
  

24 
 
CHAPTER – IV  
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE  
 
Recommendation No. 5  (Para No. 2.5) 
   
Special assistance to address resource crunch in States 
 
The Committee note that one of the principal reasons for under utilisation of funds is delay in 
release of matching State share. They find that five States viz. Haryana, Rajasthan, Maharashtra, 
Tamil Nadu and Odisha utilised less than 25% of Central funds while three States of West Bengal, 
Karnataka and Manipur utilised exactly 25% of the Central allocation for implementation of JJM. 
Lesser utilisation of Central funds allocated under JJM has been attributed to States’ inability in 
arranging funds during pandemic and associated lockdowns. The Committee believe that besides 
financial crunch, additional burden due to cost overrun has also handicapped States in releasing 
matching share timely for speedy implementation of projects/works under JJM, a pre requisite to 
achieve 100 percent coverage of Functional Household Tap Connection in rural areas. They note that 
in order to provide financial support to State Governments, Special Assistance from the Ministry of 
Finance (Department of Expenditure) was extended to States for Capital Expenditure with an 
allocation of Rs. 1 lakh crore as 50-year interest free loan, out of which Rs. 4,000 crore has been 
earmarked for works under JJM in 2022-23. They further note that the Department of Expenditure is 
the nodal agency in the matter and the States submit requisite proposals directly to them and as such 
no data for fund utilization under the scheme is maintained in the Department of Drinking Water and 
Sanitation. While praising the much needed step to provide financial succour to States, the 
Committee observe that so far noticeable impact on States’ fund release has not been seen. The 
Committee therefore, recommend the Department to furnish the details of States availing the special 
assistance along with the size of the loan available under this scheme, the amount demanded, 
received and utilised for JJM by each of them since its launch, reasons for not availing, etc. They also 
recommend that Department should urge the States to avail this assistance to enable them to 
implement the JJM works expeditiously.  
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Department of Expenditure, Ministry of Finance is the nodal Department for releasing of special 
assistance to the States. As informed by D/o Expenditure, in 2022-23, an amount of Rs. 1289.80 
Crore has been drawn by 13 States as assistance for Capital Investment under JJM. The details are 
at Annex-I.   
In 2023-24, Ministry of Finance earmarked 20% of funds allocated under Part-I of the Scheme (Rs. 1 
lakh Crore) for Jal Jeevan Mission (JJM) and Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak Yojana. States are being 
encouraged to avail this special assistance for creating rural water supply infrastructure. 
 
(OM No.H.11020/1/2023-Parliament-DDWS  Dated: 11thJuly, 2023) 
 
 
Comment of the Committee  
(Please see Para No 8 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
  

25 
 
Recommendation No. 7  (Para No. 2.7) 
  
Supply of safe drinking water in quality affected habitations 
  
The Committee note that out of 57,539 water quality affected habitations spread over 11 
States, as reported on 15 August, 2019, quality of water supplied in 35,659 habitations have improved 
as on 15 February, 2023. However, 21,880 habitations, out of which 652 habitations are affected with 
arsenic, 461 with Fluoride, 10,325 with Iron, 9,909 with Salinity, 509 with Nitrate and 89 with Heavy 
Metals, are yet to be provided with safe drinking water. While majority of habitations in arsenic and 
fluoride affected water supply areas have been covered with temporary arrangement of safe drinking 
water supply, no such measure has been taken in case of other contaminants. Since other 
contaminants can also cause health hazard, the Committee feel that these areas too need to be 
covered by temporary measures to provide immediate relief to the remaining population living in 50% 
of quality affected habitations. They, therefore recommend the Department to impress upon the 
States the need to take measures which can provide immediate solution such as mobile water 
vans/tankers carrying safe and clean drinking water or installation of small water purification 
dispensers till all such habitants are provided piped drinking water from a good quality source besides 
taking measures for permanent solution of contamination problem under JJM. The Committee would 
also like to be apprised of the details of progress in coverage of quality affected habitations with 
permanent good quality functional tap water supply as on date.  
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Providing potable drinking water to quality-affected habitations is one of the priorities under Jal Jeevan mission. States/ UTs have been advised to plan and implement piped water supply schemes of bulk water transfer based on safe water sources such as surface water sources or alternative safe ground water sources for the villages with water quality issues. As suggested, all States/ UTs have been advised from time to time to ensure expeditious implementation of piped water supply projects to provide potable tap water to every household in all quality-affected habitations. In Annual Action Plan for 2023-24 held in the month of February 
&March, 2023, all States/ UTs have planned to cover all the remaining water quality habitations. A 
weekly progress report for monitoring coverage of water quality affected habitations is reviewed and 
shared with States for expeditious coverage of the remaining habitations. 
 
As planning, implementation and commissioning of piped water supply scheme based on a safe water source may take time, purely as an interim measure, States/ UTs have been advised to install community water purification plants (CWPPs) especially in Arsenic and Fluoride affected habitations to provide potable water to every household at the rate of 8–10 litre per capita per day (lpcd) to meet their drinking and cooking requirements.  As reported by the States/ UTs, the water quality affected habitations have reduced from 21,880 in February, 2023 to 19,085 rural habitations as on 15.06.2023. Further, provision of CWPP has been made in all reported 582 Arsenic–affected and 420 Fluoride-affected habitations. The details of Water quality – affected habitations and their coverage with CWPP as on date is as under and the State/ UT wise details is at Annex-II: 
 
S. No.   Major 
Contaminants  
 No of quality–affected 
rural habitations   
 Covered with short 
term measures/ 
CWPP  
 1.  Fluoride  420  420 

26 
 
 2.   Arsenic  582  582 
 3.   Iron  8,593  4 
 4.   Salinity  8,929  9 
 5.   Nitrate  475  9 
 6.   Heavy Metal  86  58 
Total 19,085  1,123 
  Other Measures taken by the Department under JJM to provide safe drinking water in quality affected rural habitations in the country:  a) In March 2017, to provide potable drinking water to identified 27,544 Arsenic/ Fluoride- affected habitations in the country, National Water Quality Sub-Mission (NWQSM) was launched as part of National Rural Drinking Water Programme (NRDWP) which was subsequently subsumed under JJM. The NWQSM has been closed on 31st March, 2022. As reported by States, safe drinking water has become available in all these identified 27,544 Arsenic/ Fluoride-affected habitations. b) While allocating the funds to States/ UTs in a particular financial year, 10% weightage is given to the population residing in habitations affected by chemical contaminants as on 31st March of the preceding financial year. Besides, the coverage fund provided to the States/ UTs can be utilized for taking up schemes in water quality-affected areas on priority. c) Under Jal Jeevan Mission, as per existing guidelines, Bureau of Indian Standards’ BIS:10500 standards is to be adopted for ensuring safe drinking water supply. States/UTs have been advised to carry out testing of water quality on a periodic basis, i.e. once in a year for chemical and physical parameters, and twice in a year for bacteriological parameters and take remedial action wherever necessary, to ensure that the water supplied to households is of prescribed quality. d) In consultation with various stakeholders, ‘Handbook on Drinking Water Treatment Technologies’ has been released for guidance of officials of States/ UTs presenting therein consolidated details about various technologies available in market for treating different type of contaminants to provide safe drinking water to rural households. This is only suggestive in nature and may serve as a field reference manual. The States may take up appropriate water treatment technology depending upon techno-economic feasibility. 
 
(OM No.H.11020/1/2023-Parliament-DDWS  Dated: 11thJuly, 2023) 
 
 
Comment of the Committee  
(Please see Para No 11 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
 
 
 
 
  

27 
 
Recommendation No. 13 (Para No. 2.13)  
  
Release of State share of funds for various activities under SBM (G) II 
 
The Committee notice that as per the guidelines of the Ministry of Finance regarding procedure 
for release of funds under Centrally Sponsored Schemes, Centre share funds are to be released from 
Treasury to Single Nodal Account (SNA) of the schemes within 21 days of its receipt in the Treasury 
and corresponding State share funds are to be released within 40 days of receipt of Centre share. 
However, as per the facts submitted by the Department, 10 States such as Arunachal Pradesh, Bihar, 
Kerala, Manipur, Mizoram, Nagaland, Sikkim, Rajasthan, Uttar Pradesh, West Bengal have reported 
delays in releasing funds, varying for a period of 67 to 165 days in the year 2022-23, affecting 
execution of projects. Since, timely release of funds from both Central and State Governments can 
only ensure timely utilisation, the Committee would recommend the Department to apprise them 
about the reason and the steps taken to address them including addressing the issue of resource 
crunch of the States. 
 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 The delay for releasing the funds from Treasury to SNA account was taken up with the 
concerned States. So far 5 states have communicated the reason for delay in transfer of funds from 
Treasury to SNA. Details are attached at Annexure-IV 
 
Further,  this department has time and again issued advisory for releasing of funds from 
Treasury to SNA. Now, Ministry of Finance has  decided to charge interest with effect from  
01/04/2023 on the number of days of delay beyond 30 days in transfer of central share to the SNA 
account   @ 7% p.a. No further funds will be released from Centre to States until the earlier released 
funds are transferred from State Treasury to SNA. The instructions of MoF has been communicated 
to Chief Secretaries/ State Finance Secretaries for strict compliance  
 
 
(OM No.H.11020/1/2023-Parliament-DDWS  Dated: 11thJuly, 2023) 
 
 
Comment of the Committee 
(Please see Para No 20 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
 
Recommendation No. 17 (Para No. 2.17) 
 
Plastic waste management in villages 
 
The Committee note that one of the objectives of phase II of SBM(G) is to make villages 
‘visually clean’ by ensuring minimal littering, minimal stagnation of water and no accumulation of 
plastic waste in the form of a dump. The Committee are of the view that plastic waste disposal is one 
of the important dimensions in bringing about cleanliness. They note that to fulfill this objective, GPs 
have been assigned the task of arrangement for door-to-door collection of plastic waste along with 
other waste, segregation & storage of plastic waste at the common village shed constructed/available 
in the village, selling recyclable plastic waste to vendors and sending remaining plastic waste to the 
block level Plastic Waste Management Units (PWMUs). They further note that funding support of Rs. 

28 
 
16 lakhs per block is provided for setting up PWMUs. However, so far 7% of all the blocks in the 
country have been equipped with PWMUs. The Committee are happy to note that amongst all the 
States/UTs, Odisha, Tamil Nadu and Ladakh have made good progress in creating plastic waste 
management facility with 72%, 42% and 48% of the blocks covered respectively in these States. In 
view of the growing menace of plastic wastes which create environmental hazards and also create a 
filthy look in the form of heaps, the Committee recommend for expediting establishment of PWMUs in 
all the blocks of the country to realize the objective of visually clean villages. Also, facility for door to 
door collection of waste and its segregation, being the first step, the Committee recommend for 
creating monitoring mechanism including physical verification of such facility at block/ district level 
officers in those villages which have been certified as ODF plus villages. They would like to be 
apprised of the details of existing ODF plus villages where door to door facility of waste creation and 
segregation has been created, frequency of such collection and verification mechanism for the same. 
 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
As per the Swachh Bharat Mission (Grameen) Phase-II operational guideline, there must be 
one Plastic Waste Management Unit in each block, if clustering is not possible. This was again 
reiterated during the Annual Implementation Plan (AIP) meeting for all States and UTs to have Plastic 
Waste Management Units at the Blocks levels. In AIP of FY 2023-24, States and UTs have planned to 
setup PWMUs/linkages of blocks with urban facilities in over 3700 Blocks. As reported by States on 
IMIS, over 950 blocks in the country have been equipped with Plastic Waste Management Unit 
(PWMU) or linked with Urban Plastic Waste Management Facilities.  State/UT-wise, Total blocks and 
no. of blocks with Plastic Waste Management Unit (PWMU) are at Annexure-V.  
  
States/UTs have been advised via letter no. S-11011/20/2022-SBM-DDWS(Part-4) dated 21st 
June 2022 to carry out mandatory third-party verification for ODF Plus (Model category) villages. The 
States can also undertake supervisory verifications for the ODF Plus villages across all categories 
(Aspiring/Rising/Model) by the officer responsible in the chain of command at Block/District/State 
level. 
 
As reported by States/UTs on IMIS of SBM(G), over 1,32,027 ODF Plus villages are having 
Vehicle for Collection of Waste in the country, where solid waste is being collected from all 
households/common points/community bins at regular intervals. States/UTs have been advised to 
carry out mandatory third-party verification for ODF Plus (Model category) villages. 
 
 
(OM No.H.11020/1/2023-Parliament-DDWS  Dated: 11thJuly, 2023) 
 
Comment of the Committee  
(Please see Para No 23 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
  

29 
 
CHAPTER – V 
 RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLY OF THE 
GOVERNMENT IS STILL AWAITED  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NIL  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi Parbatbhai Savabhai Patel 
2 February,  2024 Chairperson 
13 Magha, 1945 (Saka) Standing Committee on Water Resources 
 
 
  

30 
 
CONFIDE Annexure-I 
NTIAL 
MINUTES OF THE FOURTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON WATER RESOURCES 
(2023-24) HELD ON FRIDAY, 02 FEBRUARY 2024 
  
The Committee sat from 1500 hours to 1530 hours in Committee Room '1', ‘A’ Block, EPHA, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
 Shri Parbatbhai Savabhai Patel      -   
 
MEMBERS 
Chairperson 
 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
  2. Shri Nihal Chand Chauhan 
  3. Smt.  Agatha K. Sangma 
  4. Shri Shivkumar Chanabasappa Udasi 
  5. Shri D. K. Suresh 
  6. Dr. Heena Vijaykumar Gavit 
  7. Shri Pratap Chandra Sarangi 
  8. Shri Hasmukhbhai Somabhai Patel 
  9. Dr. K. Jayakumar 
  10. Shri Bhagirath Choudhary 
  11. Shri Vijay Baghel 
  12. Shri Guman Singh Damor 
  13. Shri P. Ravindhranath 
  14. Shri Dhanush M. Kumar 
  15. Shri Sunil Kumar 
  16. Shri Kuruva Gorantla Madhav 
   
RAJYA SABHA 
  17. Shri H. D. Devegowda 
  18. Shri Pramod Tiwari 
  19. Shri Arun Singh 
  20. Shri Aneel Prasad Hegde  
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Smt. Suman Arora   - Additional Secretary 
2. Shri Ajay Kumar Sood  - Director 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of the Committee. Thereafter, the 
Committee took up for consideration (i) Draft Report on “Review of Upper Yamuna River Cleaning Project 
upto Delhi and River bed management in Delhi”; and (ii) Draft Report on “Action Taken by the Government 
on the observations/recommendations contained in the Twenty First Report of the Committee on the Demands 
for Grants (2023-24)”. After due deliberation, the Committee adopted the aforesaid draft Reports, without any 
modification.   
 
3. The Committee then authorized the Chairperson to present the Reports on their behalf to both the 
Houses of Parliament in the current Session. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
*** 
  

31 
 
ANNEXURE-II 
[Vide Para 4 of the Introduction] 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE RECOMMENDATIONS/ 
OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN THE TWENTY FIRST REPORT (SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
(i) Total number of Recommendations/Observations                  17 
 
(ii) Recommendation/Observations which have been accepted by the Government 
Sl. Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 6, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 14, 15 and 16 
              Total - 13  
       Percentage -76.47% 
 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in  view of the 
Government’s replies 
  
Sl. Nos. NIL                            Total - NIL 
              Percentage- 0%  
 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Government      have not 
been accepted by the Committee 
 
Sl. Nos. 5, 7, 13 and 17  
       
Total - 04 
      Percentage - 23.53 %  
 
(v) Recommendation/Observation in respect of which final reply of the Government is still 
awaited  
 
Sl.  Nos. NIL          
 
Total - NIL 
                Percentage - 0% 
 
 
  
  

32 
 
Annexure-III 
State-wise details of eligible amount as State's share of JJM and the capital expenditure approved 
towards State's share of JJM under Part-I of the Scheme for Special Assistance to States for Capital 
Investment for 2022-23.  
(Rs. in crore) 
S. 
No. 
States Approved Amount 
as State's Share of 
JJM 
Released Amount as 
State's Share of 
JJM 
1 Andhra Pradesh 0.00  0.000 
2 Arunachal Pradesh 100.00  100.000 
3 Assam 0.00  0.000 
4 Bihar 0.00  0.000 
5 Chhattisgarh 118.21  118.210 
6 Goa 26.04  26.040 
7 Gujarat 0.00  0.000 
8 Haryana 0.00  0.000 
9 Himachal Pradesh 0.00  0.000 
10 Jharkhand 350.84  350.840 
11 Karnataka 0.00  0.000 
12 Kerala 72.58  72.580 
13 Madhya Pradesh 0.00  0.000 
14 Maharashtra 177.46  177.460 
15 Manipur 32.13  16.065 
16 Meghalaya 83.00  83.000 
17 Mizoram 37.10  18.550 
18 Nagaland 0.00  0.000 
19 Odisha 0.00  0.000 
20 Punjab 0.00  0.000 
21 Rajasthan 240.00  240.000 
22 Sikkim 10.00  10.000 
23 Tamil Nadu 0.00  0.000 
24 Telangana 0.00  0.000 
25 Tripura 74.12  37.060 
26 Uttar Pradesh 0.00  0.000 
27 Uttarakhand 40.00  40.000 
28 West Bengal 0.00  0.000 
Total 1,361.48  1289.805 
 
 
DDWS’s OM No.H.11020/1/2023-Parliament-DDWS  Dated: 11thJuly, 2023 

33 
 
 
Annexure-IV 
 
State/ UT-wise number of water quality–affected rural habitations (as on 15.06.2023) 
 
S. 
No. State 
Number of water quality–affected habitations 
Total 
water 
quality-
affected  
habitati
ons 
Fluoride Arsenic 
Iron Salinit
y 
Nitrat
e 
Heavy Metal 
Total 
Cove
red 
with 
short 
term 
meas
ures/ 
CWP
P 
Total 
Cover
ed 
with 
short 
term 
measu
res/ 
CWP
P 
Tota
l 
Cover
ed 
with 
short 
term 
measu
res/ 
CWP
P 
1. Arunachal 
Pradesh 0 0 0 0 46 0 0 0 0 46 
2. Assam 0  0 0 0 6,749 0 0 0 0 6,749 
3. Bihar 0  0 0 0 66 0 0 0 0 66 
4. Jharkhand 2  2 0 0 3 0 0 0 0 5 
5. Kerala 4  4 0 0 58 17 8 0 0 87 
6. Lakshadweep 0  0 0 0 0 10 0 0 0 10 
7. Maharashtra 0  0 0 0 6 4 1 0 0 11 
8. Odisha 28  28 0 0 1,118 14 6 0 0 1,166 
9. Punjab 176  176 428 428 3 0 17 86 58 710 
10. Rajasthan 151  151 0 0 4 8,840 436 0 0 9,431 
11. Tripura 0  0 0 0 326 0 0 0 0 326 
12. Uttar Pradesh 20  20 78 78 209 44 6 0 0 357 
13. Uttarakhand 0  0 0 0 2 0 1 0 0 3 
14. West Bengal 39  39 76 76 3 0 0 0 0 118 
 Total 420  420 582 582 8,593 8,929 475 86 58 19,085 
Sources: JJM IMIS           
DDWS’s OM No.H.11020/1/2023-Parliament-DDWS  Dated: 11thJuly, 2023 

34 
 
Annexure-V 
State-wise, reasons for delay in transfer of funds from Treasury to SNA 
S. No.  States No. of Days of 
 pendency  
Reason for delay  
1 Arunachal Pradesh  165  Reply is still awaited 
2 Bihar 77  Reply is still awaited 
3 Kerala 77 Delay due to re-appropriation of the state 
budget allocation for the financial year 
2022–23  
4 Manipur 224 State Finance department verify assets 
constructed through an App called Darpan, 
whole verification process through this app 
takes around 5 months However, in the 
Financial Year, 2022-23, the process got 
delayed, due to the law & order situation in 
the State.  
5 Mizoram  105  Reply is still awaited 
6 Nagaland 70 The State Planning and Coordination 
Department could allocate the state 
matching share and clear the sanction on 
28th Sep, 2022 due to state resource 
constraints   
7 Rajasthan 85  Reply is still awaited 
8 Sikkim 84 After proposal of cabinet in its meeting held 
in 28.11.2022, Sanction sent to treasury for 
release fund & same was credited on 
06.12.2022  
9 Uttar Pradesh 93  Reply is still awaited 
10 West Bengal  67 The delay receiving fund in SNA was due to 
procedural delay in finance department. 
 
 
DDWS’s OM No.H.11020/1/2023-Parliament-DDWS Dated: 11thJuly, 2023 
 
  

35 
 
Annexure-VI 
State/Ut-wise, Total block and no. of blocks with Plastic Waste Management Unit 
(PWMU) 
Sr.No. State/UT Name Total No. of 
Blocks 
Total no of 
PWMU 
1 A & N Islands 7  7 
2 Andhra Pradesh 658  82 
3 Arunachal Pradesh 114  0 
4 Assam 244  18 
5 Bihar 533  54 
6 Chhattisgarh 146  1 
7 D & N Haveli and Daman & Diu 3  0 
8 Goa 12  4 
9 Gujarat 248  9 
10 Haryana 143  13 
11 Himachal Pradesh 77  25 
12 Jammu & Kashmir 285  3 
13 Jharkhand 263  21 
14 Karnataka 232  8 
15 Kerala 152  38 
16 Ladakh 31  15 
17 Lakshadweep 9  0 
18 Madhya Pradesh 313  5 
19 Maharashtra 351  1 
20 Manipur 44  20 
21 Meghalaya 42  2 
22 Mizoram 26  7 
23 Nagaland 74  8 
24 Odisha 314  313 
25 Puducherry 3  0 
26 Punjab 153  2 
27 Rajasthan 352  2 
28 Sikkim 32  2 
29 Tamil Nadu 388  227 
30 Telangana 540  15 
31 Tripura 58  0 
32 Uttar Pradesh 826  13 
33 Uttarakhand 95  15 
34 West Bengal 342  20 
Total:-   7110  950 
 
DDWS’s OM No.H.11020/1/2023-Parliament-DDWS Dated: 11thJuly, 2023 
 
****** 