 
6 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON WATER RESOURCES 
(2024-25) 
                 
         
EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA 
                  
         
                 
MINISTRY OF JAL SHAKTI – DEPARTMENT OF DRINKING WATER AND 
SANITATION  
 
         
         
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2024-25) 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations / 
Recommendations contained in the First Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) 
of the Standing Committee on Water Resources] 
         
         
         
SIXTH REPORT 
  
          
            
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
         
August, 2025 / Sravana, 1947 (Saka) 

SIXTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON WATER RESOURCES 
(2024-25) 
          
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
         
         
         
MINISTRY OF JAL SHAKTI – DEPARTMENT OF DRINKING WATER AND 
SANITATION 
                 
         
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2024-25) 
 
 (Action Taken by the Government on the Observations / 
Recommendations contained in the First Report on ‘Demands for 
Grants (2024-25) of the Ministry of Jal Shakti - 
Department of Drinking Water and Sanitation) 
         
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 11.08.2025 
Laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 11.08.2025 
  
 
  
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
                 
         
August, 2025 / Sravana, 1947 (Saka) 

 
W. R. C.  No. 89 
         
         
         
         
         
         
 
 
         
         
         
Price :  Rs.  
         
         
         
         
         
 
 
 
         
     
                     
 
 
 
         
        © 2025 By Lok Sabha Secretariat 
  
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok 
Sabha  (Sixteenth Edition) and Printed by  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iii) 
 

CONTENTS 
 
  Page  
 
Composition of 
the Committee 
 
……………………………………………………………… (v) 
 
 
 
INTRODUCTION ……………………………………………………………… 
 
(vii) 
 
CHAPTER - I Report……………………………………………………… 
 
1 
CHAPTER – II Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted 
by the Government…………………………… 
 
15 
CHAPTER - III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do 
not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s 
replies……………………………………………………… 
 
39 
CHAPTER - IV Observations/Recommendations in respect  of   which the 
replies of the Government have not been accepted by the 
Committee……………...................................... 
 
40 
CHAPTER - V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final 
replies of the Government are still 
awaited…………………………………………………….. 
 
46 
 ANNEXURES 
 
 
I Status of Pending Clearances for Rural Water Supply 
Projects (As on 02.05.2025) 
47 
 
 
 
II 
 
Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the First 
Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee 
 
 
48 
III Minutes of the 16 th sitting of the Standing Committee on 
Water Resources held on 08.08.2025. 
49 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iv) 
 

COMPOSITION OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON WATER RESOURCES 
(2024-25) 
  
 
Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy  -  Chairperson 
 
 LOK SABHA 
 
 
2.  Shri Narayandas Ahirwar  
3.  Shri Joyanta Basumatary  
4.  Chh. Udayanraje Pratapsinha Maharaj 
Bhonsle 
5.  Shri Isha Khan Choudhury  
6.  Shri Sher Singh Ghubaya  
7.  Shri Bapi Haldar  
8.  Md. Rakibul Hussain  
9.  Smt. Sanjna Jatav  
10.  Shri Sarabjeet Singh Khalsa  
11.  Shri Sagar Eshwar Khandre  
12.  Shri Rodmal Nagar  
13.  Shri Dhaval Laxmanbhai Patel  
14.  Shri Vishaldada Prakashbapu Patil  
15.  Shri Mohite Patil Dhairyasheel Rajsinh  
16.  Shri Dilip Saikia  
17.  Shri Pratap Chandra Sarangi  
18.  Shri Dushyant Singh  
19.  Thiru. Tamilselvan Thanga  
20.  Shri Ashok Kumar Yadav  
21.  Vacant 
 
 
 RAJYA SABHA 
 
22. Dr. Faiyaz Ahmad 
23. Shri Ashokrao Shankarrao Chavan 
24. Smt. Dharmshila Gupta 
25. Smt. Jebi Mather Hisham 
26. Shri Khiru Mahto 
27. Smt. Mausam Noor 
28. Shri Balyogi Umeshnath 
29. Shri  SanjayKumar Jha 
30. Shri Dhairyashil Mohan Patil 
31. Smt. Seema Dwivedi 
 
 
 
 
(v) 
 
 
 

 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Chander Mohan - Additional Secretary 
2. Shri Ajay Kumar Sood - Director 
3. Shri P. Ashok - Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri Umesh Bist - Under Secretary 
5. Shri Gaurav Jain - Assistant Committee Officer 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(vi) 

INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Water Resources (2024-25) having 
been authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present the Sixth  
Report on the Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in their First Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2024-25) 
of the Ministry of Jal Shakti -Department of Drinking Water and Sanitation.  
 
2.  The First Report of the Committee was presented to Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya 
Sabha on 10 February 2025. The Action Taken replies of the Government to all the 
recommendations contained in the Report were received in this Secretariat on 16 May, 
2025. 
 
3.  The replies of the Government were examined and the Report was considered and 
adopted by the Committee at their sitting held on 08.08.2025. 
 
4. An analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the First Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) of 
the Committee is given in Annexure-II. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI        RAJIV PRATAP RUDY, 
 08 August, 2025                                                   Chairperson,                                                                      
17 Sravana,1947 (Saka)   Standing Committee on Water Resources 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(vii) 

1 
 
CHAPTER I 
REPORT 
 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Water Resources (2024-25) deals 
with the action taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in their First Report (18th Lok Sabha) on the Demands for Grants                 
(2024-25) of the Ministry of Jal Shakti – Department of Drinking Water and Sanitation. 
2.  The First Report was presented to Lok Sabha on 10.02.2025 and was laid on the 
Table of Rajya Sabha on 10.02.2025. The Report contained 19 
Observations/Recommendations.  
3. Action Taken Notes in respect of all the 19 Observations/Recommendations of 
the Committee have been received from the Government. These have been examined 
and categorized as follows: - 
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government (Chapter II):  
Recommendation Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 6, 7, 8, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 17, 18 and 19 
       (Total – 16) 
(ii) Observations / Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government’s replies (Chapter III):  
Recommendation Nos. NIL       
     (Total – NIL) 
(iii) Observations / Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee (Chapter IV):  
Recommendation Nos. 5, 9 and 16       
(Total – 03)  
(iv) Observations / Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited (Chapter V):  
Para Nos. NIL        
      (Total – NIL) 
4.  The Committee desire that replies to recommendations made in the Chapter-I of 
this Report may be furnished to the Committee expeditiously.  
 

2 
 
5.  The Committee will now deal with action taken by the Government on some of 
their Observations/Recommendations that require reiteration or merit comments.   
 
A. Slow Rate of Saturation in regard to Har Ghar Jal Status and 
underperforming States/ UTs 
 
Recommendation No.3 
 
6. The Committee was concerned and dismayed that since the launch of Jal Jeevan 
Mission in 2019, only 11 States viz. Andaman & Nicobar Islands, Arunachal Pradesh, 
DNH&DD, Goa, Gujarat, Haryana, Himachal Pradesh, Mizoram, Puducherry, Punjab 
and Telangana had reached their Saturation level by achieving Har Ghar Jal Status.  
 
7. The Committee noted that States had reported that long gestation period of Multi 
Village Schemes, lack of dependable ground water sources in drought-prone & desert 
areas, geogenic contamination, terrain challenges in hilly & forested areas, lack of 
technical capabilities in the States, delay in clearances from nodal agencies, availability 
of matching State share, especially during CoVID-19 pandemic associated lockdown, 
etc. had slowed down the pace of implementation for programme in underperforming 
States.  
 
8. The Committee further noted with concern that the Saturation timelines projected 
by States/UTs to achieve Har Ghar Jal Status would be till 2027, thereby extending the 
original 2024 timeline of JJM by three more years. The Committee also noted that the 
physical progress in the remaining States/UTs range from 96.42% to 53.84%, however, 
the performance of six States viz. Odisha, Andhra Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh, 
Jharkhand, Kerala and Rajasthan were below national average under JJM. 
 
9. The Committee, therefore, recommended that the Department play a more pro-
active role and provide all necessary assistance to all the States/UTs in achieving their 
set goals expeditiously, while focusing on underperforming States/UTs for successful 
implementation of Jal Jeevan Mission. The Committee would like to be apprised of the 
tangible outcome of initiatives taken by the Department in this direction.  
 
 
 

3 
 
 
10. The Department in its action taken note has replied as follows: 
 
“To expedite the planning and implementation, as well as monitoring and 
handhold States/ UTs, Government of India has taken number of steps to 
plan and implement JJM in the whole country which inter alia includes 
discussions and consultation with States/ UTs, regular review of planning 
and implementation, workshops/ conferences/ webinars for capacity 
building and knowledge sharing, field visits by multi-disciplinary team to 
provide technical support, etc. Moreover, for online monitoring, JJM–
Integrated Management Information System (IMIS) and JJM–Dashboard 
has been put in place. Provision has also been made for transparent 
online financial management through Public Financial Management 
System (PFMS). In addition, to expedite the implementation of JJM, this 
department has also taken up SWSM and DWSM dashboards, 
Functionality Assessments and mapping of water pipelines on PM 
Gatishakti portal for effective monitoring of infrastructure created under the 
Mission.  
Further, for extending guidance to States/ UT’s officials and local village 
level functionaries to expand the water quality testing and reporting, 
surveillance of drinking water sources, sanitary surveys, setting up of 
laboratories, etc. Drinking Water Quality Monitoring & Surveillance 
Framework has also been released. States have also been advised to 
formulate a comprehensive O&M Policy inter alia including provisions for 
source sustainability and suitable provisions for development of efficient 
and sustained mechanism for collection of water tariff, finalised by the 
State in consultation with GP/ VWSC/ Pani Samiti. A draft framework for 
the comprehensive O&M Policy has also been shared with the States. So 
far, 20 States have finalized/ notified the O&M Policy and the remaining 
States have been advised to notify the respective O&M Policy before 
30.06.2025. 
 
As a result of above initiatives taken by the department, following progress 
has been done: 
 
(i) Around 20 Lakhs Kms of water pipelines have been uploaded on PM 
Gatishakti portal which is intended to provide multimodal connectivity 
infrastructures to various economic zones.  
 
(ii) To streamline the monitoring of piped water supply schemes, this 
department has developed SWSM dashboard. The dashboard will provide 
the basic information about the PWS, water quality details, functionality 
and financial details at single platform. Due to this development, apart 
from PHE department, O/o Chief Secretary, District Collectors and 
Panchayat Level functionaries will also be able to view/ monitor the 
progress of schemes. 
 
(iii) The field survey for Functionality Assessment of tap connections has been 
completed in 22,812 villages across the country. The findings of the report 
shall be shared with the States/ UTs to take corrective action on the gaps.    
 
(iv) The Department is regularly reviewing the progress with respective District 
Magistrates/ Deputy Commissioners/ Collectors, being head of DWSMs 
on various aspects of progress including scheme completion, HGJ 

4 
 
certification, priority areas, PVTG habitations, coverage of schools and 
anganwadis, O&M etc”.  
 
11. The Department has stated that it has taken number of steps to plan and 
expeditiously implement the JJM in the entire country by monitoring and 
handholding States/UTs. It has furnished number of measures that it has taken 
which inter alia include discussions and consultation with States/ UTs, regular 
review of planning and implementation, workshops/ conferences/ webinars for 
capacity building and knowledge sharing, field visits by multi-disciplinary team to 
provide technical support, etc. Moreover, for online monitoring, JJM–Integrated 
Management Information System (IMIS) and JJM–Dashboard has been put in 
place. Provision has also been made for transparent online financial management 
through Public Financial Management System (PFMS). In addition, to expedite the 
implementation of JJM, this department has also taken up SWSM and DWSM 
dashboards, Functionality Assessments and mapping of water pipelines on PM 
Gatishakti portal for effective monitoring of infrastructure created under the 
Mission. However, the Committee in its 1st Report on DFG (2024-25) of the 
Ministry of Jal Shakti – Department of Drinking Water and Sanitation observed 
that the performance of six States viz. Odisha, Andhra Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh, 
Jharkhand, Kerala and Rajasthan are below national average under JJM. The 
Committee thus once again reiterate that the Department may pay special 
attention to the above underperforming six States and take necessary measures 
to expedite the work relating to JJM in these States.  
 
B. Piped water network-restoration of public infrastructure 
Recommendation NO.4 
12. The Committee note that laying/relaying of pipelines works is being done 
transparently and efforts are being made to put up DPR prepared by the States in Gati 
Shakti portal. States have been advised to ensure minimum damage to existing 
infrastructure such as roads/highways while executing rural water schemes and to 
restore the roads/highways immediately in case of any consequent damage. The 
Committee has also noted that funds available under JJM may be utilized for repairing 
or constructing streets or roads that get affected while laying water supply pipelines and 
States have been making provision for the same in the DPR.  
 
13 The Committee also note that the Apex Committee of the State Water and 
Sanitation Mission headed by the Chief Secretary of the State with Secretaries in-

5 
 
charge of PHE/ Rural Water Supply, Rural Development (RD), Panchayati Raj (PR), 
Primary Education, Health, Finance, Planning, Information and Public Relations and a 
GOI representative as members, have been entrusted with the work of, inter-alia, 
coordination among various Departments and other agencies for convergence and 
successful implementation of the works of the JJM including the restoration of public 
infrastructure damaged during the execution of works under JJM. 
 
14. The Committee has however observed that quality of restoration of public 
infrastructure damaged during execution of works under JJM is substandard in many 
States/UTs and needs visible improvement. The Committee desires to know the 
underlying reasons for such sub-standard restoration work and urge upon the 
Department to take all necessary remedial measures in convergence with other 
stakeholders/implementation agencies in the States/UTs concerned. The Committee is 
also of the firm opinion that since the role of the local elected representatives is vital in 
the welfare measures of the States/UTs, they may also invariably be involved in 
functioning of the Apex Committee of the State Water and Sanitation Mission.  
 
15. The Department in its action taken note has replied as follows: 
 
“To avoid any hardships to the villagers, States have been advised to take 
up rural water schemes in a way with minimum damages to infrastructure 
such as roads/ highways and to restore the roads/ highways immediately 
in case of damages done while laying of pipelines for water supply 
systems. Further, funds available under JJM may be utilized for repairing 
or constructing streets or roads that get affected while laying water supply 
pipelines of rural water supply schemes taken up under JJM. 
As per the JJM Guidelines, the State implementing agencies are to ensure 
the quality of materials used in construction/ restoration of roads etc. by 
getting it certified from accredited testing agencies. Further, under JJM, 
third-party inspection of quality of works undertaken is mandatory before 
making payment to the contractors. Reference for any sub-standard 
restoration work brought to the notice of NJJM are taken up with 
respective States with an advice to take requisite corrective action within a 
month. 
 
The Apex Committee of the SWSM mainly responsible for policy guidance 
and overall planning, strategizing, and implementation of JJM in the State 
of implementation of the Mission. Further, recognizing the key role Hon’ble 
Members of Parliament (MP)/ elected representatives can play in 
mobilizing the local community and empowering them to ensure assured 
piped water supply in rural homes, provisions have been made in the 
implementation of Jal Jeevan Mission to enable their participation to make 
Jal Jeevan Mission truly a people’s movement, i.e. 'Jan Andolan'. In this 
regard, an advisory has been issued to all States/ UTs elaborating the 
roles of MPs wherein States/ UTs have been specifically requested to 
ensure that: 
 

6 
 
i.) Hon’ble MPs are consulted while preparing District Action Plans for 
water supply schemes and are also invited as ‘special invitees’ in all 
the DWSM meetings; 
 
ii.) convening of State/ District level DISHA meeting on regular intervals, 
for monitoring the progress of implementation of JJM; and 
 
iii.) invitation to various official functions organized for bhoomipujan, 
inauguration/ commissioning of schemes, etc. for which district/ 
divisional level officers to be sensitized. 
To instill the sense of ownership among the rural communities and 
Panchayats, the aspects of village level planning and community 
participation in all decisions pertaining to water supply systems have been 
included in the design of JJM. Some of the major initiatives taken up under 
the mission for participation of rural community are listed as under: 
 Around 5.29 lakh sub-committee/ user group of the Gram Panchayats i.e. 
Village Water & Sanitation Committee (VWSC) or Pani Samiti with at least 
50% women members and suitable representation to marginalized 
sections of society, have been constituted to plan, implement, manage, 
operate, and maintain in-village water supply system. 
 Five women are identified and trained from every village for testing the 
water samples through Field Test Kits (FTKs). 
More than 14,000 NGOs/ VOs/ Women SHGs/ CBOs/ Trusts/ Foundations 
referred as ISAs are engaged across the country to facilitate community 
participation at all levels of planning, implementation, management, 
operation and maintenance of in-village water supply systems and 
contribution”. 
16. The Committee are pleased to learn of the initiative taken by the 
Department on the recommendation of the Committee to encourage the role of 
the elected representatives in issuing an ‘Advisory’ to all States/UTs elaborating 
the role of MPs wherein States/UTs have been requested to ensure that Hon’ble 
MPs are consulted while preparing District Action Plans for water supply 
schemes and are also invited as ‘Special Invitees’ in all the District Water and 
Sanitation Mission (DWSM) meetings. However, the Committee further urge the 
Department to ensure that the Hon’ble MPs are aware of this ‘Advisory’ in order 
to encourage their active participation in DWSM meetings, as it has been 
observed that many of the Hon’ble MPs despite issuance of such advisories are 
still unaware of this initiative.  
C. Water Quality issue in Rural Areas 
Recommendation No.5 
17.  The Committee noted that 12,167 rural habitations in different Districts of the 
country were still affected with water contamination despite being priority areas under 
NWQSM launched in 2017 and JJM implemented in 2019. Assam and Rajasthan, two 

7 
 
of the worst water contaminated States would be likely to achieve status of Har Ghar Jal 
by 2026 and 2027 respectively. All NWQSM identified 27,544 Arsenic/Fluoride affected 
habitations had been provided safe drinking water through Community water 
purifications plants as an interim measure. Further, as on 23.10.2024, in 61 identified 
JE/AES affected districts in five States, 80.21% rural household had been provided tap 
water supply.  
 
18.  In a nut shell, as on 23.10.2024, out of around 78.67 lakh rural households in 
water quality affected habitations, more than 52.19 lakh (66.34%) households were 
reported to have tap water supply in their homes and the remaining 26.47 lakh 
households were likely to be covered by the States as per their plans. 
 
19. The Committee were of the firm and considered view that remedial measures to 
address the serious issue of water quality is to be taken by the Department with a sense 
of urgency and seriousness, as continuous use of unsafe drinking water is a serious 
health hazard to millions of people residing in the water quality affected areas. The 
Committee were also of the view that piped water supply is the only solution to tackle 
water quality problems and therefore, a time bound Plan was needed to be put in 
operation in the remaining contamination affected areas to achieve this target. 
Moreover, the Committee also urged the Department to launch a nationwide awareness 
programme to educate rural masses about the hazards of contaminated water by 
involving all stakeholders, i.e., Centre, State, Local Authorities, Civil Society, NGOs, 
etc., active in the field. The Committee desired to be apprised of the measures taken in 
this regard.  
 
20. The Department in its action taken note has replied as follows: 
 
“JJM envisages to provide every rural household with potable water of 
prescribed quality (BIS:10500), on regular and long-term basis through tap 
connection. Further, potable water supply to water quality-affected 
habitations is a priority and efforts are made to ensure safe drinking water 
to all quality-affected villages especially those affected with Arsenic and 
Fluoride contamination through Community Water Purification Plants 
(CWPPs) to meet their drinking and cooking requirements till the 
commissioning of piped water supply scheme based on a safe water 
source. As reported by States, all the Arsenic (314) and Fluoride (250) 
affected habitations have been provided with potable water through 
CWPPs. Thus, as reported by the States/ UTs, all habitations in rural area 
of the country are provided safe drinking water free from Arsenic and 
Fluoride contamination. 

8 
 
Further, as per the Operational Guidelines, States/ UTs can utilize up to 
2% of their annual allocation of funds under JJM for Water Quality 
Monitoring & Surveillance (WQM&S) activities, inter-alia, which includes 
setting up and strengthening of water quality testing laboratories, 
procurement of equipment, instruments, chemicals, glassware, 
consumables, hiring of skilled manpower, surveillance by community using 
field test kits (FTKs), awareness generation, educational programmes on 
water quality, accreditation/recognition of laboratories, etc. 
In every village, 5 persons especially women are being trained for water 
quality testing and reporting. So far, more than 24.80 lakh women have 
been trained in different villages. Moreover, to encourage water quality 
testing to ensure potable drinking water supply, States/ UTs have opened 
all the 2,180 water quality testing laboratories to general public for testing 
of their water samples at a nominal rate. Further, States have been 
advised to utilize services of degree science colleges for drinking water 
samples. In addition, this Department has suggested the nominal rates for 
testing of water samples which are suggestive for all States/ UTs. 
Year-wise details of drinking water samples tested in labs and using FTKs 
are as under: 
 
Year 
No. of samples tested Total no. of 
samples 
Tested in labs using FTKs 
2014-15 40,03,841 27,73,861 67,77,702 
2015-16 38,48,475 20,56,377 59,04,852 
2016-17 39,41,186 10,57,530 49,98,716 
2017-18 40,18,331 11,01,486 51,19,817 
2018-19 39,15,038 11,09,941 50,24,979 
2019-20 42,16,683 8,49,135 50,65,818 
2020-21 49,00,963 38,17,824 87,18,787 
2021-22 41,72,176 25,33,869 67,06,045 
2022-23 62,19,775 96,23,912 1,58,43,687 
2023-24 75,00,041 1,08,54,196 1,83,54,237 
2024-25 82,68,247 93,84,186  1,76,52,433  
2025-26 (As 
on 
01.05.2025) 
3,79,424 3,04,797  6,84,221  
[Source: JJM-IMIS] 
 
A ‘Citizen Corner’ was also developed by the Department on the JJM 
Dashboard. The corner included display of water quality test results in the 

9 
 
public domain to further create awareness and build confidence among 
people about the quality of water supplies through the PWS in rural areas.  
Further, the Department has requested all the stakeholders inter alia 
including Civil Societies, NGOs, SHGs, etc. to come forward and work 
together for generating awareness among rural masses for improved 
Water Quality Management in rural areas. In consultation with various 
stakeholders 'Concise Handbook for Monitoring Water Quality of Piped 
Drinking Water Supply to Rural Households’ has been released in 
December 2024 for guidance to States/ UT’s officials and their parastatal 
organizations for faming their own water quality monitoring and 
surveillance protocol as per their local requirements. 
Further, in collaboration in Ministry of Health & Family Welfare, a Standard 
Operating Procedures for Joint Action on Water Quality Monitoring and 
Health Outcomes was released to all State/ UTs outlining the joint actions, 
roles, and responsibilities at each level between functionaries of drinking 
water supply departments and health departments at the 
State/District/Village level, by engagement of the officials and staff mainly 
of Public Health Engineering Department (PHED)/ Rural Water Supply 
(RWS) department, and Health in the States/UTs for timely detection, 
prevention, management, and control of water-related diseases due to 
biological and chemical contaminants and their related health impacts 
through joint monitoring, preparedness, and timely response. 
Moreover, in association with NITI Aayog, Jal Utsav wasorganized in 20 
Aspirational Districts/Blocks from 6th to 20 th November, 2024 for 
encouraging community participation in preservation and protection of 
water resources and instilling a sense of responsibility towards efficient 
water use among households and water management among utilities and 
agencies. In this initiative, school students are being enrolled in water 
management activities, empowering them to act as catalysts for change 
within their families and communities”. 
 
21. The Committee in its 1st Report on DFG (2024-25) of the Ministry of Jal 
Shakti – Department of Drinking Water and Sanitation observed that piped water 
supply is the only solution to tackle water quality problems and therefore desired 
that a time bound Plan be put in operation in the water contamination affected 
areas to achieve this target. The Department in its Action Taken Replies has 
stated that efforts are made to ensure safe drinking water to all quality-affected 
villages especially those affected with Arsenic and Fluoride contamination, 
through Community Water Purification Plants (CWPPs) to meet their drinking and 
cooking requirements till the commissioning of piped water supply scheme 
based on a safe water source. It has further stated that as reported by States, all 
the Arsenic (314) and Fluoride (250) affected habitations have been provided with 
potable water through CWPPs. Thus, as reported by the States/ UTs, all 
habitations in rural area of the country are provided safe drinking water free from 
Arsenic and Fluoride contamination. However, in this regard, the Committee 

10 
 
observe that the Replies of the Department remain silent on the time bound plan 
or roadmap for providing piped water supplies to the areas which are also 
contaminated by other pollutants like Iron, Salinity, Nitrate, and Heavy metals and 
may cause health hazards. In view of this, the Committee once again recommend 
preparation and implementation of time bound plan for providing potable drinking 
water through pipelines to contamination affected areas. 
D. Operational and Maintenance work 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO.7 
 
22. The States/ UTs had been advised to meet O&M cost and sustainability of rural 
water supply infrastructure through various measures as prescribed in the operational 
guidelines of JJM. For long term sustainability, a comprehensive O&M policy including 
features such as, handing over of schemes to Panchayats/Pani Samitis, user charges, 
sufficient financing specially to cover expenses on account of energy bills, skilling, and 
deployment of local persons for O&M and water quality surveillance activities, is being 
put in place by States/UTs. However, as reported, only 12 States/UTs had notified O&M 
policies for sustainability of rural water infrastructure. States which were lagging behind, 
have attributed i) Lack of institutional capacity, ii) Financial Constraints and iii) 
Coordination Challenges, as factors adversely affecting timely formulation and 
functionality of O&M policies. The Committee failed to comprehend the reasons for such 
dismal efforts shown by the States in notification of their O&M policies. The Committee 
expressed concern over the approach shown by the Department, whereby all 
responsibilities for O&M were shifted to the States, despite being aware that an effective 
O&M policy is essential for long term sustainability of JJM. The Committee also 
expressed concern over lack of a comprehensive O&M policy even though JJM is in its 
fifth year of implementation having achieved the milestone of providing tap water 
connections to about 78.74% rural households in the country. The Committee also took 
a note of the situation that Financial constraints is a significant concern for many States 
proving to be a hurdle in notifying their O&M policy despite all the available 
arrangements provisioned under JJM by the Government of India. The Committee, 
therefore, recommended that the Department take pro-active measures and provide all 
necessary assistance to the States/UTs in notifying their O&M policy at the earliest and 
its successful implementation at ground level. The Committee might be apprised of the 
measures taken in this regard.  
 

11 
 
 
23. The Department in its action taken note has replied as follows: 
“For long term sustainability, a comprehensive O&M policy including 
features such as, handing over of schemes to Panchayats/ Paani Samitis, 
provisions for source sustainability and suitable provisions for 
development of efficient and sustained mechanism for collection of water 
tariff finalized by the State in consultation with GP/ VWSC/ Pani Samiti, 
sufficient financing specially to cover expenses on account of energy bills, 
skilling, and deployment of local persons for O&M and water quality 
surveillance activities, should be put in place by States/UTs. A draft 
framework for the comprehensive O&M Policy has also been shared with 
the States. So far, 20 States have finalized/ notified the O&M Policy and 
the remaining States have been advised to notify the respective O&M 
Policy before 30.06.2025. Further, a diagnostic matrix consisting of 19 
major components of the Model O&M Policy have also been shared with 
States to assess readiness of the State/ UT to effectively/ efficiently 
operate, manage and sustain the rural PWSs against different anticipated 
incidents/ parameters of operation and maintenance phase.  
 
Moreover, linking of notification of O&M Policy of the respective State to 
release of central grants-in-aid under JJM, proposed for extended phase 
of implementation of the Mission, is also under consideration of this 
Department”. 
 
24. The Committee are pleased to learn that so far, 20 States have finalized/ 
notified the O&M Policy and the remaining States have been advised to notify the 
respective O&M Policy before 30.06.2025. The Committee are of the view that for 
long term sustainability of the JJM, a comprehensive O&M policy is essential. In 
this regard, the Committee also note that linking of notification of O&M Policy of 
the respective State to release of central grants-in-aid under JJM, proposed for 
extended phase of implementation of the Mission, is also under consideration of 
the Department. The Committee believe that tying the notification of the O&M 
Policy with the release of central grants may go a long way in establishing a 
strong O&M mechanism in place and hence urge the Department to take all 
required steps to implement it on priority basis.  
 
E. Water Quality Monitoring and Surveillance 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO.9 
 
25. The Committee noted that as per operational guidelines for implementation of 
mission, every State/ UT had to identify and train 5 persons preferably women in each 
village viz. ASHA workers, health workers, VWSC members, teachers, etc. to conduct 
water quality testing using Field Testing Kits (FTKs)/bacteriological vials at village level. 

12 
 
States/ UTs had been advised to take requisite measures for making available 
adequate number of FTKs/ bacteriological vials at village level. As reported by States/ 
UTs, so far, as on 23.10.2024, 24.72 lakh women from 5.07 lakh villages had been 
trained for water quality testing using FTKs. Further, under JJM, up to 2% of the 
allocation to States/ UTs could be utilized for Water Quality Monitoring and Surveillance 
(WQM&S) activities, including for procurement of FTKs /H2S vials. The States had been 
advised to enable the public to get their water samples tested at laboratories at nominal 
rates which is recommended as Rs.600/- for 16 different parameters. 
 
26. The Committee while appreciating the fact that, about 5.07 lakh villages had 
trained 24.72 lakh women for water quality testing using FTKs, desired to know the 
ground reality of the progress made and whether any assessment has been made to 
ascertain the veracity of information uploaded by the States/UTs on JJM-Integrated 
Management Information System (IMIS) in this regard. The Committee were of the view 
that although 2% of the allocation to States/UTs could be utilized for WQM&S activities 
including procurement of FTKs/H2S vials, it was not a mandatory requirement and may 
not be used for the designated purpose by any State/UT. In such a scenario, the 
Committee apprehended the efficacy of WQM&S activities and water quality testing 
using FTKs and recommend the Department to revise operational guidelines of JJM 
suitable for ensuring the earmarked 2% allocation be mandatorily used, only for the 
designated purpose.  
 
27. The Department in its action taken note has replied as follows: 
 
“Under JJM, States/ UTs can utilize upto 2% of their annual allocation of 
funds for Water Quality Monitoring & Surveillance (WQM&S) activities 
inter alia which includes setting up and strengthening of water quality 
testing laboratories, procurement of equipment, instruments, chemicals, 
glassware, consumables, hiring of skilled manpower, surveillance by 
community using field test kits (FTKs), awareness generation, educational 
programmes on water quality, accreditation/recognition of laboratories, 
etc. As such, States as per their requirements may take up various 
activities under WQMS. 
 
Department has been regularly reviewing the progress made by the States 
under various WQM&S activities from time to time. Further, for water 
quality surveillance, a thorough & dedicated online portal Water Quality 
Management Information System (WQMIS) has been put in place where 
the details of water samples collected, tested along with details of 
contamination found and remedial action taken is reported on daily basis. 
Further, tagging of the water sample collected for testing to 
household/location to ensure effective remedial measures is also 
proposed during the extended phase of the mission”. 

13 
 
 
28. The Committee observe that the Department has cited number of steps 
being taken by it for water quality monitoring and surveillance. However, the 
Committee note that the Reply of the Department has not furnished specific reply 
regarding the observation made by the Parliamentary Committee in its 1st Report 
on DFG (2024-25) of the Ministry of Jal Shakti – Department of Drinking Water and 
Sanitation on the aspect of ascertaining the veracity of the information uploaded 
by the States/UTs on JJM-Integrated Management Information System (IMIS). 
Being aware of the fact that actual veracity of uploaded information is essential 
for realizing the actual ground situation and filling the visible gaps, the 
Committee reiterate its recommendation that the Department makes sincere 
efforts to ensure the authenticity of the data being fed on the IMIS.  
F. The Number of Individual Household Latrines (IHHLs) and Community 
Sanitary Complexes (CSCs) and incentives for IHHLs 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO.16 
 
29. The Committee observed that there was a reduction in the number of Individual 
Household Latrines(IHHLs) and Community Sanitary Complexes(CSCs) constructed 
during FY 2021-22 to FY 2023-24 in comparison to the year FY 2020-21. The reasons 
for construction of substantial number of IHHLs in FY 2020-21 was attributed to the fact 
that majority of the left out households were identified post achievement of ODF status 
on be basis of base-line survey carried out in 2020-21.  The department had been 
constantly asking the States/UTs to continue the Sanitation campaign so that no one is 
left behind and newly emerging households gets IHHLs.  However, the Committee felt 
that as the deadlines of the Mission was fast approaching, there was an urgent need for 
a renewed base-line survey in order to identify the left out households in order to avoid 
any gap in the implementation of the Mission. 
 
30. Further, the Committee vide its earlier recommendations, having noted that an 
incentive of Rs.12,000/- for construction of one unit of Individual Household Latrine 
(IHHL) is being provisioned under SBM(G) to BPL and identified above poverty line 
households, had opined on the department the need to review and revise the per unit 
assistance appropriately in rural areas. Keeping in view the fact that the incentive 
amount of Rs. 12000/- per unit of IHHL was based on assessment of 2014, the 
Committee, therefore, reiterated its stand and recommend that the department consider 
revision of the incentive for IHHLs based on the present rate of inflation. 

14 
 
 
31. The Department in its action taken note has replied as follows: 
 
“Presently, the incentive of IHHLs under SBM(G) Phase-II is Rs. 12,000/-.  
The recommendation of the Standing Committee has been noted. Any 
changes in the incentive will be brought to the notice of the Committee”. 
 
32. The Committee in its 1st Report on DFG (2024-25) of the Ministry of Jal 
Shakti – Department of Drinking Water and Sanitation recommended the 
Department to consider revision of the incentive of Rs. 12,000/- being given for 
construction of one unit of Individual Household Latrine (IHHL) which was based 
on assessment of the year 2014. However, the Committee note that in this regard, 
the Department through its Action Taken Replies has merely stated that the said 
recommendation of the Committee has been noted. The Committee are not 
satisfied with the reply of the Department especially in view of the fact that the 
Parliamentary Committee has raised this issue from time to time and urged the 
Department to reconsider the incentive amount. Taking cognizance of the fact 
that this amount was fixed way back on the year 2014 assessment, and since then 
cost of construction materials and other inputs has increased substantially, the 
Committee once again urge the Department to take necessary steps in this regard 
so that the objective of the Mission to ensure that all rural families have access to 
toilets may be achieved. 
  

15 
 
CHAPTER II 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT 
 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO.1 
 
 
Analysis of Demands 
 
The Committee note that the Department of Drinking Water and Sanitation has 
been entrusted with the responsibility of implementing two major Centrally Sponsored 
Schemes, i.e., Jal Jeevan Mission (JJM) erstwhile National Rural Drinking Water 
Programme (NRDWP) and Swachh Bharat Mission (Gramin) through which support is 
extended to the State Governments in their endeavor to provide safe and adequate 
piped drinking water to every household in rural areas within the targeted period and 
also provide rural sanitation infrastructure. Hence, the budgetary planning of the 
Department spins around these two Schemes.  
 
The Committee further note that an amount of Rs. 77,390.68 crore has been 
allocated for the Department of Drinking Water and Sanitation for the Financial Year 
2024-25. This is an increase of Rs.167.68 crore over the Budget Estimate of 2023--
2024 and Rs. 358.03 crore over the Revised Estimate of 2023-2024. The Committee 
also find that Rs. 70,162.90 crore and Rs. 7192.00 crore has been allotted at BE stage 
for JJM and SBM(G) respectively during the fiscal year 2024-25. The said allocation is 
almost identical to the last fiscal year 2023-24.  
 
The Department reveals that against the demand for allocation of an amount of 
Rs. 1,00,000 crore, an amount of Rs.70,162.90 crore has been allocated under JJM at 
BE stage for 2024-25. Further, Ministry of Finance has restricted the utilization of 
Rs.22,964 Crore considering the total approved outlay of Central share of Rs. 2,08,652 
Crore as per the Cabinet approval for restructuring the subsuming of erstwhile NRDWP 
into JJM in August, 2019. Henceforth, budgetary allocation of this fiscal year is 
effectively short by Rs.52,801 crore.  
 
Further, the Committee has noted that under SBM(G)-II, Rs. 16,088.08 crore was 
projected in Annual Implementation Plan for 2024-25. Considering the fact that, States 
also have to contributes their shares (in proportion of Centre-States shares of 90:10 for 
North-Eastern States, Himachal Pradesh, Uttarakhand and UT of J&K, 100% from 
Centre to remaining UTs and 60:40 for other States), the Committee apprehend that the 

16 
 
present allocation for fiscal year 2024-25 of Rs. 7,192 crore may be inadequate to meet 
the planned targets of the States/UTs. 
 
The Committee is aware that the Department may be seeking additional 
allocation of funds through Supplementary Grants, if required, based on the 
performance and requirements of the States during 2024-25. 
 
While adequate finance is crucial for the expeditious implementation of both the 
aforesaid Schemes, the Committee also expresses concern over the increasing liability 
created by the arrangement of Extra Budgetary Resources. This aspect needs to be 
looked into while working out the budgetary provisions. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend the Government to take up this matter with the Ministry of Finance - 
Department of Expenditure and ensure provision of adequate budgetary resources to 
enable the Department of Drinking Water and Sanitation to achieve all its intended 
objectives at the earliest. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Jal Jeevan Mission (JJM) 
 
In August 2019, Cabinet approved restructuring and subsuming of erstwhile 
National Rural Drinking Water Programme (NRDWP) into Jal Jeevan Mission – ‘Har 
Ghar Nal Se Jal’ with an aim to provide the Functional Household Tap Connection to 
every rural household by 2024. The estimated outlay of the mission was of Rs. 3.60 
lakh Crore, out of which Central share was Rs. 2.08 lakh Crore. Almost entire Central 
share approved by the Cabinet, without any Extra Budgetary Resources (EBR), has 
been released to the eligible States, though additional funds are required for completion 
of the approved schemes.  
 
Further, Hon'ble Finance Minister during her budget speech 2025- 26 has 
announced extension of Jal Jeevan Mission until 2028 with an enhanced total outlay. 
Accordingly, Department is actively considering the proposal for continuation of JJM 
beyond the approved period and outlay. In 2025-26, an amount of Rs. 67,000 Crore has 
been allocated for implementation of the Mission. 
 
Swachh Bharat Mission (Grameen) (SBM-G) 
 
Under Swachh Bharat Mission (Grameen) [SBM(G)] Extra Budgetary Resources 
(EBR) of Rs. 12298.20 crore was raised in 2018-19 and 2019-20 in seven tranches 
through NABARD as per the Budget Announcement and Letter of Authorization (LoA) 
issued by Ministry of Finance after obtaining the approval of the Cabinet. As per the LoA 
issued by Ministry of Finance and accordingly as per the MoA signed between DDWS, 

17 
 
NABARD and SPM-NIWAS (the receptacle agency for the servicing the EBR and its 
interest), the EBR principle amount to be repaid after 10 years in single bullet payment 
and till then the semi-annual interest is to be paid to the NABARD for the outstanding 
EBR amount. Accordingly, interest for the above EBR amount is paid to NABARD from 
the budget allocated to DDWS in each financial year. No EBR was raised under 
SBM(G) after 2019-20. Any requirements of funds for the programme is demanded by 
DDWS through Budget Estimate and supplementary grants as required. 
 
[OM No. H-11021/1/2024-Parliament-DDWS (E-file No.28076)Dated: 16thMay, 2025] 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO.2 
 
Under-utilization of funds under Jal Jeevan Mission scheme 
 
The Committee note that the financial performance of JJM during the current FY 
2024- 25 has not been encouraging. For the current fiscal year Rs. 70,162.90 Crore 
was allocated and the so far (as on 22.10.2024) an amount of Rs. 21,554.09 Crore i.e. 
30.72 % of total allocation has only been utilized. Central-State fund utilization is 
Rs.53,236.15 Crore in 2024- 25 (as on 23.10.2024) which is the lowest in comparison to 
the last two fiscal years.  
 
While analyzing State-wise financial performance, the Committee find that out of 
the total of 4.09 Crore remaining households, 3.96 Crore households are in 13 major 
States (viz. Andhra Pradesh, Assam, Chhattisgarh, Jharkhand, Karnataka, Kerala, 
Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Odisha, Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu, Uttar Pradesh and 
West Bengal) who seem to be lagging behind, in achieving the targets and objective of 
JJM and the total expenditure and funds drawn by these States out of Central Share, as 
on date in comparison to the last fiscal year, is not encouraging and may not result in 
helping them to achieve their targets expeditiously. 
 
 Taking cognizance of this issue, the Committee recommend that the Department 
make concerted efforts in close coordination with the States and implementing agencies 
to expedite their efforts in order to achieve the targets and objectives of JJM in a time 
bound manner by fully utilizing the allocated funds during the current fiscal year.  
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
As stated above, almost entire fund approved and allocated till March 2025 has 
been released to the eligible States and reported as utilized. A budgetary provision of 
Rs. 67,000 Crore has been made by Ministry of Finance for implementation of the 

18 
 
Mission in 2025-26. The Department is in process of obtaining approval for the 
proposed continuation of JJM during the extended period with enhanced total outlay.  
 
Significant progress has been made in the State since the launch of Jal Jeevan 
Mission, towards enhancing access to tap water to rural households. At the time of 
announcement of Jal Jeevan Mission in August 2019, 3.23 Crore (16.71%) rural 
households were reported to have tap water connections in the country. So far, as 
reported by States/ UTs as on 02.05.2025, around 12.37 Crore additional rural 
households have been provided with tap water connections under JJM. Thus, as on 
02.05.2025, out of 19.36 Crore rural households in the State, more than 15.60 Crore 
(80.58%) households are reported to have tap water supply in their homes and the 
remaining 3.76 Crore households are likely to be covered by the States as per their 
plans during the envisaged timelines of December, 2028. For expeditious achievement 
of envisaged objectives, Department is closely monitoring and reviewing the progress 
made by the States exhaustively. 
 
[OM No. H-11021/1/2024-Parliament-DDWS (E-file No.28076)Dated: 16thMay, 2025] 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO.3 
 
Slow Rate of Saturation in regard to Har Ghar Jal Status and underperforming 
States/ UTs 
 
The Committee is concerned and dismayed that since the launch of Jal Jeevan 
Mission in 2019, only 11 States viz. Andaman & Nicobar Islands, Arunachal Pradesh, 
DNH&DD, Goa, Gujarat, Haryana, Himachal Pradesh, Mizoram, Puducherry, Punjab 
and Telangana have reached their Saturation level by achieving Har Ghar Jal Status.  
 
The Committee note that States have reported that long gestation period of Multi 
Village Schemes, lack of dependable ground water sources in drought-prone & desert 
areas, geogenic contamination, terrain challenges in hilly & forested areas, lack of 
technical capabilities in the States, delay in clearances from nodal agencies, availability 
of matching State share, especially during CoVID-19 pandemic associated lockdown, 
etc. have slowed down the pace of implementation for programme in underperforming 
States.  
 
The Committee further note with concern that the Saturation timelines projected 
by States/UTs to achieve Har Ghar Jal Status would be till 2027, thereby extending the 
original 2024 timeline of JJM by three more years. The Committee also note that the 
physical progress in the remaining States/UTs range from 96.42% to 53.84%, however, 

19 
 
the performance of six States viz. Odisha, Andhra Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh, 
Jharkhand, Kerala and Rajasthan are below national average under JJM. 
 
The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Department play a more pro-
active role and provide all necessary assistance to all the States/UTs in achieving their 
set goals expeditiously, while focusing on underperforming States/UTs for successful 
implementation of Jal Jeevan Mission. The Committee would like to be apprised of the 
tangible outcome of initiatives taken by the Department in this direction.  
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
To expedite the planning and implementation, as well as monitoring and 
handhold States/ UTs, Government of India has taken number of steps to plan and 
implement JJM in the whole country which inter alia includes discussions and 
consultation with States/ UTs, regular review of planning and implementation, 
workshops/ conferences/ webinars for capacity building and knowledge sharing, field 
visits by multi-disciplinary team to provide technical support, etc. Moreover, for online 
monitoring, JJM–Integrated Management Information System (IMIS) and JJM–
Dashboard has been put in place. Provision has also been made for transparent online 
financial management through Public Financial Management System (PFMS). In 
addition, to expedite the implementation of JJM, this department has also taken up 
SWSM and DWSM dashboards, Functionality Assessments and mapping of water 
pipelines on PM Gatishakti portal for effective monitoring of infrastructure created under 
the Mission.  
Further, for extending guidance to States/ UT’s officials and local village level 
functionaries to expand the water quality testing and reporting, surveillance of drinking 
water sources, sanitary surveys, setting up of laboratories, etc. Drinking Water Quality 
Monitoring & Surveillance Framework has also been released. States have also been 
advised to formulate a comprehensive O&M Policy inter alia including provisions for 
source sustainability and suitable provisions for development of efficient and sustained 
mechanism for collection of water tariff, finalised by the State in consultation with GP/ 
VWSC/ Pani Samiti. A draft framework for the comprehensive O&M Policy has also 
been shared with the States. So far, 20 States have finalized/ notified the O&M Policy 
and the remaining States have been advised to notify the respective O&M Policy before 
30.06.2025. 
 
As a result of above initiatives taken by the department, following progress has 
been done: 

20 
 
(v) Around 20 Lakhs Kms of water pipelines have been uploaded on PM Gatishakti 
portal which is intended to provide multimodal connectivity infrastructures to various 
economic zones.  
 
(vi) To streamline the monitoring of piped water supply schemes, this department has 
developed SWSM dashboard. The dashboard will provide the basic information 
about the PWS, water quality details, functionality and financial details at single 
platform. Due to this development, apart from PHE department, O/o Chief 
Secretary, District Collectors and Panchayat Level functionaries will also be able to 
view/ monitor the progress of schemes. 
 
(vii) The field survey for Functionality Assessment of tap connections has been 
completed in 22,812 villages across the country. The findings of the report shall be 
shared with the States/ UTs to take corrective action on the gaps.    
 
(viii) The Department is regularly reviewing the progress with respective District 
Magistrates/ Deputy Commissioners/ Collectors, being head of DWSMs on various 
aspects of progress including scheme completion, HGJ certification, priority areas, 
PVTG habitations, coverage of schools and anganwadis, O&M etc.  
 
[OM No. H-11021/1/2024-Parliament-DDWS (E-file No.28076)Dated: 16thMay, 2025] 
 
Comment of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 11 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO.4 
 
Piped water network-restoration of public infrastructure 
 
The Committee note that laying/relaying of pipelines works is being done 
transparently and efforts are being made to put up DPR prepared by the States in Gati 
Shakti portal. States have been advised to ensure minimum damage to existing 
infrastructure such as roads/highways while executing rural water schemes and to 
restore the roads/highways immediately in case of any consequent damage. The 
Committee has also noted that funds available under JJM may be utilized for repairing 
or constructing streets or roads that get affected while laying water supply pipelines and 
States have been making provision for the same in the DPR.  
 

21 
 
The Committee also note that the Apex Committee of the State Water and 
Sanitation Mission headed by the Chief Secretary of the State with Secretaries in-
charge of PHE/ Rural Water Supply, Rural Development (RD), Panchayati Raj (PR), 
Primary Education, Health, Finance, Planning, Information and Public Relations and a 
GOI representative as members, have been entrusted with the work of, inter-alia, 
coordination among various Departments and other agencies for convergence and 
successful implementation of the works of the JJM including the restoration of public 
infrastructure damaged during the execution of works under JJM. 
 
The Committee has however observed that quality of restoration of public 
infrastructure damaged during execution of works under JJM is substandard in many 
States/UTs and needs visible improvement. The Committee desires to know the 
underlying reasons for such sub-standard restoration work and urge upon the 
Department to take all necessary remedial measures in convergence with other 
stakeholders/implementation agencies in the States/UTs concerned. The Committee is 
also of the firm opinion that since the role of the local elected representatives is vital in 
the welfare measures of the States/UTs, they may also invariably be involved in 
functioning of the Apex Committee of the State Water and Sanitation Mission.  
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
To avoid any hardships to the villagers, States have been advised to take up 
rural water schemes in a way with minimum damages to infrastructure such as roads/ 
highways and to restore the roads/ highways immediately in case of damages done 
while laying of pipelines for water supply systems. Further, funds available under JJM 
may be utilized for repairing or constructing streets or roads that get affected while 
laying water supply pipelines of rural water supply schemes taken up under JJM. 
As per the JJM Guidelines, the State implementing agencies are to ensure the 
quality of materials used in construction/ restoration of roads etc. by getting it certified 
from accredited testing agencies. Further, under JJM, third-party inspection of quality of 
works undertaken is mandatory before making payment to the contractors. Reference 
for any sub-standard restoration work brought to the notice of NJJM are taken up with 
respective States with an advice to take requisite corrective action within a month. 
 
The Apex Committee of the SWSM mainly responsible for policy guidance and 
overall planning, strategizing, and implementation of JJM in the State of implementation 
of the Mission. Further, recognizing the key role Hon’ble Members of Parliament (MP)/ 
elected representatives can play in mobilizing the local community and empowering 
them to ensure assured piped water supply in rural homes, provisions have been made 

22 
 
in the implementation of Jal Jeevan Mission to enable their participation to make Jal 
Jeevan Mission truly a people’s movement, i.e. 'Jan Andolan'. In this regard, an 
advisory has been issued to all States/ UTs elaborating the roles of MPs wherein 
States/ UTs have been specifically requested to ensure that: 
 
iv.) Hon’ble MPs are consulted while preparing District Action Plans for water supply 
schemes and are also invited as ‘special invitees’ in all the DWSM meetings; 
 
v.) convening of State/ District level DISHA meeting on regular intervals, for 
monitoring the progress of implementation of JJM; and 
 
vi.) invitation to various official functions organized for bhoomipujan, inauguration/ 
commissioning of schemes, etc. for which district/ divisional level officers to be 
sensitized. 
To instill the sense of ownership among the rural communities and Panchayats, 
the aspects of village level planning and community participation in all decisions 
pertaining to water supply systems have been included in the design of JJM. Some of 
the major initiatives taken up under the mission for participation of rural community are 
listed as under: 
 Around 5.29 lakh sub-committee/ user group of the Gram Panchayats i.e. Village 
Water & Sanitation Committee (VWSC) or Pani Samiti with at least 50% women 
members and suitable representation to marginalized sections of society, have 
been constituted to plan, implement, manage, operate, and maintain in-village 
water supply system. 
 Five women are identified and trained from every village for testing the water 
samples through Field Test Kits (FTKs). 
 More than 14,000 NGOs/ VOs/ Women SHGs/ CBOs/ Trusts/ Foundations 
referred as ISAs are engaged across the country to facilitate community 
participation at all levels of planning, implementation, management, operation 
and maintenance of in-village water supply systems and contribution. 
 
[OM No. H-11021/1/2024-Parliament-DDWS (E-file No.28076)Dated: 16thMay, 2025] 
 
Comment of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 14 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
 
 

23 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO.6 
 
Sustaining water availability/sources of water for Jal Jeevan Mission 
 
The Committee notes that under JJM it is envisaged that 55 liters of potable tap 
water per household is being provided to 78.74% rural households as on 23.10.2024. 
The major sources for water under JJM are 52% Ground water and 48% Surface Water. 
The Committee are of the view that post implementation phase of JJM, long time 
sustainability of water source is paramount for the success of the Mission and desire 
that the department should make concerted efforts in coordination with State 
Governments to formulate schemes/strategy for Water conservation in rural 
areas.Furthermore, the Committee stresses the need for revival and rejuvenation of 
traditional water bodies in rural areas including bore-wells, rain water harvesting, 
recharging of ground water, desilting of water bodies, innovative methods to conserve 
excess water during seasonal floods, technological intervention to identify dark 
block/water stressed areas and integrated approach to address water scarcity in these 
areas. The Committee, therefore, desires that a coordinated approach taking onboard 
all stakeholders and educating rural masses on the importance of water conservation, 
revival and rejuvenation of traditional water bodies is vital to attain assured supply of 
water in all rural habitations. The Committee may be apprised of the measures taken in 
this regard.  
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 Under the Mission, States have been advised for source recharging, viz. 
dedicated bore well recharge structures, rainwater recharge, rejuvenation of existing 
water bodies, reuse of greywater, etc., in convergence with other schemes such as 
MGNREGS, Integrated Watershed Management Programme (IWMP), 15th Finance 
Commission tied grants to RLBs/ PRIs, State schemes, CSR funds, etc. 
 
JJM’s focus on source sustenance integrates water conservation with broader 
development works, including the revival and rejuvenation of traditional water bodies, 
rainwater harvesting, groundwater recharge, desilting, and innovative floodwater 
conservation methods. States are also leveraging technology to identify water-stressed 
block areas, adopting an integrated approach to address scarcity. This aligns with the 
mission’s adaptability to India’s diverse geographical and climatological terrains, as 
evidenced by the strategic shift to 48% surface water-based schemes from an initial 
15% estimate, ensuring long-term functionality of tap connections. 
 

24 
 
Extensive efforts have been made to educate rural communities about the 
importance of water conservation, emphasizing sustainable water use practices. 
Additionally, JJM has implemented targeted initiatives to raise awareness among school 
students, integrating water conservation education into school curricula to foster a 
culture of responsibility towards water resources from a young age. 
 
Department of Water Resources, River Development and Ganga Rejuvenation 
(DoWR, RD & GR) has also taken various steps to address water scarcity issues in 
drought-prone areas and manage excess water issues in flood-prone regions in the 
country are as follows: - 
 
 Central Ground Water Board (CGWB) has completed the National Aquifer Mapping 
(NAQUIM) Project in the entire mappable area of about 25 Lakh sq. km including 
Odisha (1.19 Lakh Sq. km area). The Aquifer maps and management plans have 
been prepared and shared with the respective State agencies for implementation. 
The management plans include various water conservation measures through 
demand side and supply side interventions. 
 
 CGWB has prepared a Master Plan for Artificial Recharge to Groundwater- 2020 in 
consultation with States/UTs which is a macro level plan indicating various 
structures for the different terrain conditions of the country including estimated cost. 
The Master Plan envisages construction of about 1.42 crore Rain water harvesting 
and artificial recharge structures in the country to harness 185 Billion Cubic Metre 
(BCM) of monsoon rainfall including construction of about 22 thousand Rain water 
harvesting and artificial recharge structures in Odisha. DPR has to be prepared by 
the concerned line department of the respective State Government at an 
implementable level like any other water supply project or city development project. 
The Master Plan for Artificial Recharge to Groundwater- 2020 has been circulated to 
all the States/UTs and is being implemented in one district in each state through 
convergence with state schemes. 
 
 National Water Policy (2012) has been formulated by Department of Water 
Resources, RD & GR, which inter-alia advocates rainwater harvesting and 
conservation of water and highlights the need for augmenting the availability of water 
through direct use of rainfall. It also inter-alia, advocates conservation of river, river 
bodies and infrastructure should be undertaken in a scientifically planned manner 
through community participation. Further, encroachment and diversion of water 
bodies and drainage channels must not be allowed and wherever, it has taken place, 
it should be restored to the extent feasible and maintained properly. 

25 
 
 
 Central Ground Water Authority (CGWA) has been constituted under section 3(3) of 
the Environment (Protection) Act, 1986 for the purpose of regulation and control of 
ground water development and management in the country. Abstraction cum use of 
Groundwater in the country is regulated by CGWA in the country by way of issuing 
NOCs as per the provisions of its Guidelines dated 24.09.2020 and amendments 
dated 29.03.2023. The guidelines also advise States/ UTs to review to work further 
towards crop rotation/ diversification/ other initiatives to reduce overdependence on 
groundwater. 
 
 Besides, Ministry has circulated a Model Bill to all the States/UTs to enable them to 
enact suitable ground water legislation for regulation of its development, which also 
includes provision of rain water harvesting. So far, 21 States/UTs have adopted and 
implemented the ground water legislation. 
 
 Further, Jal Shakti Abhiyan: Catch the Rain (JSA: CTR) campaign aiming to 
encourage water conservation at grass-root levels with people's participation was 
launched in 2019 in 256 water stressed districts of the country. Moreover, recognizing 
the importance of sustainable water management especially for drinking water 
availability, JSA-CTR was implemented with the theme “Source Sustainability for 
Drinking Water” in 2023. Similarly, in 2024, JSA is being implemented with the theme 
"Nari Shakti se Jal Shakti" from 09.03.2024 to 30.11.2024 emphasizing the pivotal role 
played by women in the field of water conservation.  
 
To formalize this commitment, Memorandums of Understanding (MoUs) between 
the National JJM and States/UTs will ensure regular monitoring and sustained water 
service delivery to GPs and villages. Community engagement is at the heart of these 
efforts, with campaigns like “Jal Sanchay” and “Jal Utsav” fostering local participation 
and integrating cultural values into water conservation initiatives. Through these 
concerted efforts, States/UTs are not only on track to achieve JJM objectives by 2028 
but are also poised to surpass Sustainable Development Goal 6 well before 2030. 
 
[OM No. H-11021/1/2024-Parliament-DDWS (E-file No.28076)Dated: 16thMay, 2025] 
 
 
 
 

26 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO.7 
Operational and Maintenance work 
 
The States/ UTs have been advised to meet O&M cost and sustainability of rural 
water supply infrastructure through various measures as prescribed in the operational 
guidelines of JJM. For long term sustainability, a comprehensive O&M policy including 
features such as, handing over of schemes to Panchayats/Pani Samitis, user charges, 
sufficient financing specially to cover expenses on account of energy bills, skilling, and 
deployment of local persons for O&M and water quality surveillance activities, is being 
put in place by States/UTs. However, as reported, only 12 States/UTs have notified 
O&M policies for sustainability of rural water infrastructure. States which are lagging 
behind, have attributed i) Lack of institutional capacity, ii) Financial Constraints and iii) 
Coordination Challenges, as factors adversely affecting timely formulation and 
functionality of O&M policies. The Committee fails to comprehend the reasons for such 
dismal efforts shown by the States in notification of their O&M policies. The Committee 
expresses concern over the approach shown by the Department, whereby all 
responsibilities for O&M were shifted to the States, despite being aware that an effective 
O&M policy is essential for long term sustainability of JJM. The Committee also 
expresses concern over lack of a comprehensive O&M policy even though JJM is in its 
fifth year of implementation having achieved the milestone of providing tap water 
connections to about 78.74% rural households in the country. The Committee also took 
a note of the situation that Financial constraints is a significant concern for many States 
proving to be a hurdle in notifying their O&M policy despite all the available 
arrangements provisioned under JJM by the Government of India. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends that the Department take pro-active measures and provide all 
necessary assistance to the States/UTs in notifying their O&M policy at the earliest and 
its successful implementation at ground level. The Committee may be apprised of the 
measures taken in this regard.  
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
For long term sustainability, a comprehensive O&M policy including features 
such as, handing over of schemes to Panchayats/ Paani Samitis, provisions for source 
sustainability and suitable provisions for development of efficient and sustained 
mechanism for collection of water tariff finalized by the State in consultation with GP/ 
VWSC/ Pani Samiti, sufficient financing specially to cover expenses on account of 
energy bills, skilling, and deployment of local persons for O&M and water quality 

27 
 
surveillance activities, should be put in place by States/UTs. A draft framework for the 
comprehensive O&M Policy has also been shared with the States. So far, 20 States 
have finalized/ notified the O&M Policy and the remaining States have been advised to 
notify the respective O&M Policy before 30.06.2025. Further, a diagnostic matrix 
consisting of 19 major components of the Model O&M Policy have also been shared 
with States to assess readiness of the State/ UT to effectively/ efficiently operate, 
manage and sustain the rural PWSs against different anticipated incidents/ parameters 
of operation and maintenance phase.  
 
Moreover, linking of notification of O&M Policy of the respective State to release 
of central grants-in-aid under JJM, proposed for extended phase of implementation of 
the Mission, is also under consideration of this Department. 
 
[OM No. H-11021/1/2024-Parliament-DDWS (E-file No.28076)Dated: 16thMay, 2025] 
 
Comment of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 24 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO.8 
 
Water quality Testing Laboratories & NABL Accreditation 
 
The Committee notes that 1,571 out of total 2,160 Water Quality Testing 
Laboratories in rural areas are NABL (National Accreditation Board for Testing and 
Calibration Laboratories) accredited. Getting accreditation from NABL would not only 
endorse the testing results provided by these Laboratories but will also impact credibility 
to the efforts of the Department in ensuring the supply of quality water to the rural areas. 
Also, keeping in view the number of villages i.e. 5,86,655 in the Country, the number of 
Water Quality Testing Laboratories are insufficient and would not be able to achieve 
their objective.The Committee, in their successive Reports has 33 stressed the need for 
having more water testing laboratories to provide quality potable water to the rural 
populace. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department prepare time-
bound Plan for all such Laboratories for getting accreditation by NABL at the earliest 
and impress upon the States/UTs to enhance number of Water Quality Testing 
Laboratories in rural areas.  
 
 
 

28 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 Drinking Water being a state subject, the responsibility of planning, approval, 
implementation, operation, and maintenance of drinking water supply schemes, 
including those under the Jal Jeevan Mission, lies with State/UT Governments. The 
Government of India supports the States by providing technical and financial 
assistance. As per the Operational Guidelines, States/ UTs can utilize upto 2% of their 
annual allocation of funds under JJM for Water Quality Monitoring & Surveillance 
(WQM&S) activities inter alia which includes setting up and strengthening of water 
quality testing laboratories, procurement of equipment, instruments, chemicals, 
glassware, consumables, hiring of skilled manpower, surveillance by community using 
field test kits (FTKs), awareness generation, educational programmes on water quality, 
accreditation/recognition of laboratories, etc.   
 
 All States/ UTs have been advised that all district must have district level 
laboratory. In bigger States, at the regional level, district level lab should be upgraded 
into State level lab in different regions of the State. And the existing network of drinking 
water quality testing laboratories in the State may be reviewed and strengthened by 
setting up/ exploring Public Private Partnership for additional labs at regional level, 
district level and block/ sub-division level in the State. Department has been reviewing 
the status of drinking water quality testing laboratories with States/ UTs from time to 
time through several meetings including conference, review meetings through video 
conferences, field visits, etc. and requesting States/ UTs to take up required measures 
to strengthen it.  
 
 In order to ensure that the labs are equipped with facilities, States have been advised for accreditation of Drinking Water Quality Testing Laboratories as per IS/ISO/IEC:17025 at least for parameters of basic water quality importance and other parameters as per local conditions. In order to addressed shortfall in 
accreditation of water quality testing laboratories, the Department has been exploring the possibility of getting laboratories accredited/ recognized by other accreditation bodies as per IS/ISO/IEC:17025. Meetings were also held with Bureau 
of Indian Standards (BIS), Quality Council of India (QCI) and various laboratory accreditation bodies to discuss and address issues such as paucity of assessors and difficulties in getting slots for accreditation purpose.   As reported by States/UTs, as on 02.05.2025, there are 2,183 drinking water quality testing laboratories at different levels viz. State, regional/ district, sub-

29 
 
division, block level, mobile level laboratories in the country. Out of these, 1,612 laboratories (74%) have been accredited/ recognized. Further, the States have been 
advised to get all the remaining district level laboratories accredited/ recognized on or 
before 30.06.2025. Further, 521 Water Treatment Plant level laboratories under JJM have also been identified for recognition.  
[OM No. H-11021/1/2024-Parliament-DDWS (E-file No.28076)Dated: 16thMay, 2025] 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO.10 & 11 
 
Performance Audit of JJM 
 
Jal Jeevan Mission is in the fifth year of its launch and nearing the target date for 
its envisaged goals (as par data available on JJM, IMIS, around 15.06 Crore i.e. 77.97% 
out of around 19.32 Crore rural households have access to potable tap water supply as 
on date). To assess the functionality of tap water connection provided under the 
mission, Department of Drinking Water & Sanitation undertakes annual assessment 
through an independent third-party agency, based on standard sampling. The last 
comparable functionality assessment was conducted in 2022 and Functionality 
Assessment-2024 is still in progress. The Committee note that there was no annual 
assessment in 2023 and the present data on functionality of tap water connection is not 
updated.  
 
Since, annual assessment of functionality is essential for ensuring long term 
source and system sustainability and also for carrying out corrective measures based 
on its findings by States/UTs to maintain system continuity, the Committee recommend 
that the department should make sincere efforts to expedite Functionality Assessment 
2024 and share its findings with States/UTs at the earliest.  
 
Further, as the JJM is in its fifth year of launch and nearing the target date for its 
envisaged goals, the Committee also recommends that in order to ascertain its effective 
implementation, the Department may carry out performance audit of achievements 
made.  
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
The Department has received the final report of the Functionality Assessment 
survey and approval of the Department on the report is in final stages and will be 
released and shared with States shortly for requisite course correction. The 

30 
 
recommendation of performance audit of achievements made has also been noted in 
this Department for requisite action.  
 
[OM No. H-11021/1/2024-Parliament-DDWS (E-file No.28076)Dated: 16thMay, 2025] 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO.12 
 
Pending statutory and other Clearances 
 
The Committee note that various statutory and other clearances are required to 
be obtained by the State Governments and its implementing agencies (State PHED) for 
the implementation of JJM projects. The department has nominated a dedicated Deputy 
Secretary level nodal officer to coordinate with various Central Ministries and respective 
State Departments for facilitating various clearances required during the implementation 
of JJM. 
 
As on 23.10.2024, against 2,888 clearances, 2,264 have been accorded so far 
by various agencies and 624 clearances are pending across various States out of which 
12 clearances are pending at Government of India level. The Committee while taking a 
note of the pending clearances recommend that the Department should make concerted 
efforts in close coordination with Central Ministries and respective State Departments 
and implementing agencies to expedite the pending clearances in a time bound manner 
in order to facilitate timely execution of JJM projects.  
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Nomination of a nodal officer in the Department for coordinating with Central 
nodal Ministries/ Departments/ agencies viz. M/o EF&CC, M/o RTH, NHAI, M/o 
Railways etc. to facilitate the States in obtaining Statutory/ other clearances. Further, 
regular review meetings are also being taken up with these central agencies and States 
level officers by Secretary, DDWS.  
 
As on date, the process of clearances has been streamlined by online collecting 
the schematic information on JJM IMIS and capturing the events requiring GoI 
interventions. So far, States have applied for 3,343 clearances and action has been 
completed in 3,006 projects leaving 337 clearances pending across various States. 
Details are placed at Annex-I. 
  

31 
 
  Out of the total pendency of 337 cases, as reported by the User agencies/ State 
PHED, the details of the pending clearance at Government of India level are provided in 
table below: 
 
S. 
No. State Fores
t NHAI Railways GAIL Others Total 
1 Chhattisgarh 0  1 0 0 0 1 
2 Kerala 1  4 4 0 1 10 
3 Madhya 
Pradesh 
36 0 0 0 0 36 
4 Rajasthan 3  1 0 0 0 4 
5 Uttar Pradesh 3  4 25 0 0 32 
6 West Bengal 0  1 0 0 1 2 
Total 43  11 29 0 2 85 
Department is regularly following up with the involved agencies for expediting the 
clearances of all the pending schemes/ projects at the earliest. 
 
[OM No. H-11021/1/2024-Parliament-DDWS (E-file No.28076)Dated: 16thMay, 2025] 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO.13 
 
Physical performance of SBM(G)-II 
 
 Having achieved the outcomes of Open Defecation Free, in order to focus on 
ODF Plus activities i.e. ODF Sustainability and to cover all villages with Solid and Liquid 
Waste Management (SLWM), Phase II of SBM (G) was approved in February, 2020 to 
be implemented from 2020-21 to 2024-25 . 
 
The major components of the SBM (Grameen)-II are:- 
 
 Construction of Individual household latrines (IHHLs) 
 Construction of Community Sanitary Complexes (CSCs) 
 Solid and Liquid Waste Management (SLWM) 
 Information, Education and Communication (IEC) and Capacity Building 
 
However, the Department has conceded that the performance of States under 
SBM(G)-II during the initial years of implementation was not as planned in the Annual 
Implementation Plans due to various reasons such as prevalence of Covid-19 
pandemic, lack of technical knowhow, State specific issues such as remote areas, 

32 
 
difficult terrain, hydro geological conditions etc. However, the Committee is very 
concerned  to observe that Targets viz-a-via Achievements made under the Mission 
during the last four years in respect of SLWM are much below to their planned targets 
(only 34.60 targets achieved in SWM and 57% targets achieved in LWM during the last 
five years 2020-21 till 2023-24)whereas target achieved in respect of ODF Plus (Model) 
villages during the last five years is only 56%.  Further, targets viz-a-viz achievements 
made in respect of Individual Household Latrines and Community Sanitary Complexes 
during the last five years are also much below their expected goals in so far as only 
31% and 8% targets are achieved during 2024-25 as on October,2024 under both the 
components respectively.  
 
 The Committee while expressing concern over the said underperformance 
leading to slow progress of the Mission, recommends that the department make 
concerted efforts in coordination with all States/UTs to identify and address all the 
impeding issues in order to fast track the implementation of the Mission Goals and 
objectives within the targeted time-line.  
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
DDWS is continuously pursuing with the States and supporting them so that 
implementation of the programme can be speeded up at ground level. Regular review 
meetings, technical workshops with the States/UTs are being conducted. For each 
State/UT, an officer (at Deputy Secretary and Director levels) have been made area 
officer who regularly gets in touch with the States to review the programme and to know 
the issues being faced by the State/UT in implementation of the programme. Secretary 
(DDWS), Joint Secretary & Mission Director (SBM-G) and area officers in the 
Department regularly undertake visits to the States to see the progress at ground level. 
The engagement with the Stats/UTs is being continuous and vigorous review of 
implementation of the programme is being done through review meetings, reports, MIS 
etc.The program has been extended upto 2025-26 from the balance savings under 
given outlay to improve the physical progress. 
 
[OM No. H-11021/1/2024-Parliament-DDWS (E-file No.28076)Dated: 16thMay, 2025] 
  

33 
 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO.14 & 15 
 
Financial performance 
 
The Committee noticed the trend of continuous underutilization of allocated funds 
during the last three years despite reduction at RE Stage, although it was on marginal 
scale during the last two financial years.  However, Rs. 1,411.46 crore have been 
utilized out of total allocation of Rs.7,192.00 crore in the current financial year as on 
23.10.2024.  
 
 The Committee has further noticed that a substantial portion of the budgetary 
allocation ranging from 9.15% to 17.21% had been spent on payment of interest on 
Extra Budgetary Resources during the last five years. During the current Financial year, 
Rs. 1,033.30 (14% of budgetary allocation) has been earmarked for payment of interest 
on EBR thereby reducing the availability of funds for effective utilization.   
 
 The Committee express concern over the slow pace of utilization of the funds, so 
far which is only 19.61% of the allocated budget and includes 36% expenditure on 
payment of interest on EBR and recommend the Department to make concerted efforts 
in close coordination with States and implementing agencies, so as to fully utilize the 
allocated budget in a time-bound manner and also prepare a road map for prudent 
utilization/release of fund in a more evenly manner during the current  financial year, so 
as to avoid  parking of large unused funds with the Single Nodal Account of State 
Treasury towards the end of the Financial year.  
 
The Committee further urge the department to avoid raising funds through EBR 
as the same leads to payment of substantial interest and instead seek more budgetary 
Grants for the Mission.  
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
DDWS has been continuously pursuing with the State Government having slow 
pace of expenditure under SBM(G) through regular VC, meetings, D.O letters from the 
level of Secretary and Joint Secretary to the Chief Secretaries and concerned ACS/Pr. 
Secy/Secy for expediting the pace of implementation and expenditure under the 
programme. This Department has also made various amendments to the programme 
guidelines from time to time based on the discussions with the States to remove any 
hurdles/bottlenecks at ground level that impede the pace of the implementation. 
 

34 
 
Further, regarding parking of funds at Single Nodal Account of the State at the 
end of the Financial Year, it is pertinent to mention that to ensure Just-in-time release 
under the Centrally Sponsored Schemes, Ministry of Finance has introduced at new 
mechanism named SNA-SPARSH, in which the corresponding Centre share will be 
released to the State Scheme Account at RBI only after receipt of payment files from 
the State Government on daily basis which then will be transferred to the account of 
beneficiary/vendor on real time basis along with the corresponding State Share. Hence, 
this new system has eliminated the scope of parking of funds at SNA of the State Govt. 
as the funds in this system are released only on actual payment files (consolidating the 
bills raised by the implementing agencies). SBM(G) has been onboarded on this new 
system since 2023-24 on pilot basis and MoF has selected 30 States/UTs (except UTs 
without legislature) for onboarding this new system w.e.f. 01.04.2025 thus avoiding the 
scope of parking of funds at the State. 
 
Under Swachh Bharat Mission (Grameen) [SBM(G)] Extra Budgetary Resources 
(EBR) of Rs. 12298.20 crore was raised in 2018-19 and 2019-20 in seven tranches 
through NABARD as per the Budget Announcement and Letter of Authorization (LoA) 
issued by Ministry of Finance after obtaining the approval of the Cabinet. As per the LoA 
issued by Ministry of Finance and accordingly as per the MoA signed between DDWS, 
NABARD and SPM-NIWAS (the receptacle agency for the servicing the EBR and its 
interest), the EBR principle amount to be repaid after 10 years in single bullet payment 
and till then the semi-annual interest is to be paid to the NABARD for the outstanding 
EBR amount. Accordingly, interest for the above EBR amount is paid to NABARD from 
the budget allocated to DDWS in each financial year. No EBR was raised under 
SBM(G) after 2019-20. Any requirements of funds for the programme is demanded by 
DDWS through Budget Estimate and supplementary grants as required. 
 
[OM No. H-11021/1/2024-Parliament-DDWS (E-file No.28076)Dated: 16thMay, 2025] 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO.17 
Functional Assessment of key ODF plus parameters 
 
 The Committee lauds the achievements made under SBM(G)-II wherein 5,57,468 
villages out of 5,87,529 villages have declared themselves ODF Plus as on date, under 
different categories. The Committee notes that the number of villages covered with 
Solid Waste Management and Liquid Waste Management as on 24.10.2024 are 
3,68,274 while 3,987 blocks out of total 7,155 blocks are covered with Plastic Waste 

35 
 
Management Units/urban MRF and 5,30,440 vehicles are available in rural areas for 
SWM.   
 
 The Committee observed that the department has carried out Swachh 
SurvekshanGrammen (SSG)-2023, a yearly exercise, through a third-party survey 
agency, to assess and verify results claimed by the States and Districts on various 
households sanitation parameters.  The Survey covered 17,304 villages in 729 Districts 
across India and 85,901 public places namely schools, anganwadis, public health 
centres, haat/bazaars/religious places etc. in these 17,304 villages. Around 2,60,059 
Households were interviewed for their feedback on SBM(G) related issues.   
 
 The Committee feels that the scale of the survey is not adequate to map the 
functionality of key ODF plus parameters and will give an incomplete projection/report.  
The Committee, also expresses reservation on the credibility of the third party survey 
agency, their selection procedures and methodology for survey, veracity of their findings 
and recommend that the Department devise a more comprehensive and dynamic 
monitoring mechanism/system  for functionality assessment of the key ODF Plus 
parameters.  
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Swachh Survekshan Grameen (SSG) 2025 is being conducted by the 
Department through a third-party agency which has been hired through an open tender 
by following the Quality and Cost Based Selection system. With regards, to the scale of 
the Survey, compared to the previous rounds of the survey, the coverage of SSG-2025 
has been significantly expanded. This includes an increase in the number of villages 
and districts surveyed, a larger sample size, and the introduction of citizen feedback 
through a dedicated mobile application. 
 
SSG-2025 envisages to cover 21,000 villages across 761 districts in India. It will 
assess around 1,05,000 public places, including schools, anganwadis, public health 
centres, markets, religious places, etc., within these villages. SSG-2025 will also cover 
District/ Block survey for aprox. 1746 Plastic waste management units (PWMUs) along 
with backward and forward linkages and linkages with urban MRF, approx. 875 
GOBARdhan plants, aprox. 983 Faecal Sludge Management (FSM) assets and 
coverage of District with FSM facilities and FSM linkages with STP/ FSTP, including 
functionality and O&M of SLWM asset and aprox. 200 Swachhta Green Leaf Rating 
(SGLR) Assets. Additionally, feedback will be collected from approximately 3,36,000 
households on issues related to the Swachh Bharat Mission (Grameen) [SBM(G)]. 
 

36 
 
To ensure high-quality outcomes, the methodology for conducting SSG-2025 has 
been finalized by a Technical Committee, which includes a member from the Ministry of 
Statistics and Programme Implementation. Further, to ensure the veracity of the survey 
findings, robust arrangements have been put in place for data collection using digital 
tools such as Computer-Assisted Personal Interviewing (CAPI). Real-time tracking of 
data, along with measures such as geo-fencing, will be employed at the time of data 
capture to ensure accuracy, authenticity, and transparency throughout the process. The 
photographic evidences uploaded through CAPI shall be checked in real-time and 
validated by the Monitoring Executives in the Quality Assurance Cell of the agency.  A 
Multi-layer monitoring of fieldwork has been envisaged to strengthen the data quality, 
including spot checks, back-checks, review of field check tables and continuous 
supportive supervision. In addition to this, after the completion of each round of survey, 
the findings of the same are shared with the State Government for taking remedial 
measures wherever required. 
 
[OM No. H-11021/1/2024-Parliament-DDWS (E-file No.28076)Dated: 16thMay, 2025] 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO.18 & 19 
 
Solid Waste Management and Plastic Waste Management in Rural areas 
 
The Committee note that Plastic Waste Management is one of the key 
component envisaged under SBM(G)-II for managing of non-biodegradable waste at 
Block level to ensure visual cleanness of the Villages. A funding of Rs.16 Lakhs per 
block has been provisioned for establishing Plastic Waste Management Unit under 
SBM(G)-II. In regard to SWM, the Committee note that 4,23,456 villages out of 5,86,655 
villages have provision for SWM arrangements with the help of 5,30,440 Sanitation 
vehicles.  The Committee expressed apprehension on the number of Sanitation vehicles 
and desires to know their categories.  
 
Further, the Committee while being satisfied with the achievements made by the 
majority of States/UTs towards SWM Saturation, however, express concern over the 
availability of insufficient vehicles for Sanitation services in States/UTs specially in those 
States who have either achieved cent percent SWM targets such as Sikkim, or in those 
States where the gap towards SWM saturation is 25% or below viz. Karnataka (2%), 
Uttrarakhand (3%), Madhya Pradesh (10%), Mizoram(13%) and Himachal 
Pradesh(25%).   
 

37 
 
Further, the Committee express concern over those States/UTs  who are lagging 
behind in achieving SWM saturation viz  Manipur, Meghalaya, Jharkhand, Punjab and 
Nagaland and the number of blocks covered with Plastic Waste Management Units/ 
urban MRF which is only 56% to the total Blocks (7155 Blocks) and the  functional 
Plastic Waste Management Units which is only 43% to the total number of Plastic 
Waste Management Units(3987 PWMU/urban MRF).    
 
The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Department intensify their efforts 
on issues/challenges withholding the execution of works/activities in States/UTs lagging 
behind and pursue more vigorously with the agencies concerned and State Government 
for accomplishment of goals within the targeted period.   
 
The Committee also recommend the department take proactive measures in 
coordination with the States UTs to augment various activities under SWM and PWM 
viz. arrangements of sufficient number of Sanitation Vehicles for collection and 
transportation of solid waste; development of forward linkage for plastic waste 
management; and arrangements for higher number of functional Plastic Waste 
Management Units in order to achieve goals of SBM(G)-II.  
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
The Department of Drinking Water and Sanitation is actively supporting all States 
and Union Territories through regular meetings, video conferences, and advisories. The 
Department recognizes the recommendations received and is dedicated to providing 
targeted assistance to tackle challenges related to the availability of vehicles for 
sanitation services, as well as other essential Solid Waste Management (SWM) 
assets—especially in States and UTs that have achieved less than 25% progress in 
SWM. 
Funding for the procurement of sanitation vehicles is available through the 
Swachh Bharat Mission (Grameen) [SBMG] fund and the tied grant from the 15th 
Finance Commission. During the Annual Implementation Plan (AIP) meetings for FY 
2025–26, extensive discussions were held with individual States regarding progress, 
challenges, and actionable solutions related to Solid Waste Management, including 
Plastic Waste Management. 
To enhance Plastic Waste Management, the Department is conducting dedicated 
video conferences with all relevant States and UTs to better understand their strategies, 
identify bottlenecks, and gather recommendations for further improvement. 

38 
 
It is important to note that, due to ongoing support and follow-up, States and UTs 
are making significant strides in SWM and PWM. The number of SWM villages has 
increased from 4.24 lakh to 5.09 lakh, and the number of sanitation vehicles has risen 
from 5.30 lakh to 6.17 lakh. 
The committee has identified States lagging in SWM—namely Sikkim, 
Karnataka, Uttarakhand, Madhya Pradesh, Himachal Pradesh and Mizoram—each with 
a gap exceeding 25%. However, these States have made substantial progress, 
improving from 75% to nearly 100%, with the exception of Himachal Pradesh, which still 
has a 14% gap in SWM. 
Furthermore, coverage in Plastic Waste Management has increased from 56% to 
67% across a total of 7,154 Blocks, and the number of functional Plastic Waste 
Management Units and Urban Material Recovery Facilities (MRF) has grown from 43% 
to 51.20%, encompassing a total of 4,832 PWMUs/urban MRFs. 
 
[OM No. H-11021/1/2024-Parliament-DDWS (E-file No.28076)Dated: 16thMay, 2025] 
  

39 
 
CHAPTER III  
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NIL 
  

40 
 
 
CHAPTER IV 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BYTHE COMMITTEE 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO.5 
Water Quality issue in Rural Areas 
 
The Committee note that 12,167 rural habitations in different Districts of the 
country are still affected with water contamination despite being priority areas under 
NWQSM launched in 2017 and JJM implemented in 2019. Assam and Rajasthan, two 
of the worst water contaminated States would be likely to achieve status of Har Ghar Jal 
by 2026 and 2027 respectively. All NWQSM identified 27,544 Arsenic/Fluoride affected 
habitations have been provided safe drinking water through Community water 
purifications plants as an interim measure. Further, as on 23.10.2024, in 61 identified 
JE/AES affected districts in five States, 80.21% rural household have been provided tap 
water supply.  
 
In a nut shell, as on 23.10.2024, out of around 78.67 lakh rural households in 
water quality affected habitations, more than 52.19 lakh (66.34%) households are 
reported to have tap 31 water supply in their homes and the remaining 26.47 lakh 
households are likely to be covered by the States as per their plans. 
 
The Committee are of the firm and considered view that remedial measures to 
address the serious issue of water quality is to be taken by the Department with a sense 
of urgency and seriousness, as continuous use of unsafe drinking water is a serious 
health hazard to millions of people residing in the water quality affected areas. The 
Committee are also of the view that piped water supply is the only solution to tackle 
water quality problems and therefore, a time bound Plan is needed to be put in 
operation in the remaining contamination affected areas to achieve this target. 
Moreover, the Committee also urge the Department to launch a nationwide awareness 
programme to educate rural masses about the hazards of contaminated water by 
involving all stakeholders, i.e., Centre, State, Local Authorities, Civil Society, NGOs, 
etc., active in the field. The Committee desires to be apprised of the measures taken in 
this regard.  
 
 

41 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
JJM envisages to provide every rural household with potable water of prescribed 
quality (BIS:10500), on regular and long-term basis through tap connection. Further, 
potable water supply to water quality-affected habitations is a priority and efforts are 
made to ensure safe drinking water to all quality-affected villages especially those 
affected with Arsenic and Fluoride contamination through Community Water Purification 
Plants (CWPPs) to meet their drinking and cooking requirements till the commissioning 
of piped water supply scheme based on a safe water source. As reported by States, all 
the Arsenic (314) and Fluoride (250) affected habitations have been provided with 
potable water through CWPPs. Thus, as reported by the States/ UTs, all habitations in 
rural area of the country are provided safe drinking water free from Arsenic and Fluoride 
contamination. 
Further, as per the Operational Guidelines, States/ UTs can utilize up to 2% of 
their annual allocation of funds under JJM for Water Quality Monitoring & Surveillance 
(WQM&S) activities, inter-alia, which includes setting up and strengthening of water 
quality testing laboratories, procurement of equipment, instruments, chemicals, 
glassware, consumables, hiring of skilled manpower, surveillance by community using 
field test kits (FTKs), awareness generation, educational programmes on water quality, 
accreditation/recognition of laboratories, etc. 
In every village, 5 persons especially women are being trained for water quality 
testing and reporting. So far, more than 24.80 lakh women have been trained in 
different villages. Moreover, to encourage water quality testing to ensure potable 
drinking water supply, States/ UTs have opened all the 2,180 water quality testing 
laboratories to general public for testing of their water samples at a nominal rate. 
Further, States have been advised to utilize services of degree science colleges for 
drinking water samples. In addition, this Department has suggested the nominal rates 
for testing of water samples which are suggestive for all States/ UTs. 
Year-wise details of drinking water samples tested in labs and using FTKs are as 
under: 
Year 
No. of samples tested Total no. of 
samples 
Tested in labs using FTKs 
2014-15 40,03,841 27,73,861 67,77,702 
2015-16 38,48,475 20,56,377 59,04,852 
2016-17 39,41,186 10,57,530 49,98,716 
2017-18 40,18,331 11,01,486 51,19,817 

42 
 
2018-19 39,15,038 11,09,941 50,24,979 
2019-20 42,16,683 8,49,135 50,65,818 
2020-21 49,00,963 38,17,824 87,18,787 
2021-22 41,72,176 25,33,869 67,06,045 
2022-23 62,19,775 96,23,912 1,58,43,687 
2023-24 75,00,041 1,08,54,196 1,83,54,237 
2024-25 82,68,247 93,84,186  1,76,52,433  
2025-26 (As 
on 
01.05.2025) 
3,79,424 3,04,797  6,84,221  
[Source: JJM-IMIS] 
 
A ‘Citizen Corner’ was also developed by the Department on the JJM Dashboard. 
The corner included display of water quality test results in the public domain to further 
create awareness and build confidence among people about the quality of water 
supplies through the PWS in rural areas.  
Further, the Department has requested all the stakeholders inter alia including 
Civil Societies, NGOs, SHGs, etc. to come forward and work together for generating 
awareness among rural masses for improved Water Quality Management in rural areas. 
In consultation with various stakeholders 'Concise Handbook for Monitoring Water 
Quality of Piped Drinking Water Supply to Rural Households’ has been released in 
December 2024 for guidance to States/ UT’s officials and their parastatal organizations 
for faming their own water quality monitoring and surveillance protocol as per their local 
requirements. 
Further, in collaboration in Ministry of Health & Family Welfare, a Standard 
Operating Procedures for Joint Action on Water Quality Monitoring and Health 
Outcomes was released to all State/ UTs outlining the joint actions, roles, and 
responsibilities at each level between functionaries of drinking water supply 
departments and health departments at the State/District/Village level, by engagement 
of the officials and staff mainly of Public Health Engineering Department (PHED)/ Rural 
Water Supply (RWS) department, and Health in the States/UTs for timely detection, 
prevention, management, and control of water-related diseases due to biological and 
chemical contaminants and their related health impacts through joint monitoring, 
preparedness, and timely response. 
Moreover, in association with NITI Aayog, Jal Utsav wasorganized in 20 
Aspirational Districts/Blocks from 6th to 20 th November, 2024 for encouraging 
community participation in preservation and protection of water resources and instilling 

43 
 
a sense of responsibility towards efficient water use among households and water 
management among utilities and agencies. In this initiative, school students are being 
enrolled in water management activities, empowering them to act as catalysts for 
change within their families and communities. 
 
[OM No. H-11021/1/2024-Parliament-DDWS (E-file No.28076)Dated: 16thMay, 2025] 
 
Comment of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 21 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO.9 
 
Water Quality Monitoring and Surveillance 
 
The Committee note that as per operational guidelines for implementation of 
mission, every State/ UT has to identify and train 5 persons preferably women in each 
village viz. ASHA workers, health workers, VWSC members, teachers, etc. to conduct 
water quality testing using Field Testing Kits (FTKs)/bacteriological vials at village level. 
States/ UTs have been advised to take requisite measures for making available 
adequate number of FTKs/ bacteriological vials at village level. As reported by States/ 
UTs, so far, as on 23.10.2024, 24.72 lakh women from 5.07 lakh villages have been 
trained for water quality testing using FTKs. Further, under JJM, up to 2% of the 
allocation to States/ UTs can be utilized for Water Quality Monitoring and Surveillance 
(WQM&S) activities, including for procurement of FTKs /H2S vials. The States have 
been advised to enable the public to get their water samples tested at laboratories at 
nominal rates which is recommended as Rs.600/- for 16 different parameters. 
 
The Committee while appreciating the fact that, about 5.07 lakh villages have 
trained 24.72 lakh women for water quality testing using FTKs, has desired to know the 
ground reality of the progress made and whether any assessment has been made to 
ascertain the veracity of information uploaded by the States/UTs on JJM-Integrated 
Management Information System (IMIS) in this regard. The Committee are of the view 
that although 2% of the allocation to States/UTs can be utilized for WQM&S activities 
including procurement of FTKs/H2S vials, it is not a mandatory requirement and may 
not be used for the designated purpose by any State/UT. In such a scenario, the 
Committee apprehend the efficacy of WQM&S activities and water quality testing using 
FTKs and recommend the Department to revise operational guidelines of JJM suitable 

44 
 
for ensuring the earmarked 2% allocation be mandatorily used, only for the designated 
purpose.  
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Under JJM, States/ UTs can utilize upto 2% of their annual allocation of funds for 
Water Quality Monitoring & Surveillance (WQM&S) activities inter alia which includes 
setting up and strengthening of water quality testing laboratories, procurement of 
equipment, instruments, chemicals, glassware, consumables, hiring of skilled 
manpower, surveillance by community using field test kits (FTKs), awareness 
generation, educational programmes on water quality, accreditation/recognition of 
laboratories, etc. As such, States as per their requirements may take up various 
activities under WQMS. 
 
Department has been regularly reviewing the progress made by the States under 
various WQM&S activities from time to time. Further, for water quality surveillance, a 
thorough & dedicated online portal Water Quality Management Information System 
(WQMIS) has been put in place where the details of water samples collected, tested 
along with details of contamination found and remedial action taken is reported on daily 
basis. Further, tagging of the water sample collected for testing to household/location to 
ensure effective remedial measures is also proposed during the extended phase of the 
mission. 
 
[OM No. H-11021/1/2024-Parliament-DDWS (E-file No.28076)Dated: 16thMay, 2025] 
 
Comment of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 28 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO.16 
 
The Number of IHHLs and CSCs and incentives for IHHLs 
 
 The Committee observed that there is a reduction in the number of Individual 
Household Latrines(IHHLs) and Community Sanitary Complexes(CSCs) constructed 
during FY 2021-22 to FY 2023-24 in comparison to the year FY 2020-21. The reasons 
for construction of substantial number of IHHLs in FY 2020-21 is attributed to the fact 
that majority of the left out households were identified post achievement of ODF status 
on be basis of base-line survey carried out in 2020-21.  The department has been 
constantly asking the States/UTs to continue the Sanitation campaign so that no one is 
left behind and newly emerging households gets IHHLs.  However, the Committee feel 

45 
 
that as the deadlines of the Mission is fast approaching, there is an urgent need for a 
renewed base-line survey in order to identify the left out households in order to avoid 
any gap in the implementation of the Mission. 
 
 Further, the Committee vide its earlier recommendations, having noted that an 
incentive of Rs.12,000/- for construction of one unit of Individual Household Latrine 
(IHHL) is being provisioned under SBM(G) to BPL and identified above poverty line 
households, have opined on the department the need to review and revise the per unit 
assistance appropriately in rural areas. Keeping in view the fact that the incentive 
amount of Rs. 12000/- per unit of IHHL was based on assessment of 2014, the 
Committee, therefore, reiterates its stand and recommend that the department consider 
revision of the incentive for IHHLs based on the present rate of inflation. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Presently, the incentive of IHHLs under SBM(G) Phase-II is Rs. 12,000/-.  The 
recommendation of the Standing Committee has been noted. Any changes in the 
incentive will be brought to the notice of the Committee. 
 
[OM No. H-11021/1/2024-Parliament-DDWS (E-file No.28076)Dated: 16thMay, 2025] 
 
Comment of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 32 of Chapter I of the Report) 
  

46 
 
CHAPTER V  
OBSERVATION/RECOMMENDATION IN REPSECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLY OF 
THE GOVERNMENT IS STILL AWAITED 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NIL 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI                                    RAJIV PRATAP RUDY, 
08 August, 2025                            Chairperson,                                                                      
17 Sravana,1947 (Saka)              Standing Committee on Water Resources 
  

47 
 
Annex-I 
Status of pending Clearances for Rural Water Supply Projects 
(As on 02.05.2025) 
Nodal Agency Forests NHAI Railways GAIL Others Total 
S. No. State Applied Pending Applied Pending Applied Pending Applied Pending Applied Pending Applied Pending 
1. 
 
Andhra Pradesh 0 0 1 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 2 0 
2. Assam 0 0 3 0 11 0 0 0 0 0 14 0 
3. Chhattisgarh 0 0 1 1 2 0 0 0 0 0 3 1 
4. Jharkhand 44 9 34 4 60 1 0 0 119 12 257 26 
5. Karnataka 12 3 9 0 4 0 0 0 5 0 30 3 
6. Kerala 106 21 68 24 96 8 0 0 66 2 336 55 
7. Madhya Pradesh 201 109 3 0 25 0 3 0 1 0 233 109 
8. Maharashtra 612 54 268 0 285 0 0 0 477 0 1,642 54 
9. Odisha 2 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 2 0 
10. Punjab 19 0 4 0 14 0 0 0 5 0 42 0 
11. Rajasthan 8 7 4 1 2 0 0 0 2 1 16 9 
12. Sikkim 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 0 
13. Tamil Nadu 10 2 70 0 180 0 0 0 48 3 308 5 
14. Uttar Pradesh 31 3 66 13 229 54 0 0 74 3 400 73 
15. West Bengal 35 0 10 1 1 0 0 0 11 1 57 2 
 Total 1,081  208 541 44 910 63 3 0 808 22 3,343 337 
Source: JJM-IMIS

48 
 
ANNEXURE – II 
 
[Vide Para 4 of the Introduction] 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN THE FIRST REPORT 
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
(i) Total number of Recommendations/Observations 
 
          19 
(ii) Recommendation/Observations which have been accepted by the 
Government  
 
Recommendation Nos.  1, 2, 3, 4, 6, 7, 8, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 
17, 18 and 19 
 
 
 
 
Total – 16 
Percentage– 84.21 % 
 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies 
Recommendation Nos. NIL 
 
 
 
 
Total – 00 
Percentage – Nil 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee 
 
Recommendation Nos. Recommendation Nos. 5, 9 and 16  
 
 
 
 
Total – 3 
Percentage –  15.78% 
(v) Recommendation/Observation in respect of which final reply of the 
Government is still awaited 
Para Nos. NIL 
 
 
 
Total – 00 
Percentage – Nil 
 
  

49 
 
CONFIDENTIAL 
 
Confidential 
 
MINUTES OF THE SIXTEENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
WATER RESOURCES (2024-25) HELD ON 08 AUGUST, 2025. 
  
The Committee sat on Friday, the 08 August, 2025 from 1000 hours to 1100 
hours in Committee Room '2', Parliament House Annexe Extension, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
 
Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy    -  Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Narayandas Ahirwar 
3. Shri Isha Khan Choudhury 
4. Shri Sher Singh Ghubaya 
5. Shri Bapi Haldar 
6. Md. Rakibul Hussain 
7. Shri Rodmal Nagar 
8. Shri Dhaval Laxmanbhai Patel 
9. Shri Vishaldada Prakashbapu Patil 
10. Shri Mohite Patil Dhairyasheel Rajsinh 
11. Shri Pratap Chandra Sarangi 
12. Shri Dushyant Singh 
13. Thiru. Tamilselvan Thanga 
 
 RAJYA SABHA 
  14. Shri Khiru Mahto 
 15. Smt. Mausam Noor 
 16. Shri Balyogi Umeshnath 
 17. Shri Dhairyashil Mohan Patil 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Chander Mohan - Additional Secretary 
2. Shri Ajay Kumar Sood - Director  
3.  Shri Umesh Bist  -  Under Secretary 
  

50 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee.    Thereafter, the Committee took up for consideration following four Draft 
Reports: 
(i)    Sixth Report on 'Action Taken by the Government on the Observations / 
Recommendations contained in the First Report (18th Lok Sabha) on Demands for 
Grants (2024-25) of the Ministry of Jal Shakti - Department of Drinking Water and 
Sanitation'. 
(ii)  Seventh Report on 'Action Taken by the Government on the Observations / 
Recommendations contained in the Second Report (18th Lok Sabha) on Demands for 
Grants (2024-25) of the Ministry of Jal Shakti - Department of Water Resources, River 
Development and Ganga Rejuvenation'. 
(iii)  Eighth Report on 'Action Taken by the Government on the Observations / 
Recommendations contained in the Third Report (18th Lok Sabha) on Demands for 
Grants (2025-26) of the Ministry of Jal Shakti - Department of Drinking Water and 
Sanitation'. 
(iv)  Ninth Report on 'Action Taken by the Government on the Observations / 
Recommendations contained in the Fourth Report (18th Lok Sabha) on Demands for 
Grants (2025-26) of the Ministry of Jal Shakti - Department of Water Resources, River 
Development and Ganga Rejuvenation'. 
3. After some deliberation, the Committee adopted the aforesaid four draft Reports, 
without any modification.  The Committee then authorized the Chairperson to present 
the Reports on their behalf to both the Houses of Parliament in the current Session. 
 
The Committee then adjourned 
 
*** 
 