 
8 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON WATER RESOURCES 
(2024-25) 
                 
         
EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA 
                  
         
                 
MINISTRY OF JAL SHAKTI – DEPARTMENT OF DRINKING WATER AND 
SANITATION  
 
         
         
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2025-26) 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations / 
Recommendations contained in the Third Report (Eighteenth Lok 
Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Water Resources] 
         
         
         
EIGHTH REPORT 
  
          
            
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
         
August, 2025 /Sravana,1947 (Saka) 

EIGHTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON WATER RESOURCES 
(2024-25) 
          
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
         
         
         
MINISTRY OF JAL SHAKTI – DEPARTMENT OF DRINKING WATER AND 
SANITATION 
                 
         
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2025-26) 
 
 (Action Taken by the Government on the Observations / 
Recommendations contained in the Third Report on ‘Demands for 
Grants (2025-26) of the Ministry of Jal Shakti - 
Department of Drinking Water and Sanitation) 
         
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 11.08.2025 
Laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 11.08.2025 
  
 
  
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
                 
         
August, 2025 /Sravana,1947 (Saka) 

 
W. R. C.  No. 91 
         
         
         
         
         
         
 
 
         
         
         
Price :  Rs.  
         
         
         
         
         
 
 
 
         
     
                     
 
 
 
         
        © 2025 By Lok Sabha Secretariat 
  
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok 
Sabha  (Sixteenth Edition) and Printed by  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iii) 
 

CONTENTS 
 
  Page  
 
Composition of 
the Committee 
 
……………………………………………………………… (vi) 
 
 
INTRODUCTION ……………………………………………………………… 
 
(viii) 
 
CHAPTER - I Report……………………………………………………… 
 
1 
CHAPTER – II Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted 
by the Government…………………………… 
 
12 
CHAPTER - III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do 
not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s 
replies……………………………………………………… 
 
44 
CHAPTER - IV Observations/Recommendations in respect  of   which the 
replies of the Government have not been accepted by the 
Committee……………...................................... 
 
45 
CHAPTER - V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final 
replies of the Government are still 
awaited…………………………………………………….. 
 
51 
 ANNEXURES 
 
 
I State/ UT-wise details of status of laying of water supply 
pipes as reported by NWEs 
 
52 
 
 
II Status of pending Clearances for Rural Water Supply 
Projects   
 
53 
III State/ UT-wise details of unspent balances under JJM for 
last three years and current financial year i.e. 2024-25 
 
54 
IV State/ UT-wise details of Coverage of SAGY Panchayats 
 
55 
V Detailed progress in SWM 
 
57 
VI Detailed Progress regarding Plastic Waste Management 
Units (PWMUs) 
 
58 
VII Targets vs. Achievements 2024-25 under Community 
Sanitary Complex (CSC) 
 
59 
 
 
 (iv)  

 APPENDICES 
 
 
I 
 
Minutes of the 16th sitting of the Standing Committee on 
Water Resources held on 08.08.2025. 
 
60 
 
II Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Third 
Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee 
62 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(v)

COMPOSITION OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON WATER RESOURCES 
(2024-25) 
  
 
Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy  -  Chairperson 
 
 LOK SABHA 
 
 
2.  Shri Narayandas Ahirwar  
3.  Shri Joyanta Basumatary  
4.  Chh. Udayanraje Pratapsinha Maharaj 
Bhonsle 
5.  Shri Isha Khan Choudhury  
6.  Shri Sher Singh Ghubaya  
7.  Shri Bapi Haldar  
8.  Md. Rakibul Hussain  
9.  Smt. Sanjna Jatav  
10.  Shri Sarabjeet Singh Khalsa  
11.  Shri Sagar Eshwar Khandre  
12.  Shri Rodmal Nagar  
13.  Shri Dhaval Laxmanbhai Patel  
14.  Shri Vishaldada Prakashbapu Patil  
15.  Shri Mohite Patil Dhairyasheel Rajsinh  
16.  Shri Dilip Saikia  
17.  Shri Pratap Chandra Sarangi  
18.  Shri Dushyant Singh  
19.  Thiru. Tamilselvan Thanga  
20.  Shri Ashok Kumar Yadav  
21.  Vacant 
 
 
 RAJYA SABHA 
 
22. Dr. Faiyaz Ahmad 
23. Shri Ashokrao Shankarrao Chavan 
24. Smt. Dharmshila Gupta 
25. Smt. Jebi Mather Hisham 
26. Shri Khiru Mahto 
27. Smt. Mausam Noor 
28. Shri Balyogi Umeshnath 
29. Shri  SanjayKumar Jha 
30. Shri Dhairyashil Mohan Patil 
31. Smt. Seema Dwivedi 
 
 
 
 
(vi) 
 
 
 

 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Chander Mohan - Additional Secretary 
2. Shri Ajay Kumar Sood - Director 
3. Shri P. Ashok - Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri Umesh Bist -  Under Secretary 
5. Shri Gaurav Jain - Assistant Committee Officer 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(vii) 

INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Water Resources (2024-25) having 
been authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present the Eighth 
Report on the Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in their Third Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2025-26) 
of the Ministry of Jal Shakti -Department of Drinking Water and Sanitation.  
 
2.  The Third Report of the Committee was presented to Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya 
Sabha on 11 March 2025. The Action Taken replies of the Government to all the 
recommendations contained in the Report were received in this Secretariat on 17 June, 
2025. 
 
3.  The replies of the Government were examined and the Report was considered and 
adopted by the Committee at their sitting held on 08.08.2025.        
 
4. An analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Third Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) of 
the Committee is given in Appendice-II. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI        RAJIV PRATAP RUDY, 
 08 August, 2025                                                  Chairperson,                                                                      
17 Sravana,1947 (Saka)   Standing Committee on Water Resources 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(viii) 

1 
 
 
CHAPTER I 
REPORT 
 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Water Resources (2024-25) deals 
with the action taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in their Third Report (18th Lok Sabha) on the Demands for Grants                 
(2025-26) of the Ministry of Jal Shakti – Department of Drinking Water and Sanitation. 
2.  The Third Report was presented to Lok Sabha on 11.03.2025 and was laid on 
the Table of Rajya Sabha on 11.03.2025. The Report contained 25 
Observations/Recommendations.  
3. Action Taken Notes in respect of all the 25 Observations/Recommendations of 
the Committee have been received from the Government. These have been examined 
and categorized as follows: - 
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the Government 
(Chapter II):  
Recommendation Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 6, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 14, 15, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 
22, 23, 24 and 25 
       (Total – 21) 
(ii) Observations / Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in 
view of the Government’s replies (Chapter III):  
Recommendation Nos. NIL       
     (Total – NIL) 
(iii) Observations / Recommendations in respect of which replies of the Government 
have not been accepted by the Committee (Chapter IV):  
Recommendation Nos. 5, 7, 13 and 16      
 (Total – 04)  
(iv) Observations / Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited (Chapter V):  
Para Nos. NIL        
      (Total – NIL) 

2 
 
4.  The Committee desire that replies to recommendations made in the Chapter-I of 
this Report may be furnished to the Committee expeditiously.  
5.  The Committee will now deal with action taken by the Government on some of 
their Observations/Recommendations that require reiteration or merit comments.   
 
A. Water quality contamination due to radioactive elements 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 5 
6. The Committee took cognizance of the fact that 32 habitations in 9 districts of 
Punjab are affected by uranium contamination. Out of these, 22 habitations had already 
been provided with short-term measures viz. community water purification plants 
(CWPP) and individual household purifiers (IHP). In this regard, the Committee would 
further like to be apprised as to which other States/regions of the country, apart from 
Punjab, were facing contamination of water due to radioactive elements. Further, taking 
into account that so far only 22 out of 32 habitations in the State of Punjab had been 
covered with short-term measures, the Committee urge upon the Department to take 
urgent steps to provide safe drinking water to remaining 10 habitations. Further, being 
aware of the fact that radioactive elements like Uranium could accumulate and be 
retained in various organs and tissues, such as the kidneys, liver, and bones, for 
durations ranging from days to years and cause serious health hazards, the Committee 
recommended that the Department prioritize long term measures for providing safe 
water to the regions affected by such contamination. The Committee would like to be 
informed of the specific steps taken by the Department in this regard within 3 months 
from presentation of this Report.  
7. The Department in its action taken note has replied as follows: 
“As stated above, States have been advised to prioritize quality-affected habitations, 
inter alia including Uranium affected habitations, while taking up schemes to make 
provision of potable tap water supply to rural households. As reported by States on 
JJM-IMIS, 32 habitations in 9 districts of Punjab are affected by uranium contamination 
as on date. Out of these, 23 habitations have already been provided with short-term 
measures viz. community water purification plants (CWPP) and individual household 
purifiers (IHP) and the State has been advised to ensure to make short term measures 
for the remaining at the earliest. Further, coverage of tap water supply under JJM is 
being prioritized in all the water quality affected habitations including affected by 
uranium contamination. 
The Department has recently developed a web/ mobile based management information 
system to capture the data of water quality affected habitations, where States/UTs 

3 
 
provide status of habitation that have contamination in their drinking water sources. 
States/UTs have also been advised to carry out testing of water quality on a regular 
basis and take remedial action wherever necessary, to ensure that the water supplied to 
households is of prescribed quality. Further, coverage of tap water supply under JJM is 
being prioritized in all the remaining water quality affected habitations”.  
 
8. The Committee note that the Department has cited number of steps it has 
taken to make provisions of potable tap water supply to rural households. It has 
further stated that 32 habitations in 9 districts of Punjab are affected by uranium 
contamination as on date. Out of these, 23 habitations have already been 
provided with short-term measures viz. community water purification plants 
(CWPP) and individual household purifiers (IHP) and the State has been advised 
to ensure to make short term measures for the remaining at the earliest. It may be 
recalled in this regard that in its 3rd Report on DFG (2025-26) of the Department of 
Drinking Water and Sanitation, the Committee desired to be apprised of the other 
States/regions of the country, apart from Punjab which are facing contamination 
of water due to radioactive elements. However, the Reply of the Department has 
remained silent on this aspect. The Committee in view of the fact that radioactive 
elements like uranium can cause serious health hazards, once again urge upon 
the Department to take necessary step to assess other regions of the country 
which are facing radioactive contamination so that an effective policy response 
may be formulated to arrest this trend. 
 
B. Water Quality Testing laboratories & National Accreditation Board for 
Testing and Calibration Laboratories (NABL) Accreditation 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 6 
 
9. The Committee noted that accreditation/recognition of drinking water quality 
testing laboratories at least for parameters of basic water quality had been emphasized 
under JJM. In this regard, States through the 3rd Chief Secretaries Conference held in 
December 2023 had been advised to have at least 1 NABL accredited laboratory in 
each State by March, 2025. They further observed that there were 2180 drinking water 
quality testing laboratories at State, out of which 1,580 laboratories had been NABL 
accredited. However, in States like Arunachal Pradesh, Sikkim and UT of 
Lakshadweep, no laboratory was NABL accredited. Further, despite the fact that under 
JJM, up to 2% of the allocation to States/ UTs could be utilized for Water Quality 
Monitoring and Surveillance (WQM&S) activities, including setting up, upgradation, 

4 
 
improving functioning and strengthening of drinking water quality testing laboratories, 
there are very few NABL accredited or recognized water quality testing laboratories in 
the States of Bihar, Meghalaya, Mizoram, Odisha and Telangana. Recognizing the 
importance of NABL accredited laboratories in ensuring safe drinking water to the 
common man, the Committee recommended that the Department make concerted 
efforts in coordination with the lagging States in order to expand the network of water 
quality testing laboratories throughout the country.  
10. The Department in its action taken note has replied as follows: 
“Under JJM, all States/ UTs have been advised that all district must have district level 
laboratory. In bigger States, at the regional level, district level lab should be upgraded 
into State level lab in different regions of the State and the existing network of drinking 
water quality testing laboratories in the State may be reviewed and strengthened by 
setting up/ exploring Public Private Partnership for additional labs at regional level, 
district level and block/ sub-division level in the State. Department has been reviewing 
the status of drinking water quality testing laboratories with States/ UTs from time to 
time through several meetings including conference, review meetings through video 
conferences, field visits, etc. and requesting States/ UTs to take up required measures 
to strengthen it. 
In order to ensure that the labs are equipped with facilities, States have been advised 
for accreditation of Drinking Water Quality Testing Laboratories as per 
IS/ISO/IEC:17025 at least for parameters of basic water quality importance and other 
parameters as per local conditions. In order to addressed shortfall in accreditation of 
water quality testing laboratories, the Department has been exploring the possibility of 
getting laboratories accredited/ recognized by other accreditation bodies as per 
IS/ISO/IEC:17025. A meeting was also held with Bureau of Indian Standards (BIS), 
Quality Council of India (QCI) and various laboratory accreditation bodies to discuss 
and address issues such as paucity of assessors and difficulties in getting slots for 
accreditation purpose.  
As reported by States/UTs, as on 29.05.2025, there are 2,183 drinking water quality 
testing laboratories at different levels viz. State, regional/ district, sub-division, block 
level, mobile level laboratories in the country. Out of these, 1,620 laboratories (74%) 
have been accredited/ recognized. Further, the States have been advised to get all the 
remaining district level laboratories accredited/ recognized on or before 30.06.2025. 
Further, 529 Water Treatment Plant level laboratories under JJM have also been 
identified for recognition”. 
 
11. The Committee find that the under JJM, all States/ UTs have been advised 
that all district must have district level laboratory. Further, the Committee are also 
delighted to learn that in order to strengthen the capabilities of Drinking Water 
Testing Quality Labs, States have been advised for accreditation of Drinking 
Water Quality Testing Laboratories as per IS/ISO/IEC:17025 at least for 
parameters of basic water quality importance and other parameters as per local 
conditions. In order to address shortfall in accreditation of water quality testing 

5 
 
laboratories, the Department has been exploring the possibility of getting 
laboratories accredited/ recognized by other accreditation bodies as per 
IS/ISO/IEC:17025. A meeting was also held with Bureau of Indian Standards (BIS), 
Quality Council of India (QCI) and various laboratory accreditation bodies to 
discuss and address issues such as paucity of assessors and difficulties in 
getting slots for accreditation purpose. Further, the Committee take note of the 
fact that as on 29.05.2025, there are 2,183 drinking water quality testing 
laboratories at different levels viz. State, regional/ district, sub-division, block 
level, mobile level laboratories in the country, of which only 1,620 laboratories 
(74%) have been accredited/ recognized. The Committee hope that all the required 
measures are being taken to get all the remaining district level laboratories 
accredited/ recognized on or before 30.06.2025 as have been advised to the 
States. The Committee would like to be briefed about the further progress made 
in this regard within three months from presentation of this Report. 
 
C. Safe drinking water supply in all Schools, Anganwadi centres and 
Ashramshalas 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 7 
 
12. The Committee noted that giving priority to children’s health and wellbeing, a 
special campaign was launched on 2nd October, 2020 to bring awareness and make 
concerted efforts for making provision of tap water supply in these institutions for 
purposes of drinking, cooking mid-day meals, hand washing and use in toilets. Further, 
emphasis was also given on rain water harvesting and grey water management in these 
centres of learning, so that the children would learn different aspects of water 
management and imbibe the same. The Committee were happy to note that Andaman 
& Nicobar Islands, Andhra Pradesh, Dadra & Nagar Haveli and Daman & Diu, Goa, 
Lakshadweep and Sikkim had achieved 100% coverage in providing tap water 
connections both in Schools and Anganwadi centres. Other States had also done 
remarkably well in this regard. However, much more work needed to be done in the 
States of Rajasthan, Odisha, Uttarakhand, West Bengal and Meghalaya as these States 
are lagging behind in providing tap water connections to Schools and Anganwadi 
Centres. In fact in Rajasthan, only 61.05% schools had been covered with tap water 
connections. Similarly, in West Bengal, only 41,866 Anganwadis out of 1,11,074 had 
water tap connections which came to just 37.69%. The Committee took cognizance of 

6 
 
the fact that the provision of tap water connections in institutions such as schools, 
Anganwadi centres, Ashramshalas, etc. was one of the prominent aspects of Jal Jeevan 
Mission which have profound impact on the health, capacity to learn and well-being of 
the children. Being of the view that children are more susceptible to water-borne 
diseases and spend a lot of their time in schools, Anganwadi centres and 
Ashramshalas, the Committee recommended that the Department make intense efforts 
and work in close coordination with those State Governments which were falling behind 
in providing water tap connections to Schools, Anganwadi centres and Ashramshalas. 
The Committee would like to be apprised of the steps taken by the Department in this 
regard within 3 months from presentation of this Report.  
13. The Department in its action taken note has replied as follows: 
“Department is committed to provide piped water supply to schools, anganwadi centres 
and Ashramshalas, etc. and in partnership with States is prioritizing their coverage 
along with rural households the country with piped water supply across. Department is 
making utmost efforts in extending requisite technical and financial assistance along 
with reviewing and monitoring the progress made by the States. Monthly review 
meetings are held with the States for expediting the coverage and the States are 
expected to achieve saturation of coverage of rural households and schools and 
anganwadi centres as per their plans”. 
 
14. The Committee in its 3rd Report on DFG (2025-26) of the Department of 
Drinking Water and Sanitation after finding the fact that number of States such as 
Rajasthan, Odisha, Uttarakhand, West Bengal and Meghalaya are lagging behind 
in providing tap water connections to Schools and Anganwadi Centres, 
recommended that the Department make intense efforts and work in close 
coordination with these underperforming States. The Committee further desired 
to be briefed about the steps taken by the Department within three months from 
the presentation of this Report. However, the Committee find the Action Taken 
Replies furnished by the Department are quite general in nature and lack the 
specific details regarding the precise measures being taken in this regard. 
Keeping in view of the fact that Children are more susceptible to water-borne 
diseases and spend a lot of time in Schools, Anganwadi Centres and 
Ashramshalas, the Committee once again exhort the Department to prepare 
timebound plan in coordination with these States so that safe drinking water may 
be made available to all the Schools and Anganwadi Centres at the earliest in 
these States as well. 
 

7 
 
D. Need to enhance the role of Elected Representatives 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 13 
15. The total estimated outlay of SBM(G) Phase-II for five years was approx. Rs.1.40 
lakh crores, which was to be dovetailed through convergence between different verticals 
of financing [e.g. Rs.52,500 crore (Central share Rs.36,600 crore and State share 
Rs.17,900 crore) was to be allocated through the budgetary provisions for SBM(G) from 
Centre and State Governments; about Rs.51057 crore from 15th Finance Commission 
grants, Rs. 24,823 crore from MGNREGS, Rs. 6,336 crore from Business Models and 
Rs. 6168 crore from, other sources. However, the Committee observed that there were 
multiple Ministries/Departments involved resulting in lack of coordination among them 
causing underutilization of finances. The representative of the Department during the 
oral evidence had also admitted that it was a complex process and needed 
improvement and better monitoring especially at district level. 
In this regard, the Committee took note of the fact that there is District Water and 
Sanitation Mission (DWSM) where Hon’ble Members of Parliament may be requested to 
attend the DWSM meetings as ‘Special Invitees’. However, as the Hon’ble Members of 
Parliament work at the ground level and have a firsthand knowledge of the challenges 
being encountered in execution of the various development schemes including the 
flagship programmes of Jal Jeevan Mission (JJM) and Swachh Bharat Mission 
(Grameen) (SBM) (G), the Committee recommended the Department to make earnest 
endeavours to reconstitute the DWSM to include Member of Parliament and Member of 
the Legislative Assembly from the district in order to ensure effective participation of the 
elected representatives for better formulation, implementation and monitoring of JJM 
and SBM at ground level. The Committee would like to be apprised of the specific steps 
taken by the Department in this regard within three months from presentation of this 
Report. 
16. The Department in its action taken note has replied as follows: 
“As per the DISHA guidelines issued by MoRD, there is a provision of District level 
DISHA committee under the Chairmanship of the Member of Parliament of the Lok 
Sabha Constituency of the district, for holistic planning, review and monitoring of 
implementation of non-statutory schemes of Govt. of India including SBM(G) and Jal 
Jeevan Mission (JJM). Recently, Minister, Jal Shakti vide letter dated 4th June, 2025 has 
requested all MPs to effectively monitor the implementation of SBM(G) and JJM on the 
ground through DISHA.  Information on SBM(G) Phase II data is available in the DISHA 
Dashboard. With respect to the recommendation of the Committee, the States will be 
emphasized that the review of SBM(G) and JJM may be invariably brought into the 
meeting of DISHA committee”. 

8 
 
 
17. The Committee learn from the Action Taken Replies of the Department that 
the States will be emphasized to invariable bring review of SBM (G) and JJM into 
the meetings of DISHA Committees. They have further noted that Minister, Jal 
Shakti vide letter dated 4th June, 2025 has requested all MPs to effectively 
monitor the implementation of SBM(G) and JJM on the ground through DISHA. 
The Committee, in its 3rd Report on DFG (2025-26) of the Department, had 
recommended for reconstitution of District Water and Sanitation Mission (DWSM) 
where Hon’ble Members of Parliament are invited as ‘Special Invitees’, however, 
Action Taken Reply of the Department remain silent on this aspect. Being of the 
opinion that reconstitution of DWSM with the inclusion of elected representatives 
may help in better formulation, implementation and monitoring of JJM and SBM 
at ground level, the Committee, therefore strongly recommend for inclusion of 
Member of Parliament (Lok Sabha) in the DWSM.     
E. Plastic Waste Management in Rural areas 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 16 
18.  The Committee noted that the Plastic Waste Management Facilities are 
developed at Block level. For setting up Plastic Waste Management Units (PWMUs), 
funding support of Rs. 16 lakhs per block is provided under the programme. Additional 
funds could be provided from 15th Finance Commission grants to Rural Local Bodies 
(RLBs) for these activities and other plastic waste management related activities. They 
further noticed that there were 1787 number of PWMUs in 7154 number of Blocks 
spread over 34 States/UTs. However, there were only 1051 functional PWMUs out of 
total 1787. In this regard, the Committee further took note that there were very few 
PWMUs exist in number of States/UTs and even where these Units were available, 
most of them were non-functional. For example, there were only 8 PWMUs as against 
143 blocks in the State of Haryana and not even a single PWMU out of these 8 was 
functional. Almost the same situation prevailed in Assam, Goa, Ladakh, Rajasthan, 
Tripura, Manipur, Chhattisgarh, Gujarat, Andaman & Nicobar Islands. It was the State of 
Tamil Nadu which had done remarkable job in the field of PWMU coverage and 
functionality. 
The Committee in view of the above urged upon the Department to make 
concerted efforts and render all possible assistance to the States to expand the 
coverage of PWMU facilities and also ensure their proper functioning. 

9 
 
19. The Department in its action taken note has replied as follows: 
“It is important to highlight that, as a result of continued support and regular follow-ups, 
States and UTs are making notable progress in Plastic Waste Management (PWM). 
The number of Blocks covered under PWM has increased from 1,787 to 1,988 out of a 
total of 7,154 Blocks, and currently, 66% of the PWM Units (PWMUs) and Urban 
Material Recovery Facilities (MRFs) are functional. The Hon’ble Committee has rightly 
observed that, with the exception of Ladakh and Chhattisgarh, the functionality of 
PWMUs in Assam, Goa, Rajasthan, Tripura, Manipur, Gujarat, and Andaman & Nicobar 
Islands remains below expectations. The detailed progress is given at Annexure-VI 
(SBM) 
For the current financial year 2025–26, States and UTs have planned the establishment 
of 1,638 PWMUs to further strengthen PWM efforts. To accelerate both progress and 
functionality, the Department has organized dedicated video conferences with the 
concerned States and UTs to improve planning processes, review strategic approaches, 
identify operational bottlenecks, and gather actionable recommendations to enhance 
implementation on the ground”. 
 
20. The Committee note that the Department of Drinking Water and Sanitation 
has agreed with the observation of the Standing Committee on Water Resources 
that with the exception of Ladakh and Chhattisgarh, the functionality of PWMUs 
in Assam, Goa, Rajasthan, Tripura, Manipur, Gujarat, and Andaman & Nicobar 
Islands remains below expectations. It has further furnished that to accelerate 
both progress and functionality, the Department has organized dedicated video 
conferences with the concerned States and UTs to improve planning processes, 
review strategic approaches, identify operational bottlenecks, and gather 
actionable recommendations to enhance implementation on the ground. 
However, considering the perilous impact of plastic waste which may adversely 
affect the ability of ecosystem to adapt to climate change, influencing not only 
people’s livelihoods but also wildlife, the Committee are of the view that much 
more ground level remedial measures need to be taken, in addition to holding 
video conferences with the concerned States and UTs. The Committee thus call 
upon the Department to make concerted efforts to combat the menace of ‘Plastic 
Waste’. 
F. Need to conduct ‘Waste Quantification Survey’ 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 17 
21. The Committee took into account the submission of the representative of the 
Department of Drinking Water and Sanitation that ‘Waste Quantification Survey’ to 
identify type of waste that is being generated and its per capita amount, has so far not 
been conducted by either by the Government or by any private agency. They further 

10 
 
noted that the Department was taking the help of IIM Bangalore in this regard which had 
given a detailed structure as to how this kind of survey may be carried out. The 
Committee further noted that regulatory framework for solid, liquid and plastic waste 
management vests with the Ministry of Environment, Forests and Climate change. 
Besides, there were guidelines which prescribe EPR – Extended Producer 
Responsibility which prescribed that every producer of plastic is mandated to buy back 
a certain proportion of what they produce. However, at present, there is a lacuna in 
submission of the EPR certificates which are taken at face value. The Department 
therefore suggested to the Ministry of Environment, Forests and Climate Change that 
these Certificates should be certified by the Municipal Corporations and Rural Local 
Bodies. Taking cognizance of the above submissions of the Department, the Committee 
recommended that the Department take urgent steps to carry out ‘Waste Quantification 
Survey’ on priority basis. They further urged them to work in close coordination with the 
Ministry of Environment, Forests and Climate Change to enforce strict ratification of 
EPR Certificates by the concerned Agencies. The Committee would like to be apprised 
of the steps taken by the Department within three months from presentation of this 
Report. 
22. The Department in its action taken note has replied as follows: 
“The Department is in the process of initiating comprehensive waste quantification 
studies across rural and peri-urban areas of India. This pioneering, first-of-its-kind study 
at a national scale aims to accurately assess per capita waste generation, composition, 
and evolving trends in solid waste in these regions. The insights derived from this study 
will play a critical role in informing the strategic direction of the next phase of the 
Swachh Bharat Mission (Grameen), enabling data-driven planning and targeted 
interventions to strengthen waste management systems at the grassroots level and 
transform them into self-sustaining models with long-term socio-economic and 
environmental value. 
The Department of Drinking Water and Sanitation (DDWS) actively contributes to policy 
formulation, particularly as a key stakeholder in the development of Solid Waste 
Management (SWM) Rules which encompasses Extended Producers Responsibility 
(EPR) provisions. DDWS regularly provides inputs and recommendations during 
consultations and meetings convened by the Ministry of Environment, Forests and 
Climate Change (MoEF & CC), thereby playing a vital role in shaping the regulatory 
framework”. 
23. The Committee are delighted to learn from the Action Taken Replies of the 
Department that the Department is in the process of initiating comprehensive 
waste quantification studies across rural and peri-urban areas of India. The 
insights derived from this study will play a critical role in informing the strategic 
direction of the next phase of the Swachh Bharat Mission (Grameen), enabling 

11 
 
data-driven planning and targeted interventions to strengthen waste management 
systems at the grassroots level and transform them into self-sustaining models 
with long-term socio-economic and environmental value. While welcoming this 
step being taken by the Department especially in view of the fact that ‘Waste 
Quantification Survey’ to identify type of waste that is being generated and its per 
capita amount, has so far not been conducted by either by the Government or by 
any private agency, the Committee hope that such a study may be carried out in a 
timebound manner which will go a long way in formulating a precise and 
calibrated response to bolster waste management system at the grass-root level. 
 

12 
 
 
CHAPTER II 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 1 
 
Budget Analysis of the Department of Drinking Water and Sanitation 
 
The Committee note that since ‘Drinking Water Supply’ and ‘Sanitation’ are State 
subjects, the Department of Drinking Water and Sanitation (DDWS) of the Ministry of Jal 
Shakti has been primarily tasked with supporting the State Governments’ efforts to 
enhance rural drinking water supply and sanitation. The Department is providing 
technical and financial support through the Centrally sponsored schemes of Jal Jeevan 
Mission (JJM) and Swachh Bharat Mission (Grameen) [SBM(G)]. They note that a total 
Budget of Rs. 74226.02 crores has been allocated to DDWS for Financial Year 2025-
26. The Committee note that the Department has continued to increase allocations at 
BE stage which has been subsequently revised downwards at RE stage. For FY 2021-
22, BE was Rs. 60030.45 crore which was reduced to Rs. 51036.90 at RE stage. 
Similarly, the BE of Rs. 67221.12 for FY 2022-23 was reduced to Rs. 60,029.12 crore at 
RE stage. Even FY 2024-25 has witnessed a drastic reduction of 61% (appx.) of 
budgetary allocations of Rs. 77390.68 crore which at RE stage stood at Rs. 29916.68 
crore. However, for FY 2025-26 as mentioned above, the BE of Rs. 74226.02 crores 
has been provided to the Department which is 148% (appx.) higher of RE allocation for 
FY 2024-25. The Committee observe that frequent drastic reduction of budgetary 
provisions of the Department at RE stage and subsequently enhancing the BE for next 
Financial Year indicates lack of proper planning for budgetary requirements by the 
Department. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Department undertake 
their pre-budget exercise with much more care and prudence for making more 
pragmatic and conservative budgetary estimates.  
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Jal Jeevan Mission (JJM) 
 
In August 2019, Cabinet approved restructuring and subsuming of erstwhile 
National Rural Drinking Water Programme (NRDWP) into Jal Jeevan Mission – ‘Har 

13 
 
Ghar Nal Se Jal’ with an aim to provide the Functional Household Tap Connection to 
every rural household by 2024. The estimated outlay of the mission was of Rs. 3.60 
lakh Crore, out of which Central share was Rs. 2.08 lakh Crore. Almost entire Central 
share approved by the Cabinet, has been released to the eligible States, though 
additional funds are required for completion of the approved schemes. Year-wise details 
of financial progress made so far under the Mission is as under: 
(Amount in Rs. Crore) 
Year BE RE Actual 
Expenditure 
Utilization 
reported (Centre 
+ State) 
2019-2020 10,000.66 10,000.66 10,000.44 10,074.28 
2020-2021 11,500.00  11,000.00 10,999.94 20,449.96 
2021-2022 50,011.00  45,011.00 40,125.64 43,551.85 
2022-2023 60,000.00  55,000.00 54,839.79 92,339.73 
2023-2024 70,000.00  70,000.00 69,992.37 1,55,979.20 
2024-2025 70,162.90 22,694.00# 22,638.44 91,763.80 
#total utilization restricted to approved central outlay of Rs. 2,08,652 Crore       
Source: JJM-IMIS/ PFMS 
As may be seen from the table above, in 2019-20, there was no variation in BE & RE. In 
2020-21, there was a meagre reduction at RE Stage of Rs. 500 Cr. However, 
considering the fund absorbing capacity of the States and issues being faced by States 
in arrangement of matching State share, a reduction of Rs. 5,000 Cr. was made in 
2021-22 & 2022-23 at RE stage.  Further, almost entire fund allocated in 2023-24 was 
utilized. 
The Cabinet had approved the Jal Jeevan Mission for the period from 2019-20 to 2023-
24 with Central outlay of Rs. 2,08,652 Crore. This Department had utilized Rs.1,85,958 
Crore till 2023-24 leaving a balance of Rs. 22,694 Crore for utilization in 2024-25. As 
the proposal for continuation of Jal Jeevan Mission with total enhanced outlay was then 
under consideration, the balance outlay of Rs. 22,694 Crore was only been considered 
for ceiling of expenditure at RE stage for 2024-25. Against the allocated fund, almost 
entire fund has been utilized.  
Further, Hon'ble Finance Minister during her budget speech 2025- 26 has announced 
extension of Jal Jeevan Mission until 2028 with an enhanced total outlay. Accordingly, 

14 
 
Department is actively considering the proposal for continuation of JJM beyond the 
approved period and outlay. In 2025-26, an amount of Rs. 67,000 Crore has been 
allocated for implementation of the Mission. The Department is in process of obtaining 
approval for the proposed continuation of JJM for the extended period with enhanced 
total outlay and fund utilization may start after securing approval of Cabinet. 
 
Swachh Bharat Mission (Grameen) [SBM-G] 
Sanitation is a State subject and budget under SBM(G) is demand driven, as per the 
demand of the States. Proposal for Budget allocation under SBM(G) is based on the 
amount that was projected as annual expenditure and approved by the Cabinet as per 
SBM(G) Phase II Cabinet Note. Before commencement of each financial year, the 
Annual Implementation Plans (AIP) of SBM(G) for the coming year are prepared by the 
States/UTs and submitted to Department of Drinking Water and Sanitation (DDWS). 
The AIPs are then discussed with individual States/UTs in detail keeping in view the 
targets and timeline. Even the allocation made at BE stage was well within the 
requirements projected by the States/UTs in their AIPs under SBM(G) Phase-II since 
2020-21. However, due to emergence of Covid-19 in the initial years and evolving 
payment systems for Centrally Sponsored Schemes (first introduction of SNA and then 
shifting to SNA-SPARSH), the expenditure made by the States/UTs was not picked up 
as per their plan, due to which the allocation under SBM(G) was reduced at RE stage. 
However, the recommendation of the Committee has been noted and the States will be 
advised to make more realistic and achievable AIPs in the upcoming financial years. 
 
(OM No.  H-11013(12)/2/2025-Parliament-DDWS-Part(1) (E-file No. 29418)   Dated : 
17.06.2025) 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 2 
Analysis of Budgetary allocations under ‘Jal Jeevan Mission’ (JJM) 
 
The Committee are pleased to note that Hon’ble Finance Minister during the 
budget speech 2025-26 has already announced extension of Jal Jeevan Mission till 
2028 with an enhanced total outlay for achieving milestone of SDG-6.1 well before 
2030, the proposal has been firmed up aiming at Structural Reforms for transforming 
the rural water supply sector from “Department based approach” to “service delivery 
approach” with a citizen centric approach through MoU with State Level Implementing 
Agencies. The Committee note that Rs. 67,000 crore has been solely assigned for ‘Jal 
Jeevan Mission’ which is 90% (appx.) of the entire budget of the Department which is 

15 
 
Rs. 74226.02 crores. However, the Committee note that BE allocation of JJM has 
witnessed drastic reduction of 67% (appx.) at RE level for FY 2024-25. The Committee 
would like to be apprised of the specific reasons for such a huge reduction at RE stage 
for FY 2024-25 and its impact on execution of this ambitious Programme. In view of the 
fact that JJM has been extended till 2028, the Committee urge upon the Department to 
make concerted efforts to utilize the budgetary allocations optimally in order to obviate 
the possibility of huge reduction at RE stage which has been witnessed in current 
Financial Year (2024-25).  
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
As stated above, almost entire fund Rs. 2.08 lakh crore approved and allocated 
under JJM have been utilized. As per the announcement made by Hon’ble Finance 
Minister in her budget speech 2025-26, the Department is in process of obtaining 
approval for the proposed continuation of JJM for the extended period with enhanced 
total outlay and the budgetary provision of Rs. 67,000 Crore for 2025-26 may be utilized 
after securing the approval of Cabinet. 
 
(OM No.  H-11013(12)/2/2025-Parliament-DDWS-Part(1) (E-file No. 29418)   Dated : 
17.06.2025) 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 3 
Physical Progress under Jal Jeevan Mission 
 
The Committee note that at the time of announcement of JJM on 15th August 
2019, 3.23 Crore rural households (17%) of the country had tap water connections. 
Since then, around 12.19 Crore families living in rural areas have been provided with 
tap water connections in their homes. Now, out of more than 19.36 Crore rural 
households, around 15.45 Crore (79.81%) rural families of the country have assured 
potable tap water supply in their homes, improving their quality of life and enhancing 
'ease of living'. The Committee are pleased to note that 11 States/ Union Territories, 
namely Arunachal Pradesh, Goa, Gujarat, Haryana, Himachal Pradesh, Gujarat, 
Mizoram, Punjab, Telangana, Andaman & Nicobar Islands, Dadra Nagar Haveli & 
Daman Diu (DNH & DD), and Puducherry, have achieved 100% coverage of rural 
households and have attained the 'Har Ghar Jal (HGJ)' status.  
However, the Committee note that still a major part of the work remains to be 
completed in West Bengal, Rajasthan, Madhya Pradesh, Kerala and Jharkhand which 

16 
 
have so far achieved coverage of only 54.51%, 55.39%, 67.29%, 54.25% and 54.66% 
respectively. The Committee take cognizance of the fact that long gestation period of 
Multi Village Schemes, lack of dependable ground water sources in drought-prone & 
desert areas, geogenic contamination, terrain challenges in hilly & forested areas, lack 
of technical capabilities in the States, delay in clearances from nodal agencies, 
availability of matching State share, especially during CoVID-19 pandemic, nation-wide 
CoVID-19 pandemic, associated lockdown, etc. have slowed down the pace of 
implementation of the programme in these States. Being of the view that active 
participation of the States is essential to make the Programme a success, the 
Committee urge upon the Department to look into the particular problems of each of the 
lagging States hampering timely completion of the Projects and take remedial measures 
for faster implementation of the Projects in these States.  
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
Government of India is committed to extend technical and financial assistance to 
the States/ UTs for achieving functional tap water connection to every rural household 
by December, 2028. To expedite the planning and implementation, as well as 
monitoring and handhold States/ UTs, Government of India has taken number of steps 
to plan and implement JJM in the whole country which inter alia includes discussions 
and consultation with States/ UTs, regular review of planning and implementation, 
workshops/ conferences/ webinars for capacity building and knowledge sharing, field 
visits by multi-disciplinary team to provide technical support, etc. Moreover, for online 
monitoring, JJM–Integrated Management Information System (IMIS) and JJM–
Dashboard has been put in place. Provision has also been made for transparent online 
financial management through Public Financial Management System (PFMS). In 
addition, to expedite the implementation of JJM, this department has also taken up 
development of  SWSM and DWSM dashboards, Functionality Assessments and 
mapping of water pipelines on PM Gatishakti portal for effective monitoring of 
infrastructure created under the Mission.  
Further, for extending guidance to States/ UT’s officials and local village level 
functionaries to expand the water quality testing and reporting, surveillance of drinking 
water sources, sanitary surveys, setting up of laboratories, etc. Drinking Water Quality 
Monitoring & Surveillance Framework has also been released. States have also been 
advised to formulate a comprehensive O&M Policy inter alia including provisions for 
source sustainability and suitable provisions for development of efficient and sustained 
mechanism for collection of water tariff, finalised by the State in consultation with GP/ 

17 
 
VWSC/ Pani Samiti. A draft framework for the comprehensive O&M Policy has also 
been shared with the States. So far, 20 States have finalized/ notified the O&M Policy 
and the remaining States have been advised to notify the respective O&M Policy before 
30.06.2025. 
As a result of above initiatives taken by the department, following progress has 
been done: 
(i) More than 23 Lakhs Kms of water pipelines have been uploaded on PM Gatishakti 
portal which is intended to provide multimodal connectivity infrastructures to various 
economic zones.  
(ii) To streamline the monitoring of piped water supply schemes, this department has 
developed SWSM dashboard. The dashboard will provide the basic information 
about the PWS, water quality details, functionality and financial details at single 
platform. Due to this development, apart from PHE department, O/o Chief 
Secretary, District Collectors and Panchayat Level functionaries will also be able to 
view/ monitor the progress of schemes. 
(iii) The field survey for Functionality Assessment of tap connections has been 
completed in 22,812 villages across the country. The findings of the report shall be 
shared with the States/ UTs to take corrective action on the gaps.    
(iv) The Department is regularly reviewing the progress with respective District 
Magistrates/ Deputy Commissioners/ Collectors, being head of DWSMs on various 
aspects of progress including scheme completion, HGJ certification, priority areas, 
PVTG habitations, coverage of schools and anganwadis, O&M etc.  
Further, the following implementation strategy has been envisaged for extended period 
of the Mission: 
i.) Signing of State-specific MoUs with respective States/ UTs to ensure reform led 
implementation and timely completion 
ii.) Focus on quality assurance through NWEs, functionality of tap water connections 
and O&M for long term sustainability. 
i.) National WASH Experts to support State governments in ensuring construction 
quality by  
a. Ground-truthing of completed schemes  
b. Reviewing functionality 
c. Discussing with District Collectors/ DWSMs concerned 
 
ii.) NJJM to review the action taken on the NWE observations 

18 
 
iii.) Reviewing Third Party Inspection Agencies’ quality check reports 
iv.) SOP for handing over protocol for in-village infrastructure to GPs 
v.) Scheme wise project monitoring and financial release through SNA-SPARSH. 
vi.) Setting up of District and State level Command & Control Centres for real-time 
monitoring 
vii.) Grievance Redressal mechanism at GP, district and State level 
 
(OM No.  H-11013(12)/2/2025-Parliament-DDWS-Part(1) (E-file No. 29418)   Dated : 
17.06.2025) 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 4 
Contamination of Drinking Water 
The Committee note that all Arsenic and Fluoride affected habitations have been 
covered by community water purification plants (CWPP) as an interim measure. 
However, they further observe that there are 11,348 no. of quality affected habitations 
(Iron, Salinity, Nitrate, and Heavy metals) spread over 96 districts of 07 States where 
short-terms measures have not been provided. Since these contaminants can also 
cause health hazard, the Committee feel that these areas too need to be covered by 
temporary measures to provide immediate relief to the population living in quality 
affected habitations. The Committee, therefore urge the Department to emphasize to 
the States the necessity of implementing measures that can offer an immediate solution 
such as installing small water purification dispensers or sending out mobile water vans 
or tankers that carry safe and clean drinking water, until all of these residents have 
access to piped drinking water from a high-quality source. The Committee would also 
like to be apprised of the details of progress in coverage of quality affected habitations 
with permanent good quality functional tap water supply as on date.  
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
Water being a State subject, States have been advised to prioritize quality-
affected habitations while taking up schemes to make provision of potable tap water 
supply to rural households. In case planning, implementation and commissioning of 
piped water supply schemes in quality-affected habitations takes time, purely as an 
interim measure, States have been advised to install community water purification 
plants (CWPPs), to provide safe water to every household in these habitations @ of 8-
10 litre per capita per day to meet their drinking and cooking requirements.  

19 
 
Department has been reviewing the progress with States from time to time 
through several meetings including conference, review meetings through video 
conference, field visits etc.  The progress reported by State is also monitored on daily 
basis through the online monitoring system JJM –IMIS.  
 Further, States/ UTs have also been advised to plan and implement piped water 
supply schemes of bulk water transfer based on safe water sources such as surface 
water sources or alternative safe ground water sources for the villages with water 
quality issues. As recommended by the Committee, States have been requested to 
finalize schemes on priority for all of the remaining quality–affected habitations to 
ensure supply of potable water either through pipe water supply (PWS) or community 
water purification plants (CWPP). Moreover, States have been advised to revisit its 
plan, if required, and expedite the implementation of schemes to ensure provision of 
safe drinking water through tap connections to all households in quality–affected 
habitations.  As reported by States, since the launch of JJM, the number of water quality 
affected habitations, has reduced significantly over the years. Year-wise details of 
contaminant-wise quality-affected habitations is as follows: 
 No. of affected habitations as on 
Contamina
nt 
01.04.1
9 
01.04.2
0 
01.04.2
1 
01.04.2
2 
01.04.2
3 
01.04.2
4 
01.04.2
5  
28.05.2
5 
Arsenic 14,020  4,568 1,717 800 507 378 314 314 
Fluoride 7,996  5,796 1,021 638 393 348 250 249 
Iron 18,599  32,134 17,220 11,728 9,152 4,503 3,194 3,175 
Salinity 13,319  10,455 10,038 9,922 9,018 8,493 7,651 7,512 
Nitrate 1,443  907 521 515 475 447 389 388 
Heavy 
Metal 
2,162 306 187 108 84 81 46 46 
Total 57,539  54,166 30,704 23,711 19,629 14,250 11,844 11,684 
Provision of potable drinking water for cooking and drinking requirements has been 
made in all the remaining 314 Arsenic–affected and 249 Fluoride-affected habitations 
through CWPPs/ IHPs. 
(OM No.  H-11013(12)/2/2025-Parliament-DDWS-Part(1) (E-file No. 29418)   Dated : 
17.06.2025) 

20 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 6 
 
Water Quality Testing laboratories & National Accreditation Board for Testing and 
Calibration Laboratories (NABL) Accreditation 
 
The Committee note that accreditation/recognition of drinking water quality 
testing laboratories at least for parameters of basic water quality has been emphasized 
under JJM. In this regard, States through the 3rd Chief Secretaries Conference held in 
December 2023 have been advised to have at least 1 NABL accredited laboratory in 
each State by March, 2025. They further observe that there are 2180 drinking water 
quality testing laboratories at State, out of which 1,580 laboratories have been NABL 
accredited. However, in States like Arunachal Pradesh, Sikkim and UT of 
Lakshadweep, no laboratory is NABL accredited. Further, despite the fact that under 
JJM, up to 2% of the allocation to States/ UTs can be utilized for Water Quality 
Monitoring and Surveillance (WQM&S) activities, including setting up, upgradation, 
improving functioning and strengthening of drinking water quality testing laboratories, 
there are very few NABL accredited or recognized water quality testing laboratories in 
the States of Bihar, Meghalaya, Mizoram, Odisha and Telangana. Recognizing the 
importance of NABL accredited laboratories in ensuring safe drinking water to the 
common man, the Committee recommend that the Department make concerted efforts 
in coordination with the lagging States in order to expand the network of water quality 
testing laboratories throughout the country.  
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Under JJM, all States/ UTs have been advised that all district must have district 
level laboratory. In bigger States, at the regional level, district level lab should be 
upgraded into State level lab in different regions of the State and the existing network of 
drinking water quality testing laboratories in the State may be reviewed and 
strengthened by setting up/ exploring Public Private Partnership for additional labs at 
regional level, district level and block/ sub-division level in the State. Department has 
been reviewing the status of drinking water quality testing laboratories with States/ UTs 
from time to time through several meetings including conference, review meetings 
through video conferences, field visits, etc. and requesting States/ UTs to take up 
required measures to strengthen it. 
 

21 
 
In order to ensure that the labs are equipped with facilities, States have been 
advised for accreditation of Drinking Water Quality Testing Laboratories as per 
IS/ISO/IEC:17025 at least for parameters of basic water quality importance and other 
parameters as per local conditions. In order to addressed shortfall in accreditation of 
water quality testing laboratories, the Department has been exploring the possibility of 
getting laboratories accredited/ recognized by other accreditation bodies as per 
IS/ISO/IEC:17025. A meeting was also held with Bureau of Indian Standards (BIS), 
Quality Council of India (QCI) and various laboratory accreditation bodies to discuss 
and address issues such as paucity of assessors and difficulties in getting slots for 
accreditation purpose.  
 
 As reported by States/UTs, as on 29.05.2025, there are 2,183 drinking water 
quality testing laboratories at different levels viz. State, regional/ district, sub-division, 
block level, mobile level laboratories in the country. Out of these, 1,620 laboratories 
(74%) have been accredited/ recognized. Further, the States have been advised to get 
all the remaining district level laboratories accredited/ recognized on or before 
30.06.2025. Further, 529 Water Treatment Plant level laboratories under JJM have also 
been identified for recognition. 
(OM No.  H-11013(12)/2/2025-Parliament-DDWS-Part(1) (E-file No. 29418)   Dated : 
17.06.2025) 
Comment of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 11 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 8 
Need to prepare Village Action Plans (VAPs) 
 
The Committee observe that out of 5,85,831 villages, 529316 Village Water and 
Sanitation Committee (VWSC)/Pani Samiti/Village Councils have been constituted. 
Similarly, 5,20,003 Village Action Plans have also been prepared. However, the 
Committee note that some States like Bihar and Telangana are far behind both in 
constitution of VWSC and preparation of VAPs. In Bihar, out of total 37308 villages, only 
2263 VWSCs have been constituted while only 700 VAPs have been prepared. 
Similarly, in Telangana, out of 9693 villages, only 6614 VWSCs have been constituted 
and no VAP has been prepared. In this regard, the Committee note the submission of 
the Department which explains that States of Bihar and Telangana are not availing 
central grants under JJMs since 2021-22. However, the State of Telangana has been 

22 
 
reported as Har Ghar Jal state and Bihar has reported coverage of 95.71% households 
with tap water supply. In this connection, the Committee would like to be apprised of the 
reasons for not availing central grants by these two States.  
Further, the Committee take cognizance of the significance of VAPs which is 
prepared for each village by the participation of the local community with the following 
components - strengthening of local drinking water sources; in-village water supply 
infrastructure to provide tap water connections; grey-water treatment and reuse; and 
operation & maintenance of water supply systems so that every household gets an 
assured supply of potable water on a regular and long-term basis. Nevertheless the fact 
that the States of Bihar and Telangana are not availing the central grant under JJM, 
keeping in view the importance of VAPs, the Committee recommend that the 
Department persuade these States to take necessary steps for constitution of VWSCs 
and VAPs.  
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
State of Bihar through Hon’ble Minister (PHED)’s letter dated 18.10.2021, had informed 
that the State Government had already approved the schemes for saturation of all the 
rural areas through State level ‘Har Ghar Nal ka Jal’ Nischay programme for tap water 
connections and since 2021-22, the State of Bihar is not availing central funds under 
JJM. Further, the State of Telangana also has availed central grants of Rs. 188.23 
Crore till 2020-21 only under JJM and has not participated in the Annual Action Plan 
preparation exercise thereafter for availing further central funds under JJM.  
Further, the Department of Drinking Water & Sanitation has been continuously pursuing 
with States for constitution of VWSCs and preparation of VAPs for the remaining 
villages on priority. 
(OM No.  H-11013(12)/2/2025-Parliament-DDWS-Part(1) (E-file No. 29418)   Dated : 
17.06.2025) 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 9 
Non-completion of road repair works after laying of pipelines under JJM 
 
The Committee examined the submission of the Department which has furnished 
information with regard to laying of water supply pipes only in respect of 23 States/UTs. 
The Committee would like to be apprised of this information in respect of other 
States/UTs as well. Further, the Committee note that while some States like Himachal 
Pradesh and Tripura are reported to have achieved 100% milestone in properly laying 

23 
 
the water supply pipes. However, there are some States like Sikkim and Arunachal 
Pradesh which are far behind in this aspect. In Sikkim, only 56.41% of the pipes have 
been properly laid, while in case of Arunachal Pradesh, no water pipeline has been 
properly laid and percentage is ‘Nil’. The Committee are of the view that improperly laid 
water supply pipes not only cause regular leakage of precious water, but also damage 
infrastructure such roads/highways resulting in high risk of accidents. The Committee, 
therefore, urge upon the Department to examine this matter earnestly and advise the 
State Governments to fix accountability in this regard so as to ensure that the water 
pipes are laid properly in order to mitigate the sufferings of the villagers.  
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
To avoid any hardships to the villagers, States have been advised to take up 
rural water schemes in a way with minimum damages to infrastructure such as roads/ 
highways and to restore the roads/ highways immediately in case of damages done 
while laying of pipelines for water supply systems. Further, funds available under JJM 
may be utilized for repairing or constructing streets or roads that get affected while 
laying water supply pipelines of rural water supply schemes taken up under JJM. 
As per the JJM Guidelines, the State implementing agencies are to ensure the 
quality of materials used in construction/ restoration of roads etc. by getting it certified 
from accredited testing agencies. Further, under JJM, third-party inspection of quality of 
works undertaken is mandatory before making payment to the contractors. Reference 
for any sub-standard restoration work brought to the notice of NJJM are taken up with 
respective States with an advice to take requisite corrective action within a month. 
Moreover, as suggested by the Committee, the States have been requested to fix 
accountability in this regard so as to ensure that the water pipes are laid properly in 
order to mitigate the sufferings of the villagers. 
State/ UT-wise details compiled from the visits undertaken till March, 2025 are at 
Annex-I (JJM). 
(OM No.  H-11013(12)/2/2025-Parliament-DDWS-Part(1) (E-file No. 29418)   Dated : 
17.06.2025) 
 
 
 
 
 

24 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 10 
Streamlining the process of pending clearances for Rural Water Supply Projects 
The Committee observe that total 3045 proposals have been submitted by the 15 
states namely Andhra Pradesh, Assam, Chhattisgarh, Jharkhand, Karnataka, Kerala, 
Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Odisha, Punjab, Rajasthan, Sikkim, Tamil Nadu, Uttar 
Pradesh and West Bengal with different agencies like Forests, National Highways 
Authority of India, Railways, GAIL and others for clearances of rural water supply 
projects. In this regard, the Committee are pleased to note that in order to assist the 
States to get various Statutory and other clearances (NHAI, railways, GAIL, Defence 
etc), a nodal officer has been assigned the task of coordinating with States and 
respective Central Ministry/ Agency since 2022-23. A separate link has been created in 
JJM IMIS for receiving and monitoring of schemes seeking various clearances. Special 
orientation sessions have been carried out to the State Officers on NHAI, Railways and 
Forest Clearances. However, still 329 projects are pending with different agencies. 
Further, in case of Madhya Pradesh which have applied 108 proposals to the Forest 
Department, 83 projects are pending. Similarly, in case of Kerala, out of 67 proposals 
submitted with National Highways Authority of India (NHAI), 29 are pending. The 
Committee in view of the objective of the Jal Jeevan Mission (JJM) of providing assured 
potable tap water in adequate quantity on a regular and long-term basis to every rural 
household urge the Department to make necessary endeavours to expedite the 
clearance of the pending projects of rural water supply within a reasonable timeframe.  
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Nomination of a nodal officer in the Department for coordinating with Central 
nodal Ministries/ Departments/ agencies viz. M/o EF&CC, M/o RTH, NHAI, M/o 
Railways etc. to facilitate the States in obtaining Statutory/ other clearances. Further, 
regular review meetings are also being taken up with these central agencies and States 
level officers by Sr. Officers in DDWS to ensure seamless progress, address 
bottlenecks. The digital platform on JJM IMIS further helps in, collection of schematic 
information, enabling tracking, monitoring, and speedy decision-making.  
As on date, the process of clearances has been streamlined by online collecting 
the schematic information on JJM IMIS and capturing the events requiring GoI 
interventions. So far, States have applied for 3,396 clearances and action has been 
completed in 3,057 projects leaving 339 clearances pending across various States. 
Details are placed at Annex-II (JJM).  

25 
 
Out of the total pendency of 339 cases, as reported by the User agencies/ State 
PHED, the details of the pending clearance at Government of India level are provided in 
table below: 
 
S. 
No. State Fores
t NHAI Railways GAIL Others Total 
1 Chhattisgarh 0  1 0 0 0 1 
 Karnataka 1  0 0 0 1 2 
2 Kerala 3  4 3 0 1 11 
3 Madhya 
Pradesh 
34 0 0 0 0 34 
4 Rajasthan 4  1 0 0 0 5 
5 Uttar Pradesh 3  4 25 0 0 32 
6 West Bengal 0  1 0 0 1 2 
Total 45  11 28 0 3 87 
Department is regularly following up with the involved agencies for expediting the 
clearances of all the pending schemes/ projects at the earliest. 
(OM No.  H-11013(12)/2/2025-Parliament-DDWS-Part(1) (E-file No. 29418)   Dated : 
17.06.2025) 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 11 
Financial performance under Swachh Bharat Mission (Grameen) [SBM(G)-II] 
 
The Committee observe that this Scheme has witnessed gross underutilization of 
the budgetary allocations in Financial Year 2024-25, while RE was of Rs. 7192 crore in 
FY 2024-25, the actual expenditure as on 24.01.2025 was of Rs. 2354.60 crore which is 
just 33% (appx.) of the RE allocations. In this regard, the Committee note the written 
submission of the Department which states that in Financial Year 2024-25, 26 States 
have been selected for onboarding SNASPARSH, a new system introduced by 
Department of Expenditure (DoE), Ministry of Finance (MoF) for just-in-time release. In 
the new system, the State Finance Department has to develop a State Finance 
Management System and provide training to all the Implementing Agencies (IAs) for 
processing payment files in the new system. As per the instructions issued by DoE, 
MoF, funds could not be released to these States as per the existing procedure in their 
SNA a/c. Till December, 2024, only 6 States had onboarded SNA SPARSH which have 

26 
 
increased to 13 as on 12.02.2025. Remaining States were not able to onboard SNA 
SPARSH due to non-preparedness by the States to onboard the new system. Though 
many of the States become eligible for release under the programme, funds could not 
be released to the States as they could not onboard SNA-SPARSH. Even the States 
which have onboarded SNA-SPARSH, expenditure was very low for the States except 
Rajasthan and Odisha due to the new systems. This has resulted in low utilization of BE 
allocation in 2024-25. 
 
The Committee taking cognizance of the above fact recommend that the 
Department persuade the States to take all requisite steps on urgent basis to get 
themselves ready in order to adopt the new system introduced by the Ministry of 
Finance. Meanwhile, pending such steps by the States, the Committee urge upon the 
Department to approach the Ministry of Finance and inform them the practical difficulties 
in implementing the new system under SNASPARSH, and hence seek exemption for 
the time being so that the budgetary resources may be optimally utilized and 
implementation of the Programme is not adversely affected. The Committee would like 
to be categorically apprised of the steps taken in this regard within three months of 
presentation of this Report. 
 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 
In the new system of SNA-SPARSH, the State Finance Departments (SFD) has 
to develop a new Integrated Financial Management System (IFMS) which is to be 
integrated with e-kuber system of RBI and PFMS of Govt. of India. The delay in 
onboarding SNA-SPARSH or slow expenditure in the new system is due to delay in 
developing IFMS or some flaws in the State IFMS. For this, regular review meetings 
with the States have been conducted from time to time by DDWS and letter to 
SFD/Chief Secretary has been issued for expediting the process of onboarding the new 
system. Further, for some States, which have sought relaxation from immediate 
onboarding SNA SPARSH, the matter has been taken up Ministry of Finance for 
relaxation. Most of the States, except Manipur, Nagaland and Jammu & Kashmir, have 
now onboarded SNA SPARSH and sanction has been issued to these States in the new 
system. However, some of the States have yet started making payment in the new 
system which have been repeatedly pursued for pushing the payment files in the new 
system. It is expected that the States will start expediting the payment in SNA-SPARSH 
from the current financial year. 
(OM No.  H-11013(12)/2/2025-Parliament-DDWS-Part(1) (E-file No. 29418)   Dated : 17.06.2025) 

27 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 12 
Further, the Committee observe that the budgetary allocation of the Department 
is Rs. 7192 crore. However, around Rs. 1031 crore per year, is paid in the form of 
interest payment which will continue till 2030 leaving little amount left for execution of 
this ambitious programme. In view of this, the Committee believe that budgetary 
allocations for SBM (G) need to be augmented so that sufficient allocations may be 
available for proper and timely implementation of SBM (G). 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Proposal for Budget allocation under SBM(G) is based on the amount that was 
projected as annual expenditure and approved by the Cabinet as per SBM(G) Phase II 
Cabinet Note. It is also based on demand projected by the States/UTs in their Annual 
Implementation Plan (AIP) and the capacity of the States/UTs to consume their 
demand. From the previous years’ expenditure trend, it appears that the BE allocated in 
the current financial year will be sufficient for the States/UTs to carry out their work 
under the programme. However, if additional funds are required, based on the 
expenditure and progress made by the States/UTs, additional budget will be raised 
through Supplementary Demands for Grants.  
 
(OM No.  H-11013(12)/2/2025-Parliament-DDWS-Part(1) (E-file No. 29418)   Dated : 
17.06.2025) 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 14 
Open Defecation Free (ODF) Plus declared villages 
 
The Committee take note of the fact that the goal under Phase-II of SBM(G) is to 
convert all the villages from ODF to ODF Plus (Model). Further, the Committee observe 
that as on 10.02.2025, there are 4,35,314 ODF Plus Model villages out of total 5,86,611 
villages. The 10 lowest performing States/UTs in terms of percentage of total ODF Plus 
Model villages are Manipur, Meghalaya, Punjab, Arunachal Pradesh, Andhra Pradesh, 
Karnataka, Jharkhand, Nagaland, Puducherry and Haryana. In this regard, the 
Department has cited number of challenges such as remote areas, difficult terrain, 
hydro-geological conditions, lack of technical knowhow, capacity building of the 
implementing agencies and functionaries at various levels with respect to planning and 
implementation of Solid and Liquid Waste Management activities, coordination between 
different Departments/Organization for convergence of resources in proper 

28 
 
implementation of this Scheme. While taking view of the fact that as mentioned above, 
the goal of SBM (G)-II is to convert all the villages from ODF to ODF Plus (Model) and 
the programme has also been extended upto 2025-26, the Committee urge upon the 
Department to work with these lowest performing States/UTs and devise suitable 
remedial measures to quell the afore stated hindrances so that the stated objective of 
the Programme may be realized within the given timeframe. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Regular review meetings/VCs are held with the States/UTs to monitor the 
progress and understand the hurdles faced by the States in implementation of the 
programme. Officers from DDWS have been designated as area officers for each of the 
States who closely coordinate with the States to monitor the implementation and 
address the issues faced by the States. Based on the experience of the States during 
implementation, the programme guidelines have been amended from time to time to 
support the States to overcome the hurdles faced by the States in implementation of the 
programme within the broad contours of SBM(G) Phase-II. 
 
(OM No.  H-11013(12)/2/2025-Parliament-DDWS-Part(1) (E-file No. 29418)   Dated : 
17.06.2025) 
RECOMMENDATION NO.15 
 
Status of Solid and Liquid Waste Management (SLWM) facilities 
 
The Committee note that as on 22 January, 2025, there were 4,87,956 number of 
villages covered with Solid Waste Management (SWM) facilities while 5,17,600 number 
of villages covered with Liquid Waste Management (LWM) facilities. They further note 
that several Big States such as Andhra Pradesh, Jharkhand, Maharashtra, Punjab and 
Tamil Nadu have seen very slow pace in creation of SWM facilities during the year 
2024-25 as against the targets fixed. Even in case of Kerala, against the target of 637 
SWM facilities, no facility has been created in the year 2024-25. Similarly, the work 
relating to creation of LWM facilities has been going at sluggish rate in the States/UTs 
of Andhra Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, Jammu & Kashmir, Jharkhand, Kerala, Maharashtra, 
Puducherry, Punjab, Telangana and Uttar Pradesh in the year 2024-25. Further, the 
Committee also notice that in case of Dadra Nagar Haveli & Daman Diu (DNH & DD) no 
target has been fixed for the year 2024-25 with regard to both SWM and LWM facilities. 
Similarly, as far as UT of Puducherry is concerned, in the year 2024-25, no target for 
SWM has been fixed and in case of LWM facility, no such facility has been developed 

29 
 
against the target of 48 facilities. The Committee would like to be apprised of the 
specific reasons for not fixing any targets as mentioned above for SWM and LWM 
facilities in certain States/UTs. Further, having taken note of the fact that Solid and 
Liquid Waste Management (SLWM) is one of the major components of the SBM - II 
(Grameen), the Committee desire that the Department examine the causes for slow 
progress in creation of SLWM facilities in lagging States and work in close collaboration 
with them in order to mitigate the challenges faced by these States in execution of the 
programme. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
The Department of Drinking Water and Sanitation (DDWS) continues to actively 
support all States and Union Territories through regular meetings, video conferences, 
and the issuance of advisories. The Department acknowledges the recommendations 
made by the Hon’ble Committee and remains committed to providing focused 
assistance to accelerate progress in Solid Waste Management (SWM), particularly in 
the States highlighted by the Committee—namely Andhra Pradesh, Jharkhand, Kerala, 
Maharashtra, Punjab, and Tamil Nadu. It is important to note that, with the exception of 
Jharkhand and Punjab, the SWM coverage in Andhra Pradesh, Kerala, Maharashtra, 
and Tamil Nadu exceeds 83%. In line with the Committee’s recommendations, special 
emphasis will be made on expediting SWM implementation in Jharkhand and Punjab. 
 
Regarding UTs, Dadra & Nagar Haveli and Daman & Diu achieved over 96% 
SWM coverage as of March 2023, while Puducherry has reached more than 98% 
saturation. Furthermore, during the Annual Implementation Plan (AIP) meetings for FY 
2025–26, the Department conducted in-depth discussions with individual States to 
review their progress, identify challenges, and chart actionable pathways to strengthen 
SWM efforts.  Detailed progress in SWM is given at Annexure-V (SBM).  
 
The Department had examined the reasons for a delay in the creation of Liquid 
Waste Management (LWM) facilities in certain states under the Swachh Bharat Mission 
- Grameen (SBM - II) can be attributed to several key challenges:  
Financial Constraints: 
The states like Andhra Pradesh, Jharkhand, and Uttar Pradesh faced budgetary 
limitations due to delay in the release of State Share and convergence of funds due to 
they were not able to implement LWM and achieve the targets. 
 
 
 

30 
 
Administrative and Coordination Issues: 
The state/UT like Puducherry experienced administrative hurdles between 
implementing and coordinating departments, whereas Jammu & Kashmir, Punjab and 
Maharashtra had undergone through model code of conduct of Assembly and/or 
Panchayat Elections. 
 
Steps taken by the Department:  
To enhance the coordination, the department has initiated working closely with 
state governments, local bodies, and other stakeholders to streamline efforts and to 
ensure better implementation in current FY. The department has allocated total Rs. 
55,215 Cr. to the states for SBM-G implementation during current FY, where around 
89,000 villages would be provided with LWM arrangements. In these lines, Andhra 
Pradesh and Puducherry have agreed to ensure LWM arrangement in their 9,559 and 
54 villages respectively. The department has working closely with the states and 
monitoring their progress periodically. In a month of April, Andhra Pradesh has marked 
20% progress, whereas Puducherry has initiated with DPR preparation and onboarding 
of implementing agency. Dadra Nagar Haveli & Daman Diu (DNH & DD) has not taken 
any targets under Swachh Bharat Mission Gramin, because the administration is jointly 
working in convergence with urban local body to ensure LWM arrangements in their 
villages. As on date except Andhra Pradesh and Puducherry, remaining all the above-
mentioned states are showing significant progress by ensuring 85-95% coverage of 
LWM arrangements in their rural areas. 
 
(OM No.  H-11013(12)/2/2025-Parliament-DDWS-Part(1) (E-file No. 29418)   Dated : 
17.06.2025) 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 17 
 
Need to conduct ‘Waste Quantification Survey’ 
 
The Committee take into account the submission of the representative of the 
Department of Drinking Water and Sanitation that ‘Waste Quantification Survey’ to 
identify type of waste that is being generated and its per capita amount, has so far not 
been conducted by either by the Government or by any private agency. They further 
note that the Department is taking the help of IIM Bangalore in this regard which has 
given a detailed structure as to how this kind of survey may be carried out. The 
Committee further note that regulatory framework for solid, liquid and plastic waste 
management vests with the Ministry of Environment, Forests and Climate change. 
Besides, there are guidelines which prescribe EPR – Extended Producer Responsibility 

31 
 
which prescribes that every producer of plastic is mandated to buy back a certain 
proportion of what they produce. However, at present, there is a lacuna in submission of 
the EPR certificates which are taken at face value. The Department therefore suggest to 
the Ministry of Environment, Forests and Climate Change that these Certificates should 
be certified by the Municipal Corporations and Rural Local Bodies. Taking cognizance 
of the above submissions of the Department, the Committee recommend that the 
Department take urgent steps to carry out ‘Waste Quantification Survey’ on priority 
basis. They further urge them to work in close coordination with the Ministry of 
Environment, Forests and Climate Change to enforce strict ratification of EPR 
Certificates by the concerned Agencies. The Committee would like to be apprised of the 
steps taken by the Department within three months from presentation of this Report. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
The Department is in the process of initiating comprehensive waste quantification 
studies across rural and peri-urban areas of India. This pioneering, first-of-its-kind study 
at a national scale aims to accurately assess per capita waste generation, composition, 
and evolving trends in solid waste in these regions. The insights derived from this study 
will play a critical role in informing the strategic direction of the next phase of the 
Swachh Bharat Mission (Grameen), enabling data-driven planning and targeted 
interventions to strengthen waste management systems at the grassroots level and 
transform them into self-sustaining models with long-term socio-economic and 
environmental value. 
The Department of Drinking Water and Sanitation (DDWS) actively contributes to 
policy formulation, particularly as a key stakeholder in the development of Solid Waste 
Management (SWM) Rules which encompasses Extended Producers Responsibility 
(EPR) provisions. DDWS regularly provides inputs and recommendations during 
consultations and meetings convened by the Ministry of Environment, Forests and 
Climate Change (MoEF & CC), thereby playing a vital role in shaping the regulatory 
framework. 
 
(OM No.  H-11013(12)/2/2025-Parliament-DDWS-Part(1) (E-file No. 29418)   Dated : 
17.06.2025) 
Comment of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 23 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 

32 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 18 
Community Sanitary Complex (CSC) 
 
The Committee note that the Community Sanitary Complex (CSC) are 
constructed under the programme on need basis to cater to the sanitation needs of 
households who do not have individual toilets due to lack of space or for floating/ 
migrant population, or at places where large congregation of people usually takes place, 
so that ODF status of villages can be sustained. For the construction of CSC, priority 
will be given to the locations with predominant SC / ST habitations, poorest of the poor 
in the village and/or those visited by migrant labourers / floating population etc. In this 
regard, the Committee note that during the year 2024-25, States of Assam, Gujarat, 
Haryana, Himachal Pradesh, Karnataka, Manipur and Uttar Pradesh have made 
remarkable progress in the construction of Community Sanitary Complexes (CSCs). 
However, on the other hand, the pace is very slow in the States of Andhra Pradesh, 
Arunachal Pradesh, Bihar, Chhattisgarh, Jammu & Kashmir, Jharkhand, Kerala, 
Ladakh, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Meghalaya, Mizoram, Nagaland, Odisha, 
Puducherry, Rajasthan, Sikkim, Tamil Nadu, Tripura and West Bengal where fewer 
number of CSCs have been constructed as against the targets fixed. Keeping in view 
the importance of the Community Sanitary Complex (CSC) for fostering the cognitive 
development of healthy sanitation practices in the community, the Community desire 
that the Department may in collaboration with the States, evolve a strategy for 
construction of CSCs within a given timeline and also motivate the Gram Panchayats 
(GPs) for their proper upkeep and maintenance. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
The Department of Drinking Water and Sanitation has been consistently guiding 
all States and Union Territories through regular meetings, video conferences, office 
memorandums, letters, and advisories to ensure continued efforts towards sustaining 
the ODF status of villages. In light of the slow progress observed in certain States and 
UTs—namely Andhra Pradesh, Arunachal Pradesh, Bihar, Chhattisgarh, Jammu & 
Kashmir, Jharkhand, Kerala, Ladakh, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Meghalaya, 
Mizoram, Nagaland, Odisha, Puducherry, Rajasthan, Sikkim, Tamil Nadu, Tripura, and 
West Bengal—the matter was thoroughly discussed during the Annual Implementation 
Plan (AIP) meetings for FY 2025–26. Following detailed surveys and needs 
assessments, many of these States have revised their targets for the current financial 

33 
 
year. The performance of FY 2024–25 against the original targets, along with the 
updated targets for FY 2025–26, is provided in Annexure-VII (SBM).  
 
(OM No.  H-11013(12)/2/2025-Parliament-DDWS-Part(1) (E-file No. 29418)   Dated : 
17.06.2025) 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 19 
 
Need to encourage the Self Help Groups (SHGs) 
 
The Committee are of the view that Self Help Groups (SHGs) can play a 
significant role in the holistic development of sanitation in the villages, especially in 
setting up Community toilets. For this, they may be extended assistance by Financial 
Institutions like Banks which will help in enhancing the financial sustainability of the 
assets created under SBM as well as boosting economic activities. The Committee 
therefore desire that the Department may explore ways of involving SHGs with the SBM 
(G) on such line. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Sanitation is a State subject and SBM(G) is being implemented by the 
States/UTs. Accordingly, States/UTs have been given flexibility to decide the 
implementation mechanism under the programme. DDWS issues guidelines/advisories 
to the States to support them smooth implementation of the programme. SBM(G) 
Phase-II guidelines suggest for engagement of SHGs, entrepreneurs and voluntary 
organizations for infrastructure creation, Operation & Maintenance (O&M) and creation 
of market linkage. Guidelines also suggest promotion for revenue generation models for 
collection and treatment of waste and for commercial use of end products to attract 
such private agencies (including SHGs).  
Further, as per the guidance note for O&M of sanitation assets, issued by DDWS 
to the States, involvement of SHGs in O&M of the sanitation assets has been suggested 
as one of the Institutional Framework measures. The guidance note also provides for 
capacity building of such engaged agencies (including SHGs) on O&M procedures, 
technology and safety protocols through regular trainings. The States/UTs have been 
advised to develop their O&M policies based on this guidance note. 
The Department acknowledges the valuable suggestion made by the Committee 
regarding the active involvement of Self-Help Groups (SHGs) in the holistic 
development of rural sanitation, particularly in the creation and management of 

34 
 
Community Sanitary Complexes (CSCs). SHGs have proven to be effective community-
based institutions with strong local presence and the ability to mobilize resources and 
participation at the grassroots level. 
In this context, the Department has been advocating with States for exploring 
mechanisms to integrate SHGs more systematically into the implementation of Swachh 
Bharat Mission (Grameen). This includes facilitating linkages with loans to support 
SHG-led initiatives, particularly for the construction of IHHLs, operation, and 
maintenance of CSCs.  
There are many successful models across States where CSCs are being 
managed by the SHGs. The Department has also issued a guidance note for the 
formulation of Operation & Maintenance (O&M) policies for all sanitation assets, which 
includes provisions for the involvement of Self-Help Groups (SHGs) in managing and 
sustaining these assets. Further necessary advisories will be issued in consultation with 
relevant stakeholders to ensure smooth implementation. 
(OM No.  H-11013(12)/2/2025-Parliament-DDWS-Part(1) (E-file No. 29418)   Dated : 
17.06.2025) 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 20 
Galvanizing Organic Bio-Agro Resources Dhan (GOBAR-DHAN) 
 
The Committee note that Galvanizing Organic Bio-Agro Resources Dhan 
(GOBARdhan) was launched under Swachh Bharat Mission (Grameen) Scheme to 
ensure cleanliness in villages by converting bio-degradable waste like cattle waste, 
kitchen leftovers etc. into Biogas and organic manure. Under Phase-II of SBM-G, 
financial assistance of up to Rs.50.00 lakh per District is available under GOBARdhan 
for the complete programme period from 2020-21 to 2025-26 for setting up of 
Community level biogas plant. Community level biogas plants can be constructed at 
village/block/district levels under SBM(G) Phase-II. The Committee find that 816 villages 
have community GOBARdhan plants supported under SBM(G)-II. Further, the 
Committee observe that as on 13.02.2025, there are total 882 Functional Community 
Biogas Plants under SBM (G) spread over 20 States/UTs, the highest number i.e. 281 
in the State of Chhattisgarh while only minuscule number of Functional Plants i.e. 8, 7, 
8, 2 and 9 exist in the States of Haryana, Himachal Pradesh, Maharashtra, Puducherry 
and West Bengal respectively. The Committee in this regard would like to be apprised 

35 
 
of the status of Functional Community Biogas Plants in other States as well. Further, the 
Committee take note of the submission of the Department which cite number of reasons 
such as lack of awareness about benefits, non-availability of adequate feedstock, 
limited financial support, operation and maintenance, non-feasibility in all states and Off-
take of FoM (bio-slurry) which are hampering the implementation of the GOBARdhan 
Scheme. Taking into account objective of this important initiative which is to generate 
wealth and energy by converting cattle dung, agri residue and other organic waste into 
Biogas/Compressed Biogas and organic manure, the Committee urge upon the 
Department to take necessary steps to popularize this programme by making people 
aware of the benefits of this Programme as well as devise a strategy that may 
incentivize the communities for adopting this Programme. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Under Phase-ll of SBM-G, financial assistance of up to Rs.50.00 lakh per District 
is available for the complete programme period from 2020-21 to 2025-26 for setting up 
of Community level biogas plant. Community level biogas plants can be constructed at 
village/block/district levels under SBM(G) Phase-ll. The State wise coverage of 
functional biogas plants as on 29.5.2025 is given below: 
 
S.No State/ UT Name Functional 
1.  Assam  20 
2.  Bihar  17 
3.  Chhattisgarh  283 
4.  Gujarat  33 
5.  Haryana  9 
6.  Himachal Pradesh  7 
7.  Jammu & Kashmir  11 
8.  Jharkhand  29 
9.  Karnataka  64 
10.  Kerala  24 
11.  Madhya Pradesh  116 
12.  Maharashtra  8 
13.  Puducherry  2 
14.  Punjab  20 
15.  Rajasthan  14 

36 
 
16.  Tamil Nadu  78 
17.  Tripura  16 
18.  Uttar Pradesh  114 
19.  Uttarakhand  19 
20.  West Bengal  13 
Total 897 
 
Few of the States/UTs have already fully utilized the available budget and 
achieved 100% district coverage. Moreover, few States/UTs have also highlighted non-
feasibility of GOBARdhan biogas plants due to various factors. 
 
However, DDWS has taken the following efforts to generate awareness around 
GOBARdhan initiative: 
 Developed the Unified Registration Portal for GOBARdhan to streamline the 
registration of biogas plants nationwide and to monitor the progress of the same.  
 Regular interaction with States through VC is conducted periodically and capacity 
building of State level officers is also conducted.  
 A module has also been developed in the GOBARdhan portal to encourage 
reporting of functionality of all the plants on monthly basis.  
 All achievements/milestones are being published through various social media 
platforms, PIB for wider visibility/accessibility. 
 Sharing of success stories, achievements/best practices pertaining to 
GOBARdhan with States/UTs. 
(OM No.  H-11013(12)/2/2025-Parliament-DDWS-Part(1) (E-file No. 29418)   Dated : 
17.06.2025) 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 21 
Retrofit to Twin-Pit Toilets 
 
The Committee observe that Swachh Bharat Mission (Grameen) Phase II 
promotes twin-pits toilets to ensure in-situ treatment requiring no mechanized emptying, 
transportation, or treatment. Further, under SBM(G) Phase II, the provisions of 
retrofitting of toilets into twin pit toilets have been supplemented to reduce the need for 
faecal sludge management in rural areas. In this connection, the Department of Drinking 
Water and Sanitation (DDWS) launched a Mission mode campaign ‘Retrofit to Twin Pit’ 
Abhiyan on 2nd October 2022 till 30th June 2023 for onsite and safe treatment of faecal 
sludge. The States and UTs were directed to observe the Execution Phase of the 

37 
 
Campaign to promote Construction of only Twin Pits in the new IHHL as per the 
guidelines of SBMG Phase II, Retrofit the existing Single Pits to Twin Pit, retrofit existing 
Septic tanks with Soak pits and Generate awareness about safe disposal of faecal 
sludge in rural households. The Committee further note that in retrofitting single pit 
toilets into twin pit toilets, the top-performing States were Maharashtra with 5,33,471 
Andhra Pradesh with 3,55,402, and Kerala with 3,25,933 retrofitted single pit toilets. 
However, most of the States have not seen much of the progress on this indicator 
especially during FY 2024-25 (till 31st December 2024). Taking cognizance of the 
significance of switching to Twin-pit toilets for converting the faecal sludge into manure 
which can be directly reused in agriculture, the Committee urge the Department to 
examine the reasons as to why only three States as mentioned above have done 
remarkably well in retrofitting of single pit toilets into twin pit toilets despite launching an 
exclusive campaign for this purpose. Further, the Department should actively 
collaborate with the States which are falling behind so as to prioritize retrofitting single 
pits where feasible. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 The Department had examined the reasons for a delayed progress reported for 
retrofitting of the Single Pit based toilets and the following observations are submitted 
for kind consideration:   
1. Reverification of the Single Pits based toilets in FY 2024-25 
The toilet typologies i.e Twin Pit, Single Pit, Septic Tank, and others (Ecosan etc) 
updated by States/UTs in Baseline Module 67 C during the ‘Retrofit to Twin Pit Abhiyan’ 
launched on 2nd October 2022. However, the field visits undertaken by DDWS teams to 
the respective States/UTs as well as the third-party verification data captured on toilet 
typologies showed variations in the data reported in the IMIS baseline. The department 
also received requests letter from numerous States/UTs for providing access for 
updating the toilet typology reported in Module 67 C. In view of the above, the 
States/UTs were advised to take following corrective actions on priority for 
Reverification of reported Baseline and updation on IMIS during the FY 2024-25:  
 
 The reported Single pits should also be verified on ground and updated on 
baseline Module. States/UTs were advised to prioritize retrofitting of Single pits 
where feasible. It was recommended that Single pits which are not yet 
filled/emptied should ensure BCC/IEC for retrofitting and/or construction of 
additional pit before the first one fills up.  

38 
 
 States/UTs were advised to reverify the structures reported as septic tanks for 
any leakage and ensure upgradation on baseline of toilet typologies if required.  
 States/UTs are advised to complete the updation exercise in Module 67 C with 
due diligence based on the ground survey.  
 
Since, The States/UTs did ground reverification of the Single Pit based toilets and 
Septic tanks without Soak Pits and the same was updated in the IMIS during the FY 
2024-25, the progress of the retrofitting of the Single Pit based toilets was not 
remarkably well till December 2024.  
 
 Further, the Department had actively collaborated with the States which are 
falling behind to prioritize retrofitting single pits where feasible and the following 
recommendations are submitted for kind consideration: 
 
(i) State/UTs took targets for retrofitting of Single Pits and Septic tanks without 
Soak Pits in the Annual Implementation Plan for FY 2025-26  
 
The retrofitting of reverified single pits and septic tanks without Soak Pit where 
feasible is an ongoing process as all the States and UTs have taken targets of 
retrofitting proposed under Annual Implementation Plans in financial year 2025-26 
 
 
(ii) Awareness generation for retrofitting of Toilets & IEC Material  
 
To support the States/UTs, department of Drinking Water and Sanitation developed 
series of IEC content to create the required awareness on retrofitting of Single Pits 
based and Septic tank without soak pits toilets. Through a series of informative and 
action-oriented posts, the IEC material advocated for Twin Pits as a safe sanitation 
technology and encouraged citizens for switching to Twin-pit toilets for converting the 
faecal sludge into manure which can be directly reused in agriculture. All these posts 
were published on all social media handles and have also been shared with States/UTs 
for further dissemination 
 
 
(iii) Launch of Module to capture progress of retrofitting of toilets in FY 2025-26  
To promote safe sanitation through retrofitting of the single pit-based toilets and 
Septic tanks with Soak Pits as a continuous activity, the Department of Drinking Water 
and Sanitation (DDWS) launched an exclusive Integrated Management Information 

39 
 
System (IMIS) Module 67 R from 1st May 2025 to the progress of States/UTs for 
retrofitting of both Single Pits to Twin Pit Toilets and Septic tanks with Soak Pits.   
 
(OM No.  H-11013(12)/2/2025-Parliament-DDWS-Part(1) (E-file No. 29418)   Dated : 
17.06.2025) 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 22 
Unspent balances with the Implementing Agencies 
 
The Committee find that there was huge amount of unspent balance (Rs. 
23,584.56 crore) under Jal Jeevan Mission (JJM) in the Financial Year 2022-23 which 
has been substantially reduced to Rs. 11,174.01 crore in FY 2023-24. In FY 2024-25, 
as on 12.02.2025, it has further come down to Rs. 6473.61 crore. The Committee are 
pleased that year after year, there has been trend of reduction in the amount of unspent 
balances. However, the Committee notice that in case of Chhattisgarh, there is a 
reverse trend where the unspent balance under JJM was Rs. 274.37 crore in FY 2022-
23 which has risen to Rs. 428.65 crore in FY 2024-25. The same situation prevails in 
the State of Uttarakhand as well. The Committee would like to be apprised of the 
reasons for such a reverse trend. Further, SBM(G), like JJM has also witnessed 
substantial decrease in the amount of unspent balance which stood at Rs. 6131.60 
crore towards the end of FY 2022-23 that has come down to Rs. 516.94 crore in FY 
2024-25. However, in case of Jammu & Kashmir, there is no so much decrease in 
unspent balance which was Rs. 55.30 crore in FY 2023-24 and Rs. 55.00 crore in FY 
2024-25. The Committee hope that in future as well, the amount of unspent balance 
under both JJM and SBM will be kept to the minimum level. Further, the Committee 
desire that the States/UTs where the problem of unspent balance is still prominent 
should be assisted by the Department for exhaustive utilization of budgetary allocations. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Jal Jeevan Mission (JJM) 
As stated above, Department has been reviewing the progress with States from 
time to time through several meetings including conference, review meetings through 
video conference, field visits etc. The progress reported by State is also monitored on 
daily basis through the online monitoring system JJM –IMIS. States are encouraged to 
report the updated information regularly on JJM-IMIS. Unspent balances have been 
reduced significantly in 2024-25 (as on 31.03.2024) in the States of Uttarakhand and 
Chhattisgarh in comparison to last three years. Details are at Annex-III (JJM). 

40 
 
 
Swachh Bharat Mission (Grameen) [SBM-G] 
 
All States and UTs with legislature have been listed for onboarding SNA 
SPARSH by Ministry of Finance. In SNA-SPARSH, the funds will be released in ‘just-in-
time’ basis based on the payment files received from the States. Hence, there will be no 
parking of funds with the States in the new system.  
As per the instructions issued by Ministry of Finance (MoF), after onboarding 
SNA SPARSH, the States have to be return the corresponding Centre share with 
respect to the unspent balance lying in SNA to the Consolidated Funds of India. 
Accordingly, all the States which have onboarded SNA-SPARSH have been requested 
to taken necessary action for refund of unspent balance, if any, to CFI as per the SoP 
issued by MoF. 
 
(OM No.  H-11013(12)/2/2025-Parliament-DDWS-Part(1) (E-file No. 29418)   Dated : 
17.06.2025) 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 23 
 
Implementation of schemes in Saansad Adarsh Gram Yojana (SAGY) villages 
 
The Committee note that the Sansad Adarash Gram Yojana (SAGY) was 
launched in 2014 with the aim to create Adarash Grams by making holistic development 
of villages/ GPs by Ministry of Rural Development. The Committee find that as per the 
information furnished by the Department, there are 261372 Panchayats spread over 34 
States/UTs, however only 3,268 Panchayats have been identified as SAGY, out of 
which 1,755 have already been reported to have 100% households with tap connection. 
However, some of the States like Andhra Pradesh, Kerala, Odisha and Rajasthan are 
lagging behind in terms of tap water connections in SAGY Panchayats. Further, as on 
13.2.2025, there are total 7531 villages in SAGY Gram Panchayats, out of which 5433 
are ODF Plus (Model) Villages. However, the number of ODF Plus Model villages is 
quite low in States like Andhra Pradesh (62 out of 306 villages), Jharkhand (151 out of 
725), Karnataka (119 out of 631) and Punjab (14 out of 70). Taking cognizance of this 
fact, the Committee urge upon the Department to take all required steps for proper 
implementation of both the flagship schemes of the Department in the SAGY villages on 
priority basis and also extend all assistance to the States in this regard. The action 
taken in this regard may be apprised within three months of the presentation of the 
Report. 
 

41 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Jal Jeevan Mission (JJM) 
As reported by the States/ UTs, 3,268 Panchayats have been identified as SAGY 
Panchayats, out of which 1,808 have already been reported to have 100% households 
with tap connection, another 787 are having coverage more than 75% and the 
remaining are in various stages of completion of works. State/ UT-wise details are 
Annex-IV(JJM). States through various review meetings are being advised to expedite 
the progress under the Mission inter alia including prioritizing the coverage of tap water 
connection in SAGY and other priority areas. Moreover, dedicated monitoring tools 
have also been developed in JJM-IMIS for monitoring the progress in SAGY 
Panchayats. 
 
Swachh Bharat Mission (Grameen) [SBM-G] 
 
For implementation of SBM(G), States have been advised to give priority to the 
SAGY villages for declaring ODF Plus (Model).  Advisory in this regard was issued to all 
the States/UTs on 9th May, 2025.  Provision of separate monitoring of progress of SAGY 
villages has been made in the IMIS of SBM(G).  As reported by the States, so far out of 
the total 7,541 SAGY villages, 5,680 villages have been declared ODF Plus (Model).   
 
(OM No.  H-11013(12)/2/2025-Parliament-DDWS-Part(1) (E-file No. 29418)   Dated : 
17.06.2025) 
 
RECOMMENDATION. 24 
Setting up of Desalination Plants 
 The Standing Committee on Water Resources during its recent study visit to 
Puducherry, Mahabalipuram and Rajahmundry from 8 to 11 January, 2025 have found 
that no Desalination plant has been installed in U.T. of Puducherry.  However, Govt. of 
Puducherry has proposed to setup two desalination plants each with a capacity of 50 
MLD to provide drinking water to urban areas of Puducherry. Taking cognizance of the 
fact that establishing the ‘Desalination’ Plants would help in reducing the load on 
groundwater pumping and would also help to push the saline water interface seaward 
side, the Committee urge the Department to render all the assistance to the UT of 
Puducherry for setting up of these proposed Plants on priority basis.  
 
 

42 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Urban Water Supply related works are being looked after Ministry of Housing and 
Urban Affairs.  
Moreover, Puducherry has already achieved Har Ghar Jal Status i.e. 100% rural 
households with tap connections and no such proposal for setting up of desalination 
plant has been received in this Department from the UT of Puducherry. Further, aiming 
at holistic approach, considering the pace of urbanization, at planning stage under JJM, 
States were appropriately advised to exercise due care in assessing the projected 
(design) population for pipe water schemes in peri-urban areas and census towns after 
due consideration of factors such as inward influx/ outward migration in such areas. 
 
(OM No.  H-11013(12)/2/2025-Parliament-DDWS-Part(1) (E-file No. 29418)   Dated : 
17.06.2025) 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 25 
 
Need to expedite implementation of JJM and SBM in Aspirational Districts and 
Aspirational Blocks 
 
The Committee takes cognizance of the fact that on 15th August 2019, when Jal 
Jeevan Mission was announced, only 21.16 lakh (7.69%) households in 112 
Aspirational Districts had tap water supply in their homes. As on 22.01.2025, tap water 
supply has been provided to over 2.15 crore (78.30%) households in Aspirational 
Districts. Further, the Committee note that in another initiative of NITI Aayog, the 
Aspirational Blocks Programme (ABP) was launched on January 7, 2023. ABP focuses 
on improving governance to enhance the quality of life of citizens in the most difficult 
and relatively underdeveloped Blocks of India. 500 Blocks from 329 Districts across 27 
States and 4 Union Territories of India are part of the programme. Further, as on 31st 
December, 2024, out of 1.42 crores rural households in 500 Aspirational Blocks, tap 
water supply has been provided to over 1.05 crores (74.14%) rural households. While 
welcoming the initiatives taken by the Government, the Committee urge upon the 
Department to expedite the remaining work of the flagship programmes of the SBM and 
JJM in the Aspirational Districts and Aspirational Blocks. The Committee would like to 
be further apprised of the specific steps taken by the Department within three months 
from the presentation of this Report. 
 
 
 
 

43 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Jal Jeevan Mission (JJM) 
With concerted efforts from both Centre and States, the overall coverage of tap 
water connections has significantly improved in aspirational districts from 7% to 79% 
and in aspirational blocks from 8.6% to 75.79%. Further, to ensure the saturation of 
households in aspirational districts and blocks, the piped water supply works progress is 
continuously being monitored, in collaboration with NITI Aayog, through regular review 
meetings held with the States. The dedicated reporting and monitoring formats have 
also been developed at JJM-IMIS for monitoring the progress reported by the States. 
 
Swachh Bharat Mission (Grameen) [SBM-G] 
For implementation of SBM(G), States have been advised to give priority to 
Aspirational districts and Aspirational blocks for declaring ODF Plus (Model).  Advisory 
in this regard was issued to concerned the States/UTs on 9th May, 2025.   As reported 
by the States, so far out of the total 1,04,355 villages in Aspirational districts, 72,664 
villages have been declared ODF Plus (Model).  As reported by the States, so far out of 
the total 56,903 villages in Aspirational blocks, 44,222 villages have been declared ODF 
Plus (Model).   
 
(OM No.  H-11013(12)/2/2025-Parliament-DDWS-Part(1) (E-file No. 29418)   Dated : 
17.06.2025) 

44 
 
CHAPTER III 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NIL 

45 
 
CHAPTER IV 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BYTHE COMMITTEE 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 5 
Water quality contamination due to radioactive elements 
The Committee take cognizance of the fact that 32 habitations in 9 districts of 
Punjab are affected by uranium contamination. Out of these, 22 habitations have 
already been provided with short-term measures viz. community water purification 
plants (CWPP) and individual household purifiers (IHP). In this regard, the Committee 
would further like to be apprised as to which other States/regions of the country, apart 
from Punjab, are facing contamination of water due to radioactive elements. Further, 
taking into account that so far only 22 out of 32 habitations in the State of Punjab have 
been covered with short-term measures, the Committee urge upon the Department to 
take urgent steps to provide safe drinking water to remaining 10 habitations. Further, 
being aware of the fact that radioactive elements like Uranium can accumulate and be 
retained in various organs and tissues, such as the kidneys, liver, and bones, for 
durations ranging from days to years and cause serious health hazards, the Committee 
recommend that the Department prioritize long term measures for providing safe water 
to the regions affected by such contamination. The Committee would like to be informed 
of the specific steps taken by the Department in this regard within 3 months from 
presentation of this Report.  
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
As stated above, States have been advised to prioritize quality-affected 
habitations, inter alia including Uranium affected habitations, while taking up schemes to 
make provision of potable tap water supply to rural households. As reported by States 
on JJM-IMIS, 32 habitations in 9 districts of Punjab are affected by uranium 
contamination as on date. Out of these, 23 habitations have already been provided with 
short-term measures viz. community water purification plants (CWPP) and individual 
household purifiers (IHP) and the State has been advised to ensure to make short term 
measures for the remaining at the earliest. Further, coverage of tap water supply under 
JJM is being prioritized in all the water quality affected habitations including affected by 
uranium contamination. 

46 
 
The Department has recently developed a web/ mobile based management 
information system to capture the data of water quality affected habitations, where 
States/UTs provide status of habitation that have contamination in their drinking water 
sources. States/UTs have also been advised to carry out testing of water quality on a 
regular basis and take remedial action wherever necessary, to ensure that the water 
supplied to households is of prescribed quality. Further, coverage of tap water supply 
under JJM is being prioritized in all the remaining water quality affected habitations.  
(OM No.  H-11013(12)/2/2025-Parliament-DDWS-Part(1) (E-file No. 29418)   Dated : 
17.06.2025) 
Comment of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 8 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 7 
Safe drinking water supply in all Schools, Anganwadi centres and Ashramshalas 
The Committee note that giving priority to children’s health and wellbeing, a 
special campaign was launched on 2nd October, 2020 to bring awareness and make 
concerted efforts for making provision of tap water supply in these institutions for 
purposes of drinking, cooking mid-day meals, hand washing and use in toilets. Further, 
emphasis is also given on rain water harvesting and grey water management in these 
centres of learning, so that the children will learn different aspects of water management 
and imbibe the same. The Committee are happy to note that Andaman & Nicobar 
Islands, Andhra Pradesh, Dadra & Nagar Haveli and Daman & Diu, Goa, Lakshadweep 
and Sikkim have achieved 100% coverage in providing tap water connections both in 
Schools and Anganwadi centres. Other States have also done remarkably well in this 
regard. However, much more work needs to be done in the States of Rajasthan, 
Odisha, Uttarakhand, West Bengal and Meghalaya as these States are lagging behind 
in providing tap water connections to Schools and Anganwadi Centres. In fact in 
Rajasthan, only 61.05% schools have been covered with tap water connections. 
Similarly, in West Bengal, only 41,866 Anganwadis out of 1,11,074 have water tap 
connections which comes to just 37.69%. The Committee take cognizance of the fact 
that the provision of tap water connections in institutions such as schools, Anganwadi 
centres, Ashramshalas, etc. is one of the prominent aspects of Jal Jeevan Mission 
which have profound impact on the health, capacity to learn and well-being of the 
children. Being of the view that children are more susceptible to water-borne diseases 

47 
 
and spend a lot of their time in schools, Anganwadi centres and Ashramshalas, the 
Committee recommend that the Department make intense efforts and work in close 
coordination with those State Governments which are falling behind in providing water 
tap connections to Schools, Anganwadi centres and Ashramshalas. The Committee 
would like to be apprised of the steps taken by the Department in this regard within 3 
months from presentation of this Report.  
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Department is committed to provide piped water supply to schools, anganwadi 
centres and Ashramshalas, etc. and in partnership with States is prioritizing their 
coverage along with rural households the country with piped water supply across. 
Department is making utmost efforts in extending requisite technical and financial 
assistance along with reviewing and monitoring the progress made by the States. 
Monthly review meetings are held with the States for expediting the coverage and the 
States are expected to achieve saturation of coverage of rural households and schools 
and anganwadi centres as per their plans. 
(OM No.  H-11013(12)/2/2025-Parliament-DDWS-Part(1) (E-file No. 29418)   Dated : 
17.06.2025) 
Comment of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 14 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 13 
Need to enhance the role of Elected Representatives 
 
The total estimated outlay of SBM(G) Phase-II for five years is approx. Rs.1.40 
lakh crores, which is to be dovetailed through convergence between different verticals 
of financing [e.g. Rs.52,500 crore (Central share Rs.36,600 crore and State share 
Rs.17,900 crore) is to be allocated through the budgetary provisions for SBM(G) from 
Centre and State Governments; about Rs.51057 crore from 15th Finance Commission 
grants, Rs. 24,823 crore from MGNREGS, Rs. 6,336 crore from Business Models and 
Rs. 6168 crore from, other sources. However, the Committee observe that there are 
multiple Ministries/Departments involved resulting in lack of coordination among them 
causing underutilization of finances. The representative of the Department during the 

48 
 
oral evidence has also admitted that it is a complex process and needs improvement 
and better monitoring especially at district level. 
 
In this regard, the Committee take note of the fact that there is District Water and 
Sanitation Mission (DWSM) where Hon’ble Members of Parliament may be requested to 
attend the DWSM meetings as ‘Special Invitees’. However, as the Hon’ble Members of 
Parliament work at the ground level and have a firsthand knowledge of the challenges 
being encountered in execution of the various development schemes including the 
flagship programmes of Jal Jeevan Mission (JJM) and Swachh Bharat Mission 
(Grameen) (SBM) (G), the Committee recommend the Department to make earnest 
endeavours to reconstitute the DWSM to include Member of Parliament and Member of 
the Legislative Assembly from the district in order to ensure effective participation of the 
elected representatives for better formulation, implementation and monitoring of JJM 
and SBM at ground level. The Committee would like to be apprised of the specific steps 
taken by the Department in this regard within three months from presentation of this 
Report. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
As per the DISHA guidelines issued by MoRD, there is a provision of District 
level DISHA committee under the Chairmanship of the Member of Parliament of the Lok 
Sabha Constituency of the district, for holistic planning, review and monitoring of 
implementation of non-statutory schemes of Govt. of India including SBM(G) and Jal 
Jeevan Mission (JJM). Recently, Minister, Jal Shakti vide letter dated 4th June, 2025 has 
requested all MPs to effectively monitor the implementation of SBM(G) and JJM on the 
ground through DISHA.  Information on SBM(G) Phase II data is available in the DISHA 
Dashboard. With respect to the recommendation of the Committee, the States will be 
emphasized that the review of SBM(G) and JJM may be invariably brought into the 
meeting of DISHA committee. 
(OM No.  H-11013(12)/2/2025-Parliament-DDWS-Part(1) (E-file No. 29418)   Dated : 
17.06.2025) 
Comment of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 17 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
 

49 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 16 
Plastic Waste Management in Rural areas 
The Committee note that the Plastic Waste Management Facilities are developed 
at Block level. For setting up Plastic Waste Management Units (PWMUs), funding 
support of Rs. 16 lakhs per block is provided under the programme. Additional funds 
can be provided from 15th Finance Commission grants to Rural Local Bodies (RLBs) for 
these activities and other plastic waste management related activities. They further 
notice that there are 1787 number of PWMUs in 7154 number of Blocks spread over 34 
States/UTs. However, there are only 1051 functional PWMUs out of total 1787. In this 
regard, the Committee further take note that there are very few PWMUs exist in number 
of States/UTs and even where these Units are available, most of them are non-
functional. For example, there are only 8 PWMUs as against 143 blocks in the State of 
Haryana and not even a single PWMU out of these 8 is functional. Almost the same 
situation prevails in Assam, Goa, Ladakh, Rajasthan, Tripura, Manipur, Chhattisgarh, 
Gujarat, Andaman & Nicobar Islands. It is the State of Tamil Nadu which has done 
remarkable job in the field of PWMU coverage and functionality. 
The Committee in view of the above urge upon the Department to make 
concerted efforts and render all possible assistance to the States to expand the 
coverage of PWMU facilities and also ensure their proper functioning. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
It is important to highlight that, as a result of continued support and regular 
follow-ups, States and UTs are making notable progress in Plastic Waste Management 
(PWM). The number of Blocks covered under PWM has increased from 1,787 to 1,988 
out of a total of 7,154 Blocks, and currently, 66% of the PWM Units (PWMUs) and 
Urban Material Recovery Facilities (MRFs) are functional. The Hon’ble Committee has 
rightly observed that, with the exception of Ladakh and Chhattisgarh, the functionality of 
PWMUs in Assam, Goa, Rajasthan, Tripura, Manipur, Gujarat, and Andaman & Nicobar 
Islands remains below expectations. The detailed progress is given at Annexure-VI 
(SBM) 
For the current financial year 2025–26, States and UTs have planned the 
establishment of 1,638 PWMUs to further strengthen PWM efforts. To accelerate both 
progress and functionality, the Department has organized dedicated video conferences 
with the concerned States and UTs to improve planning processes, review strategic 

50 
 
approaches, identify operational bottlenecks, and gather actionable recommendations 
to enhance implementation on the ground. 
(OM No.  H-11013(12)/2/2025-Parliament-DDWS-Part(1) (E-file No. 29418)   Dated : 
17.06.2025) 
Comment of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 20 of Chapter I of the Report) 

51 
 
CHAPTER V 
OBSERVATION/RECOMMENDATION IN REPSECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLY OF 
THE GOVERNMENT IS STILL AWAITED 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NIL 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI                                    RAJIV PRATAP RUDY, 
 8 August, 2025                                                     Chairperson,                                                                      
17 Sravana,1947 (Saka)              Standing Committee on Water Resources 

52 
 
 
Annex-I (JJM) 
State/ UT-wise details of status of laying of water supply pipes as reported by 
NWEs 
(Visits carried out till March, 2025) 
S. No. State/ UT Laid properly 
Deficiencies 
reported in Pipe 
laying 
% of pipes 
laid properly 
1 Himachal Pradesh 9 0 100.0% 
2 Jammu & Kashmir 18 0 100.0% 
3 Tripura 32 0 100.0% 
4 Haryana 69 1 98.6% 
5 Ladakh 51 1 98.1% 
6 Karnataka 674 23 96.7% 
7 Gujarat 50 4 92.6% 
8 Kerala 247 20 92.5% 
9 Chhattisgarh 738 60 92.5% 
10 Uttar Pradesh 1523 149 91.1% 
11 Uttarakhand 102 10 91.1% 
12 West Bengal 675 80 89.4% 
13 Meghalaya 123 15 89.1% 
14 Assam 721 96 88.2% 
15 Rajasthan 1043 142 88.0% 
16 Andhra Pradesh 476 65 88.0% 
17 Odisha 780 112 87.4% 
18 Madhya Pradesh 1141 175 86.7% 
19 Tamil Nadu 573 101 85.0% 
20 Maharashtra 704 136 83.8% 
21 Jharkhand 508 153 76.9% 
22 Punjab 245 101 70.8% 
23 Sikkim 22 17 56.4% 
24 Arunachal Pradesh 0 72 0.0% 
Source: JJM-IMIS 

53 
 
Annex-II (JJM) 
Status of pending Clearances for Rural Water Supply Projects 
(As on 29.05.2025) 
Nodal Agency Forests NHAI Railways GAIL Others Total 
S. No. State Applied Pending Applied Pending Applied Pending Applied Pending Applied Pending Applied Pending 
1  Andhra Pradesh  -     -    1   -    1   -    -    -    -    -    2   -   
2  Assam  -     -    3   -    11   -    -    -    -    -    14   -   
3  Chhattisgarh  -     -    1   1   2   -    -    -    -    -    3   1  
4  Jharkhand  45   9   34   4   60   1   -    -    125   12   264   26  
5  Karnataka  37   4   18   -    9   -    1   -    11   1   76   5  
6  Kerala  108   23   68   24   96   8   -    -    66   2   338   57  
7  Madhya Pradesh  201   107   3   -    25   -    3   -    1   -    233   107  
8  Maharashtra  612   54   268   -    285   -    -    -    477   -    1,642   54  
9  Odisha  2   -    -    -    -    -    -    -    -    -    2   -   
10  Punjab  19   -    4   -    14   -    -    -    5   -    42   -   
11  Rajasthan  9   7   4   1   2   -    -    -    2   1   17   9  
12  Sikkim  1   -    -    -    -    -    -    -    -    -    1   -   
13  Tamil Nadu  10   2   71   -    180   -    -    -    48   3   309   5  
14  Uttar Pradesh  31   3   66   13   232   54   -    -    74   3   403   73  
15  West Bengal  28   -    10   1   1   -    -    -    11   1   50   2  
 Total  1,103   209   551   44   918   63   4   -    820   23   3,396   339  
Source: JJM-IMIS

54 
 
Annex-III (JJM) 
State/ UT-wise details of unspent balances under JJM for last three years and 
current financial year i.e. 2024-25 (as on 31.03.2025) 
(Amount in Rs. Crore) 
S. No. State/ UT 2021-22 2022-23 2023-24 2024-25 
1.  A&N Islands 0.63   2.19  4.97 4.81 
2.  Andhra Pradesh 712.13   407.42  339.88 34.23 
3.  Arunachal 450.59   310.77  25.01 51.61 
4.  Assam 1,819.23   2,447.48  780.58 111.05 
5.  Bihar 54.95   54.95  54.95 54.95 
6.  Chhattisgarh 147.09   274.37  521.03 222.8 
7.  Goa 11.95   0.91  0.41 0 
8.  Gujarat 583.39   1,088.66  947.97 188.13 
9.  Haryana 158.71   101.94  38.86 15.18 
10.  Himachal Pradesh 818.89  548.18  90.56 38.84 
11.  Jammu & Kashmir 605.71  903.83  660.7 12.62 
12.  Jharkhand 199.52   528.81  263.46 129.9 
13.  Karnataka 1,264.11   1,182.31  882.20 688.72 
14.  Kerala 436.07   900.69  106.46 0 
15.  Ladakh 262.24   280.67  65 71.39 
16.  Lakshadweep -   9.25  29.07 26.45 
17.  Madhya Pradesh 1,766.42  1,060.06  91.39 30.22 
18.  Maharashtra 1,557.65   2,363.74  1,599.47 970.23 
19.  Manipur 142.03   164.42  44.93 11.36 
20.  Meghalaya 420.52   369.04  295.53 29.93 
21.  Mizoram 80.08   121.26  7.85 2.42 
22.  Nagaland 16.99   19.57  39.76 0.17 
23.  Odisha 1,214.54   817.27  484.23 101.81 
24.  Puducherry 6.34   5.40  0.01 0.28 
25.  Punjab 264.77   (0.02) 15.97 6.81 
26.  Rajasthan 1,288.78   3,432.89  784.35 233.18 
27.  Sikkim 112.9   79.29  11.92 1.23 
28.  Tamil Nadu 534.3   813.55  813.16 211.59 
29.  Telangana 37.45   26.05  26.06 26.06 
30.  Tripura 175.78   227.02  111.1 1.5 
31.  Uttar Pradesh 3,160.84   3,007.31  851.83 0.01 
32.  Uttarakhand 590.76   284.20  232.15 129.32 
33.  West Bengal 614.67   1,751.06  953.19 475.12 
 Total 19,510.03  23,584.56 11,174.01 3,881.92 
Source: JJM, IMIS 

55 
 
Annex-IV (JJM) 
State/ UT-wise details of Coverage of SAGY Panchayats 
As on 08.06.2025 
S. No. State Total SAGY 
panchayats 
Number of SAGY panchayats having 
100% 
FHTC 
>=75% & 
< 100% 
FHTC 
>=50% & 
< 75% 
FHTC 
>=25% & 
< 50% 
FHTC 
>=0% & 
< 25% 
FHTC 
1 A&N Islands 7  7 0 0 0 0 
2 Andhra Pradesh 177  38 70 42 21 6 
3 Arunachal Pradesh 13  13 0 0 0 0 
4 Assam 48  0 36 8 2 2 
5 Bihar 182  142 32 6 1 1 
6 Chhattisgarh 116  23 64 21 6 2 
7 DNH & DD 8  8 0 0 0 0 
8 Goa 15  15 0 0 0 0 
9 Gujarat 222  222 0 0 0 0 
10 Haryana 86  86 0 0 0 0 
11 Himachal Pradesh 43  43 0 0 0 0 
12 J&K 28  11 11 6 0 0 
13 Jharkhand 117  8 44 21 18 26 
14 Karnataka 133  30 75 19 8 1 
15 Kerala 167  24 26 31 35 51 
16 Ladakh 4  4 0 0 0 0 
17 Lakshadweep 2  2 0 0 0 0 
18 Madhya Pradesh 137  77 35 11 6 8 
19 Maharashtra 259  147 75 23 11 3 
20 Manipur 27  6 13 6 1 1 
21 Meghalaya 19  13 4 1 0 1 
22 Mizoram 8  8 0 0 0 0 
23 Nagaland 4  4 0 0 0 0 

56 
 
24 Odisha 108  23 42 32 7 4 
25 Puducherry 10  10 0 0 0 0 
26 Punjab 70  70 0 0 0 0 
27 Rajasthan 188  36 50 39 23 40 
28 Sikkim 14  10 3 0 0 1 
29 Tamil Nadu 367  244 67 25 17 14 
30 Telangana 85  85 0 0 0 0 
31 Tripura 14  4 7 2 1 0 
32 Uttar Pradesh 543  365 122 19 11 26 
33 Uttarakhand 37  30 6 1 0 0 
34 West Bengal 10  0 5 3 1 1 
 Total 3,268 1,808 787 316 169 188 
Source: JJM-IMIS 

57 
 
Annexure-V (SBM) 
Detailed progress in SWM  Total 
Village 
SWM AIP 
Target 2024-
25 
Achievement 
in FY 24-25 
1st April 2024-
31st March 
2025 
Current SWM 
progress % 
Andhra Pradesh 15,995 4912 235 99.78% 
D & N Haveli and 
Daman & Diu 
98 0 0 96% 
Jharkhand 29,322 19,725 5432 31% 
Kerala 1435 637 0 96% 
Maharashtra 40,247 26,916 16248 83% 
Punjab 11,977 7021 1318 32% 
Puducherry 91 0 0 98.90% 
Tamil Nadu 11,739 5242 0 98% 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

58 
 
Annexure-VI (SBM) 
Detailed Progress regarding Plastic Waste Management Units (PWMUs) 
State Name Total 
No. 
Blocks 
Rural Plastic 
Waste 
Management 
Units 
Block 
Mapped 
in 
PWMU 
Urban 
(Total 
No. 
Blocks 
Linked 
with 
Urban 
MRF 
(Units & 
Mapped) 
Blocks 
(Total No. 
Distinct 
Blocks 
covered in 
PWMU 
(Units & 
Mapped) 
& Linked 
with Urban 
MRF (Units 
& 
Mapped))  
Functionality 
Status 
A & N 
Islands 
9 7 0 0 7 Nil 
Assam 240 148 6 0 154 1% 
Chhattisgarh 146 70 10 4 83 64% 
Goa 12 7 0 5 12 Nil 
Gujarat 248 69 32 90 189 16% 
Haryana 143 8 9 0 16 25% 
Ladakh 31 26 0 0 26 84% 
Manipur 44 24 0 0 24 Nil 
Rajasthan 369 1 1 45 47 21% 
Tripura 58 3 1 56 58 6% 
 

59 
 
Annexure-VII (SBM) 
Targets Vs Achievement 2024-25 under CSCs  
Target 2025-26 State/UT Target in 
FY 24-25 
Achievement 
in 
FY 24-25 
Progress 
Percentage 
Andhra Pradesh 21508 655 3% 2,368 
Arunachal Pradesh 522 19 4% 497 
Bihar 1030 92 9% 1,062 
Chhattisgarh 2893 701 24% 2,918 
Jammu & Kashmir 1000 527 53% 2,744 
Jharkhand 234 80 34% 162 
Kerala 690 196 28% 696 
Ladakh 62 14 23% 113 
Madhya Pradesh 1500 500 33% 1,800 
Maharashtra 12599 2752 22% 7,503 
Meghalaya 570 268 47% 2,673 
Mizoram 30 2 7% 40 
Nagaland 366 141 39% 525 
Odisha 1587 581 37% 1,203 
Puducherry 5 0 0% 10 
Rajasthan 3000 1458 49% 2,746 
Sikkim 206 80 39% 170 
Tamil Nadu 4435 1401 32% 2,393 
Tripura 661 176 27% 331 
West Bengal 16390 2063 13% 3,900 
 
 
 

60 
 
Confidential 
 
MINUTES OF THE SIXTEENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
WATER RESOURCES (2024-25) HELD ON 08 AUGUST, 2025. 
  
The Committee sat on Friday, the 08 August, 2025 from 1000 hours to 1100 hours in 
Committee Room '2', Parliament House Annexe Extension, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
 
Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy    -  Chairperson 
 
          MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Narayandas Ahirwar 
3. Shri Isha Khan Choudhury 
4. Shri Sher Singh Ghubaya 
5. Shri Bapi Haldar 
6. Md. Rakibul Hussain 
7. Shri Rodmal Nagar 
8. Shri Dhaval Laxmanbhai Patel 
9. Shri Vishaldada Prakashbapu Patil 
10. Shri Mohite Patil Dhairyasheel Rajsinh 
11. Shri Pratap Chandra Sarangi 
12. Shri Dushyant Singh 
13. Thiru. Tamilselvan Thanga 
 
 RAJYA SABHA 
  14. Shri Khiru Mahto 
 15. Smt. Mausam Noor 
 16. Shri Balyogi Umeshnath 
 17. Shri Dhairyashil Mohan Patil 
 

61 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Chander Mohan  - Additional Secretary 
2. Shri Ajay Kumar Sood - Director 
3.  Shri Umesh Bist  -  Under Secretary 
  
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of the Committee.   
 Thereafter, the Committee took up for consideration following four Draft Reports: 
 
(i)    Sixth Report on 'Action Taken by the Government on the Observations / 
Recommendations contained in the First Report (18th Lok Sabha) on Demands 
for Grants (2024-25) of the Ministry of Jal Shakti - Department of Drinking Water 
and Sanitation'. 
 
(ii)  Seventh Report on 'Action Taken by the Government on the Observations / 
Recommendations contained in the Second Report (18th Lok Sabha) on 
Demands for Grants (2024-25) of the Ministry of Jal Shakti - Department of Water 
Resources, River Development and Ganga Rejuvenation'. 
 
(iii)  Eighth Report on 'Action Taken by the Government on the Observations / 
Recommendations contained in the Third Report (18th Lok Sabha) on Demands 
for Grants (2025-26) of the Ministry of Jal Shakti - Department of Drinking Water 
and Sanitation'. 
 
(iv)  Ninth Report on 'Action Taken by the Government on the Observations / 
Recommendations contained in the Fourth Report (18th Lok Sabha) on Demands 
for Grants (2025-26) of the Ministry of Jal Shakti - Department of Water 
Resources, River Development and Ganga Rejuvenation'. 
 
 
3. After some deliberation, the Committee adopted the aforesaid four draft Reports, without 
any modification.  The Committee then authorized the Chairperson to present the Reports on 
their behalf to both the Houses of Parliament in the current Session. 
 
The Committee then adjourned 
 
*** 

62 
 
APPENDICE – II 
 
[Vide Para 4 of the Introduction] 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN THE THIRD REPORT 
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
 
(i) Total number of Recommendations/Observations 
 
         25 
(ii) Recommendation/Observations which have been accepted by the 
Government  
 
Recommendation Nos.  1, 2, 3, 4, 6, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 14, 15, 17, 
18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24 and 25 
 
 
 
Total – 21 
Percentage– 84% 
 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies 
Recommendation Nos. NIL 
 
 
 
 
Total – 00 
Percentage – Nil 
 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee 
 
Recommendation Nos. Recommendation Nos. 5, 7, 13 and 16 
 
 
 
Total – 4 
Percentage –  16% 
 
(v) Recommendation/Observation in respect of which final reply of the 
Government is still awaited 
Para Nos. NIL 
 
 
 
Total – 00 
Percentage – Nil 
 
  