 
9 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON WATER RESOURCES 
(2024-25) 
                 
         
EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA 
                  
         
                 
MINISTRY OF JAL SHAKTI – DEPARTMENT OF WATER RESOURCES, 
RIVER DEVELOPMENT AND GANGA REJUVENATION 
 
         
         
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2025-26) 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations / 
Recommendations contained in the Fourth Report (Eighteenth Lok 
Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Water Resources] 
         
         
         
NINTH REPORT 
  
          
            
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
         
August, 2025 / Sravana, 1947 (Saka) 

NINTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON WATER RESOURCES 
(2024-25) 
          
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
         
         
         
MINISTRY OF JAL SHAKTI – DEPARTMENT OF WATER RESOURCES, 
RIVER DEVELOPMENT AND GANGA REJUVENATION  
                 
         
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2025-26) 
 
 (Action Taken by the Government on the Observations / 
Recommendations contained in the Fourth Report on ‘Demands for 
Grants (2025-26) of the Ministry of Jal Shakti - 
Department of Water Resources, River Development and Ganga 
Rejuvenation) 
         
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 11.08.2025 
Laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 11.08.2025 
  
 
  
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
                 
         
August, 2025 / Sravana, 1947 (Saka) 

 
W. R. C.  No. 92 
         
         
         
         
         
         
 
 
         
         
         
Price :  Rs.  
         
         
         
         
         
 
 
 
         
     
                     
 
 
 
         
        © 2025 By Lok Sabha Secretariat 
  
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok 
Sabha  (Sixteenth Edition) and Printed by  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iii) 
 

CONTENTS 
 
  Page  
Composition of 
the Committee 
 
……………………………………………………………… (v) 
INTRODUCTION ……………………………………………………………… 
 
(vii) 
CHAPTER - I Report……………………………………………………… 
 
1 
CHAPTER – II Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted 
by the Government…………………………… 
 
26 
CHAPTER - III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do 
not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s 
replies……………………………………………………… 
 
73 
CHAPTER - IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of   which the 
replies of the Government have not been accepted by the 
Committee……………...................................... 
 
74 
CHAPTER - V 
 
Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final 
replies of the Government are still 
awaited…………………………………………………….. 
 
86 
 ANNEXURES 
 
 
I Budget allocation and actual expenditure for FY 2024-25 
 
87 
 
II List of Programme where Namami Gange Operational 
 
89 
III Copy of snapshot of data for monitoring the Namami Gange 
Programme on DISHA portal 
 
90 
IV Letter dated 02.06.2025 sent to MoEF&CC 
 
91 
 
 
 APPENDICES 
 
 
I 
 
Minutes of the Sixteenth sitting of the Standing Committee 
on Water Resources held on 08.08.2025. 
 
 
92 
II Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Fourth 
Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee 
94 
    
 
 
 
(iv) 
 

COMPOSITION OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON WATER RESOURCES 
(2024-25) 
  
 
Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy  -  Chairperson 
 
 LOK SABHA 
 
 
2.  Shri Narayandas Ahirwar  
3.  Shri Joyanta Basumatary  
4.  Chh. Udayanraje Pratapsinha Maharaj 
Bhonsle 
5.  Shri Isha Khan Choudhury  
6.  Shri Sher Singh Ghubaya  
7.  Shri Bapi Haldar  
8.  Md. Rakibul Hussain  
9.  Smt. Sanjna Jatav  
10.  Shri Sarabjeet Singh Khalsa  
11.  Shri Sagar Eshwar Khandre  
12.  Shri Rodmal Nagar  
13.  Shri Dhaval Laxmanbhai Patel  
14.  Shri Vishaldada Prakashbapu Patil  
15.  Shri Mohite Patil Dhairyasheel Rajsinh  
16.  Shri Dilip Saikia  
17.  Shri Pratap Chandra Sarangi  
18.  Shri Dushyant Singh  
19.  Thiru. Tamilselvan Thanga  
20.  Shri Ashok Kumar Yadav  
21.  Vacant 
 
 
 RAJYA SABHA 
 
22. Dr. Faiyaz Ahmad 
23. Shri Ashokrao Shankarrao Chavan 
24. Smt. Dharmshila Gupta 
25. Smt. Jebi Mather Hisham 
26. Shri Khiru Mahto 
27. Smt. Mausam Noor 
28. Shri Balyogi Umeshnath 
29. Shri Sanjay Kumar Jha 
30. Shri Dhairyashil Mohan Patil 
31. Smt. Seema Dwivedi 
 
 
 
 
(v) 
 
 
 

 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Chander Mohan - Additional Secretary 
2. Shri Ajay Kumar Sood - Director 
3. Shri P. Ashok - Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri Umesh Bist -  Under Secretary 
5. Shri Nitin Kumar Nim - Assistant Committee Officer 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(vi) 

INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Water Resources (2024-25) having 
been authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present the Ninth 
Report on the Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in their Fourth Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for                            
Grants (2025-26) of the Ministry of Jal Shakti -Department of Water Resources, River 
Development and Ganga Rejuvenation.  
 
2.  The Fourth Report of the Committee was presented to Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya 
Sabha on 11 March 2025. The Action Taken replies of the Government to all the 
recommendations contained in the Report were received in this Secretariat on 12 June, 
2025. 
 
3.  The replies of the Government were examined and the Report was considered and 
adopted by the Committee at their sitting held on 08.08.2025. 
 
4. An analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Fourth Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) 
of the Committee is given in Appendice-II. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI                           RAJIV PRATAP RUDY, 
08 August, 2025                                                                                    Chairperson,                                                                      
17 Sravana,1947 (Saka)                    Standing Committee on Water Resources 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(vii) 

CHAPTER I 
REPORT 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Water Resources (2024-25) deals 
with the action taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in their Fourth Report (18th Lok Sabha) on the Demands for Grants                 
(2025-26) of the Ministry of Jal Shakti – Department of Water Resources, River 
Development & Ganga Rejuvenation. 
 
2.  The Fourth Report was presented to Lok Sabha on 11.03.2025 and was laid on 
the Table of Rajya Sabha on 11.03.2025. The Report contained                                     
28 Observations/Recommendations.  
 
3. Action Taken Notes in respect of all the 28 Observations/Recommendations of 
the Committee have been received from the Government. These have been examined 
and categorized as follows: - 
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the Government 
(Chapter II):  
 
Recommendation Nos. 1, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12,14, 15, 16, 18, 19, 20, 21, 
22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27 & 28 
       (Total – 24) 
 
(ii) Observations / Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue 
in view of the Government’s replies (Chapter III):  
 
Recommendation Nos. NIL       
     (Total – NIL) 
 
(iii) Observations / Recommendations in respect of which replies of the Government 
have not been accepted by the Committee (Chapter IV):  
 
Recommendation Nos. 2, 3, 13 & 17       
(Total – 04)  
 
(iv) Observations / Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited (Chapter V):  
 
Para Nos. NIL        
      (Total – NIL) 
4.  The Committee desire that replies to recommendations made in the Chapter-I of 
this Report may be furnished to the Committee expeditiously.  
 
5.  The Committee will now deal with action taken by the Government on some of 
their Observations/Recommendations that require reiteration or merit comments. 

2 
 
   
A. National Water Policy 
 
Recommendation No. 2 (Para Nos.2.4, 2.5 & 2.6) 
 
6. The Committee noted that at present the National Water Policy-2012 is in effect 
with the objective to assess the existing situation and to propose a framework for a plan 
of action with a unified national perspective and to achieve this objective of the Policy, a 
number of recommendations have been made therein for conservation, development 
and improved management of water resources of the country. 
  
The Committee observed that to address current challenges in the Water Sector, 
revision of National Water Policy has been envisaged and the drafting committee 
constituted to revise the National Water Policy has submitted its draft report with 
contrary and non-coherent views from some of the key Members of this Committee and 
the same is under consideration of the Ministry. In this context, the Committee were of 
the opinion that as enumerated by the Department various challenges in the water 
sector including reduction of per capita availability of water due to increasing population, 
deterioration in quality, overexploitation of ground water resources leading to decline in 
ground water level and relatively lower efficiency of the facilities for water utilization are 
multiplying in magnitude over time period. Hence, to mitigate these challenges a robust 
and collective approach is essential. 
  
Therefore, the Committee urged the Ministry to take necessary decisions in the 
matter on urgent basis and ensure the implementation of the New National Water Policy 
on priority so that necessary systems be prepared to confront the current challenges in 
the Water Sector. 
 
7. The Department in its action taken note has replied as follows: 
“To ensure implementation of New Water Policy on priority, sincere efforts are 
being taken by DoWR, RD & GR.  New Draft National Water Policy (NWP) is 
under consideration of the Department.”  

3 
 
 
 
8. In view of the present National Water Policy-2012 and the significant 
challenges being faced by the water sector viz., reduction of per capita 
availability of water due to increasing population, deterioration in quality, over 
exploitation of ground water resources leading to decline in ground water level 
and relatively lower efficacy of the facilities for water utilization, the Committee 
urged the Ministry to expedite the process and ensure the implementation of the 
New National Water Policy on priority. However, from the action taken reply of the 
Ministry, the Committee has not observed any significant progress in the position 
towards implementation of the New National Water Policy as stated by the 
Ministry in its earlier reply. Here, the Committee believe that in the present 
scenario of various emerging crises in the water sector, it is of paramount 
importance that the new National Water Policy is implemented without any further 
delay. Hence, the Committee reiterate their recommendation and urge the 
Ministry to urgently ensure the implementation of the New National Water Policy 
on priority, so that all suitable systems are in place to address the 
current/emerging challenges in the Water Sector and ensure resilience against 
scarcity, pollution and climate driven disruptions. The Committee would like to be 
apprised of the steps taken by the Ministry in this regard, within 3 months of 
presentation of this Report.  
 
B. National Dam Safety Authority 
 
Recommendation No. 3 (Para Nos.2.7 & 2.8) 
 
9. The Committee note that the National Dam Safety Authority (NDSA) was 
established in February 2022 to implement policies, guidelines, and standards made by 
the National Committee on Dam Safety (NCDS). Maintaining standards of dam safety 
and prevention of dam failure related disasters, discharging such functions as related to 
implementation of the policies made by the National Committee including making 

4 
 
regulations on the recommendations of the National Committee are some the functions 
of the Authority.  
 
The Committee note that all dam owning States have constituted the State 
Committees on Dam Safety (SCDS) and State Dam Safety Organizations (SDSO), in 
accordance with the provisions of the Dam Safety Act.  Further, with regard to 
availability of adequate personnel, as per the information provided, the Committee 
observe an acute shortage in SCDSs and SDSOs in most of the States/UTs. In this 
regard, the Committee are of the view that to facilitate the effective implementation of 
the Dam Safety Act, it is imperative that all organizations involved in Dam Safety work, 
commit to it with full capacity. This can only be achieved if all organizations are 
adequately staffed as insufficient staffing will inevitably compromise their efficiency, 
thereby hindering the fulfilment of the Act's objectives. Therefore, the Committee 
recommend that the Department take necessary measures to address this issue and 
ensure that all organizations are sufficiently staffed and equipped to implement the Act 
effectively. 
 
 
10. The Department in its action taken note has replied as follows: 
 
“ Many meetings have been held with the Heads of Water Resource Department 
of the State of Chhattisgarh, Andhra Pradesh, Telangana, Rajasthan, Uttar 
Pradesh on dam safety issues including incumbency in SDSOs by NDSA. The 
issue of shortage of staff was highlighted in these meetings.  NDSA has 
consistently highlighted staffing shortages as a key agenda item in its regional 
review meetings with all dam-owning States/UTs. So far, 16 regional review 
meetings have been held with dam-owning States/UTs. During these 
consultations, States have been informed about the shortage of staff in SDSOs. 
Furthermore, NDSA has issued official communications to the concerned 
States/UTs highlighting the need to address these staffing issues on a priority 
basis.” 

5 
 
11. The Committee note from the action taken reply of the Department that 
regional review meetings have been held with dam-owning States/UTs and issue 
of shortage of staff in SDSOs have been highlighted by NDSA, with official 
communications to the States/UTs concerned. However, upon review, the 
Committee note that the reply has not detailed the outcome, progress, and 
current initiatives undertaken by the SDSOs to enhance staffing levels and 
strengthen their organizational capacity. In this regard, the Committee are of the 
view that the issue of dam safety is directly related to the safety of  the common 
man and therefore, strengthening all responsible agencies for the purpose, is 
essential and given the gravity of the issue, swift and concrete measures are 
imperative to address this critical aspect. Hence, the Committee reiterate their 
recommendation that the Department take all necessary measures to ensure that 
all organizations are sufficiently staffed and equipped to implement the Act 
effectively. In this regard, the Committee would like to be appraised about the 
progress in the matter within three months from the presentation of this report.   
   
Recommendation No. 4 (Para No.2.9) 
12. The Committee further observed that the NDSA established under Dam Safety 
Act, 2021 has mandate to implement policies, guidelines and standards made by the 
National Committee on Dam Safety.  Similarly, State Committee on Dam Safety and 
State Dam Safety Organizations were constituted under the provision of the Act.  
However, the Committee felt that since the uses, functioning, safety and O&M of Dam 
Structures are very crucial public issues, it is imperative that a local public 
representative may be included in the bodies/organizations under NDSA, from the 
planning phase of any project, so that a seamless implementation process is ensured. 
This will facilitate bridging the gap between the local people and the Authority and also 
address the needs and concerns of local people of the area in an inclusive way. 
Therefore, the Committee recommended that necessary provision may be incorporated 
for inclusion of elected public representatives (Member of Parliament / Member of 

6 
 
Legislative Assembly) in the bodies / organizations under NDSA by suitably amending 
Dam Safety Act, 2021 to further strengthen the NDSA. 
 
13. The Department in its action taken note has replied as follows: 
 
“As per the Dam Safety Act (DSA) 2021, NDSA is mandated, inter-alia, to 
formulate guidelines, provide technical assistance, knowledge sharing etc., with 
the dam owners in the matters for the dam safety. Planning of the Project is 
done by the State Govts/PSU and NDSA does not play any role there. Since 
dam projects are conceptualized, planned, and executed by the respective State 
Governments, it may be appropriate that the matter may be taken up with the 
States to consider involving elected public representatives in the matter relating 
to dam safety.” 
 
14. Taking note of the needs and concerns of local people and for bridging the 
gap with the authorities, the Committee recommended for incorporation of 
necessary provision for inclusion of elected public representatives (MPs / MLAs) 
in the bodies / organizations under NDSA by suitably amending Dam Safety Act-
2021 to ensure their representation from the planning phase of dam projects. 
However, in its action taken reply, the Department informed the Committee that 
dam projects are conceptualized, planned, and executed by the respective State 
Governments and the matter may be taken up with the States to consider 
involving elected public representatives in the matter relating to dam safety. In 
this regard, the Committee accept the reply of the Ministry, however, here, the 
Committee are of the opinion that, in any dam project, addressing the concerns of 
the local people is essential and in view of the seriousness and  apprehensions of 
the Committee on this issue, the Ministry may proactively intervene in the issue 
by  mooting a proposal / advisory to the States / UTs/ PSUs for inclusion of 
elected public representatives (Member of Parliament / Member of Legislative 
Assembly)   from the planning phase of any dam project. In this regard, the 

7 
 
Committee would like to be appraised about the progress in the matter within 
three months from the presentation of this report.   
 
C. Brahmaputra Board 
Recommendation No. 7 (Para No.2.14) 
 
15. The Committee expressed grave concern regarding the recurring floods and 
riverbank erosion caused by the Brahmaputra River in the North East Region, 
particularly in the State of Assam. In this regard the Brahmaputra Board has listed out 
various efforts to combat these problems, which include Preparation of Master Plans, 
DPRs of Multipurpose Projects, monitoring of FMBAP schemes, execution of anti-
erosion and flood control schemes in the identified region and execution of Drainage 
Development Schemes. While acknowledging the endeavours made by the Board to 
achieve its mandated objectives, the Committee believe that much needs to be done on 
ground to bring these cherished goals to reality. Realising that floods and land erosion 
are still responsible for humanitarian crisis displacing a huge population and pushing 
them into economic insecurity and landlessness in North East Region, the Committee 
recommended that a concerted time bound action plan needs to be envisaged to 
address the issue comprehensively and effectively in the North East Region particularly 
in the State of Assam to safeguard land and livelihood in the region. 
 
16. The Department in its action taken note has replied as follows: 
 
“The Board has been actively engaged in preparing Master Plans, developing 
Detailed Project Reports (DPRs) for multipurpose projects, monitoring FMBAP 
schemes, and executing anti-erosion, flood control, and drainage development 
schemes. The Board recognizes the need for comprehensive and integrated 
approach involving the basin states along with the stake holders to address the 
problems of flood and erosion in the North East (NE) Region. 

8 
 
The Board is currently preparing and updating the master-plans for 15 river sub-
basins using state-of-the-art technology. These includes- 
Dikhow (Nagaland and Assam)  
Jhanji (Nagaland and Assam)  
Dikrong (Arunachal Pradesh and Assam)  
Kolodyne (Mizoram) 
Tuichang (Mizoram) 
Bugi (Meghalaya) 
Dareng (Meghalaya) 
Kynshi (Meghalaya) 
Umngi (Meghalaya) 
Umiew (Meghalaya) 
Umsohryngkew (Meghalaya) 
Umngot (Meghalaya) 
Myntdu (Meghalaya) 
Lubha (Meghalaya) 
Simsang (Meghalaya)  
These masterplans will address the flood and erosion problem in the concern 
basins while catering to the water resources problem in a holistic way for proving 
a sustainable solution. These masterplans will also take account of the 
environmental related aspects while maintaining the biodiversity and will be 
prepared with the latest state of the art technology in consultation with the basin 
states. The Board has started the mechanism formulating the Request for 
Proposal (RFP) in consultation with stakeholders and obtaining the suggestion 
and views during all the phases of preparation of these masterplans. Board has 
also formulated committee for preparing the roadmap for preparation of these 
masterplans which involve members from respective State Govt., Central Water 
Commission(CWC), North East Space Application Centre(NESAC), Survey of 
India(SoI),Geological Survey of India (GSI), Academia and other Institutions.   

9 
 
Further as decided by the HPRB and 84th Meeting of BB, and in addition to the 
above 15 master-plans, following major rivers in NE region has been identified 
for preparation/updation of the masterplans, utilizing state-of-the-art technology 
based on the latest data, tools, and technologies, in close coordination with the 
basin states in phased manner. 
Sankosh-Raidak 
Teesta 
Ganol  
Jinjiram  
Umtru  
Kopili Kollong 
Dhansiri (North) 
Tangani  
Noanadi  
Nanoi  
Barnadi  
Feni  
Muhuri  
Gumti  
RFP documents have been prepared for these four packages (Package-2 to 
Package-5). A meeting will be convened soon to determine the scope and 
objectives of the master plans. 
HPRB also agreed that Brahmaputra Board should focus on preparing state-of-
the-art DPRs for the States and monitor their implementation by the states. It was 
further advised by HPRB that the Board should develop its institutional and 
technical capabilities so that it could provide high quality technical assistance to 
the states for addressing their specific challenges. 
HPRB further agreed that other than regular/continuing works, the Board should 
also take up strategic pilot projects aimed at enhancing its own technical 
capacities and showcasing innovations and best practices to the states in such 

10 
 
domains as scientific support to indigenous water management practices, nature-
based solutions, springshed and watershed development, drainage development, 
urban flooding, irrigation solutions, research studies, data systems and 
institutional development etc.  
HPRB also agreed that the states should take up anti-erosion and flood 
protection works under ongoing FMBAP scheme of Ministry. If necessary, they 
may seek the assistance of Brahmaputra Board for making holistic/ integrated 
DPRs for this purpose. 
As advised by the HPRB, Brahmaputra Board is on the quest to transform into a 
knowledge-based River Basin Organization (RBO) capable of providing the best 
possible technical solution and assistance to the basin states in preparing holistic 
& integrated masterplans, DPRs of water resources projects, capacity building, 
etc and advice on matters related to the spectrum of water resources 
management. 
The Brahmaputra Board will continue its coordination with State Governments 
and concerned agencies to ensure effective planning and implementation of flood 
management measures. Additionally, it will focus on scientific studies, capacity 
building, and stakeholder engagement to enhance the long-term resilience of the 
region against these recurring challenges. 
The Board remains committed to working towards safeguarding land, livelihood, 
and communities in the region and will strive to strengthen its initiatives to 
achieve the desired outcomes.” 
 
17. The Committee note from the action taken reply that to address the flood 
and erosion problem in the North East Region, various efforts have been listed 
out by the Department including preparing and updating the masterplans for 15 
sub-basins using state-of-the art technology. Further, in addition around 14 major 
rivers in North East region have been identified for preparation / updation of the 
masterplans with the updated technologies in coordination with the basin states 
in phased manner and in this regard a meeting will be convened soon to 
determine the scope and objectives of the master plans. Further, the Committee 

11 
 
also observe that High Power Review Board (HPRB) have also advised the Board 
to focus on preparing state-of-art DPRs for States and monitor their 
implementation and also develop its institutional and technical capabilities 
showcasing innovations and best practices. Here, the Committee observe that 
while various initiatives have been proposed to mitigate floods and erosion in the 
North East region, their success hinges on effective implementation and to 
achieve this, a dedicated and proactive approach by the Board is essential. The 
Committee expect the Board to leverage its concerted efforts to not only finalize 
its master plans but also ensure their rigorous implementation. The Committee 
hope that through its concerted efforts the Board will be successful in completing 
its masterplans and will also ensure their effective implementation. The 
Committee would like to be apprised of the progress in this regard within 3 
months of the presentation of this Report.  
 
 
D. Rainwater Harvesting 
 
Recommendation No. 13 (Para Nos.2.21 & 2.22) 
 
18. The Committee noted that Rainwater harvesting (RWH) has emerged as a very 
viable and crucial strategy to address India's escalating water scarcity, ensuring 
sustainable water management, and mitigating the reliance on conventional water 
sources. By collecting and storing rainwater, RWH can significantly alleviate water 
scarcity issues, providing a reliable alternative to traditional water sources that are often 
inadequate or unpredictable. Furthermore, RWH contributes to improved groundwater 
recharge, rendering it a vital and viable solution in regions where aquifers have 
depleted. 
 
The Committee observed that for promoting rain water harvesting in the country, 
no dedicated financial support to States/UTs has been provided by National Water 
Mission (NWM).  On this issue, the Department apprised the Committee about the 

12 
 
various efforts deployed by NWM in this regard including the Jal Shakti Abhiyan: “Catch 
the Rain campaign”, which is a convergence of various Central Government schemes 
and funds like MGNREGA, Atal Mission for Rejuvenation and Urban Transformation 
(AMRUT), Per Drop More Crop Repair, Renovation and Restoration Components under 
the Pradhan Mantri Krishi Sinchai Yojana (PMKSY) , Compensatory Afforestation Fund 
Management and Planning Authority(CAMPA), Finance Commission Grants, State 
Government schemes, Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR) funds etc. While 
acknowledging these efforts of the Government, the Committee believed that rainwater 
harvesting can be a versatile and effective solution to tackle water scarcity, manage 
storm water runoff, and support sustainable water management. Use of available 
rainwater harvesting techniques is vital in enhancing groundwater recharge, improving 
agricultural productivity and reduce dependence on traditional water sources and 
provision of dedicated financial support to States/UTs will definitely motivate them to 
make serious efforts to promote rainwater harvesting measures and ensure the 
participation of communities in masses. Keeping in view the fact that rainwater 
harvesting is increasingly recognized as a vital strategy to address water scarcity and 
ensure sustainable water management, the Committee recommended that the Ministry 
consider providing dedicated financial grant / support to the States / UTs to promote use 
of rainwater harvesting through available techniques so that problem of water scarcity in 
the country may be mitigated to some extent.  
 
19. The Department in its action taken note has replied as follows: 
“Rainwater harvesting (RWH) is increasingly recognized as a vital strategy to 
address India’s growing water scarcity and ensure sustainable water 
management. Rainwater harvesting offers a solution to the challenges posed by 
the over exploitation of water resources, erratic rainfall, and a rapidly increasing 
population. By collecting and storing rainwater, this practice can significantly 
alleviate water scarcity issues, offering a reliable alternative to conventional 
water sources, which are often insufficient or unreliable. It also helps improve 

13 
 
groundwater recharge, making it a key solution in regions where aquifers have 
been depleted. 
The Hon’ble Prime Minister’s vision for water security embraces a Whole of 
Government and Whole of Society approach to address India’s diverse water 
needs—rural and urban, domestic and industrial. The Ministry of Jal Shakti has 
been implementing the Jal Shakti Abhiyan (JSA) campaign since 2019, a flagship 
programme of the National Water Mission, Ministry of Jal Shakti with the tagline 
from 2021 “Catch the Rain: Where it Falls, When it Falls”. Institutionalized as an 
annual intervention, JSA:CTR is anchored in the principles of decentralization 
and public participation, with a strong emphasis on the community-driven 
construction, revival, and maintenance of rainwater harvesting and groundwater 
recharge structures. By engaging citizens at the grassroots level, the campaign 
fosters collective ownership and long-term stewardship of water resources 
across the country. 
The sixth edition of the Jal Shakti Abhiyan: Catch the Rain (JSA: CTR) 2025 was 
launched in collaboration with the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate 
Change (MoEF&CC) The campaign focuses on awareness generation around 
water conservation, while driving five key intervention areas each year. 
Intervention-wise progress (completed as well as ongoing works) as on 
02.06.2025 includes (i) Water Conservation & Rainwater Harvesting Structures: 
58,06,024; (ii) Renovation of Traditional Water Bodies: 12,43,752; (iii) Reuse and 
Recharge Structures: 31,00,664; (iv) Watershed Development: 73,64,755; (v) 
Afforestation: 1,39,98,27,636. 
The Jal Sanchay Jan Bhagidari (JSJB) initiative, launched in 2024, has rapidly 
accelerated local groundwater recharge efforts across India through an 
innovative, community-driven approach. The initiative focuses on the 
construction of low-cost artificial recharge structures with focus on roof top 
rainwater harvesting structures, recharging of defunct bore wells and recharge 
pits. With an ambitious target of constructing over one million recharge 
structures by May 2025, the initiative has already exceeded expectations, with 

14 
 
more than 27 lakh recharge structures uploaded on JSJB portal as on 2nd 
June 2025. The success of JSJB does not rely on central funding but is 
driven by convergent and inclusive funding model, which integrates resources 
from government schemes such as MGNREGA, AMRUT, and PMKSY with 
contributions from the private sector, including Corporate Social Responsibility 
(CSR) funds, philanthropic donations, individual donors, and crowdfunding 
platforms. This integrated financial approach not only facilitates broad-based 
participation but also fosters community ownership and ensures the long-term 
sustainability of groundwater conservation efforts. 
Across the country, youth groups, women collectives, self-help groups, NGOs, 
farmers, and students are taking small, localised steps—creating a large national 
movement. Community ownership of water resources has been the backbone of 
this movement, fostering sustained engagement, accountability, and the ongoing 
upkeep of the assets created. This is the true spirit of Jan Bhagidari is that 
citizens not merely as beneficiaries, but as active agents  of change. The JSJB 
initiative aligns with the Hon’ble Prime Minister’s vision of a “Whole-of-
Government, Whole-of-Society” approach, underscoring the importance of 
both community involvement and governmental coordination in effective water 
management. 
Under JSJB, several innovative community-driven models have emerged to 
promote sustainable groundwater conservation. The Karmbhoomi se 
Matribhoomi Model enables individuals working in Gujarat to fund borewell 
recharge projects in their state of birth, thereby fostering strong emotional and 
ecological ties. The Alwar School Building Model, developed integrates rooftop 
rainwater harvesting and sanitation facilities into schools, turning infrastructure 
into educational tools. In Raipur, the CREDAI-Hydrologist Model brings 
together builders and hydrologists to develop low-cost recharge structures at just 
₹1,500 per unit, exemplifying cost-effective collaboration. Meanwhile, the Gir 
Ganga Trust NGO Model unites NGOs, philanthropists, and local communities, 
with shared responsibilities in construction and resource support. These models 

15 
 
exemplify cost-effective, participatory, and scientifically sound approaches to 
water conservation, reinforcing India’s grassroots-led water security efforts. 
An incentive mechanism has been developed by the Ministry of Housing and 
Urban Affairs (MoHUA) to reward Municipal Corporations (MCs) and Urban 
Local Bodies (ULBs) demonstrating exemplary performance in water 
conservation and rainwater harvesting efforts. This mechanism is based on 
measurable indicators and is designed to promote equitable competition and 
balanced representation across urban areas. By recognizing successful models 
and practices at the city and town level, MoHUA aims to encourage urban 
stakeholders to proactively engage in the Jal Sanchay Jan Bhagidari initiative 
under the Jal Shakti Abhiyan: Catch the Rain campaign. 
Separately, the Ministry of Jal Shakti (MoJS) has proposed an incentive 
mechanism for recognizing outstanding contributions by Industry Associations, 
NGOs, Philanthropists, District Administrations, and other non-governmental 
actors. This incentive scheme also relies on measurable performance indicators 
and seeks to enhance private sector, civil society, and district-level participation 
in water conservation efforts. The approach reinforces decentralized, community-
driven models by encouraging innovation and local leadership, in alignment with 
the core spirit of the Jal Shakti Abhiyan and Jal Sanchay Jan Bhagidari 
initiatives.  
As per the Dynamic Ground Water Resources Assessment Report, 2024, there 
has been a total increase of 11.36 billion cubic meters (BCM) in 2024 with 
respect to 2017 through recharge by Tanks, Ponds and Water Conservation 
Structures, surpassing even the live storage capacity of 9.75 BCM of the Indira 
Sagar Dam. 
  
Apart from the Jal Shakti Abhiyan (JSA), several other flagship initiatives are 
also contributing significantly towards augmenting water supply, particularly 
through rainwater harvesting. Notable among these are the Atal Bhujal Yojana, 
which focuses on community-led groundwater management, and the 

16 
 
Rejuvenation, Renovation, and Restoration (RRR) component of the Pradhan 
Mantri Krishi Sinchayee Yojana (PMKSY), which emphasizes the revival of 
traditional water bodies to enhance water availability and sustainability. 
The Repair, Renovation, and Restoration (RRR) component under the 
Pradhan Mantri Krishi Sinchayee Yojana (PMKSY), a Centrally Sponsored 
Scheme, focuses on restoring traditional water bodies such as tanks, ponds, and 
lakes to improve their water storage capacity and ecological functionality.  
Furthermore, the Atal Bhujal Yojana, Central Sector Scheme, supported by 
World Bank, promotes sustainable groundwater management through community 
participation, encouraging the formation of water budgets and preparation and 
implementation of Gram Panchayat-wise water security plans. These plans are 
locally relevant, grounded in scientific assessment of groundwater availability and 
usage, and foster judicious water use through informed decision-making and 
collective action at the grassroots level. 
The Department of Land Resources under Ministry of Rural Development is 
implementing Watershed Development Component of Pradhan Mantri Krishi 
Sinchayee Yojana Scheme, which is a Central Sector Scheme. The scheme 
aims to develop degraded and rainfed areas of the country, by undertaking 
watershed development projects in an integrated approach. The activities 
undertaken, interalia, include ridge area treatment, drainage line treatment, soil 
and moisture conservation, rainwater harvesting, nursery raising, pasture 
development, livelihoods for asset-less persons etc. 
AMRUT (Atal Mission for Rejuvenation and Urban Transformation) 2.0 is a 
flagship initiative of the Government of India aimed at improving urban 
infrastructure with a strong focus on water sustainability. The mission 
emphasizes rainwater harvesting through effective stormwater drainage into 
clean water bodies, developing aquifer management plans to enhance 
groundwater recharge, and spreading awareness through IEC campaigns. The 
key components include improving urban water supply and sewerage systems, 
developing green spaces, and rejuvenating water bodies. Complementing 

17 
 
national efforts like the Jal Shakti Abhiyan, Catch the Rain,JSJB, AMRUT 2.0 
plays a vital role in ensuring water security and promoting efficient water use in 
urban areas. Under AMRUT, the Shallow Aquifer Management component, 
which is part of Urban Aquifer Management initiatives, addresses the city-wise 
groundwater recharge. It focuses on mapping city aquifers, preparing Aquifer 
Management Plans, and implementing recharge measures like rainwater 
harvesting and recharge wells. This helps improve groundwater availability and 
supports sustainable urban water management. 
It is important to acknowledge the pivotal role played by flagship government 
schemes like MGNREGA and the Mission Amrit Sarovar (MAS) in advancing 
the objectives of water conservation and community participation. Under 
MGNREGA alone, more than ₹1.17 lakh crore have been spent over the past 
five years on the creation and rejuvenation of water-related assets across rural 
India, significantly enhancing groundwater recharge, drought resilience, and 
irrigation potential. Complementing this, the Mission Amrit Sarovar has led to 
the creation of over 68,000 water bodies since its launch, serving not just as 
water conservation structures but also as symbols of Jan Bhagidari and 
environmental stewardship. These initiatives reflect the convergence of livelihood 
generation with sustainable water management. 
Rainwater harvesting and groundwater recharge are central to India’s water 
security strategy. Flagship initiatives like JSA:CTR and JSJB, supported by 
schemes such as PMKSY, Atal Bhujal Yojana, DoLR’s watershed programmes, 
and MoHUA’s urban water initiatives, highlight the power of community-led, 
convergent, and decentralized action. Together, they are driving a nationwide 
movement to restore the hydrological balance and build a resilient, water-secure 
future’.  
The ongoing efforts by the Central Government, State Governments, Urban and 
Rural Local Bodies, along with meaningful private sector participation, have 
collectively demonstrated encouraging progress in advancing the objectives of 
the Jal Shakti Abhiyan (JSA) and Jal Sanchay Jan Bhagidari (JSJB). The 

18 
 
core spirit of JSJB lies in community-led water conservation efforts, where 
local ownership, public participation, and collective responsibility drive impactful 
outcomes. 
Introducing a dedicated financial or administrative vertical beyond the current 
incentive-based, mission-mode approach may not align the spirit of JSA/ JSJB. 
Such a move risks undermining the foundational spirit of these initiatives, which 
is rooted in fostering intensified community engagement and strengthening 
decentralized, state-led implementation.  
This view is reinforced by the findings of the Dynamic Ground Water 
Resources Assessment Report 2024 released by the Central Ground Water 
Board (CGWB), which highlights that significant improvements in groundwater 
levels and recharge potential were most visible in regions where integrated, 
community-led interventions under JSA/ JSJB were effectively implemented—
without reliance on a rigid vertical structure.” 
 
 
20. The Committee observe from the action taken reply that the Ministry listed 
out various efforts in the form of numerous schemes, community-led/ incentive-
based programmes run by the Government to promote Rainwater Harvesting in 
the country including Jal Shakti Abhiyan (JSA) campaign since 2019, a flagship 
programme of the National Water Mission, the Jal Sanchay Jan Bhagidari (JSJB) 
initiative, launched in 2024 driven by convergent and inclusive funding model, 
which integrates resources from government schemes such as MGNREGA, 
AMRUT, and PMKSY with contributions from the private sector, including 
Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR) funds, philanthropic donations, individual 
donors, and crowdfunding flatforms. Further, the Committee also noted the other 
flagship initiatives viz. Atal Bhujal Yojana, Rejuvenation, Renovation and 
Restoration (RRR) component of the Pradhan Mantri Krishi Sinchayee Yojana 
(PMKSY), AMRUT (Atal Mission for Rejuvenation and Urban Transformation) 
Mission Amrit Sarovar (MAS) are contributing in Rainwater harvesting.  

19 
 
Regarding consideration for providing dedicated financial grants / supports 
to the States / UTs for Rainwater harvesting, as recommended by the Committee, 
the Ministry has stated that such initiative would not align with the spirit of 
JSA/JSJB and risk undermining the foundational spirit of the initiatives presently 
taken by the Ministry. However, here, the Committee find the action taken reply 
perplexing with no substantial ground for not accepting their said 
recommendation. Here, the Committee note that most of the initiatives for 
promotion of Rainwater harvesting are community-led and incentive-based which 
do not fix the compulsive responsibility of the participants. Further, the reply is 
also silent about the Repair & Maintenance (R&M) of the infrastructure being 
created for Rainwater harvesting under their various flagship schemes. Here, the 
Committee are of the view that the State / UTs governments having strong uphold 
on the manpower and resources, can play a pivotal role including maintaining 
and upgrading existing infrastructure which will significantly boost and enhance 
support rainwater harvesting initiatives as well as facilitate the effective 
implementation of all the programmes for the purpose, in totality. Hence, to 
further strengthen the present initiatives, the Committee reiterate that the Ministry 
positively consider providing dedicated financial grant / support to the States / 
UTs to promote rainwater harvesting, so that water scarcity can be mitigated, to 
some extent.  The Committee would like to be apprised about the actions taken in 
this regard, within 3 months of the presentation of this Report.      
 
E. Namami Gange Mission-II 
 
 
Recommendation No. 17 & 18 (Para Nos.2.29, 2.30 & 2.31) 
21. The Committee noted that the Government launched the Namami Gange 
Programme (NGP) in 2014-15 for the rejuvenation of river Ganga and its tributaries for 
five years, up to March 2021 and has been further extended to March, 2026. Under the 
Programme, a diverse and holistic set of interventions for cleaning and rejuvenation of 
river Ganga have been taken up, that included waste water treatment, solid waste 

20 
 
management, river front management (ghats and crematoria), ensuring e-flow, rural 
sanitation, afforestation, biodiversity conservation, public participation, etc. 
 
 The Committee observed that in the Committee/ Councils/ Bodies/ 
Organisations/ Societies established under Namami Gange Programme the Department 
informed that under present provisions, two elected representatives, one from the 
Municipalities and one from the Gram Panchayats of the District nominated as Members 
in the District Ganga Committee by the State Government. In the matter, the Committee 
felt that since, Namami Ganga Mission is a grand and ambitious programme for the 
rejuvenation of River Ganga and its tributaries effecting millions of people living in River 
Ganga Basin, the local Member of Parliament, Lok Sabha and a Member of Legislative 
Assembly can play a pivotal role in the effective and successful implementation of the 
Mission and its objectives.   The Committee, therefore recommended the Ministry to 
make necessary provisions in their guidelines for inclusion of local MP/MLA in the 
bodies under NMCG in order to ensure more cohesive outcome under Nammi Ganga 
progarmme.   
 
 Further, the Committee also recommended that the Department make earnest 
endeavours to constitute a Committee comprising Members of Parliament / Members of 
Legislative Assembly from the districts in order to ensure effective participation of the 
elected representatives for better formulation, implementation and monitoring of work 
executed under Nammi Ganga Mission at ground level.  
 
 
22. The Department in its action taken note has replied as follows: 
 
“ National Mission for Clean Ganga has taken a proactive approach towards the 
inclusion of local Lok Sabha MPs and local MLAs for better formulation, 
implementation and monitoring of work executed under Namami Gange Mission. 
It is pertinent to mention here that vide D.O. letter dated 11.02.2023, the 
Department of Rural Development was requested to include Namami Gange 
Program in the list of programs to be monitored by District Infrastructure Scheme 

21 
 
Advisory (DISHA) Committees for better transparency, coordination and 
implementation (copy enclosed as Annexure-II).  
  
           The DISHA Committees are headed by local Lok Sabha MPs and include local  
MLAs and other representatives of political parties. The list of districts where 
works under Namami Gange are being implemented was also provided to the 
Department of Rural Development. 
  
Consequently, DISHA Committees have been monitoring the Namami Gange 
Program, and the data for monitoring the Namami Gange Program is available 
on the DISHA portal (Copy of snapshot enclosed as Annexure-III). 
 
23. The Committee observe from the action taken reply that District 
Infrastructure Scheme Advisory (DISHA) Committees under Department of Rural 
Development have been monitoring the Namami Gange Program which are 
headed by local Lok Sabha MPs and include local MLAs and other 
representatives of political parties. However, the response of the Department 
remains silent on the inclusion of local MP/MLA in the District Ganga Committees 
/ bodies under National Mission for Clean Ganga (NMCG). In this context, the 
Committee are of the view that, such bodies serve dedicated platforms where 
exclusive emphasis is given on the monitoring of implementation of various 
programmes under NMCG.  Hence, being of the firm opinion that inclusion of 
elected representatives would help in better formulation, implementation and 
monitoring of NMCG at ground level, the Committee, urge the Ministry to make 
appropriate provisions in their guidelines for inclusion of local Member of 
Parliament, Lok Sabha / MLA in the bodies under NMCG including District Ganga 
Committees. The Committee would like to be apprised about the actions taken in 
this regard, within 3 months of the presentation of this Report. 
 
 
 

22 
 
F. National River Conservation Plan-Other Basins-(NRCP)  
 
 
Recommendation No. 21 (Para Nos.2.35 & 2.36) 
 
24. The Committee noted that NRCP is a Centrally Sponsored Scheme for 
conservation of rivers excluding Ganga and its tributaries on cost sharing basis by 
providing assistance to States/UTs. The Committee further noted that a Condition 
assessment and Management Plans (CAMP) study for six river basins including 
Narmada, Mahanadi, Godavari, Krishna, Cauvery and Periyar has been taken up at a 
sanctioned cost of Rs.75.72 crore.  
 Regarding the budgetary allocation, the Committee observed that for the fiscal 
year 2025-26, an amount of Rs. 558.09 has been kept for NRCP- Other Basins 
Scheme. In this regard, while the Committee concerned about the coverage of the 
Scheme encompassing 57 Rivers in the 17 States with a huge task of conservation and 
abetment of pollution, the allocation found inadequate. During the oral evidence the 
Ministry also highlighted about having adequate funding for the Ganga Rejuvenation 
under Namami Ganga Programme, however, multiple polluted river- stretches across 
the country remain untouched due to insufficient funding.  In this regard, the Committee 
were of the view that all the rivers in the Country have equal importance and require 
same attention and remedial measures for conservation and abetment of pollution. 
Since abetment of pollution from all the rivers across the Country requires joint efforts 
with holistic approach the Committee recommended that the Department take proactive 
steps in augmenting sufficient budgetary allocations for effective implementation of the 
Scheme. 
 
25. The Department in its action taken note has replied as follows: 
“The recommendations of the Committee have been noted for compliance. 
National River Conservation Directorate is taking all out efforts for augmenting 
the budgetary support for efficient implementation of the National River 
Conservation Plan. For the Fifteenth Finance Commission, Cabinet Committee 

23 
 
on Economic Affairs (CCEA) appraised the continuation of the scheme with an 
outlay of Rs.1252 crore. This budgetary support was later enhanced with an 
outlay upto Rs.2652 crore.  
In addition, project for pollution abatement of river Nag at Nagpur with an 
estimated cost of Rs.1926.99 cr. (central share is R.1115.22 cr.) was approved 
by CCEA. For the 15th Finance Commission, Rs.415 crore has been allocated 
for this Externally Aided Project. 
 
26. The Committee observe from the action taken reply that the Cabinet 
Committee on Economic Affairs (CCEA) appraised the continuation of the NRCP 
scheme with an outlay of Rs.1252 crore which was later enhanced with an outlay 
upto Rs.2652 crore. The Committee further observe that, a project for pollution 
abatement of the river ‘Nag’ at Nagpur with an estimated cost of Rs.1926.99 cr. 
(central share is R.1115.22 cr.) was approved by CCEA. Here the Committee note 
with satisfaction that in pursuance of their recommendation, the Ministry 
proactively got the budgetary support augmented for efficient implementation of 
the NRCP Scheme. Now, the Committee hope that with the enhanced budgetary 
support, the Department would be able to implement the Scheme more 
effectively. Further, the Committee expect that the issue of abatement of pollution 
with regard to other major rivers in the country will also be taken on priority. The 
Committee would like to be apprised of the progress in this regard within 3 
months of the presentation of this Report. 
 
G. Water Management in Forest Areas 
 
 
Recommendation No. 25 (Para Nos.2.42 & 2.43) 
 
27. With regard to water management in Forest Areas the Committee observed that 
National Water Policy (NWP) of India, first formulated in 1987 and revised in 2012, 
provides a comprehensive framework for the planning and management of the country’s 

24 
 
water resources. It emphasizes the protection of watersheds, including those in forest 
areas, to conserve water and prevent soil erosion. Further, the Environment Protection 
Act, 1986, provides a legal framework for environmental protection, including water 
bodies in forests. Under section 3(v) of the Environment (Protection) Act, 1986 and Rule 
5, sub-rule (viii) and (x) of the environment (Protections) Rules, “lands falling within 10 
kms of the boundaries of national parks and sanctuaries should be notified as eco-
fragile zones”. 
The Committee noted that most of the major rivers transverse through various 
National Parks/ Sanctuaries en-route to their course. However, management of all the 
forest areas, Tiger Reserves and Sanctuaries in the Country broadly come under the 
preview of Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change. Further during the oral 
evidence, the Ministry of WR, RD & GR expressed its inability to access these areas 
and also lack of any coordination with the MoE,F&CC for River management and water 
bodies in such areas. In this regard, the Committee felt that Forest Areas, Tiger 
Reserves and Sanctuaries play a very pivotal role in maintaining the eco-system of the 
country and in view of the adverse effects of climate change, the proactive management 
of water resources in these areas are necessary. The Committee, therefore, urged the 
Ministry to coordinate with the MoE,F&CC and ensure its accessibility / active 
involvement in River management and other water bodies in forest areas, Tiger 
Reserves and Sanctuaries in the country and ensure sustainability of flora and fauna in 
these areas.  
 
28. The Department in its action taken note has replied as follows: 
 
“It is to submit that Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change 
(MoEF&CC) has been requested by Department of Water Resources vide letter 
dated. 02.06.2025(attached as Annexure-IV), submitted requesting them to 
intimate the areas of co-ordination between Ministry of Jal Shakti and MoEF&CC 
required to ensure effective management of water resources in these ecologically 

25 
 
sensitive areas to facilitate integrated water resource management, conversation 
efforts and climate resilience. 
 
29. The Committee observe from the action taken reply that the Ministry of Jal 
Shakti has sought effective co-ordination with the Ministry of Environment, 
Forest and Climate Change (MoEF&CC) to ensure integrated water resources 
management in forest areas. The Committee note with satisfaction that the 
Ministry has acknowledged the importance of accessibility and active 
involvement in water management within forest areas, Tiger Reserves and 
Sanctuaries, as highlighted by the Committee in their recommendation and steps 
have been initiated to enhance co-ordination with the MoEF&CC in this regard.  
The Committee expect that this initiative will facilitate improved water 
management in forest areas, tiger reserves, and sanctuaries and ensure the 
active engagement of the Ministry. The Committee would like to be apprised of 
the progress in the matter within 3 months of the presentation of this Report.   

26 
 
CHAPTER II 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT 
 
Recommendation No. 1 (Para Nos. 2.1, 2.2 & 2.3) 
 
Analysis of Demands for Grants 
 The Committee observed that for the fiscal year 2025-26, the total budgetary 
allocation for the Department of Water Resources, River Development and Ganga 
Rejuvenation is Rs. 25,276.83 crore, out of which Rs. 24,720.49 crore has been 
allocated under the ‘Revenue Section’ and Rs. 556.34 crore has been allocated under 
the ‘Capital Section’. The overall budgetary allocation for the Financial Year 2025-26 
has witnessed a significant increase of Rs.3,953.73 crore, representing a growth of 
18.54% over the Budget Estimate (BE) of Rs.21,323.10 crore for the Financial Year 
2024-25. 
 
 The Committee further observed that under Central Sector Schemes Rs. 
6,198.09 crore has been allocated for BE 2025-26 which is nearly Rs.375.64 crore less 
than the BE allocation for FY 2024-25 i.e. Rs. 6,573.73 crore.  Regarding the Centrally 
Sponsored Schemes, a provision of Rs.17,643.94 has been made at BE level for FY 
2025-26 which is nearly Rs.4,212.46 crore over and above against BE allocation for FY 
2024-25 i.e. Rs. 13,431.48 crore. The major Schemes/Programmes in which the total 
budget allocation of the Department have been made include Polavaram Irrigation 
project, Pradhan Mantri Krishi Sinchayee Yojana- Har Khet Ko Pani (PMKSY-KKKP), 
Inter-linking of Rivers, National Ganga Plan (Namami Gange Mission-II) and Atal Bhujal 
Yojana (Atal Jal). The Committee also observed that some of the Schemes/Projects viz. 
River Basin Management, Ground Water Management & Regulation, Surface Minor 
Irrigation (SMI) and Repair, Renovation & Restoration (RRR) of Water Bodies have 
been allocated more funds in the current fiscal year 2025-26. However, DWRIS, 
National Hydrology Project, Special Package for Maharashtra, Command Area 

27 
 
Development & Water Management and Inter-linking of Rivers are some the Schemes/ 
Projects where allocation have been reduced in the FY 2025-26.  
 
 The Committee observed that the Department has been able to utilize only 60% 
of its budgetary allocation till the end of three quarters of the fiscal year 2024-25. In this 
regard the Department informed that generally, the expenditure picks up from the month 
of November onwards i.e. after Monsoon and it is expected that the Department will be 
able to spend the allocated RE for the FY 2024-25.  As per the instructions of the 
Ministry of Finance, not more than 33% and 15% of Budget Estimate during a Financial 
Year is permissible in last quarter and last month of the Financial year, respectively. 
Here, the Committee expressed its concern about meagre utilisation of allocated budget 
during first three quarters of FY 2024-25 and that a considerable portion i.e almost 40% 
of the budget yet to be utilized within the last quarter of the FY 2024-25. However, the 
Committee hoped that the Department would be able to spend its all allocated fund 
within the stipulated time period and would ensure optimum utilization of available 
resources. The Committee would like to be apprised of the position in the matter within 
three months of presentation of this Report. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
The concern shows by Hon’ble Committee noted. So far as Department of Water 
Resources is concerned, the expenditure picks up from the month of November 
onwards i.e. after Monsoon.  Majority chunk of the budget allocated to this department 
is generally utilized in the 4th quarter of F.Y. The reason for this is that the flood 
management works are generally taken after monsoon period and accordingly Ministry 
received requests from State Govts. for release of central assistance at later stages of 
financial year.  
It is further to submit that during the FY 2024-25, Department of Water 
Resources is able to spend Rs. 20054.97 Cr. which is 94.05% of BE allocation i.e. 
Rs.21323.10 Cr. and 92.67% of RE allocations i.e. Rs. 21640.88 Cr. The position of 

28 
 
actual expenditure for the FY- 2024-25 vis-à-vis BE allocation and RE allocation is 
annexed at Annexure-I.  
            Efforts are also made to ensure a more even pace in expenditure throughout the 
year and to avoid year end rush.  
 
[O.M. No. G-30013/2/2025-Budget Dated 12.06.2025] 
 
Recommendation No. 4 (Para No. 2.9) 
 
 
National Dam Safety Authority 
 
 The Committee observed that the NDSA established under Dam Safety Act, 
2021 has mandate to implement policies, guidelines and standards made by the 
National Committee on Dam Safety.  Similarly, State Committee on Dam Safety and 
State Dam Safety Organizations were constituted under the provision of the Act.  
However, the Committee felt that since the uses, functioning, safety and O&M of Dam 
Structures are very crucial public issues, it is imperative that a local public 
representative may be included in the bodies/organizations under NDSA, from the 
planning phase of any project, so that a seamless implementation process is ensured. 
This would facilitate bridging the gap between the local people and the Authority and 
also address the needs and concerns of local people of the area in an inclusive way. 
Therefore, the Committee recommended that necessary provision may be incorporated 
for inclusion of elected public representatives (Member of Parliament / Member of 
Legislative Assembly) in the bodies / organizations under NDSA by suitably amending 
Dam Safety Act, 2021 to further strengthen the NDSA. 
 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
As per the Dam Safety Act (DSA) 2021, NDSA is mandated, inter-alia, to 
formulate guidelines, provide technical assistance, knowledge sharing etc., with the 

29 
 
dam owners in the matters for the dam safety. Planning of the Project is done by the 
State Govts/PSU and NDSA does not play any role there. Since dam projects are 
conceptualized, planned, and executed by the respective State Governments, it may be 
appropriate that the matter may be taken up with the States to consider involving 
elected public representatives in the matter relating to dam safety. 
  
[O.M. No. G-30013/2/2025-Budget Dated 12.06.2025] 
 
Comment of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 14 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
 
Recommendation No. 5 (Para Nos.2.10, 2.11 & 2.12) 
 
Brahmaputra Board 
 The Committee noted that the Brahmaputra Board (BB) was constituted in 1980 
by an Act of Parliament, for the purpose of planning and integrated implementation of 
measures for the control of floods and riverbank erosion in the Brahmaputra valley and 
for matters connected therewith. The jurisdiction of Brahmaputra Board covers all the 
North Eastern States including Sikkim and North Bengal. The main functions of the 
Board are to carry out surveys and investigations and prepare Master Plan, Detailed 
Project Reports (DPRs) of multi-purpose projects, monitoring of FMBAP schemes and 
execution of anti-erosion and flood control schemes.  
 The Committee observed that out of the Master Plans and Detailed Project 
Reports (DPRs) prepared by the Board for multipurpose projects, 52 have been 
approved by the Government of India and submitted to the respective State 
Governments for implementation. However, the Committee noted that the Board lacks a 
mechanism to monitor the implementation of these approved plans. Furthermore, 
despite handing over 14 DPRs of major multipurpose projects to State Governments, 
none have been fully implemented. In this regard, the Board pointed out the reason that 

30 
 
water management falls under state jurisdiction, resulting in a lack of monitoring 
mechanisms.  
 
 The Committee while appreciated the efforts made by the Board in North Eastern 
States including Sikkim and North Bengal under its mandated objectives however, 
expressed apprehension on the desired outcome of the Masterplans due to lack of 
proper monitoring mechanism for their effective implementation by the State 
Government, despite the fact that preparation of Master plans/DPRs involves a lot of 
time, money and public resources and their improper implementation, defeated the 
Department's efforts in controlling floods and riverbank erosion in the mandated area 
which caused immense socio-economic and environmental damage, leading to 
widespread displacement and destruction. The Committee, therefore, recommended 
that the Ministry establish an effective monitoring mechanism, to ensure timely 
implementation of the recommendations outlined in the Master Plans / DPRs prepared 
by the Board for various projects for their effective outcome and successful planning 
and implementations. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Brahmaputra Board is in continuous coordination with the State 
Governments to ensure the effective implementation of Master Plans and DPRs. The 
matter has also been discussed in the Board meeting, emphasizing the need for better 
monitoring. 
To facilitate this, Google Sheets are shared among the basin states to assist them in 
sharing the status of implementation of master-plans.  
 
 [O.M. No. G-30013/2/2025-Budget Dated 12.06.2025] 
 
 
 

31 
 
Recommendation No.6 (Para No.2.13)  
 
 With regard to staff strength of the Board the Committee learned that against the 
total sanctioned strength of 415, only 206 personnel are presently in position. 
Consequently, approximately 50% of the sanctioned posts across all cadres, including 
technical and non-technical, are presently lying vacant. The Department attributed 
limited success in filling up the vacant posts through conventional methods of 
recruitment and a High- Powered Review Board has been entrusted to review the 
situation.  In this context, the Committee were of the opinion that the current shortage of 
approximately 50% of the technical and non-technical cadre's strength, compromises 
the Board's work efficiency and hampers its functioning and leads to delay in achieving 
its objectives.  Realizing the fact that the Board has a significant responsibility to control 
flood and erosion in the North East Region and to achieve this objective, the Board 
deploys various efforts, including the preparation of Master Plans and Detailed Project 
Reports (DPRs) for multipurpose projects, which necessitate specialized technical 
expertise and skills, the Committee strongly recommended that the Department must 
take prompt action to fill all the existing vacancies without delay, to enable the Board to 
execute its responsibilities efficiently and effectively.  
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
After Restructuring of Brahmaputra Board on 10.01.2019 and due to retirement 
of existing employees, Brahmaputra Board is facing acute shortage of manpower. To fill 
up vacant posts, Brahmaputra Board initially approached EdCIL(India) Limited for 
recruitment of all Direct Recruitment vacant posts which could not be materialised. 
Thereafter, Brahmaputra Board entrusted the task of Direct Recruitment of all Group B 
& C posts to Staff Selection Commission through the Department of Water Resources, 
RD & GR, MoJS for the following posts till the vacancy year 2024, 
 as detailed below: 
Junior Engineer      – 46 posts 
Junior Translator      – 1 post 

32 
 
Personal Assistant   – 2 posts 
Junior Accountant     – 14 posts 
Lower Division Clerk – 36 posts 
Driver (ordinary Grade) –7 posts 
Multi-Tasking Staff    – 33 posts 
2. As recommended by SSC, following numbers of candidates joined in Brahmaputra 
Board post wise and later some of the newly recruited candidates resigned in pursuant 
of better opportunities which are detailed as below: 
Name of 
post 
Sanctioned 
Strength 
Vacancy 
submitted 
to SSC 
Received 
from SSC 
Joined in 
Brahmaput
ra Board 
Resigned Remarks 
Junior 
Engineer 
75 46 46 posts 31 9 24 vacant 
Junior 
Translator 
01 01 1 post 1 1 Vacant  
Personal 
Assistant 
04 02 2 posts 0 0 2vacant (No. 
candidate 
attended DV) 
Junior 
Accountant 
14 11 Nil  0 0 Yet to be 
received 
Lower 
Division 
Clerk 
50 36 36 posts 21 0 29 vacant 
Driver 
(ordinary 
Grade) 
07 07 7 posts 0 0 07 
Vacant         
(Recruitment 
under 
process) 
  

33 
 
Multi 
Tasking 
Staff          
81 33 32 posts 23 2 32 vacant 
 
3.  Requisition for posts vacancy which have arisen on account of the above and 
retirement, are in the process of submission to SSC shortly. 
4.  Further, during 2022 Brahmaputra Board issued appointment letter to fill up 14 
posts of Assistant Executive Engineer (Civil) from the list of candidates of public 
disclosure of willing non-recommended of Engineering Services Examination-2020 
published by Union Public Service Commission but only 6 candidates joined in 
Brahmaputra Board. Later on, 02 candidates resigned from Brahmaputra Board in 
pursuit of better opportunity. Further, 06 vacant posts were attempted to be filled up 
from the list of candidates of public disclosure of willing non-recommended of 
Engineering Services Examination-2022 published by Union Public Service Commission 
on 14.12.2022. However, no candidate joined in Brahmaputra Board. 
5.  The High-Powered Review Board in its 13th Meeting held on 12.11.2024 
approved the direct recruitment of AEE (Civil) from GATE Examination qualified 
candidates. The proposal is under consideration  
6.  To fill up various promotion post which are vacant due to non-availability of 
eligible candidate in feeder grade, efforts are made by Brahmaputra Board. The 
Vacancy circular was advertised in Brahmaputra Board’s Website, Various Newspaper 
and Employment News. Latest advertisement has been issued on 19.03.2025 inviting 
application for filling up vacant promotional posts.    
7.  Chairman, Brahmaputra Board has also communicated with Chief Secretary/Special 
Chief Secretary of the North Eastern States including West Bengal to sponsor eligible 
and willing state government officers on deputation against the above vacancy circular 
dated 19.03.2025. 
.To meet the shortage, Brahmaputra Board has also engaged a number of 
consultants and young professionals to build its HR infrastructure.  

34 
 
It is noteworthy that the Brahmaputra Board has established several cells/units, 
such as the Data Management Cell, Geographical Information System & Remote 
Sensing Cell, Climate Change Cell, Media & Communication Cell, and International 
Cooperation Cell, to support its transformation into a knowledge-based organization 
capable of providing enhanced technical assistance to the concerned basin states. 
Furthermore, plans are underway to create additional cells/units, including the 
Tender Cell, Quality Control Unit, Capacity Building Unit, and Research and 
Development Unit, to aid in the transformation process of the Brahmaputra Board. 
To carry out these specialized roles and responsibilities, the Brahmaputra Board 
is developing a plan to appoint more subject matter consultants and young 
professionals to fulfil its objectives and execute the envisioned vision. 
 
[O.M. No. G-30013/2/2025-Budget Dated 12.06.2025] 
 
 
Recommendation No.7 (Para No.2.14) 
 
 
 The Committee expressed grave concern regarding the recurring floods and 
riverbank erosion caused by the Brahmaputra River in the North East Region, 
particularly in the State of Assam. In this regard the Brahmaputra Board has listed out 
various efforts to combat these problems, which include Preparation of Master Plans, 
DPRs of Multipurpose Projects, monitoring of FMBAP schemes, execution of anti-
erosion and flood control schemes in the identified region and execution of Drainage 
Development Schemes. While acknowledged the endeavours made by the Board to 
achieve its mandated objectives, the Committee believed that much needs to be done 
on ground to bring these cherished goals to reality. Realising that floods and land 
erosion are still responsible for humanitarian crisis displacing a huge population and 
pushing them into economic insecurity and landlessness in North East Region, the 
Committee recommended that a concerted time bound action plan needs to be 

35 
 
envisaged to address the issue comprehensively and effectively in the North East 
Region particularly in the State of Assam to safeguard land and livelihood in the region. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Board has been actively engaged in preparing Master Plans, developing 
Detailed Project Reports (DPRs) for multipurpose projects, monitoring FMBAP 
schemes, and executing anti-erosion, flood control, and drainage development 
schemes. The Board recognizes the need for comprehensive and integrated approach 
involving the basin states along with the stake holders to address the problems of flood 
and erosion in the North East (NE) Region. 
The Board is currently preparing and updating the master-plans for 15 river sub-
basins using state-of-the-art technology. These includes- 
Dikhow (Nagaland and Assam)  
Jhanji (Nagaland and Assam)  
Dikrong (Arunachal Pradesh and Assam)  
Kolodyne (Mizoram) 
Tuichang (Mizoram) 
Bugi (Meghalaya) 
Dareng (Meghalaya) 
Kynshi (Meghalaya) 
Umngi (Meghalaya) 
Umiew (Meghalaya) 
Umsohryngkew (Meghalaya) 
Umngot (Meghalaya) 
Myntdu (Meghalaya) 
Lubha (Meghalaya) 
Simsang (Meghalaya)  
These masterplans will address the flood and erosion problem in the concern 
basins while catering to the water resources problem in a holistic way for proving a 

36 
 
sustainable solution. These masterplans will also take account of the environmental 
related aspects while maintaining the biodiversity and will be prepared with the latest 
state of the art technology in consultation with the basin states. The Board has started 
the mechanism formulating the Request for Proposal (RFP) in consultation with 
stakeholders and obtaining the suggestion and views during all the phases of 
preparation of these masterplans. Board has also formulated committee for preparing 
the roadmap for preparation of these masterplans which involve members from 
respective State Govt., Central Water Commission(CWC), North East Space Application 
Centre(NESAC), Survey of India(SoI),Geological Survey of India (GSI), Academia and 
other Institutions.   
Further as decided by the HPRB and 84th Meeting of BB, and in addition to the 
above 15 master-plans, following major rivers in NE region has been identified for 
preparation/updation of the masterplans, utilizing state-of-the-art technology based on 
the latest data, tools, and technologies, in close coordination with the basin states in 
phased manner. 
Sankosh-Raidak 
Teesta 
Ganol  
Jinjiram  
Umtru  
Kopili Kollong 
Dhansiri (North) 
Tangani  
Noanadi  
Nanoi  
Barnadi  
Feni  
Muhuri  
Gumti  

37 
 
RFP documents have been prepared for these four packages (Package-2 to 
Package-5). A meeting will be convened soon to determine the scope and objectives of 
the master plans. 
HPRB also agreed that Brahmaputra Board should focus on preparing state-of-
the-art DPRs for the States and monitor their implementation by the states. It was 
further advised by HPRB that the Board should develop its institutional and technical 
capabilities so that it could provide high quality technical assistance to the states for 
addressing their specific challenges. 
HPRB further agreed that other than regular/continuing works, the Board should 
also take up strategic pilot projects aimed at enhancing its own technical capacities and 
showcasing innovations and best practices to the states in such domains as scientific 
support to indigenous water management practices, nature-based solutions, springshed 
and watershed development, drainage development, urban flooding, irrigation solutions, 
research studies, data systems and institutional development etc.  
HPRB also agreed that the states should take up anti-erosion and flood 
protection works under ongoing FMBAP scheme of Ministry. If necessary, they may 
seek the assistance of Brahmaputra Board for making holistic/ integrated DPRs for this 
purpose. 
As advised by the HPRB, Brahmaputra Board is on the quest to transform into a 
knowledge-based River Basin Organization (RBO) capable of providing the best 
possible technical solution and assistance to the basin states in preparing holistic & 
integrated masterplans, DPRs of water resources projects, capacity building, etc and 
advice on matters related to the spectrum of water resources management. 
The Brahmaputra Board will continue its coordination with State Governments 
and concerned agencies to ensure effective planning and implementation of flood 
management measures. Additionally, it will focus on scientific studies, capacity building, 
and stakeholder engagement to enhance the long-term resilience of the region against 
these recurring challenges. 

38 
 
The Board remains committed to working towards safeguarding land, livelihood, 
and communities in the region and will strive to strengthen its initiatives to achieve the 
desired outcomes. 
 [O.M. No. G-30013/2/2025-Budget Dated 12.06.2025] 
 
Comment of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 17 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
 
 
Recommendation No. 8 (Para Nos.2.15 & 2.16) 
 
Polavaram Irrigation Project 
 
 The Committee noted that Polavaram Irrigation Project is a multi-purpose 
reservoir project contemplated across the river Godavari near Ramayyapeta village, 
Polavaram Mandal in Eluru district (erstwhile West Godavari District) of Andhra 
Pradesh. The Committee further noted that the Project has been declared as a national 
project as per section 90 of Andhra Pradesh Reorganisation Act, 2014 and Central 
Government is funding 100% of the remaining cost of the irrigation component only of 
the project, for the period starting from 01.04.2024. 
 
With regard to the present status of rehabilitation & resettlement of people 
displaced due to the Project, the Committee noted that only 38 Habitations have been 
shifted so far against the total 373 Habitations affected. Further, merely 26 R&R 
Colonies competed against 213. Moreover, against 1,06,006 PDFs only 12,797 have 
been rehabilitated so far. The Committee understood that although displacement of 
local communities may be an unavoidable during execution of such large scale 
development programmes, their rehabilitation & resettlement within a stipulate time 
frame is also paramount to address post displacement issues. The Committee also 
observed that the progress of rehabilitation and resettlement under various projects 
undertaken by the Ministry are very slow, resulting in jeopardizing the position of the 
displaced communities. Taking into cognizance, the importance of timely rehabilitation 
and resettlement, the Committee recommended that the Ministry expedite the 

39 
 
rehabilitation & resettlement of people displaced, with a sensitive approach by taking all 
appropriate measures with timely planning and implementation, as well as monitoring of 
displacement and rehabilitation of the affected communities to ensure their livelihoods 
and habitation with all necessary infrastructure. 
 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
It is submitted that Polavaram Irrigation Project is a multi-purpose Project being 
constructed across the river Godavari. Due to construction of this project, a total 
1,06,006 PDFs covering in 8 Mandals are to be rehabilitated and are to be provided with 
R&R benefits. The project has been divided into 2 phases for administrative 
convenience i.e., Phase I (upto +41.15m) Phase II from+41.15mto+45.72m). Currently 
the R&R works are taking place in brisk manner with a tentative date of completion of 
Phase I, LA and R&R by Dec, 2026. 
 Progress of works under Phase I. 
 Initially, under Phase I, a total of 20,946 PDFs were identified as displaced in 
123 habitations of erst while East & West Godavari Districts. During 2020floods, several 
villages were marooned and LIDAR survey was conducted. It was reported that 49 
additional habitations, which are listed in Phase II, will be impacted at 41.15 M contour 
and were shifted to Phase I (Priority habitations) in the year 2022. 
Hence, the Phase I works are divided into two parts i.e., Phase 1A (Initially 
identified 123 habitations) & Phase IB (priority 49habitations). A total of 172 habitations 
were identified as displaced under Phase I. 
 
Phase IA:  
For providing rehabilitation to the 20,946 PDFs of 123 habitations, a total of75 
R&R colonies are proposed. Out of the 75 R&R colonies, construction of 26 R&R 
colonies are completed and 3780 PDFs are shifted in these completed colonies. For the 
balance PDFs, 49 R&R colonies are proposed and the Government have taken up 
construction of 13938 houses along with infrastructure as per Schedule III of the RFCT 

40 
 
LARR Act, 2013. The balance 3228 PDFs opted for self-construction / one time 
settlement. 
Till date, out of 13938 houses, construction is completed in respect of 11692 
houses and 9017 PDFs were shifted to the completed houses. 65 % of infrastructure 
works are completed in these 49R&R colonies and the balance are targeted to be 
completed by September, 2025. 
The balance PDFs under Phase IA will be shifted to respective R&R colonies by 
December, 2025.  
Phase IB: 
Tentatively, a total of 17114 PDFs were identified as displaced in the 49 priority 
habitations which were identified in the year 2022. As per RFCT LARR Act, the SES in 
all these habitations is completed. Grama Sabhas are being conducted in these49 
habitations. 
 Gram Sabhas in the 49 habitations will be completed by April 30th 2025. 
 Simultaneously, the identification of land for R&R colonies & land under land to 
land for tribal PDFs is also under progress and will be completed by 30th April, 
2025. 
  The publication of draft R&R schemes for these 49 habitations will be completed 
by 31st May, 2025 and final R&R scheme by 30th June 2025. 
 After publication of final R&R schemes, the No.of R&R colonies to be constructed 
will be arrived and the tenders for R&R colonies will be finalized by 15th July 
2025. 
 The commencement of R&R colony works will start from September 2025 and is 
targeted to be completed by 31st December 2026. 
Further necessary steps are being initiated to expedite the process of rehabilitation 
to the effected families to ensure their livelihood and infrastructure development. 
 
[O.M. No. G-30013/2/2025-Budget Dated 12.06.2025] 
 
 
 
 

41 
 
Recommendation No. 9 (Para No. 2.17) 
 
 
 Further, the Committee observed that the Polavaram Project is scheduled to be 
completed by March 2026 with a water storage upto EL +41.15m with a provision for 
one more year of extension due to technical challenges.  However, overall project 
progress as on 30 November 2024 upto EL +45.72m is only 53.46% having 76.79% and 
22.58 % progress in construction and LA and R&R, respectively.  Keeping in view the 
challenges and the present status of the progress of the project, the Committee strongly 
felt that the Authority needs to expedite its efforts in close coordination with all 
stakeholders in order and achieve its objectives by the stipulated deadline.   To achieve 
its targeted goal, the Committee recommended that a greater emphasis need to be 
given on the issues of R&R, O&M, coordination with stakeholder States to resolve all 
major inter-state concerns and implementation of technical advice as provided by Panel 
of Experts to ensure safety of Dam. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 
It is submitted that the overall progress of the project up to EL +45.72m is 
55.89% (Up to 31.03.2025) comprising 74.45% in works and 23.31% in LA and R&R.  
To ensure implementation of the timelines, projects are monitored physically by a 
team from Central Water Commission (CWC), Polavaram Project Authority time to time. 
During the visit, thorough physical, financial and other issues related to the project are 
discussed in detail, and a report with specific recommendations is forwarded to the 
State Government as well as CWC.  
Further, Regular review meetings at the level of Secretary, DoWR and Hon’ble 
MoJS are held In addition, Review meetings are also being conducted at State 
Government level starting from Hon’ble Chief Minister and Special Chief Secretary / 
Principal Secretary.  
The Government of Andhra Pradesh (GoAP) has been giving utmost importance 
for providing the benefits to all the displaced families due to construction of the project. 

42 
 
The LA and R&R activities are continuously monitored Commissioner(R&R), Project 
Administrator and Special Collector. 
In addition to the above, the PPA has engaged WAPCOS as Project 
Management coordination Consultancy at field level for better monitoring and Panel of 
Experts having international expertise to give strategic guidance on various technical 
challenges involved in project.  
The O&M of the project will be carried out as per the suggestions of Central 
Water Commission duly following the directions stipulated in the GWDT award 1980 & 
Inter State Agreement dated 02.04.1980. 
 [O.M. No. G-30013/2/2025-Budget Dated 12.06.2025] 
 
 
 
 
Recommendation No. 10 (Para No. 2.18) 
 
 
 The Standing Committee on Water Resources during its recent study visit to 
Puducherry, Mahabalipuram and Rajahmundry from 8 to 11 January, 2025 have 
observed that there are no permanent residential colonies near the Polavaram Project 
for monitoring the Project. The Committee were of the view that setting up of permanent 
colonies near the project sites for stationing the higher officers would go a long way in 
exercising better coordination and monitoring of the Projects resulting in timely 
completion of the same. They therefore recommended the Department to take 
necessary steps in this regard.  
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
It is submitted that the Water Resources Department has constructed a 
residential colony in Polavaram at a distance of about 4 Km from the project site to 
accommodate 87 no’s of staff including One Superintending Engineer, 2 Executive 
Engineers, 6 no’s of Dy. Executive Engineers, 30 no’s of AEEs and 48 no’s of 

43 
 
Supervisors/non-technical staff. Remaining staff who could not find accommodation in 
the colony are residing in private houses at Polavaram. 
For monitoring the works closely, the concerned Chief Engineer, is residing at 
Polavaram. 
Thus, the Technical/Non-Technical staff, by residing in the colony or private 
houses near to the project site, have been monitoring the works continuously with better 
coordination.  
Further, The Water Resources Department has proposed to construct a 
permanent two storied residential hostel building with 22 rooms including conference 
hall, dining hall etc., on right bank of spillway for employees and higher officials during 
their visits. 
 [O.M. No. G-30013/2/2025-Budget Dated 12.06.2025] 
 
 
Recommendation No. 11 (Para No. 2.19) 
 
 
 Further, the Committee have found that Project is being executed as per the 
Inter-State Agreement dated 02.04.1980 between Andhra Pradesh, Odisha and Madhya 
Pradesh (now Chhattisgarh) and Godavari Water Disputes Tribunal Award (GWDT), 
1980. However, The Andhra Pradesh Reorganisation Act, 2014 declared the Polavaram 
Irrigation Project as a National Project. Observing the very long time being taken in 
completion of the Project, the Committee would like to be briefed about the timeline of 
submission of various aspects of the Project including design of GAP-I & GAP-II of the 
Polavaram Project. Further, taking cognizance of the fact that only one Workshop 
involving different stakeholders including international agencies has been held so far for 
reviewing the progress of the project, the Committee urged upon the Department to hold 
regular Workshops of such nature in order to ensure timely completion of the Project. In 
addition to this, the Committee further recommended the Department to hold quarterly 
review of the progress being made in the Project. The Committee would like to be 

44 
 
briefed about the specific timelines for completion of the Projects and the steps being 
taken to meet this timeline within three months from presentation of this Report. 
 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The International experts visited the project site three times and conducted one work 
shop along with several virtual reviews. Further, one more workshop / Site visit is 
planning on Design of Main dams.  
  
The suggestion of the committee is noted and will be planned to conduct a greater 
number of workshops in future involving different stakeholders including international 
agencies. 
The progress of the project is being reviewed regularly by the higher authorities from 
WRD, PPA, CWC and MoJS in addition to the regular frequent site visit and review by 
the Chief Engineer, PIP, WRD and Chief Engineer, PPA. 
The details are as follows. 
  Weekly by the Special Chief Secretary to WRD, GoAP. 
  Monthly by the Hon’ble Chief Minister, GoAP 
  Monthly by the CEO, PPA 
 Quarterly by CWC authorities and MoJS 
  
In addition, The PPA has Constituted the Project Monitoring and Coordination 
Group to review progress of PIP with the following persons 
1. Chief Engineer(P&D),PPA : Convener 
2. Chief Engineer, PIP, WRD : Member 
3. Project Manager, M/s WAPCOS : Member 
4. Senior Representative from M/s MEIL : Member 
The Terms of Reference (ToR) of the Group is as follows: 
i. The Group shall monitor and review the progress and planning of various project 
activities on a weekly basis. 

45 
 
ii. The Group shall coordinate with the relevant stakeholders and promptly address 
emerging issues. 
iii. The Group shall furnish a fortnightly progress report of activities of the projector PPA 
for onward transmission to MoJS. 
 
[O.M. No. G-30013/2/2025-Budget Dated 12.06.2025] 
 
 
Recommendation No. 12 (Para No. 2.20) 
 
 The Committee observed that dams have traditionally played a significant role in 
water management, hydroelectric power generation, irrigation and flood control. 
However, the Committee are of the view that the Polavaram Project can be additionally 
developed for eco-tourism/research purposes which can also benefit the local 
population and enhance regional development by attracting tourists and creating 
employment opportunities. Accordingly, the Committee recommended that an 
appropriate administrative setup be created, so that quality infrastructure be envisaged 
for development of eco-tourism spots and also benefit research institutions/students in 
hydro-geological-engineering studies. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Government of Andhra Pradesh (GoAP) is very keen to enhance the livelihood of 
locals by creating employment and enhancing their financial status by developing 
Tourism, Pisciculture etc. at the project location. With this purpose and lot of 
enthusiasm, GoAP has entrusted the job of developing Eco-Tourism at the project 
location to the specialized Government corporation i.e., Andhra Pradesh Tourism 
Development Corporation (APTDC). The APTDC is now planning to develop Eco-
Tourism and build an impressive infrastructure hotel, transport facilities and amenities 
etc to create local employment.  
  
The Department has been allowing Research Scholars, and giving permission to 
various Engineering Institutions spread across AP and India to visit the project and to 

46 
 
interact with the Engineers on Technical matters of specialized works Viz., Ground 
Improvement works of Vibro-compaction, Construction of Diaphragm wall etc., for their 
study and research purpose. Further, the common public who are interested in knowing 
about the project are also allowed to visit the project on public holidays, without causing 
any hindrance to the project works. 
  
[O.M. No. G-30013/2/2025-Budget Dated 12.06.2025] 
 
 
 
Recommendation No. 14 (Para Nos. 2.23, 2.24 & 2.25) 
 
Command Area Development and water Management (CAD&WM) 
 
 The Committee noted that Command Area Development & Water Management 
(CADWM) Programme was launched in 1974-75 to enhance utilization of irrigation 
potential created and improve agriculture productivity and production on a sustainable 
basis. The Committee further noted that the Scheme was brought under the umbrella of 
PMKSY in 2016-17 and has been restricted to 99 prioritized AIBP projects. 
 
 The Committee noted a significant reduction in the Scheme's allocation, from 
Rs.1,400 crore at the Budget Estimate (BE) stage to Rs.100 crore at the Revised 
Estimate (RE) stage for the financial year 2024-25. In this regard, the Department 
informed the Committee that Rs.1,200 crore was allocated for the Modified CADWM, 
but since the Scheme wasn't approved, the allocation was reduced at the RE stage. 
Furthermore, the Committee observed a 40% reduction in fund allocation, as Rs.850 
crore has been allocated in FY 2025-26 compared to FY 2024-25. The Department 
attributed this reduction to the lower-than-proposed allocation for the Modified CAD 
Scheme. In this regard, in its earlier DFG 2024-25 Report the Committee highlighted the 
underutilization of funds under the Scheme and urged the Department to ensure better 
and prudent utilization of budget allocation with the implementation of the Modified CAD 
in efficient manner. The Committee further observed that the newly approved Scheme 
has been allocated insufficient funds, which raises concerns about its effective 

47 
 
implementation. Furthermore, the Committee observe that the recurring underutilization 
of budget allocations and delays in approving the Modified Scheme requires a more 
proactive approach by the Department towards implementing the Scheme.  
 
 The Committee were of the view that CAD&WM is a crucial scheme of the 
Government for improving water management leading to increased agricultural 
productivity, higher farmer incomes, and socio-economic growth in rural areas and is 
directly connected with the Government's vision to double farmers' incomes. Continuous 
underutilization of budgetary allocation is hampering achievements and progress of the 
Scheme. Therefore, the Committee strongly recommended that the Department make 
every effort to fully and optimally utilize the budget allocated with a proactive approach 
in implementing the Modified CAD Scheme as well as in view of the importance of the 
Scheme take necessary steps to augment its budgetary allocation so that proper and 
effective implementation of the Scheme be ensured. 
 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Modernization of Command Area Development and Water Management (M-
CADWM) scheme seeks to transform the existing CADWM component (Har Khet Ko 
Pani) of PMKSY to make it more integrated, efficient, sustainable and inclusive. As part 
of the revamped scheme, it is proposed to implement pilot M-CADWM projects across 
various agro-climatic zones in the country incorporating institutional, technical and 
management reforms and strategies in command area development and water 
management. Based on the learnings in design and structuring of these projects, 
National Plan for Command Area Development and Water Management will be 
designed. 
  
The Union Cabinet approved the Modernization of Command Area Development 
and Water Management(M-CADWM) as a sub-scheme of Pradhan Mantri Krishi 
Sinchayee Yojana(PMKSY) for the period  2025-26 with an initial total outlay of Rs. 
1600 crore (Central share Rs.1100 cr.).The initial approval is for taking up pilot projects 

48 
 
across various agroclimatic zones in the country by challenge funding to the states. 
Based on the learning’s in design and structuring of these projects, National Plan for 
Command Area Development and Water Management will be launched starting from 
April, 2026 for the 16th Finance Commission period.  
 
[O.M. No. G-30013/2/2025-Budget Dated 12.06.2025] 
 
 
Recommendation No. 15 (Para No. 2.26) 
 
Further, the Committee felt that for better implementation and optimal outcome, 
the water distribution network developed under Command Area Development & Water 
Management Scheme need to be strengthened with adequate financial provisions. To 
achieve the objectives all the existing canal systems are required to be upgraded and 
revamped in order to effective utilization of water resources by preventing water 
pilferages through damaged canals. The Department may also focus on using 
underground pipelines water network system as envisaged in the Modified CAD 
Scheme. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Cabinet has approved the Central Outlay of Rs 5566 crore for PMKSY-
CADWM from 2021-26. The allocations of the funds under the PMKSY-CADWM is as 
under: - 
Component Total Amount 
(Rs. In crore) 
PMKSY CADWM Outlay CS  5566 
Transferred to SMI & RRR   900 

49 
 
Allocated for M- CADWM 
scheme 1100 
Allocated for Ongoing CADWM  3566 
Expenditure since April,2021 to 
April 2025 420 
Balance in Hand 3146 
  
Further, it is submitted that the cabinet in its meeting on 09th April, 2025 
approved M-CADWM Scheme with initial total outlay of Rs. 1600 Cr. (Central share of 
Rs. 1100 Cr.)  for the period 2025-26, as sub scheme of PMKSY-CADWM to make it 
more relevant in the current context of agricultural productivity and Water Use 
Efficiency. The scheme promotes smart irrigation with close monitoring of discharge of 
water. The existing command (whether rain fed or gravity based) will be transformed to 
a Pressurized Piped Irrigation Command (PPIC) by providing pressurized irrigation 
water through underground pipelines from Established source to Farm Gate below 
Minor (Tertiary) Level Network.  
 
[O.M. No. G-30013/2/2025-Budget Dated 12.06.2025]  
 
Recommendation No. 16 (Para Nos. 2.27 & 2.28) 
 
Atal Bhujal Yojana (ATAL JAL) 
 
 The Committee noted that the Atal Bhujal Yojana (ATAL JAL) is a Central Sector 
Scheme with an objective to improve the management of groundwater resources in the 
water stressed areas of the selected States and under implementation in 8203 water 
stressed Gram Panchayats of 229 administrative blocks/ Talukas in 80 districts of seven 
States, viz. Haryana, Gujarat, Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Rajasthan 
and Uttar Pradesh for a period of five years from 01.04.2020 .The selected States 
account for about 37% of the total number of water-stressed (over-exploited, critical and 

50 
 
semi-critical) blocks in India. Further, the Scheme has been extended up to 31.03.2026 
by the Department of Expenditure.  
 
Regarding the contribution of Atal Bhujal Yojana in groundwater conservation 
and recharge and measurable improvement in groundwater levels in the areas covered 
by the Scheme the Committee observe that the Scheme is being implemented since 
April, 2020 in 8,213 water stressed Gram Panchayats and out of which only 1333 Gram 
Panchayats have shown an improvement / arrest in the declining ground water levels. In 
this regard, the Committee were of the view that this scheme has been running for the 
last 5 years on incentive basis having financial implication as well as resource 
utilization.  The Committee, while appreciating the concept and objectivity of this 
Scheme, expressed concern on its execution at ground level on the basis of its target 
achievement as on date.  Hence, intensified efforts are required to make the Scheme 
more effective. While acknowledge the Government's endeavors towards groundwater 
recharge the Committee urged the Ministry to intensify its efforts to implement the 
Scheme more effectively, thereby ensuring that the allocated resources are utilized 
optimally. 
 
 
Reply of the Government  
Government of India is implementing Atal Bhujal Yojana, a Central Sector 
Scheme, with a total outlay of Rs. 6,000 crores in 8,203 water stressed Gram 
Panchayats (GPs) of 229 administrative Blocks/Talukas in 80 districts of 7 States, viz., 
Haryana, Gujarat, Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Rajasthan and Uttar 
Pradesh for a period of 6 years from 01.04.2020.  
Atal Bhujal Yojana faced challenges in its initial two years due to the impact of 
the COVID pandemic. Hence, the progress in early phases of the program was slower. 
However, despite of this, scheme has picked up in the later period and has shown 
significant progress in the achievement of various milestones. 
The Scheme has had an unprecedented impact at grassroots level when it 
comes to awareness creation and capacity building. Under the IS &CB component of 

51 
 
the scheme around 1.2 lakh gram panchayat level trainings have been held under Atal 
Bhujal Yojana. Empowered with better knowledge, the communities have actively 
participated in preparation of GP level Water Budgets and Water Security Plans (WSPs) 
and so far, WSPs for all 8203 Atal Jal GPs have been prepared and updated regularly. 
With regard to more tangible impacts, it may be noted that, thus far under the Scheme, 
more than 68,000 artificial recharge / water conservation structures have been 
constructed which resulted in recharge of 2,359 MCM water, benefiting 3.0 crore 
people. Additionally, an area of around 6.7 lakh Hectares has been brought under 
efficient water use practices, including Drip, Sprinkler, Mulching, Crop Diversification 
etc. against the total target of 4.5 lakh Hectares.  
Further, in 2023, a total of 813 Gram Panchayats (GPs) showed improvements 
or arrest in the declining groundwater levels in water-stressed areas as per the Program 
Guidelines and his progress was further sustained in 2024, with 1333 Gram Panchayats 
showing similar improvements. 
Considering that Atal Bhujal Yojana is specifically focused on sustainable 
groundwater management in water stressed areas only, these positive outcomes serve 
as a good indicator of the scheme’s effectiveness. With the momentum gained in last 
two years, it is expected that the scheme will continue to show improvement in the 
groundwater regime in the remaining year of the program. The Ministry is also 
committed to put in all out efforts to achieve the best possible outcome under the 
scheme in the remaining final phase of the scheme. 
  
 [O.M. No. G-30013/2/2025-Budget Dated 12.06.2025] 
 
Recommendation No. 18 (Para Nos. 2.31) 
 
Namami Gange Mission-II 
 
 
The Committee recommended that the Department make earnest endeavours to 
constitute a Committee comprising Members of Parliament / Members of Legislative 
Assembly from the districts in order to ensure effective participation of the elected 

52 
 
representatives for better formulation, implementation and monitoring of work executed 
under Nmami Ganga Mission at ground level. 
 
Reply of the Government  
 
National Mission for Clean Ganga has taken a proactive approach towards the 
inclusion of local Lok Sabha MPs and local MLAs for better formulation, implementation 
and monitoring of work executed under Namami Gange Mission. It is pertinent to 
mention here that vide D.O. letter dated 11.02.2023, the Department of Rural 
Development was requested to include Namami Gange Program in the list of programs 
to be monitored by District Infrastructure Scheme Advisory (DISHA) Committees for 
better transparency, coordination and implementation (copy enclosed as Annexure-II).  
  
           The DISHA Committees are headed by local Lok Sabha MPs and include local  
MLAs and other representatives of political parties. The list of districts where works 
under Namami Gange are being implemented was also provided to the Department of 
Rural Development. 
  
Consequently, DISHA Committees have been monitoring the Namami Gange 
Program, and the data for monitoring the Namami Gange Program is available on the 
DISHA portal (Copy of snapshot enclosed as Annexure-III) 
 
 [O.M. No. G-30013/2/2025-Budget Dated 12.06.2025] 
 
 
Comment of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 23 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
 
Recommendation No. 19 (Para Nos. 2.32 & 2.33) 
 
Flood Management and Border Areas Programme (FMBAP) 

53 
 
 
 
 The Committee noted that the FMBAP comprises two key components including 
Flood Management Programme (FMP) Component and River Management and Border 
Areas (RMBA) Component. Under FMP component, the Government provides Grant-in-
Aid to States/Union Territories for implementing structural measures aimed at flood 
management, anti-erosion, river management, and anti-sea erosion. Further, under 
RMBA component flood control and anti-erosion work on common border rivers with 
neighbouring countries, including hydrological observations and flood forecasting, and 
investigation & pre-construction activities of joint water resources projects (with 
neighbouring countries) on common border rivers are being taken up with 100% central 
assistance.  
 
The Committee noted that an amount of Rs. 450 crore has been allocated for the 
Programme for the fiscal year 2025-26. The Committee also observed that during the 
last fiscal year in 2024-25 the budgetary allocation to the programme was Rs.449.57 at 
BE stage and same was reduced to Rs.400 at RE stage. However, actual expenditure 
till 31 December, 2024 was of just Rs.37.61 crore which is only 9.25% of RE. During the 
oral evidence, the Ministry apprised the Committee of the need for additional funding for 
the Programme due to overwhelming demands from flood-prone States. The Ministry 
expressed its inability to address these demands and sought enhancement in the 
allocation. In this regard, the Committee failed to understand the dichotomy that the 
Ministry during last fiscal year, could manage to utilize only 37.61 crore out of the 
allocated budget and then raise demand for Rs. 450 Crore for fiscal year 2025-26. The 
Committee felt that underutilization of fund on one hand not only hamper the 
implementation and execution of various activities under FMBAP but also raising 
concern on the prudent budgetary provisioning by the Ministry for this important 
Scheme. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry carry out necessary 
consultations with all the States/UTs concerned well in advance to make a more 
realistic budgetary allocation for the Programme in order to avoid underutilization of 
allocated fund at later stage and to ensure optimum utilization of the available fund and 

54 
 
apprise of the steps taken in this regard within three months of presentation of this 
Report. 
 
Reply of the Government  
 
FMBAP is primarily aimed at providing Central Assistance to State Governments 
for undertaking critical flood control, anti-erosion, drainage development, and anti-sea 
erosion works. Flood management, including the formulation and implementation of 
schemes, falls within the purview of the respective State Governments. 
The release of funds under the programme, is dependent on receiving technically 
sound and financially viable proposals from the State/UT Governments. Utilization is 
linked to the progress of works executed by the States and the subsequent submission 
of mandatory documents like Utilization Certificates, Audit certificates etc.  
  
FMP guidelines stipulate a Single Nodal Agency (SNA) as a prerequisite for the 
release of central assistance (CA) for flood management projects. By designating a 
single nodal agency, the government aims to streamline the decision-making process, 
enhance coordination with project authority and optimize the utilization of financial 
resources. 
Continuous coordination with State Governments is undertaken to facilitate the 
timely submission of proposals and ensure effective implementation of sanctioned 
projects. CWC endeavours with the anticipated requirements based on consultations 
and status of project proposals received from the States. 
  
[O.M. No. G-30013/2/2025-Budget Dated 12.06.2025] 
 
Recommendation No. 20 (Para Nos. 2.34) 
 
 
 The Committee observed that the recurring floods in various states, including 
Bihar, Uttar Pradesh, and Assam, are primarily attributed to rivers originating from 

55 
 
neighbouring countries. The Government of India has been deploying various efforts at 
the appropriate level to tackle this issue. This cross-border river issue necessitates a 
collaborative approach to address the problem effectively. Recognizing the complexity 
of the problem, the Committee acknowledge the involvement of Ministry of External 
Affairs in developing a policy framework hence, an integrated approach is essential for 
proper coordination between the Ministry of Jal Shakti and the Ministry of External 
Affairs to ensure effective management. Therefore, the Committee recommended that 
the Ministry of Jal Shakti, in coordination with Ministry of External Affairs undertake the 
Cross-Border Flooding Management as an independent initiative and develop a 
comprehensive strategy that mitigates the severity of floods in affected regions. 
 
 
Reply of the Government  
 
Several trans-boundary tributaries of Ganga basin system like Sarda, Ghaghra, 
Rapti, Gandak, Burhi Gandak, Bagmati, Kamla, Kosi, etc. originate from Nepal and 
bring heavy discharge from upper catchment areas located in Nepal resulting in floods 
in North Bihar and Uttar Pradesh. India has been consistently cooperating with Nepal 
for deriving mutual benefits like drinking water, power, irrigation and flood control from 
these rivers through various bilateral agreement on these trans boundary rivers. The 
management of floods due to these rivers has been a concern and the related issues 
are discussed in the existing Indo-Nepal bilateral mechanisms. The bilateral mechanism 
at various levels have been constituted to co-ordinate and deal with different aspects of 
cooperation on issues related to water resources development including flood control 
and management among the two countries. Details of important bilateral mechanism 
are as under- 
Joint Ministerial Commission on Water Resources (JMCWR) is headed by 
Ministers of Water Resources (now Jal Shakti) of India and Nepal to address bilateral 
cooperation on water resources.  

56 
 
Joint Committee on Water Resources (JCWR) is headed by Secretary (WR) of 
the two countries to review the work of various technical/expert groups set up for 
planning and implementation of water resources project as well as the work of the Joint 
Standing Technical Committee.  
Joint Standing Technical Committee (JSTC) is co-chaired by Chairman, GFCC, 
to coordinate all existing committees and subcommittees under the JCWR. 
Joint Committee on Inundation of Flood Management (JCIFM) is co-chaired by 
Member (C), GFCC is an umbrella Committee to implement the decisions of JSTC in 
inundation and flood management issues. The JCIFM addresses the issues related to 
flood management and inundation in Nepal and border areas due to trans boundary 
rivers. 
Joint Committee on Kosi Gandak Projects (JCKGP) is co-chaired by Principal 
Secretary/Secretary, Water Resources Department, Government of Bihar for operation 
and maintenance of Kosi and Gandak Projects. 
  Joint Team of Experts, specifically constituted for Sapta Kosi-Sun Kosi Projects 
to provide overall guidance, direction and monitoring of works for preparation of DPRs. 
It is led by Member (River Management), CWC from India side and Director General, 
Department of Electricity Development from Nepal. 
Further, an understanding has been reached between Government of India (GoI) 
and Government of Nepal (GoN) to jointly prepare the ‘Detailed Project Report (DPR) of 
Sapta Kosi Multipurpose Project' with objectives of flood control, irrigation and power 
generation. The preparation of DPR of Sun Kosi Kamla Diversion Multipurpose Project 
in Nepal is also being jointly taken up by both the Governments. The India-Nepal Joint 
Project Office (JPO) started functioning in August 2004 with the mandate of carrying out 
jointly field investigations and preparation of DPR for Sapta Kosi High Dam Multi-
purpose Project (SKHDMP) and Sun Kosi Storage-cum- Diversion Scheme (SSDS).  
The Pancheshwar Multipurpose Project (PMP) has been envisaged on Mahakali 
River (known as Sarada in India), where the river forms the international boundary 
between India and Nepal. A 300 m high rock fill dam across the Mahakali River, with 
two power houses - each having six units of 400 MW units, is proposed at 2.5 km 

57 
 
downstream of Pancheshwar temple. A 95 m high concrete gravity re-regulating dam 
has also been proposed at 27 km downstream to store the releases from Pancheshwar 
power houses during peak hours and regulate them to meet irrigation water demand in 
the downstream. 
A joint entity of India and Nepal namely, Pancheshwar Development Authority 
(PDA) has been set up with approval of both the Governments in September, 2014 for 
the Project. DPR of Pancheshwar Multipurpose Project has been prepared and efforts 
are being made to arrive at mutual consensus on project parameters/benefits/cost 
apportionment through a joint Team of Officials/ Experts (ToE) constituted by both the 
countries.  
Also, Government is having continuous dialogue with neighbouring countries on 
exchange of hydro-meteorological data as briefly mentioned below: 
Indo-Bhutan Cooperation: Under bilateral Indo-Bhutan arrangements, the hydro-
meteorological data of sites located in Bhutan on rivers flowing into India is being 
provided by Bhutan to India for use in flood forecasting. 
Indo- China Cooperation – The hydrological information for 3 stations on river 
Brahmaputra and one station on river Sutlej is shared during monsoon season by China 
to India; which is made use in issue of advisory flood forecasts to downstream areas on 
Indian side. 
Despite numerous efforts and initiatives by the Ministry to mitigate floods, several 
states continue to face severe flooding challenges due to combination of various 
challenges. These are unpredictable weather patterns, coupled with the increasing 
frequency and intensity of extreme precipitation events, cloud burst etc., Inadequate 
urban drainage systems and the rampant encroachment on natural waterways 
exacerbate the situation, as floodplains—originally designed to absorb excess water—
are compromised by unregulated construction activities and inadequate carrying 
capacity of river. 
The flood control measures have undoubtedly played a role in mitigating the 
severity of floods, the effectiveness of these measures is often undermined by the 

58 
 
aforementioned challenges, which further makes it difficult to forecast despite 
advancements in flood prediction technologies.  
 
[O.M. No. G-30013/2/2025-Budget Dated 12.06.2025] 
 
Recommendation No. 21 (Para Nos. 2.35 & 2.36) 
 
National River Conservation Plan (NRCP)- Other Basins 
 
 
 The Committee noted that NRCP is a Centrally Sponsored Scheme for 
conservation of rivers excluding Ganga and its tributaries on cost sharing basis by 
providing assistance to States/UTs. The Committee further noted that a Condition 
assessment and Management Plans (CAMP) study for six river basins including 
Narmada, Mahanadi, Godavari, Krishna, Cauvery and Periyar has been taken up at a 
sanctioned cost of Rs.75.72 crore.  
 
 Regarding the budgetary allocation, the Committee observed that for the fiscal 
year 2025-26, an amount of Rs. 558.09 has been kept for NRCP- Other Basins 
Scheme. In this regard, while the Committee concerned about the coverage of the 
Scheme encompassing 57 Rivers in the 17 States with a huge task of conservation and 
abetment of pollution, the allocation found inadequate. During the oral evidence the 
Ministry also highlighted about having adequate funding for the Ganga Rejuvenation 
under Namami Ganga Programme, however, multiple polluted river- stretches across 
the country remain untouched due to insufficient funding.  In this regard, the Committee 
were of the view that all the rivers in the Country have equal importance and require 
same attention and remedial measures for conservation and abetment of pollution. 
Since abetment of pollution from all the rivers across the Country requires joint efforts 
with holistic approach the Committee recommended that the Department take proactive 
steps in augmenting sufficient budgetary allocations for effective implementation of the 
Scheme. 
 
 

59 
 
Reply of the Government  
 
The recommendations of the Committee have been noted for compliance. 
National River Conservation Directorate is taking all out efforts for augmenting the 
budgetary support for efficient implementation of the National River Conservation Plan. 
For the Fifteenth Finance Commission, Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs (CCEA) 
appraised the continuation of the scheme with an outlay of Rs.1252 crore. This 
budgetary support was later enhanced with an outlay upto Rs.2652 crore.  
In addition, project for pollution abatement of river Nag at Nagpur with an estimated cost 
of Rs.1926.99 cr. (central share is R.1115.22 cr.) was approved by CCEA. For the 15th 
Finance Commission, Rs.415 crore has been allocated for this Externally Aided Project. 
 
[O.M. No. G-30013/2/2025-Budget Dated 12.06.2025] 
 
Comment of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 26 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
 
Recommendation No. 22 (Para No. 2.37) 
 
 
 Regarding the abatement of pollution from rivers, the Committee noted that the 
National Mission for Clean Ganga has authority under Section 5 of the Environment 
Protection Act, similar to the Central Pollution Control Board, but only for the Ganga and 
its tributaries. For management of water pollution in other rivers, the Ministry of Water 
Resources, RD, GR relies on the Central Pollution Control Board which is under the 
Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change. The Committee observed that 
although Ministry of WR, RD & GR is the nodal Ministry for River Development & 
Management and allocated funds under budgetary provision by Govt. of India, abetment 
of river pollution, one of the major components of River Management is under the 
mandate of Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change. The Committee, in 

60 
 
order to implement holistic management of Rivers in the Country, recommended that 
the Ministry establish a robust coordination mechanism with other Ministries of 
Government of India or expand its mandate to ensure comprehensive management, 
regulation, monitoring of all rivers in the country. 
 
Reply of the Government  
 
The Central Government, vide Notification No.1763 dated 14th June, 2019, 
further amending the Government of India (Allocation of Business) Rules, 1961, 
transferred NRCD including NRCP from Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate 
Change (MoEF&CC) to the Department of Water Resources, River Development and 
Ganga Rejuvenation (DoWR, RD&GR) under newly constituted Ministry of Jal Shakti for 
implementation of mandate for NRCP in regard to pollution abatement of rivers others 
than Ganga and its tributaries. However, Control of Pollution Division remained with 
MoEF&CC. 
NRCD is regularly coordinating and working in synergy with MoEF&CC and 
Central Pollution Control Board (CPCB). 
  
 
[O.M. No. G-30013/2/2025-Budget Dated 12.06.2025] 
 
 
 
Recommendation No. 23 (Para Nos. 2.38 & 2.39) 
 
Special Package for the State of Maharashtra 
 
 
 The Committee noted that In July 2018, Govt. of India approved a Special 
Package to provide Central Assistance up to Rs.3,831.41 crore to complete 83 Surface 
Minor Irrigation (SMI) projects and 8 Major / Medium Irrigation (MMI) Projects in suicide 
prone districts in Vidarbha and Marathwada and rest of Maharashtra region of the state 
of Maharashtra envisages creation of additional 3.77 lakh hectare of potential. The 
Committee further noted that 53 Surface Minor Irrigation projects and 02 Major/ Medium 

61 
 
Irrigation projects have been reported completed which are responsible for creation of  
irrigation potential of 1,66,532 hectare through all these projects during 2018-19 to 
2023-24 and Central Assistance of Rs.2962.36 crore has been released so far.  
 
In this regard, the Committee observed that no budgetary allocation for the 
Scheme has been made for the FY 2025-26. In this regard the Department apprised the 
Committee that the Scheme was extended till March, 2025 and since the same expires 
on 31.03.2025 no allocation has been proposed for the FY 2025-26 however, in this 
regard, based on the request of State Govt., proposal for continuation of the Scheme 
beyond time period, is being examined.  In this regard, the Committee observed that the 
Scheme is far behind from its target set for completion. Only 53 out of 83 SMI Projects 
and 2 out of 8 MMI projects have been completed so far and less than half of total 
irrigation potential envisaged in the Scheme, has been achieved.  In this context, the 
Committee were of the opinion that the Scheme is meant for drought-prone and water-
stressed regions which are still facing severe groundwater depletion and irrigation 
challenges and to improve the condition of these areas, central assistance is still 
needed. Therefore, the Committee urged the Ministry to consider the request of the 
State favourably and make necessary provision of allotment of fund to complete that 
remaining projects so that benefits envisaged with the Scheme are fully realized. 
 
Reply of the Government  
 
Noted, please. The continuation of the Special Package for Mahararastra 
Scheme in 16th FC  is under examination of this Department.  
 [O.M. No. G-30013/2/2025-Budget Dated 12.06.2025] 
 
Recommendation No. 24 (Para Nos. 2.40 & 2.41) 
 
India- Water Resource Information System (WRIS) 
 

62 
 
 
 The Committee noted that under the Ministry of Jal Shakti India- Water Resource 
Information System (WRIS) is a repository of nation-wide water resources data, 
providing a ‘Single Window’ source of updated data on water resources including 
available water bodies in the country like ponds, tanks, lakes etc. This portal enables 
stakeholders to easily access, analyse, manage and share relevant data and helps in 
assessment, monitoring, planning and development of water resources for Integrated 
Water Resources Management (IWRM) by utilizing advanced technologies like 
Geographic Information System (GIS) and Remote Sensing.   
 
     Further, during the oral evidence, the Committee took cognizance of cases 
where schemes were formulated for the water bodies on the basis of mapping available 
on the portal however the same were reported to be scrapped due to discrepancies 
between the mapped data and the actual physical conditions.  In this connection, the 
Committee are of the opinion that information available on the Water Resources 
Information System portal must be accurate and up-to-date to enable States / UTs and 
other stakeholders to utilize the same purposefully and effectively. Further, the 
Committee also took note of NAKSHA programme recently launched by Ministry of 
Rural Development, Government of India and the advance technology being used for 
mapping the information in the said programme. Keeping in view the importance of 
accurate and updated reliable data on Water Resources that needs to be maintained at 
National Level, the Committee urged the Ministry to upgrade its present technology of 
mapping of water bodies in the country to ensure authenticity of the data compiled for 
effective utilization by all stakeholders/users. 
 
Reply of the Government  
 
Mapping of water bodies on India WRIS portal is being done, using advance 
remote sensing technologies. This will ensure that information available on the Water 
Resources Information System portal is accurate and up-to-date so as to enable States 
/ UTs and other stakeholders to utilize the water data purposefully and effectively. 

63 
 
  
[O.M. No. G-30013/2/2025-Budget Dated 12.06.2025] 
 
Recommendation No. 25 (Para Nos. 2.32 & 2.33) 
 
Water Management in Forest Areas 
 
 
 With regard to water management in Forest Areas the Committee observed that 
National Water Policy (NWP) of India, first formulated in 1987 and revised in 2012, 
provides a comprehensive framework for the planning and management of the country’s 
water resources. It emphasizes the protection of watersheds, including those in forest 
areas, to conserve water and prevent soil erosion. Further, the Environment Protection 
Act, 1986, provides a legal framework for environmental protection, including water 
bodies in forests. Under section 3(v) of the Environment (Protection) Act, 1986 and Rule 
5, sub-rule (viii) and (x) of the environment (Protections) Rules, “lands falling within 10 
kms of the boundaries of national parks and sanctuaries should be notified as eco-
fragile zones”.   
 
 The Committee noted that most of the major rivers transverse through various 
National Parks/ Sanctuaries en-route to their course. However, management of all the 
forest areas, Tiger Reserves and Sanctuaries in the Country broadly come under the 
preview of Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change. Further during the oral 
evidence, the Ministry of WR, RD & GR expressed its inability to access these areas 
and also lack of any coordination with the MoE,F&CC for River management and water 
bodies in such areas. In this regard, the Committee felt that Forest Areas, Tiger 
Reserves and Sanctuaries play a very pivotal role in maintaining the eco-system of the 
country and in view of the adverse effects of climate change, the proactive management 
of water resources in these areas are necessary. The Committee, therefore, urged the 
Ministry to coordinate with the MoE,F&CC and ensure its accessibility / active 
involvement in River management and other water bodies in forest areas, Tiger 
Reserves and Sanctuaries in the country and ensure sustainability of flora and fauna in 
these areas. 

64 
 
 
Reply of the Government  
 
It is to submit that Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change 
(MoEF&CC) has been requested by Department of Water Resources vide letter dated. 
02.06.2025(attached as Annexure-IV), submitted requesting them to intimate the areas 
of co-ordination between Ministry of Jal Shakti and Ministry  and MoEF&CC required to 
ensure effective management of water resources in these ecologically sensitive areas to 
facilitate integrated water resource management, conversation efforts and climate 
resilience.  
[O.M. No. G-30013/2/2025-Budget Dated 12.06.2025] 
 
Comment of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 29 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
 
Recommendation No. 26 (Para Nos. 2.44, 2.45, 2.46 & 2.47) 
 
Management of Glacial Lake Outburst Flood (GLOFs)/ Cloudburst Flood in North-
East Region/ Himalayan Regions 
 
 
 The incidents of Glacier Lake Outburst Flood (GLOFs), Cloudburst flood, 
avalanches caused due to glacier outburst in North Eastern Region and Himalayan 
regions in India has seen substantial hike in recent past.  Climate Change is the main 
factor for these natural calamities.  The impact of warming due to climate changes has 
been observed in every part of the world, especially over the Himalayan cryosphere, 
where glaciers are receding at a greater pace, resulting in the formation and evolution of 
glacier lakes, many of which have become a potentially hazardous lake.  Most of these 
glacier lakes in the Himalyans region are known to have formed within the last half-
century.  The rapid evolution of these lakes and continuously changing climatic 
conditions has led to the increase threat of Glacier Lake Outburst Floods (GLOFs) and 
other associated hazards.  

65 
 
 
 The Committee observed that Ministry of Jal Shakti, Dept of WR, RD and GR, 
has taken various initiatives including carrying out study on Glacier risk assessment of 
glacier lakes in the Himalayan Regions of Indian River Basins through National Remote 
Sensing Centre, one of the Central Implementing Agency under National Hydrology 
Project.  The Glacier lakes database thus compiled has been used to prepare Glacier 
Atlases of Indus, Ganga, Brahmaputra and combined Indian Himalayan River basins 
and shared online on NRSC portal. Further, CWC has formulated and published 
‘Criteria for Risk Indexing of Glacier Lakes in Indian Himalayan Region’ in September 
2024.  NDMA and SDMA’s with consultation from several organizations from different 
Ministries including NIH, NRSC, GSI, C-DAC, WIHG, etc are involved in field 
observations for the assessment of vulnerable glacial lakes identified bases on the 
criteria established by CWC.    
 
 The Committee noted that in the recent past, GLOF event in Sikkim due to 
bursting of South Lhonak Lake in October 2023 resulted severe flooding of the Teesta 
River valley causing severe damage to the buildings, highways and impacted life in 
many small villages in the valley.  More recently, a Glacier burst has caused massive 
avalanche in Chamoli district in Uttrakhand causing severe loss of life and property. 
 
 The Committee while taking cognizance of various measures/technical 
interventions being taken by the Ministry and other agencies concerned in regard to 
Weather forecasting has observed that the incidents of Glacier Lake Outburst Flood 
(GLOFs), Cloudburst flood, avalanches caused due to glacier burst become more 
frequent in vulnerable basins in North Eastern Regions and Himalayan Regions causing 
severe loss of life and material.  The Committee, therefore, recommended that a more 
pro-active, comprehensive and integrated approach has to be taken by the Ministry with 
all the agencies concerned using latest technological interventions including use of 
Artificial Intelligence and Data Analytics for early warning system on forecasting for 
effective risk management in all vulnerable areas. 
 

66 
 
Reply of the Government  
 
There are large number of stakeholders working in the field of Glacier related 
studies in their respective capacities. To bring these institutions under a single umbrella, 
a steering committee under the chairmanship of Secretary, DoWR, RD & GR, MoJS has 
been constituted for Monitoring of Glaciers. Members from various national agencies 
such as National Institute of Hydrology (NIH), National Remote Sensing Centre, Indian 
Institute of Remote Sensing, Wadia Institute of Himalayan Geology, Geological Survey 
of India, Defence Geo-informatics Research Establishment, Ministry of Earth Science, 
Himachal Pradesh Council for Science, Tech. & Env., Govind Ballabh Pant National 
Institute of Himalayan Environment, Department of Science & Technology- Sikkim, 
Central Ground Water Board, Central Water Commission are included in the committee. 
The Terms of Reference of the committee are as follow: 
 To initiate systematic mapping of glaciers/glacial lakes, monitoring glacial 
changes/melting and glacial lake outburst floods. 
 To consolidate the glacier and glacial lake information collected by 
different agencies of the Government and make it available on GIS based 
web-portal. 
 To develop a coordination mechanism among various ministries (viz., 
Ministries of Jal Shakti; Environment, Forest & Climate Change, 
Department of Space, Ministry of Earth Sciences, Ministry of Mines and 
Department of Science and Technology etc.) for efficient mobilization of 
resources for glacier related studies. 
 To help building bridges among other research groups and academia for 
studies on glaciers. 
 To develop trends and predictions for behaviour of Himalayan glaciers in 
the context of climate change and their likely impact on hydrology. 
 To develop capacity through workshops, awareness and trainings 
programs on snow and glacier aspects. 
  

67 
 
Total three meeting of the committee held so far. Last meeting of the committee 
was held on January 20, 2025. 
  
A Centre for Cryosphere and Climate Change Studies has been established at 
NIH Roorkee to look after various studies related to snow/glacier and to coordinate and 
collaborate with other organizations working in the field of snow/glacier. 
CWC monitors 902 Glacial Lakes and Water Bodies (GL&WBs) of size greater 
than 10 Ha included from Glacial Lake Inventory 2011 prepared by NRSC, in the 
Himalayan Region of Indian River Basins, for the period June to October every year, 
using remote sensing techniques. High resolution multi-spectral and microwave (SAR) 
images of Sentinel Satellite at 10 m resolution are processed and analysed in open-
source cloud computing platform using automatic algorithm developed in-house. The 
monthly monitoring report enables detection of relative change in water spread area of 
GLs &WBs as well as identifying the GLs &WBs which have expanded substantially 
during the monitoring month, from a disaster perspective. The monitoring reports are 
shared with all stakeholders and e-published on CWC website for any time access by 
the concerned.  
  
CWC carried out trend analysis on water spread area of 100 Glacial Lakes 
located in India of size greater than 10 Ha, using the available monthly monitoring data 
since 2011 with a view to prioritize lakes. The Glacial Lakes depicting increasing trend, 
no change trend and decreasing trend has been identified state-wise. The state-wise 
flow path of these 100 Glacial Lakes has been prepared, and projects & CWC 
Hydrological Observation stations en-route have been mapped, to facilitate visualization 
of the potential impact in the event of GLOF.  
  
Further, CWC has finalized the Criteria for Risk Indexing of Glacial Lakes offering 
a structured approach for identifying and ranking Glacial Lakes based on their likelihood 
of failure and the potential damage they could cause in the event of GLOF. This has 
been done by evaluating key factors such as the Glacial Lake's Size, Change in Size of 

68 
 
GL, Stability of Side Slope, Proximity to other Glacial Lakes as well as considering 
Downstream vulnerabilities like Habitation, Infrastructures like Dams, Bridges etc.  
Participation of CWC in various committees functioning under NDMA: 
Committee on Disaster Risk Reduction (CoDRR), chaired by the HoD of National 
Disaster Management Authority (NDMA), includes representatives from agencies such 
as CWC, NRSC, GSI, C-DAC, NIH, DGRE, six IHR States/UTs etc conducts meeting 
regularly to address various issues related to Glacial Lakes. NDMA, in collaboration with 
SDMAs and various agencies, has planned expedition to vulnerable Glacial lakes in all 
the six States/UTs (Arunachal Pradesh, Sikkim, Uttarakhand, Himachal Pradesh, 
Jammu & Kashmir and Ladakh) in the Indian Himalayan Region. Total eight meeting of 
the committee held so far. 
  
National Disaster Management Authority (NDMA) constituted a Project 
Monitoring Committee (PMC) on 27.08.2024 including members from various agencies 
such as CWC, NIH, GSI, NRSC, ITBP, NCPOR, CEA etc. The PMC has engaged the 
Centre for Development of Advanced Computing (C-DAC), Pune, to develop an 
indigenous GLOF-Early Warning System. This system will feature a comprehensive 
Glacial Lake Database, Spatial Decision Support System (DSS), GLOF simulation 
model, Indigenous Sensors, and an alert dissemination Web Application.  
National GLOF Risk Mitigation Program (NGRMP) has been created with an 
outlay of 150 Cr, for the period from 2021-22 to 2025-26, for GLOF Risk mitigation in 
four Himalayan states i.e. Arunachal Pradesh, Sikkim, Uttrakhand and Himachal 
Pradesh. A Technical Advisory Committee (TAC) constituted under Member 
(Mitigation), NDMA for regular monitoring and implementation of the program with 
members from various national agencies viz NESAC, NIH, NRSC, NCPOR, DGRE, 
IMD, CWC, GSI, C-DAC, NHPC etc.  
Actions by Central Electricity Authority (CEA): A total of 47 hydroelectric projects 
(HEPs) operated by NHPC, UJVNL, AHPC, HPPCL etc have been identified by the 
Central Electricity Authority as vulnerable to GLOF. GLOF assessment for 15 projects 

69 
 
has been completed (Jammu & Kashmir-4, Uttrakhand-3, Himachal Pradesh-3, Ladakh-
1, Sikkim-2, Arunachal Pradesh-2) 
 [O.M. No. G-30013/2/2025-Budget Dated 12.06.2025] 
 
Recommendation No. 27 (Para No. 2.48) 
 
 
 The Committee while recognizing that only risk prevention measures are not 
sufficient to mitigate challenges posed by such natural calamities also recommended 
that all factors such as climate changes, global warming, deforestation etc. responsible 
for their trigger needs to be identified and addressed promptly by proper planning, and 
coordination by all stakeholders at every level. 
 
Reply of the Government  
 
CWC has finalized the Criteria for Risk Indexing of Glacial Lakes offering a 
structured approach for identifying and ranking Glacial Lakes based on their likelihood 
of failure and the potential damage they could cause in the event of GLOF. This has 
been done by evaluating key factors such as the Glacial Lake's Size, Change in Size of 
GL, Stability of Side Slope, Proximity to other Glacial Lakes as well as considering 
Downstream vulnerabilities like Habitation, Infrastructures like Dams, Bridges etc.  
A steering committee under the chairmanship of Secretary, DoWR, RD & GR, 
MoJS has been constituted for Monitoring of Glaciers on 09-03-2023 having members 
from various national agencies such as National Institute of Hydrology(NIH), National 
Remote Sensing Centre, Indian Institute of Remote Sensing, Wadia Institute of 
Himalayan Geology, Geological Survey of India, Defence Geo-informatics Research 
Establishment, Ministry of Earth Science, Himachal Pradesh Council for Science, Tech. 
& Env., Govind Ballabh Pant National Institute of Himalayan Environment, Department 
of Science & Technology- Sikkim, Central Ground Water Board, Central Water 
Commission. The Terms of Reference of the committee are as follow: 
  

70 
 
 To initiate systematic mapping of glaciers/glacial lakes, monitoring glacial 
changes/melting and glacial lake outburst floods. 
 To consolidate the glacier and glacial lake information collected by different 
agencies of the Government and make it available on GIS based web-portal. 
 To develop a coordination mechanism among various ministries (viz., Ministries 
of Jal Shakti; Environment, Forest & Climate Change, Department of Space, 
Ministry of Earth Sciences, Ministry of Mines and Department of Science and 
Technology etc.) for efficient mobilization of resources for glacier related studies. 
 To help building bridges among other research groups and academia for studies 
on glaciers. 
 To develop trends and predictions for behaviour of Himalayan glaciers in the 
context of climate change and their likely impact on hydrology. 
 To develop capacity through workshops, awareness and trainings programs on 
snow and glacier aspects. 
Moreover, a Centre for Cryosphere and Climate Change Studies has been 
established at NIH Roorkee to look after various studies related to snow/glacier and to 
coordinate and collaborate with other organizations working in the field of snow/glacier. 
  
[O.M. No. G-30013/2/2025-Budget Dated 12.06.2025] 
 
Recommendation No. 28 (Para No. 2.49) 
 
Salinity of Groundwater due to Seawater Ingress in Costal Regions 
 
 
 The Standing Committee on Water Resources during its recent study visit to 
Puducherry, Mahabalipuram and Rajahmundry from 8 to 11 January, 2025 have found 
that Yanam taluk/region of UT of Puducherry has been categorized as “Saline” during 
the last 10 years.  The salinity in groundwater in the region is due to the inland salinity 
originated by the depositional environment in the geological past. Further, they have 
also found out that of the 1202 assessment units (Firkas) in Tamil Nadu, 34 units have 
been categorized as saline based on the Annual Assessment of Dynamic Ground Water 

71 
 
Resources of Tamil Nadu. The Committee observed that saline water intrusion poses 
challenges to freshwater availability and agricultural activities. In view of this, the 
Committee urged upon the Department to take remedial measures to address the 
problem of salinity of groundwater due to seawater ingress in costal regions of the 
country. 
 
Reply of the Government  
 
Salinity intrusion has been observed in some coastal regions of the country due 
to seawater encroachment as well as inherent geological conditions like marine 
sedimentation. Excessive and unsustainable groundwater extraction clubbed with 
recent shifts in rainfall patterns and changes in groundwater recharge rates have also 
contributed to salinity intrusion.  
Since Water is a State subject, the responsibility of effective and sustainable 
management of ground water resources, including tackling of salinity issues, lies 
primarily with the State governments. However, realizing the importance of effectively 
monitoring the affected/likely to be affected areas and understanding the behaviour of 
the freshwater-seawater interface in such areas, the Central government has taken 
several important initiatives.  
To identify and monitor saline water intrusion zones, Central Ground Water 
Board (CGWB) has been conducting regular ground water level and quality monitoring. 
Further, under the National Aquifer Mapping and Management Programme (NAQUIM), 
CGWB has conducted aquifer mapping for all coastal districts, and the reports have 
been shared with state governments for the implementation of management plans. 
Based on the recommendations, state authorities have undertaken measures such as 
constructing tidal regulators, embankments, sea walls, check dams, recharge 
reservoirs, and recharge tanks—initiatives that are reportedly functioning effectively. 
Additionally, under the National Hydrology Project, CGWB has established a network of 
60 piezometers and installed digital water level recorders equipped with water quality 
probes along coastal aquifers in Tamil Nadu and the Union Territory of Puducherry to 

72 
 
assess the potential risk of saline water intrusion. Furthermore, the National Institute of 
Hydrology (NIH), Roorkee has carried out research studies to explore various aspects 
of salinity ingress in coastal aquifers across different regions. 
 Additionally, the state governments of Tamil Nadu and Puducherry have also 
informed to have taken various important steps to counter salinity intrusion and to 
provide adequate fresh water to the population.  
Reportedly, 33 firkas out of 34 saline firkas of Tamil Nadu and the Karaikal taluk 
of Puducherry are having salinity due to geological conditions and intervention 
measures have limited scope. However, State Ground and Surface Water Resources 
Data Centre, Tamil Nadu and State Groundwater & Soil Conservation Unit, Puducherry 
are conducting seawater intrusion studies in the coastal districts of Tamil Nadu & 
Puducherry by periodically monitoring water quality and water levels. 
Further, the following measures have also been taken to improve ground water 
recharge and water storage in the area.  
  
 Establishing rainwater harvesting structures in every household. 
  Constructing check dams across rivers along with recharge wells. 
  Creating recharge wells in tanks. 
  Identifying aquifer zones and recharging rainwater into them. 
  Desilting ponds for rainwater storage. 
  Constructing percolation ponds to help improve groundwater levels.  
  
Furthermore, arrangements have been made to meet the entire water requirement of 
Yanam and Mahe regions of Puducherry through Godavari River and Anjrakandi Dam, 
respectively. 
  
 [O.M. No. G-30013/2/2025-Budget Dated 12.06.2025] 
  

73 
 
 
CHAPTER III  
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NIL 

74 
 
CHAPTER IV 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BYTHE COMMITTEE 
 
 
Recommendation No. 3 (Para Nos. 2.4, 2.5 & 2.6) 
National Water Policy 
 The Committee noted that at present the National Water Policy-2012 is in effect 
with the objective to assess the existing situation and to propose a framework for a plan 
of action with a unified national perspective and to achieve this objective of the Policy, a 
number of recommendations have been made therein for conservation, development 
and improved management of water resources of the country.  
  
The Committee observed that to address current challenges in the Water Sector, 
revision of National Water Policy has been envisaged and the drafting committee 
constituted to revise the National Water Policy has submitted its draft report with 
contrary and non-coherent views from some of the key Members of this Committee and 
the same is under consideration of the Ministry. In this context, the Committee were of 
the opinion that as enumerated by the Department various challenges in the water 
sector including reduction of per capita availability of water due to increasing population, 
deterioration in quality, overexploitation of ground water resources leading to decline in 
ground water level and relatively lower efficiency of the facilities for water utilization are 
multiplying in magnitude over time period. Hence, to mitigate these challenges a robust 
and collective approach is essential.  
  
Therefore, the Committee urged the Ministry to take necessary decisions in the 
matter on urgent basis and ensure the implementation of the New National Water Policy 
on priority so that necessary systems be prepared to confront the current challenges in 
the Water Sector.  
 
 
 

75 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
To ensure implementation of New Water Policy on priority, sincere efforts are 
being taken by DoWR, RD & GR.  New Draft National Water Policy (NWP) is under 
consideration of the Department. 
   
[O.M. No. G-30013/2/2025-Budget Dated 12.06.2025] 
 
Comment of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 8 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
 
Recommendation No. 3 (Para Nos. 2.7 & 2.8) 
National Dam Safety Authority 
 The Committee noted that the National Dam Safety Authority (NDSA) was 
established in February 2022 to implement policies, guidelines, and standards made by 
the National Committee on Dam Safety (NCDS). Maintaining standards of dam safety 
and prevention of dam failure related disasters, discharging such functions as related to 
implementation of the policies made by the National Committee including making 
regulations on the recommendations of the National Committee are some the functions 
of the Authority.  
 
 The Committee noted that all dam owning States have constituted the Sate 
Committees on Dam Safety (SCDS) and State Dam Safety Organizations (SDSO), in 
accordance with the provisions of the Dam Safety Act.  Further, with regard to 
availability of adequate personnel, as per the information provided, the Committee 
observed an acute shortage in SCDSs and SDSOs in most of the States/UTs. In this 
regard, the Committee were of the view that to facilitate the effective implementation of 
the Dam Safety Act, it is imperative that all organizations involved in Dam Safety work, 
commit to it with full capacity. This can only be achieved if all organizations are 
adequately staffed as insufficient staffing will inevitably compromise their efficiency, 
thereby hindering the fulfilment of the Act's objectives. Therefore, the Committee 

76 
 
recommended that the Department take necessary measures to address this issue and 
ensure that all organizations are sufficiently staffed and equipped to implement the Act 
effectively.  
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Many meetings have been held with the Heads of Water Resource Department 
of the State of Chhattisgarh, Andhra Pradesh, Telangana, Rajasthan, Uttar Pradesh 
on dam safety issues including incumbency in SDSOs by NDSA. The issue of shortage 
of staff was highlighted in these meetings.  NDSA has consistently highlighted staffing 
shortages as a key agenda item in its regional review meetings with all dam-owning 
States/UTs. So far, 16 regional review meetings have been held with dam-owning 
States/UTs. During these consultations, States have been informed about the shortage 
of staff in SDSOs. Furthermore, NDSA has issued official communications to the 
concerned States/UTs highlighting the need to address these staffing issues on a 
priority basis. 
  
[O.M. No. G-30013/2/2025-Budget Dated 12.06.2025] 
 
 
Comment of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 11 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation No. 13 (Para Nos. 2.21 & 2.22) 
Rain Water Harvesting 
 The Committee noted that Rainwater harvesting (RWH) has emerged as a very 
viable and crucial strategy to address India's escalating water scarcity, ensuring 
sustainable water management, and mitigating the reliance on conventional water 
sources. By collecting and storing rainwater, RWH can significantly alleviate water 
scarcity issues, providing a reliable alternative to traditional water sources that are often 
inadequate or unpredictable. Furthermore, RWH contributes to improved groundwater 

77 
 
recharge, rendering it a vital and viable solution in regions where aquifers have been 
depleted. 
 
 The Committee observed that for promoting rain water harvesting in the country, 
no dedicated financial support to States/UTs has been provided by National Water 
Mission (NWM).  On this issue, the Department apprised the Committee about the 
various efforts deployed by NWM in this regard including the Jal Shakti Abhiyan: “Catch 
the Rain campaign”, which is a convergence of various Central Government schemes 
and funds like MGNREGS, Atal Mission for Rejuvenation and Urban Transformation 
(AMRUT), Per Drop More Crop Repair, Renovation and Restoration Components under 
the Pradhan Mantri Krishi Sinchai Yojana (PMKSY) , Compensatory Afforestation Fund 
Management and Planning Authority(CAMPA), Finance Commission Grants, State 
Government schemes, Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR) funds etc. While 
acknowledging these efforts of the Government, the Committee believed that rainwater 
harvesting can be a versatile and effective solution to tackle water scarcity, manage 
storm water runoff, and support sustainable water management. Use of available 
rainwater harvesting techniques is vital in enhancing groundwater recharge, improving 
agricultural productivity and reduce dependence on traditional water sources and 
provision of dedicated financial support to States/UTs will definitely motivate them to 
make serious efforts to promote rainwater harvesting measures and ensure the 
participation of communities in masses. Keeping in view the fact that rainwater 
harvesting is increasingly recognized as a vital strategy to address water scarcity and 
ensure sustainable water management, the Committee recommended that the Ministry 
consider providing dedicated financial grant / support to the States / UTs to promote use 
of rainwater harvesting through available techniques so that problem of water scarcity in 
the country may be mitigated to some extent.  
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Rainwater harvesting (RWH) is increasingly recognized as a vital strategy to 
address India’s growing water scarcity and ensure sustainable water management. 

78 
 
Rainwater harvesting offers a solution to the challenges posed by the over exploitation 
of water resources, erratic rainfall, and a rapidly increasing population. By collecting and 
storing rainwater, this practice can significantly alleviate water scarcity issues, offering a 
reliable alternative to conventional water sources, which are often insufficient or 
unreliable. It also helps improve groundwater recharge, making it a key solution in 
regions where aquifers have been depleted. 
The Hon’ble Prime Minister’s vision for water security embraces a Whole of 
Government and Whole of Society approach to address India’s diverse water 
needs—rural and urban, domestic and industrial. The Ministry of Jal Shakti has been 
implementing the Jal Shakti Abhiyan (JSA) campaign since 2019, a flagship programme 
of the National Water Mission, Ministry of Jal Shakti with the tagline from 2021 “Catch 
the Rain: Where it Falls, When it Falls”. Institutionalized as an annual intervention, 
JSA:CTR is anchored in the principles of decentralization and public participation, with a 
strong emphasis on the community-driven construction, revival, and maintenance of 
rainwater harvesting and groundwater recharge structures. By engaging citizens at the 
grassroots level, the campaign fosters collective ownership and long-term stewardship 
of water resources across the country. 
The sixth edition of the Jal Shakti Abhiyan: Catch the Rain (JSA: CTR) 2025 was 
launched in collaboration with the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change 
(MoEF&CC) The campaign focuses on awareness generation around water 
conservation, while driving five key intervention areas each year. Intervention-wise 
progress (completed as well as ongoing works) as on 02.06.2025 includes (i) Water 
Conservation & Rainwater Harvesting Structures: 58,06,024; (ii) Renovation of 
Traditional Water Bodies: 12,43,752; (iii) Reuse and Recharge Structures: 31,00,664; 
(iv) Watershed Development: 73,64,755; (v) Afforestation: 1,39,98,27,636. 
The Jal Sanchay Jan Bhagidari (JSJB) initiative, launched in 2024, has rapidly 
accelerated local groundwater recharge efforts across India through an innovative, 
community-driven approach. The initiative focuses on the construction of low-cost 
artificial recharge structures with focus on roof top rainwater harvesting structures, 
recharging of defunct bore wells and recharge pits. With an ambitious target of 

79 
 
constructing over one million recharge structures by May 2025, the initiative has 
already exceeded expectations, with more than 27 lakh recharge structures uploaded 
on JSJB portal as on 2nd June 2025. The success of JSJB does not rely on central 
funding but is driven by convergent and inclusive funding model, which integrates 
resources from government schemes such as MGNREGA, AMRUT, and PMKSY with 
contributions from the private sector, including Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR) 
funds, philanthropic donations, individual donors, and crowdfunding platforms. This 
integrated financial approach not only facilitates broad-based participation but also 
fosters community ownership and ensures the long-term sustainability of groundwater 
conservation efforts. 
Across the country, youth groups, women collectives, self-help groups, NGOs, 
farmers, and students are taking small, localised steps—creating a large national 
movement. Community ownership of water resources has been the backbone of this 
movement, fostering sustained engagement, accountability, and the ongoing upkeep of 
the assets created. This is the true spirit of Jan Bhagidari is that citizens not merely as 
beneficiaries, but as active agents  of change. The JSJB initiative aligns with the 
Hon’ble Prime Minister’s vision of a “Whole-of-Government, Whole-of-Society” 
approach, underscoring the importance of both community involvement and 
governmental coordination in effective water management. 
Under JSJB, several innovative community-driven models have emerged to 
promote sustainable groundwater conservation. The Karmbhoomi se Matribhoomi 
Model enables individuals working in Gujarat to fund borewell recharge projects in their 
state of birth, thereby fostering strong emotional and ecological ties. The Alwar School 
Building Model, developed integrates rooftop rainwater harvesting and sanitation 
facilities into schools, turning infrastructure into educational tools. In Raipur, the 
CREDAI-Hydrologist Model brings together builders and hydrologists to develop low-
cost recharge structures at just ₹1,500 per unit, exemplifying cost-effective 
collaboration. Meanwhile, the Gir Ganga Trust NGO Model unites NGOs, 
philanthropists, and local communities, with shared responsibilities in construction and 
resource support. These models exemplify cost-effective, participatory, and scientifically 

80 
 
sound approaches to water conservation, reinforcing India’s grassroots-led water 
security efforts. 
An incentive mechanism has been developed by the Ministry of Housing and 
Urban Affairs (MoHUA) to reward Municipal Corporations (MCs) and Urban Local 
Bodies (ULBs) demonstrating exemplary performance in water conservation and 
rainwater harvesting efforts. This mechanism is based on measurable indicators and is 
designed to promote equitable competition and balanced representation across urban 
areas. By recognizing successful models and practices at the city and town level, 
MoHUA aims to encourage urban stakeholders to proactively engage in the Jal 
Sanchay Jan Bhagidari initiative under the Jal Shakti Abhiyan: Catch the Rain 
campaign. 
Separately, the Ministry of Jal Shakti (MoJS) has proposed an incentive 
mechanism for recognizing outstanding contributions by Industry Associations, NGOs, 
Philanthropists, District Administrations, and other non-governmental actors. This 
incentive scheme also relies on measurable performance indicators and seeks to 
enhance private sector, civil society, and district-level participation in water conservation 
efforts. The approach reinforces decentralized, community-driven models by 
encouraging innovation and local leadership, in alignment with the core spirit of the Jal 
Shakti Abhiyan and Jal Sanchay Jan Bhagidari initiatives.  
As per the Dynamic Ground Water Resources Assessment Report, 2024, there 
has been a total increase of 11.36 billion cubic meters (BCM) in 2024 with respect to 
2017 through recharge by Tanks, Ponds and Water Conservation Structures, 
surpassing even the live storage capacity of 9.75 BCM of the Indira Sagar Dam. 
  
Apart from the Jal Shakti Abhiyan (JSA), several other flagship initiatives are 
also contributing significantly towards augmenting water supply, particularly through 
rainwater harvesting. Notable among these are the Atal Bhujal Yojana, which focuses 
on community-led groundwater management, and the Rejuvenation, Renovation, and 
Restoration (RRR) component of the Pradhan Mantri Krishi Sinchayee Yojana 

81 
 
(PMKSY), which emphasizes the revival of traditional water bodies to enhance water 
availability and sustainability. 
The Repair, Renovation, and Restoration (RRR) component under the 
Pradhan Mantri Krishi Sinchayee Yojana (PMKSY), a Centrally Sponsored Scheme, 
focuses on restoring traditional water bodies such as tanks, ponds, and lakes to 
improve their water storage capacity and ecological functionality.  
Furthermore, the Atal Bhujal Yojana, Central Sector Scheme, supported by 
World Bank, promotes sustainable groundwater management through community 
participation, encouraging the formation of water budgets and preparation and 
implementation of Gram Panchayat-wise water security plans. These plans are locally 
relevant, grounded in scientific assessment of groundwater availability and usage, and 
foster judicious water use through informed decision-making and collective action at the 
grassroots level. 
The Department of Land Resources under Ministry of Rural Development is 
implementing Watershed Development Component of Pradhan Mantri Krishi 
Sinchayee Yojana Scheme, which is a Central Sector Scheme. The scheme aims to 
develop degraded and rainfed areas of the country, by undertaking watershed 
development projects in an integrated approach. The activities undertaken, interalia, 
include ridge area treatment, drainage line treatment, soil and moisture conservation, 
rainwater harvesting, nursery raising, pasture development, livelihoods for asset-less 
persons etc. 
AMRUT (Atal Mission for Rejuvenation and Urban Transformation) 2.0 is a 
flagship initiative of the Government of India aimed at improving urban infrastructure 
with a strong focus on water sustainability. The mission emphasizes rainwater 
harvesting through effective stormwater drainage into clean water bodies, developing 
aquifer management plans to enhance groundwater recharge, and spreading 
awareness through IEC campaigns. The key components include improving urban 
water supply and sewerage systems, developing green spaces, and rejuvenating water 
bodies. Complementing national efforts like the Jal Shakti Abhiyan, Catch the 
Rain,JSJB, AMRUT 2.0 plays a vital role in ensuring water security and promoting 

82 
 
efficient water use in urban areas. Under AMRUT, the Shallow Aquifer Management 
component, which is part of Urban Aquifer Management initiatives, addresses the city-
wise groundwater recharge. It focuses on mapping city aquifers, preparing Aquifer 
Management Plans, and implementing recharge measures like rainwater harvesting and 
recharge wells. This helps improve groundwater availability and supports sustainable 
urban water management. 
It is important to acknowledge the pivotal role played by flagship government 
schemes like MGNREGA and the Mission Amrit Sarovar (MAS) in advancing the 
objectives of water conservation and community participation. Under MGNREGA alone, 
more than ₹1.17 lakh crore have been spent over the past five years on the creation 
and rejuvenation of water-related assets across rural India, significantly enhancing 
groundwater recharge, drought resilience, and irrigation potential. Complementing this, 
the Mission Amrit Sarovar has led to the creation of over 68,000 water bodies since 
its launch, serving not just as water conservation structures but also as symbols of Jan 
Bhagidari and environmental stewardship. These initiatives reflect the convergence of 
livelihood generation with sustainable water management. 
Rainwater harvesting and groundwater recharge are central to India’s water 
security strategy. Flagship initiatives like JSA:CTR and JSJB, supported by schemes 
such as PMKSY, Atal Bhujal Yojana, DoLR’s watershed programmes, and MoHUA’s 
urban water initiatives, highlight the power of community-led, convergent, and 
decentralized action. Together, they are driving a nationwide movement to restore the 
hydrological balance and build a resilient, water-secure future’.  
The ongoing efforts by the Central Government, State Governments, Urban and 
Rural Local Bodies, along with meaningful private sector participation, have collectively 
demonstrated encouraging progress in advancing the objectives of the Jal Shakti 
Abhiyan (JSA) and Jal Sanchay Jan Bhagidari (JSJB). The core spirit of JSJB lies 
in community-led water conservation efforts, where local ownership, public 
participation, and collective responsibility drive impactful outcomes. 
Introducing a dedicated financial or administrative vertical beyond the current 
incentive-based, mission-mode approach may not align the spirit of JSA/ JSJB. Such a 

83 
 
move risks undermining the foundational spirit of these initiatives, which is rooted in 
fostering intensified community engagement and strengthening decentralized, state-led 
implementation.  
This view is reinforced by the findings of the Dynamic Ground Water 
Resources Assessment Report 2024 released by the Central Ground Water Board 
(CGWB), which highlights that significant improvements in groundwater levels and 
recharge potential were most visible in regions where integrated, community-led 
interventions under JSA/ JSJB were effectively implemented—without reliance on a 
rigid vertical structure. 
  
 [O.M. No. G-30013/2/2025-Budget Dated 12.06.2025] 
 
 
Comment of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 20 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation No. 17 (Para Nos. 2.29 & 2.30) 
Namami Gange Mission-II 
 The Committee noted that the Government launched the Namami Gange 
Programme (NGP) in 2014-15 for the rejuvenation of river Ganga and its tributaries for 
five years, up to March 2021 and has been further extended to March, 2026. Under the 
Programme, a diverse and holistic set of interventions for cleaning and rejuvenation of 
river Ganga have been taken up, that included waste water treatment, solid waste 
management, river front management (ghats and crematoria), ensuring e-flow, rural 
sanitation, afforestation, biodiversity conservation, public participation, etc 
 
 The Committee observed that in the Committee/ Councils/ Bodies/ 
Organisations/ Societies established under Namami Gange Programme the Department 
informed that under present provisions, two elected representatives, one from the 
Municipalities and one from the Gram Panchayats of the District nominated as Members 
in the District Ganga Committee by the State Government. In the matter, the Committee 
felt that since, Namami Ganga Mission is a grand and ambitious programme for the 

84 
 
rejuvenation of River Ganga and its tributaries effecting millions of people living in River 
Ganga Basin, the local Member of Parliament, Lok Sabha and a Member of Legislative 
Assembly can play a pivotal role in the effective and successful implementation of the 
Mission and its objectives.   The Committee, therefore recommended the Ministry to 
make necessary provisions in their guidelines for inclusion of local MP/MLA in the 
bodies under NMCG in order to ensure more cohesive outcome under Nmami Ganga 
progarmme.  
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
National Mission for Clean Ganga has taken a proactive approach towards the 
inclusion of local Lok Sabha MPs and local MLAs for better formulation, implementation 
and monitoring of work executed under Namami Gange Mission. It is pertinent to 
mention here that vide D.O. letter dated 11.02.2023, the Department of Rural 
Development was requested to include Namami Gange Program in the list of programs 
to be monitored by District Infrastructure Scheme Advisory (DISHA) Committees for 
better transparency, coordination and implementation (copy enclosed as Annexure-II).  
  
           The DISHA Committees are headed by local Lok Sabha MPs and include local  
MLAs and other representatives of political parties. The list of districts where works 
under Namami Gange are being implemented was also provided to the Department of 
Rural Development. 
  
Consequently, DISHA Committees have been monitoring the Namami Gange Program, 
and the data for monitoring the Namami Gange Program is available on the DISHA 
portal (Copy of snapshot enclosed as Annexure-III) 
  
[O.M. No. G-30013/2/2025-Budget Dated 12.06.2025] 
 
 
 

85 
 
Comment of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 23 of Chapter I of the Report) 

86 
 
 
CHAPTER V  
OBSERVATION/RECOMMENDATION IN REPSECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLY OF 
THE GOVERNMENT IS STILL AWAITED 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NIL 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI                                                    Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
08 August, 2025                                                                  Chairperson,                                                                      
17 Sravana, 1947(Saka)       Standing Committee on Water Resources 

4nngxy,fe:t
Budget Allocation and Actual Expenditure for Fy z0z4-25
(Rs. in Crores)
Q entqal $eg.(pr,Fchenps
Sl. No. Scheme BE 2024-25 RE 2024-25
Actual
Expenditure
2024-25
I
Farakka Barrage Project 127.00 t29.00 125.60
a. Recovery 47.00 70.00 100.79
b. Farakka Barrage Project
(NEr) 80.00 59.00 24.8t
2.
Dam Rehab & Improv Project
(DRrP) 46.98 42.28 41.19
a
National Ganga Plan 3345.10 3000.00 2595.t|
4. River Basin Management 154.79 143.00 t31.t2
5.
Dev of Water Resources Info
System
1 15.00 170.00 t65.62
6.
Ground Water Management &
Regulation 325.00 240.00 232.fi
1. National Hydrology Proj ect 66r.20 492.80 372.95
8.
Research & Development and
NWM 67.06 45.00 42.11
a. Research & Development 38.00 26.s0 26.56
b. National Water Mission 29.06 18.s0 15.55
9. Atal Bhujal Yojana (ATAL JAL) 1778.00 600.00 594.08
10. Total Central Sector Schemes 6573.73 4792.08 4199.t0
87

(Rs. in Crores
Qgntf allv Spo.qS gred $c,h.enes
SI. No. i Scheme BE 2024-25
I Actual
RE 2024-25 1 Expenditure
I
t 2024-25
1.
Pradhan Mantri Krishi
Sinchai Yojana (PMKSY) -
Har Khet Ko Pani
4349.80 4480.8s 4398.s8
a. Debt Servicing to
NABARD 3749.80 3880.85 3809.06
b. Surface Minor Irrigation
& Repair, Renovation and
Restoration of Water Bodies
600.00 s98.87 588.39
2.
PMKSY-Accelerated
Irrigation Benefit
Programme and
National/Special Proj ects
2500.00 2040.00 1557.11
3.
PMKSY-Command Area
Development and Water
Management
1400.00 100.00 62.04
4.
Polavaram Inigation Proj ect
(PrP) 0.00 5512.50 s512.40
5.
Flood Management &
Border Areas Program 449.57 400.00 386.95
6. Irrigation Census 40.00 20.00 18.89
7.
Special Package for
Maharashtra 600.00 400.00 18s.94
8.
National River Conservation
Plan - Other Basins s92.tl 591.t2 589. I 9
9. Interlinking of Rivers 4000.00 2000.00 t954.86
10. Total CSS 13431.48 15544.47 14666.56
11. SCHEME TOTAL 20005.21 20336.55 1886s.66
88

fluuexur* -[
I
I
ofr
I
J
xoEF
Ntro
t!
ooo
.E
(!.
Eoz(,
o
3
E
o
.lJ
t
(,)
sl
z
U
o
a
de
bt)(lt
L.
o
P
P.
d
tr
d
z
d
Hql
kadPi
L
G,
B
'd
L(tI
€EFJ
8E
{i: *'
!'cd(! hI)Q. RI
EZ(!-
L.M\JC
:i i;O-
EH(\l.t,
65
C.*E6i;F()^b0 6I)(0d
FaE
dH
=dtrrJt3<p4
Lr-
. + f,,
FEFB*u*gu
li*ggggga
ggggggflIggE
$B$EH*BEH$H
$$$g$$gfis$B$
N'
et,
gs
c-Ll6nta!
-cl-cirJa!t O-y)
8# s$E€x-.dd 'E .s'
t'sEd.E -:, =E5;fcEt .cJE'-9>-CG-
:l ii': 5O.C16-(U'it(!!g
HE E,;.tr\d 6 -.co \, =o-Lu
* F^-3 6
pdri_r
{J=r!F6t!J&
dvgh
.-. u'a Fntf!u'XL-cri-:
U E e'i;;'^ :z .(! L'
s,sE*aETEi E <fis:bd
--=P5HE59o-X5!(l, -- dl
uoE,-. -
6"8 E1
= fir= c
{E6e'-S(6
-'= < r,o :i .-- ..3:ci
&Es1
---gp ? fi.lI or'ro
i gs 5
'a
Ed
h0
..o
C,
U)
f+(t
bo
E
RI
d
.d
..o
((
o
oL{(U
llo
ta
c,,ok
0{
d(ll
Ed
rd
Lr
c,
e
{d
.o
A*
d
d
zd
ad
-o6
6k
a
E
d\,
CI
z
-idL
'o
>f{ a
x::
b0 c,oot
Ed/i. .+
-tr (\
b€
Yd9.;dxoo .=
d.rF{B\r \<r
(\l<
!,
c
Z
!)
(l
Q
z
Ha<0ilF
Er
(a
rd
nil
#0
t-iFi
dH
tr
Az
Iri
go
&
Hl.f
,l
()
zfrl +'#i O\
F{aH
B
*81

A',lnftttq,/fe -Tii--
NAMAMI GANGE
re
i' i,, j....j: l
3.722
Namaml Gange / Minlstry of Jal Shakfi
"D.t6 is availeble for 9 s&tcs only."
33,278
i
s
i rurt
i:
I!
r!I,'
I
5
!.*'
t{
c
rt
.'
15,856
lii:,*r,;l l,r, \ *l',";,:: r 
"i. 
:::,,i1:itlt*n e ; v1 f t l* I I' t . i I ;. :.1
* ris.lr k.* !Bi* ii. tr) rhrry NM C.d (in xMi
ill202t.21 a-u I
Fi**ncial Frogress {Rs in Cr}
abl 3r.il.d lH B Lel rfNd IrrE O, h Crt
h
STP Capacity Sanctionsd vs Creatod (in ML0}
aglt(.i*Ir ffi (hlt r.3ItCi.*rArH 0i IrDl
drc
i
i
6
I
lr*
€
!
n
t rs"
It
Bihar
Delhi
Haryana
Himachal Pradesh
Jharkhand
Madhya Pradesh
Rajasthan
Uttar Pradesh
Uttarakhand
Total .
7,241
1.951
2r8
12
l.ll0
670
15 187
1,743
33.278
l- r):rit:.;ri t t::t):,,::-.
4,41i9
1,899
218
4
272
182
6.025
897
I5,855
1,656
17
,11
15t
146
1,9m
208
5,1 58
: '; , , l.i' r ,
1,., -il r'
1,181
l6
88
l4l
1,808
r75
{,546
... I tr .,1.\: .
838
1.268
r'r5
?
261
i6
2.596
24.4
6.395
_r6
1,213
13t
2,722
Abbrevlatiom:
sTP: Sffage Treatment Plilt
(o
_qo*
Microsoft Power Bl
MLD: M€galitels Per Day
(
Sl.t!ruT
AN
Dlstrict
nN1
Finnncinl Yaar
t' All
2025.:5
L1.,
g
I
,5.48
&L-25zozt-22
El6
lozGtr
(m
r
*..1L I

No. t{-I 101 ltZt292Z-PcC DTE
Governrnent of India
Central Water Commission
River Conservntion Directornte
First Floor, West Block-2.
R.K.Purarn, Nelv Delhi-66
E-ruai I : rcdclte-cr,vc@nic. in
Ph:011-29583390
To, 
Date: 02_A6_2025
Secretary,
Miuistry of Envilorunent, Forest & Cliruate Chauge,
Jol Bagh Rd, Lodi Colony, Neiv Dethi-110003
sub: Inter-Minlsterial coordination in matters of river management-reg
Sir,
Please fnd attached a copy of the fourth repofi of the Demand for Grants (2025-26) of
the Ministry of Jal Shakli - Depzutment of Water Resources, Rirrel Developmeut & Ganga
Rejuvenation.
2. Your kind attentiol is invited to Paragraph 2.43 of the report on 'Water Management of
Forest Areas' (page no. 54), which highlights specific findings regarding rivers traversilg
tluough National Parla and Sauctuaries. As these areas fall uuder the purview of the Ministry
of Enviromneut. Forest and Clirnate Chauge (MoEF&CC), MoJS has not been able to access
tliese regions directly for river managerlent aud rvater couselation efforts. Accorclingly, the
Conunittee has proposed enirauced coordination between MoJS and MoEF&CC iu uratters of
river ruauagement and conselvation of rvaterbodies within National Parks and Sanchraries.
Given the iurpottauce of these protected areas fur ruaintaining ecological balance aud ruitigating
climate clmnge impacts, a cohesive approach to rvater resoruce uanageneut is essential.
3. In this re{ard, it is requestecl to kindly provide guidance on the mechauism tluough rvhicli
the efforts of Ministry of Jal Shakli (lvIoJS) can be cooldinatecV integrated rvith MoEF&CC to
eusue effective uaoageuent of watel resorrces in these ecologically sensitive areas to
facilitate irrtegrated water resorrce mauagenrent- conseryatiorr efforts aud clfuuate resilience.
Towards this end, a rneeting among concemecl officials can be organized to establish urodalities
and enstue effective iurpleurentatiou these strategies. CWC is colunitted to provicle zury
assistance, irr this regard ancl undertake activities on ground, as deeured appropriate by
MoEF&CC.
It is requested to kindly look ilto the rnatter and conumuricate to this office for fiullier
necessaly action.
Yours fai
9t-
Avrrrtrcut"-e-[
River Conservatiorr

RPPE^ID,cEs -T
9onf!9p,ntie!
MINUTES OF THE SIXTEENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING GOMMITTEE ONWATER RESOURCES (2024.25) HELD ON 08 AUCUST, 2025.
The Committee sat on Friday, the 08 August, 2025 from 1000 hours to 1 100
hours in committee Room '2', parriament House Annexe Extension, New Derhi.
PR.ESF,NI
Shri Rajiv pratap Rudy _ Chairperson
rylErv!BEBg
LgK sAFr-fA
2. Shri Narayandas Ahinruar
3. Shri lsha Khan Choudhury
4. Shri Sher Singh Ghubaya
5. Shri Bapi Haldar
6. Md, Rakibul Hussain
7. Shri Rodmal Nagar
8. Shri Dhaval Laxmanbhai patel
9, ShriVishaldadaprakashbapupatil
10. Shri Mohite Patil Dhairyasheel Rajsinh
11. Shri Pratap Chandra Sarangi
12. Shri Dushyant Singh
13. Thiru. Tamilselvan Thanga
RA:JYA S+F,HA
14. Shri Khiru Mahto
15. Smt. Mausam Noor
16. Shri Balyogi Umeshnath
17. Shri Dhairyashil Mohan Patil
SEgR,ETARtAT
1. Shri Chander Mohan - Additional Secretary
2. Shri Ajay Kumar Sood - Director
3. Shri Umesh Bist - Under Secretary
9z-

(i i)
(iii)
2' At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of the
Committee' Thereafter, the Committee took up for consideration following four
Draft Reports:
(i) Sixth Report on'Action Taken by the Government on the observations /
Recommendations contained in the First Report (.lgth Lok sabha) on
Demands for Grants (2024-25) of the Ministry of Jal Shakti - Department of
Drinking Water and Sanitation'.
Seventh Report on'Action Taken by the Government on the Observations /
Recommendations contained in the second Report (1gth Lok Sabha) on
Demands for Grants (2024-25) of the Ministry of Jal Shakti - Department of
water Resources, River Development and Ganga Rejuvenation'.
Eighth Report on'Action Taken by the Government on the Observations /
Recommendations contained in the Third Report (1Bth Lok Sabha) on
Demands for Grants (2025-26) of the Ministry of Jal Shakti - Department of
Drinking Water and Sanitation'.
(iv) Ninth Report on'Action Taken by the Government on the Observations /
Recommendations contained in the Fourth Report (18th Lok Sabha) on
Demands for Grants (2025-26) of the Ministry of Jal Shakti - Department of
water Resources, River Development and Ganga Rejuvenation'.
3. After some deliberation, the Committee adopted the aforesaid four draft
Reports, without any modification. The Committee then authorized the Chairperson
to present the Reports on their behalf to both the Houses of Parliament in the
current Session.
The Committee then adjourned
-13-

APPENDICES - II
[Vide Para 4 of the lntroduction]
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN THE FOURTH REPORT
(EIGHTEENTT'| LOK SABHA) OF THE COMMITTEE
(i) Total number of Recommendations/Observations 28
(i i) Recommendation/observations which nave @Government
Recommendation Nos. 1,4,5,6,7,8,9, 10, 11,12,14, 15, 16,
18, '19, 20, 21 , 22, 23, 24, 25, 26,27 and 2g
Total - 24
Percentage* 85.71 %
(iii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee
desire to pursue in view of the Government's replies
Recommendation Nos. NIL
do not
Total - 00
Percentaqe - Nil
(iv) Recommendations/observations in respect of which replies of the
Government have not been accepted by the Committee
Recommendation Nos. 2, 3,13 & 17 Total - 4
Percentage - 14.29%
(v) Recommendation/Observation in
Government is still awaited
Para Nos. NIL
respect of which final reply of the
Total - 00
Percentaqe - Nil
*1q-