 
05 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON WATER RESOURCES 
(2024-25) 
                 
         
EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA 
         
                 
MINISTRY OF JAL SHAKTI – DEPARTMENT OF WATER RESOURCES, 
RIVER DEVELOPMENT AND GANGA REJUVENATION 
 
         
         
‘‘Review Of Upper Yamuna River Cleaning Project Upto Delhi And River 
Bed Management In Delhi” 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations / 
Recommendations contained in the Twenty Seventh Report 
(Seventeenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Water 
Resources] 
         
         
         
FIFTH REPORT 
  
          
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
         
March, 2025 / Phalguna,1946 (Saka) 
 

FIFTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON WATER RESOURCES 
(2024-25) 
          
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
         
         
         
MINISTRY OF JAL SHAKTI – DEPARTMENT OF WATER RESOURCES, 
RIVER DEVELOPMENT AND GANGA REJUVENATION 
 
                 
         
‘‘Review Of Upper Yamuna River Cleaning Project Upto Delhi And River 
Bed Management In Delhi” 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations / 
Recommendations contained in the Twenty Seventh Report 
(Seventeenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Water 
Resources] 
         
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on    11.03.2025 
Laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on  11 .03.2025 
  
 
  
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
                 
         
March, 2025 / Phalguna,1946 (Saka) 

 
W. R. C.  No. 88 
         
         
         
         
         
         
 
 
         
         
         
Price :  Rs.  
         
         
         
         
         
 
 
 
         
     
                     
 
 
 
         
        © 2025 By Lok Sabha Secretariat 
  
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok 
Sabha  (Sixteenth Edition) and Printed by  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iii)

CONTENTS 
 
  Page  
 
Composition of 
the Committee 
 
……………………………………………………………… (vi) 
 
 
 
INTRODUCTION ……………………………………………………………… 
 
(viii) 
 
CHAPTER - I Report……………………………………………………… 
 
1 
CHAPTER – II Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted 
by the Government…………………………… 
 
37 
CHAPTER - III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do 
not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s 
replies……………………………………………………… 
 
105 
CHAPTER - IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the 
replies of the Government have not been accepted by the 
Committee……………...................................... 
 
106 
CHAPTER - V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final 
replies of the Government are still 
awaited…………………………………………………….. 
 
120 
 APPENDICES 
 
 
I Minutes of the  Eleventh Sitting of the Committee held on 
 10.03.2025 
 
120 
(a) 
 
 
 
II 
 
Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Twenty 
Seventh Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee 
121 
 
 
 
ANNEXURES  
1. List of Mining Blocks of Districts Sonipat, Karnal, Palwal and 
Yamuna Nagar. 
 
 
 
122 
2. Details of Challans from the Year 2018-24 
 
129 
3. DO Letter of Government of Haryana  
 
130 
4. Water Quality Status of river Yamuna as furnished by Delhi 
Pollution Control Committee  
132 
 (iv) 

 
5. List of Projects with status on River Yamuna under Namami 
Gange 
 
136 
6. Water Quality of river Yamuna in UP 
 
140 
7. Yamuna Water Quality: December 2022 and December 2023 
 
151 
8. Status of Existing CETPs 
 
159 
9. Brief about 22 drains out falling into River Yamuna in Delhi 
and Proposed Action for Tapping of Flow 
 
160 
10. Directions issued by Himachal Pradesh Pollution Control 
Board 
 
169 
11.  Annual Average Data for the year 2023 
 
170 
12. Drain Monitoring Results  
 
171 
13. Data of STPs Operational in the Catchment of River Yamuna 
and its Tributaries 
 
172 
14. State-wise Project Details 
 
177 
15. Central Pollution Control Board Reply on Recommendation 
No. 15 
 
182 
16. Receipt and Processing Certificate 
 
183 
17. Directions under Section 33 (A) of the Water (Prevention and 
Control of Pollution) Act, 1974, as amended to date   
 
184 
18. Reply of Central Water Commission on Recommendation 23 
 
186 
19. Approach for Sediment Management of Rivers 188 
 
 
 
(v)

COMPOSITION OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON WATER RESOURCES 
(2024-25) 
  
 
Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy  -  Chairperson 
 
 LOK SABHA 
 
 
2.  Shri Narayandas Ahirwar  
3.  Shri Joyanta Basumatary  
4.  Chh. Udayanraje Pratapsinha Maharaj Bhonsle 
5.  Shri Isha Khan Choudhury  
6.  Shri Sher Singh Ghubaya  
7.  Shri Bapi Haldar  
8.  Md. Rakibul Hussain  
9.  Smt. Sanjna Jatav  
10.  Shri Sarabjeet Singh Khalsa  
11.  Shri Sagar Eshwar Khandre  
12.  Shri Rodmal Nagar  
13.  Shri Dhaval Laxmanbhai Patel  
14.  Shri Vishaldada Prakashbapu Patil  
15.  Shri Mohite Patil Dhairyasheel Rajsinh  
16.  Shri Dilip Saikia  
17.  Shri Pratap Chandra Sarangi  
18.  Shri Dushyant Singh  
19.  Thiru. Tamilselvan Thanga  
20.  Shri Ashok Kumar Yadav  
21.  Vacant 
 
 
 RAJYA SABHA 
 
22. Dr. Faiyaz Ahmad 
23. Shri Ashokrao Shankarrao Chavan 
24. Smt. Dharmshila Gupta 
25. Smt. Jebi Mather Hisham 
26. Shri Khiru Mahto 
27. Smt. Mausam Noor 
28. Shri Balyogi Umeshnath 
29. Shri  SanjayKumar Jha 
30. Shri Dhairyashil Mohan Patil 
31. Smt. Seema Dwivedi 
 
 
 
 
(vi) 
 

 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Chander Mohan - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Ajay Kumar Sood - Director 
3. Shri Shri P. Ashok - Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri Gaurav Jain - Assistant Committee Officer 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(vii)

INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Water Resources (2024-25) having 
been authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present the Fifth 
Report on the Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in their Twenty Seventh Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Review Of Upper 
Yamuna River Cleaning Project Upto Delhi And River Bed Management In Delhi’. 
 
2.  The Twenty Seventh Report of the Committee was presented to Lok Sabha and laid 
in Rajya Sabha on 06 February 2024. The Action Taken replies of the Government to all 
the recommendations contained in the Report were received in this Secretariat on              
24 June, 2024. 
 
3.  The replies of the Government were examined and the Report was considered and 
adopted by the Committee at their sitting held on  10.03.2025. 
 
4. An analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Twenty Seventh Report (Seventeenth                 
Lok Sabha) of the Committee is given in Appendices-II. 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI                                     RAJIV PRATAP RUDY, 
10 March, 2025                                                             Chairperson,                                                                      
19 Phalguna,1946 (Saka)               Standing Committee on Water Resources 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(viii) 

1 
 
CHAPTER I 
REPORT 
 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Water Resources (2024-25) deals 
with the action taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Twenty Seventh Report on ‘Review Of Upper Yamuna River Cleaning 
Project Upto Delhi And River Bed Management In Delhi’. 
 
2.  The Twenty Seventh Report was presented to Lok Sabha on 06.02.2024 and 
was laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 06.02.2024. The Report contained                                     
25 Observations/Recommendations.  
 
3. Action Taken Notes in respect of all the 25 Observations/Recommendations of 
the Committee have been received from the Government. These have been examined 
and categorized as follows: - 
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government (Chapter II):  
 
Recommendation Nos. 1,2,3,4,7,9,11,12,13,14,15,16,18,19,20,21,22,23,24 
and 25 
       (Total – 20) 
 
(ii) Observations / Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government’s replies (Chapter III):  
 
Recommendation Nos. NIL       
     (Total – NIL) 
 
(iii) Observations / Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee (Chapter IV):  
 
Recommendation Nos. 5,6,8,10 and 17      
(Total – 05)  
 
(iv) Observations / Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited (Chapter V):  
 
Para Nos. NIL        
      (Total – NIL) 
4.  The Committee desire that replies to recommendations made in the Chapter-I of 
this Report may be furnished to the Committee expeditiously.  
 

2 
 
5.  The Committee will now deal with action taken by the Government on some of 
their Observations/Recommendations that require reiteration or merit comments.   
 
A. Floodplain/Wetland of River Yamuna 
(Recommendation Para No.  1) (Para No. 2.1) 
 
6. The Committee observed that Floodplains are an integral part of the riverine 
ecosystem that comprises of wetlands, floodplain forests and grasslands with the river. 
They not only function together to recharge the aquifers but also prevent the threat of 
floods during monsoons by capturing excess water in the floodplain wetlands. 
Floodplains allow the river to spread its waters obstruction-free and encourage native 
flora and fauna to sustain in the ecosystem. In this regard, the Committee had been 
informed that on the issue of encroachment of floodplain/wetland area along the course 
of Yamuna only two States namely Delhi and Haryana have furnished the information. 
As apprised by the Department of Water Resources, River Development & Ganga 
Rejuvenation, Uttarakhand, Himachal Pradesh, Uttar Pradesh and Rajasthan had not 
furnished the information on this issue so far. From the submissions of the State of 
Haryana, the Committee found that total Flood Plain Area of river Yamuna in Haryana 
is 24,406 acre (Karnal - 10960 acre, Panipat – 5100 acre and HKB Jagadhari – 8346 
acre) and there is no wetland and no encroachment along the river Yamuna. As per the 
State Government of Delhi, total area of the Zone ‘O’ (River Zone/ floodplains) is 9,700 
Ha. as per the MPD-2021. Out of this area, land available with DDA (inclusive of UP 
Irrigation Department land) for the restoration and rejuvenation works being carried out 
as per the directions of Hon’ble National Green Tribunal is 1675.10 Ha. Further, 
encroached Flood Plain area of river Yamuna is 161.95 Ha. (appx.) The total wetland 
area of river Yamuna in Delhi is 59.82 Ha. (appx.), however, there is no encroached 
wetland area of river Yamuna in Delhi. The Committee observed that despite 
challenges like litigation of lands and consistent resistance from Jhuggis/clusters 
located in Flood Plain Area, Delhi Development Authority (DDA) has retrieved 477.79 
Hectares area from the encroachments in the flood plains of river Yamuna. However, 
they note that some parts of Yamuna Floodplains are still encroached as the removal of 
encroachment in these areas is under litigation. While appreciating the steps taken for 
removing the encroachment from the floodplains of river Yamuna, the Committee urge 
the Department of Water Resources, River Development and 70 Ganga Rejuvenation 
to act in coordination with DDA in expediting the litigations to free the flood plains of 

3 
 
river Yamuna from encroachment and restore its original ecosystem. Further, in view of 
the fact that Uttarakhand, Himachal Pradesh, Uttar Pradesh and Rajasthan are yet to 
provide the information regarding encroachment of floodplains along the river Yamuna, 
the Committee recommend to the Department to persuade the above Yamuna basin 
States to furnish the relevant information as well as the measures taken by them for 
removing those encroachments in their respective States. The Committee would like to 
be apprised of the details of measures taken within three months of the presentation of 
this Report. 
 
7. The Department in its action taken note has replied as follows: 
 
“Reply/Comments on recommendation no. 1 was sought from Irrigation & Water 
Resources Department, Haryana, Irrigation & Water Resources Department, Uttar 
Pradesh, Uttarakhand Irrigation Department, Jal Shakti Vibhag, Himachal Pradesh, 
Water Resources Department, Rajasthan, Delhi Pollution Control Committee (DPCC) & 
Delhi Development Authority (DDA) vide email dated 22.02.2024. Further, the follow-up 
was done through reminders and phone calls. 
The reply did not receive from Jal Shakti Vibhag, Himachal Pradesh.  
Reply received from Uttarakhand Irrigation Department, vide email dated 
06.03.2024 is reproduced below: 
Survey work related to the Flood Plain Zoning of Yamuna River is going on presently 
and is to be completed by 30th June, 2024. After completing the survey and other study 
works related to floodplain zoning, information regarding encroachments and the 
floodplain area of Yamuna River shall be intimated accordingly.  
 
Reply received from Water Resources Department, Rajasthan vide email dated 
15.04.2024 is reproduced below: 
Chambal River is a tributary of the Yamuna River and there is no encroachment & 
wetland in the floodplain of Chambal River in the State. 
 
Reply received from Irrigation & Water Resources Department, Uttar Pradesh, 
vide email dated 02.05.2024 is reproduced below: 
The flood plain zone of Yamuna river in Uttar Pradesh has not been demarcated yet, 
though prima facía there is no encroachment on land owned by Irrigation and Water 
Resources Department, Uttar Pradesh.The total land owned by the Irrigation and Water 
Resources Department, Uttar Pradesh in the flood plain of Yamuna River in Delhi state 

4 
 
is 230 Ha, which is encroachment-free.The rejuvenation and wetland development 
work in the said land is being done by DDA.  
Reply received fromDelhi Development Authority (DDA), vide email dated 
29.05.2024 is reproduced below: 
Data pertaining to O Zone, land available with DDA for restoration and rejuvenation 
work, encroached area and Area re-possessed by DDA is 9,700 Ha. as per the Master 
Plan of Delhi (MPD)-2021. Out of this area, land available with DDA (inclusive of UP 
Irrigation& Water Resource Department land) for the restoration and rejuvenation works 
being carried out as per the directions of the Hon’ble National Green Tribunal is 
1675.10 Ha and the total wetland area of river Yamuna 59.82 Ha. (appx.). Further for 
the area which is under litigation in Yamuna Flood Plain, DDA will take appropriate 
action to re-possess the land as and when required as per the directives of Hon’ble 
Courts. 
Reply received from Irrigation & Water Resources Department, Haryana, vide 
email dated 31.05.2024 is reproduced below: 
Flood plain area of River Yamuna under the jurisdiction of YWS Sonipat is 9367 Acres. 
There are 2 nos. Dhani's is also situated in river Yamuna having an approximate area 
of 9 acres. Ownership of these Dhani’s is with inhabitants. 
Input from the National Mission for Clean (NMCG)  
A Committee vide Office memorandum dated 06.08.2023, with Chairman, Central 
Water Commission as its Chairman has been constituted for Joint Flood management 
study of river Yamuna for its reach between Hathnikund and Okhla barrage. The Scope 
of the study included; 
 
i. Detailed catchment representative rainfall analysis to compare the floods of the 
year 1978 and 2023 and other years as decided. 
ii. Estimation of 5, 10, 25, 50, 100 and 500-year return period floods at Hathnikund 
Barrage, Wazirabad Barrage, Delhi old railway bridge and Okhla Barrage. 
iii. Carrying capacity of the river between Hathnikund barrage and Okhla barrage. 
iv. Maximum water level at salient locations of the study river reach for 5, 10, 25, 50, 
and 100-year return period floods. 
v. Afflux of barrages, bridges, flood protection dykes and other structures in the 
study reach of the river 

5 
 
vi. 2D modelling and submergence area estimation for the reach of river Yamuna 
from 10 km upstream of Wazirabad barrage and up to 10 km downstream of 
Okhla barrage. 
vii. Identification of possible drainage congestion in Delhi in case of high spate of 
river Yamuna. 
viii. To review the utility of ITO barrage in the present context. 
ix. Examine the feasibility of some innovative measures like creating underground 
reservoirs for flood moderation in line with Tokyo model. 
x. Examine the feasibility of creation of storages for surplus flood water in the flood 
plains of Yamuna and thereafter identification of such sites. 
The Committee submitted its interim report in Jan, 2024 recommending, inter-alia, that 
(a) to operate ITO barrage with all gates open during floods in coordination with 
operation of Wazirabad barrage and Okhla barrage. It is also recommended that 
regular maintenance of all hydro-mechanical equipment of barrage to be conducted as 
per the operation and maintenance manual of the barrage/codal provisions; (b) Any 
temporary structure made to facilitate construction within the right of way of river 
should be dismantled and muck should be properly disposed away from the river 
bed/bank as soon as possible; & (c) Prima facie there is a need to raise the left and 
right embankment at locations identified by model study. However, Govt. of NCT of 
Delhi may conduct ground verification in this regard to identify the exact such locations, 
etc. 
Another Committee vide Office memorandum dated 05.09.2023 under the 
Chairmanship of Member (River Management), CWC for identification & delineation of 
Flood Plain Zones in River Yamuna for the stretches (i) from Asgarpur to Etawah and(ii) 
from Shahpur to Prayagraj has been formed. The Terms of Reference of the committee 
are: 
 
a) Identify the Floodplain zones of River Yamuna for the stretches (i) Asgarpur to 
Etawah and (ii) Shahpur to Prayagraj for return period 1 in 5 years, 1 in 25 years 
and 1 in 100 years respectively. 
b) Delineate the FloodPlain Zones for no development/ construction zone, regulatory 
zone and warning zone. 
c) The Committee may further form a technical core committee for data collection, 
floodplain delineation as per return period analysis and any other technical work 
required for the study. 

6 
 
d) The Committee may co-opt any other members, if required. 
e) Field visits may be undertaken as per requirement. 
f) Demarcation of the Floodplain Zone on ground will be done by the State 
Government 
The Committee, in its first meeting held on 11.12.2023, decided to delineate the FPZ 
for the entire reach from Asgarpur to Prayagraj. It was also decided to form a core 
group for the development of a model for this work with members from CWC, NRSC, 
NIH, and Irrigation Deptt, UP. The Group held its first meeting on 22.05.2024”. 
 
8. During the examination of the subject, ‘Review Of Upper Yamuna River 
Cleaning Project Upto Delhi And River Bed Management In Delhi’, the Committee 
had noted that only two Yamuna basin States namely Delhi and Haryana 
furnished the information regarding encroachment of floodplains/wetland area 
along the course of river Yamuna. However, the Department of Water Resources, 
River Development and Ganga Rejuvenation through their Action Taken Replies 
have apprised that the States of Uttarakhand, Uttar Pradesh, Delhi, Haryana and 
the National Mission for Clean Ganga (NMCG) have informed the status of 
encroachment along the course of river Yamuna and the steps having been/being 
taken in their respective States to remove that encroachment. Only, the reply 
from the Jal Shakti Vibhag of Himachal Pradesh is yet to be received. Further, the 
Irrigation and Water Resources Department, Uttar Pradesh has apprised that the 
floodplain zone of Yamuna river in Uttar Pradesh has not been demarcated. 
Considering the significant role played by the floodplains in the riverine 
ecosystem, the Committee once again urge the Department to persuade the State 
of Himachal Pradesh to furnish the relevant information regarding the 
encroachment of river in their State. Further, the State of Uttar Pradesh may also 
be requested by the Department to demarcate the flood plain zone of river 
Yamuna. 
 
B. River Bed Management in Delhi 
(Recommendation Para No. 5) (Para No. 2.5) 
 
9. The Committee observed that Delhi Irrigation & Flood Control department in 
collaboration with CSIR NEERI carried out sampling of river bed along the length of the 
river within Delhi to assess whether legacy sludge is getting deposited year after year in 

7 
 
the river bed and if so, the extent thereof. The team jointly collected sludge/ sediment 
samples from 8 different locations in the Yamuna River Bed during pre-monsoon (June 
2019) and post monsoon (October 2019) periods. Water samples were also collected 
from the middle of the river stream. All the sludge/sediment samples were analysed for 
different physico-chemical parameters (bulk density, porosity, water holding capacity & 
organic carbon) and metal contents (Cr, Fe, Cu, Pb, Mn, Ni, Zn, Co & Cd). The findings 
revealed that levels of metals viz. Cr, Fe, Cu, Pb, Ni, Zn were exceptionally high in the 
sludge samples collected from mid-stream of Yamuna river at Old Iron Bridge, Geeta 
Colony and Up-stream of DND Bridge in pre-monsoon. In the upstream of Old Iron 
Bridge (about 6 km), Najafgarh drain mixes, however, no such trend was observed in 
post-monsoon season, which indicates scouring during monsoon flows. Further, 
sediment in the Yamuna River stretch from Kudesia Ghat onwards till the Okhla 
Barrage is found to be heavily polluted with metal content (i.e. Cr, Cu, Pb, Ni, Zn, Fe, & 
Mn) when compared with United States Environment Protection Agency (USEPA) 
Sediment Quality Guideline Values, particularly during the pre-monsoon period. 
However, the levels decreased considerably during post-monsoon period. Furthermore, 
the study did not rule out the possibility of legacy sludge in deeper section of the River 
Bed as the samples were either collected from surface or 1 ft below the surface. 
Therefore, deep digging of sludge/sediment up to 5-6 ft at few select locations was 
recommended to further support any conclusion/decision regarding legacy sludge. 73 
The Committee, taking into account the excessive presence of heavy metals like lead, 
copper, zink, nickel, cadmium and chromium in the riverbed of Yamuna in Delhi which 
constitute a severe health hazard, recommended to the Department to actively explore 
the possibility of controlled dredging in the riverbed of Yamuna for removal of debris 
and heavy metals from the bottom of riverbed of Yamuna as their flushing out cannot 
be left to the vagaries of Monsoon. Besides, the Committee also desired that 
Department might work in close coordination with other Ministries and Departments for 
framing a proper system for disposal of such extracted sludge containing heavy metals 
so that they may not pose danger at and around the neighbouring sites where they are 
proposed to be disposed off. The Committee would like to be apprised of the steps 
taken by the Department in this regard. 
 
10. The Department in its action taken note has replied as follows: 
 

8 
 
“Reply/Comments on recommendation no. 5 was sought from Delhi Jal Board, Delhi 
Pollution Control Committee (DPCC) & Delhi Irrigation & Flood Control (I&FCD) vide 
email dated 22.02.2024. Further the follow-up was done through reminders and phone 
calls. 
The reply did not receive from Delhi Jal Board.  
Reply received from Irrigation & Flood Control, Delhi vide email dated 15.04.2024 
is reproduced below: 
When flood water released from Hathni Kund Barrage more than 1 lakh cusec. It acts 
as a flushing/ carries away the sludge deposit from the river Yamuna in the stretch 
between the Wazirabad barrage to Okhla barrage. 
Regarding deposition/ erosion of silt/ sand in the river bed is also covered in the scope 
of study given to CWPRS, Pune by this department, after the highest ever flood water 
level recorded at ORB i.e. 208.66 mtr on 11th July 2023.  
Reply received from Delhi Pollution Control Committee  vide email dated 
30.05.2024 is reproduced below: 
The matter of controlled dredging in the river bed of debris and heavy metals from the 
bottom of river bed pertains to DDA, IFCD, GNCTD & NMCG/ MOJ. 
If the dredged material contains heavy metals and exceeds the Concentration limits 
given under schedule-ll of the Hazardous and  Other Waste (Management & 
Transboundary Movement)Rules, 2016, then it is hazardous waste and requires to be 
disposed at the TSDF for Hazardous Waste at Bawana in Delhi. 
Input from National Mission for Clean (NMCG) 
A. For de-silting and de-sludging of Yamuna River a committee headed by Dr M A 
Chitale in its report- For Preparation of Guidelines for Works on De-siltation from 
Bhimgauda to Farakka submitted Feb, 2017 has highlighted following 
observations:- 
 
1. The large scale de-silting or dredging of rivers are not recommended; 
2. A technical institute may be entrusted to conduct the sediment budget, 
morphological and flood routing studies that would examine and confirm the 
necessity of the delisting of the reach under consideration; 
3. The dredging/ siltation/ mining activities may result into some adverse impacts, 
i.e – (a) river degradation; (b) bank erosion; (c) channel widening; (d) lowering 
of meter surface elevations in the river channel (e) lowering of water table 
elevation adjacent to the river (f) a reduction in the structural integrity of bridges 

9 
 
pipelines jetties barrages weirs foundation supporting high tension lines, 
existing bank protection works and other manmade structures and (g) a loss of 
environmental values resulting from (a) through (e). 
B. Since similar concerns have also been underlined by Irrigation Deptt in its letter 
submitted to NMCG, it was suggested by NMCG that Department of Irrigation, 
Uttar Pradesh may first carry out detailed study in order to understand the 
necessity of de-silting/ de-sludging along with their disposal plan and its probable 
impact on environmental values. In this regard, if felt necessary, technical 
assistance may be taken from Central Water Commission (CWC). 
C. NMCG has also requested the State Government to ensure proper Solid Waste 
Management in the cities, and screens/ bars may be installed on all drains to 
prevent the floating solid waste from entering the rivers”. 
 
11. Having taken note of the presence of heavy metals like lead, copper, zink, 
nickel, cadmium and chromium in the riverbed of Yamuna which pose a serious 
threat to the heath and ecosystem of the river, the Committee recommended that 
the Department explore the possibility of controlled dredging. The Department 
have through their Action Taken Replies furnished the submissions of various 
Departments of the Yamuna basin States. However, the Delhi Jal Board has not 
furnished its reply. Further, the NMCG in their reply has cited the observation of 
a Committee headed by Dr. MA Chitale which in their Report - For Preparation of 
Guidelines for Works on De-siltation from Bhimgauda to Farakka submitted in 
February 2017 did not recommend the large scale de-silting or dredging of rivers. 
Taking into account the replies of various Departments of Yamuna Basin States 
and deteriorating water quality of river Yamuna due to existence of heavy metals 
beyond permissible limits, the Committee reiterate that the Department may take 
pro-active steps at least for controlled dredging of the sludge which cannot be 
left to the vagaries of monsoon rains and whose continued presence may further 
decay the water quality of such an important river. 
 
C. Environmental Flow (E-Flow) 
(Recommendation Para No. 6) (Para No. 2.6) 
 
12. The Committee observed that as per MoU signed among the basin States of 
Upper Yamuna basin in 1994, a minimum flow in proportion to completion of upstream 

10 
 
storages going upto 10 cumec shall be maintained downstream of Tajewala and 
downstream of Okhla Headworks throughout the year from ecological considerations, 
as upstream storages are built up progressively in a phased manner. However, the said 
storages are yet to be built. The Committee noticed that Hon’ble NGT Principle Bench, 
New Delhi vide order dated 11-06-2015 directed that “State of Haryana shall release 10 
Cumec water directly into main stream of river Yamuna from Hathnikund Barrage and 
maintain e-flow of river till Wazirabad”. As per the water released data from Hathnikund 
Barrage and Okhla Barrage the minimum 10 Cumec (352 cucec) as stipulated in the 
MoU is being released downstream of Hathnikund Barrage and downstream of Okhla 
Barrage throughout the year”. The Committee were of the opinion that 10 cumecs of 
flow being released by the State of Haryana at Hathnikund during lean season is 
inadequate, most of which evaporates or percolates before it reaches Wazirabad during 
the lean season. In fact, there is almost NIL environmental flow available at 
downstream of Wazirabad Barrage during most of the period i.e. 9 out of 12 months in 
a year. Environmental flow is only available during monsoon period of 03 months i.e., 
July- September. Further, E-flow of 23 cumecs in the lean season has been 74 
recommended by the National Institute of Hydrology (NIH) in its study report submitted 
to NMCG/ Ministry of Jal Shakti. However, the recommendations of the report could not 
be accepted as there are differences among Yamuna basin States on e-flow 
assessment recommended by NIH. Besides, the Committee also noted the written 
submission of the Department which clearly states that even if Delhi Jal Board (DJB) 
treats the entire sewage generated in Delhi upto BOD of 10 mg/l desired water quality 
of BOD less than 3 mg/l & DO more than 5 mg/l may not be achieved in river Yamuna 
due to unavailability of fresh water in the river downstream of Wazirabad. In this regard, 
the Committee took cognizance of the definition of International Union for Conservation 
of Nature (IUCN) (2003) which defines “E-flows as the water regime provided within a 
river, wetland or coastal zone to maintain ecosystems and their benefits where there 
are competing water uses and where flows are regulated”. Keeping in view the 
importance of minimum flow for sustenance of river ecosystem, the Committee 
recommended to the Department to make concerted efforts to evolve consensus 
among the Yamuna basin States to maintain E-flow of 23 cusecs in the lean season as 
recommended by the NIH. They would also like to be apprised of the reasons for 
disagreement among States regarding stipulation of a minimum E flow, so necessary 
for maintaining health of the river. 
 

11 
 
13. The Department in its action taken note has replied as follows: 
 
“Reply/Comments on recommendation no. 6 was sought from Upper Yamuna River 
Board (UYRB) and Central Water Commission (CWC) vide email dated 22.02.2024. 
Further, the follow-up was done through reminders and phone calls. 
Reply received from Central Water Commission vide email dated 03.04.2024 is 
reproduced below: 
No specific information is available in CWC. Further, CWC is presently doing the e-flow 
monitoring for 11 Hydro-Electric Projects situated in the Upper Ganga River Basin 
starting from originating glaciers and through respective confluences of its head 
tributaries finally meeting at Devprayag up to Haridwar and the main stem of Ganga up 
to Unnao district of Uttar Pradesh. 
Reply received from Upper Yamuna River Board vide email dated 21.05.2024 is 
reproduced below: 
As per the MoU of 1994 among the basin States, a minimum flow in proportion to 
completion of upstream storages going upto 10 cumec is to be maintained downstream 
of Tajewala and downstream of Okhla Head works throughout the year from ecological 
considerations. Later, Hon'ble NGT Principal Bench, New Delhi vide order dated 11-06-
2015 directed that "State of Haryana shall  release 10 Cumec water directly into the 
main stream of river Yamuna from Hathnikund Barrage and maintain e-flow of river till 
Wazirabad". As per the discharge data submitted by Government of Haryana, theflow 
of 10 cumecs is being maintained d/s of Hathnikund Barrage.The matter related to the 
E-flow study by NIH has not been dealt with in UYRB. However, the MoU of 1994 could 
be reviewed after the year 2025, if any of the Basin States so demand. The provision 
for e-flow as decided by the competent Authority over and above the current provision 
could be considered then. 
Reply from Haryana Irrigation Department is yet to be received: 
An e-mail dated 10.06.2024 has been sent to Haryana Irrigation Department and their 
reply is yet to be received. 
Input from NMCG 
As per MoU of 1994 on sharing of surface water flows among upper Yamuna basin 
States, a minimum flow of 10 cumecs will be maintained from ecological considerations 
downstream of Hathinikund and Okhla barrages. Further, this arrangement is open for 
review after 2025, if any of the Basin States demand. The Government of Haryana in 
Dec, 2020 (vide DO letter enclosed at Annexure-3) expressed that before the revision 

12 
 
of this MOU which is due only after 2025, it is absolutely unwarranted to reopen this 
issue of e-flow”.  
14. Having observed that there is almost nil environmental flow available at 
downstream of Wazirabad Barrage during 9 out of 12 months in a year, the 
Committee in its 27th Report (17th Lok Sabha) recommended that the Department 
make concerted efforts to evolve consensus among the Yamuna basin States to 
maintain E-flow of 23 cusecs in the lean season as recommended by the National 
Institute of Hydrology. The Department have now apprised the Committee that 
the reply from the Haryana Irrigation Department has not been received in this 
regard so far. However, the Government of Haryana in December 2020 vide its 
DO letter (Annexure 3) expressed that before the revision of MoU of 1994 which 
is due only after 2025, it is absolutely unwarranted to reopen this issue of e-flow. 
As per MoU of 1994 among the Yamuna Basin States on sharing of surface water 
flows among upper Yamuna basin States, a minimum flow of 10 cumecs will be 
maintained from ecological considerations downstream of Hathinikund and 
Okhla barrages. Further, this arrangement is open for review after 2025, if any of 
the Basin States demand. In view of the written submission of the Department 
during the examination of the subject ‘Review Of Upper Yamuna River Cleaning 
Project Upto Delhi and River Bed Management In Delhi’, which clearly stated that 
even if Delhi Jal Board (DJB) treats the entire sewage generated in Delhi upto 
Biochemical Oxygen Demand (BOD) of 10 mg/l desired water quality of BOD less 
than 3 mg/l & Dissolved Oxygen (DO) more than 5 mg/l may not be achieved in 
river Yamuna due to unavailability of fresh water in the river downstream of 
Wazirabad and importance of minium flow for sustenance of river ecosystem, the 
Committee reiterate that the Department take all the necessary steps to persuade 
all Yamuna basin States to maintain sufficient amount of e-flow for the overall 
health of the river. 
 
D. Water Quality of river Yamuna 
(Recommendation Para No. 7) (Para No. 2.7) 
 
15. The Committee learnt from the deposition of the representative of the National 
Mission for Clean Ganga (NMCG) that the river Yamuna has been categorized into 
three parts viz. the part from Yamunotri to HathniKund Barriage may be considered as 
unpolluted stretch, the part from HathniKund Barriage to Palla is moderately polluted, 

13 
 
however, the part from Palla to Okhla, basically the Delhi stretch is severely polluted. 
Further, as per the Primary Water Quality Criteria for organized outdoor bathing, the 
Dissolved Oxygen (DO) is specified as 5 mg/l or more, the Biochemical Oxygen 
Demand (BOD) is specified as 3 mg/l or less and Fecal Coliform (FC) is specified as 
less than 2500 MPN/100 ml. The Committee noted that river Yamuna enters in Delhi at 
Palla from Haryana and exits Delhi to enter Uttar Pradesh at Asgarpur which 
approximately is a 40 km stretch. Water quality assessment of river Yamuna is carried 
out by CPCB at 33 locations, under NWMP in association with SPCBs of Uttarakhand 
(04 75 locations), Himachal Pradesh (04 locations), Haryana (06 locations), Delhi (07 
locations) and Uttar Pradesh (12 locations). The water quality data of monitored 33 
locations during January, 2021 – May, 2023 was analyzed for 4 parameters viz., 
Dissolved Oxygen (DO), pH, Biochemical Oxygen Demand (BOD) and Fecal Coliform 
(FC). The results were compared with the Primary Water Quality Criteria for Outdoor 
Bathing (PWQC) notified by Ministry of Environment, Forest & Climate Change under 
the Environment (Protection) Rules, 1986. The analysis revealed that: a. All the 04 
monitored locations each in Uttarakhand and Himachal Pradesh are complying while all 
the 06 monitored locations are non-complying with the criteria in Haryana. b. All the 07 
monitored locations in Delhi were non-complying with the criteria during 2021. 06 
locations were non-complying except at Palla (entry point of Delhi) which is observed 
complying during 2022 & 2023. c. Out of 12 monitored locations in Uttar Pradesh, 11 
are observed non complying during 2021- 2023. One location at Prayagraj D/s 
(BaluaGhat) was observed complying with the criteria during the years. d. Overall, out 
of 33 locations on river Yamuna, 10 locations (04 in Uttarakhand, 04 in Himachal 
Pradesh, 01 in Delhi & 01 in Uttar Pradesh) are complying during 2021- 2023. 
Remaining 23 locations are non-complying (06 in Haryana, 06 in Delhi and 11 in Uttar 
Pradesh). e. Highest concentration of BOD & maximum FC observed in Haryana is 30 
mg/L and 16000000 MPN/ 100 ml respectively during 2021 at Rahimpurka Nagla, Near 
Flyover Bridge (Mazawali). f. Highest concentration of BOD observed in Delhi is 83 
mg/L at Asgarpur after meeting of Shahdara drain and Tughlakabad drain during both 
2021 & 2022. Maximum FC observed is 22000000 MPN/ 100 ml during 2021 at 
Asgarpur after meeting of Shahdara drain and Tughlakabad drain. g. Highest 
concentration of BOD & maximum FC observed in Uttar Pradesh is 36 mg/L and 
920000 MPN/ 100 ml respectively during 2021 at Mathura d/s near ShamshanGhat. 
Further, the Committee found from the submission of the Department that the 76 water 
of river Yamuna in Delhi is not fit for bathing. Besides, the Committee also took 

14 
 
cognizance of the deposition of the representative of the NMCG who apprised them 
that the Dissolved Oxygen (DO), which indicates whether the river is alive or not, is 
virtually non-existent in Delhi. The Dissolved Oxygen (DO) recovers only after 
confluence with river Chambal at Etawah. Water quality of river Yamuna meets the 
criteria at location Prayagraj d/s BaluaGhat w.r.t the PWQC in terms of all parameters. 
The Committee while observing the critical situation of river Yamuna due to 
deteriorating water quality parameters called for urgent, lucid and coordinated response 
from all the stakeholders in order to abate pollution and conserve it for posterity. 
 
16. The Department in its action taken note has replied as follows: 
 
“Reply/Comments on recommendation no. 7 was sought from Central Pollution Control 
Board (CPCB) & Delhi Pollution Control Committee (DPCC) vide email dated 
22.02.2024. Further the follow-up was done through reminders and phone calls. 
Reply received from Central Pollution Control Board vide email dated 08.03.2024 
is reproduced below: 
Implementation of Action plans for abatement of river Yamuna pollution and creation of 
infra-structure are being taken by the Delhi Jal Board and concerned State agencies. 
The review of implementation of action plans for abatement of river Yamuna pollution is 
being taken up on regular basis by the High Level Committee (HLC) constituted by 
Hon’ble NGT during January 2023 in OA No. 21 / 2023 entitled “Ashwani Yadav versus 
Government of NCT of Delhi” on 09.01.2023 under the Chairmanship of Chief 
Secretary, Government of Delhi.  
Reply received from Delhi Pollution Control Committee  vide email dated 
30.05.2024 is reproduced below: 
DPCC Laboratory carries out water quality monitoring of River Yamuna at 08 locations 
on monthly basis and Analysis Reports are placed on the website of DPCC. Copy of 
the Analysis Reports (Water Quality Status of River Yamuna) for the months of 
January, February, March & April, 2024 are collectively enclosed at Annexure -4. Vide 
order dated 09.01.2023 in OA. No. 21/2023 in the matter of Ashwani Yadav Vs. 
Government of NCT of Delhi (Now being dealt in O.A, No, 06 of 2012 in the matter of 
Nizamuddin West Association Vs. Union of India and Ors"), Hon'ble NGT has 
constituted a High Level Committee (HLC) of concerned authorities in Delhi with the 
Chief Secretary, Delhi, Convener; and consisting of Secretaries / HODs of various 
Ministries/ Departments. 

15 
 
"The HLC is to deal with all issues as set out in order dated 27.01.2021 of Hon'ble NGT 
in OA No. 06/2012 in the matter of Manoj Mishra Vs. Union of India & Ors and other 
ancillary matters. “ 
High Level Committee has prepared a Department wise detailed Action Plan for 
Rejuvenation of river Yamuna including Nodal Officers for each project after its first 
meeting on 20.01.2023 and submitted to Hon'ble NGT on 31.01.2023. 
 
Nine meetings of High Level Committee have been held so far on 
20.01.2023,14.02.2023, 14.03.2023, 21.04.2023, 09.06. 2023,10.08.2023, 10.10.2023, 
10.01.2024 & 20.02.2024 and progress of various projects & action points were 
reviewed by HLC in the said meetings. 
Status Reports were also filed in the aforementioned matter before the Hon'ble NGT on 
31.01.2023,05.07.2023, 16.10. 2023, 21.12.2023 & 12.02.2024 
Reply from National Mission for Clean (NMCG) 
Yamuna is one of the sacred rivers of India and largest tributary of Ganga River. It 
originates from the Yamunotri glacier in Uttarakhand passing through Himachal 
Pradesh, Tajewala-Haryana, Wazirabad-Delhi, Okhla-Delhi, Okhla barrage to 
Confluence Point of Chambal River and finally merges into River Ganga at Prayagraj. 
The total length of the Yamuna up to its point of confluence with the Ganga at 
Prayagraj is 1376 km with catchment area spread over 3.67 lakh sq. km. 
Yamuna River has no fresh water after Wajirabad barrage in Delhi. There is a critical 
path of 22 km where 22 major drains are discharging into River Yamuna. Only after 
confluence of River Chambal, the water quality of River Yamuna improves. 
The Government of India is supplementing the efforts of the States for improvement of 
water quality parameters of River Yamuna by providing financial assistance to different 
States of India viz. Haryana, Delhi and Uttar Pradesh, in phased manner since 1993, 
under the Yamuna Action Plan (YAP I, II & III). Under the YAP Phase – I & II, an 
expenditure of Rs. 1514.70 crore has been incurred for creation of sewage treatment 
capacity of 942 MLD and rehabilitation of 328 MLD STP in States of Haryana, Delhi & 
Uttar Pradesh. 
Presently, Government of India/NMCG has sanctioned Total 34 projects costing Rs. 
5834.71 crore by which 2110.25 MLD STP capacity will be created. They comprise of 
(01) project in Himachal Pradesh, (02) projects in Haryana, (11) projects in Delhi and 
(20) projects in Uttar Pradesh, under Namami Gange programme to abate pollution 
load to river Yamuna & Hindon River. Out of these 34 projects, 15 are already 

16 
 
completed, viz. one (01) project in Paonta Sahib, Himachal Pradesh, two (02) projects 
in Sonipat and Panipat, Haryana, six (06) projects in Vrindavan, Etawah, Firozabad, 
Baghpat and Mathura (STP & CETP), UP and six (06) projects in Delhi. The State wise 
project details are enclosed at Annexure- 5 of Himachal Pradesh which makes a total 
of 34 projects costing Rs. 5834.71 crore by which 2110.25 MLD STP capacity will be 
created. 
In addition to the above there are certain sewage treatment projects which are in under-
construction and certain more projects which are in tendering stage. Additionally, 
sewage treatment capacities are also being built by the State Governments. A 
wholesome picture of the sewage treatment capacities being built in States is reflected 
in the MPR submitted by the State Government to National Green Tribunal (NGT). 
Based on the sewage generation indicated in this MPR, the sewage treatment project 
capacities being built under NMCG (including competed, under-construction and under-
tendering projects), sewage treatment capacities created by the State Government, a 
state-wise sewage treatment gap has been esimated and a cumulative effective 
sewage treatment gap of 1500 MLD has been assessed.  
A Central Monitoring Committtee under the Chairmanship of Secrtary, DoWR, RD&GR 
has also been formed with representation from all State Governments to closely 
monitor the sewage treatment gap and enable co-ordinated efforts for closing this gap”. 
 
17. The Committee while examining the subject ‘Review Of Upper Yamuna 
River Cleaning Project Upto Delhi And River Bed Management In Delhi’ took 
cognizance of the submission of the representative of the NMCG that the 
Dissolved Oxygen (DO) which indicates whether the river is alive or not is 
virtually non-existent in Delhi. Hence, the Committee called for urgent, lucid and 
coordinated response from all the stakeholders in order to abate pollution. The 
Department now through Action Taken Replies have furnished the steps taken by 
different Agencies and Departments to improve the various water quality 
parameters. While welcoming the formation of a Central Monitoring Committee 
under the Chairmanship of Secretary, Department of Water Resources, River 
Development and Ganga Rejuvenation with representation from all State 
Governments to closely monitor the sewage treatment gap and enable co-
ordinated efforts for closing this gap, the Committee hope that all the agencies 
and States will work in close coordination to enhance the water quality of river 
Yamuna which is the largest tributary of Ganga river. 

17 
 
 
E. Impact of Pollution on the ecology of Yamuna 
(Recommendation Para No. 8) (Para No. 2.8) 
 
18. The Committee noted that though no study had been conducted to assess the 
damage to ecology of Yamuna and the fish environment, however, river Yamuna in 
Delhi is not meeting the prescribed parameters regarding healthy fish environment in 
the stretch between downstream of Wazirabad Barrage after meeting Najafgarh Drain 
to Asgarpur Village. The Committee noted that for healthy sustenance of life, minimum 
DO requirement is >4 mg/l (Designated Best Use Water Quality Criteria- Class D: 
Propagation of Wild life and Fisheries) is generally observed NIL in Delhi stretch of river 
Yamuna except at Palla. Further, incidents of dead fishes and shoals of dead fish 
washed ashore on the banks of river Yamuna in Agra have been reported a few times. 
The Committee desired that the Department of Water Resources, River Development 
and Ganga Rejuvenation in coordination with the Ministry of Environment, Forest and 
Climate Change undertake a study to assess the damage done to the ecology of river 
Yamuna and the fish environment. The Committee felt that such a study would present 
a true picture before the policy makers and would be of great significance in formulating 
the appropriate steps required to be taken to conserve ecology of the river. 
 
19. The Department in its action taken note has replied as follows: 
“Reply/Comments on recommendation no. 8 was sought from Haryana State Pollution 
Control Board, Delhi Pollution Control Committee (DPCC) & CPCB vide email dated 
22.02.2024. Further the follow-up was done through reminders and phone calls.  
Reply received from Central Pollution Control Board vide email dated 
08.03.2024is reproduced below: 
The status of restore and rejuvenate the floodplains of River Yamuna by DDA may be 
obtained from DDA. 
CPCB issued directions on 02.01.2023 to State Pollution Control Boards (SPCBs) of 
Delhi-NCT and Haryana regarding augmentation and upgradation of CETPS and 
display of OCEMS data by CETPs located in Delhi and Haryana. The details of 
directions are: 
● To take necessary action against the non-complying CETPs in the state 
● To prepare and submission of action plan for upgradation /augmentation of 
identified CETPs situated in the state. 

18 
 
● Mandatory to display of OCEMS data of each individual CETP in a conspicuous 
location. 
Reply received from Uttar Pradesh Pollution Control Board vide email dated 
29.05.2024 is reproduced below: 
Monitoring water quality of River Yamuna at 22 sampling Locations under Critically 
polluted river stretches in the State Uttar Pradesh. Out of 22, three sampling points 
are located in the Agra district which are U/s Kailash ghat, U/s water works & D/s Taj 
mahal. The water quality monitoring data obtained in the year 2021, 2022 & 2023 are 
attached as Annexure-6. 
 
Input from National Mission for Clean (NMCG) 
The water quality monitoring of River Yamuna being carried out by Delhi Pollution 
Control Committee (DPCC), there is improvement in quality in terms of BOD when 
compared from monitoring data of 2022 and 2023: 
 
TABLE 1:  BOD MONITORING DATA OF 2022 AND 2023 
 December 2022 December 2023 
ISBT 46 mg/l 35 mg/l (24% reduction) 
Asgarpur 73 mg/l 51 mg/l (30% reduction) 
 
The Water Quality Trend of River Yamuna for 2022 and 2023 is enclosed at     
Annexure- 7. So far, no such study on ecological assessment has been conducted on 
river Yamuna in the National Capital Territory (the stretch between downstream of 
Wazirabad Barrage after meeting Najafgarh Drain to Asgarpur Village) under the 
Namami Gange Programme (NGP), yet. 
The initiatives for pollution abatement through tapping of sewage drains, are being 
implemented under the Namami Gange Programme in Delhi region and on completion 
it may help in improvement of water quality vis a vis aquatic life. 
Presence of biological organisms in river water is also considered as an indicator of 
river water quality/ecology and the assessment of these biological organisms is referred 
to as Bio-monitoring. Bio-monitoring of River Ganga and River Yamuna was carried out 
during FY 2023-24 in 2 phases: (i) Pre-monsoon period-  April – June and (ii) Post-
monsoon period- November – March.  In this regard, in River Ganga, a total of 42 
locations from Gangotri,Uttarakhand to Garden Reach, West Bengal and in River 

19 
 
Yamuna, a total of 26 locations from Yamunotri, Uttarakhand to Prayagraj, Uttar 
Pradesh have been identified. 
Biomonitoring: 
a) River Yamuna originates from Yamunotri Glacier of Uttarkashi and traverses 
through states of Uttarakhand, Himachal Pradesh, Haryana, Delhi and Uttar 
Pradesh travelling to a total distance of 1376kms before confluencing with the 
river Ganges at Prayagraj, Allahabad. River Yamuna being the longest and the 
largest (by volume) tributary of river Ganga. 
b) Biomonitoring is one of the tool for assessing the long term biological quality of 
water of river Ganga and Yamuna. Benthic macro-invertebrates are referred to 
assess the biological health of water bodies as these being ubiquitous, abundant 
in aquatic ecosystem, have wide range of pollution tolerance amongst various 
families and also these are good integrators of environmental conditions. These 
organisms are used to derive Saprobic Score for Biological water quality 
assessment which is based on Biological Monitoring Working Party (BMWP) 
scoring chart. Based on the saprobic values, the surface water bodies are 
classified in different Biological Water Quality Class (BWQC) that ranges from 
Very Good to Severe. 
c) CPCB is assessing the biological health of river Yamuna since 2019 and To 
assess the seasonal variation in terms of water quality, monitoring is performed 
twice in a year viz. pre- and post – monsoon. Pre-monsoon phase of monitoring is 
carried out during April to June and post-monsoon from November to February. 
d) Biomonitoring of river Yamuna has been carried out in the Haryana, Delhi, and 
Uttar Pradesh i.e., in the stretch from Panipat (Haryana) to Prayagraj (Uttar 
Pradesh) covering 13 locations (04 Location in Haryana; 02 Locations in Delhi; 
and 07 Locations in Uttar Pradesh) to assess the biological water quality using 
benthic macro-invertebrates. 
 
TABLE 2:BIOLOGICAL WATER QUALITY CRITERIA 
Saprobic Score Biological Water Quality 
Class 
Saprobic Score 
7.0 to 10.0 Very Good 7.0 to 10.0 
5.0 to 6.9 Good 5.0 to 6.9 
3.0 to 4.9 Moderate 3.0 to 4.9 
1.1 to 2.9 Poor 1.1 to 2.9 
1.0 Severe 1.0 

 
 Based on monitoring data, the major observations are as follows:River Yamuna (First Round)● In Uttarakhand Stretch from Yamunotri to Dak Pathar the BWQ was found to be in ‘Good’ class. ● In Haryana stretch, Panipat U/S & Sonepat were in ‘Good’ class and Panipat D/S & Palwal were in ‘Moderate’ class.● In Delhi stretch, the BWQ was found in ‘Moderate class at all the three locations (Palla, Nizamuddin and Okhla D/S)● In Uttar Pradesh stretch, froPrayagraj, the BWQ of River Yamuna in the upper stretch till Etawah was in Moderate class and lower stretch (from Auraiya to Prayagraj D/S) was in ‘Good’ class.     River Yamuna (Second Round)● In Uttarkhand, stretch from Yamunotri to Dak Pathar the BWQ was in ‘Very Good’ class. ● At Paonta Sahib, in Himachal Pradesh the BWQ was in ‘Good’ class.● In the Haryana stretch, from Kalanour, Panipat U/S & D/S the BWQ was ‘moderate’ class and at Hathni kund, Sonepat● In Delhi, the BWQ was in Moderate class (Palla and Nizamuddin).● From Mathura U/S to confluence with River Ganga at Prayagraj, the BWQ from Mathura U/S to Etawah, was in Moderate class and from Auraiya to its confluence point the BWQ was in ‘Good’ class except at Hamirpur where it was in moderate class” FIGURE 1: S
6.86.65.46.15.37.37.176.95.35.14.9Saprobic Score20 
Based on monitoring data, the major observations are as follows: River Yamuna (First Round) In Uttarakhand Stretch from Yamunotri to Dak Pathar the BWQ was found to be in Haryana stretch, Panipat U/S & Sonepat were in ‘Good’ class and Panipat D/S & Palwal were in ‘Moderate’ class. In Delhi stretch, the BWQ was found in ‘Moderate class at all the three locations (Palla, Nizamuddin and Okhla D/S) In Uttar Pradesh stretch, from Mathura U/S till its confluence with River Ganga at Prayagraj, the BWQ of River Yamuna in the upper stretch till Etawah was in Moderate class and lower stretch (from Auraiya to Prayagraj D/S) was in ‘Good’ River Yamuna (Second Round) hand, stretch from Yamunotri to Dak Pathar the BWQ was in ‘Very Good’ At Paonta Sahib, in Himachal Pradesh the BWQ was in ‘Good’ class.In the Haryana stretch, from Kalanour, Panipat U/S & D/S the BWQ was ‘moderate’ class and at Hathni kund, Sonepat and Palwal was in ‘Good’ class.In Delhi, the BWQ was in Moderate class (Palla and Nizamuddin). From Mathura U/S to confluence with River Ganga at Prayagraj, the BWQ from Mathura U/S to Etawah, was in Moderate class and from Auraiya to its confluence point the BWQ was in ‘Good’ class except at Hamirpur where it was in moderate SAPROBIC SCORE AT LOCATIONS OF RIVER YAMUNA 
5.34.354.74.13.54.44.44.343.64.9 4.954.84.35.14.7454.24.54.84.74.24.85.2Locations
First Round
Second Round
In Uttarakhand Stretch from Yamunotri to Dak Pathar the BWQ was found to be in Haryana stretch, Panipat U/S & Sonepat were in ‘Good’ class and Panipat D/S & In Delhi stretch, the BWQ was found in ‘Moderate class at all the three locations m Mathura U/S till its confluence with River Ganga at Prayagraj, the BWQ of River Yamuna in the upper stretch till Etawah was in Moderate class and lower stretch (from Auraiya to Prayagraj D/S) was in ‘Good’ hand, stretch from Yamunotri to Dak Pathar the BWQ was in ‘Very Good’ At Paonta Sahib, in Himachal Pradesh the BWQ was in ‘Good’ class. In the Haryana stretch, from Kalanour, Panipat U/S & D/S the BWQ was ‘moderate’ and Palwal was in ‘Good’ class.  From Mathura U/S to confluence with River Ganga at Prayagraj, the BWQ from Mathura U/S to Etawah, was in Moderate class and from Auraiya to its confluence point the BWQ was in ‘Good’ class except at Hamirpur where it was in moderate  
5.15.25.3 5.35.65.24.85.15 5.45.1

21 
 
*Bio-monitoring could not be conducted due to early onset of monsoon 
**Sufficient number of Benthic macro-invertebrates were not collected 
 
20. Having taken note of the fact that no study has been conducted to assess 
the damage to ecology of river Yamuna and the fish environment, the Committee 
in its 27th Report (17th Lok Sabha) recommended to commission such a study. 
However, the Committee note from the Action Taken Replies of the Department 
that so far, no such study on ecological assessment has been conducted on river 
Yamuna in the National Capital Territory (the stretch between downstream of 
Wazirabad Barrage afer meeting Najafgarh Drain to Asgarpur Village) under the 
Namami Gange Programme (NGP), yet. In view of the fact that for healthy 
sustenance of life, minimum DO requirement is > 4mg/l (Designated Best Use 
Water Quality Criteria – Class D: Propagation of Wild life and Fisheries) is 
generally observed ‘Nil’ in Delhi stretch of river Yamuna except Palla, the 
Committee once again reiterate that the Department in coordination with the 
Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change undertake such an 
ecological study which will be of great help in formulating the appropriate steps 
required to be taken to preserve ecology of river.   
 
F. Need to assess the number of unauthorized industries operating in Delhi 
(Recommendation Para No.  10) (Para No. 2.10) 
 
21. Further, the Committee also noted that as per the information of DPCC, there 
was no data available on total number of unauthorized industries operating in Delhi. 
Considering the role of industrial effluents in polluting the river, the Committee desired 
that the Department may persuade the State of Delhi to carry out a study to assess the 
number of unauthorized industries operating in Delhi so that necessary arrangements 
may be made for regulating these industries and treating the industrial effluents 
generated from these industries. 
22. The Department in its action taken note has replied as follows: 
 
“Reply/Comments on recommendation no. 10 was sought from Municipal Corporation 
of Delhi, Delhi Pollution Control Committee (DPCC) & Delhi State Industrial and 
Infrastructure Development Corporation (DSIIDC) vide email dated 22.02.2024. Further 
the follow-up was done through reminders and phone calls. 
The reply did not receive from Municipal Corporation of Delhi.  

22 
 
Reply received from Delhi State Industrial and Infrastructure Development 
Corporation vide email dated 10.05.2024is reproduced below: 
Industries Department/DSIIDC only looks after the issues related to 28 approved 
industrial areas in Delhi, out of which, 17 approved industrial areas are already 
connected to 13 Common Effluent Treatment Plants (CETPs). The remaining 11 
approved industrial areas do not have CETPs as they are not water-polluting industrial 
areas. 
Reply from National Mission for Clean (NMCG) 
An Office Memorandum dated 03.06.2024 is sent to the Chief Secretary, Government 
of NCT of Delhi is sent to direct the DSIIDC department to take necessary action in this 
regard”. 
 
23. Considering the role of industrial effluents in polluting the river, the 
Committee in its 27th Report (17th Lok Sabha) urged upon the Department to 
persuade the State of Delhi to carry out a study to assess the number of 
unauthorized industries operating in Delhi so that necessary arrangements may 
be made for regulating these industries and treating the industrial effluents 
generated from these industries. However, the Committee observe from the 
Action Taken Replies of the Department, that the response from the Municipal 
Corporation of Delhi has not been received. It is also observed that an Office 
Memorandum dated 03.06.2024 was sent to the Chief Secretary, Government of 
NCT of Delhi, to direct the Delhi State Industrial and Infrastructure Development 
Corporation (DSIIDC) to take necessary action in this regard. DSIIDC has 
furnished that it only looks after the issues related to 28 approved industrial 
areas in Delhi, out of which, 17 approved industrial areas are already connected 
to 13 Common Effluent Treatment Plants (CETPs). The remaining 11 approved 
industrial areas do not have CETPs as they are not water-polluting industrial 
areas. Having taken note of the fact that no data furnished on the total number of 
unauthorized industries operating in Delhi, the Committee once again desire that 
a study in this regard may be commissioned to assess the number of 
unauthorized industries functioning in Delhi so that comprehensive steps may be 
taken to combat the effluents discharged from these units and proactively 
decrease pollution of the river. 
 
 

23 
 
G. Need to check pollution arising from cremation process 
(Recommendation Para No. 17) (Para No. 2.17) 
 
24. The Committee observed that there was no study available to show as to what 
extent the existing cremation process is responsible for pollution in Yamuna river. 
However, they noted that only Nigam Bodh crematorium is situated on the bank of 
Yamuna in the area of North Delhi Municipal Corporation, in which 6 CNG furnaces, 6 
Moksha Dah furnaces and about 90 open platform facilities are available for the rites. In 
order to reduce pollution in river Yamuna, the Committee urged the Department to 
explore ways including providing financial assistance to the States to establish 
electric/CNG furnaces. Besides, the Department with the concerned Yamuna basin 
States needed to find ways to discourage rituals on the pyres built on the banks of 
Yamuna and if possible shift the cremation sites away from the immediate periphery of 
the banks of Yamuna in order to prevent contamination of river water. 
 
25. The Department in its action taken note has replied as follows: 
“Reply/Comments on recommendation no. 17 was sought from HP Pollution Control 
Board, UK Pollution Control Board, U.P Pollution Control Board, CPCB, and Municipal 
Corporation of Delhi vide email dated 22.02.2024. Further the follow-up was done 
through reminders and phone calls. 
 
The reply did not receive from Municipal Corporation of Delhi.  
Reply received from Himachal Pradesh Pollution Control Board vide email dated 
11.03.2024 is reproduced below: 
No electric/CNG furnace has been established till date. Existing cremation process in 
MC limits is carried out through pyres built on crematorium under a shed. No proposal 
regarding electric/CNG furnaces has been submitted till date by Municipal Committee 
Paonta Sahib. 
Reply received from Uttarakhand Pollution Control Board vide email dated 
02.05.2024 is reproduced below: 
There is no pollution reported in the river Yamuna due to cremation in the State of 
Uttarakhand. Water quality of river Yamuna 07 locations is found under category- 'A' of 
the Designated Best Use Water Quality Criteria and water quality of following 04 
locations fall under category 'B' of the DBU category. 
Reply received from Central Pollution Control Board vide email dated 08.03.2024 
is reproduced below: 

24 
 
There is no specific study carried out with respect to Yamuna. The study carried out by 
CPCB i.e. Environmental Management of Crematorium of Bhopal city using cow dung 
wood as alternative fuel, recommended the following to manage the solid waste from 
crematoriums. The report is available in the following 
link:https://cpcb.nic.in/zobhopal/Project_Report_RDBhopal_3.pdf. 
 
TABLE 3: ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT OF CREMATORIUM 
Sl. No. Materials Management 
1. Cremated bones Shall be handed over to relatives, if not collected by relatives on 
time stored in tinned box with full details in a designate room 
by the management and on yearly basis disposed of in river. 
2. Ash Shall be handed over to relatives, if not collected by them or in 
case of non-claimed bodies disposed in low lying areas of 
crematorium 
3. Bamboo Shall be used by crematorium management for making plant 
protective guard, taken by working people for their use making 
huts, fence etc. 
4 Flower/ Straw Shall be collected separately from other non-degradable wastes, 
shall be treated as wet waste and send to Municipal Solid Waste 
facility for wet waste, shall install a bio—digester / composter/ 
compost pit for large sized crematoriums. 
5 Clothes Shall be donated to needy ones 
6 Utensils Shall be donated to needy people 
7 Mud pots Shall be crushed and disposed in low lying areas 
8 Metals/ 
Ornaments 
Shall be occupied by the poor people or shall be donated to the 
needy ones 
9 Plastic waste Shall be collected separately and is to be collected by Nagar 
Nigam authority 
10 Glass materials Shall be collected separately and is to be collected by Nagar 
Nigam authority 
11 Food materials Shall be collected separately from other non- degradable wastes, 
shall be treated as wet waste and send to Municipal Solid Waste 
facility for wet waste, shall install a bio—digester/ composter/ 
compost pit for large sized crematoriums 
12 Rope (Kalawa) Shall be used to prepare and tie up the plant protective guards at 
crematorium 
13 Hairs Shall be collected separately and disposed off accordingly, shall 
be collected and can be used for amino acid preparation. More 
effective ways for utilizing human hairs shall be explored. 
 
Reply received from Uttar Pradesh Pollution Control Board vide email dated 
29.05.2024 is reproduced below: 

25 
 
The issue regarding construction of electric crematorium facilities, its commissioning 
and operation is related to the Urban Development Department. Hence, this information 
may be sought from the Urban Development Department”. 
 
26. The Committee during the examination of the subject ‘Review Of Upper 
Yamuna River Cleaning Project Upto Delhi And River Bed Management In Delhi’ 
observed that there was no study available to show as to what extent the existing 
cremation process is responsible for pollution in Yamuna river. Further, in order 
to reduce pollution in river Yamuna due to cremation process, the Committee 
recommended that concerned Yamuna basin States need to find ways to 
discourage rituals on the pyres built on the banks of Yamuna and if possible shift 
the cremation sites away from the immediate periphery of the banks of Yamuna. 
However, the Committee learn from the Action Taken Replies of the Department 
that there is no specific study carried out in this regard for the Yamuna. The 
Central Pollution Control Board (CPCB) has carried out a study i.e. 
Environmental Management of Crematorium of Bhopal city using cow dung wood 
as alternative fuel.  Further, the Committee note that the no reply has been 
received from the Municipal Corporation of Delhi. Moreover, Himachal Pradesh 
Pollution Control Board has furnished that no electric/CNG furnace has been 
established till date. Existing cremation process in MC limits is carried out 
through pyres built on crematorium under a shed. No proposal regarding 
electric/CNG furnaces has been submitted till date by Municipal Committee 
Paonta Sahib. In view of the role played by the cremation process in 
contaminating the river Yamuna, the Committee reiterate that the Department not 
only commission a Yamuna specific study but also explore ways including 
providing financial assistance to the States to establish electric/CNG furnances. 
 
H. Formation of Foam in River Yamuna 
(Recommendation Para No. 18) (Para No. 2.18) 
 
27. The Committee observed that incidences of foaming in river Yamuna have been 
observed at locations such as at ITO Bridge, Okhla and Kalindi Kunj in Delhi, especially 
during onset of winter. The Committee were given to understand that Froth/Foam 
formation at the downside of Okhla Barrage is more due to turbulence caused by fall of 
water from the Okhla Barrage which is being maintained by the UP Irrigation 

26 
 
Department. At Okhla barrage, all treated and untreated wastewater of Delhi is 
impounded and only excess wastewater is released downstream. Release of 
wastewater from barrage agitate surfactants present and foam formation takes place; 
foam quantities increase with discharge quantity of wastewater from the barrage. 
Besides, large amount of water hyacinth growth on the pondage of Okhla Barrage 
release surfactants on decomposition. The presence of phosphates and surfactants in 
untreated sewage is a major reason behind frothing in the river. The Committee noted 
that the foam contain in polluted river water can cause skin irritation and infections. 
Besides, Phosphates in water cause eutrophication of algae which creates conditions 
favorable to formation of harmful algal blooms. 84 These blooms prevent light and 
oxygen from getting into the water, leading to the death of organisms in the ecosystem. 
The Committee noted that Department has cited number of efforts made for prevention 
of froth formation in Yamuna. These inter alia include constitution of a Joint Committee 
comprising of NMCG, UYRB, UP Irrigation Department, Delhi Jal Board, Irrigation & 
Flood Control Department of Delhi & DPCC to oversee and coordinate the efforts being 
made by all concerned agencies to control/minimize froth formation downstream of 
Okhla barrage in River Yamuna during the Chhath Puja, issue of directions in respect 
of Prohibition of Sale, Storage, Transportation and Marketing of Soaps & Detergents 
not conforming to the revised BIS Standards in NCT of Delhi etc. The Committee were 
of the opinion that long lasting solution for prevention of Froth/Foam formation in river 
Yamuna is complete treatment of sewage by Delhi, Haryana and Uttar Pradesh which 
is being discharged through various drains into river Yamuna. In this regard, the 
Committee in earlier paragraphs had made recommendations for enhancing the 
sewage treatment capacity of STPs by upgrading their technologies and connecting all 
the industrial clusters to CETPs. The Committee once again hoped that the Department 
would make all the endeavours to improve the functioning of the STPs. In addition to 
this, the Committee believed that efforts also needed to be made to introduce 
alternatives such as sodium aluminum silicate, sodium citrate, polyacry latest and tetra 
sodium etidronate for phosphates in detergents. Further, Surfactants released from 
households or commercial establishments need to get biodegraded in sewage 
treatment plants. They desired that Department will take up this matter with concerned 
agencies including BIS so as to reduce the foam formation in river Yamuna to negligible 
levels. 
 
28. The Department in its action taken note has replied as follows: 
 

27 
 
“Reply/Comments on recommendation no. 18 was sought from Delhi Jal Board, Delhi 
Pollution Control Committee (DPCC) & Uttar Pradesh Irrigation department vide email 
dated 22.02.2024. Further the follow-up was done through reminders and phone calls. 
The reply did not receive from Delhi Jal Board.  
Reply received from Delhi Pollution Control Committee (DPCC) vide email dated 
18.03.2024 is reproduced below: 
DJB carried out dosing of anti-foaming agents in river Yamuna during Chhath Puja. 
Government of NCT of Delhi is primarily working on following Sectors for improving the 
functioning of STPs in Delhi and details are given in following Table: 
i. Rehabilitation of existing 3 STPs at Kondli Ph-II & Rithala Ph-I and Yamuna Vihar 
Ph -II. 
ii. Upgradation and increasing capacity of remaining 18 existing STPs 
iii. Construction of 3 New STPs at Okhla, Delhi Gate and Sonia Vihar 
iv. Construction of 40 DSTPs 26 DSTPs at various locations of Delhi and 14 DSTPs 
in Najafgarh Drainage Zone] 
Total capacity of STPs after augmentation and up-gradation of existing STPs will be as 
follows: 
 Total Capacity of STPs by March, 2024 814 MGD |667 MGD + 147 MGD] 
 Total Capacity of STPs by December, 2024 922 MGD [ 667 MGD + 255 MGD] 
 Total Capacity of STPs by March, 2025 -964.5 MGD 667 MGD + 297.5 MGD] 
 
Will be sufficient to treat the sewage of 924.8 MGD (80% of 1156 MGD Water Supply) 
in future. 
Delhi Pollution Control Committee issued following directions u/s 33 (A) of the Water 
(Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1974 on 14.06.2021(enclosed at Annexure- 
17 ).  
1. Sale, Storage, Transportation and Marketing of Soaps & Detergents not 
conforming to the revised BIS Standards shall be completely prohibited in NCT of 
Delhi. 
2. All the concerned Departments / Authorities including Municipal Corporation 
al/Local Bodies, Civil Supplies Department and District Administrations having 
control over the Shops and other Establishments (Suppliers, Stockiest, 
Transporters etc.) having Sale, Storage, Transportation and Marketing facilities for 
Soaps and Detergents in NCT of Delhi shall ensure the compliance of directions 
(1l) above through strict vigil and surprise checks on such establishments. 

28 
 
Reply received from Uttar Pradesh Irrigation Department vide email dated 
02.05.2024 is reproduced below: 
Okhla barrage on Yamuna river is only a diversion head works which is built to divert 
the water into the canal for irrigation purposes.Minimum E-flow is maintained 
downstream Okhla barrage in compliance with MoU dated 11.03.1995 between 
Yamuna basin states and as per directions of NGT. After supplying water in the Agra 
canal for irrigation purposes as per demand, excess water is released downstream of 
the barrage.Barrage is operated through gates as per operation manual of barrage. The 
water only flows under the gates. There is no free fall in all of the water at the barrage. 
The foam/froth that is being formed downstream of Okhla barrage on Yamuna river is 
not due to any activity by Irrigation and water resources department, U.P. but mainly 
untreated/polluted water being discharged into river Yamuna in Delhi region. Action in 
this regard should be taken by concerned departments/agencies. No action is required 
by the Irrigation and water resources Department, U.P. However, compliance of the 
directions - given by the committee to be formed of various departments will be ensured 
by Irrigation and water department U.P. 
Reply from National Mission for Clean Ganga 
564 MLD WWTP with targeted NGT parameters of 10/10 is being constructed at Okhla 
which is likely to be fully functional by Oct 2024. Presently about 200 MLD quantity of 
liquid line commissioning has been attained at this plant”. 
 
29. The Committee are pleased to take note of the Action Taken Replies of the 
Department whereby it has furnished the submissions of the various agencies 
like Delhi Pollution Control Committee (DPCC), Uttar Pradesh Irrigation 
Department and National Mission for Clean Ganga (NMCG) which state the 
several steps having been taken/being taken to remove the problem of foam/froth 
formation in the river Yamuna. The Committee however observe that the 
response from Delhi Jal Board has not been received. The Committee in its               
27th Report (17th LS) desired that efforts needed to be made to introduce 
alternatives such as sodium aluminum silicate, sodium citrate, polyacry latest 
and tetra sodium etidronate for phosphates in detergents. Further, Surfactants 
released from households or commercial establishments needed to get 
biodegraded in sewage treatment plants. The Committee further desired that 
Department would take up this matter with concerned agencies including BIS so 
as to reduce the foam formation in river Yamuna to negligible levels. However, 

29 
 
the Committee find no concrete response on these issues in the Action Taken 
Replies of the Department. They, therefore, once again urge upon the Department 
to take up these issues with the concerned Departments so as to reduce the 
foam/froth formation in river Yamuna to negligible level.  
 
I. Need to constitute District Yamuna Committees 
(Recommendation Para. No. 21) (Para No. 2.21) 
 
30. The Committee further noted that as on date a total of 139 District Ganga 
Committees (DGCs) have been formed. However, so far no State Yamuna 
Committees/District Yamuna Committees had been set up on the lines of District 
Ganga Committees. Considering the significant role played by the DGCs by monitoring 
the work of local authorities on various parameters of river cleaning, the Committee 
urged upon the Department to take necessary measures for setting up of Yamuna 
Committees/District Yamuna Committees. Further, the Committee observed that there 
is no proposal for setting up Clean Yamuna Fund (CYF) on the lines of Clean Ganga 
Fund (CGF). The Committee wholeheartedly appreciated the concept of CGF and 
desire that the Department should explore the possibility of establishing the same fund 
for the river Yamuna which is the important tributary of river Ganga so that the work 
relating to cleaning the river may not be halted for want of funds. Further, they also 
recommended that the Department should take appropriate steps to encourage the 
corporate sector to contribute both financially and technically for conserving this 
important river. The Committee would like to be apprised of the steps taken by the 
Department in this regard within three months from presentation of this Report. 
 
31. The Department in its action taken note has replied as follows: 
 National Mission for Clean Ganga vide its D.O. letter dated 1st December, 2023 
addressed to Sh. Naresh Kumar, Chief Secretary, Government of NCT of Delhi 
has requested to put in place the State Ganga Committee (SGC), State 
Programme Management Group (SPMG) & District Ganga Committees (DGC) in 
the State of Delhi on an urgent basis in the larger interest pollution abatement of 
tributaries of river Ganga i.e. Yamuna. So far NMCG has approved a total of 08 
projects of Rs. 1728.61 Cr. During the recent years in the State of Delhi. The 
response from the Government of Delhi is still awaited. 

30 
 
 As per the Authority Notification dated 7th October 2016, the State is required to 
constitute the State Ganga Rejuvenation, Protection and Management Committee 
as per the composition and powers specified in the Schedule to implement 
various programmes and projects of NMCG. 
 The State is also required to put in place the State Programme Management 
Group (SPMG) for preparation, supervision and management of projects. The 
project funds will be routed through SPMG to the Executing Agencies. The 
institutional structures are in place in the Ganga main stem States, where the 
maximum number of projects under NMCG have been taken up so far. 
  As per Paragraph 53 of the Authority Order, District Ganga Committees (DGCs) 
are required to be constituted for the prevention, control and abatement of 
pollution in the river Yamuna (a tributary of Ganga) as specified in the aforesaid 
notification. 
 The Clean Ganga Fund (CGF) was established in 2015 as a trust under the Indian 
Trusts Act, 1882, to enable Resident Indians, Domestic and Overseas Corporates/ 
Trusts, and NRIs / PIOs to contribute towards the conservation efforts of River 
Ganga. The objective of the fund is to contribute to the national effort of improving 
the cleanliness of the River Ganga with contributions received from the residents 
of the country, NRIs/ PIO, and public and private companies. The specific purpose 
of CGF includes - 
i. To fund the work program of Ganga rejuvenation chosen from the Namami 
Gange program of the Government of India. 
ii. To coordinate and oversee the implementation of the projects sanctioned. 
iii. To accept donations/ contributions from individuals, institutions, and 
corporates. 
iv. To develop any suitable plan for achieving the main objective of improving the 
cleanliness of the river Ganga. 
 Namami Gange Programme was launched in June 2014 for a period up to 31 
March 2021 to rejuvenate River Ganga and its tributaries. The programme was 
subsequently extended up to 31March, 2026 to accomplish the twin objectives of 
effective abatement of pollution, conservation and rejuvenation of National River 
Ganga and its tributaries, which includes river Yamuna also. 
 Therefore, contributions to the CGF can also be utilized for the rejuvenation efforts 
of river Yamuna. 
 

31 
 
32. The Committee during examination of the subject ‘Review Of Upper 
Yamuna River Cleaning Project Upto Delhi And River Bed Management In Delhi’ 
took cognizance of the fact that no State Yamuna Committees/District Yamuna 
Committees were set up on the lines of District Ganga Committees. The 
Committee, therefore, urged the Department to take up this issue with concerned 
States and persuade them to set up these Committees. In this regard, the 
Committee learn from the Action Taken Replies of the Department that the 
National Mission for Clean Ganga has requested to Chief Secretary, Government 
of NCT of Delhi to put in place the State Ganga Committee (SGC), State 
Programme Management Group (SPMG) & District Ganga Committees (DGC) in 
the State of Delhi on an urgent basis in the larger interest of abatement of 
pollution in the tributaries of river Ganga, including Yamuna. However, the 
response from the Government of Delhi is still awaited. In view of the significant 
role played by the DGCs by monitoring the work of local authorities on various 
parameters of river cleaning, the Committee once again urge upon the 
Department to vigorously pursue this matter with Yamuna basin States for 
setting up of Yamuna Committees/District Yamuna Committees on priority basis.  
 
 
J. ITO Barrage and Flood Management in Delhi 
(Recommendation Para No. 22) (Para No. 2.22) 
 
33. In view of huge flooding in Delhi in the month of July 2023, the Committee on 
23.08.2023 undertook a field visit to the ITO Barrage for an inspection of the role and 
working of ITO Barrage in Flood Management in Delhi. The Committee had been 
apprised that the Yamuna Barrage near ITO, Delhi across River Yamuna was 
constructed by the Haryana Irrigation Department during the year 1966-67 for the then 
Delhi Electric Supply Undertaking (DESU) for meeting cooling water requirement of 
Indraprastha Power Station and Rajghat Power House of Delhi Thermal Power Control 
Board (DTPCB). After construction of ITO barrage, its operation & maintenance was 
assigned to Haryana Irrigation Department. Indraprastha Power Station was 
decommissioned on 31.12.2009 and Rajghat Power House was also made non-
operational in May 2015. Since, this Barrage 87 was constructed to supply cooling 
water for above mentioned thermal power houses therefore, this Barrage has no role in 
flood management in Delhi. The function of ITO Barrage is not for regulation of flood 

32 
 
water. Further, the Committee noted that the team of Experts from CWC visited the ITO 
Barrage on 27.07.2023. During the visit, it was observed that on that day some of the 
gates were in fully closed position / partially opened position. The main cause of non-
functioning of these gates is heavy silting in and around the gates and poor 
maintenance of hydro-mechanical equipment. Rope connection to the gate or counter 
in some bays was detached. In this regard, the Committee noted the submission of the 
State of Haryana, as per which, the only reason for non-maintenance/overhauling of 
gates is attributed to failure of IPGCL authorities to provide maintenance and operation 
cost apart from capital investment as per requirement. On the other hand, Delhi 
Government believes that they have technical capability to operate and maintain ITO 
Barrage at present and can operate it in a better way as per requirement during the 
flood in Delhi territory. However, in this regard, the State Government of Haryana is 
referring to a decision taken in the meeting between Chief Secretary, Haryana and 
Principal Secretary Irrigation Department, Uttar Pradesh held on 02.04.2015, wherein it 
was decided that supplies available at Barrage at ITO, Delhi be considered for further 
distribution amongst U.P. Haryana and Rajasthan at Okhla. Hence, it is not feasible for 
Haryana to transfer the control of Barrage to Delhi. They further noted that a Committee 
under the Chairmanship of Central Water Commission has been constituted by the 
Department of Water Resources, River Development and Ganga Rejuvenation for joint 
flood management study of river Yamuna, for its stretch between Hathnikund and 
Okhla Barrage. One of the scope of the study is to review the utility of ITO barrage in 
the present context. The Committee felt that this issue needed to be sorted out as early 
as possible for ensuring the safe operation of the barrage so that the State of Delhi 
does not again become a victim of floodings as witnessed in the month of July 2023. 
The Committee urged upon the Department of Water Resources, River Development & 
Ganga Rejuvenation to mediate in the matter and play the role of an honest broker in 
resolving this contentious issue between the concerned State Governments by pro-
actively engaging all stakeholders. The Committee would 88 also like to be apprised of 
the findings of the Committee constituted by the Department under the Chairmanship of 
Central Water Commission. 
 
34. The Department in its action taken note has replied as follows: 
“Reply/Comments on recommendation no. 22 was sought CWC vide email dated 
22.02.2024. Further the follow-up was done through reminders and phone calls. 

33 
 
Reply received from Central Water Commission vide email dated 03.04.2024 is 
attached below: 
Due to a combination of Western Disturbances and Southwest Monsoon, there was 
heavy rainfall in different places of Himachal Pradesh, Uttarakhand and Haryana during 
09-13 July 2023, leading to extensive landslides and flooding in the hills and plains. 
The heavy rainfall in the catchment area of river Yamuna resulted in huge runoff in the 
river, due to which an earlier Highest Flood Level (HFL) of 207.49 m recorded at the 
CWC gauging site of old Delhi railway bridge on 6th September, 1978 got surpassed by 
a new HFL of 208.66 m observed on 13th July 2023. This necessitated a fresh look at 
the river's flood management in its reach from Hathnikund Barrage up to Okhla 
Barrage. In this regard, DoWR, RD&GR, Ministry of Jal Shakti, vide OM No. Z-15011 /1 
/2020-FM Section-MOWR dated 6th August 2023, constituted a Committee for 
conducting a joint flood management study of river Yamuna for its reach between 
Hathnikund and Okhla barrage. The Committee headed by Chairman CWC has 
members from Haryana, Uttar Pradesh, NCT of Delhi and expert Organizations. It will 
inter-alia examine the meteorological aspects, return period of floods, discharging 
capacity of barrages, functional requirement of ITO barrage, etc. The Committee has 
been mandated to examine the meteorological aspects, return period of floods, 
discharging capacity of barrages, functional requirement of ITO barrage, etc. The 
Committee has submitted an Interim report in January 2024 to DoWR, RD & GR (FM 
Wing). It would be appropriate to consult the FM Wing of DoWR, RD & GR for including 
the information from the Interim report”. 
35. The Committee are delighted to learn that in line with the recommendation 
of the Committee, a Committee has been constituted for conducting a joint flood 
management study of river Yamuna for its reach between Hathnikund and Okhla 
barrage. This Committee has been headed by Chairman CWC and has members 
from Haryana, Uttar Pradesh, NCT of Delhi and expert Organizations. It will inter-
alia examine the meteorological aspects, return period of floods, discharging 
capacity of barrages, functional requirement of ITO barrage, etc. The Committee 
has been mandated to examine the meteorological aspects, return period of 
floods, discharging capacity of barrages, functional requirement of ITO barrage, 
etc. The Committee has submitted an Interim report in January 2024 to DoWR, 
RD & GR (FM Wing). The Committee would like to be apprised of the findings of 
this Interim Report. 

34 
 
K. Need to recalibrate the Gause discharge Curves of all the three Barrages in 
NCT of Delhi 
(Recommendation Para No. 23) (Para No. 2.23) 
 
36. Further, the Committee also urged upon the Department to make necessary 
steps in coordination with the States Governments of Haryana, Uttar Pradesh and Delhi 
to recalibrate the Gause discharge Curves of all the three Barrages in NCT of Delhi in 
order to ensure that the discharges from these Barrages downstream are in sync with 
each other. They also desired that Bathymetric survey of River Yamuna should be 
carried out once in 5 years or within a specified time period so that concern of silting of 
river bed could be addressed and clinical dredging could be done to accommodate the 
probable flood coming in River Yamuna. 
 
37. The Department in its action taken note has replied as follows: 
“Reply/Comments on recommendation no. 23 was sought from CWC vide email dated 
22.02.2024. Further the follow-up was done through reminders and phone calls. 
 
Reply received from Central Water Commission vide email dated 03.04.2024 is 
reproduced below: 
TheRiver cross section survey of Yamuna is carried out every year during non-
monsoon period for river morphological study purpose at approx. 10 km interval. There 
are four locations in Delhi region namely Burari (u/s of Wazirabad Barrage), 
Kalishnagar (near Old Delhi Railway Bridge), Bhogal (between Nizamuddin & DND 
bridge) and Jaitpur Extension (d/s of Okhla Barrage). A Morphological Study of 
Yamuna River has been got carried out by CWC through IIT Delhi. The final report of 
the same was submitted in Sept 2020 and a dissemination workshop on the findings of 
the report for all stakeholders was organized in Jan 2024. The objective of the study 
was: 1. To study morphological behaviour of the River Yamuna 2. To estimate erosion 
and deposition (areal retreat) on a decadal time scale 3. To analyse the dynamics of 
the river, course 4. To identify stable and critical reaches in the river. One of the 
findings of the study is "In the Delhi segment, very less braiding is observed, it is most 
likely due to the regulations of flows by Wazirabad, ITO and Okhla Barrage. Also, 
anthropogenic activities around the floodplains of Yamuna and river training works for 
flood control have restricted river activity to minimum level"(page 224). Channel bank 
Retreat due to erosion and deposition for the time frames of 1975-1990, 1990- 2000, 
2000-2010 and 2010-2016 have been estimated on grid-scale (page 341- 44). The 

35 
 
results show that channel has experienced erosion for the period 1975 up to 2000 at 
the rate of 1.17 sq.km per year whereas from 2000 to 2016 channel experienced 
deposition of 7.12 sq.km in total from Ganaur to New Delhi whereas Noida and 
surrounding Delhi NCR region, channel has experienced deposition (11.25 sq.km) 
during 1975-1990, erosion (12.66 sq.km) during 1990-2000, deposition 7.46 sq.km 
during 2000-2010 and erosion 5.47 sq.km during 2010-2016. No specific trend or 
pattern has been noticed in erosion and deposition processes in the Yamuna River. 
Aggradation and degradation patterns analysed from observed cross-sections are in 
line with satellite-based captured erosion deposition maps. Suspended sediment load 
(SSL) varies spatially across Yamuna River. Delhi recorded the maximum value of SSL 
in 1995. The year 1999- 2000 can be considered as a breaking point after which SSL 
for all available stations reduced drastically. Ministry of Jal Shakti (MoJS) has come up 
with a National Framework for Sediment Management (NFSM) for managing the 
sediments in a holistic manner. This framework lays emphasis on sediment 
management through integrated river basin management plan. It provides reference to 
all existing guidelines/policies dealing with the various aspects of the sediment 
management. The framework will facilitate the concerned stakeholders such as the 
State Governments other Ministries, Departments, etc in planning strategies and 
implementation of projects giving due consideration to environment and ecology and 
will serve as a guidance document for management of sediment across the river basin. 
The framework provides specific provisions for sediment management vide para 2.2 
and de-silting/dredging / mining restrictions details vide its Annexure-18. A "National 
Workshop on Integrated Management of Sediments in River Basins and Reservoirs for 
Sustainable Development'' was organized by CWC/MoJS on 19th June 2023 to share 
the contents of the framework with the State Government to follow for sediment 
management related sensitive issues including de-silting/dredging of rivers. Annexure -
19 of the framework provides details of de-silting/ dredging work in rivers to be followed 
by the executing agencies”. 
 
38. The Committee note that the River cross section survey of Yamuna is 
carried out every year during non-monsoon period for river morphological study 
purpose at approx., 10 km interval. Further, the Ministry of Jal Shakti (MoJS) has 
come up with a National Framework for Sediment Management (NFSM) for 
managing the sediments in a holistic manner. This framework lays emphasis on 
sediment management through integrated river basin management plan. 

36 
 
However, the Committee find no response on the recommendations made by it in 
its 27th Report (17th LS) regarding the recalibration of the Gause discharge 
Curves of all the three Barrages in NCT of Delhi in order to ensure that the 
discharges from these Barrages downstream are in sync with each other. They, 
therefore, once again urge the Department to work in coordination with the 
Government of NCT of Delhi with regard to the recalibration of the Gauge 
discharge Curves. 
 
*** 
  

37 
 
CHAPTER II 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT 
 
(Recommendation No.1) (Para No.  2.1) 
 
Floodplain/Wetland of River Yamuna 
 
The Committee observe that Floodplains are an integral part of the riverine 
ecosystem that comprises of wetlands, floodplain forests and grasslands with the river. 
They not only function together to recharge the aquifers but also prevent the threat of 
floods during monsoons by capturing excess water in the floodplain wetlands. 
Floodplains allow the river to spread its waters obstruction-free and encourage native 
flora and fauna to sustain in the ecosystem. In this regard, the Committee have been 
informed that on the issue of encroachment of floodplain/wetland area along the course 
of Yamuna only two States namely Delhi and Haryana have furnished the information. 
As apprised by the Department of Water Resources, River Development & Ganga 
Rejuvenation, Uttarakhand, Himachal Pradesh, Uttar Pradesh and Rajasthan have not 
furnished the information on this issue so far. From the submissions of the State of 
Haryana, the Committee find that total Flood Plain Area of river Yamuna in Haryana is 
24,406 acre (Karnal - 10960 acre, Panipat – 5100 acre and HKB Jagadhari – 8346 
acre) and there is no wetland and no encroachment along the river Yamuna. As per the 
State Government of Delhi, total area of the Zone ‘O’ (River Zone/ floodplains) is 9,700 
Ha. as per the MPD-2021. Out of this area, land available with DDA (inclusive of UP 
Irrigation Department land) for the restoration and rejuvenation works being carried out 
as per the directions of Hon’ble National Green Tribunal is 1675.10 Ha. Further, 
encroached Flood Plain area of river Yamuna is 161.95 Ha. (appx.) The total wetland 
area of river Yamuna in Delhi is 59.82 Ha. (appx.), however, there is no encroached 
wetland area of river Yamuna in Delhi. The Committee observe that despite challenges 
like litigation of lands and consistent resistance from Jhuggis/clusters located in Flood 
Plain Area, Delhi Development Authority (DDA) has retrieved 477.79 Hectares area 
from the encroachments in the flood plains of river Yamuna. However, they note that 
some parts of Yamuna Floodplains are still encroached as the removal of 
encroachment in these areas is under litigation. While appreciating the steps taken for 
removing the encroachment from the floodplains of river Yamuna, the Committee urge 

38 
 
the Department of Water Resources, River Development and 70 Ganga Rejuvenation 
to act in coordination with DDA in expediting the litigations to free the flood plains of 
river Yamuna from encroachment and restore its original ecosystem. Further, in view of 
the fact that Uttarakhand, Himachal Pradesh, Uttar Pradesh and Rajasthan are yet to 
provide the information regarding encroachment of floodplains along the river Yamuna, 
the Committee recommend to the Department to persuade the above Yamuna basin 
States to furnish the relevant information as well as the measures taken by them for 
removing those encroachments in their respective States. The Committee would like to 
be apprised of the details of measures taken within three months of the presentation of 
this Report. 
 
Reply of the Government 
Reply/Comments on recommendation no. 1 was sought from Irrigation & Water 
Resources Department, Haryana, Irrigation & Water Resources Department, Uttar 
Pradesh, Uttarakhand Irrigation Department, Jal Shakti Vibhag, Himachal Pradesh, 
Water Resources Department, Rajasthan, Delhi Pollution Control Committee (DPCC) & 
Delhi Development Authority (DDA) vide email dated 22.02.2024. Further, the follow-up 
was done through reminders and phone calls. 
The reply did not receive from Jal Shakti Vibhag, Himachal Pradesh.  
Reply received from Uttarakhand Irrigation Department, vide email dated 
06.03.2024 is reproduced below: 
Survey work related to the Flood Plain Zoning of Yamuna River is going on presently 
and is to be completed by 30th June, 2024. After completing the survey and other study 
works related to floodplain zoning, information regarding encroachments and the 
floodplain area of Yamuna River shall be intimated accordingly.  
Reply received from Water Resources Department, Rajasthan vide email dated 
15.04.2024 is reproduced below: 
Chambal River is a tributary of the Yamuna River and there is no encroachment & 
wetland in the floodplain of Chambal River in the State. 
Reply received from Irrigation & Water Resources Department, Uttar Pradesh, 
vide email dated 02.05.2024 is reproduced below: 
The flood plain zone of Yamuna river in Uttar Pradesh has not been demarcated yet, 
though prima facía there is no encroachment on land owned by Irrigation and Water 
Resources Department, Uttar Pradesh.The total land owned by the Irrigation and Water 
Resources Department, Uttar Pradesh in the flood plain of Yamuna River in Delhi state 

39 
 
is 230 Ha, which is encroachment-free.The rejuvenation and wetland development 
work in the said land is being done by DDA.  
Reply received fromDelhi Development Authority (DDA), vide email dated 
29.05.2024 is reproduced below: 
Data pertaining to O Zone, land available with DDA for restoration and rejuvenation 
work, encroached area and Area re-possessed by DDA is 9,700 Ha. as per the Master 
Plan of Delhi (MPD)-2021. Out of this area, land available with DDA (inclusive of UP 
Irrigation& Water Resource Department land) for the restoration and rejuvenation works 
being carried out as per the directions of the Hon’ble National Green Tribunal is 
1675.10 Ha and the total wetland area of river Yamuna 59.82 Ha. (appx.). Further for 
the area which is under litigation in Yamuna Flood Plain, DDA will take appropriate 
action to re-possess the land as and when required as per the directives of Hon’ble 
Courts. 
 
Reply received from Irrigation & Water Resources Department, Haryana, vide 
email dated 31.05.2024 is reproduced below: 
Flood plain area of River Yamuna under the jurisdiction of YWS Sonipat is 9367 Acres. 
There are 2 nos. Dhani's is also situated in river Yamuna having an approximate area 
of 9 acres. Ownership of these Dhani’s is with inhabitants. 
 
Input from the National Mission for Clean (NMCG)  
A Committee vide Office memorandum dated 06.08.2023, with Chairman, Central 
Water Commission as its Chairman has been constituted for Joint Flood management 
study of river Yamuna for its reach between Hathnikund and Okhla barrage. The Scope 
of the study included; 
 
xi. Detailed catchment representative rainfall analysis to compare the floods of the 
year 1978 and 2023 and other years as decided. 
xii. Estimation of 5, 10, 25, 50, 100 and 500-year return period floods at Hathnikund 
Barrage, Wazirabad Barrage, Delhi old railway bridge and Okhla Barrage. 
xiii. Carrying capacity of the river between Hathnikund barrage and Okhla barrage. 
xiv. Maximum water level at salient locations of the study river reach for 5, 10, 25, 50, 
and 100-year return period floods. 
xv. Afflux of barrages, bridges, flood protection dykes and other structures in the 
study reach of the river 

40 
 
xvi. 2D modelling and submergence area estimation for the reach of river Yamuna 
from 10 km upstream of Wazirabad barrage and up to 10 km downstream of 
Okhla barrage. 
xvii. Identification of possible drainage congestion in Delhi in case of high spate of 
river Yamuna. 
xviii. To review the utility of ITO barrage in the present context. 
xix. Examine the feasibility of some innovative measures like creating underground 
reservoirs for flood moderation in line with Tokyo model. 
xx. Examine the feasibility of creation of storages for surplus flood water in the flood 
plains of Yamuna and thereafter identification of such sites. 
The Committee submitted its interim report in Jan, 2024 recommending, inter-alia, that 
(a) to operate ITO barrage with all gates open during floods in coordination with 
operation of Wazirabad barrage and Okhla barrage. It is also recommended that 
regular maintenance of all hydro-mechanical equipment of barrage to be conducted as 
per the operation and maintenance manual of the barrage/codal provisions; (b) Any 
temporary structure made to facilitate construction within the right of way of river 
should be dismantled and muck should be properly disposed away from the river 
bed/bank as soon as possible; & (c) Prima facie there is a need to raise the left and 
right embankment at locations identified by model study. However, Govt. of NCT of 
Delhi may conduct ground verification in this regard to identify the exact such locations, 
etc. 
Another Committee vide Office memorandum dated 05.09.2023 under the 
Chairmanship of Member (River Management), CWC for identification & delineation of 
Flood Plain Zones in River Yamuna for the stretches (i) from Asgarpur to Etawah and(ii) 
from Shahpur to Prayagraj has been formed. The Terms of Reference of the committee 
are: 
 
g) Identify the Floodplain zones of River Yamuna for the stretches (i) Asgarpur to 
Etawah and (ii) Shahpur to Prayagraj for return period 1 in 5 years, 1 in 25 years 
and 1 in 100 years respectively. 
h) Delineate the FloodPlain Zones for no development/ construction zone, regulatory 
zone and warning zone. 
i) The Committee may further form a technical core committee for data collection, 
floodplain delineation as per return period analysis and any other technical work 
required for the study. 
j) The Committee may co-opt any other members, if required. 

41 
 
k) Field visits may be undertaken as per requirement. 
l) Demarcation of the Floodplain Zone on ground will be done by the State 
Government 
The Committee, in its first meeting held on 11.12.2023, decided to delineate the FPZ 
for the entire reach from Asgarpur to Prayagraj. It was also decided to form a core 
group for the development of a model for this work with members from CWC, NRSC, 
NIH, and Irrigation Deptt, UP. The Group held its first meeting on 22.05.2024. 
 
Comment of the Committee  
(Please see Para No. 8 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
(OM NO. LAFEAS-SCWRO29/6/2O24-SCWR   Dated  07th February 2024.) 
 
(Recommendation No. 2) (Para No.  2.2) 
Groundwater extraction in floodplains of river Yamuna 
 
The Committee further noticed that Delhi Jal Board has installed 130 production 
wells in floodplains of Yamuna river which are presently yielding 196 MLD (45 MGD) 
water. There is still scope for withdrawal of additional 190 MLD (40 MGD) water. The 
Committee observe that the water available in river Yamuna at Hathnikund barrage is 
being utilized for irrigation and supply of water for domestic/ industrial use. As a result, 
demands at Hathnikund barrage and Wazirabad barrage is invariably more than the 
availability during non-monsoon seasons causing usually negligible or insignificant 
flows downstream of Wazirabad vis-à-vis requirements of river. Furthermore, pumping 
of groundwater by bore wells in flood plains is also one of the reasons because of 
which river course also often get dry during lean season. Taking cognizance of the 
above facts, the Committee recommend that in the agriculture sector which is one of 
the significant users of water, the process to use water judiciously may be adopted by 
extensively applying micro and drip irrigation techniques, suitable pattern of cropping, 
practice of water budgeting at micro-levels and water-shed management in the 
command area of river Yamuna. They would also like to underline the urgent need for 
storage of monsoon water as well as rain water harvesting to meet the increasing water 
needs in the Yamuna basin. In addition to this, they also urge the Department to take 
necessary action in collaboration with the concerned States to prevent the pumping of 
groundwater by borewells in floodplains of Yamuna. 
 

42 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Reply/Comments on recommendation no. 2 was sought from Central Ground Water 
Board (CGWB) vide email dated 22.02.2024. 
 
Reply received from Central Ground Water Board (CGWB) vide email dated 
7.03.2024 is reproduced below: 
CGWB has proposed the development of groundwater resources in the Yamuna Flood 
Plain by dewatering aquifers up to 4-5 meters during the lean period. This allows for the 
replenishment of groundwater during the flood season. Following this recommendation, 
the Delhi Jal Board has already implemented 130 production wells in the Palla sectors, 
currently producing 196 MLD (45 MGD) of water. 
Additional areas with high potential for constructing productive tube wells include the 
Akshardham Mandir-Mayur Vihar sector, DND Flyover sector, and Kalindi Kunj-Jaitpur 
Sector. It has been observed that during the lean period, groundwater flows are 
generally from the mainland to the River Yamuna. Additionally, the region experiences 
flooding during post-monsoon inundation by the River Yamuna, contributing to natural 
recharge of subsurface aquifers through surface spreading methods during peak post-
monsoon floods. Therefore, the extraction of 45 MGD in the Palla sector has a minimal 
impact on the Yamuna River flows. 
To further mitigate the impact on the river's flow, tube wells are strategically 
recommended to be placed away from the Yamuna River course. This staggered 
placement ensures that the extraction of groundwater has minimal interference with the 
natural flow of the Yamuna River. 
To support the extraction scheme, Irrigation and Flood Control Department, 
Government of Delhi has undertaken a project to recharge groundwater by creating 
water bodies/reservoirs in the flood plains. This initiative is designed to establish water 
bodies/reservoirs between the main river course and the right marginal embankment, 
specifically between Palla and Wazirabad. Under this project, one pond has already 
been constructed. 
(OM NO. LAFEAS-SCWRO29/6/2O24-SCWR   Dated  07th February 2024.) 
 
 
 
 

43 
 
(Recommendation No. 3) (Para No. 2.3) 
Sand Mining 
 
The Committee observe that on the issue of sand mining in the floodplains of 
Yamuna (State-wise), the Department has furnished information only of two States i.e. 
Haryana and Uttar Pradesh. The Department has stated the steps taken by these two 
States for prevention of sand mining. Further, the Committee note that as per the 
Mining and Geology Department Haryana, total 3,792 cases in five districts of Haryana 
namely Yamuna Nagar (2599), Panipat (151), Karnal (202), Sonipat (281), Faridabad/ 
Palwal (559) have been recorded and total Rs. 33,63,98,069 have been recovered in 
the form of Fine/Penalty. In view of the fact that excessive sand mining leads to 
riverbed alteration, affecting the course of the river and causing bank erosion, the 
Committee desire that the Department may take necessary steps to collate the 
information regarding sand mining from all the Yamuna basin States and with their 
coordination make concerted efforts to prevent illegal sand mining in the floodplains of 
river Yamuna. In this regard, the Committee would also like to suggest setting up of a 
portal where all the relevant information like river sand mining, floodplain/wetland 
encroachment, dumping of waste into the rivers may be furnished by the concerned 
States in a time-bound manner on periodic basis. They are of the opinion that such 
information may play an important role in checking the illegal environmental activities in 
the floodplains of our rivers by having such information in public domain. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Reply/Comments on recommendation no. 3 was sought from Mining and Geology 
Department, Haryana ,  Directorate of Geology & Mining, Uttar Pradesh, Geology and 
Mining Unit, Directorate of Industries, Uttarakhand, Geology Wing, Department of 
Industries,Himachal Pradesh, Department of Mines & Geology, Rajasthanvide email 
dated 22.02.2024. Further the follow-up was done through reminders and phone calls. 
 
Reply received from Department of Mining, Himachal Pradesh vide email dated 
30.04.2024 is reproduced below: 
The river Yamuna is the primary tributary of the river ganga, originates from the 
Yamunotri Glacier near Bander poonch peak (38°59'N 78°27'E) at an elevation about 
6,387 mtrs.in district Uttrakashi. After crossing Garhwal and irrigating Jaunsar area, it 

44 
 
flows on the southern edge of the state for a distance of about 31 km. Entering in H.P. 
(i.e. only in Paonta Sahib, Division) It separates Kayarda Dun from the Dehradun and 
forms the boundary line between Himachal Pradesh and the Haryana/ Utter Pradesh. 
Within the boundary of this state the estimated maximum width of the river is about 
91m and the depth is about 6m, but this limit is far exceeded during the rainy season. In 
the summer, due to melting of snow on the high mountains, the volume of water of the 
river Yamuna is often subject to inflation. The water of this river is generally cold and 
clear but during the summer, due to melting of snow, it becomes sandy. It is a sacred 
river having two temples on its bank within H.P. boundary i.e. at Rampur and at Paonta 
where a Gurudwara also exists. Since this river flows at a lower level than of the 
plateau of the Kayarda Dun, its water cannot be made use of for irrigating the area. lt 
consists of tributaries in the district i.e. the Tons meeting it at Khodari Majri, the Giri 
Joining it near Rampur Ghat and the Bata mingling its water with it at Bata Mandi fall in 
Paonta Sahib Sub-Division of District Sirmour). 
The Yamuna catchment drain:the Punjab-Kimaon Himalayas from Shimla in the 
northwest to Mussoorie in the southeast. After flowing in a southeasterly direction for 
about 120 km, it is joined by its principal tributary the Tons near Dakpathar. The Tons 
drain a large catchment area in H.P. and hence carries a large volume of water than 
the main river Yamuna. The river pierces the lower Shiwalik range and enlys the plains 
near Tajewala. From Tajewala onward it flows in a southerly direction for a distance of 
240 km up to the Okhla headwater near Delhi. The Yamuna after receiving the water 
through other important tributaries joins the river Ganga and the underground 
Saraswati at Prayag (Allahabad) after traversing about 950 km. 
The catchment of the Yamuna River system covers part of Uttar Pradesh, Uttarakhand, 
Himachal Pradesh, Haryana, Rajasthan, Madhya Pradesh, and Delhi states. The state-
wise catchment area distribution is as below: 
TABLE 4: STATE-WISE CATCHMENT AREA 
Name of the State Total catchment area 
in Yamuna(in Sq. Km) 
Percentage contribution. 
Uttar Pradesh (including Uttarakhand) 74,208 21.5 
Himachal Pradesh 5,799 1.6 
Haryana 21,265 6.5 
Rajasthan 1,02,883 29.8 
Madhya Pradesh 14,028 40.6 
Delhi 1,485 0.4 
 
The tributaries contribute 70.9% of the catchment area and the balance 29.1% 
accounted for the direct drainage into the Yamuna River or to the smaller tributaries. 

45 
 
On the basis of area, the catchment basin of the Yamuna account to 40.2% of the 
Ganga basin and 10.7% of the total land mass of the country. 
The river marks its course through the boulder beds of Siwalik rocks and this formation 
is the prominent source of annual deposition in the river beds. During flood season, due 
to the high carrying capacity of river Yamuna, the water carries a heavy sediment load 
comprising boulders, gravels, sand, and silt intermixed with clay, which are deposited 
along the riverbed. Since the Yamuna riverbed in the boundary of Himachal Pradesh 
has heavy sedimentation/deposition after every monsoon season and resultantly bed or 
river has over deposited and as such there is a calamitous need to unearth the mineral 
in a scientific way to avoid further damage to the pvt. land/properties specifically 
existing on the right bank of the river which may be damaged due to bank erosion & 
over flooding. Thus, in order to evade any possibility of bank erosions and to ensure 
scientific and sustainable exploration of mineral wealth, the State Government has 
granted 16 no. of mineral concessions in the Yamuna riverbed after completing all 
requisite codal formalities. The details of mineral concessions granted in Yamuna River 
are as under. 
TABLE 5: FOR OPEN SALE 
Sl.No. Name & Address of mining 
leaseholder 
Area (in Hect.) 
1. Shri Manjeet Singh R/O House No. 
171/11, Devi Nagar, 42 Tehsil Paonta 
Sahib, District Sirmour. H.P. 
4.2 
 Total area 4.2 Hect. 
 
TABLE 6: AUCTIONED QUARRIES 
Sl.No. Name & Address of mining 
leaseholder 
Area (in Hect.) 
1. Shri Randeep Singh, S/o Shri 
Gurbaksh, Village Masruwala, P.O. 
Dulmana, Tehsil & District 
Hanumangarh, Rajasthan 
1-10-40 Hect. & 
53-56-40 Hect. 
2. Shri Dev Raj Negi, S/o Shri Singha 
Singh, Village Gojjar, Tehsil Paonta 
Sahib, District Sirmour, H.P. 
5-37-05 Hect. 
 Total 60-03-85 Hect 
 
 
 
 

46 
 
TABLE 7: FOR STONE CRUSHING 
Sl .No. Name & Address of mining lease holder Area (in Hect.) 
1. M/s Sab Giri Industries, Prop. Shri Madan Mohan Sharma, S/o Shri 
Natha Ram Sharma, H. No. 214, Ward No. 10, Devi Nagar, Tehsil 
Paonta Sahib, District Sirmour, H.P. 
2.68 
2. M/s Mahender Singh & Company, Prop: Shri Mahender Singh, S/o 
Shri Sohan Singh, Devi Nagar, Tehsil Paonta Sahib, District 
Sirmour H.P. 
10.2 
3. Smt. Meera Chandel, W/o Dr. Hakam Chand Chandel Devinagar 
Paonta Sahib distt. Sirmour H.P 
4.7 
4. M/S Yamuna Mines and Minerals, C/o Sh. Sher Singh Negi Ho. No. 
133/E Canal road Heerpur Paonta Sahib Distt. Sirmour H.P 
3.75 
5. Sh. Anil Sharma Sirmour Industries, Vill. Bata Mandi Tehsil Paonta 
Sahib Distt. Sirmour H.P 
3.52 
6. Sh. Vivek Gautam, Vill. Manpur Devra Tehsil Paonta Sahib Distt. 
Sirmour H.P 
2.16 
7. Sh. Mahabir Singh, Vill. Gojar adain Tehsil Paonta Sahib Distt. 
Sirmour H.P 
7.2 
8. Smt. Seema Devi, D/o Shri Ghunger Ram, Prop. M/s Krishna Stone 
Crusher, R/o Ward No. 8, Mohalla Nalagarh, Tehsil Nalagarh, 
District Solan, Н.Р 
3.75 
9. M/s Bitta Stone Crusher, (Partnership Firm. Partners S/Shri Salinder 
Singh, Sarwan Singh, Amarjeet Singh & Smt. Babita Dubey) 
Village Kunja Matralion Jehsil Paonta Sahib, District Sirmour, H.P. 
2.05 
10. M/s Akhilesh Enterprises, Partners Smt. Malini Jung &Kirnesh 
Jung. Village Ganguwala, PO Batamandi, Tehsil Paonta Sahib, 
District Sirmour, H.P. 
2.0 
11. Shri Lakhwinder Singh, S/o Sh. Jagmel Singh, Falt No.824, Phase-
2, Mohali, Punjab. 
4.2 
12. Shri Amrik Singh, Prop. M/s Neelkanth Stone Crusher, Haripur 
Tohana, Tehsil Paonta Sahib, District Sirmour, H.P. 
3.08 
13. M/s Hare Krishna Stone Crusher Prop. Shri Aachman Kapoor, 
House No. 180/46, Surya Colony, Ward No. 6, Paonta Sahib 
3.51 
 Total area 52.8 Hect. 
 
It is important to mention here that River Yamuna majorly forms inter-state border with 
state of Uttarakhand and partially with Haryana and Uttar Pradesh also. The Northern 
half of river Yamuna falls under Himachal state and the Southern half falls under the 
state of Uttarakhand. Hence, because of the aforesaid reason, entire river Yamuna in 
term of illegal mining, is vulnerable at some stretches. The river Yamuna passes for 
approximately 31 km through border of Himachal Pradesh in Paonta Sahib Sub-
Division adjoining to Uttarakhand. Incidences of illegal mining to some extent, in 
Yamuna river is being noticed from both sides, because it is not possible to outline the 
inter-state border line which is running almost along the center line of the riverbed. 
There are few area(s) of concerns in Yamuna river (border area) in Paonta Sahib Sub- 
division where apprehension of illegal mining cannot be ruled out, due to receding 

47 
 
water flow in Yamuna River specifically during winter season as the areas are located 
in proximity of interstate boundary. However, regular inspections are being carried out 
to check the incidences of illegal mining and transportation of mineral to adjoining 
State. 
It is worth submitted that, there is no explicit sand mining in River Yamuna in the 
revenue boundary of Himachal Pradesh, as there is no individual deposition of sand in 
the river channel. However, in order to check the illegal mining of the river-borne 
material effectively and to take determinant action against offenders, the Mining 
Department. as well as the Police department. is continuously taking effective actions, 
either jointly or at their own level to stop this unlawful activity which is not only 
detrimental to Environment but also causing loss to Government Exchequer Surprise 
raids are being conducted to these areas even in odd hours too. Because of collective 
efforts put in by the Police & Mining Department, and thereto stern action taken against 
the offender le. impounding the vehicles and filing the cases in court, plugging the 
unauthorized passage for illegal extraction etc., the incidents of illegal mining have 
reduced appreciably. 
 
The incidence of illegal mining in the Yamuna basin (only within the boundary in 
Himachal Pradesh) reported in preceding years is minuscule. However, the department 
still has taken action even against such activities and cases are filed in respective 
courts as per prevailing law. 
Reply received from Geology and Mining Unit, Directorate of Industries, 
Uttarakhand vide email dated 12.04.2024 is reproduced below: 
Few Mining leases for sand mining have been granted in the Yamuna River bed falls in 
Tahsil Badkot, district Uttarkashi, Uttarakhand. A list of mining leases executed in the 
river bed of the river Yamuna in the last five years are as under: 
 
TABLE 8: LIST OF MINING LEASES EXECUTED IN RIVER BED OF THE RIVER YAMUNA IN LAST 
FIVE YEARS 
S.No. Name of Mining Lease 
area in River Yamuna 
Area in hect. Lease period 
1 Bghasu 0.401 18-06-2020-16-05-2023 
2 Ponti 0.860 08-11-2016-16-05-2023 
List of the identified areas to be granting mining lease. 
1 Ponti (Indell Tok)-1 0.375  

48 
 
S.No. Name of Mining Lease 
area in River Yamuna 
Area in hect. Lease period 
2 Ponti (IndeliTok)-il 0.390  
3 Kotiyal gawn 2.750  
4 Dakhyad gawn-1 0.450  
5 Dakhyat-II 0.444  
6 Than 0.345  
7 Palar-1 0.202  
8 Palar-Il 0.217  
9 Singuni 0.665  
10 Dhari Valli 0.345  
 
1. To channelize the river stream, short-term permits are being issued for removal of 
aggraded material accumulated at the centre part of the river, leaving one-
fourtharea of the total width of the river at the point, from either side of the river. 
These venerable areas are identified by an expert committee, where, there is a 
possibility of a loss of life or property due to toe erosion by the river. For this 
Uttarakhand River dredging Policy had already been formulated by the 
government of Uttarakhand. 
2. Τοcurb/restrict illegal mining/ transportation/Storage "Uttarakhand Illegal 
mining/transportation/storage rules-2005 (amended 2021) had already been 
formulated. a six-member district level as well as six-member Tahsil level Task 
Force had already been constituted by district administration, Uttarkashi. For 
effective control of illegal mining, transportation, storage within the state, a ten-
member Enforcement Team had also been constituted at Headquarter of the 
Directorate of Geology & Mining level. An Online public grievance redressal 
system has also been launched by the Directorate of Geology & Mining, 
Uttarakhand, Dehradun on which anyone from the public can report information 
about illegal mining activity, illegal transportation of minerals or illegal storage of 
minerals. 
3. In addition, to regulate mining activities of the entire state, the transportation of 
minerals from one place to another Online e-transit pass (e- MM-11/ "MM-
110S"/e-Form-J/ "J O/S" had been implemented in 2016. 
 

49 
 
4. Total 15 offenders were found guilty of illegal sand mining in riverbeds/floodplains 
of Yamuna, they were imposed penalties of Rs. 2,31,92,517 (Rs Two crore, 
Thirty-one lakh, ninety-two thousand, five hundred, seventeen only) as per the 
relevant rules of Uttarakhand Illegal Mining, Transportation, Storage rules -2005 
(as amended 2021) in last five years (March-2019-Febuary- 2024).  
Few Mining leases of sand mining have been granted in the Yamuna River bed falls in 
Tehsil Vikasnagar district Dehradun, Uttarakhand. The list of Mining leases executed in 
the river bed of the river Yamuna in the last five years are as under; 
 
TABLE 9 :  THE LIST OF MINING LEASES EXECUTED IN THE RIVER BED OF THE RIVER YAMUNA 
IN THE LAST FIVE YEARS 
Sl.
No. 
Name of Mining 
lease area in River 
Sanction area Sanction 
area (in 
hectares) 
Sanction 
GEO No & 
date 
Lease Period 
1. Shri Janak Singh 
Rawat S/O Shri 
Sundar Singh Rawat 
Nawabgarh 1.7676 653 date 
28.07.2015 
13.10.2020 
To 12.10.2025 
2. Shri Vijay Thakur 
S/O Shri Surendra 
Singh Thakur 
Dhakrani 2.5780 1625 date 
18.12.2014 & 
1656 
date 
24.12.2014 
19.06.2023 
To 18.04.2028 
3. Shri Jagvir Singh 
S/O Shri Jeet Singh 
& Shri Jitendra 
Dhawan S/O late 
Shri Bhagwan Das 
Dhawan 
Nawabgarh 
Dakpathar 
1.913 515 date 
02.05.2015 
08.06.2015 To 
07.06.2020 
4. GMVN (Garhwal 
Mandal Vikas 
Nigam) lot no 23/3 
Kulhal 10.50 1894 date 
24.12.2020 
24.12.2020 To 
21.12.2025 
5. GMVN (Garhwal 
Mandal Vikas 
Nigam) lot no 21.1 
Dakpathar 
Nawabgarh 
Mandiggabhewa 
114.79 3170 date 
05.02.2019 
05.02.2019 
To 04.02.2024 
6. GMVN (Garhwal 
Mandal Vikas 
Nigam) lot no 21.3 
Dhakrani & 
Mandi Gayamewa 
58.614 2042 date 
03.01.2017 
03.01.2017 To 
02.01.2022 
 
1. In addition, to regulate mining activities of the state, the transportation of minerals 
from one place to another place Online e-transit pass (e- MM-11. e-Form-J) had 
been implemented in the year 2016. 
2. To curb/ restrict illegal mining/ transportation/ Storage Uttarakhand illegal mining/ 
transportation/ Storage rules-2021 had already been formulated. A six-member 

50 
 
district level as well as six-member Tahsil level Task Force had already been 
constituted by the district administration, Dehradun. For effective control on illegal 
mining, transportation, and storage within the state, a ten-member Enforcement 
Team had also been constituted at the headquarters of the Directorate of Geology 
& Mining level. An online public grievance redressal system has also been 
launched by the Directorate of Geology & Mining, Uttarakhand on which anyone 
from the public can report information about illegal Mining activity, illegal 
transportation of minerals or illegal storage of minerals. 
 Reply received from Mining and Petroleum Department, Rajasthan, vide email 
dated 18.04.2024is reproduced below: 
Chambal River lies in the state of Rajasthan which is a tributary of Yamuna River. Due 
to the declaration of the Chambal river area as Chambal Gharial Sanctuary by the State 
Government notification dated 03.09.1983, mining work is prohibited due to non-
forestry work being prevented in the river area. In the Chambal Gharial Sanctuary area 
Kota, Bundi, Forest, Police, Revenue and Mines Department conducted regular 
surprise checking and took action against illegal mining/release of mineral gravel from 
July, 2022 to January, 2024 and registered 64 cases and imposed penalty amount of 
Rs. 25.52. Lakhs were recovered. Dated 01.01.2022 in Dholpur area of Chambal River 
Gharial Sanctuary. From 2022 to 31.03.2024, action was taken against illegal 
mining/release of mineral gravel and 368 cases were registered, complaints were filed 
in courts in 295 cases and the remaining cases are under investigation. 
Continuous monitoring is being maintained to prevent illegal mining/extraction in the 
Chambal River Gharial Sanctuary area by establishing a RAC checkpoint in 
Sagarwada, Dholpur district, by forming a joint checkpoint of the Transport, Police, 
Forest, and Mineral Departments in Baretha, Sagarwada, Housing Board, Pachgaon 
district Dholpur. 
Reply received from Directorate of Geology & Mining, Uttar Pradesh, vide email 
dated 06.05.2024is reproduced below: 
To control illegal mining/transport, an eight-member task force has been formed under 
the chairmanship of the District Magistrate in every district of the state by Government 
Order No. 1/435766/2023/86 /01099/136/2019, dated 29.11.2023, in which police 
Department, Revenue Department, Transport Department, Forest Department and 
Mining Department are included as members. Apart from this, withdrawals allowed for 
effective control on illegal mining/transportation, under the Intergrated Mining 
Surveillance System, the minerals can be transported only after installing cameras and 

51 
 
weigh-bridges at the geo-fencing extraction sites of the mining areas and integration 
with the IMSS Portal established at the command center located at the Directorate.  
Artificial Intelligence(AI) equipped check-gates have been installed at 54 places on 
important routes to monitor illegal transportation and overloading of minerals. All the 
above works are being monitored through the portal developed by the department at 
the command center located in the directorate. Apart from this, a team has been 
formed at the directorate level to investigate the complaints of illegal 
mining/transportation received from various districts, through which the investigation is 
being conducted. Effective control on illegal mining/transport also increases revenue. 
Reply received from Mines and Geology Department, Haryana vide, email dated 
20.04.2024 is reproduced below: 
In the State of Haryana River Yamuna enters from Himachal side into Haryana in 
district Yamunanagar and flows from district Karnal, Panipat, Sonipat, Faridabad and 
finally exiting the state in Palwal. The state as per the provisions of Haryana Minor 
Mineral Concession, Stocking, Transportation of Minerals and Prevention of Illegal 
Mining Rule, 2012 grants mineral concession in the riverbed for extraction of sand. The 
mining operations are allowed to be commenced only after obtaining prior 
environmental clearance from the competent authority as required under EIA 
notification dated 14.09.2006 & as amended from time to time. Further, for the 
safeguard of river banks, mining operations which are being allowed are subject to 
following: 
a) No mining would be permissible in a river-bed up to a distance of five times of the 
span of a bridge on up-stream side and ten times the span of such bridge on 
down-stream side, subject to a minimum of 250 metres on the upstream side and 
500 metres on the down-stream side; 
b) There shall be maintained an un-mined block of 50 meters width after every block 
of 1000 meters over which mining is undertaken or at such distance as may be 
directed by the Director or any officer authorised by him; 
c) The maximum depth of mining in the river-bed shall not exceed three metres 
measured from the un-mined bed level at any point in time with proper bench 
formation; 
d) Mining shall be restricted within the central 3/4th width of the river/ rivulet; 
e) No mining shall be permissible in an area up to a width of 500 meters from the 
active edges of embankments in case of river Yamuna, 250 meters in case of 

52 
 
Tangri, Markanda and Ghaggar and 100 meters on either side of all other rivers/ 
rivulets; 
f) Any other condition(s), as may be required by the Irrigation Department of the 
State from time to time for river-bed mining in consultation with the Mines & 
Geology Department, may be made applicable to the mining operations in river-
beds. 
g) The details of the sand mining contracts granted in river Yamuna can be perused 
district wise is enclosed at Annexure-1. 
Efforts to prevent illegal sand mining in the floodplains of river Yamuna.  
The State of Haryana had been taking concrete steps for the prevention of illegal 
mining and special committees have been constituted at the district level as well as the 
State level for curbing of illegal mining throughout the State. In this behalf it is mention 
here that the State of Haryana has constituted the District Level Task Force under the 
Chairmanship of the Deputy Commissioner with Superintendent of Police and other 
related senior functionaries as members in each of the concerned district, in order to 
monitor/stop any incidence of illegal mining and ensure compliance with the orders of 
the Courts in this behalf. 
 
Further, the action taken by these Task Forces are reviewed by another Task Force 
constituted at the State Level under the Chairmanship of the Chief Secretary. The State 
vide notification dated 30.06.2023 has also established special “Enforcement Bureau 
Police Stations” for investigating the offences under the Mines and Minerals 
(Development & Regulation) Act, 1957 so that speedy investigation in illegal mining 
cases could be done in cases where FIRs are being lodged. 
The State is also imposing an environment compensation penalty on the vehicles being 
caught in illegal mining, as per the orders of Hon’ble NGT, New Delhi issued vide dated 
19.02.2020 in OA No. 44 of 2016. The amount of compensation being levied is as 
under: 
TABLE 10: THE AMOUNT OF COMPENSATION BEING LEVIED 
Sr. No Category of Vehicle Penalty amount 
1. Vehicles/Equipments/Excavators with showroomvalue more than 
Rs. 25 lacs and less than 05 yearsold 
Rs. 4 lacs 
2. Vehicles/Equipments/Excavators with showroomvalue more than 
Rs. 25 lacs and more than 5years but less than 10 years old 
Rs. 3 lacs 
3. For the remaining Vehicles older than 
10years/Equipments/Excavators which areotherwise legally 
permissible to be operated andnot covered by Serial No. 1 and 2 
Rs. 2 lacs 
 

53 
 
In the light of above, the state is taking every step required to curb illegal mining in the 
State under the ambit of law and the same shall be continue in future also. 
Setting-up of a portal 
The information relating to mineral concession/river sand mining, even by the 
department is already available on the departmental portal, however, other details like 
floodplains/wetland encroachment, and dumping of the waste into the river can be put 
in the public domain by the Environment Department, for which concerned department 
shall give their suggestion on this aspect. 
 
(OM NO. LAFEAS-SCWRO29/6/2O24-SCWR   Dated  07th February 2024.) 
 
 
(Recommendation No. 4) (Para No. 2.4) 
Dumping of Debris in River 
 
2.4 The Committee find that no study has been conducted to assess the impact of 
construction and demolition debris; as well as bio-medical waste dumping on the health 
of river Yamuna which has been noticed in the riverbed of Yamuna as informed in the 
DDA’s submission. The Committee further notice from DDA’s reply that a number of 
steps have been taken such as deployment of Security Guards, installation of 
surveillance and issuing challans to prevent dumping. However, they note that number 
of Challans issued has increased from 1 in the year 2018 to 610 in the year 2021, 
Indicating the rise in instances of dumping of debris into the river Yamuna. The 
Committee are of the opinion that dumping of waste, construction material, and bio-
medical waste have the potential to obstruct the natural flow of water during intense 
precipitation and water may accumulate where it is not required and thus may result in 
flash flood Further, due to presence of waste in water, the ecology of river suffers 
immensely and deposition of waste material may also disfigure the beautiful 
landscapes around the river sites. The Committee, therefore, recommend to the 
Department to prepare guidelines/ rules in this regard. Violation of these rules should 
attract penal provisions in order to avoid waste dumping in the rivers including Yamuna. 
Reply of the Government 
 
Reply/Comments on recommendation no. 4 was sought from the Delhi Pollution Control 
Committee (DPCC) vide email dated 22.02.2024. Further, the recommendation was 
given to DDA by DPCC. 

54 
 
Reply received from Delhi Development Authority (DDA) vide email dated 
10.05.2024is reproduced below: 
DDA only issues notices and challans for dumping of Puja material & dumping of debris 
via polluter’s pay principle as directed by the Hon’ble NGT and sends to different 
departments for final conclusive action to be taken by them under their respective laws. 
An increase in a number of challans does not necessarily mean that more dumping is 
being done at the site. Earlier DDA was not issuing challans for the vehicles of the 
various Government agencies who are constructing innumerable rail and road networks 
cutting across the floodplains. They leave behind a huge amount of construction debris 
on the floodplains. Notices have been sent to these Government agencies, 
compensation amounts have been raised and their idle vehicles standing on the site 
are being challaned. Thus, the increase in nos. of challans. Additionally, DDA sent a 
demand of Rs. 320 Crores as the damage and restoration charges and security deposit 
for unauthorized occupation and use of DDA land payable by NCRTC. However, no 
response or payment has been received. 
 Water inside the active channel of River Yamuna is not essentially DDA’s jurisdiction, 
we have no right over that channel. DDA’s ownership is limited to the floodplains and 
DDA is carrying out the herculean task of its protection and restoration. Till date, about 
591 Bollards and 375 Flag Posts, 134 Security Guards, 27 nos. of sign boards, 93 nos. 
CCTV cameras have also been installed at 27 locations for the protection of 
floodplains. Through 11 projects spread over both banks following an ecological 
approach, DDA has so far been able to successfully revive the ecosystem integrity and 
biodiversity in these Projects. Till date, about 0.7 million native trees, more than 10 
million riverine grasses have been planted in these floodplains by DDA. Twenty-six 
wetlands have been restored covering an area of about 35 hectares with the capacity of 
augmenting about 1350 million litres of water during the monsoons. They not only act 
as habitats for birds, butterflies & insects, help in improving microclimate and mitigating 
pollution but also have become places of attraction for the general public. 
However, the ownership of drains carrying the waste and passing through the flood 
plains, rests with DJB, I&FC, PWD, MCD and the responsibility of tapping them is 
primarily of DJB. DDA is setting up STP’s for the treatment of water in a few drains in 
DDA’s ownership in the south of Delhi. Thus, a concerted effort of all the agencies 
together will help deal with the issue of cleaning of Yamuna. 
DDA does not have any legal powers to penalize for non-compliance, thus the 
guidelines can be framed only as an executive order. We can formulate the penalties 

55 
 
for various activities to stop the dumping of debris, however cannot ensure penalisation 
since there's no statutory provision in DDA Act to penalize. Further, if such an action of 
penalizing by the DDA is challenged in a Court of law, it is likely to be struck off in view 
of the absence of such power under the DDA Act. 
Reply received from Delhi Pollution Control Committee  vide email dated 
30.05.2024 is reproduced below: 
As Informed by DPCC" Hon'ble National Green Tribunal vide Judgment dated 
13.01.2015 in OA No. 6 of 2012 and 300 of 2013 in the matter of Manoj Mishra Vs. 
Union of India and Ors. has directed that there shall be complete prohibition on 
dumping of any material in and around river Yamuna. 
Whoever violates this direction relating to the dumping of debris, shall be liable to pay 
compensation of Rs. 50,000/ on the Polluter Pays' Principle and the Precautionary 
Principle. " DDA is the concerned Department which has already submitted its Action 
Taken Report to NMCG (copy enclosed in Annexure-2).  
 
(OM NO. LAFEAS-SCWRO29/6/2O24-SCWR   Dated 07th February 2024.) 
 
 
 
(Recommendation No. 7) (Para No. 2.7) 
 
Water Quality of river Yamuna 
 
The Committee learn from the deposition of the representative of the National 
Mission for Clean Ganga (NMCG) that the river Yamuna has been categorized into 
three parts viz. the part from Yamunotri to HathniKund Barriage may be considered as 
unpolluted stretch, the part from HathniKund Barriage to Palla is moderately polluted, 
however, the part from Palla to Okhla, basically the Delhi stretch is severely polluted. 
Further, as per the Primary Water Quality Criteria for organized outdoor bathing, the 
Dissolved Oxygen (DO) is specified as 5 mg/l or more, the Biochemical Oxygen 
Demand (BOD) is specified as 3 mg/l or less and Fecal Coliform (FC) is specified as 
less than 2500 MPN/100 ml. The Committee note that river Yamuna enters in Delhi at 
Palla from Haryana and exits Delhi to enter Uttar Pradesh at Asgarpur which 
approximately is a 40 km stretch. Water quality assessment of river Yamuna is carried 
out by CPCB at 33 locations, under NWMP in association with SPCBs of Uttarakhand 

56 
 
(04 75 locations), Himachal Pradesh (04 locations), Haryana (06 locations), Delhi (07 
locations) and Uttar Pradesh (12 locations). The water quality data of monitored 33 
locations during January, 2021 – May, 2023 was analyzed for 4 parameters viz., 
Dissolved Oxygen (DO), pH, Biochemical Oxygen Demand (BOD) and Fecal Coliform 
(FC). The results were compared with the Primary Water Quality Criteria for Outdoor 
Bathing (PWQC) notified by Ministry of Environment, Forest & Climate Change under 
the Environment (Protection) Rules, 1986. The analysis revealed that: a. All the 04 
monitored locations each in Uttarakhand and Himachal Pradesh are complying while all 
the 06 monitored locations are non-complying with the criteria in Haryana. b. All the 07 
monitored locations in Delhi were non-complying with the criteria during 2021. 06 
locations were non-complying except at Palla (entry point of Delhi) which is observed 
complying during 2022 & 2023. c. Out of 12 monitored locations in Uttar Pradesh, 11 
are observed non complying during 2021- 2023. One location at Prayagraj D/s 
(BaluaGhat) was observed complying with the criteria during the years. d. Overall, out 
of 33 locations on river Yamuna, 10 locations (04 in Uttarakhand, 04 in Himachal 
Pradesh, 01 in Delhi & 01 in Uttar Pradesh) are complying during 2021- 2023. 
Remaining 23 locations are non-complying (06 in Haryana, 06 in Delhi and 11 in Uttar 
Pradesh). e. Highest concentration of BOD & maximum FC observed in Haryana is 30 
mg/L and 16000000 MPN/ 100 ml respectively during 2021 at Rahimpurka Nagla, Near 
Flyover Bridge (Mazawali). f. Highest concentration of BOD observed in Delhi is 83 
mg/L at Asgarpur after meeting of Shahdara drain and Tughlakabad drain during both 
2021 & 2022. Maximum FC observed is 22000000 MPN/ 100 ml during 2021 at 
Asgarpur after meeting of Shahdara drain and Tughlakabad drain. g. Highest 
concentration of BOD & maximum FC observed in Uttar Pradesh is 36 mg/L and 
920000 MPN/ 100 ml respectively during 2021 at Mathura d/s near ShamshanGhat. 
Further, the Committee find from the submission of the Department that the 76 water of 
river Yamuna in Delhi is not fit for bathing. Besides, the Committee also take 
cognizance of the deposition of the representative of the NMCG who apprised them 
that the Dissolved Oxygen (DO), which indicates whether the river is alive or not, is 
virtually non-existent in Delhi. The Dissolved Oxygen (DO) recovers only after 
confluence with river Chambal at Etawah. Water quality of river Yamuna meets the 
criteria at location Prayagraj d/s BaluaGhat w.r.t the PWQC in terms of all parameters. 
The Committee while observing the critical situation of river Yamuna due to 
deteriorating water quality parameters call for urgent, lucid and coordinated response 
from all the stakeholders in order to abate pollution and conserve it for posterity. 

57 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Reply/Comments on recommendation no. 7 was sought from Central Pollution Control 
Board (CPCB) & Delhi Pollution Control Committee (DPCC) vide email dated 
22.02.2024. Further the follow-up was done through reminders and phone calls. 
 
Reply received from Central Pollution Control Board vide email dated 08.03.2024 
is reproduced below: 
Implementation of Action plans for abatement of river Yamuna pollution and 
creation of infra-structure are being taken by the Delhi Jal Board and concerned State 
agencies. The review of implementation of action plans for abatement of river Yamuna 
pollution is being taken up on regular basis by the High Level Committee (HLC) 
constituted by Hon’ble NGT during January 2023 in OA No. 21 / 2023 entitled “Ashwani 
Yadav versus Government of NCT of Delhi” on 09.01.2023 under the Chairmanship of 
Chief Secretary, Government of Delhi.  
 
Reply received from Delhi Pollution Control Committee  vide email dated 
30.05.2024 is reproduced below: 
DPCC Laboratory carries out water quality monitoring of River Yamuna at 08 
locations on monthly basis and Analysis Reports are placed on the website of DPCC. 
Copy of the Analysis Reports (Water Quality Status of River Yamuna) for the months of 
January, February, March & April, 2024 are collectively enclosed at Annexure -4. Vide 
order dated 09.01.2023 in OA. No. 21/2023 in the matter of Ashwani Yadav Vs. 
Government of NCT of Delhi (Now being dealt in O.A, No, 06 of 2012 in the matter of 
Nizamuddin West Association Vs. Union of India and Ors"), Hon'ble NGT has 
constituted a High Level Committee (HLC) of concerned authorities in Delhi with the 
Chief Secretary, Delhi, Convener; and consisting of Secretaries / HODs of various 
Ministries/ Departments. 
"The HLC is to deal with all issues as set out in order dated 27.01.2021 of Hon'ble NGT 
in OA No. 06/2012 in the matter of Manoj Mishra Vs. Union of India & Ors and other 
ancillary matters. “ 
High Level Committee has prepared a Department wise detailed Action Plan for 
Rejuvenation of river Yamuna including Nodal Officers for each project after its first 
meeting on 20.01.2023 and submitted to Hon'ble NGT on 31.01.2023. 

58 
 
Nine meetings of High Level Committee have been held so far on 
20.01.2023,14.02.2023, 14.03.2023, 21.04.2023, 09.06. 2023,10.08.2023, 10.10.2023, 
10.01.2024 & 20.02.2024 and progress of various projects & action points were 
reviewed by HLC in the said meetings. 
Status Reports were also filed in the aforementioned matter before the Hon'ble NGT on 
31.01.2023,05.07.2023, 16.10. 2023, 21.12.2023 & 12.02.2024 
 
Reply from National Mission for Clean (NMCG) 
Yamuna is one of the sacred rivers of India and largest tributary of Ganga River. It 
originates from the Yamunotri glacier in Uttarakhand passing through Himachal 
Pradesh, Tajewala-Haryana, Wazirabad-Delhi, Okhla-Delhi, Okhla barrage to 
Confluence Point of Chambal River and finally merges into River Ganga at Prayagraj. 
The total length of the Yamuna up to its point of confluence with the Ganga at 
Prayagraj is 1376 km with catchment area spread over 3.67 lakh sq. km. 
Yamuna River has no fresh water after Wajirabad barrage in Delhi. There is a critical 
path of 22 km where 22 major drains are discharging into River Yamuna. Only after 
confluence of River Chambal, the water quality of River Yamuna improves. 
The Government of India is supplementing the efforts of the States for improvement of 
water quality parameters of River Yamuna by providing financial assistance to different 
States of India viz. Haryana, Delhi and Uttar Pradesh, in phased manner since 1993, 
under the Yamuna Action Plan (YAP I, II & III). Under the YAP Phase – I & II, an 
expenditure of Rs. 1514.70 crore has been incurred for creation of sewage treatment 
capacity of 942 MLD and rehabilitation of 328 MLD STP in States of Haryana, Delhi & 
Uttar Pradesh. 
Presently, Government of India/NMCG has sanctioned Total 34 projects costing Rs. 
5834.71 crore by which 2110.25 MLD STP capacity will be created. They comprise of 
(01) project in Himachal Pradesh, (02) projects in Haryana, (11) projects in Delhi and 
(20) projects in Uttar Pradesh, under Namami Gange programme to abate pollution 
load to river Yamuna & Hindon River. Out of these 34 projects, 15 are already 
completed, viz. one (01) project in Paonta Sahib, Himachal Pradesh, two (02) projects 
in Sonipat and Panipat, Haryana, six (06) projects in Vrindavan, Etawah, Firozabad, 
Baghpat and Mathura (STP & CETP), UP and six (06) projects in Delhi. The State wise 
project details are enclosed at Annexure- 5 of Himachal Pradesh which makes a total 
of 34 projects costing Rs. 5834.71 crore by which 2110.25 MLD STP capacity will be 
created. 

59 
 
In addition to the above there are certain sewage treatment projects which are in under-
construction and certain more projects which are in  tendering stage. Additionally, 
sewage treatment capacities are also being built by  the State Governments. A 
wholesome picture of the sewage treatment capacities being built in States is reflected 
in the MPR submitted by the State Government to National Green Tribunal (NGT). 
Based on the sewage generation indicated in this MPR, the sewage treatment project 
capacities being built under NMCG (including competed, under-construction and under-
tendering projects), sewage treatment capacities created by the State Government, a 
state-wise sewage treatment gap has been esimated and a cumulative effective 
sewage treatment gap of 1500 MLD has been assessed.  
A Central Monitoring Committtee under the Chairmanship of Secrtary, DoWR, RD&GR 
has also been formed with representation from all State Governments to closely 
monitor the sewage treatment gap and enable co-ordinated efforts for closing this gap. 
 
Comment of the Committee  
(Please see Para No. 17 of Chapter I of the Report) 
(OM NO. LAFEAS-SCWRO29/6/2O24-SCWR   Dated 07th February 2024.) 
 
(Recommendation No. 9) (Para No. 2.9) 
Industrial Pollution 
 
The Committee note that annual inspection of GPIs operating in river Yamuna 
main stem States namely Uttarakhand, Haryana, Delhi-NCT and Uttar Pradesh is being 
carried out since 2020. A total of 1660 GPIs during 2020-21, 1655 GPIs during 2021-22 
and 1957 GPIs during 2022-23 were inspected. During 2020-21, out of total 1660 GPI, 
freshwater consumption of 268.16 MLD and 77 discharge of 103.05 MLD wastewater 
was estimated from 1219 operational GPIs. While, during 2021-22, out of total 1655 
GPIs, freshwater consumption of 261.02 MLD and discharge of 144.4 MLD waste water 
was estimated from 1319 operational GPIs. However, data relating to the year 2022-23 
have not been furnished by the Department. The Committee find that though 
‘Freshwater Consumption’ by Grossly Polluting Industries (GPIs) which was 268.16 
MLD in the year 2020 has slightly reduced to 261.02 MLD in the year 2021, however, 
‘Effluent Discharge’ which was 103.05 MLD in the 2020 has increased substantially to 
144.4 MLD in the year 2021. Further, the Committee find that there are 50 industrial 
clusters of GPIs on Yamuna main stem States (Uttar Pradesh, Haryana and Delhi) and 

60 
 
34 CETPs. However, out of 50 only 29 clusters are connected to CETPs which treat 
their wastewater, while wastewater from remaining clusters is discharged through 
drains to river Yamuna and its tributaries. Besides, the Committee note that during 
annual inspections 2021-22, out of total 34 CETPs located on Yamuna main stem, 33 
were found operational and 01 non-operational. Further, out of 33 operational CETPs, 
only 19 were found complying and 14 were non-complying w.r.t standards prescribed 
by concerned SPCB/PCC. As far as Delhi stretch of Yamuna main stem is concerned, 
the Committee find that there are 28 approved industrial areas in Delhi out of which 17 
are connected with the 13 CETPs, as per the Delhi Pollution Control Committee 
(DPCC). The total capacity of these 13 CETPs is 212.3 MLD, however, capacity 
utilization of these 13 CETPs is only 67.5 MLD (just 31.8 % of capacity). Taking into 
account issues like connectivity of only few industrial clusters with CETPs and huge 
underutilization of the CETPs capacity which are one of the main reasons for the 
dilapidated condition of river Yamuna especially in Delhi, the Committee recommend 
the Department to nudge all the Yamuna main stem States, especially Delhi to identify 
the reasons for very low utilization capacity of CETPs so as to take necessary steps to 
overcome the identified lacunas in their working. Further, they should make all efforts 
on war-footing within a fixed timeframe to enhance the capacity utilization of the 
existing CETPs by upgrading their technology and also connect all the industrial 
clusters with the CETPs so that the effluence generated from the industry is treated 
before they enter the river. The Committee would like to be apprised of the specific 
steps taken by the Department in this regard within three months from the presentation 
of this 78 Report. They would also like to be apprised of the total number of GPIs 
currently functioning, Freshwater Consumption and Effluent Discharge by GPIs. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Reply/Comments on recommendation no. 9 was sought from CPCB, Delhi Pollution 
Control Committee (DPCC) & Haryana Pollution Control Board vide email dated 
22.02.2024. Further, the follow-up was done through reminders and phone calls. 
Reply received from Central Pollution Control Board (CPCB) vide email dated 
08.03.2024 is reproduced below: 
NMCG has been implementing the inspection of Grossly Polluting Industries (GPIs) 
through CPCB. The comments of CBCB are reproduced below.  

61 
 
Industrial Pollution: Freshwater consumption by Grossly Polluting Industries (GPIs) 
was 268.16 MLD in 2020 and 261.02 MLD in 2021, however effluent discharge was 
103.05 MLD in 2020 and 144.4 MLD in 2021. This is due to installation of flowmeters at 
ETP outlet and proper maintenance of logbooks for effluent discharge. Regular 
monitoring of GPIs has resulted into improved metering system and better compliance. 
During 2022-23, 1957 GPIs having potential to discharge into river Yamuna and its 
tributaries were inspected. Out of total 1957 GPIs, the fresh water consumption of 
296.77 MLD and the effluent discharge of 153.36 MLD were estimated from 1535 
operational GPIs.  
 
TABLE 11 :STATE-WISE STATUS 
Sl. 
No 
States 2022 - 2023 
No. of GPIs Freshwater 
Consumption (MLD) 
Effluent 
Discharge (MLD) 
1 Uttarakhand 11 2.25 1.16 
2 Haryana 1,140 162.85 73.02 
3 Delhi 196 2.01 1.12 
4 Uttar Pradesh 610 129.66 78.06 
Total Load 1,957 296.77 153.36 
 
Further, out of a total of 34 CETPs located on the Yamuna main stem, 33 were found 
operational and 01 non-operational. Further, out of 33 operational CETPs, only 19 were 
found complying and 14 were non-complying w.r.t standards prescribed by the 
concerned SPCB/PCC. The designed capacity of these CETPs is 425.75 MLD, 
however,the utilization capacity is 219.85 MLD (51.63% capacity).  Out of 33 
operational CETPs, only 3 CETPs in Haryana are working at full capacity whereas the 
remaining 30 are working under capacity.  
 
TABLE 12 :STATE-WISE DETAILS 
State Operational 
CETP (No.) 
Installed 
capacity (MLD) 
Utilized Capacity 
(MLD) 
Complying 
Haryana 18 201.25 142.5 (70.8 %) 10 
Delhi-NCT 13 212.3 71.95 (33.8 %) 8 
Uttar Pradesh 2 12.2 5.4 (44.26%) 1 
Total 33 425.75 219.85 (51.63%) 19 
Detailed information about the connectivity of clusters may be obtained from DPCC. 

62 
 
During annual inspections in 2022-23, a preliminary investigation was made for 27 
industrial clusters for the feasibility of CETPs. 
 
TABLE 13: LIST OF INDUSTRIAL CLUSTERS 
Sl. No. Region Area 
1 Mathura Saraswati Kund, Shivaji Nagar, Gaur Kendra 
2 Kanpur Dehat Rania & Growth Centre Jainpur 
3 Greater Noida Surajpur and Chapraula 
4 Noida Hoisery Complex 
5 Aligarh Talanagri (Sec 1 & Sec2 ) 
6 Ghaziabad Sahibabad, Arya Nagar, Roop Nagar, Loni, Tronica 
City 
7 Saharanpur Janta Road & Dehradun Road 
8 Muzaffarnagar Bhopa Road 
9 Delhi Anand Parbat & Nazafgarh Industrial area 
10 Panipat Sector 29 & Old Industrial area 
11 Sonipat Industrial area 
12 Faridabad DLF, Gurukul Industrial area & Ballabhgarh 
13 Yamunanagar Industrial area 
14 Karnal Industrial area 
 
CPCB issued directions on 02.01.2023 to State Pollution Control Boards (SPCBs) of 
Delhi-NCT and Haryana regarding augmentation and upgradation of CETPS and 
display of OCEMS data by CETPs located in Delhi and Haryana. The details of 
directions are: 
●To take necessary action against the non-complying CETPs in the state 
●To prepare and submit an action plan for upgradation /augmentation of identified 
CETPs situated in the state. 
●Mandatory to display OCEMS data of each individual CETP in a conspicuous 
location. 
Reply received from Industries Department GNCTD vide email dated 13.05.2024is 
reproduced below: 
11 CETPs out of 13 CETPs in Delhi are being operated & maintained by the respective 
CETP Society.  Since the CETP societies besides -operation & maintenance are also 
responsible to carry out further up- el gradation and technology of the installed 
Common Effluent Treatment Plant as per the future e requirements under the provision 
of Section 6 of the Delhi CETP Act, 2000 and Rule 3(v) of the Delhi CETP Rules, 2001. 
Accordingly, all CETP Societies have been asked to carry out the FUP-gradation of 
CETP after obtaining clearance from the concerned authorities. 

63 
 
With regard to the rest of the two CETPS at Narela & Bawana being operated & 
maintained by DSIIDC through concessionaire, their up- gradation is likely to be 
completed by 30th April, 2024. 
Reply received from Delhi Pollution Control Committee vide email dated 
30.05.2024 is reproduced below: 
In Delhi 
 There are 13 CETPs in Delhi with a total installed capacity of 212.3 MLD.  
 13 CETPs received about total 72 MLD of waste water (34 % of Installed 
Capacity) in the month of April, 2024 (Earlier about 3 years back these CETPs 
were receiving about 55 MLD of waste water 
 All the 13 CETPs are meeting the prescribed standards. 
 Out of 13 CETPs, 11 CETPs were designed by NEERI and constructed by 
DSIIDC in pursuance of the orders of the Hon'ble Supreme Court from time to 
time in WP (C) No. 4677/1985,based on the effluent quantum & characteristics 
of waste water in various industrial areas. These CETPs are more than 15 years 
old. Rest of the 2 CETPs at Narela & Bawana Industrial Areas were designed by 
consultants appointed by DSIIDC. 
 Over the period Water Polluting Industries | Units in Industrial Areas | Estates 
connected with the CETPs have been closed due to various reasons including 
Supreme Court orders / provisions under the Master Plan of Delhi etc (e.g SS 
Pickling Units in Wazirpur Industrial Area). 
 The units which are operational in Non-CETP Industrial Areas have individual 
waste water treatment facilities (ETP etc). 
 As per the Order dated 27.01.2023 of Chief Secretary, GNCTD issued W.r.t 
NGT Order dated 09.01.2023 in OA No. 21 2023, Out of 13 CETPs, 02 CETPs 
at Narela and Bawana are to be upgraded by DSIIDC and rest of the 11 CETPs 
were to be upgraded by DJB after their handing over from CETP Societies. 
 " Government, of NCT of Delhi vide Notification dated 01.01.2024 had given 
powers in respect of 11 CETPs presently being operated and maintained by 
CETPs Societies to DJB however the said Notification regarding taking over of 
these CETPs by DJB from the concerned CETPs Societies has been quashed 
by Hon'ble High Court of Delhi. 
 Work of upgradation of CETPs at Narela & Bawana as recommended by NEERI 
has been completed. 

64 
 
 Grosly Polluting Industries (GPIs) (2023- 2024) in Delhi: " No. of GPIs Found 
Non-Complying Show Cause Notices Issued - 196 - 56 - 56 " Closure Directions 
issued – 13. 
Reply received from UP-Pollution Control Board vide email dated 29.05.2024 is 
reproduced below: 
As per the GPI inventory for the year 2022-23, a total no. of 610 GPI units were 
identified by U.P. Pollution Control Board situated in the catchment area of River 
Yamuna and its main tributaries. The freshwater consumption of these units has been 
assessed as 129.66 MLD and effluent discharge was assessed as 78.06 MLD. Most of 
these GPI units established in the catchment area of river Yamuna have installed their 
own effluent treatment plant (ETP). There are 02 main industrial cluster of the same 
type of units in the catchment area of River Yamuna one at Apparel Park Tronica City 
CETP, Phase-1 (for textile units), Ghaziabad and another CETP, Industrial Area, Site-
A, Mathura. The CETPs for these 02 industrial clusters are established and operational 
In the year 2022-23, the cumulative treatment capacity of these 02 CETPs is 12.2 MLD 
and capacity utilization of these 02 CETPs was assessed as 5.4 MLD (44.26%). The 
latest inspection of these CETP was done by SPCB and as per the latest analysis 
reports both these CETPs are achieving norms as per the standard laid down by UP. 
Pollution Control Board. The copy these latest analysis reports are enclosed at 
Annexure- 8. 
(OM NO. LAFEAS-SCWRO29/6/2O24-SCWR   Dated 07th February 2024. 
 
(Recommendation No. 11) (Para No. 2.11) 
Real-Time Effluent Monitoring systems 
 
The Committee note that CPCB issued directions dated 11-03-2021 to State 
Pollution Control Boards of Uttarakhand, Haryana, Delhi and Uttar Pradesh to further 
direct GPIs to install Online Continuous Effluent Monitoring System (OCEMS). 
However, till date, only 540 GPIs out of 1957 GPIs in Yamuna main stem have installed 
OCEMS and connected with SPCB and CPCB server. Taking cognizance of the 
importance of OCEMS in improving the control on the flow of effluents, increased 
management responsibility for regulatory compliance, as well as increased public 
access to data, the Committee desire that the Department in coordination with CPCB 
prepare a schedule for installing the OCEMS in all the GPIs on Yamuna main stem 
States and make sure that all the GPIs comply with this schedule. 
 

65 
 
Reply of the Government 
Reply/Comments on recommendation no. 11 were sought from the Delhi Pollution 
Control Committee (DPCC), CPCB, Haryana Pollution Control Board and Uttar Pradesh 
Pollution Control Board vide email dated 22.02.2024. Further, the follow-up was done 
through reminders and phone calls. 
 
Reply received from Central Pollution Control Board vide email dated 08.03.2024 
is reproduced below: 
CPCB issued directions dated 11.03.2021 to State Pollution Control Boards of 
Uttarakhand, Haryana, Delhi and Uttar Pradesh to further direct GPIs to install Online 
Continuous Effluent Monitoring System (OCEMS). To date, 540 GPIs out of 1957 GPIs 
in Yamuna main stem have installed OCEMS and connected with SPCB and CPCB 
server. 
In compliance with the CPCB letter dated 16.12.2022, all the GPIs have installed flow 
meters and Web cameras as the wastewater discharge is <2 KLD. All the 13 CETPs & 
other GPls having wastewater discharge of more than 2 KLD in the NCT of Delhi have 
installed OCEMS. 
Reply received from Uttar Pradesh Pollution Control Board vide email dated 
29.05.2024 is reproduced below: 
All the large and medium-scale GPI units situated in the catchment area of River 
Yamuna in Uttar Pradesh have been installed Online. 
 
Continuous Effluent Monitoring System (OCEMS). The installation of OCEMS in small 
scale GPI units is in progress as per the guidelines of the Central Pollution Control 
Board. 
Reply received from Haryana State Pollution Control Board, vide email dated 
14.06.2024 is reproduced below:  
There are 1568   GPIs in Haryana. As per existing policy of HSPCB, 597 GPI are 
required to install Online Monitoring Devices. Out of this, 349 GPIs have installed 
Online Monitoring Devices. There are connected to central software of HSPCB. The 
HSPCB is pursuing other industries to install OMD. 
 
(OM NO. LAFEAS-SCWRO29/6/2O24-SCWR   Dated 07th February 2024.) 
 
 

66 
 
(Recommendation No. 12) (Para No. 2.12) 
Pollution from Municipalities / Non-Point Sources, etc.Discharge of Drains 
 
The Committee note that untreated sewage from municipalities constitute an 
important source for polluting the river as they contribute approx. 80% of pollution load 
into the river. They further note the submission of the UP Pollution Control Board 
(UPPCB) that discharge of sewage contributes approximately 80 percent of total 
pollution load in River Yamuna in the State of U.P. Further, according to UPPCB, there 
are total 137 drains discharging in river Yamuna in the 79 State of U.P. Though, details 
regarding flow estimation for all the drains has not been worked by UPPCB, however, 
out of 35 major drains,18 drains are carrying mixed wastewater and 17 are carrying 
purely domestic sewage. Regarding Haryana, the Committee take cognizance of the 
deposition of the representative of the NMCG, that drains no. 2 and 8 in Haryana bring 
a huge amount of organic and industrial pollution and thus hugely pollute the river in the 
State. As far as Himachal Pradesh is concerned, as per the information furnished by 
Himachal State authorities, there is no direct municipal sewage discharge into River 
Yamuna in Paonta Sahib area of District Sirmaur. However, there are 4 number of 
drains in municipal limits identified carrying grey water and ultimate discharge in River 
Yamuna. Further, as informed by HPPCB, concerned Municipal Committee and Jal 
Shakti Vibhag have not taken corrective measures as per the Yamuna Action Plan such 
as carrying out survey, preparation of DPR for STP at Pujarighat, 100% household 
connectivity to existing STP, etc. Regarding Delhi, the Committee note that as per 
DPCC, there are 22 drains which are emptying out into river Yamuna. Out of 22 Drains, 
while 09 drains have been trapped, 02 drains are partially trapped and flow is yet to be 
trapped / diverted to sewer / STPs in case of 09 drains. Two Drains i.e. Najafgarh and 
Shahdara are large drains and technically not feasible to trap whole drain however 
these drains are included in the Interceptor Sewer Project where substantial flow of 
sub-drains under their command areas will be trapped and treated after trapping of their 
sub drains. Besides, the Committee also observe that waste water coming through 
various drains from Haryana [L III (Badshahpur Drain) from Gurugram, L II from 
Dharampur from Gurugram, L I from Bajgera Palam Vihar from Gurugram, Drain No. 6 
from Sonipat, Mungeshpur Drain & Bhupania Drain from Bahadur Garh& Bhupania 
region] and drains from Uttar Pradesh (Shahibabad Drain, Indirapuri Drain &Banthala 
Drain) discharge into Najafgarh drain and Shahdara Outfall drain respectively which 
finally discharge effluent into river Yamuna in Delhi. From the above-mentioned 

67 
 
submissions of the main Yamuna stem States, the Committee are given to understand 
that at the moment, the river not only gets substantial amounts of industrial and 
domestic garbage, but it also lacks the bare minimum of fresh water because practically 
all of the water in the river is diverted for various consumptive activities. The situation is 
particularly grave in the State of Delhi where the 22-km stretch of river Yamuna 
between Palla to Okhla which is 80 less than 2 per cent of the entire length of the river 
from Yamunotri to Allahabad which is 1376 km. accounts for about 75-80 per cent of 
the total pollution in the river. They, therefore, urge upon the Department to proactively 
act with all the main stem Yamuna States to overcome the loopholes mentioned above 
in a timebound manner in order to plug the untreated sewage flowing into the drains. 
Further, the Committee feel that fixing accountability for those overseeing these work is 
necessary to strengthen the monitoring. The Committee would like to be apprised of the 
steps taken in this regard within three months of presentation of this Report. 
Reply of the Government 
 
Reply/Comments on recommendation no. 12 was sought from Haryana Pollution 
Control Board, Uttar Pradesh Pollution Control Board, Uttarakhand Pollution Control 
Board, Himachal Pradesh Pollution Control Board, Rajasthan Pollution Control Board, 
Delhi Pollution Control Committee (DPCC) & CPCB vide email dated 22.02.2024. 
Further the follow-up was done through reminders and phone calls. 
 
Reply received from Delhi Pollution Control Committee (DPCC) vide email dated 
18.03.2024is reproduced below: 
Vide order dated 09.01.2023, Hon'ble NGT has constituted a High Level Committee 
(HLC) of concerned authorities in Delhi with the Chief Secretary, Delhi, as Convener; 
and consisting of Secretaries of Irrigation, Forest & Environment, Agriculture and 
Finance, GNCTD; CEO, DJB; Vice Chairman, DDA; Secy or his nominee (not below 
the rank of Addl. Secy), Ministry of Agriculture, Gol; DG Forest or his nominee (not 
below the rank of DDG), MoEF&CC, GoI; Secy, MoJS or his nominee not below the 
rank of Addl. Secy, Secy, MoEF&CC or his nominee not below the rank of Addl. Secy, 
DG NMCG and Chairman CPCB. The Committee is to deal with all issues as set out in 
order dated 27.01.2021 of Hon'ble NGT in OA No. 06/2012 in the matter of Manoj 
Mishra Vs. Union of India & Ors and other ancillary matters. 
 
High Level Committee has prepared Department wise detailed Action Plan for 
Rejuvenation of river Yamuna including action plan for trapping of Drains out falling in 

68 
 
river Yamuna (Annexure-9) of the said Action Plan) after its first meeting on 
20.01.2023 and submitted to Hon'ble NGT on 31.01.2023. Copy of the said Action Plan 
has already been submitted to the Secretary, Ministry of Jal Shakti and DG NMCG.1st, 
2nd, 3rd, 4th, 5th, 6th, 7th, 8th and 9th meetings of the HLC were held on 20.01.2023, 
14.02.2023, 14.03.2023, 21.04.2023, 09.06.2023, 10.08.2023, 10.10.2023, 10.01.2024 
& 20.02.2024 respectively.  
 
The progress of the Action Plan in respect of tapping of Drains out falling in river 
Yamuna has been discussed extensively in each of the meetings. A brief of 22 Drains 
out falling into River Yamuna in Delhi and Proposed Action for Tapping of Flow is 
enclosed at Annexure-9. 
 
Reply received from Himachal Pradesh Pollution Control Board vide email dated 
11.03.2024 is reproduced below: 
As far as Himachal Pradesh is concerned, as per the information furnished by Himachal 
State authorities, there is no direct municipal sewage discharge into River Yamuna in 
Paonta Sahib area of District Sirmaur. However, there are 4 number of drains in 
municipal limits identified as carrying grey water and ultimate discharge in River 
Yamuna. Further, as informed by HPPCB, the concerned Municipal Committee and Jal 
Shakti Vibhag have not taken corrective measures as per the Yamuna Action Plan such 
as carrying out the survey, preparation of DPR for STP at Pujari Ghat, 100% household 
connectivity to existing STP, etc. 
 
There are 5 nos of drains identified in Municipal Area Paonta Sahib which are draining 
into River Yamuna: 
i. MC Paonta Sahib Drain near Shri Deiji Sahiba Temple Devinagar, Paonta Sahib 
ii. MC Paonta Sahib Drain, Kripal Shilla Gurudwara, Devinagar, Paonta Sahib 
iii. MC Paonta Sahib Drain near Sabji Mandi. 
iv. MC Paonta Sahib Drain, Jamniwala near Mankind Pharmaceutical Ltd. Unit 2 
v. MC Paonta Sahib Drain near Old SBI, Paonta Sahib 
All these drains carry only grey water from households and commercial shops. The 
sampling of these drains was carried out on 29.11.2023. The results of samples have 
been furnished below: 
 
 
 

69 
 
 
TABLE 14: SAMPLE RESULTS 
Sr. 
No 
Name and Location Parameters Remarks 
pH 
(6.5-
9.0) 
TSS 
(mg/l) 
(100) 
COD 
(mg/L) 
(250) 
BOD 
(mg/l) 
(30) 
FC 
(MPN/100 
ml) 
 
1 MC Paonta Sahib 
Drain near Shri Deiji 
Sahiba Temple 
Devinagar, Paonta 
Sahib 
7.23 171 296 95 1,84,000 Action 
Plan for 
treatment 
required 
from MC 
Paonta 
Sahib 
2 MC Paonta Sahib 
Drain, Kripal Shilla 
Gurudwara, 
Devinagar, Paonta 
Sahib 
7.15 211 236 65 1,09,500 
3 MC Paonta Sahib 
Drain near Sabji 
Mandi. (collection 
date: 03.08.2023) 
7.43 40 36 4 4,600 
4 MC Paonta Sahib 
drain Jamniwala near 
Mankind 
Pharmaceutical Ltd. 
Unit 2 
7.12 19 92 20.5 15,750 MC Drain 
carrying 
grey water 
near 
Jamniwala 
has been 
tapped for 
treatment 
by JSV in 
STP Zone-
III, Paonta 
Sahib. 
5 MC Paonta Sahib 
Drain near Old SBI, 
Paonta Sahib 
7.52 89 152 38 54,000 Action 
Plan for 
treatment 
required 
from MC 
Paonta 
Sahib 
 
Directions have been issued to MC Paonta Sahib enclosed at Annexure-10. 
 
Reply received from Uttarakhand Pollution Control Board vide email dated 
02.05.2024 is reproduced below: 
Pollution Control Board is monitoring water quality of river Yamuna at 11 locations 
including one Wetland i.e. Asan Conservation Reserve. Out of these 11 locations, 

70 
 
water quality at 02 locations namely Yamunotri and Sayanachatti are monitored on 
annual basis and water quality at the remaining 09 locations is being monitored on 
monthly basis.  
 Water quality of 07 locations is found under category 'A' of the Designated Best 
Use Water Quality Criteria and water quality of following 04 locations fall under 
category “B” of the DBU:  
1. River Yamuna D/S at Vikas Nagar, Dehradun 
2. River Yamuna Canal at Dakpatthar, Dehradun 
3. River Yamuna at Dakpatthar, Dehradun 
4. River Tons/Asan at Selaqui, Dehradun 
 
Annual average data for the year 2023 is enclosed at Annexure-11. 
Uttarakhand Pollution Control Board has also monitored 17 drains from Purola to Vikas 
Nagar discharging into river Yamuna during January 2021. Out of these 17 drains, 04 
drains were found dry. Amongst the remaining 13 drains. Syphon Nala and Gandha 
Nala at Vikasnagar have relatively high BOD i.e. 88 mg/l and 26 mg/l respectively. BOD 
of Sarakhanda drain at Barkot was found to be 0.4 mg/l. Very less BOD (less than 3 
mg/l) was observed in the remaining 10 drains.Drains monitoring results are enclosed 
at Annexure 12: 
 
Reply received from Rajasthan State Pollution Control Board vide email dated 
10.05.2024 is reproduced below: 
Efforts are being made to tap all the drains discharging untreated domestic effluent to 
divert to STPs. Regular communications being done with LSG to ensure the same. 
Environmental compensation is also being imposed for discharging untreated domestic 
effluent to the water bodies on defaulters. 
 
Reply received from Uttar Pradesh State Pollution Control Board vide email dated 
29.05.2024 is reproduced below: 
The issue regarding plugging of untreated sewage flow in drain is related to the 
concerned Local Bodies under Urban Development Department. Hence, this 
information may be sought from Urban Development Department. 
Accordingly, a letter dated 10.06.2024 from NMCG has been sent to Honorable 
Principal Secretary, Urban Development, Uttar Pradesh for their necessary action. 
 

71 
 
Input from National Mission for Clean (NMCG) 
Yamuna is one of the sacred rivers of India and largest tributary of Ganga River. It 
originates from the Yamunotri glacier in Uttarakhand passing through Himachal 
Pradesh, Tajewala-Haryana, Wazirabad-Delhi, Okhla-Delhi, Okhla barrage to 
Confluence Point of Chambal River and finally merges into River Ganga at Prayagraj. 
The total length of the Yamuna up to its point of confluence with the Ganga at 
Prayagraj is 1376 km with catchment area spread over 3.67 lakh sq. km. 
 
Yamuna River has no fresh water after the Wazirabad barrage in Delhi. There is a 
critical path of 22 km where 22 major drains are discharged into River Yamuna. Only 
after the confluence of River Chambal, the water quality of River Yamuna improves. 
 
The Government of India is supplementing the efforts of the States for checking the 
rising level of pollution of River Yamuna by providing financial assistance to different 
States of India viz. Haryana, Delhi and Uttar Pradesh, in phased manner since 1993, 
under the Yamuna Action Plan (YAP I, II & III). Under the YAP Phase – I & II, an 
expenditure of Rs. 1,514.70 croreshave been incurred for creation of sewage treatment 
capacity of 942 MLD and rehabilitation of 328 MLD STP in States of Haryana, Delhi & 
Uttar Pradesh. 
 
Presently, Government of India/NMCG has sanctioned Total 34 projects costing Rs. 
5834.71 crore by which 2110.25 MLD STP capacity will be created. They comprise of 
(01) project in Himachal Pradesh, (02) projects in Haryana, (11) projects in Delhi and 
(20) projects in Uttar Pradesh, under Namami Gange programme to abate pollution 
load to river Yamuna & Hindon River. Out of these 34 projects, 15 are already 
completed, viz. one (01) project in Paonta Sahib, Himachal Pradesh, two (02) projects 
in Sonipat and Panipat, Haryana, four (06) projects in Vrindavan, Etawah, Firozabad, 
Baghpat and Mathura (STP & CETP), UP and six (06) projects in Delhi. 
 
The support of MoHUA (Ministry of Housing & Urban Affairs) is sought for solid waste 
management projects in this basin as the removal & proper disposal of solid waste is a 
challenge for ultimate pollution abatement of the river. 
 
Delhi: In Delhi, under Namami Gange Programme of NMCG, a total of 11 projects are 
at various stages of implementation, for treatment of 1268 MLD sewage capacity at a 

72 
 
total cost of Rs. 2009.12 Crore to conserve the River Yamuna. They include 9 major 
sewerage infrastructure projects as under: 
 
I. Sewerage Infrastructure under EAP JICA assisted YAP III plan: There are a 
total of 8 sewerage infrastructure projects of Rs 1435.96 Crore in Delhi for: 
a. Creation of 564 MLD STP capacity at Okhla (O). After completion it will be 
counted as the largest STP plant in India. 
b. Two projects for Rehabilitation and upgradation of 386 MLD STP capacity 
at Rithala & Kondli (R2 & K3) 
c. Three projects for Rehabilitation of Trunk sewers (K1, K2 & R1a) 
d. Two projects for Rising Main of 35 Km length in Kondli & Rithala zones (K4 
& R1b). 
Out of these 8 projects, 5 projects namely (K1, K2, R1a, K4 & R1b) have 
already been completed and the balance 3 STP projects (K3, R2 & O) 
are scheduled to be completed by March 24. Further it may be noted that 
out of these 3 projects, namely Rithala (R2), Kondli (K3) & Okhla (O), the 
Rithala STP is fully operational with 160 MLD presently being received at 
the plant against total 182 MLD and the Kondli STP is fully operational, in 
all its 3 phases I, II & III having 204 MLD sewage. The sewage treatment 
at Okhla STP has just started. 
II. Sewerage Infrastructure under non EAP NGP: One project of 318 MLD WWTP 
at Coronation Pillar has been sanctioned at a cost Rs. 515.08 crore, which has 
already been completed in March 2022.  
III. In addition, Delhi Government has taken up various projects of River surface 
cleaning, Internal & Peripheral sewerage works, Interceptor sewer projects, 
Sewage treatment plants and Public outreach activities in Delhi through their 
own funding/other Central Government funding like JNNURM etc.  
IV. Uttar Pradesh (UP): In UP, under Namami Gange Programme of NMCG, a 
total of 20 projects are at various stages of implementation, for treatment of 
694.09 MLD sewage capacity at a total cost of Rs. 3,596.15 crore to conserve 
the River Yamuna. They include: 
a. Interception & Diversion (I&D) and STP Works for Baghpat Town on DBOT 
basis 
b. Interception & Diversion (I&D) and STP Works for balance drains at 
Mathura on HAM basis 

73 
 
c. Rehabilitation/Renovation of Agra Sewerage Scheme (I&D Works Part 1 & 
2) in Agra. 
d. Three projects on Kosi Kalan town, Chhata town & Vrindavan city at District 
Mathura, UP. 
e. I&D project at Kairana. 
f. Upgradation of existing 6.25 MLD CETP at Mathura. 
g. Mathura Sewerage project (New 30 MLD, Rehab – 14.5+16.5+6.8 MLD 
STP). 
h. Firozabad Sewerage Scheme (I&D) works. 
i. Etawah Sewerage Scheme (I&D) works) (New – 21 MLD, Rehab – 23.94 
MLD STP) 
j. Renovation and Upgradation of 4 MLD STP/SPS & appurtenance works at 
Vrindavan (Mathura), U.P. 
k. Four I&D &STP works at Budhana, Mujjafarnagar, Saharanpur & Hathras 
Town 
l. Four I&D & STP works at Shami Town, Thanabhawan, Banat & Babri-
bantikhera for Krishani River (Tributory of Hindon) in Shamli Distt, UP 
Out of these 20 projects, 6 projects have already been completed, 4 are under 
execution, 1 LOA issued, 4 under bid evaluation, 4 under tendering and 1 under 
retendering.In-addition to above 03 projects are in pipeline namely Deoband (Dist. 
Saharanpur), Aligarh city & Mathura City. 
The detail list with status of projects on River Yamuna under Namami Gange (11 
projects in the Delhi @ Rs. 2009.12 crore; 1 project in HP @ Rs. 11.57 crore; 2 projects 
in Haryana @ Rs. 217.87 crore; 20 Projects in UP @ Rs. 3596.15 crore) is enclosed at 
Annexure-5. 
 
Reply received from Haryana State Pollution Control Board, vide email dated 
14.06.2024 is reproduced below:  
The Haryana Governmenthas laid sewer in all the approved areas. However, 11 KM 
length of sewer is under progress at Karnal and Faridabad. Besides, this is the sewage 
is being diverted from unapproved area. 155 such locations have been identified and 
work has been completed for 123 locations of approx. 100 MLD. The work is under 
progress for 32 locations of approx. 27 MLD sewage.The work is likely to be completed 
by December, 2025. 
(OM NO. LAFEAS-SCWRO29/6/2O24-SCWR   Dated 07th February 2024.) 

74 
 
 
(Recommendation No. 13) (Para No. 2.13) 
Sewage discharge from unauthorised colonies 
 
The Committee also observe that there are 1799 number of unauthorized 
colonies in Delhi. However, till Dec 2021, sewer lines are laid and commissioned in 685 
unauthorized colonies. Sewer line works are under progress in 469 nos. of 
unauthorized colonies and in 161 colonies, the NOC from the forest department is 
awaited. In 484 no of colonies, sewerage system is to be laid and will be connected 
with Decentralized STPs after possessions of land by DDA & Revenue Departments. 
Being of the opinion that one of the important reasons for poor quality of water in River 
Yamuna is due to untreated sewage discharge from unauthorized Colonies in Delhi, the 
Committee urge the Department to work in tandem with the Delhi Jal Board (DJB) so as 
to provide sewerage network to each and every household including all the 1799 
unauthorized colonies in Delhi in a time-bound manner. 
Reply of the Government 
 
Reply/Comments on recommendation no. 13 was sought from DPCC & DDA vide email 
dated 22.02.2024. 
 
Reply from Delhi Pollution Control Committee (DPCC) vide email dated 
18.03.2024 is reproduced below: 
As per Information available with DPCC, the present Status of the Sewerage network in 
un-sewered areas in all 1799 unauthorized colonies is as follows: 
TABLE 15 : STATUS OF SEWERAGE 
Sl.No. Description Cumulative 
Status (No.) 
Timelines/Remarks 
1. Sewer line laid/ commissioned 1,064 Laid/commissioned 
2. Work of sewer network is in Progress 267 November, 2024 
3. Colonies where sewerage network is to be laid 
along with Decentralized STPs 
307 The work shall be taken 
up after allotment & 
possession of land for 
DSTPs by DDA 
/Revenue Deptt. 
 
Rest of the 161 Colonies where NOC is awaited / "O Zone", NOC was earlier awaited 
being forest area or "O Zone" or ASI land. Pr. Secretary (Env. & Forest) had taken a 
meeting on 13.12.2023 with Delhi Jal Board (DJB), Forest Deptt., Delhi Development 

75 
 
Authority (DDA), etc. to address various issues in respect of unauthorised colonies 
where NOC is awaited. It was informed that NOC has been issued by Forest Dept. in 
case of 05 unauthorised colonies and NOC is to be issued in case of 73 unauthorised 
colonies and DJB is to provide alignment with map to Forest Dept. in case of 36 
unauthorised colonies. In the case of the remaining 47 Unauthorised Colonies, 04 
unauthorised colonies are falling under "O Zone" in which responses is awaited from 
DDA, 05 unauthorised colonies was reported with ASI [wherein ASI gave permission to 
DJB for one Unauthorised Colony in Mehrauli and in case of one Unauthorised Colony 
(Tuglakabad Area) matter is pending before Hon'ble High Court and 3 Unauthorised 
Colonies reportedly don't fall under the jurisdiction of ASI], in case of 12 Unauthorised 
Colonies laying of sewerage network is not feasible. Further, 26 unauthorised colonies 
were not traceable earlier, out of which 22 unauthorised colonies have been traced by 
DJB with help of GSDL and plan is to be submitted by DJB in respect of these 
Unauthorised Colonies. 
 
Reply received from Delhi Development Authority vide email dated 10.05.2024is 
reproduced below: 
Out of a total of nine (09) cases for allotment of land to DJB for STP/SPS which are 
being monitored in High Level Committee, allotments have been done in five (05) cases 
and allotments in two (02) cases are under process. Another two cases are related to 
handing over of Water Body. The summary of the cases is as under: 
 
TABLE 16: SUMMARY OF THE CASES 
Sl. 
No 
District Village/ Capacity Status as on 15.04.2024 
1.  Rangpuri 5 MGD 
STP SPS/Lift Station 
Allotment for STP done vide letter dated 
15.01.2024. Allotment of SPS done vide letter dated 
18.03.2024 payment awaited from DJB. 
2.  Chattarpur 
Extension 
1.75 MLD for DSTP 
Allotment done vide letter dated 05.03.2024. Payment 
awaited from DJB. 
3.  Maidangarhi 
4.30 MLD for DSTP 
TSS is being carried out to ascertain the exact status, 
location, demarcation of land under reference. Upon 
receiving the same, allotment will be processed 
accordingly. 

76 
 
Sl. 
No 
District Village/ Capacity Status as on 15.04.2024 
4.  Salahpur Khera 
0.5 MGD for Lift 
station 
Rectified TSS drawing of village Salahpur has been 
forwarded to the O/o SDM (KH) South-West, 
GNCTD for verification vide letter dated 29.01.2024. 
Joint Inspection in this regard was carried out on 
20.03.2024 and discrepancies were found in TSS. The 
recitification of the same is under process. Upon 
rectification and verification of TSS, handing over of 
water body will be processed. 
5.  Shahbad 
Mohammadpur 
2 MGD for Lift 
Station 
TSS was carried out and discrepancies were found in 
TSS drawing. After rectification and verification of 
the same, handing over of water body will be 
processed. 
6.  Adjoining Maharishi 
Valmiki Hospital, 
Pooth Khurd Village 
Allotted done vide letter dated 16.10.2023. Payment 
received from DJB on 02.04.2024 and the same is 
under verification. Upon verification, possession letter 
will be issued 7.  Vijay Colony near 
Bawana Chowk 
8.  Village Mohamadpur 
Majri District 
21 MLD for DSTP 
Allotment done vide letter dated 08.12.2021 and 
Possession letter issued vide letter dtd 12.01.2024. 
9.  Swatantra Nagar and 
Bankner village for 
STP/DSTP in Narela 
Constituency 
Allotment under process 
 
As per request of DJB vide letter dtd. 13.12.2023, NOC has been issued to DJB on 
12.02.2024 for four (04) nos. of colonies falling under O Zone namely (i) New Aruna 
Nagar (Majnu ka Tila), (ii) Bhagat Singh Park Extn Siraspur Village, (iii) Garhi Mandu 
Village, (iv) Old Village Usman Pur (3rd Pushta Road) for initiating necessary action for 
extending the sewerage network by DJB. 
 
(OM NO. LAFEAS-SCWRO29/6/2O24-SCWR   Dated  07th February 2024.) 
 
(Recommendation No. 14) (Para No. 2.14) 
Sewage Intervention 
 
The Committee note that out of 35 STPs in Delhi, 22 are non-complying; in 
Haryana, out of 156 STPs, 64 are non-complying; in Uttar Pradesh, out of 130, only 27 
are non-complying, while in Uttarakhand and Himachal Pradesh, out of 69 and 75, non-
complying STPs are 30 and 22 respectively. Further the Committee note that there is 

77 
 
huge gap between the sewage generation and existing treatment capacity particularly 
in the States of Delhi, Haryana and Uttar Pradesh. While sewage generation in Delhi is 
3600 MLD in Delhi, existing treatment capacity of STPs is 2874 MLD resulting in gap of 
726 MLD (appx.). Similarly, in Uttar Pradesh, against the sewage generation of 5500 
MLD, the treatment 81 capacity is 4074.5 MLD resulting in a gap of 1425.5 MLD. 
However, in Haryana, though, treatment capacity of 1835.2 MLD is in excess of 
sewage generation of 1506.9 MLD, but due to under-utilization of existing capacity, 
there is a gap of 41 MLD (appx.) Not only this, the Committee also observe that the 
STPs in all the Yamuna main stem States are functioning below their optimum 
utilization capacity which also significantly aggravates the problem of discharging 
untreated waste into the river. The Committee are of the view that contamination of 
river Yamuna caused by both human and industrial waste transform it into a carrier of 
untreated industrial waste, garbage, agricultural run-off and municipal waste. These 
pollutants make it more of a toxic waterway than a river. This has a profound effect on 
the well-being of the people living along the course of the river. The Committee, 
therefore, urge upon the Department to take up the issue of underutilized capacity of 
STPs with concerned States and also with their coordination prepare a time-bound 
Action Plan on urgent basis to not only enhance the capacity of the existing STPs but 
also bridge the gap between the capacity generation and the utilization capacity. The 
Committee would like to be apprised of the specific steps taken in this regard by the 
Department within three months from the presentation of this Report. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Reply/Comments on recommendation no. 14 was sought from Delhi Pollution Control 
Committee, HP Pollution Control Board, UK Pollution Control Board, U.P Pollution 
Control Board, Rajasthan State Pollution Control Board& H.P State Pollution Control 
Board vide email dated 22.02.2024. 
 
Reply received from Delhi Pollution Control Committee (DPCC) vide email dated 
18.03.2024 is reproduced below: 
There are currently 37 Operational STPs of DJB in Delhi with total installed capacity of 
667 MGD. 

78 
 
Out of 37 STPs, 22 STPs were found not 2 are meeting the Standards prescribed by 
non- DPCC and only 15 STPs were found non- meeting the Standards prescribed by 
desh, DPCC in the month of January, 2024. 
 
High Level Committee has prepared Department wise detailed Action Plan for 
Rejuvenation of river Yamuna to meet the Gap and Accommodate Future Increase in 
Sewage Generation which includes following: 
 Construction of 3 New STPs at Okhla, Delhi Gate and Sonia Vihar[ 47 MGD 
addition] 
 Upgradation of Existing 18 Sewage Treatment Plants 
 Rehabilitation of existing 3 STPs at Kondli Ph-II & Rithala Ph-I and Yamuna Vihar 
Ph -II. 
 Construction of 40 DSTPs [26 DSTPs at various locations of Delhi and 14 DSTPs 
in Najafgarh Drainage Zone] [Additional Capacity 93.5 MGD] 
Total capacity of STPs after augmentation and up-gradation of existing STPs will be as 
follows: 
Total Capacity of STPs by March, 2024 
−814 MGD [667 MGD + 147 MGD] 
Total Capacity of STPS by December, 2024 
−922 MGD [667 MGD + 255 MGD] 
Total Capacity of STPs by March, 2025 
−964.5 MGD [ 667 MGD + 297.5 MGD] 
#Will be sufficient to treat the sewage of 924.8 MGD (80% of 1156 MGD Water Supply) 
in future. 
Reply received from Himachal Pradesh Pollution Control Board vide email dated 
11.03.2024 is reproduced below: 
There are 03 nos of Sewage Treatment Plants (STPs) operational to treat the domestic 
sewage load of Municipal Area Paonta Sahib. The details of these STPs are as under:  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

79 
 
TABLE 17: STP DETAILS 
Information on Sewage Generation and Treatment capacity in Catchment of River Yamuna 
Sl. 
No 
Name of 
Municipality/M
unicipal 
Corporation 
Sewage 
Generation (in 
MLD) Calculation 
as per 1991 
Census for a 
period of 25 years) 
Installed Capacity 
Installed 
treatmen
t 
capacity 
in MLD 
Numbe
r of 
STPs 
Complying 
Capacity 
Number of 
STPs 
1.  
MC Paonta 
Sahib 
Zone-I = 0.44 MLD 
 for 256 
Households 
0.44 MLD 1 0.40 MLD 
i.e., 90% of 
the proposed 
population 
as per 1991 
census 1 
Zone-II = 1.0 MLD 
 for 540 
Households 
1.0 MLD 1 0.50 MLD 
i.e.,50% of 
the proposed 
population 
as per 1991 
census 1 
Zone-III = 1.72 MLD 
 for 817 
Households 
1.72 MLD 1 STP suffered damage 
during unprecedented heavy 
rainfall last year during 
monsoon. The restoration 
work has been completed in 
the 3rd week of February, 
2024.  Now, STP is working 
and under stabilization.MC 
Drain carrying grey water 
near Jamniwala has been 
tapped for treatment. 
 
The sampling of these STPs is carried out by HPSPCB Paonta Sahib and sampling 
results of these STPs from November, 2023 to January, 2024 are given below: 
 
  

80 
 
TABLE 18 : SAMPLING RESULT 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of 
Location 
Month Parameters 
pH 
(6.5-9.0) 
TSS 
(Mg/l) 
(<99 
mg/L) 
FC 
(MPN/100 
ml) 
(<999) 
BOD(mg/l) 
(<30) 
Remarks 
1 Executive 
Engineer 
JSV STP 
Zone I 
Ward No. 
10, 
Devinagar, 
Paonta 
Sahib, 
Distt. 
Sirmaur, 
H.P. 
Nov-23 7.68 37 2700 15 - 
Dec-23 7.58 33 10800 11.5 - 
Jan-24 7.60 31 1840 10.5 - 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2 Executive 
Engineer 
JSV STP 
Zone II 
Near Main 
Bazaar, 
Paonta 
Sahib, 
Distt. 
Sirmaur, 
H.P. 
Nov-23 STP was under maintenance and upgradation for tertiary 
treatment. 
Dec-23 7.66 17 920 6.0 Complying 
Jan-24 7.54 21 700 3.9 Complying  
3 Executive 
Engineer 
JSV 
Paonta 
Zone 3 
Village 
Kishanpur
a Paonta 
Sahib, 
Sirmaur 
Nov-23 STP suffered damage during unprecedented heavy rainfall last 
year during monsoon. The restoration work has been completed 
in the 3rd week of February, 2024.  Now, STP is working and 
under stabilization. Dec-23 
Jan-24 
            
            
Reply received from Uttarakhand Pollution Control Board vide email dated 
02.05.2024 is reproduced below: 
At present there are 05 operational common STPs in the Yamuna catchment in 
Uttarakhand STP at Indranagar Dehradun @5 MLD capacity; 01 STP at Bhatta fall 
Mussorie capacity: 01 STP at Landhore North Mussorie @ 0.8 MLD capacity; 01 STP 
at Kulri bazar, Mussoorie @ 0.9 MLD capacity and 01 STP at Happy Valley Mussorie 
@ 1.1 MLD capacity) with total capacity 11.02 MLD. 

81 
 
Uttarakhand Pollution Control Board is monitoring water quality of all these 05 STPs on 
monthly basis. As per the results the STPS were found complied with the standards as 
notified by MoEFCC, GOI. 
 
All the STPs were found complying in the month December 2023 as per the standards 
prescribed by MoEF & CC while 02 STPs namely 0.8 MLD STP at Landour North and 
1.2 MLD STP Happy Valley were found non complying as per the standards prescribed 
by Hon'ble NGT, Annual average of the STP monitoring data for the year 2023 is 
enclosed at Annexure-13: 
 
Under Construction Common STPs: - 
1. 04 STPs of total capacity 3.2 MLD are under construction in Mussoorie. 
2. 02 STPs of total capacity 7.01 MLD are proposed in Vikasnagar. 
 
Reply received from Rajasthan State Pollution Control Board vide email dated 
10.05.2024 is reproduced below: 
Currently total no. of STPs in the State are 133 (123 operational & 10 non-operational) 
with treatment capacity of 1,400.05 MLD out of which the capacity utilization of existing 
STPs is 892.75 MLD. The State Board is ensuring compliance of these treatment plants 
from time to time. As of now, based on applicable standards 43 STPs are complying 
and 80 are non-complying and action isbeing taken by the State Board accordingly. 
 
Reply received from Uttar Pradesh State Pollution Control Board vide email dated 
29.05.2024is reproduced below: 
The issue regarding construction of STP, its commissioning and operation is related to 
Urban Development Department and Department of Housing and Urban Planning, Uttar 
Pradesh. Hence, the information may be sought from Urban Development Department 
and Housing and Urban Planning, Uttar Pradesh. 
 
Reply received from Haryana State Pollution Control Board, vide email dated 
14.06.2024 is reproduced below:  
There are 184 STPs in Haryana of 2033 MLD capacity. The non-complying STPs are 
being upgraded. Presently, 58 STPS are non-complying and work is likely to be 
completed by Dec., 2025. Rest of the STPs are complying. 
Input from National Mission for Clean Ganga 

82 
 
As on April 2024, under the Namami Gange Programme, a total of 200 nos. (including 
one modular STP) Sewerage Infrastructure projects costing Rs. 31,737 crores have 
been sanctioned for creation of 6,218 MLD. Out of this, 116 projects are completed with 
a treatment capacity of 3,111 MLD, 48 projects are under progress with treatment 
capacity of 1,763 MLD, and 36 projects are under tendering. The State wise Sewerage 
Infrastructure Project details is enclosed at Annexure-14. 
(OM NO. LAFEAS-SCWRO29/6/2O24-SCWR   Dated  07th February 2024.) 
 
(Recommendation No. 15) (Para No. 2.15) 
 Use of fertilizer and pollution of river Yamuna 
 
The Committee note that the assessment regarding the extent and magnitude of 
pollution caused in river Yamuna due to application / use of fertilizer in agriculture 
during last five years has not been carried out by CPCB. However, in compliance to the 
directions of Monitoring Committee on river Yamuna (MC) constituted by Hon’ble NGT 
in O.A No 06/2012 in the matter of Manoj Mishra Vs UoI, CPCB conducted a onetime 
study and tested vegetables grown on the bank of river Yamuna through laboratories 
identified by FSSAI in Delhi during 2019 in flood plains of Delhi stretch of river Yamuna. 
The study concluded that the contamination of soil was observed at most of the 
monitoring sites which may be due to excessive use of fertilizer. However, water quality 
of River Yamuna depicts trace amount of metals at some locations, which is primarily 
due to industrial wastewater discharge. In view of the potential health hazards due to 
use of fertilizers and pesticides in floodplains of river Yamuna, the Committee urge the 
Department to work with the Ministry of 82 Agriculture and Farmers’ Welfare to explore 
the ways to promote organic farming along the course of river Yamuna by providing 
incentives to the farmers so that usage of chemical fertilizers and pesticides may be 
minimized. 
Reply of the Government 
Reply/Comments on recommendation no. 15 was sought from CPCB which forwarded 
the recommendation to Ministry of Agriculture & Farmer’s Welfare. 
 
Reply received from Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers’ Welfare vide email 
dated 29.04.2024 is reproduced below: 
Government is promoting organic farming in the country through two dedicated 
schemes of Paramparagat Krishi Vikas Yojana (PKVY) and Mission Organic Value 

83 
 
Chain Development for North Eastern Region (MOVCDNER) since 21015-16. PKVY 
scheme is implementing in all the States/UTs except NE States and MOVCDNER 
scheme is exclusively for North Eastern States.The PKVY Scheme is implemented by 
the State/UTs Government with a funding pattern 100% in Union Territories (UT), 90:10 
in North-Eastern and Hilly States and 60:40 in case of all other States.  
The PKVY Scheme is implemented in a cluster mode with min. 20 ha size and states 
have been asked to implement in cluster size of 1000 ha in plain area and 500 ha in 
hilly area to facilitate marketing of organic produce. All farmers are eligible but within a 
group a farmer can avail benefit to a maximum of 2 ha. and the limit of assistance is 
Rs.31, 500 per hac., out of which, Rs. 15,000 is given as incentives to a farmer for 
organic conversion, organic inputs, during the conversion period of 3 years. 
Under PKVY scheme, for promotion of Organic Farming in 500 clusters covering 
10,000 ha area funds Rs 471.45 lakh was released in 2017-18. Government of Delhi 
was unable to make any progress under PKVY clusters showing the lack of interest and 
priority for promoting organic farming among farmers of Delhi. Therefore, GoI had 
requested them to refund the entire amount Rs. 471.45 lakh released to Delhi 
Government. 
Since, the scheme is implemented by the State/UTs government. Therefore, we may 
again request to the Delhi Government to adopt area for promotion of Organic Farming 
along the bank of Yamuna River, so that usage of chemical fertilizers and pesticides 
may be minimized. 
Reply received from Central Pollution Control Board vide email dated 08.03.2024 
is reproduced below: 
CPCB in association with SPCBs/ PCC of Uttarakhand, Himachal Pradesh, Haryana, 
Delhi and Uttar Pradesh carries out water quality monitoring of river Yamuna on 
monthly basis parameters such as physio-chemical, biological and pesticides on bi-
annually basis.The water quality data w.r.t pesticides (Alpha HCH, Beta HCH, Gamma 
HCH (Lindane), o,p' DDT, p,p' - DDT, Alpha Endosulphan, Beta Endosulphan, Aldrin, 
Dieldrin, 2,4-D, Chloropyriphos, Methyl Parathion, Malathian, Ortho Phosphate) for the 
year 2022-23 is attached as Annexure-15. It is observed that the concentration of 
monitored the pesticides found in the range 0.05- 0.5 mg/L except 2,4-D (1.52 mg/L at 
u/s of Lakhwar Dam) and Orthophosphate (0.1- 0.25 mg/L (at Dakpatthar, Dehradun). 
 
(OM NO. LAFEAS-SCWRO29/6/2O24-SCWR   Dated 07th February 2024.) 
 

84 
 
(Recommendation No. 16) (Para No. 2.16) 
Solid Waste 
 
The Committee have been apprised by the Department that only three States 
namely Himachal Pradesh, Uttar Pradesh and Delhi have furnished information 
regarding the extent and magnitude of pollution caused by the discharge of solid 
wastes into the river Yamuna and its tributaries. As per the information furnished, 
current level of waste generation in Himachal Pradesh is 11 Tonnes Per Day (TPD), 
while processed capacity is 8.65 TPD resulting in a gap of 2.35 TPD. Similarly, in Uttar 
Pradesh against the current waste generation of 1832 TPD, the processing capacity is 
1335 TPD, while the actual processing is 1201 TPD resulting in gap of 497 TPD. On 
the other hand, in Delhi, current waste generation is 11376 TPD, while processing 
capacity is 8219 TPD and actual capacity utilization is 7529 TPD, thus causing the 
huge gap of 3157 TPD. Further, the Committee also learn that as far as the State of 
Delhi is concerned, in order to fill the Gap in capacity, additional Municipal Solid Waste 
(MSW) facilities with total capacity of 6470 TPD are proposed to be installed by 
December, 2027. Besides, they also observe that only the State of Himachal Pradesh 
has furnished information regarding the installation of screens on the drains to prevent 
solid waste entering into stream of river Yamuna. Taking cognizance of the fact that 
there is a huge gap between the solid waste generation and processing capacity 
especially in Delhi which adversely impacts the quality of water in the Yamuna as well 
as endanger the aquatic species, the Committee recommend the Department to take 
up this issue with the concerned States and persuade them to make necessary efforts 
to bridge this gap on priority basis. Besides, they also urge upon the Department to 
develop some kind of monitoring mechanism in coordination with the State of Delhi to 
ensure that the proposed additional MSW facilities in Delhi may be installed within the 
fixed timeframe. The Committee would also like to be apprised of the information 
regarding the extent and magnitude of pollution caused by the discharge of solid 
wastes into the river Yamuna and its tributaries 83 as well as the steps taken by all the 
Yamuna basin States to install screens on the drains. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Reply/Comments on recommendation no. 16 was sought from Delhi Pollution Control 
Committee (DPCC) Himachal Pradesh Pollution Control Board, Uttarakhand Pollution 
Control Board, Rajasthan Pollution Control Board, Uttar Pradesh Pollution Control 

85 
 
Board and Haryana Pollution Control Board vide email dated 22.02.2024. Further the 
follow-up was done through reminders and phone calls. 
 
Reply received from Delhi Pollution Control Committee (DPCC) vide email dated 
18.03.2024 is reproduced below: 
Total Capacity of Existing MSW Processing Facilities (Including MRFs) - 8224.475 TPD 
(72.3%) 
i) Total MSW Processing – 6709.665 TPD (Fresh MSW + MRFs) (58.98%) 
ii) Disposal through Compost Pits (258 No) 549.42 TPD 
iii) Recycling through MRFs- 306 TPD 
iv) Gap in MSW Processing Capacity - 3151.525 TPD (27.7%) 
v) Gap in MSW Processing – 4666.335 TPD (41%) 
Solid Waste Monitoring Committee (SWMC) headed by Hon'ble Lt. Governor, Delhi and 
constituted by the Hon'ble National Green Tribunal vide order dated 16.02.2023 in O A. 
No. 606 /2018 in the matter of "Compliance of Municipal Solid Waste Management 
Rules, 2016 and other Environmental Issues". 
 
Solid Waste Monitoring Committee (SWMC) has prepared Department wise detailed 
Action Plan for Solid Waste Management in Delhi including following:  
1. 100% Segregation of Municipal Solid Waste at source. 
2. Transportation of all Solid Waste for Processing 
3. 100% processing of Municipal Solid Waste 
4. Bioremediation of entire legacy waste 
5. Setting up of Engineered Sanitary Landfill. 
Meetings of Solid Waste Monitoring Committee (SWMC) were held to monitor the 
progress of the said Action Plan. 
 
Reply received from Himachal Pradesh Pollution Control Board vide email dated 
11.03.2024 is reproduced below: 
MC Paonta Sahib has 13 wards for which solid waste approx. 8.65 TPD is collected 
and further processed at the designated Solid Waste Management Facility in Village 
Kedarpur, Paonta Sahib. Additional solid waste is collected by MC Paonta Sahib from 
the adjacent panchayats which is processed in the existing facility and RDF is sent to 
M/s Versatile Star Pvt. Ltd. (Copy enclosed at Annexure-16). In order to segregate 
solid waste collection & processing for municipal and rural areas, Worthy Deputy 

86 
 
Commissioner, Sirmaur has asked Block Development Officer, Paonta Sahib to identify 
separate land for solid waste processing facility for nearby rural area in Paonta Sahib 
block. 
 
Reply received from Uttarakhand Pollution Control vide email dated 02.05.2024 is 
reproduced below: 
There are seven Local Bodies located along the river Yamuna. Details of Solid Waste 
generation is submitted as follows: - 
TABLE 19: DETAILS OF SOLID WASTE GENERATION 
S.No. Name of local body Quantity of 
Municipal Solid 
Waste 
Mode of Disposal 
of Municipal Solid 
Waste 
1 Barkot Dist Uttarkashi 3.0 MTD -- 
2 Naugaon, Dist Uttarkashi 4.0 MTD -- 
3 Purola, Dist Uttarkashi 3.0 MTD -- 
4 Vikas Nagar, Dist Dehradun 10.0 MTD Disposed in SLF 
located at 
Sheeshambada, 
Dehradun 
5 Herbertpur, Dist Dehradun 4.5 MTD 
6 Selaqui Dist Dehradun 15.0 MTD 
7 Mussorie, Dist Dehradun 10.0 MTD 
 
Reply received from Rajasthan State Pollution Control Board vide email dated 
10.05.2024 is reproduced below: 
Currently total Solid Waste generation in the State is 6836.681 TPD out of which total 
6733.941 TPD is collected and processed either through treatment or land filling. The 
State Board in coordination with state ULBs is taking all steps to setup solid waste 
processing facilities for 100% collection & treatment of Solid Waste. Mapping of cement 
plants with MRF's has been done in the State to ensure co-processing of waste in 
those plants. Same plants are also under installation in state (i.e in Jaipur and 
Jodhpur). 
 
Reply received from Uttar Pradesh State Pollution Control Board vide email dated 
29.05.2024 is reproduced below: 
The issue regarding construction of Municipal Solid Waste (MSW) processing facilities, 
it's commissioning and operation is related to Urban Development Department. Hence, 
this information may be sought from the Urban Development Department. 
 

87 
 
Reply received from Haryana State Pollution Control Board, vide email dated 
14.06.2024 is reproduced below:  
The proposal and execution of installation of sewers have to be taken by the Irrigation 
Department.However, as per annual Report 2022-2023, 5785 TPD solid waste is being 
generated from 88 MCs. ULBD has decided the area into 13 clusters covering all 88 
ULBs for the safe & scientific treatment of solid waste with the aims to install one 
treatment facility in each cluster. Out of 13 clusters, the 02 facilities have been 
established & operating. 
 
(OM NO. LAFEAS-SCWRO29/6/2O24-SCWR   Dated  07th February 2024.) 
 
(Recommendation No. 18) (Para No. 2.18) 
Formation of Foam in River Yamuna 
 
The Committee observe that incidences of foaming in river Yamuna have been 
observed at locations such as at ITO Bridge, Okhla and Kalindi Kunj in Delhi, especially 
during onset of winter. The Committee are given to understand that Froth/Foam 
formation at the downside of Okhla Barrage is more due to turbulence caused by fall of 
water from the Okhla Barrage which is being maintained by the UP Irrigation 
Department. At Okhla barrage, all treated and untreated wastewater of Delhi is 
impounded and only excess wastewater is released downstream. Release of 
wastewater from barrage agitate surfactants present and foam formation takes place; 
foam quantities increase with discharge quantity of wastewater from the barrage. 
Besides, large amount of water hyacinth growth on the pondage of Okhla Barrage 
release surfactants on decomposition. The presence of phosphates and surfactants in 
untreated sewage is a major reason behind frothing in the river. The Committee note 
that the foam contain in polluted river water can cause skin irritation and infections. 
Besides, Phosphates in water cause eutrophication of algae which creates conditions 
favorable to formation of harmful algal blooms. 84 These blooms prevent light and 
oxygen from getting into the water, leading to the death of organisms in the ecosystem. 
The Committee note that Department has cited number of efforts made for prevention 
of froth formation in Yamuna. These inter alia include constitution of a Joint Committee 
comprising of NMCG, UYRB, UP Irrigation Department, Delhi Jal Board, Irrigation & 
Flood Control Department of Delhi & DPCC to oversee and coordinate the efforts being 
made by all concerned agencies to control/minimize froth formation downstream of 

88 
 
Okhla barrage in River Yamuna during the Chhath Puja, issue of directions in respect 
of Prohibition of Sale, Storage, Transportation and Marketing of Soaps & Detergents 
not conforming to the revised BIS Standards in NCT of Delhi etc. The Committee are of 
the opinion that long lasting solution for prevention of Froth/Foam formation in river 
Yamuna is complete treatment of sewage by Delhi, Haryana and Uttar Pradesh which 
is being discharged through various drains into river Yamuna. In this regard, the 
Committee in earlier paragraphs have made recommendations for enhancing the 
sewage treatment capacity of STPs by upgrading their technologies and connecting all 
the industrial clusters to CETPs. The Committee once again hope that the Department 
will make all the endeavours to improve the functioning of the STPs. In addition to this, 
the Committee believe that efforts also need to be made to introduce alternatives such 
as sodium aluminum silicate, sodium citrate, polyacry latest and tetra sodium etidronate 
for phosphates in detergents. Further, Surfactants released from households or 
commercial establishments need to get biodegraded in sewage treatment plants. They 
desire that Department will take up this matter with concerned agencies including BIS 
so as to reduce the foam formation in river Yamuna to negligible levels. 
 
Reply of the Government 
Reply/Comments on recommendation no. 18 was sought from Delhi Jal Board, Delhi 
Pollution Control Committee (DPCC) & Uttar Pradesh Irrigation department vide email 
dated 22.02.2024. Further the follow-up was done through reminders and phone calls. 
 
The reply did not receive from Delhi Jal Board.  
 
Reply received from Delhi Pollution Control Committee (DPCC) vide email dated 
18.03.2024 is reproduced below: 
DJB carried out dosing of anti-foaming agents in river Yamuna during Chhath Puja. 
Government of NCT of Delhi is primarily working on following Sectors for improving the 
functioning of STPs in Delhi and details are given in following Table: 
 
v. Rehabilitation of existing 3 STPs at Kondli Ph-II & Rithala Ph-I and Yamuna Vihar 
Ph -II. 
vi. Upgradation and increasing capacity of remaining 18 existing STPs 
vii. Construction of 3 New STPs at Okhla, Delhi Gate and Sonia Vihar 

89 
 
viii. Construction of 40 DSTPs 26 DSTPs at various locations of Delhi and 14 DSTPs 
in Najafgarh Drainage Zone] 
 
Total capacity of STPs after augmentation and up-gradation of existing STPs will be as 
follows: 
 Total Capacity of STPs by March, 2024 814 MGD |667 MGD + 147 MGD] 
 Total Capacity of STPs by December, 2024 922 MGD [ 667 MGD + 255 MGD] 
 Total Capacity of STPs by March, 2025 -964.5 MGD 667 MGD + 297.5 MGD] 
 
Will be sufficient to treat the sewage of 924.8 MGD (80% of 1156 MGD Water Supply) 
in future. 
Delhi Pollution Control Committee issued following directions u/s 33 (A) of the Water 
(Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1974 on 14.06.2021(enclosed at                
Annexure- 17 ).  
 
3. Sale, Storage, Transportation and Marketing of Soaps & Detergents not 
conforming to the revised BIS Standards shall be completely prohibited in NCT of 
Delhi. 
4. All the concerned Departments / Authorities including Municipal Corporation 
al/Local Bodies, Civil Supplies Department and District Administrations having 
control over the Shops and other Establishments (Suppliers, Stockiest, 
Transporters etc.) having Sale, Storage, Transportation and Marketing facilities for 
Soaps and Detergents in NCT of Delhi shall ensure the compliance of directions 
(1l) above through strict vigil and surprise checks on such establishments. 
 
Reply received from Uttar Pradesh Irrigation Department vide email dated 
02.05.2024 is reproduced below: 
Okhla barrage on Yamuna river is only a diversion head works which is built to divert 
the water into the canal for irrigation purposes.Minimum E-flow is maintained 
downstream Okhla barrage in compliance with MoU dated 11.03.1995 between 
Yamuna basin states and as per directions of NGT. After supplying water in the Agra 
canal for irrigation purposes as per demand, excess water is released downstream of 
the barrage.Barrage is operated through gates as per operation manual of barrage. The 
water only flows under the gates. There is no free fall in all of the water at the barrage. 
 

90 
 
The foam/froth that is being formed downstream of Okhla barrage on Yamuna river is 
not due to any activity by Irrigation and water resources department, U.P. but mainly 
untreated/polluted water being discharged into river Yamuna in Delhi region. Action in 
this regard should be taken by concerned departments/agencies. No action is required 
by the Irrigation and water resources Department, U.P. However, compliance of the 
directions - given by the committee to be formed of various departments will be ensured 
by Irrigation and water department U.P. 
 
Reply from National Mission for Clean Ganga 
564 MLD WWTP with targeted NGT parameters of 10/10 is being constructed at Okhla 
which is likely to be fully functional by Oct 2024. Presently about 200 MLD quantity of 
liquid line commissioning has been attained at this plant. 
Comment of the Committee  
(Please see Para No. 29 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
(OM NO. LAFEAS-SCWRO29/6/2O24-SCWR   Dated  07th February 2024.) 
 
(Recommendation No. 19) (Para No. 2.19) 
 
Further, the Committee observe that Froth / Foam formation in river Yamuna in 
Delhi particularly at the downstream of Okhla Barrage near Kalindi Kunj occurs 
particularly when the gates/ under sluices of Okhla barrage are opened and water is 
released through energy dissipating arrangements which creates churning and 
formation of froth. The Committee learn from the written submission of the Department 
that providing gentle slope at the Okhla barrage for smooth flow may help in avoiding 
turbulence at the downstream. Moreover, opening and closing of Gates of the barrage 
may be regulated in such a manner that free fall of discharge may be prevented. The 
Committee are of the view that though upgrading the sewage treatment capacity of the 
main Yamuna basin States may take some time, however the above two steps may be 
relatively carried out in a short span of time. Thus, the Committee urge the Department 
to take up this matter with the Departments of Government of NCT of Delhi (Irrigation 
and Flood Control Department and Delhi Jal board) and persuade them to take 
necessary remedial action in this regard on priority basis. The Committee would like to 
be apprised of the specific steps taken by the Department within three months from 
presentation of this Report. 

91 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Reply/Comments on recommendation no. 19 was sought from Delhi Development 
Authority (DDA) and Uttar Pradesh Irrigation Department vide email dated 22.02.2024. 
Further the follow-up was done through reminders and phone calls. 
 
Reply received from Delhi Development Authority vide email dated 10.05.2024 is 
reproduced below: 
The matter of Froth/Foam formation mainly relates to operation of Gates of Barrage 
and release of water thereafter, smoothness of the Flow of water and Quality of water 
in the River.  
 
Reply received from  Uttar Pradesh Irrigation  and Water ResourceDepartment 
vide email dated 02.05.2024 is reproduced below:  
UP-Irrigation Department Okhla barrage on Yamuna river is only a diversion headworks 
which is built to divert the water into the canal for irrigation purposes. 
After supplying water in Agra canal for irrigation purposes as per demand. excess water 
is released downstream of barrage. The downstream floor of existing barrage is already 
on gentle slope with D/S glacies. There is no freefall of water at any stage of the 
existing Okhla barrage.Barrage is operated through gates as per operation manual of 
barrage. The water flows under the gates only. There is no free fall of water at barrage. 
The foam/froth that is being formed at downstream of Okhla barrage on Yamuna river is 
not due to any activity by Irrigation and water resources department, U.P. but mainly 
due to untreated/polluted water being discharged into river Yamuna in Delhi region. 
 
(OM NO. LAFEAS-SCWRO29/6/2O24-SCWR   Dated  07th February 2024.) 
 
(Recommendation No. 20) (Para No. 2.20) 
 Namami Gange Programme 
 
The Committee note that the Government of India (GoI) has launched the 
Namami Gange Programme in 2014-15, to accomplish the twin objectives of effective 
abatement of pollution, conservation and rejuvenation of National River Ganga and its 
tributaries including Yamuna. The Union Government is supplementing the efforts of 
the State Governments in addressing the challenges of pollution of river Yamuna by 
providing financial assistance to States of Himachal Pradesh, Haryana, Delhi and Uttar 
Pradesh. Further, as on 31st August 2023, a total of 34 STPs Projects have been 

92 
 
sanctioned under the Namami Gange programme for river Yamuna and its tributaries. 
Out of these 34 projects, 1 Project is in Himachal Pradesh and 2 are in Haryana. These 
projects have been completed in both the States. However, in Delhi, out of 11 
sanctioned projects for creation of 1268 MLD capacity, only 6 have been completed 
resulting in creating of 704 MLD capacity. Similarly, in Uttar Pradesh, out of 20 Projects 
sanctioned for creation of 694.09 MLD capacity, only 6 Projects have been completed 
resulting in creation of 130.25 MLD. The Committee note that delay in completion of 
Projects have been attributed to various reasons such as delay in road/railway crossing 
permissions, delay in coordination at the State level specifically the State Ganga 
Committees constituted for coordinating the Ganga rejuvenation projects between 
various State agencies and a lack of coordination between the District Ganga 
Committees (DGC) headed by the District Magistrates to ensure speedy 
implementation of interventions and projects and for carrying out various activities 
pertaining to Ganga and its tributaries. While appreciating the ambitious Programme of 
Namami Gange, which aimed at cleaning and rejuvenating river Ganga and its 
tributaries, the Committee are of the view that the projects particularly in the State of 
Delhi and UP need to be executed in a fast 86 track manner so as to avoid cost and 
time overrun. The Committee hope that the Department will make concerted 
endeavours to overcome all the above mentioned issues/obstacles for speedy 
completion of these projects. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Input from National Mission for Clean Ganga  
 
In order to expedite implementation of the sewerage infrastructure projects by 
overcoming the bottlenecks and ensure timely completion of projects, the following 
measures are being taken by National Mission for Clean Ganga (NMCG): 
i) Regular monthly review, and interaction / discussions / site visits and coordination 
meetings with state agencies by NMCG. 
ii) For effective grounding and implementation of projects, a multi-level monitoring 
mechanism is already existing, both at Central and State level. At the Central 
level, NMCG holds regular review meetings with all the concerned State 
Governments and their Authorities including implementing agencies like Jal 
Nigam, Jal Sansthan etc. to oversee the pace of implementation of infrastructure 
projects. 

93 
 
iii) Resolving delay in road/railway crossing permissions by conducting high level 
inter-Ministerial meeting with Railways and NHAI. 
iv) Regular review meetings are also carried out by the Hon’ble Jal Shakti Minister as 
well as Secretary, D/o Water Resources, River Development and Ganga 
Rejuvenation, Ministry of Jal Shakti, not only with various officers of NMCG and 
the State Governments but also with the respective Hon’ble Chief Ministers or 
Chief Secretary of States to remove bottlenecks and also for expediting the pace 
of projects being executed at various levels. 
v) Important sewage infrastructure projects are reviewed at the Cabinet Secretariat 
level on PMG portal. 
vi) Sewage Infrastructure projects under Namami Gange Programme are also being 
monitored on OCMS portal, PRAYAS & NIP portal.  
vii) At State level, State Ganga Committees headed by the Chief Secretaries have 
been constituted for coordinating the Ganga rejuvenation projects between 
various State agencies and for the first time ever a district level mechanism has 
been set up in the form of District Ganga Committees (DGC) headed by the 
District Magistrate to ensure speedy implementation of interventions and projects 
and for carrying out various activities pertaining to Ganga and its tributaries. 
 
(OM NO. LAFEAS-SCWRO29/6/2O24-SCWR   Dated  07th February 2024) 
(Recommendation No. 21) (Para No. 2.21) 
 
The Committee further note that as on date a total of 139 District Ganga 
Committees (DGCs) have been formed. However, so far no State Yamuna 
Committees/District Yamuna Committees have been set up on the lines of District 
Ganga Committees. Considering the significant role played by the DGCs by monitoring 
the work of local authorities on various parameters of river cleaning, the Committee 
urge upon the Department to take necessary measures for setting up of Yamuna 
Committees/District Yamuna Committees. Further, the Committee observe that there is 
no proposal for setting up Clean Yamuna Fund (CYF) on the lines of Clean Ganga 
Fund (CGF). The Committee wholeheartedly appreciate the concept of CGF and desire 
that the Department should explore the possibility of establishing the same fund for the 
river Yamuna which is the important tributary of river Ganga so that the work relating to 
cleaning the river may not be halted for want of funds. Further, they also recommend 
that the Department should take appropriate steps to encourage the corporate sector to 

94 
 
contribute both financially and technically for conserving this important river. The 
Committee would like to be apprised of the steps taken by the Department in this 
regard within three months from presentation of this Report. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 National Mission for Clean Ganga vide its D.O. letter dated 1st December, 2023 
addressed to Sh. Naresh Kumar, Chief Secretary, Government of NCT of Delhi 
has requested to put in place the State Ganga Committee (SGC), State 
Programme Management Group (SPMG) & District Ganga Committees (DGC) in 
the State of Delhi on an urgent basis in the larger interest pollution abatement of 
tributaries of river Ganga i.e. Yamuna. So far NMCG has approved a total of 08 
projects of Rs. 1728.61 Cr. During the recent years in the State of Delhi. The 
response from the Government of Delhi is still awaited. 
 As per the Authority Notification dated 7th October 2016, the State is required to 
constitute the State Ganga Rejuvenation, Protection and Management Committee 
as per the composition and powers specified in the Schedule to implement 
various programmes and projects of NMCG. 
 The State is also required to put in place the State Programme Management 
Group (SPMG) for preparation, supervision and management of projects. The 
project funds will be routed through SPMG to the Executing Agencies. The 
institutional structures are in place in the Ganga main stem States, where the 
maximum number of projects under NMCG have been taken up so far. 
  As per Paragraph 53 of the Authority Order, District Ganga Committees (DGCs) 
are required to be constituted for the prevention, control and abatement of 
pollution in the river Yamuna (a tributary of Ganga) as specified in the aforesaid 
notification. 
 
 The Clean Ganga Fund (CGF) was established in 2015 as a trust under the Indian 
Trusts Act, 1882, to enable Resident Indians, Domestic and Overseas Corporates/ 
Trusts, and NRIs / PIOs to contribute towards the conservation efforts of River 
Ganga. The objective of the fund is to contribute to the national effort of improving 
the cleanliness of the River Ganga with contributions received from the residents 
of the country, NRIs/ PIO, and public and private companies. The specific purpose 
of CGF includes - 

95 
 
v. To fund the work program of Ganga rejuvenation chosen from the Namami 
Gange program of the Government of India. 
vi. To coordinate and oversee the implementation of the projects sanctioned. 
vii. To accept donations/ contributions from individuals, institutions, and 
corporates. 
viii. To develop any suitable plan for achieving the main objective of improving the 
cleanliness of the river Ganga. 
 Namami Gange Programme was launched in June 2014 for a period up to 31 
March 2021 to rejuvenate River Ganga and its tributaries. The programme was 
subsequently extended up to 31March, 2026 to accomplish the twin objectives of 
effective abatement of pollution, conservation and rejuvenation of National River 
Ganga and its tributaries, which includes river Yamuna also. 
 Therefore, contributions to the CGF can also be utilized for the rejuvenation efforts 
of river Yamuna. 
Comment of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 32 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
(OM NO. LAFEAS-SCWRO29/6/2O24-SCWR   Dated  07th February 2024.) 
 
(Recommendation No. 22) (Para No. 2.22) 
ITO Barrage and Flood Management in Delhi 
 
In view of huge flooding in Delhi in the month of July 2023, the Committee on 
23.08.2023 undertook a field visit to the ITO Barrage for an inspection of the role and 
working of ITO Barrage in Flood Management in Delhi. The Committee have been 
apprised that the Yamuna Barrage near ITO, Delhi across River Yamuna was 
constructed by the Haryana Irrigation Department during the year 1966-67 for the then 
Delhi Electric Supply Undertaking (DESU) for meeting cooling water requirement of 
Indraprastha Power Station and Rajghat Power House of Delhi Thermal Power Control 
Board (DTPCB). After construction of ITO barrage, its operation & maintenance was 
assigned to Haryana Irrigation Department. Indraprastha Power Station was 
decommissioned on 31.12.2009 and Rajghat Power House was also made non-
operational in May 2015. Since, this Barrage 87 was constructed to supply cooling 
water for above mentioned thermal power houses therefore, this Barrage has no role in 
flood management in Delhi. The function of ITO Barrage is not for regulation of flood 

96 
 
water. Further, the Committee noted that the team of Experts from CWC visited the ITO 
Barrage on 27.07.2023. During the visit, it was observed that on that day some of the 
gates were in fully closed position / partially opened position. The main cause of non-
functioning of these gates is heavy silting in and around the gates and poor 
maintenance of hydro-mechanical equipment. Rope connection to the gate or counter 
in some bays was detached. In this regard, the Committee noted the submission of the 
State of Haryana, as per which, the only reason for non-maintenance/overhauling of 
gates is attributed to failure of IPGCL authorities to provide maintenance and operation 
cost apart from capital investment as per requirement. On the other hand, Delhi 
Government believes that they have technical capability to operate and maintain ITO 
Barrage at present and can operate it in a better way as per requirement during the 
flood in Delhi territory. However, in this regard, the State Government of Haryana is 
referring to a decision taken in the meeting between Chief Secretary, Haryana and 
Principal Secretary Irrigation Department, Uttar Pradesh held on 02.04.2015, wherein it 
was decided that supplies available at Barrage at ITO, Delhi be considered for further 
distribution amongst U.P. Haryana and Rajasthan at Okhla. Hence, it is not feasible for 
Haryana to transfer the control of Barrage to Delhi. They further note that a Committee 
under the Chairmanship of Central Water Commission has been constituted by the 
Department of Water Resources, River Development and Ganga Rejuvenation for joint 
flood management study of river Yamuna, for its stretch between Hathnikund and 
Okhla Barrage. One of the scope of the study is to review the utility of ITO barrage in 
the present context. The Committee feels that this issue needs to be sorted out as early 
as possible for ensuring the safe operation of the barrage so that the State of Delhi 
does not again become a victim of floodings as witnessed in the month of July 2023. 
The Committee urged upon the Department of Water Resources, River Development & 
Ganga Rejuvenation to mediate in the matter and play the role of an honest broker in 
resolving this contentious issue between the concerned State Governments by pro-
actively engaging all stakeholders. The Committee would 88 also like to be apprised of 
the findings of the Committee constituted by the Department under the Chairmanship of 
Central Water Commission. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Reply/Comments on recommendation no. 22 was sought CWC vide email dated 
22.02.2024. Further the follow-up was done through reminders and phone calls. 
 

97 
 
Reply received from Central Water Commission vide email dated 03.04.2024 is 
attached below: 
Due to a combination of Western Disturbances and Southwest Monsoon, there was 
heavy rainfall in different places of Himachal Pradesh, Uttarakhand and Haryana during 
09-13 July 2023, leading to extensive landslides and flooding in the hills and plains. 
The heavy rainfall in the catchment area of river Yamuna resulted in huge runoff in the 
river, due to which an earlier Highest Flood Level (HFL) of 207.49 m recorded at the 
CWC gauging site of old Delhi railway bridge on 6th September, 1978 got surpassed by 
a new HFL of 208.66 m observed on 13th July 2023. This necessitated a fresh look at 
the river's flood management in its reach from Hathnikund Barrage up to Okhla 
Barrage. In this regard, DoWR, RD&GR, Ministry of Jal Shakti, vide OM No. Z-15011 /1 
/2020-FM Section-MOWR dated 6th August 2023, constituted a Committee for 
conducting a joint flood management study of river Yamuna for its reach between 
Hathnikund and Okhla barrage. The Committee headed by Chairman CWC has 
members from Haryana, Uttar Pradesh, NCT of Delhi and expert Organizations. It will 
inter-alia examine the meteorological aspects, return period of floods, discharging 
capacity of barrages, functional requirement of ITO barrage, etc. The Committee has 
been mandated to examine the meteorological aspects, return period of floods, 
discharging capacity of barrages, functional requirement of ITO barrage, etc. The 
Committee has submitted an Interim report in January 2024 to DoWR, RD & GR (FM 
Wing). It would be appropriate to consult the FM Wing of DoWR, RD & GR for including 
the information from the Interim report. 
Comment of the Committee  
(Please see Para No. 35 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
(OM NO. LAFEAS-SCWRO29/6/2O24-SCWR   Dated 07th February 2024.) 
 
(Recommendation No. 23) (Para No. 2.23) 
 
Further, the Committee also urge upon the Department to make necessary steps 
in coordination with the States Governments of Haryana, Uttar Pradesh and Delhi to 
recalibrate the Gause discharge Curves of all the three Barrages in NCT of Delhi in 
order to ensure that the discharges from these Barrages downstream are in sync with 
each other. They also desire that Bathymetric survey of River Yamuna should be 

98 
 
carried out once in 5 years or within a specified time period so that concern of silting of 
river bed could be addressed and clinical dredging could be done to accommodate the 
probable flood coming in River Yamuna. 
Reply of the Government 
Reply/Comments on recommendation no. 23 was sought from CWC vide email dated 
22.02.2024. Further the follow-up was done through reminders and phone calls. 
Reply received from Central Water Commission vide email dated 03.04.2024 is 
reproduced below: 
TheRiver cross section survey of Yamuna is carried out every year during non-
monsoon period for river morphological study purpose at approx. 10 km interval. There 
are four locations in Delhi region namely Burari (u/s of Wazirabad Barrage), 
Kalishnagar (near Old Delhi Railway Bridge), Bhogal (between Nizamuddin & DND 
bridge) and Jaitpur Extension (d/s of Okhla Barrage). A Morphological Study of 
Yamuna River has been got carried out by CWC through IIT Delhi. The final report of 
the same was submitted in Sept 2020 and a dissemination workshop on the findings of 
the report for all stakeholders was organized in Jan 2024. The objective of the study 
was: 1. To study morphological behaviour of the River Yamuna 2. To estimate erosion 
and deposition (areal retreat) on a decadal time scale 3. To analyse the dynamics of 
the river, course 4. To identify stable and critical reaches in the river. One of the 
findings of the study is "In the Delhi segment, very less braiding is observed, it is most 
likely due to the regulations of flows by Wazirabad, ITO and Okhla Barrage. Also, 
anthropogenic activities around the floodplains of Yamuna and river training works for 
flood control have restricted river activity to minimum level"(page 224). Channel bank 
Retreat due to erosion and deposition for the time frames of 1975-1990, 1990- 2000, 
2000-2010 and 2010-2016 have been estimated on grid-scale (page 341- 44). The 
results show that channel has experienced erosion for the period 1975 up to 2000 at 
the rate of 1.17 sq.km per year whereas from 2000 to 2016 channel experienced 
deposition of 7.12 sq.km in total from Ganaur to New Delhi whereas Noida and 
surrounding Delhi NCR region, channel has experienced deposition (11.25 sq.km) 
during 1975-1990, erosion (12.66 sq.km) during 1990-2000, deposition 7.46 sq.km 
during 2000-2010 and erosion 5.47 sq.km during 2010-2016. No specific trend or 
pattern has been noticed in erosion and deposition processes in the Yamuna River. 
Aggradation and degradation patterns analysed from observed cross-sections are in 
line with satellite-based captured erosion deposition maps. Suspended sediment load 
(SSL) varies spatially across Yamuna River. Delhi recorded the maximum value of SSL 

99 
 
in 1995. The year 1999- 2000 can be considered as a breaking point after which SSL 
for all available stations reduced drastically. Ministry of Jal Shakti (MoJS) has come up 
with a National Framework for Sediment Management (NFSM) for managing the 
sediments in a holistic manner. This framework lays emphasis on sediment 
management through integrated river basin management plan. It provides reference to 
all existing guidelines/policies dealing with the various aspects of the sediment 
management. The framework will facilitate the concerned stakeholders such as the 
State Governments other Ministries, Departments, etc in planning strategies and 
implementation of projects giving due consideration to environment and ecology and 
will serve as a guidance document for management of sediment across the river basin. 
The framework provides specific provisions for sediment management vide para 2.2 
and de-silting/dredging / mining restrictions details vide its Annexure-18. A "National 
Workshop on Integrated Management of Sediments in River Basins and Reservoirs for 
Sustainable Development'' was organized by CWC/MoJS on 19th June 2023 to share 
the contents of the framework with the State Government to follow for sediment 
management related sensitive issues including de-silting/dredging of rivers. Annexure -
19 of the framework provides details of de-silting/ dredging work in rivers to be followed 
by the executing agencies. 
Comment of the Committee  
(Please see Para No. 38 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
(OM NO. LAFEAS-SCWRO29/6/2O24-SCWR   Dated 07th February 2024.) 
 
(Recommendation No. 24) (Para No. 2.24) 
Upper Yamuna River Board (UYRB) 
 
The Committee note that a Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) was signed 
by the Chief Ministers of Himachal Pradesh, Haryana, Uttar Pradesh, Rajasthan, and 
National Capital Territory of Delhi on 12th May, 1994 regarding allocation of utilizable 
surface flow of River Yamuna upto Okhla Barrage (Upper Yamuna) among the co-basin 
States. In order to implement the said MoU, Upper Yamuna River Board (UYRB) was 
constituted. The main function of the Upper Yamuna River Board is to regulate the 
allocation of available flows amongst the beneficiary States and also maintenance of 
minimum flow, maintaining hydro-meteorological data for the basin; over viewing plans 
for watershed management; monitoring and reviewing the progress of all projects upto 
and including Okhla barrage. However, the Committee observe that UYRB is suffering 
shortage of manpower. They note that 58 posts were created for UYRB with the 

100 
 
approval of the Board members from the Basin States and funded by these States. 
However, subsequently, total 36 no of Posts, which were vacant for more than five 
years, have been abolished vide Ministry OM no. A11011/1/2014-E-III (UYRB) dated 
19.03.2015 & A-11011/7/2017 E-III Section dated 03.11.2017. There were 22 posts 
live, however, in spite of vigorous efforts to fill up the vacant posts, the same could not 
be filled and therefore out of sanctioned 22 posts, 17 posts have gone under deemed 
abolished category. Though, a proposal for revival of these posts has been submitted 
and is under consideration in DoWR, RD & GR. Presently 89 only 2 posts (Member 
Secretary & Specialist Environment) are filled and 3 officials (Deputy Director, Assistant 
Engineer-II and Junior Engineer) have been posted informally from Central Water 
Commission. The Committee feel that such a huge shortage of manpower adversely 
impacts the functioning of the UYRB. They, therefore, recommend the Department to 
take urgent measures to fill up the vacancies which are essential for smooth running of 
UYRB at the earliest and also take urgent steps on the proposal submitted to it for the 
revival of the posts which have gone under deemed abolished category. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Reply/Comments on recommendation no. 24 was sought from Upper Yamuna River 
Board vide email dated 22.02.2024. Further the follow-up was done through reminders 
and phone calls. 
 
Reply received from Upper Yamuna River Board (UYRB) vide email dated 
01.04.2024 is reproduced below: 
As per the recruitment rules, all the posts in UYRB Secretariat are intended to be filled 
through deputation of officers / staff from Central, State, and Union Territory 
Governments. It is found that even after advertisement of post for several times, there 
has been very low response from the applicants. In view of this, these posts have 
remained vacant for a long duration leading to its abolition. 
 
At present, there are only 6 live vacant posts in UYRB. The Upper Yamuna River Board 
(UYRB) Secretariat is continuously taking steps for filling the above posts. The 
advertisement for the post of Assistant Executive Engineer was issued on 4.3.2023 but 
yielded no response. The advertisement for filling two posts of Executive Engineer and 

101 
 
two posts of Draftsman were issued on 12.10.2023. The advertisement for filling one 
post of Specialist (Environment) has been issued on 7.3.2024. 
 
Even after wide circulation of the advertisements, no application has been received for 
the post of Executive Engineer. Two applications have been received for the post of 
Draftsman, processing of which is under progress. The advertisement for the post of 
Assistant Executive Engineer is being issued again. 
 
It has been found that there is an apparent lack of interest among applicants to join 
UYRB. The matter has been discussed in the Ministry. Process has been initiated to 
revise the recruitment rules to relax the conditions so as to attract a broader range of 
applicants. As a stop gap arrangement, informal postings of few officers from sister 
organizations of DoWR, RD&GR has also been made for smooth functioning of the 
organisation. Efforts are also being made for encadrement of few posts in cadres being 
managed by DoWR, RD&GR for its other organisations. 
 
The Upper Yamuna River Board (UYRB) Secretariat has also taken several other 
measures to tackle the pressing issue of staff shortages. Efforts have been made to fill 
some of the posts in the UYRB secretariat through outsourcing. In this regard, three 
skilled and four unskilled personnel have been engaged since 2013 Recently, 
DoWR,RD&GR has also approved a proposal for engagement of consultants with 
technical experience, two consultants with administrative experience, one consultant 
with finance experience and 4 young professionals with technical background. Out of 
this, five Consultants (four technical and one finance has already been engaged in Sep 
2023. Two such consultants have also left last month. Process for engaging personnel 
for these two positions and other approved positions is under progress.        
 
(OM NO. LAFEAS-SCWRO29/6/2O24-SCWR   Dated 07th February 2024.) 
 
(Recommendation No. 25) (Para No. 2.25) 
 
PUBLIC AWARENESS PROGRAMME 
 
The Committee note that various institutional, legislative and executive efforts 
have been made from time to time for prevention and control of pollution. In recent 
times, an ambitious Scheme ‘Namami Gange’ programme has been launched with the 

102 
 
aim of integrating previous and currently ongoing initiatives in holistic manner with a 
basin approach. The Committee welcome this step as it reflects the seriousness on the 
part of the Government to rejuvenate river Ganga and its tributaries. However, at the 
same time, the Committee are of the view that it is public participation and social 
awareness which make any programme a success in true spirit. The Committee feel 
that it is high time that all thestakeholders including the common people seriously 
understand their duties and also participate in the mission to clean the rivers. The 
Department should organize regular people participation programme on large scales to 
make them aware and responsible for having a clean environment including the rivers 
which are considered sacred and worshipped in our country. 
 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The National Mission for Clean Ganga (NMCG) has been undertaking comprehensive 
public awareness campaigns to foster a sense of responsibility and engagement 
among the public in efforts to clean and conserve the Ganga River through educational 
materials, community outreach, school programs, mass media campaigns, and online 
engagement. Swachhta Pakhwada Ganga Utsav, Ganga Run, Ganga Rafting 
expeditions, treks, Ghat pe Haat with a social message and several activities have also 
been taken up. 139 District Ganga Committees (DGCs) have been formed and their 
mandated monthly meetings done to encourage decentralization and ensure people’s 
participation. Some of the important public awareness programme organished by 
National Mission for Clean Ganga are; 
Swachhta Pakhwada 2024: On 28th March, 2024, NMCG, in collaboration with the 
Delhi Jal Board, partner NGOs, students, and the local public, spearheaded a vibrant 
cleanliness drive at ITO Chhath Ghat as part of Swachhta Pakhwada 2024. During the 
event, an inspiring oath-taking ceremony reiterated our collective commitment to river 
cleanliness by the Secretary of DoWR, RD & GR, along with the DG, NMCG. 
Additionally, children enthusiastically engaged in a painting competition themed 
'Ecology and Environment.'  
 
Swachhata Hi Seva (SHS) 2023 campaign: On 1st October 2023, NMCG organised a 
cleanliness drive at Chhath Ghat, ITO, as part of the Swachhata Hi Seva (SHS) 2023 

103 
 
campaign, inspired by Prime Minister Shri Narendra Modi's 'Ek Tareekh Ek Ghanta Ek 
Saath' call for collective action. The event commenced at 10 AM, and saw the active 
participation of high-ranking officials, including the Secretary, DoWR, RD & GR, and 
DG, NMCG. A pivotal aspect of the event was the administration of the Swachhata 
Pledge, emphasizing personal and collective responsibility for cleanliness. To further 
raise awareness about the importance of clean rivers, a nukkad natak was conducted 
at the ‘ghats’. The event drew substantial support, with approximately 1000 individuals.  
 
Ganga Utsav 2023: The 7th edition of Ganga Utsav 2023 was celebrated as a River 
Festival on 4th November 2023 across the Ganga basin. It was celebrated with the aim 
to spread the message of river rejuvenation as emphasized by the Hon’ble Prime 
Minister of India on numerous occasions. The event was widely publicized through 
social media platforms, print and electronic media, hoardings and banners at important 
locations within the Ganga belt.  All mediums- print and digital- are being leveraged to 
reach out to the large number of people to transform Namami Gange into a Jan 
Andolan.   
 
Ganga Utsav 2023 was also celebrated at several locations along River Ganga through 
the District Ganga Committees which organized various engaging activities on the 
ghats and other places around the river including Ganga Artis, Cultural Performances, 
Games, Poetry Recitals etc. On-ground cadres of volunteers like Ganga Praharis, 
Ganga Mitras, Ganga Doots, Ganga Task Force etc. and district administrators were at 
the helm of the celebrations in the states to truly make this a Jan Bhagidari event.  
 
State Ganga Committees and District Ganga Committees was actively engaged in the 
Ganga Utsav 2023 to promote the local products of the Ganga Basin in a bid to 
enhance the livelihood opportunities of the local people, one of the primary aim of Arth 
Ganga campaign espoused by the Hon’ble Prime Minister.  
 
Yamuna Par Azadi Ka Amrit Mahotsav:  On 16th August 2022 presided over the 
event ‘Yamuna Par Azadi Ka Amrit Mahotsav’ organised by National Mission for Clean 
Ganga (NMCG), Department of Water Resources, River Development and Ganga 
Rejuvenation, Ministry of Jal Shakti. The event took place at Zero Pushta, Sonia Vihar 
along River Yamuna in the presence of  Secretary, Do WR, RD & GR, Ministry of Jal 
Shakti, Director General, NMCG and Director General, Tourism, Ministry of Tourism.  

104 
 
The event marked the launch of many new initiatives under Arth Ganga including- the 
virtual launch of Jalajinitiative at 26 locations on Ganga basin main stem states, a MoU 
with Sahakar Bharati to achieve the vision of a sustainable and viable economic 
development by public participation and a tourism-related portal ImAvatarto promote 
livelihood opportunities along the Ganga basin by promoting Arth Ganga initiative 
through tourism. Also included in events of the day was felicitation of the winners of the 
Ganga Quest 2022 and launch of the new River Champ course on the Continuous 
Learning and Activity Portal (CLAP) by the Hon. Union Minister. 
Yamuna Ghat Par Yamunotsav: Namami Gange Amrit Vatika was created at Kalindi 
Kunj ghat on River Yamuna in Delhi on 2nd July 2022 under the Azadi Ka Amrit 
Mahotsav during which 75 saplings were planted by National Mission for Clean Ganga 
(NMCG) in association with Delhi Jal Board (DJB), NGOs and other associated 
organisations. The plantation activities were carried out under the initiative ‘Yamuna 
Ghat par Vriksharopan’.  Officials from NMCG, DJB, volunteers, school children and 
others participated in the event. A nukkad natak was also performed by the dynamic 
group of youngsters from Rang Sarthi on Environment & Rivers. School children from 
Adarsh Gyan Vatika also took part in the event. Cleanliness drive on River Yamuna in 
Delhi is a regular activity organized on the 4th Saturday of every month by NMCG. 
Ganga Run for Unity: A Run for Unity was organized in Haridwar by National Mission 
for Clean Ganga public awareness campaign, on 1st November 2022 to mark Sardar 
Vallbhbhai Patel’s birth anniversary. Union Jal Shakti Minister, Haridwar MP Shri 
Ramesh Pokhriyal Nishank and  Director General, NMCG along with mass public 
participated in the Run 
Namami Gange-Universities Connect: On 12th April 2023 NMCG and APAC News 
Network organized “Namami Gange: Universities Connect” event. Shri Gajendra Singh 
Shekhawat, Hon’ble Union Minister for Jal Shakti, presided over the function, where 
Memorandums of Understanding (MoU) were signed between NMCG and Chancellors 
/Vice-Chancellors of 49 universities to foster awareness among the youth on water 
conservation and river rejuvenation. These MoUs strive to bring the student 
communities to the forefront of the mass movement for creating a sustainable 
ecosystem of our rivers.  
(OM NO. LAFEAS-SCWRO29/6/2O24-SCWR   Dated 07th February 2024.) 
  

105 
 
CHAPTER III  
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NIL 
  

106 
 
CHAPTER IV  
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BYTHE COMMITTEE 
 
 
(Recommendation No. 5) (Para No. 2.5) 
 
River Bed Management in Delhi 
The Committee observe that Delhi Irrigation & Flood Control department in 
collaboration with CSIR NEERI carried out sampling of river bed along the length of the 
river within Delhi to assess whether legacy sludge is getting deposited year after year in 
the river bed and if so, the extent thereof. The team jointly collected sludge/ sediment 
samples from 8 different locations in the Yamuna River Bed during pre-monsoon (June 
2019) and post monsoon (October 2019) periods. Water samples were also collected 
from the middle of the river stream. All the sludge/sediment samples were analysed for 
different physico-chemical parameters (bulk density, porosity, water holding capacity & 
organic carbon) and metal contents (Cr, Fe, Cu, Pb, Mn, Ni, Zn, Co & Cd). The findings 
revealed that levels of metals viz. Cr, Fe, Cu, Pb, Ni, Zn were exceptionally high in the 
sludge samples collected from mid-stream of Yamuna river at Old Iron Bridge, Geeta 
Colony and Up-stream of DND Bridge in pre-monsoon. In the upstream of Old Iron 
Bridge (about 6 km), Najafgarh drain mixes, however, no such trend was observed in 
post-monsoon season, which indicates scouring during monsoon flows. Further, 
sediment in the Yamuna River stretch from Kudesia Ghat onwards till the Okhla 
Barrage is found to be heavily polluted with metal content (i.e. Cr, Cu, Pb, Ni, Zn, Fe, & 
Mn) when compared with United States Environment Protection Agency (USEPA) 
Sediment Quality Guideline Values, particularly during the pre-monsoon period. 
However, the levels decreased considerably during post-monsoon period. Furthermore, 
the study did not rule out the possibility of legacy sludge in deeper section of the River 
Bed as the samples were either collected from surface or 1 ft below the surface. 
Therefore, deep digging of sludge/sediment up to 5-6 ft at few select locations was 
recommended to further support any conclusion/decision regarding legacy sludge. 73 
The Committee, taking into account the excessive presence of heavy metals like lead, 
copper, zink, nickel, cadmium and chromium in the riverbed of Yamuna in Delhi which 
constitute a severe health hazard, recommend to the Department to actively explore 
the possibility of controlled dredging in the riverbed of Yamuna for removal of debris 
and heavy metals from the bottom of riverbed of Yamuna as their flushing out cannot 

107 
 
be left to the vagaries of Monsoon. Besides, the Committee also desire that 
Department may work in close coordination with other Ministries and Departments for 
framing a proper system for disposal of such extracted sludge containing heavy metals 
so that they may not pose danger at and around the neighbouring sites where they are 
proposed to be disposed off. The Committee would like to be apprised of the steps 
taken by the Department in this regard. 
 
Reply of the Government 
Reply/Comments on recommendation no. 5 was sought from Delhi Jal Board, Delhi 
Pollution Control Committee (DPCC) & Delhi Irrigation & Flood Control (I&FCD) vide 
email dated 22.02.2024. Further the follow-up was done through reminders and phone 
calls. 
 
The reply did not receive from Delhi Jal Board.  
 
Reply received from Irrigation & Flood Control, Delhi vide email dated 15.04.2024 
is reproduced below: 
When flood water released from Hathni Kund Barrage more than 1 lakh cusec. It acts 
as a flushing/ carries away the sludge deposit from the river Yamuna in the stretch 
between the Wazirabad barrage to Okhla barrage. 
 
Regarding deposition/ erosion of silt/ sand in the river bed is also covered in the scope 
of study given to CWPRS, Pune by this department, after the highest ever flood water 
level recorded at ORB i.e. 208.66 mtr on 11th July 2023.  
 
Reply received from Delhi Pollution Control Committee  vide email dated 
30.05.2024 is reproduced below: 
The matter of controlled dredging in the river bed of debris and heavy metals from the 
bottom of river bed pertains to DDA, IFCD, GNCTD & NMCG/ MOJ. 
 
If the dredged material contains heavy metals and exceeds the Concentration limits 
given under schedule-ll of the Hazardous and  Other Waste (Management & 
Transboundary Movement)Rules, 2016, then it is hazardous waste and requires to be 
disposed at the TSDF for Hazardous Waste at Bawana in Delhi. 
 

108 
 
 
Input from National Mission for Clean (NMCG) 
D. For de-silting and de-sludging of Yamuna River a committee headed by Dr M A 
Chitale in its report- For Preparation of Guidelines for Works on De-siltation from 
Bhimgauda to Farakka submitted Feb, 2017 has highlighted following 
observations:- 
 
4. The large scale de-silting or dredging of rivers are not recommended; 
5. A technical institute may be entrusted to conduct the sediment budget, 
morphological and flood routing studies that would examine and confirm the 
necessity of the delisting of the reach under consideration; 
6. The dredging/ siltation/ mining activities may result into some adverse impacts, 
i.e – (a) river degradation; (b) bank erosion; (c) channel widening; (d) lowering 
of meter surface elevations in the river channel (e) lowering of water table 
elevation adjacent to the river (f) a reduction in the structural integrity of bridges 
pipelines jetties barrages weirs foundation supporting high tension lines, 
existing bank protection works and other manmade structures and (g) a loss of 
environmental values resulting from (a) through (e). 
E. Since similar concerns have also been underlined by Irrigation Deptt in its letter 
submitted to NMCG, it was suggested by NMCG that Department of Irrigation, 
Uttar Pradesh may first carry out detailed study in order to understand the 
necessity of de-silting/ de-sludging along with their disposal plan and its probable 
impact on environmental values. In this regard, if felt necessary, technical 
assistance may be taken from Central Water Commission (CWC). 
F. NMCG has also requested the State Government to ensure proper Solid Waste 
Management in the cities, and screens/ bars may be installed on all drains to 
prevent the floating solid waste from entering the rivers. 
Comment of the Committee  
(Please see Para No. 11 of Chapter I of the Report) 
(OM NO. LAFEAS-SCWRO29/6/2O24-SCWR   Dated 07th February 2024.) 
 
(Recommendation No. 6) (Para No. 2.6) 
 
 Environmental Flow (E-Flow) 
The Committee observe that as per MoU signed among the basin States of Upper 
Yamuna basin in 1994, a minimum flow in proportion to completion of upstream 

109 
 
storages going upto 10 cumec shall be maintained downstream of Tajewala and 
downstream of Okhla Headworks throughout the year from ecological considerations, 
as upstream storages are built up progressively in a phased manner. However, the said 
storages are yet to be built. The Committee notice that Hon’ble NGT Principle Bench, 
New Delhi vide order dated 11-06-2015 directed that “State of Haryana shall release 10 
Cumec water directly into main stream of river Yamuna from Hathnikund Barrage and 
maintain e-flow of river till Wazirabad”. As per the water released data from Hathnikund 
Barrage and Okhla Barrage the minimum 10 Cumec (352 cucec) as stipulated in the 
MoU is being released downstream of Hathnikund Barrage and downstream of Okhla 
Barrage throughout the year”. The Committee are of the opinion that 10 cumecs of flow 
being released by the State of Haryana at Hathnikund during lean season is 
inadequate, most of which evaporates or percolates before it reaches Wazirabad during 
the lean season. In fact, there is almost NIL environmental flow available at 
downstream of Wazirabad Barrage during most of the period i.e. 9 out of 12 months in 
a year. Environmental flow is only available during monsoon period of 03 months i.e., 
July- September. Further, E-flow of 23 cumecs in the lean season has been 74 
recommended by the National Institute of Hydrology (NIH) in its study report submitted 
to NMCG/ Ministry of Jal Shakti. However, the recommendations of the report could not 
be accepted as there are differences among Yamuna basin States on e-flow 
assessment recommended by NIH. Besides, the Committee also note the written 
submission of the Department which clearly states that even if Delhi Jal Board (DJB) 
treats the entire sewage generated in Delhi upto BOD of 10 mg/l desired water quality 
of BOD less than 3 mg/l & DO more than 5 mg/l may not be achieved in river Yamuna 
due to unavailability of fresh water in the river downstream of Wazirabad. In this regard, 
the Committee take cognizance of the definition of International Union for Conservation 
of Nature (IUCN) (2003) which defines “E-flows as the water regime provided within a 
river, wetland or coastal zone to maintain ecosystems and their benefits where there 
are competing water uses and where flows are regulated”. Keeping in view the 
importance of minimum flow for sustenance of river ecosystem, the Committee 
recommend to the Department to make concerted efforts to evolve consensus among 
the Yamuna basin States to maintain E-flow of 23 cusecs in the lean season as 
recommended by the NIH. They would also like to be apprised of the reasons for 
disagreement among States regarding stipulation of a minimum E flow, so necessary 
for maintaining health of the river. 
 

110 
 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Reply/Comments on recommendation no. 6 was sought from Upper Yamuna River 
Board (UYRB) and Central Water Commission (CWC) vide email dated 22.02.2024. 
Further, the follow-up was done through reminders and phone calls. 
 
Reply received from Central Water Commission vide email dated 03.04.2024 is 
reproduced below: 
No specific information is available in CWC. Further, CWC is presently doing the e-flow 
monitoring for 11 Hydro-Electric Projects situated in the Upper Ganga River Basin 
starting from originating glaciers and through respective confluences of its head 
tributaries finally meeting at Devprayag up to Haridwar and the main stem of Ganga up 
to Unnao district of Uttar Pradesh. 
 
Reply received from Upper Yamuna River Board vide email dated 21.05.2024 is 
reproduced below: 
As per the MoU of 1994 among the basin States, a minimum flow in proportion to 
completion of upstream storages going upto 10 cumec is to be maintained downstream 
of Tajewala and downstream of Okhla Head works throughout the year from ecological 
considerations. Later, Hon'ble NGT Principal Bench, New Delhi vide order dated 11-06-
2015 directed that "State of Haryana shall  release 10 Cumec water directly into the 
main stream of river Yamuna from Hathnikund Barrage and maintain e-flow of river till 
Wazirabad". As per the discharge data submitted by Government of Haryana, the flow 
of 10 cumecs is being maintained d/s of Hathnikund Barrage. The matter related to the 
E-flow study by NIH has not been dealt with in UYRB. However, the MoU of 1994 could 
be reviewed after the year 2025, if any of the Basin States so demand. The provision 
for e-flow as decided by the competent Authority over and above the current provision 
could be considered then. 
 
Reply from Haryana Irrigation Department is yet to be received: 
An e-mail dated 10.06.2024 has been sent to Haryana Irrigation Department and their 
reply is yet to be received. 
 

111 
 
 
 
Input from NMCG 
As per MoU of 1994 on sharing of surface water flows among upper Yamuna basin 
States, a minimum flow of 10 cumecs will be maintained from ecological considerations 
downstream of Hathinikund and Okhla barrages. Further, this arrangement is open for 
review after 2025, if any of the Basin States demand. The Government of Haryana in 
Dec, 2020 (vide DO letter enclosed at Annexure-3) expressed that before the revision 
of this MOU which is due only after 2025, it is absolutely unwarranted to reopen this 
issue of e-flow.  
Comment of the Committee  
(Please see Para No. 14 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
(OM NO. LAFEAS-SCWRO29/6/2O24-SCWR   Dated  07th February 2024.) 
 
(Recommendation No. 8) (Para No. 2.8) 
Impact of Pollution on the ecology of Yamuna 
 
The Committee note that though no study has been conducted to assess the 
damage to ecology of Yamuna and the fish environment, however, river Yamuna in 
Delhi is not meeting the prescribed parameters regarding healthy fish environment in 
the stretch between downstream of Wazirabad Barrage after meeting Najafgarh Drain 
to Asgarpur Village. The Committee note that for healthy sustenance of life, minimum 
DO requirement is >4 mg/l (Designated Best Use Water Quality Criteria- Class D: 
Propagation of Wild life and Fisheries) is generally observed NIL in Delhi stretch of river 
Yamuna except at Palla. Further, incidents of dead fishes and shoals of dead fish 
washed ashore on the banks of river Yamuna in Agra have been reported a few times. 
The Committee desire that the Department of Water Resources, River Development 
and Ganga Rejuvenation in coordination with the Ministry of Environment, Forest and 
Climate Change undertake a study to assess the damage done to the ecology of river 
Yamuna and the fish environment. The Committee feel that such a study will present a 
true picture before the policy makers and will be of great significance in formulating the 
appropriate steps required to be taken to conserve ecology of the river. 
 
 

112 
 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
Reply/Comments on recommendation no. 8 was sought from Haryana State Pollution 
Control Board, Delhi Pollution Control Committee (DPCC) & CPCB vide email dated 
22.02.2024. Further the follow-up was done through reminders and phone calls.  
 
Reply received from Central Pollution Control Board vide email dated 08.03.2024 
is reproduced below: 
The status of restore and rejuvenate the floodplains of River Yamuna by DDA may be 
obtained from DDA. 
CPCB issued directions on 02.01.2023 to State Pollution Control Boards (SPCBs) of 
Delhi-NCT and Haryana regarding augmentation and upgradation of CETPS and 
display of OCEMS data by CETPs located in Delhi and Haryana. The details of 
directions are: 
● To take necessary action against the non-complying CETPs in the state 
● To prepare and submission of action plan for upgradation /augmentation of 
identified CETPs situated in the state. 
● Mandatory to display of OCEMS data of each individual CETP in a conspicuous 
location. 
 
Reply received from Uttar Pradesh Pollution Control Board vide email dated 
29.05.2024 is reproduced below: 
Monitoring water quality of River Yamuna at 22 sampling Locations under Critically 
polluted river stretches in the State Uttar Pradesh. Out of 22, three sampling points 
are located in the Agra district which are U/s Kailash ghat, U/s water works & D/s Taj 
mahal. The water quality monitoring data obtained in the year 2021, 2022 & 2023 are 
attached as Annexure-6. 
 
Input from National Mission for Clean (NMCG) 
The water quality monitoring of River Yamuna being carried out by Delhi Pollution 
Control Committee (DPCC), there is improvement in quality in terms of BOD when 
compared from monitoring data of 2022 and 2023: 
 
TABLE 20:  BOD MONITORING DATA OF 2022 AND 2023 

113 
 
 December 2022 December 2023 
ISBT 46 mg/l 35 mg/l (24% reduction) 
Asgarpur 73 mg/l 51 mg/l (30% reduction) 
 
The Water Quality Trend of River Yamuna for 2022 and 2023 is enclosed at Annexure- 
7. So far, no such study on ecological assessment has been conducted on river 
Yamuna in the National Capital Territory (the stretch between downstream of 
Wazirabad Barrage after meeting Najafgarh Drain to Asgarpur Village) under the 
Namami Gange Programme (NGP), yet. 
 
The initiatives for pollution abatement through tapping of sewage drains, are being 
implemented under the Namami Gange Programme in Delhi region and on completion 
it may help in improvement of water quality vis a vis aquatic life. 
 
Presence of biological organisms in river water is also considered as an indicator of 
river water quality/ecology and the assessment of these biological organisms is referred 
to as Bio-monitoring. Bio-monitoring of River Ganga and River Yamuna was carried out 
during FY 2023-24 in 2 phases: (i) Pre-monsoon period-  April – June and (ii) Post-
monsoon period- November – March.  In this regard, in River Ganga, a total of 42 
locations from Gangotri, Uttarakhand to Garden Reach, West Bengal and in River 
Yamuna, a total of 26 locations from Yamunotri, Uttarakhand to Prayagraj, Uttar 
Pradesh have been identified. 
Biomonitoring: 
e) River Yamuna originates from Yamunotri Glacier of Uttarkashi and traverses 
through states of Uttarakhand, Himachal Pradesh, Haryana, Delhi and Uttar 
Pradesh travelling to a total distance of 1376kms before confluencing with the 
river Ganges at Prayagraj, Allahabad. River Yamuna being the longest and the 
largest (by volume) tributary of river Ganga. 
 
f) Biomonitoring is one of the tool for assessing the long term biological quality of 
water of river Ganga and Yamuna. Benthic macro-invertebrates are referred to 
assess the biological health of water bodies as these being ubiquitous, abundant 
in aquatic ecosystem, have wide range of pollution tolerance amongst various 
families and also these are good integrators of environmental conditions. These 
organisms are used to derive Saprobic Score for Biological water quality 

114 
 
assessment which is based on Biological Monitoring Working Party (BMWP) 
scoring chart. Based on the saprobic values, the surface water bodies are 
classified in different Biological Water Quality Class (BWQC) that ranges from 
Very Good to Severe. 
 
g) CPCB is assessing the biological health of river Yamuna since 2019 and To 
assess the seasonal variation in terms of water quality, monitoring is performed 
twice in a year viz. pre- and post – monsoon. Pre-monsoon phase of monitoring is 
carried out during April to June and post-monsoon from November to February. 
 
h) Biomonitoring of river Yamuna has been carried out in the Haryana, Delhi, and 
Uttar Pradesh i.e., in the stretch from Panipat (Haryana) to Prayagraj (Uttar 
Pradesh) covering 13 locations (04 Location in Haryana; 02 Locations in Delhi; 
and 07 Locations in Uttar Pradesh) to assess the biological water quality using 
benthic macro-invertebrates. 
 
TABLE 21:BIOLOGICAL WATER QUALITY CRITERIA 
Saprobic Score Biological Water Quality 
Class 
Saprobic Score 
7.0 to 10.0 Very Good 7.0 to 10.0 
5.0 to 6.9 Good 5.0 to 6.9 
3.0 to 4.9 Moderate 3.0 to 4.9 
1.1 to 2.9 Poor 1.1 to 2.9 
1.0 Severe 1.0 
 
 
Based on monitoring data, the major observations are as follows: 
River Yamuna (First Round) 
● In Uttarakhand Stretch from Yamunotri to Dak Pathar the BWQ was found to be in 
‘Good’ class. 
● In Haryana stretch, Panipat U/S & Sonepat were in ‘Good’ class and Panipat D/S & 
Palwal were in ‘Moderate’ class. 
● In Delhi stretch, the BWQ was found in ‘Moderate class at all the three locations 
(Palla, Nizamuddin and Okhla D/S) 
● In Uttar Pradesh stretch, from Mathura U/S till its confluence with River Ganga at 
Prayagraj, the BWQ of River Yamuna in the upper stretch till Etawah was in 

 
Moderate class and lower stretch (from Auraiya to Prayagraj D/S) was in ‘Good’ class.   River Yamuna (Second Round)● In Uttarkhand, stretch from Yamunotri to Dak Pathar the BWQ was in ‘Very Good’ class. ● At Paonta Sahib, in Himachal Pradesh the BWQ ● In the Haryana stretch, from Kalanour, Panipat U/S & D/S the BWQ was ‘moderate’ class and at Hathni kund, Sonepat and Palwal was in ‘Good’ class.● In Delhi, the BWQ was in Moderate class (Palla and Nizamuddin).● From Mathura U/S to confluence with River Ganga at Prayagraj, the BWQ from Mathura U/S to Etawah, was in Moderate class and from Auraiya to its confluence point the BWQ was in ‘Good’ class except at Hamirpur where it was in moderate class  FIGURE 2: S*Bio-monitoring could not be conducted due to early onset of monsoon**Sufficient number of Benthic macro (Please see Para No.  (OM NO. LAFEAS-SCWRO29/6/2O24  (Recommendation No. 10) ( Further, the Committee also note that as per the information of DPCC, there is no data available on total number of unauthorized industries operating in Delhi. Considering the role of industrial effluents in polluting the river, the Committee desire 
6.86.65.46.15.37.37.176.95.35.14.9Saprobic Score
115 
Moderate class and lower stretch (from Auraiya to Prayagraj D/S) was in ‘Good’ River Yamuna (Second Round) In Uttarkhand, stretch from Yamunotri to Dak Pathar the BWQ was in ‘Very Good’ At Paonta Sahib, in Himachal Pradesh the BWQ was in ‘Good’ class.In the Haryana stretch, from Kalanour, Panipat U/S & D/S the BWQ was ‘moderate’ class and at Hathni kund, Sonepat and Palwal was in ‘Good’ class.In Delhi, the BWQ was in Moderate class (Palla and Nizamuddin). From Mathura U/S to confluence with River Ganga at Prayagraj, the BWQ from Mathura U/S to Etawah, was in Moderate class and from Auraiya to its confluence point the BWQ was in ‘Good’ class except at Hamirpur where it was in moderate SAPROBIC SCORE AT LOCATIONS OF RIVER YAMUNA monitoring could not be conducted due to early onset of monsoon **Sufficient number of Benthic macro-invertebrates were not collected Comment of the Committee  (Please see Para No. 20 of Chapter I of the Report)SCWRO29/6/2O24-SCWR   Dated 07th February 2024.)(Recommendation No. 10) (Para No. 2.10) Further, the Committee also note that as per the information of DPCC, there is no data available on total number of unauthorized industries operating in Delhi. Considering the role of industrial effluents in polluting the river, the Committee desire 
5.34.354.74.13.54.44.44.343.64.9 4.954.84.35.14.7454.24.54.84.74.24.85.2Locations
First Round
Second Round
Moderate class and lower stretch (from Auraiya to Prayagraj D/S) was in ‘Good’ In Uttarkhand, stretch from Yamunotri to Dak Pathar the BWQ was in ‘Very Good’ was in ‘Good’ class. In the Haryana stretch, from Kalanour, Panipat U/S & D/S the BWQ was ‘moderate’ class and at Hathni kund, Sonepat and Palwal was in ‘Good’ class.  From Mathura U/S to confluence with River Ganga at Prayagraj, the BWQ from Mathura U/S to Etawah, was in Moderate class and from Auraiya to its confluence point the BWQ was in ‘Good’ class except at Hamirpur where it was in moderate   of Chapter I of the Report) February 2024.) Further, the Committee also note that as per the information of DPCC, there is no data available on total number of unauthorized industries operating in Delhi. Considering the role of industrial effluents in polluting the river, the Committee desire 
5.15.25.3 5.35.65.24.85.155.45.1

116 
 
that the Department may persuade the State of Delhi to carry out a study to assess the 
number of unauthorized industries operating in Delhi so that necessary arrangements 
may be made for regulating these industries and treating the industrial effluents 
generated from these industries. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Reply/Comments on recommendation no. 10 was sought from Municipal Corporation of 
Delhi, Delhi Pollution Control Committee (DPCC) & Delhi State Industrial and 
Infrastructure Development Corporation (DSIIDC) vide email dated 22.02.2024. Further 
the follow-up was done through reminders and phone calls. 
 
The reply did not receive from Municipal Corporation of Delhi.  
 
Reply received from Delhi State Industrial and Infrastructure Development 
Corporation vide email dated 10.05.2024 is reproduced below: 
Industries Department/DSIIDC only looks after the issues related to 28 approved 
industrial areas in Delhi, out of which, 17 approved industrial areas are already 
connected to 13 Common Effluent Treatment Plants (CETPs). The remaining 11 
approved industrial areas do not have CETPs as they are not water-polluting industrial 
areas. 
 
Reply from National Mission for Clean (NMCG) 
An Office Memorandum dated 03.06.2024 is sent to the Chief Secretary, Government 
of NCT of Delhi is sent to direct the DSIIDC department to take necessary action in this 
regard. 
Comment of the Committee  
(Please see Para No. 23 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
(OM NO. LAFEAS-SCWRO29/6/2O24-SCWR   Dated 07th February 2024.) 
 
(Recommendation No. 17) (Para No. 2.17) 
 
The Committee observe that there is no study available to show as to what 
extent the existing cremation process is responsible for pollution in Yamuna river. 

117 
 
However, they note that only Nigam Bodh crematorium is situated on the bank of 
Yamuna in the area of North Delhi Municipal Corporation, in which 6 CNG furnaces, 6 
Moksha Dah furnaces and about 90 open platform facilities are available for the rites. In 
order to reduce pollution in river Yamuna, the Committee urge the Department to 
explore ways including providing financial assistance to the States to establish 
electric/CNG furnaces. Besides, the Department with the concerned Yamuna basin 
States need to find ways to discourage rituals on the pyres built on the banks of 
Yamuna and if possible shift the cremation sites away from the immediate periphery of 
the banks of Yamuna in order to prevent contamination of river water. 
 
Reply of the Government 
Reply/Comments on recommendation no. 17 was sought from HP Pollution Control 
Board, UK Pollution Control Board, U.P Pollution Control Board, CPCB, and Municipal 
Corporation of Delhi vide email dated 22.02.2024. Further the follow-up was done 
through reminders and phone calls. 
 
The reply did not receive from Municipal Corporation of Delhi.  
 
Reply received from Himachal Pradesh Pollution Control Board vide email dated 
11.03.2024 is reproduced below: 
No electric/CNG furnace has been established till date. Existing cremation process in 
MC limits is carried out through pyres built on crematorium under a shed. No proposal 
regarding electric/CNG furnaces has been submitted till date by Municipal Committee 
Paonta Sahib. 
 
Reply received from Uttarakhand Pollution Control Board vide email dated 
02.05.2024 is reproduced below:  
There is no pollution reported in the river Yamuna due to cremation in the State of 
Uttarakhand. Water quality of river Yamuna 07 locations is found under category- 'A' of 
the Designated Best Use Water Quality Criteria and water quality of following 04 
locations fall under category 'B' of the DBU category. 
 
Reply received from Central Pollution Control Board vide email dated 08.03.2024 
is reproduced below: 

118 
 
There is no specific study carried out with respect to Yamuna. The study carried out by 
CPCB i.e. Environmental Management of Crematorium of Bhopal city using cow dung 
wood as alternative fuel, recommended the following to manage the solid waste from 
crematoriums. The report is available in the following 
link:https://cpcb.nic.in/zobhopal/Project_Report_RDBhopal_3.pdf. 
 
TABLE 22: ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT OF CREMATORIUM 
Sl. No. Materials Management 
1. Cremated bones Shall be handed over to relatives, if not collected by relatives on 
time stored in tinned box with full details in a designate room 
by the management and on yearly basis disposed of in river. 
2. Ash Shall be handed over to relatives, if not collected by them or in 
case of non-claimed bodies disposed in low lying areas of 
crematorium 
3. Bamboo Shall be used by crematorium management for making plant 
protective guard, taken by working people for their use making 
huts, fence etc. 
4 Flower/ Straw Shall be collected separately from other non-degradable wastes, 
shall be treated as wet waste and send to Municipal Solid Waste 
facility for wet waste, shall install a bio—digester / composter/ 
compost pit for large sized crematoriums. 
5 Clothes Shall be donated to needy ones 
6 Utensils Shall be donated to needy people 
7 Mud pots Shall be crushed and disposed in low lying areas 
8 Metals/ 
Ornaments 
Shall be occupied by the poor people or shall be donated to the 
needy ones 
9 Plastic waste Shall be collected separately and is to be collected by Nagar 
Nigam authority 
10 Glass materials Shall be collected separately and is to be collected by Nagar 
Nigam authority 
11 Food materials Shall be collected separately from other non- degradable wastes, 
shall be treated as wet waste and send to Municipal Solid Waste 
facility for wet waste, shall install a bio—digester/ composter/ 
compost pit for large sized crematoriums 
12 Rope (Kalawa) Shall be used to prepare and tie up the plant protective guards at 
crematorium 
13 Hairs Shall be collected separately and disposed off accordingly, shall 
be collected and can be used for amino acid preparation. More 
effective ways for utilizing human hairs shall be explored. 
 
Reply received from Uttar Pradesh Pollution Control Board vide email dated 
29.05.2024 is reproduced below: 

119 
 
The issue regarding construction of electric crematorium facilities, its commissioning 
and operation is related to the Urban Development Department. Hence, this information 
may be sought from the Urban Development Department. 
Comment of the Committee  
(Please see Para No. 26 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
(OM NO. LAFEAS-SCWRO29/6/2O24-SCWR   Dated  07th February 2024.) 

120 
 
 
CHAPTER V  
OBSERVATION/RECOMMENDATION IN REPSECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLY OF 
THE GOVERNMENT IS STILL AWAITED 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NIL 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI                                    RAJIV PRATAP RUDY, 
 March, 2025                                                            Chairperson,                                                                      
Phalguna,1946 (Saka)   Standing Committee on Water Resources 
 
  

CONFIDENTIAL 
APPENDICE - I 
 
MINUTES OF THE ELEVENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
WATER RESOURCES (2024-25) HELD ON MONDAY, 10 MARCH 2025 
  
The Committee sat from 1000 hours to 1045 hours in Committee Room 'D', 
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
  
Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy    -  Chairperson 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
 LOK SABHA 
 
 
2.  Shri Narayandas Ahirwar  
3.  Shri Joyanta Basumatary  
4.  Shri Sher Singh Ghubaya  
5.  Md. Rakibul Hussain  
6.  Smt. Sanjna Jatav  
7.  Shri Sagar Eshwar Khandre  
8.  Shri Rodmal Nagar  
9.  Shri Vishaldada Prakashbapu Patil  
10.  Shri Dilip Saikia  
11.  Shri Pratap Chandra Sarangi  
12.  Shri Dushyant Singh  
13.  Shri Ashok Kumar Yadav  
 RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
14.  Smt. Dharmshila Gupta  
15.  Smt. Jebi Mather Hisham  
16.  Shri Khiru Mahto  
17.  Shri Sanjay Kumar Jha  
18.  Shri Dhairyashil Mohan Patil  
19.  Smt. Seema Dwivedi  
 
 

 
 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Chander Mohan  - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Ajay Kumar Sood  - Director 
3. Shri P. Ashok   - Deputy Secretary 
 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee. Thereafter, the Committee took up for consideration (i) Draft Report on 
Demands for Grants (2025-26) of the Ministry of Jal Shakti (Department of Drinking 
Water and Sanitation); (ii) Draft Report on Demands for Grants (2025-26) of the 
Ministry of Jal Shakti (Department of Water Resources, River Development & 
Ganga Rejuvenation) and (iii) Draft Report on Action Taken by the Government on 
the Observations / Recommendations contained in the Twenty Seventh Report on 
‘Review of Upper Yamuna River Cleaning Projects Upto Delhi And River Bed 
Management In Delhi’. After due deliberations, the Committee adopted the 
aforesaid draft Reports, with some modifications in the Draft Report on Demands 
for Grants (2025-26) of the Ministry of Jal Shakti (Department of Drinking Water and 
Sanitation).   
 
3. The Committee then authorized the Chairperson to present the Reports on 
their behalf to both the Houses of Parliament in the current Budget Session. 
 
The Committee then adjourned 
 
*** 

121 
 
APPENDICES – II 
 
[Vide Para 4 of the Introduction] 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN THE TWENTY SEVEN 
REPORT (SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
(i) Total number of Recommendations/Observations 
 
          25 
(ii) Recommendation/Observations which have been accepted by the 
Government  
 
Recommendation Nos. 
1,2,3,4,7,9,11,12,13,14,15,16,18,19,20,21,22,23,24 and 25 
 
 
 
 
Total – 20 
Percentage– 80 % 
 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not desire 
to pursue in view of the Government’s replies 
Recommendation Nos. NIL 
 
 
 
 
Total – 00 
Percentage – Nil 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee 
 
Recommendation Nos.5,6,8,10 and 17 
 
 
 
 
Total – 5 
Percentage–  20% 
(v) Recommendation/Observation in respect of which final reply of the 
Government is still awaited 
Para Nos. NIL 
 
 
 
Total – 00 
Percentage – Nil 
 
 

Er!
o&
1,:
F
n
lrlzot
FU
F(n
o
!?xobo
EE. aEFa Ai o.=
oEEfH,s.q o o c IjrUFQU 5 O.'OE]
r.9Qx Eoo
EE. sEk o.i o.=
oEEtH.gE o o c I-6(JFQ(J 5 0.olrl
Qx Eoo
HE aEk Q.x o.=
oEE{HEE o o tr tr.it(JF(JU ' o.OTI1
u.2
s?>. ohr
E E. a.=L A.X o.=
oEEtHEE o o tr E-irF(J(J = o.o
63
FE!tA z z z z
E E.B'
EsS
(n
z z z z
}EI:9H FE
Nti
z z z
fiHf; 8aEtr 6 v
Fl
z z z z
U
L.t
96
otrHE
ti
z z z z
FI
o
€J
(t
o
mNO
c!
\o
l-N
mNO
c!
q
bN
mNO
cl
\o
NN
mN(>
oj
,\o
o
t-.N
>'
6=o, !!
FE
E3o€,EEr! .=
2A
co
EEf5E
F ai>t
EE *xt(g0- t tr (!
I e'a s*
E b.:p =3=€prFi:EEF€?
<.A"' E E Ezo.coVa:
'u r q .i--
EE€5 E
a o2.tr
EE*:z{(!0" E tr (!
I-Etaf,*E b.rq P
75Ep9XtrEEFi?
<.4"' E E Ezo.m)<O:
HlUlj.g,F P
-E t;vrD=h
->89
=mi;oo-dad S,l>53E
o 5 oc\.- o;>dtrd
E hndg
:Ei so'= 6
Elo *
6U)
rK
'E;- .tr=< -.
a t E*u..!bio
= 9lH
S.EEbNAf6OH
!Go-t
L- ): N co 6 o oO
o
qEd
LA
\o .(jN hH
Nm
r-
@
\
or
t
!E
EEoip6
<ic
L
6f,,
bE$58 LO
n
o\
m
n ooo N
o?
t.
C -A,.iEo
dE ooi $
\o
4 t-
or
b.1
Nc4
e fr?
\ob
t.no
o0)oos
(!52-
(n
dh0
om G
C.)
GLo
6A
L
0.
6
E
E
6
o.v
F
E
o.
r!
zutkE .aa- o
EE H5 N
6ho
oto
;h
d=
+660
!
A
d
h2 N m +
q
vt
x
Is
€
C./
v
z
u-
o
Flh

\o @ S
IA
-l
-l
z
F
I u
7*
VZ
=a
,its
zDd
sa.
*1 5 oD ^5Yo::
+o.
:o
!)o.
t
!) N gE E3
=.H 
B E:
q{H
z,
UO
UD5E'
{D
D5r5
zzopa5gsa
zzCAt5Em
Dd
iD
z0
Ddp
D
o
p
'{PN*
I
.)
D)
o.
tso5
34 rts
*3pi.,
:+N
(l)
d(D(!oo
oJu
N
o\
a
F
@c)
9o
N
p
O!
N
o
ioo
u\o
u
(}t !n(^)
N
N
N
co Ao
o
\ I Doq 3 +,
9a!'o FgP
88o6
BE
E
Nn
o
N
!xN
Nu
o
F
@U gr
ilsEErE!J
LN
h<i.U
@N
;hH
6 lar
\N
o\
;.. N
a3i
bo\o
A
ul
Io I5o o FilS
6
\o o tso o\o { faI1-O
I .d
ZFC>actz
o 6 r = 05
9-q P 9 FE o-:Fi DE''=E*Hg
O<o
t=f- Eo5 7io o-lN
? 5 t{q- €9
f$.EtEs$ g
; ! Phopai-i-+
BE F;o=T {-A6=Y
!itO uiD 5E 55 N0qor5
={.-<o:i+Clqi
=h
He-
60 rv
oo >
2FCt6C-tZ
E E E +3;"=a3HPI _:s Id=d a657,o o-lD
95 tTq; 59
*SP€f
i€s E
EiFFS
P{r3
e gF;
8"sd'o=-f
c"H 5sr'-r crPr C
ts lt=o _p o
3t38l€ =5o<:,=t
_tEqq i
=>r?zas:5 h-
: h"q-o o
iyj.Ei;<,osq> o.lty it' ::aD
Pry 5€t r'doE*cz- m=?6=-i7y\ oXo 6o
SoFrFrRp
P
az
=' t)
o.:l(!G
t3
EEX6Ao
N
i
i!O
N
N
o\
NoNN
N
o\
N
NN
N
N
u
Oo
ai!
h
a
!)
o
o
Fo
z
co
N
No
z OJ
b
i!
!
N
b
i!o
Ot
P
ot;tsEO
oY.
lll.)
z,
6
'l'co"!PPA
oo
z oq
o
'5oo
9'oB'o
E IE;+
z F
i!oN
U
z !
!
N
-.t
(/)
Po
lrrNo
o\
N
6x
qg*
Oir:
:iB
z N
P
i.
N
z
9\oIN
\
N
t
NJ
Bor
g, frsf,.lG
E'9.9"
z
6o
o
z
'o I!)
oID
d
o
P
t
ur!
Egeoo=
rfloE tr .).,)Fla)o':-, !i o o:t'fI!io.il!ro
='o gr H
=.8 
'P B
6s <6,b,
rnoE tr .)a)-la)cr! 5 0 0 y'fi9a-i5(D
='o gu H
=A'8tsscg <o'' 7,'n
ItC)
gr
Fo
!J
i
),
vl

F
P
!, N i p Zoox
t Dt
=hE)
F tr.7irS
=D N
xH
X
I!XX
[5+ ;eXL
tn'lh
HE q
r-oa D
N EH FEq<E
z,
q-uo
-{
D
D
2YoE
+{
-a r
o-z
op'
D
'ut!roror
D)
I
Ntr
PE
!<
D
Da.
D
I
zD
-
D
AI
s6u5tsorm
DI
(lJ
#oodi O
NA
ioN
o\
!..,
o P\o
@
No
{
\o
P{o
N
90
o
u
@
N
b.
Or
s
@
UJ
o
iro
o
sN)
iro t Foc 3 r,9eE 9
vg>
GI
5ig
Epa-
3E
Io
u\o
s
oo
p
\o
N
:tr\o !^ 3Er3eED)I
\i9{F
ioN
\o
\N\OH
ioo
@
s
\=
-o\\(!
N
9G
-N
ir
Or
{o\
\O tto, >l
NJ
N
6
()l
o.lll
g-u:
(!
o o@ \o o
@ { Q.E.i
!-O_q. o.
z>q'tz
HE i:;H+OP<
o N =-5= o^ ='D; FFi.*--#E.8<:!:" g. a- r
fi r-;; io =:-r o
ETF#'
J{
=<2.<4H 9 Eo = A:t
6d qou:25 PoN >=ooq =*HD Y =
#3<rooXd-BFP
o
oz9<
rdz
.rx--x
fioq
a
FZSQ+<
: A.go b-
EEr'f;)'5 tr:r 5<
H-H55
No\-*
E[?fa
fid'-"5
F
s Y r o I5€3iil ^EtntsooY-i-
gilE;58
Do=.ri-<gq oF
I S ry s'*3.tr r"€ s E g
HHo DOq "5Sr!5
fiE.tEri
P>()=i5 3 ;:>
,i8 ts
Na3.-06X :J5
E ?' S
EB *"?'
-- o @
AE
.i xeO^
E F99' tr;.
o
dzd9o.5GO
*3
E6
E8
N
FC)
9n
N
oNN
N
Fo
or
i!o
NN
N
o\
N
NN
bo\
NoN
N
N
Ol
i!
NN
I
U
!)
o
o
Fo
z N\o
i.J
N6
z z
I
c)l,laE'Al(D
oi
lr:(1
z z '-i ts'E co
>b
z z
!'
I ,r:3 'o
E tE*+
z z Nts
9r
NTNNooNNoa
z z
!.,
i)-
3*tq:i
z z I
o
N)
N
z z
lrJ
5rxx.+o
E'q e'
2 z
ii o
p
z z
t
u-9qs
EOq|)
5 tr oo'l
? o.= 5 0
i'i 9E q, OD
? <8
(r,ol3 E (.)a)'l.)(,.t:5 0 0 5'
gHfr,ET"
=.3 
'P B
6s <8'' 6.4
fnO"d tr -r.).loq! 5 0 0 5's3*310
E'o }:'d H
=E'3Hec9 <U
a'
Flotstr.)r)-l-E:! 5 0 0:tgHr,Eac
=.3 
'P B
0qo <b6.4
sn
F(!
AT
I
;,
5
z

90 { I !^
U
tt,tFn,l
rtr
{
F
7*
;.o
tr*l
;+D
I
\6
I r-+
iro
'd
I
N
=H 
Hilo--Ii\oQz
p
D)
o-
5'D {
!,
t
A' g
D
a
D o
'd
gJ
4Z-:r
6corDO
o(,l
b
N
tr..I
\:
N\D
\oN
io
N(!
b
o\o
i$u
Ol
I\D
O'
f Foo 3 zr
EeE'9 FgP
g8!
hr
!-q;xt
r
H6o
p N
s{
ur Ico
co
p
c)
ur
FeEEsOA)!
},J
Fs
!
N
9o
s
01
@ain
'5
{o
io
Ot
I
6l
Fgil
o
o H o
@ \o
>l ileH9r
'o :z
:\J,O6
+>l
sI
rto
<5
F^.
d=
Pd-
EFSpi€Sxoi j o-'r5 5 d 7
-gf S i'i
E€ E E.E:P-ov--+v= 295o tlo t 5
= 
ft ; rE'! o tsou961- 5'Ho 'E= ir
rrfr€i-l 5 *5 0
osiL 6 iz5o oi'ortz.st=ro--P-:L t =A< (I I al
:F5E 8S-3 '--
q*
ils>{r=
D m :joq
'E P O Fi:Z
P N ='A<= -vm i o
a;lbr
=o.- Y
*3e*A
*sH.E oaC5-:fcAlDj +Hx.=
[; .,93trro { ^tb r'd -
b E] E
5'FHF
C!
oN
N
s
dzEPcL iloo
*3
€EPU
!,
N
oN
a
N
Fo
)'l|.J
b.J
o
S
o
90
N
N}J
N
F
uli!ON
N
p
t
!r
(!
o
o
z
z z
z
o
otilP5OdOOir
Itt.)
z z z z F
E tEflf,
z z z z l'r
6-
!g*c531
!i+
z z z z
1",
fssxeo
E qs
z z z z
t
uI
E8EO0C
:+o
po
n
rrolS tr o o I
"ilE*:38rUriloi
E3 €3t a'r
HsE*:e*
rHrXd
E3 E3+ 6'r
-!9-! E F R.-r'sE*!iB'
5UrXrj
E3 E3i|-
rf'Ood
D
gc !^
Fo
!Jrt
a
;
t/1
I

N
i
N
I
(A
.lFn-l
3
z
z
o
\o Zooi
wrwzw 
3.! 9ryr3>X qx9:-
;, \ \h
D
t!:uEE<tElr,C)?
e-i sZ g'A ^E IF'-it E g
-(-)6=o=
a) ,:
N EHFE
e,<Ez
Xp
t)
8<iDsqX
m=!):a
6e
+a
29OD ?oI
(,
doooo
+F
A
N
t
co
NN
90
o
u
N
Pq >.r
N
@
t Dao 3x
Q r= i'9.9tr;'
FgP
6i
Ei!
1r
3Eo'r,
r
o
:-roF
PU
bo
!
(,r
3Br9qOll !
'tr
:F,
N
;-
@
N
Fq
LD
o\
al
q"t S
l-l? ^
o
\o
S f=Erro.q. O.
tr=ii.\
,?
trt
q.
oo
s
oop.
;n
j
Etf:x- S
EE#E+ E
SP !I ^i9:-5FEe*o Y!J 35 tr r-3 6 =DOa osFP5.55-E.
Fgao I5
CSf€ tr"5t=ie*
-o 5 y - b
sPSrr=33 &H'EE
BS- f: 6.
.' E,^
IE.E EenrEgb)
= Jr
d-o<^. o p-i.
i<6'E+^ - 5i'= I 6
irrH*9
g?oioIOO
-'- 
;i
E€gu
ooi.
i!
u
\o
o
i.,o
u
o!r
tJoN@
p
U
AJ
6
,o
o
Fob\o
i$o
o\
N
N
i!
o\
o
c)Uito
E*
lodO
Os
FIa:
p
ul
q
co
z l' E IEflF
N
!Io
i$
\t
C'
bINo
{
z N EHIg,B
N
>I
N
!
9o
IN
\t
z L, irxr.+ o
E qe"
i*
oq
€oI
oa
z
t
th -uqi
H(!0A
-$n+€r#
E'3 E B6.r
OE E O
da 5 0
gnaE
='a 5
rha)
gr
FoI
!,
o
,*

t-
C(
o&
(!
(.)
&
rn
AAot
FE:t^
+
bD
!,
o
3
bo
!
3
ho
3
ho
o
=
uo
.!Lo
=
cL u!ootr
6' u .lz
Es5
an
@
oN
+
+N
co
n\o
\o
@
N
+
\C;
N
F\
N
+q
@
N
N
oN
+o(j
N
uiE
i:9H TE
Nt-l
@
N
+o
.n
N
o\
o
ry
.+
(;
@H
N
+o6N
F\.d
N
:
N
F\d
N
EiHE 8rUrG (r i{ ()
o \o
@o
O
Gi
N
@
0q
N
r\oi
LI
E:0rtr
HEos
,@
N
.n
q
Or
O
o\H
.J
cf)
niN
@
oN.j
eo\
o
N
o
o.l
m
t-
F-
o
6-r
m
(o
oFl
oo
d
a
o
\o
ry
C)
'.jN
N
N
3
<,I
\o
N
N
r)
sl
c;m
b
.i
o
m
-hu1 =eJx
*F
6>oc)q!
HEztrl
co
6
6
ca
ho
q
oa
36!4
:,
t
E:
tr>6o.dg
6^
?=
lL),o
I'Fi&
o
6
F
E
o
a
ho
ao
o!9G
:1 0
oP\=
a(J
5o.
Uo
to
V,
oi
\E>'=
€GO-l.'Eg8
N
t\
(r\ o
o\ o
o
Egd
\o
o\t-t-€
@
ao\co
rnNt-t\
F.
q
o\
$
N
c!
H
!
r.9
H. ^U
to
ci96<aE
L6l!
'l; iu!
rr) o o
r'i E !ro,= w l'lrr 
= 
E0< +
(
ts\
l-\o
*
o\co
rne!
t.F\
t.
Ior$
Nc!
o€,oqlIEsr-l
G52-
m
G
F!
ao:z
66
BFZA
bo
6
z
G
(,
(!
(!
(!
,i*tr.rl- o
EH HE N
-(! v
-88 io:JETT.EEg
=olul \ LG Fa* 
--r{bO tr'!( : S, d
Ee=:E;ig
>h 3\F\ L
g#EFgE
d->.N ii,qt'\H\ !1l r,:44--L<ts o 9* Y q*
.3?#gj&g agg =; ;
a2 NN mN -r
N hN \oN

a<
Cd
6
l!
tu
&
IO
Ee
PE&tt
rn
L
bZ
!>,u-o
: t.H
or ti il
Ess
m
:E
iEE
H(,
N
NN
oi
Nq
N
EEEE I
!-l O
c!
h
ut{
qOOe'oEP6Gtr
o
NNo
c.!
o.N
FI
o
o
(!
o
CN
D
trl
m
x
Ei
PEi.uE>oluEt,HPZA
co
(!L
6
co
E -E
EEg
r od
c)
5bn3gEliU
a
@
ul
m
co
t
bq
{!
$6iBd
L
iE(l
bE$5t ra
- .E q65.Eobrr 
= 
bo<
@ul
mm
E*$E'S
({)
A
dL
.L'5o6d
2
H>t
EEHs
N
6aL
ota
6
*.r {.o - Itr bo.!a--l- o<r! 6 qH Y >d
EEE E fi (,9
trotz t-l F.N

C/o
l-nl
I#l_
ELI l*l,E- ls ib E E E ,HJ
-ri* rt=l[ iF ts /$ i* rq ,F,
r ir-ry, ,i l€- ]L l+_ ',s 1* _,$l
i, -lE I 'H lH lg lB le 
iA 
-,$,
iflg *Er *rr _g lu j i ,'r
j$F r!, *J.l=G.]j i;i Ei | 'EE t* H-tEsls$ tEE {
ifl ,'s,fgfl: f,,g 
g i;$ 
,fg ,gf ,' 
*,'
:llt# 
g r#;fffr sfurF'urgfJ$gJr
,g isg- lF- 1n--rg 
- n--lH -rI
l*ll--r lltlL-,
t-lr\li\tl {
r

Arnn€Ll''k f
rrqtffi frrnry
II.{\(Jll 1ft I".U-
l]{.) \,., (.\lr{-1,,, f '-/'..8 }.,
I
T.ai l.t--il ril'irryqp
t ;!;;7,i|;* 1l
zll.ffqr I
{ ll llf:l-' \llNISTIR. I I.,\R\,,\\,\.
I
("'l-1",\ 5 tJl (_;. \ R r I
lr
'3, {., l i'J., 1,9.,r,.1},1; ,
i'\
n,\r, ,f x'' , ls'f *:/''' 5 /,r lri"nr,*l- !,,f-;ci,
I r.ll
r 1.r
J,
,,:
, 1, i.
i. . \t!
'l iris is 1,i11i1 r'cfcrclle:(j lr') ],ot1r iirlt{)r",'icic Nr:, IJ.t). 't'fi-ltt0 1.1/'i t2OZt)-fiio
Ail tHfl Tcclrl )1,\.1t.(]/8{i{j ri;1rei 11.t)'t,){1trt). !'irst r.:[;r11. I o,ir]illd app:-{rriirit: ?.he Iar-'r rli.r:
thr:.t r.rrrcc:'!:s L;,1'Slirl{r (}t.[-i;t:-r,;ttlit ittl','r i-tr:t.:l'i lnnltcri ilttrl i':r'1'ottr o[flirtl
,.\r; r'r.:g;rr'fis ';l.rrrr nh$Cl-r'irIrrrr:s rl!i [j{-'r('{:r'tl"ty,* Ol' ft-:(:r.)r}itl1rrllflCCi e ilori', tffi
rinubl ti.){:,.rrfonilrrr:rtrlr,cl (-l'1r-rr.r'r.irl,.rcs git'i,rr i:r labltr {.:,.1 r'if rhc lilH rr:poIt {r\rirrr'r:ur.r-.,\1
ari.i itlxlLrt 30')u r:l't!'ic rriecliirrr i';titl*$, i.rrrl rtrccliarl r';rlrrr:s clr.l l:c1 rrflr:r'l actual rrr.aiiabiiit'r'
r;f 1,,,;^rtc..r i:: r'r-rlrrlrlr:tlig Iillrtrs. .,\c!ttitl ar';ri];,rLrilitt't:l'rv;llcr itt rril i.trtr*tric terrrs r:rir: on1r,. llr:
r'.tirkr:cl o(rl l.r,r,ityr..t'alge uI tl:r al't:ra,p,ri r"laill'rtist:hi.lI'trus, litb[: H.1 ol tirr: hilH rcpt:rl lr;rs
l:r.rrrtclly rc[lt,r lt:ci. rl-l,j ii;rrrlr.' at:ci tIr.rrt: is tro te:r:1rr: rlf anl.' (:r'ror" rit'lttcxtnc' ro tly []()
19li.li,$).i, rir 61.,iE".Ilr['![rr-nIr:ntlrl-'; atrrirfrc rlistlL:u'gLr r.ll):;lrc:trn oI Hrrtlrrrllmr-rcl Fi;rrri*ue
riur-rrrg l)cc'c:trhr::'lirr,1, 1:r'rlriri ii.rirl lhr.r s;run-'.l11ncxilrr: is;1qi-{iri t:ttt:lr:x*d es A:rrrr-r*le-R
ircrt,:,,rill:, N][-l lr;,ti, 1^r(r]t'r,ril(:11dri. ri"r.',.'t'riu;r c--{lr.rrv li )$.-*T r-rti:rtc(:.\ ciLtring i)irr:.crt:lrcr 14;ri'
1rt:riccl u'lrii:lr ix'2,$ i7 lilrlr's ri ilir Jjru*crri {: llrlrr,' tcleaqcr; l[ 1ti.0 cLirn{:(:H rl'1rirl: i.u-iilrt
1i.33':n r:l r!:c ;r:1.:rlii*:t \';,r-lt.tt's ;*g;ritr:t ,J(,'"i rccotr:nrl:trrlcrl i:1' 5rr. which grnouttts to
nearly 30O% incrcase of the exlsting e-flqw of 10,O cumocs, r',"lrir:l: cAnnr.)1 [).:
;rr:i:cplcri t.ri, r.rs. ;i:i it u'r)1rlcl cr:r;rpii;tt:1-1'.icrpartlizi: a'-tz'r:i:'irrkirtg rt'eito-,r a:rtl llrig;r:.irrr,
:'*clLlireurr:it:s i* 1hr: r'.'irLtjt'ciept-ir,r:r.l *,'E;ti rr{ $r:tttlt*lrr I{nt}rrrtu,
As r'r;lnrcili )rur- ciir$r'rn';rliotr itr ttrr.: l;:,si pitrit rri -toltr D.(-t. tlrui ,rfliciajs
lj'rurr ilu f-iirry;r::;r S'l;iir'(.1fi1:r:n'ir-!1crrt hircl pitrtici;"l;rtt:c[ in tirc Iri(:i:tit'tllii irr r.rltich t]rc Nll-l
11,l-rr;t u,ms {lrst:uss*ci. ir rs poitrlcd nr,t lhill Etiy;i:it:ct'il: Citrt:f llaryitr:ii lr;'igatinn artr.l
\\t.ricr Rrxr.;rr:'r:r:$ Dcp;rrtrrtr':":t illi\Uttl)) hrcl atrongly objected to the draft final report
of NIH vide his c-mall drrtcd ?,2,5,2A2A, copy of which ls attached ao Annexure-C.
Ar i;rr:senl ii:;;lgair.sI tltu;lllactrtilrr r".rl 330 r:ubi(:(]s;tt l{liH, l,vn hnl,r:r Io
r(rlr:rir;c'il() r*r.,ri lll{R for Dclhi ln compliance of llon'ble Supreme Cclurt Orders.
This combincd witlr the mandatory relEase of 352 cusecs; make a total liabtlity of
1062 cusrc* water, lerving hardly 600 to 800 cusccs of water durlng thc month of
December to May for the $tirtes of Harytna a:"lri t-ltl;ri Praclcsh, lltnr.. HIli rr:lrrirt
l;t.l(gcst tilirl ii1.,ctilljfl * f:r.r\r Ii'uri tlrr.r r.ttr:rrLlr oI l]cccnr]:l.ir to it'lay sll'.lrtlci l:c irtcrt:;rsrri
[t-oll ril(: I)l'r.s,;t1l 1O-iJ cr.l,nrr.,cri lo 26..17 r:rtIlrrs i.q" r:rr irlcreastt lrf lh""i7 rjurrr:(s or
582 r:."i-'l'his nr,r;ill!; t!1aI rrfti'r'irtr1:icnr(:rirli.ili(]r"t +s{ r:?',r: Nl}-l 'r'cporl . lr;liatrcc i.!'alui'it:tt iar
H;rr'-t,atra anrl l,lLt;,r:'Priirl r:sli would be cvcn less than 3OO cs, which is nat even
sufficicnt for drinking wuter nee dr of Southern Haryana.
t\s i:c:r-ti){: ful{)Li li iU!14,;i mirrirrrurtl r-l'l{rw iri liro1:o:-tir:rr *rit:o:ttplciiol of
tri)rilrcam gt(lritpJ:s quirrri tlil to l0 Cr.uttct;; is tt-r ix: r{lirirltaincd (lCru,'nstl-cittn uf 'l'rljcq-'iiiai
flrou, Iilr.B] ir:lrl clr:t'nrt":'r:lrr, Olihlii Ht-ilch,,,orkr; t]rruttgi-.oLrt -th{.: r.t:ar ft',rnr r:r:olrrqirit}
cr:tr:;ide rutio!1s its rllJ!rl !'r'';1.in st{'):';ltr,c$ ttoiilrl lrr: irr]!ll ''tp J)r{)l',I'(jlisir't1;,' irr .t pl:;rsr.rd
rniMlt(.:r. (-lor:xLr-r.rrt:orr lrI l{c:1ttji:t ;rrrr-l lic,x[filrl u'!il ti.kc itirirlltt'; IO-l;.r:{:;ir$ L{),ffi:lpli]1dr,
Lri-tt r'..i1lrr:'-tt r,.'ai1ill1,, fr,l' c(Jr':!itr:;('tirlrl ()l tlrt:rit: clants. I(l r:tttncr:u iti r:-flnu' ls irr:irrg
!'clr,:iisqrl clon'nstrr:i:rlr ol lll{El b-1' llittytrrtir ltrl cttl,irollrnttrll-al cortsitlt:r'ations, Thercfore,
at this stage , be for$ the revislan af this MOU which is due anly aftor 2S?5, it is
absolutely unwarrartted to reopen thle issue qf e-flow.
. con]l*..,Xt?
Ketr .l-{.\u. 1.5r".'1.,r-i.firrir,.l:i.uli'lil'J{ll.f:'ih.t)ll;l--: rj(i.iL.iJ.t)17:'')'/'l{t.iti6i}'-r,,i
.t]'l'ti1 ;t lrllliltrlltii'J tti; rrt
0. f2,, t
l.r.!l,lq)f
,)t l
\30
I.i.:r;.J,..."....
p

-2-
lliil.r.;rt-t*.lfi(.'.-ll:L.trtrir:i;rix.rr-tt]),-riitrlir:iilir:Ri'.'r.:t\"rtllltllt'iblttr-'lrtllr0ltlf
(.,11(:rillg rti.;r_.r f-itt;Lrirt;r lrr;rirrIr.";r*n,.tL.:, ir'arirr t-r{rr'rr'rs :;1":r-rtrrii l.rt: l1i;lri. r-Lr iir$p t'11'.11''f
sr.tr.:lr poilttt.t-rtl lvirlr:ti tl \'alriir::i'' lliti-"'a:iit lras rlrat'tr I'tl,;1:1 ':rnllitlor"lr; l)litll to ll$r
trr:atl{,d \i,,;1s1.,,, ,.,.,nrt,..r1 i;l llrc $1;,rrt i*r Irr:igatior: atttl.rrlitt:t- ;:rtl1:nr;r:s ft-r:. 
:tl.f i'it'.g t"111'1' ilf
ir.rtitt::i ,rrrl r.rlrtl.t'irlc.r:1 ,,,..liirr i,, I?l\'('r" t'oi,'rrl,,i"l. "l'Irig n ili 11* ;{ krllp; ,lvit.v ii] t:lcrltrlliq t'llc
iliv{jr. l',arrrtlt-rii itfrii illhi,'r r.l:-lr;lsiit statl't;:iirDrtlci il[scr rr;lkc sil'rrtlitt pi;trrr''
At t)rCl.ctlt rittr ttr lrr:ritr sI-,ortirqe Df i"'iitcr rlllstrt:;{Il1 ilf Hilthltikunr'i
ljarrirgc, th* l:tri.inr:ci" i,i r**rvaila havB already beon ehifteri to five F.o. {Prefersnse
order) aystem wh"rein ths channelE ars. uetng run for S days in every 4O days
period, which ru *ri tndtcation of severe'crtsis of wate r avail*bility and whl*5 is
not even eufflcient to quench ths drinking water need8 r'rf trritlt-'r t111'311',e-:tl sor'ttirerrr
Hltr,,,arta.-l.irr-: Cir:rt:orr:ctrriiilr't ditc t6 sr:ilrt:il"' f,f 1r':;1(t:: ililvt: tllrtliich'startlt-l in sOi't(ltcrn
;;l+;,;,; r,,,.i il rlr 'r:r)nrr is irrrpl.rrrr:!1r.(:(r, iirr:* ir r:orr1-i rel'.-rr rr rcr'r*qi.;r1 dir;;isit-:r'[or
s(]rrilrcrrr iiary.al:;r. o,rri,.,, ?(.).r,. r.ri rtrr, 
-rli,rck,; 
rtirr-r,'iirrctrrr-r bt:cn qri'(ri1v*rr ;rri rlark z.rlirr:s
clr-rrr tn or'cr rx1"llr.tit;rtir:n cl grr:l:trtl llaf {lI '
It i* also lo inforur ltcrt:11:trt, citlr: tr: k:s:;rvsilalrilitv' ti:e xr-tpplir"5 lj'r:trt
Birlkr;r, r,.'l'ri,:h \u(:l'o 1{, tht' tttrrt: of around 9544 cu$ccs for Hhry*fla' have already
been reducod to *oO .r**"t. Thls reduetlon of ahout ?oo0 cusocs from Bhakra
supply is alreurly'"-""r"g hue end 6ry in the stnte of Haryanh, due to thls net
avallablltty of water for tfre purposc of drinking wnter supply and lrrigatlon'
l'lttts tlte t'lt'rrntlttctrdt:cl n l'lrrlv rt:lcasr: hi' filli lrunr HlitS t'lrich t'i"t'ir:s lroltt
:1:i.81(Itnt(:{:s',il I'1{).irfi (:tlllltr(:}i (8{Jli cs 1o 5324 r:o-l clltrirrg Ilot'l'l1l()}lsooir p*lriori is nr-lt
ilc[.ci)tal]lu k: tlrl: 5t'atr: ilf I-lrltliitrli at an] co$l ' lts itnplr':ttrenl atir:tt nrttY leittl io
rlrlrn,.tta,Jrablc iarr,'r,',ii ur.l", 1,rc'l:lur,s 11fld ci'r:l: trigger migrittion t,f pt-tpulation''l'ltt"ts'
l.lal.r,urta (:Llrtn{rt *f.-rr,* en(:n i1'rlrOp fif u"lttff ['l:1'O1'l(] 1O t:LilA(':cs [352 r:lrser:sI rVhich iS
,,lr**ar,beinp, rcl,.,r'rsecl irr R.ivr:r 1'llrittttr;t [t't'rtn ll]rR or, rtriiill'l.xrsis'
ldt:r1'.;tr'clilrg,lotrg,terlrlplarruingtofocr-rs{'llillcrcii'$ittgrt'atercllictr':trcfitr
. tr.rig;i!ii'rrr ri,{:clL'}r, i'at{:t'cLrttst:l'll(i<,rr u'rrl }rat'csting 1rt'aclir:c' (iirl'crrirne,l ol Htrr-valta is
\:cl}.t collli(:ior-rs irt 1,r"*",-r-r,,14 ittlci J.rrt)tcr.:tirtg ltlc glr'i.r'o;rlr{nl' r:sprt'rr:iatllr *'itlr l1:spr(:t t.J
\rirt{.,r *',,*sr,rrr,tr,r',t ;rttc[ ir"lrlrr turn,,Sfiny, bv arcltil.tli*1', cr(")J') 6i!v1115ifi1;.liqrrr r'r';i1[1
iIrr.:,-.r,ttit,ieatiUtr. rr:;t: ol lr*ittl-:d s.';tslc $';tler Irrlicl'nttcl ttti<:r0 irriililtir;n Ill',Oi((':l$i ct(:'
. Irl 'ie*, r:f tlrc irhrrrrrtrt:lttiorrq-.rl I;rcts ancl circutilslttttr;r:s. I t\'otlld rt'(lllrttl
li,ntt tl) rcJ(:ct llit: i"cc:trtt'tlttr.'rrrli'ltir,tls t.ri NIH tr] iltr:rcaltit: c-[]or"' lrurn I'{KlJ'
tu'l / t{
$hri Galendra Singh $hekhawat,
tr1ir ristcr ttJ'. Jnl Str;rltti,
{ iilr,crtltrlc!l I ol ll rclia,
.J. l0. $h;rrrttlr $lr;i.xl'i llh;trt'i'tt't' R'rli Ivl*rg'
Ncrv []eliri.
Yrlur* $lt1{(:t'e1-Y,
\
)t'-ft t {*'to'
(Manohar LalI
\3\

1t-\ *W Annexwg:L4
,-dPcc
ffi\t7,
REFORTI{o: Dp(qWryl2ot l gqq
DATE OF S MPUNG: 2r1.0{.l0tt
DEI,HI POI,LUTION CONTIIOL COMMITTEE
(Govcromenl d N,C.T, ot Ddhl) lth & Jfi tloor' ISBT Bulldlng
KrshmtrcGrtc,Drlhl ll0m6 ' ..
(Vlrll us rl hltJx:/hrwr'dpctfinlminlc'ln' 'vH,tr
onad J)lrw
F--
i n". . SemPliug lotrtionr
I \\'lcr Qurlity Crircrir
I ('C'Chss)
Lrtllude
Longitude
pH
6.5-8.5
coD
(:yll
BOD
qe"
3mg/l
or lcss
DO.
lrt
3mg/l
Ftcrl Coliform I
MPN/l00ml j
S00(desirrblc) I
2500 (mar I
-^--!--:Lt^\ 
I
I' Palla
28.8 I 3t023,
77,2r00181
't,lt ?5 2.3 6.8 5.5x 102
2 ' Wazirabad
I
28.7t31310.
?7.2319304
7.25 42 8.',| 4.2 9. lxl0l
3 ISBT Bridge
2t.6713533,
7?.233E707
7.34 136 42 NIL 22x103
!j
4iI' ITO Bridgc
28.6284288,
77.2s34917
7.40 il2 38 NIL t4xl0l
i 5 i NizarnudinBridge
;
28.59 I 5608,
'17.2715342 1.32 t44 49 NIL l8xl0l
6 I OkhlaBarrage
i.l
77'18'49"
2E'32',40"
7.20 ts2 53 NIL 27x I 0a
I
7 i AgnCanal atokhla Banagc
I
28.545414,
77.311075 ?.08 165 55 NIL 34x I 0{
I Rivcr Yamuna at Asgarpur
8 1 (After conllucncc ofShahdara
| &.Tuglakabad drains)
28.4657003,
77.3390s23t
7.44 l8l 58 NIL 43x I 0{
Nl'|,^"l.i
l/C Water Laboratory
0r.l{andita lloitra
Soentist.0,
$r
SF/AnalYs/SLA
q!n^4
W
\je

t ffifrqr*
,m
DELHI POLLUTIOI{ COiIIROL COTIilITTEE
.'nFLooR,,dXtiJ,iffifJi#*'oArE, 
oELHr.06vtrtt us et trur,//t pcc,J;,hl;il;;
YY{I-g.&^qUJLII Y S I^ I U$ Or.fi IVES I,AMUilA
3i[lli:,1ffi1#lTil1.rs( **r,n,t' ts u'wzq
s.
No. lncrlions
\\ aler Qurlitl, Critcrin
('C'Clrs)
"-*.
I Palh
%
I Wazirabad
Lrllludo
Longltudc ptt J r;on
l{nzttt
6.s.s.5 I
BO;
tyr*trl
3ngll
or lecr
i*
I t^ut
I
I s^gt
'ol mott
I
| ?ccrl Coliform
I mrylloonl
+ --. -* *-
i 5{X(dcrinbh)
1 25AA @*
28.8 t38023,
77.2t0afit 7.42 40 2 E.t 2 xlt
2E.7r313 t0,
7?.2319304 7.23 32 6 5.6 I lxld
l
I
3 ISBT Bridge 28.6713533,
77.2338207 7.36 DA 36 ML 26 xld
4 mO Bridge 28.6284288,
77.2534977 7.52 96 30 0.5 I 7rl 0:
S i Nizamudin Bridgc 28.5915608,
77.27t5342 7.56 t44 40 NIL 20xl0r j
6 t okhla Barrage 77'lg,49
28'32',4c. 7.t2 t92 53 NIL 4Jxl0l
j ifugra Canal at Okhla
Barrage
I
28.5454t4,
773trc75 7.n 152 43 NIL 22.r t 0{
{O.{t03
i ruvcr YamUnAat 
J
^l Asgarpur lza.easloot,8 '(After conlluence of, shahdara& | n.tlloszll
i't'uylatabad_drains) I _ _
7.62
I
I
?00
t
56 NIL
^'\d..tt
I/C WATER I.AB
Dr, Nandita Mollra
licientirt'0'
\:;

d locc DELHI POLLUTION CONTROL COMNilITTEE
WATER LABORATORY
lrhFLooR, tsBT BUtLDtNo, KASHMERE GATE, DELHt.og
visit us at : htlp:/idpcc.delhigovt.nic,in
#If AJ\tr7r
' WATER OUAL|Ty $TATU9 OF RtVqR:YAMUNA t ? .
REpoRT No: Dpcc/w utzozqt 6n* bM o> losf tel
DATE OF SAMPUNG: O2.OZ,2OZ4
s.
No. Localions
Latiludc
Longitude pH COD
(mg/l)
BOD
(mgll)
DO
(mett)
Fecal Coliform
MPN/I00ml
Water Qurlity Criteria
('C'Class) 6.5-8.5 3mgll
or less
Smgll
or
more
500(desirablc)
2500 (mar
permissible)
I Palla
28.8 t 38023,
77,2100t81 7.32 24 1.3 9,.6 2 xl02
2 Wazirabad
28.7t3t3IQ,
?7.2319304 7.41 48 6.7 5.3 4 xl02
3 ISBT Bridge
28,6713533,
7'7.2338207 7.34 t36 4t NIL I Ix l0l
4 ITO Bridgc 28.6284288,
77.2534977 7.75 88 28 0.8 8 xl0l
5 Nizarnudin Bridge
28.5915608,
77.2715342 7.48 160 42 NIL 9xl0r
6 Okhla Barrage 77't\',49"
28'32',40" 7.24 176 50 NIL l7 xl0a
1 Agra Canal at Okhla
Barrage
28.54s414,
77.3tt075 6.98 r68 45 NIL 12 x lOa
8
River Yamuna at
Asgarpur
(Alier confluence of
Shahdara &
Tuglakabad drains)
28.4657003,
77.1390523t 6.82 t84 54 NIL 25 xl0{
I/C WATER LAB
Llr, handita lVlollra
Sctsnilst ,tt,
N
\?".

.n
o DELHI POLLUT'OA '<*Eb
.ooR,.#g:Iiii$U?i 
conf,rrrEE
xl":llH#J,i^:lK';:,,;{f
"3
Water euality Criteria
('C'Class)
3
4 ITO Bridge
5 Nizzrnudin Bridge
_-*-E+_--__%
Okhla Barrage
Agra Canalar Okhla
Barrage
Ri;?.",ril.t'
zr.ozs+zle;
77.2534s7? i 7.27 l0t
zt.sp lsoorl
77.27 t 5342 7.20 t5?
l?'rg,d'-'
,'/ *D"fiil: l5,ol,zozq
NIL
0.3 l2x1gr
I'IIL 22x1gt '
----__NIL
6
42
44
4?
54
2g'32,40,,
zs.sqsqla,
77.3t t07s
24xt0a 
I
,.7 x lla /
I*.__l
:!
::
7.t2
::
t76
rSl
NIL
f-
I
I
I
I
I
II
7.52!
l
.l
I
NIL
- -__J
l/C Water Lab
Dr. Llandila l[oitra
.rcrenfusl ,0,
500(desira6iJ
2500 (maxzs.a rrso2f
77.2t0018t
za.zrrrJTd
77.23t ],a4
8.2x 1gr
l7't or
ze.oz rjs3f
t.3o I lzs
\ 3s-
s.
No. Locrtions Latirudf
Longitude pH coD
(ta.cil)
BOD
(nefi) DO
(me/t)
6.5-8.s
7.38 ,
3mg/l
or less
Smg/t
Dr morcI Palla
-%_
Wazirabad
ISBT Bridge
permissible)
32 2.5 6.42 4.0x l9r
46 9.0
l
37
3'
-l
7
Asgarpur .lo
o (Allel conflueucc oll 'e'tv't tuuJ2
Shahdara &_ ".i 77.33905231
l-tul,,Il g.t,r_{ g ilg i

A^^tr - (
Annexure 3 Replv of the Government on Recommendation no' 7
List of projects with status on River Yamuna under Namami Gange (11 projects in the Delhi @ Rs.
2009.12 crore; 1 proiect in HP @ Rs. 11.57 crore; 2 projects in Haryana @ Rs. 217.87 crore; 20 Projects
in UP @ Rs. 3596.15 crore)
Himachal Pradesh
\96
S.No. Name of Project
Component
Treatment
Capacity
AA&ES
Cost
Associated
River
Status Funding
Pattern
(MLD) (Rs. fn
crore)
1 Sewerage Scheme for Zone ll
& lll of Paonta Town in Tehsil
Paonia Sahib, District Sirmour,
Himachal Pradesh (New - 1.72
MLD, Rehab* 1+ 0.44 MLD
STPs)
3.16 Lt.57 Yamuna Completed Non-EAP
(100% Central
share)
Total 3.15 L7.57
ana :
S.No. Name of Project Component Treatment
Capacity
AA&ES
Cost
Associated
River
Status Funding
Pattern
(MLD) (Rs. ln
crore)
1 STP & Sewerage works" in Panipat
town (New 20+25 MLD; Rehab-
35+10 MLD)
90 217,87 Yamuna Completed Non-EAP
(7O%
Central
share,
30% State
share)
2 STP & Sewerage works" in Sonipat
town (New - 25 MLD, Rehab- 30
MLD)
55 YamLna Completed
Total L45 217.87
Delhi :
S.No. Name of Project Crimponent Treatment
Capacity
AA&ES
Cost
Associated
River
Status Funding Pattern
(MLD) (Rs.ln
crore)
1 "Rehabilitation of Trunk Sewer
No.4, (K1)" in KondliWWTP
Catchment
0 87.43 Yamuna completed EAP- JICA funding)
(85% Central share,
15% State share)
2 "Rehabilitation of Trunk Sewer
No.5 (K2)" in KondliWWTP
Catchment
0 83.4 Yamuna completed EAP- JICA funding)
(85% Central sfare,
15% State share)
3 "Providing and Laying Pressure
Mains of 700-900 mm dia Dl
Pipes in KondliWWTP
Catchment ('K-4'1"
0 59.13 Yamuna completed EAP- JICA funding)
(85% Central share,
15% State share)

4 "Rehabilitation of Sewers of
sizes varying from 600mm to
1400mm Dia. in Ashok Vihar
and Jahangirpuri Area in Rithala
(R1a)" in Rithala WWTP
Catchment
0 43.92 Yamuna Completed.
(Only some
document
submission
pending)
EAP- JICA funding)
(85% Central share,
15% State share)
5 "Providing and Laying 1200 mm
dia. Dl Rising Mains from Bharat
Nagar SPS to Pitampura ('R-1b')
)" in Rithala wwTP catchment
0 45.4 Yamuna completed, EAP- JICA funding)
(85% Central share,
15% State share)
6 "Rehabilitation & Up-gradation
of existing 182 MLD Rithala
Phase-l STP (Rzf'
L82 2L7.79 Yamuna Project
under
execution.
(Liquid Line
Fully
operational)
EAP- JICA funding)
(85% Central share,
15% State share)
7 "Rehabilitation and Up-
gradation of Kondli Phase-|, ll &
lll WWTPs 145, L14,45 MLD)
(K3)"
204 239.11 Yamuna Project
under'
execution.
(Liquid Line
Fully
operational)
EAP- JICA fundins)
(85% Central share,
15% State share)
8 "Construction of 564 MLD (124
MGD) WWTP at Okhla ('O')"
564 565.78 Yamuna Project
under
execution.
Liquid Line
partially
operational
EAP- JICA funding)
(85% Central share,
15% State share)
9 Public Outreach 20.467 Yamuna On going EAP- JICA funding)
(85% Central share,
15% State share)
10 Consultancy Services (PM C) 37.62 Yamuna On going EAP- JICA funding)
(85% Central share,
15% State share)
Sub Total 950.00 1494.O4
tt Construction of 318 MLD (70
MGD) WWTP with 10 years
O&M on DBO basis at
Coronation Pillar, Delhi
318 515.08 Yamuna Completed
(318 MLD)
Non-EAP
(50% Central share,
50% State share)
Sub Total 318.0 515,08
Total 1268.0 2009.12
Uttar Pradesh:
S.No. Name of Project Component Treatment
Capacity
AA&ES
Cost
Associated
River
Status Funding
Pattern
\ s'l

(MLD) (Rs. ln
crore)
t Kairana Sewerage project (l&D) on
DBOT basis
15 78.42 Yamuna Project
under
execution.
Non-EAP
(LO0%
Central
share)
2 Mathura Sewerage project (New 30
MLD, Rehab - 14.5+16.5+6.8 MLD STP)
under hybrid annuity based PPP model
67.8 460.45 Yamuna Completed Non-EAP
(Lo0%
Central
share)
3 Renovation and Upgradation of 4 MLD
STP/SPS & appurtenance works at
Vrindavan (Mathura), U.P.
4 42.8 Yamuna Completed Non-EAP
(70o%
Central
share)
4 Agra Sewerage Scheme (lnterception &
Diversion Works) and construction of
10 DSTPs [New -100+35+31+11.60 =
177.6 MLD STPs) under hybrid annuity
based PPP model on one city one
operator policy
L77.6 842.25 Yamuna Project
under
execution
EAP
(100% Capex
under World
Bank)
(100% Opex
under NGP)
5 lnterception & Diversion (l&D) and STP
works of Baghpat Town, (New-14 MLD)
t4 77.36 Yamuna Completed Non-EAP
{LOO%
Central
share)
6 Etawah Sewerage Scheme
(lnterception & Diversion (l&D) works)
(New- 21 MLD, Rehab - 23.94 MLD
sTP)
44.94 140.6 Yamuna Completed Non-EAP
(too%
Central
share)
7 Firozabad Sewerage Scherne
(lnterception & Diversion (l&D) works)
0 51,08 Yamuna Completed Non-EAP
(too%
Central
share)
8 Upgradation of existing 6.25 MLD CETP
at Mathura
6.25 13.87 Yamuna Completed Non-EAP
(75% Central
share,
25% State
share)
9 l&D and STP Works for balance drains
at Mathura under hybrid annuity based
PPP model
50 292.56 Yamuna LOA issued Non-EAP
(.100%
Central
share)
L0 Chhata town sewerage scheme (l&D
and STP works), District Mathura
6 56.15 Yamuna
(Kosi
Drain)
Technical
Bids under
Evaluation
Non-EAP
(100%
Central
share)
LT l&D and STP works at Kosi Kalan Town,
District Mathura
!2 65.59 Yamuna
(Kosi
Drain)
LOA to be
issued
shortly
Non-EAP
(to0%
Central
share)
\j$

12 l&D and 13 MLD STP works at
Vrindavan City, District Mathura
13 77.70 Yamuna Financial
Bids under
Evaluation
Non-EAP
ll0Oo/o
Central
share)
13 l&D and STP works at Hathras Town 24 L28.91 Karvan LOA to be
issued
shortly
Non-EAP
/700%
Central
share)
t4 l&D and STP works at Budhana, (New-
10 MLD)
10 48.76 Hindon
(Kali
West)
Project
under
execution.
Non-EAP
lt00%
Central
share)
15 l&D with STP works at Muzaffarnagar,
(New-32,50+22 = 44.50 MLD)
44.5 234.03 Hindon
(Kali
West)
Project
under
execution
Non-EAP
(100yo
Central
share)
16 Saharanpur Sewerage Scheme (l&D
and STP works)
135 577.23 Dhamola Financial
Bids undel
Evaluation
EAP
(100% Capex
under World
Bank)
(100% Opex
under NGP
17 l&D and STP works 40 MLD Shamli
Town, Shamli
40 206.02 Hindon
(krishni
river)
Financial
Bids under
Evaluation
Non-EAP
'700%
Central
share)
18 l&D and STP works 10 MLD
Thanabhawan, Distt. Shamli
10 97.19 Hindon
(krishni
river)
Under
Retendering
Non-EAP
(100%
Central
share)
19 l&D and STP works 5 MLD Banat, Distt.
Shamli
5 48.71 Hindon
(krishni
river)
Under
Retendering
Non-EAP
(t}o%
Central
share)
20 l&D and STP works 5 MLD Babri &
Bantikhera, Distt. Shamli
5 55.47 Hindon
(krishni
river)
Under
Retendering
Non-EAP
(L00%
Central
share)
Total 694.09 3596.1s
Grand Total ztto.25 5834.71
\31

\a
\
,J
:
..>
I
O
5-<
F{
ct
Fl
oAEP
CE
l!-
6=
td
E >-I ra
#.:N, il>n*:ix 9>44
sGloa>o
-O. !
EErS;!o
xog
E
eE,.2
E€q
dzr
eO;
8*.iEEC
do!
z!J15 i -l; F.! Ii Eb "E EEE q
> O EE N
o q aq i
i E *e F
E HEY .I_ o 6ry -99=eJ E
5iE i'd
'EE.E 
A
E:qEEEEEz:-
{ E $p :
EEE E ii
.5A,58;
IE
Itr
tdlu
ld
t;'lE
l!IE
lq
l6
lrl!
Itr
IEIEt9IElo
t:lrlo ^lA r't:.9:. d
T$
zv.U
td
us
EL
EE
o^il r
<tr
I
ca0
(ruooI/Ndr{)
uroJIIoJ lscsax
o
o
o
rN
o
r
olootooto ao6
o
o o o
r
oaoN
o6
r
o F
o
E
:
F
;
H
(tuooI/Ndnr)
uroJ![of, IBtoI
o
oo
o
r
o oI
I r oI I
o
o
oo
r
o
o
oo
o
(uau)'('o'J o
N
q
d
(usu)(os a
N
d
r
I \q
6
..,1
N r I
N
r
d
N 6
*
(viu) oc !q
I a .J
I
c!
r r .l I c! €
(
a
(
2
(tuooI/Ndt^t)
uroJlloJ IBc&d
o
a
ooo
6
oloolo
-lEwls
o a
N
o aoo
rN
o
o
o
d
o
o C
(tuooI/NdI4r)
uroJJIoJ IBIoI
ooo
o
r
olooto
otooto@16 6
o,o
6
ao6r
o
o
r N
6
o
o
oNo
F
6
(uau)'o'o'J o q
N
? q d
(uau)ooa .q
r q q q .!
6
...|
o c.l N
r
N
o .1
6
ts
€
(uau) oa c 
.r
r
c.l .q
€ q a
I I
F!r
dE
(ruoouNaw)
uroJIIoJ IB.8aJ
ooo
o
N
o o
oo oa
oo
o
o o
6
o
dd
o
o o
o d
(tuoouNdr^t)
uroJlloJ ltlol
oI
I
o
rI
o
r r
o
oa
I
IoNr
o
r
o
r
o
I 6
r
ooo
N6
c
d
(vtu)'('o'c I
q
N N
o a
(uiu)(os N a
6
.q
r 96
09
r ..t
r Yl$616 a
(uau) o( r
f.l
r r .1loc
€lo o!l.lalh c!
r I
q
!r
dEE
6A
o
x
(tuoouNdllt)
uroJlloJ lBrBad
olootoato
6lN
o
o
olooloolo
+t;
a
oao6
o
Nd
o
oo
oI ol-OI€olh
a
(ruooI/Ndw)
uioJIloJ IBlotr sl€ r
e
r
o.
6
r
oo
N6
olcolv
(uau)'('o'c I d
q
d
oa olo
olN
(uau)qos NI€
el"d
q6 a r
09 9 r c!
r .t 16
(ruEu) oq .': I .!Flr qr I I
clI
c! q
r I
N oq
E6
6€I
0uooI/Ndr{)
uroJlloc lEoEaJ
o
o r
o o
6
oloolooto a
N
o
o
or
oo
r
G
E
I I
(tuoor/Ndw)
uroJ!loc lBtoI o
I
a
I
oo
N
Io
a
olooloolo
oldrl9
oo o
o
o
r
r
I
I
(u3u)'o'o'J
N
qoN
qlq
Nlo €
I I
(uau)(os 09 q .! .tl.jrlE 6 r
.q
a r eloqi lod
6
r
(uau) o( ar \q
r -tl\qrle
.',t I Yrl€
oe !q
r .lr q
I
cils
hlQ
q
H I
E.=
z
(tuooI/NdI^t)
uroJlloc lBcaJ ()
(uoouNdI4r)
uroJ!loJ IBIoI
(u6u)'('o'J qa
o
N N
o
6
c
c d
c 0
(uau)qos o
F
N
q o I q qrN N
o
I o
(u8u) oo o qo o o o qo qo
n) o vl
o
E
&
u
H
I
I
I
t,
lEli
tbIE
E
6
!
$l
:l
EI
!lol
ol
leI
zA
&
tr
I
k
,=
z
{i
tr
EI
a
p
(ruooI/Ndllt)
uroJ[oJ lErad
Et
(tuooI/NdI4l)
uJoJ!lo) IEtoI
it
(u8u)'o'o'J
r
o q Io q
6 d
(uEu)
(os N
q
N c.iN
q
N
qrN
q elq
-lN
vl
d
N
I
N
o .t
(v8u) oo oloolo qo
..1
N ao .!
L L
,r t d E { c
€
z
a t{;Uzq N @ r 6 o o N d

5,oxc
o
F
o1'
€o
c!!r)E
,,o6o
3
3
6
t
3
a
0,
q,
I
P5
No
P
I
{
2
{
oe
Q
E
6
H
o
=.
oc
N
E
E
N o ! o N
0
?
{
-l
3
z
tE
n
D
tr
F
o
F
a
tr
4
2
t
g
o
E
E
F
F E
z E
7
!i
I T
5 Ip I s oiJ i') l^ 6 D
o
o
.F
Et
ts
€
as
E
F
!
E
I
I o6 P I
p :o
5 I I
6
90
o :o6 D(
a
90
o b
N
b o o.
6{
I
o o
j
@
oo
o
o
o
a
6o
o
o
a
o
o
€ I
o I {
oo
o
I
69o
tel
Co
I
{ o o
{o
o
o
6
oo
o
oI ooo
{
o
Fe
crl
+ +.N is !^ 6
ie 6
6
o !.6
6 6 l)
o
z
E 9
o s
:o6 6 :o6 N 6 ie
a I.N
D(
N
p o o b
c.
o.
o
€I o
o
p o
oo
o
o
a
No
oo
o
o
o
I Ip
o
a
o o
o
I
o 3o
ifo
€
oo
q
oo o oo
oe
{oea
o
o {
o
{N
oo
!
o
6
o
{
{
o
ao
Fe
csl
Co
6{ { 9 6 6
ie
6
5
{ {5
6
irc S II
D
o
X
umE
@
{
!oN
p N
b\ !..,o o 6 !.,
o
!..) D(
I
a
NI NIo J
6 a
N
;o
c.
o.
{
FI
{ {o 6 6o
p
oo o
o
p
oo oo
{ p
a
oI
fo
tal
Co
p
o
t?
6 I { o
o
o
Ioo
o o
a
o
o
o tal
C{
6 { o
6 .N i^ I ie
6
\
6 6 I U
o
{P
lo
x
@
D
yc
6
yo
6 i.) 6 6 6 a p 6 9o D(
N
{
NN
s €
6
I
ie
p c.
o.
N Npoo
poo
!
N p
a o
o
{ao
F
o a
o
oo
'Io
tal
N o
o o
o
o
o o
o o o
o
N
o
a
ooa a Nao
le
c8l
{ 9 5 i^ A \ i,o 60
5
b.
D
o
Fl
EP
E
m
D
p
a5 I.' N
bo
o5 ie N
6
5 b A
N
b D(
p5b ^ t,o
N
I p
'o
c.
o.
{{
c
Ioo N
o
N 6 {6 ja
a
{a
o
oa
I
oo
IN 6N a
N
os
t.l
Co
o N
a oa a
o
o
N
o
p6
o
N
oa
oo o oo
Fe
cal
t
+ { i bo i} 5 \ 6 {
t,
o
e
D
P
q
I N
p
5 a's a o J6
N
a
N I
N
p
a D(
p Io
6 90
o
p
o
p c.
o.
p{
c
oo o
o
N
oo o
o o
N
o
o o o
o
fo
!al
3o
6q{
o oo oo
o
N
o
N
o
No N
o o
N
o
Fe
;sl
Co
F
6 q 6 i.r LJ A N
.N D
o
Y
'!
0N
g
r
{a 6 6 6
N
6
NN
p
!'.,
a
p9 p
b.
N
ie D(
I b b 9o
p
b
6 c.
o.
{
66
{
o oe
o
o
€N
a
IN
oo
I
o
o
No
o
oo9
ooo
o
No
o
trl
Co
N
oo
p
o
Na ooo
N
o
{ {c { {
oe
rrt l, o r!3tt rr nlliiFeP
-fti E r
!ts{EEZE i.!q +,- o I D
ii 3 B g
i3 3.: Ied'a E x
!gftHi^EE.qe-:. io
I-C E E
ii 3 B.
at$9
F[!
=d€g
E.rar
E'
F
I
a
r
S
a
t
v
e.
{
lr
I
ro
F
!
s

N N o o o { u N rh
v
{
t9
(D
r.l
t,-l6
o
E
a
z
EI
o
o
D
o
0e
EI
o6
D
EI
ts
X
l<
&
o
m
@
m
E
o
o
I
7
E
oI
o
4o!
r,oE
o
oI
F c l-
< 16
3E E p
6
o
DI
DE
p
u\o
AI
I q !^{ 9
o { \ a
6 lia
q li
{ 9
D
o
(m
trJ
E
{!t
tn
\,6 !..,
a
a
ie N J6
{iJ
t-)
b
!
i! 9@
o D(
oA I 9O
N Ns
L,
o.
n
N
u
o
p
@
OOo
N)
a NN
o oO I
{
Oo
!O
e o
a
tal
Co
-I€ 5oo
Nt)OO
O
|.) N N
NoI
NN N)
O
OO
N,o
IT
cal
Co
5O
OO
uu
:j
{ ip
:j
! A s b\
:j
6
:j
bo
D
o
(m
U
{D
a
u p a
{5
N
b
I
N
N NN
E
N
i.,
f.)
D(
mP
6
6
A p N
5
{
a IO
A 9 !"
[.)6 o.
n
u {
I
-l
?
3
o
o
N@
oo
IN
O
€N
Po
EN
O o
oo
N EN
.o
IO
tal
Co
u
b 5o o
N
Au
N) N
O
{
O
-i
o O
N@ N{
o
N
OO O
o
o
N@
o O
cal
Co
5
O
H
o
a 90 Ja { :Ja J@ J!
{ {
6
@ @
a
90
@
tt
o
ln {
19
6
tr
E
F6
E
IteEo
{
ItJ
p
5
N
L)
N
5 I\, N
5 t., N
ir N'
l..)
!.) !.,6 P6 !.., p
5 Tt(
o
D
5
g\
a
o @ 9O
6 - (-.
o.
r!
N
o
N
O
5o N
O O O
soo O a tal
5
6(I 5 q a
o
6 6 o I 56 +
O
5
o
sa
11e
o
{€
90 6
i.j
{
6 :J@
{{ {
@
{
5 J5 {
i.J :J€
,@ 9. D
o
lcD
E
E
oa
:r
6
p
o\ I\,{ |.,{
Nq N 1.'
6
N !.,{
N
{
N !-.,
6
N
6 a D(
-tN
6 € @ 6 C.
o.
u sa ! { { {e oo
{ 5
o tel
Ss
cal
o\a
6
6
oo
6@
q
o
o@ a
o € !
O
6 a No
{6o
-l6
@
5 {l{ql{ {
@ J6 :J { { J
@ s
90
6
D
o
EC
ry
C.
o..IT
tal
Ss
cal
ts
q:
E;l
EE*t.r
D
€
p
a !., !.,
@
t.,{
Nq N P N
b !-,{ !., t.,{ t., !.,6
€
6 9.190olo
6
5u ala
oloOIO
{ A {
O
{
o o o o
NO o
6au
6
o
a
@ 66 6 6@ 6
o
{I 6
O
6
o
6
o
{
I 90190olu {l{b.lb. J {i! :{{ { {ir
@
ir)
@
i
D
o
FO
p(
c.
o.
rE,
tal
$s
cal
-E fii
!,E0e6
B
F
N
N
6 I'J{
NJ
! !.,6 !\,6 !.) l.Ja
N !.,6 !.) !..,
! 1.,6 !.,
6 alo
blb
6 6
5 alsoloolo oo Oo o
o
A
o O alsoloOIO
{ o
65a\
6
o 6 6 alrH loolo
6 {16
olo
o
o
o@ {Oo
ll
x
m
o
I
6
!.a
a
oE
D
!
D
E]ct+lgt
+lEI
=l6lrlol
9.1
=l6I
!'. I
olEI
E ECtrrUowEPttrrrll
E i rYe9
E +EE *gI zg BG ]]6lE
3 EEaB$
E FgI;s
g EFEiEp- aa i'ii( 6 cE Eg tsE 6 <.'* ! 6
'a 8.aE B
E ,q'E' E
F E4 ;'a BqFeH*b6
F.E1
rE CL
ct
E
6'
B.
g
;
N
t>t3t:t,D
lxlc
lold
I
(D
t,
o
C!.9
(1
@I
voat
o
3
J
6
E
o
o
E
6

irrrlr if yy
Ff E 1tI +E tr 9
z 3 4.e ;s;3 ! 3E ec F B
33rEF
Lt 6 r A
TEE?EhaEg61C:! 4! E
+i 3
3E
i!
I
F
D
p. :.
o6pt
P
p
-t
-_s
\-rt

a
:F
c
=.
E
o
I
! ?
a
E,
o
E
E
E
E-
2
a
d
I g
H
{ { j
L b, PH
2
t
!
s 9 s .N Do (nsn)
a'
!o
A BOD(mgr)
t b I b c.o.D. (mcn)
A
8
!l q T6til Collform
(MPN/I00ml)
{ q !? Fectl Collform
(MPN/l0oml)
{ { i! pH
a
ir b. .p $ Do (mql)
BoD(mcI)
!., b I i-) !.) C.O.D. (mgn)
s {
I !i Tot.l Coufom
(MPN/l00h1)
e a a
F€crl Collform
CMPN/l00ml)
{ { {
E
{ .A b. PH
d
x
r
I
I iJ { s b.. Do (nsl)
l!
a. :J b p BoD(mgn)
{{ 9 I C.O.D. (ng/l)
{l!
q Totrl Coliform
(MPN/100nl)
{
8
{ F.c.l Collform
(MPN/l00nl)
l^ i { pH
{
I
x
9r b. J I DO (ngr)
i^ :J :l J !'., BOD(m8n)
{,. b C.o.D. (mel)
{ !i Totrl Collfotm
(MPN/l00ml)
!I
aa
{ a
Fec.l Collform
(MPN/l00hl)
{bl :J J J :T J J pH
t
H
E
F
I
{ J 9 ir ii io DO (ms[)
{ 9 |.) BOD(mg^)
tr b i-) i, C.O.D. (mgr)
t!
a E I {a Totrl Collform
(MPN/l0oml)
I I t
Fecrl Collform
(MPN/l00ml)
J J { J J J pIl
a.
N
r
+ i^ DO (mgfl)
9 9 BoD(mg^)
9 !..)
b C.O.D. (mgr)
{ a Totrl Collfom
(MPN/l00ml)
!I
:g 5
! Fecrl Collform
(MPN/100m1)
{L J J { { J J J pH
4
e
r
ie 5 9 DO (m8r)
:J BoD(ms^)
p i-) b C.O.D. (m8n)
!i e Tot.l Collform
(MPN/l00ml)
{ { { { Fecrl Collform
(MPN/l00ml)
n
='d.
ts
d
?
19
o
o
!0
d!i
tJ<o6l.) IN<
E
ii
+
!'
c
a
t tduoPil[[
YiTY
I o-& tr'
;9 P.d;
-5EaEas6
E3*EP;*8xiE iu6 3:F8 pg
6 !;'E3.EF tr.
gE E
G'
6EEE
og
i^
I5

5
Ed
-cE=4
t+ E
E!.:
Ee 6.rl
E -iE E "q.- t e I
9bEr,r b
i€ 8o t
BIEflg E
i-EE:< !E!6-q q. t
EEEEE g
*Es{E EE;rE EZ !
!EHEA g
EEEE * iivntrtr:E
aiOQr.lra @
'a
J
a
I
,i
(tuoovNdI4l)
uroJ!lo) Itred
E
(ruooI/NdI^t)
uroJll0S lEloI r e
(viE)'a'o'3 o o q o <2
F
(6u)oos 9 N
\q
N
r v) I r: E a I
(yiu) o( 6
c: r r F
i: r F
rr rr
Hd r *t-
6
r r ar
F
'e
s
E
A
a
0uool/NdIAI)
uroJlloc llratr €lQ I F
(J
(uoouNdI,{)
uoJlto:) llloJ rl$
e r F
(yiu)'('o':) q o
I
(vau)cos r
N
r:
N
!q \q \q slo.i I c'i cil.i
(IFu) oo q rr clr r
I r r F
I
r
Hd r r r r Fls F r
IU
!li
eo
Ie
la
A
(luooI/NdI^t)
uroJllo] lli.J
ce 6
a
(-oor/Ndr{)
uroJlloJ IstoJ r oto N r
Mu)'q'o'f, € o
(y?6)(os r \q Id
!q
N d
r \q
d
r:
N
r:
d
\
(r6u) oq q r -l-
€
I
09
r F r
Hd qr r q
"dl* r r 9r
t:
r
E
t
E
D
(tuooI/N{t^D
uroJlloJ llr.,
e !
U
(uooI/NdI^l)
uroJllo3 llloJ
o o olo
:l-
(y3*)'o'o'c € I
q
(uiu)(o{ a,} .t nl9
dld
a
(uiu) oo €lr r F r r
a:
r aF
Hd r iIF
oq
r r .!r
r
r .lr
6
r F
'
E
(tuoovNdw)
uroJllo3 lBJod Nlr
Nl-
r
otootorlo
a 818
oto olo
Nld
o
I
(uooI/NdI^t)
uroJlloS IsloJ o EIe I
oru)'('oc
qlq q
Irtya-)qoa I yj
\q alal9
<ya*t oa I 3 -ls6l -i I .l,
Hd r r r r
F et r:r
oq
r
t:r
F
F
E
i5
€
(ruooriNdr^D I EuroJltoC l8!ad I o I o
El3 o a a
r 6
o
F
E
(ruoor/Ndh0 lEuroJllo:) tsloJ | <
eo o ao
olo
oto
$ld
313 F
d
(vau)'('o'3 q q qlc
std
q co
a
0/EE)(otr n a a
t
o
aE
^
o/au) oo n q @. q I I d i: A
t9
Hd rr r
a:
r r r r t:r r
r r r rr
A
t
t !
I
t
a
E
z
F
9
z F o ll
Fr
D
E
(!
6l
) c.lr. aloo>N
(HO
o>
d
o
d
B

z
I
w>rrI
CE
36
E1TBEl
^4
EA
sE'
E
E
E
I
{
ct
ET{UO9l r l
i53E
I nm i'
zE E"'
E+sEgq1,
>- =xE1! ru6 3:F83g
s gi B.
g.E g
r{ :B!
efl
9.
er
t^
E
Fo
tc
J_<t\

tl
{
a
u
a
E
E
P.
E
a
q
E
6I
N
o
{
o ?
I
q
E
a
d
z
?
h
E
3 E
U
{ { 6 J J pH
I
eE
E
t^ 9 ie I 6 Do (msn)
b I BoD(mg/l)
b b b b P C.O.D. (mg/l)
{{ { q Tot.l Coliform
(MPN/100m1)
I
q Fecil Collform
(MPN/t00ml)
J b J ir 'o PII
9 !^ :-\ 9 i$
.N DO (ng[)
BOD(ms/l)
b I 9 9 C.O.D. (ngn)
{ a
{ !e Totol Collform
(MPN/100m1)
p { q + Fecal Colifdrm
(MPN/100m1)
{ :l :J
{ { pH
x
{ ir J 6 J{ J { :J {5 DO (mgn)
E
ii { BOD(ms/l)
C.o.D. (ms[)
{
e a a
Totel Collform
(MPN/l00ml)
Fecrl Coliform
(MPN/100m1)
U
{ {
5 J { { :J J {
b. pH
{
I
F
{
tD A :l J \ J ie Do (msn)
in 9 b. BoD(mgn)
I C.O.D, (ngI)
{
Totrl Collforil
CMPN/100m1)
P a {a { F€crl Coliform
(MPN/l00ml)
s { J { { L J .N { i pH
.t
I
F
9 9 9 I 9 DO (mgll)
{ :J
in i! BOD(ng/l)
C.o.D, (mgn)
Totrl Collform
(MPNil00ml)
A
a a
q a
FEcel Collform
(MPN/100h1)
{{ { J ir J{ { pH
(:
b b. - DO (mgil)
I BoD(msn)
|.) 9 b b b b C.O.D. (mg/l)
Totrl Collform
(MPN/l00mt)
p a { F€cil Coliform
(MPN/100m1)
{ pH
E
P.
r
t, { IrO (mgn)
:J s ii BoD(mg/l)
{ b b b c.O.D. (mg/l)
{
E I I
p
a
Totrl Collform
(MPN/I00mt)
q 8
I
a a Fec.l Coliform
(MPN/l00ml)
EI!UOtEPrrrlLi iT9Y
e;9: e
E ricEg3*E9
>^ =x 
P
:XPt FT
FESE
E is l5.& E
;!
E
E
tI
l-
!1
Fo:.
_t
J
E
.c
E
c

{ll
o
a
D'
<;(D+D:J
lJ<O6
[.J FI
(,) <E
c
A'
E
c
4
a
3
:
rc
c {
q
7
e
2
E
r
E
F
tr
el
c
r
F
g
aq
z E
IBq
FE
3
g
41
g
a
:
{ J6 {{ {
5 { {
a.
{ J {{ {
in { { { PH
t!,
{g
a
a
trG
!
E
iJ to Do (mgil)
L {
i.r BOD(nsn)
b l.ro o I
N
o b so b o o b C.O.D. (mgn)
o
o o I {oo a
o
o
o
!
e o
o oo
N
ao
Iot.l Collform
(MPN/10ofr1)
a o !
o a
o o
Fe..l Collform
(MPN/l00ml)
J{ {
6
{ J
6 { s
{ S
{ J
I
{i J6 J{ { pH
1
{ 6 { { DO (msn)
s I BoD(ngn){tr
b 9 6 I C,o.D. (mgA)
, o
o oe oo o
o
o
o
o
o
fohl Collforh
(MPN/l00ml)
I
q { a oa
Fecrl Collform
(MPN/l00ml)
o
{ ir J J{ J { { { pH
e
tr
o
{
N
{ { 'p A DO (mgit)
1l
P i
!.., f, s i BOD(B8il)
{ 9 9 I C.O.D. (Egr)
E
{ a
fotel Collform
(MPN/l00ml)
o I
Fecsl Collform
(MPN/l00ml)
o
{ { {{ PH
U;
EE
a
+
{ { { { { { {
b\ J s DO (ms^)
!') N !.) 6 { 6 BoD(mgn)
o b o C.O,D. (mgl)
{ o o {o { { { { a
Totrl Collfom
CMPN/l00ml)
q o 6
o
Fec.l Collform
(MPN/I00D1)
o
{ { J rJ ir i!6 N i'l N pH
oFj
ur
r
i.
{ {{ {
{ J { { { {{ {io ie b\ DO (hg^)
b,
p
\ b\
N
{ b. { 6
!..,
{ BOD(mg^)
I
b c.o.D. (mgn)
6 { { { {a
J { o ! Totel Collform
(MPN/100m|)
Fec.l Collform
(l}iPN/l00nl)
.
{ J J N { N DH t
F'E
rd
a
E
t.
{ { b J { {{ { { { \ DO (mgr)
n, P !-, !..,
6
p
6
!'.) N t'., l.) { BoD(Esn)
th c.O.D. (mg[)
o a o Tot.l Collform
(MPN/100m1)
6
o
Feccl Collform
(MPN/100m1)
9 EYY?3?
= ? +nir9u!1 ;l-f,1*r.
5 !EEsiF
I FElBBEi q; r;N -ri E{E96'9gBEEdE;
E: f;gEia*4 UEe =; - 9
e s9r: a
'o 3.id'8. ;
E $5 i 3r- E { F
VEBd
d'iHgJ.lEE
-iB;E?217
OE
!.s,B* Fiii{rr.o
ilo
a
5
D,O

r
(-.'
-J
oo
(U
o
o
(U
L.
o+.
L.
o
E
(U
J
o
L
o.lr,
G
=
?
-Vtsoo=o.L
-Hv
)oao--o6
=96FEE
.EP b.-V^J^U
66xrC(U5(,
,E?
N
mNoN
doo
(o
oo
oqo
r{
@
oqo
.1
o
N
@qo
LO
.1
o \Fl
.1
N sf
N
NNoN
Uoo
$rlqo
(o
Nq
o
ooqo
q
N
rl
$o arr) aoo
.-{
6
I
\Fo)-E6
8P
Lo
mNoN
Uoo
@
(o
oo
+
Nl
o ao =Z =Z
=Z
=Z
NN0N
doo
=f
O')
arr) =Z ao =Z Jz =Z =z
aao
o\ xOo):m tr\L*
E
oa
(vl
NoN
uoo
o
N
q
@
ro
co O)N ost oo
v
rr)\t
Fl
ro
HH
Nl
N o (o
$ N\f, c'o
rr) s(o N(o
oo
o<Oo)UE
H$
Noo
oorr)
(o
orl
o
O:
(D
\rr-l
\t
LC)
FI
N(or'l
oNFl
$$
Noo
oo
rf,)
(o
NFl
o(or{
rt
@r{
ortN
ooN
(o|r)N
tr
o+,(6
rJ
oJ
oJ
r0
o-
'j5
o
_o
o.=N(U
o
o',]C'=
m
Fm
a
C)
O)
!.C
m
oF
oo)]J.E
m
.C
!f
Eo
.N
Z
o
O)oL!-
o
c0
o
.CY
o
q
.Cl<
o
.F'
G
r0
cooO<l)(oto
!-=
o)o<m
G!E
o'(J ^-cco';irvJJ -!- !-
(o r-L0 jC
pPtx5( oi5trl- o r0L\/ !-+
E d_g a
'L)LRJVI
e U,ts:.aa6rs.<UoU
ui9 rl N oo \t LO (o N O
T
x{
-.=
C
raNc,N
ta
ootrI
OU
NN
C3
N
t
a
(,
o
CT
aa
*,
5GI
J
C}
l-
ot,G
=oc
:,
E
G

(-\
c'l
g
oodl
GI
NoN
(J
oa o
oo
(o-t oo
$
s.l.ir Ns
(o
oo @oo N o\f, $\r
LO
oo Noo o).t
NNoN
uoo
@(o oo
LO
N
@ o(o @rr) @rr) LO
o
LO
$
LO
@\f,
LO
o) (o
=o
E
aoo
GINoN
(,
oo oroN
@$N
NoN
lr).tN Olr.l
(o
rl
o(orl
@.trl
$@rl
(o
LO
N
OO
r{N
N
oorl
\to
co
NNoN
uoo
socn
N
N
@
c'o
ca
$N
N
N
cr)
@$
CU
(o
LO
N
o$N
(o
@N
@
oN
oov
oNoo
cR
E
.nql-
(Y!
NoN
ooa oor'l
N
O>
(o
@
.il-
@
N
@
(o
N o @ro v N c{
@ $(o (o
o
NNoN
uoo
@(orl
(olr)rl
$(orl
$\tr{
ooN
N
LO
rl
(o(I)
-f,
or-l
oorl
@Nrt
oor-l
(o
cf)r{
c
(U
L
o
15
oo
E(6
z
arc!r(o
oCo+,a
.C!-
oo)
o-ot
z
-Co)(0
c0
o'a
cfg
CA\u
s6oc)
I --!-
mo!2>
o
E
oI
o)C
05z
C
C)
a
aafo
:E
C)
oo-
o
o
CI
=C)
o
\-o.C
.oC
oa
!-(0
o)oZ'-c
aG
'o
:<
j<
oo-
'=
qo_c
a
o
5o-o!-
o
c0
-Co)om'-
ro!*
(U
-C(U
!-
=o_
#o
!o
_o
o:<
a
o)
=F
o!*
G
E.Co-ca
c,
z
Ui
rl N oo $ r.c) @ N @ CI) orl rlr{ Nr{
Gtr3
Eo
o{r,
tr,q'iR
LFTartU
GNL-
cId
crr ostrI.I
EouhslTN
5R
T't
HEs=tr3tt-
o
{r,ar
-G
-J
c>Lo*,
G
=
.a

z.
0)
o)
ro
o)
-t
=E-to).
5'
(-
0)
=
E
0)
(-
l-
)o
(-c
C(o
aoE
ooo
6go)-{
Eqrt+
J6p
EJ -r
-r=o)J-.(Df,6p
='\.o
(-
0)
5
N
s,O
t\
FN
(.'l
F@
0)
C-
C
@oo
0)
zo
0 3s:f -'+r o)
iLE!
L
o:rDEq;'
Ao
=I +t
o)g
d_=o)r-r O)
o)w
Po ol
-{Ico)\O \O
5- co
xo)oa
sq
C)-
c-
A)
3
-T1
or
0)
c-t-
fo
A).t
\Ela
{o)
C(o
Ca*
@oE
oc)
zo
(foo
o
I
Jra
tr
I
J
o
=oto-l
oeoI
IO
,.,1.
aa
wotr,A
I
3
GT
\
-Y
o!I'
or+
I.
oI
J
t-l
(n
t*
C)_
a
n
C^l
3
\-()\\
l-I
@
crt c)
C^J
@
(rt 6l
C'I
{
(,l o1
@
@
o)oO
{+-o)@
{(JloO
{+. 0'l
C')
{
J-01
N)
{"+*o
5
ct)
J- 01
@
o)o)(Jl
N)
(rt(t]
C-^l
@
,CD
}-@N
o)
Cr.l o)
@
(tl(r)
C^J
o)
(rt
t\
o
('l
+\'t\
(n
cr.Jcf
@
.r-
c^P'(tl
o)
d?o)
o)
(Jtol
N)
{(,tos
{(r o1
@
@
t-O
@
{(, o1
@

o
I
3tr5o
€
0,l.F
o.I
(3trg
rot
aa
(?
otr
Ar
3Gt
\rY
z.
o)
o)
-tr\o(])
-tJ
Ef-to).
=
C"l
,C)s
N){1$ o.r
N)
t$o@
?^bl
CD
l\)(0
O.l
o.t(rr
5sN\lN)
(-
0)
J
o)
0)
c-C
ol
FO
N)O't\).5
C.rtl
t\
r$ cn
J
o.l
C"l
{6 O.I
f\)
(
@JN
CO
o)
(-iJ
- C^lN) o)N
O
6lN)
oN)
C')
s
C^l
(Jl
N). tOOco
CA
6
x+-
@
CN
oa)
zo
6g0)-r
3E
fr+
56p
EJ -.I
-r=e.df6p
- =4.f\o
1\)
O@
N)cloN)N).L\
ffis
N)5O
ffi\
\.(rr
.cD
ng
N){N)
flxc)
t\)
,NgI t\)r l\
6t
N)RO@
o.lf\)
do
N)
N)@
dcoo)
N)
{
N) f\)
(^I
c-
0))
TIoo
0).t
E
-l
q)
C.cJo
C.
c
c(o
Ca
(t)
oEt
oo
zo
ooo
dN)
N)
N'SOl\)
J
l\)
0 gs
= 30ac-r
-(D !2I_
-ol(Dcf
qD'
u)oJ "+r
o)9
J-
o-+O)=-t O)
o)E
Poo
-J -rt- I
I- o)
9roo)(D
a-E
r5'o_ -r
lJ
l6s
J
t\)s: l-l
lg-
N)
,,,." (,,1
o)I :lmo)
N)o)
do)
J
N)t\
6i c)
N)
N{i l\)
(o. t\)
J
@o)
f\)f\)
\.1
o)
c-
0)
=
.I'l
o(t
0)
T)
-l
0)
(-c)o
(-c
c(o
ca
a'o
E,+
oo
zo
ooo
(o
N
N)o.lf\)
l\)\.1
FN)t\
N)@
o)
o\t
odrts
N)(tl
<o)O

o9(l)
Ou)
-c
x
OJz.q
asOo-5
lv, (0
o-o
@
t,
J
o))
f
-
oc:,
-
G.
Oc\
oq
(o
@
l"?
@
o.
14
\,V)oo
LL
co-)
M'N(,N
ti(!o
GC's
.lf,
.E
9.,3EE
OCoogn(o-r
r- l-coodm(U'(u r-
-IEott+ -Coa
{EAa1;YoL [_
lg(gE()Cao
Q
o-c(Dj
os
.g
oc)zf o
o
o
E()
()
Z,o-
=C:)
C:)
roN
VI
@'1O
a
coar*,
Ga-LG
Ar
\
E'I
EY
(J
l&
aa
{.,
:=
IU
3
C>
L.
o{.,
G
=oc
-J
EG
o-oa
+ta
=o))
=?
oc)-
(o
o
t-
o
-oo
TL
C(!--)
olr
C'j: ^(D
9'-Et-r- (f(Dc
.lJ !_
3sFco
fre
C)-fCf
@
o
L()
Ii
c!
:O
t
F
@
(o
-(o
;n
lv)
.f
I
-f
r:
t
n.f,
r
(o
;
u?
N
{@
o)
F-
$
cd
@q
:(o
qo
IF\a
Cf,
!
N
N
N
.t
r-()
c.i
\N
'{

()
0)
Oa
-CY
OJz' .E
o
0)o-1ofr>
o-o
CN
o5o)
)
=-
oC:f'a
(5
=L
o
L
(I,
-oq)
LL
rJ)
@',
d
O
\dO
Oocq
o
\l
5
./-
C(!
-
(l)
oir-o.C
m
O
L
.ao-collo-5
.C
Bnzj ?
#oo
o-
o
U)
a
J
o))
f
-
oC
=-
(E
Oo
Mi
l-
o
cG-)
O
C)
O
c)
a
O
C)
o
O
(f
a
oo
oo)o.C
m
ma
tq4
O
!
eO(o
q
C)
@
C;
{O
e
O
c{
(:)(f,
o
C;O
ffi
C:)
oF?r
o
Iw
l*l
C:N
E
LO
nl
aEbr
a
l-l
A
-\
cn
EY
go
cn>rxof,oEooo.I
ct
aa
*tOTI
G5c>Lo*.
G
=Gg
I
J
E(u

Z
N'
0)
3Cg
f
w-t_
o(o
o
C:)
O
O
O
O
(f
o
(3
O
o
O
o
c)
lc>
ix
-T1
o(t
o)-t
E-
o)
(-
Cfo
(-
C
c(o
ca
@o'ro+
oo
O)
=t...2
oX
5'
fuxo5C)a
A
o
:'
o)
w
o)
-t-Io)
r.O
(D
O
P(,
C)
O
a
Ctr
O
cf
o
o
0)-t
(-c
@oE+
zo
o
7oa
5'
r
o)
>rJa
N)
oI
..4J
c
I
J
o
=0,1*
orl
og
gL
I'
t
aa
trT'
oooI
ocr
ox
-GT
o
I
J
A
=IJ
rc!
\nY
FT
CN
r.f
CL
olv(n
I
JrJ
GT
LrrJ
cf
ffi=
c)
Po
oPcf
ooo,oa 'rlaa .a
NN(9oNN9rN
N(,l

F.o
oOa
-CY
o-J2.tr
ao(J -'r
ot
o_
o
U)
o
C]
(3
O
o
O
Oqo
o
O
(f
O'
o
O
O
O
O
o
Cf
O
o
(f
od
(o
l- l-
=(oo_ io
h*=orX.=a= (o
<rts
(o --c)(I) (t,"
! c-l-o
=cc,J<u:<L=cooE-cn
r- Ol-(t) O,
E(I)Lr-
S
:la
oC
=-)
-ootL
Co
-
a)(,)
)
(E
=L
o-
Y
ao-c(l)i<
oq _J
.E
()dr
z5 6
()
o
O,o
O
O
O
O
!
O
+,o-o
U)
a
=o)5
)-
oC
:5
-)
(o
o
.l-(5
-o0)
tL
O
O
(:)
O
O
O
O
(f
O
o
c)
o
O
Ol"?
O
cflr)
()
l<o+)(D((,cn
((,(t, r-
(U
$m
(o
or
rrt
T
\
E'I
E
ro
nt
ott*t
u,
LJ
,An
\
E'I
EV
trocn
xo
!,o
-ooo
.I
cl
aa
*.OIr(u
:,
c)
l-
o*.
o
=Gg
I
J
EG
(E
?

-u-
-1l
=J
oxc
-lo
zI
Ir)
?Z
7
D
s
LJ
N
g
Ea
:i 'i6-ni
PgZd tIiF-3<a:i
5aF-P4
6.
Jc'lq'
=H5>sfEEoIerHr?;sHi.lf!.rq*
EG T'
il.l
Z
6h
XE
C.
ah
n
a
!
o
6
IJ
6 _o-
=44
i. a
5 F; a
b3.B*il q
q
?
A.
-t
Z { -3 '2
7
s I Eej.,lii
o :: a 6
9o95.EE€.
r I i=., t,Y:ELi=o
-3Q3.L.ir!c
d!
313eEg
'sg
$a!
o
3
&
€ :.r
F
3r
4eE,
7 I 62a'=
tt:!,
=NiPo
! <-
J -3*
"*i€ $€
<l--vaF
i F iE e r
P qz5 I q
3 g FT * E
i=tl;oo5s3=E.N ".i5'< t
j "rs'r
o
Fl
i;n{;':i.g
5 iE s
5 J<
+=q
50<
4qg ra)=6=
'p
g
-,lt-rO;
=c.E< !.
D :i =.d g-rc
.i?*:ae
4 ii
2I
D
\€

EbEI
8= E I
Bre *;o.<FFcl
hocEQ.FEH
5<s
iocEQFET6< !q
*ocEQ.FEB
o<g
*acEQ'69*
6tE
EIo
IE
o
.9,
o
(E
3
o
o(!
'!to9HTEo#ro
-trIl.9o
)8
.E8
-cLF9od
=-
^o8
.9
!O
lJl o
6coo
oL
o)
6Coo
GL
o)
tc
G
o
(E
L
o)
6c(E
C)
oL
o)
oo
Eo.
Eoo
rP-e-=A
rE*p^. -.5E
7 "?:iu
3>3=E
>E',.*T'E + o
il EdI g
(E F O/=7 - 7.; ill! "!= o)
6>6=e
iP. *-rE + O
il Etr5 g(o F o<=7"7-itD
E;E=E
>P.*T'E - O
E EdE p
G tr (EZ.E7 -lF.;br
3;3=E
o
E
(U
z
co-j'-F-
a
=
E. Ezi!= (E>p!5--
,-^LL=fVv-
-o_
E? EiEEE>.EnLL=Fvv-
-o_'-F=\
go oaY cs o-^iEi= (0:>o)tcL-,LFO-=fVv-
.e E -3E? Eia!F o>0)?tL-
F6g=
.oe5
. E *a
e - 8-iEEt'F *.s E E
66Lh#S
Eoo-o-(!
F
!oo-o.G
F
E
o)
o-o-(0
F
aoo-o.(E
F
o
o
o
CL
ah
o
=
;o
tr
$
EgEe
E85=
1r)
qt-
F
qa
@
r-
!,OG,L
Efigol!(E
F== o o o o
o
o(E
=
=0,.!i a6
E=
o)
\9
roAc! liE=
I*c?
o
ox(9;>
o)
oq
r
o
<o (9
cd>
N
\
oo()N>
c.E
o
o
o
E(!
z
oofoI
=6-o-L
6E
=o
oao(L
o_
FSYO
.E(E'L
b(ro-)
E_b3oac)
E(E
ot
oc.N
(!-
crr.=(E(U
>€
o
1
U) N (o \r
s*
-J
^v
S
C
@A
N
o
tr
C
o
lE
t,tro
E
Eo(,o
tro
->
CL
otr
ooo.
o
TIol'LI
5lxlolcltrl
<l

(fl
hocEQFEHo<g
*a
FE$5<s
hr:cEQ'6p*
6tE-
*o
EES6t.u
ho
FE&o<s
oE (g
-Fo !$o- -() co
9lQ ii orIe' = o o)E
,fi*.€E=#EE
Ec(g
o
Eo)
6c
oo
(oL
o,
Ecoo
E
o)
Ec
G
o
(E
L
t)
Ecoo
E
o)
Ecoo(!L
o)
>P. -T.E - O
E $il.s g
G tr o/.EF-?-br
= 
"== 0)
o>oiE
?B*t[ -qil -c o
o E o)EEiE=ao>oiE
> g',)
lu-V
d -qil S o:
o H o>.E
=:=-iEL_l<= q)
o>oiE
>P.-
l!-u
o- Qd tr oo H o>E
=:= 
jE
tZ_.)a= q)
o>oiE
?B*til eil F o
o E o>.E
EiE=s
o>oiE
>P.*
[ -Ef e -* s*i.E!_y= q)
o>oiE
-(L.-F=\
E? si
E-=E>FOg=
-o_'-f-=\
E? siEEE>F6g=
-(L'-1--=\
E? sip5g=
-o_'-F=\
E? aiN7 (!>o?c1-
F6g=
-tL.-F=\
E? ei
ESE>.Fog=
q o=!!
^-Yg\J (l)
^ - o-6.= g>R3il>*H rtE Ol---:O--tU)=
!
o)
o-ooF
p
o)
o-o-(5
F
o
L
-(ECE=B
$€EF
1foo-o-oF
?oo-ooF
oa
too-
^o-#s
o
F-
@q
.$ o
t-@
dN
t\o)
(f)
o o o O o o
N
\^eQ
a6'O
l->
(f)
c!
9oAq;f,
:= o
o,
q
l.c)
ENroYN=
$t-
cd
Io;i9coa
o(,
.+q
I*
'lf
Cg
U)
(E_
OD.LLfr
^i:FO
c
(E
L
o
=
()
.E(E
L
o
(E
co
=>x(E
-f
ozc.E
o
c
(o
L
p
1'co-cL-col-
E
.N(E
lr
_L
J'=_o !u
<t
ro (o t- @ o) O
t*

a---p
$N
EEoo
E(E
tr>
EE;=f; EggH,,H
eEets*e E;eEE*
- X E.=';i'- c -o N
E,l*i fi"8=.-.bXl: Q I +
S EEg;, ggE"H
E
L
oo
(E
L
o,
.c.L
o(r)
(tr.='tu'g
za
tr)c.E
oo
(,)
C
oo
=
oEo)^-o(E6.9.E * o =g E gi"ed
-z 9lc_ a L'-
EsaeEE"fl S sf EEb
occ-o'-.o
e.E'
o'- 9(l)agEo.
AE eso..:zo.
EE
EB
o-o
Eoo-
^o_F.E
cY
(f)
$
ooq
oN
o o
lr)
oi
5=:6v>
co
rO
+5=r6
N2
c,)
c'6
=(Eo
q)
cEoo@T.
c> o'6cE
EPO
c0
.g
r_€ oE-
EASA
N

s,
-uoo=oo==.o\o
E.t:r96)ao)q6'
Z'r
dN9g
N
9'(o
o)
o,N
\(o
(,l
sc
{(o
g8
E'*
8.q
r€;$;$g
$:$a:r;J ='rD =(,J-.J r(U +u:r(o o o_o
=oo*.J(o
7)<
='o)OJaC
f!)
iFg g $ 
*f; 
= 
E 
**3 
fl 3{fl s gq.E EiF5 gEE=TEEFg il
g+u-i xi: Bte"F B .''EEaFgF-i; 
EE afta3
^

c/
--o
oo
o!*E
o!=
ESJO
o_ (,, oc o -cL-cE'Fo-o o
:sg;EeEsu ? -q
S E Fg3 N
x.,86S.e 8BR
b.8E9g E E PEEE
E;: b .5'6"=Q
pg:EEggs!gEac?
I!cIJstro6.>>x.
oc
Jg
tr0)6.>>0(
L
oro
-L9oEo
fL
aALF
b8
.(E
coa
o:-oEcoo
-tJc
o'-
8E
SEE
o_ .b g)
Eoo-o o_
Pgo
Eoo-o o-
8go
sc!
t-N
Nq
(f)
o o
o)o)
d
='^dnN=
q
CO
i(=:6
-2,
q50
:-Y
(E
-o^
-GL-
.sEb l
S EE H(/)o 6>
(5: o
8',:rxzE -o^-(tr
Hc.9P:'= al, CcP(EoYEI.U>
\r ro

(o @ : P
=go={d'e. il (b
o- :l 
='5il3 P
='c ^6-E dgo=s
-. o)
C-
0)
!Ca
U
E
=
o-zqi o)
Jo)
a0)
:r.
(D
0)(o
:t
<mo(,ON:I:'I (, Y.0)
i_6) I
-aao)J
0,
J
-aBq5 *
=N=(,lgE
!"n
3
=98E
irJ
Ol
EE
9)
=s,
EE
i.J
o o o o
N)
s,t
o(Jl
Io)@
(,o
i.J
s
5(,r
g"loctooo-
g"r
Tt (t
&o
g;
!ooo
o_
g"rrouooo-
=(ro-{-:-JiFX
_<r=[<-o- o
kil o-
=@ o
:f
=cD+-rl
=4 
t;(d ='Q3a J *
'Pa
-3u--o o
=(/)+11
=iqE:<E&g
5# = &
(D rr*
--0, o
<+11oo=3E€
5 8.8qro
doa -,o:ro
f=o<oO =;l---
$=ti to f -ui6 -rl
AJ+T
d<
3-=O<OaD =x-xo--:t-:,3'< 0, * 0,
(o -i .(lx 1l5 7+.r+r-
6<
3FO<Oo =F-Xo--f_:t
5'<0, X 0,
(o j !6 !
6-<
(o
-o,
oq)
:q)
(o
il
oq,
f
!)_
(oa0)
o
0)
f
0)
,0<?' 0)
OJaC
=0)
(-o:Eo o (l) uanc o =+o ;to 6-
&H +F+*,,f;N A:q E' oYts - o -\< ()= o-o
l\)oo =(, o o -t
F-:ge*: il
Eod q
<g-" *qo o-.f -
SgEEFE;aa-F q; ;+;
T

2.\a
; E- rgiExs e E- gi* I $ 1- i- Ei*
Ec(!
o
Eo)
iB*utr 91 il S or
o E o)EE]E.:El_tZ= O)
o>oiE
O (Ei
-o=-
^-Y# L,, o)
- - @-
(I)'- P2Rqil>** rtE 0)hiO-"bCD=
o
-o
!
o)
o-
^o_FS
o)
o
Noci=
9Uo)z
.c
Eo
s
5o.(E
L
od]
o
N

(
;, E :EB*il ;E. 
'E 
I auEuEI eeuE uu= uI'
(E
c
JL
tro6.>>E
o= o
V'c lc(! q, 8_
P=E.B'6SSo
E!.lY-o
N
a?
(o
F-(o
o@
(f)
crirO
g^
NOqo
E>o<tN Cf)
c
Eo
-cL
oo)
(o
'6','
z
N

--9
--o
.s .e I b 8.9"e -q (L
c Efi ;; a!;ie ; agl' # g- s 
=
.h -o !O) O ai
E 6 EJJT E€a c e! c-o -o61 L
_tr .9.E9--
aE Ea iEsEfi
(t)x o
PE*.o.E .8_
PsEE'oS*o:
m E.Y -o
@
\.t
@.
9r]9(,d>
.E(E
L
o
oL
(!€
-c.oEa
(E
c
JL
troE.>>E

Annexure-1 Himachal Pradesh Pollution Control
Directions have been issued to MC Paonta Sahib
ffnwL
Annexure-2
Ar,ngro':T
Thc Exccutlvc Ofliccr l
Munlclpal Commlfi eg poonta Sohlb
Dlstt, Sirmaur, H,p. ,.
SubJcct: Regsrdlng lnspcctlon ofvrrlour Munlclprl CommlfiG! Drrlm ln prontr Srhtb
Sir,
This is ln rcfcrcncc to thc in+cctlon conductcd by thls ollicc along wlth
reprcscntalivc of your deprtmmt on 28.11,2023 of rnrlour dnlru providcd for scwrgdeullago
' dlscharge otMunlcipat Councll p*ntit*lb.r," ftc followlng dralnr wcro lmpc.tcd lnd s.mptln8
was donc in thc prescncc ofyour rcprcsantitlve
. l. MC Drain ncar Kripahhllta GrFrudwar., Paontr Srhlb
. 2, MC Drain ncar Shrt Dcji Srtriba Tcmplc Dcvlnrgar.
3. MC Draln nc.I Old SBI PronlE grhlb
. 4. MCDralnnearSbJlMurdlPnonla8rtrlb
5. MC Drain Jamrhvata ncar Manklnd Phumrccutisal lrd; Unlt 2' Paonta Srhlb
ll has becn smply csl&blirhcd vidc lab rnalysir rcsulu vldc rcpon no. 72E38lW-
10506, 9986t/W-10507, t I 147070/W.10509 rnd l7lJ3/W.l05l I drted 20.l2.2023,lcoolcs ofrcsults
ls cncloscd as AnncxuG A) lhrt lha unlrcqtcd domclllc w8slowilcr co,rfalnlng hlgh fccal cotlform ir
lloving thmug} thcsc dralns ls confluottcc lnto R vcr Ytmum rnd ia tsibutaiy Rlvr Bata lcading lo
wslcr potlullon in lh! catchmcol ofRlv.t Yrmuns-
Whe,!!s ths abovc mc,lllonld fialt tmhnounl lo lho vlolrtlon of the provlilon3 of
Watcr (Prsventlon & Conrrol of Pollutlon) Acl 1974, constituting r cognlzable olBnco undcr lhc
rforcsaldaar...t...i--a':--q?.4ortt.*1l!.,:,...ter."'iir:f;,TY.li1ile ..:
Hcncc, you rro rcqucstcd to lakc Plopcr mr&lurcs lo chlck flow of uni$atcd
rcwrgdeullrgo lnro ribulrdc and Riwr Yrmuna llgolf and submlt q concrclc ahort tcrm ind tong
1grm rctlon phr1 ofmc$urca to bo takcn lo rnsurc tscrimcnl and sclcntilic dkposal ofrcwagc/rullagc
bclng carrlcd out through dnlnr pmvldcd by your dcputment withln ll1!trU.
Pterse notc that.ioi.tho ovcnt of failuro lo comply and unsatlsfactory
doposltlon, aotion as Environmcnhl Compensatlon shall bc lnltlatcd as pcr rclcvant
provlsions of law
Encll as abovc
Renldffit-ffrccr
HPsPiB.-Paolro sahlb
t
t6r
!,

hqv.(li t\
Annexure- 6 : UK-PCB reply on Recomm no.12
l\nnual lVerage Data for the year 2023
Pollution Control Board, Uttarakhand Drains monitoring results are placed at Annexure 7
S.No. Monitoring
Location
pH DO
(ms/l)
BOD
(ms/l)
TC
(MPN/100m1)
Designated Best
Use (DBU) Water
Quality criteria
1 River Yamuna U/S
at Yamunotri
7.8 11.2 1 1.8 A
2 River Yamuna D/S
at Sayana-Chhatti
7.6 10.8 1 1.8 A
3. River Yarnuna at
Barkot, Uttarkashi
District
7.83 10.31 1 1.82 A
4 River Tons Before
joining to River
Yamuna at
Dakpathar,
Dehradun
8.04 9.9 1 47.75 A
5 River Tons At
Selaqui, Dehradun
7.79 6.95 2.6 295 B
6 Asan Conservation
Reserve, Dehradun
8.03 8.9 1 2.2 A
7 River Yamuna At
Lakhwar, Dehradun
8.06 10.25 1 1.86 A
8 River Yamuna D/S
At Kalsi, Dehradun
8.16 10.05 1 46.5 A
I River Yamuna D/S
at Mkash Nagar,
Dehradun
7.89 9.7 1.07 86.91 B
10 Yamuna Canal at
Dakpathar,
Dehradun
7;82 9.76 1 83.27 B
11 River Yamuna at
Dakpathar,
Dehradun
7.85 9.96 1 83.75 B
\bq

hnvv,t la
Annexure-7: UK-PGB reply on Recomm no.12
Drains monitoring results
Analysis Report Of Water Quality Of Drains
Name of Sampling Point Drains of Municipality areas (Barkot,
Naugaon, Purola, district Uttarkashi and
Vikasnagar, Harbatpur District Dehradun)
Sample collected by Pradeep Chauhan (LA)
Date of Sampling 25.01.2021 to 27 .01.2021
S.No. Name of Drains Parameters Allvalue are in mg/l except pH
pH coD BOD TSS
1 Upraadikhda, Barkot,
Uttarkashi
7.69 4 1 22
2 Sarakhdada, Barkot, Uttarkashi 7.13 12 4 422
3 Mungra Basic School Gadhera,
Naugaon, Uttarkashi
Drain is found dry during sampling
4 Naugaon Khadd, Naugaon,
Uttarkashi
8.01 6 1.2 16
5 Devalsari Khadd, Naugaon,
Uttarkashi
Drain is found dry during sampling
6 Mundri Khadd, Naugaon,
Uttarakshi
Drain is found dry during sampling
7 Salui Khadd, Naugaon,
Uttarakshi
8.16 4 1 I
8 Khundi Khadd, Naugaon,
Uttarakshi
Drain is found dry during sampling
I Devdung Gadhera, Purola,
Uttarkashi
8.08 4 1 12
10 Kumala - Khadd, Purola,
Uftarkashi
7.72 6 1.4 18
11 Chada Khadd, Purola,
Uttarkashi
7.90 4 1 10
12 Maal Gadhera, Putola,
Uttarkashi
7.94 4 1 14
13 Kamal Nandi, Purola,
Uttarkashi
8.55 8 1.6 16
14 Syphon .Nala, Vikasnagar,
Dehradun
7.21 262 88 157
15 Gandha Nala, Vikasnagar,
Dehradun
6.89 94 26 115
16 Udiyayagh Nala, Herbatpur,
Dehradun
7.29 12 1.2 15
17 Peenarala Nala, Herbatpur,
Dehradun
7.72 8 1.4 '19
t/q

t>
r
t{
Estr! rE
6_,20
EEbooz
(a
oloNI
t
G
J
tro
E"
tr
E
Eoo
cn
tr
E.
E
oo
cn
tr
a
Eoo
E')
c
5
CL
Eoo
El)
tr
-cL
Eoo
c)(\oNI
i(g
lloII
E"tr
5o.
Eoo
E"tr
E
Eoo
cD
E
-o
Eo
L)
E)tr
-cL
Eoo
CD
c
5
CL
EooI
g.
oz
(a
6to(\l
I
!
oL
o
=
cl,
tr
a
Eoo
o.EL
.al. o
E'g€=ref{
5HE#
cn
tr
a
Eoo
E')
tr
a
Eoo
E"
G
a
Eoo
E"
5e
Eoo
rD
c
5
CL
Eoo
E,,
tr
5
CL
Eoo
E')g
a
Eo(J
cn
tr
5
CL
Eoo
EI'
tr
5
CL
Eoo
o,
tr
Eo
CE
ooz<)
c,)
tr
5
CL
Eoo
E
-ocl!=
EAt!o $o)
oN t+
@
o o)\l t@ o) $
o)
(\t
o
I(0 t€
.E
oo-
E'I
tr
CL
E
TE
o
o.
o
o
o
J
o
oa o o)o o q
c, o)o o o)o o)o o @o
ooo
N
o)
(\l
o)
qo @
6
N oq
@
q
o)
c.{
o) ae, @o \t
c,
J-
CL
e Nu?
t\
u) l(,
c!
ct)
o
(9
Crl
N a
F-
q
(o
G)
l- l-
olft
cd
oqr'
F
ol{)
(0(0 t-(o o(0 (o(r) t
t
ro
@
(f,
r\ (o
.{1,
\t @\f
rF
o
o
g
E
ooo
roro lo loi- o (5
oo
oro o1\ oc, ro o
\t loro
:E
CL
c)rQ
(0
('o
o?
(0 (0
t€
tr,
@
\(0
oq
(o
q
(o
(v)
(0
rr;
Nol
@
tq
(o
o
a?
o.cE'I E
g3
o.nE
$lf;
bEs
-. E .-t
HE$zFa)
--i
6
(g
(!
-cm
-r -o)
Jii
>5
-aDN(/,r5
c.i>
o'trooao
(!>
(L
,U' 
Z
zp
eEOJ
=.7 .q
68L863o
iEeNocO
o-o-oIo+'E(5O
+3FaA=6E!;aoc!E
-)
g
1'Cg
_f
TEL!
t/, €o .-JG
EEOZ
--i
fr
(E
ocm
^olJ 'r
>o-u)N(,
-:]c.t >
o'tr
ooo
a
o>
(L
L^
'a=o=ioZ,T
"cEOJ
:L
.7 .e
68L863o
=jo2(o
ENocO
o-
o(!
Io*'Coo^o!-L (/,
l- aD
Aa
6E
=>,a,aqt
r)
g
E
5c-=fE
L!
t/, €o .-J6>o)
i-o6Z
:j(o
(E
E(!
-cd)
,_r -O
56-aN(,rJ
d>
C,
1o N cf) st rO N cf) t 1() :
I
\
YsC
al
.91LIl!l
:l
-ol
LI
ol
EI
lUl
rslF=l
PEIEalE6lg&luHC-lotrl
-cL El
Ell
881o- ol
YEIfcl
o9, tlorl trl
=l ol
8l Eltrl olcl oI
<t ol
olo-l,FI
3lol
ol
rEl
ol
nro

5 OJ NJ
=g,
I
Nc)
N
(,r s (, l\) >lt, I
=t$lOIl\lI
-[
I
I
(,l 5 (, l\) a2I
<Aoi$
*-F3oCA(hJ
8rioo)
6' ;sq)
E:o
uro
Rioozo)=rb3aLJ
EN8E6'a
=
t-ogbo
a-?
-l
=clca
v-.T
3olc*
oao
o
=.o
<sl)CA(,N)
@_o<OF
;'b(!
J
o)
o)
o)
*:
-=€r
O) -l-- bl
8ql
--l
BilII -lol
dl
I
I
<ro- irJ
g=
gCICAAJ
gdo0)
=.+oT
0)
E!
000
R tr,
azcr="o3aLJ
8n8g6'a
=
rc)3bo-z
iEea
v -'.t.T
3or
@
aoo
=.o
<s})
(/, t\)a_o<o=
6.b
@
=o)
0)
o)
-=
70
E-gIDrxb
&cJ=
Bd:r5o-
d
<JNi$
s-=3clCAa)
8rio0)
=.+o-
0)
EE
c00
R trc
$z$=
-'o3aLJ(, -:(hu
8gfra
=
t-o
3boa-?
=U-av -'l.T
3or
a
U'
oo:.o
cl-{zor:or
E $;s9q
Ffa*a
o
ES
=Gr:'(D
P
o eOl 5
P(.o
o
--r
olqrl
al{l!l
ottrl
=lcLl
-tJI
ol:, I
6lEIOI
qll
ol5lq)
B-
o
rtj
o
o
o!,oorio
:
CL
0,
o
o
oEIoo
6'
?
o
I
o5t
NeN(.1
(D
ioor o
{
i.,o i.)
o
oi,o
P(0
o
foN
E'
- 5
6-
o
o
!
aq,
3
e
GI
!
9.
Noo
(0
or @ol o)
OI
(,t
or
@OI
o
o o)o
qr
o
@(,r (o
o ot
tro
c,
€o)
(0(o @ o)(.,
(Jr
(o @(o (,l (,I
o) or(, {(o o(rt o)@
{aa otr.
*o
o
a
!
f.lo(0
f@
o
@
(.,
o 5
IN
o)
il
@o
{5
e
90
o
{\0
9o
(,r
9o
o)o
Joo
!,T
r0
N o 90
@
G'
o)
6
b5
P@
@
L
(o
i.l
9o
@
(o
i.r :oot
@
@
@
oo
o (., o o(o o(o o(o o o e o o(o aa
I olIt
o
N
gT
5o e 5o
(o @r
(0
5
(0
Ne o
(D
5
@
5 o11e.g-i q,
o-
3
$Htrg&tbs*9" ioii
t
E
oo
3t,
='GI
ozoo
€'E3
GI
oo
3T'
='GI
oo
3E'
='(cI
oo
3t,
=:GI
oo
3Eg
3
GI
oo
3T'
='(o
o
o
J
It
5'ct
oo
J
t,
GI
oo
3!,
='J
GI
oo5
t,
='GI
oo:t,
3'(o
oo
J
Eg
GI
zo
I
oo
3
E.
=.(o
zo3t
oo
3!,
g
3ct
oo
=E'
='J
(cI
oo
3!,
='J
rcl
oo
!,g
J
GI
o
o
!,
GI
oo
3!l
='GI
zo)t
oo
3E'
g
GI
ooj
t,
='(cI
oo
J
t,
3'
rct
oo
3tl
='GI
zurood9
(no20, ar
=ot3sh8
8B
J
t

N (,r s N
I
t\,oN
(rt A o) N J r-l
5l
PINIot
Nl.-
(,l a2I
ro
Bboo-?
=b-a-11
3q:
@
@
oo
=.o
<s,
U)Na_o<Or
eo
@
J
o)
q)
0)
F
(.) 70
g?
Ot-IU
8c
=i
Sr"
)a o
6
<A$i$
gF
ggcAa1
8rioo)
=.+o-
0)
EE
EOo
R(o
B=-'Cf
3aLJ
8n8ga53
rO
3boo-?o=Ebea
-11
3ol
@(tooa
o
<s,
U,N@_o<O-
6o(p
a
0)
0)
-g
7O
g?
Ot-jao
8cTip*)=
o-
6
<ro i\r
gF
3CIcaAJ
8r,oa
=,+oI
0).13
!
000
Rioozo)=
"o7aLJ
EN8E6'e
=
rogboo_7o=Eb2a,-11
3or
U'
aoo
=.o
<!,
(,)N@_o<Or
6-otpf
0)
0)
0)
=
70
8-gOrI(]
Bc:t=ilu
^ID=+L-J5
o-
d
c)-{zor:o
E la999.
Ff
=*oo
ES
=Gt5(D
I(0
o
P
@o ro
Pq)
e
zol
Edlg 
=l-* qtl
* ol
= {rl(D Ol
e =l
toC' b@
o)
o
o,
bo
Jo J6)o
{
irto (JI
t,I o
o
CN
E
@ql
j
e
GI
!
9.
=
o)(Jl
J
qlo {o
(0o (n qr
UI
cDgt ag('r (0
o @o o)o o)
o
wo
tr,
o)(, 5@
{N
CX'
o)
CL ^lor =ld 8lq&l
5'Pl-
€alO -lq 6lo ?l5 ol" !, I
r (Dl
" illo+li el
BilI
E*l
l5lI oll*l
| 3llolol{rt<lo
lq,tf1a.lorlolol=lolorl=I\<
.t(DII,
l(Dlolol5
lo)
t<toIrlo,
lo
N
Or o)(o (0(, (o
N {(,t olqI o)N aa otrE!
o
o
@
{1'
o
i.lo
Jqr
o
f.l(,r
o
@
i.,o
9o
o)
o too ioo
f(.,
o
{-L
o
J(o
o
f(,r
o L(,
E'
-
90
o
(o
tt
@
bo
(o
g)
(o
o)
90
@
(o
tt c)
(0
ig
@
5
(9
i$
@
bo
Eoo
o o o o(o N N o(0 o o oa
o
N
o 0
Nso
(,t
o
{(0 (r)
o
N@
o 5o
NN
o
@5
@r o 'rr
9.8
=: 
0,
$iltr9stbg*8a 
H
E
oo
3tt
5'
GI
oo
3!,
E
to
oo
3t,
='J
GI
oo
!,
J
(CI
oo
J)T'g
f
GI
oo
3t,
='GI
oo
3t,g
ct
oo
3E'
E
J
GI
oo
J
E'
=:)
GI
oo
3T'
=')
GI
oo
3!,g
GI
oo
3t,g
GI
oo
t,.<
GI
oo
E'
=:GI
oo
3!,
='Gt
oo
3T'
='GI
oo
3!,g
5
GI
o
o
3!,g
J
GI
()o
3E
5'
GI
zo
I
oo
g.
=.GI
oo
3E'
g
=GI
oo
3!l
='GI
oo
3t,
(o
oo)J
E.
=.=GI
zaooil9
ao29' q,
=or!s, B
BB
l
^

n
r
t{
o(E
E8E.E 
'E-ngU,
6goooz
E'}
c
5
EL
E
o
o
E,,
tr
E.
Eoot
troz
cn
E
a
Eoo
I
I
(Y'
No(\t
I
o,cl
Eo
CL
oo
E,)
tr
5
CL
Eoo
E,)
tr
5
CL
E
oo
E,,
tr
5
CL
Eo
C)!
troz
El)
5
CL
Eoo
E'I
tr
E.
Eoo
(Y'
(\loNI
otto
Io
E"tr
5
CL
Eoo
E"
5
CL
EooI
tro2
Eoo
E',
tr
5
o,
5
CL
E
oo
b
CL
!log tE at rn
E 6EEEfS
E#EE
E,,
tr
a
Eoo
trg
EtrEoo2t)
E')
tr
a
Eoo
C,l
5
CL
Eoo
cD
c
-cL
Eoo
E"tr
5
EL
Eo(,
E,)
tr
-cL
Eoo
ED
tr
-GL
Eoo
E,,
tr
EEt
Eoo
E,,
tr
E
Eo(J
C"
tr
E
E
oo
E,,
5
CL
Eoo
E
oo
E
-ofit!ts
EAtt(J
c,
(\
oo(o o
(\ o o(\$t
oc{o)
o o
N
o(Y, oro
(Y)
ot- \lo)
c'6
o-
ED
.E
Etr
G
o
o.
o
o
g
=o
oo
F { g)
o c{ o)o o $t @o N o o o)o
oom o €
@
(o
g) q
o)
c!
o) e (0
o)
(\l
CD
@
@
(,o (\l
ot a
@
CL
os ool (\|
G?
o,
@
l-
(0
ot oo)
19
€ \t@ ro
c?
€
o
a?
€
o
t-
C"
\€
oa ro
@ € otG' lo c) o)
@
(\
o)
(Y)
(o + €(o (\a
00
@ 1.)
o.
U,
o
o
E
oom
o@ o@
lt:,(0 ro
ro ro u)@ o0)
(,(o 0ro (3 o6 ro
to
I
TL
o
l-
o
u?
o
l-
u)
a?
ro
a
lr)c! te(0 \ t
@ a
o)o
l-
!+
oq
(o
tf!
o.trED:Et!>
==ooEoE-c lL
itsoE 9
EtEH.
iE8
E
.7 .e
o6
^A*a
63o
=(Ea(E
qNo@
o_
o-(5
for'E(E0
tr3j- ah
a=6E
=ac!E
e)
(!
L
a,
fEL!
t/, Ia .-
>o)6o6Z
j
E
o
(g
-cc0
n.o
>6NBFJ
ri>
o
L
oo
al,
U'
(Il-
o-'-L^
'a=
ZE
"eEOJ
E
.7 .g
68
^o)-a
63o
=o2(E
ENoc0
o-o-
G
lE q)
(!o
aO
-a6365
i6qE
r)
E!
-=
J_EL!
i/, €o .-J6>o,
E#
-iG
o
(E
.C
m
^oU'-
>6
"r3-Jc.i>
0)
L
oo
U)
o(U-
o- =-
L^,AZ
oL
AE
oqE
OJ
E
€.q
68*863o
=Ho?No00
o-o.
orqls'E(so
aO
-a636E
=Eo,|E
r)
(E
L
1)
-fir 1,
o-EL!
t/, €oJ
rtr)
O
a)$lo(\
I
ct
4o cf, $ (O N (r) $ rtr) N r) st lo
oo
Eo
oz

)t--I
L
tg
0.lGc, (,,tElEE(E(E
=oat
5.9oooz
E,,
tr
E
Eoo
E,,
c
5
CL
Eoo
E')
tr
E
EooI
troz
Et)
tr
5
CL
Eoo
E"tr
5
CL
Eoo
G)
c{oN
a
olt
E
oooo
E')
c
5o
Eoo
ct)
tr
a
EooI
tr
oz
E')
5o
EooI
oz
El)
C
E
CL
Eoo
E')
tr
a
Eo
C)
oo.
88,,,k 5EEeH€
E#EE
E')
tr
a
E
oo
E')
tr
E
Eoo
E')
c
a
Eoo
E')
C
5
CL
Eoo
E'I
c
E.
Eoo
E')
tr
E
Eoo
Et)
tr
Ee
oo
cl,g
5
CL
Eoo
E"c
a
E
o
C)
E"
tr
a
Eoo
E
-o(E=
8tIL C)
o o oltlo
o(9 (, o\t olo
(f,
c,(\
or
oN(\
o(\t
64.
tr'6
o-
E'
=GL
E
at,
o
o-
o
o
o
=o
ooo
V
o(a(\
U'(r,
l- o)ct e (\ o
o (\ \t N (Y)
o
o
v o(\
oo
dt
N
0)
q
o)
q
o c!
ot
@
@
@
@
o
o
@
o q
o)
c!
o)
o(9 o
J-
o.
la,
ro
t- @
\
C')
o?
aq o)q
0.,
q @
e?
o(o
F- q
(n
I
ro
(o
q
o)I
rO
ro
o(t)
F
c)t
(\I(o
T
@F No)
t+(0 t 6ro $€ €@ €rr)
r
o
o
o
E
!to
.E
otr
o
;E'
(!
tttrcl
o^
E-oo:,N
EcioIE9E'.tr !,#0,
5EE:H!?
EU
sugio>a .c)
oz
o
CL
o
o
Eot,c
G
o
tro
J
tor
ERttr tfvO
EEE..
EE-=oiDo
EDUr
gEo'oOc,
ooo
lf,
t
u1
ro
rr)
t\ oo) o(o olo 0(0 o@
l(,
@
rr)r.)
I
o
\fa(0
st
t-
\tot-
(0q
@
GO
a?
t-
o)
(0
roq $t
a toq
(0 at-
otE",.EG>;=oU,E
e#
b.E E-.Eo;H q
EETztstJ
j
(E
o
(E
-c.
c0
^.o
=5-oN(,ef
d>
o.C
ooao
(E>
(L
L^,AZ
>ts
"cEOJ
=.7 .e
68L86=o
=so?NocO
o-o-.(!
Io+'E(o0
^o*al-aA=
6E
i6q6
-)
g
E
Sc*!
JEL!
t/, Ic] .-Jd5o)
E:
j
(5
(o
(U
-cm
,^t .9
>6*3rJ
c.i>
o.C
ooao
(E-I(L
L^,AZ
o=
>tsoqE
OJ
=.7 .c
E8!36=o
JEo?Nom
o-o-oIor
(!0
^o*atsaA=
6E
i6
c.l E
-)
E:oCg_l
TE
L!
bgo .^Jd> (r)
Eg
ci
1
U, r N c.) .f lr) N (a $ r()

finn(lt - )vl
STATEWISE PROJECT DETAILS:
Himachal Pradesh :
s.N
o. Name of Project Gomponent Treatment
Gapacity
AA&ES
Cost
Associated
River Status
Funding
Pattern
(MLD) (Rs.ln .
crore)
1
Sewerage Scheme for Zone ll
& lll of Paonta Town in Tehsil
Paonta Sahib, District Sirmour,
Himachal Pradesh (New
1.72MLD,Rehab-1+0.44
MLD STPs)
3.16 11.57 Yamuna Completed
Non-EAP
(100%
Central
share)
Total 3.16 11.57
Haryana:
Delhi :
s.N
o. Name of Project Component Treatment
Capacity
AA&ES
Cost
Associated
River Status
Funding
Pattern
(MLD) (Rs.ln
crore)
1
STP & Sewerage works" in
Panipat town (New 20+25
MLD; Rehab- 35+10 MLD)
90
217.87
Yamuna Completed
Non-EAP
(70o/o
Central
share,
30% State
share)2
STP & Sewerage works" in
Sonipat town (New - 25 MLD,
Rehab- 30 MLD)
55 Yamuna Completed
Total 145 217.87
s.N
o. Name of Project Component
Treatment
Gapacity
AA&ES
Cost
Associated
River Status
Funding
Pattern
(MLD) (Rs.ln
crore)
1
"Rehabilitation of Trunk Sewer
No. 4, (K1)" in Kondli WWTP
Catchment
0 87.43 Yamuna completed
EAP- JICA
funding)
(85%
Central
share,
15% $tate
share)
2
"Rehabilitation of Trunk Sewer
No.S (K2)" in Kondli WWTP
Catchment
0 83.4 Yamuna completed
EAP- JICA
funding)
(85%
Central
share,
\rr

Aeh#
S.N
o. Name of Project Component
Treatment
Capacity
AA&ES
Cost
Associated
River Status
Funding
Pattern
(MLD) (Rs.ln
crore)
15% State
share)
3
"Providing and Laying
Pressure Mains of 700-900
mm dia Dl Pipes in Kondli
WWTP Catchment ('K-4'I'
0 59.13 Yamuna completed
EAP. JICA
funding)
(85%
Central
share,
15% State
share)
4
"Rehabilitation of Sewers of
sizes varying from 600mm to
1400mm Dia. in Ashok Vihar
and Jahangirpuri Area in
Rithala (R1a)" in Rithala
WWTP Catchment
0 43.92 Yamuna
Cor4pleted.
(Only some
document
submission
pending)
EAP- JICA
funding)
(85%
Central
share,
15% State
share)
5
"Providing and Laying 12OO
mm dia. Dl Rising Mains from
Bharat Nagar SPS to
Pitampura ('R-1b) )" in Rithala
WWTP Catchment
0 45.4 Yamuna completed.
EAP- JICA
funding)
(85%
Central
share,
15% State
share)
o
"Rehabilitation & Up-gradation
of existing 182 MLD Rithala
Phase-l STP (R2)"
182 211.79 Yamuna
Project under
execution.
(Liquid Line
Fully
operational)
EAP- JICA
funding)
(85%
Central
share,
15% State
share)
7
"Rehabilitation and Up-
gradation of Kondli Phase-l, ll
& lll WWTPs (45, 114, 45
MLD)(K3)"
204 239.11 Yamuna
Project under
execution.
(Liquid Line
Fully
operational)
EAP- JICA
funding)
(85%
Central
share,
15% State
share)
8 "Construction of 564 MLD (124
MGD)WWTP at Okhla ('O')" 564 665.78 Yamuna
Project under
execution.
Liquid Line
partially
operational
EAP- JICA
funding)
(85%
Central
share,
15% State
share)
o Fublic Outreach 20.461 Yamuna On going EAP. JICA
funding)
\1 b

s.N
o. Name of Project Component
Treatment
Gapacity
AA&ES
Cost
Associated
River Status
Funding
Pattern
(MLD) (Rs.ln
crore)
(85%
Central
share,
15% State
share)
10 Consultancy Services (PMC) 37.62 Yamuna On going
EAP. JICA
funding)
(85%
Central
share,
15% State
share)
Sub Total 950.00 1494.04
11
Construction of 318 MLD (70
MGD) WWTP with 10 years
O&M on DBO basis at
Coronation Pillar, Delhi
318 515.08 Yamuna Completed
(318 MLD)
Non-EAP
(s0%
Central
share,
50% State
share)
Sub Total 3'18.0 515.08
Total 1268.0 2009.12
Uttar Pradesh :
S.N
o. Name of Project Component
Treatment
Capacity
AA&ES
Cost
Associated
River Status
Funding
Pattern
(MLD) (Rs.ln
crore)
1
Kairana Sewerage project
(l&D) on DBOT basis 15 78.42 Yamuna Project under
execution.
Non-EAP
(100%
Central
share)
2
Mathura Sewerage project
(New 30 MLD, Rehab
14.5+16.5+6.8 MLD STp)
under hybrid annuity based
PPP model
67.8 460.45 Yamuna Completed
Non-EAP
(100%
Central
share)
3
Renovation and Upgradation
of 4 MLD STP/SPS &
appurtenance works at
Vrindavan (Mathura), U.P.
4 42.8 Yamuna Completed
Non-EAP
(100%
Central
share)
(11

S.N
o. Name of Project Component
Treatment
Capacity
AA&ES
Gost
Associated
River Status
Funding
Pattern
(MLD) (Rs.ln
crore)
4
Agra Sewerage Scheme
(lnterception & Diversion
Works) and construction of 10
DSTPs (New
100+35+31+1 1.60 = 177 .6
MLD STPs) under hybrid
annuity based PPP model on
one city one operator policy
177.6 842.25 Yamuna Project under
execution
EAP
(100%
Capex
under
World
Bank)
(100o/o
Opex under
NGP)
5
lnterception & Diversion (l&D)
and STP works of Baghpat
Town, (New-14 MLD)
14 77.36 Yamuna Completed
Non-EAP
(100%
Central
share)
6
Etawah Sewerage Scheme
(lnterception & Diversion (l&D)
works) (New - 21 MLD, Rehab
_23.94 MLD STP)
44.94 140.6 Yamuna Completed
Non-EAP
(100%
Central
share)
7
Firozabad Sewerage Scheme
(lnterception & Diversion (l&D)
works)
0 51.08 Yamuna Completed
Non-EAP
(100%
Central
share)
8
Upgradation of existing 6.25
MLD CETP at Mathura 6.25 13.87 Yamuna Completed
Non-EAP
(75%
Central
share,
25% State
share)
I
l&D and STP Works for
balance drains at Mathura
under hybrid annuity based
PPP model
60 292.56 Yamuna LOA issued
Non-EAP
(100%
Central
share)
10
Chhata town sewerage
scheme (l&D and STP works),
District Mathura
6 56.1 5 Yamuna
(Kosi Drain)
Technical
Bids under
Evaluation
Non-EAP
(100%
Central
share)
11
l&D and STP works at Kosi
Kalan Town, District Mathura 12 66.59 Yamuna
(Kosi Drain)
LOA to be
issued shortly
Non-EAP
(100%
Central
share)
12
l&D and 13 MLD STP works at
Vrindavan City, District
Mathura
13 77.70 Yamuna
Financial
Bids under
Evaluation
Non-EAP
(100%
Central
share)
13 l&D and STP works at Hathras
Town
24 128.91 Karvan LOA to be
issued shortly
Non-EAP
(100%
Central
share)
14 l&D and STP works at
Budhana, (New-10 MLD)
10 48.76 Hindon (Kali
West)
Project under
execution.
Non-EAP
(100%
Central
\1$

This makes a total of 34 projects costing Rs. 5834.71 crore by which 2110.25 MLD STP
capacity will be created.
s.N
o. Name of Project Component
Treatment
Gapacity
AA&ES
Gost
Associated
River Status
Funding
Pattern
(MLD) (Rs.ln
crore)
share)
15
l&D with STP works at
Muzaffarnagar, (New-
32.50+22 = 44.50 MLD)
44.5 234.03 Hindon (Kali
West)
Project under
execution
Non.EAP
(100%
Central
share)
16
Saharanpur Sewerage
Scheme (l&D and STP works) 135 577.23 Dhamola
Financial
Bids under
Evalqation
EAP
(100%
Capex
under
World
Bank)
(100%
Opex under
NGP
17 l&D and STP works 40 MLD
ShamliTown, Shamli 40 206.02 Hindon
(krishni river)
Financial
Bids under
Evaluation
Non-EAP
(100%
Central
share)
18 I&D and STP works 10 MLD
Thanabhawan, Distt. Shamli 10 97.19 Hindon
(krishni river)
Under
Retendering
Non-EAP
(100%
Central
share)
19 l&D and STP works 5 MLD
Banat, Distt. Shamli 5 48.71 Hindon
(krishni river)
Under
Retendering
Non-EAP
(100%
Central
share)
20
l&D and STP works 5 MLD
Babri & Bantikhera, Distt.
.Shamli
5 55.47 Hindon
(krishni river)
Under
Retendering
Non-EAP
(100%
Central
share)
Total 694.09 3596.15
\'1 1

a
Ps
-'
€E"a
u! 5
I8W qo Q a
N
; .1a
I.1
o
N O
I
utrll aa qa
N o
a o a
€
a
I I
E6a
:u
c5
2
IBIII vla na
v1
a
I
v')
a o
UIIAI o
v1
a na a I
.e.: {: ECI
rAI{I I I I I
v)
a
!.1
a I
u!r\l I I I a I
a-aOO^i!! a
a
xarll o
a
o
v)
a
v]
o n
qlrtl no I Q
v]
a
!.)
a
v]
a
r)
a
a! -l+-BNtr
I8IAtr I
N
n I I
uu^l I
NV) I I I
?trU
HV
XBT1I
o a o
I qa O
q
O
q
a a a a
ulm qa
I q
o q
a
O
dil
?t
xrl l a qo q a I a qo a o o q
u!ntr
a qa qa
I O I q
a q
a o a a
Ea^
* i:HO.E'EEvfrl
IEIAI q
Q
q I a I o q
o o q
a a q
a a
uu,{ qo
I qa a qo
I qa q
a q
o
<2
a qo
q^g= r
o! = b)
4E E
trl
I8IItr
O o
I q
a aa qo O
q
a q
u!w a q I q I a q a a qo a
rrO-oh .}!
ar8
xzhl I qa q
O
q
a
u!l^l I I
O
o q q qa q
rA
=HUcet
XEW I I I I aa a o a
ullttr I I I q aa a o a qa
5- 
ge
XE}AI I I I o a a a q qa
u!r1l I I O
o O a
dt!Flou ucoqE
I8W I
O O
qo
O
O
q
ulntr I I O q
a q
a O
q
O
E!H<tUil
atrg
XBI I I I I q
O
q
o
qa
urJAl I I I
a o a q q
a c
JEOA NNO N N
CJ N ddo NDN
NN
N
N?
Nc!
N
NN?\
NN NNc
NNO
N
Na N
a
N
alBls VD
g
D Il
gl v
=
!f ts ) )
U
e'E .9
6!o
z;Fl
n
z_Elj
oq
;s
trE
=nno
>H
o
a
trOeu>gbE
i{
<!:
CEdd
H SE
.i Q'b
I
Eq
3E
!&
oA
E
!!
\Edc
2>E;
9'a,=o
E--2C
H !p->EELTEo!t
5':=
-!{iiizE
r' t.i,
FT E
<5
E Er ,-<
2.i E
.d in'(5
- &c
!*€'p*.p
c
L
E
i(U
-co_
.5 6oECt!
(!
0,
co
i(g
.C,
ga6
oE'Crrl
(I,
-C,
oa
t-'
otoo
L\6
F o- iiiO l-' a.t
E R8!,
o 't(ocoo
E?c,o Y-c,(, ;p
E' iix
Lg
L
o:o P
U*
6 -*
6O
O c-co Eo-o-:o
? ufs) -'O.T L
LI
=l r.Exl (E-c
9l tsHEl ct'-<l -->
L
-l- O
q=
!P
o-(!L
3>7!.= .P
U(U
fr>0., .o-3
P
LO
3'i
mQ.PO (IrsE9>-c.tuEa(t$
50i
.(!-L
=t9o*i5
i
5
;
z
<->
C-

ftl^{r t 1 I
Annexure 10: Reply of HP-PCB on recomm. No. 16
Arnex:s.
DEW RESOURCE
MANAGEMENT
Recelpt & Processlnq Certlflcale
lssued to: MrS. NAGAR PARISHAD PONTA SAHIB
Rerer€nco: DEW/NPPS/2024r001
Authorlratlon No: 185358/UPPCB. Valld Upto:31.07.2025
Date: 05-Febraury.2o24
Thls is lo certify that we have recoived the followlng quantilles $ent by M/S, NAGAR PAR,SHAD
PONTA SAH,A, DISTT. SIRMAUR, HP On Behalf of VERSATILE STAR PW' LTO. at our
processing site Surju, Muzaffamagar, UP and lh6 same quantlty has been processed.
Month Typo of Wasto Materlal Quantlty Recelved (ton)
January RDF 210.r 15
.l
For DEW RESoURCE MAiIAGEMENT
Authorlzed Slgnatory
182711,1O2911,1A3On & 1831/t, guJru, parganb, Dlstt..Muzattarnagar-251003 {U.p,)
6 +01 9gll01303t l@ wr,ur.dewrm.com I e tnto@d€wrm.com
GSTIN r 09MTFO24toll27
\(r

0^^tx 11
S (/ llnrn
DELHr poLLUTIoN coNrnol aoMMrrrm
DEPARTMENT OI} ENVIRONMINT, GOVT. OT NCTOF DELIII5,'FLooR, IsBT BUILDING, I(ASI.IMBItn GATr, unliir;Ifi?tr
visit uq nt : http://dpcc.dclhiqovt.nic.irr
F.tz l(644) / EnvlYMC Mnttcr / Sorps & Dctcrgorlrs2L2i/SlI6, - 60l+ Datcrl : l1loffiz1
Subject: Dircctions undcr Scction 33 (A) of ltrc Watcr (I'rcvcnlitur nlrt Colrtrol 1f lroltuti'n) Act,1974, ns anrcndotl lo rlatc.
Whereas, Cenlrfll Pollutiorr Control Board (CPCI]) is tlrs Statc Boarcl lbr all thc union J.c,irorics toexercise polvers and perfbrnts functions under thc water (l)r.evention and controt of poilutionl a,ct, toli,as amended to date.
And whereas, Central Pollution Control Board has tletegatecl all its powers and functions uncter the Water(Preventiott 4nd Control of Pollution) Act, lg74 in respict of Union Territory of Delhi to Delhi pollution
control comnritree (Dpcc) vide notification Dated r5.b3. r991.
And whereas, Hon',ble National creen Tribunal vide judgrnent dated 13.01.2015 in o.A.No.0 6 of 2012 andO'A'No'300 of 2013 in the matter of Manoj Mishra vs. lnion of Inclia & Ors. has given various directionsfor control of pollution and rejuvenation of River yamuna in Delhi.
And whereas, Hon'ble National Creen Tribunal vide order dated 26.07.201g in thb said matter, hadconstituted a two member r\4onitoring Committee (known as yamuna Monitoring Committee) formonitoring and compliance olthe above mentioned Judgrnent / Orders of the Tribunal. The said Committee
monitored the various issues related to control of pollution in River Yamuna including Foam / Froth
formation due to presence of Phosphates and Surfactants in river yamuna.
And whereas, Indiscriminate use of soaps and detergents, not confirming to BIS standards has been
identified as one of the contributors to the deteriorating water quality of riveiYamuna. There is probability
of use of psn'permissible chemical substance in the manufaciure bf roups and detergents which ur" ndt
conforming to BIS standards, which may cause harm to the aquatic liie, river lvatir quality, animal,s
dependents on river water as well as human beings.
And whereas Yamuna Monitoring Committee in its report submitted to Hon'bte NGT in January, 20Zl has
recommended that "..... iv. NGT may also direct the Government of NCT Delhi to issue orders prohibiting
salq storage and transportation /marketing of detergents rvhich do not confonn to the revised BI5
standards. CNCT Delhi may also be directed to launch alvareness campaigns about the harmful effect oi
using substandard soaps and detergents......."
And whereas, Hon'ble Green Tribunal vide order dated27.0l.202l in aforesaid matter has aecepted the
recommendations of the Yamuna Monitoring Committee inctuding above mentioned ...o*,r,.ndations
regarding prohibiting.sale, storage and transportation / marketing of detergents which do not conform to the
revised BIS standards. It is also mentioned in the said order that further actions in terms of the earlier
orders of the Tribunal as well as the curent recommendations of the Comrnittee need to be taken, rvhich
may be overseen by the Chief Secretaries of concerned States on regular basis...........
Now therefore, in view of the above and inexercise of the powers conferred under section 33 (A) of the
Water (Prevention and Conhol of Pollution) Act, 1974 and keeping in view to curb pollution in River
Yamuna in Delhi, Delhi Pollution Control Committee hereby issues following directions:
I. Sale, Storage, Transportation and lvlarketing of Soaps & Detergents not conforming to the revised BIS
Standards shall be completely prohibited in NCT of Delhi.
2. ,All the concerned Departments /Authorities including Municipal Corporation / Local Bodies, Civil
Supplies Department and District Administrations having control over the Shops and other
Establishments (Suppliers, Stockiest, Transporters etc.) hryyg Sale, Storage, Traniportation and
Marketing faoilities for Soaps and Detergents in NCT of Delhi shall ensure the cornpliance of
directions at (l) above through strict vigil and surprise checks on such establishrnents.
'B&

I
;onthl)' action talien reports of inspections concluc(ecl nnd sutrscrluent oclion tnkcn shull bc subnrittctl by
1he authorized oflicers to Delhi Pollution control cornruittcc, without liril.
,t' 
Nnn ccnlpliance $'ith respcct lo above mentionecl dircctions attrncts pennl action u/s 4l ol'thc watcr
lpre'ention nnd control of porl*tio') Act, rlz+, as nni.ii,r-,r to ttnrc.
\
wz
(Dr. I(.S. .lnyachandran)
Memllcr Sccrctury, DI'CC
Tot
1. The Secretary-cum-Conrtnissioner, Food Supplies & Corrsurner Affairs Dcptt. Co.vt, of NCT of Delhi, K-
Block, vikasBhavan. I.p. Estate, Nerv Dellri- | I 0002 (cl'ood@nic.irl)
2. Tire Chairnran, New Delhi MunicipalCouncil, Palika Kendra Building, Parliament Strcct, Delhi-
I 10001.
3. The Commissioner, South Delhi Municipal Corporation (SDMC), 9th Floor, Dr. S.P.M Civic Center, JLN
{. HJ?Hff:[',\:'.ilDeuri Municipal corporation (NDMC), 4ttr Ftoor, Dr. s.p.M civic center, JLN
Nlarg, Nerv Delhi-l 10002
5. The Commissioner, East Delhi Municipat Corporation (EDMC),419, Udyog Sadarl, Patparganj Industriat
Area, Delhi-l10092
6. The Chief Executive Officer, Delhi Cantonment Board (DCB), Delhi Cantt. Sadar Bazaar, New Delhi-
I t0010
7. The Commissioner of Industries, Govt. of NCT of Delhi. 419, Udyog Sadan, FIE Patparganj, Delhi-l 10092'
8. The pr. Secretary (Revenue) cum Divisional Commissioner, 5 Sham NathMarg, Dellri-l 10054'
Copy to:
l. The Commissioner, Delhi Police, Delhi Police Headquarter, MSO Building, IP Estate, Dellti- I 10002'
2. The Vice Chairman, DelhiDevelopment Authority, Vikas Sadan, NA, Dellri-l10023;
3. The Addl. Chief Secretary, Urban Development Department, Govt of NCT of Delhi, 9th Level, Delhi
Secretariat, I.P- Estate, Delhi -l I 0002'
4. Additional Chief Secretary (Environment), 7th Level, Delhi Secretariat, I'P' Estate, Delhi - I10002.
5. The principal secretdry (Environment & Forest), 6th Floor, Delhi Secretariat, l.P.Estate, New Delhi *
I 10002.
6. The principal Secretary (Health & Family Welfare), Govt of NCT of Delhi, gtr' Level, Delhi Secretariat, I.P.
Estate,Delhi- 110002'
7. The Chief Executive Officer, Delhi Jal Board, Varunalaya Ph-II, Jhandewalan, Karol Bagh, New Delhi-
I 10005
g. The Managing Director, Delhi State Industrial & Infrastructure Development Corporation Ltd. N-36,
Bombay Life Building, Connaught Circus, New Dellri * l .l0001
g. The Secretary, Irrigation & Flood Control Department (l&FC), Govt. of NCT of Delhi, L. M. Bundlt,
Shastri Nugut, Delhi - I 10031
10. The Merrber Secretary, Central Pollution Control Board ; PariveshBlralvan, East Arjun Nagar, Delhi -
lrc$z
I l. ffe Secretary - Cum -Commissioner, Development Department, Govt. of NCT of Delhi 5/9, Under Hills
Road, Delhi-I10054
12.TheDistrict Magistrate (North Dishict) fNodal Officer & DM (HQ)], 5 Shanr NathMarg, Dellri-l10054
13. StaffOfficer to Chief Secretary, Govt. of NCT of Delhi, 5'l'Level, Dellri Secretariat, I.P. Estate, Delhi -
I 10002.
14. The Director (Environment), Govt. of NCT Delhi, Delhi Secretariat, I.P, Estate, New Dclhi- I 10002.
\
Vu,z
(K.S. Jnyrdr:rndrnrr)
Mcnrbcr Secrctnry, DI,CC\ ?s
2
al,

Anrt{L \8
Annexure 14 - Replv of CWC on Recomm 23
2.2 Sediment Management in Rivers The following basic principles should be followed for
sediment management of lndian rivers:-
1. Sediment management should become a part of integrated river basin management plan'
Regular sediment budgeting for all basins should be done especially which are affected by heavy
siltation problem.
2. Removal of sediments from river bed may help in channelization of river flow during the lean
season and improve the navigability, but will not have any considerable effect on flood levels'
3. There is natural deposition of sediments upstream of any barrage, but this attains equilibrium
after few years. Desiltation in upstream of a barrage may be taken for channelization of stream
flow. However proper operation of Gates should be ensured for reducing sediment deposition in
the upstream of the Barrages/Wier'
4. Urbanization and infrastructure development works like buildings, roads, embankments etc'
require large amount of sediment. The quantity of sediment removed in such cases from the river
shall be limited to the extent to which it does not harm the ecology of river or gainfully utilized
in developmental works, whichever amount is less. Exploitable quantity sho.uld be determined
,'a-priori,, and the reach should be monitored for excessive exploitative practices'
5. There is a need to pursue the de-siltation/dredging schemes with utmost care backed by
scientific study, including simulations through mathematical and/or physical model study at
appropriate scales and employing consistent formulations applicable to the given site'
Mathematical and/or physical model study is exempted for dredging/desiltation carried out for
navigation purpose by lnland Waterways Authority of lndia'
6. lf necessary, permanent observation stbtions may be opened for collecting data such as cross-
section, hydrological observation etc. This should be coupled with periodic monitoring of various
morphological changes with space technology such as formation of shoals, meandering tendency
of the river, effect of construction of hydraulic structures, damages to the bank' effect of
afforestation/ deforestation and tectonic occurrences. Data sharing mechanism is to be
established in case of an inter-state river'
2.2.7 Ettectof De-siltation in Reducing Floods ln general, de-silting of rivers does significantly
affect frood revers. rn this regard, it is mentioned that the Mittal committee was constituted by
the erstwhile Ministry of water Resources in the year 2001, under the chairmanship of Dr' B'K'
Mittal, Former chairman, central water commission. The main objectives of the committee
were to identify the cause and extent of siltation in rivers, to suggest measures to minimize
siltation, to examine as to whether de-silting is a technically feasible means to minimize
magnitude of floods in rivers, to suggest appropriate technology/ methods of de-silting of rivers'
to propose a realistic operational programme in a time-bound manner and other related aspects'
The findings/recommendations of the Committee were as follows: (i) De-silting of rivers for flood
\8\

iontrol is not an economically viable solution; (ii) Dredging in general has been found to be
inadequate and should not be resorted to, particularly in major rivers; (iii) There are, of course,
some locations such as tidal rivers, confluence points with narrow constrictions and the like which
can be tackled by de-silting after thorough examination and techno-economic justification; (iv)
Selective dredging is suggested depending upon local conditions; and (v) De-silting of rivers can
marginally minimize the magnitude of floods and be effective only for a short period. However,
selective need-based dredging of certain reaches of rivers coupled with structural and
nonstructural measures may be considered in order to protect habitation, agriculture land,
airports, industrial and institutional installations etc.
2,2.2 Extraction for Navigational Purpose lnland Waterways Authority of lndia (lWAl) is
required to carry out dredging to clear shoals/shallow patches on fairways in National Waterways
as a mandatory functional requirement in terms of provisions of Section 14 (Chapter lV) of lWAl
Act, 2016 (82 of 85). The above dredging shall be necessitated to be carried orit at frequent
intervals as and when shoals are surfaced and identified based on continuous
fortnightly/monthly bathymetric surveys being carried out by lWAl. This maintenance dredging
is also required to be taken up at short notice and complete the dredging in a time bound manner
to facilitate navigation. The above maintenance activities of dredging including its disposal are
also exempted from obtaining clearance from MoEF&CC.
2.2.3 Extraction for Economic Uses Sediment deposit in both rivers and reservoirs at some places
contains considerable quantity of sand. ln places where sediment deposits are having good sand
content (of the order of 30% - 4O%1, it is possible to extract sand from sediment to meet the ever-
increasing demand of iand. Sediment component such as silt and clay bears comparatively lesser
economic value but still can be used in, manv works such as for brick making, as filling material,
construction of embankments, roads, 05 constructing raised platforms for flood proofing etc. lts
different uses are given at Annexure-lV. There is possibility of revenue generation in such cases.
2.2.4 lndispensable Removal Many a time, excess deposition of sediment at undesirable places
causes bank erosion, shifting of river course and navigational issues. Sediment deposition on the
mouth of a river may cause large scale flooding due to drainage congestion. At many places,
sediment needs to be removed from a river to channelize it to bring it to its original course
especially during pre-monsoon and post monsoon, ln such cases, it is imperative to remove the
sediment by practically suitable means. Similarly, in some old reservoirs, especially those which
are supplying drinking water, sediment removal becomes necessary to regain their capacity. ln
hydro-power projects, excess deposition of sediment just below the intake level of turbines
hamper their operation and has to be removed with suitable means'
l95-

Aqn{r \t
ANNEXURE-tr
APPROACH FOR SEDIMENT
MANAGEMENT OF RTVERS
To reduce sediment production in the watershed sustainably, the main actions include (i) study
watershed characteristics, (ii) assess the vulnerability of watershed in terms of soil erosion & sediment
production using modelling and to identiff & prioritise the degraded micro-watershed for treatment,
iiii; treatment of the prioritised micro watersheds with biological and engineering erosion control
measures, (iv) stream bank erosion control using river training works like spurs etc., and (v) trapping
sediment upstream of rese.rvoir (in river) .
Identification of hotspots may be carried out for prioritizing the action plans for Sediment Management
thereby helping in tirgeted, cost-effective interventions. It is recommended to quantifu the sediment
load in order to identiff effectiveness and type of interventions required'
A. Upper course- In this stage, the rivers have steep slopes and high sediment transport capacity.
The following sediments management practices may be adopted-
a. Catchment Area Treatment- Catchment Area Treatment and Watershed Development
works along with good agricultural practices and river bank protection/anti-erosion
works are necessary to reduce silt inflow into the river system and must be undertaken in
a comprehensive way. Catchment area treatment on watershed approach plays an
important role in minimizing sedimentation. Watershed management programme
needs to be integrated with river basin management programme appropriately. An
effective and permanent method of sediment control is soil conservation in the
catchment.
The method to be adopted in catchment may include-
i. Afforestationandforestmanagement
ii. Regrading and grassland management
Cultivation practices, such as crop rotation, increasing organic matter, mulching,
seasonal cover crops, contour cultivation, strip cropping and terracing'
iv. Gully control and check dams- contourbunding and trenching.
v. Appropriate landuse controls forprotecting areas of importance.
vi. The various on-farm practices to control the soil detachment to reduce silt load may
include the following Practices:
. To maintain grass cover on soil
. Tocontrolsedimentgenerationthroughfilmtrap
Adoption of practice of bio-filter strips, field borders, sediment retention terraces and
ponds
111.
zf
\6\

b. Regrading& Check dams-Regradingof riverbed slope and constructionof checkdams
may be suitably adopted for management of degradation of river beds as per techno-
economic feasibility.
Controlled construction activities of roads and houses also reduce the silt intake in hilly
areas.
Occurrence of landslides / landslips especially in hilly areas with heavy rainfalTneed to
be controlled by proper slope stability measures.
Storage Reservoirs- The reservoirs are built to store water. Incidentally, these act as
settling tanks for sediment and trap the sediment carried by the river. Therefore, the
sediment concentration of the water released from the reservoir gets effectively reduced
depending upon the size of the reservoir.
River training works such as bank protection, spurs etc. should also be made for the
vulnerable reaches to check the river bank erosion.
Boulder/G rayel/ Sand Mining- In the upper course, boulder, gravels and sand (course
& fine) are deposited in the river. If these are mined at this stage and used for construction
purpose, then Boulder/ Gravel/sand mining can be done strictly as per following
guidelines-
I. "sustainable Sand Mining Management Guidelines - 2016" of
MoEF&CC
ii. "Sand Mining Framework" released by Ministry of Mines in March,
20tB
iii. GSI Guidelines for riverbedgravel/ sand mining.
Middle course- In ihis stage, the river exits the hills, enters the plains, gets meandered mostly on
bed of fine sand, has a wide river bed and flood plain. Most importantly, the river gets modified
through human interventions in terms of huge quantities of water diversion/abstraction and
subjected to high degree of pollutant loads from domestic, industrial and agricultural activities.
In this stage, following sediments management practices may be adopted:-
a. River training works such as bank protection, spurs etc - River training works are used
to conffol the erosion of river banks. Erosion control of riverbank reduces the sediments
intake in river
b. Submerged Vanes & Bandalling- These methods may be adopted for management of
localized aggradations within the river course as per techno-economic feasibility.
c. SandMining - In this stage, sand is deposited in the river. If these are mined at this stage
and used for construction or other purposes, then a major portion of sediment can be
reduced. Sand mining canbe done as perthe guidelines mentioned above.
d. De-siltation/Dredging- De-silting using sluicing and flushing near water resources
22
1X 1
d.
e.
f.
ob'
B.

locations such as congestion at the mouth of tidal rivers, confluence points and the likes whichcan be tackled by de-silting after thorough examination. For navigation purpose the river
reaches in the waterway path can be dredged, to have minimum required arartlor ptying vessels.
De-silting improves the hydraulic efficiency if done near outlets and intakes.
When the meander loop extends substantially in the lateraldirection, the friction loss over themeander length generates a head loss thereby resulting in a rise in the flood levels. Over thecourse of time, when the water path around a meander lengthens, arising to a critical level, a
nafrxal cut-off takes place. Construction of artificial cut-offs (cunnette) can be utilized as a
method for flood control.
It is necessary to appre ciatethat de-silting does not always lead to reduction of flood levels as thelevels in the river are essentially controlled by the hydraulic conditions persisting at the cross
sections forming upstream and downstream boundaries of the reach. The lowering of the bed
level within the reach may not have influence on them consequently leading back to drainageproblems within the season or within a few years. On the other hand, unsystem atic dred,ging
may have the effect on bank destabilisation.
C' Lowercourse-Inthis stage, theriverexperiences considerable changes inthe sedimenttransport
and deposition, causes wide spread flooding, undergoes frequent changes in the channel pith/
delta formation.
The following sediments management practices may be ad,opted:-
(a) Desiltation / Dredglng- In this stage, generally delta formation occurs due to heavy
siltation, which leads to drainage congestion and the mouth of river gets choked. In these
areas, dredging/ de-silting works may be undertaken to maintain flow continuity and
ensure sediments transportation to sea.
O) River training works wherever possible may be taken up for sediment management.
General Guidelines for carrying out de-sil tation/ dredging work
(1) A study of the river reach may be selected for de-siltati on/ dredging by appropriate
mathematical and/ or physical model studies by employing consistent practices. Based
on the outcome, the DpR may be prepared.
(ii) Dredging for de-silting of Indian rivers may be adopted only in exceptional
circumstances or when no other sustainable alternative is available. However, diedging
for maintaining the necessary draft for maintaining the navigation may be done as and
where required. However, it shall be ensured that such dredging does not cause any
considerable pollution to riverwater and notharm flora and fauia.
' (iii) The de-silting of any river reach needs to be justified bringing out clearly the flooding
caused due to siltation along with technical comparisons of the alternative flooJ
mitigation measures with "do nothing" or "proposed de-siltin g/ dredging,,being other
options. It should invariably be associated with sediment flux studies and morphological
studies to confirm no significant adverse effect on downstream or upsffeam reach of the
river including the safety and effectiveness of river crossings, water intakes, existing river
23
\$s

(lv)
(v)
bar.Jr- / flood protection measures, etc. Post dredging, sediment flux studies should also
be carried out to quantifu the amount of silt likely to be deposited in future i.e. Sediment
modelling studies forthe rivermaybe donebefore takingup any suchproject.
Negative impact on ecology and environment due to de-silting may also be studied along
with other studies and shouldbe invariably made a part of DPR.
The quantity of sediments needed to be removed from rivers is usually very high. Since it
may not be easy to find lands for silt disposal, therefore it should be ensured that all silt
removed from river should be utilizedrnsome works in association with concerned state
government
The proposal for de-siltation/ dredgqng work should also contain environmentally
acceptable, practically possible silt disposal/ utilisation plan. River gravels/sands/silts
are valuable resource and could be used gainfully in construction works, including
housing, roads, embankment and reclamation works. Since it is very dififrcult to find
lands for silt disposal therefore it should be ensured that all silt rerhoved from river is
utilized in some works in associationwith concerned state governments. However, in the
critical cases where it becomes. necessary to remove drs 5ilt for free flow of water or
protection of any installation, action may be taken up with the prior approval of the
committee.
(vi)
(vii) Under no circumstances, disposal should create any contamination of water bodies,
harmful to the flora and fauna existing adjacent to the disposal sites or disposed material
should comeback into the river again.
(viii) Desilted material should not be used for filling up of wetlands and water bodies
including oxbow lakes, as these are important for recharging the ground water and
providing base flow in rivers during lean season.
(ix) The modus operandi for sediment disposal should be ftnalized before carrying out
dredging. No project should be executed before formulating a suitable and sustainable
action plan for sediment disposal and be preceded by EIA Study, as per MoEF& CC
notification dated 15.01.2016 to avoid damage to ecology. The methodology to be
adopted (say use of dredgers etc.) should be clearly laid down in the proposal so that its
co-relation with the environmentalhazards can be made.
(x) Normally, funds required for dredging projects are enormous. Before embarking on a
major de-silting operation in any of the rivers, the financial implications may be
discussed in detail.
(xi) The dredging/de-siltation/mining activities thereby disturbing the river regime may
result into some adverse impacts, i.e., (a) River bed degradation; (b) Bank erosion; (c) Channel
widening; (d) Lowering of water surface elevations in the river channel; (e) Lowering of water
table elevations adjacent to the river; (f) Reduction in the structural integrity of bridges,
pipelines, jettieg, barrages, weirs, foundations supporting high tension lines, existing bank
protection works and other man-made structures; and (g) Loss of environmental values
resulting from (a) through (e). Restrictions as presented in Annexure III need to be enforced
24
\81

before planning and executing any dredgpng/ de-silting / mining activities. These restrictions
may be modified only after proper study and monitoring the effects of dredging / de-stlting /
mining.
OTHERSTRATEGMS
I . Silt management upstream of bridges, barrages & weirs
Shoal formation upstream of barrages /bridgesin the pond area is a natural phenomenon. Reduced
velocities of water in upstream of barrageleads to deposit of silt, but sometime after construction, this
attains equilibrium and the incoming silt is washed away through the under sluices and during the flood
season when all gates of thebarrage arc open.
I. Upstream reaches of construction works,likebarrages/bidges, etc., tend to get silted
leading to wandering of river. As the waterway provided for design flood condition is
much larger than actual waterway required in normal condition, there is a tendency for
shoal formation upstr eam of banages. Possibly, proper operation of gates verified on the
basis of physical or mathematical modelling, river training, cut-off developments and
provision of exffa water way near the constrictions could be tried after proper assessment
without impacting the morphology of river elsewhere. The area freed from the
development in the form of oxbow lakes should be used for flood moderation rather than
reclaiming it for other purposes.
II. Sediment sluicing maybe incorporated to maintain sediment continuity from upstream
to downstream reaches after carrying out necessary studies.
2. Lateral Connectivity for Sediment Management- Construction of embankment has resulted
in breaking the lateral connectivity of river with its flood plain..Therefore, the silt carried by the river is
being deposited in river bed only leaving the flood plains devoid of sediments. This has resulted in rising
of riverbed and causing bank erosion at high flood Ievels. In order to provide lateralconnectivity to the
river with its flood plains, sluice gates may be provided at appropriate places in the embankment to
allow controlled flooding in flood plains. This will allow silt carried by the river to be deposited in its
flood plains in thin layers distributed over vast areas and will ultimately result in reduction of silt loads
in rivers and will make the agriculture fields in flood plains fertile. This will benefit in multiple ways-
(a) Reduced high flood levels in downstream.
(b) Increased fertility of flood plains. Thus reducing the dependency of farmers on chemical
fertilizers.
(c) Recharge of groundwater.
(d) Rejuvenation of the waterbodies etc.
Here, it may be mentioned that the sluice gates which allow incoming of flood waters in country side
will6e used for discharging exffa water in river agarfiwhen flood levels in rivers go down. Such sluice
gates willalso reduce drainagecongestion on country side, if any.
3. FloodplainManagement
River tends to achieve equilibrium on its own given the hydrology, sediment and naturalbed and bank
disposition. It is necessary to provide the river sufficient flood plain areas and lakes along the river to
25
\qo

moderate the flood level. Any encroachment of flood plain, reclamation of lakes or disconnection of
lakes from river should be avoided. Rather, adjoining lakes/depressions may be de-silted to increase
their storage capacities. The de-silting of lakes, etc., should be in such a manner that the sediment
continuity is maintaine d ardshould not lead to head cut that creates safety issues for the river crossings,
water intakes or river training works locally or upstream.
To maintain the hydrological and ecological balance, regulation of different activities in the river bed
and different zones of floodplain is essential. The RiverRegulation Zontngfor demarcating necessary
zones should be implemented as early as possible. Central Water Commission in 1975 has already
prepared adraft Flood PlainZoningBill in this rcgard.
4. SolidWasteManagement
Solid waste from community includinggarbage, rubbish, agricultural waste, toxic Industrial discharge,
construction debris, landfills in the catchment area etc. all contributes to pollution in rivers which
damages highly sensitive and fragile river ecosystem. Such anthropogenic activities cause aggradations
and morphological changes in the river. The disposal of solid waste needs to b'e controlled by the
communiry local municipal bodies and government bodies.
Special care should be taken for solid waste generated out of industrial processes. Many times, the same
contains toxic materials and intermixing with other silt may render the same unusable for food chain
use. Such waste should not be allowed to be dumped in the river.
5. Riverrejuvenation/Environmentalflow
There is need to consffuct storages with sufficient flood cushion. The stored. water needs to be released
during the non-monsoon period in such away that environmental flow and silt carrying capacity of
river is by and large maintained. This will also improve the ecology of river. In this rcgard, DoWR, RD
& GR, Ministry of Jal Shakti, GoI has issued guidelines on e-flow for river Ganga in 2018 vide
notification dated 09. 10. 1 8
6. Bed-loadmanagement
Bed-load relocation (dredging) and artificial bed load supply, etc. Flood Control Programs-Detention
basins (holding ponds), energy dissipaters in channels (culvert outlet controls, forced hydraulic jumps,
drop structures, stilling wells, etc. Land use controls: these are used to reduce storm runoff),'Embankments/dyke/levee construction, Periodic flushing of rivers, etc may be used to control the
sediments.
7. LandManagementandSoilConservationTechniques
Check dams, settling basins, vegetation covers, agriculturai practices, 
"t 
. *uy be adopted to control
sedimentation.
8. Artificial Nourishment (with sediments) in the River
Due consideration has to be given for artificial nourishment (with sediment) in Riveir stretches/ Reaches
that contain inadequate quantity of bed sediments. This is very important to protect psammophilc/
lithophilic organism that are inhibiting in river stretches devoid of adequate supply of sediments.
26
\1r

Further, artificial sediment nourishment is required, in certain cases, to contain the adversities of
hungry water effect in river environment. This will also minimise the ill-effect on coastal and near shore
environmentaswell.
g. ApplicationofMulti-TemporalHigh-resolutionSatellitelmagery
Multi-temporal high-resolution satellite imagery may be used for identification of hotspots (heavily
sediment-laden stretches). However, there are some limitations for monitoring suspended sediment
concenffation using remote sensing such as availability of satellite data for the study period as sediment
yield is time-dependent and simultaneous satellite imagery might not be available. Therefore, more
research is necessaryto harness the advancements insatelliteremote sensingfor studyingthe suspended
sediment dynamics and sediment management in river stretches.
27
\\A

ANNEXURE.III
DREDGING/DE-SILTING/
MINING RESTRICTIONS
The dredging/ de-silting/ miningrestrictions are intended to limit the adverse impacts associated with
it. They are intended to limit those impacts to a level which will have limited and manageable minor
effect on the morphology and ecology of the river. These are guiding principles and de-silting works
should be done only and after detailed studies are undertaken. If the State Government/localbodies
have any regulatorylaw in this regard, conservative restriction shall be followed. However, dredgingby
Government agencies like fWAI, PSUs etc. for maintaining the necessary draft for maintaining the
navigationmaybe done as andwhere required.
1.0 Restriction on Riyer Bed Degradation
The magnitude of dredging-induced river bed degradation is a key factor influencing the degree of
instability of the river channel. This may result in secondary impacts such as bank erosion, channel
widening, lowering of water surface elevations adjacent to the river, alteration of aquatic and terrestrial
habitat, and a reduction in the structural integrity of man-made structures. Since sebondary impacts
increase as riverbed degradation increases, the degree of dredging/ de-silting/ mining induced river
channel instability can be limited by identifuing and selecting appropriate reaches for suitably
controlling the amount of dredging related degradation. The dredging /de-silting / mningof the river
reach shall be altered or terminated if the average riter bed degradation over a10 km reach length is
more than I meter. A reach of river which has been dredged / de-silted /mined out and closed for
further dredging will not be reopened until sufficient materials have accumulated to support renewed
dredgingactivities for areasonable period of time.
2,0 Restrictions ConcerningMan-madestructures
2.1 Bartageorweirsorjetties
The barrages or weirs act as a river bed control structures across river and have huge influence on the
river bed. If they fail, it could induce unintended severe riverbed degradation, bank erosion and channel
widening due to design and other related issues. The unregulated dredging/ de-silting can result in
Structural/functional failure of the structure in addition to the ill effects on river regime. To safeguard
the structural integrity of thebarrage or a weir, following restrictions shall apply:-
a) Dredging/ de-silting/ mining activity upstream of structure will be allowed only beyond
200 m or L / 5 whichever is more (Where L is the length of ba rrage / weir).
. b) Dredgrng/de-silting/ mining activities downstream of the structures will be aliowed
only beyond a distance of 800 m or L whichever is less @here L is the length of
barrage/weir).
c) The region of extraction shall be decided in upstream so as to have a positive effect on
hydraulics of the pond and channel.
d) Maximum volume of extraction on downstream shall be decided by proper monitoring
' so that it will not have any effect on the integrity of the structure.
29
\q3

2.2 WaterlntakeStructures
No dredging below the natural bed level will be allowed within 150 m distance from the intake
structurei for safegua rdingstructura-l integrity. However, dredging can be carried out, if the water flow
to the intake structures has been obstructed by excessive sedimentation. The dredging activity shall be
restricted so that the water level reduction will not lead to functional difficulties in diverting water in to
the intakes.
2.3 Bridges
Nodredgingwillbeallowedbelowthelevelof topof raft/bottomof pierwithin 150mof anybridge
crossing io safeguard the strucfural integrity of the bridge. This shall not be applied where water way has
been obstru.t.Jby excessive sediment deposit and is causing flooding of upstream reaches.
2.4 Pipelines
2.4.1 pipelines buried in the riverbed have a high potential to be adversely impacted by
dredging activities. lf degradation of the riverbed exposes pipelines, d,amage could ocflrr
tt rorgfr sagging, buoyancy or displacement of the line downstream due to an
, accumulation of debris. The following restrictions willlimit the potential for dredging/
de-silting/ mininginducedlocalize ddegradationto exposeburiedpipelines:
A No dredging will be allowed within 60 m of any pipelines that is buried 3 m or
below the riverbed.
b) No dredging will be allowed within 150 m from any pipeline that is buried less
than3 m below the river bed. Additional restrictions may be required for any
pipeline located on or above the river bed. Such restrictions could be developed on
a caseby casebasis.
2.4.2 Laying of pipelines/telecommunication lines/internet cables etc. below the bed of any
,ive, shorrl4 be done only after the approval of the concerned competent authority.
2.:i BankStabilizationStructures
No dredging will be allowed within 60 m of the most upstream and downstream point of the bank
stabilization structure .Dredging/ de-silting/ rnining restrictions as shown in Figure I &2 andthe limit
given in Guidelines/Notification2020 of MoEF&CC shall apply for the bank stabilizationstructures.
The same restrictions shall apply to levees or embankments also.
2.6 Otherstructures
The.support structure for high tension lines passing over the river shall also be treated as bridge piers and
relevant restrictions u, prouid.d in c1ause.2.3 for bridges shall apply. Restrictions regarding other man-
made structures not identified in this section may be determined on a case to case basis'
3.0 RestrictionsConcerningNaturalFormations
3. I Natural Rock or Hard Deposits in River Channel
30
\"$

Natural rock or hard deposits located on or in the riverbed may act as riverbed controls and/or may
increase aquatic habitatdiversiry The importance of rock or hard deposit is dependent upon extent of its
area, its thickness and other relevant factors. Based on these hard deposits, river is restrained to flow along
a predefined alignment .Dredglng/ de-silting/ mining shall not dislodge such hard deposits or dredging of
collected silt upstream or downstream of such hard sffatum shall not in turn displace it, whereby the river
loses its control. Therefore, restrictions concerning natural rock deposits ,r\rill have to be dealt case by case
basis. River Ganga flows along important ghats of Varanasi and other such places, where people gather in
large numbers. It is held to flow along these ghats due to peculiar alignment formed by rock or hard stata
and silt deposits together. Hence, dredging / de-silting / mirffig shall be avoided at these places entirely
along the width andatleast 5 km upstream and downstream of such congregational areas. However, for
navigational purpose, limited dredging willbe allowed in such shallow reaches as recommended in DPR.
3.2 RiverBanks
Dredgng/ de-silting/ mining close to riverbanks have ahiglr potential to adversely impact the stability of
those banks, especially when dredgpg/ de-silting/ mining occurs near the outside of sharp river bends.
Bank erosion induced by such dredging can result in the loss of land, damages to manlmade structures,
and adverse impact to environmental resources. Therefore, to limit the potential bed/ba*degradation,
resffictions as per notifi.cations and guidelines being notified under Environment (Protection) Act, 1986
(latest Guidelines/Notification2020 of MoEF&CC) shall apply on Dredging/ de-silting/ mining. The
restrictions as shown in Figures 1 and 2 may be used as a guide as documented for river Ganga in the
report of the Committee constituted for preparatron of guidelines for works on de-siltation from
Bhimgauda (Uttarakhand) to Faral&a flMest Bengal) prepared :r:,2017. Such restrictions for other rivers
need to be derived by studies.
qJ-
ilr|BIs
Figure 1: Typical Dtedging / De-silting / Mining Restrictions
for protectrng river bank with bank protection works
,lhh i* t6rllrt Fr. r{un Pildi
Figure 2z Typical Dredgin g / De-silting / Mining
Restrictions for protectiilg flatural river banks