 
7 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON WATER RESOURCES 
(2024-25) 
                 
         
EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA 
                  
         
                 
MINISTRY OF JAL SHAKTI – DEPARTMENT OF WATER RESOURCES, 
RIVER DEVELOPMENT AND GANGA REJUVENATION 
 
         
         
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2024-25) 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations / 
Recommendations contained in the Second Report (Eighteenth Lok 
Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Water Resources] 
         
         
         
SEVENTH REPORT 
  
          
            
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
         
August, 2025 /Sravana, 1947 (Saka) 

SEVENTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON WATER RESOURCES 
(2024-25) 
          
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
         
         
         
MINISTRY OF JAL SHAKTI – DEPARTMENT OF WATER RESOURCES, 
RIVER DEVELOPMENT AND GANGA REJUVENATION  
                 
         
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2024-25) 
 
 (Action Taken by the Government on the Observations / 
Recommendations contained in the Second Report on ‘Demands for 
Grants (2024-25) of the Ministry of Jal Shakti - 
Department of Water Resources, River Development and Ganga 
Rejuvenation) 
         
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 11.08.2025 
Laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 11.08.2025 
  
 
  
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
                 
         
August , 2025 / Sravana, 1947 (Saka) 

 
W. R. C.  No. 90 
         
         
         
         
         
         
 
 
         
         
         
Price :  Rs.  
         
         
         
         
         
 
 
 
         
     
                     
 
 
 
         
        © 2025 By Lok Sabha Secretariat 
  
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok 
Sabha  (Sixteenth Edition) and Printed by  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iii) 
 

CONTENTS 
 
  Page  
 
Composition of 
the Committee 
 
……………………………………………………………… (v) 
 
 
INTRODUCTION ……………………………………………………………… 
 
(vii) 
 
CHAPTER - I Report……………………………………………………… 
 
1 
CHAPTER – II Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted 
by the Government…………………………… 
 
24 
CHAPTER - III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do 
not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s 
replies……………………………………………………… 
 
61 
CHAPTER - IV Observations/Recommendations in respect  of   which the 
replies of the Government have not been accepted by the 
Committee……………...................................... 
 
62 
CHAPTER - V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final 
replies of the Government are still 
awaited…………………………………………………….. 
 
65 
 ANNEXURES 
 
 
I 
 
Minutes of the Sixteenth sitting of the Standing Committee 
on Water Resources held on 08.08.2025. 
 
66 
II Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Second 
Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee 
69 
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iv) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

COMPOSITION OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON WATER RESOURCES 
(2024-25) 
  
 
Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy  -  Chairperson 
 
 LOK SABHA 
 
 
2.  Shri Narayandas Ahirwar  
3.  Shri Joyanta Basumatary  
4.  Chh. Udayanraje Pratapsinha Maharaj 
Bhonsle 
5.  Shri Isha Khan Choudhury  
6.  Shri Sher Singh Ghubaya  
7.  Shri Bapi Haldar  
8.  Md. Rakibul Hussain  
9.  Smt. Sanjna Jatav  
10.  Shri Sarabjeet Singh Khalsa  
11.  Shri Sagar Eshwar Khandre  
12.  Shri Rodmal Nagar  
13.  Shri Dhaval Laxmanbhai Patel  
14.  Shri Vishaldada Prakashbapu Patil  
15.  Shri Mohite Patil Dhairyasheel Rajsinh  
16.  Shri Dilip Saikia  
17.  Shri Pratap Chandra Sarangi  
18.  Shri Dushyant Singh  
19.  Thiru. Tamilselvan Thanga  
20.  Shri Ashok Kumar Yadav  
21.  Vacant 
 
 
 RAJYA SABHA 
 
22. Dr. Faiyaz Ahmad 
23. Shri Ashokrao Shankarrao Chavan 
24. Smt. Dharmshila Gupta 
25. Smt. Jebi Mather Hisham 
26. Shri Khiru Mahto 
27. Smt. Mausam Noor 
28. Shri Balyogi Umeshnath 
29. Shri  SanjayKumar Jha 
30. Shri Dhairyashil Mohan Patil 
31. Smt. Seema Dwivedi 
 
 
 
 
(v) 
 
 
 

 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Chander Mohan - Additional Secretary 
2. Shri Ajay Kumar Sood - Director 
3. Shri P. Ashok - Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri Umesh Bist -  Under Secretary 
5. Shri Nitin Kumar Nim - Assistant Committee Officer 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(vi) 

 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Water Resources (2024-25) having 
been authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present the 
Seventh Report on the Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in their Second Report (Eighteenth Lok 
Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2024-25) of the Ministry of Jal Shakti -Department of 
Water Resources, River Development and Ganga Rejuvenation.  
 
2.  The Second Report of the Committee was presented to Lok Sabha and laid in 
Rajya Sabha on 10 February 2025. The Action Taken replies of the Government to all the 
recommendations contained in the Report were received in this Secretariat on 8 May, 
2025. 
 
3.  The replies of the Government were examined and the Report was considered and 
adopted by the Committee at their sitting held on 08.08.2025. 
 
4. An analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Second Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) 
of the Committee is given in Annexure-II. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI                      RAJIV PRATAP RUDY, 
08 August, 2025                                                                               Chairperson,                                                                      
17 Sravana,1947(Saka)                Standing Committee on Water Resources 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(vii) 

CHAPTER I 
REPORT 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Water Resources (2024-25) deals 
with the action taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in their Second Report (18th Lok Sabha) on the Demands for Grants                 
(2024-25) of the Ministry of Jal Shakti – Department of Water Resources, River 
Development & Ganga Rejuvenation. 
 
2.  The Second Report was presented to Lok Sabha on 10.02.2025 and was laid on 
the Table of Rajya Sabha on 10.02.2025. The Report contained                                     
16 Observations/Recommendations.  
 
3. Action Taken Notes in respect of all the 16 Observations/Recommendations of 
the Committee have been received from the Government. These have been examined 
and categorized as follows: - 
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the Government 
(Chapter II):  
 
Recommendation Nos. 1, 2, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12,13, 14, 15 & 16 
       (Total – 15) 
 
(ii) Observations / Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue 
in view of the Government’s replies (Chapter III):  
 
Recommendation Nos. NIL       
     (Total – NIL) 
 
(iii) Observations / Recommendations in respect of which replies of the Government 
have not been accepted by the Committee (Chapter IV):  
 
Recommendation No. 3       
(Total – 01)  
 
(iv) Observations / Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited (Chapter V):  
 
Para Nos. NIL        
      (Total – NIL) 
4.  The Committee desire that replies to recommendations made in the Chapter-I of 
this Report may be furnished to the Committee expeditiously.  
 
5.  The Committee will now deal with action taken by the Government on some of 
their Observations/Recommendations that require reiteration or merit comments.   

2 
 
A. Interlinking of Rivers 
 
 
Recommendation No. 3 (Para Nos.2.5 & 2.6) 
 
6. The Committee observed that a total of 30 link projects have been identified 
under the Programme including 16 link projects under Peninsular Component and 14 
link projects under Himalayan Component and out of which, Pre-Feasibility Reports 
(PFRs) of all the 30 links, Feasibility Reports (FRs) of 24 links and Detailed Projects 
Reports (DPRs) of 11 links, have been completed. Five links namely Ken-Betwa Link 
Project, Godavari-Cauvery link (comprising of three links) and Modified Parbati-
Kalisindh-Chambal are being pursued for implementation on priority.  The Committee 
also noticed that, only one link namely Ken-Betwa Link Project is under implementation 
which is planned to be completed within a period of 8 years i.e. by March, 2030. 
Further, budgetary allocation of Rs. 4,000 crore in year 2024-25 has been made for this 
programme concentrated on land acquisition, R&R activities for Daudhan Dam, Link 
Canal and reimbursement to / release of fund to States. Further, the Committee 
observed that, despite conducting numerous meetings with stakeholders to address 
concerns and foster cooperation, consensus among States, remains a persistent 
obstacle in the implementation of the Interlinking of Rivers program. 
 Regarding the study on interlinking of rivers in terms of ecological & 
environmental, socio-economical perspective, the Committee observed that a detailed 
study in respect of Ken Betwa Link Project had been carried out by Wildlife Institute of 
India, Dehradun. The Committee were of the opinion that interlinking of rivers would 
provide the country a viable solution to addressing water scarcity, drought mitigation, 
and flood control and such studies would also facilitate consensus-building among 
States. The Committee therefore urged the Department to conduct more such studies 
evaluating the benefits of the project, thereby enhancing awareness amongst the States 
concerned and expediting its implementation. 
 
7. The Department in its action taken note has replied as follows: 
“National Water Development Agency (NWDA) has been entrusted with work of 
Interlinking of Rivers (ILR) under National Perspective Plan (NPP) formulated by 

3 
 
Government of India in year 1980. Under NPP, a total of 30 link projects have 
been identified (16 link projects under Peninsular Component and 14 link projects 
under Himalayan Component). 
 
National Perspective Plan (NPP) has been formulated for providing storage and 
transfer of surplus waters to water deficit regions to minimize the miseries 
brought by droughts and also to mitigate the ravages of annually recurring floods. 
The link projects under NPP have been planned judicially for minimizing water 
going to sea underutilized. The flood water from flood prone/ water surplus river 
basins would be diverted to water deficit regions and would also recharge ground 
water table, tanks and canals in the command areas thus, would help 
Government to deal with issue of water crisis in various States. 
 
Government of India has accorded top priority to ILR Programme. Out of 30 
identified link projects under NPP, five links namely Ken-Betwa Link Project, 
Godavari-Cauvery link Project (comprising of three links) and Modified Parbati-
Kalisindh-Chambal (PKC) are being pursued for implementation on priority.  
  
 Ken-Betwa Link Project is under implementation. The project is planned to be 
completed by March, 2030.  Hon’ble Prime Minister has laid the foundation stone 
for the project on 25.12.2024. 
  
In respect of Modified PKC Link Project, it is to submit that the persistent efforts 
of Govt. of India has led to signing of Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) by 
both the States of Madhya Pradesh & Rajasthan with Ministry of Jal Shakti 
(MoJS), Govt. of India (GoI) on 28.01.2024 in New Delhi in the presence of 
Hon’ble Chief Ministers of both the States, for preparation of its DPR and on 
broad planning of the link project. Memorandum of Agreement (MoA) has been 
signed on 05.12.2024 amongst States of MP, Rajasthan and Govt. of India. 
Hon’ble Prime Minister declared the signing of the agreement on 17.12.2024 

4 
 
at Rajasthan. DPRs of various components of MP & Rajasthan in Modified PKC 
link are under preparation, primarily by both the States.  
  
Regarding the Godavari-Cauvery Link Project, draft DPR for transfer of about 
4189 MCM of water was circulated to all the party States/UT on 08.01.24. Draft 
MoA has been prepared for implementation of link project and has been 
circulated to concerned States/UT in April, 2024. Five consultation meetings with 
party States/UT have been held so far. The main focus is on building consensus 
amongst States/UT and signing of MoA for the implementation of this link project 
and concerted efforts are being made.  
  
System Studies has been started for the Link Projects with the help of prestigious 
Institutes viz., National Institute of Hydrology (NIH), Indian Institute of Technology 
(IIT), National Institute of Technology (NITs) to take care of factors such as 
climate changes, global warming, deforestation etc.  
  
Further Studies for evaluating the benefits of the projects, if any, may be 
considered only after the finalization of Detailed Project Reports (DPRs) of 
various link projects.  
  
Water being the State subject, thus building up the consensus amongst the 
concerned States is crucial. States should move forward for implementation of 
any Interlinking River Projects.”.  
 
8. The Committee note from the replies of the Department that out of 30 
identified link projects under NPP, five links namely Ken-Betwa Link Project, 
Godavari-Cauvery link Project (comprising of three links) and Modified Parbati-
Kalisindh-Chambal (PKC) are being pursued for implementation on priority. 
Further, the Department also stated that System Studies has been started for the 
Link Projects with the help of prestigious Institutes viz., National Institute of 
Hydrology (NIH), Indian Institute of Technology (IIT), National Institute of 

5 
 
Technology (NITs) to take care of factors such as climate changes, global 
warming, deforestation etc. However, with regard to conducting studies for 
evaluating the benefits of the projects the Department stated that the same may 
be considered only after the finalization of Detailed Project Reports (DPRs) of 
various link projects. In this regard, the Committee are of the view that out of 30 
identified link projects under NPP, Pre-Feasibility Reports (PFRs) of all the 30 
links, Feasibility Reports (FRs) of 24 links and Detailed Project Reports (DPRs) of 
11 links have been completed and on the basis of available Report(s) more 
studies encompassing advantages of the projects may be conducted as a pre-
initiative measure towards building consensus among States concerned. Hence, 
the Committee, would therefore, reiterate their recommendation and again urge 
the Department to conduct more studies evaluating the benefits of the projects, 
thereby enhancing awareness amongst the States concerned and expediting 
implementation of link projects under the programme. 
 
B. Flood Management and Border Areas Programme (FMBAP) 
 
 
Recommendation No. 5 (Para No.2.8) 
 
9. The Committee observed that in pursuant to the XII Plan, the "Flood 
Management and Border Areas Programme (FMBAP)" was initiated for the period 2017-
18 to 2019-20 which was extended until 2020-21 and further to be continued upto 2026. 
The FMBAP comprises two key components including Flood Management Programme 
(FMP) Component and River Management and Border Areas (RMBA) Component. 
Under FMP component, the Government provides Grant-in-Aid to States/Union 
Territories for implementing structural measures aimed at flood management, anti-
erosion, river management, and anti-sea erosion. Further, under RMBA component 
flood control and anti-erosion work on common border rivers with neighbouring 
countries, including hydrological observations and flood forecasting, and investigation & 

6 
 
pre-construction activities of joint water resources projects (with neighbouring countries) 
on common border rivers are being taken up with 100% central assistance. The 
Committee has noticed a drastic shortfall (-55.5%) in the budget of the Programme at 
RE stage during the FY 2023-24. In this regard, the Department apprised the 
Committee that the shortfall was due to non-receipt of funding proposal from the States.  
The Committee noted with concern, that notwithstanding the Nation's efforts to address 
the impending challenges of floods, under-utilization of the allocated budget for this 
comprehensive scheme would undermine the programme's objectives. In this regard, 
the Committee were of the considered view that, the Ministry should take a proactive 
hand hold approach with State Governments and ensure maximum utilization of 
available funds allocated under Flood Management & Border Areas Programme along 
with completion of projects, within a stipulated time frame, so that menace of flood in the 
country be dealt with more effectively and efficiently. 
 
10. The Department in its action taken note has replied as follows: 
 
“ Flood management including erosion control falls within the purview of the 
States. Flood management and anti-erosion schemes are formulated and 
implemented by concerned State Governments as per their priority. The Union 
Government supplements the efforts of the States by providing technical 
guidance and also promotional financial assistance for management of floods in 
critical areas.  
  
To strengthen the structural measures of flood management, Union Government 
had implemented Flood Management Programme (FMP) during XI & XII Plans 
for providing central assistance to States for works related to flood control, anti-
erosion, drainage development, anti-sea erosion, etc. which subsequently 
continued as a component of "Flood Management and Border Areas 
Programme" (FMBAP) for the period from 2017-18 to 2020-21 and was further 
extended up to 2026 with limited outlay. 
  

7 
 
30 flood management projects of XI and XII plan period is currently ongoing and 
for completion of these flood management projects, Secretary, Department of 
Water Resources, River Development & Ganga Rejuvenation, Ministry of Jal 
Shakti has taken a review meeting on 19th November, 2024 in which, it was 
requested to the State/UTs to complete the prolonged projects immediately and 
submit the funding proposals, if any. If the projects have already been 
completed, state government needs to submit the completion report and 
utilization certificates for closing of the project from FMBAP scheme.” 
 
11. The Committee note from the replies that 30 flood management projects of 
XI and XII plan period are currently ongoing and for completion of these flood 
management projects, Secretary, Department of Water Resources, River 
Development & Ganga Rejuvenation, Ministry of Jal Shakti has taken a review 
meeting on 19th November, 2024 in which, it was requested to the State/UTs to 
complete the prolonged projects immediately and submit the funding proposals, 
if any. If the projects have already been completed, State Government concern 
needs to submit the completion report and utilization certificates for closing of 
the project from FMBAP scheme. In view of the increasing severity of the floods 
particularly in the States/UTs sharing Trans-Border Rivers with neighbouring 
countries, the Committee, while recognising the initiatives made by the 
Department towards maximum utilization of available funds under the 
Programme, express concern over the slow progress of ongoing flood 
management projects and reiterate its stand for a more intense and dedicated 
approach by the Department to ensure effective measures to deal flood problems 
in the country.        
 
Recommendation Nos. 6 & 7 (Para Nos.2.9, 2.9.1 & 2.9.2) 
12. The Committee expressed its concern that despite numerous efforts and 
initiatives by the Government to mitigate floods, several States continue to face severe 
flooding challenges. In this regard, the Ministry listed various challenges including 
unpredictable weather patterns, coupled with the increasing frequency and intensity of 

8 
 
extreme precipitation events with wide variations in rainfall both in time and space, 
landslides, snowmelt, cloud burst and glacial lake out bursts etc., Inadequate urban 
drainage systems and the rampant encroachment on natural waterways exacerbate the 
situation, as floodplains—originally designed to absorb excess water—are compromised 
by unregulated construction activities. A fragmented approach to planning and lack of 
inter-state collaboration further hinder the implementation of comprehensive flood 
management strategies. From the points narrated by the Ministry, the Committee were 
of the view that climate change is significantly increasing the frequency and intensity of 
floods, primarily due to an increase in extreme rainfall events, particularly during the 
monsoon season, leading to more frequent and severe flooding across regions, causing 
substantial damage to infrastructure, livelihoods, and human life.  
 
 The Committee, therefore, recommended that the Ministry review its present 
flood management system to factor in with extreme precipitation events, unpredictable 
weather and climate change which are seen to be global events and upgrade the 
present flood management systems with the best available/emerging global practices to 
mitigate the socio-economic losses caused.  
  
The Committee also recommended that the Ministry in collaboration with State 
Governments take all appropriate measures to stop unregulated construction activities 
in the flood plains. The Committee may be apprised of the steps taken in this regard. 
 
 
13. The Department in its action taken note has replied as follows: 
 
“To factor in with extreme precipitation events, unpredictable weather and 
climate change, Central Water Commission (CWC) has been directed to 
review/modification of the existing Guidelines for submission, appraisal and 
acceptance of Irrigation and Multipurpose Projects, 2017 in respect of flood 
protection schemes on common border/trans boundary rivers. Integrated flood 
approach aims at adopting judicious mix of structural and non-structural 

9 
 
measures to provide a reasonable degree of protection against flood damages 
at economic cost.  
Further, Ministry of Jal Shakti has continuously impressed upon the States, the 
need to adopt flood plain zoning approach as a non-structural measure of flood 
management in the country.  In order to enable States to undertake scientific 
assessment of flood plains and its zoning, draft technical guidelines on Flood 
Plain Zoning have been prepared by Ministry and circulated to the States/UTs in 
2024 for their input. Input from some of the States/UTs have been received and 
finalization of guidelines is under process.” 
 
14. The Committee note from the replies that to stop the unregulated 
construction activities in the flood plains draft technical guidelines on Flood Plain 
Zoning have been prepared by the Ministry and circulated to the States / UTs in 
2024 for their input and finalization of the same is under process. In this regard, 
the Committee are of the view that with the finalization of the guidelines, their 
rapid compliance and effective implementation by the concerned States / UTs is 
also necessary so that devised mechanism could fulfill its objective. While noting 
efforts of the Ministry, the Committee hope that after finalization of the technical 
guidelines and its effective implementation the system would be more strengthen 
and able to curb the unregulated construction activities in the flood plains. In this 
regard they would like to be appraised about the progress in the matter within 
three months form the presentation of this report.    
 
C. Safety of Dams 
Recommendation No. 10 (Para No.2.12) 
 
15. The Committee observed that National Dam Safety Authority (NDSA) has been 
sanctioned 79 Posts in various grades including 65 Posts in Technical Cadre and 14 
Posts in non-technical grades and against 65 posts in Technical Cadre, presently only 
17 officers are working on deputation/ loan basis and against 14 posts of non-technical 
grades only 07 persons are in position. Further, against the total contractual sanctioned 

10 
 
post of 91, only 17 persons have been engaged. Further, State Dam Safety 
Organizations (SDSOs) constituted by the dam-owning States are also facing the same 
problem. The Committee recognised that NDSA have a huge mandate with high 
responsibility of ensuring the safety of dams across the country by establishing and 
enforcing uniform safety standards, overseeing inspections, maintenance, providing 
technical assistance to states and inadequate staff certainly affect the functioning of the 
Authority. The Committee strongly recommended that the Department must take prompt 
action to fill the existing vacancies without further delay to enable the Authority to 
execute its responsibilities efficiently and effectively with optimal results. 
 
16. The Department in its action taken note has replied as follows: 
 
“NDSA has sanctioned strength of 85 posts, which include the post of 
Chairman, 05 Members (JS level) and 79 below JS level posts (65 technical 
posts and 14 non-technical posts).  As on date, NDSA is functioning with the 
actual strength of 32 officers on deputation/loan/additional charge basis. In 
addition, 33 persons have also been engaged as support staff on contract basis 
against 91 approved positions. 
  
 NDSA is making all-out efforts to fill up the vacant posts. As regards 65 
technical posts, which are to be filled on deputation basis amongst the CWES 
officers as per the RR, these posts were advertised in August 2023 and 07 
CWES officers have been appointed on deputation basis. Vacancy circular has 
been issued in February 2025 to fill up the 05 posts of Members and the last 
date of receipt of applications is 07.04.2025. 
 
As regards outsourced personnel, it is submitted that these positions are mainly 
to support the officers posted against regular vacancies. Hence these positions 
can be filled up soon after officers are available against the regular posts.” 
 

11 
 
17. The Committee note from the action taken reply that National Dam Safety 
Authority (NDSA) has sanctioned strength of 85 posts including the post of 
Chairman, 05 Members (JS level) and 79 below JS level posts (65 technical posts 
and 14 non-technical posts). They further note that the Authority is functioning 
with the actual strength of 32 officers on deputation/loan/additional charge basis 
and 33 persons have also been engaged as support staff on contract basis 
against 91 approved positions. Regarding the 65 technical posts, the same were 
advertised in August 2023 and 07 CWES officers have been appointed on 
deputation basis. Here, the Committee find that efforts are being made by the 
Ministry to augment the manpower of NDSA. The Committee are of the view that 
even after persistent efforts the present strength is far behind from the 
sanctioned necessary for proper functioning of NDSA and there is need of time 
bound endeavours toward this aspect. However, the Committee hope that the 
steps taken by the Ministry will provide desired results and the posts particularly 
in technical sections will be filled urgently for appropriate functioning of the 
NDSA thereby resulting in the proper and efficient management of safety of dams 
in the country. The Committee would like to be apprised of the progress in this 
regard within 3 months of presentation of this Report.   
 
D. Flood Forecasting 
 
Recommendation No. 14 (Para Nos,2.17 & 2.18) 
 
18. The Committee observed that Central Water Commission (CWC) plays a crucial 
role in Flood Forecasting by overseeing a comprehensive flood forecasting network that 
operates across the country. The CWC set up of flood forecasting network comprises of 
short range level forecasts at 200 locations in the country and Inflow Forecasts for 140 
dams/reservoirs/barrages in various river basins. Further, to monitor the flood situation 
during every monsoon, CWC operates 36 Divisional Flood Control Rooms (DFCRs) 
located in the various field Divisions of CWC and a Central Flood Control Room (CFCR) 
at CWC (HQ), New Delhi for providing flood related information to the local 

12 
 
administration and user agencies. Central Flood Control Room (CFCR) at New Delhi 
monitors flood situation throughout the country by monitoring the data entry/FF 
formulation and issue of flood forecasts from all DFCRs through Water Information 
Management System (WIMS). 
 
The Committee noted that despite significant technological advancements and 
substantial investments in Early Warning Systems (EWS), socio-economic losses in the 
form of human lives and assets, continue to occur. In this regard, the Department 
appraised the Committee that Central Water Commission is enhancing its flood 
forecasting capabilities through various measures, including through expanding its 
network, upgrading of technology with mathematical modeling, enhancing 
computational resources, exhaustive data collection from various sources, adopting 
ensemble forecasting, etc. In this regard, the Committee were of the view that though 
various efforts have been made by the Department for better flood forecasting, the 
present system for the purpose have on occasions, been found inadequate. During oral 
evidence, the Ministry also accepted the fact that the present models used for 
processing of meteorological data for flood forecasting need improvement. Hence, in 
light of the increasing severity of flood situations due to climate change, the Committee 
recommended that the Ministry upgrade its present system accordingly with best 
available advanced technology, capable of addressing the current challenges in the 
area of flood forecasting due to climate change phenomena.  
 
19. The Department in its action taken note has replied as follows: 
“The Central Water Commission (CWC) establishes new flood forecasting sites 
based on requests received from State Governments. In certain cases, the 
CWC identifies potential flood forecasting sites or locations and seeks feedback 
or approval from the concerned State Government regarding the site's 
feasibility.  
  

13 
 
Currently, CWC has 340 (200 Level and 140 Inflow) flood forecasting sites in 
India covering 22 states and 2 UT’s which is planned to increase to around 375 
by end of 2026 covering over 28 states and 6 UT’s.  
  
The Central Water Commission (CWC) is prioritizing the expansion of inflow 
forecasting sites due to the rising frequency of dam-induced floods and the 
relatively lower number of inflow forecasting sites compared to level forecasting 
sites. Although, the network of level forecasting sites managed by the CWC has 
reached near saturation, Ministry is taking all effort to identify and enhance level 
forecasting sites in consultation with State Govt. during next five year plan 2026-
31. 
 
State-wise Flood Forecasting Stations 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of 
State/UT  
Existing No. of flood forecasting 
Stations 
Proposed additional FF 
Stations 
    Level Inflow Total Level Inflow Total 
1 Andhra Pradesh 10 10 20 0 1 1 
2 
Arunachal 
Pradesh 3 1 4 0 0 0 
3 Assam 30 0 30 0 1 1 
4 Bihar 40 3 43 0 1 1 
5 Chhattisgarh 1 2 3 0 1 1 
6 Gujarat 6 8 14 0 0 0 
7 Haryana 1 1 2 1 1 2 
8 
Himachal 
Pradesh 1 0 1 0 1 1 

14 
 
9 
Jammu & 
Kashmir 3 0 3 2 1 3 
10 Jharkhand 2 15 17 0 0 0 
11 Karnataka 1 14 15 0 3 3 
12 Kerala 4 2 6 0 2 2 
13 Madhya Pradesh 2 12 14 0 0 0 
14 Maharashtra 8 14 22 0 1 1 
15 Odisha 12 7 19 0 0 0 
16 Rajasthan 4 11 15 0 2 2 
17 Sikkim 3 5 8 1 0 1 
18 Tamil Nadu 4 11 15 0 3 3 
19 Telangana 5 10 15 0 1 1 
20 Tripura 2 0 2 4 0 4 
21 Uttar Pradesh 39 5 44 0 0 0 
22 Uttarakhand 4 5 9 0 0 0 
23 West Bengal  12 4 16 0 0 0 
24 Daman & Diu 1 0 1 0 0 0 
25 NCT of Delhi 2 0 2 0 0 0 
26 Meghalaya 0 0 0 0 2 2 
27 Nagaland 0 0 0 0 1 1 
28 Manipur 0 0 0 0 2 2 

15 
 
29 Mizoram 0 0 0 0 1 1 
30 Punjab 0 0 0 1 1 2 
31 Goa 0 0 0 0 1 1 
32 
Dadar Nagar 
Haveli 0 0 0 1 0 1 
33 Ladakh 0 0 0 0 1 1 
34 Puducherry 0 0 0 1 0 1 
  Total 200 140 340 11 28 39 
 
  
Basin-wise Flood Forecasting Stations 
Sr. 
No 
Major Interstate River 
Systems 
FF stations as on 
Date 
Proposed additional FF 
Stations 
Level Inflow Total Level Inflow Total 
1 Indus and its tributaries 3 0 3 4 5 9 
2 Ganga & its tributaries 96 43 139 0 1 1 
3 Brahmaputra & its tributaries 39 6 45 1 4 5 
4 Barak System 6 0 6 4 3 7 
5 Subarnarekha (i/c Burhabalang) 4 3 7 0 0 0 
6 Brahmani & Baitarni 3 2 5 0 0 0 
7 East Flowing (Mahanadi to 4 4 8 0 0 0 

16 
 
Pennar) 
8 Narmada 4 6 10 0 0 0 
9 Tapi 1 2 3 0 0 0 
10 Mahi 1 4 5 0 0 0 
11 Sabarmati 1 1 2 0 0 0 
12 Mahanadi 3 3 6 0 1 1 
13 Godavari 18 26 44 0 0 0 
14 Krishna 5 19 24 0 2 2 
15 West Flowing Rivers(Kutch & 
Saurashtra, Luni) 1 2 3 0 2 2 
16 West Flowing Rivers (Tapi to 
Tadri)) 2 1 3 1 4 5 
17 Cauvery and its tributaries 4 9 13 0 2 2 
18 Pennar 1 1 2 0 0 0 
19 East Flowing Rivers (Pennar to 
Kanyakumari) 1 6 7 1 2 0 
20 West Flowing River (Tadri to 
Kanyakumari) 3 2 5 0 1 0 
21 Minor rivers draining to 
Myanmar 0 0 0 0 1 1 
  Total 200 140 340 11 28 39 
  

17 
 
As per World Meteorological Organization (WMO) manual on “Flood Forecasting 
and Warning”, there are no fixed norms or criteria regarding the number of flood 
forecasting stations that should be established. Instead, the WMO emphasizes that 
the primary requirement for a flood forecasting network is the delivery of useful and 
timely information. The Central Water Commission (CWC) has adopted a 
comprehensive approach that aligns with these guidelines in several key ways.  
Utility and Timeliness: The CWC's focus on providing timely forecasts ensures that 
stakeholders have the necessary information to act promptly. 
 
 Cost-Effectiveness: By utilizing existing infrastructure and focusing on suitability 
for flood warning purposes, the CWC effectively manages resources. 
 User-Centric Approach: The integration of stakeholder feedback into network 
evaluations reflects a commitment to meeting end-user needs.  
Hydrological Observation (HO) stations are the backbone of Flood Forecasting 
network for monitoring the flood situation on near real time basis and formulation of 
forecast. As per WMO guidelines minimum hydro-meteorological stations density 
should be as follows: 
 
S. 
No
. 
Physio- 
graphic  
Region 
Minimum density (area in km2 per station) 
Precipitation Station Streamflow Measurement Station 
 Non- 
recordin
g 
 Recordin
g 
Evaporatio
n  
Station 
Strea
m  
flow  
Statio
n 
Sediment  
Discharge 
and  
Sedimentatio
n 
Water  
Temperatur
e 
 (Water 
Quality  
Station) 
1 Coastal 900 9,000 50,000 2,750 18,300 55,000 

18 
 
2 
Mountain- 
ous 
250 2,500 50,000 1,000 6,700 20,000 
3 
Interior  
Plains 
575 5,750 50,000 1,875 12,500 37,500 
4 
Hilly/ 
Undulatin
g 
575 5,750 50,000 1,875 12,500 47,500 
5 
Small  
islands 
25 2,520 50,000 300 2,000 6,000 
6 Polar/arid 10,000 100,000 100,000 20,000 200,000 200,000 
  
Based on the six physiographic regions of India and their approximate areas, 
minimum stream flow and sediment stations have been worked out as below: 
  
Physiographic 
Region 
Area (in 
km²) 
Minimum Stream Flow 
stations as per WMO 
guidelines 
Minimum sedimentation 
stations as per WMO 
guidelines 
Coastal 75,000 27 4 
Mountainous 500,000 500 75 
Interior Plains 700,000 373 56 
Hilly/Undulating 1,600,000 853 128 
Small Islands 8,000 27 4 
Polar/Arid 300,000 15 1 

19 
 
Total 1795 268 
Existing network in CWC  1522 407 
  
The number of CWC HO stations, in general, are as per minimum requirements,  
based on the WMO guidelines for stream flow stations & sedimentation stations. 
Moreover, in addition to CWC HO network compatibility with WMO standards, 
there are additional HO stations maintained by State Govt. making it more than 
WMO norms. 
 
The CWC comprehensive strategy effectively aligns with the WMO's guidelines 
by focusing on the timely delivery of useful information, engaging stakeholders, 
regularly evaluating its network and embracing technological advancements. This 
approach not only enhances the CWC's flood forecasting capabilities but also 
significantly contributes to better flood management and community resilience in 
India. 
 
As part of its ongoing commitment to effective flood management, Central Water 
Commission (CWC) receives requests from various stakeholders for the 
establishment of new flood forecasting (FF) stations. This process is integral to 
ensuring that the flood forecasting network remains responsive to evolving needs 
in flood-prone area. The CWC carefully examines these requests and takes 
appropriate action based on feasibility.  
 
Currently CWC has 1543 HO sites. The HO sites are also continuously reviewed 
in response to the emerging scenarios. The utility of HO sites diminishes with the 
establishment of downstream or upstream dams, weirs, or barrages, eventually 
compelling CWC to close these sites. Consequently, the HO network varies from 
year to year, influenced by such factors.   
  

20 
 
 
Modernisation of network 
Sensor based data collection and satellite-based communication system has 
been adopted under modernisation. At present CWC has 1121 telemetry sites, 
spanning 25 States and 5 UT’s.  
  
Under World Bank aided National Hydrology Project (NHP), State Govt. have 
been supported to install similar system to fill the gaps. Velocity radar-based 
discharge data collection at more time frequency as well as ADCP based 
accurate discharge observation has been more emphasis in addition to 
installation of SCADA system on selected Dams and Barrages to support 
accurate flood forecast model output. 
 
  Advances in Advisory Flood Forecast (AFF) 
 CWC currently provides 7-day advisory flood forecast on its web portal 
https://aff.india-water.gov.in/  using mathematical model on pan-India for 20 
major river basins of the country, covering 200 water level and 140 reservoir 
inflow forecast stations. This marks a significant paradigm shift from the 
conventional Gauge-to-Gauge correlation to a more scientific modelling 
technique for flood forecasting. The system uses regularly calibrated basin 
models developed using MIKE11 modelling software, while its real time operation 
is done in automatic manner by scheduling scripts written in Python and then 
using JavaScript for publishing the model outputs in web portal. The entire 
system is updated every three hours for all stations simultaneously.  
 
Inundation Flood Forecasting – New initiative 
 
In view of the severity of the flood situation in flood-prone regions, as indicated 
by longer lead-time forecasts, there has been a constant demand from various 
stakeholders for flood inundation extent data across affected districts. To address 

21 
 
this need and further modernize its flood forecasting capabilities, CWC has 
undertaken the development of inundation forecasting using 2D modelling 
techniques. 
        The current status of inundation forecasting is as follows: 
1. Godavari and Tapi Rivers Basin: NRSC has developed Spatial Flood Early 
Warning Systems for the Godavari and Tapi Rivers using the MIKE suite of 
software under NHP, leveraging high-resolution DEM and computational 
resources available with NRSC. The proposed solution is planned for rollout 
during the 2025 monsoon season. 
2. Mahanadi Basin: C-DAC, with the support of CWC, has developed an 
Inundation Forecast Model for the Mahanadi Basin using ANUGA, high-
resolution DEM procured from NRSC, and high-performance computing (HPC) 
resources available with C-DAC. The proposed solution is also planned for rollout 
during the 2025 monsoon season. 
3. Ganga Basin: CWC has initiated the development of an Inundation Forecast 
Model for the Ganga Basin using HEC (HMS & RAS) through consultancy under 
NHP. The DEM data for this project is being partially procured from NRSC and 
supplemented with data provided by the Survey of India (SoI). The objective is to 
develop an Early Flood Warning System, including inundation forecasting and a 
customized GIS tool for real-time dissemination of water level forecasts, 
inundation forecasts, and an inundation map library. This system will incorporate 
a 2D or 1D-2D coupled numerical model for the Ganga Basin. The system is 
under development and is likely to be rolled out from 2026. 
Implementation of AI/ML Techniques in Flood Forecasting – New Venture 
Recently the acceleration of flood-related disasters due to climate change 
underscores the urgency for effective early warning systems.  As a result, many 
nations are experimenting with global flood prevention utilising AI/ML techniques, 
particularly in areas that are highly inhabited and at risk of flooding and lack 
dense stream flow gauge networks. The accuracy, recall, and lead time of short-

22 
 
term forecasts of extreme riverine phenomena could all be enhanced by AI/ML 
techniques. Below is a list of some benefits of AI/ML: 
  
1. Real-time Monitoring: AI/ML models can process vast amounts of data from 
various sources (stations-wise, satellites, telemetry) in real-time, providing up-to-
date flood predictions. 
2. High Accuracy: These models can analyze complex spatiotemporal patterns and 
non-linear behaviours of floods, leading to more accurate predictions compared 
to conventional methods. 
3. Early Warning Systems: AI/ML techniques can generate timely flood warnings, 
allowing state authorities to take necessary precautions and evacuate if needed. 
4. Efficient Resource Allocation: By predicting flood intensity and affected areas, 
AI/ML models help in efficient allocation of resources for disaster response and 
recovery. 
5. Minimum expertise requirement: Once AI/ML models are implemented for 
forecast site, the system can be operated with minimum staff at field 
organization. 
To utilise the immense advantages of AI/ML models, CWC has delved into the 
usage of AI/ML techniques in centralized flood forecasting to replace the existing 
decentralized conventional techniques used by CWC for short range forecasting. 
As a first phase the centralized automated short range flood forecasting module 
model will be developed for selected forecasting station and rolled out from 2025. 
Rest of the stations will be added in phased manner. Pan India coverage under 
the system is planned by 2026.” 
 
 
20. The Committee note that Central Water Commission has 340 (200 Level and 
140 Inflow) flood forecasting sites in India covering 22 states and 2 UT’s which is 
planned to increase to around 375 by end of 2026 covering over 28 states and 6 
UT’s. Further, the Ministry is taking all efforts to identify and enhance level 
forecasting sites in consultation with State Govt. during next five-year plan 2026-

23 
 
31. The Committee also note that from the data provided by the Ministry that 
presently only 140 Inflow forecasting sites are available in compare to level 
forecasting sites. In this regard, as stated by the Ministry, due to the rising 
frequency of Dam-induced floods, expansion of the same are being considered 
on priority. Furthermore, as appraised by the Ministry, as per World 
Meteorological Organization (WMO) manual on ‘Flood Forecasting and Warning’, 
there are no fixed norms or criteria regarding the number of flood forecasting 
stations that should be established rather emphasised on requirement of flood 
forecasting network to deliver of useful information timely. Regarding the 
modernisation of network for flood forecasting the Ministry has listed out various 
efforts including updation of Sensor based data collection and Satellite-based 
communication system, providing of 7-day advisory flood forecast on web portal 
using of mathematical model on pan-India for 20 major river basins of the 
country, development of inundation forecasting using 2D modelling techniques 
and implementation of AI/ML Techniques in flood forecasting. While appreciating 
the Ministry's efforts, the Committee believe that, given the current magnitude of 
floods, it is essential to upgrade the flood forecasting system by incorporating 
latest technologies alongwith increasing inflow and level forecasting sites in a 
time-bound manner. The Committee hope that the Ministry's continuous efforts 
would lead to more efficient flood forecasting resulting better flood management 
in the country. The Committee would like to be apprised of the progress in this 
regard within 3 months of presentation of this Report.      
 

24 
 
CHAPTER II 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT 
 
Recommendation No. 1 (Para Nos. 2.1, 2.2 & 2.3) 
 
Analysis of Demands for Grants 
 The Committee observed that for the fiscal year 2024-25, the total budgetary 
allocation for the Department of Water Resources, River Development and Ganga 
Rejuvenation is Rs. 21,323.10 crore, out of which Rs. 20,921.15 crore has been 
allocated under the ‘Revenue Section’ and Rs. 401.95 crore has been allocated under 
the ‘Capital Section’. The budget is almost identical in comparison to BE allocations of 
Rs. 20,054.67 crore for FY 2023-24. The overall budgetary allocation for Financial Year 
2024-25 has shown a hike of Rs. 1,268.43 crore which is 6.32% increase as compared 
to the BE of FY 2023-24. 
 
The Committee further observed that under Central Sector Scheme Rs. 6,573.73 
crore has been allocated for BE 2024-25 which is nearly Rs.300 crore over and above 
against the BE allocation for FY 2023-24 i.e. Rs. 6,258.11 crore.  Regarding the Central 
Sponsored Scheme, a provision of Rs.13,431.48 has been made at BE level for FY 
2024-25 which is nearly Rs.1,050 crore over and above against BE allocation for FY 
2023-24 i.e. Rs. 12,387.23 crore. The major Schemes/Programmes in which the total 
budget allocation of the Department have been made include Pradhan Mantri Krishi 
Sinchayee Yojana- Har Khet Ko Pani (PMKSY-KKKP), Interlinking of Rivers, National 
Ganga Plan (Namami Gange Mission-II) and Atal Bhujal Yojana (Atal Jal). The 
Committee also observe that some of the important Schemes viz. Interlinking of Rivers, 
Atal Bhujal Yojana, Special Package for Maharashtra, National Hydrology Project and 
Research & Development and National Water Mission have been allocated more funds 
in the current fiscal year 2024-25. 
 

25 
 
Further, with regard to borrowings from the National Bank for Agriculture and 
Rural Development (NABARD) the Committee noted that the same have been 
discontinued since 2021-22. However, a provision of Rs. 3,749.80 has been made in 
the budget allocation in current fiscal year 2024-25 for repayment of previous 
borrowings and interest subvention. The Committee expressed their concern that still a 
significant portion of the total budget allocation, approximately 20%, is being utilized for 
the repayment of loans to NABARD, including both interest and principal amounts and 
which will, therefore, adversely impact the Schemes/Programmes of the Government in 
the long run. The Committee, therefore, recommended that a proposal regarding 
provision for early repayment of loan to NABARD may be made by the Department for 
consideration of Ministry of Finance so that committed liability may be settled within a 
shorter time frame. Consequently, early repayment of loan would enable the 
Department with greater financial flexibility to support its key schemes and programs in 
future perspective. The Committee would like to be categorically apprised of the steps 
taken in this regard within three months of presentation of this Report. 
 
Reply of the Government 
The early repayment of loan issue has been discussed with NABARD. and they 
were asked to provide financial implications (total remittance to be paid to them) in case 
of early repayment. The proposal for early repayment shall be taken up with Ministry of 
Finance, once financial implications are received from NABARD.  
 
[O.M. No. G-30013/1/2025-Budget Dated 06.05.2025] 
 
Recommendation No. 2 (Para Nos. 2.4) 
 
 
Water Resources Scenario 
 
 The Committee observed that as per the “Reassessment of water availability in 
basins using space inputs” Report, the utilizable water availability to the country is 
limited to 1,139 BCM per annum and out of which, the water potential utilized is about 

26 
 
691 BCM. Further, the total requirement of the country for different uses for high 
demand scenario for the years 2025 and 2050 has been assessed as 843 BCM and 
1,183 BCM, respectively. The Committee express its concern about the gap between 
total water availability and its demand. Notwithstanding these facts, the Ministry 
appraised the Committee about the recently carried out ‘Assessment of Water 
Resources of India’ for the year 1985-2023 by the Central Water Commission (CWC) 
assessing the Average Annual Water Resources Availability of India as 2115.95 BCM 
while the annual precipitation is 3728.78 BCM and various Studies/ Measures 
undertaken, which have been effective in bridging the gaps between water demand and 
supply. Further, for the purpose, constitution of a National Task Force on Integrated 
Water Resources Development & Management is also under consideration. The 
Committee further, observed that the Department has taken various initiatives to 
augment the water availability viz., Atal Bhujal Yojana; Pradhan Mantri Krishi Sichai 
Yojna (PMKSY), Accelerated Irrigation Benefit Programme (AIBP), Repair, Renovation 
& Restoration (RRR) of Water Bodies; Inter-linking of rivers ‘Sahi Fasal’ campaign; Jal 
Shakti Abhiyan: Catch the Rain (JSA: CTR); implementation of new projects/National 
projects like Pollavaram Project etc. In this regard, the Committee were of the view that, 
water is a fundamental prerequisite for the sustenance of life and sustainable 
development. Increasing population, rapid industrialization and accelerating 
urbanization, compounded by the impacts of climate change, have collectively rendered 
water availability as one of the most pressing issues of survival and sustainable 
development. The demand for water is projected to increase significantly, rendering it a 
critical factor in the Nation’s economic progress. While taking cognisance of all the 
efforts made to increase water availability, the Committee urged the Department to take 
all appropriate measures to expedite the process for constitution of the National Task 
Force on Integrated Water Resources Development & Management as well as to 
ensure timely implementation of all the schemes and programmes initiated for the 
purpose so that an effective system be prepared to meet the water demand in future 
effectively. 
 
 

27 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Department of Water Resources, River Development &Ganga Rejuvenation 
(DoWR, RD &GR) note the concern of the Committee. DoWR, RD &GR adopts multi - 
pronged strategy for conservation of water in a holistic manner, while catering to the 
increasing requirement of water in various sectors. Sincere efforts are   made for timely 
completion of projects/schemes.  
As regards constitution of a National Task Force for Integrated Water Resources 
Development and Management (NTFIWRDM),  it is submitted that Department of Water 
Resources, RD & GR, Ministry of Jal Shakti, has constituted a National Task Force for 
Integrated Water Resources Development and Management (NTFIWRDM), vide O.M. 
dated 25.11.2024  under the chairmanship of Shri Ramesh Chand, Hon’ble Member, 
Niti Aayog, comprising of distinguished members viz. Secretary/Additional Secretary of 
various Ministries, Heads of various Govt. Departments and Senior officials from various 
organizations. Chief Engineer (BPMO), Central Water Commission is the Member-
Secretary of the NTFIWRDM.  
 
[O.M. No. G-30013/1/2025-Budget Dated 06.05.2025] 
 
 
Recommendation No. 4 (Para Nos. 2.7) 
 
Ground Water Management and Regulation Scheme 
 The Committee observed that the Ground Water Management and Regulation 
(GWM&R) Scheme is a Central Sector Scheme under the Department of Water 
Resources, River Development, and Ganga Rejuvenation and has the approval for 
continuation up to 2026. The scheme comprises of two primary components viz. 
Component-I encompasses monitoring, assessment, management, and regulation of 
groundwater resources and Component-II focuses on Strengthening Infrastructure for 
Technological Upgradation (Machinery & Equipment). Additionally, the Public 

28 
 
Investment Board (PIB) has approved a "National Aquifer Mapping and Management 
(NAQUIM)" project for implementation under this scheme. The Committee also 
observed that the Scheme has witnessed meager utilization of their budgetary 
allocations in fiscal year 2023-24 as the same was Rs. 350 crore at BE stage, then 
reduced to Rs. 280 crore at RE stage and at the end the actual expenditure was only 
202.31 crore which is almost 40% less of its BE allocation. As per the Department’s 
submission, it was due to delays in tendering of work and final award to work could take 
place only in the last month of the fiscal year. The Committee have expressed concern 
that the Department is not utilizing its allocated budget effectively for the Scheme, a 
trend that has continued for consecutive years. This concern was also raised by the 
Committee in its earlier Report on DFG 2023-24. The Committee were of the view that 
the Ground Water Management and Regulation (GWM&R) is significantly important 
Scheme tasked to carry out scientific surveys, exploration, monitoring of development, 
management and regulation of our vast groundwater resources for irrigation, drinking, 
domestic and industrial needs. The Committee felt that the underutilization of funds 
allocated for the scheme is an issue of significant concern, as it would impact the 
Scheme's ability to achieve its objectives. The Committee, therefore recommended that 
required approvals may be obtained within a fixed timeline, factors contributing to delay 
be identified and addressed promptly so that the allocated budget is utilized efficiently 
and available resources are optimized with maximum capacity. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
As submitted earlier, the under-utilization of allocated funds is mainly due to 
delays in finalizing the tenders and taking approvals for the construction of piezometers 
and wells under the NAQUIM project. 
However, the project has been subsequently fast-tracked to overcome the initial 
delays and tenders for construction 6,835 piezometers, out of a target of 7,000,   have 
already been awarded and work has been commenced. As of 15th April 2025, 2956 
piezometers have been constructed. Similarly, contracts for 1,026 
exploratory/observations wells, out of a target of 1,135 have been awarded and 598 
wells have been constructed. 

29 
 
  
Moreover, the Ministry has holistically reviewed all the areas of project 
implementation and has taken several measures to speed up the ground execution. 
These steps include: 
  
1. Establishing a National Project Management Unit (NPMU) at the CGWB 
headquarters, along with Regional Project Management Units (RPMUs) at the 
respective regional offices to oversee the implementation. 
2.  Collaborating with State Governments, who have designated nodal officers to 
assist in expediting site selection for the construction of piezometers, exploratory 
and observation wells. 
3. Hiring Young Professionals to assist in the compilation of information. 
4. Conducting periodic monitoring through meetings and field visits at the Regional 
Offices, CGWB headquarters, and Ministry levels. 
  
  Given the progress made, with nearly all tenders awarded and work progressing 
as planned, it is anticipated that most of the tenders will be completed in 2025-26 
and the project is expected to be completed by March, 2026.  
   
[O.M. No. G-30013/1/2025-Budget Dated 06.05.2025] 
 
Recommendation No. 5 (Para Nos. 2.7) 
Flood Management and Border Areas Programme (FMBAP) 
 
 The Committee observed that in pursuant to the XII Plan, the "Flood 
Management and Border Areas Programme (FMBAP)" was initiated for the period 2017-
18 to 2019-20 which was extended until 2020-21 and further to be continued upto 2026. 
The FMBAP comprises two key components including Flood Management Programme 
(FMP) Component and River Management and Border Areas (RMBA) Component. 
Under FMP component, the Government provides Grant-in-Aid to States/Union 
Territories for implementing structural measures aimed at flood management, anti-

30 
 
erosion, river management, and anti-sea erosion. Further, under RMBA component 
flood control and anti-erosion work on common border rivers with neighbouring 
countries, including hydrological observations and flood forecasting, and investigation & 
pre-construction activities of joint water resources projects (with neighbouring countries) 
on common border rivers are being taken up with 100% central assistance. The 
Committee has noticed a drastic shortfall (-55.5%) in the budget of the Programme at 
RE stage during the FY 2023-24. In this regard, the Department apprised the 
Committee that the shortfall was due to non-receipt of funding proposal from the States.  
The Committee noted with concern, that notwithstanding the Nation's efforts to address 
the impending challenges of floods, under-utilization of the allocated budget for this 
comprehensive scheme would undermine the programme's objectives. In this regard, 
the Committee were of the considered view that, the Ministry should take a proactive 
hand hold approach with State Governments and ensure maximum utilization of 
available funds allocated under Flood Management & Border Areas Programme along 
with completion of projects, within a stipulated time frame, so that menace of flood in the 
country be dealt with more effectively and efficiently.  
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Flood management including erosion control falls within the purview of the 
States. Flood management and anti-erosion schemes are formulated and implemented 
by concerned State Governments as per their priority. The Union Government 
supplements the efforts of the States by providing technical guidance and also 
promotional financial assistance for management of floods in critical areas.  
  
To strengthen the structural measures of flood management, Union Government 
had implemented Flood Management Programme (FMP) during XI & XII Plans for 
providing central assistance to States for works related to flood control, anti-erosion, 
drainage development, anti-sea erosion, etc. which subsequently continued as a 
component of "Flood Management and Border Areas Programme" (FMBAP) for the 

31 
 
period from 2017-18 to 2020-21 and was further extended up to 2026 with limited 
outlay. 
  
30 flood management projects of XI and XII plan period is currently ongoing and 
for completion of these flood management projects, Secretary, Department of Water 
Resources, River Development & Ganga Rejuvenation, Ministry of Jal Shakti has taken 
a review meeting on 19th November, 2024 in which, it was requested to the State/UTs to 
complete the prolonged projects immediately and submit the funding proposals, if any. If 
the projects have already been completed, state government needs to submit the 
completion report and utilization certificates for closing of the project from FMBAP 
scheme. 
  
[O.M. No. G-30013/1/2025-Budget Dated 06.05.2025] 
 
Comment of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 11 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
 
Recommendation No. 6 & 7 (Para Nos. 2.9, 2.9.1 & 2.9.2) 
 
 
 The Committee expressed its concern that despite numerous efforts and 
initiatives by the Government to mitigate floods, several States continue to face severe 
flooding challenges. In this regard, the Ministry listed various challenges including 
unpredictable weather patterns, coupled with the increasing frequency and intensity of 
extreme precipitation events with wide variations in rainfall both in time and space, 
landslides, snowmelt, cloud burst and glacial lake out bursts etc., Inadequate urban 
drainage systems and the rampant encroachment on natural waterways exacerbate the 
situation, as floodplains—originally designed to absorb excess water—are compromised 
by unregulated construction activities. A fragmented approach to planning and lack of 
inter-state collaboration further hinder the implementation of comprehensive flood 
management strategies. From the points narrated by the Ministry, the Committee were 
of the view that climate change is significantly increasing the frequency and intensity of 

32 
 
floods, primarily due to an increase in extreme rainfall events, particularly during the 
monsoon season, leading to more frequent and severe flooding across regions, causing 
substantial damage to infrastructure, livelihoods, and human life.  
 
The Committee, therefore, recommended that the Ministry review its present 
flood management system to factor in with extreme precipitation events, unpredictable 
weather and climate change which are seen to be global events and upgrade the 
present flood management systems with the best available/emerging global practices to 
mitigate the socio-economic losses caused.  
The Committee also recommended that the Ministry in collaboration with State 
Governments take all appropriate measures to stop unregulated construction activities 
in the flood plains. The Committee may be apprised of the steps taken in this regard. 
 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
To factor in with extreme precipitation events, unpredictable weather and climate 
change, Central Water Commission (CWC) has been directed to review/modification of 
the existing Guidelines for submission, appraisal and acceptance of Irrigation and 
Multipurpose Projects, 2017 in respect of flood protection schemes on common 
border/trans boundary rivers. Integrated flood approach aims at adopting judicious mix 
of structural and non-structural measures to provide a reasonable degree of protection 
against flood damages at economic cost.  
Further, Ministry of Jal Shakti has continuously impressed upon the States, the 
need to adopt flood plain zoning approach as a non-structural measure of flood 
management in the country.  In order to enable States to undertake scientific 
assessment of flood plains and its zoning, draft technical guidelines on Flood Plain 
Zoning have been prepared by Ministry and circulated to the States/UTs in 2024 for 

33 
 
their input. Input from some of the States/UTs have been received and finalization of 
guidelines is under process. 
 
[O.M. No. G-30013/1/2025-Budget Dated 06.05.2025] 
 
 
Comment of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 14 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
 
 
Recommendation No. 8 (Para Nos. 2.10) 
 
 The Committee observed that the recurrent floods in Bihar and parts of Uttar 
Pradesh are primarily attributed to the rivers originating from Nepal, which has been a 
longstanding concern. A sustainable solution to mitigate this issue lies in the 
development of multi-purpose projects, incorporating flood control mechanisms in the 
upper reaches of Nepal, thereby achieving effective flood moderation. In this regard, the 
Committee noted that Government of India has been regularly interacting with the 
Government of Nepal for construction of Dams viz. Sapta Kosi High Dam Multi-purpose 
Project (SKHDMP), Sun Kosi Storage-cum-Diversion Scheme (SSDS) and the 
Pancheshwar Multipurpose Project (PMP) on these rivers with objectives of flood 
control, irrigation and power generation.  However, the Committee observed that slow 
progress in this direction is a matter of concern. The Committee previously expressed 
concern in its DFG Report 2020-21 regarding the delayed completion of these projects 
and urged the Ministry to play a more proactive role in facilitating their timely 
completion. Given the gravity and necessity of the situation, the Committee reiterated its 
desire for the Ministry to expedite its efforts, to ensure the timely completion of these 
projects and thereby mitigate the long-standing issue of flooding in the States of Bihar 
and Uttar Pradesh. The Committee may be apprised of the steps taken in this regard. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 

34 
 
Flood in State of Bihar are primarily caused by increased discharge in the rivers 
of North Bihar such as Gandak, Burhi Gandak, Bagmati, Kamla, Koshi and Mahananda 
due to heavy rainfall in the upper catchment areas. Management of floods due to these 
rivers has been a matter of concern. The related issues are discussed in the existing 
India-Nepal bilateral three-tier mechanisms, consisting of (i) Joint Ministerial Committee 
on Water Resources (JMCWR), (ii) Joint Committee on Water Resources (JCWR) and 
(iii) Joint Standing Technical Committee (JSTC).  
 
Government of India is regularly in talks with Government of Nepal for 
construction of dams on Sapta-kosi and Sun-Kosi rivers in Nepal for mutual benefit of 
both the countries, including flood control.  
  
In December, 1991, an understanding was reached between Government of 
India (Gol) and Government of Nepal (GoN) to jointly prepare the detailed project report 
(DPR) of Sapta Kosi high dam multipurpose project. Subsequently, on the request of 
Nepalese side, preparation of DPR of Sun-Kosi storage-cum-diversion scheme in Nepal 
and navigational studies on river Kosi were also agreed upon by the two countries. 
  
In this regard, a Joint Project Office (JPO-SKSKI) has been functioning at 
Biratnagar, Nepal since 2004 to prepare the Detailed Project Report (DPR) for the 
Sapta-kosi Dam Multipurpose Project and Sun-Kosi Kamla Diversion Multipurpose 
Project located in Nepal. The Sapta-Kosi Dam is a storage project conceptualized to 
provide flood cushion to prevent floods in North Bihar. The JPO-SKSKI has completed 
field works related to topographical survey, construction material survey, seismological 
studies etc. and drilling work at dam site and spillway sites are under progress. The 
implementation of the project would be taken up after finalisation of DPR and its 
acceptance.   
  
In February 1996, His Majesty’s Government of Nepal and Government of India 
had signed a treaty (known as “Mahakali Treaty”) for integrated development of the 

35 
 
Mahakali River. Under Article 3 of the Treaty, both sides agreed to build the 
Pancheshwar Project. The Pancheshwar Development Authority (PDA) was also set up 
with approval of both the Governments in September, 2014 for development, execution 
and operation of the Pancheshwar Project. 
  
M/s WAPCOS, PSU of DoWR submitted draft DPR to Pancheshwar 
Development Authority (PDA) in November, 2016. On direction of the Governing Body 
of PDA, a joint Team of Officials/ Experts (ToE) was constituted to discuss and 
resolve issues raised by Nepal on the interpretation of Mahakali Treaty, sharing of the 
Mahakali waters and assessment of project benefits in order to finalize the DPR. Five 
meetings of ToE were held so far. During the course of the meetings, most of the 
technical issues have been discussed and resolved to the satisfaction of both sides. 
However, certain fundamental issues relating to the interpretation of certain clauses of 
the Mahakali with reference to  existing and future consumptive water uses of India, 
maximization of total net benefit from the project and cost apportionment of the project 
remained unresolved in the ToE meetings and still remains to be resolved bilaterally by 
both Government of India and Nepal. One of the issues of disagreement is the 
continuing stand of Nepal to treat the existing use of Mahakali waters by India at Lower 
Sarada Barrage (LSB) (in use since 1975) as future use of India in the DPR. The other 
issue is the supply of 10 m3/s of water for irrigation to the Dodhara-Chandani area in 
Nepal (where no irrigation system exists today) which Nepal side contends is their 
existing right under Treaty and should be considered as their existing use in the DPR.  
  
In the 8th Governing Body meeting of Pancheshwar Development Authority held 
on 6th – 7thJuly, 2023 at Pokhra, both co-chair agreed on early finalisation of DPR as per 
direction of Prime Minister of Nepal and India during the visit of Prime Minister of Nepal 
to India from 31st May to 3rd June, 2023 by resolving the remaining technical issues.  
  
In the 4thToE meeting held on 21st -22nd July, 2023 at New Delhi, both sides 
agreed on the water utilization through the project, benefits from irrigation and flood 

36 
 
control, hydropower production, principles of cost apportionment for each country etc as 
per Mahakali Treaty between two countries. The cost of R&R, Land Acquisition for 
submergence area and EMP may be borne by respective Governments for their areas 
based on their prevailing rules and regulations.  
  
In the 5th ToE meeting held on 6th -7th October, 2023 at Kathmandu, both sides 
agreed that further discussion is needed before finalization of the DPR and detailed 
observations/suggestions on the updated DPR will be shared by both sides.  
Subsequently, observations have been shared by both the sides. The tenure of the ToE 
has been extended up to August, 2025 by both co-chair of Governing Body. 
  
  
[O.M. No. G-30013/1/2025-Budget Dated 06.05.2025] 
 
 
 
Recommendation No.9 (Para Nos. 2.11) 
 
 
Safety of Dams 
 
 The Committee noted that the responsibility for the safety, upkeep, and 
maintenance of dams in India lies primarily with the dam owners, which may include 
State Governments, public sector undertakings, or other dam-owning entities. Further, 
regarding the Dam Safety Act of 2021 the Department apprised the Committee that the 
Act formalizes the institutional framework responsible for ensuring dam safety at both 
the National and State levels. The key bodies involved include National Committee on 
Dam Safety (NCDS), National Dam Safety Authority (NDSA), State Committees on Dam 
Safety (SCDS) and State Dam Safety Organizations (SDSO). The Committee further 
observed that as per the National Register of Large (Specified) Dams, 2023, there are 
6,138 completed and operational specified dams and 143 are under construction stage. 
The Department further apprised the Committee that a comprehensive tool has been 
developed to assess dam hazard and vulnerability, considering technical, safety, 
environmental, and social factors. Apart from this, a Dam Break Rapid Risk Assessment 

37 
 
exercise is underway which aims to quickly evaluate the potential impact of dam failures 
on downstream populations, providing a critical tool for managing the risks associated 
with dam infrastructure in India. However, the Committee noted with serious concern 
that out of more than 6000 dams existing in the country, only 459 dams have been 
equipped with Emergency Action Plans by the States. While appreciating all the efforts 
of the Government regarding the safety of Dams in the country, the Committee were of 
the view that serious efforts need to be taken to cover the maximum number of large 
dams with Emergency Action Plan. The Committee, therefore, urged to take up this 
serious issue with the State Governments concerned at the highest levels, to ensure 
that all necessary measures in this regard are in place to strengthen the present 
system. The Committee may be apprised of the steps taken in this regard. 
 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 
The responsibility for the safety, upkeep, and maintenance of dams in India lies 
primarily with the dam owners; State Governments, Public Sector Undertakings or other 
Dam-Owning Entities. The key bodies involved include National Committee on Dam 
Safety (NCDS), National Dam Safety Authority (NDSA), State Committees on Dam 
Safety (SCDS) and State Dam Safety Organizations (SDSO). All these National and 
State level bodies have been constituted by the respective authorities. All the 19 
regulations given under Section 54(2) of the Dam Safety Act 2021 have notified in the 
Gazette of India.   
  
       As per National Register of Large (Specified) Dams, 2023, there are 6,138 
completed and operational specified dams and 143 are under construction stage. As 
regards developing comprehensive tool to assess dam hazard and vulnerability, a 
Memorandum of Agreement (MoA) has been signed between National Dam Safety 
Authority and Centre for Development of Advanced Computing (C-DAC), Pune on 
12.02.2025. The Population at Risk (PAR) value provided by the C-DAC will be utilised 

38 
 
in Rapid Risk screening exercise for obtaining Potential Impact of dam failures on 
downstream populations, providing a critical tool for managing the risks associated with 
dam infrastructure in India. Rapid Risk Screening of specified dams is being carried out 
across the country using a web tool named RRSSD. Necessary training is provided by 
the NDSA to all the State/Dam owners. Rapid Risk Screening exercise of around 700 
dams has been initiated in the web tool so far. This Rapid Risk Screening exercise is 
qualitative in nature and will provide the risk score of all the specified dams. Based on 
the risk score dams will be prioritized for carrying out dam safety related works. 
  
        As regards Emergency Action Plans (EAP) prepared by the States, it is to submit 
that as per the DSA-2021, EAP shall be prepared by the dam owner within 05 years of 
enactment of the Act.  In order to expedite the EAP preparation, NDSA has finalised a 
Term of Reference (TOR) for Emergency Action Plan & Vulnerability and Hazard 
Classification. This TOR is being shared with States/Dam owners for reference. 
Moreover, NDSA has been constantly engaged in sensitizing dam owners for 
preparation of EAP through its various correspondences and meetings.  
 As per section 35 of Dam safety Act 2021, every owner of a specified dam shall 
establish early warning system such as hydro-meteorological network, inflow 
forecasting system, emergency flood warning system etc. Necessary directions 
are already given to SDSOs for installation of early warning system for all 
specified dams. 
 Provision for comprehensive dam safety evaluation (CDSE) for each specified 
dam exists in the Clause 38(1) of Dam Safety Act 2021 (Chapter IX), viz: “the 
owner of a specified dam shall make or cause to be made comprehensive dam 
safety evaluation of each specified dam through an independent panel of experts 
constituted as per regulations for the purpose of determining the conditions of the 
specified dam and its reservoir. Provided that the first comprehensive dam safety 
evaluation for each existing specified dam shall be conducted within five years 
from the date of commencement of this Act, and thereafter the comprehensive 
dam safety evaluation of each such dam shall be carried out at regular intervals 

39 
 
as may be specified by the regulations.” In this regard, NDSA vide their letters 
dated 06.01.2025 & 27.1.2024, have directed the SDSOs of all States/ UTS to 
take up comprehensive Dam Safety evaluation for their specified dams under 
their jurisdiction. 
 As per section 31 of the Dam Safety Act 2021, every owner of a specified dam 
has been mandated to undertake annually, through their dam safety unit, a pre-
monsoon and post monsoon inspection in respect of each specified dam and to 
forward the inspection report to the concerned SDSO, which shall analyze the 
report and provide comments on safety, deficiency and remedial measures, if 
any, to the owner of the specified dam. As an outcome of pre-monsoon and post 
monsoon inspections, dams are categorized into three categories on the basis of 
urgency of required repairs/ maintenance. Category-III requires minor remedial 
measures which are rectifiable during the year. Category-II indicates major 
deficiencies requiring prompt remedial measures and Category-I indicate the 
deficiencies that may lead to their failure. Based on these inspections, if any dam 
falls under category-I or category-II; it is mandatory to take necessary corrective 
actions at the earliest to prevent any dam failure or dam incident.  NDSA vide 
letter dated 04/04/2024 requested all SDSOs/Dam owners to provide the status 
of action taken on rehabilitation of Cat-I and Cat-II dams in their jurisdiction. 
NDSA vide letter dated 04/10/2024, requested all SDSOs/Dam owners for 
completion of post monsoon inspection 2024 of specified dams as per the 
schedule and timely submission of inspection reports on DHARMA portal. NDSA 
vide letter dated 05/03/2025, requested all SDSOs/Dam owners for completion of 
pre monsoon inspection-2025 of specified dams as per the schedule and timely 
submission of inspection reports on DHARMA portal. Regular pre and post 
monsoon inspection of the dams are being carried out to ensure safety of dams.  
  
 Institutional set up envisaged in Dam Safety Act 2021`implemented with National 
Committee on Dam Safety (NCDS) and National Dam Safety Authority (NDSA) at 

40 
 
National level and State Committee on Dam Safety (SCDS) and State Dam 
Safety Organization (SDSO) at State level in all 31 dam owning States. 
  
 Three Centres of Excellence (CoE) on Dam Safety have been established: one 
at IIT Roorkee, focusing on Seismic Hazard Mapping and Reservoir 
Sedimentation; the other one at IISc Bangalore, specializing in Comprehensive 
Risk Assessment of Dams, Advanced Construction and Rehabilitation, and 
Material Testing for Dams and the another other one at National Centre for 
Earthquake Safety of Dams is being set up at MNIT Jaipur. 
  
[O.M. No. G-30013/1/2025-Budget Dated 06.05.2025] 
 
 
 
Recommendation No.10 (Para Nos. 2.12) 
 
 
 The Committee observed that National Dam Safety Authority (NDSA) has been 
sanctioned 79 Posts in various grades including 65 Posts in Technical Cadre and 14 
Posts in non-technical grades and against 65 posts in Technical Cadre, presently only 
17 officers are working on deputation/ loan basis and against 14 posts of non-technical 
grades only 07 persons are in position. Further, against the total contractual sanctioned 
post of 91, only 17 persons have been engaged. Further, State Dam Safety 
Organizations (SDSOs) constituted by the dam-owning States are also facing the same 
problem. The Committee recognised that NDSA have a huge mandate with high 
responsibility of ensuring the safety of dams across the country by establishing and 
enforcing uniform safety standards, overseeing inspections, maintenance, providing 
technical assistance to states and inadequate staff certainly affect the functioning of the 
Authority. The Committee strongly recommended that the Department must take prompt 
action to fill the existing vacancies without further delay to enable the Authority to 
execute its responsibilities efficiently and effectively with optimal results.  
 
 

41 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
NDSA has sanctioned strength of 85 posts, which include the post of Chairman, 
05 Members (JS level) and 79 below JS level posts (65 technical posts and 14 non-
technical posts).  As on date, NDSA is functioning with the actual strength of 32 officers 
on deputation/loan/additional charge basis. In addition, 33 persons have also been 
engaged as support staff on contract basis against 91 approved positions. 
  
  NDSA is making all-out efforts to fill up the vacant posts. As regards 65 technical 
posts, which are to be filled on deputation basis amongst the CWES officers as per the 
RR, these posts were advertised in August 2023 and 07 CWES officers have been 
appointed on deputation basis. Vacancy circular has been issued in February 2025 to fill 
up the 05 posts of Members and the last date of receipt of applications is 07.04.2025. 
  As regards outsourced personnel, it is submitted that these positions are mainly 
to support the officers posted against regular vacancies. Hence these positions can be 
filled up soon after officers are available against the regular posts. 
  
[O.M. No. G-30013/1/2025-Budget Dated 06.05.2025] 
 
 
Comment of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 17 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
 
Recommendation No.11 (Para Nos. 2.13) 
 
 
Atal Bhujal Yojana (ATAL JAL) 
 
 The Committee noted that the Atal Bhujal Yojana (ATAL JAL) is being 
implemented since April, 2020 in 8,774 water stressed Gram Panchayats of 222 
administrative blocks/ Talukas in 81 districts of seven States, viz. Haryana, Gujarat, 
Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Rajasthan and Uttar Pradesh for five years 
with an aim to improve the management of groundwater resources in the water stressed 

42 
 
areas in these 7 States through community participation by way of promoting 
community led ground water management and behavioural changes with primary focus 
on demand side Management. These selected States account for about 37% of the total 
number of water stressed (over-exploited, critical and semi-critical) blocks in India. 
Further, the Department appraised the Committee that 'in-principle’ approval has been 
accorded for expansion of Atal Bhujal Yojana with an outlay of Rs. 8,200 crore to be 
implemented in 05 additional States, viz., Andhra Pradesh, Bihar, Punjab, Tamil Nadu 
and Telangana, with the condition that the scheme may be restructured as a Centrally 
sponsored scheme (CSS). The Committee were of the opinion that this conversion to a 
Centrally Sponsored Scheme will entail shared financial liability between the Central 
Government and the States consequently reduce the financial burden on Central 
Government. It will also provide the scope for Central Government to include more 
water stressed States/UTs. While, the Committee appreciated the efforts of the 
Government to include 5 more States under the Atal Bhujal Yojana, in view of the fact 
that being a  Centrally Sponsored Scheme (CSS), financial liability will now also be 
shared by the State Governments, as urged by the Committee in its earlier Report on 
DFG-2021-22, the Committee reiterated that the Department should consider expanding 
the Yojana to include all the States/UTs to cover maximum water scarce 
regions/districts of the country including those having large number of over-exploited 
blocks, so that water scarcity can be addressed on broader scale and benefits of the 
Scheme can be disbursed throughout the Country. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Atal Bhujal Yojana (Atal Jal) is a pilot project for participatory groundwater 
management with a fixed duration and outlay. Given the positive impact of the scheme, 
DoWR, RD&GR has planned its second phase, whose modalities are being worked out. 
Consultation with states and Department of Expenditure are being carried out. 
  
[O.M. No. G-30013/1/2025-Budget Dated 06.05.2025] 

43 
 
 
 
Recommendation No.12 (Para Nos. 2.14) 
 
 The Committee observed that Third Party Evaluation on the appraisal / 
continuation of various Schemes run by the Department, have been conducted. In this 
context, regarding the Atal Bhujal Yojana, the Department appraised the Committee that 
a mid-term assessment was carried out by the Council on Energy, Environment and 
Water (CEEW) to study the overall impact of the Scheme in Rajasthan and as claimed 
by the Department, the scheme is progressing effectively. In this regard, the Committee 
were of the view that presently the Scheme is under implementation in seven States 
including Rajasthan and assessment of only one State would not depict the overall 
effectiveness of the Scheme. Further, to comprehensively evaluate the socio-economic 
impact of the schemes on the targeted sectors/areas, its implementation, outcome, 
achievement of goals set, usefulness in future perspective sustainability and to ensure 
that public resources are used efficiently and effectively, a third-party evaluation of the 
Scheme is essential. The Committee, therefore, recommended that a Third-Party 
Evaluation may be carried out of Atal Bhujal Yojana, by an independent body/ agency 
having sufficient expertise in the sector on priority. The Committee would like to be 
apprised of the action taken in this regard by the Department within three months of 
presentation of this Report. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Atal Bhujal Yojana has engaged Quality Council of India (QCI) on 14.11.2024 for 
undertaking Impact Assessment Study in top 30% of the Gram Panchayats covered 
under the Scheme and the work is under progress. 
  
  Additionally, preparation of third-party evaluation framework for all Central Sector 
Schemes of the Department of Water Resources, River Development and Ganga 
Rejuvenation is under process. 
  
[O.M. No. G-30013/1/2025-Budget Dated 06.05.2025] 
 

44 
 
 
 
Recommendation No.13 (Para Nos. 2.15 & 2.16) 
 
Command Area Development & Water Management (CAD&WM) 
 
 The Committee observed that the Command Area Development & Water 
Management, is a Centrally Sponsored Scheme with the objective to bridge the gap 
between irrigation potential created and utilized. The activities covered under CADWM 
component of a Project are broadly categorized as ‘Structural’ and ‘Non-Structural’. 
Structural Intervention includes survey, planning, design and execution of On-Farm 
Development (OFD) works, construction of field, intermediate & link drains, correction of 
system deficiencies and Reclamation of water logged areas. Non-Structural intervention 
includes activities directed at strengthening of Participatory Irrigation Management 
(PIM). The Committee further noted that the Program has been brought under the 
Pradhan Mantri Krishi Sinchayee Yojna (PMKSY) from 2015-16 onwards. With the new 
scheme of Prioritized AIBP Projects approved by Cabinet in July 2016, CADWM works 
have been restricted to 99 prioritized AIBP projects. 
The Committee observed that the Scheme has witnessed underutilization of 
funds in consecutive financial years i.e. actual expenditure of Rs. 99.07 crore vis-à-vis 
BE of Rs. 1044 crore in FY 2022-23 and actual expenditure of Rs. 174.39 crore vis-à-vis 
BE of Rs. 400 crore in FY 2023-24. In this regard, the Department has apprised the 
Committee of various challenges, including a limited working season and reluctance 
among farmers to relinquish their land, particularly in upper reaches where water supply 
is sufficient. Furthermore, the concurrent implementation of PMKSY-AIBP and 
CAD&WM restricted CADWM initiatives to ongoing AIBP projects resulting precluded 
numerous potential CADWM projects from being undertaken. The Committee observed 
that to confront these challenges, the Department has devised a modified Command 
Area Development Scheme for implementation during the financial years 2024-2025 
and 2025-2026. The Committee hoped that with the modified Command Area 
Development Scheme the Department would be able to ensure better and prudent 
utilization of budget allocation and implementation of the Scheme in more efficient 

45 
 
manner. However, the Committee believed that when formulating a new scheme, it is 
essential to consider and assess its potential impact on existing schemes, to ensure 
seamless integration and minimal disruption. The Committee may be apprised in this 
regard. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Modernization of Command Area Development and Water Management (M-
CADWM) scheme seeks to transform the existing CADWM component (Har Khet Ko 
Pani) of PMKSY to make it more integrated, efficient, sustainable and inclusive. In 
formulating the M-CADWM Scheme, the Department of WR, RD and GR has carried 
out detailed consultations with Central Ministries, State Governments, Private Sector 
and other Stakeholders. The Department has also adopted the principles of integrated 
water resources management in designing the new scheme. 
  
Based on the consultations with the Stakeholders and successful practices 
adopted at national and international level, a number of reforms including pressurized 
piped water supply to the farm, adoption of integrated water resources management, 
integration with micro irrigation, irrigation as a service, transfer of irrigation management 
to Water User Society (WUS) , volumetric measurement of water used, water audit and 
use of technologies for water management have been incorporated into revamped M-
CADWM scheme. 
Further, the M-CADWM scheme envisages Master Plan, Convergence and 
Saturation approach. In this approach a master plan will be prepared for each block for 
water management, viz. development of water sources including water conservation, 
harvesting and recharge, distribution network, efficient farm level application, demand 
management, participatory governance, extension services on new technologies & 
information. This will act as water security plan for the block. The Plan will utilize 
convergence of all water related central and state schemes in the block suited to the 
local context and requirement.  

46 
 
It will include convergence of schemes such as SMI/ RRR component of PMKSY, 
watershed development component of PMKSY, creation or restoration of water bodies 
under MGNREGA, Micro Irrigation under RKVY and Micro Irrigation Fund, PM-KUSUM 
scheme for farmers, Ground water schemes such as Atal Bhujal Yojna etc. The scheme 
will follow a saturation approach and in case funding is not available from the relevant 
scheme for the cluster, provision of funds will be considered under M-CADWM scheme 
within the overall allocation. 
[O.M. No. G-30013/1/2025-Budget Dated 06.05.2025] 
 
Recommendation No.14 (Para Nos. 2.17 & 2.18) 
 
Flood Forecasting 
 
The Committee observed that Central Water Commission (CWC) plays a crucial 
role in Flood Forecasting by overseeing a comprehensive flood forecasting network that 
operates across the country. The CWC set up of flood forecasting network comprises of 
short range level forecasts at 200 locations in the country and Inflow Forecasts for 140 
dams/reservoirs/barrages in various river basins. Further, to monitor the flood situation 
during every monsoon, CWC operates 36 Divisional Flood Control Rooms (DFCRs) 
located in the various field Divisions of CWC and a Central Flood Control Room (CFCR) 
at CWC (HQ), New Delhi for providing flood related information to the local 
administration and user agencies. Central Flood Control Room (CFCR) at New Delhi 
monitors flood situation throughout the country by monitoring the data entry/FF 
formulation and issue of flood forecasts from all DFCRs through Water Information 
Management System (WIMS). 
 
The Committee noted that despite significant technological advancements and 
substantial investments in Early Warning Systems (EWS), socio-economic losses in the 
form of human lives and assets, continue to occur. In this regard, the Department 
appraised the Committee that Central Water Commission is enhancing its flood 
forecasting capabilities through various measures, including through expanding its 
network, upgrading of technology with mathematical modeling, enhancing 

47 
 
computational resources, exhaustive data collection from various sources, adopting 
ensemble forecasting, etc. In this regard, the Committee were of the view that though 
various efforts have been made by the Department for better flood forecasting, the 
present system for the purpose have on occasions, been found inadequate. During oral 
evidence, the Ministry also accepted the fact that the present models used for 
processing of meteorological data for flood forecasting need improvement. Hence, in 
light of the increasing severity of flood situations due to climate change, the Committee 
recommended that the Ministry upgrade its present system accordingly with best 
available advanced technology, capable of addressing the current challenges in the 
area of flood forecasting due to climate change phenomena. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Central Water Commission (CWC) establishes new flood forecasting sites 
based on requests received from State Governments. In certain cases, the CWC 
identifies potential flood forecasting sites or locations and seeks feedback or approval 
from the concerned State Government regarding the site's feasibility.  
  
Currently, CWC has 340 (200 Level and 140 Inflow) flood forecasting sites in 
India covering 22 states and 2 UT’s which is planned to increase to around 375 by end 
of 2026 covering over 28 states and 6 UT’s.  
  
The Central Water Commission (CWC) is prioritizing the expansion of inflow 
forecasting sites due to the rising frequency of dam-induced floods and the relatively 
lower number of inflow forecasting sites compared to level forecasting sites. Although, 
the network of level forecasting sites managed by the CWC has reached near 
saturation, Ministry is taking all effort to identify and enhance level forecasting sites in 
consultation with State Govt. during next five year plan 2026-31.  
  
State-wise Flood Forecasting Stations 

48 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of 
State/UT  
Existing No. of flood forecasting 
Stations 
Proposed additional FF 
Stations 
    Level Inflow Total Level Inflow Total 
1 Andhra Pradesh 10 10 20 0 1 1 
2 
Arunachal 
Pradesh 3 1 4 0 0 0 
3 Assam 30 0 30 0 1 1 
4 Bihar 40 3 43 0 1 1 
5 Chhattisgarh 1 2 3 0 1 1 
6 Gujarat 6 8 14 0 0 0 
7 Haryana 1 1 2 1 1 2 
8 
Himachal 
Pradesh 1 0 1 0 1 1 
9 
Jammu & 
Kashmir 3 0 3 2 1 3 
10 Jharkhand 2 15 17 0 0 0 
11 Karnataka 1 14 15 0 3 3 
12 Kerala 4 2 6 0 2 2 
13 Madhya Pradesh 2 12 14 0 0 0 
14 Maharashtra 8 14 22 0 1 1 
15 Odisha 12 7 19 0 0 0 
16 Rajasthan 4 11 15 0 2 2 
17 Sikkim 3 5 8 1 0 1 
18 Tamil Nadu 4 11 15 0 3 3 
19 Telangana 5 10 15 0 1 1 
20 Tripura 2 0 2 4 0 4 
21 Uttar Pradesh 39 5 44 0 0 0 
22 Uttarakhand 4 5 9 0 0 0 
23 West Bengal  12 4 16 0 0 0 
24 Daman & Diu 1 0 1 0 0 0 
25 NCT of Delhi 2 0 2 0 0 0 
26 Meghalaya 0 0 0 0 2 2 
27 Nagaland 0 0 0 0 1 1 
28 Manipur 0 0 0 0 2 2 
29 Mizoram 0 0 0 0 1 1 
30 Punjab 0 0 0 1 1 2 
31 Goa 0 0 0 0 1 1 
32 
Dadar Nagar 
Haveli 0 0 0 1 0 1 
33 Ladakh 0 0 0 0 1 1 
34 Puducherry 0 0 0 1 0 1 

49 
 
  Total 200 140 340 11 28 39 
  
  
Basin-wise Flood Forecasting Stations 
Sr. 
No 
Major Interstate River 
Systems 
FF stations as on 
Date 
Proposed additional FF 
Stations 
Level Inflow Total Level Inflow Total 
1 Indus and its tributaries 3 0 3 4 5 9 
2 Ganga & its tributaries 96 43 139 0 1 1 
3 Brahmaputra & its tributaries 39 6 45 1 4 5 
4 Barak System 6 0 6 4 3 7 
5 Subarnarekha (i/c Burhabalang) 4 3 7 0 0 0 
6 Brahmani & Baitarni 3 2 5 0 0 0 
7 East Flowing (Mahanadi to 
Pennar) 4 4 8 0 0 0 
8 Narmada 4 6 10 0 0 0 
9 Tapi 1 2 3 0 0 0 
10 Mahi 1 4 5 0 0 0 
11 Sabarmati 1 1 2 0 0 0 
12 Mahanadi 3 3 6 0 1 1 
13 Godavari 18 26 44 0 0 0 
14 Krishna 5 19 24 0 2 2 
15 West Flowing Rivers(Kutch & 
Saurashtra, Luni) 1 2 3 0 2 2 
16 West Flowing Rivers (Tapi to 
Tadri)) 2 1 3 1 4 5 
17 Cauvery and its tributaries 4 9 13 0 2 2 
18 Pennar 1 1 2 0 0 0 
19 East Flowing Rivers (Pennar to 
Kanyakumari) 1 6 7 1 2 0 
20 West Flowing River (Tadri to 
Kanyakumari) 3 2 5 0 1 0 
21 Minor rivers draining to 
Myanmar 0 0 0 0 1 1 
  Total 200 140 340 11 28 39 
  

50 
 
As per World Meteorological Organization (WMO) manual on “Flood Forecasting 
and Warning”, there are no fixed norms or criteria regarding the number of flood 
forecasting stations that should be established. Instead, the WMO emphasizes that the 
primary requirement for a flood forecasting network is the delivery of useful and timely 
information. The Central Water Commission (CWC) has adopted a comprehensive 
approach that aligns with these guidelines in several key ways.  
  
 Utility and Timeliness: The CWC's focus on providing timely forecasts ensures 
that stakeholders have the necessary information to act promptly. 
 Cost-Effectiveness: By utilizing existing infrastructure and focusing on suitability 
for flood warning purposes, the CWC effectively manages resources. 
 User-Centric Approach: The integration of stakeholder feedback into network 
evaluations reflects a commitment to meeting end-user needs.  
  
Hydrological Observation (HO) stations are the backbone of Flood Forecasting network 
for monitoring the flood situation on near real time basis and formulation of forecast. As 
per WMO guidelines minimum hydro-meteorological stations density should be as 
follows: 
  
S. 
No
. 
Physio- 
graphic  
Region 
Minimum density (area in km2 per station) 
Precipitation Station Streamflow Measurement Station 
 Non- 
recordin
g 
 Recordin
g 
Evaporatio
n  
Station 
Strea
m  
flow  
Statio
n 
Sediment  
Discharge 
and  
Sedimentatio
n 
Water  
Temperatur
e 
 (Water 
Quality  
Station) 
1 Coastal 900 9,000 50,000 2,750 18,300 55,000 
2 Mountain- 
ous 250 2,500 50,000 1,000 6,700 20,000 
3 Interior  
Plains 575 5,750 50,000 1,875 12,500 37,500 
4 
Hilly/ 
Undulatin
g 
575 5,750 50,000 1,875 12,500 47,500 

51 
 
5 Small  
islands 25 2,520 50,000 300 2,000 6,000 
6 Polar/arid 10,000 100,000 100,000 20,000 200,000 200,000 
  
Based on the six physiographic regions of India and their approximate areas, minimum 
stream flow and sediment stations have been worked out as below: 
  
Physiographic 
Region 
Area (in 
km²) 
Minimum Stream Flow 
stations as per WMO 
guidelines 
Minimum sedimentation 
stations as per WMO 
guidelines 
Coastal 75,000 27 4 
Mountainous 500,000 500 75 
Interior Plains 700,000 373 56 
Hilly/Undulating 1,600,000 853 128 
Small Islands 8,000 27 4 
Polar/Arid 300,000 15 1 
Total 1795 268 
Existing network in CWC  1522 407 
  
The number of CWC HO stations, in general, are as per minimum requirements,  
based on the WMO guidelines for stream flow stations & sedimentation stations. 
  
Moreover, in addition to CWC HO network compatibility with WMO standards, 
there are additional HO stations maintained by State Govt. making it more than WMO 
norms. 
  
The CWC comprehensive strategy effectively aligns with the WMO's guidelines 
by focusing on the timely delivery of useful information, engaging stakeholders, 
regularly evaluating its network and embracing technological advancements. This 
approach not only enhances the CWC's flood forecasting capabilities but also 
significantly contributes to better flood management and community resilience in India. 
  

52 
 
As part of its ongoing commitment to effective flood management, Central Water 
Commission (CWC) receives requests from various stakeholders for the establishment 
of new flood forecasting (FF) stations. This process is integral to ensuring that the flood 
forecasting network remains responsive to evolving needs in flood-prone area. The 
CWC carefully examines these requests and takes appropriate action based on 
feasibility.  
  
Currently CWC has 1543 HO sites. The HO sites are also continuously reviewed 
in response to the emerging scenarios. The utility of HO sites diminishes with the 
establishment of downstream or upstream dams, weirs, or barrages, eventually 
compelling CWC to close these sites. Consequently, the HO network varies from year to 
year, influenced by such factors.   
  
Modernisation of network 
  
Sensor based data collection and satellite-based communication system has 
been adopted under modernisation. At present CWC has 1121 telemetry sites, 
spanning 25 States and 5 UT’s.  
  
Under World Bank aided National Hydrology Project (NHP), State Govt. have 
been supported to install similar system to fill the gaps. Velocity radar-based discharge 
data collection at more time frequency as well as ADCP based accurate discharge 
observation has been more emphasis in addition to installation of SCADA system on 
selected Dams and Barrages to support accurate flood forecast model output. 
  
Advances in Advisory Flood Forecast (AFF) 
  
CWC currently provides 7-day advisory flood forecast on its web portal 
https://aff.india-water.gov.in/  using mathematical model on pan-India for 20 major river 
basins of the country, covering 200 water level and 140 reservoir inflow forecast 
stations. This marks a significant paradigm shift from the conventional Gauge-to-Gauge 

53 
 
correlation to a more scientific modelling technique for flood forecasting. The system 
uses regularly calibrated basin models developed using MIKE11 modelling software, 
while its real time operation is done in automatic manner by scheduling scripts written in 
Python and then using JavaScript for publishing the model outputs in web portal. The 
entire system is updated every three hours for all stations simultaneously.  
 
Inundation Flood Forecasting – New initiative 
  
       In view of the severity of the flood situation in flood-prone regions, as indicated by 
longer lead-time forecasts, there has been a constant demand from various 
stakeholders for flood inundation extent data across affected districts. To address this 
need and further modernize its flood forecasting capabilities, CWC has undertaken the 
development of inundation forecasting using 2D modelling techniques. 
        The current status of inundation forecasting is as follows: 
4. Godavari and Tapi Rivers Basin: NRSC has developed Spatial Flood Early 
Warning Systems for the Godavari and Tapi Rivers using the MIKE suite of 
software under NHP, leveraging high-resolution DEM and computational 
resources available with NRSC. The proposed solution is planned for rollout 
during the 2025 monsoon season. 
5. Mahanadi Basin: C-DAC, with the support of CWC, has developed an 
Inundation Forecast Model for the Mahanadi Basin using ANUGA, high-
resolution DEM procured from NRSC, and high-performance computing (HPC) 
resources available with C-DAC. The proposed solution is also planned for rollout 
during the 2025 monsoon season. 
6. Ganga Basin: CWC has initiated the development of an Inundation Forecast 
Model for the Ganga Basin using HEC (HMS & RAS) through consultancy under 
NHP. The DEM data for this project is being partially procured from NRSC and 
supplemented with data provided by the Survey of India (SoI). The objective is to 
develop an Early Flood Warning System, including inundation forecasting and a 
customized GIS tool for real-time dissemination of water level forecasts, 
inundation forecasts, and an inundation map library. This system will incorporate 

54 
 
a 2D or 1D-2D coupled numerical model for the Ganga Basin. The system is 
under development and is likely to be rolled out from 2026. 
 
Implementation of AI/ML Techniques in Flood Forecasting – New Venture 
 
Recently the acceleration of flood-related disasters due to climate change 
underscores the urgency for effective early warning systems.  As a result, many nations 
are experimenting with global flood prevention utilising AI/ML techniques, particularly in 
areas that are highly inhabited and at risk of flooding and lack dense stream flow gauge 
networks. The accuracy, recall, and lead time of short-term forecasts of extreme riverine 
phenomena could all be enhanced by AI/ML techniques. Below is a list of some benefits 
of AI/ML: 
  
6. Real-time Monitoring: AI/ML models can process vast amounts of data from 
various sources (stations-wise, satellites, telemetry) in real-time, providing up-to-
date flood predictions. 
7. High Accuracy: These models can analyze complex spatiotemporal patterns and 
non-linear behaviours of floods, leading to more accurate predictions compared 
to conventional methods. 
8. Early Warning Systems: AI/ML techniques can generate timely flood warnings, 
allowing state authorities to take necessary precautions and evacuate if needed. 
9. Efficient Resource Allocation: By predicting flood intensity and affected areas, 
AI/ML models help in efficient allocation of resources for disaster response and 
recovery. 
10. Minimum expertise requirement: Once AI/ML models are implemented for 
forecast site, the system can be operated with minimum staff at field 
organization. 
         To utilise the immense advantages of AI/ML models, CWC has delved into the 
usage of AI/ML techniques in centralized flood forecasting to replace the existing 
decentralized conventional techniques used by CWC for short range forecasting. As a 
first phase the centralized automated short range flood forecasting module model will be 

55 
 
developed for selected forecasting station and rolled out from 2025. Rest of the stations 
will be added in phased manner. Pan India coverage under the system is planned by 
2026. 
 
[O.M. No. G-30013/1/2025-Budget Dated 06.05.2025] 
 
 
Comment of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 20 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation No.15 (Para Nos. 2.19) 
 
Namami Gange Mission-II 
 
The Committee noted that the Government launched the Namami Gange 
Programme (NGP) in 2014-15 for the rejuvenation of river Ganga and its tributaries for 
five years, up to March 2021 and has been further extended to March, 2026. Under the 
Programme, a diverse and holistic set of interventions for cleaning and rejuvenation of 
river Ganga have been taken up, that included waste water treatment, solid waste 
management, river front management (ghats and crematoria), ensuring e-flow, rural 
sanitation, afforestation, biodiversity conservation, public participation, etc. The 
Committee observed that in FY 2023-24, Rs. 4000 crore was allocated for Namami 
Gange Mission-II at BE stage and the same was reduced to just Rs.2400 crore 
(reduction of 40%) at RE stage. In this regard, the Department explained that at the time 
of projection of BE, many new projects were under different stages of tendering and it 
was anticipated that funds would be required during the year to meet mobilization 
advance as well as construction period payments. However, all contracts could not be 
awarded due to various reasons, requiring reduction at RE stage. The Committee are of 
the view that the Namami Gange Programme is an ambitious and comprehensive 
initiative which aims to address the pollution and degradation of the river Ganga and its 
tributaries by implementing a multifaceted approach that ensures its conservation and 
rejuvenation and to achieve this goal, substantial physical and financial resources are 

56 
 
being deployed by the Government. However, delay in projects under the Mission 
invariably increase the estimated cost and affect the budget adversely. The Committee, 
therefore, urged the Department to identify the reasons behind these delays and 
strongly recommend that the Ministry in handhold collaboration with all stakeholder take 
all possible measures to eliminate such delays, so that the allocated budget is utilized 
effectively and the Programme of rejuvenation and conservation of the Ganga and its 
tributaries can be completed within the stipulated timeframe. 
 
 
Reply of the Government  
Under the Namami Gange Programme, as of 28th February 2025, a total of 494 
projects have been sanctioned at an estimated cost of ₹40,478.15 crore, out of which 
308 projects have been completed and made operational (approximately 62% of 
sanctioned projects). The majority of the projects pertain to the creation of sewage 
infrastructure as the untreated domestic/industrial wastewater is the main reason for 
pollution in the river.  A total of 208 sewerage infrastructure projects have been 
sanctioned for the creation and rehabilitation of 6,420 Million Litres per Day (MLD) of 
Sewage Treatment Plant (STP) capacity and the laying of 5,160.87 km of sewerage 
networks. Of these, 127 projects, approximately 61%, have already been completed 
and made operational, resulting in the creation and rehabilitation of 3,445.75 MLD of 
sewage treatment capacity and the laying of 4,550 km of sewerage networks. 
  
Delays were encountered due to many factors such as road-cutting permissions, 
railway/NH crossing permissions, forest clearances, the COVID-19 pandemic and 
abnormal floods.  
  
Multiple level monitoring mechanisms have been put in place to expedite the 
implementation and execution of projects. The following monitoring mechanisms are 
being undertaken:- 
 

57 
 
 Regular Monitoring & Reviews: Monthly reviews of the project progress, 
interactions, discussions, site visits, and coordination meetings with state 
agencies are conducted by NMCG; 
 Multi-Level Monitoring: A multi-tier monitoring system is in place at both the 
Central and State levels to ensure effective project implementation. At the 
Central level, NMCG holds monthly and quarterly review meetings with 
concerned State Governments, implementing agencies like Jal Nigam and Jal 
Sansthan, and other stakeholders to oversee progress; 
 
 High-Level Reviews: Regular review meetings are conducted by the Hon’ble Jal 
Shakti Minister and the Secretary, DoWR, RD & GR, involving officials from 
NMCG, Railways, NHAI, State Governments, as and when required. The issues 
related to delay are also informed to the respective Chief Secretaries to address 
bottlenecks and expedite project execution; 
 
 Central Monitoring Committee (CMC): The CMC meetings are conducted 
under the Ministry of Jal Shakti, chaired by the Secretary, DoWR, RD & GR, with 
the Chief Secretary of the concerned State Governments, to oversee and ensure 
the effective implementation of pollution abatement and river rejuvenation 
measures across the country. 
 
 Cabinet Secretariat Review: Key sewage infrastructure projects are reviewed at 
the Cabinet Secretariat level through the PMG portal. 
 
 Technology-Based Monitoring: 
i. Sewage infrastructure projects under the Namami Gange Programme are 
monitored through the OCMS (Online Continuous Monitoring System) and the 
NIP portal (National Infrastructure Pipeline). 

58 
 
ii. NMCG has operationalized an online dashboard, “PRAYAG,” for real-time 
monitoring of river water quality, STP performance, and other key parameters for 
the Ganga and Yamuna Rivers. 
• State & District-Level Monitoring: 
ii. State Ganga Committees (SGC): Headed by Chief Secretaries, these 
committees coordinate Ganga rejuvenation efforts among various State 
agencies. 
iii. District Ganga Committees (DGC): A district-level mechanism has been 
established, headed by District Magistrates (DMs), to ensure speedy 
project execution for the Ganga and its tributaries. 
  
The pollution abatement of River Ganga and its tributaries is a continual effort 
and the National Mission for Clean Ganga is taking all possible efforts to achieve the 
mission objective within the stipulated time frame.  
 
[O.M. No. G-30013/1/2025-Budget Dated 06.05.2025] 
 
Recommendation No.16 (Para Nos. 2.20) 
 
The Committee further observed that the Detailed Project Report (DPR) on 
“Forestry Interventions for Ganga” prepared by Forest Research Institute (FRI), 
Dehradun envisages for site-specific plantation along the banks of river Ganga in a total 
area of 1,34,104 hectares in five States of Uttarakhand, Uttar Pradesh, Bihar, 
Jharkhand and West Bengal with an estimated cost of Rs. 2,293.73 crores. However, 
only 30,071 hectare plantation has, so far, been carried out for which an expenditure of 
Rs. 368 crore has been incurred by the State Forest Departments of the said five 
States. In this regard, the Department informed the Committee that the National Mission 
for Clean Ganga (NMCG) has allocated Rs. 398.50 crores for partial implementation of 
the plantation & maintenance activities till FY 2023-24 which focuses on selected 
landscapes from the DPR for afforestation along the main stem of Ganga river resulting 
no/less interventions on Agriculture and Urban landscape undertaken. Further, for the 

59 
 
complete implementation of the DPR it was decided that afforestation along river Ganga 
& its tributaries would be undertaken through the available Compensatory Afforestation 
Fund Management and Planning Authority (CAMPA) funds, operating under the aegis of 
the Ministry of Environment, Forest & Climate Change (MoEF&CC) which endorsed the 
proposed initiative. In this connection, the Committee has observed that the country is 
grappling with the challenges of climate change which is manifesting in frequent floods, 
droughts, and unprecedented hot weather across various regions. Changing rainfall 
patterns, over-exploitation of groundwater, soil erosion, and increasing pollution have 
further aggravated these issues and afforestation may seem to be a remedy to mitigate 
these adversities and there is a need to undertake serious measures towards this 
aspect. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommended that the Department, in 
coordination with M/o EF&CC and State Governments, take necessary steps to 
complete afforestation work and ensure the implementation of the DPR within a 
stipulated time frame, thereby facilitating the successful execution of the Namami 
Gange Programme in totality. 
 
Reply of the Government  
 
Under the Namami Gange program, NMCG through the State Forest 
Departments has been implementing 'Forestry Interventions in Ganga' as per the DPR 
prepared by the Forest Research Institute (FRI), Dehradun. The DPR envisages site-
specific afforestation models along the banks of river Ganga in a total area of 1,34,104 
ha. in the 5 States of Uttarakhand, Uttar Pradesh, Bihar, Jharkhand and West Bengal at 
an estimated cost of Rs. 2,293 crore.  
  
NMCG allocated funds to the tune of Rs. 414.0 crores to the State Forest 
Departments of Uttarakhand, Uttar Pradesh, Bihar, Jharkhand and West Bengal for 
partial implementation of the plantation & maintenance activities till FY 2024-25, in the 
selected landscapes from the FRI DPR for the implementation of the afforestation 
activities along the main stem of Ganga resulting no/less interventions on Agriculture 

60 
 
and Urban landscape undertaken. So far 33,024 ha. plantation has been carried out 
under the Namami Gange programme in the 5 Ganga bank States. 
  
Further, for the complete implementation of the DPR and its replications in the 
tributaries of Ganga and scaling up the planned efforts in additional Sites/States, it was 
decided that afforestation along river Ganga & its tributaries need to be carried out 
through the available CAMPA funds and MoEF& CC would lead this effort.  
  
As agreed by MoEF& CC, directions were given to the range States to implement 
all the components of the DPR prepared by FRI and replication of the scheme across 
other tributaries. Till date 59851 ha. plantations have been carried out in the Ganga 
bank states as per the FRI DPR under the CAMPA funding of MoEF&CC.   
  
So far a total of 92876 ha. plantations have been carried out in the Ganga basin 
states as per FRI DPR. 
 
[O.M. No. G-30013/1/2025-Budget Dated 06.05.2025] 

61 
 
CHAPTER III  
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NIL 

62 
 
CHAPTER IV 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BYTHE COMMITTEE 
 
 
Recommendation No.3 (Para Nos. 2.5 & 2.6) 
Interlinking of Rivers 
 The Committee observed that a total of 30 link projects have been identified 
under the Programme including 16 link projects under Peninsular Component and 14 
link projects under Himalayan Component and out of which, Pre-Feasibility Reports 
(PFRs) of all the 30 links, Feasibility Reports (FRs) of 24 links and Detailed Projects 
Reports (DPRs) of 11 links, have been completed. Five links namely Ken-Betwa Link 
Project, Godavari-Cauvery link (comprising of three links) and Modified Parbati-
Kalisindh-Chambal are being pursued for implementation on priority.  The Committee 
also noticed that, only one link namely Ken-Betwa Link Project is under implementation 
which is planned to be completed within a period of 8 years i.e. by March, 2030. 
Further, budgetary allocation of Rs. 4,000 crore in year 2024-25 has been made for this 
programme concentrated on land acquisition, R&R activities for Daudhan Dam, Link 
Canal and reimbursement to / release of fund to States. Further, the Committee 
observed that, despite conducting numerous meetings with stakeholders to address 
concerns and foster cooperation, consensus among States, remains a persistent 
obstacle in the implementation of the Interlinking of Rivers program. 
  
Regarding the study on interlinking of rivers in terms of ecological & 
environmental, socio-economical perspective, the Committee observed that a detailed 
study in respect of Ken Betwa Link Project had been carried out by Wildlife Institute of 
India, Dehradun. The Committee were of the opinion that interlinking of rivers would 
provide the country a viable solution to addressing water scarcity, drought mitigation, 
and flood control and such studies would also facilitate consensus-building among 
States. The Committee, therefore, urged the Department to conduct more such studies 

63 
 
evaluating the benefits of the project, thereby enhancing awareness amongst the States 
concerned and expediting its implementation.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
National Water Development Agency (NWDA) has been entrusted with work of 
Interlinking of Rivers (ILR) under National Perspective Plan (NPP) formulated by 
Government of India in year 1980. Under NPP, a total of 30 link projects have been 
identified (16 link projects under Peninsular Component and 14 link projects under 
Himalayan Component). 
  
National Perspective Plan (NPP) has been formulated for providing storage and 
transfer of surplus waters to water deficit regions to minimize the miseries brought by 
droughts and also to mitigate the ravages of annually recurring floods. The link projects 
under NPP have been planned judicially for minimizing water going to sea underutilized. 
The flood water from flood prone/ water surplus river basins would be diverted to water 
deficit regions and would also recharge ground water table, tanks and canals in the 
command areas thus, would help Government to deal with issue of water crisis in 
various States. 
 
Government of India has accorded top priority to ILR Programme. Out of 30 
identified link projects under NPP, five links namely Ken-Betwa Link Project, Godavari-
Cauvery link Project (comprising of three links) and Modified Parbati-Kalisindh-Chambal 
(PKC) are being pursued for implementation on priority.  
  
 Ken-Betwa Link Project is under implementation. The project is planned to be 
completed by March, 2030.  Hon’ble Prime Minister has laid the foundation stone for the 
project on 25.12.2024. 
  
  In respect of Modified PKC Link Project, it is to submit that the persistent efforts 
of Govt. of India has led to signing of Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) by both the 
States of Madhya Pradesh & Rajasthan with Ministry of Jal Shakti (MoJS), Govt. of 

64 
 
India (GoI) on 28.01.2024 in New Delhi in the presence of Hon’ble Chief Ministers of 
both the States, for preparation of its DPR and on broad planning of the link project. 
Memorandum of Agreement (MoA) has been signed on 05.12.2024 amongst States of 
MP, Rajasthan and Govt. of India. Hon’ble Prime Minister declared the signing of 
the agreement on 17.12.2024 at Rajasthan. DPRs of various components of MP & 
Rajasthan in Modified PKC link are under preparation, primarily by both the States.  
  
Regarding the Godavari-Cauvery Link Project, draft DPR for transfer of about 
4189 MCM of water was circulated to all the party States/UT on 08.01.24. Draft MoA 
has been prepared for implementation of link project and has been circulated to 
concerned States/UT in April, 2024. Five consultation meetings with party States/UT 
have been held so far. The main focus is on building consensus amongst States/UT and 
signing of MoA for the implementation of this link project and concerted efforts are being 
made.  
  System Studies has been started for the Link Projects with the help of prestigious 
Institutes viz., National Institute of Hydrology (NIH), Indian Institute of Technology (IIT), 
National Institute of Technology (NITs) to take care of factors such as climate changes, 
global warming, deforestation etc.  
  
  Further Studies for evaluating the benefits of the projects, if any, may be 
considered only after the finalisation of Detailed Project Reports (DPRs) of various link 
projects.  
  
       Water being the State subject, thus building up the consensus amongst the 
concerned States is crucial. States should move forward for implementation of any 
Interlinking River Projects. 
  
 [O.M. No. G-30013/1/2025-Budget Dated 06.05.2025] 
 
 
Comment of the Committee 
(Please see Para no. 8 of Chapter I of the Report)

65 
 
 
CHAPTER V  
OBSERVATION/RECOMMENDATION IN REPSECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLY OF 
THE GOVERNMENT IS STILL AWAITED 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NIL 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI                                                    Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
08 August  , 2025                                             Chairperson,                                                                      
17 Sravana, 1947(Saka)       Standing Committee on Water Resources

66 
 
ANNEXURE – I 
Confidential 
 
MINUTES OF THE SIXTEENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
WATER RESOURCES (2024-25) HELD ON 08 AUGUST, 2025. 
  
The Committee sat on Friday, the 08 August, 2025 from 1000 hours to 1100 
hours in Committee Room '2', Parliament House Annexe Extension, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
 
Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy    -  Chairperson 
 
 
          MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Narayandas Ahirwar 
3. Shri Isha Khan Choudhury 
4. Shri Sher Singh Ghubaya 
5. Shri Bapi Haldar 
6. Md. Rakibul Hussain 
7. Shri Rodmal Nagar 
8. Shri Dhaval Laxmanbhai Patel 
9. Shri Vishaldada Prakashbapu Patil 
10. Shri Mohite Patil Dhairyasheel Rajsinh 
11. Shri Pratap Chandra Sarangi 
12. Shri Dushyant Singh 
13. Thiru. Tamilselvan Thanga 
 
 RAJYA SABHA 
 
  14. Shri Khiru Mahto 
 15. Smt. Mausam Noor 
 16. Shri Balyogi Umeshnath 
 17. Shri Dhairyashil Mohan Patil 
 
 
 

67 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Chander Mohan - Additional Secretary 
2. Shri Ajay Kumar Sood - Director 
3.  Shri Umesh Bist  -  Under Secretary 
  
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee.    Thereafter, the Committee took up for consideration following four Draft 
Reports: 
 
 
(i)    Sixth Report on 'Action Taken by the Government on the Observations / 
Recommendations contained in the First Report (18th Lok Sabha) on Demands 
for Grants (2024-25) of the Ministry of Jal Shakti - Department of Drinking Water 
and Sanitation'. 
 
 
 
(ii)  Seventh Report on 'Action Taken by the Government on the Observations / 
Recommendations contained in the Second Report (18th Lok Sabha) on 
Demands for Grants (2024-25) of the Ministry of Jal Shakti - Department of Water 
Resources, River Development and Ganga Rejuvenation'. 
 
(iii)  Eighth Report on 'Action Taken by the Government on the Observations / 
Recommendations contained in the Third Report (18th Lok Sabha) on Demands 
for Grants (2025-26) of the Ministry of Jal Shakti - Department of Drinking Water 
and Sanitation'. 
 
(iv)  Ninth Report on 'Action Taken by the Government on the Observations / 
Recommendations contained in the Fourth Report (18th Lok Sabha) on Demands 
for Grants (2025-26) of the Ministry of Jal Shakti - Department of Water 
Resources, River Development and Ganga Rejuvenation'. 
 
 

68 
 
3. After some deliberation, the Committee adopted the aforesaid four draft Reports, 
without any modification.  The Committee then authorized the Chairperson to present 
the Reports on their behalf to both the Houses of Parliament in the current Session. 
 
The Committee then adjourned 
 
*** 

69 
 
ANNEXURE – II 
 
[Vide Para 4 of the Introduction] 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN THE SECOND REPORT 
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) OF THE COMMITTEE 
(i) Total number of Recommendations/Observations 
 
          16 
(ii) Recommendation/Observations which have been accepted by the 
Government  
 
Recommendation Nos.  1, 2, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12,13, 14, 15 
and 16 
 
 
 
 
Total – 15 
Percentage– 93.75 % 
 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies 
Recommendation Nos. NIL 
 
 
 
 
Total – 00 
Percentage – Nil 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee 
 
Recommendation Nos. Recommendation No. 3 
 
 
 
 
Total – 1 
Percentage –  6.25% 
(v) Recommendation/Observation in respect of which final reply of the 
Government is still awaited 
Para Nos. NIL 
 
 
 
Total – 00 
Percentage – Nil 
 