i 
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR, TEXTILES AND  
SKILL DEVELOPMENT 
(2024-25) 
 (EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
               MINISTRY OF TEXTILES 
 
ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE 
FIFTY-FOURTH REPORT (17TH LOK SABHA) OF THE 
COMMITTEE ON ‘SCHEMES/PROGRAMMES OF CENTRAL SILK 
BOARD FOR DEVELOPMENT AND PROMOTION OF SILK 
INDUSTRY’ PERTAINING TO THE MINISTRY OF TEXTILES. 
 
ELEVENTH REPORT 
 
     
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
NEW DELHI   
August, 2025/ Shravana, 1947 (Saka)  
11 

ii 
 
 
ELEVENTH REPORT 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR, TEXTILES AND 
SKILL DEVELOPMENT 
(2024-25) 
 
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF TEXTILES  
 
ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE 
FIFTY-FOURTH REPORT (17TH LOK SABHA) OF THE 
COMMITTEE ON ‘SCHEMES/PROGRAMMES OF CENTRAL SILK 
BOARD FOR DEVELOPMENT AND PROMOTION OF SILK 
INDUSTRY’ PERTAINING TO THE MINISTRY OF TEXTILES. 
 
Presented to Hon’ble Speaker on 04.10.2025 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 04.12.2025 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 21.08.2025 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
August, 2025/ Shravana, 1947 (Saka)   


iii 
 
CONTENTS 
       
                         PAGE No. 
        
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (iv) 
INTRODUCTION   (v) 
CHAPTER I Report 1 
CHAPTER II Recommendations/Observations which have 
been accepted by the Government 
 
11 
CHAPTER III Recommendations/Observations which the 
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of 
the Government’s reply 
 
28 
CHAPTER IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of 
which replies of the Government have not 
been accepted by the Committee and which 
require reiteration 
 
29 
CHAPTER V Recommendations/Observations in respect of 
which replies of the Government are interim 
in nature    
31 
 
APPENDICES 
 
Appendix- I Minutes of the 15th Sitting of the Committee 
held on 19th August, 2025. 
 
      32 
Appendix- II Analysis of the Action Taken by the 
Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in the Fifty-fourth 
Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) 
   34 
 
 
__ 
 
 
 
 
  

iv 
 
     COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR, TEXTILES AND SKILL DEVELOPMENT 
(2024-25) 
 
Shri Basavaraj Bommai – Chairperson 
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
2 Shri Mani A. 
3 Shri G. M. Harish Balayogi 
4 Shri Aashtikar Patil Nagesh Bapurao 
5 Shri Partha Bhowmick 
6 Shri Yogender Chandolia 
7 Shri Ram Prasad Chaudhary 
8 Shri Chandra Prakash Choudhary 
9 Shri G. Lakshminarayana 
10 Shri Asit Kumar Mal 
11 Shri Kali Charan Munda 
12 
13 
Shri Rudra Narayan Pany 
Shri Kartick Chandra Paul 
14 Shri Tanuj Punia 
15 Shri Pradeep Purohit 
16 Shri Mukesh Rajput 
17 Shri Raja Ram Singh 
18 Shri Adhikari Soumendu 
19 Shri V. K. Sreekandan 
20 Shri Manoj Tigga 
21 Shri Chavan Ravindra Vasantrao 
  
RAJYA SABHA 
22 Smt. Jaya Amitabh Bachchan  
23 
24 
Shri Ritabrata Banerjee 
Shri Naresh Bansal  
25 Shri Govindbhai Laljibhai Dholakia  
26 Shri Rajendra Gehlot 
27 Dr. Syed Naseer Hussain 
28 Shri Maharaja Sanajaoba Leishemba 
29 Shri I.S. Inbadurai  
30 Dr. Meenakshi Jain 
31 Shri S.R. Sivalingam 
  
SECRETARIAT 
1 Shri Lalkithang                             -        Joint Secretary 
2 Ms. K. Muanniang Tunglut        -        Director 
3 Smt. Shilpa Kant                           -       Under Secretary 
 

v 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Labour, Textiles and Skill 
Development (2024-25) having been authorized by the Committee, present on 
their behalf this Eleventh Report on Action Taken by the Government on the 
observations/recommendations of the Committee contained in their Fifty-fourth 
Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Schemes/Programmes of Central Silk Board 
for Development and Promotion of Silk Industry’ pertaining to the Ministry of 
Textiles. 
2. The Fifty-fourth Report was presented to Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya 
Sabha on 7th February, 2024. The Ministry of Textiles furnished their replies on 
21st May, 2024 indicating Action Taken on the Observations/ Recommendations 
contained in the Fifty-fourth Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha). The Committee 
considered and adopted the Draft Report at their sitting held on 19th August, 
2025.  
3. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in the Fifty-fourth Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) 
is given at Appendix-II. 
4. For ease of reference, the Observations/ Recommendations of the 
Committee have been printed in bold type in the body of the Report. 
 
 
 
New Delhi;               BASAVARAJ BOMMAI   
19 August, 2025                                  CHAIRPERSON, 
28 Shravana, 1947 (Saka)                 STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR,  
TEXTILES AND SKILL DEVELOPMENT 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 

1 
 
 
CHAPTER- I 
REPORT 
This Report deals with the action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in their Fifty-
Fourth Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Schemes/Programmes of Central 
Silk Board for Development and Promotion of Silk Industry’ of the Ministry of 
Textiles. 
2. The Fifty-Fourth Report was presented to Lok Sabha/laid in Rajya 
Sabha on 07th February, 2024. It contained 16 Observations/Recommendations. 
Replies of Government in respect of all the Recommendations have been received 
and are categorized as under: -  
 
(i) Recommendations/Observations which 
have been accepted by the Government – 
Rec. Para Nos. 1, 2, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 
13, 14 and 16. 
 
Chapter II 
Total: 13 
Percentage:81.25 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the 
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of 
the Government’s reply – Rec. Para No. 12. 
      
Chapter III 
Total: 01 
Percentage: 6.25 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect 
of which replies of the Government have not 
been accepted by the Committee and which 
require reiteration – Rec. Para No. 3. 
 
Chapter IV 
Total: 01 
Percentage: 6.25 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect 
of which replies of the Government are 
interim in nature – Rec. Para No. 15 
Chapter V 
Total: 01 
Percentage: 6.25 
 
 
3. The Committee desire that Action Taken Notes in respect of 
Observations/ Recommendations contained in Chapter-I and Chapter-V of 
this Report, for which interim reply has been given by the Government, be 
furnished to them at the earliest. 
 
 

2 
 
4. The Committee will now deal with some of their earlier Observations/ 
Recommendations which either require reiteration or merit further 
comments. 
I. TARGET FOR SILK PRODUCTION 
Recommendation (Para No. 2) 
5. The Committee had noted that the targets set by the Ministry for 
production of all the four varieties of silk during the year 2023-24 had been 
42,500 MT and the achievement till July, 2023 was 10,839 MT, which was only 
around one fourth of the total target fixed. The Committee had believed that since 
the data was till the onset of second quarter of FY 2023-24 i.e. July, 2023, the 
Ministry in collaboration with Central Silk Board (CSB) would make result-
oriented endeavours to overcome all the obstacles and achieve the target of 
42,500 MT by the end of the FY 2023-24.  The Committee had wished to be 
apprised of the current position with regard to achievement of the set target. 
6. The Ministry of Textiles in their Action Taken Note furnished to the 
Committee, have stated as under: 
“During April-February 2023-24, the raw silk production was 36,025 MT 
against the annual target of 42,500 MT (85% achievement). The silk 
production achieved during April-February 2023-24 is about 9% more 
than the silk production achieved during the same period in 2022-23 
(32,973 MT). It is expected to achieve a silk production of about 39,200 
MT in 2023-24, which is about 92% of the annual silk production target.” 
7 The Committee had wished to be apprised of the current position 
regarding achievement of the set target of 42,500 MT for production of all 
the four varieties of silk during the year 2023-24. The Action Taken Reply 
of the Ministry indicated that silk production of about 39,200 MT is 
expected to be achieved in 2023-24, which is about 92% of the annual silk 
production target. The Committee desire the Ministry to furnish specific 
reasons for not achieving the target fixed by the Ministry during the 
previous years along with details of the steps taken to achieve these 

3 
 
targets. The Committee emphasize the need for achieving the annual silk 
production target year after year and desire to be apprised of the targets 
fixed and the actual Silk production cumulatively as well as separately for 
all the four silk varieties during the financial years 2023-24 and 2024-25. 
The fresh initiatives likely to be taken by the Ministry in the current year 
to overcome the hurdles at the ground level and increase the annual silk 
production, in coordination with the Central Silk Board and States/UTs 
concerned may also be intimated to the Committee. 
II. ACTION PLAN TO ARREST SLUMP IN SILK PRODUCTION 
Recommendation (Para No. 3) 
8. The Committee had further observed that the State-wise targets had also 
been fixed with respect to annual raw silk production. During 2023-24, the 
target fixed for Chhattisgarh is 664 MT but till July, 2023, a measly 1 MT was 
produced there. Similarly, 4 MT were produced in Madhya Pradesh against the 
target 85 MT; 28 MT were produced in Uttar Pradesh vis-à-vis the target of 470 
MT; Andhra Pradesh with the production of 3047 MT against 10,0009 MT; 
Karnataka with the production of 3,834 MT vis-à-vis 13,000 MT; and so on. 
When the Committee desired to know the reasons for this, the Ministry attributed 
it to the adverse climatic conditions which led to the decline in the production of 
one of the varieties of Silk, i.e., Tasar. The Committee had failed to fathom that 
if only the production of Tasar silk had suffered a blow due to adverse climatic 
conditions, why the other States where the production of Mulberry, Eri and Muga 
Silk was carried out were showing a declining trend. The Committee, had 
therefore, advised the Ministry to put in further research to ascertain the reason 
for this extremely low production of Silk in some States and come up with a 
corrective action plan to arrest the slump in the production of Silk and achieve 
the set targets by the end of FY 2023-24. For this, the Committee had desired 
that the Ministry should dovetail their actions with the respective State/UT 
Governments. 

4 
 
9. The Ministry of Textiles in their Action Taken Note furnished to the 
Committee, have stated as under: 
“The silk production slumped in 2022-23 due to drastic decline in tasar 
silk production and fall out of covid related issues. However, the silk 
production has shown a positive growth in 2023-24. Further, there is a 
9% increase in raw silk production from 32,973 MT during 2022-23 (April-
February) to 36,025 during 2023-24 (April-February). As suggested by the 
Committee, appropriate action is being taken by CSB research team to 
ascertain the reason for extremely low production of Silk in some States 
and formulate a comprehensive corrective action plan to reverse the 
decline trend in the production of Silk.”  
 
10. The Committee note that appropriate action is being taken by the 
Central Silk Board research team to ascertain the reason for extremely low 
production of Silk in some of the silk-producing States and formulate a 
comprehensive corrective action plan to reverse the declining trend in silk 
production. While acknowledging the efforts being made by the Ministry, 
the Committee desire to know the manner in which the Ministry maintains 
active coordination with the States concerned in this regard and the 
constraints, if any. Laying stress on increasing silk production, especially 
tasar silk and achievement of State-wise targets for annual raw silk 
production, the Committee urge the Ministry for early finalization and 
implementation of the comprehensive corrective action plan for reversing 
the declining trend in silk production in the country. A status report in this 
regard may be communicated to the Committee within three months.  
 
III. EMPLOYMENT GENERATION IN SERICULTURE SECTOR 
Recommendation (Para No. 4) 
11. The Committee had noted that the Sericulture industry provides 
employment to approximately 9.2 million persons in rural and semi-urban areas. 
The Committee had observed that 27.89 lakh persons are engaged in Sericulture 

5 
 
industry in Assam and Bodoland Territorial Council (BTC) followed by 19.39 lakh 
in Karnataka and 15.28 lakh in Andhra Pradesh. Rest of the country contributes 
for around 3 lakh persons who were then engaged in Sericulture industry. The 
Ministry had fixed the target of employment generation of 10.97 million persons 
by 2025-26. The Committee had reckoned that as the Ministry have set the 
enhanced targets for production of raw silk in the country and one of its 
objectives was to minimize the imports of raw silk into India, it was obvious that 
the workforce employed in the Sericulture industry also required to be increased 
multifold. For this purpose, the Ministry had taken commendable measures 
such as need-based training programmes with focus on skill up-gradation in Silk 
sector; capacity building and training under Samarth Scheme to develop skill to 
the youth; support under beneficiary-oriented components starting from 
plantation to cocoon harvesting and marketing; provision of support to set up 
Chawki Rearing Centres (CRCs), private seed production, automatic reeling 
machines, etc.; promotion of Self Help Groups, Farmers Producers 
Organizations, Special Purpose Vehicle (SPV) etc. In addition to all these 
measures, the Committee had desired that the Ministry should make all 
concerted efforts with proper coordination with the States/UTs Governments to 
give positive results to these endeavours for the achievement of set employment 
generation target by 2025-26. 
12. The Ministry of Textiles in their Action Taken Note furnished to the 
Committee, have stated as under: 
“The observation/suggestion of the committee has been noted for 
compliance. Further, under Silk Samagra-2 scheme, Central Silk Board 
has taken necessary initiatives under Silk Samagra -2 scheme covering 
development of improved silkworm breeds/ hybrids, areas expansion, 
implementation of critical beneficiary field level interventions, large scale 
farming and establishment of mega reeling units, dovetailing schemes of 
line ministries etc. to ensure the achievement of targeted raw silk 
production and set employment target by the end of scheme period  
2025-26. Besides, necessary planning has been made in consultation with 
state sericulture departments and private seed producers to make high 

6 
 
quality disease free commercial silkworm seed required for production of 
raw silk of all the four varieties to match the targeted raw silk production.  
Silkworm, Seeds are produced and consumed as per the schedule.” 
13. While noting the observation/suggestion of the Committee regarding 
concerted efforts with proper coordination with the State/UT Governments 
to give positive results to their endeavours for the achievement of the set 
employment generation target of 10.97 million persons by 2025-26 for 
compliance, the Ministry have highlighted the initiatives taken under Silk 
Samagra-2 Scheme without mentioning the progress achieved so far in 
respect of the set employment generation target. The Committee, hence 
desire to be apprised about the details of employment generated so far in 
the Sericulture sector for rural, semi-urban and urban areas, the pace of 
employment generation and the corrective measures proposed to be taken 
in case of likely shortfall in meeting the target. The status of production of 
high-quality disease-free commercial silkworm seed required for production 
of raw silk of all the four varieties in consultation with State Sericulture 
Departments and private seed producers, may also be intimated to the 
Committee.   
 
IV. EXPLORING NEW INTERNATIONAL MARKETS TO INCREASE SILK 
EXPORTS 
Recommendation (Para No. 7) 
14. The Committee had noted that there was a decline in the value of silk 
exports from Rs. 2031.88 in 2018-19 to Rs. 1773.38 in 2022-23. In 2023-24 
(upto July, 2023), exports worth Rs. 691.59 crore have been reported by the 
Ministry. The Committee had been apprised by the Ministry that this decline in 
exports of Silk and Silk goods is due to economic recession in the Western 
countries followed by Russo-Ukrainian war. Taking this fact into account that 
the UAE, the USA and the European Union presently are the major markets for 
Indian silk goods, the Committee had recommended the Ministry to explore the 
markets of other countries too so that opportunities to export silk in those 

7 
 
markets can be explored and any dip in the value of exports due to the 
aforementioned reasons may be gainfully compensated. The Committee had also 
wished to know the value of exports till date in the current financial year. 
15. The Ministry of Textiles in their Action Taken Note furnished to the 
Committee, have stated as under: 
“The Indian silk goods are exported to about 170 countries across the 
globe. However, the UAE, the USA, and the Europe are the major 
destinations for the Indian silk goods. The silk exports are doing well in 
2023-24 compared to previous years and there is a 21% increase in silk 
exports (Rs. Terms) during 2023-24 (April–January 2024) compared to 
same period of pervious year. The details are as under: 
Year 
Value 
Rs. In 
Crores Mn. US $ 
2022-23 (April- January. 2023) 1268.89 159.01 
2023-24 (April- January. 2024) 1534.34 185.42 
  
The Indian Silk Export Promotion Council (ISEPC) has been taking various 
measures for intensifying and diversifying the exports of Indian silk 
goods.” 
 
16. The Ministry, in their Action Taken Reply, have stated that silk 
exports are doing well in 2023-24 as compared to previous years and there 
is a 21% increase in silk exports in monetary terms during April 2023-
January 2024 compared to the corresponding period of the previous year. 
However, the recommendation of the Committee for exploring the markets 
of countries other than the UAE, the USA and the European Union for export 
of silk, have not been addressed by the Ministry. The Committee, hence 
desire that the Ministry should act upon this aspect of their 
recommendation in right earnest and intimate them about the efforts made 
and progress achieved in this regard.  The Committee may also be apprised 
of the comprehensive measures taken by the Indian Silk Export Promotion 

8 
 
Council (ISEPC) for intensifying and diversifying the exports of Indian silk 
goods along with the outcomes of such measures.  
 
 
V. SHORTAGE OF MANPOWER IN CSB 
Recommendation (Para No. 8) 
17. The Committee had noted that the Central Silk Board (CSB) is a Statutory 
Body, established during 1948, by an Act of Parliament (Act No. LXI of 1948) for 
the development of sericulture industry in the country. It functions under the 
administrative control of the Ministry of Textiles, Government of India. The 
mandated activities of CSB are Research and Development, maintenance of four 
tier silkworm seed production network, leadership role in commercial silkworm 
seed production, standardizing and instilling quality parameters in the various 
production processes and advising the Government on all matters concerning 
sericulture and silk industry. The main objective of setting up of CSB is to make 
India Atmanirbhar in quality of silk production of international grade and 
catapult itself to the status of a global leader. There are 159 units of CSB 
functional as on date.  
        The Committee had, however, been constrained to note that in 159 units 
of CSB, there was a remarkable vacancy at 727 posts in the Group ‘A’, ‘B’ and 
‘C’ vis-à-vis total sanctioned strength of 2109 that brings the working strength 
to 1531. The Committee had further noted that out of 727 vacant posts, 
recruitment for 216 posts is under process and remaining post would be filled in 
phased manner as per prevailing rules of the Board. It was also brought to the 
notice of the Committee that the posts of Multi-Tasking Staff (MTS) and 
manpower for activities like security, Housekeeping, Maintenance, Drivers, etc. 
were not being filled and their services were being outsourced. According to the 
Ministry, CSB is facing shortage of experienced Officers and Officials due to large 
number of retirements. Further, some of the promotional posts have not been 
filled due to non-availability of eligible officials in the feeder cadre. The 
Committee had learned that the draft Recruitment Rules of amendment for filling 

9 
 
the Technical Cadre Posts and Scientific posts of CSB by deputation or by direct 
recruitment has already been submitted to the Ministry which is under 
consideration. It is also informed to the Committee that around 193 vacant posts 
in the cadre of Senior Technical Assistant shall be filled by direct recruitment, 
on approval of Recruitment Rules. To overcome the shortage of experienced 
Group A officers, filling of Group A posts on deputation basis is under process. 
Taking note of the fact that 727 posts have been lying vacant till July, 2023, the 
Committee had felt an urgent need on the part of the Ministry to fulfill them. The 
Committee had desired that the Ministry should take a serious note of it and 
chalk out a fool proof action plan to deal with the filling up of vacancies at multi-
level. As recruitment of 216 posts of MTS is under process, and the draft 
recruitment rules for filling the technical cadre and scientific posts of CSB is 
under consideration, the Committee had exhorted the Ministry to finalize it 
without any further delay. The Committee had also desired the Ministry to 
consider and approve the Recruitment Rules at the earliest so that the 193 
vacant posts in the cadre of Senior Technical Assistant can be filled at the 
earliest. Shortage of manpower at the level of officers and senior officials due to 
large number of retirements should also be taken care of within a definite time 
limit so that overall performance of CSB is not compromised and the very 
purpose of establishing CSB is not defeated. 
  
18. The Ministry of Textiles in their Action Taken Note furnished to the 
Committee, have stated as under: 
 
“The Central Silk Board (CSB) has taken several initiatives to address the 
shortage of staff through Mission Mode Recruitment. Here are the details 
of the initiatives: 
 Offer of appointment has been issued to 170 posts [66 posts of Scientist-B 
(Pre-cocoon Sector), 85 posts of Administration and Technical cadres and 19 
posts of Scientist-B (Post-cocoon Sector)]. Further, 47 posts of UDC, 01 post of 
Library and Information Asst. and 01 post of Cook could not be filled due to lack 
of eligible candidates. 
 The result of 8 posts [4-Steno (Grade-I) and 4-Steno (Grade-II)] is under 
consideration. 
 Recruitment of 122 posts of Scientist-B (Pre-cocoon Sector) has been initiated 
and is under process. 

10 
 
 Modification /Revision of Recruitment Rules for Technical and Scientific 
cadres is under progress and has already been sent to Ministry of Textiles  
Recruitment of remaining vacant Administrative, Technical and Scientific 
posts, is also under process.” 
 
19. While taking note of the action taken by the Central Silk Board (CSB) 
to address the shortage of staff through Mission Mode recruitment, the 
Committee find the number of offers of appointment actually issued i.e. 
170 posts comprising of Scientist-B and Administration and Technical 
cadres, far from being adequate taking into account 727 combined posts of 
Group A, B and C lying vacant till July 2023.  The Committee also note that 
47 posts of UDC, 01 post of Library and Information Assistant and 01 post 
of cook could not be filled due to lack of eligible candidates. As regards the 
remaining vacant posts in administrative, technical and scientific as well 
as Stenographers Grade I and II, recruitment is under process. The 
Committee express concern at the slow progress in filling up the vacancies 
under the various units of CSB and the likely adverse impact of manpower 
crunch on the performance of CSB and urge the Ministry to make all out 
efforts and explore all avenues to fill up the existing vacancy. 
Modification/revision of recruitment rules for technical and scientific 
cadres should be finalized and notified without delay. On the issue of non- 
filling up of the posts of Multi-Tasking Staff (MTS) and manpower for 
activities like security, housekeeping, maintenance, drivers, etc., the 
Committee may be apprised of the status in this regard.    
 
 
  

11 
 
CHAPTER-II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS 
WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 1) 
 The Committee note that Silk is the most elegant textile in the world with 
unparalleled grandeur, natural sheen, inherent affinity for dyes, high absorbance, light 
weight, soft touch and high in durability, characteristics that aptly lend the textile the 
moniker ‘Queen of Textiles’ all over the world. India has a rich and complex history in 
silk production. India is the second largest producer of Silk next to China. All the four 
commercially known varieties of silk, i.e., Mulberry, Muga, Eri and Tasar are being 
produced in India amongst which Mulberry silk contributes about 74% of the total silk 
production in the country. The Sericulture industry provides employment to 
approximately 9.2 million persons in rural and semi-urban areas in India. The 
Committee further note that while over 60 countries produce Silk in the world, China 
and India jointly account for 95 percent of the global silk production of 86,311 metric 
tonnes(MT), out of which India’s share is about 36,543 MT. However, owing to the 
decline of Silk production in China, India is showing an uptrend in raw silk production. 
In 2017, China was at about 1,42,000 MT; and in 2021, it was at 46,700 MT. As the 
Ministry have admitted that due to the declining trend exhibited by China, India’s role 
in the sericulture sector assumes a very important place, the Committee desire that the 
Ministry should view this as an opportunity to develop state-of-the-art infrastructure 
for augmenting the quality and quantity of production of all the four varieties of silk in 
India. This would also enhance the percentage of exports and bring down the imports 
of raw silk in India.  
REPLY :    Ministry of Textiles through Central Silk Board has been implementing 
an integrated scheme Silk Samagra 2 for the period of 2021-22 to 2025-26 for 
the overall development and promotion of Silk Industry in the country. The 
scheme synergises the efforts of State Governments and other implementing 
agencies to improve the quality, productivity and production of raw silk, besides 
generating employment opportunities, particularly in the rural areas.  With a 
view to enhance the quality, quantity and exports of silk in the country, the 
following provisions / interventions are in place under the Central Sector 
Scheme “Silk Samagra-2”   

12 
 
 Promotion of Innovative Technologies: Dissemination of innovative 
technologies and machinery developed by CSB R&D Institutes among 
stakeholders to ensure state-of-the-art infrastructure for increased production 
and productivity. 
 Collaborative Research Projects: Undertaking collaborative research projects 
with national and international research institutes to strengthen the genetic base 
and increase silkworm hybrid vigor, thereby enhancing production and 
productivity. 
 Horizontal Expansion of Sericulture: Expanding sericulture into potential new 
areas to meet the targeted silk production of 46,500 MT. 
 Support for New Farmers: Encouraging new farmers to take up sericulture by 
supporting states with beneficiary-oriented components in the form of bundle of 
packages. 
 Convergence of Schemes: Aligning schemes of line ministries of the 
Government of India to achieve the target of area expansion and other 
interventions in sericulture.  
 Focus on High-Quality Silk Production: Special focus on producing 
international quality 3/4A grade silk (Bivoltine) through the establishment of 
more indigenous Automatic Reeling Machines (ARMs) and promotion of newly 
developed bivoltine breeds with high silk content. Installation of ARMs has 
increased the production of international grade silk from 25% to 35%. 
 Support for Seribusiness Enterprises/SPVs: Providing support to Seribusiness 
Enterprises, entrepreneurs, and Special Purpose Vehicles (SPVs) to increase 
profitability and make sericulture a sustainable activity. 
 Rationalized Sharing Pattern: Implementing a rationalized sharing pattern to 
support beneficiaries in upscaling activities, making them viable, profitable, and 
sustainable. 
Capacity Building and Training: Developing a skilled workforce for the production of 
international quality silk through capacity building and training programs for farmers 
and entrepreneurs in cocoon production and reeling activities. 
  
 (Ministry of Textiles O.M. No.  H-11016/02/2024-Silk dated 21.05.2024) 
 
  

13 
 
Recommendations (Para No.2) 
 The Committee note that the targets set by the Ministry for production of 
all the four varieties of silk during the year 2023-24 has been 42,500 MT and 
the achievement till July, 2023 was 10,839 MT, which is only around one fourth 
of the total target fixed. The Committee believe that since the data is till the onset 
of second quarter of FY 2023-24 i.e. July, 2023, the Ministry in collaboration 
with Central Silk Board (CSB) would make result-oriented endeavours to 
overcome all the obstacles and achieve the target of 10,839 MT by the end of the 
FY 2023-24.  The Committee would like to be apprised of the current position 
with regard to achievement of the set target. 
REPLY:  During April-February 2023-24, the raw silk production was 36,025 MT 
against the annual target of 42,500 MT (85% achievement). The silk production 
achieved during April-February 2023-24 is about 9% more than the silk 
production achieved during the same period in 2022-23 (32,973 MT). It is 
expected to achieve a silk production of about 39,200 MT in 2023-24, which is 
about 92% of the annual silk production target. 
  
(Ministry of Textiles O.M. No.  H-11016/02/2024-Silk dated 21.05.2024) 
 
Comments of the Committee.  
Please see Para No. 7 of Chapter-I 
 
 
Recommendations (Para No. 4) 
Employment Generation 
 The Committee note that the Sericulture industry provides employment to 
approximately 9.2 million persons in rural and semi-urban areas. The Committee 
observe that 27.89 lakh persons are engaged in Sericulture industry in Assam and 
Bodoland Territorial Council (BTC) followed by 19.39 lakh in Karnataka and 15.28 lakh 
in Andhra Pradesh. Rest of the country contributes for around 3 lakh persons who are 
engaged in Sericulture industry. The Ministry have fixed the target of employment 
generation of 10.97 million persons by 2025-26. The Committee reckon that as the 
Ministry have set the enhanced targets for production of raw silk in the country and one 
of the objectives is to minimize the imports of raw silk into India, it is obvious that the 
workforce employed in the Sericulture industry also requires to be increased multifold. 
For this purpose, the Ministry had taken commendable measures such as need-based 
training programmes with focus on skill up-gradation in Silk sector; capacity building 

14 
 
and training under Samarth Scheme to develop skill to the youth; support under 
beneficiary-oriented components starting from plantation to cocoon harvesting and 
marketing; provision of support to set up Chawki Rearing Centres (CRCs), private seed 
production, automatic reeling machines, etc.; promotion of Self Help Groups, Farmers 
Producers Organizations, Special Purpose Vehicle (SPV) etc. In addition to all these 
measures, the Committee desire that the Ministry should make all concerted efforts with 
proper coordination with the States/UTs Governments to give positive results to these 
endeavours for the achievement of set employment generation target by 2025-26. 
REPLY: The observation /suggestion of the committee has been noted for 
compliance. Further, under Silk Samagra-2 scheme, Central Silk Board has 
taken necessary initiatives under Silk Samagra -2 scheme covering development 
of improved silkworm breeds/ hybrids, areas expansion, implementation of 
critical beneficiary field level interventions, large scale farming and 
establishment of mega reeling units, dovetailing schemes of line ministries etc. 
to ensure the achievement of targeted raw silk production and set employment 
target by the end of scheme period 2025-26. Besides, necessary planning has 
been made in consultation with state sericulture departments and private seed 
producers to make high quality disease free commercial silkworm seed required 
for production of raw silk of all the four varieties to match the targeted raw silk 
production.  Silkworm, Seeds are produced and consumed as per the schedule. 
(Ministry of Textiles O.M. No.  H-11016/02/2024-Silk  dated 21.05.2024) 
Comments of the Committee.  
Please see Para No. 13 of Chapter-I 
 
 
Recommendations (Para No.5) 
Role of Private Players 
 The Committee note that in Silk sector, there are different activities carried out 
by different personnel in Silk chain starting from farming to marketing/trading of Silk. 
The cocoon production and medium scale reeling /weaving /trading activities are mainly 
carried out by farmers / individuals /cooperatives depending on their availability of 
resources. Whereas, large scale activities like Chawki rearing centres in mulberry 

15 
 
sericulture, Commercial silkworm seed production, Automatic Silk Reeling through 
Automatic Reeling Machines (ARMs)  in post cocoon sector are being taken up by private 
entrepreneurs/enterprises as it requires huge investment. Besides, silk trading 
business is also mostly run by private enterprise/Entrepreneurs. The Committee were 
further apprised that in mulberry sector, 14 private registered producers have been 
roped in by CSB for production of bivoltine hybrid seed. In Tasar and Muga sectors, the 
number of private seed producers available are 154 and 25, respectively. Further 108 
ARM units established and functioning in the country are run by private parties. 
Further, seed production sector also displays private participation. The Committee 
appreciate the efforts taken by the Central Silk Board and hope that the Ministry take 
all imperative measures for proper monitoring required in this Sector so that this 
partnership results in realizing the very purpose behind establishing CSB and leads to 
enhanced production of raw silk in the country while generating more employment 
opportunities. 
 REPLY : The observation /suggestion of the committee has been noted. The 
following efforts are in place to encourage private participation:- 
             Entrepreneurship Development Training programmes are being 
conducted by R&D institutes of CSB which will help to improve self employment 
opportunities. Further, efforts are being made for establishment of incubation 
centres as part of technology commercialization  which would nurture new start-
ups/ existing entrepreneurs in their pursuit to become scalable and sustainable 
business enterprises in sericulture sector covering both pre & post cocoon 
sectors. Such endeavors are poised to strengthen private partnerships within the 
sericulture industry. 
          The Central Silk Board through its seed organizations such as National 
Silkworm Seed Organisation (NSSO-for mulberry), Basic Tasar Silkworm Seed 
Organisation (BTSSO) and Muga & Eri Silkwrom Seed Organisation (MESSO) 
produce the nucleus and basic seed of the respective silkworm varieties required 
by the private producers for production of commercial silkworm seed.  The seed 
organizations extend technical knowhow with proper hand-holding to the private 
producers and constantly monitor the quality parameters.  Cold storage facility 
is also extended to the private producers as per the need. 

16 
 
           (Ministry of Textiles O.M. No.  H-11016/02/2024-Silk dated 21.05.2024) 
  
Recommendations (Para No. 6) 
Export and Import of Silk 
 The Committee observe that the raw silk remains a major item of import which 
accounts for about 70 percent of the total value of the silk imports. According to the 
Ministry, the imports of silk are being reported to decline till 2021-22 which ranged from 
Rs. 1041.35 crore in 2018-19; Rs. 1149.32 crore in 2019-20; Rs. 570.56 crore in 2020-
21 and Rs. 819.68 crore in 2021-22. However, the Committee find a sudden surge in 
import value to Rs. 1713.68 crore in 2022-23. The Ministry have attributed this surge 
to the increase in demand for silk products in domestic market due to the increased 
economic activities during post covid period. Albeit the increase in silk production from 
34,903 MT in 2021-22 to 36,453 MT in 2022-23, the domestic silk production was not 
able to cater to the surge in the industry requirements. Therefore, the imports of raw 
silk doubled from 1978 MT in 2021-22 to 3874 MT in 2022-23. Taking into account that 
India itself is the largest consumer of the silk domestically produced and the demand of 
raw silk has been increasing after Covid-19 pandemic period, the Committee urge the 
Ministry to explore more ways to increase the productivity of all the four varieties of silk 
in India especially bivoltine raw silk. More research is needed to obtain increased 
productivity by crossing or hybridization to get superior seeds, i.e. mulberry seeds as 
well as silkworm hybrids and improvised sericulture development techniques with high 
productivity. The Committee also desire that a robust mechanism should be put in place 
by the Ministry without any delay to check and maintain the quality of the raw silk 
which is being imported into the country. This would further ensure a check in the 
quantity and value of the future imports of raw silk in the country. The Committee would 
like to be apprised of the current status of the quantity and value of the raw silk 
imported in India. 
 REPLY : The observation /suggestion of the committee has been noted for 
compliance. To increase the production and productivity of raw silk in all four 
sectors, various initiatives have been taken by CSB such as development of 
climate resilient silkworm breeds/ hybrids, horizontal expansion of host 
plantation, utilizing forest fringe and un-cultivable lands for seri-host plantation, 
providing support to beneficiaries /stake holders for various critical 
interventions, supporting seri-business enterprise for large scale farming and 
establishment of mega reeling units, support to Adopted seed rearers and 
entrepreneurs for Bivoltine seed production, convergence of schemes from line 
ministries etc. The comprehensive approach of these initiatives will address 
various aspects of sericulture and enhance raw silk production and productivity  

17 
 
             
The Central Silk Technological Research Institute (CSTRI) of CSB carries out 
several R&D projects aimed at improving the processing and reeling technology 
for mulberry (especially bivoltine cocoons) as well as Vanya varieties. The 
technologies developed  are being popularized in the field through various 
training programmes for improving the quality and productivity of raw silk. Full 
fledged raw silk testing centres of CSTRI functioning at Bangalore, Kanchipuram, 
Dharmavaram, Malda and Jammu have been evaluating the quality of imported 
as well as locally produced raw silk. These test reports help in giving feedback to 
the local reelers on improving the quality of silk. The Textile Testing Laboratory 
at CSTRI is accredited by NABL for carrying out the testing and grading of raw 
silk and other tests for fibres, yarn and fabric. The Dept. of Customs submits 
samples of the  raw silk imported into the country for quality evaluation. In these 
cases quality is tested following the ISA (International Sericulture Association) 
method of testing and grading. According to this method raw silk is classified 
into 4A, 3A, 2A, A and B grades (4A being the best quality) based on 12 
parameters including winding performance, size uniformity, defects, tenacity, 
elongation and cohesion. 
  
Efforts are being made continuously to increase the bivoltine raw silk, which is 
an import substitute silk, in the country. The bivoltine silk production has 
increased to 8,880 MT during April-February 2023-24 compared to 7,854 MT in 
the same period in 2022-23.  
  
Regarding the current status of raw silk import, it is to mention that due to 
increase in domestic silk production during 2023-24, there is 28% decline in 
quantity of raw silk imported during April–January period of 2023-24 compared 
to April – January period of 2022-23. The details are as under; 
 Year Raw Silk Imported 

18 
 
Quantity 
(MT) 
Value 
Rs. In Crore  Mn. US $ 
2022-23(April- January 2023) 3474 1532.32 192.26 
2023-24(April- January 2024) 2348 1109.54 134.13 
            
          (Ministry of Textiles O.M. No.  H-11016/02/2024-Silk dated 21.05.2024) 
 
Recommendations (Para No. 7) 
 The Committee note that there was a decline in the value of silk exports from Rs. 
2031.88 in 2018-19 to Rs. 1773.38 in 2022-23. In 2023-24 (upto July, 2023), exports 
worth Rs. 691.59 crore have been reported by the Ministry. The Committee were 
apprised by the Ministry that this decline in exports of Silk and Silk goods is due to 
economic recession in the Western countries followed by Russo-Ukrainian war. Taking 
this fact into account that the UAE, the USA and the European Union presently are the 
major markets for Indian silk goods, the Committee recommend the Ministry to explore 
the markets of other countries too so that opportunities to export silk in those markets 
can be explored and any dip in the value of exports due to the aforementioned reasons 
may be gainfully compensated. The Committee would also like to know the value of 
exports till date in the current financial year. 
 REPLY:  The Indian silk goods are exported to about 170 countries across the 
globe. However, the UAE, the USA, and the Europe are the major destinations 
for the Indian silk goods. The silk exports are doing well in 2023-24 compared 
to previous years and there is a 21% increase in silk exports (Rs. Terms) during 
2023-24 (April–January 2024) compared to same period of pervious year. The 
details are as under: 
Year 
Value 
Rs. In Crores Mn. US $ 

19 
 
2022-23 (April- January. 2023) 1268.89 159.01 
2023-24 (April- January. 2024) 1534.34 185.42 
  
The Indian Silk Export Promotion Council (ISEPC) has been taking various 
measures for intensifying and diversifying the exports of Indian silk goods. 
             (Ministry of Textiles O.M. No.  H-11016/02/2024-Silk dated 21.05.2024) 
Comments of the Committee.  
Please see Para No. 16 of Chapter-I 
 
Recommendations (Para No. 8) 
CENTRAL SILK BOARD (CSB) 
 Shortage of Manpower 
7. The Committee note that the Central Silk Board (CSB) is a Statutory Body, 
established during 1948, by an Act of Parliament (Act No.LXI of 1948) for the 
development of sericulture industry in the country. It functions under the 
administrative control of the Ministry of Textiles, Government of India. The mandated 
activities of CSB are Research and Development, maintenance of four tier silkworm seed 
production network, leadership role in commercial silkworm seed production, 
standardizing and instilling quality parameters in the various production processes and 
advising the Government on all matters concerning sericulture and silk industry. The 
main objective of setting up of CSB is to make India Atmanirbhar in quality of silk 
production of international grade and catapult itself to the status of a global leader. 
There are 159 units of CSB functional as on date.  
        The Committee are, however, constrained to note that in 159 units of CSB, 
there is a remarkable vacancy at 727 posts in the Group ‘A’, ‘B’ and ‘C’ vis-à-vis 
total sanctioned strength of 2109 that brings the working strength to 1531. The 
Committee further note that out of 727 vacant posts, recruitment for 216 posts 
is under process and remaining post would be filled in phased manner as per 
prevailing rules of the Board. It was also brought to the notice of the Committee 

20 
 
that the posts of Multi Tasking Staff (MTS) and manpower for activities like 
security, Housekeeping, Maintenance, Drivers, etc. are not being filled and their 
services are being outsourced. According to the Ministry, CSB is facing shortage 
of experienced Officers and Officials due to large number of retirements. Further, 
some of the promotional posts have not been filled due to non availability of 
eligible officials in the feeder cadre. The Committee learn that the draft 
Recruitment Rules of amendment for filling the Technical Cadre Posts and 
Scientific posts of CSB by deputation or by direct recruitment has already been 
submitted to the Ministry which is under consideration. It is also informed to the 
Committee that around 193 vacant posts in the cadre of Senior Technical 
Assistant shall be filled by direct recruitment, on approval of Recruitment Rules. 
To overcome the shortage of experienced Group A officers, filling of Group A posts 
on deputation basis is under process. Taking note of the fact that 727 posts have 
been lying vacant till July, 2023, the Committee feel an urgent need on the part 
of the Ministry to fulfill them. The Committee desire that the Ministry should 
take a serious note of it and chalk out a fool proof action plan to deal with the 
filling up of vacancies at multi-level. As recruitment of 216 posts of MTS is under 
process, and the draft recruitment rules for filling the technical cadre and 
scientific posts of CSB is under consideration, the Committee exhort the Ministry 
to finalize it without any further delay. The Committee also desire the Ministry 
to consider and approve the Recruitment Rules at the earliest so that the 193 
vacant posts in the cadre of Senior Technical Assistant can be filled at the 
earliest. Shortage of manpower at the level of officers and senior officials due to 
large number of retirements should also be taken care of within a definite time 
limit so that overall performance of CSB is not compromised and the very 
purpose of establishing CSB is not defeated. 
  
REPLY :  The Central Silk Board (CSB) has taken several initiatives to address 
the shortage of staff through Mission Mode Recruitment. Here are the details of 
the initiatives: 

21 
 
 Offer of appointment has been issued to 170 posts [66 posts of Scientist-B 
(Pre-cocoon Sector), 85 posts of Administration and Technical cadres and 19 
posts of Scientist-B (Post-cocoon Sector)]. Further, 47 posts of UDC, 01 post 
of Library and Information Asst. and 01 post of Cook could not be filled due 
to lack of eligible candidates. 
 The result of 8 posts [4-Steno (Grade-I) and 4-Steno (Grade-II)] is under 
consideration. 
 Recruitment of 122 posts of Scientist-B (Pre-cocoon Sector) has been initiated 
and is under process. 
 Modification /Revision of Recruitment Rules for Technical and Scientific 
cadres is under progress and has already been sent to Ministry of Textiles  
 Recruitment of remaining vacant Administrative, Technical and Scientific 
posts, is also under process.  
 (Ministry of Textiles O.M. No.  H-11016/02/2024-Silk dated 21.05.2024) 
Comments of the Committee.  
Please see Para No. 19 of Chapter-I 
 
Recommendations (Para No.9) 
CENTRAL SECTOR SCHEME – SILK SAMAGRA-2 
              Research and Development, Training/Skill Enhancement 
 The Committee note that a Central Sector Scheme viz. 
Silk Samagra-2 has been initiated for comprehensive development of silk industry at a 
total outlay of Rs. 4679.86 crore for implementation during 2021-22 to 2025-26. This 
is an umbrella scheme with main objectives of (i) to make India Atmanirbhar in 
production of import substitute international grade Bivoltine silk and (ii) focus on 
inclusive development of small and marginal farmers including women and tribals/SCs. 
There are four major components of the Scheme, first of which is Research and 
Development, Training, Transfer of Technology & I.T. initiatives. The Committee find 
that under Transfer of Technology, the technologies emanated out of the concluded 

22 
 
projects are transferred to the field through various Extension Communication 
Programme (ECP) viz, Krishi Melas, Group Discussions, Enlightenment programmes, 
etc. The Committee are however concerned to find that in the last three years, the 
number of ECPs are declining, i.e., in 2021-22, there were 900 ECPs held covering 
46,538 beneficiaries; in 2022-23, 748 ECPs were held covering 46,359 beneficiaries but 
in 2023-24, upto August, 2023, there were only 32 ECPs held covering 2,482 
beneficiaries. Taking note of the fact that more than two quarters were yet to be 
completed, the Committee hope that the Ministry would take appropriate measures to 
conduct a decent number of ECPs in the current financial year so as to cover a relatively 
greater number of beneficiaries. The Committee would like to know the number of ECPs 
conducted in the current financial year till date along with the number of beneficiaries.  
  REPLY: During the year 2023-24, as against the target of 690 ECP programmes 
to be conducted, a total of 709 ECP programmes were conducted and sensitized 
41,983 beneficiaries with seri-technologies. 
  
            (Ministry of Textiles O.M. No.  H-11016/02/2024-Silk  dated 21.05.2024) 
 
Recommendations (Para No.10) 
Seed Organisation 
 Seed organization is the second component of Silk Samagra-2 scheme under 
which there is chain of Basic Seed Farms supplying basic seeds to the States/Uts. The 
Committee note that Central Silk Board is mandated basically to cater to the needs of 
State Sericulture Departments and Private Entrepreneurs in respect of nucleus and 
basic silkworm seed. The Committee observe that there is a shortfall in achieving the 
target both in terms of production and acreage specifically under Mulberry and Tasar 
silk varieties. In 2023-24, up to August, 2023 the total quantity of seed production is 
167.979 Disease-Free Layings (DFLs) i.e. eggs vis-à-vis 409.445 DFLs during 2022-23. 
According to the Ministry, the Mulberry silk production reduced significantly in 2020-
21 and 2021-22 due to the lockdowns and other restrictions imposed related to Covid-
19 pandemic. In 2022-23, an enhanced target of 28,760 MT was set against the actual 
production of 25,818 MT. Although, all-time record mulberry production of 27,630 MT 
was achieved in 2022-23 yet the production was short by 4% against the target. For 
reduction in Tasar silk production during the last two financial years i.e. from 2021-22 
onwards, the Ministry have attributed to heavy unseasonal rainfall and severe disease 

23 
 
incidences on account of adverse climatic conditions, specifically in Jharkhand. Taking 
this fact into account that the CSB is mandated to cater to the needs of State Sericulture 
Departments and Private Entrepreneurs in respect of nucleus and basic silkworm seeds 
and the responsibility of production of commercial (hybrid) silkworm seed rests with 
State Sericulture Departments and Private Entrepreneurs, the Committee exhort the 
Ministry to develop special module for research and development of climate resistant 
and high-yielding varieties of seed which can resist unseasonal rainfall and severe 
disease incidences so that the annual and final targets fixed for States/Uts raw silk 
production are achieved without any obstacles. The Committee also desire that CSB 
should conduct periodic meetings with the State Sericulture Departments and Private 
Entrepreneurs involved in seed production so that their problems could be addressed 
within reasonable time without any adverse effect on the process of seed production. 
REPLY: During the current year 2023-24, the Central Silk Board (CSB) has 
initiated new research and development (R&D) projects aimed at understanding 
and addressing the adverse effects of climate fluctuations on sericulture. 
Besides, efforts are also in place to develop high-yielding improved silkworm 
breeds by the CSB R & D Institutes to mitigate the challenges posed by climate 
variability and to enhance the productivity. 
             Further, Central Silk Board has been reviewing and periodically 
monitoring the seed sector development of state departments of sericulture and 
private entrepreneurs especially with regard to production of disease free layings 
and exploring the possibilities of enhancement of seed production at state 
government and private level. During last five years (2018 onwards) CSB has 
reduced its commercial seed production by around 20%. Until these two entities 
gain confidence for capacity utilization, Central Silk Board would continue the 
production of bivoltine hybrid silkworm seed with an aim to taper off, and finally 
concentrate on the production of high quality nucleus and basic seed alone.  
             Besides, the CSB is also encouraging and extending financial support 
to State Departments of Sericulture for strengthening and establishment of state 
owned as well as private silkworm seed producers under Central Sector Scheme 
“Silk Samagra-2”, in order to meet the commercial seed requirement of states.   
             Central Silk Board constituted three National Silkworm Seed Action 
Plan Committees with the respective Directors of Seed Organization as the 
Chairperson and the state sericulture departments and selected private 

24 
 
producers as members. The Committee meets periodically to plan the 
requirement of basic and commercial silkworm seed and take stock of the 
production process. In addition to this, Director, NSSO conducts roundtable 
meeting with private seed producers who were awarded permission to produce 
bivoltine hybrid seed.  Commercial chawki silkworm rearers meetings are also 
conducted time to time.  
           (Ministry of Textiles O.M. No.  H-11016/02/2024-Silk dated 21.05.2024) 
Recommendations (Para No.11) 
 The Committee note that there are 14 private registered producers roped in by 
CSB for production of bivoltine hybrid seed, out of which 10 are active as of now and 
the production during 2022-23 was 150.99 DFLs. Similarly, for Tasar, 154 private 
producers were registered responsible for producing 10.11 DFLs and 25 are registered 
for Muga silk producing 2.42 DFLs. Taking cognizance of the fact that only 10 out of 14 
producers are involved in producing Muga silk which amounts only to 2.42 DFLs and 
the onus of producing the major share of commercial silkworm seeds lie on private 
silkworm seed producers only. The Committee desire that the CSB should take this 
matter seriously and take extra measures to deal with the problems of private seed 
producers as the support presently provided by the CSB is not sufficient as is evident 
by the data provided by the Ministry.  
REPLY :  Under Silk Samagra-2 scheme, provisions has been made to support 
for establishment and strengthening of silkworm seed production units to 
produce upto 30.00 lakh dfls   capacity, support for silkworm seed cocoon 
rearers and vanya private graineurs. Accordingly, financial support is being 
provided to the states/Private seed producers based on the project proposals 
received.  
All the private producers registered for seed production in Tasar and Muga sector 
are active in production. 
Only 10 out of 14 registered private seed producers who were given permission 
to produce bivoltine hybrid seed are actively into production of bivoltine seed. 
However, they are active in production of silkworm cross breed seed since cash 

25 
 
flow in cross breed seed in frequent unlike in bivoltine seed. Bivoltine hybrid 
seed production is capital intensive and the working capital get blocked for a 
period of 4-6 months due to the intrinsic nature of bivoltine seed. Due to this 
some producers back out. 
           (Ministry of Textiles O.M. No.  H-11016/02/2024-Silk dated 21.05.2024) 
Recommendation (Para No. 13) 
Physical and Financial Progress of Central Silk Board 
 The Committee note that during 2023-24, the amount earmarked for the 
Administrative Expenditure is Rs. 563.00 crore vis-à-vis expenditure of Rs. 233.37 crore 
and the allocated amount for Scheme Outlay is Rs. 354.77 crore against expenditure of 
45.45 crore. The Committee appreciate the Ministry for utilizing all the allocated amount 
of Rs. 875.00 crore in the year 2022-23 cumulatively under both the above mentioned 
heads and expect that in the current financial year, i.e., 2023-24 too, the Ministry would 
be able to utilize the entire amount earmarked to the Ministry of Textiles for development 
of Sericulture industry. 
REPLY :Against the approved Budget of Rs.875.00 crore (RE) for the current year 
2023-24, funds to the tune of Rs.875.00 crore has been received from Govt. of 
India which has been fully utilized as on 31.03.2024.  
         (Ministry of Textiles O.M. No.  H-11016/02/2024-Silk dated 21.05.2024) 
 
Recommendation (Para No.14) 
Convergence Efforts 
 The Committee note that during the year 2022-23, States have submitted 169 
project proposals to support Sericulture activities from plantation to marketing 
including infrastructure for both pre and post cocoon sectors and their extension. And 
received sanction for 145 projects amounting to Rs. 823.27 crore and received funds of 
Rs. 465.43 crore. During the current year 2023-24 (upto August), States have submitted 
14 project proposals and received sanction for 4 projects amounting to Rs. 36.58 crore 
and Rs. 13.62 crore could only be disbursed. The reasons behind this low disbursal are 
manifold including non-submission of Utilization Certificates due to non-utilization of 

26 
 
Central funds within the time limit; delay in sanction/release of States’ matching share, 
absence of required manpower for extension and monitoring activities of Sericulture 
sector, allocation of sufficient funds specific to Sericulture development under State 
budget etc. As proper and effective coordination between the State/UT Governments 
and the Ministry is the prime requirement to deal with these issues, the Committee 
desire that the Ministry should evolve a robust coordination mechanism under which 
periodic interventions should be made with the State Sericulture Departments and 
pursue them to timely utilize the funds allocated by the Centre and submit Utilization 
Certificates at least by the end of the 3rd quarter of the financial year so that all the 
earmarked funds are utilized and the purpose of the Scheme could be met.  
 REPLY : The concern of the committee has been discussed in various   
platforms/ meetings with States to timely utilization of funds and submission of 
Ucs. The Principal Secretaries/Additional Chief Secretaries of the states, have 
been requested vide letter dated 22.11.2023 for pursuing the matter of pending 
Ucs with the concerned State Sericulture Departments. In response, some of the 
states have submitted Ucs and the pendency of Ucs have been reduced 
significantly. Furthermore Ucs are expected shortly, after the closure of financial 
year. Besides, the CSB shall be requesting Ministry to take up the issue with the 
Chief Secretaries of respective States.  During the year 2022-23, under 
convergence programme states have submitted 222 projects, of which 176 
projects worth Rs.846.97 Crores were sanctioned and Rs.485.73 Crores of funds 
were released to the state for sericulture sector. Further, during 2023-24, out of 
201 projects submitted to the funding department 201 projects worth Rs. 166.69 
Crores were sanctioned and Rs.114.57 Crores released to support sericulture 
activities. In this regard, all States have been requested to dovetail the funds for 
sericulture activities from schemes of other line ministries. 
 
          (Ministry of Textiles O.M. No.  H-11016/02/2024-Silk dated 21.05.2024)  
 
Recommendation (Para No. 16) 
Occupational Hazards 
 The Committee learn that there are several occupational hazards attached with 
the Sericulture industry especially prevailing in the process of silkworm seed 

27 
 
production/rearing. These hazards are a cause of severe diseases and ailments posing 
threat to the health and life of the workers/farmers involved in Sericulture industry. 
The Committee note that although protective masks are provided to the Sericulture 
farmers and workers by the CSB, they are not enough considering the magnitude of the 
problem. Since the research on mechanization of filtration in the production units is 
still in its nascent stage, the Committee wonder when this research will be finalized and 
bear conclusive results for the benefit of farmers/workers. The Committee, therefore, 
urge the Ministry to finalize it at the earliest so that the ill-effects involved in the process 
could be unearthed and the remedial measures could be accordingly taken without any 
further delay. The Committee also desire that since the masks, hand gloves and aprons 
etc are provided to the workers and made available in the CSB units, the Ministry should 
conduct periodic inspections to ensure that these protective accessories are provided to 
the Casual/Time Scale Farm Workers/Skilled Farm Workers positively. 
REPLY :The sericulture being practiced by the farmers with recommended 
package of practices/ technologies, as such no specific health hazards 
associated with sericulture farmers have been reported to CSB.  
Sericulture farmers are being sensitized about techniques/ procedure needs to 
be followed/ practiced during disinfection of rearing house, bed disinfection and 
silkworm rearing to avoid heath risks associated during the various training and 
awareness programmes organized by R&D institutes of CSB. 
 Further, R&D institutes of Central Silk Board are educating farmers to 
wear face mask, hand gloves and other safety measures while performing 
silkworm rearing and rearing house disinfection through various training and 
awareness programmes to avoid health risks. 
These protective accessories are provided to the Casual/Time Scale Farm 
Workers/Skilled Farm Workers at CSB institutes. 
The respective Directors of CSB Institutes ensure that the protective accessories 
like gloves and protective masks are provided to casual/time scale farm workers/ 
skilled farmers involved in silkworm rearing/seed production and also to inspect 
whether these are being used while working at the Institute and nest units under 
their control.   
           (Ministry of Textiles O.M. No.  H-11016/02/2024-Silk  dated 21.05.2024)  
 
 

28 
 
CHAPTER-III 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLY 
 
Silk Mark Organization of India (SMOI) 
Recommendation (Para No.12) 
 The Committee note that Silk Mark Organization of India (SMOI) is 
responsible for providing assurance of purity of silk products through “Silk 
Mark”. The Ministry have stated that all the Silk items which are being exported 
may not have Silk Mark labels as this is a voluntary scheme and weavers, 
retailers and other stakeholders are not bound to affix the Silk Mark labels on 
their products. The Committee, therefore, recommend the Ministry to make the 
affixation of Silk Mark labels mandatory by the weavers, retailers and other 
stakeholders involved in the marketing chain to evolve it as an effective quality 
control mechanism acting as a seal of assurance from the Government of India 
in the interest of the consumers and arrest the sale of counterfeit silk. 
 REPLY :Silk Mark is a voluntary Scheme has been initiated with a view to 
creating consumer    awareness about its relevance and to promote genuine and 
natural products. Silk Mark is the first Textile Quality Mark in India, initiated 
by Ministry of Textiles Government of India to promote Indian Silk brand.  
However, there is a provision of penalty in the case of misusing and imitation 
of Silk Mark labels by Silk Mark Members. Also, there are two types of 
surveillance mechanism has been kept in place viz. (1) In-house surveillance and 
(2) 3rd party surveillance, In-house surveillance is undertaken by the officials 
and officers posted at ten (10) SMOI Chapters.  They take up periodical visits to 
the premises of Silk Mark AUs(authorised users) and does surprise check 
/visit.  If found guilty, they are issued notice and thereafter rectification at the 
first instance.  However, if found guilty on the next instance, their membership 
is cancelled besides following necessary legal procedures. During 3rd party 
surveillance, SMOI engaged Agencies like BITRA, Textile Committee and 
SASMIRA for providing service of surveillance. 
            (Ministry of Textiles O.M. No.  H-11016/02/2024-Silk dated 21.05.2024) 
 
 

29 
 
CHAPTER-IV 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES 
OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
AND WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION 
 
Recommendation (Para No.3) 
 The Committee further observe that the State-wise targets have also been 
fixed with respect to annual raw silk production. During 2023-24, the target 
fixed for Chhattisgarh is 664 MT but till July, 2023, a measly 1 MT was 
produced there. Similarly, 4 MT were produced in Madhya Pradesh against the 
target 85 MT; 28 MT were produced in Uttar Pradesh vis-à-vis the target of 470 
MT; Andhra Pradesh with the production of 3047 MT against 10,0009 MT; 
Karnataka with the production of 3,834 MT vis-à-vis 13,000 MT; and so on. 
When the Committee desired to know the reasons for this, the Ministry 
attributed it to the adverse climatic conditions which led to the decline in the 
production of one of the varieties of Silk, i.e., Tasar. The Committee fail to 
fathom that if only the production of Tasar silk has suffered a blow due to 
adverse climatic conditions, why the other States where the production of 
Mulberry, Eri and Muga Silk is carried out are showing a declining trend. The 
Committee, therefore, advise the Ministry to put in further research to ascertain 
the reason for this extremely low production of Silk in some States and come 
up with a corrective action plan to arrest the slump in the production of Silk 
and achieve the set targets by the end of FY 2023-24. For this, the Committee 
desire that the Ministry should dovetail their actions with the respective 
State/UT Governments. 
REPLY:  The silk production slumped in 2022-23 due to drastic decline in          
tasar silk production and fall out of covid related issues. However, the silk 
production has  shown a positive growth in 2023-24. Further, there is a 9% 
increase in raw silk production from 32,973 MT during 2022-23 (April-
February) to 36,025 during 2023-24 (April-February). As suggested by the 
Committee, appropriate action is being taken by CSB research team to 
ascertain the reason for extremely low production of Silk in some States and 

30 
 
formulate a comprehensive corrective action plan to reverse the decline trend 
in the production of Silk.   
         (Ministry of Textiles O.M. No.  H-11016/02/2024-Silk dated 21.05.2024) 
Comments of the Committee.  
Please see Para No. 10 of Chapter-I 
 
 
  

31 
 
CHAPTER-V 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES 
OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE INTERIM IN NATURE  
 
Monitoring and Evaluation 
Recommendations (Para No.15) 
16. The Committee note that the 3rd party Evaluation Study 
‘recommendations’ on the implementation of preceding scheme ‘Silk Samagra’, 
the ‘Silk Samagra-2’ scheme is to be implemented during the years 2021-22 to 
2025-26. According to the Ministry, the mid-term review/evaluation by third 
party is proposed to be taken up during the end of 2023-24 for mid-course 
corrections. The Committee are given to understand that this 3rd party 
evaluation is taken up after two and a half years and the next third party 
evaluation is under proposal stage. The Committee are glad to find that the 
Ministry in collaboration with the CSB has been taken appropriate steps so that 
mid-course correction or modification in the Scheme can be carried out. The 
Committee desire that the Ministry should speed up the process of finalizing the 
proposal of this 3rd party evaluation as it is an imperative measure to review the 
outcome/implementation of the Scheme of Silk Samagra-2 which would not only 
help in enhanced production of international grade Bivoltine silk but also 
contribute for socio-economic development of small and marginal farmers 
involved in Sericulture industry. 
 REPLY : Necessary procedural formalities to undertake third party mid-term 
evaluation study of the Silk Samagra-2 scheme is under process. 
          (Ministry of Textiles O.M. No.  H-11016/02/2024-Silk dated 21.05.2024) 
 
 
New Delhi;               BASAVARAJ BOMMAI   
19 August, 2025                                  CHAIRPERSON, 
28 Shravana, 1947 (Saka)                 STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR,  
TEXTILES AND SKILL DEVELOPMENT 
  

32 
 
APPENDIX-I 
MINUTES OF THE FIFTEENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON 
LABOUR, TEXTILES AND SKILL DEVELOPMENT 
(2024-25) 
 
The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 19th August, 2025 from 1500 hrs. to 
16:30 hrs. in Committee Room ‘C’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
         PRESENT 
Shri Basavaraj Bommai-  Chairperson 
      MEMBERS  
  LOK SABHA 
 2. Shri G. M. Harish Balayogi 
 3. Shri Aashtikar Patil Nagesh Bapurao 
 4. Shri Ram Prasad Chaudhary  
 5.                Shri G. Lakhsminarayana 
 6.            Shri Asit Kumar Mal 
           7.        Shri Kali Kumar Munda 
           8.        Shri Rudra Narayan Pany 
           9.        Shri Kartick Chandra Paul 
          10.       Shri Pradeep Purohit 
          11.       Shri Mukesh Rajput 
          12.       Shri Raja Ram Singh 
          13.       Shri Adhikari Soumendu 
          14.       Shri Manoj Tigga 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
  15. Shri Naresh Bansal 
  16. Shri Govindbhai Laljibhai Dholakia 
  17. Shri Rajendra Gehlot 
  18. Dr. Syed Naseer Hussain 
  19. Shri I.S. Inbadurai 
  20. Dr. Meenakshi Jain 
    
                    SECRETARIAT 
 
1.    Shri Lalkithang   - Joint Secretary   
2.    Ms. K. Muanniang Tunglut - Director 
3.    Ms. Mili Dinesh    -  Deputy Secretary 
4.    Shri S. Lalengzau Ngaihte - Deputy Secretary 
5.    Ms. Shilpa Kant   - Under Secretary 

33 
 
 
 
2. XXXX      XXXX      XXXX   
 
3. XXXX      XXXX      XXXX  
     
4. XXXX      XXXX      XXXX   
5. XXXX      XXXX      XXXX 
 
6. XXXX      XXXX      XXXX 
 
(The witnesses then withdrew) 
[A copy of the verbatim record of proceedings was kept on record] 
 
7.   The Committee then took up the next item on the agenda i.e. consideration 
and adoption of four draft Action Taken Reports: - 
(i) Action taken by the Government on the observations/recommendations 
contained in the Fifty-fourth Report (17th Lok Sabha) of the Committee on 
‘Schemes/Programmes of Central Silk Board for Development and 
Promotion of Silk Industry’ pertaining to the Ministry of Textiles;  
(ii) Action Taken by the Government on the observations/recommendations 
contained in the Fifty-Fifth Report (17th Lok Sabha) of the Committee on 
'Development of Cotton Sector' pertaining to Ministry of Textiles;  
(iii) Action Taken by the Government on the observations/recommendations 
contained in the First Report (18th Lok Sabha) of the Committee on 
‘Demands for Grants (2024-25)’ of the Ministry of Labour & Employment; 
and   
(iv) Action Taken by the Government on the observations/recommendations 
contained in the Second Report (18th Lok Sabha) of the Committee on 
‘Demands for Grants (2024-25)’ of the Ministry of Textiles. 
 
8. After some deliberations, the Committee adopted the aforesaid draft 
Reports with some modifications/amendments and authorized the Chairperson 
to finalise the Reports and present the same to Parliament. 
The Committee then adjourned. 
* * * * * * 
 

34 
 
                                         
APPENDIX-II 
         (Vide Para No. 3 of Introduction) 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN THE 
FIFTY-FOURTH REPORT (SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) OF THE 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR, TEXTILES AND SKILL 
DEVELOPMENT  
 Total Percentage 
   
I. Total number of Recommendations 16 
 
 
II. Recommendations/Observations 
which have been accepted by the 
Government – Rec. Para Nos. 1, 2, 4, 
5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 13, 14 and 16. 
 
13 81.25 
III. Recommendations/Observations 
which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government’s 
reply – Rec. Para No. 12. 
      
01 6.25 
IV Recommendations/Observations in 
respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by 
the Committee and which require 
reiteration – Rec. Para No. 3. 
 
01 6.25 
V Recommendations/Observations in 
respect of which replies of the 
Government are interim in nature – 
Rec. Para No. 15 
01 6.25 
           100% 
 
 
 