i 
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR, TEXTILES AND SKILL 
DEVELOPMENT 
(2024-25) 
 (EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF LABOUR AND EMPLOYMENT 
 
ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE OBSERVATIONS/ 
RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE CONTAINED IN THEIR FIRST 
REPORT (EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) ON ‘DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2024-
25)’ OF THE MINISTRY OF LABOUR & EMPLOYMENT. 
 
THIRTEENTH REPORT 
 
      
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
NEW DELHI 
 
      
August, 2025/Shravana, 1947 (Saka)  
 
  
13 

ii 
 
THIRTEENTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR, TEXTILES AND SKILL 
DEVELOPMENT 
(2024-25) 
 
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF LABOUR AND EMPLOYMENT 
 
ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE OBSERVATIONS/ 
RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE CONTAINED IN THEIR FIRST 
REPORT (EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) ON ‘DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2024-
25)’ OF THE MINISTRY OF LABOUR & EMPLOYMENT. 
 
Presented to Hon’ble Speaker on 04.10.2025 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 04.12.2025 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 21.08.2025 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
August, 2025/Shravana, 1947 (Saka)  
  


iii 
 
 
CONTENTS 
PAGE No. 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (iv) 
INTRODUCTION   (v) 
CHAPTER I Report 1 
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations which have been 
accepted by the Government 
 
24 
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations which the 
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the 
Government’s reply 
 
60 
CHAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which 
replies of Government have not been accepted by the 
Committee and which require reiteration 
 
63 
CHAPTER V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which 
replies of the Government are interim in nature  
68 
 
 
 
 
APPENDICES 
 
Appendix- I Minutes of the Fifteenth Sitting of the Committee held 
on 19th August, 2025. 
71 
Appendix- II Analysis of the Action Taken by Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the 
First Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) 
 
73 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

iv 
 
     COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR, TEXTILES AND 
SKILL DEVELOPMENT (2024-25) 
 
Shri Basavaraj Bommai – Chairperson 
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
2 Shri Mani A. 
3 Shri G. M. Harish Balayogi 
4 Shri Aashtikar Patil Nagesh Bapurao 
5 Shri Partha Bhowmick 
6 Shri Yogender Chandolia 
7 Shri Ram Prasad Chaudhary 
8 Shri Chandra Prakash Choudhary 
9 Shri G. Lakshminarayana 
10 Shri Asit Kumar Mal 
11 Shri Kali Charan Munda 
12 
13 
Shri Rudra Narayan Pany 
Shri Kartick Chandra Paul 
14 Shri Tanuj Punia 
15 Shri Pradeep Purohit 
16 Shri Mukesh Rajput 
17 Shri Raja Ram Singh 
18 Shri Adhikari Soumendu 
19 Shri V. K. Sreekandan 
20 Shri Manoj Tigga 
21 Shri Chavan Ravindra Vasantrao 
  
RAJYA SABHA 
22 Smt. Jaya Amitabh Bachchan  
23 
24 
Shri Ritabrata Banerjee 
Shri Naresh Bansal  
25 Shri Govindbhai Laljibhai Dholakia  
26 Shri Rajendra Gehlot 
27 Dr. Syed Naseer Hussain 
28 Shri Maharaja Sanajaoba Leishemba 
29 Shri I.S. Inbadurai 
30 Dr. Meenakshi Jain 
31 Shri S.R. Sivalingam 
  
SECRETARIAT 
1 Shri Lalkithang                      -        Joint Secretary 
2 Ms. K. Muanniang Tunglut     -        Director 
3 Ms. Mili Dinesh                      -        Deputy Secretary 
 

v 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Labour, Textiles and Skill 
Development (2024-25) having been authorized by the Committee, present 
on their behalf this Thirteenth Report on Action taken by the Government 
on the Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in 
their First Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants (2024-
25)’ of the Ministry of Labour & Employment. 
2. The First Report was presented to Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya Sabha 
on 16th December, 2024. The Ministry of Labour and Employment 
furnished their replies on 20th March, 2025 indicating Action Taken on the 
Observations/ Recommendations contained in the First Report. The 
Committee considered and adopted the Draft Report at their sitting held 
on 19th August, 2025. 
3. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/ Recommendations contained in the First Report 
(Eighteenth Lok Sabha) is given at Appendix-II. 
4. For ease of reference, the Observations/Recommendations of the 
Committee have been printed in bold type in the body of the Report. 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi; 
19th August, 2025 
28 Shravana, 1947 (Saka) 
BASAVARAJ BOMMAI 
CHAIRPERSON, 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR, 
TEXTILES AND SKILL DEVELOPMENT 
 
 
  

1 
 
CHAPTER- I 
REPORT 
This Report deals with the action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in their First 
Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants (2024-25)’ of the Ministry 
of Labour and Employment. 
2.  The First Report was presented to Lok Sabha/laid in Rajya Sabha on 16th 
December, 2024. It contained 50 Observations/Recommendations. Replies of 
Government in respect of all the Recommendations have been received and are 
categorized as under:-  
 
(i) Recommendations/Observations which 
have been accepted by the Government – 
Rec. Para Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 10, 12, 
13, 15, 17, 18, 21, 22, 24, 25, 26, 28, 29, 
30, 31, 34, 35, 36, 37, 38, 39, 40, 41, 42, 
43, 45, 46, 47, 48, 49 and 50 
 
Chapter II 
Total: 39 
Percentage:78.00 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the 
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of 
the Government’s reply –Rec. Para Nos. 14, 
19 and 23 
      
Chapter III 
Total: 03 
Percentage: 6.00 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect 
of which replies of the Government have not 
been accepted by the Committee and which 
require reiteration –Rec. Para Nos. 11, 16, 
27, 32 and 44 
 
Chapter IV 
Total: 05 
Percentage: 10.00 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect 
of which replies of the Government are 
interim in nature – Rec. Para Nos. 9, 20 and 
33 
Chapter V 
Total: 03 
Percentage: 6.00 
 
 
3. The Committee desire that Action Taken Notes in respect of 
Observations/ Recommendations contained in Chapter-I and Chapter-V of 
this Report, for which interim reply has been given by the Government, be 
furnished to them at the earliest. 

2 
 
4. The Committee will now deal with some of their earlier Observations/ 
Recommendations which either require reiteration or merit further 
comments. 
I. NATIONAL CAREER SERVICES PROJECT 
Recommendation (Para No.8) 
5. The Committee had noted that the Ministry are implementing the National 
Career Services (NCS) project for transformation of the National Employment 
Service to provide a variety of employment related services like job search & 
matching, career counselling, vocational guidance, information on skill 
development courses, internships etc. through a digital platform.  
6. The Committee had further noted that the target for 2024-25 is (i) to set 
up two career lounges in Model Career Centres with Industry partnership; (ii) to 
issue uniform guidelines for employment portals of the States; and (iii) to migrate 
NCS portal from DC&DR to Azure public cloud. The Committee have been 
apprised that (i) two career lounges in Model Career Centres are envisaged to be 
set up by March, 2025; (ii)  the Employment portals of 4 States have been 
studied, the study of the Employment portals of the remaining States is likely to 
be completed till May, 2025 and as soon as the study of employment portals of 
States is completed, the uniform guidelines will be issued; (iii) the onboarding of 
the Managed Service Provider (MSP) for NCS 2.0 is nearing finalization, and once 
the contract is awarded, the Minimum Viable Product (MVP) is expected to be 
ready by April 2025 and, thereafter, the migration activities will commence. The 
Committee had trusted that the Ministry will meet the deadlines in respect of 
setting up of career lounges in Model Career Centres by March, 2025, completion 
of study of Employment Portals of all States by May, 2025,  and readiness of 
Minimum Viable Product (MVP) by April, 2025. The Committee had further 
desired that after these deadlines are met, efforts be made to ensure that the 
work relating to issue of uniform guidelines for employment portals of the States  
and  migration of NCS portal from DC&DR to Azure public cloud be completed 
in a time bound manner preferably in the year 2025 itself. 

3 
 
7. The Ministry of Labour and Employment in their Action Taken Note 
furnished to the Committee, have stated as under:- 
“Efforts are being made to complete the targets in a time bound manner.” 
8. The Committee note that though the Ministry are making efforts to 
complete the targets in respect of setting up of career lounges in Model 
Career Centres by March, 2025; completion of study of Employment Portals 
of all States by May, 2025  and readiness of Minimum Viable Product (MVP) 
by April, 2025 under the National Career Services (NCS) project, the 
progress made so far and status of the works have not been furnished. 
Moreover, the Action Taken Reply of the Ministry has not indicated the 
efforts made to ensure completion of the work relating to issuance of 
uniform guidelines for employment portals of the States and migration of 
the National Career Services (NCS) portal from DC&DR to Azure public 
cloud, in a time bound manner.  The Committee emphasize the urgent 
need for connecting job seekers, including workers in the unorganized 
sector with employment opportunities, skill development and career–
related development and urge the Ministry to ensure completion of all the 
remaining works and operationalization of the NCS project without delay. 
The Committee also desire that the status in this regard as well as the 
progress achieved regarding issuance of uniform guidelines for employment 
portals of the States and migration of NCS portal from DC & DR to Azure 
public cloud, be intimated to the Committee at regular intervals.  
II. DATA ON EMPLOYMENT GENERATION  
Recommendation (Para No.11) 
9. The Committee had also been apprised that, at present, the Ministry 
depend on the PLFS survey for getting information in respect of persons who get 
jobs, education-wise, age-wise, in rural areas, in urban areas, etc. The Ministry 
also get feedback on employment and job creation from RBI on 27 sectors. In 
addition, feedback from EPFO on the new subscribers who are joining the EPFO 
provides information on job creation.  The Committee had noted that notifying 

4 
 
final hiring figures is not a mandatory requirement on NCS Portal. During 
evidence, the Committee had been assured that though NCS does not have 
mandate for providing placement details, the Ministry will work on it. The 
Committee, had therefore, strongly recommended the Ministry to devise a 
suitable mechanism to ensure that NCS portal reflects the actual number of 
placements achieved through its usage so that the data regarding employment 
generation is readily available. 
10. In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Ministry of 
Labour & Employment have stated as follows:- 
 
“The committee’s observations have been noted. DGE is capturing the 
count of the shortlisted candidates from the job fairs that conducted in 
MCC. Further, the NCS portal has got the feature wherein the employer 
can update the shortlisted candidates. 
Activities are planned and executed by DGE to educate/motivate the 
employers to update their vacancies on the NCS portal promptly.” 
 
11. While noting the recommendation of the Committee for devising a 
suitable mechanism to reflect the actual number of placements in the 
National Career Services (NCS) portal so that the data regarding 
employment generation is readily available, the Ministry have stated that 
DGE is capturing the count of the shortlisted candidates from the job fairs 
conducted in MCC.  Further, the NCS portal has got the feature wherein the 
employer can update the shortlisted candidates. The Committee are not 
satisfied with the reply of the Ministry and desire that a robust verification 
mechanism be developed and implemented to ensure that the number of 
placements reported on NCS portal accurately reflects actual employment 
outcomes. The Committee further desire that a digital confirmation system 
in respect of updation of job placements by employers on a continuous 
basis, ratings and incentives for employers who consistently report actual 
hiring data as well as a self-reporting feature for candidates who found 
placements should be featured on the NCS portal to significantly enhance 
more accurate assessment of the portal’s effectiveness in facilitating 
employment as well as help identify gaps in placement services. Moreover, 
the Ministry is exhorted to come out with more specific methods where the 
employers compulsorily report the vacancies and thereby the vacancies are 
automatically updated. The progress achieved in this regard may be 
intimated to the Committee in three months. 
 

5 
 
III. NATIONAL CAREER SERVICES CENTRES FOR SCs/STs  
Recommendation (Para No.16) 
12. The Committee had further noted that out of 36 States/UTs, the training 
to SC/ST candidates was provided in 25 States/UTs only and the candidates in 
the remaining 11 States/UTs viz. Bihar, Chhatisgarh, Goa, Sikkim, Tripura, 
Uttarakhand, Andaman and Nicobar Islands, Chandigarh, Dadra & Nagar Haveli 
and Daman and Diu, Ladakh and Lakshadweep were left out.  The Ministry have 
also categorically stated that there is one Centre at each of 25 States/UTs and, 
at present, there is no proposal to expand the training Centres in the remaining 
11 States/UTs. The Committee had felt that SC/ST candidates in these 11 
States/UTs are being deprived of their legitimate right to get training under the 
Scheme. The Committee, had therefore, impressed upon the Ministry to expand 
the number of training centres in such a way that each State/UT has at least 
one Training Centre so that the SC/ST candidates across the country get the 
training benefits under the Scheme. 
13. In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Ministry of 
Labour & Employment have stated as follows:- 
“NCSCs for SC/ST were established in the States/UTs as model institutes 
to enhance the employability of SC/ST jobseekers through 
guidance/coaching/training. These Centres are Sub-ordinate offices of 
DGE in the various parts of the country. At present, there are 25 such 
Centres functioning in the country. According to the mandate of NCSC for 
SC/ST, if State requests, similar Centres may be opened in respective 
State. The State /UT Govt. are at liberty to open similar Centres in the 
States/UTs from their own resources depending on their requirement.” 
 
14. The Committee had impressed upon the Ministry to have at least one 
National Career Services Training Centre (NCSC) in each State/UT so that 
the SC/ST candidates get the training benefits under the Scheme. The reply 
of the Ministry that the State/UT Governments are at liberty to open 
similar centres in the States/UTs from their own resources depending on 
their requirement, is not convincing to the Committee. In their considered 
view, employability of the vulnerable SC/ST job seekers need to be 

6 
 
enhanced through guidance/coaching/training provided by the NCSC and 
it is incumbent upon the Ministry to ensure that each State/UT has at least 
one Training Centre. As the States/UTs often lack the resources to 
establish NCSC on their own, the Committee reiterate their earlier 
recommendation and urge the Ministry to take pro-active steps to establish 
at least one dedicated training centre under the NCS Scheme in each 
State/UT focusing on ensuring access to training for SC/ST candidates. 
Specific funds should be earmarked for the purpose and a structured, time-
bound implementation plan be prepared in co-ordination with the 
States/UTs.  
 
IV. HEALTH CARE FACILITY FOR BEEDI/CINE/NON-COAL MINES 
WORKERS  
Recommendation (Para No. 27) 
15. The Committee had noted that health care facility is extended to 
Beedi/Cine/Non-Coal Mines workers with a network of 279 Dispensaries and 10 
Hospitals. In the F.Y. 2023-24, 18,02,000 beedi/cine/non-coal mines workers 
and their dependents were benefited with an expenditure of Rs 9.7 Crore. The 
financial assistance ranging from Rs. 30,000 to Rs. 7,50,000 is provided for 
treatment of 09 diseases viz. Cancer, Tuberculosis, Heart Diseases, Kidney 
Transplantation, Hernia, Appendectomy, Ulcer, Gynaecological diseases and 
Prostrate diseases in the Government recognized Hospitals. The Committee had 
noted that while the rates for reimbursement in respect of cancer were revised 
in 2022, there has not been any increase in the rates for reimbursement for the 
remaining 08 diseases since 2002/2003 viz. during the last 22/21 years.  The 
Committee had been informed that at present there is no proposal under 
consideration of the Government to increase the financial assistance or to cover 
more diseases. The Committee were of the considered view that owing to the 
surge in medical expenses over the years, it has become imperative, if not 
mandatory, to augment the amount of reimbursement for the treatment of 
various diseases.  The Committee had firmly believed that a powerful health care 

7 
 
system is one of the prerequisites for building a robust economy and towards 
achieving this end, the good health of the movers and shakers of the economy 
who form the base of the pyramid, i.e., the work force is of paramount 
significance.  The Committee, had therefore, desired the Ministry to undertake 
an objective assessment of the current rates prescribed and expediently 
undertake an exercise to revise the existing ceiling so that expenses incurred on 
health care facilities become affordable to the beneficiaries as well as their 
dependents.  The Committee had also recommended to simultaneously explore 
the desirability of identifying other diseases prevalent in Beedi/Cine/Non-Coal 
Mines workers adversely affectingly their liver, eyes, skin, ears, mental and 
behavioral disorders or such occupational diseases as identified by ILO. 
16. In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Ministry of 
Labour & Employment have stated as follows:- 
“Health care facilities are provided to Beedi, Cine and Non-Coal Mine 
workers and to their family members through 10 Hospitals and 279 
Dispensaries located across the country. Under this scheme OPD facility 
is provided to the workers and their family members. Apart from OPD 
facility, reimbursement of expenditure for specialized medical treatment in 
case of critical diseases like Cancer, Heart diseases, Kidney diseases etc. 
are also provided. At present, proposal for enhancement of existing ceiling 
for reimbursement of expenses is not under consideration. One of the 
distinguishing features of the health scheme is that the Labour Welfare 
Organisation provides the Health Care benefits to workers and their 
families at door step through its Medical Mobile Units located across the 
country. In the camp screening of diseases like Diabetes, Hypertension, 
related to eye, Tuberculosis etc. are also carried out.”  
 
17. In their earlier recommendation, the Committee had desired a 
revision in the existing ceiling on health care facilities provided to Beedi, 
Cine and Non-Coal Mine workers and their family members and had 
recommended to explore the desirability of identifying other 
diseases/occupational diseases prevalent in such workers as identified by 
the ILO. The Action Taken Reply of the Ministry that proposal for 
enhancement of the existing ceiling for reimbursement of expenses is not 
under consideration at present is a matter of concern. Besides, no mention 
has been made in respect of identifying other diseases/occupational 

8 
 
diseases prevalent in such workers. The Committee attach high priority 
towards the health care of Beedi, Cine and Non-Coal Mine workers who are 
vulnerable to occupational diseases and reiterate their earlier 
recommendation for undertaking an objective assessment of the current 
rates prescribed and bringing about revision in the existing ceiling at the 
earliest so that adequate provision  is made for the treatment of such 
workers. Prompt action may also be taken to identify other diseases 
prevalent in Beedi/Cine/Non-Coal Mines workers adversely affecting their 
liver, eyes, skin, ears, mental and behavioral disorders or such occupational 
diseases as identified by the ILO. 
  
 
V. CENTRAL SECTOR SCHEME FOR REHABILITATION OF BONDED 
LABOURER-2021 
Recommendation (Para Nos. 29 & 30) 
18. The Committee had noted that the Central Sector Scheme for 
Rehabilitation of Bonded Labourer-2021 has been revamped and implemented 
w.e.f. 27.01.2022. The Committee had been apprised that 2,96,795 persons have 
been rescued and Rs.10,558.30 lakhs has been disbursed since 1978. 
19. The Committee had further noted that for the fiscal 2023-24, the BE for 
the Scheme was Rs. 10 crore which was reduced to Rs. 6.98 crore at RE Stage 
and out of which, as on 31.03.2024, only a meagre amount of  
Rs.1.34 crore (23.76 %) has been utilized leaving an unspent amount of Rs.5.64 
crore due to non-receipt of documents and utilization certificates. The BE for 
current financial year is 6.00 crore and as on 19.11.2024, only Rs.33.61 lakhs 
has been spent. The Committee had reckoned that the Ministry are implementing 
the Scheme for identification and release of bonded labourers and it is demand 
driven in nature where funds are provided to the States/UTs on receipt of 
financial demand from them.  The Committee had noted that the Ministry has 
requested States to submit the reimbursement related cases timely and that 
requests were also made through letters as well as virtual meetings to all the 

9 
 
States/Union Territories to avoid late submission of their reimbursement 
proposals and to submit the claims immediately after rescue of the concerned 
bonded labourers so as to ensure optimal utilization of funds.  The Committee, 
while appreciating the efforts made by the Ministry to get timely reimbursement 
proposals from the States/UTs, had desired that heightened measures be 
undertaken in this direction.  The Committee had also desired that the process 
of submitting reimbursement proposals by the States/UTs be carried out online. 
The Committee had impressed upon the Ministry to strengthen their monitoring 
and coordination mechanism for optimal utilisation of funds and reduce 
surrender of allocated funds to the minimum extent possible.  
20. The Committee had further noted that during the year 2023-24, 468 
bonded labourers were freed/rescued/rehabilitated from five States viz., 
Rajasthan (56), Tamil Nadu (176), Chhattisgarh (76), Pondicherry (5) and Odisha 
(155).  The Committee had further noted that in 2023-24, 123 minors were also 
rescued which is a clear indication of the wide spread presence of the evil of 
bonded labour in the country.  The Committee had noted that   the Ministry is 
holding meetings with various State/UT Governments and requesting them to 
speed up the trials in respect of bonded labourers to whom immediate financial 
assistance had already been provided.  The Committee had felt that unless the 
convictions come through, it may be extremely difficult to establish the crime of 
Bonded Labour and provide full benefits under the Scheme. The Committee were, 
therefore, of the considered view that there is an urgent need on the part of the 
Ministry to shore up the efforts so as to eradicate the scourge of bonded labour 
and implement the Scheme in a more effective way. The Committee had desired 
the Ministry to explore the possibility of setting up fast track courts by taking up 
the matter with the Ministry of Law & Justice and the States/UTs, where the 
cases of bonded labourers are predominant.  In addition, the States/UTs may 
also be encouraged to set up squads of law enforcement agencies to act against 
perpetrators of bonded labour.  The Committee had strongly recommended that 
effective measures be initiated to stamp out Bonded Labour from the country 
regardless of the procedural and legal recourse being adopted. 

10 
 
21. In their Action Taken Notes furnished to the Committee, the Ministry of 
Labour & Employment have stated as follows:- 
“To expedite and streamline the implementation of the provisions under 
the Bonded Labour System (Abolition) Act, 1976, (BLSA), the Ministry of 
Labour and Employment formulated a scheme, as amended from time, to 
ensure effective rehabilitation for rescued bonded labourers.  At present, 
the scheme is named ‘Central Sector Scheme for the Rehabilitation of 
Bonded Labourers-2021’. 
  
The scheme is demand-driven. It gives direct authority and responsibility 
to District Magistrates/ District Authorities.  The proposal seeking 
financial assistance under the scheme can be submitted by the districts, 
through the concerned department in the state govt., to the Ministry of 
Labour and Employment.    
  
A Standard Operating Procedures (SoP) was issued by the Ministry on 
17.08.2017 to assist and facilitate the implementing stakeholders. It gave 
clarity on course of action right from receipt of complaint till summary trial 
and rehabilitation assistance in a time bound manner, as the BLSA clearly 
defines work to be undertaken under Central sphere and State sphere. 
   
Recently, Hon’ble Supreme Court of India in Writ Petition (Civil) No. 
511/2022 passed an order dated 21.11.2024 wherein the Ministry was 
directed to convene a meeting with the states and union territories and 
come out with a proposal which addresses the issue regarding inter-state 
trafficking and grant of release certificate.  
  
Accordingly, a meeting was held with the states and union 
territories.  Based on the discussion, a senior level committee was also 
constituted by the Ministry inter-alia to study suggestions/ comments of 
the States/UTs including improvement in Scheme/ SOP, if any.  The 
report of the committee has been submitted and the same is under 
examination. 
  
 The committee has made comprehensive recommendations, which, inter-
alia, includes effective implementation of the provisions of the Act by the 
States/ UTs, timely issuance of immediate financial assistance and 
completion of summary trial, providing rehabilitation assistance, 
utilization of funds under the Central Sector Scheme for Rehabilitation of 
Bonded Labourers, appointment of Nodal Officers, monitoring and review 
mechanism, development of online tracking/ monitoring mechanism 
including submission of reimbursement proposals etc.  
  
To ensure effective enforcement of the provisions of the Child Labour Act, 
a portal named, 'Platform for Effective Enforcement for No Child Labour 
(PENCIL) is being operated by the Ministry w.e.f. 26.09.2019.  The portal 

11 
 
is now being revamped into a comprehensive portal which will also include 
the portal for bonded labourers. 
  
The agency for developing the unified portal has been finalized and work 
has also been awarded on 11.10.24.” 
 
22. The Committee had recommended a slew of measures in respect of 
the Central Sector Scheme for Rehabilitation of Bonded Labourer such as 
optimal utilization of funds under the Scheme, online  submission of 
reimbursement proposals by the States/UTs, strengthening of monitoring 
and coordination mechanism, setting up fast track courts and squads of law 
enforcement agencies to act against perpetrators of bonded labour, 
initiating effective measures to stamp out bonded labour from the country, 
etc. The Ministry, in their Action Taken Reply, have highlighted the 
measures taken so far under the Scheme including constitution of a senior 
level committee to suggest improvement in the Scheme as well as the SOP 
issued by the Ministry, revamping of the Platform for Effective 
Enforcement for No Child Labour (PENCIL) portal to include the portal for 
Bonded Labourers, etc. In view of the critical importance of timely 
intervention and policy reforms in addressing the issue of bonded labour, 
the Committee desire that the report of the senior level committee should 
be examined and implemented at the earliest.  Concerted efforts should 
also be made for operationalization of the unified portal for both child 
labour and bonded labour within the specified timeframe.   
 
On the important issues of facilitating online submission of 
reimbursement proposals by the States/UTs,  setting up of fast track courts 
by taking up the matter with the Ministry of Law & Justice and the 
States/UTs where cases of bonded labourers are predominant and 
encouraging the States/UTs to set up squads of law enforcement agencies 
to act against perpetrators of bonded labour, the Ministry are  surprisingly 
silent. The Committee call upon the Ministry to undertake nation wide 
survey to ascertain the number of bonded labourers and initiate strict legal 
action against the perpetrators. Moreover, a systematic action plan may be 
drawn up to rehabilitate the rescued bonded labourers. This exercise may  
be taken up vigorously, particularly in those states where high incidence of 
bonded labourers have been reported. The Committee, therefore, lay stress 
on rooting out bonded labour system in the country and urge the Ministry 
to act on their recommendation in right earnest and furnish the status in 
this regard within three months.  
 

12 
 
VI. UNIFIED PORTAL FOR CHILD AND BONDED LABOUR  
Recommendation (Para No. 31) 
23. The Committee had noted with surprise that the Ministry had initially 
stated that the work related to development of the National Portal on Bonded 
Labour is in progress. The portal has the objective of facilitating in bringing 
uniformity in capturing data, which would facilitate uniformity in capturing data 
in different States/UTs to help towards eradication of the menace of bonded 
labour more efficiently. However, subsequently, the Ministry have informed that 
they are in the process of revamping the existing Platform for Effective 
Enforcement for No Child Labour (PENCiL) Portal into a comprehensive unified 
portal for Child Labour, Bonded Labour and Women Labour and for the purpose, 
the agency for revamping the Portal has been shortlisted and the work is also 
under progress. The Ministry have further stated that it is expected that the 
revamped portal will be functional within a year. The Committee had hoped that 
the Ministry of Women and Child Development, being the nodal Ministry 
responsible for overall development of women and children in the country, has 
been consulted in this regard. The Committee had called upon the Ministry to 
intensify their efforts and trust that the Ministry would fulfill their commitment 
for development of a Unified Portal within a year. 
24. In their Action Taken Notes furnished to the Committee, the Ministry of 
Labour & Employment have stated as follows:- 
“As mentioned above, to ensure effective enforcement of the provisions of 
the Child Labour Act, a portal named, 'Platform for Effective Enforcement 
for No Child Labour (PENCIL) is being operated by the Ministry w.e.f. 
26.09.2019.  The portal is now being revamped into a comprehensive 
portal which will also include the portal for bonded labourers. 
The agency for developing the unified portal has been finalized and work 
has also been awarded on 11.10.24.” 
 
25. The Committee observe that the agency for developing a unified 
portal for child labour and bonded labour has been finalized and work has 
also been awarded on 11.10.2024. As effective enforcement of the 
provisions of the Bonded Labour System (Abolition) Act, 1976 is imperative 

13 
 
to root out the prevalence of bonded labour in the country and in light of 
the pressing need for an integrated digital mechanism to monitor, report 
and act on instances of bonded labour, the Committee call upon the 
Ministry to strictly adhere to the timeline for completion and 
operationalization of the Unified Portal in the current year. The Committee 
also desire that inter-Ministry co-ordination be strengthened to facilitate 
integration of data-sharing and inter-operability of systems with all the 
entities concerned for a pilot roll out in high incidence districts of bonded 
labour before scaling it up nationwide. 
 
 
VII. IMPLEMENTATION OF IHD RECOMMENDATION 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 32) 
26. The Committee had noted that the Institute of Human Development (IHD) 
had conducted evaluation of the Scheme and based on the recommendations of 
the IHD, the immediate assistance has been increased from Rs. 20,000/- to Rs. 
30,000/-. The Committee had been apprised that based on the suggestions and 
inputs received from various stakeholders and other social partners, the Scheme 
has been continued up to the financial year 2025-26. The Committee had liked 
to know the status of implementation of the recommendation of IHD regarding 
changes in design of the Scheme and also that the payment of rehabilitation 
amount be delinked from conviction. 
27. In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Ministry of 
Labour & Employment have stated as follows:- 
“Central Sector Scheme for Rehabilitation of Bonded Labourer-2021 is a 
demand driven scheme where funds are provided to States/UTs on receipt 
of proposal from them. The scheme makes conviction a necessary 
requirement for final disbursement of cash assistance as the charges 
levied on the captor/creditor needs verification by the concerned Executive 
Magistrate in the first place in order to avoid any undue deduction of 
funds, in the event of false/frivolous cases of bonded labour. 
The scheme was previously evaluated in the year 2021 and accordingly 
revised scheme named 'Central Sector Scheme for Rehabilitation of 

14 
 
Bonded Labourer-2021' has been effective w.e.f. 27.01.2022 for the period 
upto 2025-26.” 
 
28. The Committee had noted that the Institute of Human Development 
(IHD) had conducted evaluation of the Scheme for Rehabilitation of Bonded 
Labourer and sought to know the status of implementation of the 
recommendation of IHD regarding changes in design of the Scheme and 
delinking of payment for rehabilitation from conviction. However, the 
Action Taken Reply of the Ministry has not indicated any measures taken 
or efforts made by the Ministry in this regard. The Committee, hence urge  
the Ministry to act upon their recommendation in right earnest for bringing 
about changes in the designs of the Rehabilitation of Bonded Labourer 
Scheme and delinking the payment for rehabilitation, from conviction. A 
detailed response outlining the progress made so far in this regard may be 
furnished to the Committee within three months. 
 
VIII. CORPUS FUND FOR REHABILITATION OF BONDED LABOURERS 
Recommendation (Para No. 33) 
29. The Committee had further noted that the Scheme provides for creation of 
a Bonded Labour Rehabilitation Fund at the district level by each State with a 
permanent corpus of at least Rs. 10 lakhs at the disposal of the District 
Magistrate which would be renewable for extending immediate help to the 
released bonded labourers. As informed by the Ministry, so far, only 09 States 
viz. Assam, Kerala, Bihar, Uttar Pradesh, Karnataka, Delhi, Haryana, Gujarat & 
Tamil Nadu have confirmed the constitution of district corpus funds in each 
district. The Committee had liked to be apprised of the status of creation of 
corpus funds by the remaining 27 States/UTs and the efforts made by the 
Ministry in this direction. 
30. In their Action Taken Notes furnished to the Committee, the Ministry of 
Labour & Employment have stated as follows:- 
“The details are being collected.” 
 

15 
 
31. The Committee take note that only 09 States viz. Assam, Kerala, 
Bihar, Uttar Pradesh, Karnataka, Delhi, Haryana, Gujarat & Tamil Nadu 
have confirmed the constitution of district corpus funds towards extending 
immediate help to the released bonded labourers and had sought to be 
apprised of the status of creation of corpus funds by the remaining 27 
States/UTs along with the efforts made by the Ministry in this direction. In 
their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry have stated that the details are 
being collected without providing the details of efforts made by them to 
ensure the creation of such corpus funds in all the States/UTs. The 
Committee lay emphasis on follow-up action with the defaulting States/UTs 
and urge the Ministry to actively pursue and co-ordinate with these 
States/UTs so that the mandated corpus funds for extending immediate 
help to the released bonded labourers, are established in all the States/UTs 
of the country without further delay. A status report in this regard may also 
be furnished to the Committee within three months.  
 
IX. LABOUR WELFARE AND EMPLOYMENT INDEX 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 42) 
32. The Committee had appreciated that the Ministry is in the process of 
introducing a ‘Labour Welfare and Employment Index’ (LWEI) to rank all States 
and Union Territories (UTs) and, as assured by the representative during the oral 
evidence, the proposed Index will be in place by the end of the current financial 
year. The Committee had felt that the initiative would improve labour standards, 
foster healthy competition among the States and help them to improve their 
performance in employment generation, labour requirements besides promoting 
uniformity in the implementation of Labour Codes thereby improving welfare of 
the labour as well as productivity. The Committee had desired that the exercise 
to introduce ‘Labour Welfare and Employment Index’ (LWEI) to rank all States  
 

16 
 
and Union Territories (UTs) be completed in a time bound manner so as to meet 
the intended objectives. 
33. In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Ministry of 
Labour & Employment have stated as follows:- 
“The drafting of Concept Note for Labour Welfare Employment Index is 
currently in progress. It will be finalised after consulting all stakeholders” 
 
34. The Committee note that drafting of Concept Note for Labour Welfare 
Employment Index (LWEI) is currently in progress and would be finalized 
after consulting all the stakeholders. Being of the view that LWEI is a 
positive step towards promoting accountability and improving labour 
welfare delivery mechanisms, the Committee urge the Ministry for early 
commencement and completion of all consultations with the stakeholders 
so that the Concept Note is finalized expeditiously. The Committee further 
urge the Ministry to establish a clear roadmap with defined timelines for 
the design, piloting and implementation of LWEI and to keep the 
Committee apprised of the progress periodically. 
 
X. REVISION OF WAGE CEILING UNDER ESIC 
Recommendation (Para No. 44) 
35. The Committee had noted that under the Employees’ State Insurance Act, 
1948 the employees are required to pay contribution at the rate of 3.25 percent 
of wages of the covered employees and the rate of contribution for the employees 
is 0.75 percent of their wages. Further, at present, wage workers drawing wages 
upto Rs.176 per day are exempted from paying their share of contribution. The 
Committee had been apprised that the average daily wages during a wage period 
for exemption from payment of employee’s contribution was raised to Rs.176 
w.e.f. 06 September 2019.  The Committee had also been apprised that the 
Minimum Wages for exemption of an employee from payment of employees 
contribution under Section 42 of ESI Act, 1948 read with Rule 52 of ESI (Central)  

17 
 
Rule 1950, is decided on the basis of National Floor Level Minimum Wages decided 
under Minimum Wages Act, 1948.    
36. The Committee had noted that there are 2,39,946 exempted employees in 33 
States/UTs with top five States being Tamil Nadu, West Bengal, Andhra Pradesh, 
Telangana and Maharashtra having 44,545, 44,021, 18,624, 13,871 and 13,316 
low paid employees respectively. The Committee had felt that the amount of Rs.176 
per day is way too low to sustain a family in the present time.  
37. Considering the fact that more than five years have passed since the increase 
was effected on the last occasion as well as rise in cost of living, the Committee had 
felt that there is an urgent need to revise National Floor Level Minimum Wages 
under Minimum Wages Act, 1948 so as to have corresponding revision in 
exemption of an employee from payment of employees contribution under ESI Act 
and the Rules made thereunder. The Committee, had therefore, called upon the 
Ministry to revisit the threshold limit and arrive at a reasonable amount in the 
larger interest of welfare of the low paid workers and their family members.   
38. In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Ministry of 
Labour & Employment have stated as follows:- 
“The average daily wages during a wage period for exemption from payment 
of employees’ contribution under Section 42 of the ESI Act 1948, stipulated 
in the Rule 52 of ESI (Central) Rules, 1950 is fixed on the basis of the 
National Floor level Minimum Wages decided by the Ministry. 
The revision to the average daily wages during a wage period for exemption 
from payment of employees’ contribution, stipulated in Rule 52 of the ESI 
(Central) Rules, 1950 may be taken up after the National Floor level 
Minimum Wages is revised.” 
 
39. The Committee, in their earlier recommendation, had called upon the 
Ministry to revisit the threshold limit of the National Floor Level Minimum 
Wages (NFLMW) so as to have corresponding revision in exemption of an 
employee from payment of employees contribution under the ESI Act and the 
Rules made thereunder. In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry have stated 

18 
 
that revision to the average daily wages during a wage period for exemption from 
payment of employees’ contribution, stipulated in Rule 52 of the ESI (Central) 
Rules, 1950 may be taken up after the National Floor level Minimum Wages is 
revised. The Committee find it surprising that no efforts seem to have been made 
for revision of the National Floor Level Minimum Wages. The Committee take a 
serious view in the matter since in the larger interest of the welfare of labourers, 
who play a key role in the process of nation building, the revision of NFLMW has 
to be done. It is also a matter of concern that a good number of vulnerable low-
income workers must pay contribution under the ESI Act and Rules framed 
thereunder due to non-revision of the National Floor Level Minimum wages. The 
Committee urge the Ministry to take urgent steps to expedite revision of the 
National Floor Level Minimum Wages so that the average daily wages during a 
wage period for exemption from payment of employees’ contribution under the 
ESI (Central) Rules, 1950 is revised accordingly in the interest of the vulnerable 
low- income workers. The Committee also desire to be intimated of the time by 
which a decision in this regard will be taken. 
XI. EMPLOYEES PENSION SCHEME, 1995  
Recommendation (Para No. 47) 
40. The Committee had noted note that the Employees’ Pension Scheme, 1995 
(EPS, 1995) has been framed under the Employees’ Provident Fund and Miscellaneous 
Provisions Act, 1952 (EPF & MP Act, 1952) and came into effect from 16th November, 
1995. Under the Scheme, the Central Government contributes @ 1.16% of wages with 
wage celling of Rs. 15000/- per month as Govt’s Share of pension contribution under 
Employees’ Pension Scheme, 1995. In addition, a Grant-in-Aid is provided by the 
Central Government under Minimum Pension Scheme towards re-imbursement of 
difference of amount between minimum pension of Rs. 1000/- (announced by the Govt. 
of India) and actual member pension under EPS-1995 (if it is less than Rs. 1000/-) 
w.e.f. 01.09.2014. During 2023-24, the total number of pensioners getting minimum 
pension of Rs. 1000 per month was 20,64,805 and the total grant-in-aid for providing 
minimum pension of Rs. 1000 per month from 01.04.2023 to 31.03.2024 was Rs. 
957.55 crore. 

19 
 
41. The Committee had noted that over a decade has passed since the 
minimum pension of Rs.1000 per month is being provided to the pensioners. 
Considering the manifold increase in the cost of living in 2024 vis-à-vis 2014 
and other relevant factors, as put before the Committee by various 
Stakeholders during their oral evidences held in the year 2023, the Committee 
feel that there is a need to seriously look into the aspect of considering an 
upward revision of this amount.  Notwithstanding the financial implications 
involved, the Committee had desired the Ministry/EPFO to take up this 
significant task sympathetically with a sense of urgency in the larger interest 
of the effected pensioners and their family members so as to arrive at an 
amicable solution.     
42. In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Ministry of 
Labour & Employment have stated as follows:- 
“The EPS, 1995 is a “Defined Contribution-Defined Benefit” Social Security 
Scheme. The corpus of the Employees’ Pension Fund is made up of (i) 
contribution by the employer @ 8.33 per cent of wages; and (ii) contribution 
from Central Government through budgetary support @ 1.16 per cent of wages 
up to an amount of Rs.15,000/- per month. All benefits under the scheme are 
paid out of such accumulations. The fund is valued annually as mandated 
under paragraph 32 of the EPS, 1995 and additional reliefs paid if the position 
of the fund so permits. Since the year 2000(except 2015), the fund ran into 
deficit and no additional reliefs could be paid. 
However, the Government, for the first time, in the year 2014, provided a 
minimum pension of Rs. 1000 per month to the pensioners under the EPS, 
 1995 by providing budgetary support, which was in addition to the 
budgetary support of 1.16 per cent of wages provided annually towards EPS 
to Employees’ Provident Fund Organization (EPFO). 
This Ministry had made a request to the Ministry of Finance for upward 
revision of the Minimum Pension under EPS-95 scheme. However, during 
May, 2023, Ministry of Finance conveyed its disagreement to the said request 
of MoL&E.  Further, the same proposal was made part of all the pre-budget 
proposals, which could also not be included in the budget speech/document.” 
 
43. The Committee had felt the need for an upward revision of the 
pension amount of Rs. 1000 per month under the Employees’ Pension 
Scheme, 1995 and desired the Ministry/EPFO to take up this significant 

20 
 
 task sympathetically with a sense of urgency in the larger interest of the 
affected pensioners and their family members. In their Action Taken Reply, 
the Ministry have stated that a request had been made to the Ministry of 
Finance for upward revision, however, Ministry of Finance during May 
2023, conveyed its disagreement to the said request.  Further, the same 
proposal was made part of all the pre-budget proposals, which also could 
not be included in the budget speech/document. The Committee express 
concern at the turn of events and urge the Ministry to pursue the matter 
vigorously with the Ministry of Finance presenting detailed socio-economic 
data, actuarial assessments and even comparative analysis with similar 
Schemes to make a compelling case for enhancement of the minimum 
pension under EPS-95. 
 
XII. IMPLEMENTATION OF LABOUR CODES 
Recommendation (Para No. 49) 
44. The Committee had noted that the Government have notified four Labour 
Codes, namely, the Code on Wages, 2019 on 8th August, 2019 and the Industrial 
Relations Code, 2020, the Code on Social Security, 2020 & the Occupational 
Safety, Health and Working Conditions Code, 2020 on 29th September, 2020. 
These Codes are yet to be implemented.  
45. As a step towards implementation of the four Labour Codes, the Ministry 
have pre-published seven draft Rules during the period 07.07.2020 to 
03.06.2021 whereby comments of all stakeholders including general public have 
been invited. 
46. Labour is in the Concurrent List of the Constitution and under the Labour 
Codes, rules are required to be framed by the Central Government as well as by 
the State Governments. The Central Government and a number of States/UTs 
have pre-published rules under four Labour Codes.As on 03.12.2024, 03 States 
viz Meghalaya, Nagaland and West Bengal and 01 UT viz. Lakshadweep have not 

21 
 
yet pre-published the Rules on the Code on Wages, 2019. 02 States viz. 
Meghalaya and West Bengal and 02 UTs viz. Andaman and Nicobar Islands, 
Lakshadweep and NCT of Delhi have not pre-published the Rules on the 
Occupational Safety, Health and Working Conditions Code, 2020. 03 States viz. 
Meghalaya, Nagaland, West Bengal and 01 UT viz. Lakshadweep and NCT of 
Delhi have not pre-published the Rules on the Industrial Relations Code, 2020. 
03 States viz. Meghalaya, Tamil Nadu and West Bengal and 01 UT viz.   
Lakshadweep and NCT of Delhi have not pre-published the Rules on the Code 
on Social Security, 2020. 
47. The Committee have been apprised that the Ministry had held intensive 
regional consultations with the States/UTs and found some gaps and 
deficiencies in the rules drafted by some of the States for which necessary 
clarifications have been provided by the Ministry.  
48. The Committee had been concerned to note that the four Labour Codes, 
which were notified in 2019/2020 are yet to be implemented. While most of the 
States/UTs have pre-published draft Rules under these Codes, only a few 
States/UTs have not pre-published the draft Rules. The Committee have been 
apprised that the draft Rules of all the States and UTs will be ready soon as the 
Ministry have done intensive work, regional meetings, hand-holding and State-
by-State work. 
49. Considering the fact that for carrying out the provisions of the Codes, it is 
a statutory obligation  on the States/UTs to prepare the Rules, the Committee 
had impressed upon the Ministry to further intensify their efforts and vigorously 
pursue the matter with all States/UTs and ensure that the follow up action viz. 
vetting of the draft by the Ministry of Law/ State Law Departments as required, 
etc. is also completed in a time bound manner so as to ensure that the four 
Labour Codes are implemented at the earliest. The Committee would like to be 
apprised of the progress made in this regard. 
50. In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Ministry of 
Labour & Employment have stated as follows:- 

22 
 
“It is stated that the Central Government has been making constant efforts 
in the direction of implementation of Labour Codes, including holding of 
several meetings through Video Conferences, providing handholding to 
States/UTs in framing of Rules under Labour Codes etc. As a result of this, 
significant progress has been made in pre-publication of rules by various 
States/UTs under Labour Codes. Recently, Meghalaya, Nagaland and 
Andaman & Nicobar Islands have pre-published rules under all four 
Labour Codes. Present status of pre-publication of Rules by States/UTs is 
as under:- 
 
S.No. Name of Code No. of States/UTs pre-published Rules 
1. The Code on Wages, 
2019 
34 States/UTs except West Bengal and 
Lakshadweep 
2. The Industrial Relations 
Code, 2020 
33 States/UTs except West Bengal, NCT of Delhi 
and Lakshadweep 
3. The Code on Social 
Security, 2020 
32 States/UTs except West Bengal, Tamil Nadu, 
NCT of Delhi and Lakshadweep 
4. The OSH & WC Code, 
2020 
33 States/UTs except West Bengal, NCT of Delhi 
and Lakshadweep 
 
2. Central Government has still been constantly pursuing the matter with 
States/UTs on framing of rules under Labour Codes. Recently a two days' 
meeting with Labour Ministers/Secretaries of States/UTs was held from 
29.01.2025-30.01.2025 at New Delhi, where remaining States/UTs, which 
are yet to pre-publish their rules, were requested to pre-publish their rules 
at the earliest for implementation of Labour Codes.” 
 
51. The Committee note with concern that some States/UTs are yet to 
pre-publish the Rules under one or all the four Labour Codes notified by the 
Government in 2019 and 2020. During a two days' meeting with Labour 
Ministers/Secretaries of States/UTs held from 29.01.2025-30.01.2025 at 
New Delhi, these States/UTs were requested to pre-publish their rules at 
the earliest. Given the crucial nature of labour reforms under the Codes, 
the Committee are of the view that further delay in their implementation 
would deprive the workers, especially in the unorganized sector of the 
much needed simplified and consolidated labour laws, enhanced social 
security and improved working conditions. The Committee, therefore, 
reiterate their earlier recommendation and urge the Ministry to maintain 
close coordination with the remaining States/UTs for expediting the 

23 
 
process of framing and pre-publishing the Rules under the four Labour 
Codes to facilitate seamless and uniform implementation across the 
country. Efforts made and progress achieved in this regard may be 
communicated to the Committee.  
 
 
  

24 
 
CHAPTER-II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS 
WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 1) 
 The Committee note that a total amount of Rs. 13221.73 crore was 
allocated as BE 2023-24, which was decreased to Rs.12521.06 crore at RE stage 
whereas the actual expenditure incurred as on 31.03.2024 was Rs.11539.62 
crore, which amounts to 87.27% of BE and 92.16% of RE, with Rs. 981.44 crore 
of unutilised funds. The non-utilization of funds has been observed mainly under 
ABRY, PMSYM, NDUW and Rehabilitation of Bonded Labour. According to the 
Ministry, the expenditure under these schemes is directly linked to the demand 
received. The Committee have made their Observations/Recommendation under 
each Scheme. On the under-utilization aspect, the representative of the Ministry 
during evidence also admitted that it was a serious thing. 
(Reply of Government) 
The committee's observations have been duly noted and an Action Taken 
Report (ATR) under each scheme has been provided under respective 
observations/recommendations. Further, instruction have been issued from 
time to time to the concerned division of the Ministry of Labour& Employment 
to ensure realistic estimation of Budget, full utilization of funds allocated to them 
by fixing monthly and quarterly targets. The expenditure under all schemes is 
being monitored on weekly basis by JS&FA and Secretary (L&E). 
 
(Ministry of Labour & Employment OM No.G-25015/01/2024-B&A dated 
20.03.2025) 
 
Recommendation (Para No.2) 
 The Committee further note that during 2023-24, the Ministry had 
surrendered funds amounting to Rs. 1682.11 crore on certain grounds, which 
inter-alia include non-filling up of vacant posts, non-completion of survey work, 
less demand from implementing agency(ies), non-receipt of utilization 
certificates, etc. According to the Ministry, out of Rs. 1682.11 crore, Rs. 633 
crore was surrendered due to sudden revision of demand by EPFO in the month 
of February 2024 on the basis of actual expenditure under the scheme till 
January 2024. This revision was not anticipated at RE stage when on the basis 
of the past year’s trends, approx. Rs. 633 crore was demanded additionally. The 
Committee are surprised to note that the additional amount received at RE stage 
was ultimately surrendered. The Committee do not find this type of budget 
provisioning appropriate and desire that recurrence of such instances be avoided 
in future. 
 

25 
 
(Reply of Government) 
The observations of the committee have been acted upon. EPS’95 is 
demand driven scheme. This year GoI contributions are being made on the actual 
requirements on a month on month basis. The Ministry has issued instructions 
and assigned responsibility to the concerned administrative divisions to ensure 
responsible budgeting and full utilization of funds. Additionally, Regular meeting 
are being held to review the pace of expenditure on fortnightly basis. As a result, 
RE was accurately estimated and against a RE of Rs. 10235 crore, the 
expenditure of the same amount is anticipated by March, 2025 end. 
 
(Ministry of Labour & Employment OM No.G-25015/01/2024-B&A dated 
20.03.2025) 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No.3) 
 The Ministry have also stated that justifications for surrender of funds at 
RE stage have been given while submitting annual accounts to C&AG and no 
further comments have been received. The Committee would like to be apprised 
of the comments, if any, as and when received from C&AG. The Committee note 
that re-appropriation of funds to the tune of Rs.127.34 crore from one head to 
another was made during 2023-24. The major heads enlisted are ABRY, LWS, 
NCS, PMSYM, DGMS and the reasons for savings inter-alia include less demand 
by implementing agency, fraud applications, delay in recruitment, etc.  The 
Ministry have informed that they are strictly following the provisions contained 
in GFRs for re-appropriation of funds and for optimal utilization of funds in 
future, instructions have been issued to the concerned administrative divisions 
of the Ministry to ensure responsible budgeting and full utilization of funds. The 
Ministry have also mentioned that they have also been advised to make 
provisions for only such schemes which are likely to get implemented in the 
ensuing year. The Committee are satisfied to note that appropriate instructions 
in the matter have been issued and trust that the same would be strictly adhered 
to.  
 
(Reply of Government) 
Observations of the committee have been duly complied with. 
 
(Ministry of Labour & Employment OM No.G-25015/01/2024-B&A dated 
20.03.2025) 
 
 
 
 
 

26 
 
Recommendation (Para No.4) 
 The Committee appreciate that the quantum of funds spent during the 
first two quarters of 2024-25 is even and hope that the funds earmarked for 
various Schemes will be utilized during the remaining part of the current 
financial year. The Committee also take cognizance of the submission of the 
Ministry that Bureau Heads have been advised to ensure proportionate 
expenditure during the year by fixing monthly and quarterly targets and also to 
review actual expenditure vis-a-vis targets.  The Committee hope that the 
Ministry’s endeavours bear fruit and they fare better in terms of the utilisation 
of funds during 2024-25 unlike the previous year.  
 
(Reply of Government) 
Quarter wise Expenditure plan and Expenditure are given below:                                                 
(Fig. in Crore) 
QEP 
Ist 
ExpIst 
Quarter 
QEP 
IInd 
ExpIInd 
Quarter 
QEP 
IIIrd 
ExpIIIrd 
Quarter 
QEP 
IVth 
Exp up 
28.02.
25 
3103.
8226 
2947.15
70 
3235.
3182 
2755.62
08 
3127.20
73 
2061.60
80 
13065.1
219* 
10474.
78 
* On account of anticipated expenditure under ELI. 
As of 28.02.2025, Ministry has utilized Rs. 10,474.78 crore, which 
accounts for 57.22% of the Revised Estimates (RE) 2024-25. The major portion 
of the remaining budget is pending under the ELI Scheme which was announced 
in the regular budget for FY 24-25 in July 2024. The scheme is still under draft 
stage and approval of cabinet has not yet been received. Hence it is highly 
unlikely that any expenditure in terms of beneficiary payment can be booked in 
this financial year and the funds are being surrendered. Ministry is undertaking 
continuous monitoring and proactive measures to ensure the efficient utilization 
of the budget of the other existing schemes to the maximum extent possible 
within the financial year. Other than ELI the Ministry is likely to achieve more 
than 99%of its RE. Bureau Heads have been advised to ensure full expenditure 
during the year vis-a-vis targets. The pace of expenditure is also being reviewed 
on weekly basis by JS&FA and Secretary, MoLE. 
 
(Ministry of Labour & Employment OM No.G-25015/01/2024-B&A dated 
20.03.2025) 
  
 
 
Recommendation (Para No.5) 
 As far as physical targets and achievements are concerned, the Committee 
are concerned to note that in many Schemes they have not been able to achieve 
the physical targets during 2023-24. In this context, the Committee have made 
their Observations/Recommendations under each Scheme. 

27 
 
 
(Reply of Government) 
The committee's observations have been duly noted and an Action Taken 
Report (ATR) under each scheme has been provided under respective 
observations/recommendations. 
 
(Ministry of Labour & Employment OM No.G-25015/01/2024-B&A dated 
20.03.2025) 
 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No.6) 
 The Committee note that Aatmanirbhar Bharat Rojgar Yojana (ABRY) 
Scheme was implemented through the Employees Provident Fund Organization 
(EPFO) to reduce the financial burden of the employers of various 
sectors/industries and to encourage them to hire more workers. Under ABRY, 
the Government of India credited for a period of two years both the employees’ 
share (12% of wages) and employers’ share (12% of wages) of contribution 
payable or only the employees’ share, depending on employment strength of the 
EPFO registered establishments. Under ABRY, benefits were provided to every 
establishment registered with EPFO and their new employees (earning wage less 
than Rs. 15,000/- per month) if the establishments took new employees on or 
after 01.10.2020 and upto 31st March, 2022 or those who lost jobs between 
01.03.2020 to 30.09.2020. The beneficiaries registered upto 31stMarch, 2022 
continued to receive the benefits for 2 years from the date of registration under 
the Scheme viz. upto 31.03.2024. The Scheme was intended to enroll /benefit a 
total of 71.80 lakh members pan-India. As on 31.03.2024 i.e. closure of the 
Scheme, a total of 75.78 lakh (105.5%) employees have registered under the 
Scheme, out of which 60.49 lakhs employees, fulfilling the eligibility criteria have 
availed the benefit through 1.52 lakh establishments. The reasons for not 
covering the remaining beneficiaries, as stated by the Ministry, is that the ABRY 
was a demand driven Scheme and the actual disbursement of benefits was 
contingent upon fulfilment of specific eligibility conditions.  Out of the total 
number of 60,49,287 beneficiaries, the number of beneficiaries who lost jobs 
between 01.03.2020 to 30.09.2020 i.e. Re-joinees is 6,44,955 and the new 
employees, who joined between 01.10.2020 to 31.03.2022 is 54,04,332. The 
Committee, while appreciating that the physical target, as far as 
enrolment/registration is concerned, was over achieved, a large number of 
enrolled/registered beneficiaries could not get the benefits due to non-fulfilment 
of eligibility conditions. The Committee desire that in future, while introducing 
any New Scheme/revising or re-designing the existing Scheme, steps be taken 
to ensure that, as far as possible, the intended beneficiaries fulfill the eligibility 
criteria at the time of registration/enrolment itself.   
 

28 
 
(Reply of Government) 
The committee's observations have been duly noted. 
 
(Ministry of Labour & Employment OM No.G-25015/01/2024-B&A dated 
20.03.2025) 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No.7) 
 As regards financial progress in 2023-24, the Committee note that BE of 
Rs. 2272.82 crore in 2023-24 was reduced at RE stage to Rs. 1350.00 crore (Rs. 
922.82 crore reduction) and the actual expenditure further decreased to Rs. 
1221.06 crore at RE stage leaving an unspent balance of Rs. 128.94 crore. The 
Ministry have justified reduction of Rs. 922.82 crore at RE stage stating that due 
to variation in the demand, a definite estimation of expenditure is difficult and 
on the basis of the actual trend in expenditure, Revised Estimates were reduced 
from the BE to ensure alignment with scheme guidelines and for the proper 
utilization of the fund. The Committee are not convinced with the justification 
given by the Ministry as the beneficiaries registered upto 31stMarch, 2022 only 
were to receive the benefits upto 31.03.2024. This aspect appears to have been 
overlooked by the Ministry while proposing BE of Rs. 2272.82 crore during 2023-
24 resulting in avoidable reduction of Rs. 922.82 crore at RE stage and non-
utilization of Rs. 128.94 crore till 31.03.2024. As a matter of fact, the Ministry 
were not able to gauge the trend in demand, irrespective of the variables, to arrive 
at a more definite estimate of expenditure involved. 
The Committee further note that the total expenditure incurred till 
31.03.2024 was Rs. 10,188.50 crore and the BE for 2024-25 is Rs. 150 crore. 
When the Committee desired to know the purpose for which this amount will be 
utilized in the current financial year, the Ministry have responded that the 
Budget requirement has been revised as NIL for the FY 2024-25 on re-
interpretation of the provisions/directives established under the ABRY scheme. 
The Committee firmly believe that the reduction at RE stage, under-
utilization during 2023-24 and provisioning of Rs. 150 crore at BE stage during 
2024-25 could have been avoided had the Scheme guidelines been objectively 
analyzed/interpreted. The Committee, therefore, call upon the Ministry to ensure 
that in future, in respect of various Schemes implemented by the Ministry, the 
respective Scheme Guidelines be properly analyzed/gone through/interpreted 
while proposing Budget Estimates to the Ministry of Finance so as to have 
accurate projections of estimates so that the reduction at RE stage is avoided to 
the extent possible. The Committee further recommend that all the impediments 
hampering the hassle free execution of various Schemes be looked into during 
the preparation of the estimates itself to obviate the non/under-utilisation of 
funds. 

29 
 
(Reply of Government) 
The committee’s observations have been duly noted. 
 
(Ministry of Labour & Employment OM No.G-25015/01/2024-B&A dated 
20.03.2025) 
 
Recommendation (Para No.8) 
 The Committee note that the Ministry are implementing the National 
Career Services (NCS) project for transformation of the National Employment 
Service to provide a variety of employment related services like job search & 
matching, career counselling, vocational guidance, information on skill 
development courses, internships etc. through a digital platform.  
The Committee further note that the target for 2024-25 is (i) to set up two 
career lounges in Model Career Centres with Industry partnership; (ii) to issue 
uniform guidelines for employment portals of the States; and (iii) to migrate NCS 
portal from DC&DR to Azure public cloud. The Committee have been apprised 
that (i) two career lounges in Model Career Centres are envisaged to be set up by 
March, 2025; (ii)  the Employment portals of 4 States have been studied, the 
study of the Employment portals of the remaining States is likely to be completed 
till May, 2025 and as soon as the study of employment portals of States is 
completed, the uniform guidelines will be issued; (iii) the onboarding of the 
Managed Service Provider (MSP) for NCS 2.0 is nearing finalization, and once the 
contract is awarded, the Minimum Viable Product (MVP) is expected to be ready 
by April 2025 and, thereafter, the migration activities will commence. The 
Committee trust that the Ministry will meet the deadlines in respect of setting 
up of career lounges in Model Career Centres by March, 2025, completion of 
study of Employment Portals of all States by May, 2025, and readiness of 
Minimum Viable Product (MVP) by April, 2025. The Committee further desire 
that after these deadlines are met, efforts be made to ensure that the work 
relating to issue of uniform guidelines for employment portals of the States and 
migration of NCS portal from DC&DR to Azure public cloud be completed in a 
time bound manner preferably in the year 2025 itself. 
 
(Reply of Government) 
Efforts are being made to complete the targets in a time bound manner. 
 
(Ministry of Labour & Employment OM No.G-25015/01/2024-B&A dated 
20.03.2025) 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
Please see Para No. 8 of Chapter-I 
 

30 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No.10) 
 The Committee also note that while the information regarding number of 
jobseekers, employers registered, number of vacancies, number of job fairs 
organized is available on the portal, the data regarding the number of persons 
who actually got employment is not available. The Committee were apprised that 
the NCS is aimed to bridge the gap between employers and the job seekers and 
at present, it is not mandated to get feedback, however, the Ministry are putting 
in place an AI system whereby feedback will be obtained. The Committee desire 
that an effective feedback mechanism be put in place at the earliest so that the 
potential job seekers are able to acquire suitable placements as per their 
matching skill. This would in turn be a win-win situation for both the employers 
and employees. 
 
(Reply of Government) 
The committee’s observations have been noted. The feasibility of 
implementing AI in the current NCS 1.0 portal is being evaluated. However, this 
is envisaged in the upcoming NCS 2.0 application. 
 
(Ministry of Labour & Employment OM No.G-25015/01/2024-B&A dated 
20.03.2025) 
 
Recommendation (Para No.12) 
The Committee find that the Scheme has been approved for continuation 
during 15th Finance Commission Cycle, i.e., 2021-26, however, mid-term 
review/third party evaluation of the Scheme has not yet been conducted to look 
into/assess deficiencies and possible improvements in the Scheme. The 
Committee were, however, apprised that the process of hiring of agency for third 
party evaluation of the NCS Scheme is almost at final stage and may be 
completed by December, 2024. The Committee impress upon the Ministry to hire 
the agency at the earliest and ensure that the third party evaluation of the 
Scheme is completed preferably during the current financial year so as to assess 
deficiencies and possible improvements in the Scheme. 
 
(Reply of Government) 
An agency has been onboarded for conducting the third party evaluation 
of NCS and the evaluation is already in process. 
 
(Ministry of Labour & Employment OM No.G-25015/01/2024-B&A dated 
20.03.2025) 

31 
 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No.13) 
 The Committee note that since inception of the Scheme and upto 
30.09.2024, 34.12 lakh employers and approximately 4.73 crore job seekers 
were registered, 3.32 crore vacancies mobilized, whereas only 2.12 crore 
candidates were provisionally selected implying that only 50% of the registered 
candidates got selected. The Committee would like to have an assessment from 
the Ministry with regard to the possible reasons for such less number of selection 
and the steps to be taken to overcome the shortcomings in the larger interest of 
both the employers and the job seekers. 
 
(Reply of Government) 
DGE has initiated new initiatives to reduce the gap through the 
introduction of employability assessment and employability training programs 
for the job seekers. Additionally, the counsellors are conducting counselling 
sessions (based on enrolment) to assist the job seekers in their career path. 
 
(Ministry of Labour & Employment OM No.G-25015/01/2024-B&A dated 
20.03.2025) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 15) 
 The Committee note that during 2021-24, the number of candidates 
provided training was 14,364, whereas the number of candidates given offer of 
appointment was 15,993, which includes the candidates given offer of 
appointment through job fair also. The Ministry have specifically mentioned that 
during 2021-22, the courses could not run as coaching/computer training 
institutes were closed due to pandemic. The Committee note that out of 25 
States/UTs, in 16 States/Uts, the number of candidates given offer of 
appointment was less than the number of candidates provided training despite 
the fact that the figure includes those candidates who were given offer of 
appointment through job fair also, thereby indicating that less number of 
candidates got placed than those who were trained. The Committee exhort the 
Ministry to look into the reasons for shortfall in selection vis-à-vis training and 
wherever felt necessary, take appropriate measures to ensure that maximum 
number of trained candidates get placement.  
 
(Reply of Government) 
The objective of the scheme is to enhance the employability of SC/ST 
jobseekers through vocational guidance, career counselling, computer training, 
pre recruitment training etc. These Centres conduct outreach programmes like 
job fairs, career talk and group guidance activities in various educational 

32 
 
institutes for channelizing the job seekers in appropriate vocations. Placement 
of jobseekers is not the mandate under the scheme, however efforts are made 
place the SC/ST jobseekers by conducting job fairs. During the year 2023-24, 
5085 candidates were trained through NCSCs for SC/ST. However, 4649 
candidates were placed through various job fairs/ placement drives organized by 
NCSCs for SC/ST in collaboration with State Government/ NGOs etc. The 
session of 2024-25 will complete in June, 2025. 
 
(Ministry of Labour & Employment OM No.G-25015/01/2024-B&A dated 
20.03.2025) 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No.17) 
 The Committee note that the Union Budget for the fiscal year 2024-25 has 
announced the Employment Linked Incentive Scheme (ELI) to increase 
formalisation of workforce, stimulate job creation and enhance employability. 
The Scheme, focuses on recognition of first-time employees and support to 
employees and employers. The incentives under the Scheme will be provided 
based on the enrolment of employees in the EPFO. The total estimated outlay for 
the Scheme, proposed to be implemented during 2024-25 to 2030-31, is 
Rs.1,07,000/- crores and it consists of three Parts with registration period of two 
years.   
Part A of the Scheme incentivises first time eligible employees earning 
wages not exceeding Rs.1 lakh per month based on their enrolment with EPFO. 
It will provide one month’s wage uptoRs.15,000 in three instalments to such 
employees.  Such employee must undergo compulsory online Financial Literacy 
course before claiming the second instalment. The Part A of the Scheme, 
proposed to be implemented during 2024-25 to 2027-28, has a total financial 
outlay of Rs.22,333 crore and is expected to benefit 2.03 crore First Timers.   
Part B of the Scheme will incentivise additional employment in the 
manufacturing sector, linked to the employment of in-sourced first-time 
employees earning wage not exceeding of Rs.1 lakh per month. An incentive will 
be provided both to the employee and the employer with respect to their EPFO 
contribution in the first 4 years of employment. However, the incentives will be 
calculated on a maximum EPF wage of  
Rs.25000 per month. All employers engaged in manufacturing sector and 
creating additional employment over and above the threshold limits, will be 
eligible. The Part B of the Scheme, proposed to be implemented during 2024-25 
to 2030-31, has a total financial outlay of Rs.48,326 crore scheme and is 
expected to benefit about 27 lakh First Timers in the manufacturing sector. Part 
C of the Scheme will incentivise employers across all sectors who create 
additional employment over and above the prescribed threshold and sustain the 
higher level. The government will reimburse to employers up to Rs.3,000 per 
month for 2 years towards their EPFO contribution for each additional employee. 
In case, the employer creates additional employment above 1000, such employer 
will be eligible for benefits on the same scale as provided in Part B, for the 3rd 

33 
 
and 4th year as well.  The Part C of the scheme, proposed to be implemented 
during 2024-25 to 2030-31, has a total financial outlay of Rs. 36,040 crore and 
is expected to incentivize additional employment of 1.09 crore. 
The Committee note that the ELI Scheme has not been launched yet. The 
Committee have, however, been apprised that the Cabinet Note has been 
submitted and the Scheme is expected to be launched shortly. The Committee 
have also been apprised that during 2024-25, the BE is Rs. 10,000 crore, 
however, considering the time available during the remaining part of the current 
fiscal, the BE are proposed to be reduced to Rs. 6,799 crore at RE stage. The 
Committee appreciate the efforts being made by the Ministry to increase 
formalisation of workforce, stimulate job creation and enhance employability. 
The Committee call upon the Ministry to give further fillip to their efforts so that 
the objectives of the Scheme are truly achieved.  The Committee also desire that 
efforts be made to fully utilize the RE during the remaining part of the current 
fiscal. 
 
(Reply of Government) 
It is stated that after the final EFC meeting held on 14.01.2025, Draft 
Cabinet Note is still under formulation in consultation with other stakeholder 
including PMO & Cabinet Secretariat.  
 
(Ministry of Labour & Employment OM No.G-25015/01/2024-B&A dated 
20.03.2025) 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 18) 
 The Committee further note that the EPFO is preparing a dedicated IT 
infrastructure in consultation with MEITY for implementation of the Scheme. 
The IT Plan includes preparation of software system/apps for smooth operation 
of applicants registration, disbursal of incentive/subsidy details, particulars of 
each employee/employers availing benefits from the scheme etc. As the Scheme 
will be operated using latest technology software and devices, the Committee 
desire that the process involved be completed at the earliest in a time bound 
manner. 
 
(Reply of Government) 
It is stated that after the final EFC meeting held on 14.01.2025, Draft 
Cabinet Note is under formulation in consultation with other stakeholder 
including PMO & Cabinet Secretariat.  
 
(Ministry of Labour & Employment OM No.G-25015/01/2024-B&A dated 
20.03.2025) 
 
 

34 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No.21) 
 The Committee note that during 2023-24, only 1591 beneficiaries could 
be enrolled under the NPS Traders Scheme resulting in total enrolment of only 
53948 persons from February, 2019 to 31st March, 2024 against the overall 
enrolment target of 2.5 crore beneficiaries. The BE for 2023-24 was Rs. 3 crore, 
whereas the actual expenditure was Rs. 48000 only, which is 0.16% of BE. The 
Committee further note that while no physical target has been fixed for 2024-25, 
the financial allocation during 2024-25 is Rs. 10 lakh. The Committee are deeply 
concerned to note the dismal performance of the Scheme both in financial and 
physical targets. The reasons for poor performance of the Scheme inter-alia 
include unavailability of regular employment opportunities, lack of a formal 
Employer-Employee Relationship and presence of other pension scheme 
covering unorganised workers from Central Government [Atal Pension Yojana, 
Old age pension for senior citizens under National social Assistance Program 
(NSAP)]. In addition, most of the States have separate pension scheme for 
unorganised workers free of cost. The Committee also find that measures taken 
by the Ministry in consultation with the States to effectively mobilize the targeted 
groups have not yielded the desired results resulting in abysmal performance of 
the Scheme. The Ministry have informed that the discussions on redesigning of 
the scheme to make it more attractive for unorganised workers are under 
process. The Committee strongly feel that the Scheme needs to be re-designed 
and the efforts being made in this regard need to be put to the logical end so as 
to make the Scheme more attractive and thereby cover more intended 
beneficiaries. 
 
(Reply of Government) 
The observation of the committee has been taken note of.  
 
(Ministry of Labour & Employment OM No.G-25015/01/2024-B&A dated 
20.03.2025) 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No.22) 
 The Committee note that the Ministry have finalised and circulated the 
Standard Operating Procedure (SOP)/Guidelines to share e-Shram data with 
Central Ministries/Departments. These Guidelines will enable Central Ministries 
to extend the benefit of social security schemes meant for unorganized workers 
to eligible beneficiaries. The Ministry have stated that no response/suggestion 
has been received from the Ministries/ Departments with regard to the aforesaid 
guidelines on data sharing through e-Shram portal with Central Government 
Ministries. The Committee feel that the initiative taken by the Ministry for 
sharing e-Shram data with Central Ministries/Departments is a thoughtful step 
which can be a quantum leap towards achieving the higher objective of extending 

35 
 
the benefits of social security schemes to the beneficiaries. As informed by the 
Ministry, the idea of onboarding various welfare schemes of different Ministries 
is to provide unorganized labour a single window to access benefits from these 
schemes, to apply for them in a single window through a common application 
form. The Committee, therefore, impress upon the Ministry to urge the various 
Central Ministries/Departments to come out with their propositions and 
opinions on the Guidelines and also take follow up action to address/resolve the 
issues, if any of the Ministry concerned. 
 
(Reply of Government) 
The Ministry prepared and shared guidelines for eShram data sharing with 
Central Ministries and Departments on 02.03.2023 after proper consultation 
and due deliberation with them. Based on these guidelines, eShram data has 
already been shared to facilitate implementation of different schemes of other 
Central Ministries/Departments. 
In future, eShram data will be continued to be shared as per these 
guidelines and based on the requirements of different Ministries and 
Departments the eShram registrants receive the benefits of various government 
schemes subject to verification of eligibility criteria of the respective schemes. 
The Ministry of Labour and Employment also launched the eShram–“One-Stop-
Solution” on 21st October 2024. eShram– “One-Stop-Solution” entails 
integration of different social security/ welfare schemes at single portal i.e. 
eShram. This enables unorganised workers registered on eShram to access 
social security schemes and see benefits availed by them so far, through eShram. 
Thirteen (13) Social Security/Welfare Schemes have so far been 
integrated/ mapped with the eShram viz. One Nation One Ration Card, Pradhan 
Mantri Street Vendors Atmanirbhar Nidhi (PM-SVANidhi), Pradhan Mantri 
Suraksha BimaYojana (PMSBY), Pradhan Mantri Jeevan JyotiBimaYojana 
(PMJJBY), National Family Benefit Scheme (NFBS), Mahatma Gandhi National 
Rural Employment Guarantee Act (MGNREGA), Pradhan Mantri Awas Yojana – 
Gramin (PMAY-G), Ayushman Bharat – Pradhan Mantri Jan ArogyaYojana (AB-
PMJAY), Pradhan Mantri Awas Yojana – Urban (PMAY-U),  Pradhan Mantri 
Matsya Sampada Yojana (PMMSY), Pradhan Mantri Kisan Maandhan Yojana 
(PM-KMY), Indira Gandhi Old Age Pension Scheme (IGOAPS) and   Deendayal 
Antyodaya Yojana-National Urban Livelihoods Mission (DDU-NULM). 
 
(Ministry of Labour & Employment OM No.G-25015/01/2024-B&A dated 
20.03.2025) 
 
Recommendation (Para No.24) 
 Further, considering the fact that provision also exist with regard to data 
security, protection and privacy guidelines for the Central Government 
Ministries, the Committee strongly recommend that all possible measures be 
taken to ensure the security and confidentiality of the data. 

36 
 
 
(Reply of Government) 
The Ministry is committed to ensure the security and confidentiality of 
eShram data. Regular security audits, including UIDAI audits, are conducted as 
per government guidelines and compliance requirements. These audits help 
strengthen data protection measures and ensure that eShram data remains 
secure and confidential. The Ministry continues to take all necessary steps to 
uphold data security and privacy standards in line with the government 
policies/guidelines issued from time to time. 
 
(Ministry of Labour & Employment OM No.G-25015/01/2024-B&A dated 
20.03.2025) 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No.25) 
 The Committee find that no authentic data of unorganized workers was 
available till the portal was launched on 26.08.2021, however, the database of 
over 30.37 crore unorganized workers, as on 10.11.2024, is now available. The 
Committee appreciate the initiative taken by the Ministry and desire that the 
Ministry should take one step forward and evolve some more innovative 
measures through intensive and methodical approach on the lines similar to 
the door to door survey being conducted while undertaking Census so as to 
cover each and every unorganized labourer in a time bound manner. 
 
(Reply of Government) 
The eShram portal has successfully created a comprehensive database of 
unorganized workers, with over 30.37 crore registrations as of 10.11.2024. 
During registration, key details such as Name, Gender, Date of Birth, Permanent 
Address, and Photograph are fetched directly from Aadhaar after successful KYC 
verification, ensuring data accuracy and eliminating duplication. 
To further expand the registration of unorganized workers, the Ministry is 
actively organizing enrollment camps in collaboration with the CSC centers and 
DattopantThengadi National Board for Workers Education and Development. 
Additionally, outreach efforts are being strengthened through social media 
campaigns and by seeking support from respective state governments to ensure 
wider coverage. The Ministry remains committed to adopting innovative 
measures to bring more unorgainzed workers under the eShram framework in a 
systematic and time-bound manner. 
 
(Ministry of Labour & Employment OM No.G-25015/01/2024-B&A dated 
20.03.2025) 
 

37 
 
Recommendation (Para No.26) 
 As regards financial progress, the Committee note that during 2023-24, 
the BE of Rs. 300 crore was reduced to Rs. 102.96 crore at RE stage and the 
actual expenditure was Rs. 28.96 crore only (9.6% of BE and 28.13% of RE 
respectively) leaving an unspent balance of Rs. 74 crore. The Committee express 
serious concern on gross under utilization of funds under the Scheme and call 
upon the Ministry to fully utilize the funds to the tune of Rs. 176.84 crore 
allocated during 2024-25. 
 
(Reply of Government) 
The B.E. of Rs. 176.84 crore was revised to R.E. of Rs 26.93 crore owing 
to the lesser number of ex-gratia claims approved by the approving District 
Authorities under one time ex-gratia payment to the eShram registrants who met 
with accidental death or disability with effect from 26.08.2021 to 31.03.2022. 
Ministry had received around 3,250 numbers of enquiries, related to accidental 
claim benefits, through eShram GMS portal. As ex-gratiais demand driven, 
accordingly it was envisaged that similar number of claims,may also be 
forthcoming once the ex-gratia module is launched. In view of this Rs. 140 crore 
was earmarked for this purpose. However, till now only around Rs. 10 crore has 
been disbursed on this account and therefore, the revised estimate has been 
made accordingly. Further, provisions has been made and the competent 
authority has approved for the remaining budgeted amount to be utilized by 
31.03.2025. 
 
(Ministry of Labour & Employment OM No.G-25015/01/2024-B&A dated 
20.03.2025) 
 
Recommendation (Para No.28) 
 The Committee are deeply concerned to note the plight of the mine 
workers, who have been rendered jobless due to the closure of mines in the 
Ballari district of Karnataka since 2011. The Committee reckon that the 
operations in these mines have since resumed, however, the workers have not 
been re-instated. The Committee, therefore, call upon the Ministry to take urgent 
pro-active steps to ensure livelihood of these jobless mine workers and consider 
making use of some portion of the environment cess being collected by the State 
Government of Karnataka for development of mining areas, as per the directions 
of Hon’ble Supreme Court. 
 
(Reply of Government) 
The matter has been taken up with State Government of Karnataka for 
necessary action. 
 
(Ministry of Labour & Employment OM No.G-25015/01/2024-B&A dated 
20.03.2025) 
 

38 
 
Recommendation (Para No.29 & 30) 
 The Committee note that the Central Sector Scheme for Rehabilitation of 
Bonded Labourer-2021 has been revamped and implemented w.e.f. 27.01.2022. 
The Committee have been apprised that 2,96,795 persons have been rescued 
and Rs.10,558.30 lakhs has been disbursed since 1978. 
The Committee further note that for the fiscal 2023-24, the BE for the 
Scheme was Rs. 10 crore which was reduced to Rs. 6.98 crore at RE Stage and 
out of which, as on 31.03.2024, only a meagre amount of  
Rs.1.34 crore (23.76 %) has been utilized leaving an unspent amount of Rs.5.64 
crore due to non-receipt of documents and utilization certificates. The BE for 
current financial year is 6.00 crore and as on 19.11.2024, only Rs.33.61 lakhs 
has been spent. The Committee reckons that the Ministry are implementing the 
Scheme for identification and release of bonded labourers and it is demand 
driven in nature where funds are provided to the States/UTs on receipt of 
financial demand from them.  The Committee note that the Ministry has 
requested States to submit the reimbursement related cases timely and that 
requests were also made through letters as well as virtual meetings to all the 
States/Union Territories to avoid late submission of their reimbursement 
proposals and to submit the claims immediately after rescue of the concerned 
bonded labourers so as to ensure optimal utilization of funds.  The Committee, 
while appreciating the efforts made by the Ministry to get timely reimbursement 
proposals from the States/UTs, desire that heightened measures be undertaken 
in this direction.  The Committee also desire that the process of submitting 
reimbursement proposals by the States/UTs be carried out online. The 
Committee impress upon the Ministry to strengthen their monitoring and 
coordination mechanism for optimal utilisation of funds and reduce surrender 
of allocated funds to the minimum extent possible.  
 The Committee further note that during the year 2023-24, 468 bonded 
labourers were freed/rescued/rehabilitated from five States viz., Rajasthan (56), 
Tamil Nadu (176), Chhattisgarh (76), Pondicherry (5) and Odisha (155).  The 
Committee further note that in 2023-24, 123 minors were also rescued which is 
a clear indication of the wide spread presence of the evil of bonded labour in the 
country.  The Committee note that   the Ministry is holding meetings with various 
State/UT Governments and requesting them to speed up the trials in respect of 
bonded labourers to whom immediate financial assistance had already been 
provided.  The Committee feel that unless the convictions come through, it may 
be extremely difficult to establish the crime of Bonded Labour and provide full 
benefits under the Scheme. The Committee are, therefore, of the considered view 
that there is an urgent need on the part of the Ministry to shore up the efforts 
so as to eradicate the scourge of bonded labour and implement the Scheme in a 
more effective way. The Committee desire the Ministry to explore the possibility 
of setting up fast track courts by taking up the matter with the Ministry of Law 
& Justice and the States/UTs, where the cases of bonded labourers are 
predominant.  In addition, the States/UTs may also be encouraged to set up 
squads of law enforcement agencies to act against perpetrators of bonded labour.  
The Committee strongly recommend that effective measures be initiated to stamp 

39 
 
out Bonded Labour from the country regardless of the procedural and legal 
recourse being adopted. 
 
(Reply of Government) 
To expedite and streamline the implementation of the provisions under the 
Bonded Labour System (Abolition) Act, 1976, (BLSA), the Ministry of Labour and 
Employment formulated a scheme, as amended from time, to ensure effective 
rehabilitation for rescued bonded labourers.  At present, the scheme is named 
‘Central Sector Scheme for the Rehabilitation of Bonded Labourers-2021’.  
The scheme is demand-driven. It gives direct authority and responsibility 
to District Magistrates/ District Authorities. The proposal seeking financial 
assistance under the scheme can be submitted by the districts, through the 
concerned department in the state govt., to the Ministry of Labour and 
Employment.     
A Standard Operating Procedures (SoP) was issued by the Ministry on 
17.08.2017 to assist and facilitate the implementing stakeholders. It gave clarity 
on course of action right from receipt of complaint till summary trial and 
rehabilitation assistance in a time bound manner, as the BLSA clearly defines 
work to be undertaken under Central sphere and State sphere.   
Recently, Hon’ble Supreme Court of India in Writ Petition (Civil) No. 
511/2022 passed an order dated 21.11.2024 wherein the Ministry was directed 
to convene a meeting with the states and union territories and come out with a 
proposal which addresses the issue regarding inter-state trafficking and grant of 
release certificate.   
Accordingly, a meeting was held with the states and union 
territories.  Based on the discussion, a senior level committee was also 
constituted by the Ministry inter-alia to study suggestions/ comments of the 
States/UTs including improvement in Scheme/ SOP, if any.  The report of the 
committee has been submitted and the same is under examination.  
  The committee has made comprehensive recommendations, which, inter-
alia, includes effective implementation of the provisions of the Act by the States/ 
UTs, timely issuance of immediate financial assistance and completion of 
summary trial, providing rehabilitation assistance, utilization of funds under the 
Central Sector Scheme for Rehabilitation of Bonded Labourers, appointment of 
Nodal Officers, monitoring and review mechanism, development of online 
tracking/ monitoring mechanism including submission of reimbursement 
proposals etc.   
To ensure effective enforcement of the provisions of the Child Labour Act, 
a portal named, 'Platform for Effective Enforcement for No Child Labour (PENCIL) 
is being operated by the Ministry w.e.f. 26.09.2019.  The portal is now being 
revamped into a comprehensive portal which will also include the portal for 
bonded labourers.  

40 
 
The agency for developing the unified portal has been finalized and work 
has also been awarded on 11.10.24. 
 
(Ministry of Labour & Employment OM No.G-25015/01/2024-B&A dated 
20.03.2025) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
Please see Para No. 22 of Chapter-I 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No.31) 
 The Committee are surprised to note that the Ministry had initially stated 
that the work related to development of the National Portal on Bonded Labour is 
in progress. The portal has the objective of facilitating in bringing uniformity in 
capturing data, which would facilitate uniformity in capturing data in different 
States/UTs to help towards eradication of the menace of bonded labour more 
efficiently. However, subsequently, the Ministry have informed that they are in 
the process of revamping the existing Platform for Effective Enforcement for No 
Child Labour (PENCiL) Portal into a comprehensive unified portal for Child 
Labour, Bonded Labour and Women Labour and for the purpose, the agency for 
revamping the Portal has been shortlisted and the work is also under progress. 
The Ministry have further stated that it is expected that the revamped portal will 
be functional within a year. The Committee hope that the Ministry of Women and 
Child Development, being the nodal Ministry responsible for overall development 
of women and children in the country, has been consulted in this regard. The 
Committee call upon the Ministry to intensify their efforts and trust that the 
Ministry would fulfill their commitment for development of a Unified Portal within 
a year. 
 
(Reply of Government) 
As mentioned above, to ensure effective enforcement of the provisions of 
the Child Labour Act, a portal named, 'Platform for Effective Enforcement for No 
Child Labour (PENCIL) is being operated by the Ministry w.e.f. 26.09.2019.  The 
portal is now being revamped into a comprehensive portal which will also include 
the portal for bonded labourers. 
The agency for developing the unified portal has been finalized and work 
has also been awarded on 11.10.24. 
 
(Ministry of Labour & Employment OM No.G-25015/01/2024-B&A dated 
20.03.2025) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
Please see Para No. 25 of Chapter-I 
 
 

41 
 
Recommendation (Para No.34&35) 
 The Committee note that National Child Labour Project (NCLP) Scheme 
was implemented by the Ministry of Labour and Employment with the objective 
to eliminate the child labour and mainstream them to formal education by 
providing bridge education.  The Scheme was under implementation upto 
31.03.2021.  Thereafter, it was merged with the Samagara Shiksha Abhiyan 
(SSA) Scheme of Ministry of Education in order to ensure optimum utilization of 
available resources and avoid duplication at any stage.  There is no denying the 
fact that despite merger of the NCLP Scheme with SSA, the Ministry of Labour 
and Employment continues to be the nodal Ministry responsible for elimination 
of child labour as the Child and Adolescent Labour (Prohibition & Regulation) 
Act 1986 and Child and Adolescent Labour (Prohibition and Regulation) Rules, 
1988 are administered by the Ministry. Needless to mention that it is incumbent 
upon the Ministry to follow a mission mode approach in tackling the bane of 
Child Labour. 
35. The Committee would like to remind the Ministry that in their 52nd Report 
on ‘National Policy on Child Labour – An Assessment’, they have 
comprehensively dealt with the issue and recommended concrete measures to 
be taken by the Ministry of Labour and Employment independently as well as in 
consultation and coordination with the other Ministries.  
Taking into account the gravity of the issue and also considering the fact that 
with the ratification of ILO Conventions No. 138 of 01.06.1973 concerning 
minimum age for employment and No. 182 of 01.06.1999 concerning prohibition 
and elimination of worst forms of child labour in June, 2013, the Committee 
again impress upon the Ministry to tirelessly work towards meeting its 
international commitment towards elimination of child labour as well as 
achieving the target stipulated in Sustainable Development Goal 8.7 to end all 
forms of child labour by the year 2025.   
 
(Reply of Government) 
While the NCLP Scheme has been merged with Samagara Shiksha 
Abhiyan (SSA), Ministry of Labour and Employment, being the nodal Ministry 
for the elimination of child labour, administers the Child and Adolescent Labour 
(Prohibition & Regulation) Act, 1986, and the corresponding Rules. The Ministry 
has adopted a mission-mode approach in addressing the critical issue of child 
labour. The Government has taken comprehensive measures which include 
legislative measures, rehabilitation strategy, providing right to free education 
and general socio-economic development. The details of statutory and legislative 
measures, rehabilitation strategy and education are as under:  
(i)    Enactment of the Child and Adolescent Labour (Prohibition & Regulation) 
Act, 1986.   The Act inter-alia covers complete prohibition of work or employment 
of children below 14 years of age in any occupation or process and prohibition 
of adolescents in the age group of 14 to 18 years in hazardous occupations and 

42 
 
processes.  It also provides for stricter punishment for employers for violation of 
the Act and made the offence as cognizable. 
(ii)    Framing of the Child and Adolescent Labour (Prohibition and Regulation) 
Rules, 1988. The Rules inter -alia, provide for District Nodal Officer (DNO) and 
Task Force at district level under chairpersonship of District Magistrate to 
ensure that the provisions of the Act are properly enforced. 
(iii)   Framing of model State Action Plan enumerating action points to be taken 
by respective State Governments.   
(iv)   Implementation of National Child Labour Project (NCLP) Scheme for 
rehabilitation of child labour, which has now been subsumed under Samagara 
Shiksha Abhiyan (SSA), Scheme.  
(v)   The PENCIL (Platform for Effective Enforcement for No Child Labour) is an 
online portal that was launched w.e.f. 26.9.2017 to ensure effective enforcement 
of the provisions of the Child and Adolescent Labour (Prohibition and Regulation) 
Act, 1986.  The Government is also revamping the portal to further improve its 
effectiveness and to incorporate provisions for women and bonded labour. 
 
(Ministry of Labour & Employment OM No.G-25015/01/2024-B&A dated 
20.03.2025) 
 
Recommendation (Para No.36) 
 The Committee note that during 2023-24, no target was fixed under the 
NCLP Scheme on the ground that it has been merged with 
SamagraShikshaAbhiyan (SSA) of Ministry of Education. The Committee also 
note that during 2023-24, BE of Rs. 10 crore was reduced to RE of Rs.6 crore 
and the actual expenditure was Rs.0.68 crore.  Thus, while financial allocations 
were made, physical target was not fixed. In fact, during  
2024-25, no financial allocations have been made and no target has been fixed 
on the ground that the Scheme has been closed.  When asked to clarify whether 
all committed liabilities have been met, the Ministry have now informed that the 
budgetary allocation in RE under the NCLP scheme has now been requested for 
as no budgetary allocation in BE 2024-25 were made.  The Committee do not 
find it a prudent measure and impress upon the Ministry to foresee the financial 
requirements and commitments while proposing the budgetary allocations. The 
Committee, therefore, urge the Ministry to exercise due diligence in this regard 
in future. 
(Reply of Government) 
The reduction in financial allocations and the absence of fixed physical 
targets were as a result of the Scheme’s merger with Samagra Shiksha Abhiyan 
(SSA). Regarding the financial allocations for 2024-25 in the Ministry, no 
provisions were made due to the closure of the Scheme. However, in compliance 
to the order dated 23.02.2024 of the Hon'ble High Court of Chhattisgarh, an 
amount of Rs.67,75,203/- was made available through the Supplementary 

43 
 
Demand for Grants passed by the Parliament during 2024-25 at RE stage for 
settlement of the liability claim of a Society under the NCLP scheme.  After 
receipt of the grant, fund was accordingly released. 
As regards financial requirements and commitments, it is mentioned that 
after the closure of the scheme w.e.f. 01.04.2021, the Ministry, vide letter dated 
21.10.2022, requested all the NCLP societies to submit their liability claim within 
the specified timeline for processing.  It was also mentioned that claims/ details 
furnished after the specified date will not be considered for 
processing.  Thereafter, a virtual meeting with the NCLP Societies was also taken 
by the Ministry on 17.11.2022 for submitting their liability claim with all 
supporting documents by 30.11.2022. The financial requirements submitted 
were taken into consideration accordingly in FY 2023-24. 
 
(Ministry of Labour & Employment OM No.G-25015/01/2024-B&A dated 
20.03.2025) 
 
Recommendation (Para No.37) 
 The Committee note that the Dattopant Thengadi National Board for 
Workers Education and Development (DTNBWED) (erstwhile Central Board for 
Workers Education) is a tripartite registered society established in 1958. 
Through its National network of 50 Regional Directorates and an apex training 
institute, Indian Institute of Workers Education at Mumbai, organizes various 
educational, training and awareness programmes for workers of organized and 
unorganized Sector inter-alia including awareness about government flagship 
schemes of Social Security, livelihood and Skill development activities.  The 
Board’s thrust is on educating the 92% workforce of the country of unorganized 
and rural sectors, for creating awareness about government flagship schemes of 
Social Security, livelihood and Skill development activities.  
The Committee have been apprised that DTNBWED had planned to recruit 
90 posts viz. 22 Education Officers, 13 Stenographers Grade-II, 44 Lower 
Division Clerks and 11 Multi Tasking Staff during the year 2023-24 under 
Mission Mode but only the post of Stenographer Gr. II and Lower Division Clerk 
were partially filled and later many of the newly recruited officials left the 
Organisation. The Committee find that non-filling up of all posts as planned 
resulted in under utilization of Rs. 6.975 crore under Salary Head out of the total 
unspent amount balance of Rs. 7.98 crore.  
The Committee are concerned to note that an Institute established to 
organize a slew of educational, training and awareness programmes for workers 
of organized and unorganized sector stands under-staffed which will jeopardize 
the very objective which it represents.  The Committee, therefore, urge the 
Ministry to fill up the vacancies in DTNBWED expeditiously and, simultaneously, 
undertake urgent corrective measures to retain employees for smooth and 
effective functioning of the organization.   
 

44 
 
(Reply of Government) 
Recruitment for the cadre of Education Officers could not be proceeded so 
far, as ‘pay revision case’ of the Education Officers (Cadre Officers) was pending 
before Hon’ble Calcutta High Court and subsequently before the Hon’ble 
Supreme Court. The same will be considered after the pay revision case is 
resolved. The new incumbents, who are working are kept motivated and 
encouraged to continue in the board. Also, office automation work is in progress, 
which will mitigate the shortage of manpower, to some extent.  A committee to 
carryout work study and restructuring of Board has been constituted and 
committee work is in progress. 
 
(Ministry of Labour & Employment OM No.G-25015/01/2024-B&A dated 
20.03.2025) 
 
Recommendation (Para No.38) 
 The Committee further note that during 2022-23, the Board had organized 
8308 awareness programmes covering 4,38,508 participants in both Organised 
and Unorganised Sectors. Out of 8308 programmes, 2872 programmes were 
organized for 65,196 participants in Organised Sector and 5436 programmes 
were organized for 3,73,312 particpants in the Unorganised Sector. Similarly, 
during 2023-24, the Board had organized 11,261 awareness programmes 
covering 7,78,243 participants in Organised and Unorganised Sectors. Out of 
11,261 programmes, 1670 programmes were organized for 38,548 participants 
in Organised Sector and 9,591 programmes were organized for 7,39,695 
participants in the Unorganised Sector. The Committee find that while over 
30.37 crore unorganized workers have been registered on e-Shram Portal during 
2022-23 and 2023-24, the training programmes were organized for only 11.12 
lakh workers [3.73 lakh in 2022-23 and 7.39 lakh in 2023-24].  
The Committee, therefore, desire that based on the data available on e-
Shram Portal, more training programmes be organized in those States/UTs 
where concentration of unorganized workers is on the higher side and this can 
be achieved only if the Board has adequate manpower. The Committee desire 
that the process of conducting work study be initiated so as to assess suitable 
manpower requirement in the Board. 
 
(Reply of Government) 
The training and Education programmes of the Board is conducted in 
collaboration and active participation of the stake holders that is the trade 
unions functioning in particular areas, social service organisations etc. As a 
result, the Board is able to conduct 11,261 training programmes for the financial 
year 2023-24 and trained 7,78,243 workers thereunder. For the financial year 
2024-25, 13845 workers in organized sector and 639013 workers in unorganized 
sector have been trained as of 28th February, 2025. Ministry of Labour and 
Employment has constituted a committee to review the training modules of the 

45 
 
Board and give suggestions to rationalise & effectively monitor the training 
modules so as to align with contemporary requirements related to labour welfare 
and employment.   A committee to carryout work study and restructuring of 
Board has also been constituted and committee work is in progress. 
 
(Ministry of Labour & Employment OM No.G-25015/01/2024-B&A dated 
20.03.2025) 
 
Recommendation (Para No.39) 
 The Committee appreciate the efforts being made by DTNBWED in 
generating awareness amongst unorganized workers about various Welfare 
Schemes of the Government, women empowerment, health and hygiene, 
importance of education etc. as well as organizing programmes like Safety at 
workplace, Work Ethics, Motivation and Morale, Leadership Skills and other 
behavioural topics for workers in organized sector, as per industry requirement 
thereby facilitating employment generation in various firms. The Committee 
desire the Board to continue momentum in organizing various programmes in 
2024-25 and, thereafter, also for education, training and awareness of workers 
in both the Sectors.  
 
(Reply of Government) 
The Board is continuing the momentum in organising various programmes 
in 2023-24 for workers in both sectors. Since 01.04.2023 till 31.03.2024, a total 
of 38,548 from organized sectors and 7,39,695 workers from Unorganized sector 
participated in the Board’s Training programmes. For the financial year 2024-
25, 13845 workers in organized sector and 639013 workers in unorganized 
sector have been trained as of 28th February, 2025. The Board is also working 
in the domain of skilling in collaboration with its industrial partners and about 
47,000 workers are to be trained in different job roles related to 25000 workers 
from construction sector, 11000 from agriculture sector and 11000 from health 
care sector in the 2024-25. As of now 32,662 workers have already been trained 
till 13th March, 2025. The Board shall continue education training and 
awareness programmes for workers working both in organised and unorganised 
sectors.  
 
(Ministry of Labour & Employment OM No.G-25015/01/2024-B&A dated 
20.03.2025) 
 
Recommendation (Para No.40) 
 The Committee were apprised that the field work on two major surveys viz. 
All India Survey on Migrant Workers and All India Survey on Domestic Workers 
has been completed. The Committee desire that the peer review of the data be 
accorded top priority and the exercise completed in a time bound manner so as 
to have database of both Migrant and Domestic Workers, which will help them 
to get benefits of various Social Security Schemes. 

46 
 
 
(Reply of Government) 
The Ministry has constituted a task force comprising senior professors of the 
National Council of Applied Economic Research (NCAER) and senior officers of 
the Ministry of Labour and Employment and Labour Bureau to interalia review 
the methodology and results of the Survey on Migrant Workers and Domestic 
Workers The task force is expected to submit its report by the end of March 2025. 
 
(Ministry of Labour & Employment OM No.G-25015/01/2024-B&A dated 
20.03.2025) 
 
Recommendation (Para No.41) 
 The Committee have also been apprised that work relating to revision of 
base year for Consumer Price Index for Industrial Worker (CPI-IW) (2016=100) 
and All-India Consumer Price Index Number for Agricultural Labourers and 
Rural Labourers  (CPI-AL/RL) (Base: 1986-87=100) has been initiated and the 
same is expected to be completed by next year. The Committee expect the 
Ministry to fulfil their commitment and complete the exercise by the next year, 
which will benefit a cross section of workers in industrial sectors, agricultural 
and rural labourers and others. 
 
(Reply of Government) 
An Expert Group has been constituted for Base Year revision of CPI (IW) and CPI 
(AL& RL) under the chairmanship of Shri AK Sadhu, former Director General 
(NSS), MOSPI The term of the expert group is initially for two years. 
 
(Ministry of Labour & Employment OM No.G-25015/01/2024-B&A dated 
20.03.2025) 
 
(Recommendation Para No.42) 
 The Committee appreciate that the Ministry is in the process of introducing 
a ‘Labour Welfare and Employment Index’ (LWEI) to rank all States and Union 
Territories (UTs) and, as assured by the representative during the oral evidence, 
the proposed Index will be in place by the end of the current financial year. The 
Committee feel that the initiative will improve labour standards, foster healthy 
competition among the States and help them to improve their performance in 
employment generation, labour requirements besides promoting uniformity in 
the implementation of Labour Codes thereby improving welfare of the labour as 
well as productivity. The Committee desire that the exercise to introduce ‘Labour 
Welfare and Employment Index’ (LWEI) to rank all States and Union Territories 
(UTs) be completed in a time bound manner so as to meet the intended 
objectives. 
 

47 
 
(Reply of Government) 
The drafting of Concept Note for Labour Welfare Employment Index is currently 
in progress. It will be finalised after consulting all stakeholders. 
 
(Ministry of Labour & Employment OM No.G-25015/01/2024-B&A dated 
20.03.2025) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
Please see Para No. 34 of Chapter-I 
 
Recommendation (Para No.43) 
 The Committee note that under the Code on Social Security, 2020, the 
Central Government may frame scheme for unorganised workers, gig workers 
and platform workers and the members of their families for providing benefits 
under ESIC. Further, the ESIC coverage will be extended pan-India as against 
notified districts/areas at present. In addition, ESIC benefits will be extended to 
establishments with less than 10 employees on voluntary basis and on 
mandatory basis for establishment, employing even single employee involving 
hazardous process.  Thus, in order to implement all the new provisions under 
the Code, the ESIC need to expand the coverage across the country before the 
Code comes into force. The Committee are, however, concerned to note that at 
present, out of 778 districts of the country, the ESI Scheme has been notiﬁed in 
674 districts which includes 571 fully notiﬁed districts and 103 partially notiﬁed 
districts. As a matter of fact, the ESI scheme is yet to be notiﬁed in the 104 
districts. Thus, 207 districts (103 partially notified and 104 non-notified 
districts) are awaiting full coverage under ESI Scheme. The Committee urge the 
Ministry/ESIC to gear up and have a serious view to expand the coverage of ESIC 
to all partially notified and non-notified districts so that there is no 
vacuum/inconvenience to the beneficiaries once the labour codes are 
implemented. 
 
(Reply of Government) 
ESI Corporation has continuously been requesting the State Govts for 
putting medical arrangements in place for coverage of the remaining areas. To 
ensure the full implementation of ESI Scheme in the remaining districts 
continuous communications with the respective states is being made by the 
ESIC. 
DG, ESIC vide his D.O. letter dated 10.02.2025 requested Chief Secretaries of 
the states where the areas are left for implementation with the request to 
expedite the medical arrangement for implementation in the remaining districts. 
Further, Employees State Insurance Corporation (ESIC) is in the process 
of integrating with Ayushman Bharat Pradhan Mantri Jan Arogya Yojana (AB-
PMJAY) to provide comprehensive, cashless medical care to over 14.4 crore 
beneficiaries, including 3.5 crore insured persons. This convergence will allow 

48 
 
ESIC beneficiaries to receive treatment at more than 30,000 empaneled hospitals 
across India, including emergency care and referrals for unavailable services.  
Additionally, PMJAY beneficiaries will also receive cashless treatment in 
ESIC/ESIS hospitals.  This integration aims to improve healthcare access and 
quality for both ESIC and PMJAY beneficiaries across India. 
 
(Ministry of Labour & Employment OM No.G-25015/01/2024-B&A dated 
20.03.2025) 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No.45) 
 The Committee note that ESIC has accorded “in principle” approval for 
setting up of 105 new hospitals in various States/UTs. The Committee further 
note that out of 105 new hospitals proposed to be set up, only 01 hospital at 
Bangalore Rural has been completed, in respect of 15 hospitals the work is in 
progress and is scheduled to be completed in 2024/2025/2026/2027, in respect 
of 89 hospitals, the work has been assigned to the Agency by CPWD and the 
target date of completion is awaited. The Committee are deeply concerned to note 
the extremely slow progress of setting up on new hospitals and impress upon the 
Ministry/ESIC to vigorously pursue the matter with CPWD, chalk out a 
comprehensive plan/schedule indicating the various stages involved in the 
construction of hospitals and ensure that the hospitals are set up on priority 
and in a time bound manner. 
 
(Reply of Government) 
 
 105 new hospitals projects are under various stages of construction in various 
states/UTs.  
 All the projects worth 100 Cr. or more are uploaded and monitored through 
PMG portal ensuring accelerated execution of such projects in a time bound 
manner. 
 Furthermore, at the Headquarters ESIC level regular interaction and review 
meeting with the construction agencies are conducted under the 
chairmanship of DG ESIC.  
 Construction Sub-Committee meeting is regularly conducted under the 
chairmanship of Director General to supervise and monitor construction 
activities. 
 In addition, various review meetings are conducted periodically to review all 
the construction projects under the chairmanship of Insurance Commissioner 
and Chief Engineer, wherein the progress of projects given to CPWD and PSUs 
are regularly monitored and reviewed. 
 Frequent review of on-going projects are done at regional level in close 
coordination with construction agencies, Project Monitoring Unit (PMU) has 
been operationalized at regional level to monitor all the construction projects 
and ensure their timely completion. 

49 
 
 Regular site visits and PMU meetings are held to ensure timely completion, 
adherence to milestones and identifying potential bottlenecks or delays that 
may hinder project progress, thereby preventing delays and cost overruns due 
to avoidable factors. 
Site engineers posted in regions regularly conduct site visits in such a way 
that it coincides with critical milestones. 
 
(Ministry of Labour & Employment OM No.G-25015/01/2024-B&A dated 
20.03.2025) 
 
Recommendation (Para No.46) 
 The Committee are also of the considered view that in order to offer quality 
medical care facilities to beneficiaries to the maximum extent possible, in 
addition to creation of physical infrastructure, it is equally important to offer 
state of the art facilities and professional medical care in a standardised fashion 
in ESIC hospitals in every corner of the country.  The Committee, therefore, call 
upon the Ministry to equip all the ESIC hospitals with expert medical 
practitioners, excellent allied medical care staff, state-of-the-art medical 
equipments and acquire necessary accreditations, which can be achieved by the 
collective and collaborative efforts of both the Ministry as well as ESIC.   
 
(Reply of Government) 
Measures taken for state of the art facilities and gearing up of availability 
of latest technology medical equipment in ESIC Institutions: 
(a) Updation of Equipment Norms: Updated ESIC norms of medical equipment 
(HQ circular dt 30/09/20 and 07/05/21) with bed wise details (classification 
of Beds/Hospital: upto 100 bedded, upto 300 bedded, upto 500 bedded or 
more, Medical College) of all essential medical equipment as well as enhanced 
DOP of Dean/MS (HQ circular dt 30/03/21) had been issued for facilitating 
User institutions to widen the scope of availability of equipment with latest 
technology in ESIC Hospitals/Institutions.  
 
(b) Enhancement of Delegation of Powers for procurement of medical equipment 
to empower HOD of ESIC User institutes to facilitate procurement of medical 
equipment. 
Institution Category Institutional 
Head 
Delegation of Power 
PGIMSR Medical 
Superintendent 
Rs. Two Crore /unit 
Medical College & Hospitals 
(300 beds or more) 
Dean Rs. Two Crore /unit 
Non-teaching ESIC Hospitals 
less than 300 beds 
Medical 
Superintendent 
Rs. Fifty Lakhs/unit 
 

50 
 
(c) In addition, specification of High-end equipment/ advanced medical 
equipment such as Digital X-ray Machine, CT Scan Machine, MRI Machine, 
Cath Lab and Radiation Oncology and Nuclear Medicine etc. have already 
been uploaded on ESIC website for utilization of User units/ESIC 
Institutions. 
  
(d) Comprehensive ESIC Medical Equipment Manual 2023 covering all the 
aspects of Medical Equipment i.e procurement, purchase, installation, 
maintenance and condemnation had been issued vide circular dated 
04/10/23 for utilization by all ESIC Institutions. The ESIC Medical 
Equipment Manual 2023 is a comprehensive guiding document with current 
up to date well defined procedures, guidelines and steps to assist user 
institutes/ESIC Institutions.  
Further, ESIC has taken necessary steps to conduct recruitment for the 
vacant posts of Specialist Gr.II (Junior/Senior scale), IMO Gr.II, Assistant 
Professor, Associate Professor in ESIC Hospital and Medical Colleges across the 
country and has recently issued offer of appointment to 1323 candidates. 
Further, UPSC has conducted recruitment examination for 1930 posts of 
Nursing Officer.  
 
(Ministry of Labour & Employment OM No.G-25015/01/2024-B&A dated 
20.03.2025) 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No.47) 
35. The Committee note that the Employees’ Pension Scheme, 1995 (EPS, 
1995) has been framed under the Employees’ Provident Funds and 
Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1952 (EPF & MP Act, 1952) and came into effect 
from 16th November, 1995. Under the Scheme, the Central Government 
contributes @ 1.16% of wages with wage celling of Rs. 15000/- per month as 
Govt’s Share of pension contribution under Employees’ Pension Scheme, 1995. 
In addition, a Grant-in-Aid is provided by the Central Government under 
Minimum Pension Scheme towards re-imbursement of difference of amount 
between minimum pension of Rs. 1000/- (announced by the Govt. of India) and 
actual member pension under EPS-1995 (if it is less than Rs. 1000/-) w.e.f. 
01.09.2014. During 2023-24, the total number of pensioners getting minimum 
pension of Rs. 1000 per month was 20,64,805 and the total grant-in-aid for 
providing minimum pension of Rs. 1000 per month from 01.04.2023 to 
31.03.2024 was Rs. 957.55 crore. 
The Committee note that over a decade has passed since the minimum 
pension of Rs.1000 per month is being provided to the pensioners. Considering 
the manifold increase in the cost of living in 2024 vis-à-vis 2014 and other 
relevant factors, as put before the Committee by various Stakeholders during 

51 
 
their oral evidences held in the year 2023, the Committee feel that there is a need 
to seriously look into the aspect of considering an upward revision of this 
amount.  Notwithstanding the financial implications involved, the Committee 
desire the Ministry/EPFO to take up this significant task sympathetically with a 
sense of urgency in the larger interest of the effected pensioners and their family 
members so as to arrive at an amicable solution.    
  
(Reply of Government) 
The EPS, 1995 is a “Defined Contribution-Defined Benefit” Social Security 
Scheme. The corpus of the Employees’ Pension Fund is made up of (i) 
contribution by the employer @ 8.33 per cent of wages; and (ii) contribution from 
Central Government through budgetary support @ 1.16 per cent of wages up to 
an amount of Rs.15,000/- per month. All benefits under the scheme are paid 
out of such accumulations. The fund is valued annually as mandated under 
paragraph 32 of the EPS, 1995 and additional reliefs paid if the position of the 
fund so permits. Since the year 2000(except 2015), the fund ran into deficit and 
no additional reliefs could be paid. 
However, the Government, for the first time, in the year 2014, provided a 
minimum pension of Rs. 1000 per month to the pensioners under the EPS, 1995 
by providing budgetary support, which was in addition to the budgetary support 
of 1.16 per cent of wages provided annually towards EPS to Employees’ Provident 
Fund Organization (EPFO). 
This Ministry had made a request to the Ministry of Finance for upward 
revision of the Minimum Pension under EPS-95 scheme. However, during May, 
2023, Ministry of Finance conveyed its disagreement to the said request of 
MoL&E. Further, the same proposal was made part of all the pre-budget 
proposals, which could also not be included in the budget speech/document.” 
 
(Ministry of Labour & Employment OM No.G-25015/01/2024-B&A dated 
20.03.2025) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
Please see Para No. 43 of Chapter-I 
 
Recommendation (Para No.48) 
 The Committee have been apprised that EPFO has launched a Centralized 
Pension Payment System, which is proposed to be rolled out across the country 
from 01.01.2025. The Committee note that this initiative will enable 80 lakh 
pensioners to withdraw their pension from any bank rather than being restricted 
to a few banks. While appreciating the initiative taken by the EPFO/Ministry for 
the benefit of pensioners, the Committee desire that sincere efforts be made for 
speedy disposal of claims through a transparent mechanism as well as for 
redressing the grievances of pensioners in a time bound manner. 

52 
 
 
(Reply of Government) 
In order to ensure speedy disposal of claims, the pension claim process 
has been simplified in the proposed CITES 2.0 where approval steps for pension 
claims will be brought down to 3 steps. 
Further, full scale roll out of Centralised Pension Payment System (CPPS) has 
also been implemented in all ROs. In January, 2025, pension to 69.35 lakh 
pensioners amounting to Rs. 1710 crore was disbursed through CPPS. 
In February 2025, approx Rs. 1610 crores of pension have been disbursed to 
about 69 lakh pensioners through CPPS. 
Impact of the CPPS initiative: 
i. Now Pension can be received from any bank, any branch, anywhere in the 
country. For example, in Feb 2025, more than 2200 Pensioners received 
pension in such banks which were not having any pension disbursement 
agreement with Regional offices or were outside the jurisdiction. 
ii. In earlier system, about 1 lakh cases were transferred in a year due to location 
of branch of the bank chosen by pensioners being outside the jurisdiction of 
the Regional Office. In CPPS, there would not be any transfer of pension claims 
ensuring immediate release of pension. This would be a great relief to 
pensioners who move to their hometown after retirement. 
iii.Now there would be no rejection of pension claims due to EPFO not having 
agreement with the bank preferred by the pensioner. 
iv. In new system, Pensioners do not need for visit to bank for verification or 
submission of undertakings for release of their pension. 
 
EPFO has undertaken a number of steps to streamline the process of claim 
settlement. They are as under: 
 
(i) For Auto mode processing of advance claims, the amount limit has been 
enhanced to Rupees One lakh. Further, in addition to Illness / hospitalization 
advances, the advances for housing, education and marriage are also enabled 
for auto mode processing. Now 60% of advance claims are processed are in auto 
mode.  
The auto-mode claims are processed within three days. EPFO achieved a 
historic high of 2.16 crore auto-claims settlement as on 06.03.2025 during the 
current financial year, up from 89.52 lakh in FY 2023-24    
(ii) Member details correction process has been simplified, and members having 
Aadhaar-verified UANs can make corrections in their IDs themselves, without 
any EPFO interventions. At present, about 96% corrections are being done 
without any EPF office intervention. 

53 
 
(iii)   In Transfer claim submission requests, the need for employer’s attestation 
of Aadhaar-verified UANs has been done away with.  Now only 10% transfer 
claims require member and employer’s attestation. 
(iv) The requirement for submitting a cheque-leaf with the claim form has also 
been relaxed for KYC-compliant UANs meeting prescribed criteria. 
(v)  Over 99.31% claims are now received in online mode, without any 
requirement to visit the field office. In FY 2024-25 as on 06.03.2025, 7.14 Crore 
claims have been filed in online mode. 
(vi) Certain upfront validations have been developed to guide members about 
eligibility /admissibility of claims so as to ensure that members do not file 
ineligible claims 
(vii) The claim settlement process is being further simplified with Centralization 
of member databases under CITES 2.01 
 
The disposal of claims is monitored regularly to ensure that majority of the 
cases are disposed of within the time limit.  
 
Further, EPFO has devised various grievance redressal mechanisms in 
both online and offline modes wherein the pensioners can lodge their 
problems/complaints with the concerned authority in EPFO 
The beneficiary can file their grievances in online mode through portals like 
CPGRAMS, EPFIGMS, UMANG APP. 
 
Grievances can also be sent through offline mode in the form of DAKs and by 
physical visits to the concerned office. The grievances are duly acknowledged 
and resolution is provided as per provisions/rules for which a Public Relations 
Officer has been appointed in all the field offices. 
 
The Department has further started a grass-root outreach through the 
introduction of NIDHI AAPKE NIKAT wherein endeavour is made for on-spot 
redressal of the problems of workers. 
 
(Ministry of Labour & Employment OM No.G-25015/01/2024-B&A dated 
20.03.2025) 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No.49) 
 The Committee note that the Government have notified four Labour Codes, 
namely, the Code on Wages, 2019 on 8th August, 2019 and the Industrial 
Relations Code, 2020, the Code on Social Security, 2020 & the Occupational 
Safety, Health and Working Conditions Code, 2020 on 29th September, 2020. 
These Codes are yet to be implemented.  
As a step towards implementation of the four Labour Codes, the Ministry 
have pre-published seven draft Rules during the period 07.07.2020 to 

54 
 
03.06.2021 whereby comments of all stakeholders including general public have 
been invited. 
Labour is in the Concurrent List of the Constitution and under the Labour 
Codes, rules are required to be framed by the Central Government as well as by 
the State Governments. The Central Government and a number of States/UTs 
have pre-published rules under four Labour Codes.As on 03.12.2024, 03 States 
viz Meghalaya, Nagaland and West Bengal and 01 UT viz. Lakshadweep have not 
yet pre-published the Rules on the Code on Wages, 2019. 02 States viz. 
Meghalaya and West Bengal and 02 UTs viz. Andaman and Nicobar Islands, 
Lakshadweep and NCT of Delhi have not pre-published the Rules on the 
Occupational Safety, Health and Working Conditions Code, 2020. 03 States viz. 
Meghalaya, Nagaland, West Bengal and 01 UT viz. Lakshadweep and NCT of 
Delhi have not pre-published the Rules on the Industrial Relations Code, 2020. 
03 States viz. Meghalaya, Tamil Nadu and West Bengal and 01 UT viz.   
Lakshadweep and NCT of Delhi have not pre-published the Rules on the Code 
on Social Security, 2020. 
The Committee have been apprised that the Ministry had held intensive 
regional consultations with the States/UTs and found some gaps and 
deficiencies in the rules drafted by some of the States for which necessary 
clarifications have been provided by the Ministry.  
The Committee are concerned to note that the four Labour Codes, which 
were notified in 2019/2020 are yet to be implemented. While most of the 
States/UTs have pre-published draft Rules under these Codes, only a few 
States/UTs have not pre-published the draft Rules. The Committee have been 
apprised that the draft Rules of all the States and UTs will be ready soon as the 
Ministry have done intensive work, regional meetings, hand-holding and State-
by-State work. 
Considering the fact that for carrying out the provisions of the Codes, it is 
a statutory obligation  on the States/UTs to prepare the Rules, the Committee 
impress upon the Ministry to further intensify their efforts and vigorously pursue 
the matter with all States/UTs and ensure that the follow up action viz. vetting 
of the draft by the Ministry of Law/ State Law Departments as required, etc. is 
also completed in a time bound manner so as to ensure that the four Labour 
Codes are implemented at the earliest. The Committee would like to be apprised 
of the progress made in this regard. 
 
(Reply of Government) 
It is stated that the Central Government has been making constant efforts 
in the direction of implementation of Labour Codes, including holding of several 
meetings through Video Conferences, providing handholding to States/UTs in 
framing of Rules under Labour Codes etc. As a result of this, significant progress 
has been made in pre-publication of rules by various States/UTs under Labour 
Codes. Recently, Meghalaya, Nagaland and Andaman & Nicobar Islands have 

55 
 
pre-published rules under all four Labour Codes. Present status of pre-
publication of Rules by States/UTs is as under:- 
S. 
No. 
Name of Code No. of States/UTs pre-published Rules 
1. The Code on Wages, 
2019 
34 States/UTs except West Bengal and 
Lakshadweep 
2. The Industrial 
Relations Code, 2020 
33 States/UTs except West Bengal, NCT of 
Delhi and Lakshadweep 
3. The Code on Social 
Security, 2020 
32 States/UTs except West Bengal, Tamil 
Nadu, NCT of Delhi and Lakshadweep 
4. The OSH & WC Code, 
2020 
33 States/UTs except West Bengal, NCT of 
Delhi and Lakshadweep 
 
2. Central Government has still been constantly pursuing the matter with 
States/UTs on framing of rules under Labour Codes. Recently a two days' 
meeting with Labour Ministers/Secretaries of States/UTs was held from 
29.01.2025-30.01.2025 at New Delhi, where remaining States/UTs, which are 
yet to pre-publish their rules, were requested to pre-publish their rules at the 
earliest for implementation of Labour Codes. 
 
(Ministry of Labour & Employment OM No.G-25015/01/2024-B&A dated 
20.03.2025) 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
Please see Para No. 51 of Chapter-I 
 
Recommendation (Para No.50) 
 The Committee expect that after implementation of Labour Codes, there 
will be substantial increase in the work load of the Ministry of Labour and 
Employment, ESIC, ESIC/ESIS hospitals and dispensaries and EPFO and other 
Offices under the Ministry. The Committee, therefore, desire that sincere efforts 
be made to fill up the existing vacancies in these organisations in a time bound 
manner and, if the situation demands, the process of conducting work study of 
these organizations be initiated so as to assess suitable manpower requirement 
and preparedness of these organisations in anticipation of the implementation 
of the Labour Codes. 
 
(Reply of Government) 
The committee's observations have been duly noted and organisations 
wise steps being made are as follows:  

56 
 
ESIC 
1. The ESIC is taking various measures to expedite the recruitment of the vacant 
posts in Hospital, Medical colleges and administrative offices to ensure effective 
services to the stake holders: 
2. To ensure regular and transparent recruitment of the Nursing officers the 
recruitment is being done through the NORCET being conducted by the AIIMS, 
Delhi 
3. Indent for filling up of 573 vacancies in Group B Nursing Officer Post has been 
sent to AIIMS and Advertisement was released on 07.01.2025 by AIIMS.  As per 
the advertisement last date of receipt of applications is 31.01.2025 and date of 
Exam is fixed from 26.02.2025 to 28.02.2025. 
4. Results of the written exam of 1930 posts of Nursing Officers conducted by UPSC 
has been declared. Scrutiny of documents by the UPSC are underway. 
5. Recruitment for 1206 vacancies in 13 Cadres for   Group C Paramedical Posts is 
also being conducted through the AIIMS and Advertisement was released on 
07.01.2025 by AIIMS.  As per the advertisement last date of receipt of 
applications is 31.01.2025 and date of Exam is fixed from 26.02.2025 to 
28.02.2025. 
6. Recruitment for 608 post of Insurance Medical officers (Grade-II) is being done 
through the disclosure lists of CMSE 2022 and CMSE 2023 conducted by the 
UPSC and Advertisement was released on 16.12.2025. Closing date of receipt of 
applications for the post is 31.01.2025 
7. The Committee on RRs is examining to align RRs of Group C staff with the 
Central Govt. to enable SSC to undertake recruitment for Group C posts in ESIC. 
It will help in regular recruitment of Gr. C cadre in ESIC. 
8. Indent for filling up of 1257 Vacancies for the post of MTS sent to SSC.  Exam 
completed. Result awaited. 
9. To fill up the vacancies in ESIC Hospitals and Medical colleges during the year 
2023-24 the ESIC has completed selections of 889 IMOs, 399 Teaching faculties 
(Assistant Professor-349 & Associate Professor-50), 38 specialists and 143 para 
medical staff. 
10. Advertisement for Recruitment of 287 post of Assistant Professor was released 
on 13.12.2024 and the closing date of receipt of application for the post is 
31.01.2025. 
11. Group 'A' & 'B' equivalent post of Administrative side is being filled through 
UPSC. Recently, Recruitment of 151 Deputy Director, 75 JHT, 57 JE(Civil), 20 
JE (Electrical), 10 AEE(Civil) & 13 AD(OL) is carried out. Necessary efforts are 
being made to fill up remaining vacancy through UPSC/SSC  

57 
 
Further, ESIC is in the process of conducting further recruitment on 608 
post of IMO Gr.II, 287 posts of Assistant Professor, 558 posts of Specialist 
(Junior/Senior scale) and 574 posts of Nursing Officer.  
Main Secretariat (Admin-I), MoLE 
The posts of Group A and Group B under the purview of Adm.I Section are 
posts either filled under Central Staffing Scheme or encadred posts of Central 
Secretariat Service (CSS), Central Secretariat Stenographers Service (CSSS), 
Indian statistical Service (ISS), Indian Economic Service (IES) and Central 
Secretariat Official Language Service (CSOLS) which are filled by respective 
Cadre Controlling Authorities (CCAs). The vacancies arising in these posts are 
intimated to respective cadre-controlling authorities, and the posts are filled from 
time to time by them through recruitment by the Staff Selection Commission 
(SSC)/ Union Public Service Commission (UPSC). The assessment of manpower 
requirement in respect of these posts is carried out by respective CCAs through 
cadre restructuring and the information in this respect is provided by Adm.I 
section to the CCAs as and when requested by them. 
Further, the Adm.I section is the cadre controlling authority in respect of 
Staff Car Driver, Investigator Grade-II, Economic Officers, Library Staff and 
Multi-Tasking Staff and vacancies arising in these posts are filled in a time-
bound manner through SSC and UPSC. Further assessment of manpower 
requirement is also carried out for these posts as and when the necessity arises. 
CLS-I Section, MoLE 
CLS-I Section is the Cadre Controlling Authority of Central Labour Service, 
an Organised Group-'A' Service and looks after the administrative matter e.g. 
recruitment, promotion, transfer, posting and so on of CLS officers. 
Filling up of vacancies in Central Labour Service, an organized Group – ‘A’ 
Service 
Grade  Sanctioned 
Strength  
In-Position of 
CLS as on 
01.01.2025 
Filled by Direct 
Recruitment  
During calendar 
year 2024 
Filled by 
Promotion  
During calendar 
year 2024 
HAG 1 0 0 2 
SAG 2 2 0 3 
JAG 59 16 0 0 
STS 115 84 0 6 
JTS 163 116 29 0 
Total  340 218 29 11 
 
EPFO 
Efforts are being made to fill up existing vacancies. Separate division 
headed by Additional CPFC level officer has been established to ensure regular 
recruitment.   The details of recent recruitments are given below: 

58 
 
Advertise
ment Year Cadre 
Recommen
ded 
candidates 
Recruit
ment 
Body 
Result 
Declaratio
n year 
Remarks 
2022 
Enforcement 
Officer/Account 
Officer 
421 UPSC 2023 389 joined till date 
2023 418 UPSC 
2025 Pre-appointment 
formality is under 
process 
2023 
Assistant 
Provident Fund 
Commissioner 159 UPSC 
2024 145 joined till date 
2023 
Junior 
Translation 
Officer 86 UPSC 
2024 45 joined till date 
2023 
Social Security 
Assistant 2674 NTA 
2024 1470 is currently 
working. Waiting list is 
issued for 1190 
candidates and 
appointment will be 
issued to them in the 
upcoming RozgarMela 
2023 Stenographers 185 NTA 
2024 26 joined. 
  
 The joining of the selected candidates is an ongoing process. 
 
V. V. GIRI NATIONAL LABOUR INSTITUTE, NOIDA 
 VVGNLI has sanctioned strength (Live) of 68 posts, out of which 50 posts (04 are 
to be joined shortly) are in position.  
 Under mission mode the institute has filled 18 vacancies and the process of 
filling up of 03 posts is in process. 
 No suitable candidates for the post of Fellow on deputation (01) and Associate 
Fellow (01-ST) were found eligible after a number of times these vacancies 
advertised. 
 The other posts (09 posts) are on promotion basis for which as of now no suitable 
candidates as per RRs is eligible for promotion.  
 
DGFASLI 
  The progress report w.r.t. filling up of vacancies in DGFASLI Organization is as under: 
Sl. 
No. 
Classification of 
posts 
Status 
1. Group ‘A’ 
(Technical posts) 
Proposals for filling up of Group ‘A’ posts (Technical) in 
DGFASLI have been submitted to Ministry as and when 
vacancies have arisen in various grades & disciplines. 
2. Group ‘B’ 
(Technical/ 
Non-Technical 
posts) 
Vacancy report of Group ‘B’ (Technical)/Non-Technical posts 
are submitted to Ministry of Labour and Employment for 
onward submission to UPSC for publication of advertisement 
and selection thereof through Direct Recruitment (DR) 

59 
 
method.  
Further, DPCs under the Chairmanship of DG, DGFASLI for 
filling up of these Group ‘B’ (Technical)/Non-Technical posts 
through promotions are being conducted from time to time 
3. Group ‘C’ (DGFASLI 
Cadre posts) 
Proposals for filling up of Group ‘C’ (Technical)/Non-
Technical posts 
vacancies, as and when arising are submitted to various 
Regional Staff Selection Offices for advertisement and 
recruitment through DR method. 
Further, DPCs under the Chairmanship of DG, DGFASLI for 
filling up of these Group ‘C’ (Technical)/Non-Technical posts 
through promotions are being conducted from time to time. 
4. CSS/CSSS/CSCS/ 
CSOL/SSS 
Vacancy report of various grades of CSS/CSSS / CSCS/ 
CSOL / SSS Cadre posts are regularly submitted to Ministry 
for onward transmission to DoP&T/MHA/MoSPI for filling 
up of Group ‘A’ Group ‘B’ & Group ‘C’ posts of  these  
cadresthrough circulation. 
 
DGMS 
No substantial increase in the work load envisaged in the functioning 
DGMS after implementation of Labour Codes. 
As desired by the committee, proposal(s) in respect of filling up of 
vacancies; Group A, B & C posts has been submitted well in time and is being 
followed up for timely recruitments with Ministry, UPSC and SSC. 
However, a committee is being setup in the changed scenario to meet the 
current challenges and future needs, to assess the work load, functioning, 
capacity building of officers and to suggest/recommend changes. 
DTNBWED: 
Recruitment for the cadre of Education Officers could not be proceeded so 
far, as ‘pay revision case’ of the Education Officers (Cadre Officers) was pending 
before Hon’ble Calcutta High Court and subsequently before the Hon’ble 
Supreme Court. The same will be considered after the pay revision case is 
resolved. The new incumbents, who are working are kept motivated and 
encouraged to continue in the board. Also, office automation work is in progress, 
which will mitigate the shortage of manpower, to some extent.  A committee to 
carryout work study and restructuring of Board has been constituted and 
committee work is in progress. 
 
(Ministry of Labour & Employment OM No.G-25015/01/2024-B&A dated 
20.03.2025) 
 
 
 

60 
 
CHAPTER-III 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLY 
 
Recommendation (Para No.14) 
 The Committee note that during 2023-24, total 5085 candidates were 
trained out of which 2160 candidates were registered in Special Coaching 
Scheme and 2925 candidates were registered in Computer Training.  The 
Committee also note that during 2024-25, the physical target is the same. 
However, the BE for the year 2024-25 has been reduced from Rs. 25 crore in 
2023-24 to Rs. 20.60 crore. According to the Ministry, the total outlay of the 
Scheme as per SFC Note is Rs. 99.90 Crore for 15th Finance Commission Cycle 
(five years period i.e., 2021-22 to 2025-26), out of which an expenditure of Rs. 
60.94 crore has been incurred till 2023-24. The Ministry have also mentioned 
that as per SFC, total proposed outlay for 2024-25 was Rs. 20.60 crore and hence 
same was allocated in the year 2024-25. Therefore, keeping in view the trend of 
expenditure during the past year, decrease in BE 2024-25 is unlikely to affect 
the implementation of the Scheme. The Committee, however, note that during 
2022-23 and 2023-24 the actual expenditure was Rs. 22.06 crore and 23.89 
crore respectively, which is more that the RE for 2024-25, which is Rs. 20.60 
crore. Thus, the contention of the Ministry that the trend of expenditure during 
the past years was taken into consideration while proposing BE of 2024-25 does 
not hold water. Considering the fact that the number of candidates proposed to 
be covered during 2024-25, viz., 5085 candidates (2160+2925) is the same as 
covered during 2023-24, the Committee feel that BE for 2024-25, which is less 
than the actual expenditure during 2023-24, are inadequate and need to be 
revised upwards. The Committee desire the Ministry to look into this aspect so 
that the implementation of the Scheme during the remaining part of the 2024-
25 is not adversely affected. 
 
(Reply of Government) 
 
The BE and RE for FY 2023-24 was Rs. 25.00 Crore out of which Rs. 23.84 
Crore was utilized in 2023-24 including expenditure towards payment of 
committed liabilities of Stipend etc.  
Keeping in view that there was no committed expenditure of the previous 
year (2023-24), the BE and RE for FY 2024-25 is Rs. 20.60 crore. As on 
19.02.2025 an amount of Rs. 15.97 crore (77.52%) has been utilized. The 
remaining available budget will be utilized by the end of financial year 2024-25. 
 
(Ministry of Labour & Employment OM No.G-25015/01/2024-B&A dated 
20.03.2025) 

61 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No.19) 
 
 The Committee note that no target was set during 2023-24 as the PM-SYM 
Scheme was approved for the period 2018-23. The Scheme was extended beyond 
2022-2023 without fixing any target. However, 65,775 beneficiaries were 
enrolled during 2023-24. Thus, 50.58 lakh beneficiaries have been enrolled 
under the Scheme as on 17.10.2024 against the target of 10 crore beneficiaries 
set during 2018-23 resulting in approximately 5% physical achievement of the 
initial target set. The financial progress during the fiscal year 2023-24 was also 
not upto the mark as the allocation of Rs 350 crore at BE stage was reduced to 
Rs. 205.21 crore at RE stage and the actual expenditure as on 31.03.2024 was 
Rs 162.51 crore only resulting in underutilization of funds to the tune of Rs. 
42.70 crore. However, the performance upto the second quarter of 2024-25 has 
remarkably improved, as 60,240 beneficiaries have been registered upto 
17.10.2024 and the expenditure on the said date was Rs. 94 crore against the 
quarterly expenditure plan of Rs. 88.62 crore and BE of Rs. 177.24 crore 
resulting in more that 50% utilization till 17.10.2024. The Committee desire that 
the remaining balance of Rs. 83.24 crore be utilized in the remaining part of 
2024-25. 
 
(Reply of Government) 
 
Till date, more than 1,24,545 beneficiaries have been registered under the 
Pradhan MantriShram Yogi Maandhan(PM-SYM) scheme in FY 2024-25. On the 
basis of actual requirement additional funds were reappropriated. Currently, the 
expenditure under the scheme stands at Rs 229 cr in this financial year.  
 
(Ministry of Labour & Employment OM No.G-25015/01/2024-B&A dated 
20.03.2025) 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No.23) 
 
 The Committee further note that the guidelines inter alia provide that the 
Ministry of Labour and Employment shall not be liable for any incorrectness of 
e-Shram data or resultant losses to the concerned Central Government Ministry 
upon use of e-Shram data without prior verification because the e-Shram data 
is based on self declaration by the registrant. The Committee firmly believe that 
this aspect needs to be re-looked and either the Ministry of Labour and 
Employment or the Ministry concerned or a body comprising representatives of 
various Ministries be held responsible for correctness of the data uploaded on 
the e-Shram Portal.   

62 
 
 
(Reply of Government) 
 
The eShram portal has been designed to ensure a simple and hassle-free 
registration process for unorganized workers on a self-declaration basis. During 
registration, key details of a registrant such as Name, Gender, Date of Birth, 
Permanent Address, and Photograph are fetched directly from Aadhaar after 
successful KYC verification. 
Additional detailed information of unorganized workers are collected 
through a self-declaration to make the registration process easy and accessible. 
This approach ensures wider coverage of workers while minimizing procedural 
difficulties. However, Ministries and Departments utilizing eShram data are 
advised to verify the relevant details as per their specific eligibility/requirements 
before using the eShram data for scheme implementation. 
 
 
(Ministry of Labour & Employment OM No.G-25015/01/2024-B&A dated 
20.03.2025) 
 
 
 
  

63 
 
CHAPTER-IV 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES 
OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
AND WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION 
 
Recommendation (Para No.11) 
 The Committee were also apprised that, at present, the Ministry depend 
on the PLFS survey for getting information in respect of persons who get jobs, 
education-wise, age-wise, in rural areas, in urban areas, etc. The Ministry also 
get feedback on employment and job creation from RBI on 27 sectors. In 
addition, feedback from EPFO on the new subscribers who are joining the EPFO 
provides information on job creation.  The Committee note that notifying final 
hiring figures is not a mandatory requirement on NCS Portal. During evidence, 
the Committee were assured that though NCS does not have mandate for 
providing placement details, the Ministry will work on it. The Committee, 
therefore, strongly recommend the Ministry to devise a suitable mechanism to 
ensure that NCS portal reflects the actual number of placements achieved 
through its usage so that the data regarding employment generation is readily 
available. 
 
(Reply of Government) 
 
The committee’s observations have been noted. DGE is capturing the 
count of the shortlisted candidates from the job fairs that conducted in MCC. 
Further, the NCS portal has got the feature wherein the employer can update the 
shortlisted candidates. 
Activities are planned and executed by DGE to educate/motivate the 
employers to update their vacancies on the NCS portal promptly. 
 
(Ministry of Labour & Employment OM No.G-25015/01/2024-B&A dated 
20.03.2025) 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
Please see Para Nos. 11 of Chapter-I 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No.16) 
 
 The Committee further note that out of 36 States/UTs, the training to 
SC/ST candidates was provided in 25 States/UTs only and the candidates in the 
remaining 11 States/UTs viz. Bihar, Chhatisgarh, Goa, Sikkim, Tripura, 
Uttarakhand, Andaman and Nicobar Islands, Chandigarh, Dadra & Nagar Haveli 
and Daman and Diu, Ladakh and Lakshadweep were left out.  The Ministry have 

64 
 
also categorically stated that there is one Centre at each of 25 States/UTs and, 
at present, there is no proposal to expand the training Centres in the remaining 
11 States/UTs. The Committee feel that SC/ST candidates in these 11 
States/UTs are being deprived of their legitimate right to get training under the 
Scheme. The Committee, therefore, impress upon the Ministry to expand the 
number of training centres in such a way that each State/UT has at least one 
Training Centre so that the SC/ST candidates across the country get the training 
benefits under the Scheme. 
 
(Reply of Government) 
 
NCSCs for SC/ST were established in the States/UTs as model institutes 
to enhance the employability of SC/ST jobseekers through 
guidance/coaching/training. These Centres are Sub-ordinate offices of DGE in 
the various parts of the country. At present, there are 25 such Centres 
functioning in the country. According to the mandate of NCSC for SC/ST, if State 
requests, similar Centres may be opened in respective State. The State /UT Govt. 
are at liberty to open similar Centres in the States/UTs from their own resources 
depending on their requirement. 
 
(Ministry of Labour & Employment OM No.G-25015/01/2024-B&A dated 
20.03.2025) 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
Please see Para Nos. 14 of Chapter-I 
 
Recommendation (Para No.27) 
 
 The Committee note that health care facility is extended to 
Beedi/Cine/Non-Coal Mines workers with a network of 279 Dispensaries and 10 
Hospitals. In the F.Y. 2023-24, 18,02,000 beedi/cine/non-coal mines workers 
and their dependents were benefited with an expenditure of Rs 9.7 Crore. The 
financial assistance ranging from Rs. 30,000 to Rs. 7,50,000 is provided for 
treatment of 09 diseases viz. Cancer, Tuberculosis, Heart Diseases, Kidney 
Transplantation, Hernia, Appendectomy, Ulcer, Gynaecological diseases and 
Prostrate diseases in the Government recognized Hospitals. The Committee note 
that while the rates for reimbursement in respect of cancer were revised in 2022, 
there has not been any increase in the rates for reimbursement for the remaining 
08 diseases since 2002/2003 viz. during the last 22/21 years.  The Committee 
have been informed that at present there is no proposal under consideration of 
the Government to increase the financial assistance or to cover more diseases. 
The Committee are of the considered view that owing to the surge in medical 
expenses over the years, it has become imperative, if not mandatory, to augment 
the amount of reimbursement for the treatment of various diseases.  The 

65 
 
Committee firmly believe that a powerful health care system is one of the 
prerequisites for building a robust economy and towards achieving this end, the 
good health of the movers and shakers of the economy who form the base of the 
pyramid, i.e., the work force is of paramount significance.  The Committee, 
therefore, desire the Ministry to undertake an objective assessment of the 
current rates prescribed and expediently undertake an exercise to revise the 
existing ceiling so that expenses incurred on health care facilities become 
affordable to the beneficiaries as well as their dependents.  The Committee also 
recommend to simultaneously explore the desirability of identifying other 
diseases prevalent in Beedi/Cine/Non-Coal Mines workers adversely affectingly 
their liver, eyes, skin, ears, mental and behavioral disorders or such 
occupational diseases as identified by ILO. 
 
(Reply of Government) 
 
Health care facilities are provided to Beedi, Cine and Non-Coal Mine 
workers and to their family members through 10 Hospitals and 279 Dispensaries 
located across the country. Under this scheme OPD facility is provided to the 
workers and their family members. Apart from OPD facility, reimbursement of 
expenditure for specialized medical treatment in case of critical diseases like 
Cancer, Heart diseases, Kidney diseases etc. are also provided. At present, 
proposal for enhancement of existing ceiling for reimbursement of expenses is 
not under consideration. One of the distinguishing features of the health scheme 
is that the Labour Welfare Organisation provides the Health Care benefits to 
workers and their families at door step through its Medical Mobile Units located 
across the country. In the camp screening of diseases like Diabetes, 
Hypertension, related to eye, Tuberculosis etc. are also carried out.  
 
(Ministry of Labour & Employment OM No.G-25015/01/2024-B&A dated 
20.03.2025) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
Please see Para Nos. 17 of Chapter-I 
 
Recommendation (Para No.32) 
 
 The Committee note that the Institute of Human Development (IHD) had 
conducted evaluation of the Scheme and based on the recommendations of the 
IHD, the immediate assistance has been increased from Rs. 20,000/- to Rs. 
30,000/-. The Committee have been apprised that based on the suggestions and 
inputs received from various stakeholders and other social partners, the Scheme 
has been continued up to the financial year 2025-26. The Committee would like 
to know the status of implementation of the recommendation of IHD regarding 
changes in design of the Scheme and also that the payment of rehabilitation 
amount be delinked from conviction. 

66 
 
 
(Reply of Government) 
 
Central Sector Scheme for Rehabilitation of Bonded Labourer-2021 is a 
demand driven scheme where funds are provided to States/UTs on receipt of 
proposal from them. The scheme makes conviction a necessary requirement for 
final disbursement of cash assistance as the charges levied on the 
captor/creditor needs verification by the concerned Executive Magistrate in the 
first place in order to avoid any undue deduction of funds, in the event of 
false/frivolous cases of bonded labour. 
The scheme was previously evaluated in the year 2021 and accordingly 
revised scheme named 'Central Sector Scheme for Rehabilitation of Bonded 
Labourer-2021' has been effective w.e.f. 27.01.2022 for the period upto 2025-
26. 
 
(Ministry of Labour & Employment OM No.G-25015/01/2024-B&A dated 
20.03.2025) 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
Please see Para Nos. 28 of Chapter-I 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No.44) 
 
 The Committee note that under the Employees’ State Insurance Act, 1948 
the employees are required to pay contribution at the rate of 3.25 percent of 
wages of the covered employees and the rate of contribution for the employees is 
0.75 percent of their wages. Further, at present, wage workers drawing wages 
upto Rs.176 per day are exempted from paying their share of contribution. The 
Committee have been apprised that the average daily wages during a wage period 
for exemption from payment of employee’s contribution was raised to Rs.176 
w.e.f. 06 September 2019.  The Committee have also been apprised that the 
Minimum Wages for exemption of an employee from payment of employees 
contribution under Section 42 of ESI Act, 1948 read with Rule 52 of ESI (Central) 
Rule 1950, is decided on the basis of National Floor Level Minimum Wages 
decided under Minimum Wages Act, 1948.    
The Committee note that there are 2,39,946 exempted employees in 32 
States/UTs with top five States being Tamil Nadu, West Bengal, Andhra Pradesh, 
Telangana and Maharashtra having 44,545, 44,021, 18,624, 13,871 and 13,316 
low paid employees respectively. The Committee feel that the amount of Rs.176 
per day is way too low to sustain a family in the present time.  
Considering the fact that more than five years have passed since the 
increase was effected on the last occasion as well as rise in cost of living, the 

67 
 
Committee, feel that there is an urgent need to revise National Floor Level 
Minimum Wages under Minimum Wages Act, 1948 so as to have corresponding 
revision in exemption of an employee from payment of employees contribution 
under ESI Act and the Rules made thereunder. The Committee, therefore call 
upon the Ministry to revisit the threshold limit and arrive at a reasonable amount 
in the larger interest of welfare of the low paid workers and their family members.   
 
(Reply of Government) 
 
The average daily wages during a wage period for exemption from payment 
of employees’ contribution under Section 42 of the ESI Act 1948, stipulated in 
the Rule 52 of ESI (Central) Rules, 1950 is fixed on the basis of the National 
Floor level Minimum Wages decided by the Ministry. 
The revision to the average daily wages during a wage period for exemption 
from payment of employees’ contribution, stipulated in Rule 52 of the ESI 
(Central) Rules, 1950 may be taken up after the National Floor level Minimum 
Wages is revised. 
 
(Ministry of Labour & Employment OM No.G-25015/01/2024-B&A dated 
20.03.2025) 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
Please see Para Nos. 39 of Chapter-I 
 
 
  

68 
 
CHAPTER-V 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES 
OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE INTERIM IN NATURE  
 
Recommendations (Para No.9) 
 
 The Committee have been apprised that as on 23.10.2024, 30 States/UTs 
have been integrated for information exchange with NCS Portal and integration 
with rest of the States/UT viz. Kerala, Tamil Nadu, West Bengal, Sikkim, 
Nagaland and Ladakh is under process. The Committee appreciate the efforts 
being made by the Ministry and desire that the process of integration of the 
remaining 06 States/Union Territory be completed on priority so that the 
information for the use of intended beneficiaries across the country is timely 
available on NCS portal. 
 
(Reply of Government) 
 
Integration of remaining 6 States/UTs is under process. 
 
(Ministry of Labour & Employment OM No.G-25015/01/2024-B&A dated 
20.03.2025) 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 20) 
 
 The Committee further note that the third-party evaluation of the Scheme 
was undertaken by Indian Institute of Public Administration (IIPA), which 
presented its report in March 2023. The major recommendations of the IIPA 
Study inter alia included  (i) merger of the two PM-SYM and PM-LVM pension 
schemes with the similar flagship old age pension schemes like Atal Pension 
Yojana (APY) and (ii) fresh registration under PM-SYM and PM-LVM schemes 
should be discontinued and subscribers enrolled earlier may be allowed to shift 
to APY. The recommendations of the third party evaluation conducted by Indian 
Institute of Public Administration (IIPA) were, however, reviewed by a Committee 
constituted by the Ministry of Labour and Employment, which had not agreed to 
some of the recommendations of IIPA and inter alia recommended re-designing 

69 
 
of PMSYM Scheme instead of merger with Atal Pension Yojana. As stated by the 
Ministry, they have taken steps to engage agency for actuarial valuation of the 
Scheme. The Committee have also been apprised that the, Department of 
Expenditure, Ministry of Finance has agreed to the proposal of the Ministry for 
extension of Scheme for another year i.e. 2025-26 pending revision of scheme by 
early next Financial Year.  
 
The Committee, therefore, impress upon the Ministry to work out the 
revised Scheme on priority and in a time bound manner inter alia keeping in view 
the shortcomings noticed earlier, reservations/ deficiencies, if any, pointed out 
by the States/UTs during meetings held by the Ministry from time to time and 
the recommendations of the Committee constituted  by the Ministry to review 
the recommendations of IIPA so that the workers of the unorganized sector are 
truly benefitted with the revised Scheme. The Committee would like to be 
apprised of the progress in this regard. 
 
(Reply of Government) 
 
The Ministry is in the process of redesigning the existing scheme and come 
out with a revised scheme.  
 A committee was formed under the chairmanship of JS & DGLW, to redesign 
the pension scheme of this Ministry. The committee came out with the final 
report.  
 Actuarial valuation of PM-SYM scheme is under process for FY 2021-22, 
2022-23, and 2023-24 and the final report is expected by April, 2025. The 
findings of the final report willfacilitate revision of the scheme. 
 Ministry is in the process of hiring a knowledge partner for studying the 
present scheme,actuarial inputs and provide recommendations for 
restructuring of PMSYM scheme.  
 
(Ministry of Labour & Employment OM No.G-25015/01/2024-B&A dated 
20.03.2025) 
 
 
 

70 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No.33) 
 
 The Committee further note that the Scheme provides for creation of a 
Bonded Labour Rehabilitation Fund at the district level by each State with a 
permanent corpus of at least Rs. 10 lakhs at the disposal of the District 
Magistrate which would be renewable for extending immediate help to the 
released bonded labourers. As informed by the Ministry, so far, only 09 States 
viz. Assam, Kerala, Bihar, Uttar Pradesh, Karnataka, Delhi, Haryana, Gujarat & 
Tamil Nadu have confirmed the constitution of district corpus funds in each 
district. The Committee would like to be apprised of the status of creation of 
corpus funds by the remaining 27 States/UTs and the efforts made by the 
Ministry in this direction. 
 
(Reply of Government) 
 
The details are being collected. 
 
(Ministry of Labour & Employment OM No.G-25015/01/2024-B&A dated 
20.03.2025) 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
Please see Para No. 31 of Chapter-I 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi;                                                                 BASAVARAJ BOMMAI  
19th August, 2025                                                               CHAIRPERSON,  
28 Shravana, 1947(Saka)                  STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR,  
   TEXTILES AND SKILL DEVELOPMENT 
  

71 
 
APPENDIX-I 
MINUTES OF THE FIFTEENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON 
LABOUR, TEXTILES AND SKILL DEVELOPMENT 
(2024-25) 
 
The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 19th August, 2025 from 1500 hrs. to 
16:30 hrs. in Committee Room ‘C’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
         PRESENT 
Shri Basavaraj Bommai-  Chairperson 
      MEMBERS  
  LOK SABHA  
 2. Shri G. M. Harish Balayogi 
 3. Shri Aashtikar Patil Nagesh Bapurao 
 4. Shri Ram Prasad Chaudhary  
 5.                Shri G. Lakhsminarayana 
 6.            Shri Asit Kumar Mal 
            7.        Shri Kali Kumar Munda 
           8.        Shri Rudra Narayan Pany 
           9.        Shri Kartick Chandra Paul 
          10.       Shri Pradeep Purohit 
          11.       Shri Mukesh Rajput 
          12.       Shri Raja Ram Singh 
          13.       Shri Adhikari Soumendu 
          14.       Shri Manoj Tigga 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
  15. Shri Naresh Bansal 
  16. Shri Govindbhai Laljibhai Dholakia 
  17. Shri Rajendra Gehlot 
  18. Dr. Syed Naseer Hussain 
  19. Shri I.S. Inbadurai 
  20. Dr. Meenakshi Jain 
    
                    SECRETARIAT 
 
1.    Shri Lalkithang   - Joint Secretary   
2.    Ms. K. Muanniang Tunglut - Director 
3.    Ms. Mili Dinesh    -  Deputy Secretary 
4.    Shri S. Lalengzau Ngaihte - Deputy Secretary 
5.    Ms. Shilpa Kant   - Under Secretary 

72 
 
 
 
2. XXXX      XXXX      XXXX   
 
3. XXXX      XXXX      XXXX  
     
4. XXXX      XXXX      XXXX   
5. XXXX      XXXX      XXXX 
 
6. XXXX      XXXX      XXXX 
 
(The witnesses then withdrew) 
[A copy of the verbatim record of proceedings was kept on record] 
 
7.   The Committee then took up the next item on the agenda i.e. consideration 
and adoption of four draft Action Taken Reports: - 
(i) Action taken by the Government on the observations/recommendations 
contained in the Fifty-fourth Report (17th Lok Sabha) of the Committee on 
‘Schemes/Programmes of Central Silk Board for Development and 
Promotion of Silk Industry’ pertaining to the Ministry of Textiles;  
(ii) Action Taken by the Government on the observations/recommendations 
contained in the Fifty-Fifth Report (17th Lok Sabha) of the Committee on 
'Development of Cotton Sector' pertaining to Ministry of Textiles;  
(iii) Action Taken by the Government on the observations/recommendations 
contained in the First Report (18th Lok Sabha) of the Committee on 
‘Demands for Grants (2024-25)’ of the Ministry of Labour & Employment; 
and   
(iv) Action Taken by the Government on the observations/recommendations 
contained in the Second Report (18th Lok Sabha) of the Committee on 
‘Demands for Grants (2024-25)’ of the Ministry of Textiles. 
 
8. After some deliberations, the Committee adopted the aforesaid draft 
Reports with some modifications/amendments and authorized the Chairperson 
to finalise the Reports and present the same to Parliament. 
The Committee then adjourned. 
* * * * * * 

73 
 
APPENDIX-II 
(Vide Para No. 3 of the Introduction) 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON OBSERVATIONS/ 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THEIR FIRST REPORT (EIGHTEENTH 
LOK SABHA) OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR, TEXTILES AND 
SKILL DEVELOPMENT 
  
Total 
 
Percentage 
   
I. Total number of Recommendations 50 
 
 
II. Recommendations/Observations 
which have been accepted by the 
Government – Rec. Para No. 1, 2, 3, 
4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 10, 12, 13, 15, 17, 18, 
21, 22, 24, 25, 26, 28, 29, 30, 31, 
34, 35, 36, 37, 38, 39, 40, 41, 42, 
43, 45, 46, 47, 48, 49 and 50 
 
39 
 
78 
III. Recommendations/Observations 
which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government’s 
reply –Rec. Para No. 14, 19 and 23 
      
03 
 
6.00 
IV. Recommendations/Observations in 
respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by 
the Committee and which require 
reiteration –Rec. Para No. 11, 16, 27, 
32 and 44 
 
05 
 
10.00 
V. Recommendations/Observations in 
respect of which replies of the 
Government are interim in nature – 9, 
20 and 33 
03 
 
6.00 
   100% 
***** 