i 
 
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR, TEXTILES AND  
SKILL DEVELOPMENT 
(2025-26) 
 (EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
          MINISTRY OF TEXTILES 
 
ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE 
FIFTH REPORT (18TH LOK SABHA) OF THE COMMITTEE ON 
‘DEMAND FOR GRANTS (2025-26)’ OF THE MINISTRY OF 
TEXTILES. 
 
NINETEENTH REPORT 
 
     
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
NEW DELHI   
March, 2026/ Chaitra, 1948 (Saka)  
 
19 

ii 
 
NINETEENTH REPORT 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR, TEXTILES AND 
SKILL DEVELOPMENT 
(2025-26) 
 
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF TEXTILES  
 
ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE 
FIFTH REPORT (18TH LOK SABHA) OF THE COMMITTEE ON 
‘DEMAND FOR GRANTS (2025-26)’ OF THE MINISTRY OF 
TEXTILES. 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 27.03.2026 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 27.03.2026 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
March, 2026/ Chaitra, 1948 (Saka)   


iii 
 
CONTENTS 
      
                          
PAGE No.     
    
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (iv) 
INTRODUCTION   (v) 
CHAPTER I Report 1 
CHAPTER II Recommendations/Observations which have 
been accepted by the Government 
 
28 
CHAPTER III Recommendations/Observations which the 
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of 
the Government’s reply 
 
63 
CHAPTER IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of 
which replies of the Government have not 
been accepted by the Committee and which 
require reiteration 
 
65 
CHAPTER V Recommendations/Observations in respect of 
which replies of the Government are interim 
in nature    
66 
 
APPENDICES 
 
Appendix- I Minutes of the 9th Sitting of the Committee 
(2025-26) held on 24th March 2026. 
 
      69 
Appendix- II Analysis of the Action Taken by the 
Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in the Fifth 
Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) 
71   
 
__ 
 

iv 
 
     COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR, TEXTILES AND SKILL DEVELOPMENT 
(2025-26) 
 
Shri Basavaraj Bommai – Chairperson 
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
2 Shri Mani A. 
3 Shri G. M. Harish Balayogi 
4 Shri Aashtikar Patil Nagesh Bapurao 
5 Shri Partha Bhowmick 
6 Shri Yogender Chandolia 
7 Shri Ram Prasad Chaudhary 
8 Shri Chandra Prakash Choudhary 
9 Shri G. Lakshminarayana 
10 Shri Asit Kumar Mal 
11 Shri Kali Charan Munda 
12 Shri Rudra Narayan Pany 
13 Shri Kartick Chandra Paul  
14 Shri Tanuj Punia 
15 Shri Pradeep Purohit 
16 Shri Mukesh Rajput 
17 Shri Raja Ram Singh 
18 Shri Adhikari Soumendu 
19 Shri V. K. Sreekandan 
20 Shri Manoj Tigga 
21 Shri Chavan Ravindra Vasantrao 
RAJYA SABHA 
22 Shri Ritabrata Banerjee 
23 Shri Govindbhai Laljibhai Dholakia 
24 Shri Rajendra Gehlot 
25 Dr. Syed Naseer Hussain 
26 Shri Maharaja Sanajaoba Leishemba 
27 Dr. Kalpana Saini 
28 Shri Anthiyur P. Selvarasu 
29 Shri Abdul Wahab 
30 Shri Rajinder Gupta  
31 Shri Gurwinder Singh Oberoi 
  
SECRETARIAT 
1 Shri Mukesh Kumar Sharma      -        Joint Secretary 
2 Ms. K. Muanniang Tunglut        -         Director 
3 Ms. Shilpa Kant                           -       Under Secretary 
 
 
 

v 
 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Labour, Textiles and Skill 
Development (2025-26) having been authorized by the Committee, present on 
their behalf this Nineteenth Report on Action Taken by the Government on 
the observations/recommendations of the Committee contained in their Fifth 
Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Demand for Grants (2025-26)’ of the 
Ministry of Textiles. 
2. The Fifth Report was presented to Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya Sabha 
on 28 March 2025. The Ministry of Textiles furnished their replies on 28 July 
2025 indicating Action Taken on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Fifth Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha). The Committee 
considered and adopted the Draft Report at their sitting held on 24 March 
2026.  
3. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in the Fifth Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) is 
given at Appendix-II. 
4. For ease of reference, the Observations/Recommendations of the 
Committee have been printed in bold type in the body of the Report. 
 
 
 
New Delhi;           BASAVARAJ BOMMAI   
24 March 2026                              CHAIRPERSON,                   
3 Chaitra 1948 (Saka)                   STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR,  
TEXTILES AND SKILL DEVELOPMENT

1 
 
REPORT 
CHAPTER- I 
This Report deals with the action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in their Fifth 
Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants (2025-26)’ of the 
Ministry of Textiles. 
2.    The Fifth Report was presented to Lok Sabha/laid in Rajya Sabha on 28 
March 2025. It contained 29 Observations/Recommendations. Replies of 
Government in respect of all the Recommendations have been received and 
are categorized as under:-  
 
(i) Observations/Recommendations which 
have been accepted by the Government –Rec. 
Para Nos. 1, 3, 4, 5, 6, 8, 9, 10, 11, 14, 15, 16, 
17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 28 and 29. 
 
Chapter II 
Total: 24 
Percentage:82.76 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the 
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of 
the Government’s reply – Rec. Para No. 7. 
      
Chapter III 
Total: 01 
Percentage: 3.45 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect 
of which replies of the Government have not 
been accepted by the Committee and which 
require reiteration – Rec. Para No. 13. 
 
Chapter IV 
Total: 01 
Percentage: 3.45 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect 
of which replies of the Government are 
interim in nature – Rec. Para Nos. 2, 12 and 
27. 
Chapter V 
Total: 03 
Percentage: 10.34 
 
 
3. The Committee desire that Action Taken Notes in respect of the 
Observations/ Recommendations contained in Chapter-I and Chapter-V 
of this Report, for which interim reply has been given by the 
Government, be furnished to them at the earliest. 
4. The Committee will now deal with some of their earlier 
Observations/Recommendations which either require reiteration or 
merit further comments. 
 

2 
 
I. Concessional Credit/Weavers MUDRA Loans  
Recommendation (Para No. 10) 
5. National Handloom Development Programme (NHDP) comprises several 
Schemes/Programmes for the welfare of Handloom weavers. Concessional 
credit/weavers MUDRA Loans is one of these schemes covered under NHDP. 
The Committee had noted that the State-wise MUDRA loan details had been 
furnished by the Ministry, but the loan disbursement details regarding North 
Eastern States other than Manipur could not be seen. Taking note of the 
above fact, the Committee had recommended the Ministry to consider special 
provisions including relaxed eligibility parameters and shortened sanctioning 
procedure for the North East as the Mudra loan facility is a critical 
intervention for the economic and social upliftment of the Handloom weavers. 
6. The Ministry of Textiles, in their Action Taken Note furnished to the 
Committee, have stated as under: 
      “It is submitted that O/o DC (Handlooms), Ministry of Textiles is 
implementing the Concessional Credit/Weaver MUDRA Scheme, under 
NHDP for handloom sector to meet their credit requirements in a flexible 
and cost-effective manner across the country including NER States. 
Under this scheme, eligible handloom weavers are required to approach 
participating banks and have to submit the loan application along with 
only one of the following document: 
  
 Pehchan card issued by the O/o DC(Handlooms) 
 Yarn passbook 
 Identity card issued by the State Government  
  
Further, it is the responsibility of the banks to sanction the loan to 
eligible handloom beneficiaries on receipt of viable proposals.  
  
Towards covering the more number of handloom beneficiaries, this 
office is taking continuous efforts with the States/UTs Govt. and the 
field offices of this office across the country. As a result, the number of 
loans under the scheme are being increased year by year from 2022-23 
to 2024-25. During the FY 2024-25 (upto 31.03.2025), 9211 number of 
loans have been sanctioned with loan amount of Rs.6984.16 lakh. Out 
of which, 366 number of loan sanctioned with loan amount of 
Rs.229.80 lakh in the NER States (324 in Assam with loan amount 
Rs.208.80 lakh and 42 in Manipur with loan amount Rs.21.00 lakh).  
  
To provide the credit flow in the North Eastern States, this office is 
focusing to organize more number of awareness camps/chaupals in the 
NER States and interact with the handloom weavers for dissemination 
of scheme benefits in due course through the field offices of this office 

3 
 
so as to increase the number of handloom beneficiaries under Mudra 
loan towards development of economic and social upliftment of the 
handloom weavers. 
  
Recently also, this office has written a D.O. letter dated 25.03.2025 
(copy enclosed) from Secretary (Textiles) to Secretary (Department of 
Financial Services, M/o Finance to advise all the participating banks to 
ensure prompt sanctioning and disbursal of loans and to lodge the 
claims for margin money, interest subvention and credit guarantee fee 
through the Handloom Weaver Mudra Portal to enhance the scheme’s 
reach and benefits to a greater number of handloom beneficiaries. 
  
Further, this office has also written a D.O. letter dated 15.04.2025 
(copy enclosed) to Chairman/CEO/MD/ President of all Scheduled 
Commercial Banks/State Cooperative Banks/ Regional Rural Banks/ 
District Central Cooperative Banks with a copy endorsed to 
Director/Commissioner, In-charge of Handloom Department of all 
States/UTs Govt. and Officer In-charge of Weavers Service Centres with 
the request to advise their bank branches down the ladder to ensure 
prompt sanctioning and disbursal of loans and to lodge claims for 
margin money, interest subvention and credit guarantee fee through 
the Handloom Weaver Mudra Portal for all eligible handloom 
beneficiaries across the country including NER States.” 
 
7. Having noted that the details of loan disbursement under Weaver 
MUDRA Scheme for the North Eastern (NE) States had been provided only 
for Manipur, the Committee had recommended for consideration of 
special provisions including relaxed eligibility parameters and shortened 
sanctioning procedures for the North East. The Action Taken Reply of 
the Ministry indicated the existing norms, coverage under the Scheme, 
the total number of loans sanctioned along with the loan amount 
including for Assam and Manipur during FY 2024-25, awareness 
camps/chaupals in NE States, banking procedure, etc., however, the 
specific concerns raised by the Committee have not been addressed. The 
Committee attach priority towards ensuring better access to 
institutional credit for the handloom weavers in the North Eastern 
Region and reiterate their recommendation for formulating special 
provisions, relaxed eligibility parameters and shortened sanctioning 
procedures so that the substantive issue of poor and uneven credit 
penetration is adequately addressed. The details of loan disbursement in 
the NE States, other than Assam and Manipur during FY 2024-25 along 

4 
 
with the progressive targets for the next FY may also be furnished. The 
Committee also find that the onus of sanctioning and disbursing the 
loans has been placed entirely on banks and impress upon the Ministry 
to set up a robust institutional mechanism for monitoring the entire 
process including accountability framework or feedback mechanism to 
ensure compliance by the lending institutions so that all the eligible 
handloom weavers in the NER as well as in other parts of the country, 
are brought under the coverage of the Scheme. The action taken in this 
regard may be communicated to the Committee at the earliest.  
 
II. Implementation of Wool Sector Schemes in Ladakh 
Recommendation (Para No. 13) 
8. The Committee had noted that the primary reason for under-utilization 
of funds in previous years from 2021-24 is the slow progress in project 
execution by the State Government Implementing Agencies, particularly 
under the Pashmina Wool Development Scheme in Ladakh. Harsh climatic 
conditions and prolonged road blockages for 5-6 months have constrained the 
timely implementation of projects in this region.  Further, delay in submission 
of utilisation certificates under schemes have also hampered speedy 
utilization of funds. The Committee, taking note of the above fact, had 
recommended that the Ministry should take up with the Ministry of Finance 
the aspect of harsh climatic conditions and terrain in areas like Ladakh 
hindering implementation of schemes of wool sector as they have to adhere to 
common expenditure guidelines relating to schemes.  Ministry of Finance be 
impressed upon the need for granting relaxation in spending limits and for 
putting in place tailor made provisions for schemes implemented in areas like 
Ladakh considering the uniqueness of the conditions on the ground where 
beneficiaries of the scheme reside.  
9. The Ministry of Textiles, in their Action Taken Note furnished to the 
Committee, have stated as follows: 

5 
 
“Due to adverse climatic conditions, the working period in the Ladakh 
region is from April to October. Accordingly fund allocation under the 
TASP. Capital and General Head may be provided in accordance with 
the extant rules and provision to facilitate the IA's utilizing funds in a 
speedy and timely manners. Further, Ministry of Finance will also be 
approached for tailor-made provision for schemes implemented in areas 
like Ladakh during the formulation of new scheme guidelines post 
2025-26.” 
 
10.  In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry have informed that in 
addition to the measures to be taken for facilitating the Implementing 
Agencies in utilizing funds in a speedy and timely manner given the 
adverse climatic conditions in Ladakh region, the Ministry of Finance 
would be approached for tailor-made provisions for schemes 
implemented in the region during formulation of new scheme guidelines 
post 2025-26 i.e.  after the current FY ends. The Committee are not 
satisfied with the reply of the Ministry as no attempt is being made to 
resolve the ongoing issues and recurring implementation challenges in 
the current FY itself.  The Committee, therefore, urge the Ministry to 
take immediate and proactive steps in this regard, formulate well-
defined proposals for overcoming the challenges and approach the 
Ministry of Finance for relaxation in spending norms for the FY 2025-26 
itself.  The status of consultation with the Ministry of Finance in this 
regard should be apprised to the Committee.  
Considering the short working period in Ladakh region i.e. from 
April to October only, the Committee further desire that periodic review 
meetings, online monitoring, special disbursement system, etc. should 
be made use of extensively and all out efforts made to strengthen 
coordination between the UT administration and the local implementing 
agencies so that the benefits of the schemes reach the intended 
beneficiaries in a timely manner.  
  
III. Evaluation of Wool Sector Schemes 
Recommendation (Para No. 15) 

6 
 
11. The Committee had noted that CWDB has sanctioned a project to 
evaluate the current wool sector schemes implemented by various 
Government agencies across different States. The Committee were of the view 
that Wool Sector needs special attention of the Government as it is interlinked 
with the contribution to the overall development of the Textile sector in the 
country as well as with the livelihood of wool-growers and artisans. Hence, 
the Committee exhorted that the evaluation and resultant revamping of the 
Wool sector Schemes should be taken up on priority and completed 
expeditiously. Owing to the specificities of the sector and the regions where 
wool is produced in India, the Committee had also impressed upon the 
Ministry to undertake an effective ground level survey and other similar 
feedback as part of the review of the schemes.  
12. The Ministry of Textiles, in their Action Taken Note furnished to the 
Committee, have stated as under: 
“A wool Survey study and Evaluation of existing scheme are 
under process; except in the UT of Ladakh where at present 
temperature is below zero degree. The survey and evaluation 
study will start in the month of May, 2025 for Ladakh Region. 
Based on the recommendations and report of the said survey, a 
new wool sector scheme will be finalized”. 
 
13. In pursuance of the Committee’s recommendation for taking up 
the evaluation and resultant revamping of the wool sector schemes on 
priority and undertaking an effective ground level survey, the Ministry 
have stated that a wool survey study and evaluation of existing scheme 
are under process and based on the recommendations and report of the 
said survey, a new wool sector scheme would be finalized. The 
Committee find it surprising that despite the urgent need for revamping 
of wool sector schemes for the growth and overall development of the 
textile sector as well as enhanced livelihood of wool-growers and 
artisans, the Ministry have not mentioned the efforts made to prioritize 
the survey/evaluation of the existing wool sector scheme. Stressing on 

7 
 
early completion of the evaluation study/survey so that revamping of 
the wool sector schemes could commence, the Committee urge the 
Ministry to ensure close monitoring of the progress and apprise them of 
the current status including in the UT of Ladakh.  The name of the 
agency conducting the survey and stakeholders covered therein should 
also be intimated to the Committee. The Committee further desire that 
preparatory groundwork for analyzing the recommendations of the 
evaluation study/survey report should be in place so that once the report 
is received, finalization of the new wool sector scheme could be 
completed expeditiously. 
 IV. Amended Technology Upgradation Fund Scheme  
Recommendation (Para No. 19) 
14. The Committee had further urged upon the Ministry to organize special 
awareness programmes, in the areas where Jute is majorly grown and 
processed, for making the Mill owners aware about the Amended Technology 
Upgradation Fund (A-TUFS) Scheme of the Ministry of Textiles. This scheme 
would help upgrade existing machinery and install modern looms resulting in 
overall growth and development of farmers and mill workers. The Committee 
had also wanted the Ministry to conduct proper R&D in collaboration with the 
research institutes for developing new innovations for Jute usage. Public 
Private Partnership should be explored as the mode for advancement in this 
direction. The Committee had also felt that by the current push of the 
Government to replace plastic with environment friendly packaging options 
should be seen as an opportunity and the Ministry should seek out options 
how jute can fill in the gaps that may be left by plastic bags and other 
synthetic products. Even legislative interventions like amending the Jute 
Packaging Material (Compulsory Use in Packing Commodities) Act, 1987 and 
its robust implementation on the ground could be explored to handhold the 
industry in this endeavour. When it comes to increasing the exports of jute 

8 
 
diversified products, the Committee were of the considered opinion that the 
Ministry should probe new international markets other than US, UAE, etc. 
15. The Ministry of Textiles, in their Action Taken Note furnished to the    
Committee, have stated as under: 
“NJB has been actively engaged in prioritization of Research agenda in 
exploring possibilities of jute in both textile and non-textile 
applications.  In this direction, the on-going 18 R&D projects include 
as below: 
  
Sl. 
No 
Project 
Implementi
ng R&D 
Institutes  
Title of the 
Project  Objectives 
Name of the 
Industry 
Partner 
1 Northern 
India Textile 
Research 
Association 
(NITRA) 
Development of 
Jute Composite for 
automotive 
acoustic insulation 
&other uses. 
  
i. To design and 
develop composite 
material for 
automotive 
acoustic 
insulation; 
ii. To conduct 
trials in real life 
situation  
iii. To standardize 
fibre component 
and process 
parameters for 
this specific use; 
iv. To attempt for 
use of jute non-
wovens and 
composites in 
other automotive 
parts. 
M/s RFM 
Automotives 
Pvt. Ltd., 
Gurgaon. 
2 Northern 
India Textile 
Research 
Association 
(NITRA) 
Development of a 
molten metal 
splash resistance 
unique jute blended 
work wear 
for   Steel foundry 
workers 
i. To develop 
fabrics of various 
weaves and masses 
using jute and its 
blends; 
ii. To finish these 
fabrics with 
M/s Mahavir 
Spinfab, 
Kanpur 

9 
 
  durable FR 
chemicals and 
their analysis; 
iii. To determine 
chemical, 
mechanical and 
safety 
performance 
properties; 
iv. To compare 
existing work-
wear fabric with 
newly developed 
fabric for safety 
performance and 
other properties; 
v. Techno-
commercial 
feasibility 
through field 
trials at the user 
industry 
3 National 
Institute of 
Technology, 
Durgapur 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Nano-technological 
intervention on 
jute-geotextile to 
adapt long term 
sustainability   and 
enhanced 
durability for its 
cost-effective and 
wide application in 
flexible pavement 
systems 
  
  
i Chemically 
modification of 
conventional jute 
geotextile (JGT) 
materials to 
enhance its 
durability and 
tensile strength 
properties; 
 
ii. Performance 
study of the treated 
JGT as reinforcing 
layer over the soil 
sub-grade in 
flexible pavement 
system under 
repeated wheel 
load; 
 
iii.Development of 
protocols on the 
M/s Gloster 
Ltd, Kolkata. 

10 
 
application of JGT 
as geo-material in 
pavement 
construction based 
on experimental 
and numerical 
modelling; and 
  
iv Economic 
analysis for 
pavement 
construction and 
lifelong study on 
overlying the JGT 
treated soil 
subgrade.  
4 National 
Institute of 
Technology, 
Durgapur 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Development of 
guidelines to adopt 
the process of 
height increment of 
overburden dumps 
at open cast coal 
mines in India 
using jute-
geotextile as 
reinforcing material 
To make scientific 
guidelines for 
increasing the 
height of the 
overburden dumps 
at opencast coal 
mines using jute-
geotextiles as 
reinforcing 
material through a 
detailed 
geotechnical 
characterization 
and stability 
analysis of coal 
mine overburden 
dumps in India to 
meet the techno-
economic and 
operational 
challenge to go for 
the most efficient 
overburden dump 
design, that is 
steep enough to be 
safe and flat 
enough to be 
economically 
acceptable. 
M/s Ludlow 
Jute 
&Specialitie
s Ltd., 
Kolkata. 
 
 

11 
 
5 Ahmedabad 
Textile 
Industry's 
Research 
Association 
(ATIRA) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Development of 
Jute Composite for 
application in 
Prosthetic Leg 
 
i. Development of 
jute fiber based 
polymeric 
prosthetic leg 
socket as a 
replacement of 
existing material 
by considering the 
woven jute fiber 
and needle 
punched jute fiber 
ii. Performance 
evaluation of the 
jute based 
prosthetic leg 
socket developed 
using different 
polymeric material 
on the basis of 
physical, 
mechanical and 
thermal 
characteristics; 
iii. Optimization of 
the developed 
material based on 
the performance 
attributes; 
iv. Field trial to 
study the static 
comfort test and 
life cycle 
assessment of 
prosthetic leg. 
Blind People’s 
Association 
Ahmedabad 
6 ICAR-
National 
Institute of 
Natural Fibre 
Engineering 
and 
Technology 
(ICAR-
NINFET) 
 
 
 
Development of bio-
degradable 
packaging boxes 
from jute stick and 
jute pulp for Agri-
horticultural 
products 
 
i. Development of 
durable boxes from 
jute sticks for 
transportation of 
fruits & vegetables; 
ii.  Development of 
packaging boxes 
from paper boards 
made out of jute 
pulp (stick & fibre) 
for high value 
perishable fruits 
like mushrooms 
and strawberries; 
and 
iii. Studies on the 
quality attributes 
of stores products 
during 
M/s Sheet 
Kamal Pvt. 
Ltd. 
 

12 
 
transportation and 
storage. 
7 Wool 
Research 
Association 
(WRA) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Development of 
Cost Effective 
Handmade Carpets 
& Floor Coverings, 
Home Furnishings 
& Knitwears using 
Jute (Treated 
Woolenised or 
Untreated) & other 
natural fibres with 
value added Eco 
Friendly Finishes 
such as with Flame 
Retardancy, 
Mosquito Repellent, 
Anti-
Bacterial/Antimicr
obial Properties etc. 
i. To develop 
woven/knitted 
fabrics (union 
blends or 
otherwise) using 
Jute (treated 
woolenised or 
untreated) with 
other natural 
fibers for home 
furnishings, 
handmade 
carpets and floor 
coverings; 
ii. To impart value 
added multi-
functional and eco-
friendly finishing 
such as Flame 
Retardancy, 
Mosquito 
Repellence, and 
Anti-Bacterial / 
Antimicrobial 
Properties, etc. on 
the developed 
product for floor 
coverings, home 
furnishing 
&Knitwears 
application as per 
requirement; 
iii. To study and 
evaluate the 
performance of the 
different developed 
products; and 
iv. To study the 
techno commercial 
feasibility of the 
developed products 
1.M/s VC 
Vishal Carpets 
Manufacturer 
& Exporters of 
Hand Made 
Carpets 
Bhadohi 
 
2.M/s 
Innoleague 
Technologies 
India Pvt. Ltd. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8 Government 
College of 
Engineering 
& Textile 
Technology 
 
 
Development of 
jute based 
composite for non-
structural 
applications 
 
i. To develop 
different jute 
based composite 
structures; and 
ii. To identify 
commercially 
available 
continuous and 
discontinuous 
M/s Fibro-
Plastichem 
India Pvt. Ltd. 
Kolkata 
 
 

13 
 
 
processes and to 
set the process 
parameters for 
manufacturing 
composite for 
different end uses 
9 Central Pulp 
& Paper 
Research 
Institute 
(CPPRI) 
Production of Pilot 
Scale Whole Jute 
Dissolving Pulp for 
Viscose Fibre 
 
Pilot Scale study on 
production of 
Rayon grade pulp 
from Whole Jute 
followed to 
preparation of 
viscose fibre. 
M/s ABSTCPL 
Taloja, 
Maharashtra 
 
10 Ahmedabad 
Textile 
Industry's 
Research 
Association 
(ATIRA) 
Hybrid Jute 
Composite 
Modification and 
Subsequent  Develo
pment of Porta 
Cabin 
 
i. Development of 
jute fiber-based 
sandwich panels 
for porta cabin. 
 
ii.Performance 
evaluation of the 
developed jute 
fibre reinforced 
sandwich 
composites on the 
basis of Physical, 
mechanical and 
thermal 
characteristics 
 
iii. Development of 
Numerical 
simulation model 
to evaluate the 
effect of sandwich 
and analyze the 
mechanical 
performance of the 
jute-based 
sandwich 
composites. 
 
iv. Optimization of 
the developed 
material based on 
the performance 
attributes 
M/s A. B 
Composite, 
Kolkata 

14 
 
v. Fabrication of 
porta house as well 
as study the 
performance and 
life cycle 
assessment of 
porta house under 
real environment 
(Field Trial) 
11 Indian 
Institute of 
Technology 
Bhubaneswa
r (I.I.T 
Bhubaneswa
r) 
Mechanistic-
Empirical Design of 
Jute Geotextile 
Reinforcement 
Pavements for 
Rural Roads 
  
Pavement design of 
jute geotextile 
reinforced low 
volume road 
pavements are 
being done as per 
the guidelines 
given in IRC: SP: 
126: 2019. 
However, it is not 
based on any 
pavement 
performance data. 
Mechanistic-
empirical designs 
are considered to 
be the most 
appropriate 
pavement design 
approach across 
the globe. 
Considering the 
need to collect 
systematic 
pavement 
performance data 
for such roads, the 
objective of this 
study is to support 
construction of low 
volume road 
pavements under 
PMGSY using Jute 
geotextiles, 
evaluate their 
pavement 
performance for a 
long time and 
develop 
mechanistic-
empirical based 
design charts for 
low volume roads 
M/s Birla Jute 
Mill, 
Birla,   
Kolkata. 

15 
 
using jute 
geotextiles. 
12 National 
Institute of 
Technology 
Karnataka 
Technology 
Development and 
Engineering 
Performance 
Evaluation of Jute 
Geocells for Slope 
Stabilization and 
Pavement 
Applications 
  
i. To develop a 
technology to 
manufacture 
geocells from Jute 
yarn/fiber; 
ii. To do material 
characterization of 
jute geocell by 
conducting various 
laboratory tests 
and standardizing 
jute geocells in line 
with BIS standards 
for various field 
applications; 
iii. To establish the 
performance 
evaluation of 
natural jute 
geocells through 
model tests in the 
lab; and 
iv. Filed 
implementation of 
jute geocells at two 
different sites to 
demonstrate the 
viability of the 
proposed geocells 
for various 
applications. 
M/s Birla 
Jute Mill,  
Kolkata. 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
13 ICAR-National 
Institute of 
Natural Fibre 
Engineering 
and 
Technology   
(ICAR-NINFET) 
Development of 
modern mini-
spinning machinery 
for processing of 
jute and allied 
fibres for small 
industries 
  
i. To study the 
economic viability 
of proposed 
machines to be 
developed viz-a- viz 
existing machinery 
for different range 
of yarn count of 
jute and allied 
fibres. 
  
ii. To design and 
fabricate suitable 
mini-carding, 
mini-drawing and 
mini- 
spinning    machin
ery system for 
processing jute 
and allied fibres 
  
M/s 
Bhowmick 
Calculators, 
Kolkata. 
  

16 
 
iii. To evaluate the 
spinning 
performance of the 
developed machine 
for the production 
of jute and allied 
fibre-based yarn. 
14 Indian 
Institute of 
Science 
Bangalore 
Evaluation for 
Filtration 
Characteristics of 
Jute Geotextiles 
 
 
i. To evaluate the 
physical and 
hydraulic 
characteristics of 
jute geotextiles and 
subgrade soils 
ii. To perform 
laboratory one-
dimensional flow 
filtration tests 
To evaluate the 
filtration 
characteristics 
based on the 
retention, 
hydraulic 
conductivity, and 
clogging 
requirements. 
M/s Birla Jute 
Mill, 
Kolkata. 
15 Indian Jute 
Industries 
Research 
Association 
Exploration of usage 
of Engineered Jute 
and Agro-waste based 
Agrotextiles for 
Improving Farmers’ 
Income on their 
Produce 
 
 
Innovation of novel 
textile engineering-
based jute and 
agro-waste 
blended 
Agrotextiles with 
an aim to find out 
their effectiveness 
for improving 
agriculture 
productivity 
M/s 
Kamarhati 
Jute Mill, 
kolkata 
and 
M/s Ambica 
Jute Mill, 
Howrah. 
16 Indian 
Institute of 
Science 
Bangalore 
Application of Jute 
Geotextiles in 
Reinforcing the 
Retaining Walls for 
Static and Seismic 
Stability 
 
 
i.        Building 
lab-scale retaining 
walls reinforced 
with jute 
geotextiles and jute 
geocells; 
 
ii.       Understandi
ng the 
performance of 
jute reinforced 
retaining walls 
under static and 
seismic loading 
conditions with 
flexible and rigid 
facing of the walls; 
M/s 
Engosyam 
Consultants 
 

17 
 
 
iii.      Understandi
ng the shear 
strength of jute 
geotextile-sand, 
and jute geocell-
sand interfaces 
and correlating it 
to the performance 
of the reinforced 
retaining walls; 
and 
 
iv.     Quantifying 
the performance 
benefits of jute 
geotextile 
reinforcement. 
17 Indian 
Institute of 
Technology 
Guwahati 
Development of Jute 
Clay Liners (JCL) for 
Waste Containment 
Applications 
 
 
i.        To 
understand the 
influence of the 
quality of the jute 
geotextile (different 
GSMs of the jute 
geotextiles), quality 
and gradation of 
the used 
bentonites, and 
type of the bonding 
used for JCL 
preparation; 
 
ii.       To 
understand the 
hydraulic 
characteristics of 
the proposed JCLs 
under different 
inorganic salts and 
heavy metal 
solutions; 
 
iii.      To 
understand the 
diffusion 
characteristics of 
the proposed JCLs 
with different 
inorganic salts and 
heavy metal 
solutions; and 
 
iv.      To 
understand the 
soil water 
M/s Birla Jute 
Mill, 
kolkata. 

18 
 
characteristics of 
proposed JCLs and 
its comparison 
with the existing 
GCLs with 
synthetic 
geotextiles. 
18 The Indian 
Institute of 
Technology 
(ISM) Dhanbad 
Industrial scale up of 
biodegradable, non-
polymer super-
hydrophobic jute 
fabric exhibiting 
excellent water 
repellency & stiffness 
for shopping/hand 
bag products 
 
 
The aim of 
proposed project is 
to develop cheap, 
durable, 
sustainable & 
biodegradable 
water repellent and 
stiff coatings to 
improve the 
longevity of jute 
fabrics and yarn. 
The followings are 
the main objectives 
of the proposed 
work: 
I. Improveme
nt of water-
repellency 
and 
stiffness of 
jute yarn 
and fabric 
II. Examine 
the jute 
after 
modificatio
n through 
wetting, 
surface 
morpholog
y, 
chemical, 
mechanica
l, physical 
characteris
tics 
III. Examinati
on of 
durability, 
biodegrada
tion and 
sustainabil
ity of jute 
after 
M/s Birla Jute 
Mill, 
Kolkata. 

19 
 
modificatio
n 
IV. Assessmen
t of jute 
application
s after 
modificatio
ns (eg. self-
cleaning, 
anti-stain, 
antibacteri
al, and 
anti-
fungal) 
V. Quality 
and life 
assessmen
t of coated 
jute based 
prototype 
items 
(hand and 
shopping 
bags) 
VI. Cost 
analysis of 
the coating 
at lab scale 
VII. Up-scaling 
the process 
and 
industrial 
trial 
 
  
Various Textile Research Associations viz. NITRA, ATIRA, NIT, NINFET, 
WRA have been assigned with the R&D Projects.  
  
Increasing Exports of Jute Diversified Products: 
During 2023-24, Exports of Jute Diversified Products from India were 
mainly to: USA, (28%), France (18%), UK (8%), The Netherlands (5%), 
Spain (5%), Australia (4%), Germany (4%), Belgium (3%), UAE (2%), 
Sweden (2%). All these top 10 countries accounted for 79 % of total 
value of Jute Diversified Products exported. Thus, USA and EU are the 
major countries importing Jute Diversified Products from India. 

20 
 
NJB, as measure for export promotion of Jute Diversified Products has 
identified Focus and Emerging Markets including Latin American 
countries, Australia & New Zealand and included in its International 
Marketing Plan to organise participation of Regd. Jute Exporters in 
Export Promotion Events viz. Trade Fairs, BSMs, Business Delegation, 
Conference etc.” 
16. Upon scrutiny of the reply of the Ministry, the Committee find no 
specific initiatives taken on their recommendation for organizing special 
awareness programmes for mill owners/farmers regarding the Amended 
Technology Upgradation Fund (ATUFS) Scheme, the manner in which 
jute can fill the gap left by plastic bags and other synthetic products  and 
the steps taken to explore amendment in the Jute Packaging Material 
(Compulsory Use in Packing Commodities) Act, 1987 and its robust 
implementation on the ground. Being of the view that the Ministry had 
shown a casual approach towards the concerns raised by them, the 
Committee urge for concrete measures to be taken to promote the 
ATUFS Scheme by organizing special awareness programmes so that the 
benefits of the Scheme percolate to the mill workers and farmers. The 
data regarding beneficiaries, outreach activities, fund utilization, etc. 
under the Scheme may also be apprised. On the issue of utilizing jute 
and its products to replace plastic bags, the Committee desire that R&D 
projects commissioned by the Ministry should align with the national 
initiatives such as plastic substitution, green packaging and circular 
economy, etc. The Committee further desire that a comprehensive Jute 
Packaging Expansion Strategy should be worked out to exploit the 
demand created by restrictions on single-use plastics and the progress 
made in this regard communicated to the Committee. 
V. PM-MITRA Scheme 
Recommendation (Para Nos. 22 and 23) 
17. The Committee had noted that budget is allocated under Capital and 
Revenue Heads for PM-MITRA Scheme and the allocations under Capital Head 
have been utilized in full. The Ministry had sought BE of ₹ 300.00 crore in 
2024-25 which was slashed down to ₹ 44.00 crore at RE stage. Actual 

21 
 
Expenditure under the Scheme stood at ₹ 24.51 crore as on 25.02.2025.  The 
Committee were concerned to find that the funds under Revenue Head could 
not be utilized during 2024-25 fiscal as these funds are supposed to be 
released to the seven State Governments, only once they fulfill certain criteria 
including selection of Master Developer. As none of the States had selected 
the Master Developer for the PM MITRA Parks, the Government of India share 
could not be released to them; hence there was a shortfall in utilization. This 
important Scheme was launched for a period of seven years from 2021-22 to 
2027-28 FY. Taking note of the above facts, the Committee had expressed 
their concern that even after passage of five years, only 7 sites in the 7 States 
were approved, even the construction had not started at all the sites and every 
year the funds allocated for this purpose went unutilized as in 2023-24 
wherein ₹0.13 crore was the AE vis-à-vis ₹ 52.30 crore RE. The Committee  
reckoned that PM MITRA is one of the most ambitious and prestigious 
schemes envisioned by the Prime Minister. It prima facie appeared to the 
Committee that the lack of initiative by the States in providing requisite 
infrastructure and planning was one of the reasons for the Parks not 
becoming a reality. The Committee, had therefore, recommended that the 
Ministry should take up this matter with the concerned 7 State Governments 
on priority and pursue them to appoint a Master Developer within a definite 
time-line provided by the Ministry. The Committee understood that there are 
difficulties emerging at grass-root level which the State Governments have to 
deal with while completing these Parks. But, considering the significance 
attributed to the Scheme, the Committee had recommended that a Special 
Task Force of the representatives of the Central and State Governments 
should be formed to analyse the teething issues faced by the scheme and to 
suggest practical solutions. Further the Task Force should also monitor the 
progress of PM MITRA Parks and to handhold the States to complete the 
construction of the Parks in the least possible time. This would also ensure 
that the total outlay fixed for the Scheme could be utilised and PM MITRA 
Parks start functioning and provide much needed fillip to the Textile Sector. 
18.    The Committee had expected that the funds of ₹ 300.00 crore at BE 
stage in FY 2025-26 would not go unutilized in the ensuing financial year as 

22 
 
these Parks form part of the vision of future by our PM with the aim of 
developing integrated large scale and modern industrial infrastructure facility 
for total value-chain of the textile industry and are required to be set up by 
2027-28 with the total expenditure of ₹ 4445.00 crore. Further, the Committee 
had desired to be apprised of the total amount utilized out of ₹ 4445.00 crore 
since the launch of the Scheme till date. 
19. The Ministry of Textiles, in their Action Taken Note furnished to the 
Committee, have stated as under: 
“As regards approval of only 7 PM MITRA Parks, it may be noted that 
as per Cabinet Note, only 7 sites (Greenfield/Brownfield) are to be 
selected for establishment of PMMITRA Parks for which Rs. 4445 crore 
has been sanctioned for 7 years. All States were requested to submit 
proposals for establishing PM MITRA Park in their respective States. In 
response, 18 proposals from 13 States were received. Based on the 
criteria laid in scheme guideline, 7 sites (5 Greenfield and 2 Brownfield) 
were finalized. hence the deemed action as per scheme guideline  has 
been completed and there is no laxity or shortfall on this count.  
Special Task Force:  In so far as monitoring is concerned, Project 
Approval Committee already exists to guide and oversee 
implementation of the parks. The composition of PAC is as under : 
i. Secretary, M/o Textiles-Chairman 
ii. Financial Advisor, M/o Textiles –Member 
iii. AS/JS, M/o Textiles-Member 
iv. Representatives of DPIIT and NITI Aayog 
In addition, the SPV Boards include senior State representatives also 
have been created to guide and monitor the progress of the parks.  So 
far, 8 meetings of PAC has been held.  
As regards constitution of Special Task Force, it may be noted 
that the project is being led by a Special Purpose Vehicle. 
Secretary(Textiles), Government of India is Chairperson of the Board of 
Directors of SPV and Secretary(Industry/Textiles) of State concerned is 
Chief Executive Officer of the SPV. SPV is responsible for overall 
development, governance  and  administration of the park. Under PM 
MITRA, a total of Rs. 24.63 crore has been utilized in 2023-24 and 
2024-25.  
Considerable progress has been made after the selection of the 
sites. The details of State wise progress made is as under:  
GREENFIELD PROJECTS 

23 
 
(a)    Gujarat 
 MoU and Joint Venture Agreement between GoI and State Govt 
signed 
 SPV named “PM Mitra Park Gujarat Limited” incorporated.  
 100% land acquired and Land transferred in the name of SPV. 
 Environment Clearance (EC) received on 19.02.2024. 
 RFP for onboarding of Master Developer for development of PM 
MITRA Park in Gujarat made live on n-procure website from 
27.11.2024. Pre bid meeting held on 24.12.2024. 
 Investor Sentiment Survey conducted by GIDC from potential 
investors. 
 Stakeholders’ engagement carried out with Textile Industry Body 
Associations, Investors, Ministry of Textiles, and Entrepreneurs& 
Industry Experts for Development of PM MITRA Park. 
(b)    Uttar Pradesh 
 Joint Venture Agreement between GoI and State Govt signed 
 SPV named (PM MITRA Park Uttar Pradesh Ltd.) incorporated on 
10.10.2023. 
 100% land acquired, Government of Uttar Pradesh has 
transferred the land to the SPV on 23.02.2023. 
 Environmental Clearance (EC) for the project site granted on 
15.07.2024. 
 The clearance for the extracting ground water obtained on 
01.07.2024. 
 Road widening work of 5.8 KM has been completed till park gate 
 Government of Uttar Pradesh has received investment intentions 
of Rs. 4120.85 Crores from 81 Investors, potentially creating 
Approx. 36,480 jobs opportunities. 
(c)    Madhya Pradesh 
 MoU and Joint Venture Agreement between GoIand State 
Govtbeen signed. 
 SPV named (PM MITRA Park Madhya Pradesh Ltd.) incorporated 
on 02.01.2024. 
 100% land acquired, Land transfer order been issued.  
 Park layout plan prepared.  
 Received intentions to invest worth Rs. 10,547/- Crs from 30 
investors.  
 The Competent authority has accorded in-principle approval to 
the proposal of the Govt. of Madhya Pradesh for implementation 
of PM MITRA park scheme through the Govt. of Madhya Pradesh 
subject to certain condition. 
(d) Tamil Nadu 

24 
 
 MoU and Joint Venture Agreement between GoIand State Govt 
has been signed. 
 SPV (PM Mega Integrated Textile Regions and Apparel Park Tamil 
Nadu Limited) incorporated on 20.02.2024. 
 100% land acquired, Government of Tamil Naduis in process of 
transferring land to SPV(PM Mega Integrated Textile Regions and 
Apparel Park Tamil Nadu Limited) 
 Environmental Clearance (EC) obtained on 31.07.2023.  
 11 MoUs signed with prospective investors in the PM MITRA Park 
for a total investment amount of 1231 crores thereby creating 
6,315 job opportunities. 
 The PAC agreed in the principle to the GoTN’s Proposal for 
implementing to PM MITRA park scheme through the GoTN 
(which in turn would utilise the services of SIPCOT- an 
undertaking wholly owned by Government of Tamil Nadu), 
subject to certain condition. 
(e)      Karnataka  
 MoU and Joint Venture Agreement between GoIand State Govt 
has been signed. 
 SPV (PM MITRA PARK KARNATAKA LIMITED)formed on 
27.03.2024. 
 100% land acquired, Government of Karnataka Transferred Land 
to SPV on 22.10.2024 
 8 MoU’s for investment of Rs. 1700 Crore signed by Govt of 
Karnataka. 
   BROWNFIELD PROJECTS  
(f)      Telangana 
 Park is in operation 
 Total Investments as on date – Rs. 2694 cores 
 MoU (including amendments) between GoI and Govt. of 
Telangana signed. 
 Implementing Agency: Government of Telangana through its 
State Implementing Agency (SIA) i.e TelanganaState Industrial 
Infrastructure Corporation (TGIIC). 
 Environmental Clearance (EC) is available. 
(g)     Maharashtra 
 MoU between GoI and Govt. of Maharashtra signed 
 Implementing Agency: Government of Maharashtra through its 
State Implementing Agency (SIA) i.e. Maharashtra Industrial 
Development Corporation (MIDC)  
 The tender for the infrastructure Development worth Rs. 111 cr 
finalized and work order issued.  
 5 MoUs totalling to the investment of INR 1,370 Cr. signed.  

25 
 
 The Foundation stone to the park was laid by Hon’ble Prime 
Minister in September 2024.” 
 
20.  The Committee express concern at the slow pace of progress in the 
implementation of the PM-MITRA Scheme which was launched for a 
period of seven years from 2021-22 to 2027-28 with a total allocation of 
₹ 4445 crore. The Action Taken Reply of the Ministry indicate that even 
after five years of its launch, the PM-MITRA Park is in operation only in 
the State of Telangana while production has not commenced in the 
remaining six Parks in Gujarat, Uttar Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh, Tamil 
Nadu, Karnataka and Maharashtra. Regarding the expenditure incurred 
so far under Scheme, a total of ₹ 24.63 crore has been utilized in 2023-
24 and 2024-25, a mere fraction of the total allocation under the 
Scheme. The Committee emphasize the need for boosting India’s textile 
industry through integration of the textile value chain, creation of world-
class integrated manufacturing hubs, attracting investment, promoting 
exports, generating large scale employment, etc. and urge the Ministry 
to ensure the early completion and operationalization of the remaining 
PM-MITRA Parks. The Committee express serious concern that, even 
after a lapse of four years, the Ministry have not undertaken adequate 
result-oriented measures to ensure the timely operationalisation of the 
PM- MITRA Parks. The Committee, therefore, strongly urge the Ministry 
to impress upon all State Textile Secretaries to take up this matter with 
utmost priority and in right earnest. They should ensure the preparation 
of comprehensive and up-to-date reports detailing the various stages of 
implementation of these Parks in their respective States. Such reports 
may be furnished to the Committee in advance of, or during, the meeting 
scheduled to be held in the near future for a detailed review of progress. 
The Committee also recommend that the monitoring mechanism under 
the Scheme should be strengthened and monthly review of the progress 
of the Parks should be conducted. The Committee further desire that an 
action plan be worked out to address the issue of underutilization of 
funds and other delays in the implementation of the Scheme so that all 
the PM-MITRA Parks are made functional, production is commenced and 
optimum utilization of the budgetary allocation is achieved within the 

26 
 
given period of the Scheme i.e. by 2027-28. The progress in utilization 
of the budgetary allocation and status of the Parks should also be 
intimated to the Committee at periodic intervals.    
 
VI. Production Linked Incentive Scheme 
Recommendation (Para No. 27) 
21. The Committee had noted that Ministry of Textiles had submitted two 
proposals viz. PLI 1.2 for expansion of Harmonized System (HS) lines under 
MMF Apparel and MMF fabrics and PLI 2 for apparel/garments, made-ups 
and textiles accessories for making the Scheme more comprehensive. The 
Committee finding the fact that these proposals are still under consideration, 
want that the Ministry should take measures to expedite the 
finalization/approval of these proposal. The Committee had also wanted that 
the Ministry should take well-focused steps to increase the number of PLI 
companies so to promote competitiveness and foreign investments in our 
domestic textile industries. Further, the Committee had taken note of reports 
that the Government is pondering over a decision whether or not to continue 
with the PLI Scheme further. Though facts on this matter have not been 
placed before the Committee, it is observed that the continuance of PLI 
Scheme or an appropriate alternative for Textile Sector would be crucial for 
facilitating its growth in the country. 
22. The Ministry of Textiles, in their Action Taken Note furnished to the 
Committee, have stated as under: 
“The proposal for PLI 1.2 for expanding coverage of items under the 
scheme has been shared with DPIIT which is consolidating all PLI 
schemes. Further additional comments to DPIIT are under finalization. 
Draft Cabinet note on PLI 2.0 scheme for Textiles was shared with 
Cabinet on 10.12.2024 on which further comments have been received. 
These are under consultation, for scheme finalization. 
 
Ministry has recently issued a comprehensive list of HSN codes covered 
under Technical Textile segments. PLI for textiles scheme has a 
projected investment of Rs. 28,711 crore by selected applicants. As 
noted by Committee, a 3rd window for inviting applications under the 
scheme has been opened. This was in light of the industry requests 
from MMF fabrics & Technical Textiles.” 

27 
 
  
23.  The Committee note the reply of the Ministry that additional 
comments to DPIIT regarding the proposal for Production Linked 
Incentive (PLI) 1.2 for expanding coverage of items under the Scheme, 
are under finalization. In respect of PLI 2.0 Scheme shared with Cabinet, 
further comments received are under consultation for finalization of the 
Scheme. The Ministry have also opened a 3rd window for inviting 
applications under PLI for textiles Scheme on the requests of the 
industry from MMF fabrics & Technical Textiles. The Committee note 
with concern that the proposals regarding PLI 1.2 and PLI 2.0 are still 
pending due to delay on the part of the Ministry in finalizing their 
comments. Stressing the urgency of implementing a comprehensive PLI 
Scheme for the growth of the textile industry and creation of 
employment, the Committee urge the Ministry to complete all 
consultations on the PLI Schemes and obtain the requisite approval 
without further delay. The corrective action taken to increase the 
number of PLI companies in the country may also be apprised to the 
Committee with due promptitude. 
  

28 
 
CHAPTER-II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS 
WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 1) 
  
The Committee note that in 2023-24, the Ministry of Textiles had put forth 
BE of ₹ 4389.34 crore which was revised at RE Stage to ₹ 3443.09 crore and 
Actual Expenditure could only reach 88.85% of RE, i.e. ₹ 3059.25 crore. It 
constituted 69.70% of BE. In the current FY 2024-25 BE was ₹ 4417.03 crore 
which was revised to ₹ 3342 crore at RE stage and up till 23.02.2025 only ₹ 
2698.57 crore were utilized which is only 61.09% of BE and 80.75% of RE. 
The Committee express their concern over this shortfall in utilization and 
expenditure of remaining budgetary allocation till 31 March 2025. The 
Ministry, however, assured the Committee that all possible efforts are being 
made by the Ministry for optimal utilization of funds during 2024-25. The 
Committee expressed their concern over expenditure of remaining budgetary 
allocation which is to the tune of around 40% of BE to which the Ministry 
informed the Committee that all possible efforts for optimal utilization of 
funds as per the instructions/guidelines issued by the Ministry of Finance 
are being made. Taking into consideration the fact that funds to the tune of 
around 20 per cent of RE and 40 per cent of BE are left to be utilized within 
the last one month of FY, The Committee urge upon the Ministry to make all 
concerted efforts to utilize the funds under their respective heads by the end 
of the year and stick to their commitment.  
Reply of the Government 
Ministry has taken a number of steps for the optimum utilization of 
allocated funds. These included continuous monitoring of expenditure by the 
Senior Officers and the matter is also being discussed in weekly senior officers 
Meetings. However, the Ministry utilized the funds to the tune of 96.83% of 
RE allocation at the end of the March 2025 i.e. 3235.90 crore out of RE 
allocation Rs. 3342.00 for FY 2024-25. 
(Ministry of Textile’s O.M. No. 2/05/2025-Parl., dated: 28.07.2025)  
  
Recommendation (Para No. 3) 
The Committee note that Ministry of Textiles have been granted BE of ₹ 
5272.00 crore for 2025-26 fiscal. Although the Ministry have assured that 
they are planning to spend more funds effectively during the next FY 2025-
26, the Committee, nevertheless, recommend the Ministry to take corrective 

29 
 
measures to deal with the hurdles like non-receipt of viable proposals and 
shifting of fund flow mechanism to CNA model as prescribed by the Ministry 
of Finance under the Schemes of PM MITRA and NTTM respectively so that 
optimum utilization of budgetary funds can take place in the current year as 
well as in ensuing fiscals. 
Reply of the Government 
In this connection, Ministry is taking proactive steps such as in weekly 
Senior Officers Meetings, the issue of non-receipt of viable proposals and 
shifting of fund flow mechanism to CNA models is being monitored effectively. 
The Ministry is following the instructions issued by the Ministry of Finance 
w.r.t CNA/TSA from time to time. However, the Ministry has noted the 
recommendations of Committee for future compliance.   
 (Ministry of Textile’s O.M. No. 2/05/2025-Parl., dated: 28.07.2025) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 4) 
Further, the Committee observe that the reduction of BE funds of ₹ 
4417.00 crore to ₹ 3342.00 crore at RE stage in 2024-25 was mainly under 
Amended Technology Upgradation Fund (ATUFS) Scheme, National 
Handicraft Development Programme (NHDP), National Technical Textiles 
Mission (NTTM) due to various reasons such as non-receipt of viable 
proposals, delay in procurement process etc. Taking note of the fact that this 
is the reason which led to improper and less utilization which resulted in 
reduction of funds at RE stage, the Committee are of the considered view that 
Ministry should address these issues with strategic intervention and 
pragmatic approach so that at least the funds allocated at RE stage could be 
utilized in full in the current FY. 
Reply of the Government 
In this regard, Ministry has taken various steps for optimum utilization of 
funds during the current financial year .The Ministry has prepared Quarterly 
Expenditure Plan & Monthly Expenditure Plan to deal with any shortfall in 
utilization of the funds. However, the Ministry has noted the observations of 
Committee for future compliance. 
(Ministry of Textile’s O.M. No. 2/05/2025-Parl., dated: 28.07.2025) 
  

30 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 5) 
COTTON SECTOR 
       Cotton is one of the most important cash crops and accounts for around 
23% of the total global fibre production.  The consumption of cotton is 
approximately 326 lakh bales (170 kg each) per year.  India occupies first 
position in the world in cotton acreage with 113.60 lakh hectares under cotton 
cultivation which is around 36% of the world area of 316.20 lakh hectares. 
During Cotton season, 2024-25 India’s productivity is around 448kg/ha. 
India has emerged one of the largest producers, consumers and exporters of 
cotton in the World. The Committee note that Cotton Corporation of India, a 
Public Sector Undertaking under the Ministry of Textiles, is the nodal agency 
of Government of India for undertaking MSP operations in the event of 
prevailing seed cotton (kapas) prices fall below the MSP level. During the 
current Cotton season 2024-25, as on 31.12.2024, CCI has procured 55.80 
lakh bales valuing ₹ 21,451 crore under MSP operations, benefitting about 
10.50 lakh cotton farmers in all cotton growing States. The Committee are 
concerned to note that BE in 2024-25 was revised to ₹ 1,00,000 only and that 
too was not utilized at all and BE for 2025-26 is also only ₹ 1,00,000. The 
Committee were apprised that this NIL utilization was due to an EFC Note for 
reimbursing the losses in MSP operations for cotton to CCI during the cotton 
years 2022-23 to 2024-25 was prepared and circulated to concerned 
Ministries for comments. The discussion on EFC is currently under 
process.  The Committee were also informed that the funds requirement 
would be requested in upcoming FYs based on the approval of EFC/CCEA. 
The Ministry also informed that this ₹ 1,00,000 could also not be utilized in 
the current fiscal as the above said proposal is under process. Taking note of 
this fact, the Committee expressed their concern and urged upon the Ministry 
to pursue the Department/Wing related with the finalization of this proposal 
and come up to a conclusion expeditiously. As the allocated funds under 
Cotton sector are for the benefit of a large section of cotton farmers, the 
Committee desire that the Ministry should increase their demands for 
budgetary funds under this sector and also make serious efforts to optimally 
utilize them. 
Reply of the Government 
A proposal was prepared for reimbursement of losses to Cotton 
Corporation of India (CCI), incurred after sale of cotton procured from farmers 
at MSP. It was observed that the proposal would require the approval of 
Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs (CCEA). Hence, an Expenditure 
Finance Committee (EFC) note for reimbursing losses in MSP operations for 
cotton to CCI during the cotton years 2023-24 to 2024-25 was prepared and 
circulated to concerned Ministries for comments. The discussion is currently 
under process. Therefore, the amount of Rs.600 crores allocated in BE 2024-

31 
 
25 have been reduced to Rs. 1 lakh in RE 2024-25. The fund requirement will 
be requested in Financial Year 2025-26 based on the approval of EFC/ CCEA 
Note.  
(Ministry of Textile’s O.M. No. 2/05/2025-Parl., dated: 28.07.2025) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 6) 
The Committee find that in pursuance of their recommendation given 
in their earlier Report on ‘Development of Cotton Sector’, the Ministry have 
taken initiative for providing Science and Technology support to cotton 
farmers to enhance productivity and sustainability of cotton farming and 
promote extra-long staple cotton varieties which would consequently help in 
increasing incomes of the farmers and ensure a steady supply of quality 
cotton for rejuvenating India’s traditional textile sector. This cotton mission 
comprises three Mini-Missions over a period of five years. It was informed by 
the Ministry that further course of action for implementing the Mission is 
being deliberated with Department of Agricultural Research & Education 
which is the nodal Ministry in this case. The Committee appreciate the efforts 
taken by the Ministry in this direction and hope that the Ministry of Textiles 
would ensure proper coordination and collaboration with the Department of 
Agricultural Research & Education which is the need of the hour for effective 
and successful implementation of the Cotton Mission. 
Reply of the Government 
The layout of the Cotton Productivity Mission is currently being 
developed in close consultation with key stakeholders to revitalize India’s 
cotton and textile sector. The implementation timelines for the mission have 
been finalized in active coordination with the Department of Agricultural 
Research and Education (DARE).  
  
 (Ministry of Textile’s O.M. No. 2/05/2025-Parl., dated: 28.07.2025) 
  
 
Recommendation (Para No. 8) 
The Committee, during the examination of previous year’s Demands for 
Grants (2024-25), had recommended making the enrolment of Handloom 
workers/artisans mandatory under PMJJBY/PMSBY under Handloom 
Weavers’ Welfare Scheme of NHDP. The Ministry have informed that the 
enrolment of handloom weavers/workers under PMJJBY & PMSBY has 
increased from 0.70 lakh in policy year 2022-23 to 1.35 lakh in policy year 
2023-24 and 1.33 lakh weavers in 2024-25 (up to 31.01.2025). The 
Committee also learn that State Directorates of Handlooms and its 

32 
 
subordinate offices in the field are Nodal Agency for implementation of the 
Scheme. The Nodal Agency will act for and on behalf of the insured members 
in all matters relating to insurance cover. The target fixed by the Government 
of India is also purely based on the targets indicated by the State 
Governments. As Office of DC (Handlooms) is responsible for implementing 
the welfare Schemes under Handloom Sector, the Committee urge the 
Ministry that Office of DC (Handlooms) should make more coordinated efforts 
with the State Directorate of Handlooms to spread awareness about these two 
insurance Schemes amongst the Handloom weavers. Though the Committee 
is appreciative of the efforts taken up by the Ministry as the number of 
beneficiaries are rising every year since 2022-23, it is felt that the Ministry 
have a long way to go as there are nearly 35 lakh weavers working under this 
sector and only around 3.38 lakh are covered in the last three years including 
2024-25. As the aim is to cover more and more Handloom weavers under the 
insurance Schemes, therefore the Committee desire that the Ministry should 
establish proper coordination with the State/UT Governments to ensure 
better coverage of handloom weavers under these insurance Schemes.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
It is submitted that this office is continuously making the rigorous 
efforts and taking up the matter with the States/UTs Govt. towards increasing 
the number of handloom weavers/workers to provide the insurance cover 
under PMJJBY & PMSBY across the country. As a result, the number of 
enrolment are being increased year by year from the policy year 2022-23 to 
2024-25 and it has reached upto 1.89 lakh weavers/workers enrolled during 
the current policy year 2024-25 (upto 31.03.2025) under these  schemes.  
  
Recently also, in order to enroll/cover more number of handloom 
beneficiaries, this office has taken-up the matter with Commissioner/Director 
(In-charge of Handlooms) of all States/UTs Govt. through virtual meeting held 
on 06.03.2025, impressing upon them to organize more awareness 
camps/chaupals and interact with handloom weavers to generate awareness 
about benefits of schemes and also take rigorous efforts to mobilize more 
number of applications to banks for improving the performance of the 
schemes.  
(Ministry of Textile’s O.M. No. 2/05/2025-Parl., dated: 28.07.2025) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 9) 
 
National Handloom Development Programme (NHDP) 
There are ten Schemes/programmes run under NHDP by the Ministry 
of Textiles such as Small Cluster Development Programme (SCDP), Handloom 
Marketing Assistance (HMA), Mega Cluster Development Programme, 
Handloom Weavers’ Welfare, etc. The Committee note that ₹ 189.49 crore had 
been utilized as on 25.02.2025 against the RE 2024-25 of ₹ 198.84 crore 

33 
 
under NHDP. The Ministry are expecting full utilisation of RE amount in the 
current fiscal. The Committee, therefore, hope that the Ministry would make 
concerted efforts and utilise the entire earmarked budget under this head.  
Reply of the Government 
Under National Handloom Development Programme (NHDP), the 
Ministry have utilized Rs.195.51 crore out of RE of Rs.195.84 crore during FY 
2024-25. 
(Ministry of Textile’s O.M. No. 2/05/2025-Parl., dated: 28.07.2025) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 10) 
Concessional credit/weavers MUDRA Loans Scheme under NHDP 
National Handloom Development Programme (NHDP) comprises several 
Schemes/Programmes for the welfare of Handloom weavers. Concessional 
credit/weavers MUDRA Loans is one of these schemes covered under NHDP. 
The Committee note that the State-wise MUDRA loan details have been 
furnished by the Ministry, but the loan disbursement details regarding North 
Eastern States other than Manipur cannot be seen. Taking note of the above 
fact, the Committee recommend the Ministry to consider special provisions 
including relaxed eligibility parameters and shortened sanctioning procedure 
for the North East as the Mudra loan facility is a critical intervention for the 
economic and social upliftment of the Handloom weavers. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
It is submitted that O/o DC (Handlooms), Ministry of Textiles is 
implementing the Concessional Credit/Weaver MUDRA Scheme, under NHDP 
for handloom sector to meet their credit requirements in a flexible and cost-
effective manner across the country including NER States. Under this scheme, 
eligible handloom weavers are required to approach participating banks and 
have to submit the loan application along with only one of the following 
documents: 
 Pehchan card issued by the O/o DC(Handlooms) 
 Yarn passbook 
 Identity card issued by the State Government  
  
Further, it is the responsibility of the banks to sanction the loan to eligible 
handloom beneficiaries on receipt of viable proposals.  
  
Towards covering the more number of handloom beneficiaries, this office is 
taking continuous efforts with the States/UTs Govt. and the field offices of 
this office across the country. As a result, the number of loans under the 

34 
 
scheme are being increased year by year from 2022-23 to 2024-25. During 
the FY 2024-25 (up to 31.03.2025), 9211 number of loans have been 
sanctioned with loan amount of Rs.6984.16 lakh. Out of which, 366 number 
of loans sanctioned with loan amount of Rs.229.80 lakh in the NER States 
(324 in Assam with loan amount Rs.208.80 lakh and 42 in Manipur with loan 
amount Rs.21.00 lakh).  
  
To provide the credit flow in the North Eastern States, this office is focusing 
to organize more number of awareness camps/chaupals in the NER States 
and interact with the handloom weavers for dissemination of scheme benefits 
in due course through the field offices of this office so as to increase the 
number of handloom beneficiaries under Mudra loan towards development of 
economic and social upliftment of the handloom weavers. 
  
Recently also, this office has written a D.O. letter dated 25.03.2025 (copy 
enclosed) from Secretary (Textiles) to Secretary (Department of Financial 
Services, M/o Finance to advise all the participating banks to ensure prompt 
sanctioning and disbursal of loans and to lodge the claims for margin money, 
interest subvention and credit guarantee fee through the Handloom Weaver 
Mudra Portal to enhance the scheme’s reach and benefits to a greater number 
of handloom beneficiaries. 
  
Further, this office has also written a D.O. letter dated 15.04.2025 (copy 
enclosed) to Chairman/CEO/MD/ President of all Scheduled Commercial 
Banks/State Cooperative Banks/ Regional Rural Banks/ District Central 
Cooperative Banks with a copy endorsed to Director/Commissioner, In-
charge of Handloom Department of all States/UTs Govt. and Officer In-charge 
of Weavers Service Centres with the request to advise their bank branches 
down the ladder to ensure prompt sanctioning and disbursal of loans and to 
lodge claims for margin money, interest subvention and credit guarantee fee 
through the Handloom Weaver Mudra Portal for all eligible handloom 
beneficiaries across the country including NER States. 
   (Ministry of Textile’s O.M. No. 2/05/2025-Parl., dated: 28.07.2025) 
 
Comments of the Committee.  
Please see Para No. 7 of Chapter-I 
  
 
Recommendation (Para No. 11) 
HANDICRAFTS   SECTOR 
The handicrafts sector plays a significant role in the country’s economy. 
It provides employment to a vast segment of craft persons in rural & semi 
urban areas and serves as a pivotal driver of substantial foreign exchange 
earnings for the country, while concurrently preserving our rich cultural 
heritage. The Committee are concerned to note that in FY 2024-25, only ₹ 
137.68 crore were utilised till January 2025 vis-à-vis RE of 206.80 crore 

35 
 
which amounted to around 66 per cent which indicates that around 44 per 
cent of the allocated funds were to be utilised within the last quarter of the 
financial year under Handicrafts Sector. Also, under the Scheme of National 
Handicraft Development Programme (NHDP), the utilisation was much less 
than expected i.e ₹ 108.94 crore out of RE of ₹ 175.00 crore till January 2025. 
The Ministry attributed this delay in utilisation of funds to the mandatory 
transition from Central Nodal Agency (CNA) module for fund flow for Central Schemes 
(CS) and Central Sponsored Schemes (CSS) to the Treasury Single Account Module, 
which was under process during the first three quarters of FY 2024-25. Transition 
to TSA Module had taken time which could be fully implemented in the second week 
of December 2024, causing delay in release of grants resulting in less utilisation of 
funds. The Committee find that this is one of the reasons repeated under many 
Schemes by the Ministry causing under-utilisation. The Committee opine that 
though it may be a better system of accounting, such procedural matters 
should have never come in the way of implementation of 
Schemes/Programmes of the Government. The Committee take strong 
exception to such avoidable reasons causing sub-optimal performance of 
schemes, especially those that are intended for weavers, artisans and 
handicraft sector that needs focussed handholding and recommend that 
causes of this nature should not be allowed to encumber the efficient 
implementation of schemes. 
Reply of the Government 
During the financial year 2024-25 Rs.170.64 crore were utilised against 
the Final RE of 175.74 crore which is around 97% of the total RE grant under 
Handicrafts sector.  For proper Utilisation of funds during the year 2025-26 
proposals for the implementation of programmes/projects under National 
Handicrafts Development Programme (NHDP) are being invited through online 
portal developed by the office of DC (Handicrafts) and sufficient number of 
Proposals for NHDP has already been received for improving the efficient 
implementation of schemes & proper utilization of funds.  
(Ministry of Textile’s O.M. No. 2/05/2025-Parl., dated: 28.07.2025)  
 
Recommendation (Para No. 14) 
Further, the Committee are of the considered opinion that the fact now 
Ladakh is a UT and not a State should allow more leverage to the Ministry of 
Textiles to take up the problem of slow progress in project execution by the 
UT Government Implementing Agencies, particularly under the Pashmina 
Wool Development Scheme in Ladakh. The Committee accordingly 
recommend that the Ministry of Textiles should take up this matter with the 
UT Government of Ladakh and if needed, with the Ministry of Home Affairs so 
that the wool producers are able to fully avail the benefits of the Scheme. 
 

36 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
This Ministry has taken up the matter regarding the slow 
implementation of Wool Projects by IAs with the UT Government of Ladakh. 
 
(Ministry of Textile’s O.M. No. 2/05/2025-Parl., dated: 28.07.2025) 
  
Recommendation (Para No. 15) 
The Committee note that CWDB has sanctioned a project to evaluate 
the current Wool Sector schemes implemented by various government 
agencies across different States. The Committee are of the view that Wool 
Sector needs special attention of the Government as it is interlinked with the 
contribution to the overall development of the Textile sector in the country as 
well as with the livelihood of wool-growers and artisans. Hence the Committee 
exhort that the evaluation and resultant revamping of the Wool sector 
Schemes shall be taken up on priority and completed expeditiously. Owing to 
the specificities of the sector and the regions where wool is produced in India, 
the Committee also impress upon the Ministry to undertake an effective 
ground level survey and other similar feedback as part of the review of the 
Schemes.     
Reply of the Government 
 
A wool Survey study and Evaluation of existing scheme are under process; 
except in the UT of Ladakh where at present temperature is below zero degree. 
The survey and evaluation study will start in the month of May, 2025 for 
Ladakh Region. Based on the recommendations and report of the said survey, 
a new wool sector scheme will be finalized. 
 
(Ministry of Textile’s O.M. No. 2/05/2025-Parl., dated: 28.07.2025) 
 
Comments of the Committee.  
Please see Para No. 13 of Chapter-I. 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 16) 
SILK SECTOR 
The Committee note that to assess the impact of Silk Samagra-2 
Scheme in the field and to suggest mid-course corrections / modification in 
the scheme implementation, a Mid-term evaluation study through a third 
party, is under progress. The Committee are of the considered opinion that 
the revamping of the Scheme has to be completed on preferential basis and 
unique requirements of the silk producing areas like the North East shall be 
taken into account for the reworked scheme to be more effective and to cover 

37 
 
more number of beneficiaries. Further, simplification of procedural 
requirements for the beneficiaries to make use of the scheme’s benefits shall 
be taken into account as part of the revision. 
Reply of the Government 
The AFC India Ltd. Lucknow, which has been entrusted with 
conducting the mid-term third-party evaluation of the Silk Samagra-2 
Scheme, has submitted the draft study report.  The report is currently under 
scrutiny and is expected to be finalized by mid-April 2025.  Based on the 
findings of the evaluation study and consultations with key stakeholders, the 
ongoing Silk Samagra-2 scheme is proposed to be continued in an improved 
version, with a special focus on the North Eastern Region, thereby ensuring 
wider coverage of beneficiaries and enhanced impact.  In this context, the 
preparation of Concept Note/ EFC Memo proposal, in accordance with the 
guidelines of the Department of Expenditure, Ministry of Finance, for 
continuation of the scheme during next five year           2026-27 to 20230-31, 
is currently under progress and shall be completed as per the timeline 
prescribed by the Ministry of Textiles.  Further, with regard to the 
simplification of procedural requirements for beneficiaries, it is submitted 
that since the beneficiary-oriented components under the scheme are 
implemented through the respective State Sericulture Departments, the 
beneficiaries are identified/ selected by the State involving their field level 
functionaries.  Therefore, the States have been requested to develop and 
implement an online interface or adopt suitable e-governance mechanisms to 
simplify procedural requirements, enhance accessibility and ensure effective 
implementation of the scheme. 
(Ministry of Textile’s O.M. No. 2/05/2025-Parl., dated: 28.07.2025) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 17) 
The Committee observe ‘non-receipt of viable proposals’ as a bane in 
the implementation of even many important schemes of Ministry of Textiles 
including the Schemes of Silk sector. The Committee strongly urge that this 
aspect should also be seen by the Ministry for appropriate attention as part 
of the revamping of the scheme.  
 
Reply of the Government 
With respect to the observation on the non-receipt of viable proposals, it 
submitted that the Central Silk Board (CSB) has fully utilized the budget 
allocation during 2024-25 for the implementation of the Silk Samagra-
2 scheme, including beneficiaryoriented components where support is provi

38 
 
ded to States based on their proposals. The entire Budget (RE-2024-25) of 
Rs. (RE- 2024-
25) of Rs.945.56 crore, has been effectively utilized during the year 2025-26 
shall be utilized fully towards implementation of CSB’s core mandated 
activities and also beneficiary oriented components as planned.  It is to 
mentioned that during the current financial year 2025-26, proposals 
amounting to around Rs.437.00 crore were received from various States 
against the earmarked provision of Rs.260.00 crore.  However, based on the 
viability of proposals and availability of funds, approvals have been accorded 
within the limits of the earmarked allocation.  This aspect shall also be 
ensured in the modified scheme being formulated for implementation over the 
next five years beyond Silk Samagra-2 (2026-31).  
 (Ministry of Textile’s O.M. No. 2/05/2025-Parl., dated: 28.07.2025) 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 18) 
 
JUTE SECTOR 
The Committee note that India is the largest producer of raw jute and 
jute products in the world, producing about 90 lakh bales (16 lakh MT) and 
the industry plays a significant role in the Indian economy and provides 
livelihoods for millions. It is estimated that the jute industry provides direct 
employment to 0.40 million workers in organized mills and in diversified units 
including tertiary sector and allied activities and supports the livelihood of 4.0 
million farm families. The Committee find that at present the Indian Jute 
Industry has been facing challenges such as declining demand due to 
synthetic alternatives, lack of modernization in the fields of infrastructure and 
technology, and high production costs due to outdated mills with obsolete 
technology and infrastructure. The Committee, therefore, are of the 
considered opinion that the Ministry should put in more focus on 
modernization, diversification, and market expansion, while also promoting 
sustainable practices and skill development for both farmers and mill 
workers. For this the Committee exhort the Ministry to explore the possibility 
of initiating ‘Jute Mission’ on the lines of Cotton Mission so that the above 
mentioned concerns could be taken care of more systematically. 
Reply of the Government 
The on-going National Jute Development Program (NJDP) an Umbrella 
Scheme, aim to development and promotion of Jute Sector comprising 
activities of Jute Diversification, Modernisation of machineries and Market 
Development & Promotion / Expansion during 2021 -2022 to 2025-2026. 
  

39 
 
The schemes having objectives of Modernisation, Diversification and 
Market Development / Expansion are being implemented by NJB under 
National Jute Development Program, as below: - 
  
1. Modernisation: 
 Capital Subsidy for Acquisition of Plant &Machinery (CSAPM) Scheme 
provides subsidy @ 30% of the cost of the machineries to Jute Mills and 
MSME Units for manufacturing jute diversified products.  
2. Jute Diversification: 
 Jute Resource Cum Production Centre (JRCPC) Scheme provides Basic, 
Advanced and Design skill development training programmes on 
production of Jute Diversified Products   to Jute Artisans, Rural Youths 
and WSHGs.  
 Jute Raw Material Bank (JRMB) Scheme for supplying jute raw 
materials to MSME –JDP Units / WSHGs at mill gate price for 
manufacturing jute diversified products. The Collaborating Agencies 
are supported with incentive @ 30% of the sale value of Jute Raw 
Materials within an annual celling of sales Rs. 40.00 lakhs.  
 Jute Retail Outlets (JRO) Scheme for facilitating the jute entrepreneurs 
/ exporters to display and ensure availability of jute diversified products 
in the showrooms / outlets for mass consumption. Incentive/Support 
@ 25% of the sale value of Jute Diversified Products within an annual 
celling of sales of 36.00 lakhs.  
 Jute Design Resource Centre (JDRC) Scheme for development of 
innovative and market worthy jute products and helping the jute 
artisans / jute entrepreneurs / jute exporters for prototype 
developments.  
 Product Diversification (R&D) Studies/ Projects have to be undertaken 
to explore possibilities of Jute in both textile & non-textile applications 
and Promotion of Jute Geo Textiles / Agro Textiles.  
  Production Linked Incentive (PLI) Scheme   for providing assistance to 
the registered jute exporters on manufacturing and exporting jute 
diversified products. Incentive @ 5% of the cost of jute raw material 
used in manufacturing jute diversified products exported limited to @ 
3% of FOB value and subject to maximum of Rs. 12.00 per 
unit/annum. 
3. Market   Development & Promotion (MDPS) Scheme: Organization of 
Domestic& International exhibitions/ fairs facilitating participation of 
jute artisans entrepreneurs/Regd. Jute Exporters for creating 
awareness, promotion and sale of jute products.  
 Export Market Promotion Assistance (EMPA) facilitating participation of 
registered jute exporters   in International Trade Fairs / Export 
Promotion Events for boosting export of jute products. The Participants 
are provided reimbursement @ 90% for new exporter, @ 75% to MSME 
units and @ 50 % to large/ Jute Mill/units of total expenditure of Rs. 

40 
 
7.50 lakhs per event under Space rent & decoration(Rs. 5.00 lakhs) and 
Air Fare & Hotel Stay (Rs. 2.50 lakhs). 
  Jute Mark India Logo Initiative (JMIL) to ensure quality compliance of 
jute products being manufactured by Jute Mills & MSME JDP Units.  
 Skill Development Initiatives for Jute Farmers: 
 Under ongoing Jute I-Care programme, the jute farmers are being 
actively associated on implementation of scientific method of 
cultivation, uses of HYV certified jute seeds, microbial consortium in 
retting exercise. Such awareness programme with showing and retting 
demo are being organised at regular interval at field level involving 
Primary Agriculture Co-operative Society (PACs), Farmers’ Club, 
Farmer Producers’ Organisations (FPOs) etc. Besides, Crop Protection 
Information through social media and direct training at field level by 
ICAR-CRIJAF scientists are provided to jute farmers. 
  
To explore the possibility of initiating Jute Mission on the lines of Cotton 
Mission, a Concept Note on Jute Technology Mission encompassing 
Raw Jute (Quality/Productivity Improvement), Marketing, Product & 
Process Development, Modernization, Diversification and Market 
Promotion /Expansion has been initiated. 
  
(Ministry of Textile’s O.M. No. 2/05/2025-Parl., dated: 28.07.2025) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 19) 
The Committee further urge upon the Ministry to organize special 
awareness programmes, in the areas where Jute is majorly grown and 
processed, for making the Mill owners aware about the Amended Technology 
Upgradation Fund (A-TUFS) Scheme of the Ministry of Textiles. This scheme 
would help upgrade existing machinery and install modern looms resulting 
in overall growth and development of farmers and mill workers. The 
Committee also want the Ministry to conduct proper R&D in collaboration 
with the research institutes for developing new innovations for Jute usage. 
Public Private Partnership should be explored as the mode for advancement 
in this direction. The Committee also feel that by the current push of the 
Government to replace plastic with environment friendly packaging options 
should be seen as an opportunity and the Ministry should seek out options 
how jute can fill in the gaps that may be left by plastic bags and other 
synthetic products. Even legislative interventions like amending the Jute 
Packaging Material (Compulsory Use in Packing Commodities) Act, 1987 and 
its robust implementation on the ground could be explored to handhold the 
industry in this endeavour. When it comes to increasing the exports of jute 

41 
 
diversified products, the Committee are of the considered opinion that the 
Ministry should probe new international markets other than US, UAE, etc. 
Reply of the Government 
 
NJB has been actively engaged in prioritization of Research agenda in 
exploring possibilities of jute in both textile and non-textile applications.  In 
this direction, the on-going 18 R&D projects include as below: 
  
Sl. No 
Project 
Implementing 
R&D 
Institutes  
Title of the Project  Objectives 
Name of the 
Industry 
Partner 
1. 
Northern India 
Textile 
Research 
Association 
(NITRA) 
Development of Jute 
Composite for 
automotive acoustic 
insulation &other uses.
  
i. To design 
and develop 
composite 
material for 
automotive 
acoustic 
insulation; 
ii. To conduct 
trials in real 
life situation 
iii. To 
standardize 
fibre 
component 
and process 
parameters 
for this 
specific use; 
iv. To attempt for 
use of jute 
non-wovens 
and 
composites in 
other 
automotive 
parts. 
M/s RFM  
Automotives 
Pvt. Ltd., 
Gurgaon. 
2. 
Northern India 
Textile 
Research 
Association 
(NITRA) 
Development of a 
molten metal splash 
resistance unique jute 
blended work wear 
for   Steel foundry 
workers 
  
(i)To develop 
fabrics of various 
weaves and 
masses using jute 
and its blends; 
(ii) To finish these 
fabrics with 
durable FR 
chemicals and 
their analysis; 
M/s Mahavir 
Spinfab, 
Kanpur 

42 
 
(iii) To determine 
chemical, 
mechanical and 
safety 
performance 
properties; 
(iv) To compare 
existing work-wear 
fabric with newly 
developed fabric 
for safety 
performance and 
other properties; 
(v)Techno-
commercial 
feasibility through 
field trials at the 
user industry 
3. 
National 
Institute of 
Technology, 
Durgapur 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Nano-technological 
intervention on jute-
geotextile to adapt long 
term 
sustainability   and 
enhanced durability for 
its cost-effective and 
wide application in 
flexible pavement 
systems 
  
  
(i) Chemically 
modification of 
conventional jute 
geotextile (JGT) 
materials to 
enhance its 
durability and 
tensile strength 
properties 
(ii) Performance 
study of the treated 
JGT as reinforcing 
layer over the soil 
sub-grade in flexible 
pavement system 
under repeated 
wheel load. 
(iii) Development of 
protocols on the 
application of JGT 
as geo-material in 
pavement 
construction based 
on experimental and 
numerical modeling. 
(iv) Economic 
analysis for 
pavement 
construction and 
lifelong study on 
overlying the JGT 
M/s Gloster 
Ltd, Kolkata. 

43 
 
treated soil 
subgrade.  
4. 
National 
Institute of 
Technology, 
Durgapur 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Development of 
guidelines to adopt the 
process of height 
increment of 
overburden dumps at 
open cast coal mines in 
India using jute -
geotextile as 
reinforcing material 
To make scientific 
guidelines for 
increasing the 
height of the 
overburden dumps 
at opencast coal 
mines using jute-
geotextiles as 
reinforcing material 
through a detailed 
geotechnical 
characterization 
and stability 
analysis of coal mine 
overburden dumps 
in India to meet the 
techno-economic 
and operational 
challenge to go for 
the most efficient 
overburden dump 
design, that is steep 
enough to be safe 
and flat enough to 
be economically 
acceptable.   
M/s 
Ludlow 
Jute 
&Specialiti
es Ltd.,  
Kolkata. 
  
  
5. 
Ahmedabad 
Textile 
Industry's 
Research 
Association 
(ATIRA) 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Development of Jute 
Composite for 
application in 
Prosthetic Leg 
  
i. Development of 
jute fiber based 
polymeric prosthetic 
leg socket as a 
replacement of 
existing material by 
considering the 
woven jute fiber and 
needle punched jute 
fiber 
ii. Performance 
evaluation of the 
jute based 
prosthetic leg 
socket developed 
using different 
polymeric material 
on the basis of 
physical, 
mechanical and 
thermal 
characteristics; 
iii. Optimization of 
the developed 
material based on 
Blind 
People’s 
Association 
Ahmedabad  

44 
 
the performance 
attributes; 
iv. Field trial to 
study the static 
comfort test and life 
cycle assessment of 
prosthetic leg. 
6. 
ICAR-National 
Institute of 
Natural Fibre 
Engineering 
and 
Technology 
(ICAR-NINFET) 
  
  
  
Development of bio-
degradable packaging 
boxes from jute stick 
and jute pulp for Agri-
horticultural products 
  
i. Development of 
durable boxes from 
jute sticks for 
transportation of 
fruits & vegetables 
ii.  Development of 
packaging boxes 
from paper boards 
made out of jute 
pulp (stick &fibre) 
for high value 
perishable fruits 
like mushrooms 
and strawberries 
iii. Studies on the 
quality attributes of 
stores products 
during 
transportation and 
storage. 
M/s Sheet 
Kamal Pvt. 
Ltd. 
  
7. 
Wool Research 
Association 
(WRA) 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Development of Cost 
Effective Handmade 
Carpets & Floor 
Coverings, Home 
Furnishings 
&Knitwears using Jute 
(Treated Woolenised or 
Untreated) & other 
natural fibres with 
value added Eco 
Friendly Finishes such 
as with Flame 
Retardancy, Mosquito 
Repellent, Anti -
Bacterial/Antimicrobia
l Properties etc. 
i. i. To develop 
woven/knitt
ed fabrics 
(union 
blends or 
otherwise) 
using Jute 
(treated 
woolenised 
or 
untreated) 
with other 
natural 
fibers for 
home 
furnishings, 
handmade 
carpets and 
floor 
coverings. 
ii. To impart value 
added multi-
functional and eco-
friendly finishing 
such as Flame 
1.M/s VC 
Vishal 
Carpets 
Manufacture
r & 
Exporters of 
Hand Made 
Carpets 
Bhadohi 
  
2.M/s 
Innoleague 
Technologies 
India Pvt. 
Ltd. 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  

45 
 
Retardancy, 
Mosquito 
Repellence, and 
Anti-Bacterial / 
Antimicrobial 
Properties, etc. on 
the developed 
product for floor 
coverings, home 
furnishing 
&Knitwears 
application as per 
requirement.  
iii. To study and 
evaluate the 
performance of the 
different developed 
products. 
iv. To study the 
techno commercial 
feasibility of the 
developed products 
8. 
  
  
  
  
  
Government 
College of 
Engineering & 
Textile 
Technology  
  
  
  
Development of jute 
based composite for 
non-structural 
applications 
  
i. To develop 
different jute 
based composite 
structures 
ii. To identify 
commercially 
available 
continuous and 
discontinuous 
processes and to 
set the process 
parameters for 
manufacturing 
composite for 
different end uses 
M/s Fibro-
Plastichem 
India Pvt. 
Ltd. 
Kolkata 
  
  
9. 
Central Pulp & 
Paper Research 
Institute 
(CPPRI) 
Production of Pilot 
Scale Whole Jute 
Dissolving Pulp for 
Viscose Fibre 
  
Pilot Scale study on 
production of Rayon 
grade pulp from 
Whole Jute followed 
to preparation of 
viscose fibre 
  
  
M/s 
ABSTCPL  
Taloja , 
Maharashtra 
  
10. 
Ahmedabad 
Textile 
Industry's 
Research 
Association 
(ATIRA)  
Hybrid Jute Composite 
Modification and 
Subsequent  Developm
ent of Porta Cabin 
  
i.Development of 
jute fiber -based 
sandwich panels for 
porta cabin. 
ii. Performance 
evaluation of the 
developed jute fibre 
reinforced sandwich 
M/s A. B 
Composite,  
Kolkata  

46 
 
composites on the 
basis of Physical, 
mechanical and 
thermal 
characteristics. 
iii. Development of 
Numerical 
simulation model to 
evaluate the effect of 
sandwich and 
analyze the 
mechanical 
performance of the 
jute-based 
sandwich 
composites. 
iv. Optimization of 
the developed 
material based on 
the performance 
attributes 
v. Fabrication of 
porta house as well 
as study the 
performance and life 
cycle assessment of 
porta house under 
real environment 
(Field Trial) 
  
11. 
Indian 
Institute of 
Technology 
Bhubaneswar 
(I.I.T 
Bhubaneswar) 
Mechanistic-Empirical 
Design of Jute 
Geotextile 
Reinforcement 
Pavements for Rural 
Roads 
  
Pavement design of 
jute geotextile 
reinforced low 
volume road 
pavements are being 
done as per the 
guidelines given in 
IRC: SP: 126: 2019. 
However, it is not 
based on any 
pavement 
performance data. 
Mechanistic-
empirical designs 
are considered to be 
the most
appropriate 
pavement design 
approach across the 
globe. Considering 
the need to collect 
systematic 
pavement 
performance data 
for such roads, the 
M/s Birla 
Jute Mill, 
Birla,   
Kolkata. 

47 
 
objective of this 
study is to support 
construction of low 
volume road 
pavements under 
PMGSY using Jute 
geotextiles, evaluate 
their pavement 
performance for a 
long time and 
develop 
mechanistic-
empirical based 
design charts for low 
volume roads using 
jute geotextiles. 
12. 
National 
Institute of 
Technology 
Karnataka 
Technology 
Development and 
Engineering 
Performance 
Evaluation of Jute 
Geocells for Slope 
Stabilization and 
Pavement Applications 
  
i. To develop a 
technology to 
manufacture 
geocells from Jute 
yarn/fiber. 
ii. To do material 
characterization of 
jute geocell by 
conducting various 
laboratory tests and 
standardizing jute 
geocells in line with 
BIS standards for 
various field 
applications. 
iii. To establish the 
performance 
evaluation of 
natural jute geocells 
through model tests 
in the lab. 
iv. Filed 
implementation of 
jute geocells at two 
different sites to 
demonstrate the 
viability of the 
proposed geocells 
for various 
applications. 
M/s Birla 
Jute Mill,  
Kolkata. 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
13. 
ICAR-National 
Institute of 
Natural Fibre 
Engineering and 
Technology  (ICA
R-NINFET) 
Development of 
modern mini-spinning 
machinery for 
processing of jute and 
allied fibres for small 
industries 
  
I. To study the 
economic viability of 
proposed machines 
to be developed viz-
a- viz existing 
machinery for 
different range of 
yarn count of jute 
and allied fibres. 
M/s 
Bhowmick 
Calculators, 
Kolkata. 
  

48 
 
  
II. To design and 
fabricate suitable 
mini-carding, mini-
drawing and mini-
spinning    machine
ry system for 
processing jute and 
allied fibres 
  
III. To evaluate the 
spinning 
performance of the 
developed machine 
for the production of 
jute and allied fibre-
based yarn. 
14. 
Indian 
Institute of 
Science 
Bangalore 
Evaluation for 
Filtration 
Characteristics of Jute 
Geotextiles 
  
  
i. To evaluate the 
physical and 
hydraulic 
characteristics of 
jute geotextiles and 
subgrade soils 
ii. To perform 
laboratory one-
dimensional flow 
filtration tests 
iii. To evaluate 
the filtration 
characteristi
cs based on 
the 
retention, 
hydraulic 
conductivity
, and 
clogging 
requirement
s. 
M/s Birla 
Jute Mill, 
Kolkata. 
15. 
Indian Jute 
Industries 
Research 
Association 
Exploration of usage of 
Engineered Jute and 
Agro-waste based 
Agrotextiles for Improving 
Farmers’ Income on their 
Produce 
  
  
Innovation of novel 
textile engineering-
based jute and agro-
waste blended 
Agrotextiles with an 
aim to find out their 
effectiveness for 
improving 
agriculture 
productivity 
M/s 
Kamarhati 
Jute Mill,  
kolkata 
and 
M/s Ambica 
Jute Mill,  
Howrah. 
16. 
Indian Institute 
of Science 
Bangalore 
Application of Jute 
Geotextiles in Reinforcing 
the Retaining Walls for 
I.        Building lab-
scale retaining walls 
reinforced with jute 
M/s 
Engosyam 
Consultants  

49 
 
Static and Seismic 
Stability 
  
  
geotextiles and jute 
geocells. 
  
II.       Understandin
g the performance of 
jute reinforced 
retaining walls 
under static and 
seismic loading 
conditions with 
flexible and rigid 
facing of the walls. 
  
III.      Understandin
g the shear strength 
of jute geotextile-
sand, and jute 
geocell-sand 
interfaces and 
correlating it to the 
performance of the 
reinforced retaining 
walls. 
  
IV.     Quantifying 
the performance 
benefits of jute 
geotextile 
reinforcement. 
  
17. 
Indian Institute 
of Technology 
Guwahati 
Development of Jute Clay 
Liners (JCL) for Waste 
Containment 
Applications 
  
  
i.        To 
understand the 
influence of the 
quality of the jute 
geotextile (different 
GSMs of the jute 
geotextiles), quality 
and gradation of the 
used bentonites, 
and type of the 
bonding used for 
JCL preparation. 
  
ii.       To 
understand the 
hydraulic 
characteristics of 
the proposed JCLs 
under different 
inorganic salts and 
heavy metal 
solutions. 
  
iii.      To 
understand the 
diffusion 
M/s Birla 
Jute Mill, 
kolkata. 

50 
 
characteristics of 
the proposed JCLs 
with different 
inorganic salts and 
heavy metal 
solutions. 
  
iv.      To 
understand the soil 
water 
characteristics of 
proposed JCLs and 
its comparison with 
the existing GCLs 
with synthetic 
geotextiles. 
18. 
The Indian 
Institute of 
Technology 
(ISM) Dhanbad 
Industrial scale up of 
biodegradable, non-
polymer super -
hydrophobic jute fabric 
exhibiting excellent water 
repellency & stiffness for 
shopping/hand bag 
products 
  
  
The aim of proposed 
project is to develop 
cheap, durable, 
sustainable & 
biodegradable water 
repellent and stiff 
coatings to improve 
the longevity of jute 
fabrics and yarn. 
The followings are 
the main objectives 
of the proposed 
work: 
VIII. Improvemen
t of water-
repellency 
and stiffness 
of jute yarn 
and fabric 
IX. Examine the 
jute after 
modification 
through 
wetting, 
surface 
morphology, 
chemical, 
mechanical, 
physical 
characteristi
cs 
X. Examinatio
n of 
durability, 
biodegradati
on and 
M/s Birla 
Jute Mill, 
Kolkata. 

51 
 
sustainabilit
y of jute 
after 
modification 
XI. Assessment 
of jute 
applications 
after 
modification
s (eg. self-
cleaning, 
anti-stain, 
antibacterial
, and anti-
fungal) 
XII. Quality and 
life 
assessment 
of coated 
jute based 
prototype 
items (hand 
and 
shopping 
bags) 
XIII. Cost 
analysis of 
the coating 
at lab scale 
XIV. Up-scaling 
the process 
and 
industrial 
trial 
  
  
Various Textile Research Associations viz. NITRA, ATIRA, NIT, NINFET, WRA 
have been assigned with the R&D Projects.  
  
Increasing Exports of Jute Diversified Products: 
During 2023-24, Exports of Jute Diversified Products from India were 
mainly to: USA, (28%), France (18%), UK (8%), The Netherlands (5%), Spain 
(5%), Australia (4%), Germany (4%), Belgium (3%), UAE (2%), Sweden (2%). 
All these top 10 countries accounted for 79 % of total value of Jute 
Diversified Products exported. Thus, USA and EU are the major countries 
importing Jute Diversified Products from India. 

52 
 
NJB, as measure for export promotion of Jute Diversified Products has 
identified Focus and Emerging Markets including Latin American 
countries, Australia & New Zealand and included in its International 
Marketing Plan to organise participation of Regd. Jute Exporters in Export 
Promotion Events viz. Trade Fairs, BSMs, Business Delegation, Conference 
etc. 
(Ministry of Textile’s O.M. No. 2/05/2025-Parl., dated: 28.07.2025) 
Comments of the Committee.  
Please see Para No. 16 of Chapter-I. 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 20) 
The Committee note that Government e-Marketplace (GeM) for Jute and 
jute products is a significant pre-requisite for overall development and growth 
of the Jute Industry in India. As the Ministry have admitted that GeM provides 
increased transparency and also ensures timely payments to the beneficiaries 
by the indenting State Governments, the Committee impress upon the 
Ministry to take pro-active measures to figure out the challenges which are 
there in the existing GeM for the Jute sector. The Committee also desire that, 
if need be, the Ministry may get feedback from the beneficiaries so that the 
difficulties at the grass root level may be alleviated. Considering that GeM 
platform provides innumerable benefits to the buyers as well as the sellers 
such as streamlined procurement, transparency, and increased efficiency for 
government departments and businesses, the Committee hope that it would 
be revisited at the earliest.  
Reply of the Government 
With effect from 1st November 2016 onwards, the jute bags for 
packaging of food grains are being procured through o/o Jute Commissioner, 
Ministry of Textiles. An e-platform “JUTE- SMART” (Jute Sacking Supply 
Management and Requisition Tool) has been implemented by O/o Jute 
Commissioner for procurement of jute sacking from1st November 2016,which 
provides an end-to-end digital solution for procurement of jute bags for food 
grains packaging. 
In terms of the notification no. 5459 (E) dated 26th December 2023 
issued under the Section 3(1) of the JPM Act, Central Government has 
mandated packaging of 100% food grains and 20% sugar in jute bags. The 
notification inter-alias provides for 10% procurement through reverse 
auction from GeM portal.For implementing the Notification dated 
26thDecember 2023 for 10% of the procurement of jute bags through reverse 
auction on the GeM Portal, o/o Jute Commissioner and GeM have provided 

53 
 
the necessary landholding for the jute mills to register themselves on the 
portal. 
However, the industry association IJMA vide various letters have raised 
certain issues regarding procurement of jute bags for packing of food grains 
through GeM portal, which are summarized as below: 
 The hurdle in implementation of GeM is the pegging of the ceiling price 
at the level of administrative price being declared by JC office. 
 The issue regarding terms of business not being clear was raised by the 
industry. 
 Increased working capital requirements on account of EMD, PBG etc. 
 Jute Smart portal allocates order of production of jute bags to all jute 
mills according to the allocation formula decided by the competent 
authority in consultation with the stakeholders from time to time. It is 
presently based on the installed capacity of the jute mills. The GeM 
portal does not have such mechanism at present and it allocates order 
to L-1 bidder only. Hence, an algorithm has to be prepared by GeM so 
that orders received by mills are commensurate to capacity and there 
is optimum capacity utilization of industry. 
The office of the Jute Commissioner issues the price of 580gm B-Twill 
Jute Bags under clause 3(4) of the Jute and Jute Textile Control Order 2016, 
which is the maximum price atwhich the jute bags can be sold or procured. 
Therefore, the prices in GeM portal cannot be higher than the price declared 
by Jute Commissioner under Clause 3(4) of the Jute and Jute Textiles 
Control Order, 2016. 
Some SPAs had issued tenders on GeM portal, but those could not be 
completed due to the stay granted by Hon’ble High Court of Calcutta in WPO 
818 of 2024. However, the stay has been lifted after the appeal by o/o Jute 
Commissioner was allowed and the writ petition was dismissed by Division 
Bench of the Hon’ble Court. The terms of business in GeM portal are now 
known as the tenders had been published incorporating the same. 
Further, once the State Procurement Agencies (SPAs) issue the tenders on 
GeM portal and are taken to its conclusion, the feedback shall be taken from 
the industry and the concerns, if any, shall be taken into account for future 
development. 
  
  
 (Ministry of Textile’s O.M. No. 2/05/2025-Parl., dated: 28.07.2025) 
  
 
Recommendation (Para No. 21) 
TEXTILE SECTOR 
Regarding the specific steps taken to capitalize on the increased 
international textile demands in the face of closure of a number of National 
Textile Corporation (NTC) mills in the country, the Committee find that 

54 
 
contribution of NTC Mills in overall domestic textile production was very 
minimal (around 1-2 per cent at its peak). The role of NTC Mills in export 
market is almost negligible.  As such, closure of NTC mills would not have 
any bearing on meeting international textile demand.  The Committee, taking 
note of this scenario, strongly recommend that the Ministry in this situation 
should take extra measures to provide facilitative environment to the textile 
industry in the country by various appropriate measures which may include 
more remission of duties and taxes on exports to help exporters partially offset 
their production costs to boost up the exports in textiles and apparel and 
capture more share in the international market. 
Reply of the Government 
Government is implementing Rebate of State and Central Taxes and 
Levies (RoSCTL) scheme for Apparel/Garments and Made-ups in order to 
enhance competitiveness by adopting principle of zero-rated exports. Further, 
textiles products not covered under the RoSCTL scheme are covered under 
Remissions of Duties and Taxes on Exported Products (RoDTEP) along with 
other products. In addition. Government provides financial support to various 
Export Promotion Councils and Trade Bodies under Market Access Initiative 
Scheme implemented by Department of Commerce for organising and 
participating in trade fairs, exhibitions, buyer-seller meets etc. at national and 
international levels to boost export. 
In order to increase the export potential, India has so far signed 14 Free 
Trade Agreements (FTAs) and 6 Preferential Trade Agreements (PTAs) with 
various trading partners. 
  
Further, the Government is implementing various schemes/initiatives 
to promote Indian textiles sector and enhance its competitiveness. The major 
schemes/initiatives include PM Mega Integrated Textile Regions and Apparel 
(PM MITRA) Parks Scheme to create a modern, integrated, world class textile 
infrastructure; Production Linked Incentive (PLI) Scheme focusing on MMF 
Fabric. MMF Apparel and Technical Textiles to boost large scale 
manufacturing and enhancing competitiveness: National Technical Textiles 
Mission focusing on Research Innovation & Development. Promotion and 
Market Development: SAMARTH - Scheme for Capacity Building in Textile 
Sector with the objective providing demand driven, placement oriented, 
skilling program. 
  
 (Ministry of Textile’s O.M. No. 2/05/2025-Parl., dated: 28.07.2025) 
  
 
  

55 
 
Recommendation (Para No.22) 
PM-MITRA 
The Committee note that budget is allocated under Capital and Revenue 
Heads for PM-MITRA Scheme and the allocations under Capital Head have 
been utilized in full. The Ministry sought BE of ₹ 300.00 crore in 2024-25 
which was slashed down to ₹ 44.00 crore at RE stage. Actual Expenditure 
under the Scheme stood at ₹ 24.51 crore as on 25.02.2025.  The Committee 
are concerned to find that the funds under Revenue Head could not be utilized 
during 2024-25 fiscal as these funds are supposed to be released to the seven 
State Governments, only once they fulfill certain criteria including selection 
of Master Developer. As none of the States have selected the Master Developer 
for the PM MITRA Parks, the Government of India share could not be released 
to them; hence there was a shortfall in utilization. This important Scheme was 
launched for a period of seven years from 2021-22 to 2027-28 FY. Taking note 
of the above facts, the Committee express their concern that even after 
passage of five years, only 7 sites in the 7 States have been approved, even 
the construction has not started at all the sites and every year the funds 
allocated for this purpose go unutilized as in 2023-24 wherein   ₹ 0.13 crore 
was the AE vis-à-vis ₹ 52.30 crore RE. The Committee reckon that PM MITRA 
is one of the most ambitious and prestigious schemes envisioned by the Prime 
Minister. It prima facie appears to the Committee that the lack of initiative by 
the States in providing requisite infrastructure and planning has been one of 
the reasons for the Parks not becoming a reality. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that the Ministry should take up this matter with the concerned 
7 State Governments on priority and pursue them to appoint a Master 
Developer within a definite time-line provided by the Ministry. The Committee 
understand that there are difficulties emerging at grass-root level which the 
State Governments have to deal with while completing these Parks. But, 
considering the significance attributed to the Scheme, the Committee 
recommend that a Special Task Force of the representatives of the Central 
and State Governments shall be formed to analyse the teething issues faced 
by the scheme and to suggest practical solutions. Further the Task Force 
should also monitor the progress of PM MITRA Parks and to handhold the 
States to complete the construction of the Parks in the least possible time. 
This will also ensure that the total outlay fixed for the Scheme could be 
utilised and PM MITRA Parks start functioning and provide much needed fillip 
to the Textile Sector. 
Recommendation (Para No. 23) 
The Committee expect that the funds of ₹ 300.00 crore at BE stage in FY 2025-
26 would not go unutilized in the ensuing financial year as these Parks form 
part of the vision of future by our PM with the aim of developing integrated 
large scale and modern industrial infrastructure facility for total value-chain 

56 
 
of the textile industry and are required to be set up by 2027-28 with the total 
expenditure of ₹ 4445.00 crore. Further, the Committee would like to be 
apprised of the total amount utilized out of ₹ 4445.00 crore since the launch 
of the Scheme till date. 
Reply of the Government (22 & 23) 
As regards approval of only 7 PM MITRA Parks, it may be noted that as 
per Cabinet Note, only 7 sites (Greenfield/Brownfield) are to be selected for 
establishment of PMMITRA Parks for which Rs. 4445 crore has been 
sanctioned for 7 years. All States were requested to submit proposals for 
establishing PM MITRA Park in their respective States. In response, 18 
proposals from 13 States were received. Based on the criteria laid in scheme 
guideline, 7 sites (5 Greenfield and 2 Brownfield) were finalized. hence the 
deemed action as per scheme guideline has been completed and there is no 
laxity or shortfall on this count.  
Special Task Force:  In so far as monitoring is concerned, Project Approval 
Committee already exists to guide and oversee implementation of the parks. 
The composition of PAC is as under: 
v. Secretary, M/o Textiles-Chairman 
vi. Financial Advisor, M/o Textiles –Member 
vii. AS/JS, M/o Textiles-Member 
viii. Representatives of DPIIT and NITI Aayog 
         In addition, the SPV Boards include senior State representatives also 
have been created to guide and monitor the progress of the parks.  So far, 8 
meetings of PAC have been held.  
         As regards constitution of Special Task Force, it may be noted that the 
project is being led by a Special Purpose Vehicle. Secretary (Textiles), 
Government of India is Chairperson of the Board of Directors of SPV and 
Secretary (Industry/Textiles) of State concerned is Chief Executive Officer of 
the SPV. SPV is responsible for overall development, governance and 
administration of the park. Under PM MITRA, a total of Rs. 24.63 crore has 
been utilized in 2023-24 and 2024-25.  
Considerable progress has been made after the selection of the sites. The 
details of State wise progress made is as under:  
GREENFIELD PROJECTS 
(a)    Gujarat 
 MoU and Joint Venture Agreement between GoI and State Govt signed 
 SPV named “PM Mitra Park Gujarat Limited” incorporated.  
 100% land acquired and Land transferred in the name of SPV. 
 Environment Clearance (EC) received on 19.02.2024. 

57 
 
 RFP for onboarding of Master Developer for development of PM MITRA 
Park in Gujarat made live on n-procure website from 27.11.2024. Pre 
bid meeting held on 24.12.2024. 
 Investor Sentiment Survey conducted by GIDC from potential investors. 
 Stakeholders’ engagement carried out with Textile Industry Body 
Associations, Investors, Ministry of Textiles, and Entrepreneurs& 
Industry Experts for Development of PM MITRA Park. 
(b)    Uttar Pradesh 
 Joint Venture Agreement between GoI and State Govt signed 
 SPV named (PM MITRA Park Uttar Pradesh Ltd.) incorporated on 
10.10.2023. 
 100% land acquired, Government of Uttar Pradesh has transferred the 
land to the SPV on 23.02.2023. 
 Environmental Clearance (EC) for the project site granted on 
15.07.2024. 
 The clearance for the extracting ground water obtained on 01.07.2024. 
 Road widening work of 5.8 KM has been completed till park gate 
 Government of Uttar Pradesh has received investment intentions of Rs. 
4120.85 Crores from 81 Investors, potentially creating Approx. 36,480 
jobs opportunities. 
(c)    Madhya Pradesh 
 MoU and Joint Venture Agreement between GoIand State Govtbeen 
signed. 
 SPV named (PM MITRA Park Madhya Pradesh Ltd.) incorporated on 
02.01.2024. 
 100% land acquired, Land transfer order been issued.  
 Park layout plan prepared.  
 Received intentions to invest worth Rs. 10,547/- Crs from 30 investors.  
 The Competent authority has accorded in-principal approval to the 
proposal of the Govt. of Madhya Pradesh for implementation of PM 
MITRA Park scheme through the Govt. of Madhya Pradesh subject to 
certain condition. 
(d)Tamil Nadu 
 MoU and Joint Venture Agreement between GoIand State Govt has been 
signed. 
 SPV (PM Mega Integrated Textile Regions and Apparel Park Tamil Nadu 
Limited) incorporated on 20.02.2024. 
 100% land acquired, Government of Tamil Naduis in process of 
transferring land to SPV (PM Mega Integrated Textile Regions and 
Apparel Park Tamil Nadu Limited) 
 Environmental Clearance (EC) obtained on 31.07.2023.  
 11 MoUs signed with prospective investors in the PM MITRA Park for a 
total investment amount of 1231 crores thereby creating 6,315 job 
opportunities. 

58 
 
 The PAC agreed in the principle to the GoTN’s Proposal for 
implementing to PM MITRA Park scheme through the GoTN (which in 
turn would utilise the services of SIPCOT- an undertaking wholly owned 
by Government of Tamil Nadu), subject to certain condition. 
(e)      Karnataka  
 MoU and Joint Venture Agreement between GoIand State Govt has been 
signed. 
 SPV (PM MITRA PARK KARNATAKA LIMITED) formed on 27.03.2024. 
 100% land acquired, Government of Karnataka Transferred Land to 
SPV on 22.10.2024 
 8 MoU’s for investment of Rs. 1700 Crore signed by Govt of Karnataka. 
 BROWNFIELD PROJECTS  
(f)      Telangana 
 Park is in operation 
 Total Investments as on date – Rs. 2694 cores 
 MoU (including amendments) between GoI and Govt. of Telangana 
signed. 
 Implementing Agency: Government of Telangana through its State 
Implementing Agency (SIA) i.e Telangana State Industrial Infrastructure 
Corporation (TGIIC). 
 Environmental Clearance (EC) is available. 
(g)     Maharashtra 
 MoU between GoI and Govt. of Maharashtra signed 
 Implementing Agency: Government of Maharashtra through its State 
Implementing Agency (SIA) i.e. Maharashtra Industrial Development 
Corporation (MIDC)  
 The tender for the infrastructure Development worth Rs. 111 cr 
finalized and work order issued.  
 5 MoUs totalling to the investment of INR 1,370 Cr. signed.  
 The Foundation stone to the park was laid by Hon’ble Prime Minister in 
September 2024. 
(Ministry of Textile’s O.M. No. 2/05/2025-Parl., dated: 28.07.2025) 
  
Comments of the Committee.  
Please see Para No. 20 of Chapter-I. 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 24) 
NATIONAL TECHNICAL TEXTILE MISSION (NTTM) 
The Committee note that under NTTM, implementation of TSA Hybrid 
model took a considerable time due to which assignment of budget and its 

59 
 
utilization by respective institutions got delayed. Further, as per the Ministry, 
all R&D Projects involve procurement of instruments and machinery for which 
Capital Budget is allocated. Research Institutions have pointed out that the 
procurement process as per GFR takes significant time due to which the 
assigned amount could not be utilized in timely manner. Taking note of the 
above facts, similar to the recommendation in case of Wool Sector Schemes, 
the Committee urge upon the Ministry of Textiles to take up the specific 
nature of research projects which have extended gestation periods that come 
in the way of adhering to the general fund utilisation pattern as stipulated by 
the Ministry of Finance. Because of this inherent problem, research projects 
require specifically spelt out funding and utilisation guidelines. This may even 
be considered on case-to-case basis. The Committee wants that this aspect 
shall be examined on merit and with the urgency it commands.  
Reply of the Government 
The problem faced by research projects in utilization of funds was 
examined and following measure have been adopted to address the issue to 
large extent: - 
(i)  The milestones now form of the approval letter which define the stages of 
the project and its mapping with the financial releases. 
(ii) In Capital intensive projects, the major portion of the capital funds are 
being released in first installment giving more time to Project Investigator (PI) 
for utilization.  The installments are designated project wise depending upon 
the nature of project and requirement of the PI. 
(iii)  Cases which require global tender for procurement are fast tracked for 
granting approval in accordance with guidelines of promoting make in India. 
(Ministry of Textile’s O.M. No. 2/05/2025-Parl., dated: 28.07.2025)  
 
 
  
Recommendation (Para No. 25) 
PLI SCHEME 
The Committee note that PLI Scheme for Textile Sector was launched in 2020 
with an objective of promoting production of MMF Apparel, MMF Fabrics and 
products of Technical Textiles in the country for enabling the Textile Sector to 
achieve size and scale and increase competitiveness. PLI Scheme for Textiles 
has an outlay of ₹ 10,683 crore for a period of five-years. The Committee 
understand that FY 2022-23 and FY 2023-24 were gestation period for the 
Scheme and that is why RE of ₹ 7.50 crore was allocated in 2022-23 out of 
which ₹ 7.08 crore were utilized. During FY 2023-24, RE of ₹ 5.00 crore was 
allocated out of which ₹ 4.13 crore could only be made use of. However, the 

60 
 
Committee cannot but express concern that only ₹ 2.10 crore could be utilized 
in 2024-25 against RE of ₹ 45.00 crore. Though the Ministry apprised the 
Committee that this was because FY 2024-25 is the first performance year 
under the Scheme, the Committee are not satisfied with this reply of the 
Ministry and wonder that if 2025-26 is the first incentive disbursement year, 
then what was the purpose of allocation of funds at RE stage to the tune of ₹ 
45.00 crore in 2024-25. The Committee, however, appreciate the move by the 
Ministry to make amendment in the Scheme guidelines to allow early 
incentive disbursement and expect that the Ministry shall make concerted 
efforts to ensure optimal utilization of the RE funds in 2024-25. 
Reply of the Government 
 
Rs. 45.00 cr of RE 2024-25 comprises of Rs. 5.00 cr under Professional 
Services head and Rs. 40.00 cr under Grants-in-Aid General. 
  
PLI scheme was in Gestation period for FY 2022-23 & FY 2023-24. FY 2024-
25 was the first performance year and FY 2025-26 is the first incentive claim 
year. However, in case of fast paced investment when threshold investment 
and threshold turnover is achieved by FY 2023-24, incentive may be payable 
in FY 2024-25 itself. Also, earlier the applicant was to submit a claim for 
disbursement of incentive on an annual basis. However, keeping in view, the 
requests from industry for early incentive disbursement, amendment for the 
same has been issued. 
  
Rs.40.00 Cr. in RE was sought for FY 2024-25 in view of likely early 
disbursement or fast paced disbursement for companies who achieve 
threshold investment and sales.  
The PMA (Programme management agency) has been hired from year FY 
2021-22 whose payment is given through professional services head as 
administrative cost. Allotment and expense of fund in FY 2022-23, 2023-24 
were towards that.  
It may be informed that against RE of Rs. 45.00 crore, Rs.40.00 cr have been 
disbursed from Grants-in-Aid General head in FY 2024-25 as incentive and 
an expenditure of Rs.4.53 cr approx. has been incurred from Professional 
services head. 
(Ministry of Textile’s O.M. No. 2/05/2025-Parl., dated: 28.07.2025) 
Recommendation (Para No. 26) 
The Committee, taking into consideration that BE 2025-26 has been 
enormously enhanced to ₹ 1148 crore, expect that the PLI Scheme would come 
out of gestation and the Ministry would gainfully and effectively utilize the 
earmarked budget for incentive disbursement to PLI companies in 2025-26 
and there would be no surrendering of funds at the end of the FY 2025-26. It 
is pertinent to keep in mind that realizing the purpose of the PLI Scheme of 
expanding manufacturing units in India, generate employment and 

61 
 
contribute in making the country ‘Aatma-nirbhar’ or ‘self-reliant’ by reducing 
the imports could be achieved only if time over run is prevented.  
Reply of the Government 
Noted. 
 
(Ministry of Textile’s O.M. No. 2/05/2025-Parl., dated: 28.07.2025) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 28) 
SAMARTH 
The Committee note that Scheme for Capacity Building in Textiles Sector 
(Samarth) was initiated from 2017-18 with an aim to incentivize and 
supplement the efforts of the industry in creation of jobs in the organized 
textile and related sectors, covering the entire value chain of textiles 
(excluding spinning and weaving) with an outlay of ₹ 1300 crore. The Scheme 
was extended for a period of three years, i.e., from 2021-22 to 2023- 2024 
with an outlay of ₹ 390.00 crore, with the training target of 3.40 lakh 
candidates and further extended to FY 2025-26 with outlay of ₹ 495 crore to 
train 3 lakh persons. The Committee observe that the Ministry had sought BE 
of ₹ 166.00 crore for the year 2024-25 under SAMARTH Scheme which was 
drastically revised upwards to ₹ 331.00 crore at RE stage, but the AE was only 
153.70 crore (92 per cent of BE and about 50 per cent of RE) at the end of 
February 2025. However, the Committee find that one lakh persons were to 
be given additional training after the RE stage in 2024-25 and the training of 
70,000 persons is in the final stage which will be completed in February 2025. 
The Committee understand that as the payments will be released for all these 
trainings in the month of March, 2025, the RE funds would be utilized in 
2024-25 fiscal. The Committee, still are of the firm opinion that Ministry 
should not wait till the fag end of the financial year for the training targets to 
be completed and instead should pace it evenly in batches from the beginning 
of the Financial Year. The Committee believe that the Ministry would make all 
concerted efforts to utilize the RE funds also within the timeline of the FY 
2024-25. 
Reply of the Government 
The Scheme has successfully achieved the training target of 3.4 lakh 
candidates under the allocated outlay of Rs. 390 crores. Out of 390 crores, 
BE of Rs. 166 crores for the year 2024-25 which was sought to meet the 
liabilities which were utilized fully (100%).  
          Further, SFC in its meeting dated 30th September 2024 recommended 
the extension of scheme from FY 2024-25 to FY 2025-26 with the outlay of 
Rs. 495 crores to train 3 lakh persons. Accordingly, additional RE of Rs. 165 

62 
 
Crores was sought at RE stage which was approved in the last quarter of the 
financial year (i.e. FY 2024-25). Due to allocation of funds late in the Financial 
Year cycle and thereby having limited time for achieving the physical training 
target, the Ministry utilized an amount of Rs. 260.26 crores (which is about 
78.62 % of RE) in FY 2024-25. However, For the FY 2025-26, Ministry is 
focusing on achieving physical and financial targets as about 10,000 
candidates that have been trained (FY 2025-26 till 17th April 2025) and 
another 50,000 candidates are undergoing the training. 
 (Ministry of Textile’s O.M. No. 2/05/2025-Parl., dated: 28.07.2025) 
Recommendation (Para No. 29) 
The Committee are of the considered view that imparting skill 
development training is a continuous process which cannot be stopped after 
one or two years and therefore, recommend the Ministry to take necessary 
measure to continue with this Scheme even after 2025-26 with requisite 
revamping, if required, based on the response received from implementation 
this far. The Committee also desire that the necessary approvals should be 
taken for this at the very beginning of the Financial Year so that the timely 
disbursement of budgetary funds could be carried out and there is no under 
utilisation or diversion of funds. 
Reply of the Government 
In line with the committee’s view the Ministry has taken various steps 
in this direction to continue the skill development programme beyond 2026. 
Accordingly, a skill gap study is underway to gather the skilling requirement 
of the textile sector, also a third-party Impact Evaluation Study process has 
been initiated and a Task Force for policy formulation of new scheme is been 
constituted.  
Under Samarth, the distribution of funds is directly linked to the 
physical milestones of training target. Hence, to ensure the timely 
disbursement of budgetary funds for FY 2025-26, the Ministry has allocated 
the additional training targets to empaneled Implementing Partners. 
Additionally, for broadening the base of Samarth scheme, the Ministry has 
issued an RFP on 6th December 2024 for the empanelment of new textile 
industry partners for training programme under Samarth. Currently for the 
FY 2025-26, approximately 10,000 candidates have already been trained (FY 
2025-26 till 17th April 2025) and another about 50,000 candidates are 
undergoing training.  
(Ministry of Textile’s O.M. No. 2/05/2025-Parl., dated: 28.07.2025) 

63 
 
CHAPTER-III 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO 
NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLY 
 
Recommendation (Para No.7) 
HANDLOOM SECTOR 
The Committee note that the Handloom Sector is one of the largest 
unorganized economic activities of India and it constitutes an integral part of 
the rural and semi- rural livelihood engaging over 35 lakh persons. The sector 
engages over 25 lakh female weavers and allied workers. Handloom weaving 
constitutes one of the richest and most vibrant aspects of the Indian cultural 
heritage. The sector has advantage of being less capital intensive, minimal 
use of power, being eco-friendly, flexibility of small production, openness to 
innovations and adaptability to market requirements. One of the largest in 
terms of employment potential, Handloom industry, with 28.23 lakh 
handlooms, plays a very important role in the country’s economy, producing 
both for domestic as well as international consumption. The Committee find 
that there are several Schemes /programmes in the Handloom Sector for the 
welfare of Handloom weavers.  Under this Sector, the Ministry have utilized ₹ 
337.56 crore out of RE of ₹ 378.01 crore during FY 2024-25 till January 2025. 
Albeit the Ministry have assured the Committee that the allocated funds will 
be fully utilized by the end of this FY, still the Committee desire that the 
Ministry should achieve the physical/financial targets under various schemes 
of the Sector, as stipulated. Further, the Committee are made aware that the 
Ministry are taking various measures to tackle the hurdles in the way of full 
utilization of earmarked budget such as requesting the State/UT 
Governments to submit the proposals in time, organizing meetings by the 
senior officers to review the progress with field officers as well as offices of 
State/UT Governments, etc. The Committee, nevertheless desire that the 
Ministry should also set up a reliable monitoring mechanism under the 
Financial Advisor to ensure that these steps taken by the Ministry actually 
work without fail and result in full utilization of allocated funds. 
Reply of the Government 
Under handloom sector, the Ministry has utilized Rs.374.40 crore out of RE 
of Rs.375.01 crore during FY 2024-25. During 2024-25, 79 small clusters 
sanctioned against target of 104 small clusters, 139 marketing events 
sanctioned/ organized against target of 127 marketing events, 9,211 weavers 
got mudra loans against target of 20,000 weavers, 1.38 lakh weavers enrolled 
for insurance against target of 3.245 lakh weavers and 323.84 lakh kg. yarn 
supplied against target of 360 lakh kg. Less achievement of physical targets 
can be attributed to non-availability of funds. 
  

64 
 
With regard to the observation of the Committee for setting up of a reliable 
monitoring mechanism under the Financial Advisor, it may be appraised that 
both the pace of expenditure and achieving physical targets are discussed 
time to time on various occasions during the meeting held frequently at senior 
level including the Financial Advisor of the Ministry and it is ensured to take 
action for effective implementation and optimum utilization of funds and to 
achieve set targets. 
 (Ministry of Textile’s O.M. No. 2/05/2025-Parl., dated: 28.07.2025) 
 
 
 
  

65 
 
 
CHAPTER-IV 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH 
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
COMMITTEE AND WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION 
 
Recommendation (Para No.13) 
WOOL SECTOR  
The Committee note that the primary reason for under-utilization of 
funds in previous years from 2021-24 is the slow progress in project execution 
by the State Government Implementing Agencies, particularly under the 
Pashmina Wool Development Scheme in Ladakh. Harsh climatic conditions 
and prolonged road blockages for 5-6 months have constrained the timely 
implementation of projects in this region.  Further, delay in submission of 
utilisation certificates under schemes have also hampered speedy utilization 
of funds. The Committee, taking note of the above fact, recommend that the 
Ministry should take up with the Ministry of Finance the aspect of harsh 
climatic conditions and terrain in areas like Ladakh hindering 
implementation of schemes of Wool Sector as they have to adhere to common 
expenditure guidelines relating to schemes.  Ministry of Finance be impressed 
upon the need for granting relaxation in spending limits and for putting in 
place tailor made provisions for schemes implemented in areas like Ladakh 
considering the uniqueness of the conditions on the ground where 
beneficiaries of the scheme reside.  
Reply of the Government 
Due to adverse climatic conditions, the working period in the Ladakh 
region is from April to October. Accordingly fund allocation under the TASP. 
Capital and General Head may be provided in accordance with the extant 
rules and provision to facilitate the IA's utilizing funds in a speedy and timely 
manners. Further, Ministry of Finance will also be approached for tailor-made 
provision for schemes implemented in areas like Ladakh during the 
formulation of new scheme guidelines post 2025-26. 
 (Ministry of Textile’s O.M. No. 2/05/2025-Parl., dated: 28.07.2025) 
 
Comments of the Committee.  
Please see Para No. 10 of Chapter-I. 
 
 

66 
 
CHAPTER-V 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH 
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE INTERIM IN NATURE  
 
Recommendation (Para No. 2) 
Handloom Industries 
The Committee note that the Ministry had put forth the demand of ₹ 11053 
crore which is quite high as compared to the demand of ₹ 4480.00 crore as 
BE in 2024-25. The Ministry attributed the raised allocation of funds of ₹ 
5040 crore and ₹ 1148 crore to Cotton Corporation of India (CCI) and 
implementation of Production Linked Incentive (PLI) Scheme respectively. 
However, this demand was not accepted by the Ministry of Finance and finally 
₹ 5272 crore was allocated as BE 2025-26. The Committee find that ₹ 5040 
crore was sought for CCI for giving subsidy to farmers and ₹ 384.55 crore was 
for support to PSU to pay the salaries and allowances for employees. As the 
allocation at BE stage have been slashed drastically to less than half, the 
Committee impress upon the Ministry to reiterate their demand at 
Supplementary Grants stage and rigorously and impress upon the Ministry 
of Finance at RE stage to consider enhanced allocation of funds under the 
head of CCI enabling them to implement the welfare measure of providing 
subsidy to farmers as planned. The Committee also desire that salaries and 
allowances consist an important head and Ministry need to prudently allocate 
appropriate funds under this head. 
Reply of the Government 
  For BE 2024-25, Ministry of Finance, had allocated Rs 600.00 crore for 
Cotton Corporation of India CCI. However, the same has been deducted in RE 
2024-25, as the programme division yet to take approval of EFC/ SFC for 
materialization of funds. However, the Ministry is making all possible efforts 
to get allocation of funds for the Cotton Corporation of India and for the 
salaries and allowance for the employees of BIC Under Support to PSU.   
 (Ministry of Textile’s O.M. No. 2/05/2025-Parl., dated: 28.07.2025) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 12) 
The Committee are given to understand  that the major challenges faced 
by the Ministry in effectively implementing the Schemes/programmes under 
the Schemes of Handicrafts sector are non-receipt of timely and viable 
proposals from Implementing Agencies, non-submission of Utilization 
Certificates (UCs) and other documents by the implementing agencies on 

67 
 
time, infrastructure projects delay in land acquisition by the implementing 
agencies, mandatory transition to Central Nodal Agency (CNA) and then 
Treasury Single Account (TSA) module by the Central Ministries, etc. The 
Committee are not impressed to note the cliched and time worn answers 
about the problems faced by the Ministry in the implementation of Schemes 
under Handicraft Sector and measures taken to alleviate them. It is the firm 
opinion of the Committee that the Ministry shall take goal driven proactive 
measures to take feedback from the beneficiaries of these schemes and come 
up with effective provisions that bring results on the ground. 
 Reply of the Government 
Under National Handicrafts Development Programme (NHDP) scheme 
emphasis is being given to ensure that the benefits of the scheme shall reach 
to every artisan of the country.  In order to ensure that every artisan benefit 
from the scheme, a district level saturation plan has been prepared based on 
different parameter such as number of artisans practising crafts, cluster area, 
endangered crafts etc. for FY 2024-25 to cover maximum number of 
uncovered areas. Evaluation of the NHDP schemes is under process in which 
impact assessment & feedback of the stakeholders will be taken for making 
the schemes more effective and beneficial for every artisan of the 
country.   Online facility is provided to the artisans like artisan Identity Card, 
proposal submission & applying for participation in marketing events etc. 
Handicrafts Helpline Centre is already setup for Artisans professional queries 
on a telephone call and its resolution.  
  
 (Ministry of Textile’s O.M. No. 2/05/2025-Parl., dated: 28.07.2025) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 27) 
The Committee note that Ministry of Textiles had submitted two proposals viz. 
PLI 1.2 for expansion of Harmonized System (HS) lines under MMF Apparel 
and MMF fabrics and PLI 2 for apparel/garments, made-ups and textiles 
accessories for making the Scheme more comprehensive. The Committee 
finding the fact that these proposals are still under consideration, want that 
the Ministry should take measures to expedite the finalization/approval of 
these proposal. The Committee also want that the Ministry should take well-
focused steps to increase the number of PLI companies so to promote 
competitiveness and foreign investments in our domestic textile industries. 
Further, the Committee have taken note of reports that the Government is 
pondering over a decision whether or not to continue with the PLI Scheme 
further. Though facts on this matter have not been placed before the 
Committee, it is observed that the continuance of PLI Scheme or an 
appropriate alternative for Textile Sector would be crucial for facilitating its 
growth in the country.  

68 
 
Reply of the Government 
The proposal for PLI 1.2 for expanding coverage of items under the 
scheme has been shared with DPIIT which is consolidating all PLI schemes. 
Further additional comments to DPIIT are under finalization. 
 
Draft Cabinet note on PLI 2.0 scheme for Textiles was shared with 
Cabinet on 10.12.2024 on which further comments have been received. These 
are under consultation, for scheme finalization. 
 
Ministry has recently issued a comprehensive list of HSN codes covered 
under Technical Textile segments. PLI for textiles scheme has a projected 
investment of Rs.28,711 crore by selected applicants. As noted by Committee, 
a 3rd window for inviting applications under the scheme has been opened. 
This was in light of the industry requests from MMF fabrics & Technical 
Textiles. 
 
(Ministry of Textile’s O.M. No. 2/05/2025-Parl., dated: 28.07.2025)  
 
Comments of the Committee.  
Please see Para No. 23 of Chapter-I. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi;          BASAVARAJ BOMMAI  
24 March 2026                                 CHAIRPERSON,                   
3 Chaitra 1948 (Saka)                STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR,  
TEXTILES AND SKILL DEVELOPMENT 
 
 
 
  

69 
 
APPENDIX-I 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR, TEXTILES AND SKILL 
DEVELOPMENT 
(2025-26) 
 
Minutes of the Ninth Sitting of the Committee 
 
The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 24 March, 2026 from 1500 
hrs. to 1615 hrs. in Samanvay 5, Parliament House,  New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
Shri Basavaraj Bommai-  Chairperson 
 MEMBERS  
 LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri G. M. Harish Balayogi 
3. Shri Chandra Prakash Choudhary 
4. Shri G. Lakshminarayana 
5. Shri Rudra Narayan Pany 
6. Shri Tanuj Punia 
7. Shri Pradeep Purohit 
8. Shri Raja Ram Singh 
9. Shri Chavan Ravindra Vasantrao 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
10. Shri Govindbhai Laljibhai Dholakia 
11. Shri Rajendra Gehlot 
12. Dr. Syed Naseer Hussain 
13. Shri Maharaja Sanajaoba Leishemba 
14. Shri Gurwinder Singh Oberoi 
      
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Mukesh Kumar Sharma - Joint Secretary   
2. Ms. K. Muanniang Tunglut  - Director 
3. Ms. Mili Dinesh    - Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri S. Lalengzau Ngaihte  -  Deputy Secretary 

70 
 
5. Ms. Shilpa Kant    - Under Secretary 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the 
Sitting of the Committee, convened for consideration and adoption of 
the following Reports on:  
(i)  Action Taken by the Government on the 
observations/recommendations contained in the Fourth Report 
(18th Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants (2025-26)’ pertaining to 
the Ministry of Labour & Employment; 
(ii)  Action Taken by the Government on the 
observations/recommendations contained in the Fifth Report 
(18th Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants (2025-26)’ pertaining to 
the Ministry of Textiles; and  
(iii)  Action Taken by the Government on the 
observations/recommendations contained in the Sixth Report 
(18th Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants (2025-26)’ pertaining to 
the Ministry of Skill Development and Entrepreneurship. 
 3. Giving an overview of the important 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Draft Reports, the 
Chairperson solicited the views/ suggestions of the Members.  
4. The Committee, then, took up the Draft Reports one by one for 
consideration and after some discussions, the draft Reports were 
adopted by the Committee with some modifications. 
 
5. The Committee then authorized the Chairperson to finalise the 
Draft Reports and present them to Parliament.  
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
  

71 
 
APPENDIX-II 
(Vide Para No. 3 of Introduction) 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE 
FIFTH REPORT (EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) OF THE 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR, TEXTILES AND SKILL 
DEVELOPMENT  
      Total Percentage 
   
I. Total number of Recommendations 29 
 
 
II. Recommendations/Observations 
which have been accepted by the 
Government – Rec. Para Nos. 1, 3, 4, 
5, 6, 8, 9, 10, 11, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 
20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 28 and 29. 
 
24 82.76 
III. Recommendations/Observations 
which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government’s 
reply – Rec. Para No. 7. 
 
01 3.45 
IV Recommendations/Observations in 
respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted 
by the Committee and which require 
reiteration – Rec. Para No. 13. 
01 3.45 
V Recommendations/Observations in 
respect of which replies of the 
Government are interim in nature - 
Rec. Para Nos.  2, 12 and 27. 
03 10.34 
   