i 
 
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR, TEXTILES 
AND SKILL DEVELOPMENT 
(2025-26) 
 
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF SKILL DEVELOPMENT & ENTREPRENEURSHIP 
 
ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE OBSERVATIONS/ 
RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE CONTAINED IN THEIR 
SIXTH REPORT (EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) ON ‘DEMANDS FOR 
GRANTS (2025-26)’ OF THE MINISTRY OF SKILL DEVELOPMENT & 
ENTREPRENEURSHIP. 
 
TWENTIETH REPORT 
 
 
 
       
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
NEW DELHI   
March, 2026/  Chaitra, 1948 (Saka) 
 
 
20 

ii 
 
 
TWENTIETH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR, TEXTILES AND SKILL 
DEVELOPMENT 
(2025-26) 
 
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF SKILL DEVELOPMENT & ENTREPRENEURSHIP 
 
ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE OBSERVATIONS/ 
RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE CONTAINED IN THEIR 
SIXTH REPORT (EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) ON ‘DEMANDS FOR 
GRANTS (2025-26)’ OF THE MINISTRY OF SKILL DEVELOPMENT & 
ENTREPRENEURSHIP. 
  
Presented to Lok Sabha on 27.03.2026 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 27.03.2026 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
March, 2026/ Chaitra, 1948 (Saka)


iii 
 
  
CONTENTS 
 
PAGE No. 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (iv) 
INTRODUCTION   (v) 
CHAPTER I Report 1 
CHAPTER II Recommendations/Observations which have 
been accepted by the Government 
 
21 
CHAPTER III Recommendations/Observations which the 
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of 
the Government’s reply 
 
64 
CHAPTER IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of 
which replies of the Government have not 
been accepted by the Committee and which 
require reiteration 
66 
CHAPTER V Recommendations/Observations in respect of 
which replies of the Government are interim 
in nature    
68 
 
 
 
APPENDICES 
 
Appendix- I Minutes of the 8th Sitting of the Committee 
(2025-26) held on 24 March 2026. 
 
70 
Appendix- II Analysis of the Action Taken by the 
Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in the Sixth 
Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha)  
72 
 
  

iv 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR, TEXTILES AND SKILL 
DEVELOPMENT (2025-26) 
 
                Shri Basavaraj Bommai – Chairperson 
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2 Shri Mani A. 
3 Shri G. M. Harish Balayogi 
4 Shri Aashtikar Patil Nagesh Bapurao 
5 Shri Partha Bhowmick 
6 Shri Yogender Chandolia 
7 Shri Ram Prasad Chaudhary 
8 Shri Chandra Prakash Choudhary 
9 Shri G. Lakshminarayana 
10 Shri Asit Kumar Mal 
11 Shri Kali Charan Munda 
12 Shri Rudra Narayan Pany 
13 Shri Kartick Chandra Paul  
14 Shri Tanuj Punia 
15 Shri Pradeep Purohit 
16 Shri Mukesh Rajput 
17 Shri Raja Ram Singh 
18 Shri Adhikari Soumendu 
19 Shri V. K. Sreekandan 
20 Shri Manoj Tigga 
21 Shri Chavan Ravindra Vasantrao 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
22 Shri Ritabrata Banerjee 
23 Shri Govindbhai Laljibhai Dholakia 
24 Shri Rajendra Gehlot 
25 Dr. Syed Naseer Hussain 
26 Shri Maharaja Sanajaoba Leishemba 
27 Dr. Kalpana Saini 
28 Shri Anthiyur P. Selvarasu 
29 Shri Abdul Wahab 
30 Shri Rajinder Gupta  
31 Shri Gurwinder Singh Oberoi 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Mukesh Kumar Sharma  - Joint Secretary 
2. Ms. K. Muanniang Tunglut  - Director 
3. Shri S. Lalengzau Ngaihte  - Deputy Secretary   

v 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Labour, Textiles 
and Skill Development (2025-26) having been authorized by the 
Committee, present on their behalf this Twentieth Report on Action 
taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
of the Committee contained in their Sixth Report (Eighteenth Lok 
Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants (2025-26)’ of the Ministry of Skill 
Development and Entrepreneurship. 
2. The Sixth Report was presented to Lok Sabha and laid in 
Rajya Sabha on 28 March 2025. The Ministry of Skill Development 
and Entrepreneurship furnished their replies on 10 July 2025 
indicating Action Taken on the Observations/ Recommendations 
contained in the Sixth Report. Subsequently, the Ministry 
furnished Revised Action Taken replies on few of the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Sixth Report on 
6 January 2026.  The Committee considered and adopted the Draft 
Report at their sitting held on 24 March 2026. 
3. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/ Recommendations contained in the Sixth Report 
(Eighteenth Lok Sabha) is given at Appendix-II. 
4. For ease of reference, the Observations/Recommendations of 
the Committee have been printed in bold type in the body of the 
Report. 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi; 
24 March 2026 
3 Chaitra 1948 (Saka) 
BASAVARAJ BOMMAI 
CHAIRPERSON, 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR, 
TEXTILES AND SKILL 
DEVELOPMENT 
 

1 
 
 
CHAPTER- I 
REPORT 
 
This Report deals with the action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in their Sixth 
Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2025-26) relating to 
the Ministry of Skill Development and Entrepreneurship. 
 
2. The Sixth Report was presented to Lok Sabha/laid in Rajya Sabha on 
28th March, 2025. It contained 44 Observations/Recommendations. Replies 
of Government in respect of all the Recommendations have been received and 
are categorized as under:- 
 
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been 
accepted by the Government –Rec. Para Nos.1, 2, 
3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12,13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 
18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 24, 25, 26, 28, 29, 30, 31, 33, 
34, 35, 36, 37, 39, 41, 43 and 44 
 
Chapter II
Total:38
Percentage:86.362
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the 
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the 
Government’s reply –Rec. Para Nos. 23 and 38 
 
Chapter III
Total:2
Percentage:4.546
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which 
replies of the Government have not been accepted by 
the Committee and which require reiteration – Rec. 
Para Nos. 27 and 32 
Chapter IV
Total:02
Percentage: 4.546
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which 
replies of the Government are interim in nature –
Rec. Para Nos. 40 and 42 
 
Chapter V
Total:02
Percentage:4.546
 
3. The Committee desire that Action Taken Notes in respect of 
Observations/Recommendations contained in Chapter-I and final action 
taken reply in respect of the Recommendations contained in Chapter V 
of this Report, for which interim reply has been given by the 
Government, be furnished to them at the earliest. 
4. The Committee will now deal with some of their earlier 
Observations/Recommendations which either require reiteration or 
merit further comments. 
 

2 
 
I. Review of Monitoring Guidelines  
Recommendation (Para No. 5) 
5. The Committee had noted that as on 16.02.2025, the number of 
candidates enrolled, trained, assessed and certified were 31.52 lakh, 24.49 
lakh, 16.13 lakh and 14.91 lakh respectively. Thus, 78% of enrolled 
candidates were trained, 66% of trained candidates were assessed and 92% 
of assessed candidates were certified. The Committee had observed that many 
candidates, who completed training were not found eligible for assessment 
due to shortage of attendance. The Committee were apprised that in order to 
streamline and improve the assessment and certification process, the Steering 
Committee has on 12.06.2024, inter alia, approved relaxation in the 
Assessment Eligibility criteria from 70% day and 50% QP Hours AEBAS 
attendance (current provision) to overall 50% of QP Hours. Further, the 
Training Provider/Training Centre cannot start new batches in a job role until 
assessments of previous batches in the same job role are completed. The 
Committee while appreciating the measures taken by the Ministry expected 
that the decision will increase percentage of candidates assessed vis-a-vis 
trained thereby resulting in consequent increase in the number of candidates 
certified and had desired that efforts be made to ensure that all trained 
candidates are assessed so as to have consequential increase in the number 
of certified candidates. 
Further, it is the considered opinion of the Committee that the 
procedure adopted for assessment of Certified Candidates has to be reviewed 
and the private training providers and other agencies involved, if any, that do 
not perform to commendable extent should be blacklisted and debarred from 
being an implementing agency of the scheme. The Committee were of the firm 
view that more transparent, simplified and robust assessment system should 
be put in place to look after the implementation of the scheme. The Committee 
have  liked to be apprised of the progress made in this regard. 
The Committee had further desired that the existing infrastructure 
available with education ecosystem including Higher Education Institutes, 
ITIs, Engineering and Technical Institutes, Skill Universities, etc. need to be 
effectively utilized for running Skill India Centres (SICs).  The Committee, had 
therefore, impressed upon the Ministry to strengthen their monitoring and 
coordination mechanism to achieve the desired objectives. 
6.   In their Action taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Ministry of 
Skill Development and Entrepreneurship have stated as follows: 
“The Observation/recommendation of the Committee has been noted 
for compliance. 
 
The decision for considering 50% attendance to be eligible for appearing 
in the assessments has resulted in an increased percentage of 
candidates assessed vis-a-vis trained thereby resulting in consequent 
increase in the number of candidates certified. Comparatively, till 12th 
June 2024, 4,70,483 candidates were assessed out of 9,04,423 trained 
candidates (52%), resulting in certification of 4,36,381 candidates. Post 
the decision of the Steering Committee on 12.06.2024 and till 
31.03.2025, 12,62,831 candidates were assessed out of 16,69,637 
trained candidates (75.63%), resulting in certification of 11,55,771 

3 
 
candidates. This shows an increase in the number of candidates eligible 
for assessment.  
 
Further, MSDE has recently issued a Standard Operating Procedure 
(SOP) on streamlining the assessment and certification process. All the 
processes have been defined with timelines and non-compliances will 
lead to penalty on the defaulting entity, be it Awarding Body or the 
Project Implementation Agency (PIA). Further, one of the key features of 
PMKVY 4.0 is expanding the delivery network for skill development 
through cross utilization of resources by setting Skill India Centres 
(SICs) in Institutes of National Importance (INIs), Colleges, Universities, 
Technical Institutions, etc. enabling better utilization of available 
permanent infrastructure across the country. Monitoring guidelines for 
the scheme are under process of revision and once issued will certainly 
lead to better outcome. The scheme will be implemented in FY 2025-26 
with proper planning for a better qualitative outcome”. 
 
7.  When further asked to furnish a comprehensive reply, the Ministry in 
their revised Action Taken Note, submitted as under:- 
“The decision for considering 50% attendance to be eligible for 
appearing in the assessments has resulted in increased percentage 
of candidates assessed vis-a-vis trained, as given below: 
Timeline Trained Assessed % Assessed (of 
Trained) Certified 
Till 12th June 2024 9,04,423 4,70,483 52.02% 4,36,381 
Post decision of relaxation in 
Attendance  16,69,637 12,62,831 75.64% 11,55,771 
 
Further, MSDE has recently issued a Standard Operating Procedure 
(SOP) on streamlining the assessment and certification process. All 
the processes have been defined with timelines and non-compliances 
will lead to penalty on the defaulting entity, be it Awarding Body or 
the Project Implementation Agency (PIA).  
As far as utilization of existing infrastructure available with 
education ecosystem is concerned, in the current FY, training is 
being imparted with multiple Institutes of National Importance (INIs) 
/ Higher Education Institutes (HEIs) such as NID Assam, IIT Mandi, 
IIIT Vadodara, IIT Jammu, MNNIT Allahabad, IIT Kanpur, etc. 
ensuring optimal utilisation of their laboratories, workshops, and 
classrooms for delivering quality training.  
To enhance scalability, quality assurance, and monitoring, the MSDE 
has established the “Kaushal Samiksha Kendra” (KSK) for 
independent oversight. The KSK facilitates both virtual and physical 
inspections of Skill India Centres (SICs). Between September 2024 
and October 2025, MSDE carried out virtual monitoring of 3,695 
training Centres across India. These inspections evaluated centre 
infrastructure, candidate attendance, trainer presence, and other key 
parameters. In addition, regular physical inspections through the 
PMKVY State and District Coordinators are being carried out to 
identify the gaps and improve the training quality. Physical 
inspections were carried out in 2,393 centres. A snapshot of action 

4 
 
taken by the Ministry for monitoring and quality assurance is given 
below: 
• Upon reviewing inspection reports and cross-verifying attendance 
data with batch schedules and AEBAS records, 383 Skill India 
Centres were found to be non-compliant. 
• Disciplinary action such as centre suspension, stoppage of 
payments, issuance of Show Cause Notices, Accreditation & 
Affiliation cancellations, and filing of FIRs has been initiated against 
these non-compliant centres.  
• FIR filing has been directed in 167 high-penalty cases, with D.O. 
letters issued by MSDE to the respective State DGPs for lodging FIRs. 
As of date, FIRs have been lodged against 41 Skill India Centres and 
necessary action is being taken in rest of the cases.  
• Based on the physical inspection report, 178 training 
partner/training centres which have been found to be non-compliant 
with the scheme's guidelines have been blacklisted, and recovery of 
payments has been initiated.  
• An Inter-Ministerial Appeals Committee (IMAC) comprising of 
representative from MSDE, NCVET, NSDC, DGT, MNRE, M/o Rural 
Development, M/o Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises & M/o 
Tourism have been constituted to review the appeals received from 
the blacklisted entities.  
• As of 12th December 2025, a total of 78 appeals have been 
received by MSDE or through NSDC, of which 33 cases have been 
reviewed by the IMAC.  
Recently, MSDE has also revised the monitoring guidelines to 
strengthen the monitoring of the training and adherence to scheme 
guidelines. The revised guidelines provide a comprehensive 
monitoring framework with clear KPIs and automated alerts, along 
with revised penalty matrix.”. 
 
8. Pursuant to the Committee’s recommendation in their earlier 
report regarding review of the procedure adopted for assessment of 
certified candidates and strengthening of the monitoring and 
coordination mechanism under PMKVY 4.0, the Ministry, in their revised 
Action Taken Note, have stated that a Standard Operating Procedure 
(SOP) has recently been issued to streamline the assessment and 
certification process. The SOP defines all processes with clear 
timelines and non-compliances would lead to penalty on the defaulting 
entity, be it Awarding Body or the Project Implementation Agency (PIA). 
The Ministry have further stated that the monitoring guidelines to 
strengthen monitoring of the training and adherence to scheme 
guidelines, has also been revised and now provides for a comprehensive 

5 
 
monitoring framework with clear Key Performance Index (KPI) and 
automated alerts.  The Committee emphasize the need for ensuring full 
compliance of the SOP by the Awarding Body and PIA and urge the 
Ministry for strict monitoring over its implementation to bring about 
considerable improvements in the number of candidates assessed and 
certified.  The details regarding penalty imposed on the Awarding Body 
and PIA should also be apprised. The Committee also urge the Ministry 
to ensure that the Time Based Penalty Matrix under the revised 
monitoring guidelines should transition from simple fixed fines to an 
escalation model that rewards rapid remediation and penalizes systemic 
negligence to ensure better qualitative outcomes and achievement of the 
desired objectives under the Scheme.  
 
II. Monitoring Mechanism for Skill Training 
Recommendation (Para No. 10) 
 
9.    To monitor the effectiveness of the skill training provided under PMKVY, 
the Ministry have launched SIDH. The steps taken to ensure quality 
standards across all Training Centres including PMKKs, inter alia, include 
SIDH registration, e-KYC compliance, mandatory AEBAS, virtual verification 
of operational training centres using a mobile app, feedback from candidates, 
physical visits and inspection of Training Centre, virtual monitoring through 
audio and video calls by a Kaushal Samiksha Kendra set up by MSDE.  
 
The Committee had been apprised that during the last three years, a 
total of 637 Physical Inspections (PIs) have been undertaken and key 
deficiencies noticed inter alia include non-conduct of training during visits, 
PMKKs closed on working days, non-compliance with equipment guidelines, 
candidates not available during visits, batch merging, low attendance (below 
50%), mismatches between physical attendance and AEBAS records, and in 
some cases, PMKKs not being found at the registered address on SIDH. The 
Ministry had informed that in order to avoid recurrence of such discrepancies, 
in addition to penal action like suspension, financial penalties and batch 
cancellation of non-compliant Centres, workshops are also conducted to 
orient PMKKs on quality delivery of training, retention of candidates post 
mobilization, maintenance of attendance etc. The Committee had urged the 
Ministry to maintain the momentum for putting in place a more invigorated 
monitoring mechanism so as to ensure the attainment of the objectives. The 
Committee had recommended that the Ministry take proactive measures and 
impress upon the State Government, Industries and various stakeholders to 
support PMKKs wherever these have been established. 
 
10.    In their Action taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Ministry of 
Skill Development and Entrepreneurship have stated as follows: 

6 
 
  
“The Observation/recommendation of the Committee has been noted 
for compliance. 
It is informed that; as on 30.04.2025; 5,768 Skill India Centres (SICs) 
have been physically inspected / visited by NSDC for monitoring 
during the ongoing training in these Centres under PMKVY 4.0. 
Further, a mechanism has been put in place in the Ministry to conduct 
virtual inspection of the SICs. As on 30.04.2025, 1,986 SICs have been 
inspected virtually by the Ministry. Based on the analysis of these 
SICs, actions have been initiated against the 188 SICs, out of which 
First Information Report (FIR) has been recommended against 138 
SICs. Monitoring guidelines under the scheme are under process of 
revision and once issued, will certainly lead to better outcome. Also, 
the Ministry is actively engaging with the State Skill Development 
Missions (SSDMs) of the States / UTs and formalizing their role in the 
monitoring of the skilling under the PMKVY 4.0”.  
 
11.  When further asked to furnish a comprehensive reply, the Ministry in 
their revised Action Taken Note, stated as follows:- 
 
“For robust monitoring under the PMKVY 4.0, multiple changes have 
been made which are as follows: 
• Live attendance dashboard has been developed on Skill India 
Digital Hub (SIDH) to provide insights into scheme level outputs and 
outcomes mapped with candidate lifecycle, training centre 
performance, and assessment outcomes, supporting data-driven 
decision-making. 
• Face Authentication and geo tagged attendance has been 
mandated for candidates, trainers and assessors under PMKVY 4.0. 
• Capturing Candidate Feeback during the Training Lifecycle 
through Central Communication Layer (CCL) developed by National 
Informatics Centre (NIC) for remedial actions. 
• QR-coded digital certificates to ensure authenticity, facilitating 
instant verification and boosting employer confidence. 
• All stakeholders, including trainers and candidates, must register 
via e-KYC and Aadhaar authentication, ensuring secure, paperless 
onboarding and accurate data capture. 
• A structured online application form to be hosted on SIDH for 
shortlisting PIAs/TPs based on filtration criteria and priority sectors 
for allocation of targets to private organizations. 

7 
 
• Further, the committed liabilities under PMKVY 4.0 will be 
disbursed to the Training Providers (TPs) upon successful verification 
of batch attendance. 
To enhance scalability, quality assurance, and monitoring, the MSDE 
has established the “Kaushal Samiksha Kendra” (KSK) for 
independent oversight. The KSK facilitates both virtual and physical 
inspections of Skill India Centres (SICs). Between September 2024 and 
October 2025, MSDE carried out virtual monitoring of 3,695 training 
Centres across India. These inspections evaluated centre 
infrastructure, candidate attendance, trainer presence, and other key 
parameters. In addition, regular physical inspections through the 
PMKVY State and District Coordinators are being carried out to 
identify the gaps and improve the training quality. Physical 
inspections were carried out in 2,393 centres. A snapshot of action 
taken by the Ministry for monitoring and quality assurance is given 
below: 
• Upon reviewing inspection reports and cross-verifying attendance 
data with batch schedules and AEBAS records, 383 Skill India Centres 
were found to be non-compliant. 
• Disciplinary action such as centre suspension, stoppage of 
payments, issuance of Show Cause Notices, Accreditation & Affiliation 
cancellations, and filing of FIRs has been initiated against these non-
compliant centres.  
• FIR filing has been directed in 167 high-penalty cases, with D.O. 
letters issued by MSDE to the respective State DGPs for lodging FIRs. 
As of date, FIRs have been lodged against 41 Skill India Centres and 
necessary action is being taken in rest of the cases.  
• Based on the physical inspection report, 178 training 
partner/training centres which have been found to be non-compliant 
with the scheme's guidelines have been blacklisted, and recovery of 
payments has been initiated.  
• An Inter-Ministerial Appeals Committee (IMAC) comprising of 
representative from MSDE, NCVET, NSDC, DGT, MNRE, M/o Rural 
Development, M/o Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises & M/o 
Tourism have been constituted to review the appeals received from the 
blacklisted entities.  
• As of 12th December 2025, a total of 78 appeals have been 
received by MSDE or through NSDC, of which 33 cases have been 
reviewed by the IMAC. 

8 
 
Recently, MSDE has also revised the monitoring guidelines to 
strengthen the monitoring of the training and adherence to scheme 
guidelines. The revised guidelines provide a comprehensive monitoring 
framework with clear KPIs and automated alerts, along with revised 
penalty matrix.  
So far as PMKKs are concerned, the Steering Committee for PMKVY 
4.0, in its 3rd meeting held on 05.12.2025, decided to conduct an 
independent assessment of PMKKs regarding their functioning, 
performance and future roadmap.” 
12. The Committee, in their earlier recommendation, had urged the 
Ministry to put in place a more invigorated monitoring mechanism to 
achieve the desired objectives under PMKVY 4.0. The Committee had 
also recommended that the Ministry take proactive measures to impress 
upon the State Governments, industries and various stakeholders to 
support the Prime Minister Kaushal Kendras (PMKKs). In their revised 
Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Ministry have 
highlighted multiple changes effected towards robust monitoring under 
PMKVY 4.0 which include establishment of Kaushal Samiksha Kendra 
(KSK) for independent oversight and facilitates both virtual and physical 
inspections of Skill India Centres. The Committee emphasize the need 
for improved monitoring,  quality assurance, accountability 
and evidence-driven governance across Skill India Centres nationwide, 
and desire that the Ministry should strengthen these kendras  in terms 
of number, resource allocation and infrastructure.   
In respect of PMKKs established to create benchmark institutions 
for high-quality, demand-driven vocational training, the Ministry have 
stated that the Steering Committee for PMKVY 4.0, in its 3rd meeting 
held on 05 December 2025, decided to conduct an independent 
assessment of these kendras regarding their functioning, performance 
and future roadmap. The Committee welcome this decision as it marks 
a critical shift toward evidence-based governance and long-term 
sustainability, and urge the Ministry to ensure that independent 
assessment of PMKKs is conducted within a specified timeframe. The 
agency identified for the purpose, scope and objectives of the 
assessment,  methodology being adopted, timing and resource 

9 
 
management, etc.  should be apprised to the Committee. The Committee 
also desire that the progress in this regard should be closely monitored 
and efforts made for early completion of the assessment so that future 
roadmap for PMKKs including support to be given by State Governments, 
industries and various stakeholders can be worked out.  
 
III. Pradhan Mantri National Apprenticeship Melas  
Recommendation (Para No.25) 
13. The Committee, while appreciating that to promote apprenticeship, the 
Ministry had organized Pradhan Mantri National Apprenticeship Melas 
(PMNAMs) at 190 locations/districts, since 2022-23 in the North Eastern 
Region (NER), pointed out that not even a single establishment participated 
in the PMNAM organised in Meghalaya, Mizoram and Nagaland and had 
desired that while organising PMNAMs particularly in NER, it needed to be 
ensured that the registered establishments do participate in such Melas. 
 
14. In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Ministry of 
Skill Development and Entrepreneurship have stated as follows:- 
 
“The economy of the North Eastern Region (NER) is predominantly 
agrarian, with over 70% of its population engaged in agricultural 
activities as their primary source of livelihood. The secondary and 
tertiary sectors exhibit limited diversification, encompassing areas such 
as tourism, handicrafts, textiles, and information technology, among 
others. Furthermore, factors like labour employment gap, geographical 
constraints, and infrastructural challenges, has resulted in a paucity of 
establishments within the region. Consequently, the limited number of 
establishments in the NER has translated into lower participation in the 
Pradhan Mantri National Apprenticeship Mela (PMNAM). 
 
To address these issues, MSDE is initiating a pilot scheme in the NER 
under the National Apprenticeship Promotion Scheme-2 (NAPS-2).  
Under this initiative, an additional incentive of upto ₹1500 is provided 
for apprentices who are domiciled in the NER and undertake 
apprenticeships within the NER (excluding the domiciled State) or 
outside the region. This measure is intended to attract youths to 
undertake apprenticeship outside their own State. Within the total 
financial outlay, a budget of ₹3 Crore has been allocated for awareness 
and advocacy activities, aimed at mobilizing youths and establishments 
to participation in NAPS-2 across the NER.” 
 
15. In their earlier report, the Committee had pointed out that not 
even a single establishment participated in the Pradhan Mantri National 
Apprenticeship Melas (PMNAMs) organized in Meghalaya, Mizoram and 
Nagaland and had desired that participation of the registered 

10 
 
establishments needed to be ensured while organizing PMNAMs, 
particularly in NER. In their Action Taken Note furnished to the 
Committee, the Ministry have stated that the limited member of 
establishments in the NER has translated into lower participation in the 
PMNAM. It has further been stated that to address these issues, MSDE is 
initiating a pilot scheme in NER under the National Apprenticeship 
Promotion Scheme (NAPS)-2 under which additional incentive of upto 
₹1500 is provided for apprentices who are domiciled in the NER and 
undertake apprenticeships within the NER (excluding the domiciled 
State) or outside the region. The Committee desire to know the actual 
number of registered establishments in Meghalaya, Mizoram and 
Nagaland as well as in the remaining North Eastern States, the rate of 
participation of such establishments in the PMNAMs and the reasons for 
non-participation of all the registered establishments. In respect of the 
pilot scheme under NAPS -2, the Committee emphasize the need for wide 
publicity through all the available medium and advocacy activities 
regarding the scheme, and urge the Ministry to evolve a strategy for 
activating the implementing agencies and leveraging the State media 
channels, local newspapers, and community radio to ensure that the 
benefits of the scheme is disseminated to all the potential beneficiaries.  
 
IV. Periodic Review of Measures in Identified Vulnerable Pockets  
Recommendation (Para No. 27) 
16.  The Committee had noted that out of 25.38 lakh apprentices engaged 
w.e.f. 2022-23 upto 18.02.2025, 11.37 lakh candidates (44%) belonged to SC, 
ST and OBC [2.97 lakh SCs, 1.12 lakh STs, and 7.28 lakh OBCs].  The 
Committee had been apprised that although there is no target allocation 
based on social category, the Ministry vide letter dated 28.01.2025 have 
requested all State Commissioners/Directors dealing with Skilling/ 
Apprenticeship Training and State Skill Development Missions to further 
sensitize the identified vulnerable pockets about all PMNAM events. The 
Committee while appreciating the steps taken by the Ministry had 
emphasised that periodic review of such measures be undertaken so as to 
ensure that social category candidates are not deprived of the benefits of the 
Scheme. 
 
17.  In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Ministry of 
Skill Development and Entrepreneurship have stated as follows:- 
 
“Under NAPS-2 from FY 2022-23 to FY 2025-26 (as on 30.04.2025), 
27.44 lakh apprentices engaged, 17.84 lakh candidates (56.08%) 

11 
 
belonged to SC, ST and OBC [4.71 lakh SCs, 1.78 lakh STs, and 11.34 
lakh OBCs]. 
Review of Measure: As per the Apprenticeship Rules, 1992, Section 5: 
Reservation of Training Places - The training places for the Scheduled 
Caste, Scheduled Tribe and Other Backward Classes in designated 
trades shall be reserved by the employer according to the prescribed 
norms followed in the respective State or Union Territory. In addition, 
8.6% and 16.6% of the fund is being allocated for the Scheduled Tribe 
and Scheduled Caste category, respectively.” 
 
18. The Committee had emphasized that periodic review of the 
measures to sensitize the identified vulnerable pockets about PMNAM 
events be undertaken to ensure that social category candidates are not 
deprived of the benefits of the Scheme. The Action Taken Reply of the 
Ministry indicates the number of SC, ST and OBC apprentices engaged 
from FY 2022-23 to FY 2025-26 along with the measures in place 
regarding reservation of training places for these categories by the 
employer and the percentage of funds being allocated for SC and ST 
category. The Committee, however, find that the Ministry have not 
provided information regarding periodic review of sensitization efforts 
about PMNAM events, as desired by them. The Committee, therefore, 
urge the Ministry to act upon their recommendation in right earnest and 
launch targeted awareness campaigns for these vulnerable categories by 
utilising national, regional and local media, at the earliest. The quarterly 
progress under the Scheme should be reviewed regularly and the details 
and outcome communicated to the Committee promptly. 
 
V.  PM – JANMAN Scheme 
Recommendation (Para No. 30) 
19.   The Committee had noted that the Ministry of Skill Development and 
Entrepreneurship (MSDE), through its autonomous institutes, Indian 
Institute of Entrepreneurship (IIE) and National Institute of Entrepreneurship 
and Small Business Development (NIESBUD) is undertaking the skill 
development training component of PM JANMAN Scheme of the Ministry of 
Tribal Affairs (MoTA) with the support of the Tribal Cooperative Marketing 
Development Federation of India (TRIFED). It is aimed at targeted 
development of 75 Particularly Vulnerable Tribal Groups (PVTGs) residing in 
15 States.  
 
Under this project, a total of 500 Van Dhan Vikas Kendras (VDVKs) are 
to be set up by TRIFED and a total of 42,000 PVTG beneficiaries are to be 
trained during 2024-25 & 2025-26. As on 19.02.2025, 174 VDVKs have been 

12 
 
established and 326 VDVKs are yet to be set up. The responsibility of 
NIESBUD and IIE is to implement the skilling component of the Project while 
setting up of VDVKs lies with TRIFED. From the target of 42,000 PVTG 
beneficiaries to be trained, 39,576 beneficiaries have been covered through 
Entrepreneurship Awareness Programmes (EAP). Out of the total trained 
under EAP, 31,547 beneficiaries have been trained through Entrepreneurship 
Development Programmes (EDP) of which 20,492 beneficiaries, have been 
further trained through Value Added Skill Training (VAT). The training 
programmes are ongoing and the Ministry had assured that the rest of the 
beneficiaries are expected to be trained before 31st March, 2025.The 
Committee had expected the Ministry to make concerted efforts and honour 
their commitment to cover beneficiaries who are yet to be trained. The 
Committee had also desired that the remaining 326 VDVKs be set up by 
TRIFED in the larger interest of the intended beneficiaries. 
 
20.   In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Ministry of 
Skill Development and Entrepreneurship have stated as follows:-  
 
“The Observation/recommendation of the Committee has been noted 
for compliance. 
 
The Ministry of Skill Development and Entrepreneurship is 
implementing the capacity building Component of the Pradhan Mantri 
Janjati Adivasi Nyaya Maha Abhiyan (PM-JANMAN) Project for 
Particularly Vulnerable Tribal Groups (PVTGs) through the National 
Institute for Entrepreneurship and Small Business Development 
(NIESBUD) and Indian Institute of Entrepreneurship, Guwahati (IIE). 
 
MSDE has signed MoU with Tribal Co-operative Marketing Federation 
of India (TRIFED) under MoTA wherein the responsibility of MSDE is to 
implement the capacity building component of the project, while setting 
up of Van Dhan Vikas Kendras (VDVKs) lies with TRIFED. 
 
            Under this project, a total of 500 Van Dhan Vikas Kendras (VDVKs) 
are to be established covering 42,000 PVTG beneficiaries during the FY 
2024-2025 and 2025-26.As on 30.06.2025, 251 VDVKs have been set 
up covering 34,991 participants through Entrepreneurship 
Development programme.  
 
            Efforts are being made by the Ministry to ensure that the Capacity 
Building programmes are completed once the toolkits have been setup 
by TRIFED in the VDVKs.The Ministry is undertaking all efforts to 
ensure that the remaining target are completed by March, 2026”. 
 
 
21. When further asked to furnish a comprehensive reply, the Ministry in 
their revised Action Taken Note, have stated as under:- 
 
“The Ministry of Skill Development and Entrepreneurship is 
implementing the capacity building Component of the Pradhan Mantri 
Janjati Adivasi Nyaya Maha Abhiyan (PM-JANMAN) Project for 
Particularly Vulnerable Tribal Groups (PVTGs) through the National 

13 
 
Institute for Entrepreneurship and Small Business Development 
(NIESBUD) and Indian Institute of Entrepreneurship, Guwahati (IIE). 
MSDE has signed MoU with Tribal Co-operative Marketing Federation 
of India (TRIFED) under MoTA wherein the responsibility of MSDE is to 
implement the capacity building training in 500 VDVKs, while setting 
up of Van Dhan Vikas Kendras (VDVKs) lies with TRIFED. 
Under this project, a total of 500 Van Dhan Vikas Kendras (VDVKs) are 
to be established covering 42,000 PVTG beneficiaries during the FY 
2024-2025 and 2025-26. As on 30.11.2025, 488 VDVKs have been set 
up covering 38,383 participants through Entrepreneurship 
Development programme.  
Efforts are being made by the Ministry to ensure that the Capacity 
Building programmes are completed once the toolkits have been set up 
by TRIFED in the remaining 12 VDVKs. The Ministry is undertaking all 
efforts to ensure that the remaining target are completed by March, 
2026. 
The Observation/recommendation of the Committee has been noted for 
further compliance.” 
 
 
22. The Committee note that under the PM-JANMAN Project, MSDE is 
responsible for implementing the capacity building component while 
setting up of Van Dhan Vikas Kendras (VDVKs) lies with TRIFED.  Out of 
the target of setting up 500 VDVKs covering 42,000 beneficiaries 
belonging to the Particularly Vulnerable Tribal Groups (PVTGs) during 
FYs 2024-2025 and 2025-26, a total of 488 VDVKs have been set up and 
38,383 participants have been trained through Entrepreneurship 
Development Programme as on 30 November 2025. The Ministry have 
also stated that all efforts are being taken to ensure that the remaining 
target is completed by March, 2026. The Committee understand that 
achievement of the target under the training component hinges upon 
establishment of the remaining VDVKs and setting up of the toolkits in 
the VDVKs, and urge the Ministry to impress upon TRIFED/Ministry of 
Tribal Affairs to establish the remaining VDVKs at the earliest. In 
addition to providing training to the PVTGs through Entrepreneurship 
Development Programme, the Committee desire that training through 
Value Added Skill Training may also be provided for the greater benefits 
of the PVTGs. 
 
 

14 
 
VI.  Bank Guarantee for Empanelled Vendors  
 
Recommendation (Para No.32) 
23. The Committee had been apprised that the target group to be covered 
under the programme are either the existing vendors or the new 
entrepreneurs who have the capacity to become empanelled vendors by 
submitting bank guarantee of Rs. 2.50 Lakh as per the guidelines framed by 
the MNRE. In the considered opinion of the Committee, the bank guarantee 
of Rs. 2.50 Lakh may stand a stumbling block for many especially the vendors 
in the rural areas.The Committee, had therefore, desired the Ministry to take 
up the matter regarding review of the guidelines with the Ministry of New and 
Renewable Energy so as to reduce the amount of Bank guarantee. 
 
24. In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Ministry of 
Skill Development and Entrepreneurship have stated as follows:- 
 
“The Observation/recommendation of the Committee has been noted 
for compliance. 
 
NIESBUD under the MSDE in collaboration with the Ministry of New 
and Renewable Energy (MNRE), Government of India, is organizing 
Entrepreneurship Development Programme (EDP) on Solar 
Entrepreneurship under the flagship initiative, PM Surya Ghar Muft 
Bijli Yojana.The programme aims to promote rooftop solar adoption, 
empower entrepreneurs, and create sustainable livelihood 
opportunities by fostering and mentoring budding and existing 
entrepreneurs in the field of solar entrepreneurship. 
 
NIESBUD received the sanction from the MNRE in the month of 
September 2024. The Project has been sanctioned for implementation 
across two financial years F.Y. 2024 - 25 and 2025 – 26 with a target to 
train 50,000 participants. 
 
As on 31.05.2025, the Institute has imparted training to 13,210 
participants under the project. 
 
The Ministry has taken various steps to facilitate awareness and 
mobilisation for the programme with continuous follow-ups with MNRE, 
State Governments and concerned Departments. All efforts are being 
made to ensure that the target is completed by March  2026.” 
 
25. Considering that the Bank Guarantee of Rs. 2.50 Lakh required for 
becoming empanelled vendors under the PM Surya Ghar Muft Bijli Yojana 
may stand as a stumbling block for many, especially the vendors in the 
rural areas, the Committee had recommended that the matter regarding 
review of the guidelines be taken up with the Ministry of New and 
Renewable Energy (MNRE) with a view to reducing the required Bank 
guarantee. The reply of the Ministry has found no mention of the steps 

15 
 
taken in this regard. The Committee are of the considered view that 
reduction in the amount of the Bank guarantee would ensure wider 
participation, promote solar entrepreneurship and create sustainable 
livelihood opportunities under the scheme. The Committee, therefore, 
urge the Ministry to act on their recommendation in right earnest, as 
the current bank guarantee requirement disproportionately burdens 
small and new entrants, hinder wider participation and is likely to slow 
down the growth of decentralized solar power, especially in rural areas. 
The efforts made and progress achieved in this regard may be furnished 
to the Committee promptly. 
 
VII. SWAVALAMBINI Project 
Recommendation (Para Nos. 35 and 36) 
26. The Committee had noted that the Project 'Swavalambini Women 
Entrepreneurship Programme' is specifically targeted at female students of 
colleges and universities. NIESBUD, Noida and the IIE, Guwahati, will be the 
Implementing Agency (IA) of the Project 'Swavalambini' of MSDE in 
collaboration with NITI Aayog.   The initiative will focus on empowering female 
students in Higher Education Institutions (HEIS) by providing them with 
essential skills, mentorship, and access to resources necessary for starting 
and scaling successful businesses. The Project will focus on comprehensive 
entrepreneurship training/ capacity-building combining theory-based 
training with practical exposure through experiential learning.   
 
The Committee had further noted that the Project will be implemented  
in Banaras Hindu University and Chaudhary Charan Singh University (North 
Zone-Uttar Pradesh);  University of Hyderabad, Maulana Azad National Urdu 
University, (South Zone-Telangana);  Kiang Nangba Government College, 
Jowai, Ri- Bhoi College, Ri Bhoi and North Eastern Hill University (NEHU), 
Shillong (North East Zone-Meghalaya);  Government Champai College, 
Lunglei Government College and Mizoram University (North East Zone-
Mizoram); and Gauhati University, Handique College and Dispur College 
(North East Zone-Assam). The target of the Project is to train 1200 female 
students under Entrepreneurship Awareness Programme (NIESBUD - 600, 
IIE - 600), out of which, 600 will be further selected for the Women 
Entrepreneurship Development Programme (NIESBUD-300, IIE - 300).  
 
The Committee had been apprised that the Ministry of Skill 
Development and Entrepreneurship (MSDE) in collaboration with NITI Aayog 
and Women Entrepreneurship Platform (WEP) as knowledge partner, have 
recently launched the Swavalambini Women Entrepreneurship Programme 
on 07th February, 2025 in North Eastern States of India viz. Meghalaya, 
Mizoram and Assam.  The Committee had impressed upon the Ministry to 
take necessary steps to ensure that the Project is launched/implemented in 
the already selected Higher Education Institutions (HEIS) of the remaining 
two States viz. Uttar Pradesh and Telengana. 

16 
 
 
 
 The Committee had been apprised that the programme will be 
implemented in four phases and will include Faculty Development 
Programmes (FDP) of 5 days for selected faculty members from colleges, 
Entrepreneurship Awareness Programmes (EAP) of 2 days for 1,200 students, 
Entrepreneurship Development Programmes (EDP) of 40 hours for selected 
600 students, followed by 6 months of mentoring and handholding support 
to ensure sustained guidance and business development assistance. The 
Committee had desired that it would be in the fitness of things if the feedback 
is also obtained from trained faculty and students selected as well as trained 
after every phase of the Project so as to have an objective assessment of 
shortcomings as well as improvement in future training programmes. 
 
 
27.    In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Ministry of 
Skill Development and Entrepreneurship have stated as follows:- 
 
“The Observation/recommendation of the Committee has been noted for 
compliance. 
 
The Ministry in collaboration with NITI Aayog and its Women 
Entrepreneurship Platform (WEP) is implementing the project 
SWAVALAMBINI through its autonomous Institutes NIESBUD and IIE. 
The project comprises of Faculty Development Progaramme, training of 
1200 female students under Entrepreneurship Awareness Programme 
and out of which, 600 will be selected for undergoing Entrepreneurship 
Development Programme. As on 30.06.2025, following activities have 
been undertaken: 
 
(a) Entrepreneurship Awareness Programmes (EAPs) have been organized 
for 591 students. 
(b) Faculty Development Programme for 43 faculty of HEIs have been 
completed. 
 
Further the following activities are being planned: 
 
(a) Entrepreneurship Development Programmes for 600 female students 
selected from EAP. 
(b) Shortlisting of the selected students from EDP for Award to Reward 
(initiative of NITI Aayog for hand-holding, mentoring support and setting 
up of new enterprise) 
 
All efforts are being made to ensure that the target is completed by 
March, 2026”. 
 
 
28. When asked to furnish a comprehensive reply, the Ministry in their 
revised Action Taken Note, have submitted as follows:- 
 
“The Ministry of Skill Development and Entrepreneurship (MSDE) in 
collaboration with the Women Entrepreneurship Platform of NITI Aayog 

17 
 
as knowledge partner, launched the Swavalambini - a Women 
Entrepreneurship Programme in February, 2025 in six Higher Education 
Institutions (HEIs)/Universities of Assam, Meghalaya, Mizoram, Uttar 
Pradesh and Telangana as a pilot project. The Ministry is implementing 
the programme through its Autonomous Institutes, namely, National 
Institute for Entrepreneurship and Small Business Development 
(NIESBUD), Noida and Indian Institute of Entrepreneurship (IIE), 
Guwahati. 
 
The Swavalambini project introduces a structured, multi-stage training 
approach to help young women transition from ideation to successful 
enterprise creation. The Project aims to cultivate an entrepreneurial 
mindset among female students, equipping them with awareness of 
available support mechanisms, schemes, resources and networks 
essential for pursuing entrepreneurship as a career. 
 
The target group for the Swavalambini Project includes 1200 female 
students from Higher Educational Institutes (HEIs) and Universities who 
will undergo introductory programme on entrepreneurial awareness 
through Entrepreneurship Awareness Programme (EAP). Out of these, 
600 students selected from EAP participants will undergo the 
Entrepreneurship Development Programme (EDP) offering intensive 
entrepreneurship development training covering crucial business 
aspects such as skilling, access to finance, market linkages, compliance 
and legal support, business services and networking opportunities. This 
will be followed by 21 weeks of mentorship and handholding support to 
help participants translate their ideas into sustainable enterprises. 
 
MSDE will oversee the execution, supervision, and monitoring of the 
programme, while NITI Aayog will organize workshops, provide 
mentoring support, facilitate seed funding, and recognize successful 
entrepreneurs through the Award To Reward (ATR) initiative. 
 
During the mentoring and handholding support, industry leaders and 
successful entrepreneurs will guide the participants by providing 
mentorship and hands-on support. Successful entrepreneurs will be 
invited to share their experiences, highlighting the challenges they 
overcame and the strategies they used to establish their businesses. 
 
To ensure long-term impact, the programme also includes a Faculty 
Development Programme (FDP), where faculty members from 
participating HEIs/Universities shall undergo a five-day training 
session. This initiative will equip educators with the necessary skills to 
mentor and guide aspiring women entrepreneurs within their 
institutions. 
 
The overall programme-wise details of women participants trained in six 
Higher Education Institutions (HEIs)/Universities of Assam, Meghalaya, 
Mizoram, Uttar Pradesh and Telangana under the pilot project is as 
under: 
 

18 
 
Name of the Programme Total 
Target 
Total 
Trained 
Faculty Development Programme (FDP) 75 82 
Entrepreneurship Awareness Programme 
(EAP) 1200 1,110 
Entrepreneurship Development Programme 
(EDP) 600 302 
 
The State-wise details pertaining Uttar Pradesh and Telangana and its 
programme-wise details of number of women participants trained as on 
10.11.2025 under the pilot project is as under: 
 
State 
Name of the Programme 
(Total trained) 
FDP EAP EDP 
Uttar 
Pradesh 38 491 254 
Telangana 17 150 48 
Total 55 641 302 
 
Further the following activities are being planned: 
 
(c) Entrepreneurship Development Programmes for 600 female students 
selected from EAP. 
(d) Shortlisting of the selected students from EDP for Award to Reward 
(initiative of NITI Aayog for hand-holding, mentoring support and setting 
up of new enterprise) 
 
All efforts are being made to ensure that the target is completed by 
March, 2026. 
 
The Observation/recommendation of the Committee has been noted for 
further compliance.” 
 
 
29. While noting that MSDE, in collaboration with NITI Aayog and 
Women Entrepreneurship Platform (WEP), have launched the 
Swavalambini Women Entrepreneurship Programme on 07 February 
2025 in the North Eastern States of India viz. Meghalaya, Mizoram and 
Assam, the Committee had impressed upon the Ministry to take 
necessary steps to ensure that the Project is launched/implemented in 
the already selected Higher Education Institutions (HEIs) of Uttar 
Pradesh and Telangana. The Committee had also desired that feedback 
be obtained from trained faculty and students selected as well as trained 
after every phase of the Project. In their revised Action Taken Note 
furnished to the Committee, the Ministry have provided the details of 
number of women trained under each programme in respect of Uttar 
Pradesh and Telangana, however, no mention has been made regarding 

19 
 
feedback from trained faculty and students under the Project. The 
Committee emphasize the need for obtaining feedbacks for an objective 
assessment of shortcomings and bringing about improvements in future 
training programmes under the Project and urge the Ministry to act upon 
this aspect of their recommendation in right earnest. 
 
VIII.   Establishment of SIICs 
Recommendation (Para No. 43) 
30. The Committee had been apprised during evidence on 19.11.2024, that 
it is proposed to set up 30 Skill India International Centres (SIICs) to promote 
skill based International mobility. The Committee had now been apprised that 
while two SIICs have been established at Varanasi (Uttar Pradesh) and 
Bhubaneswar (Odisha), the work relating to setting up of additional 5 SIICs 
at Indian Institute of Entrepreneurship, Guwahati (Assam); NSTI, Bengaluru 
(Karnataka); NSTI, Ludhiana (Punjab); NSTI, Hyderabad (Telangana) and 
NSTI, Kanpur (Uttar Pradesh), is in advanced stage. The Committee had 
desired that appropriate steps be taken on priority to ensure that the 
remaining Skill India International Centres are set up and made operational 
in a time bound manner so as to facilitate international workforce mobility 
opportunities for Indians and achieve the objective of making India the skill 
capital of the world. The Committee had liked to be apprised of progress made 
in this regard. 
 
 
31.  In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Ministry of 
Skill Development and Entrepreneurship have stated as follows:- 
 
“The Ministry of Skill Development and Entrepreneurship (MSDE) is in 
the process of establishing 30 Skill India International Centres (SIICs), 
beginning with 7 centres as pilot projects in government-run 
institutions. At present, two SIICs—located in Varanasi and 
Bhubaneswar—are operational, and five more at Guwahati, Bengaluru, 
Ludhiana, Hyderabad, and Kanpur have been approved by the Project 
Steering Committee chaired by Secretary, MSDE. The establishment of 
new centres is targeted by 31/05/2025, while Center at Guwahati is 
likely to be operationalized by 15/06/2025. Given that SIICs involve 
skilled migration, their operations are governed by the Emigration Act, 
1983, which mandates that recruitment for overseas employment be 
done through MEA-approved Recruitment Agents (RAs). Since NSDC 
does not hold an RA license and its application for the same was 
rejected by MEA, MSDE has decided to empanel RAs through an 
Expression of Interest process, guided by Standard Operating 
Procedures (SOPs) that are being finalized in consultation with MEA. 
These SOPs will define roles, responsibilities of various stakeholders, 
and financial arrangements. As part of a phased approach to address 
regulatory and logistical challenges, MSDE is prioritizing the 
operationalization of the 7 pilot SIICs. Once SOPs are finalized, the 
remaining 23 centres will be established in a time-bound and 
standardized manner.” 

20 
 
 
32. Having been informed of the proposal to set up 30 Skill India 
International Centres (SIICs), establishment of 2 SIICs at Varanasi and 
Bhubaneshwar and ongoing process of setting up an additional 5 SIICs 
at Guwahati, Bengaluru, Ludhiana, Hyderabad and Kanpur, the 
Committee had desired that the remaining Skill India International 
Centres should be set up and made operational in a time bound manner. 
In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Ministry 
have stated that operationalization of the 7 pilot SIICs is being 
prioritized and once the Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs) for 
empanelling Recruitment Agencies are finalized in consultation with 
MEA, the remaining 23 centres will be established in a time-bound and 
standardized manner. The Committee trust that all the pilot SIICs have 
been operationalized by now and desire to be apprised of the status in 
this regard. In respect of the remaining 23 SIIC centres, the Committee 
urge the Ministry to maintain close coordination with MEA for early 
finalization of the SOPs so that these SIICs are set up for facilitating 
international workforce mobility, without delay. The progress made 
towards establishment and operationalization of these SIICs may be 
communicated to the Committee at periodic intervals. 
 

21 
 
CHAPTER-II 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED 
BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 (Recommendation Para.No. 1) 
The Committee note that the BE for 2024-25 was  Rs.4520.00 crore whereas 
the revised estimate for the year was reduced to  Rs. 3300.83 crore, out of 
which the Ministry were able to spend only Rs. 2226.13 crore (as on 
18.02.2025) which is 49.25% of BE and 67.44% of RE. For the shortfall in 
utilisation of funds, the Ministry attributed factors like delay in approval of 
Skill India Programme (SIP) and the National Scheme for ITIs Upgradation. 
The Ministry also stated that during the remaining period of 2024-25, around 
Rs. 598 crore is expected to be released in SIP alone and around Rs. 180 crore 
in SANKALP scheme apart from other expenditure. The Committee have been 
apprised that at present, approval of the Cabinet is awaited for the National 
Scheme for ITI Upgradation.  
 
The Committee observed that there was persistent increase in the BE during 
the last three years viz. 17.28% in 2023-24, 28.50% in 2024-25 and 34.95% 
in 2025-26. However, since 2022-23, every year BE was reduced at RE stage, 
which was also not fully utilised. In response, the Ministry have stated that 
over the past three years, the variations in BE, RE, and Expenditure within 
the Ministry have primarily been due to the non-approval of its major Scheme 
viz. 'Skill India Programme', which comprises 60-65% of its total budget for 
which the Department of Economic Affairs was requested from time to time 
for fund releases.  
 
The Committee further note that the BE for SIP during 2024-25 is Rs.2685.64 
crore which was reduced to Rs.2318.00 crore at RE stage. The actual 
expenditure as on 03.03.2025 is Rs.1719.57 crore (PMKVY 4.0-Rs.1271.10 
crore against RE of Rs.1538 crore; JSS-Rs.72.62 crore against RE of Rs.180 
crore and PM-NAPS Rs.375.85 crore against RE of Rs.600 crore) which is 64% 
of the BE and 74% of RE of the scheme. The Ministry have stated that 
approximately Rs.350 crore of committed liabilities remain under the scheme, 
which are likely to accumulate upto Rs. 880 crore by 31.03.2025, based on 
ongoing training batches. The Ministry have assured that by 31st March, 
2025, the expenditure on the SIP is expected to reach Rs.2305.00 crore 
against the RE of Rs.2318.00 crore.  
 
The Committee have been apprised that following the Cabinet's approval of 
the SIP on 07.02.2025, the Ministry have released additional funds under the 
Scheme. Consequently, as on 03.03.2025, the overall expenditure of the 
Ministry has reached Rs. 2,257.27 crore surpassing last year’s total, and by 
31st March, 2025, the actual utilization is expected to cross Rs.3000 crore out 
of RE of Rs. 3300.83 crore, however, the RE of Rs. 294 crore for National 
Scheme for ITIs Upgradation is likely to remain unutilized as the Scheme is 
yet to be approved.  
 
The Committee are of the considered opinion that when fund flow has now 
been stabilized under Skill India Programme, the Ministry should make all 
concerted efforts to expedite the process of implementation of already 

22 
 
sanctioned projects in the current Financial Year i.e. 2024-25 and in the 
ensuing year also so that the huge quantum of funds viz Rs. 2700 crore 
allocated for SIP during 2025-26 are utilized judiciously.The Committee also 
expect the Ministry to make concerted efforts and honour their commitment 
for optimal utilization of the 2024-25 RE allocation under SIP. 
 
 
REPLY OF GOVERNMENT 
 
Against the BE of ₹ 4520.00 Cr and RE of ₹ 3300.83 Cr, the actual expenditure 
of this Ministry in FY 2024-25; after obtaining the Cabinet approval for the 
Skill India Programme; was ₹ 2935.99 Cr (89% of RE). For the Skill India 
Programme against the BE of ₹ 2685.64 Cr and RE of ₹ 2318.00 Cr; the 
expenditure was ₹ 2252.20 Cr (97% of RE). Thus, the overall expenditure as 
well as the expenditure in the Skill India Programmehas shown a marked 
improvement over the previous year. 
 
With the Cabinet's approval of two major Schemes, namely the 'Skill India 
Programme' and the 'National Scheme for Industrial Training Institute (ITI) 
Upgradation and Establishment of Five National Centres of Excellence for 
Skilling', the primary obstacle causing low expenditure has been addressed. 
Consequently, the Ministry anticipates an improvement in expenditure in the 
FY 2025-26. 
 
(Ministry of Skill Development and EntrepreneurshipO.M. No.H-
11013/7/2025-ICTdated 07.07.2025) 
 
(Recommendation Para 2) 
 
The Committee note that the Ministry have requested the Ministry of Finance 
to exempt it from the prescribed ceilings of expenditure of 33% in the last 
Quarter and 15% in the last month. In response, the Department of Economic 
Affairs have advised the Ministry to first utilize the available ceiling for fourth 
quarter of QEP and then re-submit the proposal. The Committee trust that 
the Ministry, after utilizing the amount as per QEP 4, have taken up the 
matter with Department of Economic Affairs and hope that necessary 
approval has been accorded for utilization of funds. 
 
REPLY OF GOVERNMENT 
 
The Ministry, adhering to the advice given by the Department of Economic 
Affairs (DEA), utilized the available expenditure ceiling for the fourth quarter 
under the QEP framework before re-submitting its request for relaxation of 
prescribed expenditure limits in the final quarter and month. Upon re-
evaluation, the DEA vide their OM No. 14(12)-B(PD)/2023 dt 19.03.2025 
approved the request, thereby enabling the Ministry to expend funds in 
accordance with actual operational requirements. 
 
(Ministry of Skill Development and Entrepreneurship O.M. No. H-
11013/7/2025-ICTdated 07.07.2025) 
 
 

23 
 
(Recommendation Para 3) 
 
The Committee also observe that the percentage of expenditure exclusively for 
the Schemes related to Skill Development was 37.33%; 51.92% and 43.27% 
of BE and 58.86; 68.65% and 59.25% of RE during 2022-23, 2023-24 and 
2024-25 (upto 03.03.2025) respectively. Observing that on an average around 
40% of RE for various Skill Development Schemes was not utilized during the 
last three years and considering the fact that the SIP which comprises 60-
65% of the total budget of the Ministry has now been approved, the Committee 
want the Ministry to ensure that the allocation for various Schemes for Skill 
Development is utilized to the maximum extent possible. 
 
Taking into account the less than appreciable fund utilisation record of the 
Ministry, the Committee observe that the commitments for better/full 
utilisation for the last few years have not been fulfilled. This raises a question 
mark on the commitment given to the Committee for better/full utilisation 
this year as well. Accordingly, the Committee recommend that during 2025-
26, utilisation of funds has to be effectively monitored State-wise on a 
quarterly basis and reported to the Committee.  In the absence of such a 
regular monitoring mechanism of expenditure on various Central Schemes by 
the States the Committee apprehend that the targets set under different 
schemes of the Ministry shall remain underachieved. 
 
REPLY OF GOVERNMENT 
 
The Committee's observation has been noted for compliance. The major 
reason for the inability of the Ministry to ensure full expenditure against 
allocation, was the non-approval of its flagship programs. Now that the 
schemes have received approval, all scheme divisions have been instructed to 
follow their Quarterly Expenditure Plan. The status will be reviewed during 
regular expenditure review meetings, and any bottlenecks identified will be 
addressed. 
 
REVISED REPLY OF GOVERNMENT 
 
MSDE has 2 Centrally Sponsored Scheme which are co-funded by Central and State 
Governments and 1 Central Sector Scheme which is fully funded by the Central Government. 
 
1. Centrally Sponsored Schemes 
 
A. PM-SETU  
 
i) PM SETU accounts for almost 50% of the total budget of the Ministry. This scheme 
received Cabinet approval on 7 May 2025. The scheme aims to upgrade 1,000 ITIs 
in a Hub-and-Spoke model through industry-led Special Purpose Vehicles (SPVs). 
Industry partners are to be selected through a competitive EOI/RFP process.  
ii) Since Cabinet approval, following activities have been undertaken for 
formulation/finalisation of the scheme:- 
 
 Co-financing of the Central funding from the World Bank and Asian 
Development Bank has been tied up. Negotiations with the Multilateral 
Development Banks have been completed.  
 Extensive consultations have been held with States/UTs and industry, as ITIs fall 
under the administrative control of State Governments. 

24 
 
 The National Steering Committee has been constituted and has approved the 
scheme guidelines.  
 Standard implementation templates have been issued to the States/UTs.  
 The Programme Management Unit and Independent Verification Agency are put 
in place, and guidelines for release of State PMU funds have been notified.  
 11 States/UTs have notified their State Steering Committees. States have started 
initiating EOIs/RFPs for selection of industry partners. MSDE will be releasing 
funds on receipt of proposals from States. 
 
iii) As per Cabinet approval, an initial pilot rollout of 25 Hub-and-Spoke ITI clusters 
are approved for the current year. Accordingly, the Revised Estimates were scaled 
down. With preparatory actions completed, the Ministry is proceeding towards 
phased rollout of the scheme. The Ministry expects utilisation of the Revised 
Estimates as State proposals are in the pipeline. Utilisation is expected to improve 
substantially in the next financial year when full scale roll out is taken up. 
 
B.  Another Centrally Sponsored Scheme is Strengthening of Infrastructure for 
Institutional Training (SIIT). This scheme is going to be discontinued from the sunset date 
i.e. 31.03.2026. As per demand from State Governments, budget in this Scheme has been 
revised and reduced from Rs.49.90 cr to Rs.11.00 crore in Revised Estimates which would be 
positively fully utilized.  
 
2. Central Sector Scheme 
 
Skill India Program, SIP is an umbrella Scheme having three components viz., Pradhan Mantri 
Kaushal Vikas Yojana(PMKVY), Jan Sikhshan Sansthan(JSS) and National Apprentice 
Promotion Scheme(NAPS).  
 
i) In PMKVY 4.0, for FY 2025-26, the B.E was ₹1,915 crore. However, the booking of 
funds has been only ₹268.12 crore due to some implementation issues that needed 
corrective action. Accordingly, RE has been reduced to ₹1,100 crore. Ministry would 
be able to utilize maximum funds by the end of this F.Y. with the following activities 
in pipeline:- 
 
 Committed liabilities of around ₹460 crore for skill training - Verification of 
attendance and assessment data undertaken by NeGD, MeitY is in progress to ensure 
financial compliance. On the basis verification, funds would be released.  
 In FY 2025-26, the MSDE has allocated fresh training targets worth ₹450 crore 
under PMKVY 4.0 so far. Further allocation is also going on. 
 
ii) MSDE has been able to utilize funds upto 70% of proposed RE in JSS and NAPS 
components. Looking to the target for engaging 13 Lakh apprentices under NAPS in 
the FY 2025-26, the Ministry has proposed increase in budgetary allotment for NAPS 
from Rs.600 cr. to Rs.715 cr. in Revised Estimates. 
 
The Ministry has been rigorously tracking the expenditure on regular basis. Expenditure 
Review Meeting under the Chairpersonship of Secretary, MSDE is being held on regular basis 
with Divisional Heads implementing schemes, wherein, continuous progress in 
implementation of the Scheme including expenditure review is deliberated thoroughly constant 
improvement in the implementation of the Scheme and prudent utilization of funds. 
 
(Recommendation Para 4) 
 
The Committee note that MSDE is implementing its flagship scheme Pradhan 
Mantri Kaushal Vikas Yojana (PMKVY), since 2015, for imparting skill 
development training through Short-Term Training (STT) and up-skilling and 

25 
 
re-skilling through Recognition of Prior Learning (RPL) to youth across the 
country. Since its inception, three iterations of PMKVY have been successfully 
implemented, with the current phase, PMKVY 4.0, underway.   
 
The Committee note that the physical target for trainees under PMKVY 4.0 in 
FY 2024-25 is 45 lakh, whereas the achievement as on 03.03.2025 is 19.17 
lakh and shortfall is 25.83 lakh. To maximize the achievement of physical 
target under PMKVY 4.0, the Ministry have stated that they are taking pro-
active convergence efforts to ensure synergy and improved the outcomes and 
actively collaborating with State Governments and Industries to maximize the 
impact of PMKVY 4.0. The Committee hope that with the approval of Skill 
India Programme on 07.02.2025, there will be improvement in the physical 
target during the remaining part of the current fiscal. 
 
REPLY OF GOVERNMENT 
 
The Observation/recommendation of the Committee has been noted for 
compliance. 
 
As on 31.03.2025, during FY 2024-25, 20.34 lakh candidates have been 
trained against the set target of 45 lakh candidates, resulting in shortfall of 
24.66 lakh candidates. The shortfall is on account of the staggered approval 
received for the implementation of the scheme prior to the Cabinet approval 
on 07.02.2025.  
 
After the Cabinet approval of SIP, MSDE is actively pursuing with the State 
Skill Development Missions (SSDMs) of the States / UTs for the State Action 
Plan and various industries for allocation of targets under the PMKVY 4.0 in 
FY 2025-26. MSDE is making all the efforts to align target allocation with key 
sectors identified under the Government’s Viksit Bharat initiative—such as 
automotive and auto components (including EVs and clean energy), 
electronics, medical devices, chemicals, drones, defence, aerospace, leather 
and footwear, furniture, food processing, and toys. MSDE is also aligning 
skilling priorities with national missions like the National Green Hydrogen 
Mission (NGHM) and PM Surya Ghar: Muft Bijli Yojana. Additionally, it is 
engaging premier institutions including IITs, IIMs, IIITs, and NITs to onboard 
them under the scheme. 
 
The Ministry is working closely with Central Ministries and Departments—
such as Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology (MeitY), Ministry 
of Tourism, Ministry of Civil Aviation, Ministry of Shipping, Ministry of Women 
and Child Development, Ministry of Jal Shakti, and Ministry of Housing and 
Urban Affairs—and their affiliated institutes like Central Institute of 
Petrochemicals Engineering & Technology (CIPET), National Institute of 
Electronics and Information Technology (NIELIT), etc. to implement skill 
development programs through convergence. 
 
The strategy is to prioritize skilling in new-age sectors such as 
Semiconductors, Green Hydrogen, Cybersecurity, Telecom, Automotive, IT & 
Electronics, etc., while also addressing state-specific priorities such as 
tourism, textiles, food processing, marine industries, and construction, etc.  
 

26 
 
REVISED REPLY OF GOVERNMENT 
 
During FY 2024-25, 20.34 lakh candidates were trained under PMKVY 4.0. The details of 
training target vis-à-vis achievement is given under:  
 
Component Target Trained Shortfall 
STT 18,00,000 17,29,767 (96.10%) 70,233 
RPL 27,00,000 3,04,919 (11.29%) 23,95,081 
Total 45,00,000 20,34,686 (45.22%) 24,65,314 
   
It may be noted that the majority of shortfall is under Recognition of Prior Learning (RPL) 
training category. As PMKVY 4.0 is a demand driven scheme and training is imparted based 
on the proposals received from various stakeholders such as industries/ industry associations/ 
State Government/ TPs, etc. Since the proposals received by the Ministry predominantly 
focused on Short-Term Training (STT), a shortfall was observed in the RPL training category. 
 
Further, in FY 2025–26, MSDE is actively engaging with Central Ministries/Departments, 
Institutes of National Importance, and institutes under Central Ministries to implement skilling 
to address national priorities such as Vibrant Village Programme (VVP), National Green 
Hydrogen Mission (NGHM), PM Surya Ghar: Muft Bijli Yojana, etc. The focus is on new-age 
sectors such as Semiconductors, Green Hydrogen, Cybersecurity, Telecom, Automotive, and 
IT & Electronics, along with state-specific sectors. MSDE is also coordinating with State Skill 
Development Missions and industries for target allocation under PMKVY 4.0. 
 
(Recommendation Para 5) 
 
The Ministry have informed that as on 16.02.2025, the number of candidates 
enrolled, trained, assessed and certified were 31.52 lakh, 24.49 lakh, 16.13 
lakh and 14.91 lakh respectively. Thus, 78% of enrolled candidates were 
trained, 66% of trained candidates were assessed and 92% of assessed 
candidates were certified. The Committee observe that many candidates, who 
completed training were not found eligible for assessment due to shortage of 
attendance. The Committee were apprised that in order to streamline and 
improve the assessment and certification process, the Steering  Committee 
has on 12.06.2024, inter alia, approved relaxation in the Assessment 
Eligibility criteria from 70% day and 50% QP Hours AEBAS attendance 
(current provision) to overall 50% of QP Hours. Further, the Training 
Provider/Training Centre cannot start new batches in a job role until 
assessments of previous batches in the same job role are completed. The 
Committee while appreciating the measures taken by the Ministry expect that 
the decision will increase percentage of candidates assessed vis-a-vis trained 
thereby resulting in consequent increase in the number of candidates certified 
and desire that efforts be made to ensure that all trained candidates are 
assessed so as to have consequential increase in the number of certified 
candidates. 
 
Further, it is the considered opinion of the Committee that the procedure 
adopted for assessment of Certified Candidates has to be reviewed and the 
private training providers and other agencies involved, if any, that do not 
perform to commendable extent should be blacklisted and debarred from 
being an implementing agency of the scheme. The Committee are of the firm 

27 
 
view that more transparent, simplified and robust assessment system should 
be put in place to look after the implementation of the scheme. The Committee 
would like to be apprised of the progress made in this regard. 
 
The Committee further desirethat the existing infrastructure available with 
education ecosystem including Higher Education Institutes, ITIs, Engineering 
and Technical Institutes, Skill Universities, etc. need to be effectively utilized 
for running Skill India Centres (SICs).  The Committee, therefore, impress 
upon the Ministry to strengthen their monitoring and coordination 
mechanism to achieve the desired objectives. 
 
REPLY OF GOVERNMENT 
 
The Observation/recommendation of the Committee has been noted for 
compliance. 
 
The decision for considering 50% attendance to be eligible for appearing in 
the assessments has resulted in an increased percentage of candidates 
assessed vis-a-vis trained thereby resulting in consequent increase in the 
number of candidates certified. Comparatively, till 12th June 2024, 4,70,483 
candidates were assessed out of 9,04,423 trained candidates (52%), resulting 
in certification of 4,36,381 candidates. Post the decision of the Steering 
Committee on 12.06.2024 and till 31.03.2025, 12,62,831 candidates were 
assessed out of 16,69,637 trained candidates (75.63%), resulting in 
certification of 11,55,771 candidates. This shows an increase in the number 
of candidates eligible for assessment.  
 
Further, MSDE has recently issued a Standard Operating Procedure (SOP) on 
streamlining the assessment and certification process. All the processes have 
been defined with timelines and non-compliances will lead to penalty on the 
defaulting entity, be it Awarding Body or the Project Implementation Agency 
(PIA). Further, one of the key features of PMKVY 4.0 is expanding the delivery 
network for skill development through cross utilization of resources by setting 
Skill India Centres (SICs) in Institutes of National Importance (INIs), Colleges, 
Universities, Technical Institutions, etc. enabling better utilization of available 
permanent infrastructure across the country. Monitoring guidelines for the 
scheme are under process of revision and once issued will certainly lead to 
better outcome. The scheme will be implemented in FY 2025-26 with proper 
planning for a better qualitative outcome. 
 
 
REVISED REPLY OF GOVERNMENT 
 
The decision for considering 50% attendance to be eligible for appearing in the assessments 
has resulted in increased percentage of candidates assessed vis-a-vis trained, as given below: 
 
Timeline Trained Assessed % Assessed (of 
Trained) Certified 
Till 12th June 2024 9,04,423 4,70,483 52.02% 4,36,381 
Post decision of 
relaxation in Attendance  16,69,637 12,62,831 75.64% 11,55,771 
 

28 
 
Further, MSDE has recently issued a Standard Operating Procedure (SOP) on streamlining the 
assessment and certification process. All the processes have been defined with timelines and 
non-compliances will lead to penalty on the defaulting entity, be it Awarding Body or the 
Project Implementation Agency (PIA).  
 
As far as utilization of existing infrastructure available with education ecosystem is concerned, 
in the current FY, training is being imparted with multiple Institutes of National Importance 
(INIs) / Higher Education Institutes (HEIs) such as NID Assam, IIT Mandi, IIIT Vadodara, IIT 
Jammu, MNNIT Allahabad, IIT Kanpur, etc. ensuring optimal utilisation of their laboratories, 
workshops, and classrooms for delivering quality training.  
 
To enhance scalability, quality assurance, and monitoring, the MSDE has established the 
“Kaushal Samiksha Kendra” (KSK) for independent oversight. The KSK facilitates both virtual 
and physical inspections of Skill India Centres (SICs). Between September 2024 and October 
2025, MSDE carried out virtual monitoring of 3,695 training Centres across India. These 
inspections evaluated centre infrastructure, candidate attendance, trainer presence, and other 
key parameters. In addition, regular physical inspections through the PMKVY State and 
District Coordinators are being carried out to identify the gaps and improve the training quality. 
Physical inspections were carried out in 2,393 centres. A snapshot of action taken by the 
Ministry for monitoring and quality assurance is given below: 
 
 Upon reviewing inspection reports and cross-verifying attendance data with batch 
schedules and AEBAS records, 383 Skill India Centres were found to be non-compliant. 
 Disciplinary action such as centre suspension, stoppage of payments, issuance of Show 
Cause Notices, Accreditation & Affiliation cancellations, and filing of FIRs has been 
initiated against these non-compliant centres.  
 FIR filing has been directed in 167 high-penalty cases, with D.O. letters issued by 
MSDE to the respective State DGPs for lodging FIRs. As of date, FIRs have been 
lodged against 41 Skill India Centres and necessary action is being taken in rest of the 
cases.  
 Based on the physical inspection report, 178 training partner/training centres which 
have been found to be non-compliant with the scheme's guidelines have been 
blacklisted, and recovery of payments has been initiated.  
 An Inter-Ministerial Appeals Committee (IMAC) comprising of representative from 
MSDE, NCVET, NSDC, DGT, MNRE, M/o Rural Development, M/o Micro, Small 
and Medium Enterprises & M/o Tourism have been constituted to review the appeals 
received from the blacklisted entities.  
 As of 12th December 2025, a total of 78 appeals have been received by MSDE or 
through NSDC, of which 33 cases have been reviewed by the IMAC.  
 
Recently, MSDE has also revised the monitoring guidelines to strengthen the monitoring of the 
training and adherence to scheme guidelines. The revised guidelines provide a comprehensive 
monitoring framework with clear KPIs and automated alerts, along with revised penalty matrix. 
 
(Recommendation Para 6) 
 
The Committee note that as on 09.01.2025, more than 1.60 crore candidates 
have been trained under the PMKVY.  Out of them, 23.28 lakh candidates 
have been trained under PMKVY 4.0, under which placement has been 
delinked. The Committee were apprised that 24.37 lakh candidates were 
reported placed prior to implementation of PMKVY 4.0 and the reported placed 
figure has been calculated based on the certified candidates under STT and 
Special Projects of PMKVY 1.0, PMKVY 2.0 and PMKVY 3.0 i.e. 56.88 lakh 

29 
 
candidates. With regard to the reasons for non-placement of the remaining 
32.51 lakh candidates, the Ministry clarified that placements were tracked in 
STT component in the first three versions of the scheme which is PMKVY 1.0, 
PMKVY 2.0 and PMKVY 3.0. During these phases, there were various 
challenges affecting placements, like - candidates declining job offers for 
pursuing higher studies, family obligations, wage expectations, and health 
issues; under PMKVY 3.0 Customized Crash Course Program for COVID 
Warriors and Skill Hub Initiatives did not focus on placements; COVID-19 
Pandemic created significant challenges for training providers and 
candidates, affecting the ability to secure or maintain jobs; reporting 
placement under PMKVY 1.0 was not mandatory; and difficulty in tracking 
and collection of placement documents for uploading on SIDH Portal by 
Project Implementing Agencies.  
 
The Committee were also apprised that the certified candidates are tracked 
for one year after the certification and physical targets have been allocated to 
projects focusing on Recruit-Train-Deploy (RTD), captive placement, etc. In 
addition, placement has been prioritized in various special projects allocated 
including Industries, Industry Associations, Institutes run by Central 
Ministries/Departments/State Government agencies, etc. The Committee 
note with concern that although physical, financial and performance targets 
for PMKVY 4.0 had been fixed by the Ministry no such target has been 
stipulated for the number of placements to be made or number of estimated 
employability of the youths under the Scheme. 
 
Observing that although placement has been delinked under PMKVY 4.0, the 
Committee are of the firm opinion that the placement statistics  is the real 
barometer for measuring the success of the Scheme and needless to say that 
the Ministry should make concerted efforts with stakeholders to ensure 
uploading of placement details of the certified candidate on Skill India Digital 
Hub (SIDH) Portal so as to have database of employment generated under the 
Scheme.  The Committee also feel that the focus of the Ministry should equally 
be concentrated on the skill enhancement of the candidates and generation 
of employment/placement for the trained/certified youths for which 
concerted efforts are warranted to achieve the objective of quality skill 
development training for enabling and empowering the youths to earn better 
livelihood.  The Committee resolutely felt that the final figures of certification 
is the benchmark of the success and effectiveness of the implementation of 
the Scheme. Hence, the clearly spelling out the number of employment 
generated through the Scheme is important.   The Committee also observe 
that there is a critical need to improve the ratio between training and 
employment generated under the Scheme.  
 
REPLY OF GOVERNMENT 
 
The Observation/recommendation of the Committee has been noted for 
compliance. 
 
Post Cabinet approval of SIP and on the lines of aforesaid recommendation of 
the Esteemed Committee, MSDE has initiated the process of capturing the 
placement details, available with the Training Providers, of the certified 
candidates under PMKVY 4.0 on Skill India Digital Hub (SIDH) Portal. 

30 
 
Further, the proposed strategy for the FY 2025-26 for allocation of training 
targets under PMKVY 4.0 will be outcome oriented, be it placement, 
internship, apprenticeship, or self-employment. The same will be reported on 
the Skill India Digital Hub (SIDH). Further, through SIDH, the trained 
candidates will be able to access employment opportunities, apprenticeship, 
and other facilities including loans for entrepreneurship. 
 
 
REVISED REPLY OF GOVERNMENT 
 
Under PMKVY 4.0 which is under implementation since FY 2022-23, the placements have 
been de-linked and the focus is to empower our trained candidates to choose their varied career 
path and they are suitably oriented for the same through On-Job Training (OJT) embedded 
industry relevant skill courses. On-Job-Training (OJT) has been made an inherent component 
of the PMKVY and has been integrated within the short-term skilling programs to ensure 
trainees gain real-world exposure and industry experience. The Ministry ensures identification 
and mapping of OJT partners at the proposal stage itself. The Training Providers (TPs) are 
required to declare the start and end date for the OJT on Skill India Digital Hub (SIDH) portal. 
The establishments offering OJT give a certificate at the end of OJT indicating the duration 
and attendance of the candidate. The same is also uploaded on SIDH either by the establishment 
/ TP. 
 
Further, on the lines of recommendation of the Esteemed Committee, MSDE has initiated the 
process of capturing the placement details, available with the TPs, under PMKVY 4.0 on SIDH 
portal. As on 2nd December 2025, placement of 1.89 lakh candidates has been reported by 284 
number of TPs, out of the total 6,957 TPs that have imparted skilling under PMKVY 4.0. 
Moreover, through SIDH, the trained candidates will be able to access to employment 
opportunities, apprenticeship, and other facilities including loans for entrepreneurship. 
 
Also, based on feedback from various stakeholders, MSDE is actively considering to make 
placement an integral component in the upcoming version of the PMKVY i.e., PMKVY 5.0. 
 
(Recommendation Para 7) 
 
The Committee are concerned to note that under PMKVY 4.0, during the last 
three years, there is persistent shortfall in enrolment viz. 33.72 lakh in 2022-
23, 32.67 lakh in 2023-24 and 49.49 lakh in 2024-25 (upto 09.01.2025). The 
physical target for 2025-26 is 30 lakh certification as recommended by EFC 
in 2022 and as on 16.02.2025, only 14.91 lakh candidates have been certified 
since 2022-23. According to the Ministry, the staggered approvals for release 
of funds have impacted full-fledged roll out of the Scheme, leading to 
intermittent momentum across FY 2022-23, FY 2023-24, and FY 2024-25. 
Further, in the absence of Cabinet approval, the Scheme was operating with 
staggered fund releases from the Department of Expenditure, leading to slow 
implementation and achievement of target and low expenditure. The Ministry 
have assured that since the Scheme has now been approved, the Ministry 
expect uninterrupted flow of funds, ensuring maximum utilization of funds 
and achievement of target in FY 2025-26.  
 
The Committee, while agreeing with the Ministry on the impact of enrollment 
due to staggered fund releases from Department of Expenditure, leading to 
slow achievement of target and appreciating the efforts made by the Ministry 

31 
 
to pursue for approval of the Scheme, expect and encourage the Ministry to 
perform better in 2025-26 and honour the assurance given by them for 
optimal utilization of the funds and achievement of physical targets in FY 
2025-26. 
 
REPLY OF GOVERNMENT 
 
The Observation/recommendation of the Committee has been noted for 
compliance. 
Skill India Programme (SIP) comprising of PMKVY 4.0, PM-NAPS and JSS has 
been approved by the Union Cabinet on 07.02.2025 with an outlay of ₹8,800 
crore for the period FY 2022-23 to FY 2025-26. For the FY 2024-25, the 
expenditure under PMKVY 4.0 amounted to ₹1,538.00 crore, fully utilizing the 
Revised Estimate (RE) of ₹1,538 crore, representing 100% utilization of funds. 
The scheme will be implemented in FY 2025-26 with proper planning for 
better qualitative outcome and optimal utilization of the allocated funds. 
 
 
REVISED REPLY OF GOVERNMENT 
 
During the FY 2024-25, a total of 9,87,880 candidates were enrolled under PMKVY 4.0. 
Further, the Ministry utilized the entire Revised Estimate (RE) of ₹1,538 crore under PMKVY 
4.0 in the said FY reflecting 100% fund utilization.   
 
For FY 2025–26, the Revised Estimate for PMKVY 4.0 is ₹1,100.00 crore. The Ministry has 
already utilized ₹268.12 Crore, and training targets have been approved worth ₹450 Crore with 
further allocation underway. Additionally, there is liabilities of around ₹460 Crore to be paid 
to training providers, for which verification of attendance and assessment data is in progress in 
association with National e-Governance Division, under Ministry of Electronics & Information 
Technology (MeitY) to ensure quality and financial compliance.   
 
MSDE is also planning to host a structured online application form on SIDH to receive training 
proposals from industries/ industry associations/ SMEs based on certain filtration criteria such 
as organizational experience, financials, legal status, infrastructure ownership, trainer 
availability, geography, sectors, job roles, OJT partnerships, and placement commitments. 
 
(Recommendation Para 8) 
 
The Committee note that National Council of Applied Economic Research (NCAER) has been 
entrusted to conduct the concurrent evaluation of PMKVY 4.0 and an agreement was signed 
between National Skill Development Corporation (NSDC) and NCAER on 20th March 2024. 
The Committee have been apprised that NCAER was supposed to submit the final report within 
a period of fourteen months, however, due to the shortage of funds, the study was eventually 
interrupted and could not be completed on time. The Committee have also been apprised that 
with the approval of the Skill India Programme, the Ministry are expecting uninterrupted flow 
of funds, and, as a consequence thereof, the concurrent evaluation study is likely to be 
completed by the end of 2025. The Committee trust that the exercise will be completed in the 
prescribed period. 
 

32 
 
REPLY OF GOVERNMENT 
 
The Observation/recommendation of the Committee has been noted for 
compliance. 
 
NCAER was engaged by NSDC through an RFP process for conducting 
Concurrent Impact Assessment of PMKVY 4.0. However, in the absence of 
substantial training due to lack of funds pending Cabinet approval, and 
unavailability of critical mass to justify the expenditure, the concurrent 
assessment of PMKVY 4.0 has lost its relevance.  
 
The PMKVY 4.0 Scheme as a component of Skill India Programme (SIP) has 
been approved by the Union Cabinet on 07.02.2025 with a sunset dated of 
31.03.2026. Further, Department of Expenditure, vide its O.M. No. 
66(59)/PFC-II/2018 dated 5th May, 2025, has advised that for continuation 
of a Scheme beyond 2025-26, an appropriate evaluation is to be necessarily 
carried out for outcome review. Considering these, the MSDE is in the process 
of finalizing an agency to have 3rd Party impact assessment of SIP, including 
PMKVY 4.0. This evaluation will also play a vital role in designing the 
successor Scheme. 
 
 
REVISED REPLY OF GOVERNMENT 
 
NCAER was engaged by NSDC through an RFP process for conducting Concurrent Impact 
Assessment of PMKVY 4.0. Since the PMKVY 4.0 was implemented in phases till FY 2024-
25, the concurrent assessment of PMKVY 4.0 was cancelled with the approval of Secretary, 
MSDE.  
 
Further, considering the sunset of PMKVY 4.0 on 31st March 2026, Department of 
Expenditure, vide O.M. dated 5th May 2025, advised that for continuation of the Scheme 
beyond 2025-26, an appropriate evaluation is to be necessarily carried out for outcome review. 
Considering this, the MSDE has commissioned a Third-party impact evaluation of PMKVY 
4.0 by Arun Jaitley National Institute of Financial Management (AJNIFM). AJNIFM has 
submitted its report on 14th December 2025. 
 
(Recommendation Para 9) 
 
The Committee note that to encourage potential employers to recruit 
candidates emerging from Training Centres (TCs), the Ministry have taken 
various measures like Regular Industry Consultations,  Implementing the 
Recruit-Train-Deploy (RTD) Model, Target allocation to Industry, Priority to 
projects offering captive placements, etc. In addition, the Ministry also 
encourage Training Centres (TCs) to train under RTD model, facilitate 
placements, mobilize candidates for job melas and impart employability skills 
training. The Committee exhort the Ministry to intensify their efforts in 
supporting and hand holding the various stakeholders and other industries 
so that the placement/self-employment of the trained/certified candidates is 
enhanced to a greater extent. 
 
 
 
 

33 
 
 
REPLY OF GOVERNMENT 
 
The Observation/recommendation of the Committee has been noted for 
compliance.  
 
MSDE is actively working with all the concerned stakeholders, such as, 
Awarding Bodies, Industries, Educational Institutes, etc. and providing them 
necessary handholding support for improving the outcomes under the 
scheme. The proposed strategy for allocation of targets under PMKVY 4.0 in 
FY 2025-26 will be outcome oriented, be it placement, internship, 
apprenticeship, or self-employment and the same will be captured through 
Skill India Digital Hub (SIDH) also.  
 
 
REVISED REPLY OF GOVERNMENT 
 
MSDE is actively working with all the concerned stakeholders such as Awarding Bodies, 
Industries, Educational Institutes, etc. and providing them with necessary handholding support 
for improving the outcomes under the scheme. Under PMKVY 4.0, the placements have been 
de-linked and the focus is to empower our trained candidates to choose their varied career path 
and they are suitably oriented for the same through On-Job-Training (OJT) embedded industry 
relevant skill courses. OJT has been made an inherent component of the PMKVY and has been 
integrated within the short-term skilling programs to ensure trainees gain real-world exposure 
and industry experience. MSDE is thoroughly examining the proposals with all the details such 
as training centres, trainers, job roles, Letters of Intent (LoIs) from industries for conducting 
OJT, etc.  
 
MSDE is actively engaging with a wide range of stakeholders, including State Skill 
Development Missions (SSDMs), Central Ministries/Departments, Public Sector Undertakings 
(PSUs/CPSUs), Institutes of National Importance (INIs), State Government departments and 
the private sector to strengthen PMKVY 4.0 implementation, and has signed multiple MoUs 
with them such as Air India Sats Airport Services Pvt. Ltd., CMR Green Technologies Ltd., 
IIT Patna, etc. Further, under the aegis of the Ministry, National Skill Development 
Corporation (NSDC), Pradhan Mantri Kaushal Kendra (PMKKs), Sector Skill Councils (SSCs) 
and Training Providers (TPs) have organized 1,500+ Rozgar Melas / Kaushal Mahotsavs, 
wherein out of 7.80+ lakh registered candidates, 2.90+ lakh have been shortlisted for 
appointment. Additionally, over 120 industries have participated in the regular industry 
consultations to assess workforce needs, promote industry-led skilling, utilize existing 
infrastructure, etc. 
 
Further, based on feedback from various stakeholders, MSDE is considering to make 
placement an integral component of the upcoming version of the PMKVY i.e. PMKVY 5.0. 
 
(Recommendation Para 10) 
 
To monitor the effectiveness of the skill training provided under PMKVY, the 
Ministry have launched SIDH. The steps taken to ensure quality standards 
across all Training Centres including PMKKs, inter alia, include SIDH 
registration, e-KYC compliance, mandatory AEBAS, virtual verification of 
operational training centres using a mobile app, feedback from candidates, 

34 
 
physical visits and inspection of Training Centre, virtual monitoring through 
audio and video calls by a Kaushal Samiksha Kendra set up by MSDE.  
 
The Committee have been apprised that during the last three years, a total of 
637 Physical Inspections (PIs) have been undertaken and key deficiencies 
noticed inter alia include non-conduct of training during visits, PMKKs closed 
on working days, non-compliance with equipment guidelines, candidates not 
available during visits, batch merging, low attendance (below 50%), 
mismatches between physical attendance and AEBAS records, and in some 
cases, PMKKs not being found at the registered address on SIDH. The Ministry 
have informed that in order to avoid recurrence of such discrepancies, in 
addition to penal action like suspension, financial penalties and batch 
cancellation of non-compliant Centres, workshops are also conducted to 
orient PMKKs on quality delivery of training, retention of candidates post 
mobilization, maintenance of attendance etc. The Committee urge the 
Ministry to maintain the momentum for putting in place a more invigorated 
monitoring mechanism so as to ensure the attainment of the objectives. The 
Committee recommend that the Ministry take proactive measures and 
impress upon the State Government, Industries and various stakeholders to 
support PMKKs wherever these have been established. 
 
REPLY OF GOVERNMENT 
 
The Observation/recommendation of the Committee has been noted for 
compliance. 
It is informed that; as on 30.04.2025; 5,768 Skill India Centres (SICs) have 
been physically inspected / visited by NSDC for monitoring during the 
ongoing training in these Centres under PMKVY 4.0. Further, a mechanism 
has been put in place in the Ministry to conduct virtual inspection of the SICs. 
As on 30.04.2025, 1,986 SICs have been inspected virtually by the Ministry. 
Based on the analysis of these SICs, actions have been initiated against the 
188 SICs, out of which First Information Report (FIR) has been recommended 
against 138 SICs. Monitoring guidelines under the scheme are under process 
of revision and once issued, will certainly lead to better outcome. Also, the 
Ministry is actively engaging with the State Skill Development Missions 
(SSDMs) of the States / UTs and formalizing their role in the monitoring of 
the skilling under the PMKVY 4.0. 
 
REVISED REPLY OF GOVERNMENT 
 
For robust monitoring under the PMKVY 4.0, multiple changes have been made which are as 
follows: 
 
 Live attendance dashboard has been developed on Skill India Digital Hub (SIDH) to 
provide insights into scheme level outputs and outcomes mapped with candidate 
lifecycle, training centre performance, and assessment outcomes, supporting data-
driven decision-making. 
 Face Authentication and geo tagged attendance has been mandated for candidates, 
trainers and assessors under PMKVY 4.0. 

35 
 
 Capturing Candidate Feeback during the Training Lifecycle through Central 
Communication Layer (CCL) developed by National Informatics Centre (NIC) for 
remedial actions. 
 QR-coded digital certificates to ensure authenticity, facilitating instant verification and 
boosting employer confidence. 
 All stakeholders, including trainers and candidates, must register via e-KYC and 
Aadhaar authentication, ensuring secure, paperless onboarding and accurate data 
capture. 
 A structured online application form to be hosted on SIDH for shortlisting PIAs/TPs 
based on filtration criteria and priority sectors for allocation of targets to private 
organizations. 
 Further, the committed liabilities under PMKVY 4.0 will be disbursed to the Training 
Providers (TPs) upon successful verification of batch attendance. 
 
To enhance scalability, quality assurance, and monitoring, the MSDE has established the 
“Kaushal Samiksha Kendra” (KSK) for independent oversight. The KSK facilitates both virtual 
and physical inspections of Skill India Centres (SICs). Between September 2024 and October 
2025, MSDE carried out virtual monitoring of 3,695 training Centres across India. These 
inspections evaluated centre infrastructure, candidate attendance, trainer presence, and other 
key parameters. In addition, regular physical inspections through the PMKVY State and 
District Coordinators are being carried out to identify the gaps and improve the training quality. 
Physical inspections were carried out in 2,393 centres. A snapshot of action taken by the 
Ministry for monitoring and quality assurance is given below: 
 
 Upon reviewing inspection reports and cross-verifying attendance data with batch 
schedules and AEBAS records, 383 Skill India Centres were found to be non-
compliant. 
 Disciplinary action such as centre suspension, stoppage of payments, issuance of Show 
Cause Notices, Accreditation & Affiliation cancellations, and filing of FIRs has been 
initiated against these non-compliant centres.  
 FIR filing has been directed in 167 high-penalty cases, with D.O. letters issued by 
MSDE to the respective State DGPs for lodging FIRs. As of date, FIRs have been 
lodged against 41 Skill India Centres and necessary action is being taken in rest of the 
cases.  
 Based on the physical inspection report, 178 training partner/training centres which 
have been found to be non-compliant with the scheme's guidelines have been 
blacklisted, and recovery of payments has been initiated.  
 An Inter-Ministerial Appeals Committee (IMAC) comprising of representative from 
MSDE, NCVET, NSDC, DGT, MNRE, M/o Rural Development, M/o Micro, Small 
and Medium Enterprises & M/o Tourism have been constituted to review the appeals 
received from the blacklisted entities.  
 As of 12th December 2025, a total of 78 appeals have been received by MSDE or 
through NSDC, of which 33 cases have been reviewed by the IMAC. 
 
Recently, MSDE has also revised the monitoring guidelines to strengthen the monitoring of the 
training and adherence to scheme guidelines. The revised guidelines provide a comprehensive 
monitoring framework with clear KPIs and automated alerts, along with revised penalty 
matrix.  
 
So far as PMKKs are concerned, the Steering Committee for PMKVY 4.0, in its 3rd meeting 
held on 05.12.2025, decided to conduct an independent assessment of PMKKs regarding their 
functioning, performance and future roadmap. 
 
 

36 
 
(Recommendation Para 11) 
 
The Committee note that to ensure the trained candidates get employment as 
per their qualifications under PMKVY 4.0, the focus of the training is to 
empower the trained candidates to choose their varied career path and also 
give opportunity through various IT tools like SIDH. The Ministry have 
submitted that the job roles are aligned with the National Skill Qualification 
Committee Framework (NSQF) approved by National Skill Qualification 
Committee (NSQC) under NCVET. The Committee further note that 
identification of job roles require collaborative process that incorporates 
inputs from various stakeholders and MANDATORY On-the-Job Training 
(OJT) component in STT training to ensure practical learning and industry 
exposure. The Committee have been apprised that the scheme also focuses 
on emerging skills like Artificial Intelligence (AI), machine Learning (ML), 
AR/VR, 3D printing, and green economy sectors to cater to future industry 
needs. Considering the fact that the objective of the Scheme is to enable and 
mobilize a large number of Indian youths to take up skill training and become 
employable to sustainable livelihood, the Committee urge upon the Ministry 
to intensify the various measures put in place so as to ensure that maximum 
number of candidates get employment and sustainable livelihood after 
successful completion of the training. 
 
REPLY OF GOVERNMENT 
 
The Observation/recommendation of the Committee has been noted for 
compliance. 
  
MSDE is actively working with the National Council for Vocational Education 
and Training (NCVET), the skilling regulator, for improving the job roles and 
their content and curriculum. More than 5,500 outdated job roles have been 
archived from the skilling ecosystem. Under PMKVY 4.0, to keep pace with 
evolving industry demands and advent of new age technology, 400+ new 
courses on AI, 5G technology, Cyber security, Green Hydrogen, Drone 
Technology, have been introduced, focusing on emerging technologies and 
future skills. The number of skilled workforce under futuristic job roles is 
expected to increase considering the marked demand and requirement. Also, 
the introduction of On-the-Job Training (OJT) in the job roles under the 
PMKVY 4.0 will ensure that candidates gain real-world exposure and industry 
experience. Further, the proposed strategy for allocation of targets under 
PMKVY 4.0 in FY 2025-26 will be outcome oriented, be it placement, 
internship, apprenticeship, or self-employment and the same will be captured 
through the Skill India Digital Hub (SIDH). All these efforts have been made 
to enhance the employment / placement opportunities for the candidates 
enabling them to a sustainable livelihood. 
 
 
REVISED REPLY OF GOVERNMENT 
 
The limited awareness among community members about training opportunities, job role 
relevance, and long-term benefits of skilling are a few challenges that have been noted while 
implementing PMKVY by engaging the community. To overcome this, an enhanced IEC 
(Information, Education, Communication) activity, such as posters, banners, hoardings, 

37 
 
publishing articles, and newsletters in social media, etc. are being undertaken under PMKVY 
4.0.  
 
Mobilization is a critical component of proposals submitted by States, PSUs, and other 
implementing partners under PMKVY 4.0, as it lays the foundation for reaching the right 
beneficiaries. During the proposal stage, Project Implementing Agencies (PIAs) are required 
to clearly identify and map specific target cohorts such as farmers, gig workers, Farmer 
Producer Organizations (FPOs), youth, women, other marginalized groups, etc. relevant to the 
local ecosystem. This early-stage identification ensures that mobilization efforts are focused, 
need-based, and aligned with the socio-economic profile of the region. Also, the Executive 
Committee for PMKVY 4.0, while approving the training targets, requests all the PIAs to share 
the mobilization strategy including advertisements and other publicity activities with the 
Ministry/NSDC.  
 
Rozgar Melas / Kaushal Mahotsav are organized by National Skill Development Corporation 
(NSDC), Pradhan Mantri Kaushal Kendra (PMKKs), Sector Skill Councils (SSCs), and 
Training Providers (TPs) under the aegis of the MSDE for providing employment opportunities 
to the candidates along with spreading awareness about the scheme. Around 1,500+ Rozgar 
Melas / Kaushal Mahotsavs have been organized so far across the country, wherein out of 7.80+ 
lakh registered candidates, 2.90+ lakh have been shortlisted for appointment. 
 
Under PMKVY 4.0, to make the candidates more employable, the Scheme is focusing on 
imparting training as per evolving industry demands. To address the requirement of industry 
4.0, 600+ new-age and futuristics courses on AI, 5G technology, Cyber security, Green 
Hydrogen, Drone Technology, have been introduced, focusing on emerging technologies and 
future skills. As on 2nd December 2025, more than 5.61 lakh candidates have been enrolled in 
such job roles under PMKVY 4.0. Further, more than 5,500 outdated job roles have been 
archived from the skilling ecosystem by NCVET. 
 
(Recommendation Para 12) 
 
The Committee note that to enhance private sector involvement in skill 
development and employment under PMKVY 4.0, emphasis has been laid on 
cross utilization of infrastructure available in different institutions including 
private entities such as private educational institutions (like AICTE affiliated 
colleges, UGC approved colleges/institutes, private schools), Industries, 
Industry Associations, Pradhan Mantri Kaushal Kendras (PMKKs), Jan 
ShikshanSansthan (JSSs), Trusts/Societies, etc. The Committee have been 
apprised that target has been allocated to such reputed private sector 
institutions to impart quality skill trainings through their A&A complied 
Training Centres. The Committee desire the Ministry to take recourse to 
proactive measures and explore areas where participation of private sector in 
imparting training and providing employment to certified trained candidates 
fructify to a considerable extent. 
 
REPLY OF GOVERNMENT 
 
The Observation/recommendation of the Committee has been noted for 
compliance. 
  
MSDE is actively and consistently engaging with various stakeholders such 
as State Skill Development Missions (SSDMs), different Central Ministries / 
Departments, prominent industries like Adani Foundation, JK Cement, 

38 
 
Honda India Foundation, etc. to strengthen the implementation of PMKVY 
4.0. This collaborative effort focuses not only on imparting high-quality skill 
training, but also on facilitating employment / placement opportunities for 
the trained candidates. The same is an ongoing and regular process being 
undertaken by MSDE to collaborate with the private sector. 
 
 
REVISED REPLY OF GOVERNMENT 
 
MSDE is actively and consistently engaging with a wide range of stakeholders, including State 
Skill Development Missions (SSDMs), Central Ministries/Departments, Public Sector 
Undertakings (PSUs/CPSUs), Institutes of National Importance (INIs), State Government 
departments, and private sector to strengthen the implementation of PMKVY 4.0. This 
collaborative approach aims not only to deliver high-quality skill training but also to facilitate 
employment and placement opportunities for certified candidates. To achieve this objective, 
MSDE has signed multiple MoUs with industry partners, INIs, and State Government entities. 
The details of these MoUs are as follows:  
 
S. 
No. MoU signed with Type of Institutions 
1 Air India Sats Airport Services Private Ltd Industry/ Pvt. sector 
2 Confederation of Indian Textile Industries (CITI) Industry/ Pvt. sector 
3 CMR Green Technologies Ltd Industry/ Pvt. sector 
4 North East Centre for Technology Application and Reach 
(NECTAR) Govt. Institution 
5 North Eastern Handicrafts and Handlooms Development 
Corporation (NEHHDC) 
Govt. Institution 
6 North Eastern Regional Agricultural Marketing Co-Operation 
(NERAMAC) 
Govt. Institution 
7 Simplex Infrastructure Ltd Industry/ Pvt. sector 
8 Flipkart Internet Private Ltd Industry/ Pvt. sector 
9 Swiggy Ltd Industry/ Pvt. sector 
10 Indian Institute of Technology (IIT), Patna INI 
11 Indian Institute of Technology (IIT), Hyderabad INI 
12 Indian Institute of Information Technology (IIIT), Una INI 
13 National Institute of Technology (NIT), Agartala INI 
14 Rashtriya Raksha University, Gujarat INI 
15 IGNOU Govt. Institution 
 
Further, the Steering Committee for PMKVY 4.0, in its 3rd meeting held on 5th December 2025, 
approved the allocation of training targets to private sector (Industry/ Industry associations/ 
SMEs) for imparting quality skill training and facilitating employment/placement opportunities 
for trained candidates. A structured online application form to be hosted on Skill India digital 
Hub (SIDH) for shortlisting PIAs/TPs based on filtration criteria and priority sectors for 
allocation of targets to private organizations. This is an ongoing and regular process undertaken 
by MSDE to ensure robust collaboration with the private sector for skill development and 
employment generation. 
 
(Recommendation Para 13) 
 
The Committee note that the design principles of PMKVY 4.0 provide for 
creation of a national pool of trainers and assessors to ensure their availability 
and efficient implementation of training and faster assessment and it has 

39 
 
been envisaged to create a pool of 1 lakh Trainers/Assessors at national level. 
The engagement of a trainer is subject to mutual agreement between trainer 
and training provider, whereas, the assessors are aligned and deployed by the 
Assessment Agency upon receiving batch information from Awarding Bodies 
to conduct assessment of the trained candidates. The Committee have been 
apprised that 1,44,555 trainers and 75,829 assessors have been trained 
during the last three years i.e. since 2022-23,.The Committee appreciate that 
while target for creation of pool of trainers has exceeded the envisaged target 
of 1 lakh trainers, however, nearly 24,000 Assessors are yet to be trained. The 
Committee call upon the Ministry to take urgent steps so as to ensure that 
the target to have 1 lakh Assessors is timely achieved. 
 
REPLY OF GOVERNMENT 
 
The Observation/recommendation of the Committee has been noted for 
compliance. 
 
The Ministry through NSDC, the implementing agency of the scheme, is 
actively working to expedite the conduct of Training of Trainers (ToT) and 
Training of Assessors (ToA) programs, with a strong focus on capacity building 
to enhance the quality of training and assessments. Furthermore, MSDE is in 
constant touch with Awarding Bodies to increase the number of Trainers and 
Assessors, thereby improving the quality and reach of skill development 
initiatives across the country.   
 
 
REVISED REPLY OF GOVERNMENT 
 
A national pool of 56,000+ Trainers and 13,000+ Assessors, having certificates with valid time 
period, has been developed under the PMKVY 4.0 for the skilling ecosystem. The same is an 
ongoing and dynamic process as the validity of the Training of Trainer (ToT) and Training of 
Assessor (ToA) certificate remains for two (2) years. Further, the number of Awarding Bodies 
(ABs) and Assessment Agencies (AAs) has expanded to 152 and 68 respectively, strengthening 
the skilling ecosystem by ensuring wider coverage, improved assessment quality, and enhanced 
industry responsiveness. Also, integrated proposals for imparting skilling to candidates as well 
as ToT have also been approved under PMKVY 4.0. For example, the Directorate of Indian 
Army Veterans (DIAV) is implementing a skilling proposal under PMKVY 4.0 for veterans, 
while also providing them training to become trainers. Further, the Steering Committee for 
PMKVY 4.0, in its 3rd meeting held on 5th December 2025, approved to provide funding for 
conducting ToT for all Government Organizations whose projects have been approved. This 
step will ensure onboarding of new trainers and expansion of pool of trainers under the Scheme. 
 
(Recommendation Para 14) 
 
The Committee note that as on 16.02.2025, more than 95,000 candidates 
have been trained/oriented through special projects of PMKVY 4.0, in various 
sectors including agriculture, handicraft and other traditional sectors. As per 
the data furnished by the Ministry, the number of candidates enrolled, 
trained, assessed and certified are 1,70,442;  95,413;  54,226; and 50,267 
respectively in 34 sectors including traditional sectors. While appreciating the 
efforts being made by the Ministry to impart sector-specific skill training, the 
Committee want that emphasis be laid to provide training in the remaining 
sectors so that adequate skilled manpower is available to cater to specific 

40 
 
needs of the Industry. The Committee further want that necessary impetus 
be given towards implementing the policy for active participation of industry 
in framing the training programmes so as to effectively capture the changing 
requirement and realities of employment. 
 
The Committee also strongly feel that there has to be total Coordination and 
integration with Industry so that the skills required as per the demands of the 
Industry are identified and imparting practical training and experience in 
these trades/skill shall be given impetus. Such a measure can help in 
mitigating the skill gaps and deficiencies felt by the Industry.  
 
REPLY OF GOVERNMENT 
 
The Observation/recommendation of the Committee has been noted for 
compliance. 
 
The Ministry has taken several initiatives to enhance industry engagement 
under PMKVY 4.0 to ensure training courses align with industry demand, 
emerging trends, and sector-specific needs. MSDE is actively engaging with 
the industries for onboarding them under PMKVY 4.0 for implementation of 
skilling as well as empaneling them as Awarding Bodies (ABs) under NCVET 
so that the pool of ABs increases in the skilling ecosystem. All the industry 
led Sector Skill Councils (SSCs) have been mandated to actively coordinate 
with industries to assess regional and sectoral demands, identify skill gaps, 
and define relevant job roles. Further, with aim to strengthen this 
engagement, the Ministry has conducted regular industry consultations, 
implemented special projects directly through industries, and supported 
sector-specific skilling initiatives in areas such as manufacturing, toy making, 
footwear, and industrial clusters in collaboration with relevant Central 
Ministries/Departments. So far, industry consultations have been held with 
over 120 industry participants to assess workforce needs, promote industry-
led skilling, utilize existing infrastructure, etc. 
 
 
REVISED REPLY OF GOVERNMENT 
 
The Ministry takes note of the recommendation of the Esteemed Committee to impart training 
in the sectors wherein there is requirement of skilled manpower to cater the specific needs of 
the Industry.  
 
The Steering Committee for PMKVY 4.0, in its 3rd meeting held on 5th December 2025, 
approved the allocation of training targets to private sector (Industry/ Industry associations/ 
SMEs) for imparting quality skill training and facilitating employment/placement opportunities 
for trained candidates. A structured online application form to be hosted on Skill India Digital 
Hub (SIDH) for shortlisting PIAs/TPs based on filtration criteria and priority sectors for 
allocation of targets to private organizations. This is an ongoing and regular process undertaken 
by MSDE to ensure robust collaboration with the industry for skill development and 
employment generation. 
 
Further, the Ministry has taken several initiatives to enhance industry engagement under 
PMKVY 4.0 to ensure training courses align with industry demand, emerging trends, and 
sector-specific needs. MSDE is actively engaging with the industries for onboarding them 
under PMKVY 4.0 for implementation of skilling as well as empaneling them as Awarding 

41 
 
Bodies (ABs) under NCVET such that the pool of ABs increases in the skilling ecosystem. All 
the industry led Sector Skill Councils (SSCs) have been mandated to actively coordinate with 
industries to assess regional and sectoral demands, identify skill gaps, and define relevant job 
roles. Further, with aim to strengthen this engagement, the Ministry has conducted regular 
industry consultations, implemented special projects directly through industries, and supported 
sector-specific skilling initiatives in areas such as manufacturing, toy making, footwear, and 
industrial clusters in collaboration with relevant Central Ministries/Departments. So far, more 
than 13 industry consultations have been held with over 120 industries such as Larsen and 
Toubro, Flipkart, Swiggy, CREDAI, Amazon Web Services, Zomato, Transworld, Power Grid, 
TCS, Wipro, IBM, Red Hat, Barclays, Zydus, Adani Agri Fresh Ltd, Hero Moto Corp, Toyota, 
Maruti Suzuki, GMR, Bosch, Sony Ericsson, Jindal Steel Power, Arcelor Mittal, Nippon, Leela 
Hotels, Taj Hotels, Mariott Hotels, HDFC Bank, Tata Electronics, etc. to assess workforce 
needs, promote industry-led skilling, utilize existing infrastructure, etc. 
 
(Recommendation Para 15) 
 
The Committee note that training under PMKVY 4.0 has also been aligned to 
the requirements of new-age and futuristic job roles such as AI - Data 
Engineer, Telecom Technician - IoT Devices/Systems, Drone Manufacturing 
and Assembly Technician, Additive Manufacturing (3D Printing), Kisan Drone 
Operator, Application Developer - Web & Mobile, etc. As on 16.02.2025, the 
number of candidates enrolled, trained, assessed and certified is 5,16,730; 
3,28,501; 2,46,790 and 2,23,578 respectively. Keeping in view the 
requirements of the industry and the potential of the new age courses for 
providing employment in emerging fields, the Committee feel that the Ministry 
need to take urgent and effective steps to address the challenges posed and 
promote the courses of new-age and futuristic job roles. The Committee also 
urge the Ministry to take measures to increase awareness about the courses 
through all possible modes, including print and electronic media, social 
media, on-line advertising, outreach programmes etc. and further strengthen 
the job prospects for trained candidates who pursue the new courses by 
working in tandem with employers to create adequate opportunities in the 
new and emerging sectors. 
 
REPLY OF GOVERNMENT 
 
The Observation/recommendation of the Committee has been noted for 
compliance. 
 
Under PMKVY 4.0, to keep pace with evolving industry demands and advent 
of new age technology, 400+ new courses on AI, 5G technology, Cyber 
security, Green Hydrogen, Drone Technology, have been introduced, focusing 
on emerging technologies and future skills. The number of skilled workforce 
under futuristic job roles is expected to increase considering the marked 
demand and requirement. MSDE, in consultation with various stakeholders, 
including Central Ministries/Departments, State Governments, NCVET, 
NSDC, Sector Skill Councils (SSCs), and industry partners; is actively working 
to promote skilling in new-age and Futuristic courses across the country. 
These consultations focus on identifying emerging skills and technologies in 
demand, funding support, developing relevant course content, ensuring 
availability of appropriate training infrastructure, and building trainer 
capacity through Training of Trainers (ToT) programs. Institutions such as 

42 
 
AICTE-affiliated colleges, Skill Universities, State bodies, SSCs, and others 
are being encouraged and engaged to deliver skilling programs aligned with 
both sectoral and regional requirements. Under PMKVY 4.0, as on 
31.03.2025, more than 4 Lakh candidates have been trained in the New Age 
skills. 
 
 
REVISED REPLY OF GOVERNMENT 
 
On several occasions, industries and other TPs showed their resistance to implement skilling 
in new-age and futuristic job roles due to lower payouts. To encourage the adoption of courses 
in these emerging areas and considering the higher cost for new laboratory equipment for 
delivering such courses, the Steering Committee for PMKVY 4.0, in its 2nd meeting held on 
12th June 2024, approved the highest cost of ₹49 per hour for skilling in new-age and futuristic 
skills under PMKVY 4.0. Also, the Ministry is in the process to revise the Common Norms.  
 
To increase awareness about the courses, training opportunities, job role relevance, and long-
term benefits of skilling, an enhanced IEC (Information, Education, Communication) activity, 
such as posters, banners, hoardings, publishing articles, and newsletters in social media, etc. 
are being undertaken under PMKVY 4.0. MSDE also urged PIAs to share all the relevant 
information related to advertisement and social media activities undertaken by them under 
PMKVY 4.0.  
 
Under PMKVY 4.0, the placements have been de-linked and the focus is to empower our 
trained candidates to choose their varied career path and they are suitably oriented for the same 
through On-Job-Training (OJT) embedded industry relevant skill courses. OJT has been made 
an inherent component of the PMKVY and has been integrated within the short-term skilling 
programs to ensure trainees gain real-world exposure and industry experience. At the proposal 
stage itself, MSDE ensures all the relevant details such as training centres, trainers, job roles, 
Letters of Intent (LoIs) from industries for conducting OJT, etc.   
 
Further, based on feedback from various stakeholders, MSDE is considering to make 
placement an integral component of the upcoming version of the PMKVY i.e., PMKVY 5.0. 
 
(Recommendation Para 16) 
 
The Committee have also been apprised that although there is no State 
component under PMKVY 4.0, the Ministry are moving forward for increasing 
State engagement for implementation under PMKVY 4.0 to understand the 
district demands holistically and subsequent actions will be taken on the 
basis of responses received from Districts accordingly. The Committee take 
cognizance of the Ministry’s efforts and are of the considered view that the 
steps taken by the Ministry are in right direction and should be persisted with 
so as to achieve the desired objectives. 
 
REVISED REPLY OF GOVERNMENT 
MSDE is actively pursuing with the State Skill Development Missions (SSDMs) of the States 
/ UTs for the State Action Plan for allocation of targets under the PMKVY 4.0 in FY 2025-26. 
As on 12.12.2025, under the Scheme, 1.12 lakh targets have been allocated to 12 States / UTs. 
These allocations are based on demand of the SSDM and as per requirement of local demand, 
District Skill Development Plans (DSDPs), skill gap studies, etc.  
 

43 
 
Further, MSDE is actively engaging with SSDMs of States and UTs, formalizing their role in 
monitoring skilling activities under PMKVY 4.0. Multiple efforts have been undertaken to 
strengthen this engagement, including regular correspondence, consultation and review 
meetings, etc. 
 
REPLY OF GOVERNMENT 
 
The Observation/recommendation of the Committee has noted for 
compliance. 
 
MSDE is actively engaging with State Skill Development Missions (SSDMs) of 
States and UTs, formalizing their role in monitoring skilling activities under 
PMKVY 4.0. Multiple efforts have been undertaken to strengthen this 
engagement, including regular correspondence, consultation meetings, 
allocation of special projects, and review meetings. Further, States have been 
requested to involve reputed State Government institutions, adopt new-age 
courses and aspirational job roles with clear career progression under PMKVY 
4.0, and avoid oversubscribed, low-demand, or redundant roles. 
 
(Recommendation Para 17) 
 
The Committee appreciate that since 2021-22, 96% to 98% of physical targets 
set were achieved and during 2024-25, out of target of 5.20 lakh beneficiaries, 
4,58,562 beneficiaries have been covered as on 19.02.2025 and, as informed 
by the Ministry, with the release of second instalment of Grant-in-Aid 
following approval of the Scheme (which is one of the three components of 
Skill India Programme) by Cabinet on 07.02.2025, 5 lakh beneficiaries are 
expected to be covered by 31.03.2025 viz. 96% target will be achieved during 
2024-25. The Committee expect the Ministry to make concerted efforts and 
honour their commitment for optimal achievement of the physical target for 
the year 2024-25.  The financial progress of the Scheme is, however, slow as, 
out of RE of Rs. 180 crore, only Rs. 72.62 crore has been utilized up to 
03.03.2025 and approximately 60% amount is yet to be spent. The Committee 
expect that with the approval of Skill India Programme on 07.02.2025, the 
Ministry will be able to utilize considerable amount of the unspent balance. 
 
 
REPLY OF GOVERNMENT 
 
The Ministry sincerely acknowledges the Committee’s appreciation of the 
physical progress under the JSS Scheme and remains committed to achieving 
the projected target of 5 lakh beneficiaries for the FY 2025-26. With the 
Cabinet approval of the Skill India Programme on 07.02.2025 and subsequent 
release of the second instalment of Grant-in-Aid, JSSs across the country 
have been mobilized to accelerate implementation. The temporary slowdown 
in financial progress was primarily due to the hold in fund disbursement 
pending Cabinet approval. However, efforts are now underway to ensure 
optimal fund utilization by the end of the financial year through active 
coordination with JSSs. 
 
Regarding coverage of priority groups and annual targets, the Ministry 
acknowledges the Committee’s observation about the decline in training 

44 
 
numbers in FY 2023-24, which was due to the absence of additional targets 
provided in the previous year FY 2022-23. For FY 2024-25, the delayed 
scheme roll-out on the Skill India Digital Hub and fund flow constraints 
impacted early-stage implementation. Despite this, efforts are being 
intensified to ensure full achievement of the current year’s targets. The 
suggestion to allocate additional targets to good-performing JSSs in FY 2025-
26 is well taken and shall be duly considered to enhance outreach to intended 
beneficiaries. Additionally, the Ministry reaffirms its vision to expand the JSS 
network across all districts, particularly in Aspirational and LWE-affected 
regions, and will explore phased expansion along with encouraging local skill-
based training in alignment with regional market demands. 
 
 
(Recommendation Para 18) 
 
The Committee note that the priority groups under JSS Scheme are Women, 
SC, ST, OBCs and minorities in rural areas and urban low-income areas. The 
Committee have been apprised that from FY 2021-22 to 26th January, 2025, 
15,84,032 women beneficiaries; 4,74,490 Scheduled Castes (SCs) 
beneficiaries; 2,63,358 Scheduled Tribes (STs) beneficiaries; 7,27,117 Other 
Backward Classes (OBCs) beneficiaries and 1,92,873 beneficiaries belonging 
to Minority Groups have been trained. The Committee, however note during 
FY 2023-24, there is decrease in training figure across all categories viz., 
Women, SC, ST, OBC, Minority and in the Financial Year 2022-23, apart from 
the regular annual training target of 1800 per JSS, an additional target of 900 
per JSSs was also provided to good performing JSSs which led to increase in 
overall training figures across different categories (Women, SC, ST, OBC, 
Minority). In FY 2023-24, an Annual Training Target of 1800 beneficiaries per 
JSS was provided and no additional training target was provided, which 
shows a downfall of training figures across different categories (Women, SC, 
ST, OBC, Minority) from FY 2022-23 to FY 2023-24.  
 
The Committee have been apprised that in the Financial Year 2024-25, due 
to migration of the JSS scheme on Skill India Digital Hub (a digital portal for 
entire skilling programme under MSDE), the training under JSS Scheme was 
initiated from June 2024 onwards. Further, in view of the pending Cabinet 
Approval for the Skill India Programme (of which JSS scheme is one of the 
three key component) which was accorded by Cabinet on 07.02.2025, the 
funds couldn’t be disbursed after release of first installment till the Cabinet 
Approval, which has also impacted the overall training numbers including 
women, SC, ST, OBC and minorities in FY 2024-25. The Ministry have 
assured that the target projected for the year 2024-25, is expected to be 
achieved. The Committee desire that as done during 2022-23 additional target 
may be provided to good performer JSS during 2025-26 in the larger interest 
of intended beneficiaries. 
 
REPLY OF GOVERNMENT 
 
The Reply given on Recommendation Para 17 may be referred. 
 
 

45 
 
 
 
(Recommendation Para 19) 
 
The Committee note that at present, 289 Jan ShikshanSansthans are 
functional in 283 different districts across the country. Out of them, 65 JSSs 
are currently functional in Aspirational Districts and 40 JSSs in LWE-affected 
districts. The vision of the Ministry is to set up one JSS in each district of the 
country in a phased manner. However, at present no proposal for setting up 
of new JSSs is under consideration.Considering the fact that the target 
beneficiaries of the scheme are non-literates, neo-literates and persons having 
rudimentary level of education (70%), school dropouts up to class 12th 
(20%),and graduates (10%) in the age group of 15-45 years, the Committee 
desire that the network of JSSs be expanded to more districts especially in 
the remaining Aspirational Districts. The Committee also urge the Ministry to 
issue appropriate guidelines to the JSSs to identify the local traditional 
skills/arts and provide training to candidates as per the local market demand. 
 
REPLY OF GOVERNMENT 
 
The Reply given on Recommendation Para 17 may be referred. 
 
 
(Recommendation Para 20) 
 
The Committee note that National Apprenticeship Promotion Scheme-2 
(NAPS-2) aims to promote apprenticeship training in the country by providing 
partial stipend support to the apprentices engaged under the Apprentice Act, 
1961 and Rules made thereunder, which is limited to 25% of the stipend paid 
subject to a maximum of Rs.1500 per month per apprentice, which was 
revised six years back viz. in 2019. The Committee have been apprised that 
one of the reasons for declining apprenticeship engagement in the age group 
of 26-30 years is that the apprenticeship stipends which are typically lower 
than the regular salaries may not be sufficient. The Committee have also been 
apprised that the proposal for revision of minimum stipend rates is under 
consideration of the Government, which is proposed to be taken up during 
the 38th CAC (Central Apprentices Council) meeting, which is yet to be 
scheduled.The Committee desire that the matter relating to upward revision 
of stipend be accorded priority and the same be increased keeping in view the 
inflation and other relevant factors. 
 
REPLY OF GOVERNMENT 
 
The 38thCAC (Central Apprentices Council) meeting was held on 26.05.2025. 
The Central Apprentices Council has agreed for a significant hike in monthly 
stipends for apprentices, increasing the range from Rs.5000-Rs.9000/- to 
Rs.6,800-Rs.12,300/-. This increase has factored inflation and is based on 
the difference in Consumer Price Index during the previous revision i.e. 
November 2019 and November 2024. 
 
 

46 
 
(Recommendation Para 21) 
 
The Committee note that NAPS – New Version has a financial outlay of Rs. 
1942 crore for a period of four years from FY 2022-23 to FY 2025-26 with 
physical target of 46 lakh apprentices over the Scheme period.  The Committee 
further note that as on 18.02.2025, the total expenditure under the NAPS 
stands at Rs. 1350.11 crore (69.52%) against the total outlay of Rs. 1942 crore 
and the physical achievement is 25.38 lakh. Thus, the remaining physical 
target stands at 20.62 lakh.   
 
The Committee further note that the Budget Estimates under NAPS for FY 
2024-25 is Rs. 512.24 crore, which has been increased to Rs. 600.00 crore at 
RE stage viz. there is increase of Rs. 87.76 crore, however, the actual 
expenditure as on 18.02.2025 is Rs. 381.79 crore (64% approx.) leaving an 
unspent balance of Rs. 218.21 crore. The Committee have been apprised that 
the fund release under the Scheme has been restored post Cabinet approval 
for Skill India Programme on 07.02.2025 and all pending DBT payment will 
be taken care. In addition, steps for payment of stipend of Rs.200 crore are 
being taken and, accordingly, the estimated expenditure will reach Rs. 582 
crore by 31.03.2025.The Committee appreciate that despite approval of the 
Scheme being accorded in February, 2025, the Ministry will be able to incur 
expenditure almost equal to enhanced RE of Rs. 600 crore in 2024-25.  The 
Committee desire that the momentum be continued unabated so as to fully 
utilize Rs. 600 crore allocated during 2025-26 also. 
 
REPLY OF GOVERNMENT 
 
NAPS–02 has a financial outlay of Rs. 1942 crore for a period of four years 
from FY 2022-23 to FY 2025-26 with a physical target of 46 lakh apprentices 
over the Scheme period.  As on 31.03.2025, the total actual expenditure under 
the NAPS stands at Rs. 1554.55 crore (80.05%) against the total outlay of Rs. 
1942 crore and the total expenditure during the FY 2024-25 is Rs.586.23 
Crore. During the current Financial Year 2025-26 expenditure of Rs.146.70 
Cr. (upto 30.04.2025) has already been incurred under NAPS. 
 
 
(Recommendation Para 22) 
 
The Committee, however, find that against the physical target of 12 lakh 
intended apprentices during 2024-25, as on 28.02.2025, 9 lakh apprentices 
have been engaged and 3 lakh beneficiaries are yet to be engaged. According 
to the Ministry, around one lakh apprentices are getting added every month. 
Consequently, there will still be shortfall of 2 lakh beneficiaries, as such, the 
Ministry may not be able to achieve the physical target set for 2024-25.  The 
Committee desire that the efforts be made to cover the remaining 20.62 lakh 
beneficiaries by 2025-26, being the culmination year of the Scheme. 
 
REPLY OF GOVERNMENT 
 
Under NAPS, a total of 9.86 lakh apprentices were engaged during the FY 
2024-25(as on 31.03. 2025). The physical achievement is 28.19 lakh from FY 
2022-23 to FY 2025-26 (as on 31.03. 2025). Thus, the remaining physical 

47 
 
target stands at 17.81 lakh. Efforts are being made to cover the remaining 
17.81 lakh apprentices till FY 2025-26. 
 
 
(Recommendation Para 24) 
 
The Committee note that while there is persistent increase in BE for NER 
during the last three years i.e. from Rs. 291.32 crore in 2022-23 to Rs. 332.15 
crore in 2023-24 to Rs. 431.31 crore (as on 15.01.2025) in 2024-25, the actual 
expenditure of the Ministry for the region has decreased during the 
corresponding period viz. from 22.83% to 22.42% to 18.26% respectively, i.e., 
more than 75% funds were not utilised every year.  The Committee further 
note that during 2024-25, as on 18.02.2025, of the total allocation of Rs. 
431.31 crore (9.54% of Ministry’s BE) the Ministry’s NER expenditure is Rs. 
144.12 crore and, as stated by the Ministry, it is estimated to reach Rs.170 
crore by the end of the current fiscal, which is significantly higher than 
previous year (Rs. 74.50 crore in 2023-24 and Rs. 66.52 crore in 2022-23). 
The Committee, however, find that Rs. 261.31 crore shall still remain 
unutilized by 31.03.2025.Considering the fact that Skill India Programme has 
now been approved by the Cabinet, the Committee expect that allocation of 
Rs. 509.85 crore for NER will be fully utilized during 2025-26.  
 
REPLY OF GOVERNMENT 
 
In FY. 2024-25, against the BE of ₹ 431.31 Cr and RE of ₹ 219.52 Cr, the 
expenditure in the NER component was ₹ 195.23 Cr (88.93 % of RE), which 
was significantly higher than previous years. However, the Ministry 
acknowledges that the lower than mandated expenditure in the NER is an 
issue of concern. Apart from taking steps to improve regular expenditure in 
NER, the Ministry has sincerely deliberated upon the issue and in order to 
address the issue, has made a special intervention by launching a pilot project 
on 20.05.2025 namely "Pilot initiative for special intervention for promotion 
of Apprenticeship in North Eastern Region (NER)" by doubling the stipend 
support from GoI to apprentices domiciled in NER and migrating either within 
or outside NER for apprenticeship opportunities.  This project will be 
implemented on a pilot mode during FY 2025-26 with a total financial outlay 
of ₹ 43.94 Cr. The initiative will directly benefit more than 26,000 NER. Based 
on the success of the pilot project, decision on further continuation of the 
intervention will be considered.  
 
 
(Recommendation Para 25) 
 
The Committee, while appreciating that to promote apprenticeship, the 
Ministry have organized Pradhan Mantri National Apprenticeship Melas 
(PMNAMs) at 190 locations/districts, since 2022-23 in the North Eastern 
Region (NER), wish to point out that not even a single establishment 
participated in the PMNAM organised in Meghalaya, Mizoram and Nagaland 
and desire that while organising PMNAMs particularly in NER, it needs to be 
ensured that the registered establishments do participate in such Melas.   
 
 

48 
 
REPLY OF GOVERNMENT 
 
The economy of the North Eastern Region (NER) is predominantly agrarian, 
with over 70% of its population engaged in agricultural activities as their 
primary source of livelihood. The secondary and tertiary sectors exhibit 
limited diversification, encompassing areas such as tourism, handicrafts, 
textiles, and information technology, among others. Furthermore, factors like 
labour employment gap, geographical constraints, and infrastructural 
challenges, has resulted in a paucity of establishments within the region. 
Consequently, the limited number of establishments in the NER has 
translated into lower participation in the Pradhan Mantri National 
Apprenticeship Mela (PMNAM). 
To address these issues, MSDE is initiating a pilot scheme in the NER under 
the National Apprenticeship Promotion Scheme-2 (NAPS-2).  Under this 
initiative, an additional incentive of upto ₹1500 is provided for apprentices 
who are domiciled in the NER and undertake apprenticeships within the NER 
(excluding the domiciled State) or outside the region. This measure is intended 
to attract youths to undertake apprenticeship outside their own State. Within 
the total financial outlay, a budget of ₹3 Crore has been allocated for 
awareness and advocacy activities, aimed at mobilizing youths and 
establishments to participation in NAPS-2 across the NER. 
 
 
(Recommendation Para 26) 
The Committee note that during 2024-25, out of 9,00,616 apprentices 
engaged as on 28.02.2025, 6,95,808 are men and 2,04,808 are women.  As 
stated by the Ministry, the difference in apprentice engagement when 
compared to FY 2023-24 has exceeded by 7,910 (4% increase than FY 2023-
24) in case of women apprentices and in case of men, it is 39,596 (5.4% lesser 
than FY 2023-24). The Committee have been apprised that it is expected that 
achievement during the current FY will not be less when compared to FY 
2023-24. The Committee have also been apprised that to increase women 
participation in apprentices, the Ministry propose to organize PMNAM with a 
focus on mobilization from women centric Institutions (Women’s College and 
Vocational Training Centres) as well as development and promotion of 
apprenticeship in   Sectors with high growth potential and traditionally higher 
female participation such as healthcare, IT/ITES, and retail.  Observing that 
apprentice engagement is dynamic and keeps on progressing throughout the 
year,  the Committee desire that in addition to the measures being taken by 
the Ministry, the other innovative measures also need to be taken so as to 
increase women participation in apprentices so that women have access to 
relevant and in-demand skills. 
 
 
REPLY OF GOVERNMENT 
In FY 2024-25 (as on 31.03. 2025) out of 9,85,653 apprentices engaged, 
7,60,998 are men and 2,24,647 are women.  As stated by the Ministry, the 
difference in apprentice engagement when compared to FY 2023-24 has 
exceeded by 27,688 (14.06% increase than FY 2023-24) in case of women 
apprentices and in case of men, it is 25,183 (3.42% increase than FY 2023-

49 
 
24). The observation of the committee has been noted for due diligence and 
the Ministry will take all out efforts that would be contributing to more woman 
apprentice participation. 
 
(Recommendation Para 28) 
The Committee note that there is persistent increase in candidates dropped 
out during the last three years. During 2022-23, 2023-24, and 2024-25, 2.34 
lakh, 2.37 lakh and 2.89 lakh candidates respectively had dropped out from 
their apprentices training. The reasons for such drop out inter-aliaincluded 
relocation challenges from place of living to establishment location at new 
location; factory/industry/establishment environment; cost of living; 
environmental conditions; health, etc.  In addition, attractive alternative 
options also lead to dropout in apprenticeship training.  The Committee have 
been apprised that the Ministry have taken measures like organisation of 
Workshops/awareness programmes to sensitize various stakeholders and 
Pradhan Mantri National Apprenticeship Mela (PMNAM) to facilitate as a 
platform to disseminate information on apprenticeship training.  The Ministry 
have also informed that besides revision of minimum stipend rates, efforts will 
also be made for a supportive workplace culture by establishments and 
States/ UTs will also be sensitized to make use of PMNAM/ workshops/ 
awareness programme to disseminate information for assisting interested 
persons to take informed decisions before joining the apprenticeship 
training.Observing that increase in drop out of apprentices is a matter of 
serious concern, the Committee recommend that the challenges faced by 
apprentices need to be addressed with utmost sincerity and desire that the 
action proposed to be taken by the Ministry needs to be taken to logical 
conclusion so as to minimize dropout of apprentices. 
 
REPLY OF GOVERNMENT 
Under NAPS-2 FY2022-23, FY2023-24, and FY2024-25, 2.34 lakh, 3.38 lakh 
and 3.49 lakh candidates respectively had dropped out from their apprentices 
training. The observation of the Committee has been noted for due diligence 
and the Ministry will monitor dropouts and identify factors that are 
contributing to the same and guidance through counselling will be explored. 
 
 
(Recommendation Para 29) 
 
Announced in budget 2024-25, the National Scheme for Upgradation of ITIs 
aims to enhance the quality and outcomes of skilling across India by 
upgrading 1,000 ITIs in a hub-and-spoke arrangement over five years. The 
BE for 2024-25 is Rs. 3000.00 crore, which has been reduced to Rs.294 crore 
as the Scheme is yet to be approved by the Cabinet. For 2025-26, against the 
demand of Rs.5010 crore, the Ministry of Finance agreed for an allocation of 
Rs.3000.00 crore. 
 
The Committee have been apprised that the Scheme has been recommended 
by the EFC in its meetings held on 09.01.2025 and 13.01.2025, the draft 
Cabinet Note has received the approval of Finance Minister on 19.02.2025 
and the MSDE is in the process of obtaining approval of Cabinet Note. The 
Committee have also been apprised that since the approval of the Scheme is 

50 
 
yet to be obtained, the funds could not be released in the FY 2024-25. The 
Ministry have also stated that it is expected that the Scheme would receive 
approval in the current FY and the exact amount of release under the scheme 
will depend upon the time available in this FY after the Cabinet approval. 
Meanwhile, pending the Cabinet approval, the Ministry have been permitted 
to spend only Rs. 10 crore on the preparatory activities of the scheme. 
 
The Committee have also been apprised that a wide range of stakeholder 
consultation involving industries, State/UT governments, and inter-
ministerial consultation has been undertaken. In addition, Workshops for 
Technical Knowledge Exchange with four countries (China, Germany, 
Singapore, and South Korea) to arrive at the design of the scheme have also 
been conducted. The Scheme is proposed to be launched in March 2025.  
 
The Committee further note that the ITIs will be identified by State 
Governments in consultation with the industries, as per the guidelines issued 
by MSDE and the Ministry is in the process of preparing the scheme 
guidelines. The Committee have been apprised that building on the initiative 
announced in previous budget, five National Centres of Excellence for skilling 
will be set up with global expertise and partnerships to equip our youth with 
the skills required for “Make for India, Make for the World” manufacturing. A 
suitable mechanism for setting up of five National Centres of Excellence for 
skilling is under process in the Ministry, and, as informed by the 
representative of the Ministry during evidence, the Ministry propose to align 
the Scheme with National Scheme for ITI upgradation. 
 
The Committee, while appreciating the efforts being made to prepare detailed 
guidelines, aligning the Scheme with the Scheme of setting up of five National 
Centres of Excellence for skilling as announced in Budget 2025-26 and 
pursuing for necessary approval of the Scheme, expect that the necessary 
approval will be accorded soon and the Ministry will be able to utilise the 
reduced RE during March 2025 and also budget estimates of Rs. 3000 crore 
in 2025-26. 
 
 
REPLY OF GOVERNMENT 
 
The Cabinet in its meeting held on 07.05.2025, has approved the National 
Scheme for ITI Upgradation and Setting Up of Five National Centres of 
Excellence for Skilling. In continuation of this, the Ministry is in the process 
of preparing detailed scheme guidelines and is planning to undertake 
stakeholder consultations shortly to finalize the implementation framework. 
The active participation of StateGovernments and industry partners is being 
ensured, as they are integral to thesuccess of the Scheme. The Ministry is 
committed to expediting the rollout of theScheme and taking all necessary 
steps to ensure effective and timely utilization ofthe Budget Estimates of 
₹3,000 crore allocated for the financial year 2025–26. 
 
 
 
 
 

51 
 
(Recommendation Para 30) 
 
 
The Committee note that the Ministry of Skill Development and 
Entrepreneurship (MSDE), through its autonomous institutes, Indian 
Institute of Entrepreneurship (IIE) and National Institute of Entrepreneurship 
and Small Business Development (NIESBUD) is undertaking the skill 
development training component of PM JANMAN Scheme of the Ministry of 
Tribal Affairs (MoTA) with the support of the Tribal Cooperative Marketing 
Development Federation of India (TRIFED). It is aimed at targeted 
development of 75 Particularly Vulnerable Tribal Groups (PVTGs) residing in 
15 States.  
 
Under this project, a total of 500 Van Dhan Vikas Kendras (VDVKs) are to be 
set up by TRIFED and a total of 42,000 PVTG beneficiaries are to be trained 
during 2024-25 & 2025-26. As on 19.02.2025, 174 VDVKs have been 
established and 326 VDVKs are yet to be set up. The responsibility of 
NIESBUD and IIE is to implement the skilling component of the Project while 
setting up of VDVKs lies with TRIFED. From the target of 42,000 PVTG 
beneficiaries to be trained, 39,576 beneficiaries have been covered through 
Entrepreneurship Awareness Programmes (EAP). Out of the total trained 
under EAP, 31,547 beneficiaries have been trained through Entrepreneurship 
Development Programmes (EDP) of which 20,492 beneficiaries, have been 
further trained through Value Added Skill Training (VAT). The training 
programmes are ongoing and the Ministry have assured that the rest of the 
beneficiaries are expected to be trained before 31st March, 2025.The 
Committee expect the Ministry to make concerted efforts and honour their 
commitment to cover beneficiaries who are yet to be trained. The Committee 
also desire that the remaining 326 VDVKs be set up by TRIFED in the larger 
interest of the intended beneficiaries. 
 
REPLY OF GOVERNMENT 
 
The Observation/recommendation of the Committee has been noted for 
compliance. 
 
The Ministry of Skill Development and Entrepreneurship is implementing the 
capacity building Component of the Pradhan Mantri Janjati Adivasi Nyaya 
Maha Abhiyan (PM-JANMAN) Project for Particularly Vulnerable Tribal 
Groups (PVTGs) through the National Institute for Entrepreneurship and 
Small Business Development (NIESBUD) and Indian Institute of 
Entrepreneurship, Guwahati (IIE). 
 
MSDE has signed MoU with Tribal Co-operative Marketing Federation of India 
(TRIFED) under MoTA wherein the responsibility of MSDE is to implement the 
capacity building component of the project, while setting up of Van Dhan 
Vikas Kendras (VDVKs) lies with TRIFED. 
 
Under this project, a total of 500 Van Dhan Vikas Kendras (VDVKs) are to be 
established covering 42,000 PVTG beneficiaries during the FY 2024-2025 and 
2025-26. As on 30.06.2025, 251 VDVKs have been set up covering 34,991 
participants through Entrepreneurship Development programme.  

52 
 
 
Efforts are being made by the Ministry to ensure that the Capacity Building 
programmes are completed once the toolkits have been setup by TRIFED in 
the VDVKs. The Ministry is undertaking all efforts to ensure that the 
remaining target are completed by March, 2026. 
 
 
REVISED REPLY OF GOVERNMENT 
 
The Ministry of Skill Development and Entrepreneurship is implementing the capacity 
building Component of the Pradhan Mantri Janjati Adivasi Nyaya Maha Abhiyan (PM-
JANMAN) Project for Particularly Vulnerable Tribal Groups (PVTGs) through the National 
Institute for Entrepreneurship and Small Business Development (NIESBUD) and Indian 
Institute of Entrepreneurship, Guwahati (IIE). 
 
MSDE has signed MoU with Tribal Co-operative Marketing Federation of India (TRIFED) 
under MoTA wherein the responsibility of MSDE is to implement the capacity building 
training in 500 VDVKs, while setting up of Van Dhan Vikas Kendras (VDVKs) lies with 
TRIFED. 
 
Under this project, a total of 500 Van Dhan Vikas Kendras (VDVKs) are to be established 
covering 42,000 PVTG beneficiaries during the FY 2024-2025 and 2025-26. As on 30.11.2025, 
488 VDVKs have been set up covering 38,383 participants through Entrepreneurship 
Development programme.  
 
Efforts are being made by the Ministry to ensure that the Capacity Building programmes are 
completed once the toolkits have been setup by TRIFED in the remaining 12 VDVKs. The 
Ministry is undertaking all efforts to ensure that the remaining target are completed by March, 
2026. 
 
The Observation/recommendation of the Committee has been noted for further compliance. 
 
 
 
(Recommendation Para 31) 
 
The Committee note that the Ministry in collaboration with the Ministry of 
New and Renewable Energy (MNRE) are organizing Entrepreneurship 
Development Programme (EDP) on Solar Entrepreneurship under the PM 
Surya Ghar Muft Bijli Yojana. The Ministry are implementing the programme 
through their autonomous institute, NIESBUD which has received the 
sanction from the MNRE in the month of September, 2024 for implementing 
the programme during F.Y. 2024 - 25 and F.Y. 2025 – 26 with a total target 
of 50,000. 
 
The Committee further note that as on 28th February, 2025, the Institute has 
imparted training to 6,900 participants under the project viz., only14% 
beneficiaries have been covered and the remaining 86% are to be covered by 
31.03.2026. The Committee impress upon the Ministry to intensify the efforts 
and cover the remaining beneficiaries by the target date.  
 
 
 
 

53 
 
REPLY OF GOVERNMENT 
 
The Observation/recommendation of the Committee has been noted for 
compliance. 
 
NIESBUD under the MSDE in collaboration with the Ministry of New and 
Renewable Energy (MNRE), Government of India, is organizing 
Entrepreneurship Development Programme (EDP) on Solar Entrepreneurship 
under the flagship initiative, PM Surya Ghar Muft Bijli Yojana. The 
programme aims to promote rooftop solar adoption, empower entrepreneurs, 
and create sustainable livelihood opportunities by fostering and mentoring 
budding and existing entrepreneurs in the field of solar entrepreneurship. 
 
NIESBUD received the sanction from the MNRE in the month of September 
2024. The Project has been sanctioned for implementation across two 
financial years F.Y. 2024 - 25 and 2025 – 26 with a target to train 50,000 
participants. 
 
As on 31.05.2025, the Institute has imparted training to 13,210 participants 
under the project. 
 
The Ministry has taken various steps to facilitate awareness and mobilisation 
for the programme with continuous follow-ups with MNRE, State 
Governments and concerned Departments. All efforts are being made to 
ensure that the target is completed by March, 2026. 
 
 
 
REVISED REPLY OF GOVERNMENT 
 
National Institute for Entrepreneurship and Small Business Development (NIESBUD) under 
the Ministry of Skill Development and Entrepreneurship in collaboration with the Ministry of 
New and Renewable Energy (MNRE), Government of India, is organizing Entrepreneurship 
Development Programme (EDP) on Solar Entrepreneurship under the flagship initiative, PM 
Surya Ghar Muft Bijli Yojana. The programme aims to promote rooftop solar adoption, 
empower entrepreneurs, and create sustainable livelihood opportunities by fostering and 
mentoring budding and existing entrepreneurs in the field of solar entrepreneurship. 
 
NIESBUD received the sanction from the MNRE in the month of September 2024. The Project 
has been sanctioned for implementation across two financial years F.Y. 2024 - 25 and 2025 – 
26 with a target to train 50,000 participants. 
 
As on 10.11.2025, the Institute has imparted training to 21,231 beneficiaries under the project 
 
The Ministry has taken various steps to facilitate awareness and mobilisation for the 
programme with continuous follow-ups with MNRE, State Governments and concerned 
Departments. All efforts are being made to ensure that the target is completed by March, 2026. 
 
The Observation/recommendation of the Committee has been noted for further compliance. 
 
 
 
 
 

54 
 
(Recommendation Para 33) 
 
The Committee note that the Ministry through their autonomous Institute viz. 
NIESBUD are organising  Sensitization and Capacity Building Workshop for 
Women Entrepreneurs sponsored by Maharashtra Small Scale Industries 
Development Corporation Limited (MSSIDC) under Raising and Accelerating 
MSME Performance (RAMP) scheme of the Ministry of Micro, Small and 
Medium Enterprises (MoMSME). The Committee further note that the 
Capacity Building workshops organised by NIESBUD under the initiative aims 
to support 10,000 women-led MSMEs across Maharashtra by providing them 
with essential knowledge on key aspects such as entrepreneurial ecosystems, 
regulatory compliance, government schemes, digital marketing, e-commerce, 
financial literacy, and legal compliance for scaling their businesses.  
 
The Committee have been apprised that the project has been sanctioned to 
NIESBUD in the month of September 2024 for implementing the programme 
in F.Y. - 2024-25 and F.Y. 2025-26. During the first phase, NIESBUD has to 
impart training to 3,000 participants by 31 March, 2025 and as on 28th 
February, 2025, the Institute has imparted training to 2,207 participants. The 
Committee have also been apprised that the Institute has mobilised the 
participants for the remaining target and is organising the programmes in 
different districts of Maharashtra, as such, the allocated target will be 
completed by 31st March 2025. The Ministry have also stated that in the 
second phase, the Institute is required to train 7,000 participants by 31st 
March 2026. 
 
The Committee find that while 30% target will be achieved by 31.03.2025, the 
remaining 70% beneficiaries will be required to be covered in 2025-26. The 
Committee, therefore, call upon the Ministry to draw a road map for achieving 
the target within the stipulated time.   
 
REPLY OF GOVERNMENT 
 
The observation of the Committee has been noted for the compliance. 
 
All efforts are being made to ensure that the target is completed by March, 
2026. 
 
REVISED REPLY OF GOVERNMENT 
 
National Institute for Entrepreneurship and Small Business Development (NIESBUD) under 
the Ministry of Skill Development and Entrepreneurship in collaboration with the Maharashtra 
Small Scale Industries Development Corporation (MSSIDC) is implementing Raising and 
Accelerating MSME Performance (RAMP) scheme. Under this program capacity building 
workshops for women entrepreneurs are being conducted across Maharashtra. This initiative 
aims to support women-led MSMEs by providing essential knowledge on entrepreneurial 
ecosystems, regulatory compliance, government schemes, digital marketing, e-commerce, 
financial literacy, and legal compliance 
 
The Institute has prepared a roadmap to achieve the remaining target under the Sensitization 
and Capacity Building Workshop for Women Entrepreneurs programme by 31 March 2026. 
 

55 
 
As on 17.12.2025, NIESBUD has imparted training to 6,449 women entrepreneurs in 
Maharashtra. To cover the remaining beneficiaries, the Institute proposes to organise the 
workshops as per the following schedule: 
 
S.No. Month No. of Programmes No. of Participants 
1 December 2025 10 500 
2 January 2026 25 1250 
3 February 2026 25 1250 
4 March 2026 10 551 
 Total 70 3551 
 
The Institute is actively mobilising participants across different districts of Maharashtra. 
During December 2025, the workshops are going to be organised in the districts of Nagpur, 
Akola, Pune, Wardha, Aurangabad, Latur, and Dhule. Participants have been mobilised for 
these workshops. 
 
With the above roadmap and ongoing mobilisation efforts, the institute would achieve the 
remaining target under the RAMP programme by 31 March 2026. 
 
The observation of the Committee has been noted for further compliance. 
 
(Recommendation Para 34) 
The Committee note that the Ministry in collaboration with the Department 
of Food and Public Distribution (DFPD), Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food 
and Public Distribution have undertaken a Capacity Building Programme for 
Fair Price Shop (FPS) Owners. The project is aimed to enable the FPS owners 
to run their businesses in consonance with the contemporary practices being 
adopted by Retail Entrepreneurs. The Committee have been apprised that the 
Ministry, through their autonomous Institute viz. NIESBUD is responsible for 
training and capacity building, while the nomination of participants is 
provided by DFPD in consultation with the respective State Food Distribution 
Departments. The total target under the project is to train 3000 FPS owners 
by 31st March, 2026 and, out of them, the number of beneficiaries trained till 
20th February, 2025 is 318 and further training of 300 more beneficiaries is 
planned to be completed by 31.03.2025. 
 
The Committee, thus, find that while 20% target will be achieved by 
31.03.2025, the remaining 80% beneficiaries will be required to be covered in 
2025-26. The Committee call upon the Ministry to coordinate with DFPD and 
achieve the target as stipulated above. 
 
REPLY OF GOVERNMENT 
 
The Observation/recommendation of the Committee has noted for 
compliance. 
 

56 
 
The Ministry through its Autonomous institute NIESBUD is implementing the 
project in collaboration with the Department of Food and Public Distribution 
(DFPD), Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution. The 
project is aimed to enable the 3000 FPS owners to run their businesses in 
consonance with the contemporary practices being adopted by Retail 
Entrepreneurs. As on 30.06.2025, training has been imparted to 315 FPS 
owners under the initiative. The nomination of participants is coordinated by 
DFPD in consultation with the respective State Food Distribution 
Departments. The training programme is organized upon receipt of 
nominations from DFPD. 
 
MSDE has been regularly following up with DFPD and communicating the 
requirement for participant nominations to facilitate the timely 
implementation of the programme. 
 
REVISED REPLY OF GOVERNMENT 
 
National Institute for Entrepreneurship and Small Business Development (NIESBUD) under 
the Ministry of Skill Development and Entrepreneurship in collaboration with the Department 
of Food and Public Distribution (DFPD), Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public 
Distribution is implementing the project. The project is being funded as a special project under 
PMKVY 4.0. The project is aimed to enable the 3000 FPS owners to run their businesses in 
consonance with the contemporary practices being adopted by Retail Entrepreneurs. As on 
30.06.2025, training has been imparted to 315 FPS owners under the initiative. The target has 
been revised and the program will now be implemented through E-learning model in order to 
ensure wider outreach.  
 
The Department of Food and Public Distribution, vide its letter No. D.O. No. 6(5)/2024-PD-I 
(E-386722) dated 26th August 2025, requested National Institute for Entrepreneurship and 
Small Business Development (NIESBUD) to develop e-learning modules in into 12 vernacular 
languages based on the capacity building curriculum delivered earlier as a five-day residential 
training programme for FPS dealers. These modules are to be hosted on an LMS platform to 
ensure wider outreach, particularly as the response from states for the existing residential 
courses has been limited. 
 
MSDE, in coordination with DFPD, has initiated the process to outline the modalities for the 
development of the e-learning modules 
 
The Observation/recommendation of the Committee has noted for further compliance. 
 
(Recommendation Para 35) 
 
The Committee note that the Project 'Swavalambini Women Entrepreneurship Programme' is 
specifically targeted at female students of colleges and universities. NIESBUD, Noida and the 
IIE, Guwahati, will be the Implementing Agency (IA) of the Project 'Swavalambini' of MSDE 
in collaboration with NITI Aayog.   The initiative will focus on empowering female students 
in Higher Education Institutions (HEIS) by providing them with essential skills, mentorship, 
and access to resources necessary for starting and scaling successful businesses. The Project 
will focus on comprehensive entrepreneurship training/ capacity-building combining theory-
based training with practical exposure through experiential learning.   
 
The Committee further note that the Project will be implemented  in Banaras Hindu University 
and Chaudhary Charan Singh University (North Zone-Uttar Pradesh);  University of 
Hyderabad, Maulana Azad National Urdu University, (South Zone-Telangana);  Kiang Nangba 

57 
 
Government College, Jowai, Ri- Bhoi College, Ri Bhoi and North Eastern Hill University 
(NEHU), Shillong (North East Zone-Meghalaya);  Government Champai College, Lunglei 
Government College and Mizoram University (North East Zone-Mizoram); and Gauhati 
University, Handique College and Dispur College (North East Zone-Assam). The target of the 
Project is to train 1200 female students under Entrepreneurship Awareness Programme 
(NIESBUD - 600, IIE - 600), out of which, 600 will be further selected for the Women 
Entrepreneurship Development Programme (NIESBUD-300, IIE - 300).  
 
The Committee were apprised that the Ministry of Skill Development and Entrepreneurship 
(MSDE) in collaboration with NITI Aayog and Women Entrepreneurship Platform (WEP) as 
knowledge partner, have recently launched the Swavalambini Women Entrepreneurship 
Programme on 07th February, 2025 in North Eastern States of India viz. Meghalaya, Mizoram 
and Assam.  The Committee impress upon the Ministry to take necessary steps to ensure that 
the Project is launched/implemented in the already selected Higher Education Institutions 
(HEIS) of the remaining two States viz. Uttar Pradesh and Telengana. 
 
REPLY OF GOVERNMENT 
 
The Observation/recommendation of the Committee has been noted for 
compliance. 
 
The Ministry in collaboration with NITI Aayog and its Women 
Entrepreneurship Platform (WEP) is implementing the project 
SWAVALAMBINI through its autonomous Institutes NIESBUD and IIE. The 
project comprises of Faculty Development Progaramme, training of 1200 
female students under Entrepreneurship Awareness Programme and out of 
which, 600 will be selected for undergoing Entrepreneurship Development 
Programme. As on 30.06.2025, following activities have been undertaken: 
 
(c) Entrepreneurship Awareness Programmes (EAPs) have been organized 
for 591 students. 
(d) Faculty Development Programme for 43 faculty of HEIs have been 
completed. 
 
Further the following activities are being planned: 
 
(e) Entrepreneurship Development Progarmmes for 600 female students 
selected from EAP. 
(f) Shortlisting of the selected students from EDP for Award to Reward 
(initiative of NITI Aayog for hand-holding, mentoring support and 
setting up of new enterprise) 
 
All efforts are being made to ensure that the target is completed by March, 
2026. 
 
REVISED REPLY OF GOVERNMENT 
 
The Ministry of Skill Development and Entrepreneurship (MSDE) in collaboration with the 
Women Entrepreneurship Platform of NITI Aayog as knowledge partner, launched the 
Swavalambini - a Women Entrepreneurship Programme in February, 2025 in six Higher 
Education Institutions (HEIs)/Universities of Assam, Meghalaya, Mizoram, Uttar Pradesh and 
Telangana as a pilot project. The Ministry is implementing the programme through its 

58 
 
Autonomous Institutes, namely, National Institute for Entrepreneurship and Small Business 
Development (NIESBUD), Noida and Indian Institute of Entrepreneurship (IIE), Guwahati. 
 
The Swavalambini project introduces a structured, multi-stage training approach to help young 
women transition from ideation to successful enterprise creation. The Project aims to cultivate 
an entrepreneurial mindset among female students, equipping them with awareness of available 
support mechanisms, schemes, resources and networks essential for pursuing entrepreneurship 
as a career. 
 
The target group for the Swavalambini Project includes 1200 female students from Higher 
Educational Institutes (HEIs) and Universities who will undergo introductory programme on 
entrepreneurial awareness through Entrepreneurship Awareness Programme (EAP). Out of 
these, 600 students selected from EAP participants will undergo the Entrepreneurship 
Development Programme (EDP) offering intensive entrepreneurship development training 
covering crucial business aspects such as skilling, access to finance, market linkages, 
compliance and legal support, business services and networking opportunities. This will be 
followed by 21 weeks of mentorship and handholding support to help participants translate 
their ideas into sustainable enterprises. 
 
MSDE will oversee the execution, supervision, and monitoring of the programme, while NITI 
Aayog will organize workshops, provide mentoring support, facilitate seed funding, and 
recognize successful entrepreneurs through the Award To Reward (ATR) initiative. 
 
During the mentoring and handholding support, industry leaders and successful entrepreneurs 
will guide the participants by providing mentorship and hands-on support. Successful 
entrepreneurs will be invited to share their experiences, highlighting the challenges they 
overcame and the strategies they used to establish their businesses. 
 
To ensure long-term impact, the programme also includes a Faculty Development Programme 
(FDP), where faculty members from participating HEIs/Universities shall undergo a five-day 
training session. This initiative will equip educators with the necessary skills to mentor and 
guide aspiring women entrepreneurs within their institutions. 
 
The overall programme-wise details of women participants trained in six Higher Education 
Institutions (HEIs)/Universities of Assam, Meghalaya, Mizoram, Uttar Pradesh and Telangana 
under the pilot project is as under: 
 
Name of the Programme Total Target Total Trained 
Faculty Development Programme (FDP) 75 82 
Entrepreneurship Awareness Programme (EAP) 1200 1,110 
Entrepreneurship Development Programme (EDP) 600 302 
 
 
The State-wise details pertaining Uttar Pradesh and Telangana and its programme-wise details 
of number of women participants trained as on 10.11.2025 under the pilot project is as under: 
 
State 
Name of the Programme 
(Total trained) 
FDP EAP EDP 
Uttar Pradesh 38 491 254 
Telangana 17 150 48 
Total 55 641 302 
 
 
 

59 
 
Further the following activities are being planned: 
 
(a) Entrepreneurship Development Programmes for 600 female students 
selected from EAP. 
(b) Shortlisting of the selected students from EDP for Award to Reward 
(initiative of NITI Aayog for hand-holding, mentoring support and 
setting up of new enterprise) 
 
All efforts are being made to ensure that the target is completed by March, 
2026. 
 
The Observation/recommendation of the Committee has been noted for 
further compliance. 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 36) 
 
The Committee have been apprised that the programme will be 
implemented in four phases and will include Faculty Development 
Programmes (FDP) of 5 days for selected faculty members from colleges, 
Entrepreneurship Awareness Programmes (EAP) of 2 days for 1,200 
students, Entrepreneurship Development Programmes (EDP) of 40 hours 
for selected 600 students, followed by 6 months of mentoring and 
handholding support to ensure sustained guidance and business 
development assistance. The Committee desire that it would be in the 
fitness of things if  the feedback is also obtained from trained faculty 
and students selected as well as trained after every phase of the Project 
so as to have an objective assessment of shortcomings as well as 
improvement in future training programmes. 
 
REPLY OF GOVERNMENT 
 
The Observation/recommendation of the Committee has been noted for 
compliance. 
 
The Ministry in collaboration with NITI Aayog and its Women 
Entrepreneurship Platform (WEP) is implementing the project 
SWAVALAMBINI through its autonomous Institutes NIESBUD and IIE. The 
project comprises of Faculty Development Progaramme, training of 1200 
female students under Entrepreneurship Awareness Programme and out of 
which, 600 will be selected for undergoing Entrepreneurship Development 
Programme. As on 30.06.2025, following activities have been undertaken: 
 
(e) Entrepreneurship Awareness Programmes (EAPs) have been organized 
for 591 students. 
(f) Faculty Development Programme for 43 faculty of HEIs have been 
completed. 
 
Further the following activities are being planned: 
 
(g) Entrepreneurship Development Progarmmes for 600 female students 
selected from EAP. 

60 
 
(h) Shortlisting of the selected students from EDP for Award to Reward 
(initiative of NITI Aayog for hand-holding, mentoring support and 
setting up of new enterprise) 
 
All efforts are being made to ensure that the target is completed by March, 
2026. 
 
 
(Recommendation Para 37) 
 
The Committee have also been apprised that over the past ten years, both 
NIESBUD and IIE have collectively trained 12,33,699 candidates through 
various programs and interventions, demonstrating their significant 
contribution to the entrepreneurial ecosystem and notably, 7,06,617 (57.27%) 
of these trainees have been women. The Committee appreciate the 
contribution made by both NIESBUD and IIE and their commitment to 
promoting women’s entrepreneurship and inclusive economic growth and 
desire both organizations to maintain momentum so as to ensure attainment 
of the objectives of the Project. 
 
REPLY OF GOVERNMENT 
 
The Ministry remains committed to promoting inclusive growth and will 
continue to maintain the momentum to achieve the objectives of the project 
in alignment with the larger vision of empowering entrepreneurs, particularly 
women, across the country. 
 
 
(Recommendation Para 39) 
 
The Ministry have further stated that the concerned State Governments and 
Regional Directorates of Skill Development and Entrepreneurship will work 
together to identify suitable training centers to initiate training in the 
remaining 43 districts. The Committee desire the Ministry to strengthen their 
coordination and monitoring mechanism so as to ensure identification and 
operationalisation of Training Centres in 43 disticts on urgent basis so that 
the deserving artisans peddle their products and services into domestic and 
global value chains. 
 
 
REPLY OF GOVERNMENT 
 
Out of 43 districts that were yet to be covered, training has already been 
initiated in 39 of these districts. In the remaining 4 districts, training could 
not be initiated due to low number of verified candidates, which is insufficient 
to create training batches. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

61 
 
(Recommendation Para 41) 
 
The Committee note that Assam, West Bengal, Tamil Nadu, Kerala and 
Karnataka are the major tea growing States. However, there is no job role 
exclusively related to Tea Plantation Workers under PMKVY 4.0. Considering 
the fact that tea plantations contribute significantly to employment and 
overall economic growth, the Committee recommend the Ministry to explore 
job role related skill training for Tea Plantation Workers under PMKVY 4.0 
and set up JSSs in the remaining districts of these States so as to improve 
the income generation and livelihood of Tea Plantation Workers of the country. 
 
REPLY OF GOVERNMENT 
 
As regards PMKVY, the Observation/recommendation of the Committee has 
noted for compliance. 
 
PMKVY is a demand-driven scheme wherein targets are allocated to eligible 
Project Implementing Agencies (PIAs) based on proposals submitted in line 
with the scheme guidelines. Under PMKVY 2.0 and PMKVY 3.0, over 46,000 
candidates from states namely Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, Kerala, Tamil 
Nadu, Tripura, and West Bengal were upskilled in the "Tea Plantation Worker" 
job role through the Recognition of Prior Learning (RPL) component of the 
scheme. Currently, under PMKVY 4.0, no proposal for training in the "Tea 
Plantation Worker" job role has been received so far. However, MSDE will 
actively consider such demand driven proposals under PMKVY 4.0. 
 
As regards JSS, the Ministry acknowledges the Committee’s valuable 
recommendation regarding skill training for Tea Plantation Workers under 
PMKVY 4.0. Recognizing the sector’s contribution to employment and the 
economy, the Ministry will explore the development of customized job roles 
aligned with the needs of tea plantation workers in consultation with relevant 
Sector Skill Councils. 
 
The suggestion to set up Jan Shikshan Sansthans (JSSs) in the remaining 
districts of major tea-growing states like Assam, West Bengal, Tamil Nadu, 
Kerala, and Karnataka is well taken. The Ministry will assess the feasibility of 
phased expansion of JSSs in these regions to enhance access to livelihood-
oriented skill training for plantation workers. In addition, the Ministry would 
further consider incorporating job roles specifically related to tea plantations 
and encourage skill development initiatives tailored to this sector in the Jan 
Shikshan Sansthan's presently active in the afore-said states. 
 
REVISED REPLY OF GOVERNMENT 
 
PMKVY is a demand-driven scheme wherein targets are allocated to eligible Project 
Implementing Agencies (PIAs) based on proposals submitted in line with the scheme 
guidelines. Under PMKVY 2.0 and PMKVY 3.0, over 46,000 candidates from states namely 
Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, Kerala, Tamil Nadu, Tripura, and West Bengal were upskilled in 
the "Tea Plantation Worker" job role through the Recognition of Prior Learning (RPL) 
component of the scheme. Currently, under PMKVY 4.0, no proposal for training in the "Tea 
Plantation Worker" job role has been received so far. However, MSDE will actively consider 
such demand driven proposals under PMKVY 4.0. 
 

62 
 
As regards JSS, the Ministry acknowledges the Committee’s valuable recommendation 
regarding skill training for Tea Plantation Workers under PMKVY 4.0. Recognizing the 
sector’s contribution to employment and the economy, the Ministry will explore the 
development of customized job roles aligned with the needs of tea plantation workers in 
consultation with relevant Sector Skill Councils. 
 
The suggestion to set up Jan Shikshan Sansthans (JSSs) in the remaining districts of major tea-
growing states like Assam, West Bengal, Tamil Nadu, Kerala, and Karnataka is well taken. 
The Ministry will assess the feasibility of phased expansion of JSSs in these regions to enhance 
access to livelihood-oriented skill training for plantation workers. In addition, the Ministry 
would further consider incorporating job roles specifically related to tea plantations and 
encourage skill development initiatives tailored to this sector in the Jan Shikshan Sansthan's 
presently active in the afore-said states. 
 
(Recommendation Para 43) 
 
The Committee were apprised during evidence on 19.11.2024, that it is 
proposed to set up 30 Skill India International Centres (SIICs) to promote skill 
based International mobility. The Committee have now been apprised that 
while two SIICs have been established at Varanasi (Uttar Pradesh) and 
Bhubaneswar (Odisha), the work relating to setting up of additional 5 SIICs 
at Indian Institute of Entrepreneurship, Guwahati (Assam); NSTI, Bengaluru 
(Karnataka); NSTI, Ludhiana (Punjab); NSTI, Hyderabad (Telangana) and 
NSTI, Kanpur (Uttar Pradesh), is in advanced stage. The Committee desire 
that appropriate steps be taken on priority to ensure that the remaining Skill 
India International Centres are set up and made operational in a time bound 
manner so as to facilitate international workforce mobility opportunities for 
Indians and achieve the objective of making India the skill capital of the world. 
The Committee would like to be apprised of progress made in this regard.  
 
REPLY OF GOVERNMENT 
 
The Ministry of Skill Development and Entrepreneurship (MSDE) is in the 
process of establishing 30 Skill India International Centres (SIICs), beginning 
with 7 centres as pilot projects in government-run institutions. At present, 
two SIICs—located in Varanasi and Bhubaneswar—are operational, and five 
more at Guwahati, Bengaluru, Ludhiana, Hyderabad, and Kanpur have been 
approved by the Project Steering Committee chaired by Secretary, MSDE. The 
establishment of new centres is targeted by 31/05/2025, while Center at 
Guwahati is likely to be operationalized by 15/06/2025. Given that SIICs 
involve skilled migration, their operations are governed by the Emigration Act, 
1983, which mandates that recruitment for overseas employment be done 
through MEA-approved Recruitment Agents (RAs). Since NSDC does not hold 
an RA license and its application for the same was rejected by MEA, MSDE 
has decided to empanel RAs through an Expression of Interest process, 
guided by Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs) that are being finalized in 
consultation with MEA. These SOPs will define roles, responsibilities of 
various stakeholders, and financial arrangements. As part of a phased 
approach to address regulatory and logistical challenges, MSDE is prioritizing 
the operationalization of the 7 pilot SIICs. Once SOPs are finalized, the 
remaining 23 centres will be established in a time-bound and standardized 
manner. 
 

63 
 
(Recommendation Para 44) 
 
The Committee trust that the Ministry have taken appropriate action on the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in their Third 
Report on Demands for Grants (2024-25) of the Ministry, which was presented 
to both the Houses of Parliament on 16.12.2024. 
 
 
REPLY OF GOVERNMENT 
 
The observations and recommendations of the Committee as outlined in the 
Third Report on the Demands for Grants (2024–25) of the Ministry, have been 
appropriately acted upon in respect of all the schemes of the Ministry, namely, 
PMKVY, NAPS, SANKALP etc.Further, it is stated that the SANKALP scheme 
has been closed on 31.03.2025 and closure processes are being pursued. The 
Ministry remains committed to implement the recommendations of the 
Committee in letter and spirit and ensure greater transparency, efficiency in 
its functioning.  

64 
 
CHAPTER-III 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO 
NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLY 
 
 
(Recommendation Para 23) 
 
The Committee note that as on 31st January, 2025, 21259 establishments 
have engaged 8,22,196 apprentices and out of them, 6,643 (0.81%) have been 
engaged by 408 establishments located in North-Eastern Region (NER) 
States.The Committee, thus find that the NER offers significantly lesser 
apprenticeship opportunities compared to the rest of the country. Therefore, 
considering the inherent issues of the States of the North Eastern Region, the 
Ministry is contemplating a Pilot project exclusively for NER to promote 
apprenticeship for which a Concept Note is in the draft stage. The Committee 
feel that implementation of the NAPS is marred with shortfall in North Eastern 
Region. The Committee would, therefore, like to impress upon the Ministry to 
take up the Concept Note for pilot project on NER on priority basis so to 
undertake capacity building of the apprenticeship ecosystem for the people of 
the NER. 
 
REPLY OF GOVERNMENT 
 
Under NAPS in FY 2024-25 (as on 31.03. 2025) 23,386 establishments have 
been engaged 9,85,653 apprentices and out of them, 7,446 (0.76%) have been 
engaged by 352 establishments located in North-Eastern Region (NER) States. 
The Pilot initiative for special intervention for promotion of apprenticeship in 
NER of Rs.43.94 Cr. for the FY 2025-26 has been approved by the competent 
authority and the Pilot Scheme has already been launched by Hon’ble 
Minister of State (I/C), Skill Development and Entrepreneurship on 
20.05.2025 in Mizoram. Under this initiative, an additional incentive of upto 
₹1500 is provided for apprentices who are domiciled in the NER and 
undertake apprenticeships within the NER (excluding the domiciled State) or 
outside the region. This measure is intended to attract youths to undertake 
apprenticeship outside their own State. Within the total financial outlay, a 
budget of ₹3 Crore has been allocated for awareness and advocacy activities, 
aimed at mobilizing youths and establishments to participation in NAPS-2 
across the NER. 
 
 
(Recommendation Para 38) 
 
The Committee note that PM Vishwakarma Scheme was launched on 17th 
September, 2023, which aims at upskilling the Vishwakarma’s with the 
knowledge of modern tools and techniques coupled with credit support for 
expanding their business. The Scheme is being implemented by three 
Ministries i.e., Ministry of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises (MSME), 
Ministry of Skill Development and Entrepreneurship (MSDE), and 
Department of Financial Services (DFS), Ministry of Finance and MSDE is the 
nodal ministry for implementation of Skilling Component of the Scheme. A 

65 
 
total of 18 trades are covered under the Scheme to promote onboarding of 
training centres under the scheme.  
 
The Committee note that as on 15.02.2025, PMV id is available in 679 
districts, however, training has been initiated in 636 districts, the training is 
yet to be initiated in 43 districts. Further, 26,96,358 PMV ID are available and 
as on 15.02.2025, 18,99,385 candidates have been trained and assessed 
against the target of 16 lakh candidates for 2023-24 and 2024-25.  
 
The Committee observe that the PM Vishwakarma Yojana is currently 
available in 34 out of 36 States/ Union Territories except Tamil Nadu and 
West Bengal. The Ministry have stated that the State Monitoring Committee 
and District Implementation Committees have not yet been constituted by 
these two States. The Committee recommend the Ministry to take up the 
matter with the two State Governments without any further delay and resolve 
the issue so that products and services of artisans of the two States also have 
their benevolent share in domestic and global value chains. The Committee 
would like to be apprised of the progress made in this regard. 
 
REPLY OF GOVERNMENT 
 
The PM Vishwakarma Yojana is being jointly implemented by the Ministry of 
Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises (M/o MSME) as the Nodal Ministry, in 
coordination with the Ministry of Skill Development and Entrepreneurship 
(M/o SDE), and the Department of Financial Services (DFS), Ministry of 
Finance. As per the Scheme Guidelines, the responsibility for registration of 
beneficiaries and integration with the various components of the scheme rests 
with M/oMSME. Further, coordination with State Governments, for the 
formation and operationalisation of State Monitoring Committee and District 
Implementation Committees is under the jurisdiction of M/o MSME. 
 
The M/o SDE is entrusted with the implementation of the Skilling component 
of the Scheme. Once the data of the beneficiaries for these 2 states i.e. Tamil 
Nadu and West Bengal is received from M/o MSME, Ministry of Skill 
Development and Entrepreneurship will immediately initiate training and 
assessment of the beneficiaries in these states 
 
  

66 
 
CHAPTER-IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES 
OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
COMMITTEE AND WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION 
 
 (Recommendation Para 27) 
 
The Committee note that out of 25.38 lakh apprentices engaged  w.e.f. 2022-
23 upto 18.02.2025, 11.37 lakh candidates (44%) belonged to SC, ST and 
OBC [2.97 lakh SCs, 1.12 lakh STs, and 7.28 lakh OBCs].  The Committee 
have been apprised that although there is no target allocation based on social 
category, the Ministry vide letter dated 28.01.2025 have requested all State 
Commissioners/Directors dealing with Skilling/ Apprenticeship Training and 
State Skill Development Missions to further sensitize the identified vulnerable 
pockets about all  PMNAM events. The Committee while appreciating the steps 
taken by the Ministry emphasise that periodic review of such measures be 
undertaken so as to ensure that social category candidates are not deprived 
of the benefits of the Scheme. 
 
REPLY OF GOVERNMENT 
 
Under NAPS-2 from FY2022-23 to FY2025-26 (as on 30.04.2025), 27.44 lakh 
apprentices engaged, 17.84 lakh candidates (56.08%) belonged to SC, ST and 
OBC [4.71 lakh SCs, 1.78 lakh STs, and 11.34 lakh OBCs]. 
 
Review of Measure: As per the Apprenticeship Rules, 1992, Section 5: 
Reservation of Training Places - The training places for the Scheduled Caste, 
Scheduled Tribe and Other Backward Classes in designated trades shall be 
reserved by the employer according to the prescribed norms followed in the 
respective State or Union Territory. In addition, 8.6% and 16.6% of the fund 
is being allocated for the Scheduled Tribe and Scheduled Caste category, 
respectively. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
Please refer to Para No.18 of Chapter-I of the report.  
 
 

67 
 
(Recommendation Para 32) 
 
The Committee have been apprised that the target group to be covered 
under the programme are either the existing vendors or the new 
entrepreneurs who have the capacity to become empanelled vendors by 
submitting bank guarantee of Rs. 2.50 Lakh as per the guidelines framed 
by the MNRE. In the considered opinion of the Committee, the bank 
guarantee of Rs. 2.50 Lakh may stand a stumbling block for many 
especially the vendors in the rural areas.The Committee, therefore, 
desire the Ministry to take up the matter regarding review of the 
guidelines with the Ministry of New and Renewable Energy so as to 
reduce the amount of Bank guarantee. 
 
REPLY OF GOVERNMENT 
 
“The Observation/recommendation of the Committee has been noted 
for compliance. 
 
NIESBUD under the MSDE in collaboration with the Ministry of New 
and Renewable Energy (MNRE), Government of India, is organizing 
Entrepreneurship Development Programme (EDP) on Solar 
Entrepreneurship under the flagship initiative, PM Surya Ghar Muft 
Bijli Yojana.The programme aims to promote rooftop solar adoption, 
empower entrepreneurs, and create sustainable livelihood 
opportunities by fostering and mentoring budding and existing 
entrepreneurs in the field of solar entrepreneurship. 
 
NIESBUD received the sanction from the MNRE in the month of 
September 2024. The Project has been sanctioned for implementation 
across two financial years F.Y. 2024 - 25 and 2025 – 26 with a target to 
train 50,000 participants. 
 
As on 31.05.2025, the Institute has imparted training to 13,210 
participants under the project. 
 
The Ministry has taken various steps to facilitate awareness and 
mobilisation for the programme with continuous follow-ups with MNRE, 
State Governments and concerned Departments. All efforts are being 
made to ensure that the target is completed by March  2026.” 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
Please refer to Para No.25 of Chapter-I of the report. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

68 
 
CHAPTER-V 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES 
OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE INTERIM IN NATURE 
 
(Recommendation Para 40) 
 
The Committee note that the Skill Acquisition and Knowledge Awareness for 
Livelihood Promotion (SANKALP) was conceived to support National Skill 
Development Mission (NSDM) in achieving its full potential.  The Scheme was 
conceptualized to operationalize Skill India Mission by setting in motion the 
sub-Missions proposed under the NSDM. It is a US $ 250 million (Rs.1,650 
crore) World Bank Loan assisted Centrally Sponsored Scheme of the MSDE. 
The Scheme was made effective on 19th January, 2018 with an initial 
implementation period till March, 2023, which has been extended till March, 
2025. The Committee further note that the World Bank has reviewed the 
project deliverables during Implementation Completion Mission (ICM) in 
March 2024 and submitted an Implementation Status and Results Report, in 
which they have rated the project's performance as 'Satisfactory’.  
 
The Committee have been apprised that the targets set for all the four Project 
Development Objectives (PDOs) under the Scheme have been achieved.  The 
Committee have also been apprised that the targets for all the Disbursement 
Linked Indicators (DLIs) have been achieved except for DLI7, which is under 
verification by the Independent Verification Agency and is expected to be 
completed by March 2025. The Committee exhort the Ministry to make sincere 
efforts and ensure that verification of the remaining Disbursement Linked 
Indicator viz. DL17 is completed by 31st March, 2025.  Further, as informed 
by the Ministry, at present, there is no proposal to extend the Scheme beyond 
March, 2025 or introduce any other Scheme on similar lines. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that an impact assessment of the Scheme be 
undertaken during 2025-26 and completed in a time bound manner. 
 
REPLY OF GOVERNMENT 
 
With respect to the verification of DLI 7, the Committee is apprised that the 
targets towards DLI 7 have been achieved and duly verified by the 
Independent Verification Agency of SANKALP within the timeline of 31st 
March 2025.Further, the Committee is apprised that Impact Assessment of 
SANKALP scheme is being conducted by NITI Aayog as a part of 'Evaluation 
of Centrally Sponsored Schemes in Package 4 - Urban Transformation & Skill 
Development'. The evaluation is presently under progress.    
 
 
 

69 
 
(Recommendation Para 42) 
 
The Committee note that the ‘Review of National Policy for Skill Development 
and Entrepreneurship’ Project was assigned to BCG India, which has 
submitted the draft National Policy Document in December 2024 and the 
same is being reviewed in consultation with key stakeholders. The Committee 
call upon the Ministry to strengthen their coordination mechanism, analyse 
the views/suggestions of key stakeholders and complete the review exercise 
in a time bound manner so as to interalia enhance skill development 
ecosystem and foster lifelong learning to improve employability and meet the 
evolving needs of the economy. 
 
REPLY OF GOVERNMENT 
 
The Committee is apprised that the exercise of review and revision of the 
National Policy for Skill Development and Entrepreneurship involved wide 
stakeholders’ consultations with Central Ministries/Departments, 
States/UTs Governments, Industries/Industry Associations, Sector Skill 
Councils, and Experts. Taking into consideration the suggestions and 
feedback received during these consultations, a final draft of the National 
Policy for Skill Development and Entrepreneurship 2025 has been prepared 
and put up on the MyGov portal for the comments/views from the general 
public, by 30.06.2025. Also, the key stakeholders (Central 
Ministries/Departments, States/UTs Governments, Industry/Industry 
Associations, Sector Skill Councils, etc.) have also been requested to provide 
their comprehensive views/comments on the draft national policy, by 
30.06.2025. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi;                       BASAVARAJ BOMMAI                
24 March 2026                                                        CHAIRPERSON 
3 Chaitra 1948 (Saka)                   STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR,  
 TEXTILES AND SKILL DEVELOPMENT 
  

70 
 
APPENDIX- I 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR, TEXTILES AND SKILL 
DEVELOPMENT 
(2025-26) 
 
Minutes of the Ninth Sitting of the Committee 
 
The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 24 March, 2026 from 1500 
hrs. to 1615 hrs. in Samanvay 5, Parliament House,  New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
Shri Basavaraj Bommai-  Chairperson 
 MEMBERS  
 LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri G. M. Harish Balayogi 
3. Shri Chandra Prakash Choudhary 
4. Shri G. Lakshminarayana 
5. Shri Rudra Narayan Pany 
6. Shri Tanuj Punia 
7. Shri Pradeep Purohit 
8. Shri Raja Ram Singh 
9. Shri Chavan Ravindra Vasantrao 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
10. Shri Govindbhai Laljibhai Dholakia 
11. Shri Rajendra Gehlot 
12. Dr. Syed Naseer Hussain 
13. Shri Maharaja Sanajaoba Leishemba 
14. Shri Gurwinder Singh Oberoi 
 
 

71 
 
 
 
     SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Mukesh Kumar Sharma - Joint Secretary   
2. Ms. K. Muanniang Tunglut  - Director 
3. Ms. Mili Dinesh    - Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri S. Lalengzau Ngaihte  -  Deputy Secretary 
5. Ms. Shilpa Kant    - Under Secretary 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the 
Sitting of the Committee, convened for consideration and adoption of 
the following Reports on:  
(i)  Action Taken by the Government on the 
observations/recommendations contained in the Fourth Report 
(18th Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants (2025-26)’ pertaining to 
the Ministry of Labour & Employment; 
(ii)  Action Taken by the Government on the 
observations/recommendations contained in the Fifth Report 
(18th Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants (2025-26)’ pertaining to 
the Ministry of Textiles; and  
(iii)  Action Taken by the Government on the 
observations/recommendations contained in the Sixth Report 
(18th Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants (2025-26)’ pertaining to 
the Ministry of Skill Development and Entrepreneurship. 
 3. Giving an overview of the important 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Draft Reports, the 
Chairperson solicited the views/ suggestions of the Members.  
4. The Committee, then, took up the Draft Reports one by one for 
consideration and after some discussions, the draft Reports were 
adopted by the Committee with some modifications. 
 
5. The Committee then authorized the Chairperson to finalise the 
Draft Reports and present them to Parliament.  
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
  

72 
 
APPENDIX-II 
(Vide Para No. 3 of the Introduction) 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONSCONTAINED IN THE SIXTH 
REPORT (EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
LABOUR, TEXTILES AND SKILL DEVELOPMENT  
 
      Total Percentage 
   
I. Total number of Recommendations 44 
 
 
II. Recommendations/Observations which have 
been accepted by the Government – Rec. Para 
Nos.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10,11, 12,13, 
14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 24, 25, 
26, 28, 29, 30, 31, 33, 34, 35, 36, 37, 39, 
41, 43 and 44 
 
 
38 86.362% 
III. Recommendations/Observations which the 
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of 
the Government’s reply – Rec. Para Nos.23 
and 38  
 
02 4.546% 
 
IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of 
which replies of the Government have not 
been accepted by the Committee and which 
require reiteration – Rec. Para Nos. 27 and 
32  
02 4.546% 
V Recommendations/Observations in respect of 
which replies of the Government are interim 
in nature - Rec. Para Nos. 40 and 42 
02 4.546% 
   100%  
 
 