i 
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR, TEXTILES AND SKILL 
DEVELOPMENT 
(2024-25) 
 (EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF TEXTILES 
 
Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations of the Committee contained in their Fifty-Third 
Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Development and Promotion of 
Jute Industry’ pertaining to the Ministry of Textiles. 
 
EIGHTH REPORT 
 
     
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
NEW DELHI   
August, 2025/ Shravana, 1947 (Saka)  
  
8 

ii 
 
EIGHTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR, TEXTILES AND SKILL 
DEVELOPMENT 
(2024-25) 
 
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF TEXTILES 
Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations of the Committee contained in their Fifty-Third 
Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Development and Promotion of 
Jute Industry’ pertaining to the Ministry of Textiles. 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 06.08.2025 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 06.08.2025 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
August, 2025/ Shravana, 1947 (Saka)  


iii 
 
CONTENTS 
       
                         PAGE No. 
        
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (iv) 
INTRODUCTION   (v) 
  
CHAPTER I Report 1 
   
CHAPTER II Recommendations/Observations which have 
been accepted by the Government 
 
18 
CHAPTER III Recommendations/Observations which the 
Committee  do not desire to pursue in view of 
the Government’s reply 
 
44 
CHAPTER IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of 
which replies of the Government have not 
been accepted by the Committee and which 
require reiteration 
 
45 
CHAPTER V Recommendations/Observations in respect of 
which  replies of the Government  are interim 
in nature    
50 
 
APPENDICES 
Appendix-I 
  
Minutes of the Thirteenth Sitting of the 
Committee held on 31st July, 2025.                    
 
54 
Appendix-II 
  
Analysis of the Action Taken by the Government 
on the Observations/ Recommendations 
contained in the Fifty–Third Report (Seventeenth 
Lok Sabha)      
56 
 
  

iv 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 1. Shri Lalkithang   - Joint Secretary 
         1.     Ms. K. Muanniang Tunglut -  Director 
 2  Shri Sandeep Kumar Malhotra - Assistant Executive Officer 
  
  
     COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR, TEXTILES AND SKILL DEVELOPMENT 
(2024-25) 
                Shri Basavaraj Bommai – Chairperson 
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2 Shri Mani A. 
3 Shri G. M. Harish Balayogi 
4 Shri Aashtikar Patil Nagesh Bapurao 
5 Shri Partha Bhowmick 
6 Shri Yogender Chandolia 
7 Shri Ram Prasad Chaudhary 
8 Shri Chandra Prakash Choudhary 
9 Shri G. Lakshminarayana 
10 Shri Asit Kumar Mal 
11 Shri Kali Charan Munda 
12 Shri Rudra Narayan Pany 
13 Shri Kartick Chandra Paul 
14 Shri Tanuj Punia 
15 Shri Pradeep Purohit 
16 Shri Mukesh Rajput 
17 Shri Raja Ram Singh 
18 Shri Adhikari Soumendu 
19 Shri V. K. Sreekandan 
20 Shri Manoj Tigga 
21 Shri Chavan Ravindra Vasantrao 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
22 Smt. Jaya Amitabh Bachchan  
23 Shri Ritabrata Banerjee 
24 Shri Naresh Bansal  
25 Shri Govindbhai Laljibhai Dholakia  
26 Shri Rajendra Gehlot 
27 Dr. Syed Naseer Hussain 
28 Shri Maharaja Sanajaoba Leishemba 
29 Shri Shibu Soren 
30 Vacant 
31 Vacant 
 

v 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Labour, Textiles and Skill 
Development (2024-25) having been authorised by the Committee, do present 
on their behalf this Eighth Report on Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in their Fifty- 
Third Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Development and Promotion of Jute 
Industry’ pertaining to the Ministry of Textiles. 
2. The Fifty-Third Report was presented to Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya 
Sabha on 7th February, 2024. The Ministry of Textiles furnished their replies on 
27th May, 2024 indicating Action Taken on the Observations/ Recommendations 
contained in the Fifty-Third Report. The Committee considered and adopted the 
Draft Report at their sitting held on 31st July, 2025.  
3. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in the Fifty-Third Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) 
is given at Appendix. 
4. For ease of reference, Observations/ Recommendations of the Committee 
have been printed in thick type in the body of the Report. 
 
 
 
New Delhi;                BASAVARAJ BOMMAI 
31 July, 2025                                   CHAIRPERSON, 
09 Shravana, 1947 (Saka)                 STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR,  
TEXTILES AND SKILL DEVELOPMENT 
 
 
  
 
  

1 
 
CHAPTER- I 
REPORT 
 
This Report deals with the action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in their 
Fifty-Third Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Development and 
Promotion of Jute Industry’ of the Ministry of Textiles. 
 
2. The Fifty-Third Report was presented to Lok Sabha/laid in Rajya 
Sabha on 7th February, 2024. It contained 30 Observations/ 
Recommendations. Replies of Government in respect of all the 
Recommendations have been received and are categorized as under:- 
 
 
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have 
been accepted by the Government – Rec. Para 
Nos. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 14, 15, 16, 
17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 28 and 29.  
 
Chapter-II 
Total:24 
Percentage: 
80.00 
 
(ii) Recommendation/Observation which the 
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the 
Government’s reply – Rec. Para No. 27. 
 
Chapter-III 
Total:01 
Percentage: 3.33 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of 
which replies of the Government have not been 
accepted by the Committee and which require 
reiteration – Rec. Para Nos. 1, 13 and 30. 
 
Chapter-IV 
Total:03 
Percentage: 
10.00 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of 
which replies of the Government are interim in 
nature – Rec. Para Nos. 12 and 26 
 
Chapter-V 
Total:02 
Percentage: 6.67 
 
3. The Committee desire that Action Taken Notes in respect of 
Observations/Recommendations contained in Chapter-I and final 
action taken reply in respect of the Recommendations contained in 
Chapter V of this Report for which interim reply has been given by 
the Government, may be furnished to them at the earliest. 
4. The Committee will now deal with some of their earlier 
Observations/Recommendations which either require reiteration or 
merit further comments. 

2 
 
I. Shortage of Skilled Workers in Jute Industry  
Recommendation (Para No. 1) 
5. The Committee had noted that as on November 2023, there are 108 
composite jute mills, out of which, the State of West Bengal has 79 jute 
mills, Andhra Pradesh 14 mills, Uttar Pradesh 3 mills, Bihar 4 mills, 
Odisha 3 mills, Assam 2 mills, Chhattisgarh 2 mills and Tripura 1 mill. 
Further, ownership-wise, 6 mills are under the Government of India, 1 mill 
each is owned by the Government of Tripura and Odisha respectively, 1 
mill in Assam is in the cooperative sector and the rest 99 mills are privately 
owned. The Committee were apprised that 5 new jute mills were 
established in last 3 years while 5 jute mills declared closure during that 
period. The Committee were also apprised that two jute mills are proposed 
to be set up in Telangana by an industrial house, whereas, the Ministry of 
Textiles has no proposal to set-up new jute mill or upgrade the existing 
mills. The reasons for closure of mills in jute sector inter alia include 
problems in management, labour troubles and financial difficulties. The 
Ministry have also stated that usually, the jobless workers of the closed 
jute mills are engaged in nearby working jute mills as jute mills are facing 
shortage of skilled workers. While appreciating that two new jute mills are 
being set up in Telengana by an industrial house, the Committee, while 
considering that, 99 out of 108 mills are privately owned, had desired the 
Ministry to have a comprehensive policy with regard to reviving the closed 
mills or setting up new mills by the Government. The Committee had also 
called upon the Ministry to develop suitable mechanism, in consultation 
with the stakeholders viz. mill owners, workers etc., to address the factors 
leading to closure of mills. The Committee had also desired the Ministry to 
devise suitable Scheme in consultation with the Ministry of Skill 
Development and Entrepreneurship to minimize the shortage of skilled 
workers in jute industry. 
6. In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Ministry 
of Textiles have stated as follows:- 
“As on date, there are 111 composite jute mills out of which the state 
of West Bengal has 82 jute mills with Andhra Pradesh having 14 mills, 
Uttar Pradesh 3 mills, Bihar 4 mills, Odisha 3 mills, Assam 2 mills, 
Chhattisgarh 2 mills and Tripura 1 Jute Mill. Ownership-wise 6 mills 
are under the Government of India, 1 mill each is owned by the 
Government of Tripura and Odisha respectively, 1 mills in Assam is in 

3 
 
the cooperative sector and the rest 102 are privately owned. In last 3 
years 3 jute mills have declared closure while 12 new jute mills have 
come up. The reasons for closure of Mills inter-alia include problems 
primarily due to labour trouble. The jobless workers of the closed jute 
mills are usually engaged in nearby working jute mills as jute mills are 
facing shortage of skilled workers. The private mills sometimes restart 
under a new management or owner after the mill is sold or given on 
lease. The mills which restart after closure are given Government 
orders for packaging foodgrains on behalf of different State 
Procurement Agencies (SPAs). To address the recommendation of the 
Committee, the Stakeholders viz. mill owners, workers, etc. may be 
consulted for Skill Development of jute workers.” 
7. The Committee find that their recommendations to formulate 
a comprehensive policy with regard to reviving the closed mills or 
setting up new mills by the Government, developing suitable 
mechanism to address the factors leading to closure of mills in 
consultation with the stakeholders and devising suitable Scheme to 
minimize the shortage of skilled workers in jute industry in 
consultation with the Ministry of Skill Development and 
Entrepreneurship, have not been addressed in the Action taken Note 
furnished by the Ministry. Rather than according due seriousness to 
these issues, the Ministry have casually stated that the stakeholders 
viz, mill owners, workers, etc. may be consulted for skill 
development of jute workers. In the opinion of the Committee, 
consultations with all the stakeholders should have been initiated 
long back and a roadmap prepared for skill development of jute 
workers to re-invigorate the jute industry and equip the rural youths 
with skills for better livelihood. The Committee, hence urge the 
Ministry to take prompt action in this regard without further delay. 
The Committee also reiterate their recommendation regarding 
formulation of a comprehensive policy for reviving closed mills or 
setting up new mills by the Government and developing suitable 
mechanism to address the factors leading to closure of mills in 
consultation with the stakeholders, and desire to be apprised of the 
progress made towards such efforts. 
 
 

4 
 
II. Violation of the JPM Act, 1987  
Recommendation (Para No. 2) 
8. The Committee had noted that the Jute Packaging Materials 
(Compulsory Use in Packaging Commodities) Act, 1987 (JPM Act) has been 
enacted to provide for the compulsory use of jute packaging material in 
the supply and distribution of certain commodities in the interests of 
production of raw jute and jute packaging material, and of persons 
engaged in the production thereof, and for matters connected therewith.  
Under the mandate of JPM Act, 1987, the Government keep percentage of 
mandatory packaging of food grains and sugar in jute material. During the 
last 5 years, the Government has been keeping 100% food grains and 20% 
sugar mandatory packaging in jute. The Notification issued by the Ministry 
is valid upto 30 June, 2024.    
9. The Committee were been apprised that O/o Jute Commissioner has 
requested multiple times to Chief Director(Sugar), District Magistrates and 
Sub-Divisional Magistrate to initiate appropriate action against sugar mills 
found to have violated the stipulations of the Order issued under JPM Act, 
1987. However, no response has been received from all concerned.  The 
Committee had impressed upon the Ministry/JCI to take up the matter at 
the highest level and ensure that strict action is taken against the violators 
of the JPM Act, 1987.  
10. In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Ministry 
of Textiles have stated as follows:- 
 “The Jute Packaging Material (Compulsory Use in Packaging 
Commodities) Act, 1987 (JPM Act) has been enacted to provide for the 
compulsory use of jute packaging material in the supply and distribution 
of certain commodities in the interests of production of raw jute and jute 
packaging material, and of persons engaged in the production thereof, 
and for matters connected therewith. A copy of the JPM Act, 1987 is 
attached.  
       The Government attempts to provide as much reservation as 
possible to utilize the jute crop that is produced in the country, without 
creating the bottle-neck in the supply-distribution chain of the 
commodities. The present Order notified on 26.12.2023 stipulates the 
following percentage of commodities to be packed in jute packaging 
material for jute year 2023-24 (July to June):- 

5 
 
 Commodity Minimum percentage to be reserved for 
packaging in Jute 
Foodgrains 100% of the procurement*  
Sugar 20% of the procurement**  
  
* Initially 10% of the indents for foodgrains would be placed through 
reverse auction on the GeM portal. 
 ** In diversified jute bags under direct purchase by the procuring 
agencies from the mills or open market. 
The above Notification is valid upto 30thJune, 2024. 
The level of reservations recommended by the Government in the 
past few years are furnished below:- 
Mandatory Jute Packaging Orders issued under the JPM Act, 
1987 
Order date Year Sugar Foodgrains 
30.11.2018 2018-19 20% 100% 
20.12.2019  2019-20 20% 100% 
26.11.2020  2020-21 20% 100% 
27.12.2021 2021-22 20% 100% 
31.03.2023 2022-23 20% 100% 
26.12.2023 2023-24 20% 100% 
  
As per stipulations of the Order, different state foodgrains 
procuring agencies including FCI purchase jute bags to the tune of 
around 35.0 lakh bales for packing foodgrains. The total purchase 
currently constitutes about 80.9% of the total production of jute goods. 
Such purchase has led to help the jute industry to maintain its 
production. 
             Office of Chief Director (Sugar) has issued instructions to the 
sugar mills to comply with the mandatory packaging requirements of 

6 
 
20% as provided by the JPM Act. The office of Jute Commissioner has 
coordinated with the jute mills and o/o Chief Director (Sugar) to resolve 
the issues relating to implementation of the JPM Act for sugar mills.“ 
As per information received from Directorate of Sugar, D/o Food & 
Public Distribution, the quantity of 15.55 LMT sugar has been packed 
in around 3.11 crore jute bags (18,038 MT) during the current sugar 
season. In association with D/o Food & Public Distribution, efforts are 
being made to ensure for compliance 20% sugar mandatory packaging 
in jute.” 
11. The Committee had impressed upon the Ministry/Jute 
Corporation of India to ensure strict action against the violators of 
the Jute Packaging Material (Compulsory Use in Packaging 
Commodities) Act, (JPM Act) 1987. The reply of the Ministry 
indicated that efforts are being made to ensure compliance of 20% 
mandatory packaging of sugar in jute, however, no mention has been 
made regarding action taken against the sugar mills found violating 
the mandatory requirements as stipulated in the Order notified 
under the JPM Act. The Committee, hence reiterate their 
recommendation and urge the Ministry/JCI to ensure that 
appropriate action is initiated against the defaulting sugar mills 
promptly under intimation to the Committee. 
III. Training to Registered Jute Farmers  
Recommendation (Para No. 12) 
 
12.  The Committee had noted that one of the important components 
under Jute ICARE is to provide training to the Registered Jute Farmers, 
wherein the farmers are made aware and motivated for adopting better 
agronomic practices for jute cultivation by Central Research Institute for 
Jute and Allied Fibres (CRIJAF) at various stages of jute production. The 
Committee were deeply concerned to note that till the 9th phase of I-
CARE project, out of estimated 40 lakh farmers, only 4.35 lakh farmers 
(10%) have been registered and the remaining 35.65 lakh farmers are yet 
to be registered. The Committee were apprised that in the tenth phase of 
I- CARE scheme, it has been planned to carry out survey so as to have 
reliable estimate of total number of jute farmers through an outside 
agency. The Committee had impressed upon the Ministry/NJB and JCI 
to ensure that the survey is undertaken and completed in a time bound 

7 
 
manner so that the welfare schemes being implemented/proposed to be 
implemented for the welfare of jute farmers are truly extended to them. 
Further, considering the fact that only 10% jute farmers are registered, 
the Committee had recommended that all possible steps be taken on 
priority for registration of jute farmers so that they get the training 
benefits being imparted by CRIJAF. 
13. In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Ministry 
of Textiles have stated as follows:- 
“JCI will carry out registration under Jute I-CARE scheme to ascertain 
actual number of jute farmers in the upcoming phase of the scheme so 
that the welfare schemes  being implemented or proposed to be 
implemented for the welfare of jute farmers may be extended to them 
in true manner.” 
14. The Ministry/National Jute Board (NJB) and Jute Corporation of India 
(JCI) have been impressed upon by the Committee to ensure that survey on 
jute farmers be undertaken and completed in a timebound manner.  The 
Committee had also recommended that in view of only 10% jute farmers 
being registered under Jute I–CARE Scheme, all possible steps for their 
registration be taken on priority. In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry 
have stated that JCI will carry out registration under the Jute I–CARE 
Scheme to ascertain the actual number of jute farmers in the upcoming 
phase of the Scheme. The Committee trust that the agency to conduct the 
survey on jute farmers has been identified and necessary infrastructure put 
in place to ensure registration of all the eligible jute farmers within a 
specified timeframe and desire to be apprised of the status in this regard.  
IV. Availability of Certified Jute Seeds 
Recommendation (Para No.13) 
15. The Committee had noted that JCI had entered into MoU with 
National Seeds Corporation (NSC) for distribution of certified jute seeds 
on commercial basis during 2020-21. The Committee were apprised that 
the new varieties JRO-2024, JBO-2003H have gained popularity under 
Jute ICARE and inculcated confidence about better results to increase 
jute production. While appreciating the steps taken by JCI with regard to 
ensuring timely availability of certified jute seeds at the doorsteps in all 
States, the Committee had desired that stringent action, in coordination 
with State Governments, be taken against those providing spurious seeds 
so that the efforts made by farmers during jute cultivation do not go waste 

8 
 
and result in increasing production and income through availability of 
certified seeds. 
16. In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Ministry 
of Textiles have stated as follows:- 
 “The recommendation of the Hon’ble Committee to ensure 
availability of Jute certified seeds to the jute farmers have been noted 
for compliance. The Jute Corporation of India conducted Awareness 
Programmes mobilizing participation of Jute Farmers on usage of Jute 
certified seed, advanced agronomic practices and enhanced retting 
practices. 361 number of mobile campaigns have been undertaken. 
Physical demonstration in this regard has also been conducted.  
Purchase Centres of JCI has Seed License for seed distribution 
purpose. JCI will ensure that all outsourced agencies to be registered 
with JCI for carrying out activities of ICARE Scheme (including Seed 
Distribution) in future, will have valid Seed License as per Seed Act 
1966.  Moreover, JCI will coordinate with the Department of 
Agriculture of all Jute growing states urging them to distribute Certified 
Seeds to the farmers through different Feld Level Demonstrations 
(FLDs) of the State Governments and to take necessary vigilance on the 
business of spurious seeds by the private parties.” 
17.  The Committee, while appreciating the steps taken by the Jute 
Corporation of India (JCI) with regard to ensuring timely availability of 
certified jute seeds at the doorsteps in all States had desired that 
stringent action, in coordination with State Governments, be taken 
against those providing spurious seeds. In their Action Taken Reply, the 
Ministry have outlined the efforts made by JCI such as, awareness 
programmes on usage of Jute certified seed, mobile campaigns, 
registration of all outsourced agencies  with JCI, distribution of certified 
seeds, necessary vigilance on the business of spurious seeds by the 
private parties, etc.  while silent on the action taken against those 
providing spurious seeds. The Committee lay stress on rooting out 
production and supply of spurious seeds and urge the Ministry to act 
upon their recommendation in right earnest so that stringent action, in 
coordination with State Governments, is taken against unscrupulous 
private parties supplying spurious seeds. The Committee also desire to 
be apprised of the progress made in this regard.  
 
  

9 
 
 
V. Jute Retail Outlets  
Recommendation (Para No. 17) 
18. The Committee had noted that to facilitate existing and new 
Artisans/Entrepreneurs, for promotion & Sale of JDPs through Retail 
Outlets/Showroom,140 Jute Retail Outlets of Jute Diversified Products 
are to be opened at a total financial outlay of Rs.12.60 crore. The 
Committee had further noted that 48 JROs are in operation till October, 
2023 incurring expenditure of Rs. 0.49 crore and, as informed by the 
Ministry, the remaining 92 JROs would be selected and start operation 
during remaining implementation period of the Scheme viz. upto 2025-
26. The Committee were not satisfied with the progress made with 
regard to operation of JROs as during 2021 to October, 2023, against 
the cumulative target of setting up of 70 JROs, only 48 JROs are 
operational and 22 more JROs are to be set up upto March, 2024. The 
Committee, had therefore, called upon the Ministry to intensify efforts 
and take immediate action so as to ensure that the remaining 22 JROs 
are set up during 2023- 24 and, thereafter, the target of setting up 70 
JROs during 2024-25 to 2025-26 is achieved before the scheduled 
completion of the Scheme. The Committee had also urged the Ministry 
to ensure that the guidelines regarding sourcing 50% of JDPs sold by 
JROs from Women Self Help Group and Jute Artisans are strictly 
adhered to. 
19. In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Ministry 
of Textiles have stated as follows:- 
       “The recommendation of the Hon’ble Committee to intensify efforts 
to ensure to set up the JROs to meet the targets during 2023-24  to 
2025-26  and to ensure to implement the guidelines on  sourcing 50% 
of JDPs sold by JROs from WSHGS and jute artisans, has been noted 
for compliance.” 
20.   Being dissatisfied that 22 more Jute Retail Outlets (JROs) are yet 
to be set up till March 2024, the Committee had called upon the 
Ministry to intensify efforts and take immediate action in this regard 
and thereafter, achieve the target of setting up 70 JROs during 2024-25 
to 2025-26. The Committee had also urged the Ministry to ensure that 
the guidelines regarding sourcing 50% of Jute Diversified Products 

10 
 
(JDPs) sold by JROs from Women Self Help Group and Jute Artisans are 
strictly adhered to. In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry have 
stated that the Committee’s recommendation has been noted for 
compliance, which is vague and needs to be substantiated with specific 
measures adopted for its implementation. The Committee, hence call 
for a comprehensive reply to their recommendation indicating the 
status of setting up of JROs and adherence to the guidelines regarding 
sourcing 50% of JDPs sold by JROs from Women Self Help Group and 
Jute Artisans.  
  
VI. Scholarship Scheme for Girl Children of Workers of Jute Mills 
/MSME JDP Unit 
Recommendation (Para No. 23)  
21. The Committee had noted that the objective of the Scholarship 
Scheme for Girl Children of Workers of Jute Mills/MSME JDP unit is 
to provide support to the jute workers girl children and family for 
providing higher education to the girl children and improvement in the 
education standard. Under the Scheme, scholarship is provided to 
Secondary Exam pass outs @ Rs.5000 and to the Higher Secondary 
pass outs @ Rs.10,000. The target for five years viz. during 2021-22 to 
2025-26 is to provide scholarship to 22500 girl children [10th Pass out 
Girl Children: 15000 (3000 children each during 2021-22 to 2025-26) 
and 12th pass out Girl Children: 7500 (1500 children each during 2021-
22 to 2025- 26)] at a total financial outlay of Rs.15.00 crore (7.5 crore 
each to 10th and 12th pass outs during 5 years period). 
22. The Committee had further noted that during 2021-22 and 2022-
23, 8172 (4404 in 2021-22 and 3768 in 2022-23) girl children (90%) 
were benefitted against the target of 9000 intended beneficiaries. As 
stated by the Ministry, the reason for less number of girl children 
participation under the scholarship scheme is attributable to less 
number of girl children passed in Secondary/Higher Secondary 
Examinations as compared to 2021-22. The Committee had also noted 
that the beneficiaries covered during 2022-23 belonged to 42 Jute Mills 
and 6MSME JDP Units in three States viz. West Bengal, Assam and 
Kerala despite the fact that there are 108 Jute Mills in 08 States. As 
informed by the Ministry, the applications from remaining 5 States 
were not received due to non-response from the jute mills. 

11 
 
23. The Committee had felt that the primary reason for not achieving 
the target is lack of awareness amongst the intended beneficiaries and 
non-availability of their data base. The Committee, had thereupon, 
impressed upon the Ministry/NJB to intensify the awareness 
campaigns at the grass root level through direct contact with jute mill 
workers/authorities and also coordinate with District 
Administration/education authorities so as to maintain data base of 
intended beneficiaries, which in turn, would also help in fixing/revising 
target during the remaining period of the Scheme. 
24. In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Ministry 
of Textiles have stated as follows:- 
       “The recommendation of the Hon’ble Committee to intensify the 
awareness campaigns at the grass root level through direct contact 
with jute mill workers / authorities and District Administration 
/education authorities so as to maintain data base of intended 
beneficiaries for fixing / revising target has been noted for 
compliance.”                                                
25. The Committee had felt that the primary reason for not achieving 
the target under Scholarship Scheme for Girl Children of Workers of Jute 
Mills/MSME JDP unit is lack of awareness amongst the intended 
beneficiaries and non-availability of their database and had impressed 
upon the Ministry/NJB to intensify the awareness campaigns at the grass 
root level through direct contact with jute mill workers/authorities and 
coordination with District Administration/education authorities so as to 
maintain database of intended beneficiaries. The Ministry have submitted 
that the Committee’s recommendation had been noted for compliance. 
The Committee find the reply of the Ministry inadequate and desire a 
comprehensive reply incorporating the details of awareness campaigns 
held so far regarding the Scheme and the status of maintaining database 
of the intended beneficiaries in coordination with District 
Administration/education authorities at the earliest. 
VII. Incorporation of Allied Fibre with Jute in the Mandate of 
NJB Act, 2008 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 26)  
26. The Committee had noted that Flax fibre has wide use in the textile 
sector for its higher strength and luster. The Committee were apprised 

12 
 
that at present, the domestic production of quality flax fibre suitable for 
the apparel sector is almost negligible and, in order to meet the domestic 
demand of flax fibre and/or fabric (linen), the manufacturers of linen 
fabrics have to import the flax fibre/fabrics from countries like Belgium, 
France, China, Netherlands, etc. for which expenditure to the tune of Rs. 
800 Cr. Is annually incurred. In 2020, India exported $3.54M processed 
Flax Fibres mainly to Bangladesh, Lithuania, Belgium, Indonesia and 
China and imported $47.7M worth Flax mainly from Belgium, France, 
Lithuania, Belarus and Egypt. The Committee were concerned to note 
that India does not have significant presence among the flax fibre 
producing countries. The Committee, had however, noted that the 
domestic demand for flax could be met by domestic supply as India has 
good supply of linseed to produce flax fibre domestically. 
27. The Committee had further noted that the mandate of National Jute 
Board Act, 2008 is connected with the development of the cultivation, 
manufacture and marketing of jute and jute products and for matters 
connected therewith and incidental thereto. The Committee had found 
that an exercise was undertaken in 2022 to analyse the importance of 
Allied fibre (Sunhemp, Ramie, Sisal, Flax, Banana Fibre, Pineapple Fibre, 
Hemp Fibre and Nettle Fibre) for incorporating them in the mandate of 
National Jute Board Act, 2008, however, the same has not yielded the 
desired results. The Committee were apprised that there is a need for 
detailed study for analyzing this sector and intervention in the cultivation 
of Allied fibre needs to be taken up with the Ministry of Agriculture & 
Farmers Welfare as the matter comes under its purview. 
28. Considering the fact that India has potential to meet its domestic 
demand for flax, the Committee had impressed upon the Ministry to 
urgently take steps to undertake exhaustive study and explore 
incorporation of Allied Fibre with jute in the mandate of National Jute 
Board Act, 2008 through consultation with the Ministries/stakeholders 
concerned including the Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare, etc. 
in the larger interest of Jute Sector/Industry. 
29. The Committee had appreciated that a Project on 'Development of 
Modern Mini-spinning Machinery for Processing of Jute and Allied Fibres 
for Small Industries' is being executed by ICAR-National Institute of 
Natural Fibre Engineering and Technology w.e.f. 27.06.2023 for a period 

13 
 
of 3 years for which Rs.82.50 lakh has been allocated. The Committee 
had wished to be apprised of the progress in this regard. 
30. In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Ministry 
of Textiles have stated as follows:- 
“In respect of recommendation of the Hon’ble Committee to undertake 
exhaustive study for analyzing cultivation of Allied fibres with Ministry 
of Agriculture and Farmers’ Welfare and explore incorporation of Allied 
fibres with jute in the mandate of National Jute Board has been noted 
for compliance. It is submitted that at present NJB is dealing with 
National Jute Development Program (NJDP) for development of jute 
sector with meager manpower as some posts were got deemed 
abolished. For implementing the recommendations of Hon’ble 
Committee, NJB would require substantial augmentation of manpower, 
especially in the technical area as the organization has limited 
institutional knowledge and expertise on “other natural fibres”. 
Further, this is becoming a focus area in the country only recently – 
hence it may take some time to develop sufficient knowledge base and 
expertise. It is submitted that the mid-term evaluation study of the 
NJDP is to be commenced during 2024-25 where apart from evaluation 
of ongoing schemes necessary inputs related to allied fibres will also be 
gathered. Those inputs will be considered by the experts / technical 
experts for moving ahead in the area of allied fibre through detailed 
study for analyzing this sector. Hence, the incorporation of allied fibres 
with jute may be explored after wider consultation with line 
Ministries/Departments with appropriate manpower in NJB.  
 “Development of Modern Mini Spinning Machinery for processing of 
Jute and Allied Fibres for Small Industries” Project has been assigned 
to ICAR- National Institute of Natural Fibre Engineering And 
Technology. The Project has been commissioned on 27/06/2023 and 
will continue for 3 years.” 
31.  The Committee had impressed upon the Ministry to take 
urgent steps for undertaking exhaustive study and exploring 
incorporation of Allied Fibre with jute in the mandate of the National 
Jute Board Act, 2008 through consultation with the 
Ministries/stakeholders concerned. In their Action Taken Note 
furnished to the Committee, the Ministry have stated that 
incorporation of allied fibres with jute may be explored after wider 

14 
 
consultation with line Ministries/Departments with appropriate 
manpower in NJB. Keeping in mind the larger interest of the Jute 
sector/industry and India’s potential to meet its domestic demand for 
flax, the Committee urge the Ministry to commence consultations with 
line Ministries/Departments without delay and augment the manpower 
in NJB including induction of experts/technical experts in the field of 
allied fibres.  
 
VIII. Timely Submission of EPF/ESI Contributions of Workers by 
Jute Mill Owners 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 29)  
32. The Committee had noted that Office of the Jute Commissioner 
often receives complaints/ grievances of the jute mills workers or 
Workers' Association regarding various issues like payment of Gratuity, 
Provident Fund, other retirement benefits. The Committee were 
apprised that Jute Corporation of India (JCI) has a designated 
Grievance Officer for redressal of all grievances raised through 
CPGRAMS portal or received directly from individual complainants and 
whenever any complaint is received through the portal or otherwise, its 
reply is sent within the stipulated time. The Committee had appreciated 
that out of 30 complaints/grievances received by the Office of the Jute 
Commissioner during the last three years (from 01st January, 2021 to 
22nd November, 2023), 29 complaints/grievances have been disposed 
of and one is under process. The Committee had desired that the 
pending single grievance be disposed of on priority and awareness 
campaign about existence of grievance redressal mechanism be 
launched for the benefit of workers. The Committee had further noted 
that Office of the Jute Commissioner have issued instructions to all the 
mills to submit monthly returns on fulfilment of statutory dues of the 
labour. The Committee had impressed upon the Ministry/JCI to ensure 
that the instructions issued by them are strictly enforced so as to 
ensure that contribution on account of EPF and ESI of the workers are 
timely submitted so that they do not face any inconvenience on this 
aspect. The Committee had also desired the Ministry/JCI to maintain 
close coordination with EPFO, ESIC and Labour Commissioner of State 
Governments in the larger interest of jute mill workers. 

15 
 
33. In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Ministry 
of Textiles have stated as follows:- 
       “The Office of the Jute Commissioner has a designated Grievance 
 Officer for redressal of all grievance received through CPGRAMS. 
 The one complaint referred in the report has been addressed. O/o 
 Jute Commissioner checks the portal regularly and resolves the 
 grievances within given timeline. The O/o Jute Commissioner 
 maintains close coordination with the appropriate authorities like 
 Labour Commissioner, Govt. of West Bengal, Employer provident 
 Fund Organization (EPFO), Jute Mills, etc. for resolution of the 
 grievances. 
 The Jute Corporation of India has grievance redressal mechanism 
 with a dedicated grievance officer. All grievances received through 
 CPGRAMS/DARPG portal or directly from individual complainants 
 are acted upon where necessary and reply is sent within 
 stipulated time. No grievances are pending at the Corporation.” 
34.  The Committee find that though the Ministry/Office of the Jute 
Commissioner have addressed the issue regarding disposal of the 
complaints/grievances of the jute mill workers or workers’ association, 
the reply is silent on strict enforcement of the instructions/guidelines 
issued to the mills for timely submission of contributions on account of 
EPF and ESI workers. The Committee attach priority towards the social 
security and health care of the vulnerable mill workers and their 
families and urge the Ministry to ensure timely submission of monthly 
returns on fulfillment of statutory dues of the labour/EPF/ESI 
contributions to avoid any inconvenience to the workers. The status of 
submission of monthly returns by mill owners and the pending statutory 
dues, may be communicated to the Committee.  
 
Recommendation (Para No. 30) 
IX.  Overall Assessment of National Jute Development 
Programme 
35. The Committee had noted that the National Jute Development 
Programme (NJDP), an Umbrella Scheme for development and 
promotion of Jute Industry /Sector, comprising the Schemes/Sub-
Schemes for jute agriculture (JUTE-ICARE), modernization (CSAPM), 

16 
 
diversification (JRCPC, JRMB, JRO, JDRC, PLI and MDPS) and 
workers' welfare (Scholarship) is being implemented during 15th 
Finance Commission period (2021-2022 to 2025-2026) at total 
financial outlay of Rs.485.58 crore. During 2021-22 and 2022-23, out 
of the allocated amount of Rs.170.95 crore, Rs.86.50 crore (50%) was 
utilized and approximately Rs.400 crore (82% of total outlay of 
Rs.485.58 crore) is to be utilized during the remaining period of 
implementation viz. during 2023-24 to 2025-26. The Committee while 
analyzing all the Schemes/Sub-Schemes under NJDP had found that 
the physical and financial progress of NJDP during the first two and 
half years of its implementation is not encouraging and despite the 
efforts being made by the Ministry, NJB and JCI, a lot still needs to be 
done to achieve the objectives of various Schemes. The Committee, had 
therefore, exhorted the Ministry to address the underutilization of 
funds, strengthen coordination, monitoring & implementation 
mechanism and bring forth robust interventions to considerably 
improve performance of the Scheme in physical and financial terms. 
The Committee had also taken cognizance of the fact that in order to 
assess the performance of the Schemes being implemented under 
NJDP, an MoU has been signed between the Ministry and NJB to 
evaluate the Schemes through a third party agency during the first 
quarter of 2024-25. The Committee had desired that the evaluation 
exercise be completed in a time bound manner and the 
recommendations so made be also examined and implemented within 
the stipulated time frame for development and promotion of Jute 
Industry/Sector. 
36. In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Ministry 
of Textiles have stated as follows:- 
“The recommendation of the Hon’ble Committee to strengthen 
coordination, monitoring and implementation mechanism for 
improvement of physical and financial performance of schemes and 
evaluation exercises in a time bound manner has been noted for 
compliance.” 
  

17 
 
37.  While analyzing all the Schemes/Sub-Schemes under the 
National Jute Development Programme (NJDP), the Committee had found 
that the physical and financial progress during the first two and half years 
of its implementation has not been encouraging and had exhorted the 
Ministry to address the underutilization of funds, strengthen 
coordination, monitoring & implementation mechanism and bring forth 
robust interventions to considerably improve the performance of the 
Scheme. Further, the Committee had desired completion of  evaluation 
exercise of the Scheme through a third party agency during the first 
quarter of 2024-25 in a time bound manner as well as examination and 
implementation of the recommendations so made within the stipulated 
timeframe for development and promotion of the Jute industry/sector. In 
their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Ministry had 
conveyed that the Committee’s recommendation has been noted for 
compliance without going into specifics thereby reflecting a casual 
approach towards the recommendation of the Committee. The Committee, 
hence desire that the Ministry should act upon their recommendation in 
right earnest and apprise them of the status of the evaluation exercise and 
robust interventions for improving the performance of the Scheme. The 
achievements under NJDP, in physical and financial terms, may also be 
furnished. 
  
______ 
 
 
                                                                                                     
                             
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

18 
 
CHAPTER-II 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN 
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
JUTE PACKAGING MATERIALS ( COMPULSORY USE IN PACKING 
COMMODITIES) ACT , 1987  
(Recommendation Para No. 2) 
 The Committee note that the Jute Packaging Materials (Compulsory 
Use in Packaging Commodities) Act, 1987 (JPM Act) has been enacted to 
provide for the compulsory use of jute packaging material in the supply 
and distribution of certain commodities in the interests of production of 
raw jute and jute packaging material, and of persons engaged in the 
production thereof, and for matters connected therewith.  Under the 
mandate of JPM Act, 1987, the Government keep percentage of mandatory 
packaging of food grains and sugar in jute material. During the last 5 
years, the Government has been keeping 100% food grains and 20% sugar 
mandatory packaging in jute. The Notification issued by the Ministry is 
valid upto 30 June, 2024.    
 The Committee were been apprised that O/o Jute Commissioner has 
requested multiple times to Chief Director(Sugar), District Magistrates and 
Sub-Divisional Magistrate to initiate appropriate action against sugar mills 
found to have violated the stipulations of the Order issued under JPM Act, 
1987. However, no response has been received from all concerned.  The 
Committee impress upon the Ministry/JCI to take up the matter at the 
highest level and ensure that strict action is taken against the violators of 
the JPM Act, 1987.  
(Reply of Government) 
The Jute Packaging Material (Compulsory Use in Packaging 
Commodities) Act, 1987 (JPM Act) has been enacted to provide for the 
compulsory use of jute packaging material in the supply and 
distribution of certain commodities in the interests of production of raw 
jute and jute packaging material, and of persons engaged in the 
production thereof, and for matters connected therewith. A copy of the 
JPM Act, 1987 is attached.  
       The Government attempts to provide as much reservation as 
possible to utilize the jute crop that is produced in the country, without 

19 
 
creating the bottle-neck in the supply-distribution chain of the 
commodities. The present Order notified on 26.12.2023 stipulates the 
following percentage of commodities to be packed in jute packaging 
material for jute year 2023-24 (July to June):- 
 Commodity Minimum percentage to be reserved for 
packaging in Jute 
Foodgrains 100% of the procurement*  
Sugar 20% of the procurement**  
  
* Initially 10% of the indents for foodgrains would be placed through 
reverse auction on the GeM portal. 
 ** In diversified jute bags under direct purchase by the procuring 
agencies from the mills or open market. 
The above Notification is valid upto 30thJune, 2024. 
The level of reservations recommended by the Government in the 
past few years are furnished below:- 
Mandatory Jute Packaging Orders issued under the JPM Act, 
1987 
Order date Year Sugar Foodgrains 
30.11.2018 2018-19 20% 100% 
20.12.2019  2019-20 20% 100% 
26.11.2020  2020-21 20% 100% 
27.12.2021 2021-22 20% 100% 
31.03.2023 2022-23 20% 100% 
26.12.2023 2023-24 20% 100% 
  
As per stipulations of the Order, different state foodgrains 
procuring agencies including FCI purchase jute bags to the tune of 
around 35.0 lakh bales for packing foodgrains. The total purchase 
currently constitutes about 80.9% of the total production of jute goods. 

20 
 
Such purchase has led to help the jute industry to maintain its 
production. 
             Office of Chief Director (Sugar) has issued instructions to the 
sugar mills to comply with the mandatory packaging requirements of 
20% as provided by the JPM Act. The office of Jute Commissioner has 
coordinated with the jute mills and o/o Chief Director (Sugar) to resolve 
the issues relating to implementation of the JPM Act for sugar mills.“ 
As per information received from Directorate of Sugar, D/o Food & 
Public Distribution, the quantity of 15.55 LMT sugar has been packed 
in around 3.11 crore jute bags (18,038 MT) during the current sugar 
season. In association with D/o Food & Public Distribution, efforts are 
being made to ensure for compliance 20% sugar mandatory packaging 
in jute. 
(Ministry of Textiles O.M. No. J-3/2/2020-Jute Section    dated  21st  
May, 2024)  
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
Please see Para No. 11 of Chapter-I. 
  
I. JUTE PACKAGING MATERIALS (COMPULSORY USE IN 
PACKING COMMODITIES) ACT, 1987. 
(Recommendation Para No. 3) 
The Committee also desire the Ministry to have close coordination 
with Department of Food and Public Distribution, Food Corporation of 
India, State Governments and District Authorities so that the orders 
regarding mandatory packaging  of food grains and sugar in jute material 
are complied with in letter and spirit.   
(Reply of Government) 
After detailed discussion among State Procurement Agencies, Food 
Corporation of India, D/o Food & Public Distribution(DF&PD), O/o 
Jute Commissioner, Indian Jute Mills Association and Ministry of 
Textiles it is ensured the availability of jute bags to the indenting 
agencies, generally six months prior to every crop season (Rabi 
&Kharif), different State Government foodgrains procuring agencies 
including FCI plan their requirements of jute bags. After receipt of 

21 
 
requirement of jute bags from all the states & FCI, a consolidated 
month wise plan for requirement of jute bags are being devised by 
Department of Food & Public Distribution, GoI. Moreover, while 
preparing the month wise schedule, the manufacturing capacity of the 
jute industry is also taken into consideration by the DF&PD.  
As per stipulations of the Order, different state foodgrains procuring 
agencies including FCI purchase jute bags to the tune of around 35.0 
lakh bales for packing foodgrains. The total purchase currently 
constitutes about 80.9% of the total production of jute goods. Such 
purchase has led to help the jute industry to maintain its 
production.                   
  
Inclusion of jute geo-textiles in the schedule of rates of various 
State Governments. 
(Recommendation Para No. 4) 
 The Committee note that Jute Geo Textiles (JGT), an eco- compatible 
product enables to address critical geo technical problems such as soil 
erosion, consolidation of soft soil, construction of rural roads, stabilizing 
the slopes and for various agro textiles applications. The Committee were 
apprised that the use of Jute Geo Textiles in rural road construction 
through State Governments is one of the prime agenda of NJB for JGT 
promotion and for the purpose, the Ministry of Textiles have  approached 
all State Governments for inclusion of Jute Geo Textiles in schedule of 
rates. The Committee note that while no State has expressed reservation 
in this regard, only 9 States have conveyed that they are including Jute 
Geo Textiles in schedule of rates.  The Committee were apprised that the 
Ministry have already taken up the matter with the Chief Secretaries of 
the remaining States for inclusion of Jute Geo Textiles in the schedule of 
rates. In addition, the user agencies under State and Central Governments 
have also been approached for execution of MoUs for institutional buying 
of Jute Geo Textiles products. Further, the National Highway 
Infrastructure Development Corporation Limited (NHIDCL) have expressed 
their willingness to execute MOU with NJB for institutional buying of jute 
geo textiles products.  
 Taking into account the steps being taken by the Ministry for 
promotion of Jute Geo Textiles and their institutional buying, the 

22 
 
Committee recommend that concerted efforts be continued in coordination 
with the State Governments, user agencies, etc. for including Jute Geo 
Textiles in the schedule of rates of various State Governments so as to 
have an inbuilt mechanism for  institutional buying of the Jute Geo 
Textiles products. The Committee agree with the views of the Ministry that 
for promoting jute products, the Government procurement agencies 
should buy jute products as  office stationery for 
Conferences/Seminars/Workshops etc. and desire the Ministry to take up 
the matter with all concerned on priority.   
 (Reply of Government) 
National Jute Board (NJB), as measure for promotion of Jute Geo-
Textile, has been organizing awareness programs in collaboration with 
State Govt. end users. The Chief Secretaries of the State Governments 
have been approached for inclusion of Jute Geo-Textile in Schedule of 
Rates (SoR). In response, nine states have shown their interest to 
include jute geo-textile in SoR.  
  
NJB organized Jute Symposium with special focus on Jute Geo-
textile/Agro textile on 21st December 2023 in New Delhi with active 
participation of Govt. organizations including National Highway 
Infrastructure Development Corporation Limited(NHIDCL), Karnataka 
Rural Road Development Agency(KRRDA), Indian council of Agricultural 
Research(ICAR) and various Textiles Research Associations (TRAs). Viz. 
National Institute of Technology (NIT),Bombay Textile Research 
Association(BTRA), Synthetic & Art Silk Mills' Research Association 
(SASMIRA), National Institute of Design (NID) etc. In the Symposium, MOA 
between NJB and NHIDCL was entered into and Technology Transfer 
exercises by the developers to the industry partners for commercialization 
were undertaken. Further, in the Mega event of the Ministry of Textile- 
Bharat Tex held during 26th-29th February 2024 at New Delhi, NJB signed 
two MoUs with– (i) NRIDA and M/o Rural Development for promotion of 
uses/application of Jute Geo-Textiles in rural roads and projects of 
NRIDA, and (ii) Indian Institute of Technology (Indian School of Mines) 
Dhanbad for Industrial scaling up of biodegradable, non-polymer super-
hydrophobic jute fabric exhibiting excellent water repellence & stiffness for 
shopping/hand bag products. 
  
NJB made its presentation with active participation of jute mills and 
MSME- JDP units and arranged display of wide range of jute products 
for having consumers’ response/feedbacks. On 28th February 2024, 

23 
 
Jute Mark India App launched in the presence of Hon’ble Minister of 
State for Textile and Railways. In order to have an in built mechanism 
for institutional buying of Jute Geo Textiles, NJB executed MOU with 
National Rural Infrastructure Development Agency (NRIDA), MoRD and 
Indian Institute of Technology (Indian School of Mines, Dhanbad). It 
has been informed that MoRD/NRIDA have issued necessary direction 
to States on the use of new materials and technology which are 
environment friendly including Jute/ Coir/ Geo-Textile. The MOU 
specifies “ Use of Jute Geo- Textile in the rural roads construction 
where CBR value of the sub-grade soil is poor and less than 5%and 
requires ground improvements to meet the design criteria” NRIDA has 
conveyed that it will take required step in accordance with the MOU.  
So far 9 states have conveyed that they are in the process of inclusion 
of Jute Geo- Textile in the Schedule of Rates. It is gathered that the 
R&B Dept., Govt. of Gujarat has approved inclusion of Jute Geo- Textile 
in their SoR and a circular has been issued on 22nd February 2024. 
NJB as part of its promotional initiative has been organizing awareness 
programs/seminars on usage of jute and jute products as environment 
friendly in place of plastic/synthetics with active participation of jute 
entrepreneurs/exporters, local administration and Chamber of 
Commerce/ Business Council. The awareness programme is followed 
by BSM which facilitate the jute entrepreneurs to enter into business 
dialogues on jute diversified products. NJB also is having official 
interactions with the Govt. departments for supplying Jute diversified 
products including Jute File Covers, Stationery Items, Give away Bags, 
office Carry Bags etc. of late, Jute industry bagged 2.00 cr. piece of jute 
promotional bags from Govt. of Odisha.  
        The recommendation of the Hon’ble Committee for promotion of 
jute products through Govt. procurement agencies has been noted for 
compliance.                                                                                      
                       
Workers’ Welfare Scheme (SulabhSauchalaya) 
(Recommendation Para No. 5) 
 The Committee note that NJB provided assistance to the jute mills 
for improvement of sanitation, health facilities and working conditions of 
jute mill workers through construction of toilets in jute mills. The 

24 
 
Committee were apprised that the Sulabh Sauchalayas provided  workers 
the best sanitation and health facilities and a wide spread impact was felt 
by the workers and their families.The Committee were also apprised that 
NJB is planning to organize medical check-up camps for jute mill workers 
and their family members during 2023-24 in association with local 
administration /District Authorities and the Health Departments of 
respective State Governments.The Committee are of the considered 
opinion that the welfare measure proposed to be initiated is in the right 
direction and appreciate the approach of the Ministry for improving health 
of jute mill workers and their families through coordinated efforts with 
State Governments. The Committee desire that the exercise of conducting 
medical-health check up camps be conducted on regular basis on periodic 
intervals. In addition, the facility of follow up treatment be provided 
especially in the case of occupational diseases caused due to exposure of 
jute mill workers to the working conditions. 
 (Reply of Government) 
The recommendation of the Hon’ble Committee for conducting medical 
health check-up camps    on regular basis and follow up treatment 
facilities for Jute Mill workers has been noted for compliance. 
A detail scheme following CGHS norms with financial outlay is under 
preparation in consultation with jute industry and on finalization, the 
same would be placed in the ensuing Board meeting of NJB for 
approval.   
III                     JUTE CORPORATION OF INDIA 
(Recommendation Para No. 6) 
 The Committee note that Jute Corporation of India (JCI)  has its 
presence in six jute growing States namely West Bengal, Bihar, Assam, 
Odisha, Andhra Pradesh and Tripura and, at present, it has 110 
Departmental Purchase Centres (DPC). The Committee further note that 
to replace hand and eye method to identify the grading of raw jute and the 
allowable moisture content in jute, the JCI is in the process of procuring 
lightweight digital moisture meters developed by  Indian Jute Industries 
Research Association (IJIRA) for equipping all the DPCs.  The Committee 
were apprised that 63 digital moisture meters have been distributed to the 
field units and by the end of the year 2023, all the centres would be 
equipped with these meters. Considering the fact that moisture content of 

25 
 
jute is an important parameter to determine its quality, the Committee 
trust that all the remaining 47 Departmental Purchase Centres (DPC) have 
been provided digital moisture meters. The Committee wish to be apprised 
of the progress in this regard. 
 (Reply of Government) 
All 110 purchase centres of the Corporation have already been 
equipped with lightweight Bluetooth enabled moisture meters. Further, 
orders have been placed for portable hand held digital instruments for 
measuring quality parameters for all the purchasecentres and 14 
regional offices. 
(Recommendation Para No. 7) 
The Committee further note that JCI, in association with ICAR-
National Institute of Natural Fibre Engineering and Technology (NINFET), 
has set up its first Instrumental Jute Grading Common Facility Centre 
(Laboratory) at Katwa, West Bengal and the second laboratory is proposed 
to be setup at its Head Office in Kolkata. The Committee were apprised 
that this step will bring more scientific testing which is one of the 
important requirements for jute to comply on the quality parameters. As 
Jute crop cultivation is primarily concentrated in three States, namely, 
West Bengal, Assam and Bihar, the Committee desire that such  
laboratories be set up in Assam and Bihar also so that  jute farmers get to 
know about the grade/quality of their jute, which, in turn, will help them 
in determination of the correct price of their jute.   
 (Reply of Government) 
The first common facility centre for instrumental jute grading was 
set up at Katwa west Bengal last year. Instruments have also been 
procured for HO at Patsan Bhawan, Kolkata. To strengthen the quality 
and jute gradation awareness amongst farmers in all the jute growing 
states the Corporation has already ordered Bluetooth enabled hand 
held portable digital tensile testers and digital lustre meters for all its 
110 procurement centres and 14 regional offices. Awareness camps 
under I-CARE also cover the jute grading system. Further different 
grades of raw jute along with their quality parameter scores and grade-
wise rates are displayed at all the purchase centres. The suggestion of 

26 
 
setting up laboratories at Assam and Bihar has been noted for 
compliance. 
 
 (Recommendation Para No. 8) 
 The Committee further note that JCI in association with the 
National Jute Board (NJB) has entered into MoU with National Remote 
Sensing Centre (NRSC-ISRO) for the Jute Crop Information system for 
Jute Crop surveillance and monitoring of the agronomy. While 
appreciating the initiative taken by JCI and NJB, the Committee desire 
that the coordinated efforts be continued so as to ensure that the 
endeavour is drawn to its logical conclusion and information system for 
surveillance and monitoring of the agronomy is established in a time 
bound manner. 
 (Reply of Government) 
       The Corporation along with NJB has signed a Memorandum of 
Understanding with National Remote Sensing Centre (NRSC-ISRO) for 
development and implementation of the Jute Crop Information System. 
The Jute Crop Information System would consist of estimation of the 
total jute sowing/cropping area, estimation of total production of the 
jute crop and determining the jute crop health status from time to time. 
NRSC is to provide a dashboard for data collection and display for three 
years along with hand holding of concerned JCI and NJB officials. After 
three years the Corporation as well as NJB would be in a position to 
independently conduct jute crop surveillance and monitoring of its 
agronomy, bringing the project to its logical conclusion. 
       During last two years, there has been significant increase in Crop-
Cutting Experiments (CCE) from 314 to 796. This year, the figures 
would go up further. As an outcome, it is expected that a more accurate 
forecast of the jute crop would emanate from this ensuing year’s 
Report.  
  

27 
 
 
IV. NATIONAL JUTE DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMME (NJDP) 
A. Jute –ICARE ( Improved Cultivation and  Advanced Retting 
Exercise ) Scheme  
(Recommendation Para No. 9) 
 The Committee note that NJB has been implementing Jute-ICARE 
(Improved Cultivation and Advanced Retting Exercise) Scheme since 
2015-16 in a phased manner in association with Jute Corporation of 
India Ltd. (JCI), Central Research Institute for Jute & Allied Fibres 
(CRIJAF), Ministry of Agriculture, National Institute of Natural Fibre 
Engineering and Technology (NINFET) and Indian Jute Industries 
Research Association (IJIRA).  The objective of the Scheme is to improve 
quality and productivity in jute cultivation with introduction of a 
package of modern and scientific agronomic practices through 
distribution of High Yielding Varieties (HYV) of certified jute seeds @ 
50% cost to increase the quality, productivity and farmer’s income; free 
of cost distribution of (i) CRIJAF Sona (a microbial Consortium) to jute 
farmers for fast and quality retting of jute fibre and   (ii) modern & 
scientific agronomic tools viz. seed drills, cycle nail weeder.  
 The Committee further note that from 2015-16 to 2020-21, the 
ICARE Scheme was spread to 2,58,324 jute farmers covering 1,10,893 
hectare of land and 130 blocks under West Bengal, Bihar, Assam, 
Odisha, Meghalaya, Andhra Pradesh and Tripura. Subsequently, the 
Scheme was extended and included under NJDP after incorporating the 
suggestions/recommendations of the third party evaluation. The target  
set for five years viz during 2021-22 to 2025-26 is to cover 290 jute 
growing blocks, 2,70,893 hectare land, 5,78,000 jute farmers including 
the achievements made in the earlier scheme implemented during 
2015-16 to 2020-21 at a total financial outlay of Rs 69.31 crore. 
  The Committee note that the land covered upto 2020-21 was 
1,10,893 hectares, the target for 2021-22 to 2025-26 is 1,60,000 
hectare and out of which 80379 hectare has been covered during first 
three years of implementation of the Scheme viz. 2021-22 to 2023-24 
and 79621 hectares (approx 50%) of land is required to be covered 
during 2024-25 and 2025-26. The Committee also note that 2,58,324 
jute farmers were covered upto 2020-21, the target for 2021-22 to 2025-

28 
 
26 is to cover 3,19,676 farmers and out of which 1,76,890 farmers have 
been covered during first three years of implementation of the Scheme 
viz. 2021-22 to 2023-24 and 1,42,786 (approx 45%) farmers are 
required to be covered during 2024-25 and 2025-26. The Committee 
further note that 130 blocks were covered upto 2020-21, the target for 
2021-22 to 2025-26 is to cover 160 blocks and out of them, 82 blocks 
have been covered during first two years of implementation of the 
Scheme viz. 2021-22 and 2022-23 and 78 blocks (approx 50%) are 
required to be covered during 2023-24 to 2025-26. 
 The Committee find that progress in respect of land and farmers to 
be covered is slow as approximately 50% land  and 45% farmers are 
required to be covered in two years viz. 2024-25 and 2025-26. The 
Committee trust that, as assured by the Ministry, the target will be met 
by 2025-26. 
(Reply of Government) 
       The five year Targets (2021-22 to 2025-26) of Jute I-CARE project 
and achievements during (2021-22 to 2023-24) are furnished below:  
Compone
nts 
Achieve
ments 
(2020-21
) 
Five-Year 
Targets 
Achieveme
nts 
(2021-22 t
o 2023-24) 
Target for 
Achieveme
nts 
(2024-25 t
o 2025-26) 
Land Cove
red (Hecta
res) 
1,10,893 2,70,893 
(addl. 1,60
,000) 
80,379 79,621 
No. of Blo
cks 
130 290 
(addl. 160) 
116 44 
No. of Far
mers 
2,58,324 5,78,324 
(addl. 3,20
,000) 
1,76,890 1,43,110 
  
The recommendation of the Hon’ble Committee has been noted for 
compliance. During 2024-25 and 2025-26, the activities will be 
expedited to cover Land and Farmers to meet the targets under Jute I-
CARE 
project.                                                                                          
                                     

29 
 
IV. NATIONAL JUTE DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMME (NJDP) 
A. Jute –ICARE (Improved Cultivation and  Advanced Retting 
Exercise) Scheme  
(Recommendation Para No. 10) 
 The Committee were apprised that under ICARE Scheme, MGNREGA 
funds are being used for retting tanks. The Committee were also apprised 
that the process of construction of retting ponds under ICARE involves two 
phases i.e. construction and maintenance. Construction part is in 
convergence with MGNREGA, PMKSY and RKVY Schemes of Government 
of India and after completion of construction part, one time maintenance 
assistance @ Rs 5000/- per pond is given under ICARE Scheme of NJB 
being implemented at the field by JCI.   
 The Committee further note that 6771 farmers have expressed their 
willingness to provide land for construction of retting ponds and, out of 
them 194 tanks have been completed but none of the farmers have claimed 
financial assistance for the maintenance of constructed retting tanks 
indicating lack of awareness about the Scheme amongst the farmers. The 
Committee, therefore, desire the Ministry/NJB/JCI to intensify efforts and 
take all possible steps to ensure that the benefits of the Scheme are made 
available to the eligible farmers. The Committee also impress upon the 
Ministry to make coordinated efforts with the State Governments, District 
Administration and the nodal Ministries implementing MGNREGA, PMKSY 
and RKVY schemes so as to cover the remaining  6581 farmers, who have 
expressed their willingness to provide land for construction of retting 
ponds. 
(Reply of Government) 
       The recommendation of the Hon’ble Committee to make 
coordinated efforts with the State Governments, Districts’ 
Administration and the nodal Ministries to cover the remaining farmers 
for construction of retting ponds has been noted for compliance. The 
matter has been sincerely followed up.  
The acceptance of the farmers’ proposals have already been forwarded 
to Districts’Administration and MGNREGA cell. So far 245 retting 
ponds have been completed.   
  

30 
 
IV. NATIONAL JUTE DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMME (NJDP) 
A. Jute –ICARE (Improved Cultivation and  Advanced Retting 
Exercise) Scheme  
(Recommendation Para No. 11) 
  The Committee are concerned to note that there has been shrinkage 
in area under jute cultivation in all 10 Jute & Mesta growing States (except 
Meghalaya) from 8,38,000 hectares in 2013-14 to 6,67,300 hectares in 
2021-22 i.e. the shrinkage is to the extent of 1,70,700 hectares in 09 years 
and one of the reasons for shrinkage is availability of alternate higher 
yielding option like real estate. The Committee have been apprised that 
new States viz. Jharkhand, Nagaland, Tripura and Andhra Pradesh have 
been included under Jute ICARE to increase the area under jute 
cultivation. While taking note of the assurance given by the Ministry that 
with implementation of Jute -ICARE, the total area under jute cultivation 
will increase, the Committee urge the Ministry to further strengthen the 
measures/initiatives  and also taken other innovative steps in this 
direction. 
(Reply of Government) 
       The recommendation of the Hon’ble Committee to strengthen the 
measures/initiatives to increase the area under jute cultivation has 
been noted for compliance.  
  
VI. NATIONAL JUTE DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMME (NJDP) 
B) Jute Diversification Scheme (JDS)  
 i)  Capital Subsidy for Acquisition of Plant & Machinery (CSAPM) 
for Manufacturing  Jute Diversified Products 
 (Recommendation Para No. 14)  
 The Committee note that to facilitate modernization / upgradation of 
the existing Jute mills and  MSME  JDP  Units for manufacturing 
Jute  Diversified  Products, incentive @ 30% of the cost of machinery 
facilitating investment of Rs 10,000 Lakh in acquisition of new 
machineries for production of JDPs by 100 Jute Mills/MSME-JDP Units, 
investment of over Rs 100 crore at total financial outlay Rs 30.00 crore 

31 
 
would be provided under  Sub-Scheme of Jute Diversification 
Scheme.  The Committee further note that during 2021-22 and 2022-23, 
3 applications (3 units) were covered under the CSAPM Scheme and Rs. 
71.10 Lakh was disbursed against investment of Rs.2.37 Crore. In 
addition, 13 units have submitted their applications of LOI for 
participation under the CSAPM Scheme from whom claim applications are 
awaited. The Committee find that the progress under this Scheme is not 
satisfactory as against the targeted investment of Rs. 100 crore in 
acquisition of new machineries, the investment of only Rs. 2.37 crore has 
taken place during first two years of the implementation of the Scheme viz. 
during 2021-22 and 2022-23. The Committee, therefore, impress upon the 
Ministry to intensify the measures already initiated besides resorting to 
other innovative measures so as to ensure that  a sizeable investment in 
acquisition of new machineries is obtained before the completion of the 
Scheme. 
 
(Reply of Government) 
       The recommendation of the Hon’ble Committee to intensify the 
measures so as to ensure investment in acquisition of new machineries 
under CSAPM scheme has been noted for compliance.   
 
VII. NATIONAL JUTE DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMME (NJDP) 
 (Recommendation Para No. 15)  
B) Jute Diversification Scheme (JDS)  
   ii) Jute Resource cum Production Centre (JRCPCs)                
The Committee note that to  spread jute  diversification  programme  by 
providing Basic, Advance and Design development trainings 
to  new  artisans, rural youths  and  WSHGs 
for  sustained  employment  for production  of  JDPs, 150 JRCPC Centres 
are to be set up to provide training to 18,000 artisans/beneficiaries and 
employment to 10,800 beneficiaries at a total financial outlay Rs 36.00 
crore. The Committee note that out of 150 JRCPCs, only 41 JRCPCs  (27% 
of the target for five years) have been set up and upto October, 2023, 1208 

32 
 
artisans/beneficiaries (6.7% of the target for five years) have been 
imparted training and out of them 282 artisans (2.6% of the target for five 
years) are employed in the production units or are self-employed and upto 
October, 2023, the expenditure incurred is Rs. 83.26 lakh (2.3% of the 
allocation for five years). The Committee, thus, find that during the 
remaining period of implementation of the Scheme viz. upto 2025-26, 99 
JRCPCs (66%) are to be set up, 16792 (93%) persons are to be trained  
and, out of them, 10518 (97.4%) persons are to be provided employment. 
The Committee thus find that the physical and financial progress of the 
Scheme is well behind the target set for five years. The Committee have 
been apprised that NJB is in the process of increasing the number of 
training programmes by pursuing the matter with collaborating agencies 
/ JRCPCs in various States to achieve the target under the scheme. The 
Committee call upon the Ministry to seriously look into the impediments 
being faced in implementation of the Scheme and take appropriate 
measures on war footing so as to achieve physical and financial targets 
under the Scheme so that the objective of providing training to new 
artisans, rural youths and WSHGs and sustained employment for 
production of JDPs is truly achieved. 
(Reply of Government) 
The recommendation of the Hon’ble Committee to take appropriate 
measures to achieve physical and financial targets under JRCPC 
Scheme has been noted for 
compliance.                                                                                    
                                          
VIII. NATIONAL JUTE DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMME (NJDP) 
(B) Jute Diversification Scheme (JDS)  
(iii) Jute Raw Material Banks (JRMBs)  
(Recommendation Para No. 16) 
 The Committee  note that to supply jute raw materials at mill gate 
price to  Jute  Artisans, MSMEs  JDP  Producing units and beneficiaries  
of  Jute Resource  cum  Production Centres (JRCPCs) to  manufacture  
Jute  Diversified  Products, 140 Jute  Raw  Material  Banks (JRMBs)  are 
to be opened to provide Jute Raw Materials at a total financial outlay Rs 
16.80 crore. The Committee further note that 72 JRMBs have been opened 

33 
 
till October, 2023 incurring expenditure of Rs. 2.91 crore. The Committee 
have been apprised that the existing MSME-JDP Units and WSHGs face 
difficulty in sourcing jute raw materials in smaller quantities locally or 
directly from the jute mills which hampers their production schedule and 
these JRMBs cater to their requirements. The Committee are satisfied with 
the progress made during 2021 to October, 2023, as against the target of 
setting up of 70 JRMBs, 72 JRMBs have  been set up. The Committee 
desire that, as assured by the Ministry, the remaining 68 JRMBs be set 
up during the remaining implementation period of the Scheme viz. upto 
2025-26 so that the benefits of the Scheme are truly extended to the 
intended beneficiaries. 
  
(Reply of Government) 
       The recommendation of the Hon’ble Committee to set up 68 
JRMBs during 2024-25 and 2025-26 to extend benefits of JRMB 
Scheme to the beneficiaries has been noted for 
compliance.                                                                                    
                                      
IX. NATIONAL JUTE DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMME (NJDP) 
 
 (B) Jute Diversification Scheme (JDS)  
(iv) Jute Retail Outlets (JRO) 
(Recommendation Para No. 17) 
 The Committee note that to facilitate existing and new Artisans /  
Entrepreneurs,  for  promotion & Sale of JDPs  through  Retail  Outlets /  
Showroom, 140 Jute Retail Outlets of Jute Diversified Products are to be 
opened at a total financial outlay of Rs. 12.60 crore. The Committee further 
note that 48 JROs are in operation till October, 2023 incurring 
expenditure of Rs. 0.49 crore and, as informed by the Ministry, the 
remaining 92 JROs would be selected and start operation during 
remaining implementation period of the Scheme viz. upto 2025-26. The 
Committee are not satisfied with the progress made with regard to 
operation of JROs as during 2021 to October, 2023, against the 
cumulative target of setting up of 70 JROs, only 48 JROs are operational 

34 
 
and 22 more JROs are to be set up upto March, 2024. The Committee, 
therefore, call upon the Ministry to intensify efforts and take immediate 
action so as to ensure that the remaining 22 JROs are set up during 2023-
24 and, thereafter, the target of setting up 70 JROs during 2024-25 to 
2025-26 is achieved before the scheduled completion of the Scheme. The 
Committee also urge the Ministry to ensure that the guidelines regarding 
sourcing 50% of JDPs sold by JROs from Women Self Help Group and Jute 
Artisans are strictly adhered to. 
(Reply of Government) 
        The recommendation of the Hon’ble Committee to intensify efforts 
to ensure to set up the JROs to meet the targets during 2023-24  to 
2025-26  and to ensure to implement the guidelines on  sourcing 50% 
of JDPs sold by JROs from WSHGS and jute artisans, has been noted 
for compliance.  
                                                                                                     
                            
(Ministry of Textiles O.M. No. J-3/2/2020-Jute Section    dated  21st  
May, 2024)  
Comments of the Committee 
   
Please see Para No. 20 of Chapter I. 
 
NATIONAL JUTE DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMME (NJDP) 
B) Jute Diversification Scheme (JDS)  
(v) Jute Design Resource Centres(JDRCs)  
 (Recommendation Para No. 18) 
 The Committee note that for designing and development of market  
worthy innovative  Jute Diversified  Products and helping  existing  and  
new JDP  manufacturers  and  exporters,1600 Designs of innovative 
lifestyle jute products would be developed at total financial outlay Rs 5.80 
crore. The Committee were apprised that NJB was in the process of 
procurement of machines through GeM Portal, however, due to non-

35 
 
availability of  machines through GeM Portal, a Tender Committee has 
been constituted for procurement of machines. The Committee desire that 
the target of developing 1600 designs of innovative lifestyles jute products 
be achieved in a time bound manner. The Committee hope that the JDRC 
being set up by NIFT, Kolkata at the newly constructed Patsan Bhawan 
would be operationalized by the end of January 2024, as assured by the 
Ministry and  similar Bhawans be set up in other major jute growing 
States. 
(Reply of Government) 
       The recommendation of the Hon’ble Committee to operationalize 
JDRC at the newly constructed PatsanBhawan and to set up similar 
Bhawans in other major jute growing States has been noted for 
compliance. 
                                                                                                     
                   
  
 NATIONAL JUTE DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMME (NJDP) 
B) Jute Diversification Scheme (JDS)  
(vi) Production Linked Incentive (PLI)  
(Recommendation Para No. 19) 
 The Committee note that the objective of the Production Linked 
Incentive (PLI) is to support/incentivize Jute Mills and MSME JDP units 
exporting JDPs to become cost competitive in the international markets 
and to help them to fetch export orders for JDPs. The Committee further 
note that during five year implementation period of the Scheme viz  2021-
2022 to 2025-2026, 550 JDP manufacturing units would be provided 
incentive @ 3% of the export value or 5% of jute raw material cost, 
whichever is lower subject to maximum of Rs 12.00 Lakh per annum /unit 
at the total financial outlay of Rs 66.00 crore. The Committee were 
apprised that during 2021-22 to 2023-24 (upto Oct 2023), 103 
JDP/exporter units (19%) have been provided incentive under the Scheme 
with the total expenditure of Rs. 8.14 crore (12%). The Committee are 
concerned to note that only 19% beneficiaries have been covered in the 
first 2½ years of implementation of the Scheme incurring only Rs. 8.14 

36 
 
crore (12%) of the financial outlay of Rs. 66 crore and the remaining 81% 
(447 JDP manufacturing units) are to be covered during the remaining 2½ 
year period of the Scheme with balance of financial outlay of approx. Rs. 
56 crore, which in the opinion of the Committee is difficult to achieve in 
terms of physical and financial targets.  The Committee, therefore, desire 
the Ministry to seriously look into the impediments and take early steps to 
achieve the target by 2025-26.  
(Reply of Government) 
During 2023-24, under PLI scheme, total no of exporters to be covered 
is 110 at total financial outlay of Rs. 13.20 crore. The recommendation 
of the Hon’ble Committee forlooking into the impediments and taking 
steps to achieve the target has been noted for 
compliance.                                                                                    
                        
IV. NATIONAL JUTE DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMME (NJDP) 
B) Jute Diversification Scheme (JDS)  
(Recommendation Para No. 20) 
 The Committee note that 17 projects are being undertaken for 
Product Diversification (R&D Studies) since November, 2021 to explore 
the possibilities of Jute in both the Textile and Non-Textile applications 
and out of 17 projects, 11 projects are scheduled to be completed by 
December, 2024. While appreciating the steps being taken by the Ministry 
for Product Diversification (R&D Studies) to develop JDPs, the Committee 
desire that the timelines fixed for completion of projects be strictly 
adhered to through optimum utilization of budget allocated for the 
purpose besides periodically increasing the allocation for R&D Schemes 
keeping in mind the evolving needs. 
  
(Reply of Government) 
       The recommendation of the Hon’ble Committee to strictly adhere 
to the timeline fixed for completion of the projects and optimum 
utilization of budget allocated for the purpose has been noted for 
compliance.  
 

37 
 
IV. NATIONAL JUTE DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMME (NJDP) 
C) Market Development & Promotion Scheme (MDPS)  
       (i) Jute Mark Logo  
(Recommendation Para No. 21) 
The Committee note that Jute Mark Logo was launched on 9 July, 2022 
for branding and positioning of Indian Jute globally in domestic and 
international markets. The Committee further note that Jute Mark India 
registration authenticates the product being manufactured are of pure jute 
and jute blended products of Indian origin. The measures initiated by NJB 
for creating awareness on usage of jute eco friendly product including jute 
bags inter alia include organizing outreach programmes for increasing 
awareness on usage of jute bags in place of plastic and publicity campaign 
on use of eco friendly jute bags “Bring your own bag”, etc. The Committee 
were also apprised that the impact assessment of Jute Mark Logo will be 
done in year 2024-25 alongwith other Schemes of NJDP. 
The Committee feel that the logo will help jute farmers to get fair prices for 
their product; give boost to jute industry thereby creating job opportunities 
for artisans and manufactures; and availability of authentic and high 
quality jute products to consumers, etc. The Committee, therefore, desire 
that the measures already initiated for promotion of jute products 
especially those bearing Jute Mark Logo be intensified in the larger interest 
of jute farmers, artisans and manufacturers and consumers and also to 
achieve the objective of branding and positioning of Indian Jute globally in 
domestic and international markets. This will also help tackling the 
menace of plastic bags and replacing such bags with eco friendly jute bags. 
(Reply of Government) 
       The recommendation oftheHon’bleCommittee to intensify the 
measures initiated for promotion of jute products bearing Jute Mark 
Logo to achieve the objective of branding and positioning Indian Jute 
in domestic and international markets has been noted for 
compliance.                               
 
 

38 
 
 NATIONAL JUTE DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMME (NJDP) 
C. Market Development & Promotion Scheme (MDPS)  
ii) Fairs/Exhibitions 
(Recommendation Para No. 22) 
 The Committee note that for facilitating participation of Jute 
Artisans, WSHGs, MSMEs and Mills in Exhibitions and Fairs for direct 
sales and promotion of JDPs in domestic and international markets, 
during 2021-2022 and 2022-23, 66 Fairs/Exhibitions (24 in 10 States/UT 
in 2021-22 and 42 in 2022-23 in 16 States/UT) were organized and 1,300 
Units/Beneficiaries  (564 in 2021-22 and 736 in 2022-23) were supported. 
Considering the fact that the approved Schemes under National Jute 
Development Programme (NJDP) are being implemented by NJB on Pan 
India basis, the Committee desire that the promotional activities being 
organized by NJB for facilitating participation of Jute Artisans, WSHGs, 
MSMEs and Mills be organized Pan India for Development and Promotion 
of jute sector. 
(Reply of Government) 
       The recommendation of the Hon’ble Committee to organize 
promotional activities facilitating participation of jute artisans/ 
WSHGs/ MSMEs and Mills for development and promotion of jute 
sector has been noted for 
compliance.                                                                                    
 NATIONAL JUTE DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMME (NJDP) 
(D)Scholarship Scheme for Girl Children of Workers of Jute Mills 
/MSME JDP Unit 
(Recommendation Para No. 23) 
 The Committee note that the objective of the Scholarship Scheme for 
Girl Children of Workers of Jute Mills/MSME JDP unit is to provide 
support  to  the jute  workers girl  children  and  family  for  providing 
higher education to the  girl  children  and improvement 
in  the  education  standard. Under the Scheme, scholarship is provided 
to Secondary Exam pass outs @ Rs 5000  and to the Higher Secondary 
pass outs @ Rs 10,000. The target for five years viz. during 2021-22 to 

39 
 
2025-26 is to provide scholarship to 22500 girl children [10th Pass out Girl 
Children: 15000 (3000 children each during 2021-22 to 2025-26) and 12th 
pass out Girl Children: 7500 (1500 children each during 2021-22 to 2025-
26)] at a total financial outlay of Rs 15.00 crore (7.5 crore each to 10th and 
12th pass outs during 5 years period).  
 The Committee further note that during 2021-22 and 2022-23, 8172 
(4404 in 2021-22 and 3768 in 2022-23) girl children (90%) were benefitted 
against the target of 9000 intended beneficiaries. As stated by the Ministry, 
the reason for less number of girl children participation under the 
scholarship scheme is attributable to less number of girl children passed 
in Secondary/Higher Secondary Examinations as compared to 2021-22. 
The Committee also note that the beneficiaries covered during 2022-23 
belonged to 42 Jute Mills and 6MSME JDP Units in three States viz. West 
Bengal, Assam and Kerala despite the fact that there are 108 Jute Mills in 
08 States. As informed by the Ministry, the applications from remaining 5 
States were not received due to non-response from the jute mills.  
 The Committee feel that the primary reason for not achieving the 
target is lack of awareness amongst the intended beneficiaries and non-
availability of their data base. The Committee, thereupon, impress 
upon the Ministry/NJB to intensify the awareness campaigns at the 
grass root level through direct contact with jute mill 
workers/authorities and also coordinate with District 
Administration/education authorities so as to maintain data base of 
intended beneficiaries, which in turn, would also help in fixing/revising  
target during the remaining period of the Scheme. 
 (Reply of Government) 
       The recommendation of the Hon’ble Committee to intensify the 
awareness campaigns at the grass root level through direct contact 
with jute mill workers / authorities and District Administration 
/education authorities so as to maintain data base of intended 
beneficiaries for fixing / revising target has been noted for 
compliance.             
Comments of the Committee 
                           Please see Para No. 25 of Chapter I. 
  

40 
 
IV. NATIONAL JUTE DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMME (NJDP) 
(D) Scholarship Scheme for Girl Children of Workers of Jute Mills 
/MSME JDP Unit 
(Recommendation Para No. 24) 
  The Committee note that the Scholarship Scheme is being 
implemented by NJB since 2014-15 and, on an average, 3600 girl children 
were benefitted for which Rs. 2.60 crore was incurred annually.  The 
Committee also note that the Scholarship amount was fixed in 2014-15 
and there has been no increase during the last eight years. The Committee, 
therefore, desire that the Scholarship amount be suitably increased 
keeping in view the inflation as well as the interest of beneficiaries.  
        
(Reply of Government) 
The recommendation of the Hon’ble Committee to increase the 
scholarship amount keeping in a view the inflation and interest of the 
beneficiaries has been sincerely noted for 
compliance.                                                                                    
                                
 
IV. NATIONAL JUTE DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMME (NJDP) 
(D) Scholarship Scheme for Girl Children of Workers of Jute Mills 
/MSME JDP Unit 
 (Recommendation Para No. 25)  
  The Committee appreciate that a proposal to provide scholarship to 
the girl children on passing out graduation level examinations is also 
under active consideration of Ministry of Textiles. The Committee desire 
that the same be expedited so that the endeavour is drawn to its logical 
conclusion and the targetted persons are actually benefitted. 
 (Reply of Government) 
The recommendation of the Hon’ble Committee to expedite the proposal 
to provide scholarship to the girl children on passing out graduation 

41 
 
level examinations to its logical conclusions has been noted for 
compliance.      
 
 
VII AWARENESS CAMPAIGNS 
(Recommendation Para No. 28)  
 
 The Committee note that the National Jute Board (NJB) organizes 
workshops, seminars and awareness campaigns for promotion of 
innovative Jute Products, Jute Mark India Logo, etc. with active 
participation of representatives of Jute Industry (Jute Mills & MSME JDP 
Units), Indian Jute Mills Association (IJMA) and Jute Products 
Development & Export Promotion Council (JPDEPC). The Jute Corporation 
of India (JCI) also, on their part, organizes awareness camps under Project 
I-CARE through which Advance Agronomic practice are disseminated to 
the farmers and Jute advisories are also issued from time to time through 
ICAR CRIJAF. 
 The Committee are of the considered view that conducting 
awareness/ publicity campaigns on “Stop Use Plastic, Use Eco-friendly 
Jute Bag”, associating environmental groups/NGOs in publicity 
campaign, Display & promotion through Jute Retail Outlets and Jute 
Fairs/ Exhibitions with active participation of jute artisans/ 
entrepreneurs are the steps in right direction and need to be continued  in 
the right earnest. Further, as assured by the representative of the Ministry 
during oral evidence, the Committee desire that the State/District 
administration also need to be associated while organizing awareness 
campaigns so as to have better coordination. The Committee also desire 
that the participation of local MPs, MLAs and other public representatives 
be ensured so that their feedback and suggestions  could be gainfully 
utilized. 
 (Reply of Government) 
 
The recommendation of the Hon’ble Committee to associate State 
/District Administration while organizing awareness campaigns along 

42 
 
with ensuring participation of local MPs, MLAs and other  public 
representatives has been noted for 
compliance.                                                                                    
                                       
  
 
 VIII. GRIEVANCE REDRESSAL  
(Recommendation Para No. 29) 
 The Committee note that Office of the Jute Commissioner often 
receives complaints/ grievances of the jute mills workers or Workers’ 
Association regarding various issues like payment of Gratuity, Provident 
Fund, other retirement benefits. The Committee were apprised that Jute 
Corporation of India (JCI) has a designated Grievance Officer for redressal 
of all grievances raised through CPGRAMS portal or received directly from 
individual complainants and whenever any complaint is received through 
the portal or otherwise, its reply is sent within the stipulated time. The 
Committee appreciate that out of 30 complaints/grievances received by 
the Office of the Jute Commissioner during the last three years (from 01st 
January, 2021 to 22nd November, 2023), 29 complaints/grievances have 
been disposed of and one is under process. The Committee desire that the 
pending single grievance be disposed of on priority and awareness 
campaign about existence of grievance redressal mechanism be launched 
for the benefit of workers. The Committee further note that Office of the 
Jute Commissioner have issued instructions to all the mills to submit 
monthly returns on fulfilment of statutory dues of the labour. The 
Committee impress upon the Ministry/JCI to ensure that the instructions 
issued by them are strictly enforced so as to ensure that contribution on 
account of EPF and ESI of the workers are timely submitted so that they 
do not face any inconvenience on this aspect. The Committee also desire 
the Ministry/JCI to maintain close coordination with EPFO, ESIC and 
Labour Commissioner of State Governments  in the larger interest of jute 
mill workers. 
(Reply of Government) 
       The Office of the Jute Commissioner has a designated Grievance 
Officer for redressal of all grievance received through CPGRAMS. The 

43 
 
one complaint referred in the report has been addressed. O/o Jute 
Commissioner checks the portal regularly and resolves the grievances 
within given timeline. The O/o Jute Commissioner maintains close 
coordination with the appropriate authorities like Labour 
Commissioner, Govt. of West Bengal, Employer provident Fund 
Organization (EPFO), Jute Mills, etc. for resolution of the grievances. 
The Jute Corporation of India has grievance redressal mechanism with 
a dedicated grievance officer. All grievances received through 
CPGRAMS/DARPG portal or directly from individual complainants are 
acted upon where necessary and reply is sent within stipulated time. 
No grievances are pending at the Corporation. 
(Ministry of Textiles O.M. No. J-3/2/2020-Jute Section    dated  21st  
May, 2024)  
Comments of the Committee 
Please see Para No. 34 of Chapter I. 
  
  

44 
 
 
CHAPTER-III 
 
OBSERVATIONS/ RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE 
DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S 
REPLY 
                                                                                                     
       
VI .NATIONAL JUTE POLICY 
(Recommendation Para No. 27)  
 The Committee note that the National Jute Policy for development 
and promotion of Jute Sector was declared in 2005. The Committee were 
apprised that New Jute Policy has been included in the draft National 
Textile Policy, which is under consideration of Ministry.The Committee feel 
that the exercise being undertaken by the Ministry would not only help in 
policy formulation and planning but also pave the way for development of 
the Textiles Industry. Considering the fact that the jute sector occupies an 
important place in the national economy and provides direct and indirect 
employment and source of livelihood to millions of people including a large 
number of women and rural population, the Committee exhort the 
Ministry to expedite formulation of National Textile Policy and complete 
the exercise within a definite timeline. 
(Reply of Government) 
The recommendation of the Hon’ble Committee to expedite formulation 
of National Textile Policy within a definite timeline, it is pertinent to 
mention that DPIIT being a nodal Department is finalizing a 
comprehensive Industrial Policy to establish a broad framework for all 
sectors including the Textile Sector.    
                                                                                                    
  

45 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER-IV  
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH 
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY 
THE COMMITTEE AND WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION 
 
 
IV. THE JUTE AND JUTE TEXTILE INDUSTRY  
(Recommendation Para No. 1) 
 The Committee note that as on November 2023, there are 108 
composite jute mills, out of which, the State of West Bengal has 79 jute 
mills, Andhra Pradesh 14 mills, Uttar Pradesh 3 mills, Bihar 4 mills, 
Odisha 3 mills, Assam 2 mills, Chhattisgarh 2 mills and Tripura 1 mill. 
Further, ownership-wise, 6 mills are under the Government of India, 1 mill 
each is owned by the Government of Tripura and Odisha respectively, 1 
mill in Assam is in the cooperative sector and the rest 99 mills are privately 
owned.  The Committee were apprised that 5 new jute mills were 
established in last 3 years while 5 jute mills declared closure during that 
period. The Committee were also apprised that two jute mills are proposed 
to be set up  in Telangana by an industrial house, whereas, the Ministry 
of Textiles has no proposal to set-up new jute mill or upgrade the existing 
mills. The reasons for closure of mills in jute sector inter alia include 
problems in management, labour troubles and financial difficulties. The 
Ministry have also stated that usually, the jobless workers of the closed 
jute mills are engaged in nearby working jute mills as jute mills are facing 
shortage of skilled workers.  While appreciating that two new jute mills are 
being set up in Telengana by an industrial house, the Committee, while 
considering that, 99 out of 108 mills are privately owned, desire the 
Ministry to have a comprehensive policy with regard to reviving the closed 
mills or setting up new mills by the Government. The Committee also call 
upon the Ministry to develop suitable mechanism, in consultation with the 
stakeholders viz. mill owners, workers etc., to address the factors leading 
to closure of mills. The Committee also desire the Ministry to devise 
suitable Scheme in consultation with the Ministry of Skill Development 

46 
 
and Entrepreneurship to minimize the shortage of skilled workers in jute 
industry. 
 (Reply of Government) 
As on date, there are 111 composite jute mills out of which the state of 
West Bengal has 82 jute mills with Andhra Pradesh having 14 mills, 
Uttar Pradesh 3 mills, Bihar 4 mills, Odisha 3 mills, Assam 2 mills, 
Chhattisgarh 2 mills and Tripura 1 Jute Mill. Ownership-wise 6 mills 
are under the Government of India, 1 mill each is owned by the 
Government of Tripura and Odisha respectively, 1 mills in Assam is in 
the cooperative sector and the rest 102 are privately owned. In last 3 
years 3 jute mills have declared closure while 12 new jute mills have 
come up. The reasons for closure of Mills inter-alia include problems 
primarily due to labour trouble. The jobless workers of the closed jute 
mills are usually engaged in nearby working jute mills as jute mills are 
facing shortage of skilled workers. The private mills sometimes restart 
under a new management or owner after the mill is sold or given on 
lease. The mills which restart after closure are given Government 
orders for packaging foodgrains on behalf of different State 
Procurement Agencies (SPAs). To address the recommendation of the 
Committee, the Stakeholders viz. mill owners, workers, etc. may be 
consulted for Skill Development of jute workers 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
Please see Para No. 7 of Chapter I. 
 

47 
 
Recommendation (Para No.13) 
V. NATIONAL JUTE DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMME (NJDP) 
C. Jute –ICARE ( Improved Cultivation and  Advanced Retting 
Exercise) Scheme  
Skilling of jute farmers 
14. The Committee note that JCI had entered into MoU with National 
Seeds Corporation (NSC) for distribution of certified jute seeds on 
commercial basis during 2020-21. The Committee were apprised that 
the new varieties JRO-2024, JBO-2003H have gained popularity under 
Jute ICARE and inculcated confidence about better results to increase 
jute production. While appreciating the steps taken by JCI with regard 
to ensuring timely availability of certified jute seeds at the doorsteps in 
all States, the Committee desire that stringent action, in coordination 
with State Governments, be taken against those providing spurious 
seeds so that the efforts made by farmers during jute cultivation do not 
go waste and result in increasing production and income through 
availability of certified seeds. 
(Reply of Government) 
  The recommendation of the Hon’ble Committee to ensure 
availability of Jute certified seeds to the jute farmers have been noted 
for compliance. The Jute Corporation of India conducted Awareness 
Programmes mobilizing participation of Jute Farmers on usage of Jute 
certified seed, advanced agronomic practices and enhanced retting 
practices. 361 number of mobile campaigns have been undertaken. 
Physical demonstration in this regard has also been conducted.  
Purchase Centres of JCI has Seed License for seed distribution 
purpose. JCI will ensure that all outsourced agencies to be registered 
with JCI for carrying out activities of ICARE Scheme (including Seed 
Distribution) in future, will have valid Seed License as per Seed Act 
1966.  Moreover, JCI will coordinate with the Department of 
Agriculture of all Jute growing states urging them to distribute Certified 
Seeds to the farmers through different Feld Level Demonstrations 
(FLDs) of the State Governments and to take necessary vigilance on the 
business of spurious seeds by the private parties. 
Comments of the Committee 
 
Please see Para No. 17 of Chapter I. 
 

48 
 
 
IV. OVERALL ASSESSMENT OF NATIONAL JUTE DEVELOPMENT 
PROGRAMME(NJDP) 
 (Recommendation Para No. 30) 
 The Committee note that the National Jute Development Programme 
(NJDP), an Umbrella Scheme for development and  promotion of  Jute 
Industry /Sector, comprising the Schemes/Sub-Schemes for jute 
agriculture (JUTE-ICARE), modernization (CSAPM), diversification 
(JRCPC, JRMB, JRO, JDRC, PLI and MDPS) and workers’ welfare 
(Scholarship) is being implemented during 15th Finance Commission 
period (2021-2022 to 2025-2026) at total financial outlay of Rs. 485.58 
crore.  During 2021-22 and 2022-23, out of the allocated amount of Rs. 
170.95 crore, Rs.86.50 crore (50%) was utilized and approximately Rs. 400 
crore (82% of total outlay of Rs. 485.58 crore) is to be utilized during the 
remaining period of implementation viz. during 2023-24 to 2025-26. The 
Committee while analyzing all the Schemes/Sub-Schemes under NJDP 
find that the physical and financial progress of NJDP during the first two 
and half years of its implementation is not encouraging and despite the 
efforts being made by the Ministry, NJB and JCI, a lot still needs to be 
done to achieve the objectives of various Schemes. The Committee, 
therefore, exhort the Ministry to address the underutilization of funds, 
strengthen coordination, monitoring & implementation mechanism and 
bring forth robust interventions to considerably improve performance of 
the Scheme in physical and financial terms. The Committee also take 
cognizance of the fact that in order to assess the performance of the 
Schemes being implemented under NJDP, an MoU has been signed 
between the Ministry and NJB to evaluate the Schemes through a third 
party agency during the first quarter of 2024-25. The Committee desire 
that the evaluation exercise be completed in a time bound manner and the 
recommendations so made be also examined and implemented within the 
stipulated time frame for development and promotion of Jute 
Industry/Sector.  
(Reply of Government) 
The recommendation of the Hon’ble Committee to strengthen 
coordination, monitoring and implementation mechanism for 
improvement of physical and financial performance of schemes and 

49 
 
evaluation exercises in a time bound manner has been noted for 
compliance.  
                                                                                                     
  Comments of the Committee 
Please see Para No. 37 of Chapter I. 
  
 
 
  

50 
 
 
 
CHAPTER-V  
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH 
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE INTERIM IN NATURE 
IV. NATIONAL JUTE DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMME (NJDP) 
B. Jute –ICARE (Improved Cultivation and  Advanced Retting 
Exercise) Scheme  
Skilling of jute farmers  
 (Recommendation Para No. 12) 
 The Committee note that one of the important components under 
Jute ICARE is to provide training to the Registered Jute Farmers, wherein 
the farmers are made aware and motivated for adopting better agronomic 
practices for jute cultivation by Central Research Institute for Jute and 
Allied Fibres (CRIJAF) at various stages of jute production. The Committee 
are deeply concerned to note that till the 9th  phase of I-CARE project, out 
of estimated 40 lakh farmers, only 4.35 lakh farmers (10%) have been 
registered and the remaining 35.65 lakh farmers are yet to be registered. 
The Committee were apprised that  in the tenth phase of I-CARE scheme, 
it has been planned to carry out survey so as to have reliable estimate of 
total number of jute farmers through an outside agency. The Committee 
impress upon the Ministry/NJB and JCI to  ensure that the survey is 
undertaken and completed in a time bound manner so that the welfare 
schemes being implemented/proposed to be implemented for the welfare 
of jute farmers are truly extended to them. Further, considering the fact 
that only 10% jute farmers are registered, the Committee recommend that 
all possible steps be taken on priority for registration of  jute farmers so 
that they get the training benefits being imparted by CRIJAF. 
 
(Reply of Government) 
JCI will carry out registration under Jute I-CARE scheme to ascertain 
actual number of jute farmersin the upcoming phase of the scheme so 
that the welfare schemes  being implemented or proposed to be 

51 
 
implemented for the welfare of jute farmers may be extended to them 
in true manner. 
Comments of the Committee 
Please see Para No. 14 of Chapter I. 
 
V.    ALLIED FIBRE /FLAX FIBRE 
(Recommendation Para No. 26)  
 The Committee note that Flax fibre has wide use in the textile sector 
for its higher strength and luster. The Committee were apprised that at 
present, the domestic production of quality flax fibre suitable for the 
apparel sector is almost negligible and, in order to meet the domestic 
demand of flax fibre and/or fabric (linen), the manufacturers of linen 
fabrics have to import the flax fibre/fabrics from countries like Belgium, 
France, China, Netherlands, etc. for which expenditure to the tune of Rs. 
800 Cr. is annually incurred. In 2020, India exported $3.54M processed 
Flax Fibres mainly to Bangladesh, Lithuania, Belgium, Indonesia and 
China and imported $47.7M worth Flax mainly from Belgium, France, 
Lithuania, Belarus and Egypt. The Committee are concerned to note that  
India does not have significant presence among the flax fibre producing 
countries. The Committee, however, note that the domestic demand for 
flax could be met by domestic supply as India has good supply of linseed 
to produce flax fibre domestically. 
 The Committee further note that the mandate of National Jute Board 
Act, 2008 is connected with the development of the cultivation, 
manufacture and marketing of jute and jute products and for matters 
connected therewith and incidental thereto. The Committee find that an 
exercise was undertaken in 2022 to analyse the importance of Allied fibre 
(Sunhemp, Ramie, Sisal ,Flax, Banana Fibre, Pineapple Fibre, Hemp 
Fibreand Nettle Fibre) for incorporating them in the mandate of National 
Jute Board Act, 2008,  however, the same has not yielded the desired 
results.The Committee were apprised that  there is a need for detailed 
study for analyzing this sector and intervention in the cultivation of Allied 
fibre needs to be taken up with the Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers 
Welfare as the matter comes under its purview. 
 

52 
 
 Considering the fact that India has potential to meet its domestic 
demand for flax, the Committee impress upon the Ministry to urgently take 
steps to undertake exhaustive study and explore incorporation of Allied 
Fibre with jute in the mandate of National Jute Board Act, 2008 through 
consultation with the Ministries/stakeholders concerned including the 
Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare, etc. in the larger interest of 
Jute Sector/Industry. 
 The Committee appreciate that a Project on ‘Development of Modern 
Mini-spinning Machinery for Processing of Jute and Allied Fibres for 
Small Industries’ is being executed by ICAR-National Institute of 
Natural Fibre Engineering and Technology w.e.f. 27.06.2023 for a 
period of 3 years for which Rs. 82.50 lakh has been allocated.  The 
Committee wish to be apprised of the progress in this regard. 
 
 (Reply of Government) 
In respect of recommendation of the Hon’ble Committee to undertake 
exhaustive study for analyzing cultivation of Allied fibres with Ministry 
of Agriculture and Farmers’ Welfare and explore incorporation of Allied 
fibres with jute in the mandate of National Jute Board has been noted 
for compliance. It is submitted that at present NJB is dealing with 
National Jute Development Program (NJDP) for development of jute 
sector with meager manpower as some posts were got deemed 
abolished. For implementing the recommendations of Hon’ble 
Committee, NJB would require substantial augmentation of manpower, 
especially in the technical area as the organization has limited 
institutional knowledge and expertise on “other natural fibres”. 
Further, this is becoming a focus area in the country only recently – 
hence it may take some time to develop sufficient knowledge base and 
expertise. It is submitted that the mid-term evaluation study of the 
NJDP is to be commenced during 2024-25 where apart from evaluation 
of ongoing schemes necessary inputs related to allied fibres will also be 
gathered. Those inputs will be considered by the experts / technical 
experts for moving ahead in the area of allied fibre through detailed 
study for analyzing this sector. Hence, the incorporation of allied fibres 
with jute may be explored after wider consultation with line 
Ministries/Departments with appropriate manpower in NJB.  

53 
 
 “Development of Modern Mini Spinning Machinery for processing of 
Jute and Allied Fibres for Small Industries” Project has been assigned 
to ICAR- National Institute of Natural Fibre Engineering And 
Technology. The Project has been commissioned on 27/06/2023 and 
will continue for 3 years. 
Comments of the Committee 
Please see Para No. 31 of Chapter I. 
  
 
New Delhi;               BASAVARAJ BOMMAI 
31st July, 2025                        CHAIRPERSON,  
09 Shravana, 1947 (Saka)          STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR, 
            TEXTILES AND SKILL DEVELOPMENT  

54 
 
Appendix-I 
 
MINUTES OF THE THIRTEENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON LABOUR, TEXTILES AND SKILL DEVELOPMENT 
(2024-25) HELD ON 31 July, 2025 
 
The Committee sat on Thursday, the 31st July, 2025 from 1500 hrs. 
to 1645 hrs. in Committee Room No.1, Block ‘A’, Parliament House 
Annexe-Extension Building, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
Shri Basavaraj Bommai-  Chairperson   
MEMBERS  
  
LOK SABHA 
 
  2. Shri G. M. Harish Balayogi 
  3. Shri Ram Prasad Chaudhary 
  4. Shri G. Lakshminarayana 
  5. Shri Asit Kumar Mal 
  6. Shri Rudra Narayan Pany 
  7. Shri Kartick Chandra Paul 
  8. Shri Tanuj Punia 
  9. Shri Pradeep Purohit 
10. Shri Mukesh Rajput 
11. Shri Raja Ram Singh 
12. Shri Adhikari Soumendu 
13. Shri Manoj Tigga 
14. Shri Chavan Ravindra Vasantrao 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
15. Shri Ritabrata Banerjee 
16. Shri Naresh Bansal 
17. Shri Govindbhai Laljibhai Dholakia 
18. Shri Rajendra Gehlot 
 
  

55 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Lalkithang   - Joint Secretary   
2. Ms. K.Muanniang Tunglut - Director 
3. Ms. Mili Dinesh    -  Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri S. Lalengzau Ngaihte - Deputy Secretary 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting 
of the Committee, convened for consideration and adoption of the following 
Draft Reports on:  
 
(i) Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations of the Committee contained in their Fifty- First Report 
(Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on the subject ‘The Employees State Insurance 
Corporation-Applicability and Benefits under ESI Scheme, Functioning of 
ESI Hospitals and Management of Corpus Fund’ pertaining to the Ministry 
of Labour and Employment;  
(ii) Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations of the Committee contained in their Fifty-Third Report 
(Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on the subject ‘Development and Promotion of 
Jute Industry pertaining to Ministry of Textiles’;  
(iii) Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations of the Committee contained in their Fifty- Sixth Report 
(Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on the subject ‘Implementation of Skill 
Acquisition and Knowledge Awareness for Livelihood Promotion 
(SANKALP) Project’ pertaining to the Ministry of Skill Development & 
Entrepreneurship; and  
(iv)   Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations of the Committee contained in their Third Report 
(Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants (2024-25)’ pertaining to 
the Ministry of Skill Development & Entrepreneurship. 
 
3. After some deliberations, the Committee adopted the aforesaid Draft 
Reports with some modifications and authorised the Chairperson to 
finalise the Reports and present the same to Parliament. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
* * * * * * 
 
 

56 
 
Appendix-II 
 
(Vide Para No. 3 of the Introduction) 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON 
OBSERVATIONS/ RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE FIFTY- 
THIRD REPORT (SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) OF THE STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON LABOUR, TEXTILES AND SKILL DEVELOPMENT  
 
      Total Percentage 
I. Recommendations/Observations 
which have been accepted by the 
Government – Rec. Para Nos. 2, 3, 
4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 14, 15, 16, 
17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 
28 and 29. 
 
24 80.00% 
II. Recommendation/Observation 
which the Committee do not desire 
to pursue in view of the 
Government’s reply – Rec. Para No. 
27. 
 
01 03.33% 
III. Recommendations/Observations in 
respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been 
accepted by the Committee and 
which require reiteration – Rec. 
Para No. 1, 13 and 30. 
 
03 10.00% 
IV Recommendations/Observations in 
respect of which replies of the 
Government are interim in nature - 
Rec. Para Nos. 12 and 26 
02 06.67% 
   100% 
 
 