i 
 
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR, TEXTILES AND SKILL 
DEVELOPMENT 
(2024-25) 
 (EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF TEXTILES 
 
ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE 
SECOND REPORT (18TH LOK SABHA) OF THE COMMITTEE ON 
‘DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2024-25)’ OF THE MINISTRY OF 
TEXTILES. 
 
FOURTEENTH REPORT 
 
     
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
NEW DELHI   
August, 2025/ Shravana, 1947 (Saka)  
  
14 

ii 
 
FOURTEENTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR, TEXTILES AND SKILL 
DEVELOPMENT 
(2024-25) 
 
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF TEXTILES 
ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE 
SECOND REPORT (18TH LOK SABHA) OF THE COMMITTEE ON 
‘DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2024-25)’ OF THE MINISTRY OF 
TEXTILES. 
 
Presented to Hon’ble Speaker on 04.10.2025 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 04.12.2025 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 21.08.2025 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
August, 2025/ Shravana, 1947 (Saka)  


iii 
 
CONTENTS 
      
                            PAGE No.
      
   
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (iv) 
INTRODUCTION   (v) 
  
CHAPTER I Report 1 
   
CHAPTER II Recommendations/Observations which have 
been accepted by the Government 
 
15 
CHAPTER III Recommendations/Observations which the 
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of 
the Government’s reply 
 
30 
CHAPTER IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of 
which replies of the Government have not 
been accepted by the Committee and which 
require reiteration 
 
31 
CHAPTER V Recommendations/Observations in respect of 
which replies of the Government are interim 
in nature    
36 
 
APPENDICES 
 
Appendix-I 
  
Minutes of the Fifteenth Sitting of the Committee 
held on 19th August, 2025.                    
 
38 
Appendix-II 
  
Analysis of the Action Taken by the Government 
on the Observations/ Recommendations 
contained in the Second Report (Eighteenth Lok 
Sabha)    
40 
 
  

iv 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
 1. Shri Lalkithang   - Joint Secretary 
   2.     Ms. K. Muanniang Tunglut -  Director 
 3.  Smt. Shilpa Kant  - Under Secretary 
  
  
     COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR, TEXTILES AND SKILL DEVELOPMENT 
(2024-25) 
                Shri Basavaraj Bommai – Chairperson 
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2 Shri Mani A. 
3 Shri G. M. Harish Balayogi 
4 Shri Aashtikar Patil Nagesh Bapurao 
5 Shri Partha Bhowmick 
6 Shri Yogender Chandolia 
7 Shri Ram Prasad Chaudhary 
8 Shri Chandra Prakash Choudhary 
9 Shri G. Lakshminarayana 
10 Shri Asit Kumar Mal 
11 Shri Kali Charan Munda 
12 Shri Rudra Narayan Pany 
13 Shri Kartick Chandra Paul 
14 Shri Tanuj Punia 
15 Shri Pradeep Purohit 
16 Shri Mukesh Rajput 
17 Shri Raja Ram Singh 
18 Shri Adhikari Soumendu 
19 Shri V. K. Sreekandan 
20 Shri Manoj Tigga 
21 Shri Chavan Ravindra Vasantrao 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
22 Smt. Jaya Amitabh Bachchan  
23 Shri Ritabrata Banerjee 
24 Shri Naresh Bansal  
25 Shri Govindbhai Laljibhai Dholakia  
26 Shri Rajendra Gehlot 
27 Dr. Syed Naseer Hussain 
28 Shri Maharaja Sanajaoba Leishemba 
29 Shri I.S. Inbadurai 
30 Dr. Meenakshi Jain 
31 Shri S.R. Sivalingam 

v 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Labour, Textiles and Skill 
Development (2024-25) having been authorised by the Committee, present on 
their behalf this Fourteenth Report on Action Taken by the Government on 
the Observations/ Recommendations of the Committee contained in Second 
Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants (2024-25)’ of the 
Ministry of Textiles. 
2. The Second Report was presented to Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya Sabha 
on 16th December, 2024. The Ministry of Textiles furnished their replies on 
13th March, 2025 indicating Action Taken on the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in the Second Report. The Committee 
considered and adopted the Draft Report at their sitting held on 19th August, 
2025.  
3. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in the Second Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) is 
given at Appendix II. 
4. For ease of reference, the Observations/ Recommendations of the 
Committee have been printed in bold type in the body of the Report. 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi; BASAVARAJ BOMMAI  
19 August, 2025 CHAIRPERSON, 
28 Shravana, 1947 (Saka)      STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
LABOUR, TEXTILES AND SKILL 
DEVELOPMENT 
 
 
 
 
  

 
1 
 
CHAPTER- I 
REPORT 
This Report deals with the action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in their Second 
Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants (2024-25)’ of the 
Ministry of Textiles. 
2.    The Second Report was presented to Lok Sabha/laid in Rajya Sabha on 
16th December, 2024. It contained 18 Observations/Recommendations. 
Replies of Government in respect of all the Recommendations have been 
received and are categorized as under:-  
 
(i) Recommendations/Observations which 
have been accepted by the Government – 
Rec. Para Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 9, 10, 12, 13, 
14,15, 16 and 17. 
 
Chapter II 
Total: 13 
Percentage:72.22 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the 
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of 
the Government’s reply – Rec. Para No. 7. 
      
Chapter III 
Total: 01 
Percentage: 5.55 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect 
of which replies of the Government have not 
been accepted by the Committee and which 
require reiteration – Rec. Para Nos. 6 and 
11. 
 
Chapter IV 
Total: 02 
Percentage: 11.11 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect 
of which replies of the Government are 
interim in nature – Rec. Para Nos. 8 and 18 
Chapter V 
Total: 02 
Percentage: 11.11 
 
 
3. The Committee desire that Action Taken Notes in respect of 
Observations/ Recommendations contained in Chapter-I and Chapter-V 
of this Report, for which interim reply has been given by the 
Government, be furnished to them at the earliest. 
4. The Committee will now deal with some of their earlier 
Observations/Recommendations which either require reiteration or 
merit further comments. 
  

 
2 
 
I. OVERALL FINANCIAL OUTLAY AND PERFORMANCE 
Recommendation (Para No. 1) 
5. The Committee had noted that in 2023-24, the Ministry of Textiles had 
put forth BE of ₹ 4389.34 crore which was revised at RE Stage to ₹ 3443.O9 
crore and Actual Expenditure could only reach 89.55% of RE, i.e. ₹ 3083.30 
crore. It constituted 70.25% of BE. In 2024-25 BE was ₹ 4417.03 crore and 
up till 19.l1.2024 only ₹ 1668.42 crore were utilized which constituted only 
38% of BE. The Committee were apprised that the RE for the Ministry of 
Textiles could not be decided until mid of November, 2024. The Committee 
had observed that even though the allocated funds could only be utilized up 
to 89.55% of BE in 2023-24, the Demands for Grants had been significantly 
enhanced by the Ministry of Textiles in 2024-25 and only 38% of the funds 
could be utilized during the third quarter of the fiscal 2024-25. 
6. Taking into consideration the Ministry's assurance that funds allocated 
under BE 2024-25 would be fully utilized and more funds would be utilized 
after fixation of RE 2024-25, the Committee had desired that the Ministry 
should make more tangible efforts to plan their action for utilization of 
allocated funds in those Schemes where earmarked sum could not be used in 
a best possible manner such as ‘National Technical Textiles Mission (NTTM)’ 
and ‘Scheme for Procurement of Cotton’ etc. The Committee, therefore, had 
expected that the Ministry would prepare scrupulous plan of action for 
managing the earmarked funds and come up to their commitment. 
7. The Ministry of Textiles in their Action Taken Note furnished to the 
Committee, have stated as under: 
“Against the total allocation of Rs. 3443.09 crore in RE 2023-24, the 
Ministry of Textiles at the close of FY 2023-24, were able to utilize Rs. 
3059.92 crore or 88.87% of the revised estimates of the year. In line 
with the recommendations of the Committee, concerted efforts were 
made to utilize the entire funds made available in the revised 
estimates. Regular monitoring of expenditures and measures to 
remove bottlenecks in absorption of funds by the implementing 
agencies through monitoring of unspent balances etc. were constantly 
undertaken, particularly during the last quarter and month of the year. 
In addition, the expenditure progress is being monitored regularly in 
the Senior Officers Meetings. On the subject of NTTM, the funds have 

 
3 
 
been reduced in RE 2024-25 as Rs. 250.00 crore against the BE 
allocation of Rs. 375.00 crore due to less expenditure at the time RE 
discussion by MoF. However, the expenditure reached 80% of RE 
allocation as on date 23.02.25 and the efforts are being made for 
maximum utilization of funds during the current financial year on RR 
2024-25. And the BE allocation of Cotton Corporation of India (CCI), 
Rs. 600.00 crore has been curtailed as a token provision by Ministry 
of Finance during the Revised Estimates. All efforts are being made for 
maximum utilization of funds allocated during current FY 2024-25.” 
8. The Committee had desired that the Ministry should make more 
tangible efforts to plan their action for utilization of allocated funds in 
Schemes such as ‘National Technical Textiles Mission (NTTM)’ and 
‘Scheme for Procurement of Cotton’, etc. The Committee had also 
expected that the Ministry would prepare scrupulous plan of action for 
managing the earmarked funds and fulfill their commitment. The Action 
Taken Reply of the Ministry indicated that expenditure under NTTM has 
reached 80% of RE 2024-25 allocation of Rs. 250 crore as on 23.02.2025 
and efforts are being made for maximum utilization of funds.  Regarding 
the Cotton Corporation of India (CCI), the BE allocation of Rs. 600.00 
crore has been curtailed as a token provision by Ministry of Finance 
during the Revised Estimates. While taking note of these developments, 
the Committee emphasize the need for not only financial but also 
achievement of physical targets under each scheme. The Committee 
strongly recommend for fixing proper accountability for the lapses in not 
utilizing the allocated funds year after year and once again reiterate that 
a specific action plan be chalked out by the Ministry in order to utilize 
the earmarked budget and proper implementation of 
Schemes/Programmes of the Ministry. The Committee also stress that 
expenditure should be spread evenly throughout the year and not 
concentrated in the final quarter. The Committee, therefore, desire to 
be apprised of the Actual Expenditure incurred against the overall 
Budgetary allocation for FY 2024-25, along with scheme-wise and 
project-wise break-up separately.   
II. TIMELY RECEIPT OF VIABLE PROPOSALS AND UTILIZATION 
CERTIFICATES 
Recommendation (Para No. 4) 

 
4 
 
9. The Committee had further noted that the overall reduction in the BE 
figures during the year 2023-24 from ₹ 4389.34 crore to ₹ 3443.09 crore at 
RE stage was mainly due to the reduction in the allocation of the three 
Schemes. First, ATUFS (from ₹ 900 crore to ₹ 675 crore) because no new 
projects could be accepted during the entire year and funds were utilized only 
for clearing the pending liability. Secondly, under National Handicraft 
Development Programme (₹ 238.33 crore to ₹ 155.00 crore) ~ due to the non-
receipt of viable proposals and pending utilization certificates and thirdly, 
under NTTM Scheme (from ₹ 450.00 crore to ₹ 170.00 crore) due to extended 
procurement procedure. The Committee had believed that these are the 
perennial and ever-prevailing reasons that underline every Central Sector 
Scheme and desire the Ministry to take serious and focused steps towards 
dealing with these clichéd problems. The Committee had recommended that 
the Ministry should take up the matter with the apex level officers of the 
States/UTs to sort out this issue and pursue the matter periodically with 
them in order to receive utilization certificates and proposals well in time so 
that the earmarked budget is not surrendered. Appropriate handholding may 
also be offered to the States/UTs in structuring their proposals under the 
schemes. 
10. The Ministry of Textiles in their Action Taken Note furnished to the 
Committee, have stated as follows: 
“The details are as under: - 
(I) ATUFS: This is the final year of the scheme period and committed 
liabilities are being cleared. For clearing all the committed liability 
under ATUFS, regular review meetings under the chairpersonship of 
Secretary are being held. Also, weekly progress is being furnished to 
O/o HMOT vis a vis action plan submitted by implementing agency. 
So far, 6 review meetings have been held. Various other steps such 
as camp mode settlement, fast track of OTC's, rationalization of 
staffs in TxC office etc. have been taken. 
ii) National Handicraft Development Programme: The Office of 
Development Commissioner (Handicrafts) has developed a MIS 
portal i.e. https://indian.handicnafts.gov.in/en for inviting the 
proposal for implementation of the projects and; submission of the 
account settlement documents such as Utilization Certificates (UCs) 
etc. through online mode. It boosts the speed of document 

 
5 
 
submission and other relevant process. So, the issue of late 
settlement of UCs document will be largely resolved. Further, many 
awareness programmes are being conducted by the field office with 
all the stakeholders including departments/ corporations of 
respective States Government and a meeting was also held with 
Resident Commissioners on 26.04.2024 and the concerned states 
every month in this regard. 
(iii) NTTM For optimally utilizing the allocated funds for NTTM in 
the current FY (2024-2025), following measures have been adopted: 
○ Regular review of projects is ensured by Monitoring and review 
group to expedite the financial and physical progress of each 
project. 
◦ The mechanism for necessary approvals e.g. for global tenders, the 
various requests of Principal Investigators (PIs) is developed and 
fast tracked. 
○ The PIs were sensitized about the new system of payment 
mandated by MOF through regular interactions. 
○ Physical visits by senior officers for reviewing progress of some 
important projects. 
Further., for better implementation of NTTM in the current F.Y. 
(2024-2025), following actions have been adopted: 
○ The Mission Directorate has been strengthened at executive level 
for better implementation of Mission. 
○ Interaction meetings with Project implementing agencies to 
address the concern and bottleneck being faced. 
○ Technical guidance by experts of review & monitoring group for 
better result of research projects. 
 
○ Revision in IPR guidelines & improvement in other scheme 
guidelines under NTTM have been carried out for better 
implementation of Mission.”  
 
11.  While taking note of the perennial problems being faced by the 
Ministry - such as non-receipt of viable proposals, pending utilization 
certificates, extended procurement procedure, etc. in respect of various 
Central Sector Schemes, the Committee had recommended that  the 
Ministry should take up the matter with the apex level officers of the 
States/UTs to resolve these issues and pursue the matter periodically 
with them, also provide appropriate handholding to the States/UTs in 

 
6 
 
structuring their proposals under the Schemes. The Ministry, in their 
Action Taken Reply, have highlighted the efforts made and measures 
adopted for optimum utilization of funds and better implementation of 
Schemes under Amended Technology Upgradation Fund Scheme 
(ATUFS), National Handicraft Development Programme (NHDP) and 
National Technical Textiles Mission (NTTM). The Committee felt that 
more stringent action including the reappropriation of allocation from 
the States which are under-utilized to better utilization States should be 
considered in future. The Committee would like to be apprised of the 
tangible outcome of efforts made during FY 2024-25, including 
measurable progress such as the number of viable proposals received, 
percentage of pending UCs cleared and improvement in quarterly 
utilization trends across all schemes.  
On the issue of providing appropriate handholding to the 
States/UTs in structuring their proposals under the Schemes, the 
Committee found no mention of the efforts made in this regard. The 
Committee, therefore, desire that the Ministry should act upon this 
aspect of their recommendation, develop and implement a structured 
training, a capacity-building programme for State/UT Government 
officials involved in the formulation and submission of project proposals 
under its various Central Sector Schemes. This should include 
workshops, online modules and technical guidance materials to be rolled 
out within three months.  
III. ACHIEVEMENT OF PHYSICAL AND FINANCIAL TARGETS 
Recommendation (Para No. 6) 
12. The Committee had found that the Ministry needed to enhance the 
utilisation of the allocated budgetary funds as well as achieving the physical 
targets specially under the Schemes of Amended Technology Upgradation 
Fund Scheme (ATUFS), National Handloom Development Programme, Raw 
Material Supply Scheme, Schemes/programmes related to Handicrafts 
Industries such as National Handicrafts Development Programme (NHDP) and 
Comprehensive Handicrafts Cluster Development, Pashmina Wool 
Development Programme, Grants towards Development of Silk Industry, 

 
7 
 
Scheme for Development of Jute Sector, Integrated Process Development 
Scheme of Textiles Sector, PM Mega Integrated Textile Region and Apparel 
(PM MITRA) and Production Linked Incentive (PM) Scheme for Textiles. The 
Committee had noted that since each Scheme is plagued with problems of 
their own kind, the Ministry should follow individual or customized approach 
to ensure achievement of physical and financial targets set under each 
Scheme. The Committee had desired to be apprised of the steps taken in this 
regard and the progress made in achieving the said targets in the present and 
ensuing FYs. 
13. The Ministry of Textiles in their Action Taken Note furnished to the 
Committee, have stated as under: 
“The details are as under: - 
(i) Amended Technology Upgradation Fund Scheme (ATUFS):  
This is the final year of the scheme period and committed liabilities arc 
being cleared. As of 17.02.2025, 296 ATUFS cases with value of Rs. 
235.9 crore are under examination and additional 222 cases with value 
Rs. 395.7 crore are pending due to various reasons like clarification 
awaited from the unit, recovery, audit observation etc. The Ministry 
aims to settle all pending cases within this Financial Year. For 
expeditious settling of these cases, regular review meetings under the 
chairpersonship of Secretary are being held. Also, weekly progress is 
being furnished to 0/o HMOT vis-a-vis action plan submitted by 
implementing agency. So far, 6 review meetings have been held. Various 
other steps such as camp mode settlement, fast track of OTC's, 
rationalization of staffs in Office of Textile Commissioner etc. have been 
taken  
(ii) National Handicraft Development Program (NHDP) & 
Comprehensive Handicrafts Cluster Development Scheme 
(CHCDS):  
The proposals for the implementation of programmes/projects under 
National Handicrafts Development Programme (NHDP) and 
Comprehensive Handicrafts Cluster Development Scheme (CHCDS) are 
being inviting through the MIS portal i.e. https:/ /indian.handicrafts. 
gov.in/en developed by the office of DC (Handicrafts) recently. Further, 
submission of the account settlement documents such as Utilization 
Certificates (UCs) etc. are being undertaken through online mode also. 
The implementation of the of MIS portal and online procedure boosts 
the speed of documents submission and other relevant process and 
subsequently enhanced the physical and financial achievements under 
the NHDP and CHCDS. Due to the implementation of the MIS portal 

 
8 
 
and online procedure, till 20th February 2025, under NHDP scheme 
₹135.06 Cr. against the RE ₹175.00 Cr. has been utilized (77.18% of 
the RE) and under CHCDS scheme ₹ 24.59 Cr. against the RE ₹ 25.00 
Cr. have been utilized (98.36% of the RE)  
(iii) Pashmina Wool Development Program  
The Central Wool Development Board (CWDB) has sanctioned projects 
under the Pashmina Wool Development Scheme to the Director, Sheep 
Husbandry Department, Leh, for implementation in Leh and Kargil 
districts, and to the Director, Industries and Commerce, UT of Ladakh, 
for projects in Leh district. However, the implementation of the projects 
under this scheme is slow by the Implementing Agencies. To address 
this, the Board has sent letters to the Implementing Agencies to 
expedite the implementation of the sanctioned projects. Apart from it, 
Board has also discussed the matter for speedy implementation of the 
projects with officials of the Implementing Agencies during the various 
meeting as well as through telephonic conversation. Communication 
have sent by the Joint Secretary, Ministry of Textiles, to the Secretary, 
UT of Ladakh, emphasizing on speedy implementation of the projects 
which cover under the project Pashmina Wool Development Scheme. 
(iv) Grants towards Development of Silk Industry  
In respect of Grants towards Silk Industry (Silk Samagra-2 scheme), 
the Ministry of Textiles through Central Silk Board is making concerted 
efforts to enhance the utilization of allocated budgetary funds and 
achieve the set physical targets under the Silk Samagra-2 scheme. The 
approved Revised Estimates (RE) of ₹945.56 crores are being optimally 
utilized through a strategic and need-based approach, ensuring 
effective implementation of scheme components. Recognizing the 
unique challenges associated with different aspects of sericulture 
development, the Central Silk Board (CSB) has adopted a customized 
approach for each intervention under the scheme. The details are as 
under:  
(a) The CSB's R&D efforts in sericulture focus on enhancing silk 
production through the development of region-specific high-yielding 
mulberry varieties, climate-resilient silkworm hybrids, and precision 
fanning techniques like standardized drip fertigation. Advanced disease 
management solutions, bio-control agents, and diagnostic tools for 
silkworm diseases and pesticide residues are being implemented. 
Collaborative projects with Japan, Uzbekistan, and Bulgaria aim to 
improve silk quality and productivity. Apart from this, CSB has 
collaboration with 16 reputed national institutes/organizations for 
overall development of silk industry. Efforts in tasar, eri, and muga silks 
include conservation of eco-races, development of improved rearing 
technologies, and mechanization for higher silk recovery. Indigenous 
Automatic Reeling Machines (IARM) promoted under Atmanirbhar 
Bharat, supports for quality silk production, while new fabric 
innovations and improved dyeing, weaving, and printing technologies 
enhance value addition.  

 
9 
 
(b) Central Silk Board R&D institutes have developed several farm 
machineries to reduce drudgery and improve efficiency in sericulture, 
including a tractor-mounted mulberry shoot harvester, cocoon cutting 
machines, and mechanized solutions for the seed sector. Drone-
operated disinfection has been introduced in tasar rearing, while 
automation efforts aim to enhance quality silk production. 
Advancements in silk processing include warp strapping machines, 
winding cum doubling machines, and Al-based seriplane test analysis. 
Efforts are underway to develop a warp knotting machine for 
handlooms and a computerized Zari testing protocol. Additionally, a 
mobile app-based testing service has been launched at CSTRI. These 
initiatives are aimed at increasing silk production and improving overall 
sector efficiency. 
 (c) New technologies are being explored for converting silk waste into 
high-value by-products in the non-textile, medical, industrial, and 
technical textile sectors.  
(d) During the current year 2024-25, up to end of January 2025, 25 
new research projects were initiated and 16 research projects were 
concluded by CSB Research Institutes and total 102 research projects 
are under progress. 
 (e) Besides maintaining a robust four-tier silkworm seed production 
system by CSB Seed Organizations, private sector participation is being 
actively encouraged and supported, to ensure a consistent and reliable 
supply of quality silkworm seeds. The Seed Organizations of CSB have 
produced 237.49 Lakh Nos. Silkworm DFLs (Disease Free Layings) 
during the current year 2024-25 (up to December, 2024). 
 (f) Technology transfer is strengthened by providing critical input 
support to farmers /stakeholders through implementation of 
beneficiary-oriented components., ensuring they have access to tools 
and techniques for higher productivity. During 2024-25 (up-to 
January), supported States with funds of Rs. 185.70 crores towards 
implementation of beneficiary-oriented components under Silk 
Samagra-2 scheme covering 19113 beneficiaries.  
(g) CSB's R&D institutes provide comprehensive training across the silk 
value chain, enhancing production, entrepreneurship, and 
employment, with a focus on rural communities, women, and 
marginalized groups. During the year 2024-25 (up-to January), 8150 
persons have been trained by CSB training Institutes.  
(h) The Silk Mark certification initiative and stringent quality control 
measures across the entire silk value chain—from seed to fabric—are 
being strengthened to ensure high-quality silk production and effective 
market positioning. During 2024-25 (up-to January), registered 430 
Silk Mark Authorized users, distributed 37.26 Silk Mark Labels, and 
Organized 676 awareness programmes/ Exhibitions  
 

 
10 
 
(i) The impact of CSB's interventions is reflected in the sector's 
performance:  
 In 2023-24, India achieved 38,913 MT of raw silk production, a 
6% increase over the previous year, reaching 92% of the annual 
target of 42,500 MT.  
 Bivoltine raw silk production increased by 9%, from 8,904 MT in 
2022-23 to 9,675 MT in 2023-24. 
 Vanya silk production recorded a 1% increase, while Tasar silk 
production grew by 20% compared to the previous year.  
 During 2024-25 (April-December 2024), total raw silk production 
stands at 30,614 MT, achieving 69% of the annual target, with 
further production expected in the remaining months.  
(v) Scheme for Development of Jute Sector:  
National Jute Board has been implementing National Jute Development 
Programme -NJDP umbrella schemes for overall development of Jute 
Sector during 2021-22 to 2025-26. The NJDP document, approved in 
the Standing Finance Committee (SFC), has scheme wise Physical and 
Financial targets for each year. The progress of implementation of each 
scheme has been closely monitored by the Sub-Committee and reported 
/reviewed by the Monitoring Committee under the Chairmanship of 
Jute Commissioner, keeping in view the Physical and Financial targets. 
The. Committee meets a regular interval and reviews the progress of 
implementation so as to achieve overall physical targets of various 
schemes under NJDP.  
(vi) Integrated Processing Development Scheme (IPDS): Under 
Integrated Processing Development Scheme (IPDS), 6 projects were 
approved in Rajasthan/Gujarat. In FY 2024-25, nearly 100% allocation 
under RE is likely to be expended. Over 90% of the amount has already 
been sanctioned. It is expected that 3 projects will be completed during 
FY 2025-26.  
(vii) PM — Mega Integrated Textile Region and Apparel (PM-MITRA): 
Under PM MITRA, Rs. 24.5 crore has been released under capital head. 
Maharashtra has finalized tender of infrastructure development for Rs. 
111 crore and work order has been issued. Environmental Clearance 
(EC) received for 5 states and likely for 6th state shortly. In addition to 
the development works inside the parks, works worth Rs 1612 Cr have 
already been sanctioned for provision of key external infrastructure 
facilities like water, road and power till the park gate and works worth 
Rs. 486 crore are under approval.  
(viii) Production Linked Incentive 1121.11 Scheme for Textiles:  
PLI scheme was in Gestation period for FY 2022-23 & FY 2023-24. FY 
2024-25 is the first performance year and FY 2025-26 is the first 
incentive claim year. In case of fast paced investment when threshold 
investment and threshold turnover is achieved by FY 2023-24, incentive 
may be payable in FY 2024-25 itself. As per earlier scheme guidelines, 
incentive disbursement was on annual basis. However, in order to 

 
11 
 
enable early incentive disbursement Amendment in scheme guidelines 
has been published on 20th February, 2025. Further, a proposal for 
inclusion of additional HSN codes of MMF apparel and fabrics has been 
shared with DPIIT. Regular review meetings with PLI companies are also 
held to monitor the progress made and to resolve issues. Ministry also 
coordinates with various line Ministries/Departments. State 
Governments etc., if required to ensure smooth implementation of the 
scheme and ease of doing business for PLI participants.” 
 
14. While noting that Schemes such as, Amended Technology 
Upgradation Fund, National Handloom Development Programme, 
Schemes/programmes related to Handicrafts Industries, Pashmina Wool 
Development Programme, Grants towards Development of Silk Industry, 
Scheme for Development of Jute Sector, PM Mega Integrated Textile 
Region and Apparel (PM MITRA), Production Linked Incentive (PLI) 
Scheme for Textiles, etc. are plagued by problems of their own kind and 
the Ministry should follow individual or customized approach to ensure 
achievement of physical and financial targets set under each Scheme, 
the Committee had desired to be apprised of the steps taken in this 
regard and the progress made in achieving the said targets. The Action 
Taken Reply of the Ministry, however, has no mention of physical and 
financial targets set as well as the achievements or 
individual/customized approach followed by the Ministry for ensuring 
achievement of physical and financial targets set under each Scheme. 
The Committee, therefore, reiterate their earlier recommendation and 
urge the Ministry to prepare detailed Scheme specific action plans for 
the achievement of physical and financial targets under each Scheme for 
the current and ensuing FYs. The Actual Expenditure under each Scheme 
vis-à-vis RE during FY 2024-25 may also be furnished to the Committee, 
along with a comparison of physical achievements against set targets.  
 
 
 
 

 
12 
 
 
IV. INSURANCE SCHEMES FOR HANDLOOM WORKERS 
Recommendation (Para No. 9) 
15. The Committee had been concerned to note that reduction of funds 
continuously at RE stage since 2021-22 is attributed to non-receipt of viable 
proposals from States/UTs Government and Handloom workers not coming 
forward for enrolment under PMJJBY/PMSBY and for Weavers MUDRA loan 
as these insurance schemes are voluntary under National Handicraft 
Development Programme of the Ministry. The Committee further noted these 
reasons being quoted for underutilization of funds under other schemes of the 
Ministry. In the considered opinion of the Committee, these reasons plaguing 
the Schemes of the Ministry point towards a serious lack of pro-active 
measures to make the Schemes more effective. The Committee had, therefore, 
recommended that there has to be continuous engagement with the States 
and UTs for the same as these schemes are intended to benefit some of the 
neediest beneficiaries in the textile Sector in the country and appropriate 
inter-governmental architecture should be set up for the same. The 
Committee had also recommended such efforts in case of other schemes of 
the Ministry too wherein the reasons for underutilization of funds are same 
or similar. 
16. The Committee had also desired that the Ministry should explore the 
possibility for mandatory enrolment of the handloom workers/artisans under 
PMJJBY and PMSBY which are significant insurance schemes of the 
Government of India. The Committee were of the considered opinion that even 
more effective steps should be taken by the Ministry to spread proper 
awareness about the Weavers Mudra Loan Scheme amongst the rural 
population of the country so that its benefit could be availed by the small and 
marginal target group. 
17. The Ministry of Textiles in their Action Taken Note furnished to the 
Committee, have stated as under: 

 
13 
 
“The Office of Development Commissioner for Handlooms has noted the 
recommendation of the committee for critically analyzing and 
reengineering of the scheme to iron out the bottlenecks to make these 
schemes more effective. This office has been constantly taking up the 
matter with States/UTs Govt. in close coordination of WSCs i.e. field 
offices of this office for spreading proper awareness through conducting 
awareness camps/chaupals across the country. 
Recently, this Office has written a DO letter dated 17.10.2024 to 
Additional Chief Secretary/Principal Secretary, In-charge of Handloom 
Department of All States/UTs Govt. to take all out efforts towards 
achieving the targets assigned under the Concessional Credit/Weaver 
MUDRA Scheme.” 
 
18. In pursuance of the recommendation of the Committee to make 
the insurance schemes viz, PMJJBY/PMSBY and Weavers MUDRA loan 
under the National Handicraft Development Programme of the Ministry 
more effective, the Ministry has informed that Office of Development 
Commissioner for Handlooms has taken note of the recommendation of 
the Committee for critically analysing and reengineering these schemes. 
The Committee emphasize the need to make these Schemes more 
targeted and outcome oriented to ensure maximum benefits for 
handloom workers, weavers, and artisans and desire that the Ministry, 
in coordination with the Office of Development Commissioner for 
Handlooms, should develop and implement a restructured insurance 
scheme at the earliest. On the issue of exploring the possibility for 
mandatory enrolment of the handloom workers/artisans under PMJJBY 
and PMSBY, the Committee may be apprised of the efforts made and 
progress achieved so far in this regard.  
V. SCHEME FOR HEALTH CARE OF WEAVERS/ARTISANS 
Recommendation (Para No. 11) 
19. During the course of evidence, the Committee had come across the fact 
that the weavers/artisans involved in the traditional handloom and 
handicrafts industries for a long period of time like 20-25 years suffer from 
grave life-threatening lung diseases such as tuberculosis which is inevitable 
for them. The Committee had exhorted the Ministry to take up this matter 
with uttermost seriousness and launch a fresh scheme or programme meant 

 
14 
 
to take care of medical facilities and expenses of these persons who get these 
terminal illnesses due to their Involvement in the production of world class 
textiles. They have given their significant contribution in the economic 
development of the country therefore the Ministry should adopt a 
humanitarian angle and seek separate budget allocation for this Scheme from 
the Ministry of Finance in the next FY 2025-26.  
20. The Ministry of Textiles in their Action Taken Note furnished to the 
Committee, have stated as under: 
 
“Noted for compliance.” 
 
21.  The Committee, in their earlier Report, had exhorted the Ministry  
to launch a fresh scheme or programme meant to take care of the 
medical facilities and expenses of those persons who suffered from 
terminal illnesses due to their involvement in the production of world 
class textiles and seek  separate budget allocation for this Scheme from 
the Ministry of Finance in the next FY 2025-26. However, the Ministry 
have submitted that the Committee’s recommendation had been merely 
noted for compliance. The Committee find the reply of the Ministry 
inadequate and therefore desire to be apprised of the concrete follow-up 
action taken or proposed, including timelines and steps towards 
implementation of their recommendation in letter and spirit. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

 
15 
 
CHAPTER-II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS 
WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 1) 
 
The Committee note that in 2023-24, the Ministry of Textiles had put 
forth BE of ₹ 4389.34 crore which was revised at RE Stage to ₹3443.09 crore 
and Actual Expenditure could only reach 89.55% of RE, i.e. ₹ 3083.30 crore. 
It constituted 70.25% of BE. In 2024-25 BE was        ₹ 4417.03 crore and up 
till 19.11.2024 only ₹ 1668.42 crore were utilized which is only 38% of BE. 
The Committee were apprised that the RE for the Ministry of Textiles could 
not be decided until mid of November, 2024. The Committee observe that even 
though the allocated funds could only be utilized up to 89.55% of BE in 2023-
24, the Demands for Grants had been significantly enhanced by the Ministry 
of Textiles in 2024-25 and only 38% of the funds could be utilized during the 
ongoing third quarter of the current fiscal. 
 Taking into consideration the Ministry’s assurance that funds allocated 
under BE 2024-25 would be fully utilized and more funds would be utilized 
after fixation of RE 2024-25, the Committee desire that the Ministry should 
make more tangible efforts to plan their action for utilization of allocated 
funds in those Schemes where earmarked sum could not be used in a best 
possible manner such as ‘National Technical Textiles Mission (NTTM)’ and 
‘Scheme for Procurement of Cotton’ etc. The Committee, therefore, expect that 
the Ministry would prepare scrupulous plan of action for managing the 
earmarked funds and come up to their commitment.  
Reply of the Government 
 Against the total allocation of Rs. 3443.09 crore in RE 2023-24, the Ministry 
of Textiles at the close of FY 2023-24, were able to utilize Rs. 3059.92 crore or 88.87% 
of the revised estimates of the year. In line with the recommendations of the 
Committee, concerted efforts were made to utilize the entire funds made available in 
the revised estimates. Regular monitoring of expenditures and measures to remove 
bottlenecks in absorption of funds by the implementing agencies through monitoring 
of unspent balances etc. were constantly undertaken, particularly during the last 
quarter and month of the year. In addition, the expenditure progress is being 
monitored regularly in the Senior Officers Meetings. On the subject of NTTM, the 
funds have been reduced in RE 2024-25 as Rs. 250.00 crore against the BE 
allocation of Rs. 375.00 crore  due to less expenditure at the time RE discussion by 
MoF. However the   expenditure reached 80 % of RE allocation as on date 23.02.25 
and the efforts are being made for maximum utilization of funds during the current 
financial year on RE 2024-25. And the BE allocation of Cotton Corporation of India 
(CCI), Rs. 600.00 crore has been curtailed as a token provision by Ministry of Finance 

 
16 
 
during the Revised Estimates. All efforts are being made for maximum utilization of 
funds allocated during current FY 2024-25. 
(Ministry of Textile’s OM No. 2/19/2024-Parl., dated 13.03.2025) 
 
Comments of the Committee.  
Please see Para No. 8 of Chapter-I 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 2) 
The Committee understand that effectively only four months of FY are 
available to utilize the earmarked funds for 2024-25 and the Ministry are 
making sincere efforts to optimally utilize the allocated funds. The Ministry’s 
rationale behind demanding enhanced funds under BE 2024-25 raises 
questions considering the fact that out of ₹ 4417.03 crore, only  
₹ 1668.42 crore have been utilized and only four months are left of the FY 
2024-25. The Committee, therefore, advice the Ministry to demand enhanced 
funds under Supplementary Demands only based on specific head/scheme 
wise projections of expenditure so that excess funds are not surrendered as 
‘savings’ at the end of the FY 2024-25. The Committee would also like to be 
apprised of the latest position regarding RE 2024-25 as well as 
Supplementary Demands for Grants for the year 2024-25. 
Reply of the Government 
The recommendations of the Committee are well noted. The Ministry will take 
all efforts necessary to leverage its performance in full utilization of funds available 
in FY 2024-25. The Ministry has utilized the funds of Rs. 2698.57 crore by 23rd Feb, 
2025, which is 80.75% of RE 2024-25. To enable smooth expenditure flows, the 
monthly and quarterly expenditure plans have been prepared and communicated to 
all Divisions of the Ministry. The performance against this will also be regularly 
monitored to prevent savings and surrender of funds at the end of the financial year.  
As recommended by the Committee, the final estimates of the expenditure will be 
worked out well in advance of the 4th quarter during FY 2024-25, as per Revised 
Estimates, that will be done in consultation with the Ministry of Finance. 
Recommendations of the Committee are noted for future compliance.  
(Ministry of Textile’s OM No. 2/19/2024-Parl., dated 13.03.2025) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 3) 
 
The Committee are concerned to note that up till mid November, 2024, 
only 38% of the budgetary funds have been utilized. According to the 
guidelines issued by the Budget Division (Ministry of Finance), there is a 
ceiling limit of expenditure i.e. 25% in last quarter and 10% in the last month 
of the fiscal year. Considering the fact that there are huge funds left unspent 

 
17 
 
with the Ministry, the Committee hope that the Ministry plan their strategy in 
such a way so that the guidelines of the Ministry of Finance are adhered to 
and the enhanced funds received at supplementary demands level, if any, are 
utilized completely.  
 
 
Reply of the Government 
Against the total allocation of Rs. 3342.00 crore in RE 2024-25, the Ministry, 
is able to utilize Rs. 2698.57 crore  as on date 23.02.25  i.e.  80.75 % of the Revised 
Estimates of the year. The Ministry can incur the expenditure upto 33% of BE in the 
last quarter and 15 % of BE in last month of the FY 2024-25 as per Ministry of 
Finance, Department of Economic Affairs’ OM No 12(13)-B(W&M)/2020 dated 25th 
May, 2022. The Ministry is making all possible efforts for optimal utilization of funds 
as per the instructions/ guidelines issued by the Ministry of Finance from time to 
time. 
 
(Ministry of Textile’s OM No. 2/19/2024-Parl., dated 13.03.2025) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 4) 
 The Committee note that the overall reduction in the BE figures during 
the year 2023-24 from ₹ 4389.34 crore to ₹ 3443.09 crore at RE stage was 
mainly due to the reduction in the allocation of the three Schemes. First, 
ATUFS (from ₹ 900 crore to ₹ 675 crore) because no new projects could be 
accepted during the entire year and funds were utilized only for clearing the 
pending liability. Secondly, under National Handicraft Development 
Programme (₹ 238.33 crore to ₹ 155.00 crore) due to the non-receipt of viable 
proposals and pending utilization certificates and thirdly, under NTTM 
Scheme (from ₹450.00 crore to ₹ 170.00 crore) due to extended procurement 
procedure. The Committee believe that these are the perennial and ever-
prevailing reasons that underline every Central Sector Scheme and desire the 
Ministry to take serious and focused steps towards dealing with these clichéd 
problems. The Committee recommend that the Ministry should take up the 
matter with the apex level officers of the States/UTs to sort out this issue and 
pursue the matter periodically with them in order to receive utilization 
certificates and proposals well in time so that the earmarked budget are not 
surrendered. Appropriate handholding may also be offered to the States/UTs 
in structuring their proposals under the schemes. 
 
Reply of the Government 
The details are as under :- 
(i) ATUFS: This is the final year of the scheme period and committed liabilities are 
being cleared. For clearing all the committed liability under ATUFS, regular review 

 
18 
 
meetings under the chairpersonship of Secretary are being held. Also weekly progress 
is being furnished to O/o HMOT vis a vis action plan submitted by implementing 
agency. So far, 6 review meetings have been held. Various other steps such as camp 
mode settlement, fast track of OTC’s, rationalization of staffs in TxC office etc. have 
been taken.   
(ii) National Handicraft Development Programme : The Office of 
Development Commissioner (Handicrafts) has developed a MIS portal i.e. 
https://indian.handicrafts .gov.in/en for inviting the proposal for implementation of the 
projects and; submission of the account settlement documents such as Utilization 
Certificates (UCs) etc. through online mode. It boosts the speed of document 
submission and other relevant process. So, the issue of late settlement of UCs document 
will be largely resolved. Further, many awareness programmes are being conducted by 
the field office with all the stakeholders including departments/ corporations of 
respective States Government and a meeting was also held with Resident 
Commissioners on 26.04.2024 and the concerned states every month in this regard. 
(iii) NTTM For optimally utilizing the allocated funds for NTTM in the current FY 
(2024 - 2025), following measures have been adopted: 
o Regular review of projects is ensured by Monitoring and review group to expedite the 
financial and physical progress of each project. 
o The mechanism for necessary approvals e.g. for global tenders, the various requests of 
Principal Investigators (PIs) is developed and fast tracked. 
o The PIs were sensitized about the new system of payment mandated by MOF through 
regular interactions. 
o Physical visits by senior officers for reviewing progress of some important projects. 
Further, for better implementation of NTTM in the current F.Y. (2024 - 2025), 
following actions have been adopted: 
o The Mission Directorate has been strengthened at executive level for better 
implementation of Mission. 
o Interaction meetings with Project implementing agencies to address the concern and 
bottleneck being faced. 
o Technical guidance by experts of review & monitoring group for better result of research 
projects. 
o Revision in IPR guidelines & improvement in other scheme guidelines under NTTM have been 
carried out for better implementation of Mission. 
 
 (Ministry of Textile’s OM No. 2/19/2024-Parl., dated 13.03.2025) 
 
Comments of the Committee.  
Please see Para No. 11 of Chapter-I 
 

 
19 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 5) 
The Committee note that the proposed BE 2023-24 under the scheme 
National Handicraft Development Programme of ₹ 250.00 crore was reduced 
to ₹ 206.00 crore. Similarly, under Development of Jute Textiles (NJB), ₹ 
104.67 crore has been reduced to ₹ 50.00 crore; under Textiles Cluster 
Development Scheme ₹ 142.04 crore to ₹ 100.00 crore and under Integrated 
Processing Development Scheme, ₹ 60.80 crore reduced to ₹ 30.00 crore. The 
Committee are worried to find this conspicuous reduction in allocation of 
funds at BE level under these Schemes/Programmes of the Ministry. The 
Committee are not aware if the reduction in the funds sought at the BE stage 
has had an adverse impact on the targets set under the scheme. The 
Committee, therefore,  are of the considered opinion that the Ministry should 
take appropriate steps at the time of presenting Supplementary Demands for 
Grants for appropriate additional funds under these Schemes as these are 
some of the significant Schemes of the Ministry which require sufficient funds 
for effective implementation which cover the wellbeing and welfare of the 
workers/artisans working at the grass root levels of our society.  
 
Reply of the Government 
Against the total allocation of Rs. 3342.00 crore in RE 2024-25, the Ministry, 
is able to utilize Rs. 2698.57 crore  as on date 23.02.25  i.e.  80.75 % of the 
Revised Estimates of the year. The progress of expenditure is being monitored 
rigorously in Senior Officers Meetings.   The Ministry is making all possible 
efforts for optimal utilization of funds as per the instruction/ guidelines 
issued by the Ministry of Finance from time to time. However, supplementary 
Demand, if any, would be sought on basis of the Programme division’s 
requirement for effective implementation of the schemes.  
 (Ministry of Textile’s OM No. 2/19/2024-Parl., dated 13.03.2025) 
Recommendation (Para No. 9) 
The Committee are concerned to note that reduction of funds 
continuously at RE stage since 2021-22 is attributed to non-receipt of viable 
proposals from States/UTs Government and Handloom workers not coming 
forward for enrolment under PMJJBY/PMSBY and for Weavers MUDRA loan 
as these insurance schemes are voluntary under National  Handicraft 
Development Programme of the Ministry. The Committee also note these 
reasons being quoted for underutilization of funds under other schemes of the 
Ministry.  In the considered opinion of the Committee, these reasons plaguing 
the Schemes of the Ministry point towards a serious lack of pro-active 
measures to make the Schemes more effective. The Committee recommend 
that underlying causes for non-receipt of viable proposals and the 
PMJJBY/PMSBY Schemes and Weavers MUDRA loan having no takers have 

 
20 
 
to be critically analysed and the Schemes need to be re-engineered to iron out 
these bottlenecks. There has to be continuous engagement with the States 
and UTs for the same as these schemes are intended to benefit some of the 
neediest beneficiaries in the textile Sector in the country and appropriate 
inter-governmental architecture should be set up for the same. The 
Committee also recommend such efforts in case of other schemes of the 
Ministry too wherein the reasons for underutilization of funds are same or 
similar.  
 The Committee also desire that the Ministry should explore the 
possibility for mandatory enrolment of the handloom workers/artisans under 
PMJJBY and PMSBY which are significant insurance schemes of the 
Government of India. The Committee are of the considered opinion that even 
more effective steps should be taken by the Ministry to spread proper 
awareness about the Weavers Mudra Loan Scheme amongst the rural 
population of the country so that its benefit could be availed by the small and 
marginal target group. 
Reply of the Government 
 The office of Development Commissioner for Handlooms has the 
recommendation of the committee for critically analyzing and reengineering 
of the scheme to iron out the bottlenecks to make these schemes more 
effective. This office has been constantly Taking up the matter with 
States/UTs Govt. in close coordination of WSCs i.e. field offices of this office 
for spreading proper awareness through conducting awareness 
camps/chaupals across the country.  
Recently, this office has written a DO letter dated 17.10.2024 to Additional 
Chief Secretary/Principal Secretary, In-charge of Handloom Department of All 
States/UTs Govt. to take all out efforts towards achieving the targets assigned 
under the Concessional Credit/ Weaver MUDRA Scheme.   
 
(Ministry of Textile’s OM No. 2/19/2024-Parl., dated 13.03.2025) 
Comments of the Committee.  
Please see Para No. 18 of Chapter-I 
 
Raw Material Supply Scheme 
Recommendation (Para No. 10) 
The Committee appreciate the fact that the Ministry have been 
able to gainfully utilize the funds allocated for Raw Material Supply 
Scheme. During the year 2022-23, ₹ 139.70 crore was spent vis-à-vis 

 
21 
 
RE of ₹ 130.00 crore and in 2023-24, against RE of ₹ 160.00 crore, ₹ 
159.72 crore were utilized. Again in 2024-25, Ministry had put forth 
demand of ₹ 172.17 crore as BE. The Committee observe that ₹ 88.41 
crore vis-à-vis the BE of 2024-25 had been utilized till September, 2024 
and the Ministry have assured the Committee that the entire allocated 
funds will be utilized by the end of current FY 2024-25. The Committee 
are pleased with the efforts of the Ministry and expect the Ministry to 
take resolute steps towards meeting their commitment and achieve 
optimal utilization as well as objectives of the Scheme. The Committee 
would also like to be apprised of the physical targets fixed under the 
Scheme for the current fiscal.  
Reply of the Government 
 During 2024-25 (as on 31.12.2024), ₹ 169.40 crore has been utilized out of 
allocated fund ₹172.17 crore as BE. There is target of 360 lakh kg. Yarn 
distribution for 2024-25. 
 (Ministry of Textile’s OM No. 2/19/2024-Parl., dated 13.03.2025) 
 
Handicrafts Sector 
Recommendation (Para No.12) 
The Committee note that under Handicrafts Sector, in 2023-24, BE of 
₹ 284.52 crore was sought by the Ministry, vis-à-vis an RE of ₹ 177.38 was 
granted out of which, ₹ 180.51 crore was utilized which was more than the 
RE. The Committee note with curiosity that in 2024-25, Ministry have 
requested for ₹ 242.00 crore which is quiet higher than the previous year’s 
Actual Expenditure. Moreover, the Ministry have also requested for 
supplementary grants of ₹ 23.24 crore. The Committee, therefore, advise the 
Ministry to live up to their own expectations in regard to the expenditure 
under various Schemes covered under Handicrafts Sector and prepare 
foolproof plan of action to efficiently utilise the allocated funds.  
 
Reply of the Government 
  The details are as under:- 
(i) Justification for requesting ₹ 242.00 crore during FY 2024-25, which 
was quite higher than the previous year's Actual Expenditure: The Office of 
Development Commissioner (Handicrafts) has target of ₹236.00 crore during 
the FY 2024-25 under the EFC/SFC (Expenditure Finance Committee/ 
Standing Finance Committee) for the National Handicrafts Development 
Programme (NHDP- 214.00 Crores) and the Comprehensive Handicrafts 

 
22 
 
Development Scheme (CHDS- 22.00 Crores). Additional funds have been 
sought by O/o DC Handicrafts to address committed liabilities of previous 
years. The EFC/SFC target of NHDP and CHCDS is as per given below: 
 
 
 
 
Year wise financial target of NHDP (Rs. in crores) 
Year. 2022-23 2023-24 2024-25 2025-26 Total 
Allocation 194 209 214 220 837.00 
 
Financial target of CHCDS (Rs. in crores) 
Year 2021-
22 
2022-
23 
2023-
24 
2024-
25 
2025-
26 
Total 
Allocation 40.00 35.00 30.00 22.00 15.50 142.50  
Committed 
Liabilities  
17.50     17.50  
  Grand Total  160.00 
 
As per EFC/SFC targets for the FY 2024- 25, to utilise the budget effectively 
by the Office of Development Commissioner (Handicrafts), a District 
Saturation Plan (DSP) was prepared for better utilization of funds and to 
reach every district across India. The DSP was prepared well in advance in 
February 2024 based on proposals invited in January 2024 for the F.Y. 
2024-25. In a similar manner, annual action plans have been prepared for 
Handicrafts Schemes to ensure full fund will be utilized in the financial year.  
 
(ii) Justification for supplementary grant of Rs 23.24 Crores during FY 
2024-25: The O/o DC(Handicrafts) have two developmental schemes i.e. 
"National Handicrafts Development Programme" and “"Comprehensive 
Handicrafts Cluster Development Scheme"-Mega Cluster”. Under the 
Handicrafts Mega Cluster Scheme 10.05 crores supplementary grant was 
requested for completion of 12 ongoing Mega Cluster projects, active/fast 
implementation of projects in MP, UP, Chhattisgarh, Himachal & 
Uttarakhand, and under NHDP scheme, Rs 11.69 crores supplementary was 
sought by the Programme division under the object heads Grant for “creation 
of capital assets”, Building & Structure to meet previous year liabilities of 
NBCC and for undertaking Departmental activities under object head “Other 
Revenue Expenditure” for approval of new proposals and to meet pending 
liabilities of ongoing projects. Under the Establishment Scheme Indian 
Institute of Carpet Technology Rs 2.00 Crores was requested for payment of 
3rd Installment of lab upgradation and for paying object head Grant-in Aid 

 
23 
 
Salaries allowances to recoup previous liabilities. However Supplementary 
fund of Rs 4.55 crores has been allocated to this Office against 23.24 crores 
during RE 2024-25 stage.  
 
(iii) Justification of Excess Expenditure over RE 2023-24: So far, the excess 
expenditure over RE 2023-24 is concerned, this office was allocated lesser 
funds at the level of Revised Estimates for 2023-24 as compared to the initial 
request, later the additional funds were provided to recoup the expenditure 
already incurred vide supplementary grants.  
 
(Ministry of Textile’s OM No. 2/19/2024-Parl., dated 13.03.2025) 
National Handicraft Development Programme (NHDP) 
Recommendation (Para No. 13) 
 
Under National Handicraft Development Programme (NHDP), the 
Committee are constrained to find that the Ministry could utilize only  
₹ 158.90 crore vis-à-vis the BE of ₹ 238.33 crore in 2023-24. According to the 
Ministry, this shortfall was because the utilization up to September, 2023 had 
deviated from the Quarterly Expenditure Plan (QEP); problems faced by 
Implementing Agencies (IAs) in opening of Zero Balance Subsidiary Accounts 
as per Central Nodal Agency (CNA) module and new accounting procedure of 
CNA which became active in August, 2022 only. Further, the Committee are 
not happy to note the reduction of funds allocated at RE stage in 2023-24 
which came down to ₹ 155.49 crore due to late receipt/non receipt of viable 
proposals and non-submission of reimbursement documents and account 
settlement during the first two quarters of FY 2023-24.  The Committee 
express their serious discontent over the trite replies of the Ministry and 
exhort them to look for structural deficiencies from a fresh perspective in the 
very design of the Schemes/Programmes so that it can be implemented more 
efficiently. Moreover, the Committee do not find it prudent to find reasons like 
introduction of new accounting practices impeding the implementation of 
schemes and take a serious note of it. In the considered opinion of the 
Committee such reasons squarely reflect imprudent implementation of 
schemes designed for the benefit of a vulnerable sector like handicrafts. It is 
recommended that the Ministry shall take all measures to avoid such factors 
affecting the very performance of schemes.     
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 To improve the performance and better implementation of the scheme 
Office of Development Commissioner (Handicrafts) has initiated the scheme 

 
24 
 
evaluation process through the Economic Division, Ministry of Textiles. 
Proposed changes will be incorporate in new EFC/Guidelines.  
(i) Reason for lesser utilisation vis-à-vis BE during 2023-24: A key issue that 
has arisen involves the lesser utilization of funds under the new CNA System 
of Public Financial Management System (PFMS). According to the guidelines 
issued by the Department of Expenditure (DoE), the Programme Divisions (the 
departments responsible for overseeing the schemes) were unable to generate 
sanctions IDs in PFMS for submitting the bills to PAO for payments, since 
there was a cap of 6.25% of the funds that were pending with the Central 
Nodal Agency (CNA) account. This limit created a difficulty in the flow of funds 
and hindered the disbursement process.  
The issue was escalated to the Chief Controller of Accounts (CCA) office, 
Ministry of Textiles. After consulting with the Ministry of Finance, Department 
of Expenditure, an OM dated 6th October 2023 was issued instructing to 
sanction token amount of Rs. 1.00, which will serve as a placeholder for fund 
utilization. This will allow the funds to be reduced in the CNA account below 
the 6.25% threshold. Once the funds were utilized by the Implementing 
Agencies (IAs), the balance in the CNA account decreased, enabling the 
Programme Divisions to generate further sanction IDs in PFMS. After the 
resolution of the issue, Office of DC(Handicrafts) was able to utilize funds 
more effectively and efficiently.  
(ii)  Steps taken by the Office of the Development Commissioner (Handicrafts) 
to streamline payment under (CNA) regime: Since the Handicrafts Sector is 
unorganized, this office has taken significant steps to streamline the funding 
process under the new Central Nodal Account (CNA) System. To support the 
implementing agencies (IAs), the Office of the DC (Handicrafts) had provided 
"handholding" assistance for opening new Zero Balance Savings Accounts 
(ZBSA) in ICICI Bank, under the new CNA System. This initiative ensured that 
the IAs, most of them were new to the CNA system, have no prior experience 
with such new banking arrangements, received the necessary support to set 
up these accounts smoothly. The various meetings with the Ministry of 
Textiles and other stakeholders were also conducted to make them aware of 
the new payment system under CNA. Apart from this, the office organized 
video conferences/Meetings with regional/Field offices of this office to guide 
IAs on the new procedures and instructions related to the streamlined 
payment process under the CNA system, to provide real-time support to IAs, 
ensuring they understand the system's requirements and can comply with 
them efficiently. In cases where IAs faced difficulties in opening the accounts, 
the Office of the DC (Handicrafts) requested branch managers to step in and 
assist, ensuring that these obstacles were quickly overcome. These efforts 
enable smoother financial transactions and strengthening the overall 
implementation of development programs, particularly for agencies in the 
unorganized sector.  

 
25 
 
 
 Once the system was streamlined, the processes became more familiar 
to the IAs, the flow of funds under the Handicrafts Schemes improved 
significantly. As implementing agencies familiar with the new procedures 
involved in opening and linking Zero Balance Subsidy Accounts (ZBSAs) to 
the Central Nodal Agency (CNA) accounts, the earlier challenges related to 
account opening and funds disbursement gradually diminished., with better 
coordination and more efficient use of banking channels, the fund transfer 
process became smoother. As a result, the expenditure figures also saw 
marked improvements in last quarter.  
(Ministry of Textile’s OM No. 2/19/2024-Parl., dated 13.03.2025) 
Recommendation (Para No. 14) 
 Non receipt of viable proposals and pendency of Utilization Certificate (UCs) 
have been cited as reasons for shortfall in achieving physical and financial targets 
under National Handicraft Development Programme and Handicraft Mega Cluster 
Scheme. The Committee recognise that there are a few speed breakers which the 
Ministry have to manoeuvre but, at the same time, are not satisfied with the reply 
of the Ministry as these issues need to be anticipated while implementing any 
schemes/programmes. Hence, the Committee urge upon the Ministry to take more 
conclusive measures to alleviate these problems. As part of this, timelines should 
be drawn for sanctioning of new projects and submission of UCs and these 
timelines should be strictly adhered to. Stringent action should be taken in case 
of non-compliance. The Ministry should dovetail their efforts with the departments 
of respective State Governments to spread more awareness about the Schemes and 
more coordinated efforts should be put in so that monitoring of implementing 
agencies could be done properly and there are no further delays. Further, the 
Committee desire that the Ministry take prioritized steps to implement the module 
in PFMS to receive UCs through it.  
Reply of the Government 
 Office of Development Commissioner (Handicrafts) has developed a 
MIS portal i.e. https://indian.handicrafts.gov.in/en for inviting the proposal, 
implementation of the projects &submission of the account settlement 
document online. It boosts the speed of document submission and other 
relevant process. So, the issue of late settlement of UCs document will be 
largely resolved.  
Further, many awareness programmes are being conducted by the field office 
with all the stakeholders including departments/corporations of respective 
States Government and a meeting was also held with Resident Commissioners 
on 26.04.2024 and the concerned states every month in this regard. 

 
26 
 
 (Ministry of Textile’s OM No. 2/19/2024-Parl., dated 13.03.2025) 
Silk Sector 
Recommendation (Para No. 15) 
 The Committee note that India is the second largest producer of Silk in 
the world after China with the production of 38,913 MTs of silk. India 
produces four varieties of silk viz. Mulberry (76.82%), Tasar (4.08%), Eri 
(18.46%) and Moga (0.65%). The Bivoltine raw silk production has also 
increased by 8.66% from 8,904 MTs to 9,675 MTs during 2023-24. The 
Committee find the achievements of the Ministry in the sector and also the 
utilization of the funds under this Head commendable. The Committee hope 
that the Ministry would stick to their commitment of optimal utilization of the 
allocated funds of ₹ 900.00 crore (BE) in 2024-25 and would like to be 
apprised of the RE as well as supplementary demand under this Head. The 
Committee also desire the Ministry to take well-focussed steps to conduct 
more research and development under Silk sector for further improving the 
quality of indigenously manufactured silk to compete with Silk manufactured 
by other major players in the world market. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 The country achieved a record production of 38,913 MT of raw silk 
during 2023-24, marking a 6% increase compared to the previous year and 
achieving 92% of the annual target of 42,500 MT. Notably, Bivoltine raw silk 
production increased significantly by 9%, rising from 8,904 MT in 2022-23 to 
9,675 MT in 2023-24. This growth reflects the success of focused 
interventions under the Silk Samagra-2 scheme. Mulberry silk production 
achieved 97% of the annual target in 2023-24, supported by an 8% increase 
in cross-breed silk production. Vanya silk production registered a marginal 
increase of 1%, with Tasar silk production showing an impressive 20% growth 
over the previous year. During the current year 2024-25 (April-October 2024), 
total raw silk production stands at 21,900 MT, achieving 49.3% of the annual 
target.  
 
Efforts are underway to ensure optimal utilization of the allocated funds 
under the Budget Estimates (BE) 2024-25 of ₹900 crores, with the Revised 
Estimates (RE) proposed at ₹945.56 crores. The requirement of 
Supplementary demand is "NIL" as on date and the CSB is committed to 
utilize the allocated funds effectively within the fiscal year. 
The Central Silk Board (CSB) has intensified its research and development 
initiatives to improve the quality of indigenously manufactured silk and 

 
27 
 
enhance its global competitiveness. Efforts are underway to develop new 
climate-resilient silkworm breeds, host-plant varieties, allied technologies to 
increase silk production and advanced machinery to enhance production 
efficiency of quality silk. New technologies are being explored for the 
utilization of silk waste into valuable products and by-products, including 
non-textile, medical, industrial, and technical textiles. CSB is also engaging 
in global collaborations through the International Sericultural Commission 
(ISC) to adopt best practices and promote innovation. To ensure a reliable 
supply of quality silkworm seeds, private players in the seed sector are being 
encouraged and supported. 
The modernization of the post-cocoon sector remains a priority, with 
initiatives to adopt improved indigenous reeling, weaving, and spinning 
machines that enhance both quality and efficiency. Large farming modelsare 
also being promoted to foster innovation and sustainability. The CSB is also 
fostering start-ups by providing incubation facilities to support both pre-
cocoon and post-cocoon sector entrepreneurs, enhancing innovation and 
scalability. In order to transfer the technologies evolved by CSB R & D 
Institutes, CSB has been providing critical input support to farmers and 
beneficiaries, ensuring that they have access to tools and techniques that 
enhance silk production. Additionally, the Silk Mark certification initiative 
and rigorous quality checks at all stages of the silk value chain, from seed to 
fabric, are being strengthened to ensure high standards in marketing and 
branding. These efforts aim to increase India's share in the international silk 
market by reinforcing the global reputation of Indian silk. 
 
 (Ministry of Textile’s OM No. 2/19/2024-Parl., dated 13.03.2025) 
Textile Sector 
Recommendation (Para No. 16) 
 The Committee note that the Ministry had sought BE of ₹ 316.55 crore 
which was reduced to ₹ 134.85 crore at RE stage and the Actual Expenditure 
was only ₹ 67.79 crore in 2023-24. In 2024-25, the Ministry have requested 
for BE of ₹ 381.77 crore. According to the Ministry, a major portion of the 
allocation was designated for PM-MITRA. Since the scheme was in its initial 
phase and as a pre-requisite for the release of funds, a Master Developer had 
to be appointed by all the States, the process of which could not be completed 
in the previous year, therefore the funds could not be released. The Committee 
find that in 2024-25, BE has been enhanced by the Ministry vis-à-vis the 
previous year in the expectation that a major portion of it, i.e., ₹ 300 crore, 

 
28 
 
allocated under PM-MITRA Scheme would be utilized by the end of the current 
fiscal. The Committee express their concern over the delay and lack of interest 
displayed by the State/UT Governments in sending the viable proposals as 
well as completing the ongoing projects. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that the Ministry should explore other options also such as 
inclusion of private players, to develop these Parks at the earliest, as this is 
the project initiated by the Central Government which has the potential to 
generate unlimited employment opportunities, which would eventually 
contribute to the economic development of the country.  
 
Reply of the Government 
The suggestions made by the committee have been duly noted and various 
models including State Government/Industrial Development Corporation 
(IDC) led model, Private Sector Master Developer based Public Private 
Partnership (PPP) model and a combination of the two i.e. Hybrid Model, are 
now being used for development of PM MITRA Parks. At present following 
implementation plan is adopted for scheme execution: 
  
(a)     Brownfield Parks: 
 
(i) Telangana: Government of Telangana through its agency viz. Telangana State Industrial 
Infrastructure Corporation (TGIIC) to be the Implementing Agency 
(ii) Maharashtra: Government of Maharashtra through its agency viz.  Maharashtra 
Industrial Development Corporation (MIDC) to be the Implementing Agency 
  
(b) Greenfield parks:  
 
(i)SPV led Model: Tamil Nadu and Madhya Pradesh:   PM MITRA parks in 
Madhya Pradesh (MP) and Tamil Nadu (TN) are being implemented through 
the respective state governments i.e. Govt. of MP and Govt. of TN through 
their Industrial Development Corporations. (IDCs) 
  
(ii)  Private Sector led Master developer parks in PPP mode:  Parks in 
Gujarat, UP and Karnataka are being developed through a Master 
Developer (MD) led model in Public Private Partnership (PPP) Mode.  
 
 (Ministry of Textile’s OM No. 2/19/2024-Parl., dated 13.03.2025) 
  

 
29 
 
Production-Linked Incentives (PLI) Scheme For Textiles 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 17) 
 
The Committee note that the Production-Linked Incentives (PLI) 
Scheme for Textiles has been launched by the Government with an approved 
outlay of ₹ 10,683 crore over a five year period to promote production of 
Manmade Fibre (MMF) Apparel, MMF fabrics and products of technical 
textiles in the country to enable Textile Sector to achieve size and scale and 
to become competitive. The Committee find that in 2023-24, BE of ₹ 5.00 crore 
were sanctioned for this Scheme and ₹ 4.13 crore were actually utilized and 
an amount to the tune of ₹ 42.00 lakh was surrenderd in FY 2021-22 and 
2022-23 and ₹ 87 lakhs were left unutilized in 2023-24. In 2024-25, ₹ 45.00 
crore have been sought by the Ministry. The Committee understand that the 
FY 2022-23 to 2023-24 was supposed to be the gestation period for the 
Scheme and as FY 2024-25 is the first performance year of the Scheme, the 
Ministry had to seek BE of ₹ 45.00 crore in 2024-25. The Committee, taking 
note of the above fact, are of the considered opinion that under this situation 
wherein 74 companies have been selected under the PLI Scheme, it is 
expected that the Ministry should be in a position to meet the demand in case 
incentives are claimed and the disbursement of funds will take place 
effortlessly from this year onwards.  
 
Reply of the Government 
Rs. 45 crore of BE 2024-25 comprises of Rs. 5cr under Professional 
Services head and Rs. 40 crore under Grants-in-Aid General. Production-
Linked Incentives(PLI) scheme was in Gestation period for FY 2022-23 & FY 
2023-24.FY 2024-25 is the first performance year and FY 2025-26 is the first 
incentive claim year. However, in case of fast paced investment when 
threshold investment and threshold turnover is achieved by FY 2023-24, 
incentive may be payable in FY 2024-25 itself. 
Also, earlier the applicant was to submit a claim for disbursement of incentive 
on an annual basis. However, keeping in view, the requests from industry for 
early incentive disbursement, amendment for the same has been issued. 
Additionally, PLI scheme provides flexibility in a way that the year in which 
prescribed threshold turnover would be achieved, that year will be the first 
performance year.  
(Ministry of Textile’s OM No. 2/19/2024-Parl., dated 13.03.2025) 
 
 

 
30 
 
CHAPTER-III 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO 
NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLY 
 
COTTON SECTOR 
Recommendation (Para No.7) 
 The Committee note that in 2023-24, under the Central Sector Scheme 
of Procurement of Cotton, BE and RE was ₹ 0.01 crore out of which there was 
nil utilization. The reason cited by the Ministry was the price of kapas which 
remained above the MSP, so no MSP support was required for 2021-22 and 
2022-23. The Committee are given to understand that under this Scheme, 
when the price of seed cotton (kapas) falls below the MSP, the Cotton 
Corporation of India (CCI) which is the Central Nodal Agency under the 
Ministry of Textiles to conduct MSP operations, procures it at MSP rates from 
the farmers. However, the volume of procurements under MSP operations 
depends on the prevailing market situation based on demand and supply of 
cotton in domestic and international market. The Committee find that in 
2024-25, the Ministry had put forth remarkably enhanced demand of ₹ 600 
crore at BE stage as the improvement in the demand for cotton in the market 
after lockdown measures during 2019-21 drove the prices significantly higher. 
Taking note of the above, the Committee expect the Ministry to make 
concerted efforts to ensure efficient utilization of the amount of ₹ 600 crore as 
sought in the current fiscal year and there’s no surrendering of funds under 
this Head at the end of the current fiscal. 
 
Reply of the Government 
A proposal was sent for the concurrence of Internal Finance Wing (IFW), 
Ministry of Textiles for reimbursement of losses to CCI. IFW stated that the 
approval of the competent authority (CCEA) is required for reimbursement of 
the losses/ price support incurred on account of carrying out MSP operations. 
 
Hence, an EFC Note for reimbursing the losses in MSP operations for cotton 
to CCI during the cotton years 2022-23 to 2024-25 was prepared and 
circulated to concerned Ministries for comments. The discussion on EFC is 
currently under process.  Therefore, the amount of Rs 600 crores allocated in 
BE 2024-25 have been reduced to Rs 1 Lakhs in RE 2024-25. The funds 
requirement will be requested in upcoming FYs based on the approval of 
EFC/CCEA”. 
 
(Ministry of Textile’s OM No. 2/19/2024-Parl., dated 13.03.2025) 

 
31 
 
 
CHAPTER-IV 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH 
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
COMMITTEE AND WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION 
 
Recommendation (Para No.6) 
 The Committee find that the Ministry need to enhance the utilisation  
of the allocated budgetary funds as well as achieving the physical targets 
specially under the Schemes of Amended Technology Upgradation Fund 
Scheme (ATUFS), National Handloom Development Programme, Raw Material 
Supply Scheme, Schemes/programmes related to Handicrafts Industries 
such as National Handicrafts Development Programme (NHDP) and 
Comprehensive Handicrafts Cluster Development, Pashmina Wool 
Development Programme, Grants towards Development of Silk Industry, 
Scheme for Development of Jute Sector, Integrated Process Development 
Scheme of Textiles Sector, PM Mega Integrated Textile Region and Apparel 
(PM MITRA) and Production Linked Incentive (PLI) Scheme for Textiles. The 
Committee note that since each Scheme is plagued with problems of their own 
kind, the Ministry should follow individual or customized approach to ensure 
achievement of physical and financial targets set under each Scheme. The 
Committee would like to be apprised of the steps taken in this regard and the 
progress made in achieving the said targets in the present and ensuing FYs.  
 
Reply of the Government  
The details are as under:- 
(i) Amended Technology Upgradation Fund Scheme (ATUFS) : This is the final 
year of the scheme period and committed liabilities are being cleared. As of 
17.02.2025, 296 ATUFS cases with value of Rs. 235.9 crore are under 
examination and additional 222 cases with value Rs. 395.7 crore are pending 
due to various reasons like clarification awaited from the unit, recovery, audit 
observation etc. The Ministry aims to settle all pending cases within this 
Financial Year. For expeditious settling of these cases, regular review 
meetings under the chairpersonship of Secretary are being held. Also weekly 
progress is being furnished to O/o HMOT vis a vis action plan submitted by 
implementing agency. So far, 6 review meetings have been held. Various other 
steps such as camp mode settlement, fast track of OTC’s, rationalization of 
staffs in Office of  Textile Commissioner  etc. have been taken 

 
32 
 
 
(ii) National Handicraft Development Program (NHDP)& Comprehensive Handicrafts 
Cluster Development Scheme (CHCDS): The proposals for the implementation of 
programmes/ projects under National Handicrafts Development Programme (NHDP) 
and Comprehensive Handicrafts Cluster Development Scheme (CHCDS) are being 
inviting through the MIS portal i.e. https://indian.handicrafts. gov.in/en developed 
by the office of DC (Handicrafts) recently. Further, submission of the account 
settlement documents such as Utilization Certificates (UCs) etc.  are being 
undertaken through online mode also.  The implementation of the of MIS portal and 
online procedure boosts the speed of documents submission and other relevant 
process and subsequently enhanced the physical and financial achievements under 
the NHDP and CHCDS.  Due to the implementation of the MIS portal and online 
procedure, till 20th February 2025, under NHDP scheme ₹135.06 Cr. against the RE 
₹175.00 Cr. has been utilized (77.18% of the RE) and under CHCDS scheme ₹24.59 
Cr. against the RE ₹25.00 Cr. have been utilized (98.36% of the RE) 
 
(iii) Pashmina Wool Development Program 
The Central Wool Development Board (CWDB) has sanctioned projects under the 
Pashmina Wool Development Scheme to the Director, Sheep Husbandry 
Department, Leh, for implementation in Leh and Kargil districts, and to the Director, 
Industries and Commerce, UT of Ladakh, for projects in Leh district. However, the 
implementation of the projects under this scheme is slow by the Implementing 
agencies. To address this, the Board has sent letters to the Implementing Agencies 
to expedite the implementation of the sanctioned projects. Apart from it, Board has 
also discussed the matter for speedy implementation of the projects with officials of 
the Implementing Agencies during the various meeting as well as through telephonic 
conversation.Communication have sent by the Joint Secretary, Ministry of Textiles, 
to the Secretary, UT of Ladakh, emphasizing on speedy implementation of the 
projects which cover under the project Pashmina Wool Development Scheme. 
(iv) Grants towards Development of Silk Industry 
In respect of Grants towards Silk Industry (Silk Samagra-2 scheme), the Ministry of 
Textiles through Central Silk Board is making concerted efforts to enhance the 
utilization of allocated budgetary funds and achieve the set physical targets under 
the Silk Samagra-2 scheme. The approved Revised Estimates (RE) of ₹945.56 crores 
are being optimally utilized through a strategic and need-based approach, ensuring 
effective implementation of scheme components. Recognizing the unique challenges 
associated with different aspects of sericulture development, the Central Silk Board 
(CSB) has adopted a customized approach for each intervention under the scheme. 
The details are as under: 
(a) The CSB’s R&D efforts in sericulture focus on enhancing silk production through 
the development of region-specific high-yielding mulberry varieties, climate-resilient 
silkworm hybrids, and precision farming techniques like standardized drip 
fertigation. Advanced disease management solutions, bio-control agents, and 
diagnostic tools for silkworm diseases and pesticide residues are being 
implemented. Collaborative projects with Japan, Uzbekistan, and Bulgaria aim to 
improve silk quality and productivity. Apart from this, CSB has collaboration with 
16 reputed national institutes/organizations for overall development of silk 

 
33 
 
industry. Efforts in tasar, eri, and muga silks include conservation of eco-races, 
development of improved rearing technologies, and mechanization for higher silk 
recovery. Indigenous Automatic Reeling Machines (IARM) promoted under 
Atmanirbhar Bharat, supports for quality silk production, while new fabric 
innovations and improved dyeing, weaving, and printing technologies enhance value 
addition.  
 
(b)CSB R&D institutes have developed several farm machineries to reduce drudgery 
and improve efficiency in sericulture, including a tractor-mounted mulberry shoot 
harvester, cocoon cutting machines, and mechanized solutions for the seed sector. 
Drone-operated disinfection has been introduced in tasar rearing, while automation 
efforts aim to enhance quality silk production. Advancements in silk processing 
include warp strapping machines, winding cum doubling machines, and AI-based 
seriplane test analysis. Efforts are underway to develop a warp knotting machine for 
handlooms and a computerized Zari testing protocol. Additionally, a mobile app-
based testing service has been launched at CSTRI. These initiatives are aimed at 
increasing silk production and improving overall sector efficiency 
(c)  New technologies are being explored for converting silk waste into high-value 
by-products in the non-textile, medical, industrial, and technical textile sectors. 
(d) During the current year 2024-25, up to end of January 2025, 25 new research 
projects were initiated and 16 research projects were concluded by CSB Research 
Institutes and total 102 research projects are under progress. 
(e) Besides maintaining a robust four-tier silkworm seed production system by CSB 
Seed Organizations, private sector participation is being actively encouraged and 
supported, to ensure a consistent and reliable supply of quality silkworm seeds. The 
Seed Organizations of CSB have produced 237.49 Lakh Nos. Silkworm Dfls (Disease 
Free Layings) during the current year 2024-25 (upto December, 2024)  
(f) Technology transfer is strengthened by providing critical input support to farmers 
/stakeholders through implementation of beneficiary-oriented components., 
ensuring they have access to tools and techniques for higher productivity. During 
2024-25 (up-to January), supported States with funds of Rs. 185.70 crores towards 
implementation of beneficiary-oriented components under Silk Samagra-2 scheme 
covering 19113 beneficiaries.  
 
(g) CSB’s R&D institutes provide comprehensive training across the silk value chain, 
enhancing production, entrepreneurship, and employment, with a focus on rural 
communities, women, and marginalized groups. During the year 2024-25(up-to 
January), 8150 persons have been trained by CSB training Institutes.  
 
(h) The Silk Mark certification initiative and stringent quality control measures 
across the entire silk value chain—from seed to fabric—are being strengthened to 
ensure high-quality silk production and effective market positioning. During 2024-
25(up-to January), registered 430 Silk Mark Authorized users, distributed 37.26 
Silk Mark Labels, and Organized 676 awareness programmes/ Exhibitions 
(i) The impact of CSB’s interventions is reflected in the sector’s performance: 
(j) In 2023-24, India achieved 38,913 MT of raw silk production, a 6% increase over 
the previous year, reaching 92% of the annual target of 42,500 MT. 

 
34 
 
(k) Bivoltine raw silk production increased by 9%, from 8,904 MT in 2022-23 to 
9,675 MT in 2023-24. 
(l) Vanya silk production recorded a 1% increase, while Tasar silk production grew 
by 20% compared to the previous year. 
(m) During 2024-25 (April-December 2024), total raw silk production stands at 
30,614 MT, achieving 69% of the annual target, with further production expected in 
the remaining months. 
(v) Scheme for Development of Jute Sector :National Jute Board has been implementing National 
Jute Development Programme -NJDP umbrella schemes for overall development of Jute Sector during 
2021-22 to 2025-26. 
The NJDP document, approved in the Standing Finance Committee (SFC), has 
scheme wise Physical and Financial targets for each year. The progress of 
implementation of each scheme has been closely monitored by the Sub-Committee 
and reported /reviewed by the Monitoring Committee under the Chairmanship of 
Jute Commissioner, keeping in view the Physical and Financial targets. The. 
Committee meets a regular interval and reviews the progress of implementation so 
as to achieve overall physical targets of various schemes under NJDP. 
(vi) Integrated Processing Development Scheme (IPDS) : Under Integrated Processing 
Development Scheme (IPDS), 6 projects were approved in Rajasthan/Gujarat. In FY 2024-25, 
nearly 100% allocation under RE is likely to be expended. Over 90% of the amount has already 
been sanctioned. It is expected that 3 projects will be completed during FY 2025-26. 
(vii) PM – Mega Integrated Textile Region and Apparel (PM-MITRA): Under PM MITRA, 
Rs. 24.5 crore has been released under capital head.  Maharashtra has finalized 
tender of infrastructure development for Rs. 111 crore and work order has been 
issued. Environmental Clearance (EC) received for 5 states and likely for 6th state 
shortly. In addition to the development works inside the parks, works worth Rs 1612 
Cr have already been sanctioned for provision of key external infrastructure facilities 
like water, road and power till the park gate and works worth Rs. 486 cr are under 
approval. 
(viii) Production Linked Incentive (PLI) Scheme for Textiles: PLI scheme was in Gestation period for 
FY 2022-23 & FY 2023-24. FY 2024-25 is the first performance year and FY 2025-26 is the first 
incentive claim year. In case of fast paced investment when threshold investment and threshold 
turnover is achieved by FY 2023-24, incentive may be payable in FY 2024-25 itself. As per earlier 
scheme guidelines. incentive disbursement was on annual basis. However, in order to enable early 
incentive disbursement Amendment in scheme guidelines has been published on 20th February 
2025. Further, a proposal for inclusion of additional HSN codes of MMF apparel and fabrics has 
been shared with DPIIT. Regular review meetings with PLI companies are also held to monitor the 
progress made and to resolve issues. Ministry also coordinates with various line Ministries/Deptts. 
State Governments etc., if required to ensure smooth implementation of the scheme and ease of 
doing business for PLI participants. 
 (Ministry of Textile’s OM No. 2/19/2024-Parl., dated 13.03.2025) 
Comments of the Committee.  
Please see Para No. 14 of Chapter-I 
 

 
35 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No.11) 
During the course of evidence, the Committee came across the fact that 
the weavers/artisans involved in the traditional handloom and handicrafts 
industries for a long period of time like 20-25 years suffer from grave life-
threatening lung diseases such as tuberculosis which is inevitable for them. 
The Committee exhort the Ministry to take up this matter with uttermost 
seriousness and launch a fresh scheme or programme meant to take care of 
medical facilities and expenses of these persons who get these terminal 
illnesses due to their involvement in the production of world class textiles. 
They have given their significant contribution in the economic development of 
the country therefore the Ministry should adopt a humanitarian angle and 
seek separate budget allocation for this Scheme from the Ministry of Finance 
in the next FY 2025-26. 
Reply of the Government 
 Noted for Compliance. 
 (Ministry of Textile’s OM No. 2/19/2024-Parl., dated 13.03.2025) 
Comments of the Committee.  
Please see Para No. 21 of Chapter-I 
 
 
  

 
36 
 
 
CHAPTER-V 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH 
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE INTERIM IN NATURE  
 
Handloom Industries 
Recommendation (Para No. 8) 
 The Committee observe that the fiscals 2021-22 to 2024-25 witnessed 
reduction of funds from BE to RE stage in respect of Handloom Industries. 
Although, ₹ 367.00 crore were sought by the Ministry as BE in 2023-24, it 
was reduced to ₹ 357.00 crore out of which ₹ 352.31 crore could be utilized. 
Again, the Ministry have sought BE of ₹ 379.17 crore in 2024-25. The 
Committee desire to be apprised of the figures regarding RE and actual 
utilization under the head ‘Handloom Industries’ along with the cogent 
measures taken for optimal utilisation of funds. 
Reply of the Government 
 During 2024-25 (as on 31.12.2024), ₹336.38 crore has been utilized 
out of allocated fund. ₹379.17 crore as BE.  The concerned authorities have 
been directed to liaise with respective State / UT Governments and other 
implementing agencies to furnish viable proposals expeditiously for 
release/utilizing funds in time.Theprogress  in this  regard is being  monitor
ed  by  headquarter level from time to time.  
(Ministry of Textile’s OM No. 2/19/2024-Parl., dated 13.03.2025) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 18) 
 The Committee further note that an investment of about ₹ 6,000 crores 
has been made under Production-Linked Incentives (PLI) Scheme and the 
Ministry is expecting additional investments of about ₹ 28,000 crores. The 
Committee, keeping in the background, the surrender of unutilized funds year 
after year since 2021 till 2023-24, urge the Ministry to make determined efforts 
to plug the loopholes, if any, in the Scheme. The Committee further desire that 
the Ministry should come up with some more incentives such as developing 
motivational programmes. Also measures for spreading awareness about the 
Scheme should be further augmented so that more and more beneficiaries can 
be attracted and enrolled under the same. The Committee are of the view that PLI 
Scheme is not meant for Textile Sector alone, but the Government has announced 
an outlay of handsome amount across 14 key sectors viz. Ministry of Electronics 
and Information Technology, Department of Pharmaceuticals, Department of 

 
37 
 
Telecommunications, Ministry of Food Processing Industries, etc to create 
national manufacturing champions. The Committee believe that a huge potential 
lies within the various sectors of Ministry of Textiles and the Ministry should 
make concerted efforts to exploit them through proper research and development 
in the MMF Sector and come up with an appropriate plan so that allocated funds 
are gainfully utilized within the stipulated timeline. 
Reply of the Government 
 The PMA for PLI(Textiles) organises regular workshops for the awareness 
of scheme guidelines and amendments thereof with PLI participants. Ministry 
also provides a platform to the PLI companies to participate in weekly open house 
forum discussion along with regular review meetings to answer queries and 
address any issues being faced by the companies. Further the PLI portal for 
Textiles is updated from time to time for spreading awareness about the Scheme. 
Recently, PLI pavilion was also set up in Bharat Tex 2025 held in Bharat 
Mandapam from 14.02.2025 to 17.02.2025 to provide a platform to PLI 
companies for showcasing their products and to create interest among buyers, 
industry, entrepreneurs and other potential participants. 
On industry feedback and for making the scheme comprehensive, Ministry of 
Textiles has submitted two proposals viz., PLI 1.2 for expansion of HS lines under 
MMF apparel and MMF fabrics, and PLI 2 for apparel/garments, made-ups and 
textiles accessories. Both the proposals are currently under consideration at the 
highest levels. 
(Ministry of Textile’s OM No. 2/19/2024-Parl., dated 13.03.2025) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi; BASAVARAJ BOMMAI  
19 August, 2025 CHAIRPERSON, 
28 Shravana, 1947 (Saka)      STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
LABOUR, TEXTILES AND SKILL 
DEVELOPMENT 
 
 
 
 
 

 
38 
 
APPENDIX-I 
MINUTES OF THE FIFTEENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON 
LABOUR, TEXTILES AND SKILL DEVELOPMENT 
(2024-25) 
 
The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 19th August, 2025 from 1500 hrs. 
to 16:30 hrs. in Committee Room ‘C’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
         PRESENT 
Shri Basavaraj Bommai-  Chairperson 
      MEMBERS  
  LOK SABHA  
 2. Shri G. M. Harish Balayogi 
 3. Shri Aashtikar Patil Nagesh Bapurao 
 4. Shri Ram Prasad Chaudhary  
 5.                Shri G. Lakhsminarayana 
 6.            Shri Asit Kumar Mal 
            7.        Shri Kali Kumar Munda 
           8.        Shri Rudra Narayan Pany 
           9.        Shri Kartick Chandra Paul 
          10.       Shri Pradeep Purohit 
          11.       Shri Mukesh Rajput 
          12.       Shri Raja Ram Singh 
          13.       Shri Adhikari Soumendu 
          14.       Shri Manoj Tigga 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
  15. Shri Naresh Bansal 
  16. Shri Govindbhai Laljibhai Dholakia 
  17. Shri Rajendra Gehlot 
  18. Dr. Syed Naseer Hussain 
  19. Shri I.S. Inbadurai 
  20. Dr. Meenakshi Jain 
    
                    SECRETARIAT 
 
1.    Shri Lalkithang   - Joint Secretary   
2.    Ms. K. Muanniang Tunglut - Director 
3.    Ms. Mili Dinesh    -  Deputy Secretary 
4.    Shri S. Lalengzau Ngaihte - Deputy Secretary 
5.    Ms. Shilpa Kant   - Under Secretary 
 
 

 
39 
 
2. XXXX      XXXX      XXXX   
 
3. XXXX      XXXX      XXXX 
      
4. XXXX      XXXX      XXXX 
  
5. XXXX      XXXX      XXXX 
 
6. XXXX      XXXX      XXXX 
 
(The witnesses then withdrew) 
[A copy of the verbatim record of proceedings was kept on record] 
 
7.   The Committee then took up the next item on the agenda i.e. consideration 
and adoption of four draft Action Taken Reports: - 
(i) Action taken by the Government on the observations/recommendations 
contained in the Fifty-fourth Report (17th Lok Sabha) of the Committee 
on ‘Schemes/Programmes of Central Silk Board for Development and 
Promotion of Silk Industry’ pertaining to the Ministry of Textiles;  
(ii) Action Taken by the Government on the observations/recommendations 
contained in the Fifty-Fifth Report (17th Lok Sabha) of the Committee on 
'Development of Cotton Sector' pertaining to Ministry of Textiles;  
(iii) Action Taken by the Government on the observations/recommendations 
contained in the First Report (18th Lok Sabha) of the Committee on 
‘Demands for Grants (2024-25)’ of the Ministry of Labour & Employment; 
and   
(iv) Action Taken by the Government on the observations/recommendations 
contained in the Second Report (18th Lok Sabha) of the Committee on 
‘Demands for Grants (2024-25)’ of the Ministry of Textiles. 
 
8. After some deliberations, the Committee adopted the aforesaid draft 
Reports with some modifications/amendments and authorized the 
Chairperson to finalise the Reports and present the same to Parliament. 
The Committee then adjourned. 
* * * * * * 
 
  

 
40 
 
APPENDIX-II 
(Vide Para No. 3 of Introduction) 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN THE 
SECOND REPORT (EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) OF THE 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR, TEXTILES AND SKILL 
DEVELOPMENT  
      Total Percentage 
   
I. Total number of Recommendations 18 
 
 
II. Recommendations/Observations 
which have been accepted by the 
Government – Rec. Para Nos. 1, 2, 3, 
4, 5, 9, 10, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16 and 
17 
 
13 72.22 
III. Recommendations/Observations 
which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government’s 
reply – Rec. Para No. 7 
 
01 5.55 
IV Recommendations/Observations in 
respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted 
by the Committee and which require 
reiteration – Rec. Para Nos. 6 and 11 
02 11.11 
V Recommendations/Observations in 
respect of which replies of the 
Government are interim in nature - 
Rec. Para Nos.  8 and 18  
02 11.11 
           100% 
 