i 
 
 
 
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR, TEXTILES AND SKILL 
DEVELOPMENT 
(2025-26) 
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF LABOUR AND EMPLOYMENT 
 
ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE OBSERVATIONS/ 
RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE CONTAINED IN THEIR FOURTH 
REPORT (EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) ON ‘DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2025-
26)’ OF THE MINISTRY OF LABOUR & EMPLOYMENT. 
 
 
EIGHTEENTH REPORT 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
March, 2026/Chaitra, 1948 (Saka) 
18 

ii 
 
 
EIGHTEENTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR, TEXTILES AND SKILL 
DEVELOPMENT 
(2025-26) 
 
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF LABOUR AND EMPLOYMENT 
 
Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ Recommendations 
of the Committee contained in their Fourth Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) 
on ‘Demands for Grants (2025-26)’ of the Ministry of Labour & Employment. 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 27.03.2026 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 27.03.2026 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
March, 2026/Chaitra, 1948 (Saka) 
  


iii 
 
 
CONTENTS 
PAGE No. 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (iv) 
INTRODUCTION   (v) 
CHAPTER I Report 1 
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations which have been 
accepted by the Government 
 
18 
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations which the 
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the 
Government’s reply 
 
59 
CHAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of 
which replies of Government have not been 
accepted by the Committee and which require 
reiteration 
 
63 
CHAPTER V Observations/Recommendations in respect of 
which replies of the Government are interim in 
nature  
65 
APPENDICES 
Appendix- I Minutes of the Ninth Sitting of the Committee held 
on 24 March 2026. 
    67 
Appendix- II Analysis of the Action Taken by Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the 
Fourth Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) 
69 
 
  

iv 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR, TEXTILES AND SKILL DEVELOPMENT 
(2025-26) 
 
                Shri Basavaraj Bommai – Chairperson 
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2 Shri Mani A. 
3 Shri G. M. Harish Balayogi 
4 Shri Aashtikar Patil Nagesh Bapurao 
5 Shri Partha Bhowmick 
6 Shri Yogender Chandolia 
7 Shri Ram Prasad Chaudhary 
8 Shri Chandra Prakash Choudhary 
9 Shri G. Lakshminarayana 
10 Shri Asit Kumar Mal 
11 Shri Kali Charan Munda 
12 Shri Rudra Narayan Pany 
13 Shri Kartick Chandra Paul  
14 Shri Tanuj Punia 
15 Shri Pradeep Purohit 
16 Shri Mukesh Rajput 
17 Shri Raja Ram Singh 
18 Shri Adhikari Soumendu 
19 Shri V. K. Sreekandan 
20 Shri Manoj Tigga 
21 Shri Chavan Ravindra Vasantrao 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
22 Shri Ritabrata Banerjee 
23 Shri Govindbhai Laljibhai Dholakia 
24 Shri Rajendra Gehlot 
25 Dr. Syed Naseer Hussain 
26 Shri Maharaja Sanajaoba Leishemba 
27 Dr. Kalpana Saini 
28 Shri Anthiyur P. Selvarasu 
29 Shri Abdul Wahab 
30 Shri Rajinder Gupta  
31 Shri Gurwinder Singh Oberoi 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Mukesh Kumar Sharma - Joint Secretary 
2. Ms. K. Muanniang Tunglut - Director 
3. Ms. Mili Dinesh   - Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri Sandeep Kumar Malhotra - Assistant Executive Officer 

v 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Labour, Textiles and Skill 
Development (2025-26) having been authorized by the Committee, present on 
their behalf this Eighteenth Report on Action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in their Fourth 
Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants (2025-26)’ of the Ministry 
of Labour & Employment. 
2. The Fourth Report was presented to Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya Sabha 
on 28 March 2025. The Ministry of Labour and Employment furnished their 
replies on 16 June 2025 indicating Action Taken on the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in the Fourth Report. Subsequently, the Ministry 
furnished Revised Action Taken replies on few of the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Fourth Report on 16 January 
2026.  The Committee considered and adopted the Draft Report at their sitting 
held on 24 March 2026. 
3. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in the Fourth Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) is 
given at Appendix-II. 
4. For ease of reference, the Observations/Recommendations of the 
Committee have been printed in bold type in the body of the Report. 
 
 
New Delhi; 
24 March 2026 
3 Chaitra 1948 (Saka) 
BASAVARAJ BOMMAI 
CHAIRPERSON, 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR, 
TEXTILES AND SKILL DEVELOPMENT 
 
 
 

1 
 
REPORT 
 
CHAPTER- I 
 
This Report deals with the action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in their Fourth 
Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants (2025-26)’ of the Ministry 
of Labour and Employment. 
 
2. The Fourth Report was presented to Lok Sabha/laid in Rajya Sabha on 
28th March, 2025. It contained 55 Observations/Recommendations. Replies of 
Government in respect of all the Recommendations have been received and are 
categorized as under:- 
 
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been 
accepted by the Government – Rec. Para No. 1, 3, 
4, 5, 7, 8, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 22, 23, 
24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35, 
37, 38, 39, 40, 42, 43, 44, 45, 46, 47, 48, 49, 
50, 51, 52, 53 and 55. 
 
Chapter-II 
Total:45 
Percentage: 81.82 
 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the 
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the 
Government’s reply –Rec. Para Nos. 2, 11, 20, 21 
and 36. 
 
Chapter-III 
Total:05 
Percentage: 9.09 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of 
which replies of the Government have not been 
accepted by the Committee and which require 
reiteration –Rec. Para Nos. 41 and 54. 
 
Chapter-IV 
Total:02 
Percentage: 3.64 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of 
which replies of the Government are interim in 
nature – Rec. Para Nos. 6, 9 and 10   
Chapter-V 
Total:03 
Percentage: 5.45 
 
3. The Committee desire that Action Taken Notes in respect of 
Observations/Recommendations contained in Chapter-I and final action 
taken reply in respect of the Recommendations contained in Chapter V of 
this Report for which interim reply has been given by the Government, may 
be furnished to them at the earliest. 
4. The Committee will now deal with some of their earlier 
Observations/Recommendations which either require reiteration or merit 
further comments. 

2 
 
I.  FEEDBACK AND PLACEMENT DETAILS UNDER NCS 
Recommendation (Para No. 12) 
5. The Committee were deeply concerned to note that during 2024-25 (as on 
31.01.2025), only 35.23 lakh candidates were provisionally selected through 
portal and job fairs against the 1.94 crore vacancies posted by the Employers, 
which was not encouraging. 
 The Ministry had persistently maintained that notifying final hiring figures 
was not a mandatory requirement of NCS Portal as they do not get any feedback 
from employers as well as selected candidates on the grounds that the selected 
candidates change jobs on getting better job opportunities. The Committee found 
that this had proven to be a lacuna for understanding the number of candidates 
finally selected every year through this portal. The Committee had impressed 
upon the Ministry to have a re-look at their policy and ensure that placement 
details are made available on the portal by getting necessary feedback from both 
employers and the selected candidates.  
6. In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Ministry of 
Labour and Employment have stated as follows:- 
“As suggested by committee, MoLE is looking into the policy in light of 
feasibility of tracking / recording of the actual jobs given to jobseekers.” 
 
7. The National Career Services (NCS) portal has emerged as a critical 
platform for connecting job seekers with employers across the country.  
The Ministry, in their response to the Committee’s recommendation for 
ensuring the availability of placement details on the portal, have stated 
that they are looking into the policy in light of feasibility of 
tracking/recording of the actual jobs given to jobseekers.   The Committee 
are of the firm view that the intent of the NCS portal is not only to register 
the employment seekers but is also a major platform for employers to get 
an opportunity to acquire skilled hands for their establishments. However, 
the Committee are constrained to note that as against the 1.94 crore 
vacancies posted on the Portal, the actual placements are only 35.23 lakh 
candidates, which is far from satisfactory.  The Action Taken Note received 
from the Ministry also do not speak about any immediate and effective 
measures that are likely to be taken to rectify the entire procedure 
currently existing in the Portal. The Committee strongly opine that the 
very purpose of the NCS Portal will fail if the aforesaid modifications are 
not carried out in the Portal itself.  The Committee express concern over 
the apparent lack of seriousness on the part of the Ministry in undertaking 
the necessary amendments to the Portal.  In the interest of transparency, 
accountability and effective monitoring, the Committee desire that all out 
efforts be made by the Ministry to lay down a robust mechanism for 
obtaining feedback from employers and the selected candidates so as to 
track the data on actual placements made through NCS portal, 
State/district/sector-wise. Such data should invariably be compiled, 
updated and published at regular intervals and the progress made in this 

3 
 
regard communicated to the Committee.  The Labour Secretary is advised 
to take responsibility in the matter and report the changes made in the 
Portal to the Committee at the earliest.             
II.    BRIDGING SKILL GAPS FOR SECURING EMPLOYMENT  
Recommendation (Para No. 13) 
8. In addition, the factors responsible for less number of candidates being 
selected vis-à-vis vacancies viz skill gaps, lack of requisite experience, location 
limitations, industry-specific requirements, employer preferences, etc. also need 
to be addressed on priority in consultation with various stakeholders like the 
Ministry of Skill Development & Entrepreneurship and Industry Associations so 
as to achieve the objective of the Ministry to promote skill development and 
strengthening employment services. The Committee had, while strongly 
recommending the Ministry to take corrective measure in this regard, also liked 
to be apprised of the developments made in this regard within one month. 
9. In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Ministry of 
Labour and Employment have stated as follows:- 
“The Committee’s direction has been duly noted for compliance.” 
 
10. When further asked to furnish a comprehensive reply, the Ministry , in 
their revised Action Taken Note, stated as under:- 
“To enhance the employability, digital and career skills of jobseekers and 
empower & equip youth with an array of essential employable skills, NCS 
Portal inter-alia offers online employability enhancement programmes, 
digital skill enhancement programmes and self-paced career skill 
programmes. NCS portal is integrated with Skill India Digital Hub (SIDH) 
that is specially designed and developed to skill, reskill and upskill 
individuals through an online training platform for jobs and 
entrepreneurial opportunities. The integration of NCS Portal with SIDH 
has paved the way for the skilled jobseekers on SIDH to avail the benefits 
of NCS Portal and the jobseekers to avail the skilling services offered by 
SIDH.   
Ministry has signed MoUs with the private and public employers/ 
portals/Platforms to strengthen public-private partnerships for enhancing 
employment opportunities. Till date more than 25 Memorandums of 
Understanding (MoUs) with Companies like Swiggy, Zomato, Amazon, 
Zepto, TCS iON, Quikr, FoundIt (Monster), APNA, Rapido, Cygnus Ujala 
Group of Hospitals etc., have been signed to enhance service offerings on 
the NCS portal, such as integrating job listings, providing skill 
development programs, and offering additional career counselling.  
  

4 
 
National Career Service (NCS) portal has also been integrated with e-
Shram portal. e-Shram registrants can avail all services available on the 
portal including job search. 
  
New initiatives (like facilitation of International Labour Mobility (ILM) and 
technology upgrades such as AI/ML-based services, predictive analytics, 
fraud detection, etc.) are being incorporated into the NCS portal.   
The measures suggested by the Committee are being actively woven into 
the design of the NCS 2.0.” 
 
11. The Committee, in their earlier recommendation, had emphasized 
the need to address the underlying factors for the comparatively lower 
number of candidates being selected against the vacancies notified on the 
National Career Service (NCS) Portal such as skill gaps, lack of requisite 
experience, location constraints, industry-specific requirements and 
employer preferences, in consultation with concerned stakeholders 
including the Ministry of Skill Development and Entrepreneurship and 
industry associations. In their revised Action Taken Note, the Ministry 
have highlighted certain initiatives, including integration of the NCS 
Portal with the Skill India Digital Hub (SIDH), collaboration with various 
private sector entities through Memorandums of Understanding, 
integration with the e-Shram Portal, and proposed technological upgrades 
under the proposed NCS 2.0 framework. The Committee, however, find the 
reply largely descriptive and desire that the Ministry furnish detailed and 
outcome-oriented measures, viz. (i) the concrete steps undertaken to 
bridge the identified skill and employability gaps; (ii) the manner in which 
coordination has been established with the Ministry of Skill Development 
and Entrepreneurship and industry bodies to align skill training with 
labour market requirements; (iii) the measurable impact of the integration 
of NCS with SIDH and the e-Shram portal in terms of placements; and (iv) 
the specific timelines and implementation roadmap for the proposed 
enhancements under NCS 2.0. The Committee, further desire that a 
comprehensive and updated status report indicating the progress 
achieved, supported by relevant data on registrations, vacancies notified, 
candidates shortlisted and candidates actually placed through the NCS 
ecosystem be submitted to the Committee at the earliest.  
III. REVIEW OF TRAINING MODULE FOR SC/ST CANDIDATES 
    Recommendation (Para No. 18) 
12. The Committee had noted that in 2022-23, out of 2400 trained SC/ST 
candidates, only 821 candidates [543(SC) and 278 (ST)] viz. only 34.20% got 
employment, whereas in 2023-24, out of 2160 trained SC/ST candidates, only 
606 (SC 427 and ST 179) viz. only 28% got employment. The Committee were 
not satisfied with the physical performance and had desired that the Ministry 
need to have a serious review of the training module and other relevant factors, 
which may be responsible for selection of less number of candidates so as to 

5 
 
ensure that there is considerable increase in employment of trained SC/ST 
candidates under the Scheme. 
13. In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Ministry of 
Labour and Employment have stated as follows:- 
‘The primary objective of the scheme is to enhance the employability of 
SC/ST job seekers. However, efforts are made to place these candidates by 
organizing job fairs from time to time. In the years 2023-24 and 2024-25, 
a total of 10,170 candidates have been trained and during this period 
7,354 candidates have been placed successfully. 
Further, the suggestions of the Committee have been noted for 
compliance.” 
 
14. The Committee were not satisfied with the rate of placement of trained 
SC/ST candidates and had desired a serious review of the training module 
and other relevant factors to increase employment of such candidates 
considerably. In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry have stated that 
efforts are made to place these candidates by organizing job fairs from 
time to time while silent on review of the training module.  The Committee 
further observe that the Ministry have not furnished details regarding the 
number of SC/ST candidates trained and successfully employed across the 
country, which, prima facie, appears to be on the lower side. In the 
considered view of the Committee, employability of SC/ST job seekers can 
be suitably enhanced with the right skills and training in line with the 
requirement of the market or industry. The Committee, therefore, 
reiterate their earlier recommendation urging the Ministry to undertake a 
comprehensive review of the training module as well as other relevant 
factors and based on the findings, undertake corrective measures to bring 
about significant improvement in the rate of employment of trained 
SC/ST candidates.  Moreover, the Committee exhort the Ministry to take 
all States on board and undertake the exercise with utmost sincerity and 
vigour, so as to ensure that visible improvement is achieved from the very 
first quarter.  
IV. INTEGRATION OF SOCIAL SECURITY/WELFARE SCHEMES WITH  
E-SHRAM 
Recommendation (Para No. 24) 
15. The Ministry of Labour & Employment had launched eShram portal on 
26.08.2021 with an objective to create National Database of Unorganised 
Workers (NDUW). The eShram portal was meant to register and support the 
unorganised workers by providing them a Universal Account Number (UAN). As 
on 04.03.2025, over 30.69 crore unorganized sector workers had registered on 
eShram Portal, on self-declaration basis. 
  E-Shram – “One-Stop-Solution” 
The Committee had noted that the Ministry have launched eShram – One-
Stop-Solution on 21st October, 2024, which entails integration of different Social 

6 
 
Security/Welfare Schemes at Single Portal i.e. eShram, which will provide a 
single platform to unorganized workers to have easy access to a variety of 
Government Welfare Schemes. The data of 13 Social Security/Welfare Schemes 
have been integrated/mapped with eShram, which inter-alia includes Mahatma 
Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Act, National Social Assistance 
Programme (Indira Gandhi National Disability Pension Scheme), Indira Gandhi 
National Widow Pension Scheme, National Family Benefit Scheme, Pradhan 
Mantri Awas Yojana – Gramin (PMAY-G) and Pradhan Mantri Kisan Samman 
Nidhi Scheme, etc. of various Ministries. The Ministry had further informed that 
mapping or integration with Central and State Government Welfare and Social 
Security Schemes is a continuous and ongoing process.  
 
Observing that, at present, only 13 Central Social Security/Welfare 
Schemes have been integrated/mapped with eShram and no State Government 
Welfare and Social Security Schemes has been integrated, the Committee had 
exhorted the Ministry to work towards mapping/integration of all Central and 
State Government Social Security Schemes under this common umbrella in the 
shortest possible timeframe so that the benefits available under various schemes 
reach the unorganized workers.  
16. In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Ministry of 
Labour and Employment have stated as follows:- 
“The Ministry of Labour and Employment (MoLE) is actively engaged 
in discussions with other Central Ministries to facilitate the integration of 
additional schemes. This is an ongoing process, and MoLE is committed 
to make efforts that relevant schemes are integrated under this common 
umbrella. 
Furthermore, the Ministry of Labour and Employment (MoLE) is 
planning to extend this integration effort to include schemes run by State 
and Union Territory departments in the near future to ensure that the 
benefits available under various schemes reach the unorganised workers 
efficiently and effectively.” 
 
17.  The Committee had been informed that integration of Central social 
security/welfare schemes with eShram is an ongoing process and the 
Ministry is planning to extend this integration effort to include schemes 
run by State and Union Territory departments in the near future, however, 
no timeframe has been mentioned in this regard as desired by the 
Committee.  The Committee attach high priority towards ensuring easy 
access of the various welfare schemes of the Government to workers in 
the unorganized sector through eShram and urge the Ministry to work out 
a plan with specified timelines in coordination with Central Ministries, 
State/UT Governments and other stakeholders. The Committee also feel 
that the true objective of launching the eShram portal cannot be fully 
realized without the inclusion of State/UT level schemes and urge the 
Ministry to ensure the active involvement of the State/UT Governments 
towards the integration efforts for seamless delivery of the benefits of 
welfare schemes to the vulnerable workers in the unorganized sector. 

7 
 
V. EX-GRATIA PAYMENT TO ESHRAM REGISTRANTS 
Recommendation (Para Nos. 27 & 28) 
18. The Committee had noted that the Ministry aimed to provide accidental 
risk cover to all unorganised workers registered on the eShram portal through 
the Pradhan Mantri Suraksha Bima Yojana (PMSBY) until 31st March, 2022. 
However, due to technical and operational issues PMSBY could not be 
operationalised. 
The Committee had been apprised that since PMSBY benefits could not be 
applied retrospectively, it was decided to offer the same benefits as ex-gratia 
payment to eligible claimants registered on eShram. Accordingly, all unorganised 
workers registered on the eShram portal by 31st March, 2022, are eligible to 
initiate claim. Incidents occurred after registration and on or before 31st March, 
2022, are considered for ex-gratia payment. The ex-gratia module was launched 
in August 2023 and decision of approval or rejection is under the purview of 
State/ UT Government, as per ex-gratia guidelines issued by Ministry of Labour 
& Employment.  
 The Committee had appreciated the positive move/ initiative taken by the 
Ministry in providing the much needed relief to the claimant/legal heir of the 
eShram registrants, who met with accidental deaths or disability during 
26.08.2021 to 31.03.2022.  
 
19. The Committee were, however, concerned to note that, as on 18.02.2025, 
out of 702 claims (474 in 2023-24 and 228 in 2024-25) approved by District 
Magistrate/District Collector, the payment has been made to only 501 (330 in 
2023-24 and 171 in 2024-25) claimants and the remaining 201 claimants are 
yet to get ex-gratia payment due to administrative/procedural reasons. The 
Committee felt that the very purpose of any social security scheme is defeated if 
the ex-gratia amount is not timely paid to the claimant. The Committee, had 
therefore called upon the Ministry to ensure that the payment to the remaining 
claimants be made on priority for timely receipt of ex-gratia payment.  
20. In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Ministry of 
Labour and Employment have stated as follows:- 
 
“The Ministry has been diligently processing payments for eligible 
beneficiaries. In addition, recognizing the importance of ensuring that no 
beneficiary is left behind, Ministry have extended the deadline for claim 
submissions to 30th June 2025.  
This extension aims to facilitate maximum participation and ensure 
that all eligible beneficiaries receive their rightful ex-gratia payments 
without any delays. Ministry remains committed to transparent and 
efficient administration in this matter.” 
 
21. The Committee note that the Ministry have extended the deadline 
for submission of claims for ex-gratia payments of eligible beneficiaries 
registered on eShram to 30th June, 2025. Though the extended deadline 
comes as a major relief to the claimants, the delay in payment of ex-gratia 

8 
 
on account of administrative/procedural reasons is a dampener to the very 
essence of providing benefits to the intended beneficiaries and it is 
imperative that the issue be fully addressed. The Committee, therefore, 
urge the Ministry to ensure that administrative/procedural delays in 
payment of ex-gratia are done away with and the progress in settlement of 
claims is closely monitored in the Ministry. A status report on the number 
of pending and settled claims may also be furnished to the Committee 
within one month of the presentation of this Report. 
 
VI. HEALTHCARE FACILITY TO PLATFORM WORKERS UNDER AB-PMJAY 
Recommendation (Para No. 33) 
22. The Ministry had also mentioned that the provision of healthcare to 
Platform Workers under Ayushman Bharat PM Jan Arogya Yojana (AB-PMJAY) 
is proposed to be implemented by expanding the base of the existing AB-PMJAY 
scheme to include the Platform Workers. Since National Health Authority (NHA) 
already possesses established infrastructure and systems along with 
coordination mechanism with States/UTs for delivering healthcare benefits to 
various groups of beneficiaries, these existing mechanisms of NHA are intended 
to be leveraged to provide benefits to the eligible Platform Workers. 
The Committee had desired that it will be in fitness of things if the Ministry 
of Labour and Employment also coordinate with NHA and provide 
desired/requisite handholding so that the healthcare benefits under AB-PMJAY 
are timely made available to the Platform Workers. 
23. In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Ministry of 
Labour and Employment have stated as follows:- 
“The Ministry is actively collaborating with the National Health Authority 
(NHA) to integrate platform workers into the AB-PMJAY health benefits 
program. Extensive discussions have taken place to understand NHA's 
system and establish a process for securely transferring verified platform 
worker data, with finalization of these modalities currently underway.”  
 
24.  The Committee note that the Ministry is actively collaborating with 
the National Health Authority (NHA) to integrate platform workers into the 
AB-PMJAY health benefits programme and establishing a process for 
securely transferring verified platform workers’ data along with 
finalization of these modalities, is currently underway. Stressing the need 
to provide healthcare benefits to the vulnerable platform workers without 
delay, the Committee urge the Ministry to step up its collaboration with 
the NHA and ensure that the requisite modalities for integration of 
platform workers into the AB-PMJAY is finalized at the earliest.  
 
 

9 
 
VII. UPWARD REVISION OF INCOME CEILING UNDER WELFARE 
SCHEMES FOR BEEDI WORKERS 
Recommendation (Para No. 35) 
25. The Committee were concerned to note that one of the grounds for 
rejection of applications under Education Scheme is that some of the  applicants 
did not meet the income criteria of the Scheme such as Rs. 1.2 lakh per annum 
ceiling set for Beedi workers. The Committee had been apprised that the eligible 
income ceiling for financial assistance for education to the wards of Beedi 
workers was revised from Rs. 3,500 per month to Rs. 10,000 per month i.e. Rs. 
1.2 lakh per annum in April 2003 and at present no proposal is under 
consideration to revise the income ceiling limit. Observing that the income ceiling 
has not been increased for the last 22 years, the Committee had been of the 
considered view that the Ministry take a relook in the matter and earnestly 
consider to revise the ceiling keeping in view the inflation and other relevant 
factors so that the benefits of the Schemes are truly extended to the deserving 
wards of Beedi workers.  
 
26. In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Ministry of 
Labour and Employment have stated as follows:- 
“Observations of the Committee are duly noted.” 
 
27. When further asked to furnish a comprehensive reply, the Ministry , in 
their revised Action Taken Note, submitted as under:- 
“The Ministry is examining upward revision of the income ceiling for the 
revised scheme under preparation for extension in the next financial 
cycle.” 
 
28. The Committee, in their earlier recommendation, had expressed 
concern over the rejection of certain applications under the education 
assistance scheme for the wards of Beedi workers on the ground that the 
applicants did not satisfy the prescribed income ceiling of Rs. 1.2 lakh per 
annum effective since April, 2003 and were of the considered view that the 
Ministry take a relook in the matter and earnestly consider revising the 
ceiling.  The revised Action Taken Note of the Ministry indicates that the 
matter regarding upward revision of the income ceiling is under 
examination in the context of the revised scheme proposed to be 
implemented in the next financial cycle. The Committee desire that the 
continuation of an income ceiling fixed more than two decades ago should 
not be prolonged and urge the Ministry to take an early decision regarding 
upward revision of the income ceiling in a realistic and pragmatic manner, 
taking into account the prevailing economic conditions and inflationary 
trends. The timeline for implementation of the revised income ceiling in 
the forthcoming financial cycle should also be intimated to the Committee. 
 
 
 
 

10 
 
VIII. THIRD PARTY EVALUATION OF LESS SCHEME 
Recommendation (Para No. 41) 
29. The Committee had noted that in order to continue Labour & Employment 
Statistical System (LESS) Scheme in next finance commission cycle and critically 
evaluate the activities of Labour Bureau, the Third Party Evaluation of Labour 
and Employment Statistical System (LESS) Scheme has been entrusted to Arun 
Jaitley National Institute of Financial Management (AJNIFM), a Center of 
Excellence under Department of Expenditure, Ministry of Finance in October, 
2024. The Committee had been apprised that the team from AJNIFM visited 
Labour Bureau, Chandigarh and Regional Office, Chennai. Stakeholder 
discussions were also held by AJNIFM with field functionaries, academicians and 
State government departments. The exercise was likely to be completed 
tentatively by end of March, 2025. The Committee had expected that the exercise 
would be completed as per stipulated timeline and had desired that further follow 
up action be taken and completed in a time bound manner. 
30. In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Ministry of 
Labour and Employment have stated as follows:- 
“Labour Bureau has engaged AJNIFM, Faridabad for the third- party 
evaluation of LESS. Based on report, follow up action, including extension 
of LESS, will be undertaken. 
Observations of the Committee are duly noted.” 
 
31.  The Committee had expected that the Third Party Evaluation of 
Labour and Employment Statistical System (LESS) Scheme, which was  
entrusted to Arun Jaitley National Institute of Financial Management 
(AJNIFM), would be completed as per the stipulated timeline by end of 
March, 2025 and had desired further follow-up action to be taken and 
completed in a time bound manner. The Ministry’s reply that follow-up 
action including extension of LESS would be undertaken based on the 
report of AJNIFM, is not at all satisfactory as the status of the evaluation 
report including concrete details and specific timelines regarding its 
completion is lacking. The Committee further note that the Third-Party 
Evaluation of AJNIFM has since been completed and the report submitted 
to the Government. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that 
the Ministry undertake an expeditious and time-bound examination of the 
recommendations contained in the AJNIFM evaluation report and clearly 
spell out the action taken or proposed to be taken on each 
recommendation, particularly with regard to the continuation, 
restructuring, or strengthening of the LESS Scheme in the forthcoming 
Finance Commission cycle.  A comprehensive Action Taken Statement, 
indicating recommendation-wise decisions, implementation timelines, and 
measurable outcomes, be furnished to the Committee at the earliest. 
 

11 
 
IX. UPGRADATION OF INFRASTRUCTURE AND MEDICAL FACILITIES IN 
ESIC HOSPITALS/DISPENSARIES  
Recommendation (Para No. 44) 
32. The Committee had noted all one-doctor dispensaries will be upgraded to 
two-doctor dispensary with a minimum criterion of 1,000 Insured Persons, in 
the Northeast Region including Sikkim. Further, the catchment area for 
establishment and upgradation of health facilities have been increased or kept 
fluid in order to enable clubbing of 2-3 or more districts in one catchment area, 
wherever the time taken for commuting to the Dispensary (HUB) from the 
adjoining district (SPOKE) is up to 3 hours/up to 100 kms.  
The Committee had appreciated the efforts being made to facilitate 
enhancing medical facilities in NER and had impressed upon the Ministry/ESIC 
to upgrade infrastructure/equipment and fill up vacancies of Doctors, Nurses 
and Paramedical staff in Hospitals/Dispensaries of ESIC across the country and 
particularly in NER. 
33. In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Ministry of 
Labour and Employment have stated as follows:- 
“ESIC has issued necessary instructions on 24.06.2024 for upgrading all 
the ESI run one doctor dispensaries to two doctor dispensaries with a view 
to strengthen the primary care services and designate these dispensaries 
as hub facilities to provide medical services. It also includes reducing the 
threshold limit of Insured Persons due to low population density in order 
to improve the doctor-patient ratio. 
 
Two 100 bedded hospitals have been approved to be run by ESIC in NER 
at 
  1. Shyamli bazaar, Agartala,Tripura 
  2. ⁠Rangpo, Sikkim. 
 
Seven new 2 doctor dispensaries in Assam are approved by clubbing of 2-
3 or more districts in one catchment area, wherever the time taken for 
commuting to the Dispensary (HUB) from the adjoining district (SPOKE) is 
up to 3 hours/up to 100 kms. They are in the districts as given below:- 
1.   Kokrajhar 
2. Nalbari 
3. Kamroop 
4. Hailakandi 
5. Nagaon 
6. Shibsagar 
7. Dhemji 
Additionally, ESIC has   approved a policy titled “The provision of Medical 
Services to ESIC beneficiaries in non-implemented, partially implemented 
districts and Un-served Areas through state PHCs and CHCs” in February 
2025. 
The integration of Employees’ State Insurance Corporation (ESIC) services 
with state health infrastructure aims to provide comprehensive medical care 

12 
 
to beneficiaries, leveraging state-run PHCs and CHCs. It targets non-
implemented or underserved districts lacking ESIC/ESIS facilities & may 
also be utilised for implementation of new areas in NE States. 
The policy defines care levels, with primary services like OPD 
consultations, diagnostics, pharmacy, and medical certification at notified 
PHCs, and secondary care at CHCs, ESIC/ESIS hospitals, or empanelled 
PMJAY hospitals. Referrals to tertiary care follow a defined pathway based 
on facility proximity and availability. Facilities are selected based on 
proximity to insured persons, ideally within 8–10 km. 
 
Operationally, the policy mandates assessing and notifying PHCs/CHCs. 
A dedicated ESIC Mitra facilitates registration, certification, grievance 
redressal, and IT support.  
 
Section 15 of the policy : “Special Considerations for North East/Hilly 
Areas” states: “Need for flexibility in the norms for number of IPs required 
for dispensaries in hilly or difficult-to-access areas based upon the regional 
needs to be assessed by the concerned Regional Directors and the Zonal 
Medical commissioner will approve such relaxations needed in the specific 
conditions”.  
 
Implementation of the CHC/PHC policy requires a Memorandum of 
Understanding (MoU) between ESIC and state governments, ensuring 
clarity on roles, responsibilities, and operational frameworks to enhance 
healthcare access for ESIC beneficiaries. The field offices have been advised 
for identification of PHCs/CHCs and to take up the matter with the 
respective State Govt. for the signing of the MoU. 
 
To strengthen the medical services in Northeastern States, the ESIC has 
given approval for 06 DCBOs out of which Champhai &Lawngtlai in 
Mizoram and Nongstine & Khylirihat in Meghalaya have been made 
operational. For the DCBOs at Jowai & Tura in Meghalaya the process of 
hiring of premises is being undertaken. 
 
The recruitment of doctors, nursing officers and paramedical staff is a 
continuous process and is routinely held by ESIC. Following steps have been 
taken for filling up vacancies in ESIC Medical 
Colleges/Hospitals/Dispensaries/DCBOs across the country including those 
located in NER:  
• The recruitment examination on 1930 posts of Nursing Officers 
through UPSC and on 573 posts through NORCET, AIIMS has already 
been conducted.  
• The ESIC has finally selected 388 candidates for the post of IMO 
Grade-II through the UPSC CMS Examination disclosure list for 2022 & 
2023. 
• The interview for selection of 287 Assistant Professors is being held 
from 22.05.2025 to 28.06.2025. 
• The advertisement for 558 posts of specialists already advertised 
with closing date of 02.06.2025. 

13 
 
•  The ESIC is also conducting the recruitment of 1206 para medical 
Group ‘C’ post through Combined Recruitment Examination (CRE)- 2024 
being conducted by AIIMS.” 
 
34.  The Committee appreciate the commendable initiatives undertaken 
by the Ministry in the North Eastern Region (NER) and desire that similar 
measures be extended across the country to ensure equitable benefits 
nationwide. However, the Committee are not satisfied with the routine 
assurances of the Ministry in response to their earlier recommendation 
for upgrading infrastructure/equipment and filling up vacancies of 
Doctors, Nurses and Para-Medical Staff in all ESIC hospitals/dispensaries 
across the country, and particularly in the NER. Despite the efforts of the 
Ministry, persistent shortages of medical personnel and infrastructural 
gaps continue to hamper the effective delivery of health care services, 
especially in the NER. The Committee strongly recommend the Ministry 
to prioritise the establishment of new ESIC hospitals, particularly in areas 
with a high concentration of workers, so as to enhance accessibility to 
healthcare services for the insured population. The Committee also urge 
the Ministry/ESIC to evolve a strategic action plan and take concrete 
measures to upgrade infrastructure/equipment, enhance medical facilities 
and fill up the vacancies of Doctors, Nurses and Para-Medical Staff in all 
the ESIC hospitals/dispensaries across the country, within a specified 
timeframe. Special focus should also be accorded to the NER by adopting 
a targeted approach towards recruitment and infrastructural upgradation 
and the effective intervention taken in this regard be communicated to 
the Committee within three months.    The Committee also direct the 
Ministry to furnish detailed information regarding all ESIC hospitals 
proposed to be established at various locations, including their current 
status and timelines for completion, within one month from the 
presentation of this Report. 
 
X. INSPECTION OF MINES  
Recommendation (Para No. 53) 
35. The Committee had noted that inspection of mines are generated online 
through randomized, risk-based inspection system on Shram Suvidha portal. 
The modalities of “Risk-based inspection System” are based on various pre-
defined parameters like category of mine, risks involved etc. to ensure 
transparency as well as accountability. The portal also facilitates online 
intimation to the mine management regarding the scheduled inspection of the 
mine. Besides, Inspections are also undertaken in case of complaints, accidents, 
dangerous occurrences or any other activity.  
 The Committee had been apprised that during inspection, the officials of 
the Directorate General of Mines Safety (DGMS) oversee the status of the 
compliance of the provisions of the Mines Act 1952, the rules and regulations 
made thereunder, including basic safety facility viz. supply/use of Personal 
Protective Equipments (PPEs), viz. Helmet, Dust respirator, Protective footwear 
etc., workplace safety, medical examination including training to the persons 

14 
 
employed in mines, etc. Accordingly, based on the observations, mine 
managements are advised for resolution of deficiencies and compliances are 
followed up accordingly. For repetitive and serious violations, managements are 
issued improvement notices to comply with the provisions within the stipulated 
timeline. For urgent and immediate danger, prohibitory orders are issued. 
Punitive actions are also initiated where there were serious contraventions or 
major violations under provisions of the Mines Act 1952, thereby leading to 
prosecutions as applicable in the law. The Committee had noted that the number 
of inspections conducted during 2022, 2023, and 2024 are 8310, 9008 & 8385; 
the number of Enquiries are 1400, 1284 & 1557; the number of Improvement 
notices issued are 127, 233 & 256; and the number of prohibitory order issued 
are 216, 330 & 348 whereas the prosecutions launched were 24, 36 and 34 
respectively, which appear to be on a lower side vis-à-vis the number of 
prohibitory orders issued. 
 The Committee were of the considered view that the mining sector involves 
hazardous and even life-threatening situations. In the wake of the fact that a 
mere negligence can cause irreversible injuries, if not casualties, the Committee 
firmly opined that inspections are highly mandatory to safeguard mine workers 
and promote safe mining practices. The Committee had, therefore, strongly 
recommended to prioritize frequent inspections in high risk mining areas so as 
to minimize accidents, thereby saving valuable lives of mine workers.  
36. In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Ministry of 
Labour and Employment have stated as follows:- 
 
“Inspections in mines by officers of the Directorate General of Mines Safety 
are carried out online through the Shram Suvidha Portal (SSP). The 
Inspections are generated in randomized manner based on the Risk rating 
of the mines. The algorithm of the Shram Suvidha Portal has been 
designed in such manner so as to give higher priority and frequency to 
inspection in mines which are more prone to risk of accident. 
To prioritise such risk-based inspections, the SSP evaluates the mines on 
the basis of following criteria: 
(i) Major Risk Category, where crítical hazards can cause major 
accidents such as fires, explosions, water inrush, ground movement, 
etc.  
(ii) Operational Risk Category, where risks associated with the different 
operations in the mine causes accidents, 
(iii) Historical Risk Category, where past history of the mine and 
attitude of management is considered. 
 
Each parameter within these categories is scored based on its risk level. 
The combined score of a mine helps identify how risky the mine is. Mines 
with higher scores are allotted more frequent inspections. This system 
helps to priorities inspections, focusing more on mines having higher risks 
and safeguard mine workers & promote safe mining practices 
 

15 
 
Additionally, there is also provision for inspections in certain specific 
situations like Accidents, Dangerous Occurrences, Complaints, 
Government directives and other emergencies. 
 
DGMS officers point out various contraventions to the management and 
also advise them on ways to address deficiencies during inspections itself. 
These are followed up with issuing of violation letters, improvement notices 
and temporary stoppage of mines, if required.  
 
This results in ensuring compliances of safety provisions in most of the 
cases. It is only in very few cases that the matter reaches prosecution 
stage.  
 
Besides above, proactive activities like theme-based Safety Awareness 
Programmes camps in mine clusters, on spot briefing about best practices 
during inspections, Occupational Health Awareness programmes and 
Mock drills to review the emergency preparedness are also carried out 
regularly.” 
37. In pursuance of the Committee’s recommendation for prioritizing 
frequent inspections in high- risk mining areas so as to minimize accidents, 
the Ministry have informed that inspections in mines are carried out in 
online mode through the Shram Suvidha Portal (SSP) in a randomized 
manner based on the Risk rating of the mines and provision for inspections 
in emergency situations also. The Committee emphasize the need for 
ensuring the safety and security of the mine workers as well as promoting 
safe mining practices, and desire that the Directorate General of Mines 
Safety (DGMS) should periodically review and update the inspection 
algorithm, prescribe a minimum frequency of inspections for high and 
medium-risk mines, and strengthen post-inspection monitoring with 
automatic escalation for non-compliance. The Committee strongly 
recommend that, in view of the potential for hazardous gas emissions, 
landfilling be made mandatory in mines where mining activities have been 
completed. The Committee further recommend that no fresh mining in 
other areas be permitted until this exercise has been duly undertaken. The 
Committee also recommend for a public disclosure of inspection outcomes 
on the SSP while laying stress on capacity-building, safety awareness and 
emergency preparedness and striving for a robust and proactive inspection 
and monitoring regime for safe and sustainable mining practices.  The 
Committee are of the firm view that inspections listed under the SSP are 
insufficient to ensure compliance with safety norms, particularly in high-
risk category mines. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that 
inspections be extended beyond the SSP framework and safety measures be 
substantially strengthened so as to obviate any risk of accidents in the 
mines. 
XI. INDIAN LABOUR CONFERENCE 
 Recommendation (Para No. 54) 
 

16 
 
38. The Committee had been apprised that the 46th Session of Indian Labour 
Conference (ILC) was held in New Delhi on 20-21 July, 2015. The Committee 
were dismayed to note that the reasons for not holding it during the last 10 years 
and the tentative date of its next session have not been conveyed to the 
Committee despite being specifically asked to do so. The Ministry had simply 
stated that the Government has been holding tripartite consultations on 
important labour policies/issues from time to time.  
The Committee had understood that holding the conference is a critical 
step towards strengthening tripartite mechanisms and fostering social dialogue 
which are essential for addressing the evolving needs of the workforce and 
ensuring equitable economic growth. During evidence before the Committee, the 
representatives of trade unions had expressed their serious concern for not 
holding ILC and had urged to convene the ILC to uphold the traditions of 
tripartism and also to address pressing labour issues. Observing that during the 
last 10 years, many important decisions involving labour issues including 
notification of 4 Labour Codes in the year 2019/20 have been taken, the 
Committee had exhorted the Ministry to convene the Indian Labour Conference 
at the earliest opportunity in the larger interest of the labour force.  
39. In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Ministry of 
Labour and Employment have stated as follows:- 
 
“Observation of the committee has been duly noted.” 
 
40. When further asked to furnish specific reply on the earlier 
recommendation of the Committee, the Ministry, in their revised Action Taken 
Note, stated as below:- 
“The process of tripartite consultations is being practised as an integral 
part of policy framing on all major policy initiatives of Ministry of Labour 
& Employment in the larger interest of labour force. In this connection 
Ministry wants to bring to the kind notice of the Committee that there have 
been widespread consultations while finalizing all 4 Labour Codes 
including nine tripartite consultations which were undertaken on 
10.03.2015, 13.04.2015, 06.05.2015, 14.07.2015, 06.10.2015, 
04.10.2017, 22.11.2018, 27.11.2018 and 05.11.2019 inviting all Central 
Trade Unions, Employers Associations and State Governments. The 
stakeholders had participated in the afore-said tripartite meetings and 
gave suggestions on various aspects of Labour Codes. All 4 Labour Codes 
came into effect from 21.11.2025. 
 
Stakeholder consultations is a continuous process and recently a tripartite 
consultation on Draft Shram Shakti Niti 2025-National Labour and 
Employment Policy of India under the Chairmanship of the Hon'ble 
Minister for Labour and Employment was held on 13.11.2025 in New 
Delhi.” 
 
 

17 
 
41. The Committee, in their earlier recommendation, had exhorted the 
Ministry to convene the Indian Labour Conference (ILC) which was last held 
in July 2015, at the earliest keeping in view the larger interest of the labour 
force.  The revised Action Taken Note of the Ministry highlighted the 
tripartite consultations undertaken as an integral part of policy 
formulation and cited the series of meetings held with stakeholders during 
the process of finalizing the Labour Codes, as well as a recent consultation 
on the Draft Shram Shakti Niti 2025. While the Committee appreciate the 
efforts made by the Ministry in holding consultations with stakeholders on 
specific policy initiatives, they are of the considered view that such 
consultations cannot be regarded as a substitute for convening the Indian 
Labour Conference, which is a long-standing and premier national forum 
for comprehensive tripartite deliberations on Labour matters. The 
Committee, therefore, reiterate their earlier recommendation and strongly 
urge the Ministry to take expeditious steps to convene the next session of 
the Indian Labour Conference at the earliest possible date. The Committee 
also desire that the Ministry indicate a clear timeline for holding the 
Conference and ensure that the institutional mechanism of the Indian 
Labour Conference is revived and convened regularly in order to uphold the 
established tradition of tripartite consultation in the larger interest of the 
labour force. 
***** 
 
  

18 
 
CHAPTER-II 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY 
THE GOVERNMENT 
Recommendation (Para No. 1) 
Overall Financial Performance 
 The Committee note that BE of Rs. 22531.47 crore for the year 2024-25 
was reduced to Rs. 18307.22 crore at RE stage while the Ministry were able to 
spend only Rs. 9527.66 crore viz. 52% (as on 15.02.2025). According to the 
Ministry, the major remaining portion (77%) of the Revised Estimates (RE) for 
2024-25, amounting to Rs. 8779.56 crore, is pending primarily under ELI 
Scheme (NEGS) which is yet to be approved by the cabinet. The expenditure 
under the ELI scheme will depend on the final approval from the Cabinet and 
the timing of such approval. It is expected that the allocation in RE 2024-25 
under the other schemes will be utilized. The Ministry do not anticipate any 
significant unspent funds by the end of 31st March, 2025, except for the ELI 
scheme. The Ministry are making all out efforts to obtain the final approval from 
the Cabinet at the earliest. The Ministry have, subsequently, informed that out 
of Rs. 11044.05 crore surrendered during 2024-25, Rs.9999.50 crore pertain to 
ELI Scheme. The Ministry have also stated that the other Schemes for which 
funds have been surrendered are ABRY, National Database for Unroganised 
Workers (NDUW), LESS, etc. 
The Committee feel that although the funds allocated under ELIS during 
2024-25 have been surrendered, the Ministry need to continue pursuing the 
matter regarding seeking approval of the Scheme and after the same is approved, 
revisit the plan of action for utilization of funds in 2025-26 and take prudent 
measure so as to increase the BE at RE Stage. 
(Reply of the Government) 
In light of discussions held at various levels, some changes were made in scheme 
structure, and the proposal was re- submitted for EFC meeting which was held 
on 09.05.2025. 
Accordingly, after incorporating recommendations of the EFC, a revised 
DCN has been submitted to Department of Expenditure on 21.05.2025 for 
soliciting approval of Hon’ble Finance Minister. Hon’ble Finance Minister has 
accorded approval vide OM no 45(01)/PFC-II/2024-DCN dated 28.05.2025. 
Once the scheme is approved, the same will be implemented and the funds 
earmarked for the scheme will be utilised based on approved year-wise physical 
& financial targets.   
 
Furthermore, Committee’s recommendations on ELI scheme have been 
noted for consideration and compliance. 
 
(Ministry of Labour & Employment No.G-25015/01/2025-B&A dated 16.06.2025) 
 
 

19 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 3) 
Overall Financial Performance 
As informed by the Ministry, the Re-appropriation of funds of Rs. 1118.25 
crore under DGMS, DGFASLI, NDUW, PM-SYM, DGE, Labour Bureau, etc. was 
done only on functional requirements and strictly following the provisions 
contained in GFRs. The Committee expect that the  provisions contained in GFRs 
will be adhered to in 2025-26 and, thereafter also.  
(Reply of the Government) 
Observation of the committee has been duly noted. 
 
(Ministry of Labour & Employment No.G-25015/01/2025-B&A dated 16.06.2025) 
(Revised reply of the Government) 
Re-appropriations are done by Ministry of Labour and Employment, through the 
re-appropriation module on the Ministry of Finance’s UBIS portal. All re-
appropriations in the previous and current financial years have been made 
strictly in accordance with the GFR provisions. The Ministry of Labour and 
Employment will continue to adhere to these and provisions in the DEA’s budget 
circular in the future as well. 
(Ministry of Labour & Employment No.G-25015/01/2025-B&A dated 16.12.2025) 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 4) 
 
Allocation for North Eastern Areas 
The Committee note that BE of Rs. 2191.07 crore for North Eastern Areas 
has been reduced to Rs. 1758.97 crore at RE stage during 2024-25. The BE for 
2025-26 is Rs. 3208.67 crore. With regard to the reasons for reduction of funds 
at RE stage during 2024-25, the Committee were apprised that the North Eastern 
Region (NER) is provided with gross budgetary support amounting to at least 10 
% of the allocation of schemes. If the revised estimates for the scheme are 
reduced for any reason, the NER components will be automatically reduced. As 
on 15.02.2025, the Ministry’s NER expenditure is Rs. 909.51 crore compared to 
the Ministry’s total expenditure up to 15.02.2025, Rs. 9527.66 crore, which is 
almost 10%.  
The Ministry further stated that for BE 2025-26, the increase in fund 
allocation for the North Eastern Areas is mainly due to a 100% increase in the 
allocation under the ELI Scheme from Rs. 10,000 crore to Rs. 20,000 crore. The 
Ministry are making all out efforts to obtain the final approval from the Cabinet 
for ELI scheme at the earliest so that the increased funds can be fully utilized 
during FY 2025-26 
 
The North Eastern areas of the country have hilly and rugged terrain and 
due to these geographical challenges, the labourers undergo a lot of hardships, 
especially in navigating the terrain and facing hazardous work environment 

20 
 
while being employed in tea gardens and other plantations.   Accordingly, the 
Committee are of the firm opinion that a holistic development of the North 
Eastern areas is necessary to bring about positive changes in every sphere of the 
region for which funds are granted under each Ministry/Department in Budget.  
There has to be specific/tailor made programmes to provide assistance to 
labourers particularly in the areas of mobility, shelter and health.  The education 
of children of labourers should also be given focus.  Therefore, the Committee 
want the Ministry to give high priority regarding proper allocation of funds to the 
North-Eastern Region for the development of the region.  
(Reply of the Government) 
Ministry of Labour and Employment is committed to the welfare and 
development of the North Eastern region. As per the guidelines, North Eastern 
Region (NER) is provided with gross budgetary support amounting to at least 10 
% of the allocation of schemes. During the FY 24-25, the Ministry’s NER 
expenditure was Rs. 1087.31 crore compared to the Ministry’s total expenditure 
Rs. 10675.81 crore under schemes, which is more than 10%. Further, Ministry 
has allocated Rs. 3208.67 Cr under NER component, which is 10.08 % of the 
total allocation of Budget Estimate (BE) 2025-26 under Schemes i.e. Rs 
31820.80 Cr. 
(Ministry of Labour & Employment No.G-25015/01/2025-B&A dated 16.06.2025) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 5) 
Implementation of Four Labour Codes 
The Committee note that the Government have notified four Labour Codes, 
namely, the Code on Wages, 2019 on 8th August, 2019 and the Industrial 
Relations Code, 2020, the Code on Social Security, 2020 & the Occupational 
Safety, Health and Working Conditions Code, 2020 on 29th September, 2020 by 
amalgamating 29 labour laws. These Codes are yet to be implemented. As a step 
towards implementation of the four Labour Codes, the Ministry have pre-
published seven draft Rules during the period 07.07.2020 to 03.06.2021 
whereby comments of all stakeholders including general public have been 
invited. 
Labour is in the Concurrent List of the Constitution and under the Labour 
Codes, rules are required to be framed by the Central Government as well as by 
the State Governments. The Central Government and a number of States/UTs 
have pre-published rules under four Labour Codes. As on 31.12.2024, 01 State 
viz. West Bengal and 01 UT viz. Lakshadweep have not yet pre-published the 
Rules on the Code on Wages, 2019. 01 State viz. West Bengal and 02 UTs viz. 
Lakshadweep and NCT of Delhi have not pre-published the Rules on the 
Occupational Safety, Health and Working Conditions Code, 2020. 02 States viz. 
Nagaland and West Bengal and 02 UTs viz. Lakshadweep and NCT of Delhi have 
not pre-published the Rules on the Industrial Relations Code, 2020. 02 States 
viz. Tamil Nadu and West Bengal and 02 UTs viz. Lakshadweep and NCT of Delhi 
have not pre-published the Rules on the Code on Social Security, 2020. 

21 
 
Thus, while 32 States/UTs have pre-published the Rules under all 4 Labour 
Codes, 1 State viz. West Bengal and 1 UT viz. Lakshadweep have not pre-
published rules on all the 4 Labour Codes. The Committee express deep concern 
to note that the four Labour Codes, which were notified in 2019/2020 are yet to 
be implemented. The Committee are of the firm view that the efforts being made 
by the Ministry to pursue the States/UTs, which have not yet pre-published the 
draft rules have not yielded the desired results. The Ministry need to be more 
proactive in their approach as even after the Rules are pre-published by all the 
States/UTs, a lot further needs to be done for implementation of the Codes at 
the ground level. The Committee, therefore, while expressing their displeasure 
on the progress of work being undertaken since 2019, impress upon the Ministry 
to further intensify their efforts, fix deadlines, improve coordination and 
monitoring mechanism and ensure pre-publication of draft Rules by all 
States/UTs by providing all necessary hand holding required in completion of 
the task without further loss of time.The Committee would like to be apprised of 
the progress made in this regard.  Considering the cardinal importance of the 
implementation of the Labour Codes, the Committee is in the process of 
examining the same in detail by seeking the opinion of the stakeholders and will 
be presenting a Report to the Parliament in due course. 
(Reply of the Government) 
The Central Government has been sensitizing remaining States/UTs on regular 
basis for pre-publication of rules under Labour Codes so as to avoid legal 
vacuum post implementation of Labour Codes. In this connection, various 
meetings at the level of Secretary(L&E) have been held with Status/UTs on pre-
publication of Rules.  
 
Six regional meetings were held in the year 2024 with the representatives 
of all States/UTs wherein, States/UTs which had not pre-published their rules 
in respect of one or more Labour Codes, were requested to pre-publish their rules 
on urgent basis and all States/UTs agreed to frame their respective rules under 
Labour Codes and pre-publish the same.  
  
Teams from the Ministry of Labour and Employment also visited 
Meghalaya and UTs of Lakshadweep & Andaman & Nicobar Islands for providing 
handholding to these States/UTs with a view to facilitate them to frame their 
Rules within the ambit of Labour Codes. Ministry of Home Affairs has also been 
requested for taking up the matter related to pre-publication of rules by Union 
Territories.   
Further, a two-days workshop was recently held from 29 to 30th January, 2025 
under the Chairmanship of Hon’ble Minister for Labour & Employment, 
Government of India with State Labour Ministers and Secretaries, wherein, inter-
alia, concerned States/UT were requested to expedite the exercise of pre-
publication of Rules under Labour Codes.   
 
As per available information, 34, 33, 32 and 33 States/Union Territories 
have pre-published their draft Rules under the Code on Wages, 2019, the 
Industrial Relations Code, 2020, the Code on Social Security, 2020 and the 
Occupational Safety Health and working Conditions Code, 2020 respectively so 

22 
 
far. Only West Bengal and Lakshadweep have not pre-published Rules under 
any of the Codes. NCT of Delhi is yet to pre-publish Rules under 3 Codes viz. 
Industrial Relations Code, Code on Social Security and Occupational Safety, 
Health & Working Conditions Code. Tamil Nadu is yet to pre-publish the Rules 
under only Code on Social Security,2020.        
      
The Government has been taking all efforts including holding meetings at 
various Levels, physically visiting the States/UTs, offering handholding for 
framing the rules etc., for sensitizing the States/UTs for pre-publication of Rules 
under all four Labour Codes. Regular updates regarding the steps taken by 
remaining States/UT for pre-publication of their rules, are being taken. 
 
(Ministry of Labour & Employment No.G-25015/01/2025-B&A dated 16.06.2025) 
Recommendation (Para No. 7) 
National Career Services 
(b) Third Party Evaluation of Scheme 
 The Committee were apprised that the Scheme has been approved for 
continuation during 15th Finance Commission Cycle, i.e., 2021-26 and third 
party evaluation of the Scheme has been entrusted to M/s Quality Council of 
India on 11th December, 2024 and the  field work is likely to be completed by 
07th March, 2025.  The Committee hope that the field work has been completed 
as per stipulated time period and desire that further follow up action be taken 
so as to ensure that the third party evaluation is completed well before the expiry 
the term of the 15th Finance Commission. 
 (Reply of the Government) 
The third party evaluation of NCS was awarded to Quality Council of India (QCI) 
who has completed the field work. Based on this, report has been prepared which 
is under examination/approval. 
The evaluation will be completed within the stipulated timeframe, with necessary 
follow-up actions taken well before expiry of the term of the 15th Finance 
Commission. 
 
(Ministry of Labour & Employment No.G-25015/01/2025-B&A dated 16.06.2025) 
Recommendation (Para No. 8) 
National Career Services 
(c) On-boarding of Managed Service Provider (MSP) for NCS 2.0  
 The Committee have been apprised that NCS 2.0 portal will be launched 
to facilitate activities duly integrating various new features like AI enabled smart 
job matching, job recommendation engine, integrated data system for better 
employment service to both job seekers and employers. The Committee have also 
been apprised that the exercise for the selection of the Managed Service Provider 
(MSP) has been initiated and is at the stage of finalization.  The Committee desire 

23 
 
that post selection of MSP, further follow up action be taken on priority so as to 
ensure that on boarding of MSP for development of NCS 2.0 is completed in a 
time bound manner.  
(Reply of the Government) 
The Committee’s directions are noted for compliance. 
 
(Ministry of Labour & Employment No.G-25015/01/2025-B&A dated 16.06.2025) 
(Revised reply of the Government) 
Improvement of the National Career Service (NCS) Portal is a continuous and 
dynamic process and is based on suggestions and requirements of stakeholders.  
  
Certain developments   have already been undertaken to upgrade NCS to better 
serve the jobseekers, including the Jobseeker Module (Cloud based Web 
Application), designed to enhance user experience, streamline registration, and 
provide advanced job search functionalities; the Employer Module (Cloud based 
Web Application), which enables employers to post vacancies, manage 
applications, and engage with jobseekers more effectively; the Mobile 
Application for Jobseekers, and AI-enabled functionalities (such as intelligent 
job matching and an advanced resume builder), offering greater accessibility and 
convenience by allowing users to search and apply for jobs anytime, anywhere. 
 
In view of the above, National Career Service (NCS) has strategically transitioned 
from a service platform to a Digital Public Infrastructure (DPI) for Employment 
and Livelihoods, envisioned also as a Global Digital Public Good. NCS is now 
being developed as an open, secure, and interoperable digital backbone that 
connects government systems, private job portals, educational institutions, and 
startups which has necessitated revision of the technical architecture. 
As of now the existing Service provider CSC is maintaining and upgrading the 
portal, while the contours of the technical requirements for the Managed Service 
Provider (MSP) for NCS 2.0 is under review. 
 The Ministry is actively working to comply with the suggestions of the Committee 
suggestions of the Committee. 
(Ministry of Labour and Employment No.G-25015/01/2025-B&A dated 16.12.2025) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 12) 
National Career Services 
 (f)  Feedback and placement details under NCS 
 The Committee are deeply concerned to note that during 2024-25 (as on 
31.01.2025), only 35.23 lakh candidates were provisionally selected through 

24 
 
portal and job fairs against the 1.94 crore vacancies posted by the Employers, 
which is not encouraging. 
 The Ministry have persistently maintained that notifying final hiring 
figures is not a mandatory requirement of NCS Portal as they do not get any 
feedback from Employers as well as selected candidates on the grounds that the 
selected candidates change jobs on getting better job opportunities. The 
Committee find that this proves as a lacuna for understanding the number of 
candidates finally selected every year through this portal. The Committee 
impress upon the Ministry to have a re-look at their policy and ensure that 
placement details are made available on the portal by getting necessary feedback 
from both employers and the selected candidates.  
 (Reply of the Government) 
As suggested by committee, MoLE is looking into the policy in light of feasibility 
of tracking / recording of the actual jobs given to jobseekers. 
 
(Ministry of Labour & Employment No.G-25015/01/2025-B&A dated 16.06.2025) 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para No. 7 of Chapter-I) 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 13) 
National Career Services 
 (f)  Feedback and placement details under NCS 
 In addition, the factors responsible for less number of candidates being 
selected vis-à-vis vacancies viz skill gaps, lack of requisite experience, location 
limitations, industry-specific requirements, employer preferences, etc. also need 
to be addressed on priority in consultation with various stakeholders like the 
Ministry of Skill Development & Entrepreneurship and Industry Associations so 
as to achieve the objective of the Ministry to promote skill development and 
strengthening employment services. The Committee, while strongly 
recommending the Ministry to take corrective measure in this regard, would like 
to be apprised of the developments made in this regard within one month. 
 (Reply of the Government) 
The Committee’s direction has been duly noted for compliance. 
 
(Ministry of Labour & Employment No.G-25015/01/2025-B&A dated 16.06.2025) 
(Revised reply of the Government) 
To enhance the employability, digital and career skills of jobseekers and 
empower & equip youth with an array of essential employable skills, NCS Portal 
inter-alia offers online employability enhancement programmes, digital skill 
enhancement programmes and self-paced career skill programmes. NCS portal 

25 
 
is integrated with Skill India Digital Hub (SIDH) that is specially designed and 
developed to skill, reskill and upskill individuals through an online training 
platform for jobs and entrepreneurial opportunities. The integration of NCS 
Portal with SIDH has paved the way for the skilled jobseekers on SIDH to avail 
the benefits of NCS Portal and the jobseekers to avail the skilling services offered 
by SIDH. 
  
Ministry has signed MoUs with the private and public employers/ 
portals/Platforms to strengthen public-private partnerships for enhancing 
employment opportunities. Till date more than 25 Memorandums of 
Understanding (MoUs) with Companies like Swiggy, Zomato, Amazon, Zepto, 
TCS iON, Quikr, FoundIt (Monster), APNA, Rapido, Cygnus Ujala Group of 
Hospitals etc., have been signed to enhance service offerings on the NCS portal, 
such as integrating job listings, providing skill development programs, and 
offering additional career counselling.  
  
National Career Service (NCS) portal has also been integrated with e-Shram 
portal. e-Shram registrants can avail all services available on the portal including 
job search. 
  
New initiatives (like facilitation of International Labour Mobility (ILM) and 
technology upgrades such as AI/ML-based services, predictive analytics, fraud 
detection, etc.) are being incorporated into the NCS portal. 
  
The measures suggested by the Committee are being actively woven into the 
design of the NCS 2.0. 
(Ministry of Labour & Employment No.G-25015/01/2025-B&A dated 16.12.2025) 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 11 of Chapter-I) 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 14) 
National Career Services 
 (g) Employment trends as per PLFS data 
 The Committee note that the data on Employment and Unemployment is 
collected through Periodic Labour Force Survey (PLFS) which is conducted by 

26 
 
the Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation (MoSPI) since 2017-
18. The survey period is July to June every year. As per the data available in 
latest Annual PLFS Reports, the estimated Worker Population Ratio (WPR) 
indicating employment on usual status for females of age 15 years and above 
(including contractual workers in Organized and Unorganized Sectors) has 
increased from 28.7% in 2019-20 to 40.3% in 2023-24. 
 
Observing that the upward trend bring to the fore the positive aspect of 
participation of more women workforce in both organized and unorganized 
sectors, the Committee impress upon the Ministry to further intensify their 
efforts through other innovative measures like encouraging employers to engage 
more women workforce, organizing awareness campaigns in 
rural/remote/hilly/underserved areas in particular about NCS portal, etc. so as 
to further increase women participation in various sectors, thereby uplifting their 
social and financial status.  
(Reply of the Government) 
PLFS data indicates an upward trend in female employment. 
 
Further, to enhance the employability of female workers, the Ministry has taken 
various efforts. 
 
A number of provisions have also been incorporated in the labour laws for 
congenial work environment for women workers, such as paid maternity leave, 
child care leaves, equal wages etc.  
 
The Ministry has constituted a Task Force on “Improving Female Workforce 
Participation in India” with the objective of enhancing female workforce 
participation in India.  
 
In addition, Ministry of Labour and Employment in January, 2024 issued an 
“Advisory for Employers to Promote Women Workforce Participation”.  
 
The Ministry has also taken various measures for consideration of women 
jobseekers on the NCS portal like; A specific option in the form of checkbox, 
“Jobs for Women” has been featured on NCS Portal Home Page to help women 
jobseeker to easily search and then apply to women specific jobs.; Employers 
have an option to post jobs on NCS portal mentioning their preference for female 
candidates. 
 
(Ministry of Labour & Employment No.G-25015/01/2025-B&A dated 16.06.2025) 
Recommendation (Para No. 15) 
National Career Services 
 (h) Funds allocation and utilization 
 
 The Committee note that the BE and RE under National Career Services 
for 2024-25 was Rs. 58.00 crore, out of which an amount of Rs. 37.37 crore 
(64.43%) only has been utilized, as on 15.02.2025 which leaves Rs. 20.63 crore 

27 
 
(35.57%) as unspent balance. The Committee have been apprised that the entire 
amount of Rs. 58.00 crore would be utilized for payment of committed liabilities 
of Consultancy agency, System Integrator, Social Media agency, etc. during the 
FY 2024-25.  
 
 The Committee, thus, find that the Ministry intend to utilize around 35% 
of RE in the remaining one and a half month of the fourth quarter implying that 
the guidelines issued by the Ministry of Finance with regard to ceiling of 
expenditure, i.e., 33% in last quarter and 15% in the last month of the financial 
year are not being adhered to by the Ministry. The Committee, therefore, call 
upon the Ministry to ensure that, in future, the expenditure is incurred as per 
the quarterly expenditure plans and also by observing the quarterly and monthly 
ceiling of expenditure fixed by the Ministry of Finance. 
 (Reply of the Government) 
The Committee’s directions have been noted for future compliance. 
(Ministry of Labour & Employment No.G-25015/01/2025-B&A dated 16.06.2025) 
Revised reply of the Government 
After 15.02.2025 an additional amount of Rs. 10.06 crore was incurred during 
the financial year 2024-25, which resulted into a total expenditure of Rs. 47.43 
i.e. around 81.77% of total allocated BE of Rs. 58.00 crore. 
During the last quarter of financial year i.e. January 2025- March 2025, an 
amount of Rs. 19.20 crore was utilized, which is around 33.10% of the total 
allocated amount under BE. Further, an amount of Rs. 8.80 crore was utilized 
during the last month which corresponds to 15.17% of total BE. 
Thus, the expenditure incurred by the Ministry was broadly in line with the 
ceilings prescribed by the Ministry of Finance for the last quarter and the last 
month. The Ministry remains committed to adhering to the quarterly expenditure 
plans and the expenditure ceilings in all future financial years. 
 
(Ministry of Labour & Employment No.G-25015/01/2025-B&A dated 16.12.2025) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 16) 
Welfare of SC/ST Job Seekers Through Coaching and Guidance 
 
 The objective of the Scheme is to enhance the employability of SC/ST 
jobseekers through vocational guidance, career counselling, computer training, 
pre-recruitment training, etc. The Scheme has been approved for continuation 
during 15th Finance Commission Cycle i.e., from 2020-21 to 2025-26. 

28 
 
(a) Third Party Evaluation of the Scheme 
The Committee have been apprised that the third party evaluation of the 
scheme has been entrusted to M/s Quality Council of India (selected through 
GeM) on 11.12.2024 and the field work has been completed on 17.02.2025. The 
Committee desire that the exercise be completed in a time bound manner and 
further follow up action be taken well before the completion of term of the 15th 
Finance Commission. 
(Reply of the Government) 
The third party evaluation of NCSC for SC/ST was awarded to Quality Council 
of India(QCI) who has completed the field work. Based on this, report has been 
prepared which is under examination/approval. 
The evaluation will be completed within the stipulated timeframe, with necessary 
follow-up actions taken well before expiry of the term of the 15th Finance 
Commission. 
 
(Ministry of Labour & Employment No.G-25015/01/2025-B&A dated 16.06.2025) 
Recommendation (Para No. 17) 
Welfare of SC/ST Job Seekers Through Coaching and Guidance 
 (b) Funds allocation and utilization 
 The Committee note that the BE and RE for 2024-25 was Rs. 20.60 crores, 
out of which, an amount of Rs. 15.97 crore (77.52%) has been utilized till 
19.02.2025 leaving an unspent balance of Rs. 4.63 crore, and as informed by 
the Ministry, rest of the amount would be utilized for payment of committed 
liabilities of Stipend, Academic fee, etc. during FY 2024-25. The Committee are 
satisfied with the utilization of funds under the Scheme and trust that the 
remaining balance will be utilized by 31.03.2025. 
 (Reply of the Government) 
The BE and RE for 2024-25 was Rs. 20.60 Crores, out of which an amount of 
Rs. 18.86 Crores (91.55 %) has been utilized till 31.03.2025. 
 
(Ministry of Labour & Employment No.G-25015/01/2025-B&A dated 16.06.2025) 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 18) 
Welfare of SC/ST Job Seekers Through Coaching and Guidance 
 (c) Physical Targets 
 The Committee note that in 2022-23, out of 2400 trained SC/ST 
candidates, only 821 candidates [543(SC) and 278 (ST)] viz. only 34.20% got 
employment, whereas in 2023-24, out of 2160 trained SC/ST candidates, only 
606 (SC 427 and ST 179) viz. only 28% got employment. The Committee are not 
satisfied with the physical performance and desire that the Ministry need to have 

29 
 
a serious review of the training module and other relevant factors, which may be 
responsible for selection of less number of candidates so as to ensure that there 
is considerable increase in employment of trained SC/ST candidates under the 
Scheme. 
(Reply of the Government) 
 
The primary objective of the scheme is to enhance the employability of SC/ST 
job seekers. However, efforts are made to place these candidates by organizing 
job fairs from time to time. In the years 2023-24 and 2024-25, a total of 10,170 
candidates have been trained and during this period 7,354 candidates have been 
placed successfully. 
Further, the suggestions of the Committee have been noted for compliance. 
 
(Ministry of Labour & Employment No.G-25015/01/2025-B&A dated 16.06.2025) 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 14 of Chapter-I) 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 19) 
New Employment Generation Scheme (ELIS) 
 
 The Committee note that three Schemes aimed at boosting employment 
and hiring in the formal sector, collectively known as ‘Employment Linked 
Incentive’ Scheme to be implemented through the Employees Provident Fund 
Organisation (EPFO) was announced in the FY 2024-25 Budget Speech by the 
Finance Minister. The Committee further note that these schemes provide 
benefits to both employers and first-time employees enrolled in the EPFO. Under 
the Scheme, during 2024-25, the BE of Rs. 10,000 crore was reduced to Rs. 
6799.43 crore at RE stage. Out of which an amount of Rs.6799.37 crore has not 
been utilized as on 15.02.2025 i.e. there is 100% non-utilization. 
 
The Committee have been apprised that the Scheme has been appraised 
by the EFC and is at the Draft Cabinet Note stage. Pending Cabinet approval, 
DoE has allowed only Rs 20 Cr to be used for pre-launch activities. Due to these 
reasons, the funds earmarked for FY 2024-25 remain unutilized. However, this 
will not impact the overall financial implications of the scheme as spending can 
commence only after approval.  
 
The Ministry have also informed that so far as provisions and utilisation 
of Rs 20,000 crore during the financial year 2025-26 is concerned, the same has 
been earmarked against the estimated expenditure of Rs 28693.78 crores. More 
allocation can be sought as necessary, at RE stage. The Ministry have, 
subsequently, informed that Rs. 9999.50 crore has been surrendered, thereby 
implying that the Scheme has not been approved. The Committee expect that the 
necessary approval of the Scheme will be accorded in 2025-26 and desire that 
the preparatory work undertaken during 2024-25 need to be taken to the logical 
end so as to ensure that the earmarked funds are utilized during 2025-26. 
 

30 
 
 
 (Reply of the Government) 
In light of discussions held at various levels, some changes were made in scheme 
structure, and the proposal was re- submitted for EFC meeting which was held 
on 09.05.2025. 
 
Accordingly, after incorporating recommendations of the EFC, a revised 
DCN has been submitted to Department of Expenditure on 21.05.2025 for 
soliciting approval of Hon’ble Finance Minister. Hon’ble Finance Minister has 
accorded approval vide OM no 45(01)/PFC-II/2024-DCN dated 28.05.2025. 
Once the scheme is approved, the same will be implemented and the funds 
earmarked for the scheme will be utilised based on approved year-wise physical 
& financial targets.   
 
Furthermore, Committee’s recommendations on ELI scheme have been 
noted for consideration and compliance. 
 
(Ministry of Labour & Employment No.G-25015/01/2025-B&A dated 16.06.2025) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 22) 
Pradhan Mantri Shram Yogi Maandhan (PM-SYM) 
(c) Evaluation of the Scheme 
 The Committee have been apprised that the detailed evaluation of the PM-
SYM scheme requires actuarial evaluation for which an actuarial firm has been 
on-boarded and the work has commenced.  The Ministry have further stated that 
on the basis of the report of the actuarial evaluation, scheme parameters will be 
comprehensively reviewed and a draft cabinet note for a revised scheme will be 
prepared by mid FY 2025-26. Considering the fact that the Department of 
Expenditure, Ministry of Finance has extended the PM-SYM Scheme in the 
present form till 31.03.2026, the Committee desire that the necessary approval 
of the revised Scheme be obtained, as per the target fixed and well before the 
completion of term of the 15th Finance Commission. 
 (Reply of the Government) 
Observation of the Committee noted for compliance. 
 
 
(Ministry of Labour & Employment No.G-25015/01/2025-B&A dated 16.06.2025) 
 
(Revised reply of the Government) 
Actuarial evaluation and third party evaluation of the scheme has been 
completed and both have recommended the merger of the PM-SYM & NPS-
Traders scheme. Accordingly, an EFC note for merger and revamp of the schemes 
i.e. PMSYM & NPS-Traders has been prepared and is under circulation to the 

31 
 
stakeholders/Ministries/Departments. After EFC appraisal the cabinet note for 
the revised scheme will be finalized expeditiously.  
(Ministry of Labour & Employment No.G-25015/01/2025-B&A dated 16.12.2025) 
Recommendation (Para No. 23) 
National Pension Scheme for Traders and Self-Employed Persons 
 The Committee note that, as on 31.12.2024, approximately only 58 
thousand beneficiaries have been enrolled under the NPS Traders Scheme which 
was launched on 12.09.2019.  The Department of Expenditure, Ministry of 
Finance has extended the Scheme in present form till 31.03.2026. 
Physical and Financial Progress 
As regards financial progress, the Committee note that the Scheme has 
allocation of Rs.1 lakh only during 2024-25 and the utilization upto 15.02.2025 
was Rs. 6000 only. Further, the physical target for 2024-25 was to enroll 10,000 
beneficiaries, however, only 4505 beneficiaries could be enrolled. The Committee 
find that the physical as well as financial progress of the Scheme is not up to the 
mark. The Committee have been apprised that the major features of NPS-Traders 
are akin to that of PM-SYM and work on actuarial evaluation of PM-SYM has 
commenced and the report of the actuarial evaluation is likely to be received by 
April end. Once it is reviewed by the Ministry and various options are evaluated, 
revision of the scheme/future plan will be firmed up. Considering the fact that 
both NPS traders and PM-SYM require revamping and have been extended till 
31.03.2026, the Committee exhort the Ministry to ensure that sincere efforts are 
made to complete the entire revamping exercise at the earliest. 
 (Reply of the Government) 
Observation of the Committee noted for compliance. 
 
(Ministry of Labour & Employment No.G-25015/01/2025-B&A dated 16.06.2025) 
(Revised reply of the Government) 
Actuarial evaluation and third party evaluation of the scheme has been 
completed and both have recommended the merger of the PM-SYM & NPS-
Traders scheme. Accordingly, an EFC note for merger and revamp of the schemes 
i.e. PMSYM & NPS-Traders has been prepared and is under circulation to the 
stakeholders/Ministries/Departments. After EFC appraisal the cabinet note for 
the revised scheme will be finalized expeditiously 
(Ministry of Labour & Employment No.G-25015/01/2025-B&A dated 16.12.2025) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 24) 
National Database for Unroganised Workers (NDUW) 
 The Ministry of Labour & Employment has launched eShram portal on 
26.08.2021 with an objective to create National Database of Unorganised 
Workers (NDUW). The eShram portal is meant to register and support the 

32 
 
unorganised workers by providing them a Universal Account Number (UAN). As 
on 04.03.2025, over 30.69 crore unorganized sector workers have registered on 
eShram Portal, on self-declaration basis. 
(a) E-Shram – “One-Stop-Solution” 
The Committee note that the Ministry have launched eShram – One-Stop-
Solution on 21st October, 2024, which entails integration of different Social 
Security/Welfare Schemes at Single Portal i.e. eShram, which will provide a 
single platform to unorganized workers to have easy access to a variety of 
Government Welfare Schemes. The data of 13 Social Security/Welfare Schemes 
have been integrated/mapped with eShram, which inter-alia includes Mahatma 
Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Act, National Social Assistance 
Programme (Indira Gandhi National Disability Pension Scheme), Indira Gandhi 
National Widow Pension Scheme, National Family Benefit Scheme, Pradhan 
Mantri Awas Yojana – Gramin (PMAY-G) and Pradhan Mantri Kisan Samman 
Nidhi Scheme, etc. of various Ministries. The Ministry have further informed that 
mapping or integration with Central and State Government Welfare and Social 
Security Schemes is a continuous and ongoing process.  
Observing that, at present, only 13 Central Social Security/Welfare 
Schemes have been integrated/mapped with eShram and no State Government 
Welfare and Social Security Schemes has been integrated, the Committee exhort 
the Ministry to work towards mapping/integration of all Central and State 
Government Social Security Schemes under this common umbrella in the 
shortest possible timeframe so that the benefits available under various schemes 
reach the unorganized workers.  
 (Reply of the Government) 
The Ministry of Labour and Employment (MoLE) is actively engaged in 
discussions with other Central Ministries to facilitate the integration of 
additional schemes. This is an ongoing process, and MoLE is committed to make 
efforts that relevant schemes are integrated under this common umbrella. 
Furthermore, the Ministry of Labour and Employment (MoLE) is planning 
to extend this integration effort to include schemes run by State and Union 
Territory departments in the near future to ensure that the benefits available 
under various schemes reach the unorganised workers efficiently and effectively. 
 
(Ministry of Labour & Employment No.G-25015/01/2025-B&A dated 16.06.2025) 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para No. 17 of Chapter-I) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 25) 
National Database for Unroganised Workers (NDUW) 
(b) Onboarding of 20 crore more unorganized workers on e-Shram Portal. 
 The Committee note that in addition to 30.69 crore unorganized workers, 
already registered on eShram Portal as on 04.03.2025, approximately atleast 20 

33 
 
crore more unorganized workers need to be registered, however no physical 
target has been fixed for 2025-26. The Ministry have informed that as per the 
approval of the Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC), eShram envisaged 
registration of 25 crore unorganised workers till 31st March, 2025. The Ministry 
of Finance, Department of Expenditure have accorded approval for continuation 
of eShram beyond Financial Year 2024-25 for one year i.e., 1st April, 2025 to 31st 
March, 2026, within the limit of the originally approved outlay of the scheme on 
18th November 2024 but no target for registration was given. The registration of 
unorganised workers on eShram has been slowly but steadily inching towards 
saturation. In such a situation due to wide variation in registration numbers, it 
has become difficult for Ministry to anticipate and fix a physical target for 
registration of unorganised workers for the Financial Year 2025-26 and beyond. 
The Committee have been apprised that the Ministry have enumerated 
several measures to address the challenges in the registration process and 
spread awareness amongst unorganized workers, which inter-alia include launch 
of multilingual functionality on the eShram portal on 7th January, 2025 using 
the Bhashini platform, which allows workers to interact with eShram portal in 
22 Indian languages thereby improving accessibility and promoting inclusivity 
for all; launch of the eShram mobile application on 24th February, 2025, which 
provides real-time access to welfare schemes integrated with eShram thereby 
significantly improving accessibility and convenience, awareness through SMS, 
social media campaigns, etc. 
 
The Committee appreciate the endeavour embarked upon by the Ministry 
to extend the Social Security benefits to the large section of unorganized sector 
workers who are in dire need of such benefits. The Committee would, however, 
desire to reiterate their earlier recommendation made in their 1st Report (18th 
Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2024-25) and call upon the Ministry to take 
one step forward and evolve some more innovative measures through intensive 
and methodical approach on the lines similar to the door to door survey being 
conducted while undertaking Census so as to cover each and every unorganized 
worker in a time bound manner. The Committee would like to be apprised of the 
progress made in this regard.  It is pertinent to point out in this regard that the 
ultimate aim of the eShram portal to provide social security and employment 
opportunities to the unorganised workers in a structured fashion shall always 
be accorded prime importance.   
(Reply of the Government) 
The eShram portal has successfully created a comprehensive database of 
unorganized workers, with over 30.86 crore registrations as of 29.05.2025. 
During registration, key details such as Name, Gender, Date of Birth, Permanent 
Address, and Photograph are fetched directly from Aadhaar after successful KYC 
verification, ensuring data accuracy and eliminating duplication. 
 
To further expand the registration of unorganized workers, the Ministry is 
actively organizing enrollment camps in collaboration with the CSC centers and 
State/UTs Labour Departments. Additionally, outreach efforts are being 
strengthened through social media campaigns and by seeking support from 
respective state governments to ensure wider coverage. The Ministry remains 
committed to adopting innovative measures to bring more unorganized workers 

34 
 
under the eShram framework in a systematic and time-bound manner on a self-
deceleration basis. 
(Ministry of Labour & Employment No.G-25015/01/2025-B&A dated 16.06.2025) 
Recommendation (Para No. 26) 
National Database for Unroganised Workers (NDUW) 
(c) Criteria for verification of eShram registrants. 
 The Committee note that the verification of eShram registrants involves 
several key criteria to ensure the accuracy and authencity of the data. eShram 
involves Aadhaar eKYC verification, for registration of unorganised workers, thus 
authenticated information including name, age (DoB), gender, address and 
photograph of workers is retrieved from UIDAI itself. Further, it has been 
mandated to use biometric mode of authentication if any worker is getting 
registered in assisted mode through Common Service Centre (CSC). Other details 
of workers are captured on a self-declaration basis. The Committee have been 
apprised that eShram data is being shared with all States/ Union Territories and 
while doing so, it is advised that, the status of all the eShram registrants 
belonging to their respective States/ Union Territories must be verified before 
extending any social security/ welfare scheme to them. 
The Committee desire that while sharing data, States/UTs may also be 
advised to maintain security and confidentiality of the data. The Committee 
further desire that States/UTs may also be advised to verify credentials of all the 
persons belonging to their respective State/UT and registered on eShram so as 
to ensure that the credentials of the registrants are foolproof. This will also 
ensure that only genuine and intended beneficiaries get the benefits of various 
Social Welfare Schemes. 
(Reply of the Government) 
The Ministry is committed to ensure the security and confidentiality of eShram 
data. Regular security audits, including UIDAI audits, are conducted as per 
government guidelines and compliance requirements. These audits help 
strengthen data protection measures and ensure that eShram data remains 
secure and confidential. The Ministry will continue to take all necessary steps to 
uphold data security and privacy standards in line with the government 
policies/guidelines issued from time to time. 
Further, the Ministry had already issued Data Sharing Guidelines on 20.10.2022 
which mandate that all data received from the eShram portal must be thoroughly 
verified and validated by the respective States/ UTs before extending any benefits 
or enrolling individuals under any welfare scheme. This verification process is 
crucial to ensure the authenticity of the registrants. The guidelines also require 
States/UTs to securely store eShram data and safeguard it from any cyber risks 
once downloaded.  
 
(Ministry of Labour & Employment No.G-25015/01/2025-B&A dated 16.06.2025) 
 
 

35 
 
Recommendation (Para Nos. 27 & 28) 
National Database for Unroganised Workers (NDUW) 
(d) Ex-gratia Payment to the e-Shram Registrants 
27. The Committee note that the Ministry aimed to provide accidental risk 
cover to all unorganised workers registered on the eShram portal through the 
Pradhan Mantri Suraksha Bima Yojana (PMSBY) until 31st March, 2022. 
However, due to technical and operational issues PMSBY could not be 
operationalised. 
 
The Committee have been apprised that since PMSBY benefits could not 
be applied retrospectively, it was decided to offer the same benefits as ex-gratia 
payment to eligible claimants registered on eShram. Accordingly, all unorganised 
workers registered on the eShram portal by 31st March, 2022, are eligible to 
initiate claim. Incidents occurred after registration and on or before 31st March, 
2022, are considered for ex-gratia payment. The ex-gratia module was launched 
in August 2023 and decision of approval or rejection is under the purview of 
State/ UT Government, as per ex-gratia guidelines issued by Ministry of Labour 
& Employment.  
 
 The Committee appreciate the positive move/ initiative taken by the 
Ministry in providing the much needed relief to the claimant/legal heir of the 
eShram registrants, who met with accidental deaths or disability during 
26.08.2021 to 31.03.2022.  
 
28. The Committee are, however, concerned to note that, as on 18.02.2025, 
out of 702 claims (474 in 2023-24 and 228 in 2024-25) approved by District 
Magistrate/District Collector, the payment has been made to only 501 (330 in 
2023-24 and 171 in 2024-25) claimants and the remaining 201 claimants are 
yet to get ex-gratia payment due to administrative/procedural reasons. The 
Committee feel that the very purpose of any social security scheme is defeated if 
the ex-gratia amount is not timely paid to the claimant. The Committee, therefore 
call upon the Ministry to ensure that the payment to the remaining claimants be 
made on priority for timely receipt of ex-gratia payment.  
 (Reply of the Government) 
The Ministry has been diligently processing payments for eligible beneficiaries. 
In addition, recognizing the importance of ensuring that no beneficiary is left 
behind, Ministry have extended the deadline for claim submissions to 30th June 
2025.  
This extension aims to facilitate maximum participation and ensure that all 
eligible beneficiaries receive their rightful ex-gratia payments without any delays. 
Ministry remains committed to transparent and efficient administration in this 
matter. 
(Ministry of Labour & Employment No.G-25015/01/2025-B&A dated 16.06.2025) 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 21 of Chapter-I) 

36 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 29) 
National Database for Unroganised Workers (NDUW) 
 The Committee have also been apprised that the B.E. of Rs. 176.84 crore 
was revised downwards to R.E. of Rs 26.93 crore owing to the lesser number of 
ex-gratia claims approved by the approving District Authorities under one time 
ex-gratia payment to the eShram registrants who met with accidental death or 
disability during 26.08.2021 to 31.03.2022. The Ministry had received around 
3,250 numbers of enquiries related to accidental claim benefits, through eShram 
GMS portal. Further, it was envisaged that similar number of incidents, may also 
be forthcoming once the module is launched. In view of this Rs. 140 crore was 
earmarked for this purpose. However, as on 15.02.2025, only around Rs. 10 
crore has been disbursed on this count and therefore, the fund requirement was 
revised downwards. The remaining amount of Rs. 13.02 crore will be utilized to 
clear the committed liabilities upto 31.03.2025. The Committee trust that the 
Ministry will be able to utilize the earmarked funds. 
 (Reply of the Government) 
The B.E. 2024-25 of NDUW was 176.84 Crores and the R.E. 2024-25 was 26.93 
Crores based on the committed liabilities. An expenditure of Rs. 25.07 Crore was 
incurred to clear the all the committed liabilities during FY 2024-25. 
 
(Ministry of Labour & Employment No.G-25015/01/2025-B&A dated 16.06.2025) 
Recommendation (Para No. 30) 
National Database for Unroganised Workers (NDUW) 
(e) Revamping of Shram Suvidha and Samadhan Portal 
30. The Committee have been apprised that for the convenience of employers 
and employees, Shram Suvidha and Samadhan Portals are being revamped and 
the exercise will be completed by August, 2025. While appreciating the initiative 
taken by the Ministry, the Committee desire that the August 2025 deadline for 
the revamp be stringently adhered to in the larger interest of Employees as well 
as Employers. 
 (Reply of the Government) 
All efforts are being taken to adhere to the time limit for revamping of Shram 
Suvidha and Samadhan Portals in the larger interest of Employees as well as 
Employers. 
 
(Ministry of Labour & Employment No.G-25015/01/2025-B&A dated 16.06.2025) 
 
 
 

37 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 31) 
 
National Database for Unroganised Workers (NDUW) 
(f)  Third-party evaluation and outcome review of the National Database 
of Unorganised Workers (NDUW) / eShram Scheme 
 The Committee note that the Department of Expenditure has agreed to the 
continuation of National Database of Unorganised Workers (NDUW) / eShram 
scheme for the FY 2025-26 within the limit of originally approved outlay of the 
scheme i.e. Rs. 704.01 crore, which will also make NDUW/eShram scheme co-
terminus with remaining 15th Finance Commission period ending on 31st March, 
2026. 
The Committee have also been apprised that in terms of DoE’s O.M. dated 
23.02.2017 aligning the schemes with financial resources cycle of Central and 
State Governments, it is desirable to align the scheme with the Finance 
Commission cycle. The Ministry have, therefore, initiated the process of third-
party evaluation and outcome review of the National Database of Unorganised 
Workers (NDUW) / eShram scheme which may take some time. The Ministry 
have further stated that, depending upon the outcome review, the scheme can 
continue in its present form or be amended with necessary modifications for the 
16th Finance Commission cycle, for which approval of Department of 
Expenditure will be obtained in due course. 
The Committee appreciate that the step timely taken by the Ministry is in 
the right direction and desire that the road map for completing the exercise be 
devised and its implementation ensured so as to complete the exercise in a time 
bound manner so that the Ministry have a clear picture of necessary 
modifications to be made in the scheme well before the completion of term of 15th 
Finance Commission. 
 (Reply of the Government) 
The third-party evaluation of the eShram is carried out by Quality Council 
of India. Based on this, a report has been prepared which is under examination 
/ approval. The evaluation will be completed within the stipulated time frame, 
with necessary follow-up actions taken well before the expiry of term of 15th 
Finance Commission. 
 
(Ministry of Labour & Employment No.G-25015/01/2025-B&A dated 16.06.2025) 
Recommendation (Para No. 32) 
 
National Database for Unroganised Workers (NDUW) 
(g) Registration of online Platform Workers on the e-Shram Portal 
 The Committee note that in line with the budget announcement 2025-26 
for registration of platform workers on the eShram portal and providing them 
health care under PM Jan Arogya Yojana (PMJAY) to assist nearly one crore gig 

38 
 
workers, the Ministry are on-boarding platform Aggregators onto the eShram 
portal for which the Ministry have developed a separate module for Aggregators 
on e-Shram for their registration as well as registration of platform workers 
engaged by them. There is no official database /estimate on how many 
aggregators are in existence. As on date, 10 major platforms namely- Zomato, 
Blinkit, Uncle Delivery, Urban Company, Swiggy, Uber, Rapido, Ola, Zepto & 
Ecom Express have been onboarded on e-Shram portal. The onboarding of 
platform workers through aggregators is an ongoing process as this is a growing 
sector. Onboarding of platforms is expected to pick up with the launch of the 
scheme for providing social security to Platform workers through PMJAY. 
 The Ministry have further stated that according to NITI Aayog, the number 
of gig workers, including those working on online platforms was 77 lakh in 2020-
21 and is projected to rise to over 1 crore by 2024-25, reaching 2.35 crore by 
2029-30. It is estimated that approximately 35 lakh platform workers will be 
eligible for the scheme in FY 2025-26, with the number expected to expand to 
over 1 crore by 2029-30. It is expected that through this module updated data 
of platform workers will be available. 
The Committee note that as on 19.02.2025 70,306 platform workers of 36 
States/UTs have been registered in eShram portal. The States having more than 
4000 platform workers registered on eShram are West Bengal (24,799), Assam 
(9,816), Maharashtra (6,995) and Uttar Pradesh (4,222). Observing that nearly 
35 lakh platform workers will be eligible for the Scheme in 2025-26 and out of 
them only 70,306, are registered on eShram as on 19.02.2025, and with the 
onboarding of 10 major Aggregators on eShram, the Committee expect that there 
will be considerable increase in registration of platform workers. However, it is 
imperative on the part of the Ministry to identify and locate all the Aggregators 
who are in existence at present and take fruitful steps to onboard them on the 
eShram Portal expediently so that the intended beneficiaries are not deprived of 
the proposed social security/health benefits. 
 (Reply of the Government) 
The Ministry has taken a progressive step regarding the registration of platform 
workers on eShram by launching a simplified registration form specifically for 
platform workers in March 2025. This initiative aims to make the registration 
process more accessible and user-friendly for platform workers. To maximize the 
registration of Platform workers on e-Shram portal, two nation-wide special 
campaigns were held during 7-17th April, 2025 and 21-30 May, 2025 in 
collaboration with States/UTs by organizing district/city level registration 
camps.  
Furthermore, the Ministry has provided clear instructions to States, Union 
Territories, and Platform Aggregators to onboard platform workers onto the 
eShram portal. These efforts are part of our ongoing efforts to ensure that all 
eligible workers are registered and can benefit from the proposed social security 
and health benefits. 
 
In addition to these measures, the Ministry is actively identifying and 
engaging with all existing Aggregators to expedite their onboarding process on 

39 
 
the eShram portal. This proactive approach is intended to ensure that no 
intended beneficiaries are deprived of the social security and health benefits 
proposed under the scheme. Till date total 12 major Aggregators have been 
onboarded namely- Zomato, Blinkit, Uncle Delivery, Urban Company, Uber, 
Amazon, Ola, Swiggy, Ecom Express, Rapido, Zepto and Porter. The Ministry has 
also issued an advisory on 02.05.2025 to 187 more aggregators to onboard 
themselves as well as platform workers engaged by them on eShram portal.  
 
The State/UT wise details of platform workers registered on eShram portal 
as on 05.06.2025 is as under:- 
 
Sl. No. State/UT Registration Count 
1. Andaman And Nicobar Islands 99 
2. Andhra Pradesh 22112 
3. Arunachal Pradesh 239 
4. Assam 13291 
5. Bihar 11159 
6. Chandigarh 325 
7. Chhattisgarh 1959 
8. Delhi 7728 
9. Goa 619 
10. Gujarat 14804 
11. Haryana 5832 
12. Himachal Pradesh 591 
13. Jammu and Kashmir 1241 
14. Jharkhand 5080 
15. Karnataka 9790 
16. Kerala 4467 
17. Ladakh 25 
18. Lakshadweep 1 
19. Madhya Pradesh 9350 
20. Maharashtra 70920 
21. Manipur 280 
22. Meghalaya 464 
23. Mizoram 97 
24. Nagaland 318 
25. Odisha 3170 
26. Puducherry 204 
27. Punjab 3409 
28. Rajasthan 11180 
29. Sikkim 147 
30. Tamil Nadu 12578 
31. Telangana 9518 
32. The Dadra And Nagar Haveli And 
Daman And Diu 
47 
33. Tripura 780 
34. Uttar Pradesh 16913 
35. Uttarakhand 1692 

40 
 
36. West Bengal 29739 
 Total 2,70,168 
 
(Ministry of Labour & Employment No.G-25015/01/2025-B&A dated 16.06.2025) 
Recommendation (Para No. 33) 
 
National Database for Unroganised Workers (NDUW) 
 The Ministry have also mentioned that the provision of healthcare to 
Platform Workers under Ayushman Bharat PM Jan Arogya Yojana (AB-PMJAY) 
is proposed to be implemented by expanding the base of the existing AB-PMJAY 
scheme to include the Platform Workers. Since National Health Authority (NHA) 
already possesses established infrastructure and systems along with 
coordination mechanism with States/UTs for delivering healthcare benefits to 
various groups of beneficiaries, these existing mechanisms of NHA are intended 
to be leveraged to provide benefits to the eligible Platform Workers. 
The Committee desire that it will be in fitness of things if the Ministry of 
Labour and Employment also coordinate with NHA and provide desired/requisite 
handholding so that the healthcare benefits under AB-PMJAY are timely made 
available to the Platform Workers. 
 (Reply of the Government) 
The Ministry is actively collaborating with the National Health Authority (NHA) 
to integrate platform workers into the AB-PMJAY health benefits program. 
Extensive discussions have taken place to understand NHA's system and 
establish a process for securely transferring verified platform worker data, with 
finalization of these modalities currently underway.  
(Ministry of Labour & Employment No.G-25015/01/2025-B&A dated 16.06.2025) 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 24 of Chapter-I) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 34) 
Labour Welfare Scheme 
 The Scheme has three components viz. Health Care Scheme, Housing 
Scheme and Education Scheme. While the Housing Scheme has attained sunset, 
the Health Care Scheme, which is demand driven, and Education Scheme are in 
operation.  
(a) Physical Targets under Education Scheme 
The Committee observe that under the Education Scheme, the target was 
to cover 1 lakh beneficiaries, while only 29,563 beneficiaries were covered upto 
16.01.2025 resulting in shortfall of 70,437 intended beneficiaries viz., approx. 
70% of the target. As informed by the Ministry, the payment to 29,563 
beneficiaries have already made and the payment for additional 78,118 
applications for AY 2024-25 has been approved which are uploaded on National 

41 
 
Scholarship Portal. Consequently, the total number of beneficiaries benefitted 
will be 1,07,681 by 31st March, 2025, which is well above the target hence there 
will be no short fall. The Committee appreciate that the proactive measures taken 
by the Ministry have led to fulfilling the desired target during the year. 
 (Reply of the Government) 
Observations of the Committee are noted. 
(Ministry of Labour & Employment No.G-25015/01/2025-B&A dated 16.06.2025) 
(Revised reply of the Government) 
The Committee's observations have been examined. Against the target of one 
lakh beneficiaries for AY 2024-25, 92118 beneficiaries have been benefited, 
further, in AY 2025-26, notable 2,61,617 applications have been received upto 
11.12.2025. The Ministry will continue to strive towards pro-active measures to 
achieve targets. 
(Ministry of Labour & Employment No.G-25015/01/2025-B&A dated 16.12.2025) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 35) 
Labour Welfare Scheme 
 (b) Income ceiling for financial assistance for education to the wards of 
Beedi Workers 
 The Committee are concerned to note that one of the grounds for rejection 
of applications under Education Scheme is that some of the  applicants did not 
meet the income criteria of the Scheme such as Rs. 1.2 lakh per annum ceiling 
set for Beedi workers. The Committee have been apprised that the eligible income 
ceiling for financial assistance for education to the wards of Beedi workers was 
revised from Rs. 3,500 per month to Rs. 10,000 per month i.e. Rs. 1.2 lakh per 
annum in April 2003 and at present no proposal is under consideration to revise 
the income ceiling limit. Observing that the income ceiling has not been 
increased for the last 22 years, the Committee are of the considered view that 
the Ministry take a relook in the matter and earnestly consider to revise the 
ceiling keeping in view the inflation and other relevant factors so that the benefits 
of the Schemes are truly extended to the deserving wards of Beedi workers.  
(Reply of the Government) 
Observations of the Committee are duly noted. 
(Ministry of Labour & Employment No.G-25015/01/2025-B&A dated 16.06.2025) 
(Revised reply of the Government) 
The Ministry is examining upward revision of the income ceiling for the revised 
scheme under preparation for extension in the next financial cycle. 
(Ministry of Labour & Employment No.G-25015/01/2025-B&A dated 16.12.2025) 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 28 of Chapter-I) 
 

42 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 37) 
Labour Welfare Scheme 
 (d) Third-party Evaluation of the Scheme 
 The Committee note that the third-party evaluation of the Labour Welfare 
Scheme (LWS) is underway and the draft report has been submitted for analysis. 
The Ministry have informed that the appraisal process is expected to be 
completed before the commencement of the 16th Finance Commission 
discussions, and necessary modifications will be proposed based on the 
evaluation outcome.  
The Committee appreciate that the Ministry are reviewing the findings and 
recommendations to assess the continuation of LWS beyond 2026-27 in 
alignment with the 16th Finance Commission and to ensure better 
implementation, stakeholder consultations, financial planning, and digital 
enhancements are being considered. The Committee trust that the timeline for 
completion of the appraisal process will be met. 
(Reply of the Government) 
Observations of the Committee noted for compliance. 
 
(Ministry of Labour & Employment No.G-25015/01/2025-B&A dated 16.06.2025) 
(Revised reply of the Government) 
The third-party evaluation has been completed and the final report has been 
duly examined. The proposed changes and recommendations contained in the 
report are under active consideration prior to placing it before the Appraisal body 
for examining continuance of the scheme beyond 31/03/2026. 
 
(Ministry of Labour & Employment No.G-25015/01/2025-B&A dated 16.12.2025) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 38) 
Central Sector Scheme for Rehabilitation of Bonded Labourer – 2021 
 The Committee note that the number of bonded labourers rehabilitated 
during the last three years viz. 2022-23, 2023-24 and 2024-25 (upto 31.01.2025) 
was 673; 468; and 246 respectively. The Committee, thus, find that there is 
persistent decrease in the number of bonded labourers rehabilitated during the 
last three years, which is encouraging.  The Committee, however, are distressed 
to note that the scourge of bonded labour still persist in the society and 
spreading its tentacles.  
The Committee are deeply concerned to note that out of the 246 bonded 
labourers released and rehabilitated during 2024-25, 50 were rescued from 
Rajasthan and the remaining 196 were rescued from Tamil Nadu. The Committee 
earnestly call upon the Ministry to address the menace of bonded labour with 
utmost seriousness and vigour by roping in the State/UT Governments; 
strengthening laws and implementing them effectively; enforcing rigorous 

43 
 
punishments and stricter penalties; setting up fast track courts; spreading 
awareness amongst workers, etc. The Committee strongly feel that such a 
multifaceted approach can go a long way in eradicating the evil completely from 
the entire country. 
 (Reply of the Government) 
The observations of the Committee have been noted. The Central Sector Scheme 
for Rehabilitation of Bonded Labourer-2021 is demand driven in nature where 
funds are provided/reimbursed to the State/UT Governments on receipt of 
proposal from them. Under the Scheme, State/UT Governments are encouraged 
to conduct the following activities in bonded labour prone areas:  
a. Survey of Bonded Labourer for which Rs. 4.50 lakh per sensitive district 
is provided once in three years. 
b. Evaluatory Studies for which Rs. 1.50 lakh is provided (maximum of five 
evaluatory studies per year). 
c. Awareness Generation Program for which Rs. 10 lakh per State per annum 
is provided.  
The Central Government gives 50% of amount in advance and reimburses the 
remaining amount on satisfactory performance and submission of documents. 
Regular meetings are conducted with the State/UTs for effective implementation 
of the Bonded Labour System (Abolition) Act, 1976 as well as Rehabilitation of 
Bonded Labour Scheme. Apart from this, the Ministry is in the process of 
revamping the existing PENCiL Portal into a comprehensive portal for child, 
bonded and women labour for effective implementation of the laws pertaining to 
Bonded Labour. The Agency for revamping the existing portal has been finalized 
& development work has started. 
  
In this meantime, the Ministry has also discussed the matter relating to the 
revamping of PENCIL portal for inclusion of the bonded labourers with the 
States/ UTs on 09.04.2025 for their suggestions/ views on the functional 
requirements relating to the portal shared with them. 
  
The aforesaid Central Sector Scheme for Rehabilitation of Bonded Labourer-
2021 is also due for review for continuation of 2025-26 and the process of 
evaluation is being taken.  After the evaluation, necessary action to strengthen 
the scheme will also be taken accordingly. 
 
(Ministry of Labour & Employment No.G-25015/01/2025-B&A dated 16.06.2025) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 39) 
 
Central Sector Scheme for Rehabilitation of Bonded Labourer – 2021 
 The Committee are concerned to note that out of the 246 bonded labourers 
released/rehabilitated during the financial year 2024-25, there are 119 males, 
51 females and 76 children. The Committee feel that the rehabilitation of these 
bonded labourers particularly women and children requires a multidimentional 
approach that addresses their underlying causes of exploitation. The Committee 
urge the Ministry to provide rescued labourers proper shelter in secure 

44 
 
rehabilitation homes/centres, counseling and emotional support, immediate 
medical assistance, free legal aid and educate them about their legal rights. In 
addition, special care need to be accorded to ensure that the rescued children 
are re-integrated into the formal education system and ample financial support 
for their education be made available. The Committee further exhort that adult 
rescued labour be extended vocational training and skill development to improve 
their employability alongwith job placement support that provide sustainable 
employment opportunities to them. 
 (Reply of the Government) 
The Central Sector Scheme for Rehabilitation of Bonded Labourer-2021 is being 
implemented by the Ministry of Labour and Employment for identification and 
release of bonded labourer. The said scheme not only provides rehabilitation 
assistance to the rescued bonded labour but also focuses on capacity building 
of bonded labourers including children. Point 1(ix) of the Scheme states that 
State Governments/UTs shall be required to concentrate their efforts on the 
following activities: 
a. The District Administration in a convergence approach shall undertake 
measures for providing safe and secure environment for the capacity building of 
child bonded labourers in coordination with all relevant Government 
departments. Accordingly, facilities for, ensuring their proper education, psycho 
social counselling, short stay home till education upto class 12th, skill 
development shall be an integral component of the rehabilitation package. 
b. For addressing the special needs of female freed bonded labourers, State 
Government shall also provide financial and other assistance for marriage, apart 
from other capacity building measures mentioned at sub para (a). 
c. For addressing the needs of the disabled persons, special care should be 
made available by the State as per national policy for disabled people apart from 
other capacity building measures mentioned at sub para (a) and (b). 
d. For adult bonded labour who do not come under any of the above 
categories, employable skill development training shall be a compulsory element 
of rehabilitation. 
The benefits prescribed herein before shall be, in addition to, other cash or non-
cash benefits which a beneficiary under this scheme is entitled to, by or under 
any other scheme or law applicable for the time being in force. 
The committee’s directions are noted for compliance.  
 
(Ministry of Labour & Employment No.G-25015/01/2025-B&A dated 16.06.2025) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 40) 
Labour Statistics 
All India Survey on Migrant Workers (MWS) and All India Survey on 
Domestic Workers (DWS) 
 
 With regard to the status of All India Survey on Migrant Workers (MWS) 
and All India Survey on Domestic Workers (DWS), the Committee were apprised 
that the results of the surveys are being reviewed by a Task Force with the 

45 
 
mandate to vet the methodology and conclusion as well as to give a proper 
perspective. The Task Force is expected to submit its report by end of March 
2025. The Committee expect that the Task Force will submit its Report as per 
deadline of March, 2025 and desire that the outcome of the surveys be made 
available at the earliest so as to provide crucial input for recalibration of policy 
decisions pertaining to Labour Reforms, expansion of social security measures, 
availability of data on employment trends, migration patterns and its impact, 
urban and rural planning as well as gender and vulnerable group support.  
(Reply of the Government) 
 
Task Force has submitted its report containing findings and suggestions for 
improvement by end of March 2025. The report is under consideration in the 
Ministry. 
Observations of the Committee noted. 
 
(Ministry of Labour & Employment No.G-25015/01/2025-B&A dated 16.06.2025) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 42) 
Labour & Employment Statistical System (LESS) 
 (b) Funds allocation and utilization 
 The Committee note that an allotment of Rs. 50.00 crore was made as BE 
for 2024-25, however, the allocation was reduced drastically at the RE stage to 
Rs. 26.58 crore and even against this considerably reduced RE, only Rs. 8.80 
crore has been utilised till 20.02.2025 leaving a shortfall of Rs. 17.78 crore viz. 
66.00% of RE. The Committee have been apprised that a major portion (35%) of  
the total funds allocated under the LESS scheme are for the SC & ST and North 
East components, which cannot be utilised as scheme is not beneficiary oriented.  
The Committee do not find any justification for continuation of the Scheme 
and allocation of funds, which is not beneficiary oriented. The Committee call 
upon the Ministry to take immediate measures and ensure that there is no 
compromise with the funds allocated for the benefit of SC, ST and those 
belonging to NER. 
 (Reply of the Government) 
Observations of the Committee are duly noted. 
 
(Ministry of Labour & Employment No.G-25015/01/2025-B&A dated 16.06.2025) 
(Revised reply of the Government) 
Main activities under the LESS scheme are to collect and compile statistics on 
prices, labour, surveys etc. These statistics have pan India utility. The Consumer 
Price Index for Industrial Workers is used for determination of dearness 
allowances of government employees and workers in organised sector, price 
adjustment in business & individual work contracts. The Consumer price Index 
for Agricultural & Rural Labourers is used for revision of wages under MNREGA 

46 
 
by Ministry of Rural Development, updating of cooking cost under PM POSHAN 
scheme by Ministry of Education, fixation of Minimum Support Price by 
Commission of Agricultural Costs & Prices. Benefits of these statistics 
encompass entire sections of population and areas.  As guided by the Committee, 
the steps taken by the Ministry for utilising funds earmarked for the North 
Eastern Regions, SC and ST component include increase in centres for collection 
of data from such areas, undertaking focused surveys after approval, capacity 
building of officers from NER regions on labour statistics, strengthening of office 
in NER region. 
The Ministry is examining upward revision of the income ceiling for the revised scheme 
under preparation for extension in the next financial cycle. 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 43) 
Employees’ State Insurance Corporation (ESIC) 
(a) Setting up of 10 new Medical Colleges 
 The Committee were apprised that establishment of 10 new Medical 
Colleges in 09 States and 01 Union Territory (NCT of Delhi) has been approved 
in the 194th ESI Corporation Meeting held on 08.10.2024 for which essentiality 
certificate and Consent of Affiliation have been received for all the locations. 
Application has been submitted to National Medical Commission (NMC) for Letter 
of Permission. 
 
The Committee appreciate the efforts being made by the Ministry/ESIC for 
setting up new medical colleges and emphasize that the proposed 10 new Medical 
Colleges be established and operationalised in a time bound manner. The 
Committee further desire that efforts be made to setup Medical Colleges, in a 
phased manner, in those States/UTs which do not have any Medical College. 
 (Reply of the Government) 
It is submitted that efforts are underway to establish 10 new medical colleges in 
a time-bound manner. Already existing land is available at Andheri, 
Basaidarapur, Naroda, Bapunagar, and Indore. In the remaining locations viz. 
Guwahati-Beltola, Noida, Varanasi, Jaipur, Ludhiana, and Ranchi-efforts are 
being made for acquisition of land from the state Govt. Furthermore, measures 
are being taken to streamline the projects and facilitate their timely 
implementation.  
 
Setting up of medical colleges is being considered in accordance to ESIC 
and NMC norms. The upgradation of the ESIC Hospitals by establishing PG 
Courses (MD/MS or DNB) is also being undertaken. 
 
(Ministry of Labour & Employment No.G-25015/01/2025-B&A dated 16.06.2025) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 44) 

47 
 
Employees’ State Insurance Corporation (ESIC) 
 (b) Changes in the norms effected to improve services of ESIC in the 
North-Eastern States 
The Committee note all one-doctor dispensaries will be upgraded to two-
doctor dispensary with a minimum criterion of 1,000 Insured Persons, in the 
Northeast Region including Sikkim. Further, the catchment area for 
establishment and upgradation of health facilities have been increased or kept 
fluid in order to enable clubbing of 2-3 or more districts in one catchment area, 
wherever the time taken for commuting to the Dispensary (HUB) from the 
adjoining district (SPOKE) is up to 3 hours/up to 100 kms.  
The Committee appreciate the efforts being made to facilitate enhancing 
medical facilities in NER and impress upon the Ministry/ESIC to upgrade 
infrastructure/ equipments and fill up vacancies of Doctors, Nurses and 
Paramedical staff in Hospitals/Dispensaries of ESIC across the country and 
particularly in NER. 
 (Reply of the Government) 
ESIC has issued necessary instructions on 24.06.2024 for upgrading all the ESI 
run one doctor dispensaries to two doctor dispensaries with a view to strengthen 
the primary care services and designate these dispensaries as hub facilities to 
provide medical services. It also includes reducing the threshold limit of Insured 
Persons due to low population density in order to improve the doctor-patient 
ratio. 
 
Two 100 bedded hospitals have been approved to be run by ESIC in NER 
at 
 1. Shyamli bazaar, Agartala,Tripura 
 2. ⁠Rangpo, Sikkim. 
 
Seven new 2 doctor dispensaries in Assam are approved by clubbing of 2-3 or 
more districts in one catchment area, wherever the time taken for commuting to 
the Dispensary (HUB) from the adjoining district (SPOKE) is up to 3 hours/up to 
100 kms.They are in the districts as given below:- 
1.Kokrajhar 
2.Nalbari 
3.Kamroop 
4.Hailakandi 
5.Nagaon 
6.Shibsagar 
7.Dhemji 
Additionally, ESIC has   approved a policy titled “The provision of Medical 
Services to ESIC beneficiaries in non-implemented, partially implemented 
districts and Un-served Areas through state PHCs and CHCs” in February 
2025. 
The integration of Employees’ State Insurance Corporation (ESIC) services with 
state health infrastructure aims to provide comprehensive medical care to 
beneficiaries, leveraging state-run PHCs and CHCs. It targets non-implemented 

48 
 
or underserved districts lacking ESIC/ESIS facilities & may also be utilised for 
implementation of new areas in NE States. 
The policy defines care levels, with primary services like OPD consultations, 
diagnostics, pharmacy, and medical certification at notified PHCs, and 
secondary care at CHCs, ESIC/ESIS hospitals, or empanelled PMJAY hospitals. 
Referrals to tertiary care follow a defined pathway based on facility proximity and 
availability. Facilities are selected based on proximity to insured persons, ideally 
within 8–10 km. 
 
Operationally, the policy mandates assessing and notifying PHCs/CHCs. A 
dedicated ESIC Mitra facilitates registration, certification, grievance redressal, 
and IT support.  
 
Section 15 of the policy : “Special Considerations for North East/Hilly 
Areas” states: “Need for flexibility in the norms for number of IPs required for 
dispensaries in hilly or difficult-to-access areas based upon the regional needs 
to be assessed by the concerned Regional Directors and the Zonal Medical 
commissioner will approve such relaxations needed in the specific conditions”.  
 
Implementation of the CHC/PHC policy requires a Memorandum of 
Understanding (MoU) between ESIC and state governments, ensuring clarity on 
roles, responsibilities, and operational frameworks to enhance healthcare access 
for ESIC beneficiaries. The field offices have been advised for identification of 
PHCs/CHCs and to take up the matter with the respective State Govt. for the 
signing of the MoU. 
 
To strengthen the medical services in Northeastern States, the ESIC has given 
approval for 06 DCBOs out of which Champhai &Lawngtlai in Mizoram and 
Nongstine & Khylirihat in Meghalaya have been made operational. For the 
DCBOs at Jowai & Tura in Meghalaya the process of hiring of premises is being 
undertaken. 
 
The recruitment of doctors, nursing officers and paramedical staff is a 
continuous process and is routinely held by ESIC. Following steps have been 
taken for filling up vacancies in ESIC Medical 
Colleges/Hospitals/Dispensaries/DCBOs across the country including those 
located in NER:  
• The recruitment examination on 1930 posts of Nursing Officers through 
UPSC and on 573 posts through NORCET, AIIMS has already been 
conducted.  
• The ESIC has finally selected 388 candidates for the post of IMO Grade-II 
through the UPSC CMS Examination disclosure list for 2022 & 2023. 
• The interview for selection of 287 Assistant Professors is being held from 
22.05.2025 to 28.06.2025. 
• The advertisement for 558 posts of specialists already advertised with 
closing date of 02.06.2025. 
•  The ESIC is also conducting the recruitment of 1206 para medical Group 
‘C’ post through Combined Recruitment Examination (CRE)- 2024 being 
conducted by AIIMS. 
 

49 
 
(Ministry of Labour & Employment No.G-25015/01/2025-B&A dated 16.06.2025) 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 34 of Chapter-I) 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 45) 
Employees’ State Insurance Corporation (ESIC) 
 (c)  Availability of ESI Hospital facilities to the Tea Plantation Workers. 
The Committee note that ESI Act is not applicable to plantation workers as the 
plantation workers are covered under a separate legislation namely ‘The 
Plantations Labour (PL) Act, 1951’ which regulates the conditions of work in 
plantations and provides for the welfare of plantation labour. The Plantations 
Labour Act requires the employers to provide the workers with housing, medical 
facilities, sickness and maternity benefits and other forms of social security 
measures. However, as per First Schedule of Code on Social Security, 2020, an 
employer of a plantation, may opt for application of ESIC facility in respect of the 
plantation by giving willingness to the Corporation, where the benefits available 
to the employees are better than what the employer is providing to them. The 
Code on Social Security, 2020 is yet to be implemented. 
The Committee observe that the Tea plantation workers face several 
occupational health issues viz., respiratory diseases, arthritis, skin diseases 
vector-borne diseases, malnutrition, pesticide poisoning, etc. The Committee call 
upon the Ministry to ensure that periodic inspections are carried out by the 
officials of the Ministry along with the employer of Tea Plantation to check the 
functioning of Clinics/health care facilities provided by the employers and also 
to ensure that all the basic medical facilities are made available to these workers. 
The Committee also feel that feedback be taken from the workers to understand 
their needs/grievances and also to improve health care facilities. 
 (Reply of the Government) 
The plantations workers are not within the purview of ESIC. The existing legal 
provisions do not mandate for inspection of plantation units by the ESIC. 
 
(Ministry of Labour & Employment No.G-25015/01/2025-B&A dated 16.06.2025) 
(Revised reply of the Government) 
 
The Code on Social Security, 2020 has come into force from 21.11.2025. As per 
the First Schedule of the Code on Social Security, employers of plantations at 
places where the Central Govt. has notified that ESI contribution from employers 
and employees shall be payable and where ESI benefits available to the 
employees are better than what the employer is providing to them, can now opt 

50 
 
for the application of the ESI Scheme to their plantation by giving willingness to 
the ESI Corporation.  
Thus, once the ESI Scheme is made applicable to a plantation, the employees of 
that plantation will become eligible for ESI benefits including medical care. 
 
(Ministry of Labour & Employment No.G-25015/01/2025-B&A dated 
16.12.2025) 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 46) 
Employees’ State Insurance Corporation (ESIC) 
 (d). Convergence of Pradhan Mantri Jan Arogya Yojana (PM-JAY) with 
ESIC. 
 The Committee note that a decision has been taken to converge Pradhan 
Mantri Jan Arogya Yojana (PM-JAY) with ESIC whereby the ESIC beneficiaries 
will have access to approx. 30,000 new hospitals and any person can avail 
facilities in ESIC Hospitals. The Ministry have informed that draft SOPs on 
modalities of convergence are ready. Further, the convergence will be through 
the digital platform of the NHA and requires technical convergence between the 
HIS/ERP application of ESIC and NHA and, for the purpose, the MoU is under 
examination and the convergence programme shall be launched shortly. 
The Committee appreciate the convergence of PM-JAY with ESIC for its 
potential to improve healthcare access and efficiency and recommend that 
convergence programme be launched at the earliest and efforts be made for 
leveraging of underutilized healthcare facilities under PM-JAY to provide full-
fledged services to the ESIC beneficiaries.  
 (Reply of the Government) 
Employees State Insurance Corporation (ESIC) is integrating with Ayushman 
Bharat Pradhan Mantri Jan Arogya Yojana (AB-PMJAY) to provide 
comprehensive, cashless medical care to over 14.4 crore beneficiaries, including 
3.5 crore insured persons. This convergence will allow ESIC beneficiaries to 
receive treatment at more than 30,000 empaneled hospitals across India, 
including emergency care and referrals for unavailable services. Additionally, 
PMJAY beneficiaries will also receive cashless treatment in ESIC/ESIS hospitals. 
This integration aims to improve healthcare access and quality for both ESIC 
and PMJAY beneficiaries across India. 
To enable seamless integration with AB-PMJAY, ESIC has linked its Dhanwantri 
application with NHA’s BIS and TMS systems, creating a digitally integrated 
referral and claim processing system. PMJAY hospitals can verify ESIC 
beneficiaries via NHA system, modify treatment packages online for quicker 
approvals, and process claims end-to-end through the TMS portal, ensuring 
faster, smoother treatment and payment. 

51 
 
A pilot trial is being conducted at ESIC Hospital, Bapunagar, Beltola & 
Gurugram for system’s functionality and workflow validation. The insight gained 
at the pilot are being analysed and utilised, for technical, operational 
improvement and modifications, if required, to ensure system is robust and 
capable enough to handle the anticipated volume of users to deliver seamless 
and reliable services to ESIC beneficiaries for the planned Pan-India integration. 
 
(Ministry of Labour & Employment No.G-25015/01/2025-B&A dated 16.06.2025) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 47) 
Employees’ State Insurance Corporation (ESIC) 
 (e) New Hospitals and Dispensaries 
The Committee note that to improve the health services infrastructure, 
ESIC has approved the establishment /construction of a total of 104 new 
hospital projects and currently 16 new hospitals are under construction across 
the country. 
The Committee have been apprised that frequent review of on-going 
projects are done at the regional level in close coordination with construction 
agencies. Project Monitoring Unit (PMU) has also been operationalized at regional 
level to monitor all the construction projects and ensure their timely completion. 
At the ESIC Headquarters level, regular interaction and review meetings with the 
construction agencies are conducted under the chairmanship of DG, ESIC. 
Furthermore, Construction Sub-Committee meeting is regularly conducted to 
supervise and monitor construction activities. 
While appreciating the monitoring mechanism put in place by the 
Ministry/ESIC at Regional and Headquarters level, the Committee, impress upon 
the Ministry/ESIC to fix targets, chalk-out monthly plan and gainfully utilize the 
earmarked funds for the purpose and ensure that the hospitals are 
operationalized in a time bound manner so as to meet the present as well as 
future requirements. This is essential as the coverage of ESI is to expand pan 
India after implementation of the Social Security Code, 2020.  
(Reply of the Government) 
 
It is submitted that a total of 56 projects are currently under construction, 
comprising 23 new hospitals, 17 hospital modernization projects, and 16 
dispensaries and other buildings. Each project is assigned clear milestones with 
defined outcomes and accountability frameworks, enabling real-time monitoring 
and timely course correction wherever necessary. Monitoring of capital works 
exceeding 100 crores is being undertaken through the PMG portal to ensure 
enhanced oversight and prompt resolution of implementation issues. In addition 
to above monitoring, specific focus is being placed on physical and financial 
progress, manpower planning, and coordination with local authorities for 
clearances and utilities. Furthermore, special emphasis is being laid on the 
phased and need-based release of funds, linked to project progress. This 

52 
 
approach aims to prevent both underutilization and idle parking of funds, 
thereby improving expenditure efficiency. 
 
(Ministry of Labour & Employment No.G-25015/01/2025-B&A dated 16.06.2025) 
 
Recommendation (Para Nos. 48 & 49) 
 
Employees’ Provident Fund Organisation (EPFO) 
(a) Employees’ Pension Scheme, 1995 (EPS, 1995) 
48. The Committee note that a Grant-in-Aid is provided by the Central 
Government under Minimum Pension Scheme towards re-imbursement of 
difference of amount between minimum pension of Rs. 1000/- (announced by 
the Govt. of India) and actual member pension under EPS-1995 (if it is less then 
Rs. 1000/-) w.e.f. 01.09.2014. The Committee have been apprised that in respect 
of ‘Government support towards minimum pension’, the RE of Rs. 985 crore is 
expected to be utilized during 2024-25 and BE for 2025-26 is Rs. 1000 crore. 
The Committee find that during the last three years, the average Government’s 
support towards minimum pension is approx  
Rs. 980 crore each year.  
Further, during evidence, the Committee were apprised that the Ministry 
have taken up the matter regarding revision of minimum pension of EPS, 1995 
Pensioners on a number of occasions with the Ministry of Finance and their reply 
is awaited. The Committee have also been apprised that the proposal for 
increasing the minimum pension under EPS, 1995 from Rs. 1000 to Rs. 2000 
per month by providing additional budgetary support, was not approved by the 
Ministry of Finance in the year 2020 and it was also a part of Ministry’s pre-
budget proposal in FY 2024-25.  
 
In this context, the Committee in their 1st Report (18th Lok Sabha) on 
Demands for Grants (2024-25) of the Ministry had recommended that 
considering the manifold increase in the cost of living in 2024 vis-à-vis 2014 and 
other relevant factors, as put before the Committee by various Stakeholders 
during their oral evidences held in the year 2023, there is a need to seriously 
look into the aspect of considering an upward revision of this amount. The 
Committee had further observed that notwithstanding the financial implications 
involved, the Ministry/EPFO need to take up this significant task 
sympathetically with a sense of urgency in the larger interest of the effected 
pensioners and their family members so as to arrive at an amicable solution. The 
Committee reiterate their earlier recommendation.  
49. Further, the Committee express their strong displeasure about non-
furnishing of information regarding action taken by the Ministry on the status of 
representations received from various stakeholders in the matter relating to 
increase in minimum pension despite the fact that the Ministry were specifically 
asked to provide these details, which  indicates a casual approach in responding 
to the information sought by a Parliamentary Committee. The Committee, 
therefore, call upon the Ministry to exercise due diligence and caution in future 
in respect of the information sought by the Committee. 

53 
 
 (Reply of the Government) 
The EPS, 1995 is a “Defined Contribution-Defined Benefit” Social Security 
Scheme. The corpus of the Employees’ Pension Fund is made up of (i) 
contribution by the employer @ 8.33 per cent of wages; and (ii) contribution from 
Central Government through budgetary support @ 1.16 per cent of wages up to 
an amount of Rs.15,000/- per month. All benefits under the scheme are paid 
out of such accumulations. The fund is valued annually as mandated under 
paragraph 32 of the EPS, 1995 and additional reliefs paid if the position of the 
fund so permits. Since the year 2000(except 2015), the fund ran into deficit and 
no additional reliefs could be paid. 
  
However, the Government, for the first time, in the year 2014, provided a 
minimum pension of Rs. 1000 per month to the pensioners under the EPS, 1995 
by providing budgetary support, which was in addition to the budgetary support 
of 1.16 per cent of wages provided annually towards EPS to Employees’ Provident 
Fund Organization (EPFO).  
 
This Ministry had made a request to the Ministry of Finance for upward revision 
of the Minimum Pension under EPS-95 scheme. However, during May, 2023, 
Ministry of Finance conveyed its disagreement to the said request of MoL&E.  The 
same proposal was made part of all the pre-budget proposals, since then.  
 
Further, Ministry of Labour & Employment is again processing the matter for 
approaching Ministry of Finance for revising the amount of Minimum Pension.   
The observations of the Committee are duly noted. 
(Ministry of Labour & Employment No.G-25015/01/2025-B&A dated 16.06.2025) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 50) 
 
Employees’ Provident Fund Organisation (EPFO) 
 (b) Third Party Evaluation of EPS, 1995 
 
 The Committee note that the Ministry have awarded the contract for 
conducting Third Party Evaluation of the EPS 95 Scheme through RFP Route 
and the exercise is currently underway. In response to a specific query, the 
Ministry have further stated that in so far as conducting such evaluation in the 
past is concerned, as per available information, no such evaluation was 
conducted earlier. Observing that the Third Party Evaluation of the Scheme is 
being conducted after 30 years of its introduction, the Committee strongly 
recommend that the exercise be completed within a definite timeframe, 
preferably by the end of the year 2025 so as to assess effectiveness, sustainability 
and scope for further improvement, etc. of the Scheme. The Committee would 
like to be apprised of the progress made in this regard. 
 
 
 

54 
 
 
(Reply of the Government) 
The report of Third Party Evaluation of EPS-95 has been received on 30.05.2025, 
which is under active examination/consideration of the Ministry in consultation 
with EPFO.  
 
(Ministry of Labour & Employment No.G-25015/01/2025-B&A dated 16.06.2025) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 51) 
Non-Deposit of Contribution of Tea Plantation Workers of West Bengal 
 
 The Committee are deeply concerned to note that there are a number of 
PF defaulters particularly at Jalpaiguri PF Regional office who have defaulted in 
remitting PF payment of the workers and simultaneously defaulting on their own 
contribution as well. The Committee have been apprised that inquiries under 
section 7A of EPF&MP Act,1952 have been initiated against 100 such 
establishments and the total dues determined during the last three years is Rs. 
68.67 crores. In addition, 15 FIRs have been filed in the last three years.  
The Committee are of the considered view that PF defaults by 
establishments not only jeopardise the financial security and also erode the trust 
of the workers, besides highlighting systemic issues within establishment. The 
Committee, therefore, strongly recommend to buttress enforcement mechanisms 
viz., conduct of regular audits, stricter penalties for non-compliance and swifter 
legal proceedings, etc. and earnestly feel that these measures, if implemented in 
letter and spirit, will minimize the recurrence of such defaults.   
 (Reply of the Government) 
The directions of the committee to strengthen the enforcement mechanisms by 
way of conducting regular audits, stricter penalties for non-compliance and 
swifter legal proceedings, etc. are noted for strict compliance. 
 
(Ministry of Labour & Employment No.G-25015/01/2025-B&A dated 16.06.2025) 
(Revised reply of the Government) 
The directions of the committee to strengthen the enforcement mechanisms by 
way of conducting regular audits, stricter penalties for non-compliance and 
swifter legal proceedings, etc. are noted for strict compliance. 
The total number of 7A proceedings initiated by RO Jalpaiguri in respect of Tea 
Plantation establishments during the year 2024–25 is 09 and for the year 2025–
26 (till 30.11.2025) is 10. 
The number of cases under section 7A that have been concluded by RO 
Jalpaiguri in respect of Tea Plantation establishments during the year 2024–25 
is 32 and for the year 2025–26 (till 30.11.2025) is 10. 

55 
 
The total number of members engaged in Tea Plantation establishments in the 
Jalpaiguri Region during the year 2024–25 is UAN – 398953 and for the year 
2025–26 (till 30.11.2025) is UAN – 398943. 
The total recovery made by RO Jalpaiguri in respect of Tea Plantation 
establishments during the year 2024–25 is Rs.3.48 crore and for the year 2025–
26 (till 30.11.2025) is Rs.13.54 crore. 
(Ministry of Labour & Employment No.G-25015/01/2025-B&A dated 16.12.2025) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 52) 
 
Non-Deposit of Contribution of Tea Plantation Workers of West Bengal 
 
         Further, in response to a pointed query regarding involvement of middle 
men/agents for settlement of claim/retirement benefits of Tea Plantation 
Workers at Regional Office, Jalpaiguri, the Committee have been apprised that a 
committee has been constituted at the Zonal Office level with representatives 
from Vigilance and Audit of EPFO to review the claims disposal and rejection at 
RO Jalpaiguri. The Committee would like to be apprised of the outcome of the 
inquiry. 
 
 (Reply of the Government) 
Following actions have been taken on the observations of the committee 
constituted by Zonal office, Kolkata:-  
1. Lack of awareness among tea garden workers and employers was a key reason 
for their reliance on middlemen. Accordingly, Regional Office Jalpaiguri has 
initiated awareness campaigns through pamplets, banners, and local media 
(both Hindi and Bengali) to make both employees and employers aware of the 
provisions/processes under the EPF & MP Act & Scheme, promoting direct 
interaction with EPFO and encouraging the use of its digital services.  
 
2. The Officers and Staffs in the Accounts and Pension section have been 
sensitized to process claims diligently, especially death and EDLI claims, and 
avoid piecemeal objections. The need for duly verifying the genuineness of the 
death certificates has been reemphasized.  
 
3. In case of any doubt/ discrepancies in the EDLI claim and death certificates 
etc. the services of Enforcement Officers are being utilized for field- level 
verification. 
 
4. Complete reshuffling of staff in the Accounts branch has been carried out by 
Regional Office Jalpaiguri. 
 
(Ministry of Labour & Employment No.G-25015/01/2025-B&A dated 16.06.2025) 
 
 

56 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 53) 
Directorate General of Mines Safety (DGMS) 
 The Committee note that inspection of mines are generated online through 
randomized, risk-based inspection system on Shram Suvidha portal. The 
modalities of “Risk-based inspection System” are based on various pre-defined 
parameters like category of mine, risks involved etc. to ensure transparency as 
well as accountability. The portal also facilitates online intimation to the mine 
management regarding the scheduled inspection of the mine. Besides, 
Inspections are also undertaken in case of complaints, accidents, dangerous 
occurrences or any other activity.  
 The Committee have been apprised that during inspection, the officials of 
the Directorate General of Mines Safety (DGMS) oversee the status of the 
compliance of the provisions of the Mines Act 1952, the rules and regulations 
made thereunder, including basic safety facility viz. supply/use of Personal 
Protective Equipments (PPEs), viz. Helmet, Dust respirator, Protective footwear 
etc., workplace safety, medical examination including training to the persons 
employed in mines, etc. Accordingly, based on the observations, mine 
managements are advised for resolution of deficiencies and compliances are 
followed up accordingly. For repetitive and serious violations, managements are 
issued improvement notices to comply with the provisions within the stipulated 
timeline. For urgent and immediate danger, prohibitory orders are issued. 
Punitive actions are also initiated where there were serious contraventions or 
major violations under provisions of the Mines Act 1952, thereby leading to 
prosecutions as applicable in the law. The Committee note that the number of 
inspections conducted during 2022, 2023, and 2024 are 8310, 9008 & 8385; the 
number of Enquiries are 1400, 1284 & 1557; the number of Improvement notices 
issued are 127, 233 & 256; and the number of prohibitory order issued are 216, 
330 & 348 whereas the prosecutions launched were 24, 36 and 34 respectively, 
which appear to be on a lower side vis-à-vis the number of prohibitory orders 
issued. 
 The Committee are of the considered view that the mining sector involves 
hazardous and even life-threatening situations. In the wake of the fact that a 
mere negligence can cause irreversible injuries, if not casualties, the Committee 
firmly opine that inspections are highly mandatory to safeguard mine workers 
and promote safe mining practices. The Committee, therefore, strongly 
recommend to prioritize frequent inspections in high risk mining areas so as to 
minimize accidents, thereby saving valuable lives of mine workers.  
 (Reply of the Government) 
Inspections in mines by officers of the Directorate General of Mines Safety are 
carried out online through the Shram Suvidha Portal (SSP). The Inspections are 
generated in randomized manner based on the Risk rating of the mines. The 
algorithm of the Shram Suvidha Portal has been designed in such manner so as 
to give higher priority and frequency to inspection in mines which are more prone 
to risk of accident. 

57 
 
To prioritise such risk-based inspections, the SSP evaluates the mines on the 
basis of following criteria: 
(i) Major Risk Category, where crítical hazards can cause major accidents such 
as fires, explosions, water inrush, ground movement, etc.  
(ii) Operational Risk Category, where risks associated with the different 
operations in the mine causes accidents, 
(iii) Historical Risk Category, where past history of the mine and attitude of 
management is considered. 
 
Each parameter within these categories is scored based on its risk level. The 
combined score of a mine helps identify how risky the mine is. Mines with higher 
scores are allotted more frequent inspections. This system helps to priorities 
inspections, focusing more on mines having higher risks and safeguard mine 
workers & promote safe mining practices 
 
Additionally, there is also provision for inspections in certain specific situations 
like Accidents, Dangerous Occurrences, Complaints, Government directives and 
other emergencies. 
 
DGMS officers point out various contraventions to the management and also 
advise them on ways to address deficiencies during inspections itself. These are 
followed up with issuing of violation letters, improvement notices and temporary 
stoppage of mines, if required.  
 
This results in ensuring compliances of safety provisions in most of the cases. It 
is only in very few cases that the matter reaches prosecution stage.  
 
Besides above, proactive activities like theme-based Safety Awareness 
Programmes camps in mine clusters, on spot briefing about best practices during 
inspections, Occupational Health Awareness programmes and Mock drills to 
review the emergency preparedness are also carried out regularly. 
 
(Ministry of Labour & Employment No.G-25015/01/2025-B&A dated 16.06.2025) 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 37 of Chapter-I) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 55) 
G20 Feasibility Study on Development of International Reference 
Classification  
 
  The Committee note that during India's G20 Presidency in 2023, G20 leaders 
committed to establishing well-managed, regular, and skills-based migration 
pathways. As part of this effort, they agreed to explore the development of an 
international reference classification of occupations based on skill and qualification 
requirements. As informed by the Ministry, the International Labour Organization 
(ILO) and the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) will 
conduct a feasibility study on this, with a completion target of 2026 and annual 
progress updates. The Ministry have further stated that this classification will help 

58 
 
Indian youth bridge global skill shortages by enhancing cross-country comparability, 
benchmarking, and mutual recognition of skills and qualifications. Observing that, 
moving forward in the direction of attainment of the desired objectives, India is signing 
an MoU with ILO to contribute its pledged funds and support the study, and taking 
into consideration the massive advantages that are likely to be garnered by the Indian 
youth to exploit employment opportunities in the foreign markets, the Committee call 
upon the Ministry to take all viable measures and contribute towards timely 
development of an international reference classification of occupations based on skill 
and qualification requirements. 
 (Reply of the Government) 
 
 The G20 leaders during India's G20 Presidency of 2023 recognized that 
well-integrated and adequately skilled workers benefit origin and 
destination countries alike, and committed to working towards ensuring 
well-managed, regular and skills-based migration pathways. 
 In this direction, they committed to consider development of an 
international reference classification of occupations by skill and 
qualification requirements. 
 ILO and Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD), 
agreed to carry out a feasibility study on development of the reference 
classification and update progress annually. 
 The feasibility study requires new research and analysis as well as 
extensive consultations by ILO and OECD. The cost estimated by ILO and 
OECD for conducting the study is Euro 800,000 (₹. 7.96 crores approx). 
 Extensive outreach for garnering financial support for the project was 
made during Employment Working Group meetings organized under the 
Brazilian G20 Presidency of 2024. 
 Germany has expressed willingness to financially contribute to the project 
and pledged Euro 100,000 (₹99.56 Lakhs approx). ILO also expressed 
willingness to financially contribute Euro 50,000  (₹49.78 Lakhs approx).  
 As the proposed feasibility study is an outcome of India's G20 Presidency 
and promises to facilitate India's youth in securing quality overseas 
employment, India pledged to contribute rest of the amount i.e. Euro 
650,000 (6.47 crores approx) in a phased manner (as per the concept 
note at Annexure-A). 
 For contributing the pledged funds to ILO, India is entering into an MoU 
with ILO with proposal for completion of the major outputs by March, 
2027. 
 The financial commitment of Euro 650,000 for the proposed feasibility 
study on development of international reference classification is subject to 
approval of the Cabinet note. 
 
(Ministry of Labour & Employment No.G-25015/01/2025-B&A dated 16.06.2025) 
****** 
  

59 
 
 
CHAPTER-III 
 
OBSERVATIONS/ RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLY 
                                                                                               
Recommendation (Para No. 2) 
Overall Financial Performance 
 The Committee find that the pace of expenditure during the first two 
quarters of 2024-25 is more or less as per Quarterly Expenditure Plan, however, 
during the third & fourth quarter, the expenditure is less due to several reasons 
including non-approval of ELIS, for which the Ministry persistently followed up 
from time to time. The Committee have observed that in some of the Schemes 
the guidelines issued by the Ministry of Finance regarding ceiling of expenditure 
in the last quarter and the last month have not been strictly adhered to by the 
Ministry during 2024-25. The Committee call upon the Ministry to ensure that 
these guidelines are followed in letter and spirit in 2025-26 and, thereafter, also. 
(Reply of the Government) 
Details of quarter wise QEPs and expenditure in FY 2024-25 are as under:  
(Fig. in Crore) 
QEP Ist  Exp  Ist 
Quarter 
QEP 
IInd  
Exp  IInd 
Quarter 
QEP 
IIIrd  
Exp  
IIIrd 
Quarter 
QEP 
IVth 
Exp  IVth 
Quarter 
3103.82 2947.16 3235.32 2755.62 3127.21 2839.87 13065.
12* 2893.84 
* On account of anticipated expenditure under ELI. 
As per the guidelines issued by Department of Economic Affairs (DEA), MoF vide 
OM dated 25.05.2022 regarding cash management in the Central Government,  
33% and 15% of expenditure of the Budget Estimates during a Financial Year 
shall be permissible in the last quarter and last month of the financial year. This 
limit is seen at Grant level. The actual Expenditure incurred by the Ministry 
during the last quarter of FY 2024-25 and the month of March, 25 stood at 
12.84% and 4.27% respectively of the total Budget Estimates for FY 2024-25. 
Thus, it may be seen that the Ministry has not exceeded the limit of the 
expenditure for the last quarter and last month of the FY at the Grant level. 
Further, any instances for exceeding expenditure in specific object heads in last 
quarter and month of the financial year 2024-25 is carefully monitored and 
allowed only on justified grounds are as given below: 
 
PMSYM: It is a demand driven scheme and the Budget provision of this scheme 
was enhanced from Rs.177.24 Cr to Rs.242.73 Cr in RE 24-25 for making 
payment for GOI Contribution to LIC i.e implementing agency in the last quarter 
of FY 24-25 as per actual demand. 
 

60 
 
LWS:  Expenditure under the Education component was incurred during the last 
quarter, as the demand was received through the NSP portal in the final quarter 
of FY 2024-25. 
 
Accordingly, it is submitted that there has been no breach of the prescribed 
expenditure limits, and the Ministry has adhered strictly to the QEP and MEP as 
laid in the Parliament. In addition to the QEP/MEP mentioned in the Detailed 
Demand for Grants (DDFG), the Ministry has also prepared scheme-wise 
QEP/MEP for effective monitoring of expenditure. Additionally, all scheme 
divisions have been advised to follow the respective QEP/MEP and ensure that 
there is no rush of expenditure in the last quarter and last month. 
 
(Ministry of Labour & Employment No.G-25015/01/2025-B&A dated 16.06.2025) 
Recommendation (Para No. 11) 
National Career Services 
 (e) Job Fairs Organised 
 The Committee are concerned to note that in the 7,337 job fairs organized 
during 2024-25 (as on 31.01.2025) through the NCS Portal in which 37,138  
employers participated, out of 5,68,019 job seekers, who had participated only 
over 1 lakh job seekers were selected i.e. only 18% job seekers were selected. The 
Committee desire that the reasons for such a low placement/selection be 
analysed and corrective measures be taken so as to meet the requirement of 
employers and also to increase the number of selected candidates. 
(Reply of the Government) 
The criteria and the process for selection of candidates in the job fairs varies 
from employer to employer who are participating in the job fairs.  
In order to reduce the skill gap and increase the employability of the jobseekers, 
NCS in collaboration with various Industry partners is providing Skill 
development courses, employability enhancement trainings, digital skills etc. 
which will make them ready for industry identified job roles. 
 
The Committee’s suggestions have been noted for compliance. 
 
(Ministry of Labour & Employment No.G-25015/01/2025-B&A dated 16.06.2025) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 20) 
Pradhan Mantri Shram Yogi Maandhan (PM-SYM) 
 
 The Committee note that as on 31.12.2024, over 45.56 lakh beneficiaries 
have been enrolled under the PM-SYM scheme, excluding bulk enrollment of 
5.06 lakhs beneficiaries for the period of 2019-20.  
 
 

61 
 
(a) Funds allocation and utilization 
 
The Committee note that during 2024-25, the BE of Rs.177.24 crore was 
increased to Rs. 242.73 crore at RE stage, out of which, only Rs. 168.74 crore 
(70%) was utilized, as on 19.02.2025 and Rs. 73.99 crore (30%) are yet to be 
utilised. The Committee have been apprised that BE was increased at RE stage 
on account of Government’s  liability for contribution and it is expected that close 
to the allocation in RE 2024-25 will be utilized. The Committee, thus, find that 
the Ministry have not been able to utilize even the funds of Rs. 177.24 crore as 
per BE. Although the Ministry have assured that they will be able to utilize the 
remaining Rs. 73.99 crore (30%) of enhanced RE of Rs. 243.73 crore in one and 
a half month of the last quarter, the Committee strongly feel that in future, the 
Ministry need to  adhere to the guidelines issued by the Ministry of Finance with 
regard to expenditure ceiling in last quarter and last month of the fiscal. 
(Reply of the Government) 
 
The expenditure during 2024-25 was Rs. 231.50 crore. Observation of the 
Committee is noted for compliance. 
(Ministry of Labour & Employment No.G-25015/01/2025-B&A dated 16.06.2025) 
(Revised reply of the Government) 
The expenditure during 2024-25 was Rs. 231.50 crore against the budget 
allocation of Rs. 242.73 crore. The expenditure incurred in the scheme is as per 
equal matching share of Government of India against the premium deposited by 
the beneficiary during a month. As the expenditure varies from month to month, 
hence the slight difference between actual expenditure and the revised estimate. 
 
(Ministry of Labour & Employment No.G-25015/01/2025-B&A dated 16.12.2025) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 21) 
Pradhan Mantri Shram Yogi Maandhan (PM-SYM) 
(b) Achievement of Physical Targets 
 The Committee note that the target during 2024-25 & 2025-26 is to enroll 
1 lakh beneficiaries each year and the number of registrations during 2024-25 
is 1,17,066. The Committee appreciate that at least during 2024-25, the Ministry 
have been able to achieve physical target and desire that the momentum be kept 
unabated during 2025-26 also. 
 (Reply of the Government) 
Observations of the Committee have been noted and effort will be made to 
achieve the physical targets for the financial year 2025-26 also. 
 
(Ministry of Labour & Employment No.G-25015/01/2025-B&A dated 16.06.2025) 

62 
 
(Revised reply of the Government) 
During the current financial year 61,640 beneficiaries have already registered in 
the PMSYM scheme throughout the country. As this is a voluntary scheme efforts 
are being made through Government mechanism and IEC activities to register 
more beneficiaries in the scheme.  
(Ministry of Labour & Employment No.G-25015/01/2025-B&A dated 16.12.2025) 
Recommendation (Para No. 36) 
Labour Welfare Scheme 
 (c) Funds allocation and utilization 
 The Committee note that during 2024-25, out of the allocation of Rs. 50.68 
crore, only Rs. 14.99 crore (30%) was utilized, as on 15.02.2025 viz. almost 70% 
of the funds allocated were unutilized. On a pointed query, the Committee have 
been apprised that the proposals amounting to Rs. 30.60 crore under LWS 
(Education) and Health are under process and the total expected expenditure 
upto 31st March, 2025 is Rs. 45 crore. The Committee, thus, find that out of 70% 
balance of RE as on 15.02.2025, 60% will be utilized in the last one and half 
month of 2024-25. The Committee strongly feel that in future, the Ministry need 
to  adhere to the guidelines issued by the Ministry of Finance with regard to 
expenditure ceiling of 33% in last quarter and 15% in the last month of the fiscal. 
 (Reply of the Government) 
The expenditure during 2024-25 was Rs 41 cr. Observations of the Committee 
noted for compliance. 
(Ministry of Labour & Employment No.G-25015/01/2025-B&A dated 16.06.2025) 
 
(Revised reply of the Government) 
 
The timeline for LWS (Education) is determined by the National Scholarship 
Portal, which is a common platform for all Ministries and is administered by the 
DBT Mission. As per established practice, the portal opens in June and closes in 
the middle of January of the following year. Expenditure under the Education 
component can be undertaken only after the closure of the portal and completion 
of verification and approval processes. Thus, major expenditure happens in the 
last quarter. 
Under LWS (Health), expenditure is contingent upon the actual footfall of 
beneficiaries, as the component is entirely demand-driven.  
The expenditure ceiling for last quarter and last month is applied on the 
Ministry’s grant as a whole to allow for scheme specific variations. 
 
(Ministry of Labour & Employment No.G-25015/01/2025-B&A dated 16.12.2025) 
 
****** 

63 
 
CHAPTER-IV 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES 
OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
AND WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION 
 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 41) 
Labour & Employment Statistical System (LESS) 
(a) Third Party Evaluation of the Scheme 
 The Committee note that in order to continue Labour & Employment 
Statistical System (LESS) Scheme in next finance commission cycle and critically 
evaluate the activities of Labour Bureau, the Third Party Evaluation of Labour 
and Employment Statistical System (LESS) Scheme has been entrusted to Arun 
Jaitley National Institute of Financial Management (AJNIFM), a Center of 
Excellence under Department of Expenditure, Ministry of Finance in October, 
2024. The Committee have been apprised that the team from AJNIFM visited 
Labour Bureau, Chandigarh and Regional Office, Chennai. Stakeholder 
discussions were also held by AJNIFM with field functionaries, academicians and 
State government departments. The exercise is likely to be completed tentatively 
by end of March, 2025. The Committee expect that the exercise will be completed 
as per stipulated timeline and desire that further follow up action be taken and 
completed in a time bound manner. 
 (Reply of the Government) 
Labour Bureau has engaged AJNIFM, Faridabad for the third- party evaluation 
of LESS. Based on report, follow up action, including extension of LESS, will be 
undertaken. 
 
Observations of the Committee are duly noted. 
 
(Ministry of Labour & Employment No.G-25015/01/2025-B&A dated 16.06.2025) 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 31 of Chapter-I) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 54) 
Indian Labour Conference 
  
 The Committee have been apprised that the 46th Session of Indian Labour 
Conference (ILC) was held in New Delhi on 20-21 July, 2015. The Committee are 
dismayed to note that the reasons for not holding it during the last 10 years and 
the tentative date of its next session have not been conveyed to the Committee 

64 
 
despite being specifically asked to do so. The Ministry have simply stated that 
the Government has been holding tripartite consultations on important labour 
policies/issues from time to time.  
The Committee understand that holding the conference is a critical step 
towards strengthening tripartite mechanisms and fostering social dialogue which 
are essential for addressing the evolving needs of the workforce and ensuring 
equitable economic growth. During evidence before the Committee, the 
representatives of trade unions have expressed their serious concern for not 
holding ILC and have urged to convene the ILC to uphold the traditions of 
tripartism and also to address pressing labour issues. Observing that during the 
last 10 years, many important decisions involving labour issues including 
notification of 4 Labour Codes in the year 2019/20 have been taken, the 
Committee exhort the Ministry to convene the Indian Labour Conference at the 
earliest opportunity in the larger interest of the labour force.  
 (Reply of the Government) 
Observation of the committee has been duly noted. 
 
(Ministry of Labour & Employment No.G-25015/01/2025-B&A dated 16.06.2025) 
(Revised reply of the Government) 
The process of tripartite consultations is being practised as an integral part of 
policy framing on all major policy initiatives of Ministry of Labour & Employment 
in the larger interest of labour force. In this connection Ministry wants to bring 
to the kind notice of the Committee that there have been widespread 
consultations while finalizing all 4 Labour Codes including nine tripartite 
consultations which were undertaken on 10.03.2015, 13.04.2015, 06.05.2015, 
14.07.2015, 06.10.2015, 04.10.2017, 22.11.2018, 27.11.2018 and 05.11.2019 
inviting all Central Trade Unions, Employers Associations and State 
Governments. The stakeholders had participated in the afore-said tripartite 
meetings and gave suggestions on various aspects of Labour Codes. All 4 Labour 
Codes came into effect from 21.11.2025. 
 
Stakeholder consultations is a continuous process and recently a tripartite 
consultation on Draft Shram Shakti Niti 2025-National Labour and Employment 
Policy of India under the Chairmanship of the Hon'ble Minister for Labour and 
Employment was held on 13.11.2025 in New Delhi. 
(Ministry of Labour & Employment No.G-25015/01/2025-B&A dated 16.12.2025) 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 41 of Chapter-I) 
 

65 
 
CHAPTER-V 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES 
OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE INTERIM IN NATURE 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 6) 
National Career Services 
(a) Integration with 30 States for information exchange 
The Committee note that one of the features of the NCS Portal is 
integration with States/UTs for information exchange.  The Committee have been 
apprised that 23 States/UTs have been integrated and 07 States are directly 
using NCS. The Committee have also been apprised that the integration of the 
remaining 6 States/UTs is under process and is likely to be completed by July, 
2025.  The Committee desire that the exercise for integration of the remaining 6 
States be completed as per the laid down timeframe so as to enhance the career 
and employment opportunities of the intended beneficiaries.  The Committee 
further desire that the exercise regarding the linking of overseas jobs on NCS 
Portal be also completed expeditiously.  
 (Reply of the Government) 
Of the remaining six States/UTs, Sikkim is already using NCS directly. The 
integration with Kerala, Ladakh & Daman Diu state has been initiated. Tamil 
Nadu and West Bengal are revamping their portals following which they will be 
ready for integration.  
The direction of the Committee is duly noted. 
 
(Ministry of Labour & Employment No.G-25015/01/2025-B&A dated 16.06.2025) 
Recommendation (Para No. 9) 
National Career Services 
 (d) Setting up of PM e2E (Pradhan Mantri Education to Employment) 
Career Lounges and preparation of uniform guidelines for 
employment portals of the States. 
        The Committee were apprised that the work relating to setting up of 02 
Career Lounges in Model Career Centre with Industry Partnership and 
preparation of uniform guidelines for employment portals of the States is under 
process.  The Ministry have informed that both PM E2E (Pradhan Mantri 
Education to Employment) Career Lounge are set to be launched and make 
operational by March 2025. The Committee trust that the Ministry would meet 
their commitment and both the Career Lounges would become operational in 
March, 2025.   
 

66 
 
 (Reply of the Government) 
An E2E Career Lounge at NICS Noida has been made operational on 1st April 
2025. 
Discussion with various universities and Industry partners is underway to setup 
more E2E Career Lounges in the country in PPP mode. 
 
(Ministry of Labour & Employment No.G-25015/01/2025-B&A dated 16.06.2025) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 10) 
National Career Services 
 (d) Setting up of PM e2E (Pradhan Mantri Education to Employment) 
Career Lounges and preparation of uniform guidelines for 
employment portals of the States. 
 The Committee have also been apprised that the study of employment 
portals of 5 States/UTs has been completed for preparation of uniform guidelines 
and that of the remaining States is likely to be completed by May, 2025.  The 
Committee call upon the Ministry to complete the exercise for study of 
employment portals of the remaining states on priority so as to ensure that the 
uniform guidelines are timely issued and thereafter, implemented in letter and 
spirit by all States/UTs. 
 (Reply of the Government) 
Some more State/ private portals are also being studied. Work on drafting 
Uniform guidelines is also being undertaken simultaneously. 
 
(Ministry of Labour & Employment No.G-25015/01/2025-B&A dated 16.06.2025) 
 
 
New Delhi; 
24 March 2026 
 3  Chaitra, 1948 (Saka) 
BASAVARAJ BOMMAI 
CHAIRPERSON, 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR, 
TEXTILES AND SKILL DEVELOPMENT 
  

67 
 
 
Appendix- I 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR, TEXTILES AND SKILL 
DEVELOPMENT (2025-26) 
 
Minutes of the Ninth Sitting of the Committee 
 
The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 24 March, 2026 from 1500 hrs. 
to 1615 hrs. in Samanvay 5, Parliament House,  New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
Shri Basavaraj Bommai-  Chairperson 
 MEMBERS  
 LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri G. M. Harish Balayogi 
3. Shri Chandra Prakash Choudhary 
4. Shri G. Lakshminarayana 
5. Shri Rudra Narayan Pany 
6. Shri Tanuj Punia 
7. Shri Pradeep Purohit 
8. Shri Raja Ram Singh 
9. Shri Chavan Ravindra Vasantrao 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
10. Shri Govindbhai Laljibhai Dholakia 
11. Shri Rajendra Gehlot 
12. Dr. Syed Naseer Hussain 
13. Shri Maharaja Sanajaoba Leishemba 
14. Shri Gurwinder Singh Oberoi 
 
      
  

68 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Mukesh Kumar Sharma - Joint Secretary   
2. Ms. K. Muanniang Tunglut  - Director 
3. Ms. Mili Dinesh    - Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri S. Lalengzau Ngaihte  -  Deputy Secretary 
5. Ms. Shilpa Kant    - Under Secretary 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the Sitting 
of the Committee, convened for consideration and adoption of the following 
Reports on:  
(i)  Action Taken by the Government on the 
observations/recommendations contained in the Fourth Report 
(18th Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants (2025-26)’ pertaining to 
the Ministry of Labour & Employment; 
(ii)  Action Taken by the Government on the 
observations/recommendations contained in the Fifth Report (18th 
Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants (2025-26)’ pertaining to the 
Ministry of Textiles; and  
(iii)  Action Taken by the Government on the 
observations/recommendations contained in the Sixth Report (18th 
Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants (2025-26)’ pertaining to the 
Ministry of Skill Development and Entrepreneurship. 
 3. Giving an overview of the important 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Draft Reports, the 
Chairperson solicited the views/ suggestions of the Members.  
4. The Committee, then, took up the Draft Reports one by one for 
consideration and after some discussions, the draft Reports were adopted 
by the Committee with some modifications. 
 
5. The Committee then authorized the Chairperson to finalise the Draft 
Reports and present them to Parliament.  
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 

69 
 
Appendix-II 
 
(Vide Para No. 3 of the Introduction) 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON 
OBSERVATIONS/ RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE FOURTH 
REPORT (EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON LABOUR, TEXTILES AND SKILL DEVELOPMENT  
 
      Total Percentage 
I.     Total Number of Recommendations. 55  
II. Recommendations/Observations 
which have been accepted by the 
Government – Rec. Para No. 1, 3, 4, 
5, 7, 8, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 
19, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 
30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35, 37, 38, 39, 
40, 42, 43, 44, 45, 46, 47, 48, 49, 
50, 51, 52, 53 and 55. 
 
45 81.82% 
III. Recommendations/Observations 
which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government’s 
reply –Rec. Para Nos. 2, 11, 20, 21 
and 36. 
 
05 9.09% 
IV. Recommendations/Observations in 
respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by 
the Committee and which require 
reiteration –Rec. Para Nos. 41 and 54. 
 
02 3.64% 
V. Recommendations/Observations in 
respect of which replies of the 
Government are interim in nature – 
Rec. Para Nos. 6, 9 and 10   
03 5.45% 
     
 
 
 