i 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR, TEXTILES AND SKILL 
DEVELOPMENT 
(2024-25) 
 (EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF TEXTILES 
 
ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE OBSERVATIONS/ 
RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE CONTAINED IN THEIR 
FIFTY- FIFTH REPORT (SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) ON 
‘DEVELOPMENT OF COTTON SECTOR’ PERTAINING TO THE 
MINISTRY OF TEXTILES.  
 
 
TWELFTH REPORT 
 
       
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
NEW DELHI   
August, 2025/Shravana, 1947 (Saka)  
 
12 

ii 
 
 
TWELFTH REPORT  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR, TEXTILES AND SKILL 
DEVELOPMENT 
(2024-25) 
 
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF TEXTILES 
 
ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE OBSERVATIONS/ 
RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE CONTAINED IN THEIR 
FIFTY- FIFTH REPORT (SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) ON 
‘DEVELOPMENT OF COTTON SECTOR’ PERTAINING TO THE 
MINISTRY OF TEXTILES.  
 
Presented to Hon’ble Speaker on 04.10.2025 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 04.12.2025 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 21.08.2025 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
August, 2025/Shravana, 1947 (Saka)  
 


iii 
 
CONTENTS 
       
                         PAGE No. 
        
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (iv) 
INTRODUCTION   (v) 
CHAPTER I Report 1 
CHAPTER II Recommendations/Observations which have 
been accepted by the Government 
 
10 
CHAPTER III Recommendations/Observations which the 
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of 
the Government’s reply 
 
22 
CHAPTER IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of 
which replies of the Government have not 
been accepted by the Committee and which 
require reiteration 
 
23 
CHAPTER V Recommendations/Observations in respect of 
which replies of the Government are interim 
in nature    
26 
 
APPENDICES 
 
Appendix- I Minutes of the 15th Sitting of the Committee 
held on 19th August, 2025 
 
   27 
Appendix- II Analysis of the Action Taken by the Government 
on the Observations/ Recommendations 
contained in the Fifty-Fifth Report (Seventeenth 
Lok Sabha) 
29 
 

iv 
 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
1.        Shri Lalkithang                            -        Joint Secretary 
2.    Ms. K.Muanniang Tunglut     - Director 
3.   Shri S.Lalengzau Ngaihte  - Deputy Secretary 
 
  
     COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR, TEXTILES AND 
SKILL DEVELOPMENT (2024-25) 
 
                Shri Basavaraj Bommai – Chairperson 
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
2 Shri Mani A. 
3 Shri G. M. Harish Balayogi 
4 Shri Aashtikar Patil Nagesh Bapurao 
5 Shri Partha Bhowmick 
6 Shri Yogender Chandolia 
7 Shri Ram Prasad Chaudhary 
8 Shri Chandra Prakash Choudhary 
9 Shri G. Lakshminarayana 
10 Shri Asit Kumar Mal 
11 Shri Kali Charan Munda 
12 Shri Rudra Narayan Pany 
13^ Shri Kartick Chandra Paul 
14 Shri Tanuj Punia 
15 Shri Pradeep Purohit 
16 Shri Mukesh Rajput 
17 Shri Raja Ram Singh 
18 Shri Adhikari Soumendu 
19 Shri V. K. Sreekandan 
20 Shri Manoj Tigga 
21 Shri Chavan Ravindra Vasantrao 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
22 Smt. Jaya Amitabh Bachchan  
23 Shri Ritabrata Banerjee 
24 Shri Naresh Bansal  
25 Shri Govindbhai Laljibhai Dholakia  
26 Shri Rajendra Gehlot 
27 Dr. Syed Naseer Hussain 
28 Shri Maharaja Sanajaoba Leishemba 
29 Shri I.S. Inbadurai 
30 Dr. Meenakshi Jain 
31 Shri S.R. Sivalingam 

v 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
 I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Labour, Textiles and Skill 
Development (2024-25) having been authorized by the Committee, present 
on their behalf this Twelfth Report on Action Taken by the Government on 
the Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in their 
Fifty Fifth Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Development of Cotton 
Sector’ pertaining to the Ministry of Textiles. 
2. The Fifty-Fifth Report was presented to Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya 
Sabha on 7th February, 2024. The Ministry of Textiles furnished their 
replies on 18th April, 2024 indicating Action Taken on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Fifty-Fifth Report. The 
Committee considered and adopted the Draft Report at their sitting held on 
19th August, 2025.  
3. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/ Recommendations contained in the Fifty-Fifth Report 
(Seventeenth Lok Sabha) is given at Appendix-II. 
4. For ease of reference, the Observations/Recommendations of the 
Committee have been printed in bold type in the body of the Report. 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi;          BASAVARAJ BOMMAI  
19th August,2025                                                 CHAIRPERSON 
28 Shravana,1947 (Saka )            STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR,  
TEXTILES AND SKILL DEVELOPMENT 
  
  

1 
 
CHAPTER- I 
REPORT 
 
This Report deals with the action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in their Fifty-Fifth 
Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on “Development of Cotton Sector” relating to 
the Ministry of Textiles. 
 
2. The Fifty-Fifth Report was presented to Lok Sabha/laid in Rajya Sabha on 
7th February, 2024. It contained 10 Observations/Recommendations. Replies of 
Government in respect of all the Recommendations have been received and are 
categorized as under:- 
 
(i)  Recommendations/Observations which have 
been accepted by the Government – Rec. Para Nos. 
1, 2, 4, 6, 7, 8 and 9  
 
Chapter-II 
Total:07 
         Percentage:70 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the 
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the 
Government’s reply – Rec. Para No. Nil 
 
Chapter-III 
Total:00 
Percentage:0.00 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of 
which replies of the Government have not been 
accepted by the Committee and which require 
reiteration – Rec. Para Nos. 3 and 5 
 
Chapter-IV 
Total:02 
          
Percentage:20  
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of 
which replies of the Government are interim in 
nature - Rec. Para No. 10   
Chapter-V 
Total:01 
             
Percentage:10  
 
 
3. The Committee desire that Action Taken Notes in respect of 
Observations/ Recommendations contained in Chapter-I and final action 
taken reply in respect of the Recommendation contained in Chapter V of 
this Report, for which the Government has given interim reply, be 
furnished to them at the earliest. 
 
4. The Committee will now deal with some of their earlier Observations/ 
Recommendations which either require reiteration or merit further 
comments. 
 

2 
 
I. AVAILABILITY OF AFFORDABLE GENETICALLY MODIFIED COTTON 
SEEDS 
Recommendation (Para No. 3) 
5. The Committee had reckoned the fact that the Indian Council of 
Agricultural Research (ICAR) and State Agricultural University (SAUs) released 
107 varieties/hybrids comprising Bt. and Non Bt. cotton varieties. Further, 125 
BG II cotton hybrids developed by private sector were also released after multi-
location testing by ICAR-AICRP on the cotton. The Committee had observed that 
the Government proposes to popularize cotton varieties to the cotton growing 
farmers by means of Front Line Demonstrations. Demonstrations are conducted 
to 10 farmers in 10 districts in which Department of Agriculture and Corporation 
(DAC) provides funding and technical support. The Committee had further noted 
that the developed variety cotton has good yield with location testing done by 
ICAR-AICRP. The Committee had observed that Bt. Cotton Hybrid seeds are 
mostly produced by the private sector seed industry as a means of value capture 
mechanism for the licensed. Productivity is lower in the absence of canopy 
management, nutrient and moisture limitations and pest/disease outbreaks. 
The Committee were made aware that the problem with this Genetically Modified 
seeds is that farmers have to buy the seed every year and the farmers’ debt 
journey starts from buying seed and gets steeper as the pesticides, fertilizer and 
labour costs add up without commensurate increase in yield. Cotton 
cultivation/production plays a major role in sustaining the livelihood of millions 
of cotton farmers and other people engaged in related activities.  
6. The Committee were of the firm opinion that much needs to be done in the 
area of availability of affordable and climatically adapted Bt. or other Hybrid 
varieties of cotton seeds in the Country. Farmer education/training initiatives in 
this connection also need to be given a fillip. Further, farmers should be further 
supported financially in quality seed procurement and in the adoption of best 
farming practices. In view of this, the Committee had recommended that the 
Ministry of Textiles in coordination with the Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers’ 
Welfare should draw up specific interventional initiatives to address the 
problems faced by the farmers in procuring the genetically modified seeds by 
appropriation of their meagre resources by considering measures like a cap on 
prices of the same, impetus of seed development by various government entities, 
etc.  and also review the premium in consultation with the Textile Industries who 
are paying the premium, for creating better condition of livelihood to the cotton 
growing farmers.  
7. The Ministry of Textiles in their Action Taken Note furnished to the 
Committee, have highlighted the steps taken by the Government regarding the 
recommendation of the Committee as under: 
“i. Department of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare is implementing 
cotton development programme under National Food Security Mission 
(NFSM) in 15 major cotton growing States. These States include Assam, 
Andhra Pradesh, Gujarat, Haryana, Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh, 

3 
 
Maharashtra, Odisha, Punjab, Rajasthan, Telangana, Tamil Nadu, 
Tripura, Uttar Pradesh & West Bengal from 2014-15. 
ii.  The primary objective of this initiative is to increase production and 
productivity. Assistance is being provided to farmers for seed, canopy 
management and Integrated Pest Management (IPM) inputs to promote 
adoption of high-density planting system in shallow soils, closer planting 
in medium soils and production technology for ELS cotton.  States can 
also support cotton development programme under Rashtriya Krishi Vikas 
Yojana- Remunerative Approaches for Agriculture and Allied Sectors 
Rejuvenation (RKVY-RAFTAAR). 
iii. Cotton Seeds Price Control Order for uniform regulation across India 
for fixation of sale price of cotton seeds is in practice.  
iv. Under NFSM, promotion of seeds developed by the public sector is 
possible with adequate funding support and entry of varieties into the seed 
multiplication chain through National and State seed production 
agencies”. 
 
8. The Committee, in their earlier Report, had recommended that the 
Ministry of Textiles in coordination with the Ministry of Agriculture & 
Farmers’ Welfare should draw up specific interventional initiatives to 
address the problems faced by the farmers in procuring the genetically 
modified cotton seeds by considering measures like cap on prices, impetus 
of seed development by various government entities, etc. and also review 
the premium in consultation with the Textile Industries. In their Action 
Taken Reply, the Ministry have highlighted the steps taken by the 
Department of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare in implementing cotton 
development programme under the National Food Security Mission (NFSM) 
and the practice of fixation of sale price of cotton seeds. However, the 
Ministry is silent on the specific initiatives/interventions taken by them 
to ensure affordability of genetically modified cotton seeds to the cotton 
growing farmers and revision of premium paid by the textiles industry for 
high quality cotton. The Committee are not satisfied with the action taken 
by the Ministry on their earlier recommendation. The Ministry is exhorted 
to work very closely with the Indian Council of Agricultural Research 
(ICAR), various other reputed Agricultural Universities/Institutes in the 
country dealing with agricultural farming to address the challenges posed 
by GM modified cotton seeds and to develop new variety of cotton seeds, 
which are strong and sustainable, and capable of becoming highly 
competitive in both domestic and international markets. The Committee, 
therefore, reiterate their earlier recommendation urging the Ministry to 
take proactive steps in this regard and apprise the Committee, of the status 
within three months. 

4 
 
II. ISSUES PLAGUING THE COTTON SECTOR 
Recommendation (Para No. 4) 
9. The Committee had noted that as on 1st September 2023, projected Global 
cotton production for 2022-23 is 25.07 million tonnes (1474 Lakh bales) which 
is 2% higher compared to the previous year’s production of 24.62 million tonnes 
(1448 Lakh bales). A comparative analysis of area and productivity (yield) of 
major cotton producing countries during the year 2022-23 indicates that India’s 
per hectare yield of cotton is extremely low compared to the world’s average yield 
or other major cotton producing countries per hectare yield. For instance, in 
2022-23 India has an area of 13061 thousand hectare for cotton production, but 
productivity yield is only 447 Kgs/hectare, whereas USA has an area of 2957 
thousand hectare only, but productivity yield is 1065 Kgs./hectare. China has 
an area of 3000 thousand hectare but productivity yield is 1993 Kgs./hectare. 
Pakistan has an area of 2065 thousand hectare, but yield is 405 Kgs./hectare. 
Brazil has an area of 1650 thousand hectare for production, but yield is 1830 
Kgs./hectare. Thus kilogramme per hectare yield in India is extremely low when 
compared with kilogramme per hectare yield of other major cotton producing 
countries. The Committee had noted that this low per hectare yield in India is 
due to the fact that the Bt. seed technology in the country has become outdated 
and there is an urgent need for new variety of seeds. The Ministry also cite the 
outbreak of whitefly and pink bollworm infestation which caused yield loss in 
the range of 10-30% and the reduction in area from 122 lakh hectares to about 
108 lakh hectares. The Committee had observed that increase in cotton area by 
expansion into less suitable soils pull down the average State and national 
productivity level. Further, cultivated area of cotton cannot increase as it have 
to compete with others crops and farmers grow only that crop in which they get 
more beneficial.   
10. The Committee had also noted that Indian Council of Agricultural 
Research (ICAR) is the nodal agency for evaluation and release of both hybrids 
and other varieties after multi-location testing. The Committee had desired that 
the Ministry should take steps to augment the development of early maturing 
and compact varieties and hybrids that suit the cotton growing areas having 
lower productivity trend. The Committee had also wanted that there should be 
an effective and symbiotic pest management strategy through coordinated efforts 
between the Central and State agencies. The Committee had recommended that 
the Ministry of Textiles in collaboration with Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers 
Welfare should overhaul the cropping system of cotton in the country in order to 
undergo a systematic change, strengthen market linkages to help the farmers, 
enhance Research and Development to develop new cotton varieties, improve 
pest management practices and develop innovative technologies to improve 
cotton farming. The Committee should be apprised on action taken in this 
regard. 
11. The Ministry of Textiles in their Action Taken Note furnished to the 
Committee, have stated as under: 

5 
 
“i. A project titled 'Insecticide Resistance Management (IRM): 
Dissemination of Pink Bollworm Management Strategies' is being 
implemented by ICAR-CICR since 2018-19 under NFSM with an objective 
to disseminate Pink Bollworm Management Strategies integrating several 
multiple strategies during different growth stages of cotton crop to combat 
it. 
ii. ICAR-CICR and All India Coordinated Research Project (AICRP) on 
Cotton formulated and initiated multi-location testing of early maturing 
and compact Bt genotypes since 2021-22. 
iii. Central Varietal Identification Committee undertook fast track 
identification of compact genotypes that meet the identification criteria 
after two-year zonal multi-location testing as against the normal 
mandatory three-year testing. The Central Sub-Committee on Crop 
Standards, Notification and Release of Varieties in its 91st Meeting in 2023 
recommended the release and notification of the identified compact Bt 
hybrids. 
iv. Innovative technologies for pest management and precision cotton 
farming through drone, sensor and AI-based technologies have been 
initiated under Network Project on Precision Agriculture of ICAR. 
v. The other suggestions of the committee on varietal improvement, 
pest management, coordination between central and state departments, 
and overhauling the cotton cropping system can be addressed under the 
aegis of both the Ministries”. 
12. The Committee find the reply of the Ministry - that the Committee’s 
suggestions for varietal improvement of cotton, pest management, 
coordination between Central and State Departments and overhauling the 
cotton cropping system can be addressed under the aegis of both Ministries 
of Textiles and Agriculture and Farmers Welfare – unsatisfactory, as no 
mention has been made of the specific initiatives taken/being taken to 
address these issues plaguing the cotton sector. The Committee take a 
serious view in the matter and strongly recommend that the Ministry 
undertake intense research into the best practices that are prevailing in 
other countries and make the best use of it for the benefit of cotton 
growers/farmers in the country. Moreover, given the extremely low per 
hectare yield of cotton in the country as compared to other major cotton 
producing countries,  the continued use of outdated Bt. cotton seed 
technology, and the urgent need for an effective and co-ordinated pest 
management strategy involving both the Central and State agencies, the 

6 
 
Committee call for close collaboration between the Ministry of Textiles and 
the Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers’ Welfare to develop a joint strategy 
to effectively address the long standing issues plaguing the cotton sector. 
The action taken in this regard may be apprised to the Committee within 
three months. 
 
III. ACTION ON SUGGESTIONS GIVEN BY ICAR-CICR 
Recommendation (Para No. 5) 
 
13. The Committee had noted that on Bt. cotton production, the ICAR-
Central Institute for Cotton Research (CICR), Nagpur has suggested that there 
is scope to divert at least 20% of the cotton area under long duration Bt. 
hybrids towards early maturing Bt. varieties and non-Bt. varieties of cotton 
including other species for niche areas (Gossypium arboreum, G.barbadense 
and G. Hermaceum). For this to be realized, varieties need to be given 
protection under PPV FRA to encourage the private sector to develop Bt 
varieties apart from Bt hybrids. Adequate seed multiplication of released 
varieties of public sector through seed chain is also essential. The Committee 
were given to understand this to be an area of promise and hence should be 
apprised of the action taken on the suggestions given by the ICAR-CICR in 
this regard on the Bt. cotton production. 
 
 14. The Ministry of Textiles in their Action Taken Note furnished to the 
Committee, have stated as under: 
“Breeder seeds of released varieties/hybrids are available with ICAR-
CICR and AICRP on Cotton centres. The Govt. has regulated the sale of 
Bt. Cotton Seeds by evoking the provisions of the EC Act. The details of 
Maximum Sale Price (MSP) of Bt. Cotton Seeds Packet fixed during last 
three years and current year is as under: 
2020 2021 2022 2023 
BG-
I 
(Rs.)
BG-II 
(Rs.) 
BG-I (Rs.) BG-II 
(Rs.) 
BG-I 
(Rs.) 
BG-II 
(Rs.) 
BG-I 
(Rs.) 
BG-II (Rs.) 
635 730 635 767 635 810 635 853 
 
15. In their earlier Report, the Committee had desired to be 
apprised of the action taken on the suggestions given by the ICAR-
Central Institute for Cotton Research (CICR) which inter alia include 
scope for diversion of at least 20% of the cotton area under long duration 
Bt. hybrids towards early maturing Bt. varieties and non-Bt. varieties of 

7 
 
cotton including other species for niche areas, cotton varieties to be 
given protection under Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights 
Authority (PPV FRA) to encourage the private sector to develop Bt. 
varieties apart from Bt. hybrids and adequate seed multiplication of 
released varieties of public sector through seed chain. The Action Taken 
Reply of the Ministry is evasive as it merely indicated the availability of 
Breeder seeds of released varieties/hybrids with ICAR-CICR and AICRP 
on Cotton centres and regulation of the sale of Bt. Cotton seeds by 
evoking the provisions of the Essential Commodities Act. In addition, 
the details of Maximum Sale Price of Bt. Cotton Seeds Packet fixed 
during the last three years and the current year have also been provided. 
The Committee, regret to note that the Ministry have not provided 
specific information on the action taken by them regarding the 
suggestions given by the ICAR-CICR on Bt. cotton production in the 
country and urge the Ministry to act upon their recommendation in right 
earnest. The efforts made and progress achieved in this regard may be 
furnished to the Committee within three months. 
 
IV. COTT-ALLY MOBILE APP FOR COTTON FARMERS 
Recommendation (Para No. 9) 
16. The Committee had noted with appreciation that in order to increase 
awareness among the cotton farmers about Minimum Support Price (MSP) of 
cotton, Cotton Corporation of India (CCI) have developed an exclusive Mobile App 
‘Cott-Ally’ for cotton farmers in regional languages. The Mobile App also helps 
CCI to have direct interaction with and outreach to the cotton farmers. The 
Committee find it encouraging to note that so far about 21-22 lakh farmers have 
registered themselves in the Mobile App. The Committee had desired that the 
Ministry should take all necessary measures to make the Application accessible 
to all cotton farmers in the country which will help them registered therein and 
enable the cotton farmers have their grievances also redressed through this 
initiative. Further, the Committee had wanted the Ministry/Cotton Corporation 
of India to expand the ambit of the Mobile Application to provide other related 
information like sale of cotton seed, market and trends on demand for various 
varieties of cotton, aspects related to quality of cotton including how to conform 
to domestic/international quality specifications, best practices in activities 
ranging from cultivation to handling of cotton till it reaches the market, etc. 
Authentic information in such matters could be of help to farmers. In the opinion 

8 
 
of the Committee, the App could even be used to disseminate information to 
farmers on how to avoid middlemen and their activities and how to have access 
to the market directly to secure maximum benefit to the original producers. The 
action taken by the Government in this direction should be furnished to the 
Committee.  
17. The Ministry of Textiles in their Action Taken Note furnished to the 
Committee, have stated as under: 
“The following steps have been taken by Government:- 
  
i. The Cott Ally mobile app has been developed by Cotton Corporation of 
India which is an OTP-based application available in nine regional 
languages, aimed at providing essential services to cotton farmers 
across the country. Its primary objectives include increasing awareness 
about MSP rates, locating nearest procurement centers, tracking 
payments, providing weather updates, offering videos on best farm 
practices, sharing important news related to cotton, and facilitating 
grievance resolution for farmers. In addition to its existing features, the 
Cott Ally mobile app is now seamlessly integrated with the CCI website 
to offer comprehensive information such as cotton and cotton seed 
sales, market trends, and other related updates. This integration 
enhances accessibility and ensures that farmers have access to all 
relevant information at one platform. 
ii. To streamline processes and eliminate intermediaries, CCI has 
implemented an on-the-spot Aadhar-based farmer registration and 
payment system through the Public Financial Management System 
(PFMS) Portal since the 2023-24 cotton season. This system enhances 
transparency, efficiency, and ensures that genuine cotton farmers 
receive their payments directly into their Aadhar-linked bank accounts, 
thereby reducing delays and potential exploitation by middlemen. 
iii. Furthermore, a Blockchain-based QR coded Bale Identification & 
Traceability System (BITS) has been introduced from October 1st, 2023. 
This system enables complete traceability of cotton bales produced by 
CCI, ensuring that maximum benefits accrue to the original producers. 
By leveraging blockchain technology, the BITS initiative enhances 
transparency, authenticity, and accountability in the cotton supply 
chain”.  
18. The Committee acknowledge the important role played by the Mobile 
App ‘Cott-Ally’ in providing essential services to cotton farmers across the 
country and its integration with the Cotton Corporation of India (CCI) 
website to offer comprehensive information such as cotton and cotton seed 
sales, market trends, and other related updates thereby enhancing 
accessibility and ensuring that farmers have access to all relevant 

9 
 
information at one platform.Laying emphasis on securing maximum 
benefits for cotton farmers, the Committee urge the Ministry to facilitate 
and ensure registration of all the eligible cotton farmers in the ‘Cott-Ally’ 
mobile App. The total number of eligible cotton farmers in the country and 
the number of such farmers actually registered in the mobile App so far, 
may be intimated to the Committee. 
  

10 
 
CHAPTER-II 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY 
THE GOVERNMENT 
 Recommendation (Para No.1) 
The Committee noted that Cotton is one of the most important commercial 
crops in the country which account for around 24% of the total global cotton 
production. An estimated 6 million cotton farmers and 40-50 million people are 
engaged to have their livelihoods related to cotton processing and trade. The 
Committee also noted that cotton contributes largely to India’s net foreign 
exchange by way of exports of raw cotton and intermediate products. Due to its 
economic importance, it is termed as ‘White-Gold’. In term of acreage under 
cotton and yield, India is at 1st place in the world with 130.61 Lakh hectares area 
under cotton cultivation, i.e. around 40% of world area of 322.12 Lakh hectares. 
The Committee are also made aware that India occupied second place in the 
world with estimated production of 343.47 lakh bales (5.84 Million Metric 
Tonnes) during cotton season of 2022-23 and is the 2nd largest consumer of 
cotton in the world with an estimated consumption of 311 lakh bales (5.29 
Million Metric Tonnes). 
The Committee find that India is one of the top producer and consumer of 
cotton in the world. They also recognize that such a feat cannot be attained 
without sustained facilitative action by the Government. The Committee observe 
that due to the dependence of the livelihood of a large number of people on 
production, processing and trade, Cotton Sector should be a high priority area 
for the Government. The commercial significance of cotton trade for the Country 
also lends cotton sector a prominent place. The Committee desire that the 
Government should come up with an umbrella policy approach for Cotton Sector 
encompassing and symbiotically linking the activities in all spheres of the Sector. 
(Reply of Government) 
A comprehensive plan for the development of the cotton sector, 
encompassing and linking the activities of various stakeholders, was discussed 
and recommended by the Textile Advisory Group constituted by the Ministry of 
Textiles.  Subsequently, a special project focusing on enhancing cotton 
productivity through the scaling up of technologies targeting agro-ecology in a 
public-private partnership (PPP) mode was sanctioned by Ministry of Agriculture 
& Farmers Welfare during 2023-24 with an outlay of 41.87 crores. This project 
envisages scaling up of three components (High Density Planting System (HDPS), 
Closer Spacing and production technology for Extra Long Staple (ELS)) in 61 
districts of 8 states covering an area of 9064.34 ha involving 10418 farmers.  
 (Information received from Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers’ Welfare) 
 
(Ministry of Textiles OM No. 6/8/2021 (Fibre-I) dated 18thApril,2024) 
                                                                                     (Prajakta L. Verma) 
                                                Joint Secretary to the Govt. of India 
 

11 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 2) 
The Committee are made aware that about 67% of India’s cotton is 
produced on rain-fed areas and 33% on irrigated lands. However, The Committee 
note that in a country like Mexico, 90% cotton cultivation is irrigated and there 
is 100% adoption of Genetically modified (GM) seeds with Bt+ Herbicide 
Tolerance (HT) traits. In terms of productivity, India rank 36th in the world with 
a yield of 447 Kg/ha. The Committee observe that majority of cotton production 
in the country comes from 9 major cotton growing States divided into three zones 
– Punjab, Haryana and Rajasthan (Northern Zone); Gujarat, Maharashtra and 
Madhya Pradesh (Central Zone); Telangana, Andhra Pradesh and Karnataka 
(Southern Zone). Cotton is also grown in the States of Odisha and Tamil Nadu. 
The Committee note that production and yield of cotton in the country depends 
on agro-climatic conditions and 70% of its cultivation is in the arid ecosystem. 
The Committee observe that the major limiting factor responsible for fluctuating 
and largely less than optimal growth in cotton production is cultivation in rainfed 
conditions (67%) making the crop vulnerable to variability in rainfall and 
relatively frequent of extreme weather events at different vulnerable crop growth 
stages. Even in assured irrigated areas, irrigation is supply driven (based on 
release of canal water) and not demand driven (based on crop need). As informed 
to the Committee, another significant reason for low productivity is cultivation 
of medium to long duration hybrids in rainfed areas of Central Zone (in about 
3.8 million ha, 28% of total area) in shallow to medium deep soils at low plant 
densities (12000 to 18000 plants/ha) leading to low productivity. The problem is 
exacerbated due to deterioration in soil health as a consequence of continuous 
cultivation of cotton without crop rotation and proper crop residue management. 
Better management practices such as legume rotation/intercropping, use of 
organic manures and balanced fertilizers are not widely adopted by farmers 
leading to low productivity. Higher area expansion in less efficient districts in the 
Central zone is also responsible for lower productivity.  
The Committee observe that the core agro climatic limiting factors in 
cotton cultivation in India seem to be in our knowledge. Decisive multipronged 
action needs to be taken to deal with restraints. First of all, it appears to the 
Committee that in addition to the Bt+ and other similar seed traits, the Country 
is in dire need of varieties of cotton seeds/plants that are adaptive/suitable for 
our soil and climatic conditions. This has to be followed up with improvised 
farming techniques suitable for such climatic conditions. Since the significant 
dependence on favourable agro-climatic conditions is hampering production and 
yield of cotton in the Country, the Committee recommend that the Ministry of 
Textiles in co-ordination with Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare 
should commission a comprehensive study on the issues relating to production, 
productivity, soil system, etc with a view to increasing the productivity of cotton. 
Sustainable steps should also be contemplated for bringing more area of cotton 
cultivation under irrigation aiming at gradual achievement of demand driven 
irrigation. Development of newer farming techniques and effective farmer 
education and training leading to optimal use of fertilizers, herbicides, etc are 
also critical needs. The Committee also desire that the Ministry should conduct 

12 
 
campaigns for crop health and pest eradication initiatives and demonstrate best 
practices to boost cotton productivity extensively in all the cotton growing zones 
of the Country. 
 
(Reply of Government) 
                 Inputs furnished by Ministry of Agricultureare as under: 
 ICAR-CICR has undertaken a landscape diagnostic survey in project mode to 
assess production practices of 3000 farmers in 10 cotton growing districts in 
Maharashtra (largest area of 4.0 million ha but lowest productivity) in 2023-
24.rea of 4.0 million ha but lowest productivity) in 2023-24. 
 
i. Good Agricultural Practices are being promoted to optimize water and 
nutrients through an integrated approach, thereby rationalizing the 
quantity of fertilizer applied for plant nutrition and water requirement. The 
nutrient expert tool was developed in collaboration with International 
Plant Nutrition Institute for balanced use of fertilizers based on soil test 
values and validated the tool through frontline demonstrations in farmers’ 
fields. Scaling up of Nutrient expert tool through demonstrations in rainfed 
areas is proposed.  
iii. ICAR-CICR and centers of All India Coordinated Research Project on 
Cotton (AICRP on Cotton) standardized micro-irrigation (drip) system to 
increase water use efficiency and reduce the water footprint in irrigated 
cotton in the central and southern zones. Validation of precision cotton 
farming technique through sensor-based irrigation method for higher 
water productivity through demonstrations is proposed. 
iv. In rainfed areas, soil moisture conservation practices are formulated to 
improve productivity in cotton. Conservation tillage-based production 
systems were assessed in cotton-wheat system in the north zone, 
rainfedvertisols in central zone and irrigated conditions in south zone. 
Technologies for green manuring, intercropping and cotton stalk recycling 
were developed to reduce soil loss alongwith improvement in water holding 
capacity and soil fertility. Technology for sustainable cotton production in 
calcareous soils is applicable in vast areas in the central zone. These 
sustainable practices and new precision farming technologies development 
require upscaling in different cotton growing zones in the country 
supported by funding. 
v. Awareness campaigns for dissemination of pink bollworm (PBW) 
management strategies are in operation by CICR and AICRP on Cotton 
centres in State Agricultural Universities since 2018-19 funded by the 
Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare under NFSM. Technical 
backstopping was provided for PBW and Boll rot management campaigns 
in different states. These campaigns are to be continued and also initiated 

13 
 
in new areas such as north Rajasthan in coordination with State 
Department of Agriculture and PPP mode. 
vi. A Pilot Project on “Awareness and Extension Services on Best Farm 
Practices for Cotton Farmers to Improve Quality, Yield and Sustainability” 
funded by Cotton Corporation of India (Rs. 2.53 crore) was implemented 
in 11 cotton growing States during 2023-24 season.  
vii. Front Line Demonstrations (FLDs) to popularize new high yielding varieties 
and hybrids (including desi and ELS Cotton), integrated crop management 
and cotton based intercropping system to improve soil health is being 
implemented in 11 cotton growing States namely Punjab, Haryana, 
Rajasthan, Gujarat, Maharashtra, Madhya Pradesh, Odisha, Andhra 
Pradesh, Telangana, Karnataka, Tamil Nadu. The Ministry of Agriculture 
& Farmers Welfare, Government of India has allocated Rs. 80.00 lakhs for 
the year 2023-24. During last five years (2018-2023), 4492 FLDs were 
conducted. This scheme is to be continued for promotion of public sector 
varieties with increased financial allocation support. 
viii. ICAR-CICR and its AICRP network on cotton in 11 States provide real time 
weekly advisories to State departments of agriculture and extension 
personnel in Krishi Vigyan Kendras (KVKs) for alerting cotton farmers on 
crop, pest and diseases status and timely interventions. Development of a 
web-based geographical information system for providing dynamic 
information on crop, pest and disease status will be valuable for all 
stakeholders and is being proposed as part of umbrella activities under 
the proposed Technology Mission on Cotton (phase II) by the Ministry of 
Textiles.  
ix. Cotton advisories to farmers’ mobile phones through voice messages on 
crop production & protection measures are issued regularly to registered 
farmers in all the cotton growing states in local language. The voice 
message services can be linked to cotton farmers’ databases in different 
states with adequate funding support. 
x. ICAR-CICR, Nagpur is collaborating in the Crop Pest Surveillance and 
Advisory Project (CROPSAP) project of the State Department of Agriculture, 
Government of Maharashtra to provide pest management advisories to 
cotton farmers. 
xi. A Special Project on Cotton ‘Targeting technologies to agro-ecological 
zones- large scale demonstrations of best practices to enhance cotton 
productivity’ funded under National Food Security Mission (NFSM) was 
implemented during 2023-24 with an outlay of 41.87 crores. This project 
envisages scaling up of three components (High Density Planting System 
(HDPS), Closer Spacing and production technology for Extra Long Staple 
(ELS)) in 61 districts of 8 states covering an area of 9064.34 ha involving 
10418 farmers. The progress of the project was presented in the COCPC 
meeting held on 14.03.2024. Scaling up of sustainable cotton technologies 
and awareness programs will be continued with the support of Ministry of 

14 
 
Textiles and Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare. Considering its 
effectiveness, Ministry of Textiles requested Ministry of Agriculture to 
consider extension of the project. 
xii. Technologies for carbon sequestration and sustainability such as Cotton 
stalk recycling through in-situ composting and biochar conversion to build 
soil organic carbon, nutrient augmentation, soil health, in major cotton-
growing regions of India needs to be upscaled.  
(Ministry of Textiles OM No. 6/8/2021 (Fibre-I) dated 18thApril,2024) 
                                                                                          (Prajakta L. Verma) 
                                                                   Joint Secretary to the Govt. of India 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 4) 
  
The Committee note that as on 1st September 2023, projected Global 
cotton production for 2022-23 is 25.07 million tonnes (1474 Lakh bales) which 
is 2% higher compared to the previous year’s production of 24.62 million tonnes 
(1448 Lakh bales). A comparative analysis of area and productivity (yield) of 
major cotton producing countries during the year 2022-23 indicates that India’s 
per hectare yield of cotton is extremely low compared to the world’s average yield 
or other major cotton producing countries per hectare yield. For instance, in 
2022-23 India has an area of 13061 thousand hectare for cotton production, but 
productivity yield is only 447 Kgs/hectare, whereas USA has an area of 2957 
thousand hectare only, but productivity yield is 1065 Kgs./hectare. China has 
an area of 3000 thousand hectare but productivity yield is 1993 Kgs./hectare. 
Pakistan has an area of 2065 thousand hectare, but yield is 405 Kgs./hectare. 
Brazil has an area of 1650 thousand hectare for production, but yield is 1830 
Kgs./hectare.  
Thus kilogramme per hectare yield in India is extremely low when 
compared with kilogramme per hectare yield of other major cotton producing 
countries. The Committee note that this low per hectare yield in India is due to 
the fact that the Bt seed technology in the country has become outdated and 
there is an urgent need for, new variety of seeds. The Ministry also cite the 
outbreak of whitefly and pink bollworm infestation which caused yield loss in 
the range of 10-30% and the reduction in area from 122 lakh hectares to about 
108 lakh hectares. The Committee observe that increase in cotton area by 
expansion into less suitable soils pull down the average State and national 
productivity level. Further, cultivated area of cotton cannot increase as it have 
to compete with others crops and farmers grow only that crop in which they get 
more beneficial.  The Committee also note that Indian Council of Agricultural 
Research (ICAR) is the nodal agency for evaluation and release of both hybrids 
and other varieties after multi-location testing. The Committee desire that the 
Ministry should take steps to augment the development of early maturing and 
compact varieties and hybrids that suit the cotton growing areas having lower 
productivity trend. The Committee also want that there should be an effective 
and symbiotic pest management strategy through coordinated efforts between 

15 
 
the Central and State agencies. The Committee recommend that the Ministry of 
Textiles in collaboration with Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare should 
overhaul the cropping system of cotton in the country in order to undergo a 
systematic change, strengthen market linkages to help the farmers, enhance 
Research and Development to develop new cotton varieties, improve pest 
management practices and develop innovative technologies to improve cotton 
farming. The Committee shall be apprised on action taken in this regard. 
 
(Reply of Government) 
            Action taken by Government in this regard are as under: 
i. A project titled 'Insecticide Resistance Management (IRM): Dissemination 
of Pink Bollworm Management Strategies' is being implemented by ICAR-
CICR since 2018-19 under NFSM with an objective to disseminate Pink 
Bollworm Management Strategies integrating several multiple strategies 
during different growth stages of cotton crop to combat it. 
ii. ICAR-CICR and All India Coordinated Research Project (AICRP) on Cotton 
formulated and initiated multi-location testing of early maturing and 
compact Bt genotypes since 2021-22. 
iii. Central Varietal Identification Committee undertook fast track 
identification of compact genotypes that meet the identification criteria 
after two-year zonal multi-location testing as against the normal 
mandatory three-year testing. The Central Sub-Committee on Crop 
Standards, Notification and Release of Varieties in its 91st Meeting in 2023 
recommended the release and notification of the identified compact Bt 
hybrids. 
iv. Innovative technologies for pest management and precision cotton farming 
through drone, sensor and AI-based technologies have been initiated 
under Network Project on Precision Agriculture of ICAR. 
v. The other suggestions of the committee on varietal improvement, pest 
management, coordination between central and state departments, and 
overhauling the cotton cropping system can be addressed under the aegis 
of both the Ministries. 
 
   (Ministry of Textiles OM No. 6/8/2021 (Fibre-I) dated 18thApril,2024) 
                                                                            (Prajakta L. Verma) 
      Joint Secretary to the Govt. of India  
 
Comments of the Commitee 
Please refer to Para No.12 of Chapter-I of the Report 
 

16 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 6) 
  
The Committee observe that Kasturi Cotton is a welcome innovative 
initiative of the Government of India. The Government have developed the 
protocol and their trademark related to the Brand. Kasturi cotton is a long staple 
parameter of 29 plus mm. Production of the Kasturi cotton variety is open to 
every stake holder. The Traceability and Certification exercise is carried out 
jointly by the Government of India, Trade Bodies and Industry to promote the 
Kasturi cotton. The Committee are highly appreciative of the fact that the 
Ministry of Textile are driving this in mission mode and have allocated budgetary 
support in alignment with Rs. 15 crores contribution from Trade and Industry 
Bodies. The Committee note that Kasturi cotton is completely market segmented 
international brand that has quality parameter of whiteness, strength and length 
totally different from other cotton brands. Kasturi cotton is expected to create a 
niche market for India. The Committee desire the Ministry of Textiles shall take 
steps to enhance the quality and traceability of the Kasturi cotton and also take 
necessary measures to strengthen India’s competitiveness in the global cotton 
market through the Kasturi cotton and create a sustainable ecosystem for all 
stake holders involved. Action taken in this regard shall be apprised to the 
committee irrespective of the time period taken for the same. 
 
(Reply of Government) 
Kasturi Cotton’ is an initiative of the Government of India, Textile Trade 
Bodies & Industry with the objective of creating premium value for cotton grown 
in India as per benchmarked specifications. The introduction of the 'Kasturi 
Cotton Bharat' brand, with its end-to-end traceability using Blockchain 
technology, is a ground-breaking initiative, setting a new standard for 
transparency in the cotton textile value chain. Milestones achieved in this 
initiative are as under: 
i. Certification protocol has been finalized for standardization of quality for 
29 mm and 30 mm cotton, which is under long staple cotton category.  The 
sampling and testing will be carried out through authorized National 
Accreditation Board for Certification Bodies and NABL-accredited 
agencies/labs. 
ii. 355 units 315 Ginners & 40 supply chain members have been registered 
as on 18th March, 2024. 
iii. Certified Kasturi Cotton lots are being produced during Cotton Season 
2023-24 by the Cotton Corporation of India Ltd. as well. To provide 
complete traceability of Kasturi Cotton Bharat across the supply chain, 
QR based certification technology are being used at each stage of the 
processing and a blockchain based software platform provides end to end 
traceability and transaction certificate. In this regard, Microsite with QR 
code verification and Block Chain technology have been developed. 
iv. Kasturi Cotton Bharat website has been launched on the occasion of World 
Cotton Day on 7th October 2023. This website provides a digital platform 

17 
 
for necessary information and updates on the initiatives and highlights the 
registration process for ginners to produce Kasturi Cotton Bharat Brand 
and its processes that make the branded Indian cotton unique. 
v. Advertisement agency has been finalized for managing the campaign at 
national and international level. So far, Two Brand Films and Three 
Celebrity Endorsement Films with Shri Pankaj Tripathi, a renowned 
Bollywood actor, along with Festive Greeting videos and still photographs 
have been developed.  
vi. The Kasturi Cotton Bharat was internationally launched at the 81st 
Plenary Meeting of the International Cotton Advisory Committee (ICAC) 
held in Mumbai from 2nd to 5th December 2023. 
(Ministry of Textiles OM No. 6/8/2021 (Fibre-I) dated18th April,2024) 
                                                                                  (Prajakta L. Verma) 
                                                                  Joint Secretary to the Govt. of India 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 7) 
  
The Committee note that India export of cotton is 6% of world export of 
528 Lakh bales (898 million Metric Tonnes) in 2022-23. However, about 5% of 
the total consumption of cotton in the country is imported by the Textile 
industries. The Committee observe that primarily extra-long staple variety of 
cotton which have Giza and Pima fabric with specific requirement are imported. 
The cotton variety having Giza and Pima fabric are said to be contaminant free. 
The Committee understand that the Budget for 2021-22 imposed 10% import 
duty on such cotton variety which is harmful to the cotton industry in the 
country. The said import duty led to steep rise in cotton prices and eroded the 
competitiveness of the Textile industry, the main consumer of cotton. However, 
the Committee also find that the Government exempted all cotton import from 
custom duty from 14 April 2022. The Committee observe that generally import 
duty is imposed to protect the cotton growing farmers.In the opinion of the 
Committee, the move to exempt all cotton imports from custom duties without 
ensuring assured remunerative prices and procurement of cotton grown by 
farmers in India could lead to an inflow of cheap cotton from other countries. In 
the absence of an effective procurement and a price stabilisation fund to ward 
off adverse impact of such inflow on prices could lead to added burden on the 
already crisis-ridden cotton farmers in the country. The Committee are of the 
firm opinion that that the Ministry of Textiles in consultation with the Ministry 
of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare should take necessary measures for 
protection guaranteed to the cotton farmer in the form of assured procurement 
at remunerative prices at least one and half time the cost of production of cotton 
by the farmers. In the considered opinion of the Committee, the Government 
should, instead of foregoing revenue by scrapping of import duties, should 
incentivise the cotton growing farmers of the country and handhold them 
irrespective of the cotton growing zone of the country to which they belong to. 
Otherwise, the Committee feel that the import/inflow of raw cotton will lead to a 

18 
 
debilitating impact on prices and consequently, exacerbate the burden on the 
hapless farmers. The Committee shall be apprised of action taken in this regard 
irrespective of the timeframe for the action taken in this regard.  
                                         (Reply of Government) 
In this regard, the following steps have been taken by Govt.: 
  
i. To safeguard the economic interest of cotton farmers, Minimum support 
prices (MSP) of Cotton is announced by the Government of India at the 
beginning of the sowing season based on the recommendations of the 
Commission for Agricultural Costs and Prices (CACP). MSP system 
ensures remunerative price to cotton farmers and saves them from distress 
sales in any eventuality of Fair Quality cotton prices falling below MSP. 
ii. MSP is determined based on the comprehensive cost of production, which 
includes factors like input costs, family labor, and a margin for profit. 
Every year before commencement of the Cotton Year (Oct. to Sept.), MSP 
is recommended by the CACP based on the formula of 1.5 times of cost of 
production (A2+FL) and inputs from various stakeholders to ensure 
reasonably fair remuneration i.e. at least 50% over cost of production to 
farmers. 
iii. Accordingly, taking into consideration the recommendation of CACP, 
Ministry of Agriculture declares MSP for two basic varieties of Fair Average 
Quality (FAQ) cotton viz. Medium Staple length (staple length of 24.5 mm 
to 25.5 mm &micronaire value of 4.3 to 5.1) and long staple length (staple 
length of 29.5 to 30.5 mm &micronaire of 3.5 to 4.3). Based on the Support 
Price of these two basic varieties of Seed cotton (Kapas) and taking into 
account the quality differential, normal price differential and other 
relevant factors, the MSP for other classes of Seed cotton (Kapas) of Fair 
Quality is fixed by the Office of Textile Commissioner, Ministry of Textiles. 
iv. To ensure the benefit of MSP to large section of cotton farmers, CCI is 
appointed as a Central Nodal agency under Ministry of Textiles for 
undertaking MSP operations of cotton. CCI Procurement Officials remain 
present at procurement centres right from the beginning of the current 
cotton year to ensure minimum support prices to the cotton farmers 
wherever the prevailing kapas prices fall below MSP. CCI procures entire 
quantity of kapas offered by the cotton farmers at MSP rates. 
v. During the cotton season 2021-22, due to lesser production in comparison 
to consumption, a sharp increase in cotton price was observed globally 
wherein the entire cotton value chain was impacted. Therefore, to support 
the domestic textile industry duty free import of cotton was permitted by 
the Government of India for a limited time as a temporary measure from 
14th April till 31st October 2022. 
(Ministry of Textiles OM No. 6/8/2021 (Fibre-I) dated 18th April,2024) 
           (Prajakta L. Verma) 
                                                                  Joint Secretary to the Govt. of India 

19 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 8) 
  
The Committee reckon that the Cotton Corporation of India (CCI) has been 
designated for undertaking Minimum Support Price (MSP) operations in the 
event of prices of seed cotton (Kapas) falling below the MSP level for procuring 
Fair Average Quality (FAQ) grade Kapas offered by the cotton farmers in various 
Agriculture Produce Marketing Committee (APMC) market yards at MSP rate. 
The Committee note that the cotton year is from October to September and MSP 
is recommended by the Commission for Agricultural Costs and Prices (CACP) 
based on the formula of 1.5 times of cost of production (A2+FL). The Committee 
are also made aware that that the formula of MSP is such that the same should 
always ensure that farmer gets at least 50% over cost of production. The 
Committee observe that based on CACP recommendation, the Ministry of 
Agriculture declare MSP for two basic varieties of FAQ cotton viz. Medium Staple 
Length and Long Staple Length. The MSP for the Medium and Long Staple Length 
varieties for the year 2023-24 is Rs. 6,620/Quintal with a rate of increase of Rs. 
540/Quintal (8.88%) and Rs. 7,020/Quintal with a rate of increase of Rs. 
640/Quintal (10.03%), respectively. 
 
Since MSP is the pivotal tool to ensure that the farmers get appropriate 
returns from their crops and they find cultivation as a sustainable means for 
livelihood, the Committee want the Government to accord high priority to pegging 
MSP at the best possible remunerative level. Further, in case the price situation 
in the market warrants the intervention by the CCI for procurement on MSP 
rates, the same shall be done in the quickest possible time to facilitate the 
farmers as well as to stabilise the market. Mechanism to forecast situations 
requiring such intervention should be in place. In the opinion of the Committee 
opening maximum number of procurement centres by the CCI is very important 
as this adds to ease of access to the market for the farmer to sell his produce.  
 
                                            (Reply of Government) 
In this regard, the following steps have been taken by Govt.: 
 
i. Regarding intervention by the CCI for procurement on MSP rates in the 
quickest possible time and opening maximum procurement centres, it is 
stated that during the current cotton year 2023-24, CCI has opened 478 
procurement centers under its 17 procurement branches in 145 districts 
of 11 cotton producing states as compared to 450 procurement centers 
last year to ensure the Minimum Support Prices to cotton farmers in all 
the cotton growing States.   
ii. As a policy, Minimum Support Price (MSP) is a sovereign function and the 
primary role of the CCI begins from the first day of the cotton season. CCI 
Officials remain present at all procurement centres right from the 
beginning of the cotton season to keep close watch on market situation 
and as and when any farmer offers its cotton at MSP, the same is 
purchased on the same day as per MSP guidelines. 

20 
 
iii. CCI plays a crucial role in supporting cotton farmers even when the prices 
of cotton prevail above MSP rates. CCI's presence in the market itself acts 
as safety net to ensure a fair remunerative price to cotton farmers. 
 
(Ministry of Textiles OM No. 6/8/2021 (Fibre-I) dated18th April,2024) 
                                                                        (Prajakta L. Verma) 
                          Joint Secretary to the Govt. of India 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 9) 
 
  The Committee note with appreciation that in order to increase awareness 
among the cotton farmers about Minimum Support Price (MSP) of cotton, Cotton 
Corporation of India (CCI) have developed an exclusive Mobile App ‘Cott-Ally’ for 
cotton farmers in regional languages. The Mobile App also helps CCI to have 
direct interaction with and outreach to the cotton farmers. The Committee find 
it encouraging to note that so far about 21-22 lakh farmers have registered 
themselves in the Mobile App. The Committee desire that the Ministry should 
take all necessary measures to make the Application accessible to all cotton 
farmers in the country which will help them registered therein and enable the 
cotton farmers have their grievances also redressed through this initiative. 
Further, the Committee want the Ministry/Cotton Corporation of India to expand 
the ambit of the Mobile Application to provide other related information like sale 
of cotton seed, market and trends on demand for various varieties of cotton, 
aspects related to quality of cotton including how to conform to 
domestic/international quality specifications, best practices in activities ranging 
from cultivation to handling of cotton till it reaches the market, etc. Authentic 
information in such matters could be of help to farmers. In the opinion of the 
Committee, the App can even be used to disseminate information to farmers on 
how to avoid middlemen and their activities and how to have access to the 
market directly to secure maximum benefit to the original producers. The action 
taken by the Government in this direction shall be furnished to the Committee.  
 
 
(Reply of Government) 
 
In this regard, following steps have been taken by Govt.: 
  
i. The Cott Ally mobile app has been developed by Cotton Corporation of 
India which is an OTP-based application available in nine regional 
languages, aimed at providing essential services to cotton farmers 
across the country. Its primary objectives include increasing awareness 
about MSP rates, locating nearest procurement centers, tracking 
payments, providing weather updates, offering videos on best farm 
practices, sharing important news related to cotton, and facilitating 
grievance resolution for farmers. In addition to its existing features, the 

21 
 
Cott Ally mobile app is now seamlessly integrated with the CCI website 
to offer comprehensive information such as cotton and cotton seed 
sales, market trends, and other related updates. This integration 
enhances accessibility and ensures that farmers have access to all 
relevant information at one platform. 
ii. To streamline processes and eliminate intermediaries, CCI has 
implemented an on-the-spot Aadhar-based farmer registration and 
payment system through the Public Financial Management System 
(PFMS) Portal since the 2023-24 cotton season. This system enhances 
transparency, efficiency, and ensures that genuine cotton farmers 
receive their payments directly into their Aadhar-linked bank 
accounts, thereby reducing delays and potential exploitation by 
middlemen. 
iii. Furthermore, a Blockchain-based QR coded Bale Identification & 
Traceability System (BITS) has been introduced from October 1st, 
2023. This system enables complete traceability of cotton bales 
produced by CCI, ensuring that maximum benefits accrue to the 
original producers. By leveraging blockchain technology, the BITS 
initiative enhances transparency, authenticity, and accountability in 
the cotton supply chain.  
 
 (Ministry of Textiles OM No. 6/8/2021 (Fibre-I) dated18th April,2024) 
                                                                        (Prajakta L. Verma) 
                               Joint Secretary to the Govt. of India 
 
 
Comments of the Commitee 
Please refer to Para No.18 of Chapter-I of the Report 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

22 
 
 
CHAPTER-III 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLY 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Nil 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

23 
 
 
CHAPTER-IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES 
OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
AND WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 3) 
  
The Committee reckon the fact that the Indian Council of Agricultural 
Research (ICAR) and State Agricultural University (SAUs) released 107 
varieties/hybrids comprising Bt and Non Bt cotton varieties. Further, 125 BG II 
cotton hybrids developed by private sector were also released after multi-location 
testing by ICAR-AICRP on the cotton. The Committee observe that the 
Government proposes to popularize cotton varieties to the cotton growing 
farmers by means of Front Line Demonstrations. Demonstrations are conducted 
to 10 farmers in 10 districts in which Department of Agriculture and Corporation 
(DAC) provides funding and technical support. The Committee further note that 
the developed variety cotton has good yield with location testing done by ICAR-
AICRP. The Committee observe that Bt Cotton Hybrid seeds are mostly produced 
by the private sector seed industry as a means of value capture mechanism for 
the licensed. Productivity is lower in the absence of canopy management, 
nutrient and moisture limitations and pest/disease outbreaks. The Committee 
are made aware that the problem with this Genetically Modified seeds is that 
farmers have to buy the seed every year and the farmers’ debt journey starts 
from buying seed and gets steeper as the pesticides, fertilizer and labour costs 
add up without commensurate increase in yield. Cotton cultivation/production 
plays a major role in sustaining the livelihood of millions of cotton farmers and 
other people engaged in related activities.  
The Committee are of the firm opinion that much needs to be done in the 
area of availability of affordable and climatically adapted Bt or other Hybrid 
varieties of cotton seeds in the Country. Farmer education/training initiatives in 
this connection also need to be given a fillip. Further, farmers should be further 
supported financially in quality seed procurement and in the adoption of best 
farming practices. In view of this, the Committee recommend that the Ministry 
of Textiles in coordination with the Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers’ Welfare 
should draw up specific interventional initiatives to address the problems faced 
by the farmers in procuring the genetically modified seeds by appropriation of 
their meagre resources by considering measures like a cap on prices of the same, 
impetus of seed development by various government entities, etc.  and also 
review the premium in consultation with the Textile Industries who are paying 
the premium, for creating better condition of livelihood to the cotton growing 
farmers.  
 

24 
 
(Reply of Government) 
The following steps have been taken by Government regarding the 
recommendation by the Committee: 
i. Department of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare is implementing cotton 
development programme under National Food Security Mission (NFSM) in 
15 major cotton growing States. These States include Assam, Andhra 
Pradesh, Gujarat, Haryana, Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, 
Odisha, Punjab, Rajasthan, Telangana, Tamil Nadu, Tripura, Uttar 
Pradesh & West Bengal from 2014-15. 
ii. The primary objective of this initiative is to increase production and 
productivity. Assistance is being provided to farmers for seed, canopy 
management and Integrated Pest Management (IPM) inputs to promote 
adoption of high-density planting system in shallow soils, closer planting 
in medium soils and production technology for ELS cotton.  States can 
also support cotton development programme under 
RashtriyaKrishiVikasYojana- Remunerative Approaches for Agriculture 
and Allied Sectors Rejuvenation (RKVY-RAFTAAR). 
iii. Cotton Seeds Price Control Order for uniform regulation across India for 
fixation of sale price of cotton seeds is in practice.  
iv. Under NFSM, promotion of seeds developed by the public sector is possible 
with adequate funding support and entry of varieties into the seed 
multiplication chain through National and State seed production agencies. 
(Ministry of Textiles OM No. 6/8/2021 (Fibre-I) dated18thApril,2024) 
                                                                               (Prajakta L. Verma) 
                                       Joint Secretary to the Govt. of India 
 
     Comments of the Commitee 
Please refer to Para No.8 of Chapter-I of the Report 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 5) 
  The committee note that on Bt cotton production, the ICAR-Central 
Institute for Cotton Research (CICR), Nagpur has suggested that there is scope 
to divert at least 20% of the cotton area under long duration Bt hybrids towards 
early maturing Bt varieties and non-Bt varieties of cotton including other species 
for niche areas (Gossypiumarboreum, G.barbadense and G. Hermaceum). For 
this to be realized, varieties need to be given protection under PPV FRA to 
encourage the private sector to develop Bt varieties apart from Bt hybrids. 
Adequate seed multiplication of released varieties of public sector through seed 
chain is also essential. The Committee are given to understand this to be an area 
of promise and hence shall be apprised of the action taken on the suggestions 
given by the ICAR-CICR in this regard on the Bt cotton production. 
 

25 
 
 
 (Reply of Government) 
 
Inputs in this regard are as under: 
Breeder seeds of released varieties/hybrids are available with ICAR-CICR 
and AICRP on Cotton centres. The Govt. has regulated the sale of Bt. Cotton 
Seeds by evoking the provisions of the EC Act. The details of Maximum Sale Price 
(MSP) of Bt. Cotton Seeds Packet fixed during last three years and current year 
is as under: 
 
 2020 2021 2022 2023 
BG-I 
(Rs.) 
BG-II 
(Rs.) 
BG-I (Rs.) BG-II 
(Rs.) 
BG-I 
(Rs.) 
BG-II 
(Rs.) 
BG-I 
(Rs.) 
BG-II 
(Rs.) 
635 730 635 767 635 810 635 853 
 
 
(Ministry of Textiles OM No. 6/8/2021 (Fibre-I) dated 18th April,2024) 
                                                                                   (Prajakta L. Verma) 
Joint Secretary to the Govt. of India 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
Please refer to Para No.15 of Chapter-I of the Report 
 
 
 
 
 
 
         
  

26 
 
CHAPTER-V 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES 
OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE INTERIM IN NATURE 
Recommendation (Para No. 10) 
  The Committee are made aware that Extra-long staple cotton is the most 
sought-after variety of cotton by the industries in terms of quality. Large portion 
of the imports of cotton into India also belongs to this variety as there is a 
demand supply gap in respect of domestic production of this variety. The 
Committee note that the Government are taking steps to increase the production 
of the Extra-long staple variety of cotton and also to improve the quality of cotton 
produced. It is also understood that a Quality Improvement Mission by the 
Government for cotton is in the works. The Committee are of the firm opinion 
that to improve global competitiveness of the Country in cotton, a slew of 
effectively synchronized measures involving multiple 
Ministries/Departments/Agencies of the Government is required. From seed 
development to best cultivation practices to efficient marketing measures, all 
boxes relating to development of cotton sector need to be ticked. The Committee 
feel that development of seeds that exhibit more drought/arid region tolerance 
along with resistance to pests and diseases could be one area that calls for 
immediate attention. Along with such high performance seeds, cutting edge 
techniques of drip irrigation and other farming practices can be adopted. 
Countries like Israel are reported to have developed such farming methods to 
generate outstanding results. The Committee consider partnership with the 
Private Sector in all spheres of cotton development as an option to further 
invigorate the bouquet of activities in this direction.  
 (Reply of Government) 
Efforts by Ministry of Agriculture in association with Ministry of Textiles 
are underway for development of ELS cotton varieties and hybrids to meet the 
requirements of the textile industry. Drip-irrigation technology combined with 
higher plant population has been standardized for increasing productivity and 
is ready for upscaling by state departments of agriculture in niche areas of Tamil 
Nadu and Karnataka. Under Special project on cotton, production technology for 
ELS cotton through large scale demonstrations is being promoted in the States 
of Madhya Pradesh and Tamil Nadu. 
 (Ministry of Textiles OM No. 6/8/2021 (Fibre-I) dated 18th April,2024) 
  
 
 
 
 
New Delhi;                   BAVASARAJA BOMMAI  
19th August, 2025                         CHAIRPERSON, 
28 Shravana, 1946 (Saka )                STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOUR,  
                                                         TEXTILES AND SKILL DEVELOPMENT  

27 
 
APPENDIX-I 
 
MINUTES OF THE FIFTEENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON 
LABOUR, TEXTILES AND SKILL DEVELOPMENT 
(2024-25) 
 
 
The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 19th August, 2025 from 1500 hrs. to 
16:30 hrs. in Committee Room ‘C’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
         PRESENT 
Shri Basavaraj Bommai - Chairperson 
      MEMBERS  
  LOK SABHA 
 2. Shri G. M. Harish Balayogi 
 3. Shri Aashtikar Patil Nagesh Bapurao 
 4. Shri Ram Prasad Chaudhary  
 5.                Shri G. Lakhsminarayana 
 6.            Shri Asit Kumar Mal 
           7.        Shri Kali Kumar Munda 
           8.        Shri Rudra Narayan Pany 
           9.        Shri Kartick Chandra Paul 
          10.       Shri Pradeep Purohit 
          11.       Shri Mukesh Rajput 
          12.       Shri Raja Ram Singh 
          13.       Shri Adhikari Soumendu 
          14.       Shri Manoj Tigga 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
  15. Shri Naresh Bansal 
  16. Shri Govindbhai Laljibhai Dholakia 
  17. Shri Rajendra Gehlot 
  18. Dr. Syed Naseer Hussain 
  19. Shri I.S. Inbadurai 
  20. Dr. Meenakshi Jain 
    
                    SECRETARIAT 
 
1.    Shri Lalkithang   - Joint Secretary   
2.    Ms. K. Muanniang Tunglut - Director 
3.    Ms. Mili Dinesh    -  Deputy Secretary 
4.    Shri S. Lalengzau Ngaihte - Deputy Secretary 
5.    Ms. Shilpa Kant   - Under Secretary 
 

28 
 
 
2. XXXX      XXXX      XXXX   
 
3. XXXX      XXXX      XXXX  
     
4. XXXX      XXXX      XXXX   
5. XXXX      XXXX      XXXX 
 
6. XXXX      XXXX      XXXX 
 
(The witnesses then withdrew) 
[A copy of the verbatim record of proceedings was kept on record] 
 
7.   The Committee then took up the next item on the agenda i.e. consideration 
and adoption of four draft Action Taken Reports: - 
(i) Action taken by the Government on the observations/recommendations 
contained in the Fifty-fourth Report (17th Lok Sabha) of the Committee on 
‘Schemes/Programmes of Central Silk Board for Development and 
Promotion of Silk Industry’ pertaining to the Ministry of Textiles;  
(ii) Action Taken by the Government on the observations/recommendations 
contained in the Fifty-Fifth Report (17th Lok Sabha) of the Committee on 
'Development of Cotton Sector' pertaining to Ministry of Textiles;  
(iii) Action Taken by the Government on the observations/recommendations 
contained in the First Report (18th Lok Sabha) of the Committee on 
‘Demands for Grants (2024-25)’ of the Ministry of Labour & Employment; 
and   
(iv) Action Taken by the Government on the observations/recommendations 
contained in the Second Report (18th Lok Sabha) of the Committee on 
‘Demands for Grants (2024-25)’ of the Ministry of Textiles. 
 
8. After some deliberations, the Committee adopted the aforesaid draft 
Reports with some modifications/amendments and authorized the Chairperson 
to finalise the Reports and present the same to Parliament. 
The Committee then adjourned. 
* * * * * *  
 
 

29 
 
APPENDIX-II 
(Vide Para No. 3 of the Introduction) 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONSCONTAINED IN THE FIFTY-FIFTH 
REPORT (SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
LABOUR, TEXTILES AND SKILL DEVELOPMENT  
      Total Percentage 
   
I. Total number of Recommendations 10 
 
 
II. Recommendations/Observations 
which have been accepted by the 
Government – Rec. Para Nos. 1, 2, 4, 
6, 7, 8 and 9 
 
07 70.00 
III. Recommendations/Observations 
which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government’s 
reply – Rec. Para No. Nil 
 
00 0.00 
IV Recommendations/Observations in 
respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by 
the Committee and which require 
reiteration – Rec. Para Nos. 3 and 5 
02 20.00 
V Recommendations/Observations in 
respect of which replies of the 
Government are interim in nature - 
Rec. Para No.  10  
01 10.00 
     100% 
 
 
 
 
 
 