 
 
         
 
 
          PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
          RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
PERSONNEL, PUBLIC GRIEVANCES, LAW AND JUSTICE 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
February, 2024 / Magha, 1945 (Saka) 
 
 
REPORT NO 
144 
   
1313
7137-
-- 
ONE HUNDRED FORTY FOURTH REPORT 
ON 
ACTION TAKEN ON ONE HUNDRED THIRTY THIRD REPORT OF THE 
COMMITTEE 
ON THE SUBJECT "JUDICIAL PROCESSES AND THEIR REFORMS" 
PERTAINING TO 
THE DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE 
(MINISTRY OF LAW & JUSTICE)  
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 7th February, 2024) 
 (Laid on the Table of the Lok Sabha on 7th February, 2024) 
 

 2 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
E-mail : rs-cpers@sansad.nic.in 
 
Website : http://sansad.in/rs 
 
 
 

 3 
C O N T E N T S 
 
PAGE NO. 
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE                                                                                      4 
 
2. INTRODUCTION                                                                                                                           5 
 
3. ACRONYMS                                                                                                                                   6 
 
4. REPORT                                                                                                                                           7 
                                                                                                                               
(I) CHAPTER I                                                                                                                       9 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN 
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
(II) CHAPTER II                                                                                                                          12 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES 
NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES GIVEN BY THE 
GOVERNMENT 
(III) CHAPTER III                                                                                                                         17 
                                                                                    
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH 
COMMITTEE DOES NOT ACCEPT THE REASONS GIVEN BY THE 
GOVERNMENT AND REITERATES ITS RECOMMENDATIONS    
 
(IV) CHAPTER IV                                                                                                                         24                                                                                     
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL 
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN RECEIVED   
 
5. RELEVANT MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF THE COMMITTEE                                         26 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                       
 
 
 
 

 4 
 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
(Re-constituted w.e.f. 13th September, 2023) 
 
 
1. Shri Sushil Kumar Modi  Chairman 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shrimati Vandana Chavan 
3. Shri Mahesh Jethmalani 
4. Shri Kanakamedala Ravindra Kumar 
5. Shri Sanjay Raut 
6. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Ray 
7. Shri K. R. Suresh Reddy  
8. Shrimati Darshana Singh 
9. Shri Vivek K. Tankha 
10. Shri P. Wilson 
 
LOK SABHA 
11. Shri Manickam Tagore B. 
12. Shri Kalyan Banerjee 
13. Shri Pradan Baruah 
14. Shri Venkatesh Netha Borlakunta 
15. Shri Vinod Chavda 
16. Shrimati Veena Devi 
17. Shri Jasbir Singh Gill 
18. Shri Choudhury Mohan Jatua 
19. Shri Raghu Rama Krishna Raju Kanumuru  
20. Shri Jyotirmay Singh Mahato 
21. Shri Malook Nagar 
22. Dr. Ramesh Pokhriyal "Nishank" 
23. Shri Suresh Kumar Pujari 
24. Shri A. Raja  
25. Shri Omprakash Bhupalsingh alias Pavan Rajenimbalkar 
26. Shri Upendra Singh Rawat 
27. Shrimati Sandhya Ray 
28. Shri Kuldeep Rai Sharma 
29. Shri Mahendra Singh Solanky 
30.   Shri Rajan Baburao Vichare 
31.  Vacant 
 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri P.Narayanan, Director 
2. Smt. Indira Chaturvedi Vaidya, Additional Director 
3. Shri Sunil Tripathi, Under Secretary 
4. Ms. Chinmayee Chakravarty, Assistant Committee Officer 
 

 5 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 I, the Chairman of the Department related Parliamentary Standing Committee 
on Personnel, Public Grievances, Law and Justice, having been authorized by the 
Committee to present the Report on its behalf, do hereby present this One Hundred 
Forty Fourth (144th) on Action Taken on One Hundred and Thirty Third (133rd) 
Report of the Committee on "Judicial Processes and their Reforms " pertaining to the 
Ministry of Law & Justice.  
2. The One Hundred and Thirty Third Report of the Department related 
Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions, 
Law and Justice was presented to Rajya Sabha on 07th August, 2023 and laid on the 
Table of Lok Sabha on the 07th August, 2023.  
3. The Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances & Pensions, furnished their 
Action Taken Replies on the One Hundred and Thirty Third Report of the Committee 
on 08th November, 2023 . The Committee considered the draft One Hundred Forty 
Fourth Report (144th) and adopted the same in its meeting held on 6th February, 2024. 
4. For the facility of reference and convenience, the observations and 
recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters in the body of 
the Report. 
 
 
New Delhi     
7th February, 2024      SUSHIL KUMAR MODI 
                                                       Chairman, 
                                                         Department-related Parliamentary Standing  
                                                       Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances, 
                                                                                                               Law and Justice 
 
 
 

 6 
 
ACRONYMS 
 
AOR Advocates on Record 
CCR Case Clearance Rate  
CJI Chief Justice of India 
COPLOT Committee on Papers laid on the Table 
DOJ Department of Justice 
HC High Court 
MOP Memorandum of Procedure  
 NCRWC The National Commission to Review the Working of the Constitution 
 NJDG The National Judicial Data Grid 
OBCs Other Backward Castes 
RTI Right to Information 
SC/SCI Supreme Court of India 
SCC Supreme Court Collegium  
SCs Scheduled Castes 
STs Scheduled Tribes 
  

 7 
R E P O R T 
 This Action Taken Report of the Committee deals with the action taken by the 
Ministry of Law & Justice on the recommendations / observations of the Department-
related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances, Law and 
Justice in its One Hundred and Thirty Third (133rd) Report on "Judicial Processes and 
their Reforms", which was presen ted to the Rajya Sabha on 07th August, 2023 and 
laid on the Table of the Lok Sabha on the 07th August, 2023. 
2. The Committee had made 22 recommendations/observations in its  133rd   
Report. Replies of the Department thereto have been categorized and scrutinized 
under four chapters on the basis of satisfaction of the Committee. These replies have 
been categorized as follows: 
Chapter – I:  Recommendations/observations (5) which have been accepted by the 
Department, i.e. in respect of paras 21, 22, 30, 31 and 32 of the 
Report. The Committee is pleased to note that the Department has 
accepted those recommendations. 
Chapter – II:  Recommendations/observations ( 3) which the C ommittee does not 
desire to pursue in view of the replies given by the Department, i.e. in 
respect of paras 47, 48 and 68 of the Report. The Committee is 
satisfied with the explanations advanced by the Department and does 
not wish to pursue those as of now.  
Chapter – III:  Recommendations/observations (12) in respect of which Committee 
has not accepted the replies of the Department, i.e. with regard to 
paras 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 49, 61, 66, 67, 70 and 71  of the Report. 
The Committee does not accept the reasons given by the Department 
and reiterates the same. 
Chapter – IV: Recommendations/observations (2) in respect of which final  replies 
of the Government have not been received. The Committee expresses 
its deep concern that it did not receive the replie s from the 
Government in respect of Committee's recommendations vide Para 
Nos. 79 and 82. 
 
 

 8 
4. The details of the ATR have been discussed in the respective Chapters in the 
succeeding pages. For reference purpose, para  numbers of the original report (i.e. of 
133rd Report) have been mentioned at the end of each recommendation/observation.   
--- 
  

 9 
CHAPTER I 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN 
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION 
FEASIBILITY OF REGIONAL BENCHES OF SUPREME COURT 
1.1 The Committee feels that the demand for having regional benches of the 
Supreme Court of India is about 'access to justice,' which is a fundamental right 
under the Constitution. There has been a long -standing demand for  having 
regional benches of the Highest Court in the country for taking justice to the 
doorstep of the common citizen. The regional benches may also be seen as a 
solution to the overflowing caseload of the judiciary and to reduce the litigation 
cost to the common man. (Para 30 of the report) 
  
1.2      The Delhi-centric Supreme Court causes a big hurdle for those litigants 
who are coming from far -flung areas of the country. First, there is a language 
problem for them, and then finding lawyers, the cost of l itigation, travel, and 
staying in Delhi makes justice very costly. (Para 31 of the report) 
  
1.3      This Committee has also been recommending for a long time on 
establishment of regional benches of the Supreme Court in the Country. The 
Committee still ho lds the view that the Supreme Court of India may invoke 
Article 130 of the Constitution for establishing its regional benches at four or 
five locations in the Country. The interpretation of Constitution and 
Constitutional matters may be dealt at Delhi and the regional benches may 
decide appellate matters. However, the appellate benches may not be made as 
another layer of the judiciary by treating their decisions as final. (Para 32 of the 
report) 
  
Action Taken on para 1.1 to 1.3: 
  
1.4 As per Article 130 of  the Constitution of India, the Supreme Court shall sit in 
Delhi or such other place or places, as the Chief Justice of India may, with the 
approval of the President, from time to time, appoint. 
  

 10 
The matter of regional benches of the Supreme Court has bee n referred for the 
opinion of the Attorney General on two occasions. The then Learned Attorney 
General for India, Shri G.E. Vahanvati, vide his letter dated 21 st January, 2010 
intimated that in his opinion, the issue of regional benches of the Supreme Cour t is 
impermissible. Constitutional amendments of this kind are simply unacceptable for 
various reasons. Further, the then Learned Attorney General for India, Shri Mukul 
Rohatgi, vide letter dated 31 st March 2016, opined that the Court sitting in Regional 
Benches would impair the unity, integrity, importance and majesty of the Supreme 
Court and the Supreme Court ought not to sit in the regional Benches for the 
aforesaid reasons and also for additional reason that there would be immense conflict 
of views whic h may become difficult to resolve entailing time and expenditure of 
litigants. The issue of territorial jurisdiction was also flagged. The Supreme Court has 
been consistently rejecting the proposal for setting up of the Benches of Supreme 
Court at a place outside Delhi.  
           
In Writ Petition WP(C) No. 36/2016 on establishment of National Court of 
Appeal, the Supreme Court vide its judgment dated 13.07.2016 deemed it proper to 
refer the aforementioned issue to Constitutional Bench for authoritative 
pronouncement. The matter is sub-judice in the Supreme Court. 
          
The Supreme Court has been consistently rejecting the proposal for setting up 
of the Benches of Supreme Court at a place outside Delhi.  
           
  
The matter is sub-judice in the Supreme Court. 
 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION 
PREPARATION AND PUBLICATION OF ANNUAL REPORTS BY THE 
SUPREME COURT AND HIGH COURTS 
  
1.5    The Committee notes that the preparation and publication of the Annual 
Report is like an appraisal of what that institution has done over the past year. 
There is no harm if each Court also, at the beginning of every year, takes stock 
of work that it ha d transacted last year. After all, Courts are also public 
institutions, and the preparation and publication of the Annual Report will 
highlight the work of the Judiciary and make it accessible to the public. The 

 11 
Supreme Court is already publishing its Annu al Report also depicting the work 
done by all High Courts of the Country. (Para 21 of the report) 
  
1.6    For High Courts, only some of them are publishing their Annual Report on 
their own volition, the others need to do the same. Accordingly, the Committee 
recommends the Department of Justice to approach the Supreme Court of India 
requesting them to issue necess ary directions to all the High Courts to prepare 
and publish their Annual Reports regularly, on their respective websites. In this 
regard, the Supreme Court may suggest the items to be included in the Annual 
Report, so that there is uniformity in the Repor t to be prepared by different 
High Courts. (Para 22 of the report) 
  
Action taken on para No.1.5 and 1.6:  
  
1.7  The Committee appreciated the elaborate Annual Report prepared by the 
Orissa High Court and suggested adoption of format developed by Orissa H igh Court 
by all High Courts.   
  
Chief Justice of India, Supreme Court of India and all Hon‟ble Chief Justices 
of High Courts have already been requested on 19.6.2023 to consider the aspect of 
uniform publication of Annual Reports by all the High Courts in the fixed periodicity 
of time and disseminate the same through their websites for knowledge of public on 
the lines of Orissa High Court so that this small initiative will go a long way to foster 
better understanding and more appreciation amongst the general public of the judicial 
initiatives.     
 
  
   
 
*** 
 
 
 
 
 

 12 
CHAPTER II 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE 
COMMITTEE DOES NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF 
THE REPLIES GIVEN BY THE GOVERNMENT 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION 
EXPLORING THE POSSIBILITIES OF INCREASING THE RETIREMENT 
AGE OF HIGH COURT AND SUPREME COURT JUDGES 
  
2.1    In view of the above observations the Committee feels that the age of 
retirement of judges needs to be increased in sync with the increase in the 
longevity and advancement in medical sciences leading to improved health of the 
population. The Committee accordingly, recommends that relevant Articles of 
the Constitution of India need to be amended and the age of retirement of 
Judges of the Supreme Court and High Courts may be increased appropriately. 
                   (Para 47)        
  
Action Taken on para 2.1: 
  
2.2(a)      Constitutional position – Clause (1) of Article 124 of the Constitution 
provides that a Judge of the Supreme Court shall hold office until he attains the age 
of 65 years and Clause (1) of Articl e 217 of the Constitution of India provides that 
every Judge of a High Court shall hold office until he attains the age of sixty -two 
years. Clause (3) of Article 224 of the Constitution provides that no person appointed 
as an Additional or Acting Judge of a High Court shall hold office after attaining the 
age of sixty-two years. 
  
2.2(b)      Revision of retirement age of High Court Judges - The retirement age of 
High Court Judges, which was fixed at 60 years in the beginning, was revised to 62 
years w.e.f. 5.10.1963 by the Constitution (Fifteenth Amendment) Act, 1963 pursuant 
to the increase in the retirement age of Central Government employees from 55 to 58 
years w.e.f. 1.12.1962 on the recommendations of the Second Central Pay 
Commission, mainly relying upon increase in life expectancy in India. 
  
2.2(c)      Resolution passed by Chief Justices‟ Conference in 2002 - In the Chief 
Justices' Conference held in September, 2002 at New Delhi, a resolution was passed 
on raising the age of retirement of High Court Judges. 

 13 
  
2.2(d)      Recommendations of the Parliamentary Standing Committee - Department-
Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances, Law 
and Justice has recommended in its 39 th Report presented to the Rajya Sabha on 
29.04.2010 for increase in the retirement age of Judges of High Courts from 62 to 65 
to be at par with the retirement age of Judges of the Supreme Court. 
  
2.3    Earlier proposal to enhance the age of retirement of High Court Judges 
2.3(a)      Government introd uced „The Constitution (one Hundred and Fourteenth 
Amendment) Bill, 2010‟, which provided for increasing the retirement age of the 
Judges of High Courts from 62 to 65 years in the Lok Sabha on 25.08.2010.   The Bill 
was referred to the parliamentary Standin g Committee for examination.   The 
Committee in its 44th Report on the Bill recommended that the Bill in its present 
form be passed without delay. 
  
The Bill was taken up for discussion in the Lok Sabha on 
28.12.2011.  However, the discussion remained incon clusive due to adjournment of 
the Winter Session of the Parliament and could not be taken up for further discussion 
in the subsequent Sessions.   The Bill lapsed with the dissolution of the 15 th Lok 
Sabha.   
           
Increase in life expectancy, improved health standards, need for utilization of 
the knowledge, experience and wisdom of High Court Judges etc. were some of the 
reasons put forward in support of increasing the retirement age of Judges.   
  
2.3(b)      The then Chief Justice of India also proposed increasing the retirement age 
of High Court Judges on June 21, 2019.   However, as of now the Government has no 
proposal to increase the retirement age of Judges, Additional and Acting Judges of 
the High Courts. An y requirement for increasing the retirement age of High Court 
Judges in the future will be considered by the Government at an appropriate time in 
consultation with the various stake holders. Therefore, the Government does not feel 
the need to increase the retirement age of the High Court Judges as proposed by the 
Bill. 
  
2.4    Stand of Government on the proposal: 
  
2.4(a)      The increase in age of retirement of High Court would bring parity in the 
retirement of Judges of the High Courts and Supreme Court  and would reduce 

 14 
attraction among High Court Judges for getting elevated to Supreme Court. The 
probable consequence of enhancing the age of High Court Judges could be that many 
High Court Judges may prefer to remain in High Courts being their Parent High 
Court either as Judge or as Chief Justices, in case the retirement ages of the Supreme 
Court and High Court Judges is the same. Further, bringing parity in the retirement 
age of the Supreme Court and High Court Judges may result in consequential demand 
for increase in retirement age of the Supreme Court Judges.   Many retired Judges of 
High Courts are appointed as members of Tribunals. Increase in retirement age to 65 
may deprive the tribunals of having Presiding Officer/Judicial Members from retired 
High Court Judges. 
  
2.4(b)      Also it would be appropriate if the increase in retirement age is considered 
along with other measures to ensure transparency and accountability in the 
appointments to the Higher Judiciary and a concerted effort is made to fill up the 
existing vacancies.   
  
2.4(c)      It may lead to a situation where there will be no regular vacancies for the 
post of High Court Judges for the enhanced years of service and the authorities would 
totally be deprived of the opportunity to recruit deserving and meritor ious candidates 
from feeder channel i.e. JOs, Advocates.  
  
2.4(d)      Enhancement of age of retirement might extend benefit in terms of 
extended years of service in certain non -deserving cases and lead to non -performing 
and under-performing judges to continue.  
  
2.4(e)      There will be no limit to it and in future, there may efforts to increase the 
age further.   Besides this, other public agencies i.e. Tribunals, Commissions, 
etc.  may also follow suit starting a chain reaction.  
  
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION 
 
2.5.    However, while increasing the age of retirement for judges, the 
performance of Judges may be reassessed based on their health conditions, 
quality of judgements, number of judgments delivered etc. For this, a system of 
appraisal may be devised and put in place, by the Supreme Court collegium, 
before any judge is recommended for enhancement of their tenure.       (Para 48) 
  

 15 
Action Taken on para 2.5: 
  
2.6 Linking performance evaluation to the issue of increase in retirement age may 
not be practical and may not actually bring out the desired results.   This will result in 
empowering the SCC for the evaluation of the Judges at the time of giving extensions 
on individual basis and will further erode the powers of Parliament and empower 
judiciary through the SCC to take decision on the enhancement of age.  This step may 
also result in undue favouritism and make the judges susceptible to pressures, thus 
impinging on their performance as impartial judges.   Besides, this would create 
avoidable burden on the limited manpower resources in the judiciary and the 
executive, who are involved in the appointment process.  
 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION 
VACATIONS IN THE SUPREME COURT AND HIGH COURTS 
2.7    With regard to High Courts, the pendency is humongous. More than 60 
lakh cases are pending as on date, which is a reason for deep concern. Though it 
is also a grim fact that almost all the High Courts have a very high level of 
vacancies. As on 31.12.2022, overall vacancies in the High Courts stood at 30% 
of the sanctioned strength and in many of them had vacancies ranging from 40 - 
50%. Thus vacations are not the only cause of high pendency in the higher 
judiciary.                   (Para 68) 
  
Action Taken on para 2.7: 
  
2.8 As on 01.11.2023 against the sanctioned strength of 1114, 782 Judges are 
working leaving vacancy of 332 Judges to be filed. At present, 114 proposals of the 
High Court are at various stages of processing between the Government and the 
Supreme Court Collegium. Further recommendations from High Court Collegium are 
yet to be received in respect of the remaining 218 vacancies of the High Courts. 
  
Judges of various High Courts are appointed under Article 217 a nd 224 of the 
Constitution of India and as per the procedure laid down in the Memorandum of 
Procedure (MoP) prepared in 1998 pursuant to the Supreme Court Judgment of 
October 6, 1993 (Second Judges case) read with their Advisory Opinion of October 
28, 1998 (Third Judges case).  As per MoP, initiation of proposal for appointment of 
Judges in the High Courts vests with the Chief Justice of the concerned High Court. 

 16 
Chief Justice of the High Court is required to initiate the proposal to fill up the 
vacancy of a High Court Judge six months prior to the occurrence of vacancy. 
Government appoints only those persons as Judges of High Courts who are 
recommended by Supreme Court Collegium (SCC).   
  
Filling up of vacancies in High Courts is a continuous, integrated a nd 
collaborative process between the Executive and the Judiciary. It requires 
consultation and approval from various Constitutional Authorities both at the State 
and Centre level. At regular intervals, Government receives names recommended by 
the Supreme C ourt Collegium for appointment as Judges in various High Courts, 
which are processed for necessary approval as per the provisions of Memorandum of 
Procedure. While every effort is made to fill up the existing vacancies expeditiously, 
vacancies of Judges in  High Courts do keep on arising on account of retirement, 
resignation or elevation of Judges and also due to increase in the strength of Judges. 
 
 
*** 
  

 17 
CHAPTER III 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF 
WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT ACCEPT THE REASONS 
GIVEN BY THE GOVERNMENT AND REITERATES ITS 
RECOMMENDATION 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION 
SOCIAL DIVERSITY IN APPOINTMENT OF JUDGES IN THE SUPREME 
COURT AND HIGH COURTS 
 
3.1 As per the data provided by the Government on the social status of the 
Judges of the High Courts and otherwise also, it can be seen that our higher 
judiciary suffers from a 'diversity deficit'. The representation of SCs, STs, 
OBCs, Women, and Minorities in t he higher judiciary is far below the desired 
levels and does not reflect the social diversity of the country. In recent years 
there has been a declining trend in representation from all the marginalized 
sections of Indian society.               (Para 12) 
  
3.2      Though there is no provision for reservation in the judicial appointments 
at High Courts and Supreme Court level, the Committee feels that adequate 
representation of various sections of Indian society will further strengthen the 
trust, credibility, and acceptability of the Judiciary among the citizens. (Para 13) 
  
3.3      The Hon’ble Supreme Court of India itself, in its judgment dated 
06.10.1993 in the Supreme Court Advocates -on-Record Assn. v. Union of India 
(Second Judges Case) has inter-alia recorded the following: 
          “…Along with other factors, such as, proper representation of all 
sections of the people from all parts of the country, legitimate expectation of 
the suitable and equally meritorious Judges to be considered in their turn i s 
a relevant factor for due consideration while making the choice of the most 
suitable and meritorious amongst them, the outweighing consideration being 
merit, to select the best available for the apex court.”                        (Para 14) 
  
3.4      Further, the Government has informed that the need for ensuring 
adequate representation has also been acknowledged by the Supreme Court 

 18 
Collegium, which while sending their comments on the draft MoP vide CJI’s 
letter dated March 2017 agreed to the following provision: 
“Merit and integrity shall be the prime criteria for appointment of a judge in 
the High Court.   As far as possible, representation shall be given to women 
and marginalized sections of society.   However, in case of judicial officers, 
due weightage shall also be given to their inter-se seniority.”          (Para 15) 
  
3.5      Thus the Committee is of the view that while making recommendations 
for appointments to the Higher Judiciary, both the Supreme Court and the High 
Court's Collegiums should recommend an adequate number of women and 
candidates from the marginalized sections of the society including minorities. 
This provision should be clearly mentioned in the Memoranda of Procedure 
(MoP), which is presently under finalization.             (Para 16) 
  
3.6      Further, as of now, data related to the social status of High Court judges 
are available from 2018 onwards, the Committee recommends the Department 
of Justice find ways and means to collect such data in respect of all judges 
presently serv ing in the Supreme Court and High Courts. For doing this, if 
required, necessary amendments may be brought in the respective Acts/service 
rules of the judges.                 (Para 17) 
 
Action Taken 
3.7 Appointment of Judges of the Supreme Court and High C ourts is made under 
Articles 124, 217 and 224 of the Constitution of India, which do not provide for 
reservation for any caste or class of persons.  
         In present system of appointment of Judges to the constitutional courts through 
the Collegium syst em, the onus to provide social diversity and representation to all 
sections of the society including SC/ST/OBC/Women/Minorities primarily falls on 
the Judiciary. As per MOP, initiation of a proposal for appointment of Judges in the 
Supreme Court vests with the Chief Justice of India, while initiation of a proposal for 
appointment of Judges in the High Courts vests with the Chief Justice of the 
concerned High Court. All the names recommended by High Court Collegium are 
sent with the views of the Government t o the Supreme Court Collegium (SCC) for 
advice. Government appoints only those as recommended by the High Court 
Collegium/Supreme Court Collegium.         
  

 19 
The Memorandum of Procedure was under finalization by the Government in 
consultation with the Supreme Court Collegium in view of Supreme Court judgment 
of WP(C) 13 of 2015 in NJAC matter vide Order dated 16-12-2015 on supplementing 
the Memorandum of Proced ure (MoP).  In the draft MoP for appointment of judges 
in the High Court, it was agreed by the Supreme Court that  “Merit and integrity shall 
be the prime criteria for appointment of a judge in the High Court.  As far as possible, 
representation shall be g iven to women and marginalized sections of 
society.  However, in case of judicial officers, due weightage shall also be given to 
their inter-se seniority.”   
The Supreme Court vide its order dated 4.07.2017 in Suo Motu  Contempt 
Petition (Civil) No.1 of 2017 in case of one of the Judges of Calcutta High 
Court  inter alia  highlights the need to revisit the process of selection and 
appointment of Judges of the Constitutional Courts factoring in the need for social 
diversity. The Government of India conveyed the need to make improvement on the 
draft MoP to the Secretary General of the Supreme Court vide letter dated 
11.07.2017. In its recent communication dated 06.01.2023 to the Chief Justice of 
India, the Government has emp hasized the need to finalize the MoP in view of 
various judicial pronouncements. The views of the Supreme Court on draft MoP are 
awaited. 
 The Proforma for seeking information on recommendee Judges for elevation 
to the High Courts, as prescribed by the Sup reme Court for all the High Courts was 
revised in July 2017. As a result, data is available since the year 2018. The veracity of 
the data has not been cross -checked as no caste certificate is being sought at the time 
of appointment. However, class/category-wise data in respect of the remaining judges 
who are presently serving in the Supreme Court and High Courts is being sought 
from the judiciary and there appears no need to altering/amending the service rules of 
the judges for the purpose. 
  
In last one ye ar, i.e. from 31 st October, 2022 to 8 th November, 2023, the 
number of judges appointed, belonging to different category i.e. from SC, ST, OBC, 
Unreserved and Women, are given below:- 
  
Sl. 
No. 
Category No. of Judges Appointed 
1. Unreserved 81 
2. SC 5 

 20 
3. ST 5 
4. OBC 20 
5. Minority 8 (04Jain, 2 Christian, 1 
Muslim and 1 Zoroastrian) 
6. Women 22 
  Total 141 
  
In the present system of appointments, the judiciary initiates the proposals to 
appoint the Judges in the High Courts and Supreme Courts and the onus of 
addressing the issue rests with the Judiciary. However, the Government is committed 
to social diversity in the appointment of Judges in the Higher Judiciary. The Hon'ble 
Minister of Law & Justice has been requesting the Chief Justices of High Court s that 
while sending proposals for appointment of Judges, due consideration be given to 
suitable candidates belonging to Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes, Other 
Backward Classes, Minorities and Women to ensure social diversity in appointment 
of Judges in High Courts.  
 
Further observation of the Committee: 
3.8  The Committee observes that the views/ comments on draft Memoranda of 
Procedure (MoP)  of the Supreme Court are still awaited . Whenever it is 
finalized, the Government may factor in the aspect of social diversity into it.  The 
Committee desires that the Ministry may pursue the Supreme Court to send its 
views on the MoP at the earliest. 
3.9 The Committee also notes that the class/category-wise data in respect of 
the judges who are presently serving in the Supreme Court and High Courts is 
available from the year 2017. For the remaining judges who are presently 
serving in the Supreme Court and High Courts, data has been sought from the 
judiciary by the Ministry .  This process may be expedited with judiciary and it 
may be forwarded to th e Committee for examination as and when such an 
exercise is completed.  
 
 
 
 

 21 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION 
EXPLORING THE POSSIBILITIES OF INCREASING THE RETIREMENT 
AGE OF HIGH COURT AND SUPREME COURT JUDGES 
 
3.10 Many stakeholders had also raised objections to the post -retirement 
assignments given to judges, and the Committee is accordingly, of the view that 
with the increase in the age of retirement of judges, the practice of post -
retirement assignments to judges of Supreme Court and High Courts in 
bodies/institutions financed from public exchequer may be reassessed to ensure 
their impartiality.                 (Para 49) 
 
Action Taken 
3.11 Appointments of retired Supreme Court Judges to various Constitutional posts , 
Commissions, Tribunals etc. are made by different Ministries/Departments as per 
relevant rules laid down by the respective appointing authority. Some of these bodies 
require expertise and experience possessed by the Judges of the Supreme Court /High 
Courts. 
 
Further observation of the Committee: 
3.12 Though t he Committee takes cognizance of the stand of the Committee 
regarding appointments of retired Supreme Court Judges to various 
Constitutional posts, Commissions, Tribunals etc. made by different 
Ministries/Departments as per relevant rules laid down by the respective 
appointing authority,  nevertheless the Committee suggests that the entire 
gamut of issues related to such appointments of retired judges may be 
comprehensively studied again and relooked upon by the Ministry.   
 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION 
VACATIONS IN THE SUPREME COURT AND HIGH COURTS 
3.13 During the deliberations on this issue, most of the members were of the 
opinion that the need of the hour is an efficient judiciary that is not only 
committed to meeting the needs and interests of the citizens but also 
communicates this commitment by modif ying its practices to suit the needs of 

 22 
the country. The judiciary, therefore, needs to be sensitized from shutting down 
courts en masse for a couple of months a year.             (Para 61) 
  
3.14    The demand for doing away with vacations in the Courts emanates 
primarily due to two factors, one is the huge pendency of cases in our courts, 
and the other is the inconvenience faced by the litigants during the vacations of 
the courts. A common man holds a perception that despite having such huge 
pendency of cases their judges go on long vacations. Further during the 
vacations, the litigants have to suffer a lot despite having a handful of vacation 
courts/benches.                 (Para 66) 
  
3.15    Though in this connection it may be noted that for the past few years, the 
pendency in the Supreme Court has remained static and in the year 2022 the 
disposal of cases was more than the number of cases instituted in that year. Thus 
it can be seen that as f ar as the disposal of cases is concerned, the performance 
of our Supreme Court is quite good. The problem lies with the legacy arrears of 
about 35000.                 (Para 67) 
  
3.16    From the foregoing discussion it can be seen that vacations in the 
Judiciary are not the only factor for pendency. For reducing pendency there is a 
need to have a multipronged strategy. However, at the same time, it is an 
undeniable fact that vacations in the judiciary are a 'colonial legacy' and with 
entire court going on vacation en masse  causes deep inconvenience to the 
litigants.                   (Para 70) 
  
3.17.    In this scenario, the Committee is of the view that the suggestion of the 
former Chief Justice of India Shri RM Lodha on court vacations, that instead of 
all the judges going on vacation, all at one time, individual judges should take 
their leave at different times through the year so that the courts are constantly 
open and there are always benches present to hear cases, should be considered 
by the Judiciary.                  (Para 71) 
  
Action taken on para Nos. 3.13 to  3. 17:  
  
As a part of the recommendations of the 133 rd Report, the Parliamentary 
Standing Committee has endorsed the suggestion of former Chief Justice of India 
Shri R.M. Lodha on Court vacations, who opined that instead of all the judges going 
on vacations, all at one time, individual judges should take their leave at different 

 23 
times through the year, so that the courts are constantly open and are always present 
to hear cases, which should be considered by Judiciary. Since the vacations for the 
Supreme Court and various High Courts are prescribed as per the rules framed by the 
respective courts for which they have been empowered under the provisions of the 
Constitution, the reco mmendations of the Hon‟ble Committee has been sent by the 
Department of Justice to the Supreme Court of India  and the Registrar Generals of 
the State High Courts after due approval of the Hon‟ble MoS (I/C), Law & 
Justice.  Their response is awaited.  
 
Further observation of the Committee 
3.18 The Department may take up the issue with  the Supreme Court of 
India and the Registrar Generals of the State High Courts  to forward their 
response on the recommendations of the Committee regarding staggered 
vacation by individual judges at different times of the year, at the earliest , so 
that the issue of vacation can be settled for once and all. Once this issue is 
finalized, the Courts will have more days at its disposal, which will enable it to 
reduce the pendency  and mitigate the inconvenience presently being faced by 
the litigants, to a large extent.   
 
 
 
*** 
  

 24 
CHAPTER IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF 
WHICH FINAL REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT 
BEEN RECEIVED:  
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION 
MANDATORY DECLARATION OF ASSETS BY THE JUDGES OF THE 
SUPREME COURT AND HIGH COURTS 
  
4.1   As a general practice, all constitutional functionaries and government 
servants must file annual returns of their assets and liabilities. The Supreme 
Court has gone to the ex tent of holding that the public has a right to know the 
assets of those standing for elections as MPs or MLAs. When so, it belies logic 
that Judges don't need to disclose their assets and liabilities. Anybody holding 
public office and drawing a salary from  the exchequer should mandatorily 
furnish annual returns of their property. (Para 79 of the report) 
  
4.2    Declaration of assets by the Judges of the Higher Judiciary will only bring 
more trust and credibility into the system. As the last resolution of t he Supreme 
Court on the declaration of assets by Judges on a voluntary basis is not complied 
with, the Committee recommends the Government to bring about appropriate 
legislation to make it mandatory for Judges of the higher judiciary (Supreme 
Court and High Courts) to furnish their property returns on an annual basis to 
the appropriate authority. (Para 82 of the report) 
  
Action taken on para No.4.0 and 4.1: 
  
4.3 Based on the recommendations made by the Parliamentary Standing 
Committee, this Department is proposing to frame Rules under the High Court 
Judges Act, 1954 and Supreme Court Judges Act, 1958 to lay down a procedure for 
making statutory provisions in the Rules for  Declaration of Assets by the Judges of 
the Supreme Court and High Court Judges  on their initial appointment and thereafter 
every year by the due date.   Consultation with the Registry of the Supreme Court has 
since been initiated, soliciting their views in the matter.   Their response, however, is 
awaited. 

 25 
 
Further observation of the Committee: 
4.4 The Department may fastrack the consultation process with the Registry 
of the Supreme Court for making statutory provisions in the Rules 
for Declaration of Assets by the Judges of the Supreme Court and High Court 
Judges on their initial appointment and apprise the Committee of the same. 
 
 
      ******* 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 26 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINUTES 

 27 
VII 
SEVENTH MEETING  
 
          The Department -related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, 
Public Grievances, Law and Justice met at 1.00 PM on Tuesday, 06.02.2024, in 
Committee Room No.4, Block „A‟, Parliament House Annexe Extension Building, 
New Delhi.  
  
MEMBERS PRESENT 
i. Shri Sushil Kumar Modi      -        Chairman 
          Rajya Sabha 
ii. Shrimati Vandana Chavan 
iii. Shri Mahesh Jethmalani 
iv. Shri Kanakamedala Ravindra Kumar 
v. Shri Sanjay Raut 
vi. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Ray 
vii. Shri K.R.Suresh Reddy 
viii. Shrimati Darshana Singh 
ix. Shri Vivek K.Tankha 
 Lok Sabha 
x. Shri Malook Nagar 
xi. Shri Raghu Rama Krishna Raju Kanumuru 
xii. Shri Suresh Kumar Pujari 
xiii. Shri A.Raja 
xiv. Shri Omprakash Bhupalsingh alias Pavan Rajenimbalkar 
xv. Shri Rajan Baburao Vichare 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri P. Narayanan, Director 
2. Smt.Indira Chaturvedi Vaidya, Additional Director 
3. Shri Abhyuday Singh Shekhawat, OSD to the Vice-President of India 
4. Shri Sunil Tripathi, Under Secretary 
5. Shri Prabhakar Singh, Under Secretary 

 28 
 2.          At the outset, the Chairman welcomed all the Members to the meeting of the 
Committee and apprised them about the agenda of the meeting, i.e. consideration and 
adoption of the following draft reports of the Committee: 
i. *                                                        *                                                      * 
ii. *                                                        *                                                      * 
iii. *                                                        *                                                      * 
iv. 144th Report on Action Taken on 133 rd Report of the Committee on the subject 
"Judicial Processes and their Reforms" pertaining to the Department of Justice 
(Ministry of Law and Justice).  
3.          The Committee unanimously adopted all the draft Reports and decided to 
present those Reports to both Houses of Parliament on 07 th February, 2024.   The 
Committee authorized Shri Vivek K.  Tankha and, in his absence, Shri P. Wilson to 
present the Reports in Rajya Sabha and Shri Raghu Rama Krishna Raju Kanumuru 
and, in his absence, Shri Malook Nagar to lay the reports in Lok Sabha.  
5.      The meeting adjourned at 2.15 PM. 
  
  
New Delhi                                                                    P. NARAYANAN 
      6th February, 2024                                                               DIRECTOR    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                             
*pertains to other matters 