PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA 28
DEPARTMENT -RELA TED PARLIAMENT ARY STANDING
COMMITTEE  ON PERSONNEL,  PUBLIC  GRIEVANCES,  
LAW AND JUSTICE
TWENTY EIGHTH REPORT
ON
THE SUPREME COURT (NUMBER OF JUDGES)
AMENDMENT BILL, 2008
TH 
(PRESENTED TO THE HON’BLE CHAIRMAN, RAJYA SABHA ON 4 AUGUST, 2008)
ND 
(LAID ON THE TABLES OF THE RAJYA SABHA AND LOK SABHA ON 22 OCTOBER, 2008)
TH 
(PRESENTED TO THE HON’BLE CHAIRMAN, RAJYA SABHA ON 4 AUGUST, 2008)
ND 
(LAID ON THE TABLES OF THE RAJYA SABHA AND LOK SABHA ON 22 OCTOBER, 2008)
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
OCTOBER, 2008/ASVINA, 1930 (SAKA)OCTOBER, 2008/ASVINA, 1930 (SAKA)

Website : http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail : rsc-pers@sansad.nic.in

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA  SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON PERSONNEL, PUBLIC GRIEVANCES,
LAW AND JUSTICE
TWENTY EIGHTH REPORT
ON
THE SUPREME COURT (NUMBER OF JUDGES)
AMENDMENT BILL, 2008
(PRESENTED TO THE HON’BLE CHAIRMAN, RAJYA SABHA ON 4TH AUGUST, 2008)
(LAID ON THE TABLES OF THE RAJYA SABHA AND LOK SABHA ON 22ND OCTOBER, 2008)
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
OCTOBER, 2008/ASVINA, 1930 (SAKA)
CS(P&L)-55

CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ........................................................................................ (i)-(ii)
2. I NTRODUCTION ........................................................................................................................ (iii)
3. R EPORT ................................................................................................................................... 1—20
4. R ELEV ANT MINUTES OF THE MEETINGS OF THE C OMMITTEE .............................................. 21—30
5. A NNEXURES — ......................................................................................................................... 31—43
A. The Supreme Court (Number of Judges) Amendment Bill, 2008 ................ 33—37
B. List of persons who submitted Memoranda on the Bill ................................ 38
C. Information/data regarding the status of pendency in the Supreme Court
since 1950 submitted by the Department of Justice, Ministry of Law
and Justice .............................................................................................................. 39—41
D. Data regarding Institution, disposal and pendency in respect of PIL
matters alongwith direct and indirect tax matters in the Supreme
Court of India for the years 2006 and 2007 .................................................. 42
E. Data regarding civil and criminal matters being instituted, disposed and
pending in the Supreme Court for the years 2006 and 2007 ..................... 43

(i)
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2007-08)
(Constituted on 5th August, 2007)
1. Dr. E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan – Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shrimati Jayanthi Natarajan
3. Dr. Abhishek Manu Singhvi
4. Shri Balavant alias Bal Apte
5. Shri Virendra Bhatia
6. Shri Tariq Anwar
7. Shri Ram Jethmalani
8. Sardar Tarlochan Singh
9. Dr. (Shrimati) Najma A. Heptulla
10. Shrimati Brinda Karat
LOK SABHA
11. Shri Raj Babbar
12. Prof. Ram Gopal Yadav
13. Shri N.S.V. Chitthan
14. Shri Chhattar Singh Darbar
15. Shri N.Y . Hanumanthappa
16. Shri S.K. Kharventhan
17. Shri A. Krishnaswamy
18. Dr. C. Krishnan
19. Shri Shailendra Kumar
20. Shri Harin Pathak
21. Shri Dahyabhai V allabhbhai Patel
22. Shri Varkala Radhakrishnan
23. Prof. M. Ramadass
24. Shri Bhupendrasinh Solanki
25. Shri Vishvendra Singh
26. Shri Devendra Prasad Yadav
27. Shrimati Tejasvini Gowda
28. Shrimati Kiran Maheshwari
29. Adv. P. Satteedevi
30. Shrimati Krishna Tirath
31. Vacant

(ii)
SECRETARIAT
Shri Sham Sher Singh, Joint Secretary
Shri K.P. Singh, Joint Director
Shri K.N. Earendra Kumar, Deputy Director
Shrimati Niangkhannem Guite, Committee Officer

(iii)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances, Law and Justice, having
been authorised by the Committee to submit this Report on its behalf, do hereby present its Twenty
Eighth Report on the Supreme Court (Number of Judges) Amendment Bill, 2008. The Bill seeks
to augment the strength of the Judges in the Supreme Court by increasing their number from the
present twenty-five to thirty excluding the Chief Justice of India. For the purpose, the Bill seeks
to amend the Supreme Court (Number of Judges) Act, 1956 by substituting the word ‘‘twenty-
five’’ with the word ‘‘thirty’’ in Section 2 of the said Act.
2. In pursuance of the rules relating to the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee, the Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha in consultation with the Hon’ble Speaker, Lok
Sabha referred
♣ the Bill, as introduced in the Lok Sabha on the 29th April, 2008 and pending
therein, to this Committee on the 9th May, 2008 for examination and report.
3. Keeping in view the importance of the Bill, the Committee decided to issue a press
communique to solicit views/suggestions from desirous individuals/organisations on the provisions
of the Bill. Accordingly, a press communique was issued in response to which memoranda
containing suggestions were received by the Committee.
4. The Committee considered the Bill in three sittings and heard the oral evidence of the
Secretary, Department of Justice, Ministry of Law and Justice in its meeting held on 27th May, 2008.
The Committee also heard the oral evidence of the representatives of the Bar Council of India and
the Supreme Court Bar Association. The Committee also discussed the Bill with the Bar Councils/
Bar Associations of the respective States during its study visit to Chennai, Kolkata and Mumbai in
June, 2008.
5. While considering the Bill, the Committee took note of the following documents/information
placed before it :—
(i) Background note on the Bill;
(ii) Comments of the Dep artment of Justice on the views/suggestions contained in the
memoranda received from various organisations/institutions/individuals/experts on the
Bill; and
(iii) Information/data furnished by the Department of Justice, Ministry of Law and Justice.
6. The Committee held clause-by-clause consideration of the Bill on the 17th July, 2008.
7. The Committee adopted the Report in its meeting held on the 1st August, 2008.
8. For the facility of reference and convenience, the observations and recommendations of the
Committee have been printed in bold letters in the body of the Report.
E.M. SUDARSANA NATCHIAPPAN
N
EW D ELHI; Chairman,
1st August, 2008 Committee on Personnel,
Public Grievances, Law and Justice.
♣Rajya Sabha Parliamentary Bulletin Part-II (No. 45132) dated the 12th May, 2008.

1
REPORT
1.0 The Supreme Court (Number of Judges) Amendment Bill, 2008 (Annexure A) introduced in
Lok Sabha on 29th April, 2008 seeks to augment the strength of the Judges in the Supreme Court
by increasing their number from the present twenty-five to thirty excluding the Chief Justice of India.
1.1 To attain the objective, the Bill seeks to amend the Supreme Court (Number of Judges) Act,
1956 by substituting the word “twenty-five” with the word “thirty” in Section 2 of the said Act.
The Bill was referred by the Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha, in consultation with the Hon’ble
Speaker, Lok Sabha to the Department Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel,
Public Grievances, Law and Justice on 9th May, 2008 for examination and report within three
months.
1.2 The statement of objects and reasons appended to the Bill elucidate the reasons and the need
for bringing forth the present Bill. It states as under:—
“The pendency of cases in the Supreme Court of India has constantly been on the rise
largely due to higher rate of institution of cases. As on the 31st day of March, 2007,
41,581 cases were pending in the Supreme Court. The Chief Justice of India has intimated
that the Judge in the Supreme Court feel over-burdened and have been working under acute
work pressure. It has  also not been possible for the Chief Justice of  India to constitute a
five-Judge Bench on a regular basis to hear cases involving interpretation of constitutional
law as doing that would result in constitution of less number of Division Benches which
in turn will result in delay in hearing of other civil and criminal matters’’ .
1.3 The statement of objects and reasons further states:—
“Suitable steps are, therefore, required to be taken to augment the strength of the
Judges in the Supreme Court so that it can function more efficiently and effectively towards
attaining the ultimate goal of rendering speedy justice to the litigant public”.
“It is, therefore, proposed to amend the Supreme Court (Number of Judges) Act, 1956
to increase the number of Judges in the Supreme Court from twenty-five to thirty, excluding
the Chief Justice of India” .
2.0 While considering the Bill, the Committee decided to invite views/ suggestions from various
individuals/organisations/stakeholders on the subject matter of the Bill. The Committee, accordingly
authorized the Secretariat to issue a press release for inviting views/suggestions on the Bill.
Accordingly, the Secretariat issued a press release on the Bill on 24th May, 2008 which was
published in the major English and Hindi dailies and vernacular newspapers all over the country.
In response thereto, a number of representations/memoranda were received.
3.0 The major points raised in various representations/memoranda (total 27 memoranda were
considered, a list of individuals/organisations who submitted the memoranda is at Annexure B) are
summarized as follows:—
(i) The present structure of jurisprudence should be changed to democratic structure
and all the existing cases in the courts at lower and higher levels should be disposed
of through persuasion, mediation and fraternal settlement. Only complicated cases
where the State is involved as one of the litigants should go to the courts.
(ii) It is a welcome move to enhance the strength of  the Supreme Court judges to ease
the burden and pendency of  the cases to deliver speedy justice to the litigants.

2
(iii) The appointment of the Supreme Court and High Court judges is based on a
collegium which consists of Judges alone. As the higher judiciary and for that
matter the judiciary itself requires highly integrated, qualified, worthful, unbiased and
humane personnel with full sense of devotion to the profession, the new law should
have a provision for constitution of a collegium consisting of the professionals
having the above qualities and the political element should be eliminated from it in
future appointments. The said amendment should have a provision for constitution
of such a collegium.
(iv) T ill now, the Judges of the Supreme Court are not from all parts of the country
and thus they are not representing India in toto. The new judges may be selected
from those States and regions which are not represented in the Supreme Court till
date.
(v) The social composition of the Supreme Court Judges is heavily in favour of the
ruling classes, castes and influential segments of the society. The weaker sections
especially OBCs do not have any representation in the Supreme Court and hence
their concerns, problems and demands are not heard. Therefore, the five new judges
may be reserved for OBC category. This is justified as reservations are already
provided for OBCs in the Central Government establishments including in the higher
educational, technical and scientific institutions. This will take away the unhappiness
of the OBCs, for at least providing this opportunity after 60 years of independence,
who consist of more than 50% of India’s population and will bring harmony in the
society.
(vi) This opportunity ma y be utilized to constitute a Supreme Court Bench in South India
which is a long pending demand so that the time, money and energies of the litigants
spent on litigation is reduced drastically which in turn will facilitate speedy disposal
of the pending cases.
(vii) As time passes on, cases are becoming complicated due to changed socio,
economic, political, cultural, environmental and scientific scenarios and they require
specialized knowledge of the laws. The opportunity may be used to appoint the new
judges with specialized knowledge and skills for easier understanding, assessment
and disposal of technically oriented litigations.
(viii) The proposed Bill will help the litigant public to get justice without delay thus
reducing the pendency of cases considerably.
(ix) Justice delayed is justice denied. How India can compete global competition with
other countries in the absence of fear of law and order. There is an urgent need to
increase the strength of the Supreme Court Judges judges from 25 to 30. Similarly,
the strength of the judges in all the High Courts should also be increased without any
delay.
(x) The increase in the number of Judges of the Supreme Court is a welcome step as
the population has increased manifold since 1956. The increasing crime rate has
contributed to pendency of cases.
(xi) While the proposal to increase the number of Judges in the Supreme Court is a
welcome step as it will help in reducing the pendency in the Supreme Court, it is
sad that nothing is being done to reduce the pendency in lower Courts.
(xii) V acancies at all levels of the judiciary should be filled up expeditiously to reduce the
pendency of cases especially in the High Courts.

3
(xiii) The present number of Judges in the Supreme Court is quite high. There should not
be any further increase. Increasing the number of judges will make the Court
unwieldy and increase its mediocrity, at a time of declining standards, and when it
is becoming increasingly difficult to find judges of high caliber and impeccable
professional integrity, increasing the number of judges will definitely dilute the
high standards of judicial scholarship desired and expected of the Supreme Court
Judges.
(xiv) The proposed amendment is a step in the right direction and it would certainly go
a long way to contain the backlog of cases pending in the Supreme Court. Similar
provisions need to be made by the States in the case of respective High Courts and
lower Courts as well, as the backlog of pending cases there is of more concern.
It is suggested that each Bench in Supreme Court take up at least one pending case
in each sitting, after the proposed amendment is enacted and additional Judges are
in position. One factor that contributes in a big way to backlog of pending cases
in courts is adjournments and stay orders frequently sought by the parties to suits.
This needs to be controlled.
(xv) Summer vacation in courts is a colonial legacy of the past and courts should ponder
over this matter. If judiciary takes a conscious decision to forgo these vacations, it
would help matters. Judiciary is very much needed for all the 12 months.
(xvi) The very pendency of different sensitive cases, antagonizes the common civilians
and they tend to loose the faith in judiciary. Inadequacy of judges in the judicial
system leads to the prolongation of the true judgment and the proposed increase in
the number of judges in the Hon’ble Supreme Court is a brighter step. Judges to
be appointed through meticulously systemized screening and the appointment should
not be shrouded with political manoeuvre.
(xvii) Re-connectability of the judges is more important than increasing their numbers.
(xviii) Increasing the number of judges is only a remedial step and not a complete solution
for reducing the pendency of cases.
(xix) The Supreme Court can take measures at its own level to solve the problem of
arrears such as curbing the tendency of preferring cases of rich and corporate
bodies, discouraging public interest litigation, lengthy arguments, medical,
educational, fee regulation, environmental, mining, river cleaning, religious disputes
cases etc.
(xx) Sanctioning of more posts of the Judges in the Supreme Court will not reduce or
clear the backlog of cases. More alarming is the backlog of cases in various High
Courts which needs to be addressed urgently. One solution is to appoint additional
judges in the High Courts for a period of two years under article 224 (1) of the
Constitution of India, exclusively for clearing the backlog of cases.
(xxi) The system of setting up the Constitution Benches in the Supreme Court of India
has also not stood the test of time. If the judgment of a Constitution Bench
comprising nine judges, is to be reviewed, in that situation, a Bench of eleven judges
would be constituted. Thus, setting up of Constitutional Benches is a drain on the
limited number of judges available in the Supreme Court of India. The need of the
hour is that there should be a cap on the maximum number of judges comprising
a Constitution Bench, and a formula should be devised for evaluating the requirement
of the judges that may comprise a Constitutional Bench.

4
(xxii) Increasing the number of posts of the Supreme Court Judges is not the only
alternative or criterion for reducing the piling of cases, but simultaneously the
factors of flow of cases and the filing in the Supreme Court may also be
considered. In case of cases being filed directly under Article 32 of the Constitution
of India, this aspect involves an important role of the Executive Government
because when any urgency arises, and when there is a tug of war between the
cause of action and relief for justice, the litigants are required to approach the
Supreme Court. If the executive functionary acts with proper caution, vigilance
and adhere to the rules laid down, the justice seeking persons would be satisfied
at that stage only; failure of which leads them to approach the Supreme Court
directly.
(xxiii) Increase in the strength of the judges from 25 to 30 is inadequate as the increasing
population, enactment of Acts by Parliament and State Legislatures along with the
flow of cases coming to the Supreme Court from various High Courts, puts strain
on the judiciary thus delaying the dispensation of justice.
(xxiv) The increase in the number of judges should be linked with the efficiency also.
(xxv) The accumulation of cases cannot be solved merely by increasing the number of
judges in the Supreme Court. The cases must be fixed for a specific period and
accountability fixed on the judicial officer at the originating stage of the case.
(xxvi) Before increasing the number of Supreme Court Judges, the Supreme Court should
simplify the filing procedure, provide for guidance and counseling facility for
common people in the Supreme Court registry and adhere to strict working schedule
along with setting up of Commission/Council for judges’ accountability.
(xxvii) There are various irregularities such as inefficiency, corruption, nepotism, biasness,
undeserving behaviour etc. in the present legal system that delay the rendering of
speedy and proper justice to the people. Rather than increasing the number of
Judges in the Supreme Court, the focus should be on reforming and improving the
functioning of the judicial institutions, transparency in the selection and appointment
of judges in the Supreme Court, High Courts and subordinate judiciary.
(xxviii) Judges’ strength in the Supreme Court should be according to the population. Some
formula needs to be worked out to keep judge-population ratio adequate.
(xxix) Judges in the Supreme Court enjoy summer/winter vacations along with other
holidays which needs to be curtailed to increase working days/hours to clear the
cases instead of increasing the number of Judges in the Supreme Court.
(xxx) Of late, the variety and volume of litigation has increased manifold in view of the
tremendous socio-economic advancement and on account of globalization. The
judge-population ratio has also been far below the desired/optimum level at which
justice can be rendered to the common man. As a necessary corollary and
concomitant, the number of judges in various Courts should be increased so that
there are no delays in the dispensation of Justice.
(xxxi) It is high time that a Bench of the Hon’ble Supreme Court of India is set up and
constituted at Chennai so that the litigant public, living in the southern States of
India, have access to justice. The reason for setting up a Bench at Chennai is that
Madras has been the seat of the only Chartered High Court in Southern India and
that excellent facilities are available here with good infrastructure.

5
(xxxii) It is a well known fact that on account of awareness of the public about their
rights, expansion of commercial activities on account of  modern facilities like roads,
communications and transport involving the Government controls and the invasion
into their rights by the administrators and beaurecrats, they are forced to seek their
remedy in a Court of  Law leading to a large number of cases particularly in the
High Court under Art. 226 of the Constitution and subsequent appeals under the
Letters Patents to the Appellate Bench and ultimately to the Supreme Court. The
disposal of the cases at every level is not commensurate with the filing of  fresh
cases. Therefore, there is a need to appoint more Judges at every level both in the
High Courts and in the Supreme Court.
(xxxiii) The litigants in Southern States in general and Tamil Nadu in particular have to incur
large expenditure in being able to have access to the Supreme Court on account of
the distance and cost involved in the process. Therefore a Bench of the Supreme
Court should be established in Tamil Nadu to meet the needs and expectations of
the innumerable litigants in the Southern Region.
(xxxiv) The present proposal for increase of strength of the judges would pave way for the
clearance of backlog of cases thereby enabling the litigant public to have easy
access to justice, which will fulfill the dreams of the framers of the Constitution
who had foreseen the administration of justice for the betterment and transformation
of the Indian society.
3.1 The memoranda received from various individuals/organisations/stakeholders were
forwarded to the Department of Justice, Ministry of Law and Justice for their comments. The
Department of Justice furnished their comments on the points/issues raised in the memoranda. The
comments are summarised as under:—
(i) The increase in judge strength is expected to help in early hearing and disposal of
pending cases.
(ii) The Bill is restricted to the increase in judge strength of the Supreme Court.
(iii) In crease in number of pending cases is due to filing of more cases, general
awareness among the masses, more cases being disposed of by the High Courts
etc.
(iv) The increase in judge strength is expected to liquidate arrears to some extent.
(v) The judges in the High Courts are appointed only after giving due consideration to
the laid down guidelines about their qualifications, experience, temperament etc.
(vi) The Chief Justice of India is empowered to decide about the number of working
days in terms of the Supreme Court Rules, 1966.
(vii) The judge strength of the Supreme Court has been increased from 10 to 13 in 1960,
to 17 in 1977 and to 25 in 1986 which is the present strength of the judges
excluding the Chief Justice of India.
(viii) There are at present no criteria existing for calculating/fixing the judge strength in
the Supreme Court. However, pendency of cases has been taken into account while
proposing the increase in the judge strength by 5 judges.
(ix) It is not possible to include the criteria of efficiency and time bound disposal in the
proposed Bill.

6
(x) V arious steps have been taken by the Government for the speedy disposal of cases
which include setting up of fast track courts, amendment to the civil procedure
code, permanent adalats for disputes relating to public utilities, increase in the
number of posts of judges, establishment of special courts/tribunals, improvement
in the standard of legal education, adoption of alternative modes of disputes
resolution, such as arbitration and conciliation etc.; judicial reforms is, however,
a continuous process.
(xi) The Chief Justice of India has not proposed appointment of any adhoc judge in the
Supreme Court to dispose of the pending cases.
(xii) There are no norms for increasing the strength of the Supreme Court judges.
However, the pendency of cases in the Supreme Court has been taken into account
while suggesting increase in judge strength by 5 judges.
3.2 The Committee heard the presentation of the representatives of the Department of Justice,
Ministry of Law and Justice on the Bill on 27th May, 2008 . The Committee was also enlightened
by the views/opinion of Shri S.N.P. Sinha, Chairman, Bar Council of India and Shri P.H. Parekh,
President, Supreme Court Bar Association. The Committee heard their presentation on the Bill on
10th June, 2008.
3.3 The Committee also discussed the Bill with the State Bar Councils/Associations at Chennai,
Kolkata and Mumbai during its study visit to these places in July, 2008.  At Chennai, the Committee
heard the oral evidence of Ms. K. Santhakumari, President, Women Lawyers’ Association, Shri R.
Krishnamoorthy, President, Madras Bar Association and Shri G. Mohana Krishnan, Secretary,
Madras High Court Advocates’ Association. The above stated Associations also submitted their
written submissions on the Bill to the Committee. Similarly, at Kolkata the Committee heard the oral
evidence of Shri Arun Kumar Sircar and Shri P.R. Banerjee, Chairman and Secretary, Bar Council,
Kolkata and Ms. Tanushree Ghosh, Executive Committee Member, Kolkata Bar Association. At
Mumbai, the Committee heard the oral evidence of Shri Rajiv Patil, representative, Bar Council of
Maharashtra and Goa and Shri Shashi Kumar Nair and Shri D. Jariwala, representatives, Bombay
Bar Association along with the representatives of  the Advocates Association of Western India.
3.4 The Committee took up clause-by-clause consideration of the Bill in its meeting held on
17th July, 2008.
3.5 The Committee considered and adopted its draft report on the Bill in its meeting held on
1st August, 2008 and adopted the clauses of the Bill as under :—
Clause 2
3.6 Clause 2 of the Bill provides for amendment in the Supreme Court (Number of Judges)
Act, 1956 by substituting the word “twenty five” with the word “thirty” thus increasing the
strength of the judges of the Supreme Court from present 25 to 30 excluding the Chief Justice
of India.
3.7 The Clause was adopted without any change.
Clause 1
3.8 Clause 1 states the title of the Bill and the enacting formula.
3.9 The Clause and the enacting formula were adopted without any change.

7
LONG TITLE OF THE BILL
3.10 The long title of the Bill states that the Supreme Court (Number of Judges) Amendment Bill,
2008 is a Bill to further amend the Supreme Court (Number of Judges) Act, 1956.
3.11 The long title of the Bill was adopted without any change.
3.12 The Committee approves the Bill and recommends that while passing the Bill due
consideration be given by the Government to the suggestions of the Committee on the
issues discussed in the succeeding Chapters.

8
CHAPTER-II
PENDENCY OF CASES
4.0 The problem of pendency of cases at all levels of the judiciary has engaged the attention
of all. In fact, the pendency of cases has been a much debated and discussed matter at various
fora. This Committee also has all along been expressing its serious concern at the arrears of cases
pending in the Supreme Court, High Courts and the subordinate Courts. The Committee has felt
that inordinate delay in delivering justice to the people defeats the very purpose of the judiciary as
an institution. The magnitude of the problem of pendency of cases at various levels in the judiciary
must be understood in the context that the people resort to judicial remedy as a last resort for the
redressal of their grievances and to get justice. This is so because the people have reposed their
ultimate faith and trust in the judicial system above the legislature and the executive. In this context
pendency of cases hits the common man, seeking justice, the hardest. Perhaps, that is the reason
that it is said justice delayed is justice denied. However, inspite of the various measures taken by
the Government and the judiciary itself, it is a matter of serious concern that the pendency or
arrears of cases has been increasing steadily over the years bringing the judicial system as a whole
to near stagnation. Further, the pendency of cases in the Supreme Court is very reflective of the
delays in the judicial system, thus a cause of extreme concern requiring immediate remedial steps.
4.1 That the pendency of cases in the Supreme Court is the prime reason which has led to the
introduction of the Bill, is amply illustrated in the background note of the Department of Justice
which states that:—
“In the Conference of the Chief Ministers and the Chief Justices held in September, 2004,
it was observed that there is need to strengthen the Supreme Court Bench to expedite the
disposal of cases, to enable the setting up of larger benches and to facilitate the
functioning of the Constitution Bench’’ .
The background note of the Department of Justice on the Bill further states that:—
“The Chief Justice of India has informed that there were 41,078 cases pending in the
Supreme Court as on 1st March, 2007 and the Judges feel over-burdened and have been
working under acute work pressure. He has further stated that despite a satisfactorily high
rate of disposal, the  pendency of cases in the Supreme Court has constantly been on the
rise due  to comparatively higher rate of institution of cases. Pendency of cases in the
Courts could be directly ascribed to complex factors, with inadequate judge strength coming
at the top .’’
4.2 The Committee also noted that the pendency of cases in the Supreme Court is a prime reason
necessitating the introduction of the Supreme Court (Number of Judges) Amendment
Bill, 2008 by observing that “we have gone through the Bill and we could find that the justification
for this increase is pending cases ”. The representative of the Department of Justice, while making
a presentation on the Bill before the Committee stated that “the primary reason for proposed increase
is to address the problem of increasing pendency of the cases in the Supreme Court. Successive Chief
Justices of India have strongly felt that the number of judges in the Supreme Court needs to be
increased to address the problem of increasing pendency in the apex court”.
4.3 During the course of examination of the Bill, the Committee took note of the status of
pendency in the Supreme Court since 1950 ( Annexure C ). The Department of Justice was
8

9
requested to furnish the said information to assess the effects of increase in the number of judges
on the cases pending and disposed off by the Supreme Court. The following table provides the
details of the number of Judges and the cases pending before the Supreme Court:
Year No. of Judges Total No. of cases pending
1950 7 690
*1956 10 1,722
*1960 13 2,656
1970 13 8,663
*1977 17 19,773
1980 17 37,851
*1986 25 85,899
1990 25 1,09,277
2000 25 22,145
2008 25 46,374
*Years in which number of judges in the Supreme Court was increased.
4.4 It is, however, pertinent to mention here that the strength of the Supreme Court judges was
originally fixed at 7 by the Constitution of India excluding the Chief Justice of India. This number
has been increased four times since then through legislation. In 1956, the number of Supreme
Court judges was increased from 7 to 10 for the first time. Thereafter, through the amendment
of the Supreme Court (Number of Judges) Act, 1956 in the years 1960, 1977 and 1986 the number
of judges in the Supreme Court was increased to 13, 17 and 25 respectively excluding the Chief
Justice of India.
4.5 As regards the reasons which contribute to pendency in the Supreme Court, the prime reason
appears to be higher number of institution of cases i.e. admission cases being filed in the Supreme
Court each year. Till the year 1977, the number of both the admission and regular cases in the
Supreme Court was less than 10,000. However, this number increased 2.4, 1.3 and 2.4 times in the
next three decades from 1977 viz. 1987, 1997 and 2007. It is discernible from the figures given
below that there has been a constant increase in the number of admission cases being filed in the
Supreme Court each year thus adding to the total pendency inspite of regular disposal of cases.
However, for the decade from 1987-1997 inspite of the increase in the admission cases, the total
number of pendency had gone down considerably. It is interesting to note that a year before the
decade 1987-1997 i.e. in 1986 the Judges strength was raised by a maximum number i.e. 8. Decade-
wise figures of institution of cases, disposal and pendency are as given in the following table:—
Year Institution T otal Total
Admission Regular Disposal Pendency
1977 9,251 5,250 10,395 19,773
1987 22,234 5,806 21,807 92,132
1997 27,772 4,584 36,569 19,032
2007 62,281 6,822 61,957 46,926

10
4.6 Apart from the high rate of institution of cases, another reason which has contributed to
the pendency in the Supreme Court is the increase in the strength of the High Court judges
resulting in more number of cases being taken up and decided by them. This consequently causes
increased flow of cases from the High Courts to the Supreme Court thus adding to the institution
of cases. The Department of Justice in their background note on the Bill also raised the issue by
stating that “the Chief Justice of India is of the view that to keep pace with the growing litigation,
the total judge strength of the High Courts which was 424 in 1985 had gone up to 725 in 2003.
The strength has again gone up by 152 judges to make a total of 877 judges after the review of
judge strength was undertaken in the years 2006-07. The inescapable fall out of the growing
number of High Courts and their judges would be greater disposal at the High Court level, and
in turn, larger number of appeals to the Supreme Court, worsening the docket explosion. The Chief
Justice of India has expressed the view that if judge strength in the High Courts can be enhanced
triennially, it can definitely be done in the case or Supreme Court too, at least, once in a decade.”
The Department of Justice further emphasized on the issues by stating that “the appointments to
the Supreme Court are made from amongst the Chief Justices and the Judges of the High Courts
all over the country and if the size of the feeding cadre increases the number of posts in the
Supreme Court deserves to be increased proportionately.’’
4.7 Further, pendency in the Supreme Court is also associated with quite a large number of
laws being passed by the Parliament and the State Legislatures each year. Still another reason which
is internal to the Supreme Court is the constraints in constituting a 5 judge bench on regular basis
in the Supreme Court resulting in the pendency of cases. How this constraint results in pendency
was amply illustrated by the Department of Justice in their background note by stating that “The
Chief Justice of India has also pointed out that under compelling circumstances, it has not been
possible to constitute a 5-Judge Bench on a regular basis to hear cases involving interpretation of
Constitutional Law as doing that would mean constitution of fewer number of Division Benches
which in turn would result in delay in hearing of other civil and criminal matters. This vicious
circle has led to an accumulation of huge arrears of cases.’’
4.8 Apart from the above, there are certain Acts which provide for filing of the appeal directly
to the Supreme Court which again contribute to institution of cases in the Supreme Court which
increase the pendency. These Acts and their relevant provisions are as under:—
• Section 130E of the Customs Act;
• Section 35L of the Central Excise and Salt Act;
• Section 23 of the Consumer Protection Act, 1986;
• Section 19(1)(b) of the Contempt of Courts Act, 1971;
• Section 38 of the Advocates Act, 1961;
• Section 116A of the Representation of People Act;
• Section 10 of the Special Court (Tribal of offences relating to Transaction and
Securities) Act, 1992;
• Section 55 of the Monopolies and Restrictive Trade Practices Act 1969;
• Section 18 of the Telecom Regulatory Authority of India Act 1977;
• Section 15(z) of the Securities and Exchange Board of India Act 1992;
• Section 261 of the Income-tax Act, 1961; and
• Section 19 of the Terrorists and Disruptive Activities (Prevention) Act, 1987.

11
4.9 Evidently, appeals, writs and Public Interest Litigation make a substantial contribution to the
number of cases pending in the Supreme Court. While the filing of appeals and writs in the
Supreme Court is understandable for the final settlement of a dispute and dispensation of justice,
whether public interest litigation also serves that purpose is a debatable question. The Public
Interest Litigation was initiated as a tool to provide justice to the people who were unable to have
access to the judicial system due to poverty, illiteracy or any other social economic disability.
However, later this tool came to be used to gain publicity or to drag civil authorities, executive and
the legislature in the Court of Law. Such matters have only added to the pendency of cases in the
Supreme Court. A statement of institution, disposal and pendency in respect of PIL matters along
with direct and indirect tax matters in the Supreme Court of India for the years 2006 and 2007
is at Annexure D. Similar data regarding civil and criminal matters being instituted, disposed and
pending in the Supreme Court for the years 2006 and 2007 is at Annexure E.
5.0 Thus, there are various reasons for the huge pendency of cases in the Supreme Court.
Further, there are arrears of cases at the High Courts and subordinate courts level also, a
considerable number of which might also go to the Supreme Court later. If the number of judges
in the Supreme Court is inadequate, the problem of pendency might further aggravate shaking the
faith of the people in the judiciary. Therefore, it would be appreciable to ensure that inadequacy
of the judges does not become one of the reasons for the pendency of cases and if by increasing
the strength of the judges in the Supreme Court, pendency could be reduced it would be an
appreciable step to take. In the light of the foregoing, the Committee strongly feels that the
Government should take every conceivable step/measure to reduce the pendency of cases
not only in the Supreme Court but also in the High Courts and the subordinate Courts so
that delays occurring due to pendency of cases in the dispensation of justice are reduced.
5.1 Further, the increase in the number of judges in the Supreme Court has always resulted in
the increased disposal of cases thus making a dent in the pendency or arrears of cases in the
Supreme Court. This is evident from the figures listed below:—
Year of Institution Disposal Pending
augmentation Admission Regular Admission Regular Admission Regular
of S.C.
Judges
1956 1732 630 1720 258 627 1095
1960 1971 1276 1910 1271 706 1950
1977 9251 5250 8714 1681 5271 14,502
1986 22,334 5547 17,881 12,819 46,293 39,606
5.2 Evidently, in the years in which the strength of the Supreme Court judges is increased, the
disposal rate, both in the cases of admission and regular cases, has always gone up, thus reducing
the pendency. Remaining pendency may be attributed to the accumulation of cases over the years
and also to the fact that the inflow of cases is also on the rise constantly. The increased inflow
of cases could be attributed to the fact that the people have become more aware of the laws and
the justice delivery system. The other important reason that the Committee feels is the
enactment of new legislations by Parliament and State legislatures, in addition to the
executive orders which add to the flow of cases. The representative of the Supreme Court Bar
Association while making a presentation before the Committee on the Bill made a strong case for
increasing the strength of the Supreme Court judges by stating that “Look at the arrears of cases.
In the Supreme Court, we have 45000 cases pending. As far as the High Courts are concerned,

12
thirty seven lakhs sixty four thousand five hundred sixty five (37,64,565) cases are pending. In
fact, when foreigners come to invest in India, they are very happy with our democracy, they are
very happy with our independent Judiciary, but they are all quite upset about the disposal rate of
cases, which is very bad. It is good that there are more cases because people have confidence. But
making cases linger on for 40 years, 50 years or 60 years, people really lose confidence in the
administration of Justice’’ .
5.3 The Committee, in the light of the above deliberations, is of the opinion that the
very purpose of this sanctified institution viz. the judiciary shall be defeated if timely justice
is not delivered to the people who look at this institution as a last resort of redressing their
grievances and to get justice. In this context, the Committee observes that to reduce
pendency in the Supreme Court and to enable the people to get timely and speedy justice,
it is absolutely necessary to devise various mechanisms and to take corrective and other
measures to ensure timely justice to the people.

13
CHAPTER-III
ISSUES REQUIRING CONSIDERATION ALONG WITH INCREASE IN THE NUMBER OF
JUDGES
6.0 While considering the Bill and its purpose viz. increasing the strength of the Supreme Court
judges to reduce pendency of  cases in the Supreme Court, the Committee Members raised many
issues connected with the pendency of cases in particular and with the judiciary in general and the
Supreme Court in particular. The Committee was of the unanimous opinion that the pendency of
cases not only in the Supreme Court, but also in the High Courts and the subordinate Courts has
acquired a menacing proportion threatening to collapse the entire judicial system.
6.1 Therefore, the Committee being concerned about the huge number of  pending cases,
observed that immediate corrective measures were required to be taken to reduce pendency at
various levels in order to facilitate timely and speedy justice to the litigant people. The Committee
agreeing that one of  the immediate corrective measures could be the increase in the strength of
the judges, however, raised concern if whether by increasing the number of  judges alone in the
Supreme Court, pendency could be reduced. While debating on this particular point, the Members
raised various issues and concerns, which actually contribute to pendency at various levels. These
included appointment of judges and the mode of appointment, judges’ accountability, measures of
control and regulation existing within the judiciary, vacations and holidays being observed in the
Supreme Court, increase in working hours, setting work norms etc. along with the reforms in the
Criminal Procedure Code, alternative dispute redressal mechanism which the Committee felt should
be considered earnestly for reducing pendency along with the increase in the strength of the judges.
APPOINTMENT OF JUDGES AND THEIR ACCOUNTABILITY
6.2 In fact on the issue of appointment of judges and their accountability one of the Committee
Members referring to the Committees’ earlier report on the Judges (Inquiry) Bill, 2006 observed
“That is an important Bill because as per the provisions of the Constitution, only one impeachment
proceeding is available. If a Judge commits a minor irregularity, he cannot be punished. We are
in such a position that even for dereliction of duty, the only proceeding is impeachment under the
provisions of the Constitution. We thought it better to bring in a new legislation to seek remedies
in those matters...The Bill is important so far as higher judiciary is concerned regarding enquiries
about the Judges of the Supreme Court and High Courts...In India, the present situation is that it
is the only country in the  world, where Judges appoint themselves and are not appointed by any
other authority ...’’
6.3 The Member further observed that “Now, by this amendment, you want to increase the
number of Judges from 25 to 30. We do not stand in your way but priority should be given to
the other Bill. Priority should naturally be given to the Judges Inquiry Bill, which has already been
submitted’’ .
6.4 It is stated that in the year 1997, the Supreme Court with a view to devise a control and
regulating mechanism within the judiciary had passed two resolutions dealing with the judicial
accountability viz. the Restatement of Values of Judicial life and an in-house procedure to address
the instances of complaints against the members of the higher judiciary. This in-house procedure
to be devised by the Hon’ble Chief Justice of India, is essentially meant for disciplining the judges
against whom complaints of judicial misconduct and misbehaviour are received. The Committee
13

14
feels that for maintaining the faith and trust of the people in the judicial system, strict adherence
to these two measures of accountability is the need of the hour.
6.5 In the light of the above, the Committee expressed unanimous opinion that its
recommendations as contained in its report on the Judges (Inquiry) Bill, 2006 be given thoughtful
consideration by the Government as they pertained to very important issues of appointments, mode
of appointments, accountability and control in the judiciary. Concluding on the point, the Chairman
of the Committee observed that “we did a lot of research on that particular subject. We called even
the former Chief Justices of India and others. On that basis, we have made some recommendations,
till now, that Bill has not seen the light of the day...The recommendations made by this Committee
should be considered whole heartedly to see that the judges are properly regulated...When the
executive is not ready to come forward with a regulation how are you going to control the judges
by adding the numbers.” On the specific point’ of appointment of the judges in the Supreme Court
and the High Courts, the Committee was for restoring the pre-1993 position and desired that the
Government should follow the recommendations made by the Committee in its Report on the
Judges (Inquiry) Bill, 2006. The Chairman of the Committee summarised the observations of the
Committee as under:—
“I would like to conclude by saying that the Government should expeditiously
see to it that appointment of judges in High Courts and Supreme Court are done
in a transparent way. We have recommended in two ways: One is,  we have to see
to it that the collegium system has to be done away with. Instead we have
suggested that an Empowered Committee, which comprises representative of the
Judiciary, the Executive and Parliament, should be set up. That was our
recommendation in the Judges (Inquiry) Bill. And, subsequently, since
appointments will be delayed, we have said that from the very beginning of
identifying the eligible persons, the various places of recommendations, be it at
the level of the High Courts, or, at the Governor’s level or at the level of the
Departments, and finally be the Supreme Court, should be transparent, and this
should be put up in the web site then and there so that the person, who is going
to occupy the Constitutional place, is known to the public, and their background
should be allowed to be discussed by the public and, finally, it has to go through
the process of issuing warrant by the President of India. But, what is happening
presently is that from the day one of identifying the person till the issuance of
the warrant, nothing is known to anybody except to the persons who are involved
in it. Even the persons who are identified and who are going to be made as
judges of  the High Court or of the Supreme Court, may not know about it. This
type of secrecy is not good for democracy. We have already mentioned about it;
we wanted to stress it again here.”
The Committee endorses the observations of the Chairman of the Committee and impresses
upon the Government to ensure their compliance in regard to the appointment of the judges of the
Supreme Court and the High Courts.
FINAL VERDICTS/JUDICIAL PRONOUNCEMENTS AND THE APPOINTMENT OF
QUALIFIED AND EFFICIENT JUDGES
6.6 One of the Hon’ble Members, while observing on the pendency of cases, stated that the
judges prefer not to give final verdicts thus leaving the question/point of dispute open to be decided
again by a larger Bench. The Committee feels that the Judges should try to give conclusive/final
verdicts taking into account every fact, circumstances, evidence adduced before them. This
essentially means application of judicial tenets in the discharge of judicial functions. The

15
Committee’s observation rests on the premise that for hearing a matter at any stage, at any judicial
level, considerable expenses in terms of judicial infrastructure, legal/judicial procedure,
administrative machinery, time and money is incurred. Taking this point further, another Hon’ble
Member observed that “it is not the quantity or number of judges  but the quality and efficiency
of judges in the pronouncement of judgment which is very important. The Ministry should strictly
pay attention to the  quality and efficiency of the judges more than the number of judges. “Another
Member observed “The number of judges requires to be increased,. there is no question. But the
problem is not merely about increasing the number. The problem, today, is finding competent and
honest judges...there are judges who know nothing of criminal laws but they are deciding cases
everyday and deciding questions of life and death. ’’ Taking this point further, another Member
suggested that “only those people should be appointed as judges who at least, know the criminal
law.’’
RETIREMENT AGE OF THE HIGH COURT JUDGES
6.7 The Committee, in its Twentieth report on the Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Law
and Justice, had recommended that there was a need to bring about uniformity in the retirement
age of the Judges of the Supreme Court and the High Courts. The Committee had recommended
so on the ground that the mode of appointment and removal of the  Judges of the Supreme Court
and High Courts being the same, the Judges of the High Courts should also retire at the age the
Judges of the Supreme Court retire i.e. 65. Since this issue has also been discussed in the
Conference of the Chief Ministers and the Chief Justices of the High Courts held in March, 2007
the Committee recommends that the issue be given consideration and the retirement age
of the Judges of the High Courts be increased to 65 years. This will also facilitate the
availability of experienced Judges for elevation to the Supreme Court.
BENCHES OF THE SUPREME COURT
6.8 The Committee in its Second, Sixth, Fifteenth, Twentieth and Twenty Sixth Reports on the
Demands for Grants of the Ministry of  Law and Justice impressed upon for setting up of Benches
of the Supreme Court in Southern, Western and Eastern parts of the country. The Committee’s
recommendation rests on the premise that it is not possible for the people living in far-flung and
remote areas to come to the National Capital for seeking justice for  various reasons. The
Committee reiterates this recommendation.
SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EQUITY AT HIGHER JUDICIARY
6.9 While deliberating upon the Bill, the Members raised concern about the inadequate
representation of the weaker sections viz., SC, ST, OBC and women in the higher judiciary. The
Members observed that because of the inadequate representation of the weaker sections in the
Supreme Court and High Courts, the judiciary is unable to comprehend the social flavour of the
legislations passed by Parliament and the State Legislatures. Further when the Executive and the
Legislature, under the constitutional provisions, are required to provide adequate representation to
these sections of the society there is no reason that the higher judiciary should also not come under
this ambit to address the issue of social justice and equity. Accordingly, the Committee
recommends that the Government should ensure adequate representation of the weaker
sections and the women in the Supreme Court and High Courts. More so when the number
of judges is increased in the Supreme Court, this social justice and equity should be ensured.
DIFFERENTIAL FEES FOR COMMERCIAL AND CORPORATE CASES
7.0 While deliberating upon the Bill, the Committee discussed the issue of differential fees for

16
commercial and corporate cases. The Committee seized the issue for discussion in the context of
globalization and corporate/commercial competition being observed during the recent times. In this
era of globalized economy and free flow of trade and commerce, many multinational companies of
Indian and foreign origin make huge investments in India and outside. Within the country, Indian
commercial and corporate sector is making huge strides and contributing to the Indian economy.
Foreign companies and multinationals are also being drawn to India. The attraction for the foreign
companies to invest in India is its vibrant democracy and inbuilt independent judicial system. The
Indian and foreign commercial sector has intense faith on both the democracy and the
independence of the judiciary for protection of their commercial and corporate interests. With
growing competition in the commercial/corporate sector within and outside, these Indian and
multinational companies often take recourse to judicial remedy for settlement of their claims, right
and liabilities arising out of their contractual and other commercial agreements.
7.1. While discussing the issue of litigation being conducted by these commercial/corporate sector
companies, the Committee observed that these companies under the relevant Supreme Court, High
Court and other Rules are required to pay very less amount as Court fees for settling their disputes
worth crores of rupees. The Committee specifically inquired from the Department of Justice, Ministry
of Law and Justice on the issue of maximum and minimum Court fees levied in the Supreme Court
for any suit, appeal or other proceedings. The Department of Justice replied “the Supreme Court has
informed that the maximum prescribed Court fees is Rs. 250/- if the value of the subject matter is
upto Rs. 20,000/- and Rs. 5/- per thousand for every additional value of Rs. 1000/- or part, thereof
in excess of Rs. 20,000/- subject to a maximum of Rs. 2000/- in case of civil appeal by certificate
of fitness under article 132(1) and 133(1) of the Constitution and appeal under section 18 of the
Telecom Regulatory Authority of India Act. The minimum  prescribed Court fees is Rs. 10/- in case
of appeal under section 38 of the Advocates Act. IIowever, no Cour t fees is levied in the case of
special leave petition (Criminal), writ petition (Criminal) etc.” The Committee further inquired from
the Department of Justice whether separate court fee is applicable for commercial/corporate
institution/bodies, Government or private such as SEBI, TRAI etc. The Department of Justice replied
that “the Supreme Court has informed that there is no separate Court fees applicable for commercial/
corporate institutions/bodies whether Government or private such as SEBI, TRAI etc.’’
7.2. The Committee infers that a large number of cases are filed in the Supreme Court and the
High Courts by the corporate sector. Further, there are cases filed by the statutory institutions/
bodies created by the Government of India such as the Securities and Exchange Board of India,
Telecom Regulatory Authority of India, Competition Commission etc. for getting their commercial/
corporate interests/disputes settled. Invariably, the value of such corporate/commercial interests/
disputes filed by these corporate/statutory institutions/bodies runs into crores of rupees. However,
these corporate statutory bodies are required to pay a very minimum amount as Court fees for
settling their disputes worth crores of rupees. For going in appeal to the High Courts in such
matters, these companies/commercial corporate/statutory bodies have to pay only an amount of
Rs.250 as Court fees and Rs.2000 maximum Court fees for going to the Supreme Court for getting
their disputes redressed.
7.3. The Committee further taking note of the facts, observes that the time spent by the Courts
at various levels and the expenses incurred by the judicial infrastructure and Government
exchequer, while settling such disputes has never been taken into account resulting in allowing the
corporate, commercial/statutory bodies making use of the judicial infrastructure at the minimum
expenses on their part within a short duration, as such matters are invariably listed for early hearing
and disposal because of their commercial/contractual nature.
7.4. The Committee has made a comparison between the corporate/commercial litigation and
ordinary litigation by the common man and noted that the ordinary citizens have to spend a lot of

17
money and time to get justice whereas the corporate/statutory bodies are able to approach the
Supreme Court by paying a very minimum amount of fees. The Committee also noted that this
situation was very depriving for the common man. The concern of the Committee on the issue was
voiced by the Chairman of the Committee by observing that “the ordinary citizens, the poor
people, who are living on their own income, have to pay more and spend more time and  they
do not have accessibility to justice when you compare them with corporate bodies or other
companies.’’
The Committee therefore observes that it is high time that a differential Court fees
system for the corporate sector is considered on the following lines :—
(i) The present system of Court fees of Rs.250/- to Rs.2000/- for all cases of civil
and criminal nature needs to be reviewed urgently. For the poor, illiterate
people who have no access to justice the Court fees should be waived altogether
i.e. there should be no Court fee for such litigants.
(ii) Corporate commercial bodies have huge financial resources at their disposal and
invariably their disputes are worth crores of rupees. Accordingly, it would be
reasonable if they are required to pay the court fees as per the value of their
dispute on ad-valorem basis which should extend from 1 per cent to 5 per cent
of the total value of the dispute.
(iii) There are certain Acts which enable the companies to go directly to the
Supreme Court for getting their disputes resolved. These Acts include the
Customs Act, the Central Excise and Salt Act, the Consumer Protection Act, the
Monopolies and Restrictive Trade Practices Act, the Telecom Regulatory
Authority of India Act, the Securities and Exchange Board of India Act and the
Income Tax Act. The Committee feels that a maximum fees of Rs.2000 in terms
of the Supreme Court Rules, 1966 is grossly inadequate and should, therefore,
be revised accordingly.
(iv) The corporate matters going by the very nature of the dispute, the companies
desire for early settlement or speedier disposal by the Court; therefore, if they
are required to pay higher court fee, it would only be reasonable.
(v) It is the common man, an ordinary citizen who waits for justice for years. Early
hearing and disposals of cases by the Courts in corporate cases only delay the
cases of ordinary citizen as they take valuable Court time within minimum
Court fees. Therefore, there is a strong case for a differential Court fee for the
corporate sector. In any case, the corporate sector makes use of the legal
facilities/judicial infrastructure for which they should be required to pay as the
expenses for creating and maintaining the judicial infrastructure are borne by
the State.
(vi) The differential Court fees will only add to the revenue of the Supreme Court
which could be utilized for creating further judicial infrastructure for the
judiciary.
(vii) As per the information furnished by the Supreme Court, the total stamp/court
fees collected by the Supreme Court in the years 2006 and 2007 is
Rs.1,20,40,382 and 1,17,15,951 respectively. The Supreme Court generates
revenue of more than Rs.l crore by way of stamp/Court fee. If the differential
Court fees is applied for the corporate cases, that will only add to the Supreme
Court revenue. As per the Constitution of India, all moneys and fees collected

18
by the Supreme Court form part of the consolidated fund of India. Hence, the
money so accrued to the consolidated fund of India could be used by the State
for fulfilling one of its obligations as envisaged under Article 39A of the
Constitution which directs the “State shall secure that the operation of the legal
system promotes justice, on a basis of  equal opportunity, and shall, in particular,
provide free legal aid, by suitable legislation or schemes or in any other way, to
ensure that opportunities for securing justice are not denied to any citizen by reason
of economic or other disabilities.’’
(viii) The operation of judicial system should not result in any disadvantage to the
common man or ordinary citizens. However, the present, judicial system
operates in such a manner that the citizens have to wait for years to get justice
in both civil and criminal matters. Cases linger on for years making public lose
their faith in the administration of justice. In criminal matters, delay in the
operation of judicial system sometimes renders the appeal against the conviction
infruetuous as the convict might have completed the term of conviction in
prison while his case completes trial. In this scenario, when the judicial system
is cloggcd by the huge number of cases, preference to corporate cases, that too
on minimum Court fees may amount to taking away the time meant for the
common man who has no other alternative remedy or recourse open to him.
This situation also makes out a case for differential Court fees.
(ix) The corporate bodies could easily get their disputes resolved through the
methods of Arbitration and Conciliation. However, arbitration may involve
higher cost. For this reason also the corporate bodies make use of the judicial
infrastructure. However, while recourse to judicial infrastructure cannot be
denied, there is no harm if higher Court fees is levied because the State incurs
huge expenses in maintaining the entire judicial infrastructure.
(x) The Committee therefore draws the attention of the executive and the judiciary
to arrive at a decision regarding the differential Court fees for the commercial/
corporate/company matters immediately; and to amend the Supreme Court
Rules, High Court Rules and other Court Fees Acts accordingly.
INCREASED IN-FLOW OF FINANCE TO THE JUDICIARY
7.5 The Committee feels that there could be an added advantage of  levying a differential Court
fees for the corporate sector. As per the information made available by the Supreme Court, it carns
about Rs. 1 crore by way of Court fees/stamp fees in a year. By applying thc ad valorem  Court
fees for corporate cases, the Supreme Court can add to its revenue manifolds. This revenue so
collected could flow back to the Judiciary in the form of higher grants. This could also change
the people’s perception about the judiciary being a financial burden on the State as the grants given
to the Supreme Court and other Courts come under the head “expenditure”. The public perceive
that the Government of India, in order to give grants to the judiciary, mobilizes the finances from
other sources. However, levy of differential Court fees, both in the Supreme Court and the High
Courts, for corporate cases could make these institutions “revenue generating” also which could
go a long way in tiding over the financial crunches in the judiciary by flowing the same finance
to the Supreme Court and High Courts. Therefore, the Committee is in favour of levy of
differential Court fees and recommends that amendments be carried out in the relevant
rules in terms of Article 145 of the Constitution of India.
EMERGENCE OF ARBITRATION AND CONCILIATION AS A SERVICE INDUSTRY IN INDIA
8.0 The additional benefit that might accrue to the judicial system as a result of differential Court

19
fees and separate Benches for the corporate cases could be the emergence of arbitration and
conciliation. as a method of dispute resolution and as a service industry within the Indian judicial
system. It is a well known fact that commercial, mercantile or corporate contracts have shorter life
span and with changing circumstances, these contracts undergo many changes also. If the litigation
for such matters has to drag for years, the litigation itself becomes infructuous. Therefore, the
corporate sector may prefer arbitration and conciliation as a method of dispute resolution in place of
the conventional, time consuming, complex judicial procedure, which in Indian context is
characteristically slow leading to delays and pendency. Once separate Benches are constituted, judges
well versed in commercial/corporate laws could conduct arbitration and conciliation not only between
the Indian parties but also between the multinationals, commercial/corporate institutions of foreign
origin. The benefit of such a system would be that the arbitration and conciliation, hitherto a least
preferred mode of dispute resolution because of absence of an institutionalized mechanism within the
judiciary, will slowly get institutionalized in the Indian judicial system as well.
8.1 The Committee’s above inference is, based on the premise that the Indian judicial system,
in spite of being slow, has a distinct advantage of being structurally institutionalized, with the
Supreme Court at the apex then the High Courts at middle level and the subordinate Courts at the
lowest level. In addition, the system has a tremendous advantage of  English as a working language
and a very intelligent and knowledgeable Bar throughout the country. Thus there are very conducive
circumstances existing within the Indian judiciary which can institutionalize arbitration and
conciliation as methods of dispute resolution in the way it has been institutionalized in Singapore.
In such a scenario, the multinationals/international parties can opt India as a venue of arbitration,
thus saving and earning foreign exchange. Therefore, there is no reason that arbitration and
conciliation cannot emerged as a Service Industry in India.
V ACATIONS AND HOLIDAYS OBSERVED IN THE SUPREME COURT
9.0 V acations and holidays being observed in the Supreme Court was one of the issues that came
in for some debate during the course of examination of the instant Bill. It was observed by the
Committee that the system of  vacations is a colonial legacy that has no relevance today. In fact, some
Committee Members were of the view that given the huge pendency existing at various levels
including at the Supreme Court level, vacations is a privilege that the judicial system could hardly
afford. Whereas some witnesses were of the opinion that the judges also work at their residences
for studying the cases, writing judgments etc. after the office hours and even on holidays; so
vacation should not be treated as privilege. The Committee inquired about the vacations and holidays
being observed in the Supreme Court. The Supreme Court informed the Committee as under :—
“the vacations and holidays in the Supreme Court are governed by the Supreme
Court Rules, 1966. “As per Order II Rule 4(2) of Supreme Court Rules, 1966 the
period of the summer vacation shall not exceed 10 weeks.’’
“As per Sub Rule 3 of rule 4 of Order II, the length of the summer vacation
of the Court and the number of holidays for the Court and the offices of the Court
shall be such as may be fixed by the Chief Justice and notified in the Official
Gazette so as not to exceed one hundred and three days (excluding Sundays
not falling in the vacation and during holidays).
As per Rule 5 of Order II, the Court shall not ordinarily, sit on Saturday, nor
on any other days notified as Court holidays in the Official Gazette.
With effect from the year 2006, the Summer Vacation of the Court has been
reduced from eight weeks to seven weeks and number of working days has been
increased from 185 to 190 days. The Courts sit from 10.30 A.M to 4 PM on

20
Tuesdays, Wednesdays and Thursdays and from 10.30 A.M till the work is over on
Mondays and Fridays. The Courts do not  sit on Saturdays and holidays except to
hear the matters of urgent nature. Since 2006, a Bench consisting of two Hon’ble
Judges sits regularly during Summer Vacation for hearing urgent miscellaneous
matters on Mondays and old regular matters from Tuesdays to Fridays. Additional
Benches as per availability of Hon’ble Judges are constituted to hear old
regular matters in Summer Vacations.
Except on Sundays and holidays, the offices of the Court remain open from
10.00 A.M to 5.00 PM from Monday to Friday and from 10.00 A.M to 1.00 P. M
on Saturday. If so directed by the Hon’ble Chief Justice of India, the office
remains closed on Saturdays during Summer Vacations.’’
9.1 Regarding the number of holidays being observed in the Supreme Court, the Committee was
informed that a total number of 45, 44 and 45 holidays were observed in the Supreme Court in
the years 2006, 2007 and 2008 respectively.
9.2 However, the Committee taking note of the information furnished by the Supreme
Court, feels that given the huge number of cases pending in the Supreme Court, the
system of lengthy vacation is better done away with. Reduced vacations will automatically
add to the number of working days. The Committee, accordingly, recommends for increasing
the number of working days in the Supreme Court to accord speedy justice to the people
and to break the vicious circle of pendency.
INCREASE IN THE WORKING HOURS IN THE SUPREME COURT
9.3 Another issue which invited Committee’s attention was the feasibility of increasing the
working hours in the Supreme Court. The Committee felt that by increasing the working hours,
it is possible to take up more matters for hearing, thus contributing to reduction in pendency. The
Committee desires that the Supreme Court should explore this possibility in the interest of
justice.
ALTERNATIVE DISPUTES REDRESSAL MECHANISM
9.4 While considering the Bill, the Committee also deliberated upon the issue of alternative
dispute redressal mechanism in the Supreme Court in the context of the pendency of cases. The
Committee was of the opinion that these methods were of great importance to reduce the’
pendency while disposing of the litigations within a short duration. On this particular issue, the
Supreme Court informed the Committee that “in the year 2006, several attempts were made to hold
Lok Adalats in the Supreme Court by giving notice and publication in the newspapers. However,
no favourable response was received. Further, efforts in this direction were made in the year 2007,
as a result of which a Lok Adalat was held in the Supreme Court on 3rd May, 2008 and 25 out
of 45 matters referred to the Lok Adalats were disposed of” The Committee, in light of the above,
is of the considered opinion that efforts should be made through press and media to educate people
about the alternative methods of dispute resolution. The Committee is of the view that the Supreme
Court should organise seminars, workshops and publish write-ups etc. on the efficacy of the
alternative methods of dispute resolutions and their benefits in terms of saving time and money so
that the people resort to these methods for settlement of their disputes over conventional method
of going to the Courts through long procedures.
9.5 In the light of the above deliberations, the Committee observes that it is not against
increasing the number of judges in the Supreme Court but it directs the Government that
issues discussed in the report and recommendations/observations of the Committee thereon
should  also be given thoughtful consideration so that there is no pendency of cases in
future, and the objective of this Bill is achieved.

21
MINUTES

22

23
23
RELEVENT MINUTES OF THE MEETINGS OF THE DEPARTMENT RELATED
PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON PERSONNEL, PUBLIC
GRIEVANCES, LAW AND JUSTICE
XX
TWENTIETH MEETING
The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public
Grievances, Law and Justice met at 11.00 A.M. on Tuesday, the 27th May, 2008, in Committee
Room ‘A’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
1. Dr. E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shrimati Jayanthi Natarajan
3. Shri Balavant alias Bal Apte
4. Shri Virendra Bhatia
5. Sardar Tarlochan Singh
6. Dr. (Shrimati) Najma A Heptulla
7. Shrimati Brinda Karat
LOK SABHA
8. Shri Raj Babbar
9. Dr. Shafiqur Rahman Barq
10. Shri N.S.V . Chitthan
11. Shri Chhattar Singh Darbar
12. Shri S.K. Kharventhan
13. Shri A Krishnaswamy
14. Dr. C. Krishnan
15. Shri Shailendra Kumar
16. Shri Harin Pathak
17. Shri Varkala Radhakrishnan
18. Prof. M. Ramadass
19. Shri Bhupendrasinh Solanki
20. Shri Devendra Prasad Yadav
SECRETARIAT
Shri Sham Sher Singh, Joint Secretary
Shri K.P Singh, Joint Director
Ms. Niangkhannem Guite, Committee Officer

24
WITNESSES
Representatives of the Ministry of Law and Justice
1. * * *
2. Department of Justice
1. Shri Ramesh Abhishek, Joint Secretary; and
2. S. Twickly, Deputy Secretary.
2. * * *
3. * * *
4. The Committee, thereafter heard the presentation of the representatives of the Department of
Justice on the Supreme Court (Number of Judges) Amendment Bill, 2008. The Members of the
Committee raised queries on various issues connected with the Bill which were replied to by the
representatives. The Members also sought certain specific information on the Supreme Court and
advised the Ministry to reply in writing.
(The witnesses then withdrew)
5. * * *
6. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
7. The meeting was adjourned at 1.50 
P.M.
*** Relate to some other matters.

25
XXII
TWENTY SECOND MEETING
The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances,
Law and Justice met at 11.00 P.M. on Tuesday, the 10th June, 2008, in Committee Room ‘A’,
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
1. Dr. E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shrimati Jayanthi Natarajan
3. Shri Virendra Bhatia
4. Shri Tariq Anwar
5. Sardar Tarlochan Singh
LOK SABHA
6. Prof. Ram Gopal Yadav
7. Shri N.S.V . Chitthan
8. Shri A. Krishnaswamy
9. Shri Shailendra Kumar
10. Shri Harin Pathak
11. Shri Varkala Radhakrishnan
12. Shri Bhupendrasinh Solanki
13. Shri Devendra Prasad Yadav
14. Shrimati Tejasvini Gowda
15. Shrimati Kiran Maheshwari
16. Shrimati Krishna Tirath
SECRETARIAT
Shri Sham Sher Singh, Joint Secretary
Shri K.P Singh, Joint Director
Shri K.N. Earendra Kumar, Deputy Director
Ms. Niangkhannem Guite, Committee Officer
WITNESSES
I. * * *
25
*** Relates to some other matters.

26
II. The Supreme Court (Number of Judges) Amendment Bill, 2008
Representative of the Supreme Court Bar Association
Shri P.H. Parekh, President.
Representatives of the Bar Council of India
1. Shri S.N.P. Sinha, Chairman
2. Shri Jai Ram Beniwal, Vice Chairman
3. Shri Jagdev, Member; and
4. Shri M.D. Joshi, Joint Secretary
Representative of the Ministry of Law and Justice (Department of Justice)
Shri K. Gurtu, Director.
2. * * *
3. * * *
4. The Chairman then welcomed Shri P.H. Parekh, President, Supreme Court Bar Association
to the meeting and requested him to make his presentation on various provisions of the Supreme
Court (Number of Judges) Amendment Bill, 2008.
5. Thereafter, Shri Parekh made a detailed presentation before the Committee. He was of the
view that the number of Judges in the Supreme Court should be increased from 26 to 30 keeping
in view number of cases pending in different courts of the country. He also suggested that the Act
should be suitably amended to provide increase in number of Judges from time to time, by the
President in consultation with the Chief Justice of India so that the need for introducing a Bill in
Parliament does not arise.
6. The Chairman then welcomed the Chairman, Bar Council of India and his colleagues and
requested them to make their presentation on the Bill. The representatives from the Bar Council
were unanimous that the number of Judges should be raised to thirty as this would help in reducing
the arrears of cases.
7. Members were unanimous that though the number of Judges should be increased but at the
same time they should be made accountable, their working hours should be increased and number
of vacation days should be cut.
(The witnesses then withdrew).
8. V erbatim record of the proceeding was kept.
9. The meeting adjourned at 1.00 
P.M.
*** Relate to some other matters.

27
27
XXVI
TWENTY SIXTH MEETING
The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances,
Law and Justice met at 11.00 A.M. on Thursday, the 17th July, 2008, in Committee Room ‘A’,
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
1. Dr. E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shrimati Jayanthi Natarajan
3. Shri Balavant alias Bal Apte
4. Shri Virendra Bhatia
5. Shri Tariq Anwar
6. Shri Ram Jethmalani
7. Sardar Tarlochan Singh
8. Shrimati Brinda Karat
LOK SABHA
9. Prof. Ram Gopal Yadav
10. Shri N.S.V . Chitthan
11. Shri S.K. Kharventhan
12. Dr. C. Krishnan
13. Shri Shailendra Kumar
14. Shri Harin Pathak
15. Shri Varkala Radhakrishnan
16. Prof. M. Ramadass
17. Shri Bhupendrasinh Solanki
18. Shri Devendra Prasad Yadav
19. Shrimati Tejaswini Gowda
20. Adv. P. Satteedevi
21. Shrimati Krishna Tirath
SECRETARIAT
Shri Sham Sher Singh, Joint Secretary
Shri K.P. Singh, Joint Director
Shri K.N. Earendra Kumar, Deputy Director
Ms. Niangkhannem Guite, Committee Officer

28
*** Relate to some other matters.
WITNESSES
I. Representatives of the Ministry of Law and Justice
(i) * * *
(ii) Department of Justice
1. Shri Ramesh Abhishek, Joint Secretary
2. Shri K. Gurtu, Director
2. * * *
3. Thereafter, the Committee took up clause-by-clause consideration of the Supreme Court
(Number of Judges) Amendment Bill, 2008. The Chairman and Members of the Committee desired
that the recommendations of the Committee on the Judges (Inquiry) Bill, 2006 should be duly
considered and implemented by the Government without delay. Clause 2 of the Bill was adopted
without any changes.
4. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
5. The meeting was adjourned at 12.15 
P.M.

29
29
XXVII
TWENTY SEVENTH MEETING
The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances,
Law and Justice met at 11.00 A.M. on Friday, the 1st August, 2008, in Committee Room ‘A’,
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
1. Dr. E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Balavant alias Bal Apte
3. Shri Virendra Bhatia
4. Shri Tariq Anwar
5. Sardar Tarlochan Singh
6. Shrimati Brinda Karat
LOK SABHA
7. Prof. Ram Gopal Yadav
8. Shri N.S.V . Chitthan
9. Shri Chhattar Singh Darbar
10. Shri N.Y . Hanumanthappa
11. Shri S.K. Kharventhan
12. Dr. C. Krishnan
13. Shri Shailendra Kumar
14. Shri Varkala Radhakrishnan
15. Shri Bhupendrasinh Solanki
16. Shri Devendra Prasad Yadav
17. Shrimati Tejaswini Gowda
18. Adv. P. Satteedevi
SECRETARIAT
Shri K.P. Singh, Joint Director
Shri K.N. Earendra Kumar, Deputy Director
Ms. Niangkhannem Guite, Committee Officer
2. The Committee took up for consideration the Draft Report on the Supreme Court (Number
of Judges) Amendment, Bill, 2008. The Chairman requested Members to offer their views on the
Draft Report. After some discussion the Committee adopted the Report with some changes. The
Committee decided to present the said report to Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha as the Parliament

30
is not in Session. The Committee also authorized the Chairman of the Committee to present the
report to Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha.
3. * * *
4. * * *
5. The meeting was adjourned at 12.15 
P.M.
*** Relate to some other matters.

31
ANNEXURES

ANNEXURE-A
AS INTRODUCED  IN L OK S ABHA
29 APRIL, 2008
Bill No. 41 of 2008
THE SUPREME COURT (NUMBER OF JUDGES)
AMENDMENT BILL, 2008
A
BILL
further to amend the Supreme Court (Number of Judges)
Act, 1956.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-ninth Year of the
Republic of India as follows:—
1. This Act may be called the Supreme Court (Number of
Judges) Amendment Act, 2008.
2. In section 2 of the Supreme Court (Number of Judges)
Act, 1956, for the word ‘‘twenty-five’’, the word ‘‘thirty’’ shall
be substituted.
33
55 of 1956. 5
Short title.
Amendement
of section 2.

34
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The pendney of cases in the Supreme Court of India has constantly been
on the rise largely due to higher rate of institution of cases. As on the 31st day
of March, 2007, 41,581 cases were pending in the Supreme Court. The Chief
Justice of India has intimated that the Judges in the Supreme Court feel over-
burdened and have been working under acute work pressure. It has also not
been possible for the Chief Justice of India to constitute a five-Judge Bench on
a regular basis to hear cases involving interpretation of constitutional law as
doing that would result in constitution of less number of Division Benches which
in turn will result in delay in hearing of other civil and criminal matters.
2. Suitable steps are, therefore, required to be taken to augment the
strength of the Judges in the Supreme Court so that it can function more
efficiently and effectively towards attaining the ultimate goal of rendering speedy
justice to the litigant public.
3. It is, therefore, proposed to amend the Supreme Court (Number of
Judges) Act, 1956 to increase the number of Judges in the Supreme Court from
twenty-five to thirty, excluding the Chief Justice qf India.
4. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objective.
N
EW D ELHI; H.R. BHARDWAJ.
The 15th April, 2008.
PRESIDENTS RECOMMENDATION UNDER ARTICLE 117
OF THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
[Copy of letter No. 12011/l/2002-US.II dated the 15th April, 2008 from
Shri H. R. Bhardwaj, Minister of Law and Justice to the Secretary-General,
Lok Sabha]
The President, having been informed of the subject matter of, the
proposed-Supreme Court (Number of Judges) Amendment Bill, 2008, has
recommended the introduction of the Bill under clause (1) of article 117 of the
Constitution of India.
34

35
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 2 of the Bill seeks to increase the strength of the Judges of the
Supreme Court from the present strength of 25 to 30 judges excluding the Chief
Justice of India. This will entail expenditure on account of pay and allowances
on creation of 5 additional posts of judges along with required staff. The judges
will also be entitled to the use of rent-free official residence under rule 4 of the
Supreme Court Judges Rules, 1959. Each judge will have to be provided with
personal staff at residence and office. The increase in the strength of the judges
would also require construction of 5 bungalows for accommodating the judges
which would entail expenditure on the construction and the maintenance thereof.
2. The recurring expenditure would consist of salary of 5 judges along with
their staff amounting to Rs.11.57 lakhs per month amounting to Rs.171.37 lakhs
per annum. The recurring expenses on maintenance of the accommodation
provided to the judges would be approximately Rs.6.65 lakhs per bungalow per
annum which would include general maintenance and electricity and water
charges. The non-recurring expenditure would be the cost of constructing 5
bungalows at a total cost of Rs.9.85 crores and purchase of vehicles, electronic
items, etc., at a cost of approximately Rs.81.25 lakhs. Thus, the total non-
recurring expenditure would be approximately Rs.10.66 crores.
3. The. Bill, if enacted, is not likely to involve any other recurring or non-
recurring expenditure.
35

36
ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE S UPREME C OURT (N UMBER OF J UDGES) A CT, 1956
(55 OF 1956)
** * * *
2. The maximum number of Judges of the Supreme Court,
excluding the Chief Justice of India, shall be twenty-five.
** * * *
36
Maximum
number of
Supreme Court
Judges other
than Chief
Justice.

37
37
LOK SABHA
A
BILL
further to amend the Supreme Court (Number of Judges) Act, 1956.
(Shri H.R. Bhardwaj, Minister of Law and Justice)

38
ANNEXURE-B
38
LIST OF INDIVIDUALS/ORGANIZATIONS WHO SUBMITTED THEIR MEMO-
RANDA ON THE BILL
1. Shri G. Venkateswarlu, Chennai.
2. Shri Ratul Goswami, Assam.
3. Focal Point Industries Association, Amritsar.
4. Shri P. Mathew, Hyderabad.
5. God-Images Good Governance Society, New Delhi.
6. Shri Ishrat Hussain AMU, Aligarh;
7. Justice (Retd.) R.K. Mahajan, New Shimla.
8. Shri Satya Dev Verma, Faridabad.
9. Shri H.C. Arora, Punjab and Haryana High Court.
10. Shri B.R. Acharaya, Gujarat.
11. Shri S. Balaram, Chennai.
12. Rakshak, California, U.S.A.
13. Shri Mohd. Harun Rashid, New Delhi.
14. Shri S.K. Goyal, Delhi.
15. Shri N.K. Sharma, Delhi.
16. Prof. Abdul Gani Bhat, Srinagar.
17. Shri Hari Bhagwan Bharti and others, New Delhi.
18. Shri Ajoy Dutta, Krishno K. Borooah and Prashanta Kumar Barman, Guwahati.
19. Dr. Lakshmi Narain, Meerut.
20. Shri Banwaree, New Delhi.
21. Dr. Durlabh Chandra Bhattacharya, Calcutta High Court.
22. Dr. Shyam M. Agarwal, Rajasthan.
23. Shri P.M. Bhalla, Delhi.
24. Shri Gokulananda Mishra, Orissa.
25. Women Lawyers Association, Chennai.
26. Madras Bar Association, Chennai.
27. Madras High Court Advocates Association, Chennai.
28. State Public Interest Protection Council, Cuttack.
29. Charan Lal Sahu, 165, Supreme Enclave, Mayur Vihar, Phase-I, Delhi-110091.

39
ANNEXURE-C
STATEMENT OF INSTITUTION, DISPOSAL AND PENDENCY OF CASES IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
FROM THE YEAR 1950 TO 30.04.2008
Year Institution T otal Disposal Total Pendency T otal
Admission Regular Admission Regular Admission Regular
1 2 3 4 56 78 9 1 0
1950 1,037 178 1,215 491 34 525 546 144 690
1951 1,324 600 1,924 1,560 227 1,787 310 517 827
1952 1,127 330 1,457 1,145 527 1,672 292 320 612
1953 1,354 360 1,714 1,163 252 1,415 483 428 911
1954 1,743 410 2,153 1,522 427 1,949 704 411 1,115
1955 1,580 512 2,092 1,669 200 1,869 615 723 1,338
1956 1,732 630 2,362 1,720 258 1,978 627 1,095 1,722
1957 1,490 999 2,489 1,527 411 1,928 600 1,683 2,283
1958 1,698 784 2,482 1,694 623 2,317 604 1,844 2,448
1959 1,870 783 2,653 1,829 682 2,511 645 1,945 2,590
1960 1,971 1,276 3,247 1,910 1,271 3,181 706 1,950 2,656
1961 2,000 1,214 3,214 1,899 1,654 3,553 807 1,510 2,317
1962 2,214 1,345 3,559 2,291 1,542 3,833 730 1,313 2,043
1963 2,189 1,561 3,750 2,152 1,131 3,283 767 1,743 2,510
1964 2,544 1,520 4,064 2,463 1,605 4,068 848 1,658 2,506
1965 2,366 1,535 3,901 2,444 1,341 3,785 770 1,852 2,622
1966 2,639 3,012 5,651 2,429 1,412 3,841 980 3,452 4,432

40
12 3 4 5 6 7 89 1 0
1967 2,826 2,493 5,319 2,515 1,566 4,081 1,291 4,379 5,670
1968 3,489 3,317 6,806 3,138 3,032 6,170 1,642 4,664 6,306
1969 4,185 3,512 7,697 3,731 2,737 6,468 2,096 5,439 7,535
1970 4,273 3,203 7,476 3,779 2,569 6,348 2,590 6,073 8,663
1971 5,338 2,641 7,979 4,588 1,903 6,491 3,340 6,811 10,151
1972 4,853 4,223 9,076 5,053 1,769 6,822 3,140 9,265 12,405
1973 6,298 3,876 10,174 6,112 2,063 8,175 3,326 1 1,078 14,404
1974 5,423 2,780 8,203 5,103 3,158 8,261 3,646 10,700 14,346
1975 6,192 3,336 9,528 5,749 2,978 8,727 4,089 1 1,058 15,147
1976 5,549 2,705 8,254 4,904 2,830 7,734 4,734 10,933 15,667
1977 9,251 5,250 14,501 8,714 1,681 10,395 5,271 14,502 19,773
1978 13,723 7,117 20,840 10,624 6,471 17,095 8,370 15,148 23,518
1979 16,088 4,666 20,754 1 1,988 3,845 15,833 12,470 15,969 28,439
1980 21,749 4,616 26,365 14,520 2,433 16,953 19,699 18,152 37,851
1981 24,474 6,566 31,040 16,528 2,162 18,690 27,645 22,556 50,201
1982 29,706 13,804 43,510 26,593 2,519 29,112 30,758 33,841 64,599
1983 37,602 18,300 55,902 35,745 10,079 45,824 32,615 42,062 74,677
1984 37,799 1 1,275 49,074 28,813 6,734 35,547 41,601 46,603 88,204
1985 36,243 15,349 51,592 36,004 15,074 51,078 41,840 46,878 88,718
1986 22,334 5,547 27,881 17,881 12,819 30,700 46,293 39,606 85,899
1987 22,234 5,806 28,040 15,476 6,331 21,807 53,051 39,081 92,132
1988 21,950 5,771 27,721 15,714 4,181 19,895 59,287 40,671 99,958

41
1989 21,213 6,256 27,469 17,389 4,011 21,400 63,111 42,916 1,06,027
1990 22,265 6,223 28,488 20,890 4,348 25,238 64,486 44,791 1,09,277
1991 26,283 6,218 32,501 28,679 6,662 35,341 62,090 44,347 1,06,437
1992 20,435 6,251 26,686 20,234 15,613 35,847 62,291 34,985 97,476*
1993 18,778 2,870 21,648 17,166 3,718 20,884 37,549 21,245** 58,794**
(98,240)
1994 29,271 12,775 42,046 35,853 12,037 47,890 30,967 21,983 52,950
1995 35,689 15,754 51,443 51,547 16,790 68,337 15,109 20,947 36,056
1996 26,778 6,628 33,406 35,227 10,989 46,216 6,660 16,586 23,246
1997 27,771 4,584 32,355 29,130 7,439 36,569 5,301 13,731 19,032
1998 32,769 3,790 36,559 31,054 4,179 35,233 7,016 13,342 20,358
1999 30,795 3,888 34,683 30,847 3,860 34,707 6,964 13,370 20,334
2000 32,604 4,507 37,111 30,980 4,320 35,300 8,588 13,557 22,145
2001 32,954 6,465 39,419 32,686 6,156 38,842 8,856 13,866 22,722
2002 37,781 6,271 44,052 36,903 5,536 42,439 9,734 14,601 24,335
2003 42,823 7,571 50,394 41,074 6,905 47,979 11,483 15,267 26,750
2004 51,362 7,569 58,931 47,850 7,680 55,530 14,995 15,156 30,151
2005 45,342 5,198 50,540 41,794 4,416 46,210 18,543 15,938 34,481
2006 55,402 6,437 61,839 51,584 4,956 56,540 22,361 17,419 39,780
2007 62,281 6,822 69,103 56,682 5,275 61,957 27,960 18,966 46,926
Jan to
Apr., 08 24,833 3,174 28,007 25,720 2,839 28, 559 27,073 19,301 46,374
* The pendency figures shown upto the year 1992 indicates the number of matters after expanded hyphenated number on files.
** from 1993 onwards the figure of pendency of matters are actual file-wise i.e. without expanding hyphenated number of files.
Figures taken from monthly statement provided by NIC.

42
ANNEXURE-D
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
*STATEMENT OF INSTITUTION, DISPOSAL AND PENDENCY OF CATEGORY 3 (DIRECT TAXES MATTERS),
4 (INDIRECT TAXES MATTERS), 8 (PIL MATTERS) FOR THE YEAR 2006 AND 2007
Year and Pendency at Institution T otal available for Disposal Pendency
Category the beginning disposal
of the year
Admission Regular Admission Regular Admission Regular T otal Admission Regular T otal Admission Regular T otal
2006
3 515 539 1850 442 2365 981 3346 1745 150 1895 620 831 1451
(Direct Taxes
Matters)
4 694 1893 2667 413 3361 2306 5667 2722 449 3171 639 1857 2496
(Indirect Taxes
(Matters)
8 572 301 975 119 1547 420 1967 864 100 964 683 320 1003
(PIL Matters)
2007
3 620 831 3300 556 3920 1387 5307 2690 312 3002 1230 1075 2305
(Direct Taxes)
4 639 1857 3719 520 4358 2377 6735 3503 651 4154 855 1726 2581
(Indirect Taxes)
8 683 320 1078 66 1761 386 2147 909 40 949 852 346 1198
(PIL)
*Figures taken from the statement provided by NIC.

43
ANNEXURE-E
SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
STATEMENT OF INSTITUTION, DISPOSAL AND PENDENCY OF SLP (CIVIL AND CRIMINAL) CASES
FOR THE YEAR 2006 TO 2007 AS PER ANNUAL STATEMENT
Y ear Pendency at Institution T otal available for Disposal Pendency
the beginning disposal
of the year
Admission Regular Admission Regular Admission Regular T otal Admission Regular T otal Admission Regular T otal
2006
Civil 12256 718 25493 203 37749 921 38670 22598 221 22819 15151 700 15851
Criminal 1829 54 8333 18 10162 72 10234 7372 22 7394 2790 50 2840
2007
Civil 15151 700 27906 511 43057 1211 44268 24237 113 24350 18820 1098 19918
Criminal 2790 50 9458 22 12248 72 12320 8612 20 8632 3636 52 3688
Figures taken from annual statement provided by NIC.

Printed at : Bengal Offset Works, 335, Khajoor Road, Karol Bagh, New Delhi-110005.