PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA 36
DEPARTMENT -RELA TED PARLIAMENT ARY STANDING
COMMITTEE  ON PERSONNEL,  PUBLIC  GRIEVANCES,  
LAW AND JUSTICE
THIRTY SIXTH REPORT
ON
THE CONSTITUTION (ONE HUNDRED AND EIGHTH AMENDMENT )
BILL, 2008
TH 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 17 DECEMBER, 2009)
TH 
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 17 DECEMBER, 2009)
TH 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 17 DECEMBER, 2009)
TH 
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 17 DECEMBER, 2009)
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
DECEMBER, 2009/PAUSA (SAKA 1931)DECEMBER, 2009/PAUSA (SAKA 1931)

Website:http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail:rsc-pers@sansad.nic.in

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA  SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON PERSONNEL, PUBLIC GRIEVANCES, LAW
AND JUSTICE
THIRTY SIXTH REPORT
ON
THE CONSTITUTION (ONE HUNDRED AND EIGHTH AMENDMENT)
BILL, 2008
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 17 TH DECEMBER, 2009)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 17 TH DECEMBER, 2009)
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
DECEMBER, 2009/PAUSA, (SAKA 1931)
CS (P & L)-71

CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ......................................................................................... (i)-(ii)
2. I NTRODUCTION ........................................................................................................................ (iii)-( iv)
3. R EPORT .................................................................................................................................. 1—26
4. M INUTES OF D ISSENT S UBMITTED BY S HRI V IRENDRA B HATIA, M EMBER, R AJYA S ABHA
AND S HRI S HAILENDRA K UMAR, M EMBER, L OK S ABHA ....................................................... 27
5. R ELEVANT M INUTES  OF THE M EETINGS  OF THE C OMMITTEE ............................................ 29—60
6. A NNEXURE ............................................................................................................................... 61—159
A. The Constitution (One Hundred and Eighth Amendment) Bill, 2008 ...................... 65—72
B. Comments of the Ministry of Law and Justice (Legislative Department) on the
views/suggestions contained in memoranda submitted by individuals/organisations/
experts on the provisions of the Bill ........................................................................... 73—125
C. Reply furnished by the Ministry of Law and Justice (Legislative Department)
to the Questionnaire on the Bill .................................................................................... 127—132
D. Memoranda received from Political Parties on the Bill ............................................. 133—159

(i)
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2009-10)
1. Shrimati Jayanthi Natarajan – Chairperson
RAJYA SABHA
2. Dr. Abhishek Manu Singhvi
3. Shri Shantaram Laxman Naik
4. Shri Balavant alias Bal Apte
5. Shri Parshottam Khodabhai Rupala
6. Shri Virendra Bhatia
7. Shri Tiruchi Siva
8. Sardar Tarlochan Singh
9. Shri Parimal Nathwani
10. Shri H.K. Dua
LOK SABHA
11. Shri Bhajan Lal
12. Shri N.S.V. Chitthan
13. Shrimati Deepa Dasmunsi
14. Shrimati Jyoti Dhurve
15. Shri D.B. Chandre Gowda
16. Dr. Monazir Hassan
17. Shri Syed Shahnawaz Hussain
18. Shrimati Chandresh Kumari
19. Shri Lalu Prasad
20. Dr. Kirodi Lal Meena
21. Kumari Meenakshi Natrajan
22. Shri Devji M. Patel
23. Shri Harin Pathak
24. Shri S. Semmalai
25. Shri Shailendra Kumar
26. Shri Vijay Bahadur Singh
27. Dr. (Shrimati) Prabha Kishor Taviad
28. Shri Manish Tewari
29. Shri R. Thamaraiselvan
30. Adv. P.T. Thomas (Idukki)
31. Vacant

(ii)
SECRETARIAT
Shri Sham Sher Singh, Joint Secretary
Shri K.P. Singh, Joint Director
Shri K.N. Earendra Kumar, Joint Director
Shrimati Niangkhannem Guite, Assistant Director

(iii)
♣Rajya Sabha Parliamentary Bulletin Part-II (No. 45131) dated the 9th May, 2008.
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairperson of the Department Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel,
Public Grievances, Law and Justice, having been authorised by the Committee on its behalf, do hereby,
present the Thirty Sixth Report on the Constitution (On Hundred and Eighth Amendment) Bill, 2008.
The Bill seeks to amend the Constitution of India, to reserve seats for women in the Lok Sabha
and Legislative Assembly of every State.
2. In pursuance of the rules relating to the Department Related Parliamentary Standing Committee,
the Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha referred
♣ the Bill, as introduced in the Rajya Sabha on the
6th May, 2008 and pending therein, to this Committee on the 8th May, 2008 for examination and report.
3. Keeping in view the importance of the Bill, the Committee decided to issue a press communique
to solicit views/suggestions from desirous individuals/organisations on the provisions of the Bill.
Accordingly, a press communique was issued, in response to which memoranda containing
suggestions were received, from various organizations/individuals experts, by the Committee.
4. The Committee considered the Bill in fourteen sittings and heard the oral evidence of the
Secretary, Legislative Department, Ministry of Law and Justice in its meeting held on 27th May, 2008
and that of the Secretary, Ministry of Panchayati Raj in its meeting held on 10th June, 2008. The
Committee also recorded oral evidence of various Political Parties which are represented in Parliament
and Non-Governmental Organisations who have had close association with the subject matter of the
Bill. During its Study Visits to Chennai, Kolkata, Mumbai, Lucknow, Patna, Bhopal, Bhubhaneshwar,
Kochi, Bangaluru and Hyderabad, the Committee interacted with the respective State Governments, local
Political Parties and stakeholders, in particular women’s organizations, social workers, Jurists etc. on
the provisions of the Bill. Meanwhile the 14th Lok Sabha was dissolved and the Committee became
defunct. Thereafter, the 15th Lok Sabha was constituted and then the Committee was reconstituted on
31st August, 2009.
5. While considering the Bill, the Committee took note of the following documents/information
placed before it : —
(i) Background note on the Bill submitted by the Ministry of Law and Justice (Legislative
Department);
(ii) Views/suggestions contained in the memoranda received from State Government, various
Political Parties/organisations/institutions/individuals/experts on the provisions of the Bill;
(iii) The comments of the Legislative Department on the views/suggestions contained in the
memoranda received from various Political Parties/organisations/institutions/individuals/
experts on the provisions of the Bill;

(iv)
(iv) Views expressed during the oral evidence tendered before the Committee; and
(v) Other research material/documents related to the Bill.
6. The Committee adopted the Report in its meeting held on the 14th December, 2009.
JAYANTHI NATARAJAN
NEW D ELHI; Chairperson,
14th December , 2009 Committee on Personnel,
Public Grievances, Law and Justice.

1
REPORT
1. The Constitution (One Hundred and Eighth Amendment) Bill, 2008 (Annexure-A) aims at
eliminating gender inequality and discrimination against women, through political empowerment of
women, so as to fulfill people’s mandate of Women Empowerment as envisaged in the National
Common Minimum Programme of the Union Government.
2. The Bill seeks:
(i) to reserve, as nearly as may be, one third seats of the present strength of the House of
People and Legislative Assembly of every State for women;
(ii) to provide, as nearly as may be, one-third reservation for women including one-third the
number of seats reserved for the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes in the
House of the People and in the Legislative Assembly of every State to be reserved for
women of that category;
(iii) to provide for reservation for women in respect of nominations of members of Anglo-
Indian community in the House of the People and in the Legislative Assemblies of the
States;
(iv) to provide for reservation for women in the Legislative Assembly of the National Capital
Territory of Delhi; and
(v) to provide that reservation of seats for women should cease to have effect on the
expiration of a period of fifteen years from the enactment of the Bill.
3. To give effect to the above proposals, a Bill to amend the Constitution has been introduced
in Parliament which provides for:
(a) amendment of articles 239AA, 331 and 333 and insertion of new articles 330A, 332A and
334A in the Constitution to provide for reservation for women in the House of the People
and the Legislative Assemblies of the States; and
(b) consequential changes in certain other related enactments.
4. The Statement of Objects and Reasons, accompanying the Bill states about the object in the
following words:
“The issue of empowerment of women has been raised in different fora in the country from
time to time. Political empowerment of women is rightly perceived as a powerful and
indispensable tool for eliminating gender inequality and discrimination. The Government in its
National Common Minimum Programme has stated that it will take lead to introduce legislation
for one-third reservation of seats for women in Vidhan Sabhas and in the Lok Sabha. The
aforesaid idea followed by debate amongst the political parties and in intellectuals has paved way
in getting the insight in the matter...”

2
5. The Constitution (One Hundred and Eighth Amendment) Bill, 2008 was introduced* in the Rajya
Sabha on 6th May, 2008. It was referred ♣  by the Chairman, Rajya Sabha to this Department Related
Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances, Law and Justice on 8th May, 2008
for examination and report.
6. The background note, furnished by the Ministry of Law and Justice on the Bill, stated as
follows:
“During the years, a consistent demand has been made for giving adequate representation to
women in Parliament and State Legislatures. Such a demand finds support in the 73rd and 74th
Amendments to the Constitution made in the year 1992. There is a proposal to amend the
Constitution and to provide for reservation in Parliament and State Legislatures. In the past,
three Bills were introduced in Parliament in the years 1996, 1998 and 1999 respectively, but due
to one reason or the other, the Bills could not be passed...The issue of providing reservation
of seats for women in the Lok Sabha and the Legislative Assemblies of the States was first
taken up by Parliament for deliberation through the introduction of the Constitution (Eighty-first
Amendment) Bill, 1996 in the Eleventh Lok Sabha on the 12th September, 1996...The Constitution
(Eighty-first Amendment) Bill, 1996 was referred to the Joint Committee of the two Houses of
Parliament under the Chairmanship of (late) Shrimati Geeta Mukherjee, MP. The Committee
presented its report to the Lok Sabha on the 9th December, 1996. The Constitution (Eighty-
first Amendment) Bill, 1996, as reported by the Joint Committee of Parliament, lapsed with the
dissolution of the Eleventh Lok Sabha. Thereafter, a similar Bill, namely, the Constitution
(Eighty-fourth Amendment) Bill, 1998 was introduced in the Twelfth Lok Sabha, which also
lapsed with dissolution of that House. Again, another Bill, namely, the Constitution (Eighty-fifth
Amendment) Bill, 1999, prepared on the lines of the earlier Bills and introduced in the Thirteenth
Lok Sabha on 23.12.1999 could not be considered due to lack of political consensus. The Bill
also lapsed on dissolution of that House...”
7. The Committee heard the presentation of the Secretary, Legislative Department of the Ministry
of Law and Justice on the Bill on 27th May, 2008. The Secretary, Ministry of Panchayati Raj deposed
before the Committee on the Bill on 10th June, 2008.
8. In order to have a broader view on the Bill, the Committee decided to invite views/suggestions
from desirous individuals/organisations on the Bill. Accordingly, a press release was issued inviting
views/suggestions. In response to the press release published in major English and Hindi dailies and
vernacular newspapers all over India on 18th May, 2008, a number of representations/memoranda were
received.
8.1 The Committee forwarded the memoranda so received from the individuals and organisations
to the Ministry of Law and Justice (Legislative Department) for their comments thereon. The list of
these memoranda alongwith the gist of views and suggestions is placed at Annexure-B.
8.2 The major points raised in the memoranda are summarized as follows:
*Published in Gazette of India (Extraordinary) Part-II Section 2 dated the 6th May, 2008.
♣ Rajya Sabha Parliamentary Bulletin Part-II (No. 45131) dated the 9th May, 2008.

3
(i) Reservation for  women should be same as nearly as may be, that of percentage of
women out of the total population of India or States according to the census of 2001,
of the seats of the present strength of the House of People and the Legislative Assembly
of every State;
(ii) Amongst the reserved constituencies, the reservation for women of SC/ST and OBC
must also be made at the same percentage which is applicable in the case of reservations
for employment to SC/ST and OBC category candidates;
(iii) Muslim women, being weakest section of Indian society, needs a separate reservation
quota in legislative bodies;
(iv) Special quota for  physically challenged women for  inclusion in the Bill;
(v) One third reservation for  women should be provided in both the Houses of Parliament;
(vi) One third among the reserved seats for  women should be provided to the SC/ST/OBC
women in Parliament and State Legislatures;
(vii) R eservation for  women to be provided for  not only 15 years, but should be continued
to next 15 years also;
(viii) Reservation of seats for  the Neutral Gender in the House of the People;
(ix) It should be made compulsory for  political parties to give at least 33% party tickets to
women, as per Gill formula;
(x) Dual member constituencies may be established, amending Articles 81 and 170 of the
Constitution;
(xi) Tri cameral legislature system;
(xii) One third reservation for  women both in Parliament and State Assemblies is a grave
necessity with respect to the promotion of gender equality in all spheres of human
endeavour and to do away with the general backwardness of women at all levels;
(xiii) Quota is not an answer to women’s problems and quota results in discrimination on the
basis of gender, violation of the democratic right of people to choose their representatives
and violation of the democratic right of people to contest elections. The reservation will
only help elite women who are proxy of powerful men; women candidates may not get
party ticket to contest from unreserved constituency etc. Therefore, there is no need for
reservation for  women in the Legislatures;
(xiv) O.B.C. women will not be empowered without quota;
(xv) There should be a quota within the women quota for  SC, ST, OBC, Minority, Urban,
Rural etc. for  genuine empowerment of all the segments of women of our society;
(xvi) In view of the provision contained in Article 15(4) of the Constitution of India and Indian
Panchayati Raj Act, 1994, 50% reservation (out of 33%) should be given to the women
of Other Backward Classes on the basis of their population strength in each State of
India, as per preceding decennial census. 50% share in democracy may be provided to

4
women in the country which may play a big role to raise the status as well as benefit
for the Other Backward Classes;
(xvii) Political parties should be made responsible to ensure distribution of tickets in such a
manner that the various social and economic strata of society, especially marginalized and
disadvantaged groups, get adequate representation;
(xviii) The policy of rotation of seats will prevent the candidates from nurturing their constitu-
encies over a period of time;
(xix) W ith regard to the issue of terminating the reservation policy after a period of 15 years,
after 15 years of enforcement, the policy of reservation should be assessed to gauge the
impact it has had on the participation of women in politics in terms of numbers and
roles. Whether it should be continued or terminated should be reviewed on the basis of
considerations of this assessment; and
(xx) Nomination of trans genders as Members of Lok Sabha in the place of the Anglo Indian
representatives should be considered since many Anglo Indians have shifted to their place
of origin and also since their population is insignificant in number.
8.3 The Legislative Department has responded on the comments/suggestions contained in the
memoranda as under:
“It is a matter of policy. On the basis of the report/recommendations of the Parliamentary
Standing Committee, the Department will go to the Cabinet for taking a policy decision”.
8.4 A Questionnaire on the Bill was also prepared by the Secretariat and forwarded to the Ministry
for their replies. The reply to the Questionnaire was furnished by the Ministry on 22nd July, 2008 and
the same was considered by the Committee. (Annexure ‘C’)
9.1 The Committee decided to seek the views of the Political Parties which are represented in the
Parliament in writing and also to invite them for hearing before the Committee. Accordingly, the
Chairman of the Committee wrote to the heads of these Political Parties. In response, the Committee
received written comments from the Political Parties viz.:- Communist Party of India (Marxist), Indian
National Lok Dal, Maharashtrawadi Gomantak Party, All India Anna Dravida Munnetra Kazhagam,
Dravida Munnetra Kazhagam, Desiya Murpokku Dravida Kazhagam, All India Forward Bloc, Janata Dal
(United), Marumalarchi Dravida Munnetra Kazhagam, Bhartiya Janta Party, Communist Party of India
(Tamil Nadu State Council), Indigenous Nationalist Party of Twipra, Pattali Makkal Katchi, Dravidar
Kazhagam, Nationalist Congress Party, Bahujan Samaj Party, Indian National Congress, Mizoram
Peoples’ Conference, Samajwadi Party, Rashtriya Janta Dal, Indian Union Muslim League, Swatantra
Bharat Paksha and CPI (Marxist-Leninist).
9.2 The representatives of Political Parties appeared before the Committee on the Bill on 17th and
18th June, 2008 viz.:- Communist Party of India (Marxist), Communist Party of India, Indian National
Congress, All India Anna Dravida Munnetra Kazhagam, Dravida Munnetra Kazhagam and All India
Forward Bloc.
9.3 The Committee also heard the views of various NGOs viz. National Federation of Indian
Women, All India Democratic Women’s Association, Guild of Service (North India), Women Power

5
Connect, Rakshak Foundation, Delhi Janwadi Mahila Samiti and Streebal on the Bill in its meetings held
on 3rd, 17th and 18th June, 2008 and 8th July, 2008. The Committee further held in-house discussion
on the Bill on 17th July, 1st August, 18th September, 7th October, 2008; 28th January, 16th February
and 10th November, 2009.
9.4 The Committee heard the views of the State Governments of Tamil Nadu, West Bengal,
Maharashtra, Uttar Pradesh, Bihar, Madhya Pradesh, Orissa, Kerala, Karnataka and Andhra Pradesh on
the Constitution (One Hundred and Eighth) Amendment Bill, 2008 and held discussions with the
representatives of Political Parties, NGOs, individuals and stakeholders on the Bill during the course of
its Study Visits to Tamil Nadu, West Bengal, Maharashtra, Uttar Pradesh, Bihar, Madhya Pradesh,
Orissa, Kerala, Karnataka and Andhra Pradesh.
9.5 The Committee also interacted with the Political Parties at the State level during its Study Visits
viz.:- Marumalarchi Dravida Munnetra Kazhagam, Indian Union Muslim League, Communist Party of
India, Communist Party of India (Marxist), Bahujan Samaj Party, Nationalist Congress Party, All India
Anna Dravida Munnetra Kazhagam, Bharatiya Janata Party, Indian National Congress, Dravida Munnetra
Kazhagam, Desiya Murpokku Dravida Kazhagam, Samatwa Makkal Katchi, Dravida Kazhagam and
Pattali Makkal Katchi at Chennai: Indigenous Nationalist Party of Twipra, Bharatiya Janata Party,
Democratic Socialist Party, West Bengal Socialist Party, Revolutionary Socialist Party, Rashtriya Janta
Dal, Communist Party of India, Communist Party of India (Marxist), Indian National Congress and All
India Forward Bloc at Kolkata: Bahujan Samaj Party, Nationalist Congress Party, Communist Party of
India (Marxist) — Maharashtra State Committee, Shiv Sena, Bharatiya Communist Party, Bharatiya
Communist Party (Marxwadi), Communist Party of India (Marxist) — Maharashtra State Council,
Bhartiya Janata Party and Indian National Congress at Mumbai: Congress Party — U.P. Congress
Committee, Samajwadi Party, Rashtriya Janata Dal, Janata Dal (United), Bahujan Samaj Party, Bharatiya
Janata Party, Indian National Congress, Nationalist Congress Party and Communist Party (Marxist) State
Committee at Lucknow: Communist Party of India, Bihar Pradesh Samajwadi Party, Janta Dal (United),
Bahujan Samaj Party, Nationalist Congress Party, Bihar Pradesh Congress Committee, Communist Party
of India (Marxist), Marxwadi Communist Party and Communist Party of India (Marxist-Leninist) at
Patna: Communist Party of India (Marxist), Nationalist Congress Party, Indian National Congress,
Rashtriya Janata Dal and Communist Party of India at Bhopal: Bharatiya Janata Party, Biju Janata Dal,
Communist Party of India, Communist Party of India (Marxist), Indian National Congress, Jharkhand
Mukti Morcha and Nationalist Congress Party at Bhubhaneshwar: Janathipathiya Samrakshana Samithy,
Indian National Congress, Kerala Congress (Jacob), Kerala Congress (Secular), NSP, Kerala Jan
Congress, Indian Muslim League and Janata Dal at Kochi: Indian National Congress, Nationalist
Congress Party, Bahujan Samaj Party and Bharatiya Janata Party at Bangaluru: and Bharatiya Janata
Party, Communist Party of India (Marxist), A.P. Congress Committee, Telangana Rashtra Samiti, Telugu
Desam Party, Indian National Congress and Bahujan Samaj Party at Hyderabad.
9.6 The Committee also sought the views of all the State Governments on the provisions of the
Bill. The Governments of NCT of Delhi, Himachal Pradesh, Meghalaya, Andaman and Nicobar
Administration, Rajasthan, Dadra and Nagar Haveli Administration, Union Territory of Lakshadweep
Administration, Haryana, Union Territory of Chandigarh Administration, Assam, Jammu and Kashmir,
Orissa, Chhattisgarh, Nagaland, Mizoram, Gujarat and Punjab submitted their written comments
thereon.

6
9.7 The Government of National Capital Territory of Delhi has stated that “the Bill is acceptable to
this Government”. The Government of Himachal Pradesh has stated that “this State Government is of
the considered view that the above Bill which provides for one-third reservation of seats for women
in the House of People and Legislative Assemblies (including seats reserved for Scheduled Castes and
Scheduled Tribes) is a forward step to achieve the objective of eliminating gender inequality and
ensuring political empowerment of women. Thus, this Government conveys its approval on the said
Bill.
9.8 The Government of Meghalaya has stated that “as far as the State of Meghalaya is concerned,
the proposed amendment is not agreeable as presently women are not banned from contesting election
alongwith men from the reserved seats for Scheduled Tribe.” The Andaman and Nicobar Administration
has stated that “since this Union Territory is without a legislature, all Bills, Acts, Policy decisions
adopted by the Central Government are implemented here and hence this Union Territory Administration
has no specific comments to offer on the Women Reservation Bill”.
9.9 The Government of Rajasthan has stated that “the Bill under question should be brought in at
an early date as the same shall provide legal opportunities of adequate representation in Parliament,
Rajya Sabha and also in State Assemblies.” The Dadra and Nagar Haveli Administration has stated that
“this U.T. Administration is a centrally administered territory having no legislature. All the instructions/
guidelines with respect to the electioneering including Reservation Policy as issued by the Election
Commission are implemented by the U.T. Administration. As such, this U.T. Administration has no
comments to offer on the proposed enactment.”
9.10 The Administration of the Union Territory of Lakshadweep has stated that “...there is only one
Lok Sabha seat reserved for Lakshadweep for the present. This Union Territory Administration has
therefore no any specific comments in the proposed Bill.” The Government of Haryana has stated that
“...State Government is fully supportive of the Bill introduced by the Government of India.”
9.11 The Administration of Union Territory of Chandigarh has stated that “…U.T. Chandigarh is
without legislature. U.T. Chandigarh constitutes one constituency in the House of the People. Though
the issue is not of much relevance to the U.T., there being no State Legislature yet a perusal of the
Bill reveal that this seeks to empower the women and eliminate gender inequalities and discrimination.
There is already a provision of reservation for women in the Urban Local Bodies/PRIs as provided
under Part IX and Part IX-A of the Constitution of India. The purpose of providing such reservation
at the grass root level in the institutions of local self governance has been fulfilled to a large extent
though the same may not be visible/apparent as of now. Provision of reservation for women in the
Assemblies/Lok Sabha would be another step in the direction”.
9.12 The Government of Mizoram has stated that “...this State Government has objected the above
stated Amendment ‘Women Reservation Bill’ as it would result as many as thirteen seats out of only
forty seats in the State Legislature.” The Government of Assam has stated that “…the Government of
Assam is in agreement with the different provisions contained in the Constitution (One Hundred and
Eighth Amendment) Bill, 2008 subject however to inclusion of a suitable provision that for both the Lok
Sabha and Legislative Assembly , the seats once reserved for women should continue to be so reserved
for a period of two terms of such Lok Sabha or Legislative Assembly. This it felt was necessary to
suitably empower the women. This provision would however not apply to cases of single or double

7
seats in which case the procedure as provided in the Constitution (One Hundred and Eighth Amendment)
Bill, 2008 should be followed”.
9.13 The Government of Jammu and Kashmir has stated that “...The purpose of the Bill is laudable
so far as providing of reservation of women is concerned. State of Jammu and Kashmir has its own
Constitution and attempts have been made for providing 20% reservation of seats to women by
enhancing the strength of number of seats in the S tate Legislative Assembly. However, the said Bill
could not see the light of the day and was deferred as no national consensus had been arrived at the
national level. The passing of the Bill was also deferred because 2/3rd majority was required for
passage of the Bill in both the Houses. The State Government is committed in providing reservation
to the women and will follow suit as and when reservation is provided to the women at the national
level. With regard to amendment of providing reservation to the women in Parliament is concerned, the
said amendment shall not apply to the State of J&K  automatically in view of peculiar constitutional
position the State is enjoying under the Constitution of India, in its application to the State of Jammu
and Kashmir. The said amendment shall have to be extended to State of Jammu and Kashmir in terms
of provisions of Article 370 of the Constitution of India”.
9.14 The Government of Orissa has stated that “...The State Government is in agreement with the
suggestions regarding the reservation of seats in Lok Sabha and Legislative Assemblies of the States
in favour of women”. The Government of Chhattisgarh has stated that “Reservation of woman in the
House of People and in the Legislative Assemblies of the States would eliminate gender inequality and
discrimination in order to achieve empowerment of woman in the society. State of Chhattisgarh is agreed
with the proposed 108th Constitution Amendment Bill”.
9.15 The Government of Nagaland has stated that “...The All Political Party Consultative Committee
after a thorough deliberation took a decision not to accept the Bill on the Women’s Reservation.” The
Government of Gujarat has stated that “... the proposed amendments are proper.” The Government of
Punjab has stated that “...the State Government is agreed with the proposal regarding reservation for
women in the House of People and in the Legislative Assembly of the State.”

8
Chapter-II
Deliberations of the Committee on various provisions of the Bill
Rationale behind reservation for women
10.1 Clause 3 of the Bill proposes to insert Article 330A(1) in the Constitution which provides for
reservation of seats for women in Lok Sabha.
10.2 Clause 5 of the Bill proposes to insert Article 332A (1) in the Constitution, which provides for
reservation of seats for women in the Legislative Assembly of every State.
10.3 The Committee notes that as per the latest statistics from NIPCCD (National Institute of Public
Co-operation and Child Development) published in 2007, women represented 8.2% in the Lok Sabha
and 11.4% in Rajya Sabha in the year 2004. Equally their representation in Central Council of Ministers
in the year 2004 has been extremely low at 10.29%. Also the participation of women in executive
position in IAS, was only 10.42% in the year 2002 and in IPS 4.44% in the year 2005. Women hardly
occupied 4.5% in the year 2005 of total number of judges in Supreme Court and 3.31% in the High
Court as on 2003 statistics.
10.3.1 One of the Members of the Committee, while deliberating upon the Bill, opined that “...the
present Constitutional Amendment has been brought in the context of political and social justice to be
given to women. We fully agree that women should be given their due representation so that we are
able to render justice, at least, after six decades of our independence...”
10.3.2 The representative of AIADMK, while tendering oral evidence before the Committee on the Bill,
stated that “...the study done by the International Labour Organisation shows that while women
represent 50 per cent of the world’s adult population and a third of the official labour force, they
perform nearly two-third of all working hours, receive a tenth of world’s income and own less than
one percent of the world’s property. So, reservation for women is not a bounty but it is an honest
recognition of their contribution to social development and to the society at large...”
10.3.3 The representative of the All India Forward Bloc, while deposing before the Committee on the
Bill, stated thus:
“...When 50 per cent of the sky is covered with women, they must have their legitimate say
in determining/establishing their own rights in the society and the State. It is shameful for
a country with over 50 crores women, not even 10 per cent of the total number of legislators
in the Parliament and the State Assemblies come from women. Hence their problems,
sufferings and aspirations are not properly reflected in the deliberations of the law-making
houses. It is true that women are not debarred from contesting Assembly or Parliamentary
elections, but due to age-old traditions of our male dominated society, the women generally
do not or cannot come out of the family restrictions or natural shyness to contest the
elections in proportionate numbers along with their male counterparts. As a result of which
8

9
women are compelled to miss the proportionate representation and they are only obliged to
follow the male members of the family in the matters of public interest. There is no logic
in saying that women are deficient in physical, mental and intellectual capabilities. Still, they
have been forced to be earmarked as the weaker sections of the society. In fact, by keeping
50 per cent of the society weaker we have made the whole society weak. In such a situation,
some compulsory legislative measures to be taken for proportionate representation of the
women in the House of People...”
10.3.4 In its written memorandum on the Bill, the All India Forward Bloc has further stated that
“...women need additional support for their upliftment and provisions must be made in the Constitution
for women reservation, which only can ensure much talked about empowerment of the women...”
10.3.5 The Nationalist Congress Party, in its memorandum submitted before the Committee, has stated
that “...Women are being denied of their due share in the highest democratic institution of our country
and in running the administration of the country...”
10.3.6 The Dravidar Kazhagam, in its memorandum has opined that “...when half of the world
population remains permanently weak and does not have a voice and the right to make a choice of
its own in public sphere, the loser is the whole human race...”
10.3.7 The Pattali Makkal Katchi (PMK), has submitted in its memorandum on the Bill that “...A
nation’s development hinges on the development of its people and not on its Gross Domestic Product
or per-capita income alone. However, People’s development revolves round the equitable and balanced
development of people belonging to all sections of the society, especially in a country like India, where
heterogeneity and diversity is rule rather than an exception. In a vast country like India with a
population of about 112 crores, women constitute half of the population. Therefore, a comprehensive
development of Indians is possible, if only half of the Indian population viz. women population register
equitable development on par with men…”
10.3.8 The Marumalarchi Dravida Munnetra Kazhagam (MDMK), has opined in its written submission
that “...The democracy cannot exist unless all citizens, men and women, have the equal right to
participate in the affairs of the country...Parliamentary democracy is a part of the basic structure of
our Constitution. The true democracy is meaningless unless women are there to represent...The special
reservation in favour of women in the House of People and State Legislature the need of hour...”
10.3.9 The representatives of CPI, while tendering oral evidence before the Committee, stated that
“...we think that one-third of the seats in Parliament and State Assemblies should be reserved for
women. It is not a favour that we are doing; I think it is their right. After all, they are half the society.
I am always fond of quoting Mao Zedong on this issue that, after all, they too hold up half the sky.
They should normally be half, but I think, it will take some time before we reach that stage. So, let
us begin with the concept of one-third...”
10.3.10 The representative of DMK, while deposing before the Committee on the Bill, stated that
“...in Afghanistan, 30  per cent reservation is provided for women in their Legislative bodies. In
Pakistan, 17 per cent seats in the Legislatures are reserved for women. In Argentina, 30 per cent quota
is there for women. Nepal will soon enact 30 per cent reservation for women in its National Assembly.
South Africa has 30 per cent reservation and the present women representation in their Parliament
comes to 34.8 per cent…”

10
10.3.11 The Mizoram Peoples’ Conference, in its written memorandum has stated that “...That the
Mizoram Peoples’ Conference (Party) whole — heartedly supports the Women’s Reservation Bill, which
was introduced to the Parliament (Rajya Sabha) on the 6th May, 2008 to become the Constitution (One
Hundred and Eighth) Amendment Bill, 2008...”
10.3.12 In its written submission, the Indian National Congress, has stated that “...The Congress party
supports the Bill as it has been introduced in the Rajya Sabha. However, we are also willing to go with
the consensus that may evolve amongst the various political parties represented in the Standing
Committee regarding certain other aspects, in order to facilitate early passage of the Bill...”
10.3.13 The Committee takes into account the above mentioned views on the Bill. It notes that
Article 15 (3) of the Constitution of India explicitly provides that the State can make any special
provision for  women. Furthermore, social and political justice; and equality of status and opportunity
are adumberated in the Preamble of the Constitution.
10.3.14 The Committee is of the firm opinion that there is no adequate representation of
women in the social, economic and political life of the country even after more than 60 years
of independence. It notes that though women have made their presence felt in many male
dominated professions, their representation in the decision making bodies/processes is far less
than that of men. The Committee acknowledges that there has been a historical social
exciusion of women from polity due to various social and cultural reasons and patriarchal
traditions. The Committee feels that meaningful empowerment of women can be achieved only
with adequate participation by women in legislative bodies or Parliamentary machinery, as
inadequate representation of women in Parliament and State legislature is a primary factor
behind the general backwardness of women at all levels.
10.3.15 The Committee is of the unanimous opinion that reservation of seats for women is a
valid and necessary strategy to enhance women’s participation in the decision/policy making
process. It feels that representation of women in policy making machineries is critical to the
nation building process.
10.3.16 The Committee further  takes note of the opinion of the representatives of the National
Federation of Indian Women, who tendered oral evidence before the Committee on the Bill, that
“political empowerment of women is also an equally essential tool for  strengthening democracy...We are
having this opinion because we  believe that women’s participation in decision making process is very
much essential for  meaningful democracy...”
10.3.17 A closer look at the facts and circumstances which prevail at present, reveal that women are
impoverished in every sphere of activity not by choice but by systematic exclusions from  policy options
and protective measures. Neither social legislations nor landmark judgments on these have had major
effect to render gender justice on this count.
10.3.18 The Committee takes note that in all walks of life, women who acquired the
necessary skills and education have proved themselves capable of holding of their own. But
unfortunately they have failed to gain the requisite ground in the field of politics. All these
trends indicate that women’s representation in politics requires special attention and positive
action.

11
10.3.19 The delegates of the All India Democratic Women’s Association, while placing its views before
the Committee, stated that “...India has a very proud record of  Parliamentary democracy – our
Government representatives always speak about the fact that there are more elected women representatives
in India than any other country; that is, there are more than a million women representatives. This is
naturally something that we are very proud of . But we often forget that these more than a million
Members are at the level of  the Panchayati Raj Institutions and the local bodies, and they have been
elected because a Statutory Provision has been provided for their election. Now, more than one-third
of the seats in many of the States are actually reserved for women, and even in those States where
only one-third are reserved at that level, because of  their good work and their good performance, there
are now actually more than 33 per cent. In some places, there are 42 per cent of  them; at other places,
they are more in number. This has come about because a statutory provision has been made to that
effect...”
10.3.20 The Committee is of the considered view that reservation for women is needed to
compensate for the social barriers that have prevented women from participating in politics and
thus making their voices heard. It is of the opinion that this Bill is a crucial affirmative step
in the right direction of enhancing the participation of women in the State legislatures and
Parliament and increasing the role of women in democratization of the country.
10.3.21 In their presentation on the Bill, the Delhi Janwadi Mahila Samiti informed the Committee that
women’s representation in the Legislative Assembly of  Delhi has witnessed a decline from the 2nd to
the 3rd Assembly after an increase from the 1st to the 2nd as under:
Delhi Assembly Total W omen % Share of
MLAs MLAs W omen
1st Assembly (1993-1998) 70 3 4.3%
2nd Assembly (1998-2003) 70 9 12.9%
3rd Assembly (2003-) 70 6 8.6%
10.3.22 In the memorandum submitted by the DMK, the following figures were given with respect
to the Legislative Assembly Elections in Tamil Nadu between 1989 and 2006 :—
Year Total Women Total Elected
Contestants
1989 70 9
1991 102 32
1996 156 9
2001 112 25
2006 156 22
10.3.23 The above mentioned figures reveal that out of  the 234 seats in the Tamil Nadu Legislative
Assembly, the highest number of  women elected in one election during the last four elections are only

12
32, which amounts to a mere 14 per cent. This underlines a clear need for a Constitutional
provision to ensure a minimum representation of women in the Parliament and State Legislatures.
10.3.24 One of the Members of the Committee, while deliberating on the Bill, stated thus:
“... we are not seeking charity here. We are representing 51% of the population of this largest
democracy of the world. It is our basic right. We are contributing to the society. We are
contributing to the culture, family, State, nation and human resources development...”
10.3.25 The Committee is of the firm opinion that reservation is needed to ensure the participation
of women who constitute a traditionally neglected section of the society. The Committee feels that
in the true democratic spirit, no class/community should be excluded from the decision making
due to the social and economic barriers placed upon that gender as a whole, and merely
hypothetical tokenism or symbolic participation should be avoided. It is of the firm opinion that
‘Reservation’ is a sociological concept evolved to bring about social reengineering and that
reservation for women is, therefore, needed to make the democratic process inclusive.
10.3.26 One of the landmark events in history during the women’s movement particularly in the late
80s was the vision of former  Prime Minister Shri Rajiv Gandhi who incorporated the 73rd and 74th
Amendments in the Constitution of India providing reservation of 1/3rd seats in the Panchayats and
Nagarpalikas for  women. The Committee feels that such reservation ensured that women at the
grassroot level, occupying prominent position in the Panchayats and Nagarpalikas, take decisions for
their own life and for  their rural/urban communities on many issues of concern. It also imparted a
gender perspective to issues concerning social and economic life of women.
10.3.27 The representative of DMK, while deposing before the Committee on the Bill, stated that
“...The denial of equal right of representation to half of the population is not only injustice to women,
but, we believe, it weakens the democratic process itself. India set a record to be proud of with the
largest number of women of over one million in decision-making bodies at the Panchayat and Municipal
level. Unfortunately, the correct lessons from this historic achievement, however, have not been
learned...”
10.3.28 The delegates of the Guild of Service (North India), while tendering oral evidence before the
Committee on the Bill, also stated that women in the Panchayati Raj systems have done a tremendously
good job.
10.3.29 The Committee notes that reservation of the seats for  women in Panchayati Raj institutions
was a pioneering step as far as political empowerment of women is concerned. It feels that the
Panchayati Raj amendment was more effective than expected in energising women and it is the major
reason to legitimize the demand for  reservation in higher bodies such as State Legislatures and
Parliament.
10.3.29.1 Taking into account the above mentioned facts and opinion, the Committee is of
the firm view that reservation of seats for women in Panchayati Raj institutions through the
Constitution (73rd and 74th Amendment) was a pioneering step as far as political empowerment
of women is concerned. It feels that the reservation in Panchayati Raj institutions was more
effective than expected in energising women and has underscored the need for reservation in
higher bodies such as State Legislatures and Parliament.

13
10.3.30 The Ministry of Panchayati Raj, in its written reply furnished to the Committee, has stated that
“...the study on elected women representatives (EWRg) in Panchayati Raj Institutions provides several
insights into the performance of EWRs over three round of elections. The study showed that elected
representatives are deeply involved in development efforts as well as social issues in the village
community. The study of EWRs in PRIs shows that women participate freely in Gram Sabha meetings
and are able to raise issues relating to the development of the community. The level of acceptance of
EWRs and their voice in the Gram Panchayats has also been assessed in the study. A sizeable
proportion (94%) stated that they could freely raise issues during Gram Sabha meeting and only 20%
felt that their views were not considered by Panchayat/Gram Sabha...”
10.3.31 The data further shows that through 1/3rd reservation of seats for women in Panchayats and
Nagarpalikas, they have been able to make meaningful contributions and that the actual representation
of women in Panchayati Raj institutions has gone upto 42.3% i.e., beyond the reservation percentage.
10.3.31.1 The Committee, therefore, notes that the concerns raised earlier that women will be
only proxy to men, after reservation was given to women in Panchayats and Nagarpalikas, often
leading to misuse of their position, have in time turned out to be baseless and that the track
record of most of the elected women representatives has been proved commendable. This has
led the Government to make 50 per cent reservation for women in local bodies. This further
augments the imminent need to give reservation for women in State Assemblies and Parliament.
10.3.32 The Ministry of Panchayati Raj, in its detailed Status Note on the subject ‘Empowerment of
women through Panchayati Raj Institutions and Reservations for Other Backward Classes in Panchayats’,
has stated that “...The last fifteen years of Panchayati Raj in India have contributed significantly not
only to the political but also the social empowerment of women as is evident from the findings of the
study on EWRs in PRIs. Earlier notions of women being mere proxies for male relatives have gradually
ceded space to the recognition that given the opportunity to participate in the political system, women
are as capable as their male counterparts. The impact of women’s participation in the Panchayats is
seen in the development priorities identified by them. EWRs have used their office to not only
mainstream gender issues but also address the developmental needs of the community as a whole. The
positive contribution made by EWRs needs to be sustained by ensuring the continued participation of
women in the political process...”
10.3.3 The Committee is of the opinion that it was through 1/3rd reservation of seats for
women in Panchayats and Nagarpalikas that women were enabled to make meaningful
contributions in these bodies. It notes that the actual representation of women in Panchayati
Raj Institutions has gone upto 42.3% i.e., beyond the mandatory reservation percentage which
is proposed to be further raised to 50%. The Committee feels that this proves that strategic
empowering measures are the need of the hour for the upliftment of women.
10.3.34 The Committee acknowledges the definite and positive impact that the reservation of
1/3rd seats at the grass root level for women has had, on the participation of women at the
grass root levels.
10.4 The representatives of an NGO, Rakshak Foundation who deposed before the Committee stated
that since women have been granted equal political rights in India by the Constitution, there is no need
for reservation for women, as it will discriminate against men. In support of their stand, they stated

14
that large number of women have made meaningful contributions in India’s Panchayati Raj System and
apprised the Committee of the progress made by women in various fields.
10.4.1 One of the views presen ted before the Committee was that the provisions of the Bill discriminate
against men. Another argument that was put forward was that reservation of seats for women alone
cannot solve the complex problem of gender injustice.
10.4.1.1 The Committee feels that the various policies and programmes adopted by the Central
and State Governments have mainly been responsible for the astounding rate of growth of
opportunities in education and employment for women in India. It is of the view that what is
lacking at present is the political empowerment of women in its true sense. The commendable
representation and performance of women in Panchayats is largely due to statutory reservation
of seats for them. Therefore, the Committee strongly feels that reservation would ensure
considerable political empowerment of women and pave the way to the achievement of political
justice to women as promised in the Preamble and Article 38 of the Constitution of India.
10.4.1.2 Taking into account the increase in the interest shown by women in the political
process in the country as substantiated by various studies and data supplied to the Committee,
the Committee feels that this is furthermore reason to enable women to have greater
participation in the decision/policy making process. It is of the view that the reservation
proposed in the Bill is an affirmative step in this direction.
10.4.1.3 A view was expressed before the Committee that consequent upon reservation of 1/3rd of
seats in State Assemblies and Lok Sabha, the sitting members in case they happen to be male members
who have nurtured their constituencies will suffer injustice, as will other males who might wish to
contest from the reserved constituency. The propounders of this view opined that if at all the
reservation is granted to women, it should be done by increasing the seats in Assemblies and
Parliament. In this context, the Committee wishes to place on record that the rationale behind
reservation for women, is to mitigate the deleterious effects of social and economic barriers
that have prevented the political empowerment of women, and not to discriminate against men
through the process of reservation; but to instill a new harmonious social order promoting
genuine fraternity between both the sexes.
10.4.1.4 The Committee is of the considered opinion that the pertinent question at this
juncture is not whether there is necessity of reservation of seats for women in Parliament
and State Assemblies. It is of the view that the recommendations of the Geeta Mukherjee
Committee which had examined this issue earlier make it amply clear that the reservation
for women is the need of the hour. Since this matter is well settled, the Committee is of the
considered view that taking into consideration the Report of the Geeta Mukherjee Committee,
views of the Political Parties, NGOs and individuals, other provisions of the Bill should be
deliberated upon.
Reservation of 1/3rd seats for women
11.1 The representatives of the Communist Party of India (Marxist), while deposing before the
Committee on the Bill, stated that “...We are fully in favour of reservation of 33 per cent of seats in
Parliament and State Legislatures. We consider this the minimum number required to make an effective

15
impact on increasing women’s role in elected decision-making bodies. There should not be any dilution
in the number of seats reserved. Sir, 1/3rd reservation of seats in Panchayat institutions and municipalities
is working very well…”
11.2 The CPI (M), in its written memorandum, has stated that “...We are in favour of reservation
of thirty-three percent seats in Parliament and State Assemblies. We believe that the one-third seat
reservations have worked well in the Panchayati Raj system as well as in local bodies. It has been
seen that this is the minimum number required to make an impact on increasing women’s role in
elected decision making bodies, therefore, there should be no dilution of the number of seats to be
reserved...”
11.3 The representative of the Indian National Congress, while tendering oral evidence before the
Committee, stated that “...Thirty-three per cent reservation for women has been our demand. This has
been considered by the U.N. agencies and others as the critical mass to influence the decision-making
process in any Body. It is not that it is a sacrosanct thing which has been calculated on computers
or whatever it is. But this is what has been our demand all along, though we are fifty per cent of
population…”
11.4 In its written submission, the PMK has stated that “...Since woman population is almost half
of the Indian population, reservation of seats to women in State Legislatures and Parliament should be
in proportion to the population of women in total population i.e. about 50 per cent. Therefore,
reservation of 33% falls short of 50% of the seats as required by the canon of social justice. However,
we do not dispute this proportion of 33% at this juncture for various issues and also of the necessity
to provide for reservation to women immediately...”
11.5 In this regard, the Committee notes that 33% reservation of seats for women in
Panchayats and Municipalities has had the desired effect on the empowerment of women. It is
of the considered view that 1/3rd reservation of seats in Assemblies and Lok Sabha would
ensure a certain level of presence of women that cannot be overlooked by Political Parties.
Therefore, it is of the opinion that dilution of the 1/3rd reservation of seats for women is not
called for at this juncture.
Time period for reservation
12.1 Clause 7 of the Bill provides that the reservation of seats for women shall cease to have effect
on the expiration of 15 years from the commencement of the Constitution (One Hundred and Eighth
Amendment) Act, 2008.
12.2 One of the Members of the Committee, opined during the discussions of the Committee on the
Bill that “...Of course, the reservation is not a rule of perpetuity. It will have to end at a particular
period...”
12.3 The representatives of Women Power Connect, while tendering oral evidence before the
Committee on the Bill, stated that “...An in-depth review of the policy and its impact upon completion
of 15 years will display the results of reservation based on the same as informed decision of success
or failure of the policy and further continuation of the policy can be taken. Such a process will also
identify and plug gaps in policy and implementation which will enhance the effects of policy if it is
to continue...”

16
12.4 In one of the memoranda submitted to the Committee, it was stated that with regard to
the issue of terminating the reservation policy after a period of 15 years, once it has completed
15 years of enforcement, the policy of reservation should be assessed to gauge the impact it has
had on the participation of women in politics – in terms of number and roles and that whether
it should be continued or terminated should be reviewed on the basis of considerations raised
by this assessment.
12.5 In its written memorandum, the PMK has submitted that “...We are taking a deliberate decision
to provide for reservation for women in political decision-making bodies after 60 years of India’s
Independence and to withdraw this after 15 years would not help the long term representation of
women in State Assemblies and Parliament...”
12.6 The Indigenous Nationalist Party of Twipra, has expressed its written view that “...In the
proposed new Article 334A ceasation of effect of the Act should be only after the year 2026 i.e. after
the census conducted, conforming to the direction of clause (3B) of Article 332...”
12.7 In this regard, the Geeta Mukherjee Committee had recommended that “the provisions governing
the reservation of seats for women in the House of the People or the Legislative Assemblies of the
States should be in the first instance for a period of 15 years from the date of commencement of the
Act and may be reviewed after a period of 15 years to decide whether the reservation for women is
to be continued thereafter.”
12.8 Taking into account the above mentioned views, the Committee recommends that the
Government may consider this proposal as and when the need arises. The Committee feels that
reservation is certainly needed to enable women to cross the socio-gender hurdles and to give
them a level playing ground/equal opportunities as their male counterparts. Once this
“equalisation” process is done and “adequate” political representation of women is achieved,
then the time prescribed for reservation may be reconsidered.
Rotation of seats
13.1 Clause 3 of the Bill proposes to insert Article 330A(3) in the Constitution, which provides for
rotation of seats reserved for women in Lok Sabha.
13.2 Clause 5 of the Bill proposes to insert proviso to Article 332A (3) of the Constitution, which
provides for rotation of seats reserved for women in State Assemblies.
13.3 One argument raised against rotation of seats is that it will lead to lack of accountability and
that rotation of seats will prevent the incumbent from nurturing her constituency.
13.4 The representative of CPI (M), while tendering oral evidence before the Committee on the Bill,
opined that “...We also agree with the proposal of rotation of seats. Rotation of seats also helps
horizontal spread of women’s involvement in the political affairs of the country. We do not subscribe
to the argument that this may cause a change over of experienced MPs. and MLAs and, therefore, may
adversely affect the political discourse. The experienced members can seek acceptance from any other
constituency. It is also a fact that women elected from these constituencies are as efficient, or, more
efficient than the present incumbents...In a vibrant democratic system, it is the State and national
interest and policies that should have precedence over constituency interest…”

17
13.5 In its written memorandum, CPI (M) has stated that “…We cannot base our democracy on
a no-change approach which may lead to political monopolies and entrenched interests which are an
anathema to democratic processes. Rotation of women reserved seats also helps horizontal spread of
women’s involvement...Since all seats will be rotated at some point or the other this will “affect” all
in equal measure. The reservation of seats may be done in such a way so that the road map for
reservation is known in advance for the next three terms so as to eliminate uncertainty and allow for
planning...”
13.6 The representatives of the Communist Party of India, while deposing before the Committee on
the Bill, stated that “...It has to be on rotation basis. How should it be decided by you so that there
is no arbitrariness about it. At the same time, there should be some principle or basis according to
which it will be done, so that we could know which seats will become reserved and when. As far
as the question of rotation is concerned, we are of the view that there should be two terms. I am
saying two terms advisedly. There is something which is known as MPLAD. Once she is elected, she
should have the opportunity to do some good work also. And, once she has done it, she should be
able to take advantage of the good work she has done in her constituency and to be able to stand again.
So, if the two-term principle is followed, then, it will be possible to see all the seats, by turn, becoming
reserved in the course of a few years...”
13.7 The Rashtriya Janta Dal, in its written submission, has opined that “...The selection of
Parliamentary reserved constituencies for women should be decided by the political party itself. No
specific Parliamentary constituency should be marked for women candidates only. The number of
reserved Parliamentary constituencies should be provided to the political parties for their decision to
contest women candidates on such number of seats...”
13.8 The Pattali Makkal Katchi, in its written memorandum, has tendered its views that “...women
seats should rotate once in 15 years so as to enable women to contribute substantially to the
development of their respective constituencies. This would provide a reasonable stability to the political
career of woman and improve horizontal spread of the influence of woman in other constituencies as
well...”
13.9 The Swatantra Bharat Paksha, has submitted its written views on the issue, as “...if the Bill
is passed in the present form it will seriously affect the servicing of the constituency by the elected
members of the legislature. It would further adversely affect the quality of the legislatures in as much
as the legislatures are unlikely to contain more than 33% second-termers...”
13.10 The Committee is of the opinion that rotation is in the interest of democracy and that
it is the duty of the incumbent to work towards the welfare of the constituency, irrespective
of whether she would be elected next time or not.
13.11 The PMK, in its written submission, has opined that “...the procedure for determining the
constituencies reserved for women is not clearly laid down in the Act and is left to the Parliament to
decide. In our view, this should be categorically provided in the Act itself...”
13.12 The Committee desires that the Government may consider this proposal
appropriately.

18
Reservation for women belonging to Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes
14.1 Clause 3 of the Bill proposes to insert Article 330A(2) in the Constitution, which provides for
reservation of 1/3rd of the total number of seats reserved for women, for women belonging to the
Scheduled Castes or the Scheduled Tribes, in the elections to Lok Sabha.
14.2 Clause 5 of the Bill proposes to insert proviso to Article 332A (2) of the Constitution, which
provides for reservation of 1/3rd of the total number of seats reserved for women, for women
belonging to the Scheduled Castes or the Scheduled T ribes, in the elections to the Legislative Assembly
of every State.
14.3 The Bahujan Samaj Party, in its written views on the Bill, has stated that “...This Bill should
be passed only when the separate one third reservation for the women belonging to/Scheduled Caste
and Scheduled Tribe. In addition to the existing reservation provided as per the part XVI of Article 330
“Reservation of seats for Scheduled Caste and Scheduled Tribe in the House of the People. This Bill
should be passed only when the separate one third reservation for the women belonging to SC and ST
in addition to existing reservation provided as per the Part XVI of Article 332. “Reservation of seats
for Scheduled Caste and Scheduled Tribe in the Legislative Assemblies of the States as under
clause (1) shall bear, as nearly as may be, the same proportion to the total number of seats in the
Assembly as the population of the Scheduled Castes in the State or of the Scheduled Tribes in the State
or Part of the State, as the case may be, in respect of which seats are so reserved, bears to the total
population of the State...”
14.4 The Committee is aware that this is a Constitutionally mandated requirement. In
addition, the Committee strongly feels that political equality cannot be realized without social
and economic equality. It feels that reservation is needed for women belonging to the SC/ST
communities to enable them to have fair competition with women belonging to the forward
classes. It is of the firm view that reservation as provided in Clauses 3 and 5 of the Bill is
necessary for their political, economic and social advancement.
Anglo Indian nomination
15.1 Clause 4 of the Bill proposes to insert proviso to Article 331 of the Constitution, which would
provide for reservation of nomination of a woman of Anglo-Indian community to the House of People.
15.2 Clause 6 of the Bill proposes to insert proviso to Article 333 of the Constitution, which
would provide for reservation of nomination of a woman of Anglo-Indian community to the Legislative
Assembly of a State.
15.3 Article 331 of the Constitution provides as follows:—
“Notwithstanding anything in article 81, the President may, if he is of opinion that the Anglo-
Indian community is not adequately represented in the House of the People, nominate not more
than two members of that community to the House of the People.”
15.4 Article 333 of the Constitution provides as follows:-—
“Notwithstanding anything in Article 170, the Governor of a State may, if he is of opinion that
the Anglo-Indian community needs representation in the Legislative Assembly of the State and
is not adequately represented therein, nominate one member of that community to the Assembly.”

19
15.5 The representative of the Legislative Department, Ministry of Law and Justice, while
deposing before the Committee, stated as follows :
“...there are two provisions in the Constitution, Article 331 and 333, which provide for
nomination of Anglo-Indians. Just to ensure that one of the seat is reserved for women, a
proviso is being added so that formula is applicable in the case of nomination also.”
15.6 The provision relating to Anglo-Indians is mandated in the Constitution, and hence the
Committee recommends the inclusion of this clause in the Bill. The Committee also took note of the
demand to include nomination of neuter gender/transgenders an nomination of blind/handicapped
people who can contribute in the decision making process, as Members of Lok Sabha.
15.7 The Committee’s attention was drawn to the political empowerment of visually impaired and
other physically challenged citizens. In  one of the memoranda submitted to the Committee, it was
highlighted that in United Kingdom, a visually impaired person, Mr. Blunkett was elected Member of
Parliament for Sheffield Brightside with a large majority.
15.8 The Committee’s attention was also drawn to the need for equal rights and representation in
policy making, for individuals who are transgender/neuter gender. It was submitted that their
grievances are generally ignored by MPs/MLAs and that since they are marginalized groups, their
representative should be nominated as Member of Lok Sabha and State Assemblies.
15.9 Although some of the memoranda received expressed the view that Anglo-Indians were
too small in number to have seats reserved for them, and that seats should instead be reserved
for other marginalized sections including physically challenged citizens, the Committee is of the
view that since Anglo-Indian reservation is mandated in the Constitution, it need not be
disturbed while Government may appropriately consider, reservation for other marginalized
sections.

20
20
Chapter-III
Other issues examined by the Committee
Reservation of seats for women by Political Parties
16.1 One of the points which came up for discussion before the Committee was the Gill Formula,
which was a proposal of the Election Commission of India to make it mandatory for the recognised
Political Parties to ensure putting of minimum agreed percentage for women in State Assembly and
Parliamentary election so as to allow them to retain the recognition with the Election Commission as
Political Parties.
16.2 Majority of the memoranda received by the Committee rejected the Gill’s formula on the ground
that it might lead to political parties giving seats to women, which they perceive are not winning
seats, thereby negating actual representation of women in elected bodies.
16.3 In its written memorandum, the Samajwadi Party, however has stated that “...Our party fully
supports the Election Commission’s proposal or women’s reservation...”
16.4 The Bharatiya Janata Party has tendered its written views on the issue that “...We are ready
to accept the consensus view on the Election Commission’s proposal pertaining to the issue of
women reservation...”
16.5 The Dravidar Kazhagam, in its written submission, has opined on this issue that “...The parties,
usually dominated by male office bearers, will tend to field women candidates in constituencies where
they are weak. That will defeat the purpose of electing 33% of women representatives...”
16.6 The Indian National Lok Dal, has stated in its memorandum, that “...It would be in the fitness
of things if all the parties, particularly the National Parties and the Regional Parties recognized by
Election Commission of India, adopt the formula that all the parties will be giving at least 1/3 of the
party tickets at various levels to women candidates. This will avoid unnecessarily controversies being
raised on various reservations made for other groups/categories...”
16.7 The Communist Party of India (Marxist-Leninist), in its written submission on the Bill, has
opined that “...the proposal of some political parties that instead of promulgating law on women’s
reservation, the Election Commission should force the political parties to have quota for women
candidates is fully objectionable and it is against the basic spirit of guarantee of assured participation
of women in Parliament and Legislative Assemblies…”
16.8 On this issue, the representatives of the National Federation of Indian Women, while tendering
oral evidence before the Committee stated that “...one of the alternatives that was mooted even by the
Election Commission also has been much talked about by various foras — not so by the women’s
organisations — they have unanimously rejected it — and leaving it to the parties to bring 33 per cent
reservation. Now, we have gone into almost the mechanics of how actually it will work. Surely, you

21
know, given the patriarchal attitudes, ...Now you  will find, if you  give the opportunities, they will come
up. But, overnight, things will not change. It is quite clear that in a competitive politics, when winning
a seat is absolutely uppermost, if women are not already working in a constituency or being prominent
or known, they won’t make a winning seat. Therefore, winning seats will be given to the male
candidates and it will be the losing seats for women...”
16.9. The r epresentatives of CPI (M) while tendering oral evidence before the Committee on the Bill,
opined that “...One proposal is that the political party should reserve 1/3rd of the candidates belonging
to women. This will not ensure representation of women in Parliament or Legislative Assemblies. This
will only ensure the presence of names of women in the list of political parties. What we need is their
actual representation in the elected bodies. This sort of system may work in a country where the
proportional representation system is in existence. Ours  is entirely a different system. We have the First
Past the Post System. This will only ensure existence of women name in the list. That will not serve
the purpose...”
16.10 The representative of the All India Anna Dravida Munnetra Kazhagam, while deposing before the
Committee, stated that “...With regard to another point which had been mentioned in the political arena
that instead of passing a Bill like this, it may be prudent on the part of the political parties themselves
to reserve some amount of seats for women to contest elections on their own. That is something
which my party considers as a flawed concept, and, in an era where every party aspires to come to
power, they will always allot only the weak seats of their party to their women candidates. We do not
accept that concept and we feel that this Bill is an absolute essentiality and it has to be passed at the
earlies...”
16.11 The Committee is of the firm opinion that reserving seats for women in Assemblies and
Lok Sabha should not be left to the discretion of Political Parties, rather it should be
guaranteed in the Constitution itself and enforced by all means.
Reservation for women in Rajya Sabha and Legislative Councils
17.1 During the deliberations of the Committee, the need for providing reservation for women in
Rajya Sabha and Legislative Councils was also highlighted.
17.2 The PMK, in its written memorandum, has stated that “...This Bill provides for reservation of
women only in State Assemblies and Lok Sabha, and reservation is not provided in the Rajya Sabha
and Legislative Councils of various States. The above deficiencies, in our view, should be rectified in
the proposed Act itself...”
17.3 The Committee recommends that the demand for extending reservation for women in
Rajya Sabha and the Legislative Councils needs to be examined thoroughly as the upper Houses
of the Parliament and State Legislatures play equally important role under the Constitution and
by applying the principle of equality, women should also get their due share in the second or
upper chamber of Parliament and State Legislatures.
Reservation for women belonging to Other Backward Classes
18.1 In its written memorandum, the Rashtriya Janta Dal has stated that “...In case of providing
reservation to women, there must be a quota for OBC,  Minorities including Muslims, Christians and

22
others, and Dalits (SC/ST) within it. There must be a quota within quota for these sections of
women proportionate to their population in the country...”
18.2 The Samajwadi Party, in its written submission, has stated that “...if reservation is to be given
to women, there must be a quota for OBC and Muslim women within it...”
18.3 In its written views submitted before the Committee, the Nationalist Congress Party has opined
that “...we don’t find any need for reasons for special quota for OBC within the women’s quota as
suggested from certain quarters. Now there are 429 seats excluding reserved seats for SC/ST category
in the Parliament. There is no reservation for OBC in the above mentioned existing unreserved
seats. But still there is good representation for OBC category in the Parliament at present. Same
is the case of OBC category in the State Assemblies as well...”
18.4 The Dravidar Kazhagam has stated in its written submission that “...Our submission is Women’s
Reservation Bill when finally passed should include provisions for sub-reservation for STs, SCs, OBCs
and Minority communities within the 33 per cent quota. If this provision is not included there is the
real danger of the promotion of gender justice defeating social justice regarding women’s representation.
Social Justice is adumbrated in the Preamble of the Constitution and this principle should be given
practical shape through all the constitutional and Government bodies. In the prevailing social scenario,
it is obvious that the women of lower castes or minority communities cannot politically compete with
the upper caste women. So special provision should be made to reserve seats within the quota...”
18.5 On this issue, the PMK has given its written views that “...this means that within seats reserved
for Scheduled Castes men one third’ seats will be reserved for SC women. This implies that other
women belonging to Backward Classes, Minorities and other weaker sections of the society, who now
enjoy benefits under various Government programmes such as education, employment, development
programmes are deprived of political reservation. This is against the concept of equality and runs
contrary to Constitutional provisions. It discriminates between women of different groups and will
enable increased representation of only women from upper castes, which would perpetuate the already
raging disparities among women. This unjust situation has to be remedied...”
18.6 The Desiya Murpokku Dravida Kazhagam, in its written memorandum, has stated that “...We
strongly feel that real social justice will be rendered only if the women of backward classes and other
backward classes are given reservation in this Bill. But on account of this, this bill need not be
delayed...”
18.7 In its written memorandum, the Bhartiya Janata Party has stated that “...Bharatiya Janata Party
supports the proposed Women Reservation Bill. We firmly reject the demand of Quota within Quota...”
18.8 The representatives of the National Federation of Indian Women, while tendering oral evidence
before the Committee on the Bill, stated that “...on the issue of OBC reservation, our organisation, would
like to make it very, very clear that we are for reservation for OBC or any other section of the society.
We want reservation for women, they may belong to upper castes or lower castes or middle castes. We
won’t mind, but women should be represented equally or adequately...we cannot reject the Bill on any
of these issues that are being raised and sought to be solved within the ambit of the Bill...”
18.9 The representatives of CPI (M), while deposing before the Committee, stated that “...we support
the provision for reservation of 1/3rd  of seats for women from SC/ST, from amongst the seats

23
reserved for women. There is a demand that this facility should be extended to the OBCs. We do not
agree with that, because there is no Constitutional provision for reservation for OBCs. So, this will not
stand for scrutiny. There is also a demand that a similar provision should also be made with regard
to minorities. There is also no provision for reservation of minorities...As far as OBCs are concerned,
at present, there is no constitutional provision for reservation to OBCs. This is, as the Chairman said,
only with regard to Panchayati Raj institutions and this option is also left to the States. The States,
after taking into consideration the situation prevalent there, can take a decision whether that can be
extended to the OBCs in the Panchayati Raj institutions or not…”
18.10 One of the Members of the Committee, while expressing his views on this provision of the Bill
in writing, has stated that “...In view of larger interest of OBC community, suggest that it should
be incorporated in the Constitution as under:
“Nothing in this part shall prevent the Parliament from making any provision for reservation
of seats in Parliament and State Legislature in favour of backward class of citizens in
accordance with their population in the State”.
18.11 In response to a query on reservation for women belonging to Other Backward Classes/
minorities, the Legislative Department has stated that the several alternatives have been explored by
the Government and for this purpose two meetings of all political parties had been convened on 22nd
and 24th August, 2005 to sort out the difference of opinion and formulate modalities for providing
reservation for women in Parliament and State Legislature but no consensus could be arrived at in these
meetings.”
18.12 The Ministry of Panchayati Raj, in its detailed Status Note on the subject ‘Empowerment of
women through Panchayati Raj Institutions and Reservations for Other Backward Classes in Panchayats’,
has stated that as on June, 2008 as per available information, 17 States out of 24 which come under
the purview of Part IX of the Constitution have provided for reservations for Backward Classes/Other
Backward Classes (OBCs) in Panchayati Raj Institutions. These States are the following:—
Sl. No. Name of the State Sl. No. Name of the State
1. Andhra Pradesh 2. Bihar
3. Chhattisgarh 4. Gujarat
5. Goa 6. Himachal Pradesh
7. Haryana 8. Jharkhand
9. Karnataka 10. Maharashtra
11. Madhya Pradesh 12. Orissa
13. Punjab 14. Rajasthan
15. Sikkim 16. Uttar Pradesh
17. Uttarakhand

24
18.13 In one of the submissions made before the Committee, it was opined that sub-divisions as
regards reservation for women, have to be considered on a case to case basis depending on the
actual constituents in a given constituency. If it is dominated by SC/ST and Other Backward Classes,
it has to be taken care of, as it will be actually a promotion of the socially backward groups and
there will be several women among them who will make themselves eligible to be elected to the
Parliament.
18.14 The Committee notes that the Geeta Mukherjee Committee had recommended that the Government
may consider the issue of extending the benefit of reservation to Other Backward Classes also at the
appropriate time so that the women belonging to Other Backward Classes will also get the benefit of
reservation.
18.15 The Committee feels that the Bill in itself is not an entirety, rather it is a formula to
achieve Political Empowerment of women. The Committee is of the considered view that this
Bill only lays down the principle/basic framework for reservation of women in State Assemblies
and Lok Sabha. It is of paramount importance that women reach a goal of adequate representation
in Parliament and the State Legislatures and all other issues may be considered at an
appropriate time by Government without any further delay at the present time in the passage
of the Bill.
19.1 Reservation for Other Backward Classes citizens in the educational institutions and jobs and
Services as per the Constitutional provisions Articles 15 and 16 already exists in the Constitution.
19.2 By the 73rd amendment of the Constitution, reservation in the political elected posts for the
Other Backward Class citizens in Panchayats were provided in Article 243D(6) :
“Nothing in this Part shall prevent the Legislature of a State from making any provision for
reservation of seats in any Panchayat or offices of Chairpersons in the Panchayats at any
level in favour of backward class of citizens.”
and in Nagarpalikas in 243T(7) :
“Nothing in this Part shall prevent the Legislature of a State from making any provision for
reservation of seats in any Municipality or offices of Chairpersons in the Municipalities in favour
of backward class of citizens”.
19.3 The Geeta Mukherjee Committee Report had also observed that “such reservation of seats has
not been provided for in the Bill for women belonging to Other Backward Classes because there is no
reservation for Other Backward Classes at present under the Constitution as it exists for Scheduled
Castes and Scheduled Tribes”. The Committee, therefore, recommended that the Government may
consider the issue of extending the benefit of reservation to Other Backward Classes also at the
appropriate time so that the women belonging to Other Backward Classes will also get the benefit of
reservation.
19.4 The question of reservation within reservation for OBC women and some minorities
generated great discussion in the Committee, with one section of opinion strongly of the
view that such OBC reservation within reservation should be provided. The Committee is
of the view that this matter should be considered by the Government and action on this
taken at the appropriate time.

25
Double-Member constituencies and increasing the number of seats in Lok Sabha and
Legislative Assemblies
20.0 During the in-house deliberations of the Committee and interactions with National and regional
Political Parties, the Committee could sense an undercurrent among Members of Parliament regarding
setting apart seats which might be occupied by them or presently occupied by them, so that they can
be reserved for women. The Committee also takes note of the suggestions which came up from
various quarters that dual Member constituencies or increasing the number of seats in Lok Sabha and
Legislative Assemblies can address this concern.
20.1 As regards this suggestion, the proposal is to increase 1/3rd seats in Parliament and Legislative
Assemblies and to make 1/3rd constituencies as double-member constituencies wherein seats will be
reserved for women.
20.1.1 During the discussions of the Committee on the Bill, one Member observed that “...we are
having 543 Members in Lok Sabha at present. This figure was fixed some sixty years back. At that
time, our population was only thirty crores. Now, it is more than one hundred crores. Why have we
not raised the number of seats? If we can raise another two hundred fifty seats, we can easily give
reservation to women. We can also make double-Member constituencies...”
20.1.2 The delegate of Streebal, while speaking on the issue of double- Member constituencies, stated
that “...The double-Member constituency also has a constitutional, historical legacy in our country. If
you look back at the elections of 1952 and 1957, one-third of the MPs were coining from multi-
member constituencies because 20 per cent of the constituencies were double member or treble
member ones, until 1962...”
20.1.3 She fu rther opined that “...We have found, with experience of the rotation principle in the
Panchayat level and local tier things, that it is unsatisfactory. In fact, the appeal is being made not to
use rotation there. You also find, perhaps, stated or unstated, the hidden insecurity with which this Bill
has been jeopardized all these years. And you have also the point that you have reached a stage in your
population where, really, you are being undemocratic to keep your sizes as small as you are doing so
that it becomes such an extensive club that the constituents are denied their democratic rights to be
represented with the kind of a personal contact that should occur between those that represent them
and those that vote for them, and that you will get more and more into this issue as the years go by
because you have now extended the freeze fur 25 years. So, we are offering you an alternative that
looks at all issues and sorts them out, does not delay because it can be done very fast as was done
when the two-member constituencies were destroyed. At that time, It was one very Last...”
20.1.4 The representatives of CPI (M), while deposing before the Committee, stated that “...There is
another suggestion – to increase 1/3rd seats in Parliament and Legislative Assemblies so that women
get the representation. Here is a case where the delimitation process has already been over. Delimitation
will take a lot of time It is only to delay the process...”
20.1.5 The representative of the Indian National Congress, while tendering evidence before the
Committee, stated that “...About increasing seats, this has been debated repeatedly. Delimitation has just
been finished, and going in again for adding seats, new seats, is going to take you another 15 years
and it is going to push the entire process backwards. It cannot be done in one day by redrawing map.

26
It will take another 10 years. This delimitation process itself was going through so many roadblocks
and so many problems. Therefore, I think now, again taking it back to new increased seats is unfair...”
20.1.6 The delegates of All India Democratic Women’s Association, while expressing its views on this
issue before the Committee, stated that “...This will also mean that women, who are independents and
who do not belong to any political party, also will have the trouble of getting elected...”
20.1.7 In this regard, the Committee takes note of the view submitted by the representatives of
CPI (M) that “...this will make unnecessary tension and conflict in a particular constituency, because
MP and MLAs belong to different political parties. This also may not serve the purpose. It is not only
that, this will also create two types of MLAs and MPs – one with sole responsibility and another with
double responsibility...”
20.1.8 Concern was also voiced before the Committee that elected women representatives will be
forced to be granted a second class status. The representative of the Indian National Congress, while
tendering oral evidence before the Committee, stated that “...For instance, if I had to be one, as a
woman, representing a double-Member constituency with a man, I would consider it very humiliating
and demeaning because we can’t represent a constituency when we need a man along either to guide,
support or help us. After all, we are capable of representing our constituencies. I think it is not fair
to club women into double-Member constituencies. It would make us second class MPs. in Parliament...”
20.1.9 The Dravidar Kazhagam, in its written memorandum, has stated that “...Our firm view in this
context is, when the number of seats is increased, the proportion of their allocation to States like Kerala
and Tamil Nadu that have bee9 successfully implementing family planning programme should not get
reduced. Otherwise it will amount to punishing them for sincerely carrying out a vital programme of
the Union as well as the State Governments...”
20.1.10 In its reply to the questionnaire sent by the Secretariat, with regard to the issue of increasing
the number of seats in Lok Sabha and State Assemblies, the Ministry has stated that “...if it is proposed
to increase the seats, there will be need of delimitation of constituencies. Further, so far as the time
is concerned the Delimitation Commission was constituted in July, 2002 and it took almost 6 years to
complete its task, though initially, it was given 2 years to complete the work. Therefore, it would be
difficult to have any speculative time frame for completion of fresh delimitation.”
20.1.11 The Committee, after taking into account the above mentioned views and the reply of
the Ministry, does not endorse the concept of double-Member constituencies. It feels that
elected women representatives should be granted the same opportunities/status as their male
counterparts. Providing for double-Member constituencies might result in women being reduced
to a subservient status, which will defeat the very purpose of the Bill. Therefore, the
Committee feels that this concept is discriminatory to women. The Committee strongly feels
that further delay in enactment of this Bill would further hamper the concept of Political
Empowerment of women.
20.2 The Committee feels that already more than twelve years have elapsed after the Geeta
Mukherjee Committee Report and still, the much required reservation has not reached 50 per
cent of the population of the nation, namely women. It strongly feels that further time should
not be wasted; rather the Women’s Reservation Bill should be passed in Parliament and put
in action without further delay.

27
MINUTES OF DISSENT SUBMITTED BY SHRI VIRENDRA BHATIA, MEMBER,
RAJYA SABHA AND SHRI SHAILENDRA KUMAR, MEMBER, LOK SABHA
We take this opportunity to record our protest against the manner in which the draft bill
pertaining to Women’s Reservation Bill has been prepared. We wish to state that our party is not against
providing reservation to the Women of this country but it is against the current form  in which the
above mentioned bill has been drafted and is proposed to be implemented.
The views of our party and ourselves are as follows:—
(a) Every political party shall distribute at least 20% of their party tickets to women
in their party.
(b) Even in its current form the reservation should not be more than 20%.
(c) A very important point to be noted is that under the proposed form  of reservation
for women there should also be a quota for  the women belonging to the Other
Backward Class and minorities as it has been proposed for  the women belonging
to the Scheduled Caste and Schedule Tribe. Women have been provided reservation
in the elections for  local bodies and a similar provision should be enacted for
providing reservation to women belonging to the Other Backward Class and minorities.
Sd- Sd-
(VIRENDRA BHATIA) (SHAILENDRA KUMAR)
Member, Rajya Sabha Member, Lok Sabha
27

MINUTES

31
RELEVANT MINUTES OF THE MEETINGS OF THE DEPARTMENT RELATED
PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON PERSONNEL, PUBLIC
GRIEVANCES, LAW AND JUSTICE
XX
TWENTHIETH MEETING
The Department Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances,
Law and Justice met at 11.00 A.M. on Tuesday, the 27th May, 2008, in Committee Room ‘A’,
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Dr. E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shrimati Jayanthi Natarajan
3. Shri Balavant alias Bal Apte
4. Shri Virendra Bhatia
5. Sardar Tarlochan Singh
6. Dr. (Shrimati) Najma A. Heptulla
7. Shrimati Brinda Karat
LOK SABHA
8. Shri Raj Babbar
9. Dr. Shafiqur Rahman Barq
10. Shri N.S.V . Chitthan
11. Shri Chhattar Singh Darbar
12. Shri S.K. Kharventhan
13. Shri A. Krishnaswamy
14. Dr. C. Krishnan
15. Shri Shailendra Kumar
16. Shri Harin Pathak
17. Shri Varkala Radhakrishnan
18. Prof. M. Ramadass
19. Shri Bhupendrasinh Solanki
20. Shri Devendra Prasad Yadav

32
SECRETARIAT
Shri Sham Sher Singh, Joint Secretary
Shri K.P. Singh, Joint Director
Ms. Niangkhannem Guite, Committee Officer
WITNESSES
Representatives of the Ministry of Law and Justice
I. Legislative Department
1. Shri K.D. Singh, Secretary; and
2. Dr. Sanjay S.ingh, Joint Secretary and Legislative Counsel.
II. * * *
2. * * *
3. Thereafter, the Committee took up for discussion the Constitution (One Hundred and Eighth
Amendment) Bill, 2008 and decided to call for wide ranging consultations on the Bill with all the
stakeholders viz. the political parties, women organisations, social activists and other groups. The
Committee further decided to call for the views of the State level/regional political parties and State
level women organisations/forums, etc. on the Bill during the Committee's study visits to various
places in June-July, 2008. Thereafter, the Committee heard the presentation of the Secretary,
Legislative Department on the Constitution (One Hundred and Eighth Amendment) Bill, 2008. The
Secretary also replied to some of the queries raised by the Members of the Committee and was
advised to give replies to the remaining queries of the Members in writing.
(The witnesses then withdrew)
4. * * *
5. The Committee decided to undertake a study visit to Chennai, Kolkata, Hyderabad,
Bangalore and Mumbai in June-July, 2008 in connection with the Constitution (One Hundred and
Eighth Amendment) Bill, 2008.
** *
6. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
7. The meeting was adjourned at 1.50 
P.M.
*** Relates to some other matter.

33
XXI
TWELFTH MEETING
The Department Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances,
Law and Justice met at 11.00 A.M. on Tuesday, the 3rd June, 2008, in Committee Room ‘A’,
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Dr. E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shrimati Jayanthi Natarajan
3. Dr. Abhishek Manu Singhvi
4. Shri Balavant alias Bal Apte
5. Shri Virendra Bhatia
6. Shri Tariq Anwar
7. Sardar Tarlochan Singh
LOK SABHA
8. Prof. Ram Gopal Yadav
9. Shri Chhattar Singh Darbar
10. Shri N.Y . Hanumanthappa
11. Dr. C. Krishnan
12. Shri Shailendra Kumar
13. Shri Harin Pathak
14. Shri Varkala Radhakrishnan
15. Shri Bhupendrasingh Solanki
16. Shri Devendra Prasad Yadav
17. Shrimati Tejasvini Gowda
18. Shrimati Kirn Maheshwari
19. Shrimati Krishna Tirath
SECRETARIAT
Shri K.P. Singh, Joint Director
Ms. Niangkhannem Guite, Committee Officer
33

34
WITNESSS
I. * * *
II. * * *
III. * * *
IV. Representatives of the National Federation of India Women
1. Ms. Annie Raja, General Secretary;
2. Ms. Primla Loomba, Vice President;
3. Ms. Krishna Majumdar, Secretary; and
4. Ms. Shyamkali, Member.
V. Representatives of the Ministry of Law and justice (Legislative Department)
Dr. Sanjay Singh, Joint Secretary & Legislative Counsel.
2. * * *
3. * * *
4. * * *
5. * * *
6. * * *
7. The Chairman then welcomed the representatives of National Federation of India Women and
requested them to make their presentation on the Constitution (One Hun dred and Eighth Amendment)
Bill, 2008.
8. The witnesses made a detailed presentation on the various provisions of the Bill, which inter
alia included reservation for women, political empowerment of women, quota within quota, reservation
for OBCs, allocation of seats by the political parties, rotation of seats, reservation for 15 years, gender
equality etc. Members raised some queries, which were replied to by the witnesses.
(The witnesses then withdrew).
9. A verbatim record of the proceeding was kept.
10. The meeting adjourned. at 1.55 
P.M.
*** Relate to some other matters.

35
XXII
TWENTY SECOND MEETING
The Department Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances,
Law and Justice met at 11.00 P.M. on Tuesday, the 10th June, 2008, in Committee Room ‘A’,
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Dr. E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shrimati Jayanthi Natarajan
3. Shri Virendra Bhatia
4. Shri Tariq Anwar
5. Sardar Tarlochan Singh
LOK SABHA
1. Prof. Ram Gopal Yadav
2. Shri N.S.V . Chitthan
3. Shri A. Krishnaswamy
4. Shri Shailendra Kumar
5. Shri Harin Pathak
6. Shri Varkala Radhakrishnan
7. Shri Bhupendrasinh Solanki
8. Shri Devendra Prasad Yadav
9. Shrimati Tejasvini Gowda
10. Shrimati Kiran Maheshwari
11. Shrimati Krishna Tirath
SECRETARIAT
Shri Shamsher Singh, Joint Secretary
Shri K.P Singh, Joint Director
Shri K.N. Earendra Kumar, Deputy Director
Ms. N. Guite, Committee Officer
35

36
WITNESSES
I. The Constitution (One Hundred and Eighth) Amendment Bill, 2008
Representatives of the Ministry of Panchayati Raj
1. Shrimait Sushma Singh, Secretary;
2. Shri Sudhir Krishna, Additional Secretary;
3. Shri Rajwant Sandhu, Additional Secretary;
4. Shri T.R. Raghunandan, Joint Secretary;
5. Shri A.S. Sahota, Joint Secretary; and
6. Shri D.K. Jain, Joint Secretary.
Representatives of the Ministry of Law and Justice (Legislative Department)
1. Dr. Sanjay Singh, Joint Secretary and Legislative Counsel; and
2. Shri G. Narayana Raju, Additional Legislative Counsel.
II. ** *
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Secretary, Ministry of Panchayati Raj and her
colleagues and informed them that the purpose of inviting them was to elicit their views/suggestions
on various provisions of the Constitution (One Hundred and Eighth Amendment) Bill, 2008, which
intended to eliminate gender inequality and discrimination. He then, requested them to offer their views/
suggestions on various provisions of the Bill.
3. Thereafter, the Secretary, Panchayati Raj made an exhaustive power point presentation on the
Constitution (One Hundred and Eighth Amendment) Bill, 2008. She also drew the attention of the
Committee on the research done by the Ministry on the working of women panchayats in various
States and participation of women in politics at various levels. Members raised some queries, which
were replied to by the witness. (The witness then withdrew)
4. * * *
5. * * *
6. * * *
7. * * *
8. V erbatim record of the proceeding was kept.
9. The meeting adjourned at 1.00 
P.M.
*** Relate to some other matter.

37
XXIII
TWENTY THIRD MEETING
The Department Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances,
Law and Justice met at 11.00 A.M. on Tuesday, the 17th June, 2008, in Room No. ‘63’, First Floor,
Parliament House, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Dr. E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shrimati Jayanthi Nataraja
3. Dr. Abhishek Manu Singhvi
4. Shri Balavant alias Bal Apte
5. Shri Virendra Bhatia
6. Shri Tariq Anwar
7. Shrimati Brinda Karat
LOK SABHA
8. Shri N.S.V . Chitthan
9. Shri N.Y . Hanumanthappa
10. Shri S.K. Kharventhan
11. Dr. C. Krishnan
12. Shri Harin Pathak
13. Shri Varkala Radhakrishnan
14. Prof. M. Ramadass
15. Shrimati Tejaswini Gowda
16. Shrimati Kiran Maheshwai
17. Adv. P. Satteedevi
SECRETARIAT
Shri Shamsher Singh, Joint Secretary
Shri K.P. Singh, Joint Director
Shri K.N. Earendra Kumar, Deputy Director
37

38
WITNESSES
I. Representatives of Communist Party of India (Marxist).
II. Representatives of Communist Party of India.
III. Representatives of All India Anna Dravida Munnetra Kazhagam.
IV. Representative of Indian National Congress.
V. Representatives of the All India Democratic Women’ s Association.
1. Ms. Subhashini Ali, President;
2. Ms. Sudha Sundararaman, General Secretary;
3. Ms. Jagmati Sangwan;
4. Ms. Rampari Yadav; and
5. Ms. Mauniiba Nikkag, Member.
VI. Representative of the Ministry of Law and Justice (Legislative Department)
Dr. Sanjay Singh, Joint Secretary and Legislative Counsel.
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed Shri S. Ramachandran Pillai, representative of Communist
Party of India (Marxist) and requested him to make his presentation on the various provisions of the
Constitution (One Hundred and Eighth Amendment) Bill, 2008 presently pending before the Committee
for examination and report.
3. Thereafter, Shri Pillai thanked the Committee for giving an opportunity to his party to present
their views on the Bill. He, then informed the Committee that CPI (M) fully supports the Constitution
(One Hundred and Eighth Amendment) Bill, 2008 in its present form which had been pending from the
last 12 years. He urged the Committee to pass the Bill as early as possible. His presentation inter alia
includes rotation of seats after 3 consecutive terms, double member constituencies, reservation of seats
by political parties, reservation for OBCs, increase in 1/3rd seats in Parliament and Legislative
Assemblies etc. Members raised some queries, which were replied to by the witness.
(The witness then withdrew)
4. The Chairman then welcomed Shri A.B. Bardhan, General Secretary, Communist Party of India
and his colleagues and requested them to make their presentation on the various provisions of the
Constitution (One Hundred and Eighth Amendment) Bill, 2008. Then Shri Bardhan made an exhaustive
presentation which inter alia  includes party's support for the Bill, rotation of seats, empowerment of
women, quota within quota, reservation of seats for women from all sections including OBCs,
Minorties etc, period of reservation should be reduced to 10 years etc. Members raised some queries,
which were replied to by the witnesses.
(The witness then withdrew)
5. Thereafter, the Chairman welcomed Dr. V . Maitreyan, representative of All India Anna Dravida
Munnetra Kazhagam (AIADMK) and informed him that the purpose of inviting him was to elicit his
views/suggestions on the Constitution (One Hundred and Eighth Amendment) Bill, 2008.

39
6. The witness then made his presentation on the Bill and informed , the Committee that AIADMK
was the first party which started reserving 33 per cent seats for women for all party posts and had
taken various measures like Cradle baby Schemes, All women, Police Station, First Women Commando
Police Battalion etc. for empowerment of women. Members raised some queries, which were replied
to by the witnesses.
(The witness then withdrew)
7. The Chairman then, welcomed Smt. Margaret Alva, General Secretary, Indian National Congress
and requested her to make his presentation on the Bill. Thereafter, Smt. Alva made her presentation on
the bill. Members raised some queries, which were replied to by the witnesses.
(The witness then withdrew)
8. Thereafter, the Chairman welcomed the representati ves of the All India Democratic Women's
Association and her colleagues and informed them that the purpose of inviting them was to elicit their
views/suggestions on various provisions of the Constitution (One Hundred and Eighth Amendment)
Bill, 2008, which intended to eliminate gender inequality and discrimination. He then, requested them
to offer their views/suggestions on various provisions of the Bill.
9. The witness then made a detailed presentation on the various provisions of the Bill which inter
alia includes comparison with other countries, working of women as panchayat presidents, nominated
members, rotation of seats, reservation of seats by the parties etc. Members raised some queries, which
were replied to by the witnesses.
(The witness then withdrew)
10. V erbatim record of the proceeding was kept.
11. The meeting adjourned at 1.55 
P.M.

40
40
XXIV
TWENTY FOURTH MEETING
The Department Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances,
Law and Justice met at 11.00 A.M. on Wednesday, the 18th June, 2008, in Committee Room ‘A’,
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Dr. E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shrimati Jayanthi Nataraja
3. Shri Balavant alias Bal Apte
4. Shri Virendra Bhatia
5. Shri Tariq Anwar
6. Shrimati Brinda Karat
LOK SABHA
7. Prof. Ram Gopal Yadav
8. Shri N.S.V . Chitthan
9. Shri N.Y . Hanumanthappa
10. Shri S.K. Kharventhan
12. Shri A. Krishnaswamy
13. Shri Harin Pathak
14. Prof. M. Ramadass
15. Shri Bhupendrasingh Solanki
16. Shrimati P. Tejaswini Gowda
17. Adv. P. Satteedevi
18. Shrimati Krishna Tirath
SECRETARIAT
Shri K.P. Singh, Joint Director
Shri K.N. Earendra Kumar, Deputy Director

41
WITNESSES
I. Representative of Dravida Munnetra Kazhagam
Shri T.K.S. Elangovan, Organizing Secretary.
II. Representative of All India Forward Bloc
Dr. Barun Mukherjee, General Secretary.
III. Representatives of Joint National Movement Organisations of India
1. Dr. V . Mohini Giri, Chairperson, War Widows Association.
2. Ms. Sudha Sundararaman, General Secretary, All India Democratic Women's Association.
3. Ms. Annie Raja, President, National Federation of Indian Women.
4. Ms. Gomati Nair, President, All India Women's Conference.
5. Ms. Sudhashini Ali, President, All India Democratic Women's Association
6. Ms. Usha Rai, Eminent Senior Development Journalist.
7. Ms. Jyotsana Chatterjee, President, Joint Women's Programme.
8. Ms. Nalina Jiwnani, Director, Bhai Office for the Advancement of Women.
9. Ms. Surabhi Chaturvedi, Senior Coordinator and Psychologist, Guild of Service.
10. Ms. Suman Sharma, Conveyr. Gender sensitization Committee, Motilal Nehru College,
Delhi University.
IV. Representatives of Rakshak Foundation
1. Dr. Anupama Singh;
2. Shri Sachin Bansal;
3. Shri Poppinder Kumar;
4. Shri Madhav Aggarwal;
5. Ms. Chanchal Jhingan;
6. Shri Niladri Das;
7. Ms. Pallavi Agarwal; and
8. Ms. Preeti Goel.
V. Representatives of Women Power Connect
1. Dr. Ranjana Kumari, President;
2. Ms. Gauri Choudhury, Executive Committee Member;
3. Ms. Sunila Singh, Executive Committee Member;
4. Dr. N. Hamsa, Executive Director; and
5. Ms. Nalina Jinwnani, Member.
VI. Representative of the Ministry of Law and Justice (Legislative Department
Dr. Sanjay Singh, Joint Secretary and Legislative Counsel.

42
2. The Chairman welcomed the representatives of Dravida Munnetra Kazhagam and All India
Forward Bloc to the meeting, and invited them to present their views on the Constitution (One Hundred
and Eighth Amendment) Bill, 2008 before the Committee.
3. Shri T.K.S. Elangovan, Organizing Secretary, Dravida Munnetra Kazhagam expressed the
unconditional support of his Party to the Bill and stated that the denial of equal representation to women
was not only an injustice to women, but also weakened the democratic process. While speaking on
the issue of reservation for women belonging to Other Backward Classes (OBC), he opined that there
were no official estimates of constituency-wise OBC population as there are for Schedule Castes/
Schedule Tribes, which is the basis on which seats have been reserved for them. He further stated
that since the delimitation process was concluded recently and that, re-opening of this issue would only
delay the Bill inordinately.
(The witnesses then withdrew)
4. Dr. Barun Mukherjee, General Secretary, All India Forward Bloc while deposing before the
Committee on the Bill, voiced the support of his Party to the Bill. He stated that 1/3rd reservation for
women in Panchayats and Nagarpalikas had proved successful and stressed upon the need for statutory
reservation of seats for women in Parliament and State Assemblies.
5. The witnesses responded to the points raised by the Chairman and Members of the Committee.
(The witnesses then withdrew)
6. After Chairman's salutory welcome to the representatives of the Joint National Movement
Organisations of India, they highlighted on the need for earnest efforts to ensure that the Bill is passed
without further delay.
(The witnesses then withdrew)
7. Thereafter, the Chairman welcomed the delegates of the Rakshak Foundation and invited their
views. They, while critiquing the Bill, submitted before the Committee data regarding female literacy
rate, employment of women, female voter turnout etc. and opined that there should not be gender-based
reservations in the legislative bodies. They are opposed to reservation for women as the reservations
are inherently divisible.
8. The witnesses replied to the queries put forward by the Committee.
(The witnesses then withdrew)
9. The Chairman then welcomed and invited the views of the representatives of Women Power
Connect on the Bill to which they stated that reservation for women would give women an opportunity
to contribute to the National and State level decision making process. They suggested that Political
Parties could be bound by a Constitutional mandate that 33% seats should be distributed to women
according to certain category and criteria. While opposing the provision for rotation of seats in the Bill,
they also stated that seats may be reserved for three consecutive terms.
10. The witnesses responded to the points raised by the Committee.
(The witnesses then withdrew)
11. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
12. The meeting was adjourned at 1.50 
P.M.

43
XXV
TWENTY FIFTH MEETING
The Department Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances,
Law and Justice met at 11.00 A.M. on Tuesday, the 8th July, 2008, in Room No. ‘A’, Ground Floor,
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Dr. E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Dr. Abhishek Manu Singhvi
3. Shri Balavant alias Bal Apte
4. Shri Virendra Bhatia
5. Shri Tariq Anwar
6. Sardar Tarlochan Singh
7. Dr. (Shrimati) Najma A. Heptulla
8. Shrimati Brinda Karat
LOK SABHA
7. Shri Raj Babbar
8. Shri N.Y . Hanumanthappa
9. Shri S.K. Kharventhan
10. Dr. C. Krishnan
11. Shri Shailendra Kumar
12. Shri Harin Pathak
13. Prof. M. Ramadass
14. Shri Bhupendrasinh Solanki
15. Shrimati Tejaswini Gowda
16. Adv. P. Satteedevi
SECRETARIAT
Shri Shamsher Singh, Joint Secretary
Shri K.P. Singh, Joint Director
Shri K.N. Earendra Kumar, Deputy Director
43

44
WITNESSES
I. Representatives of Delhi Janwadi Mahila Samiti
1. Ms. Sehba Farooqui, Secretary;
2. Ms. Soniya Varma;
3. Ms. Asha Sharma;
4. Ms. Asha Yadav; and
5. Ms. Albeena Shakil.
II. Representative of Streebal
Ms. Rami Chabra, Founder-President.
III. Ministry of Law and Justice (Legislative Department)
Dr. Sanjay Singh, Joint Secretary and Legislative Counsel.
2. * * *
3. The representatives of Delhi Janwadi Mahila Samiti, while expressing their views on the
various provisions of the Bill, stated that l/3rd reservation of seats for women in Parliament and
State Assemblies is the need of the hour and that dilution of this quota would not suffice in ensuring
political empowerment of women. They highlighted the need for passing this Bill without further
delay and stated that women, as a community, are discriminated against based on gender,
irrespective of their caste/creed/religion.
4. The witnesses responded to the points raised by the Chairman and Members of the Committee.
(The witnesses then withdrew)
5. The representative of Streebal, while critiquing the Bill, suggested that double – Member
constituencies is a better alternative to the proposed Bill. She invited the attention of the Committee to
Articles 81 and 170 of the Constitution of India and stated that double – Member constituencies had
a Constitutional and historical legacy in India.
6. The witness replied to the queries put forward by Members of the Committee.
(The witness then withdrew)
7. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
8. The meeting was adjourned at 1.00 
P.M.
*** Relate to some other matter.

45
XXVI
TWENTY SIXTH MEETING
The Department Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances,
Law and Justice met at 11.00 A.M. on Thursday, the 17th July, 2008, in Room No. ‘A’, Ground
Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Dr. E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shrimati Jayanthi Natarajan
3. Shri Balavant alias Bal Apte
4. Shri Virendra Bhatia
5. Shri Tariq Anwar
6. Shri Ram Jethmalani
7. Sardar Tarlochan Singh
8. Shrimati Brinda Karat
LOK SABHA
9. Prof. Ram Gopal Yadav
10. Shri N.S.V . Chitthan
11. Shri S.K. Kharventhan
12. Dr. C. Krishnan
13. Shri Shailendra Kumar
14. Shri Harin Pathak
15. Shri Varkala Radhakrishnan
16. Prof. M. Ramadass
17. Shri Bhupendrasinh Solanki
18. Shri Devendra Prasad Yadav
19. Shrimati Tejaswini Gowda
20. Adv. P. Satteedevi
21. Shrimati Krishna Tirath
SECRETARIAT
Shri Shamsher Singh, Joint Secretary
Shri K.P. Singh, Joint Director
Shri K.N. Earendra Kumar, Deputy Director
Ms. Niangkhannem Guite, Committee Officer
45

46
WITNESSES
I. Representatives of Ministry of Law and Justice
(i) Legislative Department
Dr. Sanjay Singh, Joint Secretary and Legislative Counsel;
(ii) * * *
2. The Chairman, while extending his welcome to the Members present, apprised the Committee
that a letter has been received from Shri Amar Singh, General Secretary, Samajwadi Party, stating the
Party’s stand on the Constitution (One Hundred and Eighth Amendment) Bill, 2008. Then the Chairman
initiated discussion on a Note prepared by the Secretariat on the issue of “Inclusion of Article 330(A)
(IV) in the Constitution” in connection with the Bill and the Members tendered their views on the same.
3. * * *
4. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
5. The meeting was adjourned at 12.15 
P.M.
*** Relate to some other matter.

47
XXVII
TWENTY SEVENTH MEETING
The Department Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances,
Law and Justice met at 11.00 A.M. on Friday, the 1st August, 2008, in Committee Room No. ‘A’,
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Dr. E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Balavant alias Bal Apte
3. Shri Virendra Bhatia
4. Shri Tariq Anwar
5. Sardar Tarlochan Singh
6. Shrimati Brinda Karat
LOK SABHA
7. Prof. Ram Gopal Yadav
8. Shri N.S.V . Chitthan
9. Shri Chhattar Singh Darbar
10. Shri N.Y . Hanumanthappa
11. Shri S.K. Kharventhan
12. Dr. C. Krishnan
13. Shri Shailendra Kumar
14. Shri Varkala Radhakrishnan
15. Shri Bhupendrasinh Solanki
16. Shri Devendra Prasad Yadav
17. Shrimati Tejaswini Gowda
18. Adv. P. Satteedevi
SECRETARIAT
Shri K.P. Singh, Joint Director
Shri K.N. Earendra Kumar, Deputy Director
Ms. Niangkhannem Guite, Committee Officer
2. * * *
47
*** Relates to some other matter.

48
3. Thereafter, the Committee held discussion on the progress made in the Constitution (One
Hundred and Eighth) Amendment Bill, 2008. Since the three months time limit for examination and
report of the Bill is going to expire on 7th August, 2008 the Committee decided and authorized its
Chairman to request the Hon'ble Chairman for further extension of sixty days.
4. The meeting was adjourned at 12.15 P.M. to meet again on 11th August, 2008.

49
III
THIRD MEETING
The Department Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances,
Law and Justice met at 11.00 A.M. on Thursday, the 18th September, 2008 in Committee Room
‘A’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Dr. E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Balavant alias Bal Apte
3. Shri Virendra Bhatia
4. Shrimati Brinda Karat
5. Shri Tariq Anwar
6. Sardar Tarlochan Singh
LOK SABHA
7. Shri Raj Babbar
8. Shrimati Tejasvini Gowda
9. Shri S.K. Kharventhan
10. Dr. C. Krishnan
11. Shri Shailendra Kumar
12. Shri Harin Pathak
13. Shri Varkala Radhakrishna
14. Adv. P. Satteedevi
15. Shri Bhupendrasinh Solanki
SECRETARIAT
Shri K.P. Singh, Joint Director
Shri K.N. Earendra Kumar, Deputy Director
Shrimati Niangkhannem Guite, Committee Officer
WITNESSES
I. * * *
II. * * *
49
*** Relates to some other matter.

50
The Constitution (One Hundred and Eighth Amendment) Bill, 2008
2. The Chairman of the Committee, while initiating a discussion on the Constitution (One Hundred
and Eighth Amendment) Bill, 2008 informed the Members that during the last study visit of the
Committee, the Committee interacted with the Chief Ministers and Chief Secretaries and senior officials
of the State Governments of Madhya Pradesh and Orissa on the Bill. He apprised the Committee that
the Chief Ministers of both the States were of the view that the Bill should be passed in its present
form and that in both the States 50% seats in Panchayati Raj institutions and Nagarpalikas have
been reserved for women. The Committee further deliberated upon various nuances of the Bill and decided
to seek extension of time for further examination of the Bill, since the time period for presentation of
report on the Bill will expire on 7th October, 2008. It was also decided that a Status Note on the Bill
may be circulated to Members of Committee.
3. * * *
4. * * *
5. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
6. The meeting was adjourned at 12.08 
P.M. to meet again on 29th September, 2008.
*** Relates to some other matter.

51
V
FIFTH MEETING
The Department Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances,
Law and Justice met at 11.00 A.M. on Tuesday, the 7th October, 2008 in Committee Room ‘D’,
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Dr. E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Balavant alias Bal Apte
3. Dr. (Shrimati) Najam A. Heptulla
4. Shri Virendra Bhatia
5. Shrimati Brinda Karat
6. Shri Tariq Anwar
7. Sardar Tarlochan Singh
LOK SABHA
8. Shri Raj Babbar
9. Shri N.S.V . Chitthan
10. Shrimati Tejasvini Gowda
11. Shri S.K. Kharventhan
12. Shri A. Krishnaswamy
13. Dr. C. Krishnan
14. Shri Shailendra Kumar
15. Shri Harin Pathak
16. Shri Varkala Radhakrishna
17. Prof. M. Ramadass
18. Adv. P. Satteedevi
19. Shri Bhupendrasinh Solanki
SECRETARIAT
Shri Sham Sher Singh, Joint Secretary
Shri K.P. Singh, Joint Director
Shri K.N. Earendra Kumar, Deputy Director
Shrimati Niangkhannem Guite, Committee Officer
51

52
WITNESSS
I. * * *
II. * * *
III. * * *
IV. Ministry of Law and Justice (Legislative pepartmen9
Dr. Sanjay Singh, Joint. Secretary and Legislative Counsel.
I. * * *
2. * *
3. * *
II. * * *
4. * *
5. * *
III. The Constitution (One Hundren and Eighth Amendment) Bill, 2008
6. The Chairman, while initiating a discussion on the Bill, desired that the Members may come
forward with their opinion/comments on the Status Note on the Bill circulated to them.
7. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
8. The meeting adjourned at 12.22 P.M. to meet again on 21st October, 2008.
*** Relates to some other matter.

53
XII
TWELFTH MEETING
The Department Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances,
Law and Justice met at 11.00 A.M. on Wednesday, the 28th January, 2009 in Room No. ‘63’, First
Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Dr. E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Balavant alias Bal Apte
3. Shri Tariq Anwar
4. Sardar Tarlochan Singh
LOK SABHA
5. Shri Raj Babbar
6. Shri Chhattar Singh Darbar
7. Shrimati Tejasvini Gowda
8. Shri S.K. Kharventhan
9. Dr. C. Krishnan
10. Shri Harin Pathak
11. Prof. M. Ramadass
12. Shrimati Krishna Tirath
SECRETARIAT
Shri K.P. Singh, Joint Director
Shri K.N. Earendra Kumar, Deputy Director
Shrimati Niangkhannem Guite, Committee Officer
2. * * *
A. * * *
WITNESSES
3. * * *
53
*** Relates to some other matter.

54
4. * * *
B. * * *
WITNESSES
** *
** *
** *
** *
5. * * *
C. The Constitution (One Hundred and Eighth Amendment) Bill, 2008
6. The Committee considered the letter received from Shrimati Brinda Karat, Member of the
Committee suggesting that the Committee should give a report as majority of the Members support the
Bill. The Chairman then suggested that Committee should arrive at consensus before the report is
finalized and may again discuss the Bill in its next meeting to be held on 6th February, 2008.
(The witnesses then withdrew)
7. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
8. The meeting adjourned at 1.01 
P.M.
*** Relates to some other matter.

55
XIII
THIRTEENTH MEETING
The Department Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances,
Law and Justice met at 04.00 P.M. on Monday, the 16th February, 2009 in Committee Room ‘E’,
Basement, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Dr. E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Dr. Abhishek Manu Singhvi
3. Shri Balavant alias Bal Apte
4. Dr. (Shrimati) Najma A. Heptulla
5. Shrimati Brinda Barat
6. Shri Ram Jethmalani
7. Sardar Tarlochan Singh
LOK SABHA
8. Shrimati Tejasvini Gowda
9. Shri A. Krishnaswamy
10. Dr. C. Krishnan
11. Adv. P. Sathedevi
12. Shrimati Krishna Tirath
SECRETARIAT
Shri Sham Sher Singh, Joint Secretary
Shri K.P. Singh, Joint Director
Shri K.N. Earendra Kumar, Deputy Director
Shrimati Niangkhannem Guite, Committee Officer
A. * * *
2. * * *
B. The Constitution (One Hundred and Eighth Amendment) Bill, 2008
55
*** Relates to some other matter.

56
3. The Committee then held in-house discussion on the Constitution (One Hundred and Eighth
Amendment) Bill, 2008.
C. * * *
** *
4. * * *
5. * * *
6. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
7. The meeting adjourned at 5.05 
P.M.
*** Relates to some other matter.

57
VI
SIXTH MEETING
The Department Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances,
Law and Justice met at 11.00 A.M. on Tuesday, the 10th November, 2009, in Committee Room ‘A’,
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shrimati Jayanthi Natarajan — Chairperson
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Shantaram Laxman Naik
3. Shri Tiruchi Siva
4. Sardar Tarlochan Singh
5. Shri Parimal Nathwani
LOK SABHA
6. Dr. Monazir Hassan
7. Shri Syed Shahnawaz Hussain
8. Shrimati Chandresh Kumari
9. Dr. Kirodi Lal Meena
10. Shri Devji M. Patel
11. Shri S. Semmalai
12. Shri Shailendra Kumar
13. Shri Vijay Bahadur Singh
14. Dr. (Shrimati) Prabha Kishor Tavid
SECRETARIAT
Shri Sham Sher Singh, Joint Secretary
Shri K.P. Singh, Joint Director
Shri K.N. Earendra Kumar, Deputy Director
Shrimati Niangkhannem Guite, Committee Officer
Representatives of the Ministry of Law and Justice (Legislative Department)
1. Shri N.K. Nampoothiry, Joint Secretary and Legislative Counsel (Department of the Bill); and
2. Shri V .G. Mangal, Undr Secretary (Parl.).
57

58
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members of the Committee for an in-house
discussion on the Constitution (One Hundred and Eighth Amendment) Bill, 2008. In her opening
remarks, the Chairperson enlightened the Members regarding progress made by the previous Committee
on the Constitution (One Hundred and Eighth Amendment) Bill, 2008 since it was referred to this
Committee by the Hon'ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha. The Chairperson urged the Members to work in
tandem during the deliberations upon the Bill so that a consensus based report could be prepared in
time. She then requested the members to express their views/suggestions on the various provisions of
the above mentioned Bill.
3. Thereafter, some of the Members expressed their views on the issues connected with the Bill.
Many Members were of the opinion that in view of the importance of the legislation, it is imperative
that every section of the society and all the State Governments should be given the opportunity to
submit their views and therefore, the States which have not been covered by the previous Committee
may be visited for the same. The Chairperson mentioned that she would try to arrange for visits to
the couple of remaining States which have not been visited by the Committee, but in view of the
austerity measures it may be difficult for the Committee to travel. However, she would still try to work
it out. She requested the co-operation of the Members in this regard.
4. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
5. The Committee adjourned at 11.35 
A.M.

59
VII
SEVENTH MEETING
The Department-Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances,
Law and Justice met at 3.00 P.M. on Monday, the 14th December, 2009 in Committee Room ‘C’,
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shrimati Jayanthi Natarajan — Chairperson
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Shantaram Laxman Naik
3. Shri Parshottam Kohodabhai Rupala
4. Shri Virendra Bhatia
5. Shri Parimal Nathwani
6. Shri Tiruchi Siva
LOK SABHA
7. Shri N.S.V . Chitthan
8. Shrimati Deepa Dasmunsi
9. Shrimati Jyoti Dhurve
10. Shri Syed Shahnawaz Hussain
11. Dr. Kirodi Lal Meena
12. Kumari Meenakshi Natrajan
13. Shri Devji M. Patel
14. Shri Harin Pathak
15. Shri Shailendra Kumar
16. Shri Vijay Bahadur Singh
17. Dr. (Shrimati) Prabha Kishor Tavid
18. Shri Manish Tewari
19. Adv. P.T. Thomas (Idukki)
SECRETARIAT
Shri Sham Sher Singh, Joint Secretary
Shri K.P. Singh, Director
Shri K.N. Earendra Kumar, Joint Director
Ms. Niangkhannem Guite, Assistant Director
59

60
2. * * *
3. The Committee considered the draft 36th Report on the Constitution (One Hundred and Eight
Amendment) Bill, 2008 and adopted the same. Shri Virendra Bhatia and Shri Shailendra Kumar,
Members of the Committee submitted their dissenting notes on the report of the Committee. The
Committee then decided that the same may be appended as Minutes of Dissent.
4. The Committee authorised the Chairperson and in her absence Shri Tiruchi Siva to present both
the reports in Rajya Sabha and Shri Syed Shahnawax Hussain and in his absence Advocate P.T. Thomas
(Idukki) to lay the said reports in Lok Sabha on Thursday, the 17th December, 2009.
5. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
6. The  Committee adjourned at 3.29 
P.M.
*** Relates to some other matter.

61
ANNEXURES

ANNEXURE – A
THE CONSTITUTION (ONE HUNDRED AND EIGHTH
AMENDMENT) BILL, 2008

ANNEXURE-A
AS I NTRODUCED  IN T HE L OK S ABHA
06 MAY ., 2008
Bill No. XXX of 2008
THE CONSTITUTION (ONE HUNDRED AND EIGHT
AMENDMENT) BILL, 2008
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-ninth Year of the
Republic of India as follows:—
1. ( 1) This Act may be called the Constitution (One Hundred
and Eighth Amendment) Act, 2008.
(2) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In the article 239AA of the Constitutiion, in clause (2), in
sub-clause (b), for the words “Scheduled Castes”, the words “the
Scheduled Castes and the women” shall be substituted.
3. After article 330 of the Constitution, the following article
shall be inserted, namely:—
“330A. ( 1) Seats shall be reserved for women in the House
of the People.
65
Short title, and
commencement.
Amendment of
article 239AA.
Insertion of new
article 330A.
Reservation of
seats for women
in the House of
the People.

66
(2) As nearly as may be, one-third of the total number of seats
reserved under clause (2) of article 330 shall be reserved for women
belonging to the Scheduled Castes or the Scheduled Tribes, as the
case may be.
Provided that where the seat reserved for the Scheduled Castes
or the Scheduled Tribes, as the case may be, in relation to a State or
Union territory is one, then, in every block comprising of three general
elections to the House of the People, the seat in the first general
elections shall be reserved for women belonging to the' Scheduled
Castes or the Scheduled Tribes and no seat shall be So reserved in the
other two general elections:
Provided further that where the seats reserved for the Scheduled
Castes or the Scheduled tribes, as the case may be, in relation to a
State or Union territory are two, then, in every block comprising of
three general elections to the House of the People,—
(a) one seat shall be reserved for women belonging to
the, Scheduled Castes or the Scheduled Tribes m the first two
general elections in such a manner that the same constituency
is not reserved for women in both the aforesaid elections; and
(b) no seat shall be reserved for women belonging to the
Scheduled Castes or the Scheduled Tribes in the third general
elections.
(3) As nearly as may be, one-third (including the number of
seats reserved for women belonging to the Scheduled Castes and the
Scheduled Tribes) of the total number of seats to be filled by direct
election to the House of the People in a State or Union territory shall
be reserved for women and such seats may be allotted by rotation to
different constituencies in that State or Union territory in such manner,
as Parliament may by law determine:
Provided that where the seat, not being a seat reserved for the
Scheduled Castes or the Scheduled Tribes, in relation to a State or
Union territory is one, then, in every block comprising of three general
elections to the House of the People, the seat in the first general
elections shall be reserved for women and no seat shall be so reserved
for women in the other two general elections:
Provided further that where the seats, not being seats reserved
for the Scheduled Castes or the Scheduled Tribes, in relation to a
State or Union Territory are two, then in every block comprising of
three general elections to the House of the People,—

67
(a) one seat shall be reserved for women in the first two
general elections in such a manner that the same constituency
is not reserve for women in both the aforesaid elections; and
(b) no seat shall be reserved for women in the third
general elections.”.
4. In article 331 of the Constitution, the following proviso shall
be inserted at the end, namely:—
“Provided that where such nominations are made, in
relation to every block comprising of three general elections to
the House, one seat shall be reserved for nomination of a
woman of Anglo-India community to every House constituted
after first two general elections and no seat shall be reserved
for the women of that community in the House constituted after
the third general elections.”.
5. After article 332 of the Constitution, the following article shall
be inserted, namely:—
“332A. ( 1) Seats shall be reserved for women in the Legislative
Assembly of every State.
(2) As nearly as may be, one-third of the total number of seats;
reserved under clause (3) of article 332 shall be reserved for women
for belonging to the Scheduled Castes or the Scheduled Tribes, as the
case may be:
Provided that where the seat reserved for the Scheduled Castes
or the Scheduled Tribes, as the case may be, in relation to a State is
one, then, in every block comprising of three general elections to the
Legislative Assembly of that State, the seat in the first general elections
shall be reserved for women belonging to the Scheduled Castes or the
Scheduled Tribes, as the case may be :
Provided further that where the seats reserved for the Scheduled
Castes or the Scheduled Tribes, as the case may be, in relation to a
State are two, then, in every block comprising of three general
elections to the Legislative Assembly of that Sate,-
(a) one seat shall be reserved for women belonging to the
Scheduled Castes or the Scheduled Tribes in the first two
general elections in such a manner that the same constituency
is not reserved for women in both the aforesaid elections; and
(b) no seat shall be reserved for women belonging to the
Scheduled Castes or the Scheduled Tribes in the third general
elections.
Insertion of
new article
332A.
Amendment of
article 331.
Reservation of
seats for women
in the
Legislative
Assemblies of
the States.

68
(3) As nearly as may be, one-third (including the number of
seats reserved for women belonging to the Scheduled Castes and the
Scheduled Tribes) of the total number of seats to be filled by direct
election in the Legislative Assembly of every State shall be reserved
for women and such seats may be allotted by rotation to different
constituencies in that State in such manner, as Parliament may by law
determine.”.
6. In article 333 of the Constitution, the following proviso shall
be inserted at the end, namely:—
“Provided that where such, nomination is made, in relation to
every block comprising of three general elections to the Assembly, the
seat in the Assembly constituted after the first general elections shall
be reserved for nomination of a women of the Anglo-Indian community
and no seat shall be reserved for the women of that community in the
Assembly constituted after the second and the third general elections.”
7. After article 334 of the Constitution, the following article
shall be inserted, namely:—
“334A. Notwithstanding anything in the foregoing provisions of this
Part or Part VIII, the provisions of the Constitution relating to the
reservation of seats for women in the House of the People, the
Legislative, Assembly of a State and the Legislative Assembly of the
National Capital Territory of Delhi shall cease to have effect on the
expiration of a period of fifteen years from the commencement of the
Constitution (One Hundred and Eighth Amendment) Act, 2008:
Provided that nothing in this article shall affect any representation
in the House of the People, the Legislative Assembly of a State or the
Legislative Assembly of the National Capital Territory of Delhi until the
dissolution of the then exiting House, Legislative Assembly of a State
or the Legislative Assembly of the National Capital Territory of Delhi,
as the case may be.”.
8. The amendments made to the Constitution by the Constitution
(One Hundred and Eigh th Amendment) Act, 2008 shall not affect any
representation in the House of the People, the Legislative Assembly of
a State or the Legislative Assembly of the National Capital Territory of
Delhi until the dissolution of the House, the Legislative Assembly of a
State or the Legislative Assembly of the National Capital Territory of
Delhi, as the case may be, in existence at the commencement of the
said Act.
Amendment
of article 333.
Insertion of
new article
334A.
Reservation
of seats for
women to
cease after
fifteen years.
Amendment
not to affect
reprersentation
in the House
of the People
or Legislative
Assembly of a
State or
Legislative
Assembly of
the National
Capital
Territory of
Delhi.

69
69
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The issue of empowerment of women has been raised indifferent fora in the
country from time to time. Political empowerment of women is rightly perceived
as a powerful and indispensable tool for eliminating gender inequality and
discrimination. The Government in its National Common Minimum Programme
has stated that it will take lead to introduce legislation for one-third reservation
of seats for women in Vidhan Sabhas and in the Lok Sabha. The aforesaid idea
followed by debate amongst the political parties and in intellectuals has paved
way in getting the insight in the matter.
2. As a first step to achieve the aforesaid objective, reservation for women
in Panchayats and Municipalities was provided by insertion of articles 243D and
243T in the Constitution vide the Constitution (Seventy-third Amendment) Act,
1992 and the Constitution (Seventy-fourth Amendment) Act, 1992, respectively. The
next step towards this direction was the introduction of the Constitution (Eighty-first
Amendment) Bill, 1996 in the Eleventh Lok Sabha on 12th September, 1996 which
sought to reserve not less than one-third of total number of seats filled by direct
election in the House of the People and in the Legislative Assemblies of the States
for women. The said Bill was referred to the Joint Committee of Parliament which
further strengthened some of the provisions of the Bill by extending the provision
of reservation for women even in those cases where number of seats was less than
three in a State or a Union territory. The Constitution (Eighty-first Amendment) Bill,
1996, as reported by the Joint Committee, however, lapsed with the dissolution of
the Eleventh Lok Sabha.
3. Again attempt was made to provide reservation for women in Lok
Sabha and the State Assemblies and in the Legislative Assembly of the National
Capital Territory of Delhi for a period of fifteen years from the commencement
of the proposed enactment, by introducing the Constitution (Eighty-fourth
Amendment) Bill, 1998 in Lok Sabha on 14th December, 1998. The said Bill
lapsed on the dissolution of the Twelfth Lok Sabha. Yet, another attempt was
made by introducing the Constitution (Eighty-fifth Amendment) Bill, 1999 in Lok
Sabha on 23rd December, 1999. But this Bill also had not been pursued due to
lack of consensus amongst the political parties.
4. The Government has decided to reintroduce a Bill on the lines of the
aforesaid Bills Seeking to provide for reservation for women in the House of the

70
People and in the Legislative Assemblies of the States. This is in fulfilment of the
people’s mandate.
5. The Bill seeks to achieve the aforesaid objectives.
NEW D ELHI; HANS RAJ BHARDWAJ.
The 5th May, 2008.

71
ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE C ONSTITUTION OF I NDIA
** * * *
239AA. * * * *
(2)(a)* * * * *
(b) The total number of seats in the Legislative Assembly, the
number of seats reserved for Scheduled Castes, the division of the
National Capital Territory into territorial constituencies (including the
basis for such division) and all other matter relating to the functioning
of the Legislative Assembly shall be regulated by law made by Parliament.
** * * *
Special
provisions
with respects
to Delhi.
71

72
72
RAJYA SABHA
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
(Shri Hans Raj Bhardwaj, Minister of Law and Justice)

73
ANNEXURE – B
COMMENTS OF THE MINISTRY OF LAW AND
JUSTICE (LEGISLATIVE DEPARTMENT) ON THE
VIEWS/SUGGESTIONS CONTAINED INMEMORANDA
SUBMITTED BY INDIVIDUALS/ORGANISATIONS/
EXPERTS ON THE PROVISIONS OF THE BILL

74

75
ANNEXURE-B
Sl. Name of the Comments/Suggestions Response of Government
No. Organisation/individual
12 3 4
1. Shir Subhash Chandra
Agrawal (Guinness Record
Holder for 1775, Kucha
Lattushah, Dariba
Delhi.
2. Shri Anup Kumar Mishra
President
District Badminton
Association Suguja
Ambikapur
Chhattisgarh
3. Prof. Man Cahnd
Khandala
General Secretary
Citizens Association for
Rights
12-The-14, Jawahar Nagar
Jaipur – 302004.
He has suggested that Gill formula to make it compulsory for every
political party to give at least 33 per cent party-tickets to women
may be immediately enforced as an interim measure.
He has suggested that reservation for women should be same as
nearly as may be, that of percentage of women out of the total
population of India or States according to the census of 2001, of
the seats of the present strength of the House of People and the
Legislative Assembly of every State.
He has suggested that the following amendments:—
1. The percentage of women reservation should be increased to
50, which is logical because of their percentage of population
in India.
2. Amongst the reserved constituencies again the reservation for
women of SC/ST and OBC must also be made at the same
percentage which is applicable in the case of reservations for
employment to SC/ST and OBC category candidates.
3. It is illogical and most impracticable suggestion to increase the
same number of seats in the Lok Sabha and State Legislative
Assemblies which will be reserved for women.
It is a matter of policy. On the
basis of the report/recommen-
dations of the Parliamentary Standing
Committee, the Department will go
to the Cabinet for taking a policy
decision.
–do–
–do–

76
12 3 4
4. Zameer Ahmed Jumlana
5. Sitaram Raigar,
Jaipur.
6. Subodh Bansal
Strategy Designer
4. The eligibility for contesting election in such reserved women
constituencies should not be changed in any way.
5. The reserved women constituencies should not be changed in
any way.
6. The suggestion that in place of such reservation obligatory
reservation should be made by the political parties in the same
percentage at the time of nominating candidates in elections of
Lok Sabha or State Legislative Assemblies is totally a biased
suggestion of professional and power greedy male politicians.
He has suggested that Muslim Women being weakest section of
Indian society needs a separate reservation quota in legislative
bodies.
He has made some observations which are as under:—
It is very bad decision for India because it is not similar for all
categories. If you give reservation you should separate total seats
of women and give reservation for SC/ST/OBC in it. So, they may
not have struggle/competition in men and women. It should be
done not only for 15 years but may continue forward.
He has described this Bill as undemocratic and unconstitutional act
which would kill the freedom of voters as voters would have to
choose from only women candidate.
It is a matter of policy. On the
basis of the report/recommen-
dations of the Parliamentary Standing
Committee, the Department will go
to the Cabinet for taking a policy
decision.
–do–
–do–

77
She has requested for special quota for physically challenged
women for inclusion in the Bill.
His suggestions on the Bill are as under :
To link the norm to 21 years male/female (population/literacy) ratio
in the country as a whole for Lok Sabha and in each State
Assemblies.
The Bill aims at eliminating gender inequality.
To encourage women to participate in the making of laws for the
Union and for the States.
He has suggested that
(i) Provide 33% reservation to women without any increase in the
number of seats of any House.
(ii) Since it is very difficult to give very precise solution because
women’s population is evenly  distributed all over country. One
way to implement is to allocate 33% sets randomly evenly
distributed all over country and then keep rest 66% seats in
two different groups on with the women’s reservation should
be applied after every next election. So the total seats will be
distributed in three groups and for seats in each group women’s
reservation will apply after a gap of two elections. This period
of two elections can by set differently by putting the period as
5 years for each seats/group.
(iii) Reservation to Backward Castes Women should be compulsory
part of the Bill.
She has suggested some amendments which are as under:
(i) One third reservation should be provided in both the Houses
of parliament.
–do–
–do–
–do–
7. Gayatri Sankaran
Padmashree Awardee
4, East Coast Road,
Thiuvanmayur, Chennai.
8. SMMV Krishna Rao
Srinivas Krishnarao
9. Santosh Kumar
10. Shrimati Shobha Suman
W/o Nilesh Kumar
Advocate
Vidisha

78
12 3 4
11. Gayatri Sankaran
Padmashree Awardee
4, East Coast Road,
Thiuvannaayur
Chennai.
12. Bahujan Svvarajya Party
House No.351, Ward
No.29, Mohalla Bhind
P.O. Bhind, Madhya Pradesh
13. Shri Pooran Koli
Assistant Professor
Department of Chemistry
Jai Narain Vyas University
Jodhpur,
Rajasthan
(ii) One third among the reserved seats for women should be
provided to the SC/ST/OBC women in parliament and State
Legislatures.
(iii) Reservation for women should be made in nomination to
Anglo-Indian Community.
(iv) One third reservation for women should be provided in Delhi
Legislative Assembly.
(v) Reservation for women not only be provided for 15 years but
it should be continued to next 15 years also.
She has requested for special quota for physically challenged
women for inclusion in the Bill.
Article 108(1) Reservation of seats for women Neuter in the
House of the People
(a) Women Gender
(b) Neuter Gender
He has suggested his scheme for women reservation which is
based on two members constituency – Tri cameral legislature
system which requires amendment in following articles :—
(i) Article 79 – Parliament shall consists of President and
Tricameral
Legislature – House of People (Lok Sabha), House of Women
(Mahila Sabha) and Council of States (Rajya Sabha).
It is a matter of policy. On the
basis of the report/recommen-
dations of the Parliamentary Standing
Committee, the Department will go
to the Cabinet for taking a policy
decision.
–do–
–do–

79
(ii) Article 81 – The amended article 81 shall provide for
composition of Lok Sabha with maximum strength 545
(530 + 13 + 2) as well as for composition of Mahila Sabha
with maximum strength 545 (530 + 13 + 2).
(iii) Article 83 – Amended article 84 will provide that only
women shall contest for Mahila Sabha. The other qualifications
for Mahila Sabha shall be as present today for membership of
Lok Sabha. There will be no change in qualification for Lok
Sabha and Rajya Sabha. It means women shall also be eligible
for Lok Sabha and Rajya Sabha.
(iv) Article 168 – The amended article 168 will provide for
tricameral State legislature – Legislative Assembly (Vidhan
Sabha). Legislative Assembly of Women (Mahila Vidhan Sabha)
and Legislative Council, in States where there is bicameral
system presently and bicameral State Legislature – Vidhan
Sabha and Mahila Vidhan Sabha in States where there is
unicameral system presently as the case may be. The number
of Membership of Mahila Vidhan Sabha will be equal to
Vidhan Sabha in States and Union Territories – Delhi and
Pondicherry.
(v) Article 239 A – Amended article 239A will provide for
bicameral legislature for Delhi and Pondicherry. The
membership of Mahila Vidhan Sabha shall be equal to that of
Vidhan Sabha in these Union Territories.
(vi) Article 173 – In amended article 173, there shall be no
change in qualifications for Vidhan Sabha and Vidhan Parishad.
Amended article 173 will provide that only women shall
contest for Mahila Vidhan Sabha. Women shall also be eligible
for Vidhan Sabha and Vidhan Parishad.

80
12 3 4
(vii) Article 107 – Amended article 107 shall provide for
introduction of non-money Bills in Lok Sabha or Mahila
Sabha or Rajya Sabha. Each Bill has to be passed. Separately
by rest two non-originating Houses. If there is dispute between
Houses, two Houses in one side and rest one in other side,
or all three Houses have different stand on a Bill then there
shall be joint sitting under Article 108. Amended Article 108
will provide for sitting of Rajya Sabha and Lok Sabha in
building of Lok Sabha, and Mahila Sabha will sit in her own
House. This way there will not be any problem of single
building housing meeting of 1335 MPs. The requirement of
voting for passage of a Bill in joint sitting will remain the
same which exists today. Bills concerning women and
children the Mahila Sabha will have final say as presently
Lok Sabha have in case of money Bills. There shall be
provision that any Bill can become an Act only after it is
passed by all three Houses of the Parliament and assented
by the President.
(viii) Article 109 – The amended, article 109 will provide for
introduction of money Bills in Lok Sabha or Mahila Sabha
but not in Rajya Sabha as presently. The final say will
remain with Lok Sabha plus Mahila Sabha combinedly in
case of any dispute between Lok Sabha and Mahila Sabha
over money Bills there will be joint sitting of Lok Sabha and
Mahila Sabha in which Lok Sabha and Mahila Sabha will
interact through video conferencing.
(ix) Article 196 – The amended article 196 will provide same
legislative relationship between houses of state legislature as
will be at central legislature level.

81
(x) Article 330 – The amended article 330 will also provide
reservation for SC and ST women in Mahila Sabha on
same pattern which is presently in Lok Sabha. There will be
no change in reservation pattern in Lok Sabha. In addition to
reservation for SC/ST women in Mahila Sabha the amended
article 330 may also provide reservation for women of OBCs
and Minorities Classes in proportion to their population
respectively.
(xi) Article 331 – After amendment in article 331 provision will
remain same for Lok Sabha but in case of Mahila Sabha
amended article will provide for nomination of two women
from Anglo-Indian community in case this community is not
adequately represented in Mahila Sabha.
(xii) Article 332 – After amendment in article 332 there shall be
proportionate representation of women from SCs, STs, OBCs
Minorities Classes in Mahila Vidhan Sabha. The provision
regarding reservation with respect to Vidhan Sabha will remain
unchanged.
(xiii) Article 333 – The amended article 333 will provide for
nomination of women from Anglo-Indian community in Mahila
Vidhan Sabha. Provision with respect to Vidhan Sabha will
remain unchanged.
(xiv) Article 334 – Amended article 334 will provide for reservation
of seats and special representation of women in legislature
till specified time.
(xv) 97th Amendment – Portfolios relating with women and
children will necessarily go to women ministers.
(xvi) Article 54 – Amended article 54 will provide that electoral
college for Presidential election shall consist of elected
members of Lok Sabha, Mahila Sabha, Rajya Sabha, Vjdhan
Sabha and Mahila Vidhan Sabha.

82
12 3 4
(xvii) Article 66(1) – Amended article 66(1) will provide that
electoral college for Vice-President shall consists of Lok
Sabha, Mahila Sabha and Rajya Sabha.
(xviii) Article 61 – Amended article 66 will provide that resolution
for impeachment shall be introduced in either house of
central legislature but that has to approved separately by rest
two non-originating houses.
(xix) Article 67 (b) – Amended article 67 (b) will provide that
resolution for removal of Vice-President shall be introduced
in Rajya Sabha but that has to be agreed to by both Lok
Sabha and Mahila Sabha separately.
(xx) Article 75(3) – Amended article 75 (3) will provide that
council of ministers shall be collectively responsible to both
popular houses Lok, Sabha and Mahila Sabha. No-confidence
motion shall be introduced in Lok Sabha but has to be
agreed to by Mahila Sabha or vice-versa. In case of dispute,
there shall be joint sitting of Lok Sabha and Mahila Sabha.
(xxi) Article 164 (2) – Amended article 164(2) will provide that
council of ministers at state level shall be collectively
responsible to both popular houses – Vidhan Sabha and
Mahila Vidhan Sabha.
(xxii) Article 124(4) – Amended article 124 (4) shall provide that
resolution for removal of Supreme Court judges will be
introduced in either house but it has to be agreed to by rest
two houses non-originating separately. Other provisions will
be same which exists presently in this regard.
(xxiii) Article 217 (1) - Amended article 217 (1) will provide same
provision for removal of High Court judges as for Supreme
Court judges.

83
(xxiv) Article 89 – After tricameral system article 89 will remain
unchanged.
(xxv) Article 93 – Amended article 93 shall provide that the Lok
Sabha and Mahila Sabha shall as soon as may be possible
separately chose two members of the Lok Sabha/Mahila
Sabha as the case may be, to be respectively Speaker and
Deputy Speaker.
(xxvi) Article 178 – Amended article 178 shall provide separate
Speaker and Deputy Speakers for Vidhan Sabha and Mahila
Vidhan Sabha. Mahila Vidhan Sabha shall elect her own
Speaker and Deputy Speaker from her own members and
will also have power to remove her Speaker and Deputy
Speaker.
(xxvii) The amended Representation of People’s Act will provide for
two member parliamentary constituencies and two member
assembly constituencies. Each parliamentary constituency will
have one member to Lok Sabha for which both men and
women shall contest and one member of Mahila Sabha for
which only women shall contest.
(xxviii) The election for Lok Sabha and Mahila Sabha shall always
be held simultaneously. During election, at each booth,
there shall be two Electronic V oting Machine (EVM) – one
for Lok Sabha and one for Mahila Sabha.

84
12 3 4
14. Working Women’s Forum
(India)
55, Bhimasena Garden
Road, Chennai.
15. O.B.C. Front (West Bengal)
2/2, Nirmal Chandra
Street, P.O. Bowbazar,
Kolkata-700 012.
16. God-Images Good
Governance Society,
204, Anand Chambers,
25/34, East Patel Nagar,
New Delhi.
17. Shri Keshev Chandra
Pant, Vill. Mithi beri,
P.O. Prem Nagar, Dehradoon.
18. Shri Kalind Nandini,
32/13-14; A, Arya Nagar,
Ajmer.
Has suggested that one third reservation for women both in
Parliament and State Assemblies is a grave necessity with respect
to the promotion of gender equally in all sphere of human endeavor
and do away with the general backwardness of women at all
levels.
Has suggested that 50% of the seats within the ambit of one-third
reservation for women aiming in this Bill should be reserved for
the women of Backward Classes to establish Social-Justice in our
country.
Has suggested women empowerment needs 100% Representation,
not 33% in Central, State and Local Governments.
The summary of the suggestions is not in favour of the Bill for
the reasons that it is politically motivated and not conforming with
the socio-economic state in the country.
Different views have been expressed, on 3 clauses of the Bill:—
(i) The very first clause provides only 1/3 seats of the present
strength of the Lok Sabha and State Assemblies. It is said that
It is a matter of policy. On
the basis of the report/
recommendations of the
Parliamentary Standing
Committee, the Department
will go to the Cabinet for
taking a policy decision.
–do–
–do–
–do–
–do–

85
women are 50% of the population. Hence, it should be ½ of the
members of Lok Sabha and State Assemblies.
(ii) The Second clause of the proposed Bill is even worse as
it states that in the proposed 1/3 reservation for women the
1/3 might be reserved for SC/ST women, which is unacceptable
as there are already ample member of reserved seats in Lok
Sabha and State Assemblies.
(iii) The third clause is unacceptable as it says nominations
for Anglo-Indian Women. President already nominates 2 Anglo-
Indian.
All happening for political expediency. Reservation of women
belonging to Anglo-Indian community is an attempt to give
benefit of reservation on the basis of religion.
Says there are several shortcomings in the current Bill such as
Insufficient grounds for 33% reservation, Discrimination on the
basis of gender, violation of the democratic right of people to
choose their representatives, violation of the democratic right of
people to contest elections and quota is not an answer to women's
problems. The reservation will only help elite and women who are
proxy of powerful men, women candidates may not get party
ticket to contest from unreserved constituency etc. There is no
need for reservation for women in the Legislatures.
Women empowerment is necessary for speedy development of
women.
O.B.C. women require reservation.
O.B.C. women will not be empowered without quota.
19. Shri D.D. Gupta, 4/32-
A, East Punjabi Bagh,
New Delhi 110026.
20. Rakshak Foundation,
2784, Homestead road,
#235, Santa Clara. Califor-
nia, USA.
21. Shri Uma Shankar Prasad,
General Secretary,
Jan Jagriti Samiti,
Khajuri Khas, Delhi-94.

86
12 3 4
22. National Federation of
Indian Women, 1002,
Ansal Bhawan, 16,
Kasturba Gandhi Marg,
New Delhi-l
They welcome the SOR attached to the Bill
They want all sections of women should be represented in the
elected forums and are able to voice their concerns and
demands. Wants government to take steps at various levels so
that muslim women can overcome their disabilities.
Rotation of seats poses no hurdles for women to show their
interest in politics/election.
Art. 334A of the Bill provides that the provision of the
Constitution relating to the reservation for seats for women in
the House of the People and the Legislative Assemblies shall
cease to have effect on the expiry of 15 years period. They
feel it should be amended as to provide only for a review after
15 years.
–do–

87
Memorandam Name of the Comments/views Response of Government
Nos. Organisation/individual
1 234
23. Dr. Jyotsna Chattrji,
Director, Joint Women’s
Programme, B49B,
Gangotri Apartments,
Alaknanda, New Delhi-19.
24. G . V enkateswarlu,
Section Officer (G),
SERC, CSIR Campus,
Chennai-13.
25. V . Mohini Giri,
Chairperson, Guild of
Service, an NGO with
“SHUBHAM” C-25, Qutab
Institutional Area,
New Delhi.
26. Jagjeet Singh Matharu,
President, Ramgarhia
Federation of Haryana,
Gurudwara Ramgarhia,
We stand by our demand for 33% reservation of seats for
women in State Assemblies and Parliament. We have no
Objection for any other category of women getting reservation
within 33% and we request the Parliament to find ways in
which it is to be done.
Suggesting that there should be a quota within the women
quota for SC, ST, OBC, Minority, Urban, rural, etc, for
genuine empowerment of all the segments of women of our
society.
Suggesting change in clause 3, in article 330A(2) of the Bill,
as follows:—
“(2) As nearly as may be, one third of the total number of
seats reserved under clause (2) of article 330 shall be reserved
for women belonging as the case may be to Scheduled Caste,
Scheduled Tribes or such other class of women as may be
determined so eligible by Parliament by law”.
In view of the provision contained in article 15(4) of the
Indian Constitutional and Indian Panchayati Raj Act, 1994,
kindly give 50% reservation (out of 33%) to the women of
It is a matter of policy. On
the basis of the report/
recommendations of the
Parliamentary Standing
Committee, the Department
will go to the Cabinet for
taking a policy decision.
–do–
–do–
–do–

88
1 234
Slarganj Gate, Maharaja
Jassa Singh Ramarhia
Chowk, Panipat
27. Mr. G.N. Sinha,
President, Samagra,
5/523, Viram Khand,
Gomti Nagar,
Lucknow-226010.
28. Dr. Ranjana Kumari
President, Women
Power Connect,
A,1/125, First Floor,
Safdarjung. Enclave,
New Delhi-110029.
29. Dr. K.C. Sunny, Head of
the Department of Law,
University of Kerala,
Kariavattom P.O.
Thiruvananthapuram-695581
other backward classes on the basis of their population-
strength in each State of India, as per preceding decennial
census, 50% share in democracy may be provided in the
country which may play a big role to rise the status as well
as benefit for the other backward classes.
Indian Constitution has been amended umpteen times. There is
no need to pursue Constitution (One hundred eighth Amendment)
Bill.
1. Opposed to the idea of creating quotas within the 33%
quota for women. As an alternative we suggest that political
parties be made responsible to ensure distribution of tickets in
such a manner that the various social and economic strata of
society, especially marginalized and disadvantaged groups, get
adequate representation.
2. Against the policy of rotation of seats, as this will prevent
the candidates from nurturing their constituencies over a
period of time.
3. With regard to the issue of terminating the reservation
policy after a period of 15 years, we feel that once it has
completed 15 years of enforcement, the policy of reservation
should be assessed to gauge the impact it has had on the
participation of women in politics in terms of numbers and
roles. Whether it should be continued or terminated should be
reviewed on the basis of considerations of this assessment.
–do–
–do–

89
4. Is the reservation policy to continue until the completion
of three general elections (which under normal circumstances
should span fifteen years) or does it apply to all general
elections that might take place in the fifteen years from the
date of its enforcement?
Following are the comments:
1. The provisions are generally satisfactory.
2. There is no need to introduce the system of rotation for
the constituencies reserved for women. So proviso to
sections 2 and 3 may be modified.
3. Since there is no justification for delaying the legal measures
for reserving seats for women in Lok Sabha and State
Legislative Assemblies steps should be taken for implementing
the Amendment before October 2nd, 2008.
–do–

90
Sl. No. Name of the Comments/suggestions Response of Government
Organisation/individual
1 234
30. Ali Munib Bin Mendi
“Mobarak-Manzil”
Power House Road
Distt. Goalpara, Assam.
31. Gurpreet Singh Johal
Village and Post Office
Mandiani,
Distt. Ludhiana, Punjab.
32. D.S. Pokwang
Type-V Residential Colony,
Khonsa-786 630.
Arunanchal Pradesh.
The following points have been suggested:
1. One third seats in the present strength of the house
of the people and he legislative assembly of every
statemay not be given effect it may be increased to
10% only.
2. Reservation for women for SC/ST in the House of the
People and in the Legislative Assembly of every State
may be reserved up to 2% only for the both caste.
3. No reservation of seats for women is required in the
Legislative Assembly of the State.
4. No Policy should be introduced for reservation of seats
for W omen but selection may be made best on quality,
efficiency and Education.
He has made the following comments:
1. Lack of quality in legislatures
2. Past experience of women reservation not good
3. Women have taken more than due of their power in
India
4. Punjab experience a good lesson to learn from
5. Highly discriminatory to rural men
6. Once reserved it would be difficult to de-reserve.
He has suggested the following:
Nominated representation for tribal women’s children from
non-tribal fathers from the North-eastern state in Parliament
and State Legislative Assembly should also be thought of while

91
33. Sehba Farooqui
Delhi Janwadi Mahila Samiti,
Secretary,
8, Uttaranchal Apartments,
5, IP Extension, Patparganj
Delhi.
34. Akhil Bhartiya Kaiwart
Kalyan Samity
76/A/7, Motilal Gupta Road,
Kolkata.
35. Mrs. Sarita
Flat No.33, Type IV
DCE Campus, Bawana
Road, Delhi.
36. M.S. Handa, 83C, DDA
Flats, Masjid Moth Phase-
2, New Delhi - 48.
37. Mr. Sukumar Dey,
Turn Government College, Tura.
38. Akhil Bhartiya Prajapati
(Kumbhkar) Mahansangh
(Regd.).
282, Chirag Delhi, New Delhi.
considering reservation for women including that of the
Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes.
She has suggested a need for a Constitutional provision to
ensure a minimum representation of women in legislatures and
urge upon the Government to recommend the passage of this
Bill at the earliest so that a decisive and historic step can be
taken to advance the cause of gender justice in our country.
It has been suggested that a separate provision of reservation
for women belonging to OBC/SC/ST may kindly be made
in the Proposed women Reservalion Bill for upliftment OBC/
SC/ST which contribute 80% population of the country.
She has suggested the followings:
15% seats for SC category women
7.5% seats for ST category women
27% seats for OBC category Women.
He has commented that no reservation is required or needed.
He is against any reservation.
The proposed Bill has the provision of one-third reservation
of the seats reserved for SCs and STs and hence their
political empowerment assured.
–do–
–do–
–do–
–do–
–do–
–do–

92
–do–
–do–
–do–
1 234
39. Grameen Janta, Gram
Panchayat Raj, Peerpur
Mathura, Prakhand
Gairola, Distt. Vaishali, Bihar.
40. Shri H.L.K. Joshi
Ispat Bhavan, Kodambakkam
High Road, Chennai.
41. [Enhancing Women’s
Representation in
Legislatures]
Madhu Kishwar (CSDS)
Manushi, New Delhi
Dhirubhai Shthi
(Loknayan/CSDS, Delhi)
Yogendra Yadav (CSDS,
Delhi)
Jayaprakash Narayan (Lok
Satta, Hyderabad).
Sub-quota should be provided for OBCs, Dalits and minorities.
If proposal not accepted, there may be referendum.
By 1/3rd reservation for women in Lok Sabha and State
legislatures, present weaknesses in caste based system can be
addressed.
After passing of the Bill for its implementation there will be
need of Women Vigilance Committees at Distt. level.
In the Council of States as nearly as may be one-third of
all seats, whether elected or nominated, shall be reserved
for women.
In the States in which Legislative Councils exist, as nearly
as may be, one-third of all seats filled from each category,
whether elected or nominated shall be reserved for women.
Provided that in case of members elected by members of
local authorities, graduates, and teachers, the seats reserved
for women shall be rotated and decided by draw of lots.
An alternative to the Govt. Bill for Women's reservation has
been suggested.

93
It is a matter of policy. On
the basis of the report/
recommendations of the
Parliamentary Standing
Committee, the Department
will go to the Cabinet for
taking a policy decision.
–do–
–do–
Sl. No. Name of the Comments/suggestions Response of Government
Organisation/individual
1 234
42. Subhashini, President.
All India Democratic
Women Association,
121 Vithalbhai Patel House,
Rafi Marg,
Delhi – 110001.
43. Milap Choraria,
B-5/52, Sector-7, Rohini,
Delhi-85.
44. Vasudev J. Desai,
47, Nutan Prakash Park,
IOC Road, Ahmedabad.
They have solicited Committee’s support for the passage of
the Bill, expressed their hope and conviction that Indian women,
especially those who bear the triple burden of class, caste and
gender discrimination, will always enjoy the support and
solidarity of the Indian Parliament in their struggle for radical
social change.
They have suggested as follows:
1. The total number of women members including directly
elected women members shall be 1 against 2 elected
male members.
2. The expression ‘population’ means the population as
ascertained at the last preceding census of which the
relevant figures have been published in the Gazette.
3. The Number of members of every State Legislative
Assembly chosen by direct election from territorial
constituencies in every State in such a manner that
every Lok Sabha constituency as far as practicable,
shall be multiple of not more than ten.
He has suggested as follows:
All women of foreign origin be barred from contesting election
on any seat reserved for women.
Provision of appointing one Parsi women in Lok Sabha and
one in Rajya Sabha two MLS’s in Maharashtra Assembly and
one in Gujarat Assembly be made.

94
–do–
–do–
–do–
–do–
–do–
1 234
45. Prof. Om Prakash,
Vice-Chancellor, University
of Rajasthan,
1/245, SFS, Manasarover,
Jaipur.
46. Didar Singh Nalvi
President.
Bhartiya Soshit Samaj Vikas
Manch, Kothi No.239,
Sector-7, Urban Estate,
Kurukshetra.
47. Om Prakash Chautala
National President
Indian National Lokdal.
48. Communist Party of India
(Marxist)
49. Sharad Joshi
National President
Swatantra Bharat Paksha
1 In trying to eliminate gender inequality, greater inequalities
may be in store.
2. The entire rotational system would be highly complicated
throwing the sons of the soil out of their own
constituency.
3. There may also be a demand for similar increase in the
size of Rajya Sabha making legislative decisions even
more difficult to take.
They have suggested as follows:
In view of the provision contained in article 15(4) of the
Indian Constitutional and Indian Panchayati Raj Act, 1994 we
request to give 50% reservation (out of 33%) to the women
of other backward classes on the basis of their population-
strength in each State of India.
It would be the fitness of things if all the parties particularly
the National Parties and the Regional Parties recognized by
Election Commission of India, adopt the formula that all the
parties will be giving at least 1/3 of the party tickets at
various levels to women candidates.
They support the present Bill and to recommend it for adoption
in the ensuing session of Parliament.
They have serious reservations on any system of reservation
based on rotation.

95
12A, Meena Bagh
Opp. Nirman Bhawans,
New Delhi.
The number of seats for SC/ST women in any given State/
UT should not exceed 3, the candidates fielded by various
parties are more than likely to be c1ose relations or
acquaintances of the party leaders.
The phenomenon of members of legislatures getting elected
for six or seven consecutive terms will simply disappear.

96
Memorandam Name of the Comments/views Response of Government
No. Organisation/individual
1 234
50. Amit Manglani,
Research-scholar at BHU.
Suggests the following for better enactment:—
1. If there is women reservation - there must be restriction
for political leaders (governing or otherwise) to contest their
family members in any constituency. A kind of ‘Creamy-layer’
exclusion.
2. Avoid making reservation, try other methods like – full
financial support, scholarship for all the first. A middle-
income family will gain more from these measures.
3. There must be rotation in seats. It must not be restricted
to female contestants but to males as well. This can help in
avoiding use of muscle power in every 5 years’ election. It
must make a clause that one should contest at least 500
kilometers apart from previously contested constituency.
4. ‘Reservation for Women’ in Panchayats, is good. It should
be made more stringent so that no two persons from a single
family hold posts at any level of governance be it a Member
of Parliament post or a Block Development Officer’s (BDO)
post. Clearly, only one person per family should be allowed to
contest any where from India.
It is a matter of policy. On
the basis of the report/
recommendations of the
Parliamentary Standing
Committee, the Department
will go to the Cabinet for
taking a policy decision.
MEMORANDA NOS.50 TO 57 RECEIVED FROM DIFFERENT ORGANIZATIONS/INDIVIDUALS ON THE CONSTITUTION
(ONE-HUNDRED AND EIGHTH AMENDMENT) BILL, 2008.

97
51. Joint statement of
Women’s organizations on
the Constitution (One
Hundred and Eighth)
Amendment Bill, 2008.
[Dr. V . Mohini Giri-the
Guild of Service and the
War Widows Association,
Ms. Sudha Sundaraman –
5. The underprivileged have not received much facilities or
power even after providing reservation in job and education
since independence. This fact alone tells the failure of
reservation system. Therefore, before extending the reservation
net, a proper study of reservation already provided to various
sections and its benefits they received must be done.
6. Reservation itself is not a facility. It is an evil tool in the
hands of our ‘law-makers’ (our parliamentarians). Parliament
should restrict itself from using this tool every time. This will
help our society from further fragmentation.
7. It must be remembered that protection of women against
dowry cases has worked as a ‘double-edged sword'. Where,
in many cases it help the deceased woman to get the justice,
at some other cases, family members of females used it as
harassing tool for ‘bridegroom’ side. In other words, any
such Bill must be considered and re-considered several times
so that if it increases Powers of women, it shall not create
any problem for males.
Principles of gender equity and social justice will be achieved
if this is done.
Participation of women in governance will help challenge a
patriarchal notion of development.
Our experiences have shown that women have started taking
a keen interest in politics and there are States where elected
women representatives have exceeded the 33% reservation
figures in Panchayats.
The reason why only 2% women get re-elected (as stated by
the Ministry) is because there is increasing backlash/violence
–do–

98
1 234
all India Democratic
Women’s Association,
Ms. Gomati Nair – all India
Women’s Conference,
Ms. Annie Raja – National
Federation of Indian
women, Ms. Jyostana
Chaterjee – Joint Women’s
Programme, Ms. Akhila
Sivadas – Centre for
Advocacy and Research
and Ms. Nalina Jiwnani –
Bahai Office for the
Advancement of Women
52. Anwara Meerza,
Meerza01 @yahoo.co.in
53. Maharashtrawadi
Gomantak Party, Near Sai-
Baba Temple, Boca-Da-
Vaca, Panaji-Goa, 403001.
against women willing to contest elections. Violence is used as
a threat to prohibit their participation. But one cannot use this
line of thought to argue against reservation.
Experiences have shown that caste barriers between women
have loosened because women see each other as support.
They stand by each other irrespective of the divisive social
communities they belong to.
Results of panchayat elections in some States have demonstrated
that women have entered the public life and have started
demanding for redress mechanisms for issues that have been
excluded from the purview of development.
This bill has generated significant political momentum and
is a sign that India's democracy is moving in the right
direction therefore supports the Bill.
Wishes to get an opportunity to appear before the Committee
and give a presentation on the' draft Bill.
Section 1
Sub-section (2) of section I states that the provisions
of this amendment will come in to force from the appointed
date as may be notified by the Central Government in official
Gazette and the Central Government can appoint different date
for different provisions.
It may be examined if there can be included words
providing for appointment of different dates for bringing it
into force in different States in consultation with the concerned
–do–
–do–

99
State Government. This is suggested because the people in
each State shall be free to consider the local situation, social
conditions, total population as well as the literacy rate, and opt
for reservation of seats in respect of State Assembly in that
State.
Section 2
This section proposes amendment to article 80 of the
constitution. Article 80 is on composition of Council of State.
Clause (2) speaks about allocation of seats in the
Council of State. In original clauses after the word “seats” the
words “including those reserved for women” are to be inserted.
Secondly, this allocation is in accordance with provisions
contained in the Fourth Schedule which also will have to be
amended. It may be noted that there are some States with
only one seat allotted to them in this regard.
In clause (3) of the Article 80 also there is a provision
suggesting of at least not less than one-third members to be
nominated by the President. Nomination of such one-third
member by nominating women as their reserved seats should
not later on lead to the demand for further reservation within
for women coming from certain reserved categories like ST,
SC, OBC, etc. Therefore, a mention will have to be made at
appropriate place clarifying that the nomination of women
shall be irrespective of caste, creed, category, community or
religion.

100
1 234
Article 3
The Bills seeks insertion of a provision to clause (3)
of article 171 which speaks on composition of the legislative
council. This provision mention that at least 1/3rd of the seats
shall be reserved for women. Our view is that in this article
also there should not be scope for further reservation as
mentioned above, i.e. the number of this 1/3rd seats should
not further be required to be allotted to women coming from
reserved categories like SC, ST, OBC, etc.
Article 239A
No comments.
The Section 330
No comments.
Article 332A
This Party is in agreement with the proposed
amendment and insertion of article 332A.
In the first proviso to this article 332A(2), the words
“No seats shall be reserved in the other two general elections”
have not been inserted as has been done in the first proviso
to article 330A(2). Therefore, either these words be inserted
in 332A(2) or deleted from the proviso under 330A(2).

101
54. J Jayalalithaa, General
Secretary – AIADMK,
Former Chief Minister of
Tamil Nadu, Leader of the
Opposition, Tamil Nadu
Legislative Assembly.
55. T.K.S. Elangovan,
Organisation Secretary, D.M.K.
56. Dr. Baron Mukherjee,
National Secretary, All
India Forward Block,
Central Committee, 28,
Gurudwara Rakabganj Road,
New Delhi.
57. Shri Sharad Yadav,
President, Janata Dal
(United), 7, Jantar Mantar
Road, New Delhi.
Article 333
No comments.
Article 334 - proposing insertion of article 334
No comments.
The AIADMK is of the opinion that the 33 per cent reservation
envisaged for women should be applicable to existing quotas
as well. For example, 33 per cent of the seats reserved for
Dalits should field Dalit women only as candidates. In other
words, if 30 seats are reserved for Dalits, a sub-reservation
should exist whereby 10 seats will go to Dalit women. This
will ensure that women from all segments of society will find
representation in Government.
Expresses its unconditional support to the Constitution (One
Hundred and Eighth Amendment) Bill, 2008.
Demand immediate reservations of one-third seats for women
in Vidhan Sabhas and Lok Sabha.
Requests the Standing Committee to drop the Bill.
–do–
–do–
–do–
–do–

102
1 234
58. Rami Chhabra
59. Dr. Medha Nanivedekar,
President
Bharatiya Stree Shakti
Reg off: 4, Girish, T.H.
Kataria Marg, Mahim,
Mumbai-400016
60. Dr. Medha Nanivedekar,
President
Centre for Womens’
Studies, Shivaji University,
Kolhapur-416004
She has demanded dual member constituency in place of
existing single member constituency or pooling together
two three contiguous constituencies in each State, according
to the number of women’s constituencies agreed upon and
make bigger constituencies reserved for women.
She has submitted the following for consideration of the
PSC:—
(i) Rotation of reserved seat should be pre-determined;
(ii) Political parties ought to amend their constitutions to
provide for reservation of l/3rd seats for women at every
level and in every wing of the party organization;
(iii) There should be no time limit of such nomination. This
would ensure that even after the constituencies get de-reserved,
women would not be thrown out of elective roles.
(iv) Urges not to dilute the volume of quotas permitted.
She is of the view that:
(i) the rotation of reservation of one-third seats is the most
serious flaw in bill.
(ii) rotation of constituencies reserved for women turns
women’s quota into a Zero Sum game.
The National Commission to
Review the Working of the
Constitution considered this
proposal and was of the view
that this proposal not found
acceptable on the grounds of
being either impracticable or
unnecessary.
Provision for the rotation of
reserved seats is based on
the recommendations of the
Select Committee headed
by Smt. Geeta Mukherjee.
However, The Legislative
Department would consider
the proposal if so
recommended by the Hon’ble
Parliamentary Standing
Committee.
Provision for the rotation of
reserved seats is based on
the recommendations of the
Select Committee headed by
Smt. Geeta Mukherjee
Further total numbers of
seats.

103
61. Rekha Thakur, Convener
OBC Arakshan Samiti,
Mumbai.
62. Dr Ujwala Jadhav, Bharip
Bahujan Mahasangh,
Mumbai.
63. All India Democratic
Women’s Association,
Mumbai.
(iii) attempts should be made to seek an option which would
increase women’s representation without decreasing the number
of male MPs.
(iv) no provision for extending reservation to Rajya Sabha and
Legislative Councils.
(v) OBC quota.
(vi) organizational quota in party organization.
(vii) precaution to prevent the drop in women's representation
after fifteen years.
(viii) no down scaling from 33% volume of women’s quota.
She has demanded the reconstruction of women’s reservation
Bill with the provision for the proportionate representation for
disadvantaged social groups like the tribals, muslims, dalits
and OBCS.
She has demanded the reconstruction of women’s reservation
Bill with the provision for the proportionate representation for
disadvantaged social groups like the tribals, muslims, dalits
and OBCs.
She has demanded reservation for women in both Houses of
Parliament. When the issue of reservation for different
categories in the Rajya Sabha is discussed, women should get
one third reservation.
have been freezed till the year
2026. Therefore, number of
total seats cannot be
increased. However, the
Legislative Department would
consider the proposal if so
recommended by the Hon’ble
Parliamentary Standing
Committee.
Provisions for reservation of
seats to Scheduled Castes/
Scheduled Tribes have been
provided in the Bill. As regards
the reservation to other groups
the Legislative Department
would consider the proposal
if so recommended by the
Hon’ble Parliamentary Standing
Committee.
See comments against
S1. No.61
The Legislative Department
would consider the proposal if
so recommended by the
Hon’ble Parliamentary Standing
Committee.

104
1 234
64. Dr. Mithu Alur, Founder
Chairperson, Spastics
Society of India,
New Delhi.
65. Sandhya Mhatra, Samajvadi
Mahila Sabha, 27 Kamat
Industry Estate, 2nd Floor,
396, V eer Savarkar Bhavan
Prabha Devi Mumbai, 26
66. Vinay Sahasrabuddhe
Director General, Rambhau
Mhalgi Prabodhini,
618, Bombay 82.
He has demanded nomination of disabled women through
women’s reservation Bill.
She has asked for specific reservation which will include
tribals, muslims and dalits and OBCs in the present Bill.
He has suggested the Election Commission to encourage setting
up a mechanism for building the capacity of new women
leaders emerging in all political parties. The women elected
representatives should be provided with a Special Training
Allowances as an incentive for joining a capacity building
programme. All political parties to provide for 33% reservation
for women. Constituencies reserved for women must be
determined not by a draw of lots but by a definite sequence
in rotation. Reservation of 1/3 seats in various Committees of
Municipal Corporation and State Legislatures also must be
provided. A Standing Committee for Women’s Development
needs to be constituted in the Parliament as well as in the
The Legislative Department
would consider the proposal
if so recommended by the
Hon’ble Parliamentary
Standing committee.
Provisions for reservation for
Scheduled Castes/Scheduled
Tribes have been provided in
the Bill. The Legislative
Department would consider
the proposal if so
recommended by the Hon'ble
Parliamentary Standing
Committee.
The Legislative Department
would consider the proposal
if so recommended by the
Hon’ble Parliamentary
Standing Committee.

105
67. Geeta Mahajan of National
Federation of Indian
Women, Maharashtra State,
Bhupesh Gupta Bhavan, 85
Sayani Road, Prabhadevi
Mumbai, 400025.
68. Paschim Banga Mahila
Samity
162 B Acharya Jagadish
Chandra Bose Road,
Kolkata 700014.
69. Malini Bhattacharya,
Chairperson,
West Bangal Commission
for Women, Kolkata.
State Legislatures wherein 1/3 seats must be reserved for men
in order to work out the implications of various Governmental
policies for women.
She has demanded reservation for women belonging to OBC
in the Bill.
Their demands are:—
(i) 33% women reservation Bill should be placed in the coming
Monsoon Session of thee Parliament for discussion.
(ii) The Bill can not be deferred delayed or kept pending.
(iii) A separate constitutional amendment Bill should be
introduced for the reservation of other communities.
(i) She has demanded that the Bill be passed in the Monsoon
Session.
(ii) She has supported the rotational provision and support the
reservation of 1/3 the number of seats reserved for SC and
ST for women.
(iii) The reservation is in consonance with this Bill which may
be extended to Rajya Sabha as well.
The Legislative Department
would consider the proposal
if so recommended by the
Hon’ble Parliamentary
Standing Committee.
No comments attracted, as it
supports the Bill.
The Legislative Department
would consider the proposal
if so recommended by the
Hon’ble Parliamentary
Standing Committee.
See comments against S1.No.
68.

106
1 234
70. Priya Babu and K. Dhanam,
SIPTF, 51-0 Gangai
Amman Kovil Street
Kamarajpuram, Velachery,
Chennai 42.
71. A Arul Mozhi, Advocate,
Madras High Court,
19 Second Trust Main
Road, Mandaveli Pakkam
Chennai 600028.
72. Ms. A. Naseem Begam,
Coordinator, National
Committee for Minority
Educational Institutions,
2 Pachalappan Street Mount
Road Chennai-2.
73. U. Vasuki,
General Secretary, All India
Democratic Women’s
Association,
27, Mosque Street,
Triplicane, Chennai-65.
Equal rights and representation for trans gender community in
policy making. Nomination of transgender women as Members
of Lok Sabha and also in place of vacancies arising out of the
Anglo-Indian representative member.
He has suggested that instead of compressing the reservation
of women belong to SC and ST within the reservation
already provided for SC and ST general category, the sub-
reservation for women proportionate to SC, ST, OBC and
other caste population will be beneficial to the women folk
belonging to all communities.
She has suggested the women reservation Bill should included
provisions for sub-reservation of SCs STs, OBCs and
Minority Communities within the 33% quota.
She has supported the Bill and. stated that although there is
no reservation at present, yet almost 90% women who got
elected in the Tamil Nadu Assembly are of from
disadvantaged groups and therefore the Bill should not be
delayed in the name of reservation to OBCs and others. She
has also stated that since this is not a community based
reservation therefore that aspect may not be considered in
the present Bill.
The Legislative Department
would consider the proposal
if so recommended by the
Hon’ble Parliamentary
Standing Committee.
The Legislative Department
would consider the proposal
if so recommended by the
Hon’ble Parliamentary
Standing committee.
Provisions for reservation to
Scheduled Castes/Scheduled
Tribes have been provided in
the Bill. As regards the other
community, the Legislative
Department would consider the
proposal if so recommended
by the Hon’ble Parliamentary
Standing Committee.
No comments as it support
the Bill.

107
74. J. Julie, Secretary, Chennai
Jananayaga Madhar
Sangam, 13, Mosque
Street, Triplicane,
Chennai-600005.
75. Dr. Sikha Sen Gupta,
Chairman, Agragami
Mahila Samiti, Kolkata.
76. D. Yasodha, MLA,
Sreeperumbudoor Assembly
Constituency,
106-A, Vellala Street
Kodambakkam, Chennai-24.
77. Mr. S. Sukumaran,
Advocate, 14 Shanthi
Nagar Madurai-6250 18.
78. A.S. Fathima Muzaffer,
State Organiser, Women’s
Wing, Indian Union Muslim
League, Tamil Nadu,
5/1 Habiubullah Road T.
Nagar Chennai-600017.
79. Dr. Shyam Mohan Agarwal,
Assistant Professor,
So far as Tamil Nadu is concerned, majority of women
MLAs elected are from OBCs and SCs/STs community. So,
question of reserving a certain percentage of seats for
OBCs within 33% does not arise at all.
She has supported the present Bill wholeheartedly as it will
bring more power for the country as a whole.
She has supported 33% reservation of women in the present
Bill and will make a amendments as and when required in
the State.
He has suggested that the Anglo- Indian-community of blind
should be adequately represented in the House of the People
and the President should nominate at least one member of
that community.
She has suggested providing reservation under reservation
giving proportionate representation to women of all
communities.
He has made certain points, namely:
(i) That the time frame of 15 years for women reservation
should not exceed at any cost and the aim of women
No comments as it support
the Bill.
No comments as it support
the Bill.
No comments as it support
the Bill.
The Legislative Department
would consider the proposal
if so recommended by the
Hon’ble Parliamentary Standing
Committee.
The Legislative Department
would consider the proposal
if so recommended by the
Hon’ble Parliamentary Standing
Committee.
The provision is based on the
recommendation made by the
Hon’ble Select Committee

108
1 234
Political Science
Department, Rajasthan
University, Jaipur.
empowerment should be completed within stipulated time.
(ii) The provisions for reservation should be outlined in the
Bill.
(iii) Minimum educational qualification should be provided in
the Bill.
(iv) Since the reservation is caste based, provisions of
creamy layer should be incorporated in the Bill.
(v) Benefit of reservation should be given only once to one
women only.
(vi) Women nominees having a criminal background and
indulgence in corruption should be barred from being
nominated. Instead, women working in the field of
environment should be encouraged for special reservation.
headed by Shrimati Geeta
Mukherjee.
The National Commission to
Review the working of the
Constitution considered the
proposal for providing literacy
qualification for legislators and
this proposal was not found
acceptable on the grounds of
being either impracticable or
unnecessary.
The creamy layer for SC/ST
candidate in general is not
applicable.
The Legislative Department
would consider the proposal
if so recommended by the
Hon’ble Parliamentary Standing
Committee.
To prevent the candidate of
criminal background there is
already a provision under
Section 8 of the

109
80. Rami Chhabra
81. P.C. Singhi, IAS
(vii) Women representative should work for social, cultural,
financial and creative subjects and they should rise above
party politics for maintaining discipline.
(viii) Provisions for recall of women representative.
She has suggested the Committee to examine and duly amend
articles 81 and 170 relating to composition of the House of
the People and composition of the State Legislative Assemblies
and also articles 80 and 171 to address the Rajya Sabha and
the Legislative Councils. She has stated that the Bill, 2008
retains divisive features that in the past have jeopardized the
women’s reservation Bill. She has stated that any increase
affected by the Will of Parliament in the actual number of
representatives in both Parliament and State Legislative
Assemblies that as long as the increase is universally/pro-rata
applied to existing numbers maintaining the existing balance
would provide far more desirable room for women’s inclusion
than the present displacement of l/3rd of male representatives.
She has also attached self-written copies of newspaper articles
published in the Tribune dated 7th April, 2008
Reservation of seats for women will not serve any purpose,
unless they are well educated. Counting of heads is not
enough but what matters is the contents of that head. Simple
Representation of the People
Act, 1951.
The Legislative Department
would consider the proposal
if so recommended by the
Hon’ble Parliamentary
Standing Committee.
–Do–
Provisions for reservation of
one-third seats for women in
the House of People and
Legislative Assemblies have
been provided in the Bill. The
Legislative Department would
consider the proposal if so
recommended by the Hon’ble
Parliamentary Standing
Committee.
The Legislative Department
would consider the proposal
if so recommended by the

110
1 234
82. Ms. Sarita Jain,
All India Digamber Jain
Womens’ Organisation, 609
Bhandari House, 91, Nehru
Place, New Delhi-110019.
83. Asha Ramesh, Director,
Rights Based Programme,
Secunderabad,
Andhra Pradesh.
84. Asha Ramesh, Director,
Centre for Worlds
Solidarity, Secunderabad,
Andhra Pradesh.
reservation on caste and gender basis will support and
strengthen the political corruption and disintegrate the national
unity. 33% seats in the Legislature and Parliament should be
filled only by co-option of competent women irrespective of
the caste, community, creed, religion, language, etc. Some
minimum academic qualification should also be fixed.
She supports the Bill. According to her the Bill essentially
requires a special provision in respect of women of Jain
community (minority group) for giving them the adequate
representation and also to ensure their rights and safety.
She has stated that since there is already reservation in place
of SC/ST women in Women's Reservation Bill, therefore, it
could also include the reservation of OBC women, including
the minorities. She has also requested to increase the 15 years
time frame for reservation to women to 25 (minimum
five full election terms).
She has stated that since there is already reservation in place
of SC/ST women in Women’s Reservation Bill, therefore, it
could also include the reservation of OBC women, including
the minorities. She has also requested to increase the 15 years
time frame for reservation to women to 25 years (minimum
five full election terms)
Hon’ble Parliamentary Standing
Committee.
No comments as it support
the Bill. As regards the
reservation to the minority
groups, the Legislative
Department would consider the
proposal if so recommended
by the Hon’ble Parliamentary
Standing Committee.
The Legislative Department
would consider the proposal
if so recommended by the
Hon’ble Parliamentary Standing
Committee.
The Legislative Department
would consider the proposal
if so recommended by the
Hon’ble Parliamentary Standing
Committee.

111
85. K. Rajmohana Dhas,
Secretary, AIFBC, Trichy.
86 Vijayakant
Desiya Murpokku Dravida
Kazhagam, Chennai.
87. Rajnath Singh, President,
Bharatiya Janata Party
88. V . Rajamohan,
Communist Party of India,
Tamil Nadu State Council,
19, Chevaliae, Sivaji
Ganesan Road, T. Nagar,
Chennai-17.
89. Com. Asha Mokashi, State
Executive Member
Communist Party of India,
Maharashtra State Council.
90. B.K. Hrangkhawl, President
INPT, Indigenous
Nationalist Party of Tripura.
He has demanded 27% reservation for OBC’s women out of
33%. His Association is proposing reservation for OBCs women.
He has suggested reservation for women of backward
classes and other backward classes which can be introduced
by amending the Women Reservation Bill.
His party has rejected the demand of Quota within Quota.
He has suggested that there should not be any dilution in
the proposed Bill and it sould be passed in the Parliament.
Her party (CPI) is of the opinion that benefits of this Bill
should reach to the women from all sections of the society.
She is not against the reservation for OBC women.
Suggestions on the Bill are as under:—
(i) The proposal put forward in section 2 for the amendment
of articles 80 and 171 of the Constitution is agreed.
The Legislative Department
would consider the proposal
if so recommended by the
Hon’ble Parliamentary Standing
Committee.
The Legislative Department
would consider the proposal
if so recommended by the
Hon’ble Parliamentary Standing
Committee.
No comments as it support
the Bill.
No comments as it support
the Bill.
No comments as it support
the Bill.
The Legislative Department
would consider the proposal
if so recommended by the
Hon’ble Parliamentary Standing
Committee.

112
1 234
91. G .K. Mani, MLA
Pattali Makkal Katchi, 63
Nattumuthu Naichken
Street, Teynampet,
Chennai-18.
(ii) Proposal for amendment of article 239AA – No comments
as it is exclusively related to NCT Delhi only.
(iii) In the first proviso of sub-section (2) of section 5, the
words appearing “in the first general elections” should be
substituted by the words “in the second general elections”
(iv) Has amended the proviso of section 6 as under:—
“Provided that where such nominations are made in relation to
every block comprising of 3 general elections to the House,
one seat shall be reserved for nomination of women of Anglo-
Indian Community to every House constituted after second
General election and no seat shall be reserved for the women
of that community in the House constituted after the first and
the third general elections.
(v) In the first proviso of clause (2) of article 332A, the seat
shall be reserved for women (ST) in second general election
(instead of such reservation in the first general election in a
block of three general elections as proposed for).
(vi) In the proposed new article 334A cessation of effect of
Act should only be after the year 2026, i.e. after the census
conducted, conforming to the direction of clause 3(b) of
article 332.
Comments on the Bill are as under:
(i) Approved the SOR of the Bill.
(ii) 33% reservation falls short as it is not in proportion to the
population of women which is almost half of the Indian
population, which is about 50%.
(iii) Reservation should also be made in the Rajya Sabha and
Legislative Councils of the State.
The Legislative Department
would consider the proposal
if so recommended by the
Hon’ble Parliamentary Standing
Committee.

113
92. Dr. K Veeramani,
President, Dravid
Kazhagam, Chennai- 7.
93. G Devadoss, Legal Wing
Secretary, MDMK, New
No. 12, Rukmani
Lakhmipathi Road,
Egmore, Chennai-600008.
94. Dr. Ashok Dhawala, State
Secretary, CPI(M),
Maharashtra, Janashakti
Pandurang Budhkar Marg,
Worli, Mumba-13.
(iv) Reservation should also be provided to the OBC men and
then only it can be given to OBC women.
(v) Reservation should not be restricted to IS years but
should continue indefinitely.
(vi) Rotation of reservation should be once in 15 years and
not in 10 years.
The Bill when finally passed should include provision for sub-
reservation for STs. SCs, OBCs and Minority communities
with in the 33% quota. If this provision is not included there
is the real danger of the promotion of gender justice defeating
social justice regarding women’s representation.
They are of the view that instead of providing one-third
reservation to women, the political parties should be compelled
by law to allot one-third of seats to women candidates, or in
the alternative, increase the number of seats in Lok Sabha to
750 without affecting the number of men elected at present;
He has stated that reservation in favour of women in the
House of the People and State Legislatures are the need of the
hour and are required to be carried out before the next
General Election to the Lok Sabha.
He has urged the Standing Committee to support the present
bill and to recommend it for adoption in the next session of
Parliament.
The Legislative Department
would consider the proposal
if so recommended by the
Hon’ble Parliamentary Standing
Committee.
No comments as it support
the Bill.
No comments as it support
the Bill.

114
1 234
95. Bharat Bharati, Bahujan
Samaj Party, Mumbai.
96. V . Mohini Giri,
Chairperson, Guild of
service (North India).
97. T.P. Peethambaran Master,
General Secretary,
Nationalist Congress Party,
New Delhi.
98. Bhim Raskar,
Convenor, Mahila Rajsata
Andolan, Mumbai.
99. Mrs. M.K. Sayeekumary,
President, Pondicherry
Women’s Conference,
GF-l, Raagamaliga
Apartments, Anna Nagar
Main Road, Puducherry-5.
He has suggested that the Bill should be passed only when a
separate one third reservation for the women belonging to SC
and ST is in addition to the existing reservation provided as
per Part XVI of articles 330 & 332 which provides for
reservation of seats for SC and ST in the House of the People
and Legislative Assemblies of the States.
The Bill should be passed in the present form and amendments
can be made later to include OBC and other minority groups.
This amendment would be gender neutral and benefit both
men and women from the said category.
The Bill may be passed and if found necessary, further
amendment to the Act can be carried out later.
The Bill should be passed in the same way as it is introduced.
Has acknowledged the efforts taken to introduce the women
Rights Bill and has expressed the hope that the Bill be passed.
The Legislative Department
would consider the proposal
if so recommended by the
Hon’ble Parliamentary Standing
Committee.
No comments as it support
the Bill.
No comments as it support
the Bill.
No comments as it support
the Bill.
No comments as it support
the Bill.

115
100. Pranab Mukherjee,
Minister of External
Affairs.
101. Dr Kenneth Ghawngliana,
Executive General Secretary,
Mizoram People’s
Conference, General
Headquarters, Mizorm,
Aizawl.
102. Amar Singh, MP,
Samajwadi Party
103. Prof Ram Deo Bhandary,
General Secretary,
Rashtriya Janta Dal,
New Delhi.
The Congress Party supports the Bill as it has been introduced
in the Rajya Sabha and are also willing to go with the
consensus that may evolve amongst the various political parties
represented in the Standing Committee regarding lowering the
number of seats and reservation within reservation of the
seats.
He has on behalf of Mizoram Peoples Conference of
Mizoram wholeheartedly support the Women Reservation
Bill.
Their party does not support the Bill in the present form.
There must be a quota for OBC and Muslim women. A
consensus formula should be adopted for the reservation for
women. They have fully supported the Election Commission’s
proposal for women reservation. No decision should be taken
in haste without reaching a consensus among the political
parties.
The party supports the reservation for women but does not
support the Bill in its present form. In case of providing
reservation to women, there must be a quota for OBC,
minorities including Muslims, Christians and others and Dalits
(SC/ST) within it. There must be a quota within quota. For
these sections of women proportionate to their population in
the country. The selection of Parliamentary reserved
constituencies for women should be decided by the political
party itself. No specific parliamentary constituency should be
marked for women candidates only rather it should be left to
the discretion of the political parties to decide the women
candidates on such number of seats. A national political
consensus should be adopted for the reservation for women.
And no decision should be taken in haste without reaching a
national consensus among the political parties.
No comments as it support
the Bill.
No comments as it support
the Bill.
The Legislative Department
would consider the proposal
if so recommended by the
Hon’ble Parliamentary Standing
Committee.
The Legislative Department
would consider the proposal
if so recommended by the
Hon’ble Parliamentary Standing
Committee.

116
1 234
104. A.K. Ahmad, National
Working President All India
Momin Conference, Patna
105. Dr. Ramvachan Roy,
General Secretary (Regional)
Rashtriya Janata Dal (Bihar).
106. Shri Shiv Prasann Yadav,
Bihar Pradesh Janta Dal
(United), 149, Vidhayak
Flat, Patel Path,
Patna-800001.
107. Shri Ashok Kumar Singh,
Regional President, Bihar
Pradesh Samajwadi Party,
MLA Flat No.53, Virchand
Patel Path, Patna-l.
He has suggested reservation for Muslim OBC and Dalit
women who deserve a sub-quota in the House of the People
and in the Legislative bodies of the State.
He endorses the comments of the Rashtriya Janata Dal that
they will accept and support the Bill if the Bill includes
provision for reservation in respect of women belonging to
Other Backward Classes, SC/ST and Minority Group on pro-
rata basis.
His party supports the Bill with the stipulation that women
belonging to Other Backward Class and Muslim (Minority)
are given reservations according to their population.
He has advocated for reservation of the Muslims, Sikh,
Christians, Backward Class and Scheduled Castes. The political
parties should have the rights to identify the women seats and
should not be left to the Election Commission. He is against
the rotational system of representation. If 33% reservation is
made for women and 22% has already been given, then only
45% seats will be left for forward class and men. If the Bill
is passed in the present form, benefit will go to the women
of repute and poor women will not get a chance to take part
in the governance of the country.
The Legislative Department
would consider the proposal
if so recommended by the
Hon’ble Parliamentary Standing
Committee.
The Legislative Department
would consider the proposal
if so recommended by the
Hon’ble Parliamentary Standing
Committee.
The Legislative Department
would consider the proposal
if so recommended by the
Hon’ble Parliamentary Standing
Committee.
The Legislative Department
would consider the proposal
if so recommended by the
Hon’ble Parliamentary Standing
Committee.

117
108. Shri Vijay Kushvaha,
Organisation Secretary,
Bihar Pradesh Rashtravadi
Congress Party, 13,
Virchand Patel Path,
Patna-800001.
109. Jo int representation of
S/Shri Shashi Yadav, Arun
Singh and Dhirendra Jha,
Members, Communist
Party of India (Marksvadi-
Leninvadi), Bihar State
Office, 7-Virchand Patel
Path, Patna-l.
110. Francis Fanthome, MP,
Lok Sabha.
Supports the Bill with following conditions:—
(i) that 27% seats out of total seats likely to be reserved for
women be reserved for backward and extremely backward
classes women;
(ii) that 14.5% seats out of total seats likely to be reserved for
Scheduled Tribes women.
(iii) that 8% seats out of total seats likely to be reserved for
women be reserved for Scheduled Castes women; and
(iv) that the reservation already available to SC/ST should not
be disturbed.
Demands the Bill be passed during the present Lok Sabha.
Reservation should not be made compulsory but rather it should
be left to the State’s discretion whether to implement it or not.
He suggests that the proposed Bill be considered with the
following amendments:—
(i) In Clause 2th : Line 8 the word 'the' be dropped before
women.
(ii) He suggests the provisiol1 for reservations for women be
for a minimum period of 50 years from the commencement
of the reservation i.e. for at least ten terms of the Lok Sabha,
assuming that each term lasts five years.
The Legislative Department
would consider the proposal
if so recommended by the
Hon’ble Parliamentary Standing
Committee.
The Legislative Department
would consider the proposal
if so recommended by the
Hon’ble Parliamentary Standing
Committee.
To maintain the parity of the
expression used in the
Constitution the word ‘the’
has been used in this clause.
The Legislative Department
would consider the proposal
if so recommended by the
Hon’ble Parliamentary Standing
Committee.

118
1 234
111. Shri Hridaya Narayan Singh,
Member, Bihar Legislative
Assembly, 109-110, MLA
Flat, Virchand Patel Path,
Patna.
112. Ravindra Ram Vice-President
Bihar State Federation,
Patna.
113. Joint respresenttion of
Samajvadi Party (Mahila
Sabha), UP.
(iii) The fact that Lok Sabha may have shorter tenures needs
to be kept in mind. Therefore, the mention in clause 3(2)(b)
“no seats shall be reserved for women in the third general
elections” may be deleted.
(iv) Clause 4 may end at line 47. The rest of the proposed
provision may kindly be deleted.
(v) Articles 332, 333 and 334 may likewise be amended to
include the matter referred to above.
(vi) The reservations for women be 33% of the number of
representatives in the House of the People i.e. in Lok Sabha
and State Legislatures.
Forwards the comments of the Bahujan Samaj Party that out
of 33% seats likely to be reserved for women, a reservation
on prorata basis according to the population of SC/ST,
Backward and minority classes women be accorded to
them.
He has suggested that women of India do not need reservation
in legislature but reservation in. education and job in all
categories, that SC, ST, OBC and General. The women of
India must reject reservation in Legislature out rightly and
aggressively pursue reservation in education and job.
Oppose the provision of rotation. Demands that identification
of seats reserved for women be left to the discretion of
political parties.
–Do–
The suggestion may not be
accepted.
No comments required.
The Legislative Department
would consider the proposal
if so recommended by the
Hon’ble Parliamentary Standing
Committee.
The Legislative Department
would consider the proposal
if so recommended by the
Hon’ble Parliamentary Standing
Committee.
The Legislative Department
would consider the proposal
if so recommended by the
Hon’ble Parliamentary Standing
Committee.

119
114. Joint Representation from
Akhil Bhartiya Pragatisheel
Mahila Association,
Bihar, 148, MLA Flat,
Virchand Patel Path, Patna-1
115. Kumari Shobha Sinha,
Mahamantri, Gaya Zila,
SITU Karyalaya.
116. Rozina Khanam,
Director,
Women Welfare Society of
Patna.
Demands that the Bill be passed in the current session itself
without postponing it further on the pretext of deliberation and
evolving of consensus of opinion on the provisions of the Bill.
The 33% seat reservation should not be reduced.
On behalf of Aanganwari Sevikas/Assistants (Working Women
Organization) supports the Bill and demands that the 33%
reservation in favour of women be passed as soon as possible
and it should not be further postponed in the name of OBC
as all women are equal.
Her questions and objections are:—
(i) How much reservation is given to Muslim women in the
present Bill although at present there is no reservation on the
basis of religion.
(ii) Adequate numbers of women be selected among the
nominated Members of Rajya Sabha. As and when the issue
of reservation for different categories in the Rajya Sabha is
discussed, one-third of the seats should be reserved for
women.
(iii) A suggestion has also been made to ensure reservation for
women candidates in party lists instead of seats which is the
practice in some countries. This system can work only when
the electoral system is one of Proportional Representation
which is not the case in India. In a first-past-the post system
that we have, this will not ensure one-third representation to
women in the Lok Sabha and the State Assemblies and will,
therefore, defeat the very purpose of the Bill. Also, women
who do not belong to any political party, would also not be
able to get elected if this method was adopted.
No comments as it support
the Bill.
No comments as it support
the Bill.
The Legislative Department
would consider the proposal
if so recommended by the
Hon’ble Parliamentary Standing
Committee.

120
1 234
117. Fr. A. Xavier Aryl Raj
Secretary,
Kirithavar Vazhuvrimai
Iyakkam Pastoral Centre,
Bishops House,
Thoothukudi-628001
118. Shri R. Anbarasu,
Rajiv Gandhi Memorial
Trust, 16/6, Appadurai
Street, V aaniyar Teyrampet,
Chennai-18 (Tamil Nadu)
(iv) Without a quota for OBC women within the 33% reserve
quota, only women belonging to elite group and the upper
caste will be benefited, which is totally wrong.
(v) The issue of quotas within quotas is problematic also
because there are no official estimates of OBC population
constituency-wise as there are for the SCs STs which is the
basis on which seats have been reserved for them. Since the
delimitation process has only just been concluded, reopening
these issues now will only delay the Bill inordinately.
He represents the Christian denominations in Tamil Nadu
Punducherry. He would like to impress upon the Committee
the necessity for internal reservation within the proposed
33% electoral reservation for women. He has requested the
Committee to extend the inclusive reservation within the
proposed 33% also for the marginalized Christian community
under the category of religious minorities.
On behalf of the Trust, he has suggested the following
points for consideration of the Hon'ble Committee;
(i) The proposed Bill is an attempt to bring down the
number of MPs belonging to OBC from 250 MPs in Lok
Sabha.
(ii) The proposed Bill provide reservation only for most of
the upper caste bopped women and not for the women
toiling and moiling belonging to OBCs and minorities. Ways
and means should be explored for the reservation of seats
for women belonging to OBCs and minorities in the present
Bill. There need not be any other separate amendment to
the Constitution providing reservation for women belonging
The Legislative Department
would consider the proposal
if so recommended by the
Hon’ble Parliamentary Standing
Committee.
The Legislative Department
would consider the proposal
if so recommended by the
Hon’ble Parliamentary Standing
Committee.

121
The Legislative Department
would consider the proposal
if so recommended by the
Hon’ble Parliamentary Standing
Committee.
119. Shrimati Bijaya Laxmi Mishra
State President, BJP Mahila
Morcha, Orissa.
to OBCs and minorities. In the alternative, a separate clause
providing reservation of seats for the women belonging to
OBCs and minorities may be incorporated in the proposed
Bill itself, on the lines of the Panchayat Raj Act.
(iii) The Standing Committee should not deprive appropriate
opportunity for the 60% of the women belonging to OBCs
and minorities.
(iv) The percentage of reservation of seats may be increased
from 33% to 50% so as to provide equality between men
and women and to eliminate the disparity between men and
women. In fact proportional representation in reservation
shall be an appropriate step.
(v) Hon’ble Standing Committee to provide reservation of
seats within reservation for the OBCs and minorities. Hence
the Hon’ble Standing Committee to consider the views of the
floor leader.
(vi) The reservation of seats .for women belonging to Anglo-
Indian is redundant. The presence of Anglo-Indian women
is not in all the States. There presence is restricted only in
some States like Punducherry, Goa and Karnataka. Hence,
providing reservation of seats for Anglo-Indian women may be
restricted to some States.
(vii) This is an appropriate time wherein the Standing Committee
should consider the reservation of seats for the women
belonging to OBCs and minorities before finalizing the proposed
Bill.
Expresses concern over rotation of seats and demands that
the strength of the Lok Sabha should be increased to
accommodate more women representatives as per 33%
norm.

122
1 234
120. Dr. Sruti Mohapatra,
Bhubaneswar, Chief
Executive Officer,
Swabhiman.
121. Joint representations of
Ms. Pramila Swain,
Convenor and Ms. Lalita
Missal, State Coordinator
and other members of
National Alliance of Women
Orissa Chapter, Gender
Resource and Training
Centre, N-6/474, Jyadev
Vihar, IRC Village, Nayapalli,
Bhubaneswar-751015.
122. All India Democratic
Womens’ Association,
Orissa State Committee.
VR-5/1, UNIT-III, Kharvel
Nagar, Bhubaneswer-751001
She is of the view that if any section of women deserves
representation, they are the women with disability. In support
of her arguments, she has referred and enclosed the article 29
of the UNCRPD-UN Convention which mandates political
participation of persons with disabilities. She has requested
3% reservation for them in Lok Sabha and two persons (one
male and one female to be nominated by President of India)
in Rajya Sabha. Further, she is of the view that for ensuring
representation of all disabilities, the four disabilities must be
rotated (Orthopedically impaired, Speech and Hearing impaired,
Visually impaired and parents of the Mentally retarded).
They have enclosed a copy of the Report of an all party
consultation on the issue of women reservation Bill organized
in 2003 and have also held several consultations on the
issue. On the basis of all the consultations, they demand
that the Bill should be tabled in the Parliament and should
be passed in the present form. They are of the view that
there is no need for unanimity/consensus over the provisions
of the Bill and the Bill should be passed with majority
voting system.
Memorandum is incomplete.
The Legislative Department
would consider the proposal
if so recommended by the
Hon’ble Parliamentary Standing
Committee.
No comments, as it supports
the Bill.
No comments.

123
123. Shri K. Rajamohana Dhas,
Working President and
N. Pushparajan, General
Secretary, AIOBCIOFS,
Ministry of Defence, HQ:M
154, Phase II, Annanagar,
Tiruchirappalli-620026.
124. Centre for Legislative
Research and Advocacy,
160, South Avenue,
New Delhi-l1.
125. Shri V . Hanumantha Rao,
Member of Parliament,
Convenor, Parliamentary
Forum of OBC MPs, and
Chairman, Rajya Sabha
Standing Committee on
Industry, 11, Janpath,
New Delhi-110011.
On the line of Mandal-Commission’s Report, they demand
27% reservation in favour of OBC's women out of 33%
reservation proposed to be given to women in Parliamentary
election.
This memorandum is in the form of a journal Published by
CLRA (Centre for Legislative Research and Advocacy), Delhi,
for parliamentarians to encourage them to take action at a
critical juncture for India’s institutions of governance, interest
groups and the male and female electorate. It has been
suggested that the Bill be passed in the next session of
Parliament.
Suggests on behalf of Parliamentary Forum of OBC MPs that
the present Women Reservation Bill should incorporate
provisions on similar lines as that of Article 2430 (6) so that
the representation of OBCs in Parliament as well as in the
State Legislative Assemblies is protected.
The Legislative Department
would consider the proposal
if so recommended by the
Hon’ble Parliamentary Standing
Committee.
No comments as it support
the Bill.
The Legislative Department
would consider the proposal
if so recommended by the
Hon’ble Parliamentary Standing
Committee.

124
Memorandam Name of the Comments/views Response of Government
Nos. Organization/individual
1 234
126. Bhartiya Janata Party,
Andhra Pradesh,
Dr. Shyama Prasad Mukhetjee
Bhavan, Opposite Exhibition
Grounds, Nampally,
Hyderabad-0l.
127. CPI (M), Andhra Pradesh
State Committee, 1-1-60/2,
RTC X Roads,
Hyderabad-20.
128. All India Democratic
Women’s Association
(AIDWA), Andhra Pradesh
State Committee, 1-8-538/4,
Chikkadpalli,
Hyderabad-20. Ph: 27605845.
129. Shri Raj Kumar, Advocate,
R/o Vikll.&P.O. Kohand,
Distt. Kamal (Haryana).
The party is committed to empowering women and is the
first and the only party in the country to have given 33%
reservation to women within the party organization at all
levels. They support 33% reservation given to women in
the Bill and demand an immediate and exhaustive discussion
of the Bill with the aim of getting it passed.
They have urged early passes of the Bill so that in the next
general elections which are to be held within three months
women candidates will be able to be elected to one-third of
the total seats of the Lok Sabha.
Supports the Bill as it will eradicate the discrimination in the
Indian political system.
He is of the view that 33% reservation to women is
unconstitutional as they are constitutionally entitled to 50%
without reservation. Representation of a constituency by a
single representative male or female is unconstitutional.
He prays that W omen Reservation Bill, 2008 may not be
proceeded with and may be referred to the President of India
No comments as it support
the Bill.
No comments as it support
the Bill.
No comments as it support
the Bill.
It is a matter of policy. On
the basis of the report/
recommendations of the
Hon’ble Parliamentary
Standing Committee, the
Department would place the

125
130. W omen Welfare Society of
Patna, Office : Room No.7,
Diamond Lodge, Subzibagh,
Patna - 800004.
131. Matfew Joseph Moozhayil,
Cherupushpam Lane,
Kadavanthara, Kochi-20.
for a full fledged inquiry and immediate action in view of the
coming Lok Sabha elections in April-May, 2009.
He has further drawn the attention of the House towards the
ignorance about the role of Rajya Sabha in the formation of
the Union Council of Ministers and suggested that the Prime
Minister must be elected by both the Houses of Parliament. He
also suggested that, a non-member can never be appointed as
a Minister or Chief Minister or Prime Minister.
This Organization has demanded 16% Muslim women
reservation within 33% reservation for women in Parliament.
They have referred to Sachar Committee report, wherein it
was found that Muslim constitute a backward class, almost as
backward as SC/ST and more backward than Dalits.
He does not support the women reservation and has turned it
as undemocratic since the Constitution of India do not make
distinction between men and women as far as their democratic
and Legal rights are concerned. He is of the view that the
objective of the increasing the representation of women in the
Legislative bodies can be attain simply by amending the
representation of Peoples Act. He has also criticized the
reservation by rotation because this general form of democracy
within Parliamentary democracy gives more option to electorate
in 33% constituencies but to vote only for women candidates.
This curtailment of freedom negates the essence bf democracy.
matter before the Cabinet for
taking a policy decision.
The suggestion does not
appear within the purview of
the proposed legislation, hence
no comments.
It is a matter of policy. On the
basis of the report/recommen-
dations of the Hon’ble
Parliamentary Standing
Committee, the Department
would place the matter before
the Cabinet for taking a policy
decision.
The suggestion does not
appear within the purview of
the proposed legislation, hence
no comments.

ANNEXURE – C
REPLY FURNISHED BY
THE MINISTRY OF LAW AND JUSTICE
(LEGISLATIVE DEPARTMENT) TO
THE QUESTIONNAIRE ON THE BILL

129
ANNEXURE-C
Comments/clarifications of the Legislative Department in respect of the Constitution
(108th Amendment) Bill, 2008
Sl. No. Questionnaire Comments/clarification
12 3
1. As per clause 2 of the Bill, the words “Scheduled
Castes”, will be substituted by “Scheduled Castes
and the women” in Article 239 AA (2) (b) of the
Constitution. The Committee would like to be
apprised of the rationale behind including the
term “women” in the same clause, since the
former is a caste based reservation, whereas the
latter is a gender based reservation? Moreover,
this clause cannot come into effect unless the
law enacted in respect of National Capital territory
of Delhi is simultaneously amended. If a separate
amending Bill has to be introduced in respect of
Delhi is it not necessary for the entire nation?
2. Furnish a note on the advantages and
disadvantages of rotation of seats.
Article 239AA of the Constitution does
not deal only with reservation in respect
of Scheduled Castes. Therefore, it has
been found appropriate to insert the word
“women” after the words “Scheduled
Castes” in article 239AA (2)(b) of the
constitution. It may be pointed out that
separate legislation in respect of other
States as well as Parliament will also be
necessary.
The advantage of the rotation is that it
will give an opportunity to every
constituency to be represented by a
women representative and this will help
in attaining the political and social
empowerment of women all over the
country.
The argument against rotation may be
given that since there is no provision of
rotation in respect of the seats reserved
for the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled
Tribes; then, why it be for women. In
this regard, it may be stated that the seats
are reserved for the SCs and STs at
present in descending order i.e. on the
basis of decreasing percentage of their
population with a view that the reserved

130
12 3
3. Keeping in view the demand raised from various
sections of the public that reservation should be
granted to women belonging to Other Backward
Classes minorities, the Committee would like to
know whether such a possibility has been explored
by the Legislative Department? If yes, what has
been the outcome. If not, what is the opinion of
the Department in this regard? Furnish a detailed
note on this matter.
4. The Committee notes that reservation of seats for
OBC women was provided in certain States in
Panchayat elections. The Committee would like
to know whether reservation in the same lines
can be granted to OBC and/or minority women
for elections to Lok Sabha and Legislative
Assemblies of States. If yes, the Committee may
seats are distributed evenly throughout the
State. Such a system has been followed,
as the population of SCs and STs are not
similar in every constituency. The same
formulae may not be valid in the case of
reservation for women because the
scenario is different as the proportion of
population of women is more or less the
same in every constituency. Therefore,
without keeping any provision for rotation
of reserved seats for women, we may
deprive millions of women in getting them
represented by a woman representative.
Further, the Joint Committee of
Parliament on the Constitution (Eighty-
first Amendment) Bill, 1996 headed by
Hon’ble Shrimati Geeta Mukherjee has
made a recommendation in favour of the
rotation of seats.
The several alternatives have been
explored by the Government and for this
purpose two meetings of all political
parties had been convened on 22nd and
24th August, 2005 to sort out the
difference of opinion and formulate
modalities for providing reservation for
women in Parliament and State Legislature
but no consensus could be arrived at in
these meetings. Being a very sensitive
issue, it would be desirable to have a
political consensus in the matter.
The information in respect of OBCs in
panchayats has been called for from the
State Governments/Union Territories
administration but no information in this
regard has been received so far. In the
absence of any such information, it is
difficult to comment upon.

131
12 3
be apprised of the relevant provisions. If not,
adduce the reasons therefore.
5. Clause 7 of the Bill stipulates that the reservation
of seats for women as per this Bill shall cease to
have effect after 15 years from its commencement.
The Committee would like to be enlightened about
the factors, which led to the fixation of such a
time period.
6. The Committee would like to be apprised that if
it is envisaged in future that seats may be reserved
for women belonging to OBCs, minorities, whether
the criteria of “creamy layer” will be applicable in
such cases?
7. In the event of increasing the number of seats in
the Lok Sabha and State Assemblies, whether
there is a need for a new Delimitation Commission?
Or whether it can be done by the Election
Commission? In both cases, what will be the
minimum time period required for such exercise?
8. As per Article 334 of the Constitution, the
reservation of seats for the Scheduled Castes and
Scheduled Tribes in the House of the People and
in the Legislative Assemblies of the States; shall
cease to have effect on the expiration of a period
of sixty years from the commencement of this
Constitution i.e. till 2010. But Clause 7 of the Bill
provides that the provisions of the Constitution
relating to the reservation of seats for women in
the House of the People and Legislative Assemblies
shall cease to have effect on the expiration of a
period of fifteen years from the commencement
The Joint Committee of Parliament on the
Constitution (Eighty-first Amendment) Bill,
1996 headed by Hon'ble Shrimati Geeta
Mukherjee has made a recommendation in
this regard and the Government has
adopted that recommendation.
This pertains to policy on which a decision
can be taken with the approval of the
Cabinet.
The present Bill does not propose any
increase in seats. However, if it is proposed
to increase the seats, there will be need
of delimitation of constituencies. Further,
so far as the time is concerned the
Delimitation Commission was constituted
in July, 2002 and it took almost 6 years
to complete its task, though initially, it
was given 2 years to complete the work.
Therefore, it would be difficult to have
any speculative time-frame for completion
of fresh delimitation.
The provision of reservation for women
should cease to have effect on the expiry
of a period of 15 years from the
commencement of the Constitution (l08th
Amendment) Bill, 2008 has been made
on the basis of the provisions contained
in the Constitution (81st Amendment) Bill,
1996 as reported by the Joint Committee
of Parliament headed by late Shrimati
Geeta Mukherjee, MP.

132
12 3
of the Constitution (One Hundred and Eighth
Amendment) Act, 2008 which would mean that
reservation for women who belong to the above
mentioned communities will go beyond 2010. The
Committee would like to be enlightened on this
point.
9. Whether the Legislative Department considered
the recommendation of the Geetha Mukherjee
Committee Report regarding reservation for OBC
women? Whether legal opinion was sought on
the matter? What was the outcome?
Same as in point (3).

133
ANNEXURE – D
MEMORANDA RECEIVED FROM
POLITICAL PARTIES ON THE BILL

ANNEXURE-D
ALL INDIA ANNA DRAVIDA MUNNETRA KAZHAGAM
Fifty pe r cent of the world’s population consists of women. But, unfortunately, over time, the
male of the species has tended to dominate. Medieval Greece is widely believed to be the birthplace of
democracy. The classical Greeks were male-centric and the  public role of women was quite diminished.
In Athens only men could vote, inherit property and take legal action. Women were confined to their
homes, where, with the help of female slaves, they managed the household and raised children.
In India, things are slightly different. At some time or other, we have all heard the comment,
“Gender is a Western concept. We do not need it in India”. A number of arguments are used to justify
this stand. We are told that India is the original home of the Mother Goddess. In our ancient history,
we have many instances of women scholars and women rulers. Stories from mythology and folklore
are recounted to prove that women in India have always been honored and respected. We are proud
of the fact that India was one of the first countries in the world to give women the right to vote.
The Indian Constitution is one of the most progressive in the world, and guarantees equal rights for
men and women. Women have occupied the highest political offices in India. Indian women today
climb mountains. They have achieved great distinctions in Sports. They have crossed the frontiers of
the earth and even ventured into space. They have conquered several erstwhile male bastions like the
Armed Forces, the Police Service and the Commando Units. In academics, year after year we find
girls faring better than boys. All this can be cited as evidence to support the contention that Indian
women are free and equal members of Society.
Alongside this, however, is another body of evidence - the official statistics that are presented
in Government reports, the findings of local surveys and, most significantly, the daily experiences of
women and men as documented in the media. These paint a very different picture.
• Men outnumber women in India, unlike in most other countries where the reserve is the case.
In 1991, there were only 927 women for every 1000 men. The reason for this imbalance is
that many women die before reaching adulthood. Many are killed while still in their mother’s
womb, while several others are cruelly killed within minutes of their birth. The sole reason
being that they were born as the “wrong sex”.
• The majority of Indian women go through life in a state of nutritional stress. They are anaemic
and malnourished. Girls and women face nutritional discrimination within the family. They eat
last, and most often the least.
• Only 50% of Indian women are literate as compared to 65.5% men. Far fewer girls than boys
go to school. Even when girls are enrolled, many of them are forced to drop out of school.
In many cases, their education is stopped at the mid-school level when they attain puberty.
• There are far fewer women in the paid workforce than there are men. Women’s work is
undervalued and unrecognized. Women work longer hours than men, and carry the major
burden of household and community work, which is unpaid and unrecognized.
• Women generally earn a far lower wage than men doing the same work. In no State do
women and men earn equal wages in agriculture. Though Selvi J. Jayalalithaa as Chief Minister
135

136
introduced a statute of equal pay for equal work in agriculture, it is not being followed in
practice under the present Government.
• Women are legally discriminated against in land and property rights. Most women do not own
any property in their own names, and do not get a share of parental property.
• Women face violence inside and outside the family throughout their lives. Police records show
that a woman is molested in the country every 26 minutes. A rape occurs every 34 minutes.
Every 42 minutes, an incident of sexual harassment takes place. Every 43 minutes, a woman
is kidnapped. Every 93 minutes, a woman is killed.
• Women are under represented in governance and decision making positions. At present, less
than 8% of Parliamentary seats, less than 6% of Cabinet positions, less than 4% of seats in
High Courts and the Supreme Court, are occupied by women. Less than 3% of administrators
and managers are women.
This imbalance has to be corrected.
The AIADMK party founded by Dr. Puratchi Thalaivar M.G. Ramachandran has always stood
for the empowerment of women. This ideal gained in strength under his successor and the present
General Secretary, Puratchi Thalaivi J. Jayalalithaa. Realising the need for gender equality in politics,
the AIADMK under Ms. Jayalalithaa played a pioneering role as early as in the early 1990s by
becoming the first political party in the world to announce that 33 per cent of all party posts would
go to women. It was while Selvi J. Jayalalithaa was Chief Minister of Tamil Nadu that the “cradle-
baby scheme” was launched, under which the State adopted abandoned female infants. The scheme
virtually brought to a halt the pernicious practice of female infanticide.
It was under Puratchi Thalaivi J. Jayalalithaa that “All-Women Police Stations” were introduced
in Tamil Nadu to exclusively handle cases relating to offences against women, including domestic
violence.
It was she who constituted an exclusive Commando Battalion comprising only women. Selvi
J. Jayalalithaa also has the honour of having accorded the maternal role of women due legal
recognition by legitimizing the use of one’s mother’s name as one’s initials instead of, or in addition
to, the father’s.
Again, it was Selvi J. Jayalalithaa who provided the impetus for the growth of Women Self-
help Groups in Tamil Nadu, which encouraged woman-entrepreneurship, empowering them enough to
come at par with, if not excel, men in attaining economic freedom.
During Selvi J. Jayalalithaa’s tenure as Chief Minister from 2001 to 2006, most of the top
positions in the State Government hierarchy, including the post of Chief Secretary were adorned by
women.
While women are equalling or even surpassing men in various spheres of activity, one area
which is still highly male-dominated is politics. True, we have had a woman as Prime Minister. We
have had several woman Chief Ministers in various States. Today, we even have a woman as President
of India. Yet the representation of women in Parliament and the State Legislatures does not reflect their
demographic representation. In  the May, 2004 General Election, for example, 539 candidates were
elected to the 14th Lok Sabha. Only 44 of them are women - a mere 8 per cent.
Keeping in mind the need for ironing out gender inequalities perpetuated in a male-dominated
India, the AIADMK party under the leadership of Selvi J. Jayalalithaa hereby insists that the Constitution
(l08th Amendment) Bill, 2008 (more popularly known as the Women’s Reservation Bill) is a crying
need and has to be passed in Parliament and implemented with the overwhelming support of all the

137
Political parties without any further delay. There should not be any further delay in the name of making
amendments or incorporating new suggestions.
Though most political parties have spoken in favor of the Women’s Reservation Bill, there has
been opposition from some quarters and this is the reason for the delay in making the Bill into law.
We understand that two areas of opposition exist. One is that the Bill would deny adequate
representation to other sections of society, more specifically the Dalits, Backward Classes, Muslims
and other religious minorities. The other is that if 33.3 per cent reservation for women is added to
the already existing 22.5 per cent for Scheduled Castes and Tribes, more than 55 per cent of seats
in Parliament would be reserved and this would not be fair to other sections of the population.
The AIADMK is of the opinion that the 33 per cent reservation envisaged for women should
be applicable to existing quotas as well. For example, 33 per cent of the seats reserved for Dalits
should field Dalit women only as candidates. In other words, if 30 seats are reserved for Dalits, a
sub-reservation should exist whereby 10 seats will go to Dalit women. This will ensure that women
from all segments of society will find representation in Government.
In order to ensure that there are no regional or constituency-wise inequities when it comes
to women’s representation, the AIADMK suggests that reserved constituencies are rotated once in 10
years (two terms). For example, if Chennai North is a constituency reserved for women in 2009, in
2019, Chennai Central would become the reserved constituency and in 2029, Chennai South would
become the reserved constituency and so forth.
There is one school of thought that feels that political parties can be compelled to mandatorily
nominate women candidates for at least one-third of the seats on pain of losing recognition. This point
of view is politically flawed. It is freely admitted by most parties that because of the inbuilt prejudice
against women, male candidates will have an unfair advantage in elections. Thus, political parties will
tend to allow women candidates to fight elections from constituencies where they are weak. It is
unwise to underestimate the opposition from the male Members of Parliament. To expect one-third of
the male members to gracefully accept political hara-kiri is unrealistic. They will not give up their
privileges so easily. The opposition to the Women’s Reservation Bill is mainly on this count.
Women are not asking for grace and charity. Their contribution to the cause of nation-building
exceeds that of men. An International Labour Organisation study shows that ‘while women represent
50 per cent of the world’s adult population and third of the official labour force, they perform nearly
two-third of all working hours, receive a tenth of world’s income and own less than one per cent
of the world’s property. Therefore, reservation for women is not a bounty but only an honest
recognition of their contribution to social development.
ALL INDIA FORWARD BLOC
When fifty per cent of the sky is covered by the women, they must have their legitimate
say in determining and establishing their own rights in the society and the State. It is shameful for
a country with over 50 crores of women, not even ten per cent of the total number of legislators
in the Parliament and the State Assemblies come from the women. Hence their problems, sufferings
and aspirations are not properly reflected in the deliberations of the law-making Houses. It is true
that women are not debarred from contesting the Assembly or Parliament elections, but due to age-
old tradition of our male-dominated society, the women generally do not or can not come out of
the family restrictions or natural shyness to contest the elections in proportionate numbers along
with their male counterparts. As a result of which women are compelled to miss the proportionate
representation and they are only obliged to follow the male members of the family in the matters

138
of public interest. There is no logic in saying that women are deficient in physical, mental and
intellectual capabilities. Still they have been forced to be earmarked as weaker section of the society.
In fact by keeping 50 per cent of our society as weaker, we have made the whole society weak.
In such a situation, some compulsory legislative measures need to be taken for proportionate
representation of the women in the Houses of the people. In other words, women need additional
support for their upliftment and provisions must be made in the Constitution for women reservation,
which only can ensure much talked about empowerment of the women. We on behalf of our Party.
All India Forward Bloc, demand – as we have been consistently demanding since last five decades –
that one third of the total seats in our all State Assemblies and the Parliament be reserved for the
women.
We are happy that after a prolonged continuous struggle, the UPA Government has of late at
the fag end of the last Budget, 2008 session in May, 2008 – has introduced a Bill in the Rajya Sabha
for necessary Constitutional Amendment to ensure one-third reservation for the women.
The proposed Bill could not be discussed in the House. It was rather immediately referred to
the concerned Standing Committee for their thorough study and recommendations, which we hope
would be eventually sent back to the House for further discussion, adoption and enactment at an early
date.
We once more confirm our full support in principle to the proposed Bill and extend our all
support for necessary Constitutional Amendment to ensure thirty three per cent reservation of seats
for women in the State Assemblies and Parliament.
Incidentally, it should be mentioned that the National Common Minimum Programme of the
UPA Government has committed to fully empower women politically, educationally, economically and
legally. It is further committed that the UPA Government will take the lead to introduce legislation for
one-third reservations for women in Vidhan Sabhas and in the Lok Sabha. All India Forward Bloc,
along with other Left Front partners extended their support from outside to the UPA Government on
the basis of this Common Minimum Programme formulated in May 2004. It is regrettable that the UPA
Government took four long years to introduce the promised Women Reservation Bill. We want that
the Bill be enacted without any further delay.
It is noted that some of the political parties are having apprehensions about the misuse
and the limited success of the proposed Bill. Hence they want reservations of seats for the women
of the poor backward classes and the dalits and minorities, otherwise, they apprehend, that the
reserved seats will be cornered by the women of the elite society and the affluent classes, thereby
depriving the poor illiterate women of the backward classes of the legislative advantages. Hence
they oppose the Bill and demand a special quota of reservations among one-third reservations. On
the excuse of such opposition even by the UPA allies, the Congress-led UPA Government has so
long delayed and avoided fulfilment of their commitment to NCMP with the plea of reaching a
consensus on the issue. But such a consensus has eluded the country for a long time and has
continued to deprive the women of their rights for equality and justice. We feel that all such pleas
are mere excuses to avoid women reservation. Women reservations have already been introduced
at the Panchayat and other local self-government levels and after some initial drawbacks, the
reservation system is now working well there for a positive step towards empowerment of the
women. Hence, we demand immediate reservations of one-third seats for women in Vidhan Sabha
and Lok Sabha and hope, the limitations and shortcomings of the proposed Bill could be over
come through recommendations of the Standing Committee and subsequent discussion on the
floor of the Parliament. We want women reservation before we face the forthcoming Lok Sabha
election.

139
BAHUJAN SAMAJ PARTY
1. This Bill (Women Reservation Bill) should be passed only when the separate one-third
reservation for the women belonging to Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes. In addition
to the existing reservation provided as per the Part XVI of Article 330 “Reservation of Seats
for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes in the House of the People”.
2. This Bill (Women Reservation Bill) should be passed only when the separate one third
reservation for the Women belonging to SC and ST in addition to the existing reservation
provided as per the Part XVI of Article 332 “Reservation of Seats for Scheduled Castes and
Scheduled Tribes in the Legislative Assemblies of the States under clause (1) shall bear, as
nearly as may be, the same proportion to the total number of seats in the Assembly as the
population of the Scheduled Castes in the State or of the Scheduled Tribes in the State or Part
of the State, as the case may be, in respect of which seats are so reserved, bears to the total
population of the State.
BHARATIYA JANATA PARTY
1. Bharatiya Janata Party supports the proposed Women Reservation Bill and we shall cooperate
in getting this Bill adopted.
2. We firmly reject the demand of Quota within Quota.
3. If a consensus view emerges among all political parties on any other formula other than the
existing Bill to give reservation to women, we are ready to discuss it provided the Committee
should send it to us as a formal draft. Commenting on assumptions and suppositions is not
required.
4. We are ready to accept the consensus view on the Election Commission’s proposal pertaining
to the issue women reservation.
5. The women reservation should become a reality in the Current Session of Parliament so that
the women should benefit from it in forthcoming Lok Sabha elections. Therefore the issue
should not be delayed any further on the basis of any reason.
COMMUNIST PARTY OF INDIA (MARXIST)
The CPI(M) supports the 108th Constitutional Amendment Bill. It is in full agreement with the
objects and reasons behind the amendment, namely the reservation of one-third seats in Parliament and
State Assemblies for women. The Amendment Bill has been pending for the last twelve years. It is
high time that Parliament adopted it and addressed the gross under-representation of women.
The CPI(M) approach to the main areas of debate are as follows :
Percentage of seats to be reserved:  We are in favour of reservation of thirty three per cent
seats in Parliament and State Assemblies. We believe that the one-third seat reservations have worked
well in the Panchayat raj system as well as in local bodies. It has been seen that this is the minimum
number required to make an impact on increasing women’s role in elected decision making bodies,
therefore there should be no dilution of the number of seats to be reserved.
Rotation of seats:  The Bill proposes rotation of seats which are to be reserved for women.
Concern has been expressed by some that rotation will destabilize the polity. The argument is that such
a large number of seats will see the changeover of experienced Members of Parliament and will
therefore also affect the standards of political discourse. It is also said that individual MPs nurture their

140
constituencies and therefore this rotation will break that link. We disagree with such propositions. We
cannot base our democracy on a no-change approach which may lead to political monopolies and
entrenched interests which are an anathema to democratic processes. Rotation of women reserved
seats also helps horizontal spread of women’s involvement. The exact period for women reserved
seats may be decided separately. This is the present practice for panchayats and local bodies. Some
States for example rotate the seats only after ten years.
The method whereby seats are to be reserved has also been brought up and concern
expressed that reserving a seat for women may be used as an instrument to target particular opposition
leaders by the party in power. Since all seats will be rotated at some point or the other this will
“affect” all in equal measure. The reservation of seats may be done in such a way so that the road
map for reservations is known in advance for the next three terms so as to eliminate uncertainty and
allow for planning”.
Quota within Quota: At present the Constitution provides for reservations for Scheduled
Caste and Scheduled Tribe candidates. The present Bill provides for quota within the quota of SCs/
STs adjusted both ways, from the caste reservations as well as the women’s reservation quota. The
SC/ST reserved quota is thus within the stipulated limit of 22.5 per cent. We support this proposal.
A demand has been raised for similar reservations for OBCs within the women reserved quota.
It is argued that since women are not a homogenous community, women of the socially and
economically backward classes should be given a quota within the quota. This proposal is not
constitutionally viable. At present there is a constitutional provision namely Article 243D Clause 6
which permits State Governments to reserve seats for OBCs at the panchayat level as follows
“Nothing in this part shall prevent the legislature of a State from making any provision for reservation
of seats in any panchayat or offices of Chairpersons in the panchayats at any level in favour of
backward class citizens. “In the States where OBC quotas exist the quota is caste based for both men
and women and within such an OBC caste quota there is a gender based quota for OBC women
adjusted to the caste quota as well as the women’s quota. There is no such reservations for OBC
castes in Parliament or in any State Assembly therefore the issue of OBC quota within women’s quota
does not arise. However it is important to add that in the present scenario, without reservations OBC
women make up around 40 per cent of the women in Parliament and around 20 per cent are of SC
and ST women. If more seats are reserved for women the percentage of women from backward, and
Scheduled Castes and Tribes which is approximately 60 per cent at present will certainly increase even
further.
A demand has also been raised for reservation for minority women. This also is linked to the
general issue of reservations based on religion. Although such provisions have been made in a few
States, at the national level it has not been included. While it is true that the under representation of
the minority communities is a matter of concern with only two Muslim women among the 50 women
in the Lok Sabha, it cannot be solved through the Women’s Reservation Bill.
Thus the CPI(M) reiterates its support to the proposed arrangement in the present Bill with
the conviction that the one-third reservation will help women of all communities.
Alternative proposals:  some alternative proposals have been suggested:
Reservations within Party lists
Many countries in the world have adopted the practice of reservations within party lists.
However the majority have some system of proportional representation where party lists are “checked-
off’ according to the percentage of votes polled by the Party. In a first part the post system like India,
the concern is that although women may have one-third reservations in lists this will not translate into

141
one third representation in the decision making bodies. What is required is reservations in Parliament
and State Assemblies not in Party lists. Unless seats are reserved, Parties will follow the same practice
based on inability to change sitting MPs or MLAs. Thus losing seats may be farmed out to women.
The very purpose of reservations will be compromised.
The other proposals of increase of seats by one-third or by changing them into double
member constituencies are impractical and will effectively mean that the issue is shelved. It is well
known that the delimitation exercise is complete for the forthcoming elections. Therefore the process
to carve out 180 new seats will take an inordinately long time. The proposal to make 180 seats double
member will create two classes of MPs/MLAs, one with sole responsibility and the other with shared
responsibility, thus downgrading the latter. The CPI(M) is not in agreement with either proposal.
No More Delay
Taking all these factors into consideration, the CPI(M) urges the Standing Committee to
support the present Bill and to recommend it for adoption in the next session of Parliament.
COMMUNIST PARTY OF INDIA (MARXIST-LENINIST)
CPI (Marxist-Leninist) is in favour of Women’s Reservation Bill firmly. We want that there
should be guarantee of presence and participation of adequate number of women in Parliament of the
country and State Legislative Assemblies. It will not only initiate a new era of empowerment of women
but also prove to be instrumental in paving the way for abolishing the age old gender based inequality
and discrimination.
We are of the view that women as a whole and as a community have been exploited in the
male dominated society, they have been deprived of their social - political rights and have been victim
of class as well as social discrimination. This discrimination is deeply existent in the present civilized,
modern and democratic society also and this Bill can be an important step in doing away with this
faulty discrimination. In this context, in view of some of our fears arising out of intentions of ruling
class, we want to put forth before you the opinion of our party, which is as under :-
1. Lapsing thrice of this important Bill is not merely a co-incidence but ruling class has
made it a political game. It is first such incidence in the Parliamentary history of India
and perhaps in the Parliamentary history of the World. Is our politics not a victim of male
obsession against women?
2. The earlier NDA Government and present UPA Government never tried to make consensus
on the issues deciding the fate and future of the country. Attempts were never made to
evolve consensus among all political parties or to take a decision on the basis of
consensus on the question of WTO, Nuclear Agreement, view point on Israel and
relations with Iran. Then, is it not the politics of procrastination to make such attempts
again and again on the Bill which is concerned with the progress of Indian society,
women’s claim and equal participation. Our CPM (Ma-Le) party declares this behaviour
of ruling parties as male feudalistic mentality and it is directly an anti-women behaviour.
As far as the question of 2/3 majority is concerned for amendment in Constitution, it is
clearly visible in Parliament. It is, therefore, necessary to show courage to go ahead with
this process so that the real face of the parties making pretention could be exposed before
the Nation.
3. The proposal of some political parties that instead of promulgating law on women’s
reservation, the Election Commission should force the political parties to have quota for
women candidates is fully objectionable and it is against the basic spirit of guarantee of

142
assured participation of women in Parliament and Legislative Assemblies. In this context,
the conduct of BJP which is a victim of adopting the view point of confining women
to the position of mother, daughter and wife shows its double standard. In fact, the
Congress is playing a drama and BJP is doing comedy on this Bill. The biggest example
of this fact is that the anti-SC and ST parties have to provide a candidate from amongst
SCs and STs for the reserved seats and apart from these seats rarely any ruling party
has taken the risk of providing any dalit candidate.
4. The fear of some political parties is also baseless that as a result of the class based social
composition of women participation is likely to change. Our Parliamentary practice and
election results show that the winning and losing election by a candidate depends on the
political position and status of parties and it does not depend on the physical appearance,
complexion and educational - social conditions. In fact, putting hurdle on this ground is
basically meant for withholding Women’s Reservation Bill because these parties have not
been serious on questions related to women.
5. Our party CPM (Ma-Le) also refutes the contention that the reservation should be made
compulsory in Parliament while in States it should be left on their discretion to implement
it or not.
In the long run we demand that there should be no more delay in the name of consensus and
it should be passed during the tenure of this Lok Sabha only.
COMMUNIST PARTY OF INDIA (TAMIL NADU STATE COUNCIL)
Our party appreciates the initiative taken by the Government to introduce the Constitution (One
Hundred and Eighth Amendment) Bill, 2009.
For the past many years Communist Party of India had been demanding 33% reservation for
women in State Legislatures and Parliament. Our party is of the view, that there should not be any
dilution in the proposed Bill and it should be passed in Parliament.
Some political parties are having a view that there must be an inner reservation for women
belonging to Backward Communities. We wish to point that no reservation is provided for General
Elections except for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes. So, it is not the time for entering into
such discussion.
Our party feels that the demand for inner reservation is only an attempt to divert the issue
and delay the passing of the Bill. Hence, we require the Committee, to take steps to expedite the matter
and the Bill is passed in the next session of Parliament.
DESIYA MURPOKKU DRA VIDA KAZHAGAM
We, Desiya Murpokku Dravida Kazhagam, wholeheartedly welcome the introduction of Women
Reservation Bill in Rajya Sabha. We will be really happy and fully satisfied only if this Bill comes into
force as this Bill is pending for a long time and almost has lost its strength due to the long pendency.
Therefore, D.M.D.K. strongly suggests and wishes that this Bill should come into force irrespective
of any objection and obstacle from any side or quarter.
Decades back our veteran leader Thanthai E.V.R. Periyar declared and taught us that men and
women are equal. As we also belong to the same soil, we once again whole heartedly welcome this
Women Reservation Bill with jubilant frame of mind.
We strongly feel that real social justice will be rendered only if the women of backward
classes and other backward classes are given reservation in this Bill. But on account of this, this Bill
need not be delayed.

143
We respectfully suggest and feel that the W omen Reservation Bill should come into force
immediately and the suggested reservation for women in backward classes and other backward classes
can be introduced by amending the Women Reservation Bill later.
In the interest of social justice and principles of natural justice, we, D.M.D.K. strongly
feel that it is essential to pass the Women Reservation Bill which was already introduced in Rajya
Sabha.
DRAVIDA MUNNETRA KAZHAGAM
At the outset the D.M.K. Party express its unconditional support to the Constitution (One
Hundred and Eighth Amendment) Bill, 2008.
In this context, we wish to bring to your notice our promise made to the people of Tamil
Nadu during Parliamentary Elections - 2004. Our Election Manifesto states :–
Women’s Welfare
In Tamil Nadu, 33% seats in the Local Bodies are reserved for women. Likewise 33%
reservation should be provided for women in Parliament and State Legislatures. The Bill introduced in
Lok Sabha was not discussed and passed. The D.M.K. Party will work for the implementation of
Reservation for Women in Parliament and State Legislatures.
It is happy to note that the above Bill was introduced in Rajya Sabha. We hope the Bill will
receive the support of all political parties in the country.
We would like to quote a passage from the book written by famous British philosopher John
Stuart Mill, “The principle which regulates the existing social relations between the two sexes - the
legal subordination of one sex to the other - is wrong in itself, and now one of the chief hindrances
to human improvement, and that it ought to be replaced by a principle of perfect equality, admitting
no power or privilege on the one side, nor disability on the other.
The D.M.K. fully agrees with the views of J.S. Mill and has been working for the empowerment
of women in all walks of life. Some of the achievements of the D.M.K. Government headed by
Dr. Kalaignar M. Karunanidhi in the past, listed below will stand evidence to the D.M.K’s commitment.
1. 30% reservation for women in all Government jobs in the State.
2. Only women should be appointed as teachers in Elementary schools.
3. Financial assistance for marriages to women from poor families and widows who
remarry.
4. Equal share for women in ancestral properties.
5. 33% reservation for women in Local Body elections.
The passage of Women Reservation Bill has been delayed for 11 long years. In this period,
elections to the Lok Sabha and State Assemblies have been held several times. The non-passage of
the Bill has meant that large numbers of Indian women have been denied their right to contest elections
and to become elected representatives at the states and national level.
The denial of equal rights of representation to one half of the population is not just injustice
to women, but we believe it weakens the democratic process itself. India set a record to be proud
of with the largest number of women of over one million in decision-making bodies at the panchayat
and municipal level. Unfortunately the correct lessons from this historic achievement, however have
not been learned.

144
The experience in Tamil Nadu shows that reservation to women in local bodies, had led
women to get elected in the seats reserved for them irrespective of their castes and religions. More
women from the minorities could be elected and Scheduled Caste women could be elected from
General Constituencies, which is another way of civilizing the society.
India the largest democracy in the world, has only 8% women members in the Lok Sabha
and even less, on an average, in State Assemblies. This is less than half of the global average of
elected women representatives holding 17.1% of parliamentary seats. In addition, we lag behind at least
three of our neighbours, Pakistan, Afghanistan and Nepal.
In Afghanistan 30% reservation is provided for women in their Legislative bodies. In Pakistan
17% seats in the Legislatures are reserved for women. Argentina has 30% quota for women. Nepal
will soon enact 30% reservation for women in its National Assembly. South Africa has 30%
reservation and the present women representation in their Parliament amounts to 34.8%.
In Tamil Nadu the Legislative Assembly elections between 1989 and 2006 show the following
figures.
Y ear Total Women Contestants Total Elected
1989 70 9
1991 102 32
1996 156 9
2001 112 25
2006 156 22
Out of the 234 seats in the Tamil Nadu Legislative Assembly, the highest number of women
elected in one election during the last four elections are only 32, which amounts to a mere 14 per cent
in 2001 elections. The rest of the elections show a dismal proportion.
The global experience makes it clear that a constitutional provision for mandatory quotas for
women is essential if democratic processes are to be made more inclusive. It is this understanding
that informs the present Bill which, despite the fact that major political parties committed their support
to its passage when it was being finalized in the Select Committee, has been languishing for many
years. We are very hopeful that once again all political parties will rally behind the Bill and ensure its
enactment now.
It is the question of reservation within reservation that has become the most contentious and
intractable. The proponents of this have been saying that without a quota for OBC women within the
33% reserved quota, only women belonging to elite groups and the upper castes will benefit. Some
of them also raise the question of giving representation of Muslim women within this quota.
The issue of quota within quota is problematic also because there are no official estimates of
constituency-wise OBC population as there are for the SCs/STs which is the basis on which seats
have been reserved for them. Since the De-limitation process has only just been concluded, re-opening
this issue now will only delay the Bill inordinately.
In any case, we strongly believe, and all the evidence bears this belief out, that women’s
reservation will help all women, across communities.

145
In conclusion, we appreciate the move through the introduction of this Bill to undo at least
in part the historic injustices that women suffer. We also welcome the support that this Bill and
womens’ rights in general have received from all sections of MPs. We are very conscious of the fact
that no struggle for women’s equality can succeed without the unstinted support of enlightened men
and women.
We solicit your support for the passage of the Bill. Since our struggle goes far beyond
reservations, we would like to express the hope and conviction that Indian women, especially those
who bear the triple burden of class, caste and gender discrimination, will always enjoy the support
and solidarity of the India Parliament in their struggle for radical social change.
DRAVIDAR KAZHAGAM
Consequences of male domination
From the dawn of civilization all the societies, big and small, have been Patriarchal – ruled
or controlled by men, giving them power and importance. Women had no share in power structure,
no role in public sphere, no voice in religious affairs, and no hold over socio-economic affairs. As
a result men have become dominant, arrogant, exploitative and oppressive. Being exploited and
abused, women undergo endless suffering, resulting in their loss of hope, self-confidence and self-
esteem. Female children were denied of sufficient care and nourishment, physical and intellectual,
resulting in the stunted growth of their body and mind. When half of the world population remains
permanently weak and does not have a voice and the right to make a choice of its own in public
sphere, the loser is the whole human race.
It is injustice to deny women the opportunities men enjoy.
When the Age of Faith set in, the condition of women became worse than what it was in
ancient period. Scriptures specifically asserted they were created only to serve and entertain men.
From time immemorial women were treated as chattels by all religions. At best they were house-
keepers and dignified domestic servants.
Worthless Life
Laws, religion, social customs, cultural ethos etc. kept women servile for millennia. To keep
them servile they were made weak, physically and mentally. How?
They were denied education and property rights that men had. Daughters had no equal
rights of inheritance with sons. Women could not earn independently. They had practically no right
to education. They were not sent to learn in educational institutions. They had no share in public
affairs – they could not become rulers, administrators, advisers etc. They are not allowed even
now, to officiate as priests. They were usually confined to the narrow domestic duties of keeping
the home clean, preparing palatable food and drink, and satisfying the carnal desires of the husband
and rearing children. They eagerly awaited the chances of visiting places of worship, taking part
in ceremonial functions and participating in religious festivals as those were the only outlets of
possible relaxation for women. But those occasions did not really end their drudgery and misery.
Periyar’s Service
Periyar E.V . Ramasamy wanted to free women from the cruel circumstances of permanent
dependence on men, of illiteracy, Ignorance, superstition, helplessness, hopelessness and endless
suffering. From the later part of 1920s, his Self-Respect Movement demanded the abolition of
conditions that made women a fallen lot and giving them rights and opportunities that would make
them equal, able and intelligent partners of men.

146
Periyar urged women to take part in public activities, particularly in socio-cultural
transformation and advancement. He encouraged his first wife and his sister to lead the picketing
of toddy shops at Erode in 1921. Again, they went to Vaikom in Kerala in 1924 to play a vital role
in the struggle of the suppressed castes to gain the right to walk in public roads. The women
encouraged by him played a sterling role in 20
th century Tamil Nadu in emancipating others. They
worked for the abolition of caste and untouchability, child marriage, Devadasi (temple prostitute)
system, widowhood of women etc.
Through his speeches, writings and resolutions passed at conferences, the first provincial
conference at Chinglepet in 1929 being a historic one, Periyar urged the implementation of measures
that would give wider opportunities for women and make them equal to men in all respects.
Like men, women should learn and get trained in modem knowledge and techniques.
All jobs that men do should be open to women, including maintaining law and order as
police personnel, and defending the country from external aggression as soldiers in the army.
Women should be given priority to serve as teachers in elementary and middle schools.
Government jobs should be equally divided between women and men.
Women should have the freedom to decide about bearing children.
Women should have equal rights of inheritance with men. (With regard to Hindus, Kalaignar
Karunanidhi’s State Government enacted a law to this effect in 1989; the Central Government under
UPA also made the law in 2006).
Though considered with contempt and ridiculed when they were proposed Periyar’s ideas
became realities one by one in course of time.
Justice Party
The South Indian Liberal Federation (SILF – also known as Justice Party) was a fore-
runner of Dravidar Kazhagam. The Justice Party was in power in the then composite Madras
Presidency from 1921 to 1937, except for a brief period. During its rule women were given the
right to vote along with men in early 1920s. Again, the same party made provision for reservation
of seats for women in the Madras (now Chennai) Corporation Council in 1930.
Rajiv Gandhi
Late lamented Rajiv Gandhi took the initiative to introduce the 73
rd and 74 th Constitutional
Amendments to make the Urban and Rural Local Bodies vibrant and effective. A very important
aspect of his endeavour was to reserve 33 per cent of seats to women in the local bodies.
The idea of making a legal provision for reserving seats for women in Parliament and State
Assemblies came into being during Rajiv Gandhi’s tenure as the Prime Minister of India (1984-89).
His government mooted the idea of revitalizing the Panchayat Raj. The 73rd Constitutional
Amendment and the 74th Amendment, that defined the tenure and responsibilities of Rural and
Urban Local Bodies respectively, were passed in 1992. They provided for not less than 33%
reservation to women in local bodies.
Following the UN World Conference on Women (WCM) in Beijing in 1995, the demand for
atleast 33 per cent reservation for women in power sharing has become strong. But the above
figures show that politics in India is still a male preserve. In  Parliament, the predominantly male
political class is loath to allow the Women’s Reservation Bill  to pass. Although all national parties

147
say they are committed to passing the Bill, it has been scuttled several times on one pretext or the
other.
If the Bill is passed in the present form, 181 seats will go to women, and men will lose them.
This may be the reason for a section of the male members reluctant to support the Bill. But any
progressive march towards a just and equitable society involves elimination of dominance, which will
be resisted initially by the affected persons, but accepted by all the fair-minded common people. So
the political parties should boldly come forward to pass the Bill without any further delay.
Alternatives
An alternative proposal is suggested : Instead of assigning one-third of the Lok Sabha seats,
the political parties should be compelled by law to allot one-third of seats to women candidates. If
they do not follow this norm, they would lose recognition. But this alternative will not serve the
purpose. The parties, usually dominated by male office bearers, will tend to field women candidates
in constituencies where they are weak. That will defeat the purpose of electing 33 per cent of women
representatives.
Another alternative suggestion is to increase the number of seats in Lok Sabha to 750 in the
light of increase in population from 54 crores in 1971 to 102 crores in 2001. This will enable
providing 33 per cent of seats to women without affecting the number of men elected at present.
These extra seats could be dovetailed into double member constituencies, which will ensure reservation
of one seat for women. Our firm view in this context is, when the number of seats is increased, the
proportion of their allocation to States like Kerala and Tamil Nadu that have been successfully
implementing family planning programme should not get reduced. Otherwise it will amount to
punishing them for sincerely carrying out a vital programme of the Union as well as the State
Governments.
Gender and Social Justice
Our submission is Women’s Reservation Bill when finally passed should include provisions for
sub-reservation for STs, SCs, OBCs and Minority communities within the 33 per cent quota. If this
provision is not included there is the real danger of the promotion of gender justice defeating social
justice regarding women’s representation. Social Justice is adumberated in the Preamble of the
Constitution and this principle should be given practical shape through all the constitutional and
government bodies. In  the prevailing social scenario, it is obvious that the women of lower castes or
minority communities cannot politically compete with the upper caste women. So special provision
should be made to reserve seats within the quota.
In this context we would like to point out that our suggestion regarding sub-quota is nothing,
new. Article 243 D(6) dealing with Panchayat states: “Nothing in this Part (IX) shall prevent the
legislature of a State from making any provision for reservation of seats in any Panchayat or offices
of Chairpersons in the Panchayats at any level in favour of backward class of citizens.”
We urge what is provided for in Panchayat institutions should also be available to the State
Assemblies and Union Parliament.
Conclusion
Women still suffer from various disabilities because legitimate opportunities are denied to them
and kept subordinate to men in social, economic, religious, and political activities. Providing greater
representation to them in Parliament and State Assemblies is the vital step to widen the scope for
women in public affairs. Their participation will make democracy more purposeful, meaningful,
constructive and fruitful. They know better than men the laws and measures needed to uplift them.

148
Periyar used to say, as rats cannot earn their freedom through cats, women cannot have
their advancement through the laws made by men. Women know better how to remove their
indignities and disabilities. A notable example is the pioneering efforts taken by Dr. Muthulakshmi
Reddy, as a member of the legislature of the then composite Madras Presidency, to abolish the
Devadhasi system in 1929.
Even in fulfilling the general aspirations and requirements of the people, they perform
outstandingly as proved by their role as members of Panchayat Raj institutions. A study by UNICEF
published in December, 2006 reveals that the Panchayats headed by women perform well in developing
infrastructure and providing health, drinking water and education facilities. So the country will
progress faster when women become law-makers and rulers.
INDIAN NATIONAL CONGRESS
The Congress Party supports the Bill as it has been introduced in the Rajya Sabha. However,
we are also willing to go with the consensus that may evolve amongst the various political parties
represented in the Standing Committee regarding lowering the number of seats and reservation within
reservation of the seats.
INDIAN NATIONAL LOKDAL
The above matter was considered by the highest body of the party and we are of the
considered opinion that the objective behind the Bill is laudable. However keeping in view the
controversies/doubts raised by various parties on this issue, we are of the opinion that the matter
needs handling at other levels and by other means then the legislation or constitutional amendment. It
would be in the fitness of things, if all the parties particularly The National Parties and The Regional
Parties recognized by Election Commission of India, adopt the formula that all the parties will be giving
at least 1/3 of the party tickets at various levels to women candidates. This will avoid unnecessarily
controversies being raised on various reservations made for other groups/categories and I think this
needs a broad concession then the legislation moved by the Government on this issue.
INDIGENOUS NATIONALIST PARTY OF TWIPRA (INPT)
1. After examining the text of the proposed Bill of women reservation, the INPT has decided
to support the move and introduced the proposed Bill in the Rajya Sabha (One hundred
and eighth Amendment) Bill, 2008 in letter and spirit.
2. The INPT defending the existing nature of proportionate one-third Scheduled Tribe seats
reservation in the Legislative Assembly of Tripura should continue undisturbed (Reference
Tripartite memorandum of settlement of TNV , Central Government and State Government
of Tripura signed on 12th  August, 1988).
3. Section 8 – In article 333 the proposed proviso to be inserted and it should also be
amended partially with the implementation of coming of first general election in a block
of three general elections. There shall be no reservation as such in the Assembly so
constituted after the first and third general election.
4. Section 9 – In the proposed new article in article 334A cessation of effect of the Act
should be only after the year 2006 i.e. after the census conducted, conforming to the
direction of clause (3B) of article 332.
INDIAN UNION MUSLIM LEAGUE
On behalf of the Tamil Nadu State Indian Union Muslim League we whole heartedly welcome

149
the Bill of 33% reservation for women and we stress upon you sir, to kindly make all arrangements
to pass this Bill in the coming session itself, and make way for the women of India to contest in the
forthcoming elections. If and when possible, in the future, if any amendments regarding due
representation for all the communities of India we request you to provide reservation under reservation
giving proportionate representation to women of all communities. But at present, let this request be
not taken as a hurdle in passing the Bill.
Our foremost priority is getting the 33% Women Reservation Bill passed at the earliest without
any further delay, we once again humbly request you to do your best and urge upon you to pass the
Bill in the coming parliamentary session.
JANATA DAL (UNITED)
Reservation for Women Bill introduced in Rajya Sabha is a chain of conspiracies only that
is going on against Backward Classes of the society. The powerful section of society wants to
continue its supremacy by bringing forward women. This demand for reservation for women had
started immediately after 27 per cent of reservation was provided to Backward Classes after the
Supreme Court ruling in 1993.
Calculations were clear. 15% of seats are reserved for Scheduled Castes and 7.5% of seats
are reserved for Scheduled Tribes in Lok Sabha and State Assemblies. Thus, around 48% of seats
get reserved after 1/3 seats are offered to women. The court has fixed the ceiling of 50% and
therefore if OBC demand reservations in Lok Sabha and State Assemblies, then there will not
remain anything for them. 1/3 reservation for Women Bill is the product of this mind. We are
opposing the Bill in its present form and we will continue to do so in future also.
We are of view that share of seats in the reservations being made should be identified
separately for women belonging to Backward Classes, Dalits, Tribals, and religious minorities.
Women belonging to Backward Classes and religious minorities have not been provided reservations
separately in the present Bill. As a result thereof, women belonging to powerful sections of the
society would only be benefited and consequently the powerful sections will continue to be
powerful.
Objection is raised that there is no provision for reservations for religious minorities in the
Constitution. Therefore, they cannot be provided reservations within reservation. But in Backward
Classes, more than 80% of population belonging to religious minorities is included. Therefore
women belonging to the religious minorities get reservation automatically when reservations are
provided to backward classes.
Objection is raised that Backward Classes are not getting reservations in Lok Sabha and
State Assemblies from the beginning like Dalits and tribals. Therefore women belonging to
Backward Classes cannot get reservations. We are of the view that Backward Classes be provided
reservations in Lok Sabha and State Assemblies as is the case in Government jobs and higher
educational institutions. After doing so, 1/3 of the seats reserved for Backward Classes would be
reserved for women belonging to Backward Classes.
Therefore, before taking any further action on the Women Reservation Bill, 27% of seats
be reserved for Backward Classes in Lok Sabha and State Assemblies. There is already a provision
in the Constitution in this regard. The provisions which provide reservations to Backward Classes
in Central and State Government jobs, under the same provisions it is possible to provide 27% of
reservation in Lok Sabha, State Assemblies and other government posts. And if anybody feels that
this provision is insufficient, 27% reservation for Backward Classes may be ensured in Lok Sabha
and State Assemblies.

150
After 15%, 7.5% and 27% reservations are ensured for Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes
and Backward Classes respectively in Lok Sabha and State Assemblies, if provision of reservation
is ensured for women in all these categories, our party has no objections over this.
Our opposition is against the Women Reservation Bill in its present form which makes the
creamy layer of the society more stronger. On the one hand, people belonging to lower middle
class in Backward Classes are being deprived from the benefit of reservation in the name of
creamy layer and on the other hand, efforts are being made to make the most powerful families
(actual creamy layer) of the country more stronger by making the provision of reservation for
women.
Our protest is with regard to rotation of seats as well. As per this provision, seats reserved
for women will continue to change. It means that similar number of general seats for women
would also continue to get reserved. As a result thereof, there will be a huge chaos. This step is
likely to weaken the democracy in the country. Our democracy makes the representatives of people
responsible to voters. Representatives of people cannot ignore the voters despite their desire to  do
so because they have to fight the next election again, they have to go at the doors of  the voters
in the next election.
The arrangement of  rotation that exists in the present Bill, weakens the position of  voters.
When the representatives of  people would already be knowing that they will not contest the next
election from  their present constituency, they may start giving less importance to  the voters of  their
constituency. They would also show apathy towards the problems of  their constituency. The
feeling of  responsibility which exists among the representatives of  people in a democracy would
also start fading.
This feeling of  apathy towards their constituency and its voters by representatives of  people
is fatal for  the democracy. Because in such a situation, the voters would also tend to  become
apathetic towards elections. The voting percentage in our country is already 25 to  65%. This
percentage may go  down further. V oters go to  exercise their franchise to punish their present
representative. But due to rotation there is much possibility that their present representative avoids
election. A number of voters go for  voting because they feel happy with the performance of their
current representative. But if their current representative is not contesting the election, the fervour
of exercising their franchise will also diminish.
Thus the Bill which has been brought forth in the name of empowering women is likely
to hit the very foundation of democracy because of the provisions of seat rotation. Today the need
of hour is to create an environment whereby maximum number of voters could reach to polling
booths. But in its present form, the Bill ensures that the voters could be kept away from polling
booths. We lodge our protest against this anti-democracy Bill.
We demand that the Government withdraw this Bill that has been introduced in Rajya Sabha.
Government should hold talks with political parties to make a provision of 27% of
reservation for Backward Classes in Lok Sabha and State Assemblies. Meanwhile, alternative
measures should be taken for the empowerment of women.
One such alternative is to empower the Election Commission of India. It may be made
mandatory for all political parties that 10 or 15% of party tickets (it should also be decided from
consensus) distributed in each State should be given to women candidates. The Election
Commission of India may be empowered to derecognize the political parties which do not comply
with the above provisions.

151
The provision of providing 10 or 15% of reservation is being insisted because the
participation of women candidates in political parties today is very less. When the number of
women itself would be less, the number of women candidates fit for contesting elections would
automatically go down. With the rise of participation of women in politics and political parties, the
percentage of party tickets for women can also be enhanced.
In brief, we request the Parliamentary Committee that the Bill seeking to provide reservation
for women in Lok Sabha and State Assemblies be withdrawn.
MAHARASHTRAWADI GOMANTAK PARTY
Section 1
Sub Section 2 of Section 1 states that the provisions of this amendment will come in to force
from the appointed date as may be notified by the Central Government in official Gazette and the
Central Government can appoint different dates for different provisions.
It may be examined if there can be included words providing for appointment of different
dates for bringing it in to force in different States in consultation with the concerned State Government.
This is suggested because the people in each State shall be free to consider the local situation, social
conditions, size of the House/Assembly, total population as well as the literacy rate, and opt for
reservation of seats in respect of State Assembly in that State.
Section 2
This Section proposes amendment to Article 80 of the Constitution. Article 80 is on composition
of Council of State.
Clause 2 speaks about allocation of seats in the Council of State. In original clause after the
word “seats” the words “including those reserved for women” are to be inserted. Secondly, this
allocation is in accordance with provisions contained in the Fourth Schedule which also will have to be
amended. It may be noted that there are some States with only one seat allotted to them in this regard.
In Clause 3 of Article 80 also there is a provision suggested of atleast not less than one-third
members to be nominated by the President. Nomination of such one-third member by nominating
women as their reserved seats should not later on lead to the demand for further reservation with-
in for women coming from certain reserved categories like ST, SC, OBC etc. Therefore a mention
will have to be made at appropriate place clarifying that the nomination of women shall be irrespective
of caste, creed, category, community or religion.
Article 3
The Bill seeks insertion of a provision to clause 3 of article 171 which speaks on composition
of the legislative council. This provision mention that atleast 1/3 of the seats shall be reserve for
women. Our view is that in this article also there should not be scope for further reservation as
mentioned above i.e. the number of this 1/3 seats should not further be required to be allotted to
women coming from reserved categories like SC, ST, OBC etc.
Article 239 A
No comments.
Section 330
After this article the proposal is for insertion of 330A.

152
Article 330
No comments.
Article 332 A
This Party is in agreement with the proposed amendment and insertion of article 332A.
In the first proviso to this article 332 A(2), the words “No seats shall be reserved in the other
two general elections” have not been inserted as has been done in the first proviso to article 330A(2).
Therefore either these words be inserted in 332A(2) or deleted from the proviso under 330A(2).
Article 333
No comments.
Article 334 - Proposing Insertion of article 334A
No comments.
MARUMALARCHI DRAVIDA MUNNETRA KAZHAGAM
All human beings are born free and equal and dignity and rights. They are endowed with
reason and conscience and should act towards one another in a spirit of brotherhood so declares the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights.
There was an era when powerful or a rich or a strong or a dacoit aged more than 60 years
married a beautiful young girl despite her resistance. Except to weep, she had no choice of selecting
her mate. To a large extent, such a situation does not prevail today. Now, young persons are selecting
mates of their choice after verifying full details thereof. So begins the judgment of the Supreme Court
in the famous PUCL Vs UOI case.
Women are human being so they are certainly entitled to have due share to represent in the
democracy. Almost all political parties declare that women should be given due share in politics. Yet
for one or other reasons, political parties are under compulsion to give tickets only to men. All
members of the society, men and women, should be able to form their own beliefs and communicate
them freely to others. Freedom of speech and expression should therefore receive a generous support
from all those who believe in the people in the administration. The democracy cannot exist unless all
citizens, men and women, have the equal right to participate in the affairs of the country.
Parliamentary democracy is a part of the basic structure of our Constitution. The true
democracy is meaningless unless women are there to represent. The few who involve themselves in
political activities are finding it increasingly difficult to succeed in getting ticket in elections. Today’s
electoral system has been totally subverted by money and muscle power. In order to uphold the fights
of the women, though almost all the political parties have expressed the view that there should be
special reservation for women yet the same could not be fructified till today as some vested interest
are successfully placing their obstacle in getting the Bill adopted. The special reservation in favour of
women in the House of People and State Legislatures are the need of the hour and required to be
carried out before the next General Election to the Lok Sabha.
Marumalarchi Dravida Munnetra Kazhagam founded with the object of bring a renaissance of
the policies and principles of Thanthai Periyar and Perarignar Anna who have, aired the view for the
empowerment of power for women in all walks of life, welcomes and supports the Women

153
Reservation Bill and hopefully expects the early adoption of the said Bill as introduced in the Parliament
without any further delay.
MIZORAM PEOPLES’ CONFERENCE
That the Mizoram Peoples’ Conference (Party) whole-heartedly supports the Women Reservation
Bill, which was introduced to the Parliament (Rajya Sabha) on the 6th May, 2008 to become the
Constitution (One Hundred and Eighth Amendment) Bill, 2008.
NATIONALIST CONGRESS PARTY
It is unfortunate that even after sixty years of our independence, women in our country have
not been provided for their due representation in the Parliament and in the State Assemblies, and are
being denied of their due share in the highest democratic institution of our country and in running the
administration of the country.
This Bill has been kept pending or was being postponed for one reason or another for the
last twelve years. It is a blemish on the political leaders of our country to have blocked the passage
of the Bill all these years. So, we entreat to the Members of the Parliament that the Bill as presented
in the Rajya Sabha may be passed without any further delay.
We also support the Block of three general elections for rotation of seats as provided for in
this Bill.
We don’t find any need or reason for special quota for OBC within the women’s quota as
suggested from certain quarters.
Now there are 429 seats excluding reserved seats for SC/ST category in the Parliament. There
is no reservation for OBC in the above mentioned existing unreserved seats. But still there is good
representation for OBC category in the Parliament at present. Same is the case of OBC category in
the State Assemblies as well.
That shows that OBC candidates are getting elected to the Parliament and State Assemblies
without special reservation for them. Similarly, OBC women candidates also can very well get elected
from reserved seats for women without special reservation for OBC category.
We see that candidates are put up by political parties, taking into consideration also the
strength of various communities in the constituencies. As such women from OBC category can get
elected in good numbers from reserved seats for women just as OBC candidates get elected at present
from unreserved seats. So, there is no justification for delaying the passage of the Bill on the question
of OBC quota within women’s reservation.
So, let us pass the Bill and implement it without any further delay. We can, if found necessary,
after implementation, have further amendment to the Act later.
Political parties often fail to give sufficient representation for women in their lists of candidates.
So, due share for women in the Parliament and in State Assemblies can be assured only by passing
the present Bill.
So, let us not block or deny any further the legitimate right of women for their due share
in the highest democratic bodies in our political system.

154
We expect all political parties to come forward and support the Bill. We also appeal to all
Parliamentarians to pass the Bill as presented by the Government in the Rajya Sabha unanimously and
without any further delay.
PATTALI MAKKAL KATCHI
At the outset, Pattali Makkal Katchi, a political party founded on the principles of equality,
equity and social justice, expresses its delight and pleasure at the efforts of the United Progressive
Alliance (UPA) Government headed by Dr. Manmohan Singh, an internationally reputed Economist and
Prime Minister of India for piloting the Constitution (One Hundred and Eighth Amendment) Bill, 2008.
By introducing this momentous Bill in the Rajya Sabha on 5.5.2008, the UPA Government under the
dedicated Chairmanship of Madam Sonia Gandhi attempts to fulfil one of the vital commitments made
in the Common Minimum Programme evolved by alliance partners including the Pattali Makkal Katch
(PMK).
As one of the architects of the Common Minimum Programme, the Pattali Makkal Katchi
extends its full support and commitment to this Bill with little more inclusive amendments to it.
Pattali Makkal Katchi has always been championing the social, economic, education and
political empowerment of women. The Founder President of PMK has also propounded the doctrine
of ‘equal opportunity, equality status, equal rights’ to women of all walks of life. A nation’s
development hinges on the development of its people and not on its Gross Domestic Product or per-
capita income alone. However, people’s development revolves round the development, round the
equitable and balanced development of people belonging to all sections of the society, especially in a
country like India, where heterogeneity and diversity is rule rather than an exception. In a vast country
like India with a population of about 112 crores, women constitute half of the population. Therefore,
a comprehensive development of Indians is possible, if only half of the Indian population viz. women
population register equitable development on par with men. Unfortunately, in India in the last 60 years,
this has not happened due to a plethora of multi sectoral factors. Women have been lagging behind
men in all spheres and in all parameters in India. There are gender inequalities in literacy rates,
educational accomplishments, health indicators like infant fertility rate, death rate, per-capita income
and political empowerment. Further, there are vast and raging disparities among different categories
of women i.e. there are inter-caste disparities in social, educational and economic and political
achievements. For instance, the literacy rate of women in upper castes is much higher than those of
women belongings OBCs, SCs, STs and Minorities. Like-wise, the social status and the social
behaviour of women in upper castes are fully different from those of women from OBC, SC, ST and
minority communities.
Therefore, the Government of India and various State Governments have take measures to
improve the economic and social well being of women and to bring equality between sexes and among
women folk through a variety of programmes. Programmes of women empowerment have received
the due of the attention of the Government of India. Consequently, there has been considerable
improvement in enrolment rate of girls and literacy rate of women, employment rate of women.
Politically there has been a woman Prime Minister; currently a woman is the President of India and
the Chairperson of the UPA Government is a woman. Woman have handled important Cabinet positions
even Chief Ministers of various States have been women. India has the largest number of elected
women representatives in the world. Elected women in the Panchayatiraj is 42 per cent and there has
been increased voter turn out of women. There has been gender budgeting exclusively for women
development by the Central Government.
All these developments and initiatives are laudable and welcome indeed. Nevertheless, we have
many more miles to go in the path of comprehensive development of all sections of women in India
and to obtain inter sex and intra sex equality.

155
It is in this context, that we have to take certain unconventional measures for development
of women. One aspect, which emerges, clearly is that the principle of equality between men and
women have not been achieved and they happen to be unequals. Under this circumstance, we
have to apply the Ambedkar’s excellent principle of “unequal treatment to unequals”. What such
treatment calls for this is reservation of posts in all spheres. This we have amply done in the case
of men in the fields of education and employment. In the political arena, we have also reserved
seats in State Assemblies and Lok Sabha to men belonging to SCs and STs. Unfortunately, we
have not done this for women yet. It is in this context of political empowerment of people, we
have to provide for reservation of women, in all bodies of decision-making, including State
Legislatures and Parliament. Thanks to the innovative endeavour of Late Shri Rajiv Gandhi, we
have ensured reservation for women in village Panchayats and urban local bodies. In a federal
country like India characterized by a three tier Government, reservation for women in the lowest
tier of the Government and absence of reservation in the higher tiers of Government smacks of
political justice. On this premise, social thinkers and political analysts have been demanding for
quite a long time reservation of seats for women in the State Assemblies and Parliament. The
Government of India appointed a Select Committee in 1996 under the Chairmanship of
Mrs. Geetha Mukherjee to suggest the principles of reservation for women in State Assemblies
and Parliament. However, for one reason or the other, the issue of reservation has been dragging
without a political consensus for the last 12 years. With such a prolonged wait, the present
Government with a firm decisiveness and determination has come forward with the present
Women Reservation Bill. It is in consonance with our philosophy and hence we welcome this Bill
of course with minor improvements.
Comments on the above Bill are as follows:
1. Political empowerment of women is a powerful and indispensable tool for eliminating
gender inequity and discrimination. This Bill is based on this sacred dictum and hence we
approve the statement of objects of the Bill.
2. The Bill provides that one third of the total number of seats reserved under Article 330
shall be reserved for women. There are two flaws in this assumption.
Firstly, one-third reservation does not strictly meet the needs of social justice. Social
justice can be achieved if only seats are reserved in proportion to the population, either
in education or in employment or in political field. Since woman population is almost half
of the Indian population, reservation of seats to women in State Legislatures and
Parliament should be in proportion to the population of women in total population i.e.
about 50 per cent. Therefore, reservation of 33% falls short of 50% of the seats as
required by the canon of social justice. However, we do not dispute this proportion of
33% at this juncture for various issues and also of the necessity to provide for reservation
to women immediately.
Secondly, the Bill states that only within the reserved seats in State Assemblies and
Parliament, one-third seats will be reserved for women. This means that within seats
reserved for Scheduled Castes men one third seats will be reserved for SC women. This
implies that other women belonging to Backward Classes, Minorities and other weaker
sections of the society, who now enjoy benefits under various Government programmes,
such as education, employment, development programmes are deprived of political
reservation. This is against the concept of equality and runs contrary to constitutional
provisions. It discriminates between women of different groups and will enable increased

156
representation of only women from upper castes, which would perpetuate the already
raging disparities among women. This unjust situation has to be remedied.
3. The Bill provides for reservation of seats for women only for a period of 15 years. This
is also untenable. We are taking a deliberate decision to provide for reservation for women
in political decision-making bodies after 60 years of India’s independence and to withdraw
this after 15 years would not help the long term representation of women in State
Assemblies and Parliament.
4. The procedure for determining the Constituencies reserved for women is not clearly laid
down in the Act and is left to the Parliament to decide. In our view, this should be
categorically provided in the Act itself.
5. This Bill provides for reservation of women only in State Assemblies and Lok Sabha, and
reservation is not provided in the Rajya Sabha and Legislative Councils of various States.
The above deficiencies in our view should be rectified in the proposed Act itself.
Suggestions:
1. In our view reservation of seats for women should be made not only in State Assemblies
and Lok Sabha but also in Rajya Sabha and Legislative Councils of States, because these
are also equally important bodies where vital decisions are taken for national development.
Women should have the right to express their views in these bodies also. Therefore, this
amendment Bill should provide for reservation in Rajya Sabha and Council of States
wherever they exist. This would again require constitutional amendment, which could be
brought in the present Bill itself. This would not in any case delay the process of passing
this Bill. The Standing Committee itself can incorporate necessary changes in the present
Bill itself at appropriate places.
2. We wish to reiterate that the principle of social justice or reservation cannot be achieved
unless the interests of backward classes of India are taken into consideration. Currently
the Constitution of India does not provide for reservation of seats for men belonging to
OBCs in State Assemblies and the Parliament. Therefore, it is not possible to reserve seats
for women belonging to OBCs as in the case of SC women. This we consider is a great
injustice done to about half of the population of India, who happens to be OBC men and
women. For 60 years, this injustice is left to continue despite the fact that the socio-
economic status of the backward classes have not improved vastly in this country. Even
in the sphere of employment, it was only after 1994 reservation for OBCs were made
although several Commissions of Backward Classes recommended this at different points
of time. With very great difficulty we have succeeded in providing 27% reservation to
OBCs in higher educational institutions only from this year and that too at the initiative
of Madam Sonia Gandhi and Dr. Manmohan Singh, the Prime Minister of India.
Consequently, the socio-economic status of the OBCs has not improved substantially. In
fact, it is much worse in the political sphere. The Mandal Commission has very ably
documented the conditions of OBCs. Recently, the Tenth Five Year Plan document also
vividly remarked that the socio economic and educational conditions of OBCs are no
better than those of SCs or STs.
Therefore, in our view it is high time that the necessary Con stitutional Amendment is made
to provide for 27% reservation to OBCs in the State Assemblies Legislative Councils, Lok Sabha and

157
Rajya Sabha. If this reservation is done, automatically the reservation of OBC women can be ensured
from amongst the seats reserved for OBC men in these bodies.
It may be appropriate to point out here that while making reservation of seats to Local Body
institutions Article 243 (d) Section 6 provides for reservation of seats in favour of Backward Classes
of citizens. Relevant section reads as follows :-
“Nothing in this part shall prevent the Legislature of a State from making any provision for
reservation of seats in any Panchayat or offices of Chairpersons in the Panchayats at any level in
favour of backward class of citizens.”
In pursuance of the above constitutional provisions, 17 States in the country have provided
for OBC reservation in the local bodies. The same procedure may be adopted for State legislatures
as well as Parliament to maintain parity among the three layers of the Government in India.
Pattali Makkal Katchi insists that this provision should be incorporated in the Bill itself so that
the interest of Backward Classes can be protected.
A similar arrangement should be made for providing reservation to Minority men and hence
Minority women.
It may be argued that the incorporation of the above changes will take more time and hence
it would delay the passing of the Bill. PMK does not subscribe to this view. The Standing Committee,
which is examining the present Bill, is fully competent to bring the needed changes in the Constitution
(One Hundred and Eighth Amendment) Bill, 2008 at appropriate places. The Committee need not take
additional time to discuss this issue after analyzing the views of various parties. During the deliberation
itself the Committee can incorporate these changes and the Bill can assume comprehensive form,
which can be presented to the Government within the time frame given to the Committee. We also
wish to state that this Bill should be passed in the ensuing Monsoon Session itself and should not be
delayed further. Once the Bill is passed, the necessary reservation of seats of OBCs, Minority men
and women can be done within the normal period. What is needed is the political will to include OBCs
and Minorities within the ambit of reservation. Where there is a will there is a way. The appropriate
time has come to show the light and way to about 60 per cent of the people, who happen to be OBCs
and minorities. At a time when the Parliament is taking a far reaching radical, social measure it should
not leave out a major chunk of the population from the benefit of reservation. The Indian Parliament
would be paying tributes to the Constitution makers of India especially stalwarts like Mahatma Gandhi,
Jawahar Lal Nehur and Dr. Ambedkar. The UPA Government is credited with the achievement of
economic growth with social justice in the last 4 years. A Government, which has brought milestone
legislations in the arena of social justice and reservation should not deprive of the same opportunities
to 60 per cent of OBCs and Minorities. This Government would be providing social and political
advantages to all sections of society and ensure equity and equality among men and women of
different communities and creed.
In our view reservation for women should not be restricted only to 15 years but should
continue indefinitely. Necessary changes have to be made for this also.
Finally women seats meant for SCs, OBCs and Minorities should rotate once in 15 years and
not 10 years so as to enable women to contribute substantially to the development of their respective
constituencies. This would provide a reasonable stability to the political career of woman and improve
horizontal spread of the influence of woman in other constituencies as well.

158
The above suggestions of PMK should not be construed as opposition to the Bill in its present
form, but they are meant to provide a comprehensive Bill, which would meet the canons of social
justice and equality to Indian people after 60 years of independence. We hope that the Hon’ble
Committee would look into the issue of Indian people especially Indian women in larger perspective
and not take a hasty decision to exclude OBCs and Minorities. The argument that their interest will
be taken care of later by passing the present Bill does not hold water. We have waited 60 years even
for the present Bill. Let us provide an opportunity to OBCs and Minorities also in the same Bill and
pass it.
RASHTRIYA JANATA DAL
1. Rashtriya Janata Dal supports the reservation for women but does not support the
‘Women Reservation Bill’ in the present form at all.
2. In case of providing reservation to women, there must be a quota for OBC, Minorities
including Muslims, Christians and others, and Dalits (SC/ST) within it. There must be a
quota within quota for these sections of women proportionate to their population in the
country.
3. The selection of parliamentary reserved constituencies for women should be decided by
the political party itself. No specific parliamentary constituency should be marked for
women candidates only. The number of reserved parliamentary constituencies should be
provided to the political parties for their decision to context women candidates on such
number of seats.
4. Our party is of the view that a national political consensus should be adopted for this
important issue of reservation for women.
5. No decision should be taken in haste without reaching a national consensus among the
political parties.
SAMAJWADI PARTY
1. Samajwadi Party does not support the Women Reservation Bill in the present form.
2. If reservation is to be given to women, there must be a quota for OBC and Muslim
women within it.
3. Our party is of the view that a consensus formula should be adopted for the reservation
of women.
4. Our party fully supports the Election Commission’s proposal for women’s reservation.
5. No decision should be taken in haste without reaching a consensus among the political
parties.
SWATANTRA BHARAT PAKSHA
The Swatantra Bharat Paksha (SBP), of which I have the honour to be national president is
very closely associated with the Shetkari Mahila Aghadi (SMA), probably the largest organization of
rural women. It has the distinction of having made pathbreaking innovations in the domain of women’s
empowerment and women’s property rights.

159
It may be recalled that it was as far back as 1986 that the SMA initiated the move of panels
of candidates exclusively of women for Panchayat Raj elections in Maharashtra. The declaration had
sent shock waves across the political arena of Maharashtra. As a consequence, the Panchayat Raj
elections in that State were suspended for six years. Finally, the Government of Maharashtra came
forward with an attenuated solution of providing 33% reservations for women. It is this initiative of
the Government of Maharashtra which forms the basis of the present amendment to the Constitution
Bill, 2008.
The SBP has serious reservations on any system of reservation based on rotation. This
position has been clearly brought out in the SBP Manifesto, 2009.
The novel feature of the present Bill is the provision it contains for reservation in every State/
Union Territory of 1/3rd of seats reserved for SC and ST for women belonging to the respective
category. I have had the arithmetic of this provision worked out and have come to the conclusion that
in all cases where the number of seats for SC/ST women in any given State/UT does not exceed 3,
the candidates fielded by various parties are more than likely to be close relations or acquaintances
of the party leaders.
I have pointed out, in the relevant extract of the document attached, that if the Bill is passed
in the present form it will seriously affect the servicing of the constituency by the elected members
of the legislature. It would further adversely affect the quality of the legislatures in as much as the
legislatures are unlikely to contain more than 33% second-termers. The phenomenon of members of
legislatures getting elected for six or seven consecutive terms will simply disappear, with disastrous
consequences one can easily imagine.
I shall be grateful if you bring to the notice of the committee the SBP position on this issue
and under all circumstances keep out from the Bill the provision related to rotation of seats reserved
for women.

Printed at : Bengal Offset Works, 335, Khajoor Road, Karol Bagh, New Delhi-110005.