 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
PERSONNEL, PUBLIC GRIEVANCES, LAW AND 
 JUSTICE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi  
March, 2025/ Chaitra, 1947 (Saka) 
REPORT NO. 
151 
 
ONE HUNDRED FIFTY FIRST REPORT 
ON 
ACTION TAKEN ON ONE HUNDRED FORTY THIRD REPORT OF THE  
COMMITTEE 
ON THE SUBJECT 
"REVIEW OF THE WORKING OF LEGAL AID UNDER THE LEGAL 
SERVICES AUTHORITIES ACT, 1987" 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 27th March, 2025) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on27th March, 2025) 
 
 

 
2 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
E-MAIL: rs-cpers@sansad.nic.in 
WEBSITE: http://sansad.in/rs 

 
3 
 
C O N T E N T S 
 
PAGE NO. 
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE                                                                      4 
 
2. INTRODUCTION                                                                                                           5 
 
3. ACRONYMS                                                                                                              6 
 
4. REPORT 
 
(I) CHAPTER I                                                                                                  8 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN 
ACCEPTED BY THE DEPARTMENT 
(II) CHAPTER II                                                                                                     12 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE 
COMMITTEE DOES NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE 
REPLIES GIVEN BY THE DEPARTMENT  
(III) CHAPTER III                                                                                                    16 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH 
COMMITTEE DOES NOT ACCEPT THE REASONS GIVEN BY 
THE DEPARTMENT AND REITERATES ITS 
RECOMMENDATIONS   
(IV) CHAPTER IV                                                                                                     23 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH 
FINAL REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN RECEIVED   
 
6.          RELEVANT MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF THE COMMITTEE*                      24 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
*to be appended at later stage 

 
4 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
(Re-constituted w.e.f. 26th September, 2024) 
 
1. Shri Brij Lal         Chairman 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
2. Shri Ranjan Gogoi 
3. Ms. Swati Maliwal 
4. Shri Manan Kumar Mishra 
5. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Ray 
6. Shri K.R. Suresh Reddy 
7. Shri C. Ve Shanmugam 
8. Shri Vivek K. Tankha 
9. Shri P. Wilson 
10. *Shri Sana Sathish Babu 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
11. Shri M. Mallesh Babu 
12. Shri Kalyan Banerjee 
13. Shri Arup Chakraborty 
14. Shri Gaddigoudar Parvatagouda Chandanagouda 
15. Shri P. P. Chaudhary 
16. Shri Varun Chaudhry 
17. Dr. Faggan Singh Kulaste 
18. Shri Dineshbhai Makwana 
19. Shri Aga Syed Ruhullah Mehdi 
20. Adv. Gowaal Kagada Padavi 
21. Shri Gyaneshwar Patil 
22. Shri Radhakrishna 
23. Shri A. Raja 
24. Shri Madhavaneni Raghunandan Rao 
25. Shri Saleng A. Sangma 
26. Shri Pushpendra Saroj 
27. Shrimati Manju Sharma 
28. Shri Abdul Rashid Sheikh 
29. Shri Mahendra Singh Solanky 
30. Shri K. Sudhakaran 
31. Shri Lalji Verma 
 
_____________________________ 
* Nominated w.e.f. 07.01.2025 
SECRETARIAT 
 
Dr. Vandana Kumar, Additional Secretary 
Shri P.Narayanan, Joint Secretary 
Smt. Indira Chaturvedi Vaidya, Director 
Shri Kuldeep Kumar Vats, Under Secretary 
 
 

 
5 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 I, the Chairman of the Department related Parliamentary Standing Committee on 
Personnel, Public Grievances, Law and Justice, having been authorized by the Committee to 
present the Report on its behalf, do hereby present this One Hundred Fifty First Report (151st) on 
the Action Taken on One Hundred Forty-Third Report (143rd) of the Committee on "Review of 
the working of Legal Aid under the Legal Services Authorities Act, 1987 (Ministry of Law & 
Justice). 
2. The One Hundred Forty -Third Report  (143rd) Report of the Department related 
Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions, Law and 
Justice was presented to Rajya Sabha on the 7th February, 2024 and laid on the Table of Lok 
Sabha on the 7th February, 2024.  
3. The Department of Justice (Ministry of Law & Justice) furnished their Action Taken 
Replies on the One Hundred and Forty-Third Report (143rd) of the Committee on 7th May, 2024. 
The Committee considered the draft One Hundred Fifty First Report and adopted the same in its 
meeting held on 25th March, 2025.  
4. For the facility of reference and convenience, the observations and recommendations of 
the Committee have been printed in bold letters in the body of the Report. 
 
 
New Delhi  
27th March, 2025   BRIJ LAL 
 Chairman, 
 Department-related Parliamentary Standing  
 Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances, 
Law and Justice 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
6 
 
ACRONYMS 
 
ADR Alternative dispute resolution 
LADCS Legal Aid Defense Counsel System 
NALSA National Legal Services Authority  
NCRB National Crime Records Bureau  
PLV Para-legal volunteers 
State LSAs State Legal Services Authorities  
 
  

 
7 
R E P O R T 
 This Action Taken Report (ATR) of the Committee deals with the action taken by the 
Department of Justice (Ministry of Law & Justice) on the recommendations / observations of the 
Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances, Law 
and Justice in its One Hundred Forty-Third (143rd) Report of the Committee on "Review of the 
working of Legal Aid under the Legal Services Authorities Act, 1987 ”pertaining to the 
Department of Justice (Ministry of Law & Justice), which was presented to Rajya Sabha on the 
7th February, 2024 and laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on the 7th February, 2024. 
2. The Committee had made 16 recommendations/observations in its 1 43rdReport. Replies 
of the Department thereto have been categorized and scrutinized under three chapters on the 
basis of satisfaction of the Committee. These replies have been categorized as follows: 
Chapter – I:  Recommendations/observations ( 4) which have been accepted by the 
Department, i.e. in respect of paras 23, 24, 28 and 30 of the Report. The 
Committee is pleased to note that the Department has accepted those 
recommendations. 
Chapter – II:     Recommendations/observations ( 5) which the Committee does not desire to 
pursue in view of the replies given by the Department, i.e. in respect of paras 
11, 19 , 20, 21 and 34  of the Report. The Committee is satisfied with the 
explanations advanced by the Department and does not wish to p ursue those 
as of now.  
Chapter – III:      Recommendations/observations ( 6) in respect of which Committee has not 
accepted the replies of the Department, i.e. with regard to paras 10, 14, 15, 22, 
26 and 33 of the Report. The Committee does not accept the reasons given by 
the Department and reiterates the same. 
Chapter – IV:    Recommendations/observations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government have not been received.  
3. The Committee desires t hat the Department should furnish pointed and detailed Action 
Taken Notes in respect of all the further Recommendations/Observations made by the 
Committee in Chapter – III of this report. 
4. The details of the ATR have been discussed in the respective Chapters in the succeeding 
pages. For reference purpose, para numbers of the original report (i.e. of the 143rdReport) have 
been mentioned at the end of each recommendation/observation.   
  

 
8 
CHAPTER I 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
DEPARTMENT 
CHALLENGES IN LOK ADALATS 
Recommendation/Observation 
1.1 Lok Adalats are being organized by NALSA and State LSAs for amicable settlement of 
disputes. Though Lok Adalats  are designed to expedite case resolution, they encounter 
challenges due to their limited powers compared to regular courts. They also don't have to adhere 
to any proper procedures. Further, they cannot compel the parties to appear for the proceedings. 
Many times one of the parties does not appear for the hearing and then there is a delay in the 
disposal. Therefore, there is a need to have a relook into the powers and procedures of 
conducting Lok Adalats for making them more effective and efficient. The Lok  Adalats should 
have powers to ensure the presence of parties for finding the scope of an amicable settlement. 
(Para 23) 
Action Taken: 
I. The Lok Adalats are governed under Chapter VI (Section 19 to 22) of the Legal Services 
Authorities Act, 1987. As per Section 19 (5) of the Legal Services Authorities Act, 1987 
the Lok Adalats  "have jurisdiction to determine and to arrive at a compromise or 
settlement bet ween the parties to a dispute". The Lok Adalats are statutory bodies 
established for the purpose of amicable settlement between the parties in dispute. Section 
22 of the LSA Act 1987 states that the "Lok Adalats have the same powers as are vested 
in Civil Court under the CPC, 1908, while trying a suit ... ". Overall, the Lok Adalats are 
based on a participatory approach of dispute resolution and the proceeding in Lok 
Adalats are usually not adjudicatory. 
II. With respect to the issue of delay in disposal becaus e of absence of the parties, it is 
submitted that NALSA regularly engages with the SLSAs to conduct pre -Lok Adalat 
meetings for ensuring the attendance of the parties and consequently increasing the 
disposal rate. The data below shows the consequent increase in disposal rate. 
III. In the year 2023, National Lok Adalats disposed the highest ever number of cases with 
more than 110% increase in total cases disposed in comparison to the previous year. The 
disposal of cases at the State Lok Adalats also increased in the F.Y. 2023 -24 from 
8,51,309 to 9,97,494. 
IV. It is proposed that NALSA will strengthen Lok Adalats through extensive awareness 
campaigns on Lok Adalats as an Alternative Dispute Resolution platform to enhance the 
participation of parties in the Lok Adalats which will in turn increase the disposal rate. 
 
Recommendation/Observation  
1.2 Thus Strengthening and streamlining Lok Adalats becomes imperative to make them 
more effective in resolving disputes efficiently. Lok Adalats often suffer from inadequate 
infrastructure, facilities, staff and training. This affects their efficiency and quality of service. 
Accordingly, the Committee feels that Lok Adalats need to be provided with adequate 

 
9 
infrastructure, equipment, staff and training. They also need to adopt mode rn technology and 
methods to streamline their processes and reduce delays. (Para 24) 
Action Taken: 
I. The Lok Adalats are organized on a non -working day of the Courts so that the Court s' 
existing infrastructure can be used for periodic Lok Adalats. 
II. NALSA grants cannot be used for infrastructure development and are only to be used for 
carrying out the various legal services activities and programmes including organizing of 
Lok Adalats. 
III. The referral judges and the judges deputed at Lok Adalats are regularly trai ned at the 
judicial academies as per the State's judicial training schedules. 
IV. It is proposed that SLSAs to take up the issue of infrastructure, facilities and staff for 
strengthening Lok Adalats at the State level with the respective State/UT Governments 
and High Courts. 
 
INCREASED ACCESS TO LEGAL-AID TO THE PRISONERS 
Recommendation/Observation 
1.3 The Committee is, therefore, of the view that access to justice, especially to the 
undertrials is still limited, sufficient time for consultation and a centrali sed application process is 
vital for seeking help. A centralised application process will provide for prompt allocation of 
counsel and would enable them to seek their legal remedies with minimal delay. (Para 28) 
Action Taken: 
I. It is submitted that NALSA has  developed a centralized application processing system 
i.e., the Legal Services Management System portal, which serves as a single point digital 
platform for beneficiaries to apply and track their application status. In prisons, the PLVs 
and prison visiting lawyers assist the prisoners in accessing the LSMS portal. 
II. Further, access points for Legal Aid to undertrials are established at all points of their 
interaction with the criminal justice system, as under: 
A. At police stations: Under the 'NALSA's early access to justice at pre-arrest, arrest and 
remand stage framework, legal aid lawyers are made available to arrested persons at 
the police stations. In the year 2023, 20,688 arrested persons were provided legal aid 
at the police station. For strengthening a ccess to legal aid services at the police 
station, a roster of legal aid lawyers is put up at 4,126 Police Stations and the process 
is ongoing for the remaining police stations. 
B. At Courts: Under the above-mentioned framework, 9,372 remand lawyers are deputed 
at all concerned courts in the country for enabling prompt access to legal 
representation to arrested persons produced before remand courts. In the year 2023, 
the remand lawyers filed 66,294 bail applications out of which bail was granted in 
56% of the applications. 
C. At Prisons: the 'NALSA SOP on Access to Legal Aid Services to Prisoners and 
Functioning of Prison Legal Aid Clinics' mandates that all prisons must have a leg al 
aid clinic run by the Jail Visiting Lawyers and PL Vs, for reaching out to the 
prisoners for prompt, easy and continuous access to legal aid. The legal aid clinics are 

 
10 
set up at a common area in prison which is accessible to prisoners. There are 1,171 
Prison Legal Aid Clinics which were visited by 3,32,600 prisoners out of which 
2,33,269 prisoners were provided legal assistance. 
III. It is further submitted that in the year 2023, 1,38,764 undertrial prisoners (32% of the last 
reported UTPs) and 25,288 convicts (19% of the last reported total convict prisoners) 
were provided free legal representation at various stages by the Legal Services 
Institutions. 
IV. It is proposed that SLSAs collaborate with the prison departments to ensure that the 
prisoners are allowed re gulated, monitored, and guided access to designated computer 
system(s) in prisons which can be used for accessing the LSMS portal, under supervision 
and with assistance of the PLVs deputed at the prison legal aid clinic. 
 
LEGAL AID DEFENCE COUNSEL SCHEME 
Recommendation/Observation 
1.4 The Legal Aid Defence Counsel Scheme (LADCS) engages full -time experienced 
lawyers to exclusively devote their effort to provide legal aid, assistance and representation to 
the beneficiaries in criminal matters. This is a paradigm shift in the manner in which the legal aid 
is provided in the country, whereas earlier cases were assigned to the empanelled lawyers who 
also had a private practice. The Committee appreciates such scheme and hope that it will 
improve the quality of l egal aid to the beneficiary. It is also expected that competent and 
dedicated lawyers are empanelled through a transparent selection process for manning this 
Scheme. (Para 30) 
Action Taken 
I. Appreciating potential of LADCS, the Government of India approved n ew Central Sector 
Scheme namely LADCS Scheme for three years (F.Y. 2023 -24 to F.Y. 2025 -26) with 
outlay of Rs. 998.43 crore with 100% Central share. Year -wise allocation of LADCS 
Scheme as approved by Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC) is as follows: 
 
Scheme FY Proposed Outlay (INR Crores) 
Legal Aid Defense Counsel 
System (LADCS) 
2023-24 200.00  
2024-25 367.70 
2025-26 430.73 
Total 998.43 
II. After 2025-26, Central Government envisages to gradually reduce  its share for LADCS 
Scheme and eventually, after 2030 -31, LADCS Scheme expected to be completely 
funded by the State Governments. This arrangements helps to make the scheme 
sustainable in the long run.  
III. NALSA has been advised that the terms of contract en tered into under LADCS with the 
Counsels, Office Assistant and others shall be enforced for two years initially and 
extended by one year on performance basis. Since, there is need for transparent selection 
process, as the success of the scheme will depend upon the team of Defense Counsels at 
the District level, NALSA has been requested to draft terms of contract, SOP for 
engaging counsels and other resources and the yardsticks for performance as the basis for 

 
11 
extension. 
IV. Presently, as per LADCS Modified S cheme 2022, the Legal Aid Defenc e Counsels are 
hired on a two -year contract basis through a ''fair, transparent and competitive selection 
process adopted by the DLSAs under the guidance of SLSA" and is ''purely based on 
merit, taking into account the knowledg e, skills, practice and experience of candidates". 
The Scheme specifies criteria of eligibility for the candidates at different levels and the 
selection is made by a Selection Committee comprising of the Principal District & 
Sessions Judge (Chairman, DLSA)  as the chair and at least three senior most judicial 
officers dealing mainly with criminal cases. The candidates recommended by the 
Selection Committee are put for consideration and final approval by the Hon'ble 
Executive Chairman, SLSA. 
V. The regular worki ng of the LADCs on a case -to-case basis is monitored by the 
Monitoring and Mentoring Committees (MMCs) set up at the district level under Rule 10 
of the National Legal Services Authority (Free and Competent Legal Services) 
Regulations, 2010. 
VI. The Scheme fur ther mandates monthly review of LADCS's functioning at the district 
level by the DLSA Chairman, quarterly review at the state level by the SLSA and half -
yearly review by NALSA at the national level. The review includes performance 
evaluation of the LADCS b ased on objective parameters such as number of cases dealt 
with, number of cases disposed, number of bail applications filed, among other key duties 
of the LADCs. 
VII. Legal Aid Defense Counsels are given specialized training at the time of induction based 
on the dedicated training modules for different levels of LADCs, prepared by NALSA. 
VIII. By the end of the year 2023, LADCS offices have been set -up at 529 DLSAs. It is 
proposed that in the FY. 2024 -25, LADCS will be established at total 600 DLSAs and in 
the F.Y. 2025-26, LADCS will be established at all the 703 DLSAs. Further, regular and 
rigorous trainings will be conducted for LADCs at the State level on specific aspects of 
criminal litigation, client counseling, and their roles under the Scheme. The trainings wi ll 
also include refresher courses on the three new criminal laws. 
IX. It is further proposed that after one year of working of the LADCS offices, an extensive 
and comparative performance evaluation of LADCS will be carried out by NALSA to 
measure the intended outcomes and impact of the new system on strengthening legal aid 
in criminal matters. 
 
--- 
  

 
12 
CHAPTER II 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES GIVEN BY THE DEPARTMENT 
 
LACK OF AWARENESS AND LEGAL EDUCATION 
Recommendation/Observation  
2.1  Further, the Committee expresses its concern on the plight of vulnerable sections, 
where NALSA should have been involved effectively. As per the data available in the 
public domain, out of total number of prisoners  in the country, approximately 70 percent 
are under trials. The Committee was further given to understand that a large number of 
under trial prisoners have spent more time in jail than the actual sentence prescribed 
under the relevant Sections/ Acts in cas e if they have been convicted. A large number of 
prisoners are unable to arrange bail due to non-furnishing of personal bail bonds/surety. 
In view of this, the Committee recommends that NALSA should study and evaluate 
these types of cases and assist them o n priority. (Para 11). 
Action Taken: 
I. As per the National Crime Records Bureau (NCRB) data, the proportion of under  trial 
prisoners in prisons can be contextualized as under: 
A. In 2022, there were 1.42 crore arrests for offences in IPC, offences under State &  
Local Laws and under Cr.P.C. provisions. 
B. 18.04 Lakh persons were admitted to prisons during the year 2022, however, the 
prison population only increased by 19,186 from 2021 to 2022 which shows that 
majority of the prisoners admitted during the year were r eleased either on bail or 
acquitted. 
II. The above-mentioned point is further substantiated by the fact that 69% of the under  trial 
prisoners as on 31 st December, 2022 had spent less than a year in the prison. Further 
break-up of this data point shows that 32% of the under trial prisoners had spent only upto 
3 months in the prison. This reflects that the majority of the under  trial population in 
prisons is a floating population. 
III. To keep a check on avoidable arrests and imprisonment of accused persons due to 
absence of legal representation, NALSA is augmenting legal services at pre -trial stages 
through the 'Early Access to Justice at Pre-arrest, Arrest and Remand Stage' framework. 
Following statistics for the year 2023 reflect the effectiveness of NALSA' s initia tive of 
focusing on legal aid at pre-trial stages to keep a check on avoidable imprisonment: 
A Suspects provided legal aid at police station 27,521 
B Suspects not arrested by police 9,948 (36% of A) 
C Arrestees provided legal aid at police station  20,688 
D Persons provided legal aid at remand stage 1,70,912 

 
13 
E Bail applications filed at remand stage 66,294 (39% of D) 
F Bail granted at remand stage 37,155 (56% of E) 
 
IV. Under trial Review Committees (UTRCs) are district level bodies chaired by the DLSA 
Chairperson for regular review of a total of 13 categories of Under   trial Prisoners 
(UTPs) who are eligible to apply for bail under different provisions of Cr.P.C. and one 
category of convict eligible for release. UTRCs are governed by the NALSA's SO P for 
UTRCs. In last five years, UTRCs have recommended for the release of 3,36,219 
prisoners out of which 1,60,576 (48%) were released. 
V. From this year onwards it has been decided to conduct quarterly UTRC meetings on 
scheduled dates across the country as the data reflects higher efficiency of UTRCs when 
the meetings are conducted as per a fixed schedule across the country. 
VI. UTRCs also review cases of prisoners who have spent half or more time in prison than 
the maximum imprisonment prescribed for the concer ned offence, as a distinct category 
covered under Section 436A of CrPC. 
VII. To monitor the cases of ''prisoners who are unable to arrange bail due to non  furnishing 
of personal bail bonds/surety", NALSA collaborated with the National Informatics 
Centre (NIC) and Ministry of Home Affairs for to create a technology -based dashboard 
system on the e -prisons module which automatically generates alerts for the concerned 
DLSA when a prisoner granted bail is not released within 7 days of bail order. Under this 
monitoring mechanism, the DLSAs are to take prompt action on a case -to-case basis on 
the basis of the alerts generated by the system and the SLSAs monitors such cases 
through the dashboard on the e-prisons module. 
VIII. In the year 2023, more than 5000 such persons wer e identified manually through prison 
wise screening and were subsequently released by filing modification of bail order 
applications under Section 440 of Cr.P.C. through the intervention of legal services 
institutions. 
IX. To further assist the prisoners, NALSA will take following steps:  
A. NALSA will develop a Training of Trainers (ToT) program on the functioning of 
UTRCs for training master trainers at the SLSA level who will then conduc t half -
yearly training programs for UTRC members for strengthening its functioning. 
B. NALSA will develop  intensive orientation program s for PLVs deputed at police 
stations and prisons, and Jail Visiting Lawyers at the induction level and half -yearly 
refresher courses and workshops for their capacity building on implementing the 
'NALSA's SOP on Access to Legal Aid Services to Prisoners and Functioning of the 
Prison Legal Aid Clinics, 2022' with a focus on identifying and assisting prisoners in 
need of legal aid and implementation of the NALSA's Early Access to Justice 
framework at the police station level. 
C. NALSA will strengthen the monitoring of legal services provided at the Prison Legal 
Aid Clinics through standardized reporting format based analysis of the duties and 
mandate of legal services providers under the 2022 SOP referred above. 
D. NALSA will commission an independent monitoring study of the working of the 

 
14 
'Early Access to Legal Aid at Pre-arrest, Arrest and Remand Stage' to determine the 
reasons for the gaps between the number of persons arrested and number of legal aid 
beneficiaries at the pre-arrest, arrest and remand stage. The study/report will be put 
up for discussion and consultation with the stakeholders to chalk out a future course 
of action for strengthening access to legal aid at the pre-arrest, arrest and remand 
stage. 
 
ROLE OF LAWYERS AND COMPENSATION 
Recommendation/Observation  
2.2 Therefore, the Committee is of the view that Bar Council of India should make 
mandatory appearance of every lawyer in at least in one pro bono work in a year to enable him to 
secure any relief fund from All India/State Bar Council. (Para 19) 
Action Taken:  
I. It is proposed that the matter will be taken up by NALSA and SLSAs with the Bar 
Council of India and respective State Bar Councils and associations respectively to 
promote the culture of pro-bono law practice. 
 
Recommendation/Observation  
2.3 Further, the Committee is also of the view that designated Senior Advocates in all High 
Courts/Supreme Court may come together to form a panel for doing pro -bono works and 
undertake such works. In each District Judiciary, High Courts and in Supreme Courts, the 
Advocates / Bar Association can involve advocates in pro -bono works by rotation and 
Association can monitor the same. (Para 20) 
Action Taken 
I. It is submitted that as on December, 2023 there wer e 8138 pro -bono lawyers under the 
Legal Services Institutions across the country. It is proposed that the matter will be taken 
up by NALSA and SLSAs with the Bar Council of India and respective State Bar 
Councils and associations respectively to promote th e culture of pro -bono law practice, 
monitoring pro -bono services and for issuance of a certificate of appreciation to such 
lawyers for their pro-bono services. 
 
Recommendation/Observation  
2.4 The Committee also suggests that District Judiciary/High Courts /Supreme Court can 
encourage these advocates by giving them merit certificates based upon their contributions to the 
pro-bono works done by them and such merit certificates could be utilized while assessing their 
individual merits. The pro  bono work done b y a lawyer may be taken into consideration for 
assessing his/her merit when they apply for any judicial posts, law officers post including 
appointment of High Court Judges and Supreme Court Judges, consideration of designation of 
Senior Advocates. (Para 21) 
Action Taken 

 
15 
I. It is proposed that above recommendation will be shared by NALSA with the Supreme 
Court and the High Courts for consideration and necessary action. 
 
MANNING THE NALSA  
Recommendation/Observation  
2.5 The Committee further recommends the NALSA to take proactive steps to fill up the 
vacant posts, in accordance with their respective RRs, on regular basis and not to allow piling up 
of unfilled vacancies. (Para 34) 
Action Taken: 
I. It is submitted that there are 33 sanctioned posts at NALSA in addition to the statutory 
position of the Member Secretary, out of which 5 posts are vacant as of March, 2024. 
NALSA is taking prompt steps to fill the existing vacancy of 5 posts. It is furthe r 
submitted that in last one year, 11 posts were filled resulting in the reduction of vacancy 
from 41 % to 9%.  
 
--- 
 
  

 
16 
CHAPTER III 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE 
COMMITTEE DOES NOT ACCEPT THE REASONS GIVEN BY THE DEPARTMENT 
AND REITERATES ITS RECOMMENDATIONS 
LACK OF AWARENESS AND LEGAL EDUCATION 
Recommendation/Observation  
3.1  Therefore, empowering individuals through education and creating awareness about their 
rights and the role of legal aid is essential to bridge this informational gap. Accordingly, the 
Committee is of the view that Government may take an extensive mass media campaign to 
educate the eligible population about the legal aid avenues available for them to get justice. (Para 
10)  
Action Taken:  
 
I. It is submitted that National Legal Services Authority (NALSA) is bridging the 
information gap among the eligible population with its ongoing awareness programmes. 
During the year 2023, 3,44,580 physical legal awareness programmes were organized 
which benefitted 3,21,50,1 78 persons. The increase in number of persons availing legal 
services reflects the impact of existing awareness programmes: 
A. The number of persons availing free legal services including legal representation, 
assistance, and advice increased by 36% in the year 2023 (14.9 lakh) in comparison to 
the year 2022 (10.9 lakh). 
B. The number of persons availing legal services at pre-arrest stage, arrest and remand 
stage increased by 30% from 1. 7 lakh in the year 2022 to 2.2 lakh in the year 2023. 
II. NALSA regularly conduc ts legal aid camp -based awareness campaigns across the 
country and has developed a NALSA 'theme song' for media -based awareness on the role 
of NALSA. However, NALSA has not yet ventured into mass -media campaigns at the 
national level. For mass -media campai gns, there will be need of specially qualified 
human resource having experience in media and communications for designing, 
coordinating, and analyzing mass -media campaigns. In order to bridge the information 
gap, it is proposed that NALSA will adopt following two pronged approach: 
A. Strengthening the existing awareness programmes/ campaigns: 
Conducting Pan-India beneficiary category wise targeted legal awareness campaigns, 
as per a fixed calendar/schedule of campaigns. The campaigns would include: 
i. Legal Literacy and Awareness camps: Tailored programs will be developed with 
focused attention on specific subject matters and rights & obligations, and 
processes under related laws. 
ii. Community outreach: Public events/meetings, street plays, etc. by students and 
PLVs. 
iii. On-spot legal services: Legal counselling & assistance camps by engaging 
lawyers (Panel Lawyers and Legal Aid Defence Counsels {LADCs}) with 

 
17 
subject-matter expertise; 
iv. Information Dissemination: Outreach -kits containing flyers, posters, etc. in local 
languages regarding the role of Legal Services Institutions (LSIs) and legal 
services schemes, programmes, etc. will be distributed. 
v. Mobile clinics for remote areas: Utilize vehicle based legal aid clinics for remote 
areas and small communities, including nomadic and semi nomadic communities. 
vi. Student PLV involvement: Encourage University based legal aid clinics for 
conducting follow-up legal awareness and outreach camps in areas in the vicinity 
of their institutions. 
vii. Reporting and Feedback: District Legal Services Authorities (DLSAs) will 
prepare categorized data of the campaigns which will be analyzed at the state 
level by the State Legal Services Authorities (SLSAs) and at the national level by 
NALSA for identifying improvement areas and sharing of good p ractices among 
SLSAs. 
B. Building capacity for "extensive mass media campaign to educate the eligible 
population about the legal aid avenue ": 
i. NALSA will take assistance of a special government agency in designing, 
executing, and analyzing mass media campaign s, from the earmarked funds for 
this purpose. 
ii. Local campaigns will focus on digital and physical dissemination of NALSA's 
Information, Education & Communication (IEC) material such as posters and 
flyers on legal services schemes, eligibility under Section 12 of the LSA Act 
1987, platforms/means for accessing legal services, etc. 
iii. These mass -media and physical campaigns will be synchronized with the 
scheduled targeted campaigns as proposed in part 'A' of the proposed action. 
iv. To enhance the dissemination of th e 'theme song', NALSA will coordinate & 
collaborate with mass -media platforms such as All India Radio, Doordarshan, 
Rajya Sabha TV, Lok Sabha TV, etc. for playing NALSA's theme song. 
v. SLSAs and DLSAs will ensure the widespread distribution of NALSA's theme 
song at public events, market areas, community fairs/carnivals, etc., in the local 
language. 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
3.2 Despite NALSA's commendable efforts, legal awareness remains limited, 
particularly in rural and marginalized communities. Awareness is crucial for the success of 
legal aid mechanisms. Therefore, the Committee recommends that NALSA collaborate 
with educational institutions and NGOs to integrate legal literacy into curricula, leverage 
mass media and digital platforms to  disseminate information widely  and regularly assess 
the impact of these initiatives through surveys and feedback mechanisms to ensure 
effectiveness. 
 
BUDGETARY CONSTRAINTS AND ALLOCATIONS 
Recommendation/Observation 

 
18 
3.3 It is an admitted fact that the prevalent social and economic disparity in the country is 
eroding the democratic objective of 'justice for all'. As majority of our population lacks legal 
awareness and necessary means to approach the courts, they are compelled to suffer in silence. 
Legal aid is an obligation of the State and rights of the Citizen, accordingly, it should be 
provided in the true spirit as envisaged in the Constitution. (Para 14) 
Action Taken: 
I. It is submitted that during April, 2023 to December, 2023, the Legal Services Authorities 
organized 3,55,850 legal awareness programs by engaging its 42,412 lawyers and 42,782 
PLVs, which benefitted 3,21,50,178 persons across the country. 
II. NALSA launched the revamped National Legal Aid Helpline 15100 on the Legal 
Services Day 2023 to enhance the reach of Legal Services Institutions and bridge the gap 
of access in remote areas and for persons under circumstances of restricted mobility. 
Between 09.11.2023 and 26.12.2023 (47 days), 84,235 persons were assisted though the 
helpline for their legal queries, requests, emergency services, legal assistance, etc. 
III. It is proposed that NALSA will increase the number of PLVs on the basis of a need-based 
assessment at the SLSA level.  
IV. It is further submitted that NALSA has informed that during the regular confer ences and 
meetings, majority of the SLSAs have expressed budgetary constraints as the prominent 
challenge in achieving the intended outcomes of legal services programmes. Section 16 
of the Legal Services Authorities Act, 1987 mandates State governments to provide funds 
to the State Legal Services Authorities (SLSAs). It has been decided by NALSA to take 
up this issue with the SLSAs at the State / Regional conferences. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
3.4   In this regard, the Committee observes that the majority of the Indian population are eligible 
for legal aid. However, as per 'India Justice Report, 2019' published by the Tata Trust, per capita 
free legal aid s pend in India is just 0.75 paisa  per annum (in 2017 -18), which is perhaps among 
the lowest in the wor ld. Though funding legal services authorities is also one of the 
responsibilities of States, there is a dire need to significantly enhance the expenditure on this 
front. Therefore, the Committee strongly recommends that Grant -in-aid to NALSA may be 
substantially increased in order to carry out the activities as planned by them. (Para 15) 
Action Taken: 
I. The majority of the population is 'eligible' for legal aid as per the wide eligibility criteria 
given under Section 12 of the Legal Services Authorities Act, 1987. Wide eligibility 
framework ensures that no one in need of free legal services is rendered ineligible to 
receive the services. It may be noted that 'eligibility' does not necessarily mean 'need' 
and therefore every eligible person for legal aid may not need free legal services. 
II. During the F.Y. 2022 -23, Rs. 190 crore were provided to NALSA as Grant -in-Aid for 
free legal aid activities which were increased to Rs. 200 crore during F.Y. 2023-24 during 
Budget Estimate stage. Further, the Government of India  has approved a new Central 
Sector Scheme namely Legal Aid Defense Counsel System (LADCS) Scheme for three 
years (F.Y. 2023-24 to F.Y. 2025 -26) with outlay of Rs. 998.43 crore (including Rs. 200 

 
19 
crore for F.Y. 2023 -24 for implementation and operationalizat ion of LADCS Scheme) 
with 100% Central share. Hence, total Rs. 400 crore were provided to NALSA during the 
F.Y. 2023-24.  
III. In absence of adequate funds from the State governments, SLSAs are dependent on 
NALSA grants only. To address this issue, it is propos ed that NALSA will take steps for 
deliberating this issue at appropriate platform for finding sustainable and decentralized 
funding solutions. 
IV. It is further proposed that NALSA will request a specialized government agency such as 
NITI Aayog to conduct a pa n-India survey for demand and supply of free legal services 
as well as to map the anticipated increase in demand. Such a study will be crucial in an 
objective determination on the required funds and human resources to meet the demand. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
3.5 Budget limitations impede the scalability and effectiveness of legal aid programs, 
affecting infrastructure, staffing, and outreach activities. The Department of Justice's 
DISHA program, which reached 1.53 million individuals through legal awareness 
initiatives as of June 30, 2024, demonstrates the potential impact of well -funded programs. 
Therefore, the Committee advocates for a fixed percentage of state GDP to be allocated to 
legal aid, encouraging state contribut ions through matching central grants, and exploring 
partnerships with the private sector and CSR initiatives to supplement funding and ensure 
sustainable resource allocation. 
 
ROLE OF LAWYERS AND COMPENSATION 
Recommendation/Observation 
3.6 As regard s fee , it is being observed that panel lawyers are not being adequately 
compensated and their remuneration has remained stagnant for years together. This affects the 
quality of legal aid service provided to the clients. This also often leads to lawyers found 
harassing beneficiaries or demanding 'fees' from them. The Committee accordingly, recommends 
NALSA to compensate lawyers adequately, so that they are able to sustain themselves and 
remain motivated in their job. While ensuring this, a robust system of monitori ng the efficacy 
and accountability of legal aid services provided to the beneficiaries may also be put in place by 
NALSA. (Para 22) 
Action Taken: 
I. Regulation 14 of The National Legal Services Authority (Free and Competent Legal 
Services) Regulations, 2010 provides that the SLSAs and other LSIs "shall effect periodic 
revision of the honorarium to be paid to panel lawyers". 
II. The Central Authority of NALSA vide its meeting dated 17.09.2015 constituted a 
committee on this subject -matter. The Committee proposed th e following minimum fee 
structure: 
At High Court Level 
Drafting of substantive pleadings  Rs. 1500  

 
20 
Drafting of miscellaneous applications Rs. 500  
Appearance per effective hearing  Rs. 1000  
Appearance per non-effective hearing Rs. 750  
(maximum of Rs. 10,000 per case) 
Subordinate Courts at all levels including Tribunals 
Drafting of substantive pleadings  Rs. 1200  
Drafting of miscellaneous applications Rs. 400  
(maximum of Rs.800 for all applications) 
Appearance per effective hearing  Rs. 750 
Appearance per non-effective hearing Rs. 550  
(maximum of Rs. 7,500 per case) 
 
III. Under Legal Aid Defense Counsel Scheme (Modified) 2022, the LADCs are paid a 
competitive retainership fee or honorarium up to Rs. 1 Lakh per month to Chief LADCs, 
up to Rs. 75, 000 per month to Dy Chief LADCs, and upto Rs. 45,000 to Assistant 
LADCs. 
IV. With respect to the "robust system of monitoring the efficacy and accountability of legal 
aid services provided to the beneficiaries", it is submitted that the Monitoring and 
Mentoring Committees (MMCs) are set up at the district level under Rule 10 of the 
National Legal Services Authority (Free and Competent Legal Services) Regulations, 
2010 which undertake case-to-case monitoring of the  functioning of the LADCS, in line 
with the monitoring of the cases assigned to the Panel Lawyers. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
3.7 Efforts to encourage pro -bono work and enhance lawyer compensation are 
progressing, yet the absence of structured in centives and formal recognition continues to 
deter widespread participation. Recognizing the vital role of effective legal representation, 
constitutional courts have emphasized the need to strengthen free legal aid services, 
particularly for prisoners. To address this, the Committee recommends establishment of a 
national registry for pro-bono lawyers, offering recognition and linking their contributions 
to career advancement opportunities, such as senior designations or judicial appointments. 
Additionally, annual reviews of compensation rates should be institutionalized to align with 
market standards, ensuring the recruitment and retention of committed legal professionals. 
 
UNDERUTILIZATION OF PARA-LEGAL VOLUNTEERS 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
3.8 To overcome these challenges and enhance the utilization of PLVs Committee feels that 
some immediate measures should be taken like providing regular and comprehensive training 
and capacity building of PLVs. They should also be provided with adequate resour ces and 
support to perform their duties effectively. PLVs should be paid or compensated adequately for 

 
21 
their work, so that they remain interested in their work. They should also receive recognition and 
appreciation from the legal system and the society. Th is would enhance their motivation and 
commitment to serve the people. Further, the legal services authorities and the Lok Adalats 
should conduct awareness campaigns and outreach programs to inform and educate the people 
about the role and functions of PLVs . In turn, the PLVs should also build trust and rapport with 
the people and address their concerns and grievances. (Para 26) 
Action Taken 
I. There are 42,782 PLVs, out of which 17,765 (41.5%) are female, 235 are transgender 
persons and 24,782 are male, who ha ve been given induction training. In addition to the 
induction training, 7,407 PLVs have been provided special training through various  
capacity building programmes during the last five F.Y. i.e. 2019-20 to 2023-24. 
II. As per the Scheme for Para -Legal Volunte ers (Revised), the PLVs' tenure may be 
extended for more than a year if the Chairperson, DLSA finds the PLV's performance 
satisfactory based on regular review. 
III. NALSA periodically organizes national level programmes for PLVs for recognizing and 
commending t heir performance. The State authorities also regularly organize similar 
programmes at the State level. 
IV. In reference to the issue of providing adequate resources to the PLVs, it may be noted 
that the expenses incurred by the PLVs in performance of their dut ies, including travel 
costs, are reimbursed as per the 'Scheme for Para Legal Volunteers (Revised).' 
V. In reference to the issue of payment and adequate compensation to the PLVs for their 
services, it may be noted that the SLSAs and DLSAs decide the honorar ium for the PLVs 
as per the revised Scheme (referred above). As per the Scheme, revised in the year 2013, 
the honorarium of the PLVs shall not be less than Rs. 250 per day. As of January, 2024, 
the honorarium for PLV in different SLSAs ranges between Rs. 250 to Rs. 1800 per day. 
VI. It is proposed that NALSA will ensure that intensive subject-specific trainings for PLVs 
are conducted at the district level based on their area of work and experience, in 
collaboration with the local organizations and government bodies. Further, SLSAs will be 
asked to ensure that the PLVs are empanelled under all categories as mentioned in the 
revised scheme. 
VII. It is further proposed that the agenda of revising the minimum fee structure for PLVs will 
be taken up in the next Central Au thority meeting of NALSA. In addition, all campaigns 
of NALSA will include awareness about the specific roles of PLVs. Pamphlets and 
posters displaying the details of the PLVs in the district/taluk a along with their subject -
specific roles will also be publicized at relevant public places. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
3.9 Para-Legal Volunteers (PLVs) remain an underutilized resource despite their 
potential to connect marginalized communities with essential legal services. Their 
effectiveness can be significantly enhanced through expanded roles, targeted training, and 
meaningful recognition. To bridge existing gaps, the Committee recommends training 

 
22 
programs should incorporate digital literacy, mediation techniques, and specialized legal 
skills relevant to local needs. Performance-based incentives must be introduced to motiva te 
consistent excellence, while peer -review mechanisms can foster collaboration and identify 
best practices for replication. Recognizing top -performing PLVs through awards and 
public acknowledgment will further enhance their commitment and inspire broader 
participation, ultimately strengthening the grassroots reach of legal aid services. 
 
MANNING THE NALSA  
 
Recommendation/Observation  
3.10 The Committee notes that NALSA's activities have increased manifold since its inception 
and it is actively engaged in taking the legal aid movement in India to every nook and corner. 
However, its existing sanctioned staff strength of 34 only is too low considering its mandate and 
reach. Accordingly, the Committee recommends the Government to sanction additional 40 posts 
as requested by them. (Para 33) 
Action Taken 
I. It is submitted that NALSA is working on the proposals for creation of additional posts 
for NALSA and Department of Justice will act on it as per due process. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation  
 
3.11 The Committ ee has repeatedly emphasized the urgency of this issue, but the 
Department's responses have been consistently vague and non -committal. NALSA has 
frequently highlighted this concern during its depositions, underscoring the critical 
need for adequate staffin g to fulfil its expanding mandate. The Committee strongly 
recommends that the Department of Justice provide a clear and actionable timeline 
for the creation and recruitment of the requisite officers and staff in NALSA. Such a 
commitment is essential to ens ure the effective functioning of NALSA and the 
fulfilment of its objective to provide accessible and efficient legal aid services across 
the country. 
 
--- 
 
 
 
  

 
23 
 
CHAPTER IV 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES 
OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN RECEIVED:  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-NIL- 
  

 
24 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINUTES 