PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA 35
DEPARTMENT -RELA TED PARLIAMENT ARY STANDING
COMMITTEE  ON PERSONNEL,  PUBLIC  GRIEVANCES,  
LAW AND JUSTICE
THIRTY FIFTH REPORT
ON
ACTION TAKEN REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ON
THE RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED
IN THE 29TH REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON “PUBLIC
GRIEVANCES REDRESSAL MECHANISM”
TH 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 17 DECEMBER, 2009)
TH 
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 17 DECEMBER, 2009)
TH 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 17 DECEMBER, 2009)
TH 
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 17 DECEMBER, 2009)
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
DECEMBER, 2009/PAUSA (SAKA 1931)DECEMBER, 2009/PAUSA (SAKA 1931)

Website:http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail:rsc-pers@sansad.nic.in

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA  SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON PERSONNEL, PUBLIC GRIEVANCES, LAW
AND JUSTICE
THIRTY FIFTH REPORT
ON
ACTION TAKEN REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ON THE
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS CONTAINED
IN THE 29TH REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON “PUBLIC
GRIEV ANCES REDRESSAL MECHANISM”
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 17 TH DECEMBER, 2009)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 17 TH DECEMBER, 2009)
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
DECEMBER, 2009/PAUSA (SAKA 1931)
CS (P & L)-69

CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ......................................................................................... (i)-(ii)
2. I NTRODUCTION ........................................................................................................................ (iii)
3. R EPORT .................................................................................................................................. 1—20
(i) C HAPTER -I
Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by
the Ministry .............................................................................................................. 2—5
(ii) C
HAPTER -II
Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not desire to
pursue for now in view of the Government’s Action Taken replies .............. 6—8
(iii) C
HAPTER -III
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which the Committee has
not accepted replies of the Ministry .................................................................... 9—14
(ii) C
HAPTER -IV
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies of the
Ministry have not been received .......................................................................... 15—20
5. R
ELEVANT M INUTES  OF THE M EETINGS  OF THE C OMMITTEE ............................................ 21—24

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2009-10)
(Constituted on 31st August, 2009)
1. Shrimati Jayanthi Natarajan — Chairperson
RAJYA SABHA
2. Dr. Abhishek Manu Singhvi
3. Shri Shantaram Laxman Naik
4. Shri Balavant alias Bal Apte
5. Shri Parshottam Khodabhai Rupala
6. Shri Virendra Bhatia
7. Shri Tiruchi Siva
8. Sardar Tarlochan Singh
9. Shri Parimal Nathwani
10. Shri H.K. Dua
LOK SABHA
11. Shri Bhajan Lal
12. Shri N.S.V. Chitthan
13. Shrimati Deepa Dasmunsi
14. Shrimati Jyoti Dhurve
15. Shri D.B. Chandre Gowda
16. Dr. Monazir Hassan
17. Shri Syed Shahnawaz Hussain
18. Shrimati Chandresh Kumari
19. Shri Lalu Prasad
20. Dr. Kirodi Lal Meena
21. Kumari Meenakshi Natrajan
22. Shri Devji M.Patel
23. Shri Harin Pathak
24. Shri S. Semmalai
25. Shri Shailendra Kumar
26. Shri Vijay Bahadur Singh
27. Dr. (Shrimati) Prabha Kishor Taviad
28. Shri Manish Tewari
29. Shri R. Thamaraiselvan
30. Adv. P.T. Thomas (Idukki)
31. Vacant
(i)

(ii)
SECRETARIAT
Shri Sham Sher Singh, Joint Secretary
Shri K.P. Singh, Director
Shri K.N. Earendra Kumar, Joint Director
Shrimati Niangkhannem Guite, Assistant Director

(iii)
INTRODUCTION
I, The Chairperson of the Department related Parliamentary Standing Committee on
Personnel, Public Grievances, Law and Justice, having been authorized by the Committee to present
the Report on its behalf, do hereby present this Thirty Fifth Report on Action Taken by
Government on the recommendations/observations contained in the Twenty Ninth Report of this
Committee on “Public Grievances Redressal Mechanism”.
2. The Twenty Ninth Report of the Department related Parliamentary Standing Committee on
Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions was presented to Rajya Sabha and laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 23rd October, 2008.
3. The Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions furnished the Action Taken
Replies on the Twenty Ninth Report of the Committee on 17th March, 2009. The Committee has
also taken into account the Statement made by the Minister in the House on 8th June, 2009 on
the status of implementation of recommendations of the Committee made in its 29th Report.
4. The Committee considered the draft Report and adopted the same at its meeting held on
14th December, 2009.
5. For the facility of reference and convenience, the observations and recommendations of the
Committee have been printed in bold letters in the body of the Report.
JAYANTHI NATARAJAN
N
EW D ELHI; Chairperson,
14th December, 2009 Committee on Personnel,
Public Grievances, Law and Justice.

1
REPORT
The Action Taken Report of the Committee deals with the action taken by the Ministry of
Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions on the recommendations/observations of the Department
Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances, Law and Justice in its
29th Report on “Public Grievances Redressal Mechanism”. The Report was presented to Rajya Sabha
and laid on the table of Lok Sabha on 23rd October, 2008.
2. The Action taken replies have been received from the Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances
and Pensions (DARPG) in respect of the recommendations contained in the above mentioned Report.
These replies have been categorised as follows:
Chapter – I – The recommendations/observations which have been accepted by the Ministry in respect
of paras, 3.47, 3.54, 3.55, 3.57, 3.60 and 3.61. The Committee is pleased to note that the Ministry
has accepted its recommendations as mentioned in Chapter – I of the Report.
Chapter – II – The recommendations/observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue for
now in view of the replies given by the Ministry in respect of paras 3.46, 3.53 and 3.59. The
Committee is convinced with the explanations advanced by the Ministry and does not want to pursue
them as of now.
Chapter – III – The recommendations/observations in respect of which Committee has not accepted
replies given by the Ministry with regard to paras 3.48, 3.49, 3.51, 3.56 and 4.4. The Committee
expresses its concern for not accepting the recommendations of the Committee contained in
Chapter – III of this Report and desires that the Ministry should furnish logical explanations in respect
of these recommendations.
Chapter – IV – The recommendations/observations in respect of which final replies of the Ministry have
not been received with regard to paras 6, 7, 8, 3.50, 3.52 and 3.58. The Committee observes that the
Ministry has furnished evasive or interim replies and therefore desires that the Ministry should furnish
action taken notes in respect of recommendations categorised in Chapter – IV .
3. The recommendations/observations of the Committee in its 29th Report, the A TRs furnished by
the Ministry, statement made by the Minister on House in the implementation of the Committee’s
recommendations, if any, and the Committee’s further recommendations/observations have been dealt
with in the succeeding Chapters.

2
CHAPTER-I
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS WHICH
HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE MINISTRY
Recommendation/observation
The Committee also recommends that grievance handling system should be accessible,
simple, quick, fair, responsive, and effective. It is not uncommon to hear from people complain-
ing against harassment, waste of time and money, repeated visits to offices etc. The Committee
therefore, recommends that every Ministry/Department in the Union/ State Government/UTs
should have a dynamic public grievance redressal mechanism in place with special focus on the
information delivery system. The Committee further feels that the language and the content
of various applications/complaint forms should be user friendly, and should be widely available
in various outlets, like post offices, on websites for downloading etc. In addition, the applica-
tions or petitions should be acknowledged through acknowledgements slips. [Para 3.47]
Action Taken Reply
The six qualities of a grievance handling system recommended by the Committee are the ideals
towards which the Department has been aspiring and moving through its Policy Guidelines on
Grievance Redress Mechanism framework in Government of India. However, providing for a dynamic
grievance redress system with special focus on information delivery system is the prerogative of each
Ministry/Department/Organization as the controlling authority as per Allocation of Business Rules 1961
and of each State/UT as per the three tier federal structure. Under the existing constitutional framework
of decentralized distribution of power it may not be feasible for this Department to ensure the dynamic
nature of the PGRM in every Ministry/Department in the Union/State/Union Territory. It is only in States
where the State Governments are dynamic and also responsive to the administrative reforms require-
ments including the Policy Guidelines on Grievance Redress Mechanism that better progress is being
witnessed. Provision for time bound acknowledgement of each and every grievance already exists in
the Policy Guidelines. In the CPGRAM this acknowledgement is instant and sent through e-mail also
in cases where e-mail address is indicated. The grievance submission form has been simplified and
made user friendly in the CPGRAM System already in use in 89 Central Government Ministries/
Departments/Organizations plus the Reserve Bank of India. The recommendation of the Committee on
making the grievance forms available through post offices is being explored for implementation.
Status as per the statement made by the Minister in the House
(a) This recommendation of the Committee to make available Public Grievances forms through post
offices has been considered. The Department has not prescribed any ‘Complaint Form’ for submission
of grievances by the citizens as it is an encumbrance. At present the citizen is free to write the
grievance in the form of a short or long letter, on any sheet of paper and the same is accepted for
2

3
the purpose of being processed through the Public Grievances Redress Mechanism of Government of
India. The Department is of the view that this open grievance submission format is more in the interest
of the citizen.
(b) With regard to application forms prescribed by various Ministries/ Department, all Central
Ministries/Departments have been requested to take action as recommended by the Committee as per
DARPG D.O. letter No. G-11012/3/2008-PG dated 27th May, 2009.
Recommendation/observation
The Committee is of the considered view that there is a need to bring about a total
change in the attitude/behaviour of public servants or in other words the mindset towards
redress of public grievances at all levels and to pinpoint responsibility for action against
grievances of the people. The Committee also feels that one step towards bringing in attitudinal
change lies in improving the motivational levels of public servants through rewarding good work
and awarding effective suggestions and punishing the deliberate negligence. The Committee
refers to the Himachal Pradesh Specific Corrupt Practices Act which equates omissions on the
part of officers to discharge their statutory and bona fide  duties with a corrupt practice. The
Committee feels a legal support is essential requirement to achieve the objective of PGRM. The
Committee therefore, observes if we are able to change our behaviour/attitude we can win
hearts and in turn help the banks and the PSUs to be stronger in today’s cut throat
competition. [Para 3.54]
Action Taken Reply
The DARPG proposes to forward this recommendation of the Committee to the Training
Division of Department of Personnel and Training and to the Banking Division of Ministry of Finance
for further appropriate action regarding change of mindset and behaviour of public servants. The
recommendation is also being forwarded to Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions for
considering incorporation of appropriate amendment in the definition of corrupt practices under Conduct
Rules.
Status as per the statement made by the Minister in the House
The Committee’s recommendation has been communicated to all Central Ministries/Department
for necessary action as per DARPG D.O. letter No. G-11012/3/2008-PG dated 27th May, 2009. The
recommendation has also been brought to the notice of Department of Personnel and Training, for
action considering the provision of Himachal Pradesh Specific Corrupt Practices Act.
Recommendation/observation
The Committee also feels that monitoring is one of the most important aspect of
PGR system and there must be a separate unit in each and every Ministry/Department
which caters to the needs of the citizens or a computerized system like PGRAMS should
be used in each and every Ministry/Departments so that a grievance can also be lodged online
and a number is given to the aggrieved so that be can see the status of its grievance online.
[Para 3.55]

4
Action Taken Reply
The CPGRAM System has already been installed in 89 Central Government Ministries/Depart-
ments/Organizations and is functional. This number increases many folds as links are provided to all
the attached, subordinate offices and field units under each Ministry/Department.
Status as per the statement made by the Minister in the House
No action is pending on this paragraph.
Recommendation/observation
There is therefore a need for monitoring at the level of Administrative Ministry to
ensure and strengthen the PGRM in bodies under their control. The Committee recommends
that adherence to the Guidelines/circular issued by the Government must be ensured by both
the administrative Ministries as well as by PSU/Bank and the feedback must be obtained by
DARPG from each of the administrative Ministries so that a cross check can be there to see
that instructions issued are followed properly. The Committee observes that this is a continuous
process and yearly report must be sent to the Government of India by the administrative
Ministries to check that instructions issued by the Government are complied with. [Para 3.57]
Action Taken Reply
The DARPG Policy Guidelines on the matter of regular annual reporting by administrative
Ministries are being reiterated to strengthen the monitoring of compliance as recommended by the
Committee.
Status as per the statement made by the Minister in the House
The Committee’s recommendation has been communicated to all Central Ministries/Department
for necessary action as per DARPG D.O. letter No. G-11012/3/2008-PG dated 27th May, 2009.
Recommendation/observation
The Committee is pleased to note that the CPGRAMS has been introduced and is
working in all Ministries and Departments. The Committee further feels that the Department
of Administrative Reforms and Public Grievances may pursue the matter with those Ministries
who have yet to fully implement the PGRAMS and take expeditious steps in this regard to
install the same with out further delay. [Para 3.60]
Action Taken Reply
It is confirmed that the username and password for activating the CPGRAM System has been
sent by Secretary (AR & Pensions) to Secretaries of all Central Ministries/Departments in June, 2007.
As such no action on installation of the CPGRAMS in any Central Ministry/Department is pending.
Status as per the statement made by the Minister in the House
No action is pending.

5
Recommendation/observation
The Committee also recommends that Ministry of Personnel, PG and Pensions (Depart-
ment of Personnel and Training) should impress upon all the Ministries/Departments to issue
such guidelines to all the Public Sector Banks/Public Sector Undertakings which falls under
their purview to include four items namely Implementation of Right to Information Act, Public
Grievances Redress Mechanism, Citizen’s Charter, and Reservations Policy under the Corporate
Social Responsibility in their Annual Report so that one can have the idea about the institution
and adherence to all the Acts/ Guidelines/Circulars/issued by the Ministry from time to time.
[Para 3.61]
Action Taken Reply
The recommendation of the Committee is being forwarded to the Department of Personnel and
Training for further action.
Status as per the statement made by the Minister in the House
All these four aspects are already being reported as part of the Annual Report of each
Ministry/Department. However, the Committee’s recommendation has been communicated to all Central
Ministries/Department for necessary action as per DARPG D.O. letter No. G-11012/3/2008-PG dated
27th May, 2009 for ensuring compliance of existing guidelines in the matter.

6
CHAPTER-II
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES GIVEN BY THE MINISTRY
Recommendation/observation
The Committee is of the view that generally, people are not aware that a system of
grievance redressal exists in many of the Government departments and its subordinate offices
where they are required to visit. The Committee, therefore, recommends that wide publicity
through national, regional and local media as well as through electronic media to create
awareness regarding the redressal mechanism among people is the need of the day particularly
for the weaker sections of the society, women and those challenged with handicaps and also the
people living in remote areas. The Committee also feels that every Government office should
not only display its organizational structure at a prominent place, indicating names of the
officers and their functions with location of their rooms, particularly in respect of the grievance
redressal officers but also the wide publicity needs to be given through periodic advertisements,
in media, publishing and distributing the bulletins, pamphlets on this issue and putting up
relevant information on its website. The Committee feels that such steps will certainly help and
depict to the people, friendly interface of the Government. [Para 3.46]
Action Taken Reply
For publicity on the Public Grievance Redress Mechanism the DARPG for the last few years
has been publishing annually a full page advertisement in English and Hindi newspapers giving the
names, addresses, and contact numbers of all the Directors of Grievance in Central Ministries/
Departments. This mode is being continued.
Action Proposed to be Taken
As recommended by the Committee the DARPG proposes to begin a media campaign on the
national and regional network of Doordarshan, during the year 2009-10. For this purpose a 30 second
video spot is proposed to be created through DA VP. Material for Broadcasting through AIR network
is also being prepared. Regarding distribution of pamphlets and bulletins the Department currently has
a Brochure on PG Portal that is being revised and can be considered for distribution through State
Governments/Union Territory Administrations. Regarding distribution of Pamphlets it is felt that this
mode would be more appropriate for remote areas and the pamphlets should be in vernacular languages.
Material for these is also being prepared and cooperation of State Governments is proposed to be
sought in this regard.
Status as per the statement made by the Minister in the House
(1) The work on creation of a 30 second video spot was with held due to code of conduct for
6

7
the General Elections during which no new activity could be outsourced before the taking of oath by
the-newly elected government.
(2) The Brochure on Sevottam and the Brochure on Central Public Grievances Redress and
Monitoring System have been re-created and both were distributed to all participants on the Civil
Services Day 2009 as part of dissemination of information by DARPG.
(3) Both the Brochure are also being distributed in the Central Ministries/Departments as part of
implementation of Sevottam service model.
(4) All Central Ministries/Departments are being requested to provide a link to www.pgporta1.gov.in
on their website.
Committee’s further observation
The Committee appreciates the measures taken by the Department for enhancing awareness
of general public regarding the existing Public Grievances Redressal Mechanism in various Minis-
tries/Departments and other government offices. The Committee further feels that ongoing nation
wide awareness campaign about the Public Grievance Redressal Mechanism should not be treated
on temporary basis rather it should be a continuous exercise so that public will become more
conscious about their rights.
Recommendation/observation
The Committee feels that if the grievance of an individual is settled then and there then
one thing is for sure that it will certainly result in decline in filing of cases and there will be
a win-win situation both for the aggrieved and the organization and resultantly the judicial
system will be less burdened. It will automatically reduce a large number of cases and motivate
others to settle their grievances through the internal machinery itself. The Committee, there-
fore, recommends that innovative methods like settlement of grievances through video
conferencing where the officials and the aggrieved both can see and speak to each other can
be used in the redress of grievances. [Para 3.53]
Action Taken Reply
The Department agrees that if the grievances are redressed timely at the level at which they
arise the citizen will not approach Court of Law, and resource and time of both Government and
aggrieved would be saved. The innovative method suggested by the Committee is proposed to be
explored by requesting for responses from all the Central Ministries and requesting for funds required
for the Video Conferencing facility.
Status as per the statement made by the Minister in the House
The Committee’s recommendation has been communicated to all Central Ministries/Department
for necessary action as per DARPG D.O. letter No. G-11012/3/2008-PG dated 27th May, 2009.
Committee’s further observation
The Committee appreciates that the Department is in agreement with the rationale suggested

8
by the Committee in its recommendation for strengthening the internal grievance redressal system
in the Ministries/Departments/Organizations. However, the Committee would like to know the
responses of the Ministries/ Departments/ Organizations vis a vis the innovative method suggested by
the Committee.
Recommendation/observation
The Committee further recommends that Government of India should give rewards to
those Ministries/Departments which are least involved in court cases and has taken some good
and innovative methods to strengthen the system. The employees working in the Public
Grievance office should be suitably rewarded or given promotion if he or she has done a good
job in handling grievances cases and making the aggrieved employees withdraw their cases from
the court and settling it by arbitration/conciliation methods. [Para 3.59]
Action Taken Reply
A proposal for instituting an award for PGRM on lines recommended by the Committee is being
put up for consideration and seeking comments of all Ministries/Departments.
Status as per the statement made by the Minister in the House
While a reward in the nature of cash amount/certificate can be considered, the question of
including promotion as part of the reward in beyond the purview of DARPG.
Committee’s further observation
The Committee appreciates the steps taken by the Department regarding the Committee’s
abovementioned recommendations. The Committee is of the view that such steps would definitely
encourage the Public Officers for speedy and effectively handling of the grievances. However, the
committee may be apprised of the further developments in this regard.

9
CHAPTER-III
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
COMMITTEE HAS NOT ACCEPTED REPLIES OF THE MINISTRY
Recommendation/observation
The Committee is of the view that time limits should be fixed for approval or rejection
of applications on the basis of well-publicized and uniformly applied criteria. Also, redressal
should be done within a reasonable time period as prescribed for each stage of redressal without
indulging in lengthy technicalities of the procedure. The Committee, therefore, recommends
that due attention should be given to timely redressal of grievances lodged. It is also of the
considered view that officers responsible for delay should be made accountable and suitable
action taken against them. [Para 3.48]
The Committee feels that improvements as suggested in the Committee findings above
in the existing set up of public grievances redressal mechanism can work to the satisfaction of
any citizen if we bring about behavioral change in attending to each and every grievance. The
work becomes all the more important in those departments which have direct dealing with the
public like banks, post offices, passport office, dispensaries etc. The Committee also feels that
monitoring is one of the most important aspect of PGR system and there must be a separate
unit in each and every department which caters to the needs of the citizens or a computerized
like PGRAMS should be used in each and every department so that a grievance can also be
lodged online and a number is given to the aggrieved so that he can see the status of its
grievance online. [Para 3.49]
Action Taken Reply
Time lines for redress of grievances are prescribed in the Policy Guidelines. With the objective
of giving due attention to timely redress an improved monitoring mechanism has been developed in the
form of Centralized PGRAM System introduced in June, 2007.
The CPGRAM System has already been installed in 89 Central Ministries/Departments/Organizations
through which all the subordinate organizations are also linked. Requisite training for working on the
System has also been provided in each. CPGRAMS is an important tool to monitor the progress of
public grievances by all the nodal Ministries/Departments. The power to redress continues to be in the
hands of the competent authority in the nodal Ministry/Department. However, the citizen is kept better
informed about the progress of the redress of his/her grievances through the online monitoring on
CPGRAMS. As such the CPGRAMS facilitates expediting of redress indirectly through greater transparency,
efficiency and access that it provides both to the citizens as well as to the nodal competent authority
concerned.
9

10
Status as per the statement made by the Minister in the House
(a) A D.O. letter from Secretary (AR and Pensions) to Secretaries of all Central Ministries/
Departments has been issued for closer monitoring of redress of public grievances through the
CPGRAM System.
(b) Training on the handling of the System has already been provided to officers concerned in all
the 89 Central Ministries/Departments.
(c) Regarding making officers accountable for delay in the redress of grievances Ministries/
Departments can be requested to take administrative action under Disciplinary Rules for serious lapses.
The ultimate decision/action in this regard however lies with the controlling authority of the officers
concerned.
Committee’s further observation
Though, the Committee appreciates the introduction of the PGRAM System, it is constrained
to note that the Department’s Action Taken Reply under this para does not address the real concerns
expressed by the Committee in its recommendation regarding making officers accountable for delays
in the redress of grievances. The Committee desires that the Department being the nodal agency
should unambiguously specify the administrative action needs to be taken, amend the relevant
conduct & disciplinary rules and impress upon all the Ministries/Departments/ Organizations for
making of their officers fully accountable to ensure the timely redressal of the public grievances.
The Committee desires to be informed of the further action taken in the matter.
Recommendation/observation
The Committee further recommends that the Public Grievance Redress Mechanism
should be envisaged in a statutory form on the line of the Right to Information Act, 2005 which
would make it mandatory on all State Governments. [Para 3.51]
Action Taken Reply
The Department is acting on the recommendation of the Committee and the issue of envisaging
Public Grievance Redress Mechanism (PGRAMS) in a statutory form is being examined in consultation
with Ministry of Law.
Status as per the statement made by the Minister in the House
(a) The main purpose and intent of this recommendation for a statutory form to the Public
Grievance Redress Mechanism in Government of India is to make government servant accountable. The
matter of accountability of public servants has been considered in various reports of the Second
Administrative Reforms Commission also. In its 12th Report on ‘Citizen Centric Administration –The
Heart of Governance’ the Second Administrative Reforms Commission has stated the following in
paragraph 2.5.8 relating to Accountability. In its Tenth Report on “Refurbishing of Personnel
Administration” the Commission had observed as under: 13.3.1. Accountability also means answerability
i.e. questions asked of public officials have to be answered by them. There are two types of questions
that can be asked. One type as under the RTI Act merely seeks information/data and involves one way

11
transmission of information. The second type of question enquires not just as to what was done but
why; and therefore involves a consultative two-way flow of information with the citizens usually
providing a feedback in respect of the working of government department and service delivery of public
agencies. Such mechanisms include citizens’ charters, service delivery surveys, social audit, citizen’s
report card and outcome surveys. Each of these mechanisms would be examined in detail in the
Commission’s subsequent Report on ‘Citizen Centric Administration’. Accordingly the Commission has
examined tools such as citizen’s charters etc. in a separate chapter in this Report.”
(b) In paragraph 2.5.10 the Commission states that “Addressing the grievances of those whose
expectations are not fulfilled is primarily the task of the Government agency concerned even though
external accountability mechanisms, often having limited scope, do exist. In this Report the Commission
has primarily focused on the internal grievance redress mechanisms that public agencies and Government
should develop so that citizens do not have to resort to costly alternatives such as judicial interventions,
to seek redress of their grievances.”
(c) On the matter of making institutions vibrant, responsive and accountable the Commission in
paragraph 2.6.2 states “Steps to ensure this are being discussed separately in the Reports on the
Commission on ‘Organizational Structure of the Government of India’ and ‘Steps to ensure effective
administration at the State level’.”
(d) In paragraph 7.9.3 the 12th Report of Second ARC refers to the Parliamentary Standing
Committee’s recommendation that “the public grievances mechanism should be backed by a law similar
to the Right to Information (RTI) Act, 2005 which should ensure that public grievances are given the
attention that they deserve. The basic features of the RTI Act were: (a) it clearly defined the right of
citizens to obtain information from public authorities (b) establishing well defined points of contact for
seeking information (c) mandated that departments should suo-motu declare specified information,
(d) stipulating a time-frame with in which the information has to be furnished to the applicant, (e) set
up an internal appellant mechanism, and (f) constituted an independent appellant mechanism with the
powers to issue directions and even impose fines.”
(e) The Commission is of the view that when it comes to public grievances some principles of the
RTI initiative may be adopted. However, public grievances cover a wide range of issues and problems
ranging from simple complaints regarding red-tapism, corruption and delays to major demands for
provision of physical and social infrastructure. Grievances could thus be categorized into three broad
groups – (i) grievances arising out of abuse of office and corruption on the part of public functionaries
(ii) grievances arising out of systemic deficiencies with in an organization (iii) grievances arising from
non-fulfilment of needs/demands. While the first category is amenable to statutory intervention similar
to those embodied in the RTI Act the second and third categories may require internal reforms,
organization capacity building, and even substantial budgetary allocations. Statutory mechanism already
exist to deal with the first category of grievances. Moreover, the Commission has recommended
creation of Local Body Ombudsman in its Sixth Report. The Commission is of the view that since
budgetary allocations are a legislative process, setting up of an internal mechanism as under the RTI
Act, with powers to issue directions on such issues would interfere with the resource allocation
process which is approved by the legislature. Moreover, setting up of an external appellate authority
with powers to issue directions by means of a law, may lead to proliferation of litigation, convert the
grievance redress process in to a legalistic exercise and may create a turf war with the existing judicial

12
and statutory mechanisms. In view of these observations of the Commission the Department does not
propose to pursue the matter of statutory form for the public grievances redress mechanism in
Government of India Ministries/Departments.
Committee’s further observation
The Committee takes note of the Statement made by the Minister in the House on the status
of the implementation of the recommendations which is based on the recommendations of the
Second Administrative Reforms Commission’s Reports. However, the Committee would like to draw
the attention of the Ministry to para 7.9.3 of the Twelfth report of the Second ARC, which refers
to the recommendations of the Committee vis--a-vis providing the statutory backing to the PGRM
in the lines of the RTI. Further, in the para 7.9.3.2 of the same report, the Commission accepts
that some principles of the RTI may be adopted in case of the PGRM as well. In addition, the
Commission also recommends that the grievances arising out of abuse of office and corruption on
the part of public functionaries are amenable to statutory intervention similar to the RTI Act.
Though the Commission acknowledges that various statutory mechanisms to deal with the
abovementioned category of grievances already exist and given some financial and functional
complexities providing statutory back-up to the PGRM does not seem necessary.
However, the Committee feels that the existing mechanism as cited in the para 7.9.1 of the
Twelfth report of the Commission are external bodies and relating to some specific aspects of the
redressal of public grievances but there is no distinct statutory body to look after the internal
grievances redressal mechanism in the various Government Department/Ministries/Organizations. The
Commission has also accepted in the para 7.9.3A of the abovementioned report that despite the
existence of large number of external bodies, the internal grievances redressal mechanism have not
functioned effectively and there has been inadequate compliance to the guidelines issued by the
DARPG in this regard.
The Commission has recommended that creation of a Local Body Ombudsman may also be useful
in this regard. The Committee welcomes such move, if it serves the very objective of ensuring an
effective grievances redressal mechanism. The Committee is of the view that whatever may be the
modus operandi for redressal of the internal grievances in the Government Department/Ministries/
Organizations but sans statutory backup it remains as an arrangement without teeth. However, if the
government desires to have other specific statutory body to deal with the grievances in the lines of
the recommendations of the second ARC, the Committee has no reservations in this regard.
Therefore, the Committee urges the Government to take immediate and pertinent steps in this regard
at the earliest as ensuring an effective Public Grievances Redressal Mechanism is the need of the
hour.
Another rationale behind the Committee’s favor for statutory backup to the PGRM is that
it would provide an alternative avenue for the redressal of public grievances that would ultimately
lessen the burden of the judiciary. Though, prima facie, it may appear that providing statutory
backup to the PGRM for some category of grievances would lead towards some functional overlapping
and legalistic complexities. Nevertheless, in the long run, when this mechanism would have become
popular, it would certainly provide a speedy alternative to the redressal of the public grievances and
would lessen the overburdened Judiciary as the cases, in which the government is a party, are cause

13
of large bulk of litigation in the Courts. The Law Commission’s 100th and 230th Reports
Litigations by and against the Government: Some Recommendations for Reform; and Reforms
in Judiciar y: Some Suggestions, respectively, are the indicative of this fact. The Committee
therefore impresses upon the Government to come out with a solution taking into account the
observations of this Committee in a time bound manner.
Recommendation/observation
The Committee is of the opinion that the guidelines issued by the Union Ministry are
not properly adhered to in many of the PSUs as well as the Banks. Some of the organizations
were not even aware of revised guidelines which were issued from time to time. The Committee
feels that such a lackadaisical approach was the main reason behind weak PGR system. The
Committee is of the view that here the role of administrative ministries becomes all the more
important and they have to see that the instructions, guidelines, so issued are properly
followed. [Para 3.56]
Action Taken Reply
The PSU come under the purview of different Central Ministries/ Departments and cannot be
directly monitored by the DARPG. Similarly, for the Banks the DARPG has to go through the Banking
Division in Ministry of Finance. As per Allocation of Business Rules 1961 each Ministry has an
exclusive and independent authority to decide upon the sector of work allocated to it. In the
circumstances the DARPG can at best issue Policy Guidelines and re-iterate its request to other Central
Ministries/Department for implementation of the guidelines. The guidelines are issued only to the nodal
Ministry who in turn re-circulates them to all its subordinate and field units. The DARPG has no say
in this regard.
Status as per the statement made by the Minister in the House
No action is pending in this paragraph.
Committee’s further recommendation
The Committee gathers from the reply of Ministry that its mandate is restricted to framing
guidelines and issuing circulars, instructions to the Ministries/Department of Government of India.
This reply is not acceptable to the Committee. The Committee strongly feels that merely by doing
so the responsibility of DARPG , the nodal Department is not over. This Department has to stretch
out to ensure the implementation of these guidelines by all concerned because anything less than
this will not fulfill the objective. This is true in respect of PGRM and also in respect of other various
issues which are coordinated by DARPG . The Committee, therefore, impresses upon DARPG to
ensure such guidelines are implemented in letter and spirit.
Recommendation/observation
In support of its foregoing recommendations/observations, the Committee strongly
recommends that the Public Grievance Redress Mechanism should be envisaged in a statutory
form on the line of the Right to Information Act, 2005 which would make it mandatory on all

14
State Governments/Union Territories/ Ministries/Departments/Organizations to pursue the
grievance till their final disposal. The Committee also reiterates that like Right to Information
Act in the PGRM system there should be a time limit of 30 days and provision of fine on delay
should be there. [Para 4.4]
Action Taken Reply
The DARPG is already committed to examine this recommendation of the Committee as
conveyed through the D.O. letter Nos. G-11012/2/2008-PG dated 11th December, 2008 from Secretary
(AR & Pensions) to the Chairman of the Committee. A Policy Note on a Law on Public Grievances
is proposed to be submitted to the new Minister after the next Government is installed in May, 2009.
Status as per the statement made by the Minister in the House
In the light of recommendations of the Second Administrative Reforms Commission in its
12th Report on ‘Citizen Centric Administration–The Heart of Governance’ the matter of enactment of
a law on public grievances are no longer under consideration.
Committee’s further observation
The Committee still remains concerned about the fact that without statutory backup how the
system of PGRM in all Governments/Ministries/Departments/Organizations would function effectively.
The Committee takes note of the reply furnished by the Department in this regard that is based on
the recommendations of the Second ARC. However, the Committee would like to elaborate some
recommendations of the same commission relating to the establishment of an effective internal
grievances redressal mechanism in the lines of the RTI Act as per the para 7.9.3.3  of the
Commissions’ Twelfth report. The Committee finds that these recommendations may be considered
by the Government to ensuring successful PGRM in the lines of the RTI Act. Therefore, the
Committee desires the Government to implement the recommendation of the Commission in this
regard at the earliest possible.

15
CHAPTER-IV
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
FINAL REPLIES OF THE MINISTRY HAVE NOT BEEN RECEIVED
Recommendation/observation
The Committee is of the firm opinion that citizen’s charters specify standards of services
and time limits that the public can reasonably expect from the organization. It also contains
the details of grievances redressal mechanism and how it can be accessed. It, therefore,
provides for an independent mechanism with the involvement of citizens and consumer groups.
The Committee notes that in most of the Government organizations, the Charters are in the
initial or middle stage of formulation and implementation. These need to be expedited and put
in place on priority. Further, in most cases, Citizens Charters are not formulated through a
consultative process. The Committee therefore, recommends that there is a need for citizens
and staff to be consulted at every stage of formulation of the Charter and there is a need for
orientation of staff about the salient features and goals of the Charter. [Para 6]
The Committee also recommends that the Charters so formulated by each of the Ministry/
Department/State Governments/UTs should be widely publicized through the print/electronic
media and displayed at conspicuous places in the organization or establishment. [Para 7]
The Committee is of the view that charter should be precise and as far as possible
simple and spoken language should be used. [Para 8]
Action Taken Reply
The Policy Guidelines on the content formulation and implementation of Citizen’s Charter issued
by the Department of Administrative Reforms and Public Grievances (DARPG) include these
recommendations made by the Committee. Yet the Report of a Study of Citizen’s Charters in
Government of India Ministries/Departments conducted by DARPG through the Indian Institute of
Public Administration, New Delhi in 2007-08 has revealed the lack of compliance of the Policy
Guidelines on Citizen’s Charter. Further action on the Report is under process with Ministries/
Departments concerned.
In addition the Second Administrative Reforms Commission (ARC) in its fourth report on
“Ethics in Governance” has also recommended that “Citizen Charters’ should be made effective by
stipulating the service levels and also the remedy if these service levels are not met”. In the light of
these recommendations instructions have been issued to all Ministries/Departments regarding setting of
a mechanism or system in each Government of India Department/Organization to ensure monitoring of
Standards of services defined in the Citizens’ Charter. The instruction reiterate that all Citizen’s Charter
should be reviewed periodically after taking the feedback from users and stake holders and they should
be involved in review of the Charter.
15

16
As per policy guidelines all Ministries/Departments have been requested to place their Citizen’s
Charter on the website in addition to displaying information relating thereto at prominent places with
in the organization.
Action on all these matters is now being undertaken by DARPG through a comprehensive
strategy of implementation of the ‘Sevottam’ model in all Central Ministries/Departments/Organizations.
The model has three interrelated components of (1) the Citizen’s Charter, duly created and updated
through a consultative process with the consumers and employees; (2) the Public Grievance Redress
Mechanism; and (3) the capacity building of the organization to improve the quality of its service
delivery by 10% each year. It is hoped that this comprehensive strategy will facilitate in bringing
improvement in the existing situation.
Status as per the statement made by the Minister in the House
In this connection action on creation, review, publication of Citizen’s Charter in the following
Central Ministries/Departments has been completed/is under progress:—
(a) Implementation of Sevottam service delivery model that includes — Citizen’s Charter,
Public Grievances Mechanism and Capacity Building for Service Delivery as its three
components- has been started in the following Central Ministries/Departments
(1) Department of Posts - completed
(2) Central Board of Direct Taxes (CBDT) M/o Finance
(3) Central Board of Excise and Customs M/o Finance
(4) Kendriya Vidayalaya Sangathan (KVS) M/o Human Resource Development
(5) Employees Provident Fund Organization (EPFO) M/o Labour
(6) Registrar of Companies, (RoC) Ministry of Corporate Affairs
(7) Ministry of Food Processing Industries
(8) Ministry of Railways
(9) Department of Pensions
(10) Passport Office, Ministry of External Affairs
(11) Protector of Emigrants Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs
(12) Foreigners Regional Registration Office (FERRO) in Chandigarh, Ministry of
Overseas Indian Affairs
(13) Council for Advancement of People’s Action and Rural Technology (CAPART)
Ministry of Rural Development
(14) Five Police Stations in Gurgaon – PS City, PS Civil Lines, PS Sector 56, PS Old
Sector 5, and PS Sadar Gurgaon.
(b) For the first nine Ministries Secretary (AR & Pensions) has written D.O. letter No.
F15012/16/2006-PG V ol. 3 dated 31st March, 2009 informing about the 18 month project

17
from April, 2009 to June, 2010, requesting for cooperation in its time bound implementation
through setting up of core group, nodal officer, and appointment for Initiation Meeting. By
31st May, 2009 the Initiation Meeting was held in all the Ministries/Departments.
(c) In Ministries from (11) to (14) the stage of preparation of draft of Citizen’s Charter has
been reached.
(d) In addition 32 Ministries/Departments have created/reviewed their Citizen’ Charters in
response to DARPG’s requests made in June, 2008.
(e) In addition the DARPG has created a special portal http://www.goicharters.nic.in
The portal includes ‘Citizen’s Charters – A Handbook’ and the ‘Framework of Citizen’s
Charters’ developed by Indian Institute of Public Administration, New Delhi and related documents
giving information on various aspects of Citizen’s Charters.
Committee’s further observation
The Committee appreciates the steps taken by the DARPG to ensure the standardization of
the Citizen’s Charter and effective monitoring of the level of services defined in the Citizen’s Charter.
However, the Committee would like to know the steps taken by the Ministries/Department for
providing the Citizen’s Charter in possible simple and spoken language. The Committee would also
like to be appraised of the status of the action taken by the DARPG to ensure the effective
implementation of the Citizen’s Charter and PGRM in all central Ministries/Departments/Organizations
through a comprehensive strategy of Sevottam model.
Recommendation/observation
The Committee further feels that a wrong notion has entered into the mind of the
public that the Right to Information Act is an instrument to solve their grievances by giving/
providing them information written/oral required by them. The Committee feels that this wrong
notion needs to be changed because information seeking is altogether different from the
redressal of grievances and need to be looked in a different manner. The Committee therefore,
recommends that Government should immediately take some urgent steps like taking the help
of NGOs working in the field of Right to Information, print and electronic media, organizing
nukkad natak in the rural and urban area on the subject to educate people about their rights
etc. The committee also recommends that in order to solve the problems of the people, the
Government must give statutory backing to the Public Grievance Redressal Mechanism on the
line of Right to Information Act, so that both work parallel to each other and help in solving
the grievances. [Para 3.50]
Action Taken Reply
The wrong notion observed by the Committee is partly due to the wider publicity given to the
Act by the Central Information Commission than the publicity given to the Public Grievances Redress
Mechanism. The DARPG is proposing to undertake wider publicity for the Public Grievance Mechanism
as recommended by the Committee in paragraph 3.46 above. Meanwhile the recommendation of the
Committee is being conveyed to Central Information Commission and the nodal Ministry for appropriate
correction in their publicity relating to RTI Act, 2005.

18
Status as per the statement made by the Minister in the House
The recommendation of the Committee has been conveyed to the Central Information Commission,
for appropriate action as per DARPG D.O. letter No. G-11012/3/2008-PG dated 21st May, 2009.
Committee’s further observation
The Committee fails to understand how the Central Information Commission can be held
responsible for the publicity to PGRM. Central Information Commission is entrusted with RTI only.
The confusion in the minds of people with reference to RTI vis-a-vis PGRM has to be removed by
the DARPG in general and the respective Ministries/Departments/PSUs/Banks, etc. in particular. The
PGRM fails to get due attention as it does not have the statutory backing as in the case with RTI.
The thrust of the Committee’s recommendation is that Government must give statutory support to
PGRM on the lines of RTI. The Committee desires Ministry’s reply from that point of view. The
Government should categorically inform the Committee what it is doing in this regard and also set
up a time-frame for doing so.
Recommendation/observation
The Committee feels that each Department/PSU/Bank Trust etc. is having their internal
system for redressal of grievances of its personnel but it is not working satisfactorily and that
is the reason that non settlement of grievances result in filing of petition in the courts on petty
issues. Our Judicial system which is already overburdened by over 3 crore cases pending in
various courts of the country contains a large segment of cases on small and petty issues which
could have been settled by the parent Department/organizations had there been a good and
mature internal grievance redress system. The Committee, therefore, recommends that internal
grievances redressal methods available in various Ministries/Departments and the organizations
should be strengthened or restructured in a way like both the representative of the organization
and the aggrieved party must be present before the designated authority and the grievance is
settled then and there. [Para 3.52]
Action Taken Reply
The Department is keen to strengthen the Public Grievance Redress Mechanism to ensure
efficient and timely redress of public grievances. With this objective the DARPG has introduced the
Centralized Public Grievance Redress and Monitoring (CPGRAM) System, as a handy tool for monitoring
of grievances both by the nodal authority as well as by the citizens. In addition the CPGRAM System
provides suggestive categories under which the Ministries/Departments can categorize the grievances
for making systemic improvements. The System also has many facilities for the citizens like lodging
complaints online and getting a unique registration number for further reference, instant acknowledgement
as well as acknowledgement through e-mail where ever e-mail address is given by the citizen. In
addition the citizens can send their grievances directly to Ministries/Departments/ Organizations concerned.
Grievances received directly by post are registered on to the CPGRAM System by DARPG on behalf
of the citizen and is then forwarded to Ministry concerned. Since the redress of grievances is
undertaken in a decentralized manner as per Allocation of Business Rules 1961, the usage of the
CPGRAM System by all Ministries/Departments including their attached offices, subordinate offices and

19
field units. The CPGRAM System is therefore expected to facilitate in timely redress of grievances by
all Ministries/Departments in Government of India.
Status as per the statement made by the Minister in the House
The Committee’s recommendation has been communicated to all Central Ministries/Department
for necessary action as per DARPG D.O. letter No. G-11012/3/2008-PG dated 27th May, 2009.
Committee’s further observation
The Committee appreciates the introduction of CPGRAM system for monitoring of grievances both
by the nodal agency as well as by the citizens. However, the Committee feels that CPGRAM
mechanism just deals with the monitoring part of the PGRM, the other part pertaining to the
establishment of an relevant authority for the appropriate redressal of grievances has not received
the due importance. The redressal of the grievance requires a designated authority within the
Ministries/ Departments/Organizations for the internal settlement of grievances, as recommended by
the Committee. The Committee further feels that desired weightage has not been given to this aspect
in the Department’s reply. Therefore, the Committee would like to be apprised of the comments of
the Department in this regard.
Recommendation/observation
The Committee taking in to account the huge number of cases, mostly trivial in nature
and are pending in the courts in which Government of India is a party and filed by the
employees of the Government and the people suffering mainly due to unfair and ineffective
service, being provided by the Government departments and its other organizations feels that
we still carry the colonial legacy. In colonial days the notion was that if you were not satisfied
go and knock the door of judiciary for the redress of grievances. This attitude or mind set has
to be changed. Otherwise the cases would continue to pile up in courts and people would
continue to suffer. The Committee strongly feels that an efficient, quick and fair PGRM will
reduce the number of cases being filed in the various courts across the country. The Committee
therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Personnel, PG and Pensions (DoPT) should impress
upon all the Ministries / Departments etc. to further improve, sensitize and strengthen the
internal grievance redress mechanism so that the grievances could not only be redressed by the
Ministry/Department but the burden on the courts is also lessened. [Para 3.58]
Action Taken Reply
The DARPG proposes to request all Ministries/Department to consider this recommendation of
the Committee. The Department also proposes to send a special request to the Legislative Division of
Ministry of Law and Justice to consider issuing a similar request to all administrative Ministries/
Departments.
Status as per the statement made by the Minister in the House
The Committee’s recommendation has been communicated to all Central Ministries/Department
for necessary action as per DARPG D.O. letter No. G-11012/3/2008-PG dated 27th May, 2009

20
Committee’s further observation
The Committee takes note of the reply given by the Department to ensure the effective
implementation of the PGRM so that the burden over judiciary could be lessened. The Committee
also notes that the Department has conveyed Committee’s concerns to various Ministries /Departments
on the abovementioned subject. But this is not enough. The DARPG , Law Ministry and other
Ministries have to find out the ways to change the colonial attitude or mind set which is main
hurdle in the way of redress of grievances and forcing citizens to go to the Courts. The change of
mind set and support of strong redress mechanism is the only remedy. In this context the Committee
would like to know the specific steps taken by the Department and also by other Ministries /
Departments.

21
MINUTES

23
RELEVANT MINUTES OF THE MEETINGS OF THE DEPARTMENT RELATED
PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON PERSONNEL, PUBLIC
GRIEVANCES, LAW AND JUSTICE
VII
SEVENTH MEETING
The Department-Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances,
Law and Justice met at 3.00 P.M. on Monday, the 14th December, 2009, in Committee Room ‘C’,
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shrimati Jayanthi Natarajan — Chairperson
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Shantaram Laxman Naik
3. Shri Parshottam Khodabhai Rupala
4. Shri Virendra Bhatia
5. Shri Parimal Nathwani
6. Shri Tiruchi Siva
LOK SABHA
7. Shri N.S.V . Chitthan
8. Shrimati Deepa Dasmunsi
9. Shrimati Jyoti Dhurve
10. Shri Syed Shahnawaz Hussain
11. Dr. Kirodi Lal Meena
12. Kumari Meenakshi Natrajan
13. Shri Devji M. Patel
14. Shri Harin Pathak
15. Shri Shailendra Kumar
16. Shri Vijay Bahadur Singh
17. Dr. (Shrimati) Prabha Kishor Taviad
18. Shri Manish Tewari
19. Adv. P.T. Thomas (Idukki)

24
SECRETARIAT
Shri Samsher Singh Rana, Joint Secretary
Shri K.P. Singh, Director
Shri K.N. Earendra Kumar, Joint Director
Shrimati Niangkhannem Guite, Assistant Director
2. The Committee considered and adopted the draft 35th Report on the Action Taken Replies
of the Government on the recommendations/observations contained in the 29th Report of the
Committee on Public Grievances Redressal Mechanism.
3. * * *
4. The Committee authorised the Chairperson and in her absence Shri Tiruchi Siva to present
both the reports in Rajya Sabha and Shri Syed Shahnawaz Hussain and in his absence Advocate
P.T. Thomas (Idukki) to lay the said reports in Lok Sabha on Thursday, the 17th December, 2009.
5. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
6. The Committee adjourned at 3.29 
P.M.
*** Relates to some other matter.

Printed at : Bengal Offset Works, 335, Khajoor Road, Karol Bagh, New Delhi-110005.