                              
 
 
          PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
          RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
PERSONNEL, PUBLIC GRIEVANCES, LAW AND JUSTICE 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
December, 2022 / Pausha, 1944 (Saka) 
 
 
 
 
REPORT NO. 
125 
 
ONE HUNDRED TWENTY-FIFTH REPORT 
ON 
ACTION TAKEN ON ONE HUNDRED FIFTEENTH REPORT 
OF THE COMMITTEE ON DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2022-23) 
 
PERTAINING TO THE DEPARTMENT OF LEGAL AFFAIRS 
(MINISTRY OF LAW & JUSTICE) 
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 22nd December, 2022) 
 (Laid on the Table of the Lok Sabha on 22nd December, 2022) 
 

 
2 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
E-mail : rs-cpers@sansad.nic.in 
 
Website : http://rajya sabha.nic.in 

 
3 
C O N T E N T S 
 
PAGE NO. 
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE                                                                         4      
 
2. INTRODUCTION                                                                                                              5  
 
3. ACRONYMS                                                                                                             6 
 
4. REPORT                                                                                                                            7                                                                                                                      
                                                                                                                               
(I) CHAPTER I                                                                                                      9   
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN 
ACCEPTED BY THE DEPARTMENT 
(II) CHAPTER II                                                                                                          17    
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE 
COMMITTEE DOES NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE 
REPLIES GIVEN BY THE DEPARTMENT  
(III) CHAPTER III                                                                                                        24 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH 
COMMITTEE DOES NOT ACCEPT THE REASONS GIVEN BY 
THE DEPARTMENT AND REITERATES ITS 
RECOMMENDATIONS    
(IV)  CHAPTER IV                                     31 
THE RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF 
WHICH FINAL REPLIES OF THE DEPARTMENT HAVE NOT 
BEEN RECEIVED 
 
5. ANNEXURE                           34 
 
6.          RELEVANT MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF THE COMMITTEE                        38 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   

 
4 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
            (Re-constituted w.e.f. 13th September, 2022) 
 
1. Shri Sushil Kumar Modi                   Chairman 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shrimati Vandana Chavan 
3. Shri Mahesh Jethmalani 
4. Shri Kanakamedala Ravindra Kumar 
5. Shri Sanjay Raut 
6. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Ray 
7. Shri K. R. Suresh Reddy  
8. Shrimati Darshana Singh 
9. Shri Vivek K. Tankha 
10. Shri P. Wilson 
 
LOK SABHA 
11. Shri Manickam Tagore B. 
12. Shri Kalyan Banerjee 
13. Shri Pradan Baruah 
14. Shri Venkatesh Netha Borlakunta 
15. * Vacant 
16. Shri Vinod Chavda 
17. Shrimati Veena Devi 
18. Shri Jasbir Singh Gill 
19. Shri Choudhury Mohan Jatua 
20. Shri Raghu Rama Krishna Raju Kanumuru  
21. Shri Jyotirmay Singh Mahato 
22. Shri Malook Nagar 
23. Dr. Ramesh Pokhriyal "Nishank" 
24. Shri Suresh Kumar Pujari 
25. Shri A. Raja  
26. Shri Omprakash Bhupalsingh alias Pavan Rajenimbalkar 
27. Shri Upendra Singh Rawat 
28. Shrimati Sandhya Ray 
29. Shri Kuldeep Rai Sharma 
30. Shri Mahendra Singh Solanky 
31. Shri Rajan Baburao Vichare 
SECRETARIAT 
Dr. Vandana Kumar Additional Secretary 
Shri Vimal Kumar, Joint Secretary 
Shri P.Narayanan, Director 
Shri Goutam Kumar, Deputy Secretary 
Shri Sammer Kapoor, Deputy Secretary 
Shri Sunil Tripathi, Under Secretary 
Shri Prabhakar Singh, Committee Officer 
__________________________ 
* vacant due to change in nomination of Shri Durai Murugan Kathir Anand w.e.f. 08.12.2022 

 
5 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 I, the Chairman of the Department related Parliamentary Standing 
Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances, Law and Justice, having been 
authorized by the Committee to present the Report on its behalf, do hereby present 
this One Hundred Twenty Fifth (125th) Report on Action Taken on One Hundred 
Fifteenth (115th) Report of the Committee on Demands for Grants (2022-23) 
pertaining to the Department of Legal Affairs (Ministry of Law & Justice). 
2. The 11 5th Report of the Department -related Parliamentary Standing 
Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions, Law and Justice was 
presented to Rajya Sabha and laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on the 24 th March, 
2022.  
3. The Department of Legal Affairs, of the Ministry of Law & Justice furnished 
their Action Taken Replies on the 11 5th Report of the Committee on 10th October, 
2022. The Committee considered the draft 125th Report and adopted the same in its 
meeting held on 20th December, 2022. 
4. For the facility of reference and convenience, the observations and 
recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters in the body of 
the Report. 
 
 
New Delhi     
20th December, 2022 SUSHIL KUMAR MODI 
 Chairman, 
 Department-related Parliamentary Standing  
 Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances, 
                                                                                              Law and Justice 
 
 
 
 

 
6 
ACRONYMS 
 
ACI Arbitration Council of India 
Addl. LA Additional Legal Adviser 
BCI Bar Council of India 
BE Budget Estimates 
CBDT Central Board of Direct Taxes 
CBI Central Bureau of Investigation 
CBIC Central Board of Indirect Taxes and Customs 
CPWD Central Public Works Department 
CSS Central Secretariat Services 
CSSS Central Secretariat Stenographer Services 
CSCS Central Secretariat Clerical Services 
CSOLS Central Secretariat Official Language Service 
DoPT Department of Personnel and Training 
DPC Departmental Promotion Committee 
DR Direct Recruitment 
FY Financial Year 
GCS General Central Service 
ICT Information Communication Technology 
ILI Indian Law Institute 
ILS Indian Legal Service 
ITAT Income Tax Appellate Tribunal 
JS&LA Joint Secretary & Legal Adviser  
LIC Law Commission of India 
LIMBS Legal Information on Management and Briefing System 
MOF Ministry of Finance 
NBCC National Buildings Construction Corporation 
NDIAC New Delhi International Arbitration Centre 
PwBD Persons with Benchmark Disabilities 
RE Revised Estimates 
UPSC  Union Public Service Commission 
 

 
7 
R E P O R T  
 This Action Taken Report of the Committee deals with the action taken by 
the Department of Legal Affairs (Ministry of Law &  Justice) on the 
recommendations / observations of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing 
Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances, Law and Justice in its One Hundred 
Fifteenth (115th) Report on Demands for Grants (2022-23) pertaining to the 
Department of Legal Affairs (Ministry of Law & Justice), which was presented to 
the Rajya Sabha and laid on the Table of the Lok Sabha on the 24th March, 2022. 
2. The Committee had made 30 recommendations/observations in its 11 5th 
Report. Replies of the Department thereto have been categorized and scrutinized 
under four chapters on the basis of satisfaction of the Committee. These replies 
have been categorized as follows: 
Chapter – I:  Recommendations/observations (7) which have be en accepted by 
the Department, i.e. in respect of paras 2.23, 3.15, 3.16, 3.19, 3.27, 
3.28 and 3.30 of the Report. The Committee is pleased to note that 
the Department has accepted those recommendations. 
Chapter – II:  Recommendations/observations (9) which the Committee does not 
desire to pursue in view of the replies given by the Department, i.e. 
in respect of paras 2.21, 2.22, 3.13, 3.22, 3.23, 3.38, 3.41, 3.42 and 
3.45 of the Report. The Committee is satisfied with the 
explanations advanced by the D epartment and does not wish to 
pursue those as of now.  
Chapter – III:  Recommendations/observations (8) in respect of which Committee 
has not accepted the replies of the Department, i.e. with regard to 
paras 2.13, 2.14, 2.15, 2.17, 3.6, 3.7, 3.14, and 3.34 of the Report. 
The Committee does not accept the reasons given by the 
Department and reiterates the same. 
Chapter - IV: Recommendations/observations ( 6) in respect of which final 
replies of the Department have not been received, i.e. in respect of 
paras 3.52, 3.53, 3.54, 3.59, 3.60 and 3.61  of the Report, the 
Committee has not received replies.  
3. The Committee desires that the Department should furnish pointed and 
detailed Action Taken Notes in respect of all the further 
Recommendations/Observations made by the Committee in this report. 

 
8 
4. The details of the ATR have been discussed in the respective Chapters in the 
succeeding pages. For reference purpose, para numbers of the original report (i.e. 
of 11 5th Report) have been mentioned at the end of each 
recommendation/observation.   
--- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
9 
CHAPTER I 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN 
ACCEPTED BY THE DEPARTMENT 
NEW DELHI INTERNATIONAL ARBITRATION CENTRE (NDIAC) 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
1.0 The Committee also observes that the Department has also not been able to spend a 
single rupee out of the funds allocated from the Financial Years 2020 -21 onwards; it has sought 
exponentially higher allocations. The Committe e, accordingly, recommends that the Department 
in future needs to rationally project its demand under the head NDIAC. (2.23) 
 
Action Taken 
 
1.1 It is submitted that tentative provisions in the budget were made anticipating finalization 
of the establishment  of the NDIAC after completion of the requisite and ongoing procedural 
requirements. 
  
1.2 It is submitted that for enabling smooth and expeditious functioning of the NDIAC, the 
anticipated expenditure for which the funds had been solicited included ,setti ng up the 
Arbitration Centre, payment of salary and allowances to officers/officials of the Centre, likely 
expenditure on Rooms/work station of Chairman/Members and other officers/employees of 
NDIAC. Further, since the repair/maintenance of the building lo cated at Vasant Kunj, where the 
NDIAC would be functioning from, is also being undertaken by this Department through 
CPWD, certain budgetary projections were also made to meet expenditure on the maintenance of 
the aforesaid building. 
  
1.3 With the establishment of the Centre, vide notification dated 13.6.2022, the utilization of 
the funds for the Centre is expected to increase. It is further submitted that as advised by the 
Committee, the considered and rational budget estimates shall be prepared keeping i n view the 
likely expenditure towards operationalization and functioning of the NDIAC. 
 
Further observation 
 
1.4 The Committee takes note of the reply.  
 
VACANCIES OF NOTARIES 
 
Recommendation/Observation  
1.5 The Committee further observes  that the distribution of notaries across the States/UTs is 
uneven and believes that there should be objective criteria to project required number of notaries 

 
10 
in States/UTs to optimally utilize their services. The Committee understands that notary -ship is 
not a civil post or any kind of employment under the Central Government and hence does not 
attract any affirmative policy in any manner. Accordingly, the Committee recommends the 
Department to make a wholehearted endeavour so that composition of notaries is inc lusive and 
reflects the balanced socio-economic composition of the society. (3.15) 
Action Taken 
1.6 In terms of provisions of Notaries Rules, 1956, only relaxations in terms of „ experience 
as an advocate/legal practitioner „ as eligibility condition are provided in favour of social 
category candidates  (SC/ST/OBC/Women/PH) ( seven years‟ experience vis a vis 10 years for 
general category candidates) . The prescribing of eligibility qualifications in terms of experience 
however do not mean any kind of social category reservations as such in favour of any of these 
categories in appointment of notaries.  
1.7 The schedule appended to the Notaries rules, 1956 provide details of maximum number 
of notaries to be appointed in the State/UT by the central Government as well as State 
Governments. The schedule is periodically amended in view of request made by the re spective 
State Governments for enhancement of their State/UT quota and same is considered on the 
criteria of (i) increase in the population of the concerned State/UT (ii) increase in the number of 
districts or tehsil or taluka of concerned State/UT. 
1.8 The central Government also enhance their quota for central government notaries on 
account of increase in number of Courts/Tribunals, creation of more districts /Talukas, increase 
in commercial activities in the State, industrialization, increase in number o f educational 
institutions and increase in population in the State. 
1.9 Accordingly, vacancies for notaries in particular State/UTs are determined on account of 
number of factors explained above. 
Further Observation 
 
1.10 The Committee takes note of the reply.  
 
 
DIGITAL SIGNATURES FOR AUTHENTICATION OF NOTARIZED DOCUMENTS 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
1.11 The Committee in its previous reports, including 101st, 107th and 109th Reports dealt the 
issue of digital signatures and had recommended the Department t o explore the feasibility of 
introducing Digital Signatures for authenticating notarized documents to reduce malpractices of 
anti-dating or/and attestation of blank document, etc. and improve transparency. The Committee 
also feels that along with digital s ignatures, the Department may also explore the feasibility of 

 
11 
introducing e -affidavits as practice of e -stamping is already in vogue and the Government of 
India is also promoting courts through video conferencing and virtual courts. (3.16) 
Action Taken 
 
1.12 The issue of introduction of digital signature facility for notary attestations has been 
examined. It is submitted that majority of the documents which are presented for notarization 
before a Notary Public are invariably in the physical form. Apart from  signature, a notary has to 
put his seal and also affix notarial stamp on the documents being notarized by him. Digital 
signature means „authentication of any electronic record by a subscriber by means of any 
electronic method or procedure on the documents ‟. Using of digital signature for authentication 
of documents to be notarized by a Notary, such documents must be in electronic form whereas 
majority of such documents are invariably presented in physical form which are not compatible 
for Digital Signature. 
  
1.13 As regards introducing e -affidavits, the subject is not within the purview of the Notaries 
Act 1952 and rules framed thereunder.  
  
1.14 Thus, in present circumstances introducing digital signatures for authentication of 
documents on the part of Notary may not be viable. 
 
Further Observation 
 
1.15 The Committee takes note of the reply.  
 
EMPANELMENT OF COUNSELS 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
1.16 The Committee observes that the Department has not devised any criteria/methodology to 
project the required number of panel counsels for a Court/ Tribunal. Further, there is no 
information available on the Department‟s website with regard to empanelment process of panel 
counsels. The Committee, accordingly, feels that the Department needs to devise a ra tional 
methodology for projecting required number of panel counsels/advocates based on the number of 
institution/pending cases, nature of cases and so forth to ensure transparency and optimal 
utilisation of government resources. The details of empanelment process/criteria also need to be 
uploaded in the Department‟s website for the benefit of potential candidates applying for 
empanelment as government/panel counsels. (3.19) 
Action Taken 
1.17 It is stated that the panel counsel for various courts / tribunals  are engaged by this 
Department to represent Union of India for a particular term and as such they are not appointed 
against any civil post. Therefore, the concept of sanctioned post or vacant posts does not apply in 

 
12 
case of panel counsel. Presently, there  is no criteria/methodology to project the required number 
of panel counsel for a court/tribunal. It is pertinent to mention here that relationship between a 
panel counsel & Government is that of an Advocate and client. Empanelment/engagement of 
Advocates to represent Government before various courts should not be compared with 
appointment to a “post” in the Government. There is no extra financial burden on the 
Government on empanelling large number of counsel as payment of fee is paid to them on case -
to-case basis in lieu of their professional services. Further, Government has more choices to 
choose/select suitable counsel from the panel in terms of expertise and experience required to 
defend a particular case.   However, keeping in view the size of the cour t, number of Central 
Govt. litigations etc. appropriate number of counsel are engaged for that court. Moreover, due to 
expiry of terms, deaths and resignation etc. of counsel, the process of empanelment/engagement 
of Advocates as panel counsel is an ongoin g process due to which projecting total number of 
panel counsel for a High Court on an earlier date is not feasible.   
1.18 Further, it is a settled proposition of law enunciated by the Hon‟ble Supreme Court of 
India and various High Courts that Government  Advocate being a special engagement has no 
vested right to continue in that position. Appointment of Government Advocate is purely a 
prerogative of the Government because it is a professional engagement between a litigant and its 
Advocate. As such, at pre sent, Advocates are empanelled / engaged by this Department for all 
courts/tribunals in the country with the approval of Hon‟ble Minister for Law & Justice and 
orders in this regard are issued on behalf of the President.   We may, therefore, publish this 
procedure on website of the Department for public information.  
Further Observation 
 
1.19 The Committee takes note of the reply.  
 
INCOME TAX APPELLATE TRIBUNAL (ITAT) 
 
Recommendation/Observation  
1.20 From the information furnished by ITAT, the Committee observes that highest number of 
vacancies are in the Benches of Mumbai (07), followed by Delhi (03). It has also been observed 
that 100 percent posts of Members, both, Judicial and Accountant are vacant in Jaipur and 
Jodhpur Bench of ITAT. Further, in Ahmeda bad and Pune excess posts of Accountant Members 
have been filled-up at the cost of Judicial Members, whereas in Kolkata excess Judicial Members 
have been filled-up at the cost of Accountant Members. (3.27) 
1.21 The Committee, accordingly, recommends that t he Department/ITAT should fill -up the 
vacant positions so that activities of ITAT are not hampered. Further, it feels that the practice of 
appointing excess posts of Judicial Members over Accountant Members and vice-versa needs to 
be discouraged in all the  Benches of ITAT to avoid over -representation of Members from one 
group over the other. (3.28)  

 
13 
Action Taken 
1.22 Against 126 sanctioned posts of Judicial/Accountant Members in ITAT, 86 posts of 
Members are filled up as on date.   Out of 86 filled posts, 21  Members (comprising 12 Judicial 
Members and 09 Accountant Members) have been appointed recently i.e. in December, 2021/ 
January, 2022.  The new Members (AM / JM) have been posted upon successful completion of 
the Orientation and Training, to the Benches k eeping in view of the requirement of exigencies of 
nature of work like number   of pending appeals, age of appeals at a particular Bench and given 
vacancy position.    
1.23 The imbalance in the posting of Judicial/Accountant Members at a particular Bench is  
due to transfer of Members to/from a particular Bench.   Routine transfer is given effect keeping 
in view of the public interest in view of various factors viz. availability of Members in the 
Tribunal, number of pending appeals, age of appeals at a particu lar Bench, superannuation of 
Members and practice / professional background of the Members prior to their joining in the 
ITAT, etc.   Besides, it is also relevant to inform that the mismatch of posting of Judicial and 
Accountant Members is due to number of Members in position, which are not equal to the 
strength of both Judicial and Accountant Members.   For instance, at present out of 126 
sanctioned posts, only 86 posts are filled up, which comprises of 45 Judicial Members and 41 
Accountant Members, thus ref lecting a mismatch.   Thus four (04) additional Judicial Members 
have been posted in various Benches suitably keeping in view of relevant factors.  
1.24 As on 01 September, 2022, the status of position of Members (AM/JM) at those Benches 
of the ITAT which have been referred in this para by the Committee is as under: 
Benches AM JM 
S F V S F V 
Mumbai 11 8 3 11 8 3 
Pune 3 3 0 3 3 0 
Delhi 9 7 2 9 8 1 
Jaipur 2 1 1 2 1 1 
Jodhpur 1 0 1 1 1 0 
Ahmedabad 4 3 1 4 4 0 
Kolkata 4 3 1 4 3 1 
Total  34 25 9 34 28 6 
   S- Sanctioned, F-Filled, V-Vacant 
 
1.25 The total sanctioned strength of ITAT Members is 126 i.e. 63 each of Accountant and 
Judicial Members.  The figure is inclusive of post of one President and ten Vice -Presidents.  As 
on date, the overall category wise status of position of Members (AM/JM) in ITAT is as under:- 
  

 
14 
  AM JM 
S F V S F V 
Total 63 41 22 63 45 18 
                                          S- Sanctioned, F-Filled, V-Vacant 
 
1.26 Advertisement regarding filing up of the posts of Vice -President (04) and Members 
(Judicial – 18 and Accountant - 22) in ITAT has been published.  
1.27 While noting the suggestion of the Committee regarding the posting of the 
Judicial/Accountant Members evenly across the ITAT benches, it is submitted that ITAT, as far 
as possible ensures posting of the Members in the Benches across the country keeping in view 
the factors like   availability of Members in the Tribunal, number of pending appeals, age of 
appeals at a particular Bench, superannuation of Members and practice / professional 
background of the  Members prior to their joining in the ITAT, etc. and balance would be 
maintained with regard to posting of Accountant and Judicial Members at a station.   
Further Observation 
 
1.28 The Committee takes note of the reply.  
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
1.29 The Committee appreciates the ITAT for having higher disposal of appeals as compared 
to other institutions, but observes that still large numbers of appeals are  pending in various 
Benches of ITAT. The ITAT Benches with highest pendency of cases are in Delhi (16513), 
followed by Mumbai (11070), Ahmedabad (4813), Chennai (4150), and Hyderabad (3728). The 
Committee, accordingly, recommends the Department to expedite  disposal of cases so as to 
reduce the overall pendency of cases in ITAT. (3.30) 
 
Action Taken 
 
1.30 The Department / ITAT feels honored by the appreciation of the Committee regarding 
higher rate of disposal in comparison to other Institutions.  It is submitted that despite shortage of 
Members and restrictions imposed due to Covid 19 pandemic, position of  pendency of appeals 
has been kept in check.   A brief statement in respect of Institution, Disposal and Pendency for 
last few years is as under:-  
 
Year (Apr.to Mar.) Institution of 
appeals 
Disposal of 
appeals 
Pendency at the end of 
year 
2016-17 48800 48385 92386 
2017-18 50222 49791 92817 
2018-19 51154 51766 92205 
2019-20 45842 50031 88016 
2020-21* 9515 30971 66560 

 
15 
2021-22* 16258 32396 50422 
2022-23 
(upto Aug, 2022 as on 
01.09.2022)* 
10077 18536 43691 
* The rate of disposal is higher than the rate of institution of Appeals. 
 
1.31 The above statement shows that during the year F.Y. 2016 -17, 2017 -18, 2018 -19 and 
2019-20, the ITAT has been able to dispose off almost similar number of Appeals as that of 
Appeals instituted.   During the years 2020 -21, 2021 -22 and 2022 -23, the rate of disposal is 
higher than the rate of institution of Appeals. Hence, the disposal rate in ITAT is reasonably 
placed.   It is added that the ITAT is making incessant and vigorous efforts to reduce pendency, 
in a planned manner as stated hereunder:- 
 
1. Disposal of old appeals  
  
President, ITAT is working in close coordination with Zonal Vice Presidents for disposal of 
appeals pending for more than 5 years within a reasonable time frame. A special drive is 
underway for disposal of old appeals. 
  
2. Covered & Small Matters  
  
All Benches have been advised to scrutinize and identity cases, which are covered by decisions 
of ITAT, High Courts, and the Supreme Court and list them, including group and small matters, 
for hearing on priority basis. Members of the Bar have been requested to bring   all such covered 
cases to the notice of ITAT for out-of-turn fixation before the respective Benches. 
  
3. Special Categories   
  
Fixing of appeals   under  specific categories   like  Search and S eizure matters   and Appeals   
against Orders passed under Section 263 by Administrative Commissioners etc., Appeals   
involving  assessed income  of uptoRs 50 lakh which can be heard by Single Member Bench, are 
fixed on priority.   Appeals covered by Vivad Se  Vishwas Scheme have been fixed on priority 
basis and disposed off. 
  
4. Hearing  of cases through video conferencing 
  
Despite constraints, imposed due to Covid -19 pandemic, ITAT continued with its adjudicatory 
functions by hearing of appeals through video conferencing, thus catering to the needs of tax 
litigants, uninterrupted.  
 
5. Tour to non functioning Benches 
  

 
16 
Benches of ITAT, which are not functioning in a regular manner for any reasons, are made 
functional by periodic visits of Members from other Benches for adjudication of pending appeals 
at such Benches and provide admissible relief to the litigants. 
  
1.32 In this regard, it is also submitted that with the induction of 21 new Members during 
December, 2021 and removal of Covid 19 restrictions, the disposal of Appeals is expected to get 
further accelerated. 
 
Further Observation 
 
1.33 The Committee takes note of the reply.  
 
--- 
  

 
17 
CHAPTER II 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE 
DOES NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES GIVEN BY 
THE DEPARTMENT 
NEW DELHI INTERNATIONAL ARBITRATION CENTRE (NDIAC) 
 
Recommendation/observation  
 
2.0 The Committee is of the view that arbitration processes are user friendly, cost effective, 
and expeditious as compared to litigation in courts. The New Delhi International Arbitration 
Centre Act, 2019 was enacted for the pu rpose of creating an independent and autonomous 
regime for institutionalized arbitration in the country. The Committee in its previous reports, viz. 
107th and 109th had recommended for expediting the process of appointment of Chairperson and 
Members of NDIAC so as to promote institutional arbitration and make India a hub of 
International Arbitration. However, more than 2.5 years have passed since the enactment of the 
NDIAC Act, rules for the same are yet to be finalised. (2.21) 
 
2.1 The Committee observes that framing of rules are taking more time than the original Act 
itself, which may be due to bureaucratic quagmire. The Committee expresses its concern for this 
inordinate delay in framing of rules and desires that the Department should apprise cogent 
reasons for not following the recommendations of the Committee. (2.22) 
 
Action Taken 
 
2.2 The Central Govt vide notification dated 13.6.2022 has since established the New Delhi 
International Arbitration Centre (NDIAC). 
  
2.3 It is further submitted that acti on for appointment of the Chairperson, NDIAC is 
underway. Various other steps including engagement of officers/officials for the NDIAC 
Secretariat and completion of other administrative requirements are also being taken up 
expeditiously for operationalization of the Centre. 
 
2.4 It is submitted that the following Rules have been framed, notified and laid before the 
both Houses of the Parliament during the Monsoon Session of Parliament relating to the NDIAC 
Act, 2019 and the Arbitration and Conciliation (Ame ndment) Act, 2019 {In the Rajya Sabha on 
28.07.2022 and in the Lok Sabha on 29.07.2022}. 
 
 
 
 
 

 
18 
 
 
New Delhi International Arbitration Centre (NDIAC) Act, 2019.  
  
S. 
No. Rules Status 
1. NDIAC(terms & conditions and salaries and allowances 
payable to the Chairperson and Full-time Members) Rules,2022 
Notified G.S.R..442(E) vide 
dated 11.6.2022. 
2. NDIAC(Form of Annual statement of Accounts), Rules, 2022 Notified 464(E) vide dated 
21.6.2022. 
3. NDIAC(Number of Posts and Recruitment of Registrar, 
Counsel and other officers and employees) Rules, 2022 
Notified 469(E) vide dated 
24.6.2022 
4. NDIAC(travelling and other allowance payable to the Part-time 
Members) Rules, 2022 
Notified 470(E) vide dated 
24.6.2022 
  
Arbitration and Conciliation (Amendment) Act, 2019 
  
S. 
No. Rules Status 
1. 
The Arbitration Council of India (Qualifications, Appointment 
and other Terms and Conditions of the Service of Chief Executive 
Officer) Rules, 2022 
Notified G.S.R.528(E) 
vide dated  09.07.2022 
2. 
The Arbitration Council of India (Terms and Conditions and the 
salary and allowances payable to Chairperson and Members) 
Rules, 2022 
Notified G.S.R.527(E) 
vide dated 09.07.2022 
3. 
The Arbitration Council of India (Number of officers and other 
Employees, their qualifications, appointment and other Terms and 
Conditions) Rules, 2022. 
Notified G.S.R.530(E) 
vide dated 09.07.2022 
4. The Arbitration Council of India (Traveling and other Allowances 
Payable to Part-time Members) Rules, 2022 
Notified G.S.R.529(E) 
vide dated 09.07.2022 
 
Further observation 
 
2.5 The Committee takes note of the reply. 
 
 
 

 
19 
VACANCIES OF NOTARIES 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
2.6 The Committee observes that there are a large number of vacancies of notaries in the 
country. As against the total sanctioned strength  of 35,003 notaries in the country, 12,487 posts 
are vacant as on 31.12.2021. The Committee appreciates the Department for targeted initiative to 
fill-up vacancy positions of notaries from under -represented States/UTs. However, it observes 
that there has b een poor response from North -Eastern and some other States with regard to 
filling-up notary positions and, the Committee, accordingly, feels that either the Department may 
have failed to effectively advertise its invitations for application for notary or t hese States/UTs 
have been allocated excess central quota of notaries. The Committee therefore recommends 
submitting a status report on the rationale behind projection of notary posts in these States/UTs. 
(3.13) 
Action Taken 
2.7 The Notary Cell, Department of Legal Affairs vide OMs dated 28.04.2021 and 
29.07.2021 had requested Registrars of all the High Court‟s/Chairman of all the Bar Councils 
including those States and UTs (where 100 percent of positions of Notaries are vacant) f or 
widely circulating proposal for inviting online applications from eligible legal practitioners.   
  
2.8 The interviews for appointment of central public notaries were conducted in the month of 
September, 2021 in the UTs of Jammu and Kashmir and 81 numbe r of notaries have been 
appointed. Interviews for the UT of Puducherry were conducted in month of July, 2022 for 
appointment. Further for the State of Himachal Pradesh, Online Interviews for appointment of 
three hundred and one (301) notary vacancies have been conducted in the month of September, 
2022. In the State of Gujarat, document verification process for 9198 applications have been 
completed and online interviews are presently being conducted by constituting 6 number of 
Interview Boards.  
  
2.9 Furthermore, online interviews for the State of Karnataka and Maharashtra are also 
proposed to be conducted in the months of November/ December, 2022  
  
2.10 Keeping in view the fairly poor response of online applications    from North Eastern 
States (Except Stat es of Assam and Goa, and UT of Puducherry) a decision to invite online 
applications (through advertisements in local newspapers in that State/UT) was taken. 
Accordingly, in these North Eastern States, advertisements in local newspapers (English and 
local l anguage) were published with last date of receipt of applications as 30th July, 2022. 
Pursuant to response of applicants from these States/UTs, interview schedule will be 
programmed.  
 
 
 

 
20 
Further observation 
 
2.11 The Committee takes note of the reply and e xpects the Department to fill up all the 
vacancies of notaries in the under-represented States/UTs expeditiously.  
 
PENDENCY OF GOVERNMENT CASES 
 
Recommendation/Observation  
2.12 The Committee appreciates the Department for creating LIMBS portal for monito ring of 
government litigations in courts and tribunals and also initiatives of some Ministries/Department 
like Ministry of Finance and Ministry of Railways to reduce litigations. However, the Committee 
also observes that still large numbers of government c ases are pending in various courts and 
tribunals, and accordingly, feels that monetary threshold for filing appeals may be gradually 
enhanced to avoid unnecessary appeals. (3.22) 
2.13 With regard to large number of contempt cases against various Ministries , the Committee 
fails to understand as to why there are so many contempt cases against government 
Departments/Ministries. The Committee feels that the Department need to prepare broad 
guidelines/policy for filing cases/appeals so as to limit discretions of  government officials 
dealing with cases for filing appeal after appeal leading to contempt cases, thereby wasting 
government resources. The Committee, accordingly, recommends the Department to frame 
guidelines/policy for filing cases/appeals in court case s and also sensitize the 
Departments/Ministries in this regard to reduce contempt cases. (3.23) 
Action Taken 
2.14 In this regard, it is stated that a proposal for issuance of detailed guidelines for reducing 
Government litigations is under consideration wh ich includes, inter-alia, measures for increasing 
monetary threshold and to reduce contempt cases against the Government. 
Further Observation 
 
2.15 The Committee takes note of the reply and expect s the Government to finalize and 
publish such guidelines soon. Once finalized the Committee may be informed accordingly.  
 
INDIAN LAW INSTITUTE (ILI) 
 
Recommendation/Observation  
2.16 The Committee observes that Institution of National Importance (INI) status has been 
granted to institutions imparting education in engineering, design, medicine, science, pharmacy 
and so forth, however, no such status has been granted to institution s imparting dedicated 
law/legal education. The Committee feels that the ILI  deserves to flourish under the umbrella of 

 
21 
an Institution of National Importance in the field of legal education and research, through 
appropriate enactment by the Parliament. This will help in furthering legal education and 
research dimensions at a globa l platform through the legacy earned by the Indian Law Institute. 
The Committee is of the view that a time bound action must be taken in this regard. In the light 
of the above, the Committee recommends that the Department of Legal Affairs should take 
appropriate steps to bring a draft enactment in Parliament for empowering the Indian Law 
Institute as an Institution of National Importance (INI) in line with other INIs of various other 
Ministries. (3.38) 
Action Taken 
2.17 The recommendation of the Committee r egarding empowering the Indian Law Institute 
(ILI)  as an Institution of National Importance (INI) in line with other INIs of various other 
Ministries is already under consideration of the Department as earlier recommended by the 
Hon‟ble Committee in its 9 6th Report.  In this regard, ILI has been requested to forward the 
blueprint for generation of revenue with an aim to achieve self -sustaining model and increased 
outreach in terms of research projects, academic activities, legal research publications as al so 
collaboration for Workshop and Training Programme with other prestigious organizations and 
institutions and submit the blueprint to this Department for further necessary action.   ILI has also 
been requested to frame and submit a proposal in this regard for consideration of this 
Department.  
Further Observation 
 
2.18 The Committee takes note of the reply and expects ILI and the Government to work 
in tandem for enhancing the stature of the ILI and making it an Institution of National 
Importance.  
 
LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA 
 
Recommendation/Observation  
2.19 The Union Cabinet approved the constitution of the 22nd Law Commission of India and 
Gazette notification for the same was published on the 21st February, 2020. However, the 
Committee observes that even afte r more than two years of its constitution, the appointment 
processes of Chairperson and Members of the Commission is yet to be completed. The 
Committee is disappointed with the snail‟s pace of their appointment processes, as a body whose 
tenure itself is t hree years is now in its 3rd year without a Chairperson and Members. The 
Committee fails to understand that why post of Chairperson and Members are vacant for such a 
longtime in such an important body like Law Commission. (3.41) 
2.20 The Committee feels th at since more than two and half years have already elapsed, 
appointment of Chairman and Members for the remainder would not serve the desired purpose. 
The Committee desires that the Chairman and Members of the LCI may be appointed for full -

 
22 
term of three ye ars, instead of the remaining period from the date of constitution of the LCI, for 
its meaningful tenure and functioning, and recommends that the Department should furnish its 
views on the suggestions of the Committee. (3.42) 
Action Taken 
2.21 Pursuant to the approval of the Cabinet, the Govt. has notified re -constitution of the 22 nd 
Law Commission of India in the Gazette of India on 21.02.2020 for a term of three years from 
the date of notification. The appointment of Chairperson and Members of 22 nd Law Commission 
of India is under consideration of the Government. The suggestion to appoint Chairperson and 
Members of the Commission beyond the tenure of the Commission shall require due 
consideration and requisite approval of the Union Cabinet, while finalizing such appointments.  
Further Observation 
 
2.22 The Committee welcomes the Constitution of the 22nd Law Commission of India. 
 
2.23 The Committee hopes that t he Law Commission being an important institution for 
suggesting legal reforms in the country would start doing its work, on legal reforms as soon 
as the office bearers are appointed. 
 
NEW DELHI INTERNATIONAL ARBITRATION CENTRE (NDIAC) 
 
Recommendation/Observation  
2.24 The Committee observes that the Department has initiated framing of rules/subor dinate 
legislations and appointment process at NDIAC. However, the Committee observes that New 
Delhi International Arbitration Centre Act was enacted in July, 2019, and almost 2.5 years have 
passed without framing of rules or appointment of Chairperson, Me mbers and Officers making 
the NDIAC dysfunctional. The Committee, accordingly, recommends the Department to 
expedite the framing of rules and appointment process to make the NDIAC functional. (3.45) 
Action Taken 
2.25 It is submitted that the following Rule s have been framed, notified and laid before the 
both Houses of the Parliament during the Monsoon Session of Parliament {In the RajyaSabha on 
28.07.2022 and in the LokSabha on 29.07.2022}. 
 
 
 
 

 
23 
New Delhi International Arbitration Centre (NDIAC) Act, 2019. 
S.No Rules Status 
1. 
NDIAC(terms & conditions and salaries and allowances 
payable to the Chairperson and Full-time Members) 
Rules,2022 
Notified G.S.R..442(E) 
vide dated 11.6.2022. 
2. NDIAC(Form of Annual statement of Accounts), Rules, 2022 
Notified 464(E) vide dated  
21.6.2022. 
3. NDIAC(Number of Posts and Recruitment of Registrar, 
Counsel and other officers and employees) Rules, 2022 
Notified 469(E) vide dated  
24.6.2022 
4. NDIAC(travelling and other allowance payable to the Part-time 
Members) Rules, 2022 
Notified 470(E) vide dated 
24.6.2022 
 2.26 It is further submitted that action for appointment of the Chairperson, NDIAC is 
underway. Various other steps including engagement of officers/officials for the NDIAC 
Secretariat and complet ion of other administrative requirements are also being taken up 
expeditiously for operationalization of the Centre. 
Further Observation 
 
2.27 As the necessary rules been framed the Committee expects that NDIAC becomes 
fully operational soon.  
 
--- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
24 
CHAPTER III 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE 
COMMITTEE DOES NOT ACCEPT THE REASONS GIVEN BY THE 
DEPARTMENT AND REITERATES ITS RECOMMENDATIONS 
 
BUDGET ALLOCATION TO INDIAN LAW INSTITUTE 
Recommendation/Observation 
3.0 The Department/ ILI  has informed that over the last 5 years, 100 percent of funds 
released to ILI have been utilised and there was excess expenditure (50 percent approx.) of ILI 
vis-à-vis grants allocated for the same period. The ILI has informed this Committee that it has 
incurred an expenditure of Rs. 6.7 crore in the current financial year (as on 31.1.2022) towards 
payment of salaries and allowances. However, the Committee observes that the ILI is not able to 
meet even its salary requirement for teaching and non -teaching staff from the grants allocated by 
the Department of Legal Affairs. Therefore, the Committee is of the view that ILI being a 
grantee institution should not eternally depend on government grants and thus it needs to become 
self sufficient to meet its basic r equirements. The Committee also feels that for the time being, 
grants-in-aid to ILI may be enhanced. The Committee, accordingly, recommends the Department 
to at least provide grants -in-aid to meet its 100 percent salary and allowances expenditure for 
sanctioned positions for the next five years. (2.13) 
3.1 The Committee observes that majority of earnings of ILI is from course fee charged from 
students/trainees, rent received from Ministry of Law and Justice for leasing its premises, and 
interests. The Committee also observes that the pattern of earning has remained same for the last 
2-3 years, except some variations in financial year 2020 -21 due to Covid -19 pandemic. The 
Committee is of the view that the ILI being a research Institution, needs to generate mo re and 
more funds from academic and consultancy activities, which are its core activities and not from 
rent/leasing its premises to Ministries/Departments of Government of India. The Committee, 
accordingly, recommends the ILI to explore additional avenues to generate more funds from 
research/ consulting activities and gradually become self sufficient. (2.14) 
 
3.2 The Committee also feels that ILI needs to expand its activities by way of introducing 
demand degrees/diploma programmes and consultancy activitie s by optimally utilising its 
existing infrastructure and accordingly, is of the view that its premises rented out to the 
Departments/institutions needs to be utilised for its own expansion. The Committee, accordingly, 
recommends the Department to get the ILI premises vacated for its expansion. (2.15) 
Action Taken  
3.3 The Department is providing almost 50% of total salary and allowances expenditure of 
Indian Law Institute (ILI) as Grants -in-Aid. Besides that Rs.6.50 crore has been provided to ILI 

 
25 
in the RE-2021-22 as one time special Grants -in-Aid for payment of outstanding property tax to 
NDMC and for strengthening of building infrastructure. During Revised Estimate (2021 -22), the 
Department allocated Rs. 3.00 crore and the same allocation has been retai ned for BE- 2022-23. 
Keeping in view the recommendation of the Committee to enhance the allocation for salary and 
allowances, the proposal for enhancement of Grant -in-Aid (Salary) to Rs.6.00 crore has been 
agreed to by this Department and sent to Integrate d Finance Division for getting the same 
approved by the Competent Authority. 
3.4 ILI has informed that at present, the Institute manages to generate an amount of Rs.4.00 
crore through its own resources i.e. course fee, rent, sale of publications, research activities etc. 
Further, it is difficult for the Institute to introduce more academic courses due to space 
constraints and lack of infrastructure and there is very less scope for the Institute to earn more 
revenue from its core activities. However, the Ins titute is continuously striving to explore more 
avenues for expansion of its academic, research and consulting activities to generate more funds. 
3.5 The Indian Law Institute (ILI) building has been constructed with a loan from the 
Government with an agreement between the Government and ILI to rent out some portion of the 
building to the Government by the ILI. ILI has rented out 13184 Sq. Feet portion of the building 
to the Department of Legal Affairs. As per the recommendation of the committee, the 
Department of Legal Affairs may consider vacating the rented portion of the premises, for 
optimum utilization of the infrastructure of ILI, when the Central Vista made operational, 
accommodating all offices of the Department of Legal Affairs in the Central Vista. 
Further Observation  
3.6 The Indian Law Institute (ILI) was founded primarily with the objective of 
promoting and conducting legal research. After more than six decades of its coming into 
existence the institute is expected to  have evolved itself into a center of excellence in the 
field of Law. For this , the Government should provide adequate funds for running the 
institute and augmenting its infrastructure. On the other hand the ILI should generate 
more funds from research/consulting activ ities and gradually become self sufficient in 
terms of finances.  
ARBITRATION COUNCIL OF INDIA 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
3.7 The Committee observes that the Department was not able to spend a single Rupee from 
the allocations made under the head Arbitrat ion Council of India (ACI) in the Financial Year 
(2020-21) & (2021 -22), however, it has again made a projection of Rs. 6.50 crore for the 
Financial Year (2022 -23) to the Ministry of Finance, against which Rs. 3.00 crore has been 
allocated in BE (2022 -23). In view of the above, the Committee feels that submission of 
Department that ACI allocations is primarily due to judicious expenditure in the Financial Year 
2021-22 and projection of optimum budget requirement in Financial Year (2022 -23), is not 

 
26 
tenable. The Committee, accordingly, recommends the Department to expedite the appointment 
process of Chairperson, Members and Secretariat Staffs without further delay so that it become s 
functional, and apprise the Committee about the timeline in this regard. (2.17)  
Action Taken 
 
3.8 It is submitted that tentative provisions in the budget for ACI were made anticipating 
establishment of the ACI after completion of the requisite and ongoing procedural requirements. 
  
3.9 As regards the steps taken for enabling establishment of the ACI, it is submitted that after 
consultation with the concerned Departments, the following Rules have been framed and notified 
pursuant to the Arbitration and Conciliation (Amendment) Act, 2019 and also laid before the 
both Houses of the Parliament during the Monsoon Session of Parliament (In the Rajya Sabha on 
28.07.2022 and in Lok Sabha on 29.07.2022). 
  
  
S.No. Rules Status 
1. 
The Arbitration Council of India (Qualifications, Appointment 
and other Terms and Conditions of the Service of Chief 
Executive Officer) Rules, 2022 
Notified G.S.R.528(E) 
vide dated 09.07.2022 
2. 
The Arbitration Council of India (Terms and Conditions and the 
salary and allowances payable to Chairperson and Members) 
Rules, 2022 
Notified G.S.R.527(E) 
vide dated 09.07.2022 
3. 
The Arbitration Council of India (Number of officers and other 
Employees, their qualifications, appointment and other Terms and 
Conditions) Rules, 2022. 
Notified G.S.R.530(E) 
vide dated 09.07.2022 
4. The Arbitration Council of India (Traveling and other 
Allowances Payable to Part-time Members) Rules, 2022 
Notified G.S.R.529(E) 
vide dated 09.07.2022 
  
3.10 Further, during deliberations and discussions regarding establishment of ACI, it emerged 
that as ACI has been envisaged as an autonomous body, funding of the ACI directly through a 
direct budget line may not be possible. Therefore, provisions are required to be made in the 
Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 for funds and grants for ACI.  Moreover,  since  the  ACI  
would  be  fully  funded  by  the  Central Government, provisions are required to be provided in 
the Act for audit of the accounts of the ACI to be carried out by CAG and the related aspects. 
  
To enable inclusion of the requisite provisions relating to ACI as afore mentioned, the 
Department has taken steps to carry out the requisite amendments to the Arbitration and 
Conciliation Act, 1996. It is proposed to introduce the said amendment in the Parliament in the 
ensuing session. 
  

 
27 
3.11 Upon the amendments being carried  and enabling provisions being introduced, further 
expeditious and immediate steps for establishment and operationalization of the ACI would be 
taken. 
Further observation  
 
3.12 The Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 was amended by the Arbitration and 
Conciliation (Amendment) Act 2019 and certain provisions of the Amendment Act were 
enforced w.e.f 30.08.2019. The said Amendment Act inter -alia provided for the 
establishment and incorporation of an independent body namely, the Arbitration Council 
of India  (ACI) for the purpose of grading of arbitral institutions and accreditation of 
arbitrators, etc. Subsequently, the Government has also notified 4 rules in connection with 
the establishment of the ACI. However, the Department is now stating that there is a  
requirement to further amend the 1996 Act for incorporating provisions related to funding 
of the ACI. The Committee accordingly, recommends the Government to bring the 
requisite amendment at the earliest and make the ACI fully functional at the earliest. 
 
VACANCIES IN THE DEPARTMENT OF LEGAL AFFAIRS 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
3.13 The Committee observes that around 50 percent of Indian Legal Service posts, as 
compared to sanctioned posts, are vacant at various grades. Further, large number of posts of 
General Central Services (GCS), Central Secretariat Services (CSS), Central Secret ariat 
Stenographer Services (CSSS), Central Secretariat Clerical Services (CSCS), and Central 
Secretariat Official Language Service (CSOLS) are also vacant in the Department. The 
Department has informed that in consultation with recruiting agencies like UP SC and SSC and 
cadre controlling authority DoPT, various processes have been initiated to fill -up these vacancy 
positions. The Committee in its previous reports on Demands for Grants had also raised the issue 
of vacancy positions in the Department and acco rdingly, had pointed that filling -up of these 
vacancies positions need to be expedited for smooth functioning of the Department. (3.6)  
3.14 The Committee, accordingly, recommends the Department to approach the concerned 
cadre controlling and recruiting agencies, i.e. Department of Personnel and Training (DoPT), 
Union Public Service Commission (UPSC) and Staff Selection Commission (SSC), and impress 
upon them to fill -up the vacancy positions of General Central Services (GCS), Central 
Secretariat Services (CSS), Central Secretariat Stenographer Services (CSSS), Central 
Secretariat Clerical Services (CSCS), and Central Secretariat Official Language Service 
(CSOLS) officers. The Committee further recommends the Department to at least fill -up 
vacancies of ILS Officers in a time bound manner, as the Department of Legal Affairs itself is 
the cadre controlling authority of this service. (3.7) 
 
 

 
28 
Action Taken 
 
3.15 The vacancies in various grades belonging to the Cadres of Central Secretariat Services 
(CSS), Central Secretariat Stenographer Services (CSSS), Central Secretariat Clerical Services 
(CSCS), and Central Secretariat Official Language Services (CSOLS) are filled up on the basis 
of nomination received from the Department of Personnel & Training (DoPT) and Department of 
Official Language (DoOL) respectively. 
3.16 The shortage of manpower in the posts belonging to above mentioned cadres is due to 
non-receipt of nominations from DoPT and DoOL in spite of repeated reminders. The vacancies 
in the grades of Accounta nt and Junior Accountant belonging to General Central Service (GCS) 
Cadre could not be filled up as the Recruitment Rules of these posts are being amended.  
3.17 Matter is being taken up with DoPT and DoOL regularly for making nominations against 
the vacan t posts. Latest reminder in this regard was sent on 30.08.2022 and 01.08.2022 
respectively. Efforts are being made to finalize the process of amendment of Recruitments Rules 
in respect of the posts of Accountant and Junior Accountant at the earliest. 
 3.18 As regards GCS Cadre in the Department of Legal Affairs, vacancies have already been 
reported to the SSC for 10 posts of Court Clerks to be appointed through Direct Recruitment    
and 13 of Court Clerks have been reported for Limited Departmental Competiti ve Examination.  
Further, SSC has recommended 11 candidates for the posts of Assistant Legal and all candidates 
have joined the department. Status regarding Action Taken for filling up the posts in Legal 
Adviser Cadre and Government Advocate Cadre as on 10.06.2022 may be seen at Annexure-A .  
Further observation 
 
3.19 Shortage of manpower  has been a perennial  problem in the Department of Legal 
Affairs notably in the Indian Legal Service (ILS) cadre, who are the Principal Legal 
Advisers to the Government. The Committee in its p revious reports has time and again 
recommended accelerating the recruitment process for ILS b ut the Department citing 
delays in amending the Recruitment Rules (RRs), Court Cases etc. has lagged behind in 
overcoming the shortage, which presently is about 50% of the cadre strength. As the ILS 
cadre play a pivotal role in the functioning of the Depar tment of Legal Affairs and 
Legislative Department, the Committee once again recommends the Government to fill all 
the pending vacancies in the ILS cadre on priority and overcome all the hurdles in 
achieving this target. A time line for filling up of all vacancies in the cadre may be prepared 
and shared with the Committee. 
3.20 As far as vacancies in the CSS, CSSS, CSCS and CSOL cadre are concerned the 
Department should take up the matter with the concerned cadre controlling authorities 
from higher level and with more vigor, rather than shooting an innocent reminder to them 
on regular basis. 
 

 
29 
VACANCIES OF NOTARIES 
 
Recommendation/observation  
 
3.21 The Committee also observes that from the year 2019 onwards very few appointments 
i.e. 2019(439), 2020(0), and 2 021(91) have been made by the Department despite large number 
of vacant positions and more than 81000 pending online applications. The Committee is not 
convinced with the submission of the Department that appointment could not be made due to 
covid-19 pandemic, as prior to the covid -19 pandemic also large number of positions of notaries 
were vacant in various States/UTs. Further, in the year 2019, when there was no covid -19 
pandemic, very few appointments of notaries were made. The Committee feels that the 
Department needs to make an all out effort to fill -up the vacant positions and accordingly, 
recommends the Department to submit a status note proposing a tentative timeline for filling 
these vacant posts while furnishing Action Taken Replies. The Committee,  further, recommends 
the Department to publish names of officers along with contact details dealing with notaries in its 
website for the benefit of notary applicants and general public. (3.14) 
Action Taken 
3.22 In the year 2018 and 2019, number of intervie w Boards for conducting interviews in 
various States/UTs were constituted. However, due to Covind -19 Pandemic, no interviews could 
be conducted in any of States/UTs in the year 2020-21, except in the UTs of Jammu and Kashmir 
where interviews were conducted in the month of September, 2021 and 91 candidates have been 
appointed. Further, interviews for the UT of Puducherry have also been completed. Furthermore, 
process is over for the state of Himachal Pradesh.   
3.23 In view of non -conducting of interviews du e to Covid -19 Pandemic, online applications 
from all the States/UTs have been received and Notary Cell has accordingly decided to increase 
the number of vacancies for central government notaries in these States/UTs. A Gazette 
notification to this effect h as been issued. The notification paves the way for holding of 
interviews in these States/UTs in phased manner as decided by the Central Government. 
3.24 Furthermore in 09 States including North Eastern States, advertisements have been issued 
in local newspapers inviting Online Notary Applications with last date as 31st July, 2022. The 
last date for inviting applications in these States were further extended till 31st August, 2022.  
3.25 Names and Designation of Officers and Staff along with contact det ails working in 
Notary Cell have been published on the official website of the Department. 
Further Observation  
3.26 As per the data provided by the Department about two -third of vacancies of 
Notaries in the country has remained unfilled as on 31.12.2021. Even before the onset of 
COVID there were huge vacancies of Notaries in the country. The pandemic has caused 

 
30 
further delay in appointment. Since, t he effects of the pandemic has almost completely 
waned, the Department should set a time-line to fill up the vacancies of Notaries.  
 
INDIAN LAW INSTITUTE (ILI) 
 
Recommendation/Observation  
3.27 The Committee observes that out of the sanctioned 20 teaching posts, only 7 posts (35 
percent) are filled-up. Further, out of 75 non teaching posts, only 36 are in position (48 Percent). 
The Committee is not convinced with the argument of the ILI that existing strength of teaching 
and non -teaching posts is sufficient to meet the present requirement and is of the unanimous 
view that for the ILI t o function at its optimal level, it will have to fill -up the vacant positions of 
teaching and non -teaching staffs. The Committee also feels that ILI may explore the feasibility 
of introducing post -doctoral research fellowships to young legal researchers on  emerging legal 
areas. (3.34) 
Action Taken 
3.28 It is submitted that the Department has increased the grant to Indian law Institute (ILI) by 
Rs.1.00 crore under „Salary and allowance” head  to an amount of Rs.3.50 crore in R.E 2021 -22 
from Rs 2.50 crore all ocation in BE -2021-22.   However, although under BE 2022 -23 the 
allocation under “Grants -in-Aid Salaries” has been kept to Rs.3.00 crore, the Department has 
noted the recommendation of the Committee regarding enhancement of budget under this head, 
and the matter shall be taken up with the Department of Expenditure to increase allocation under 
“Grants-in-Aid Salaries” head to ILI during RE 2022-23 on the basis of demand of ILI.   
3.29 The ILI has also been advised to take action to implement the recommendati on of the 
Committee regarding exploring the feasibility of introducing post -doctoral research fellowships 
to young legal researchers on emerging legal areas.  
Further Observation 
 
3.30 It seems that the teaching positions and other posts have been kept vac ant due to 
want of sufficient funds for giving salaries and allowances. The Committee feels saddened 
to note that an institution of the stature of ILI is made to run with 35% of the sanctioned 
teaching posts due to dearth of funds. The Committee wants to s ee the ILI to expand and 
prosper; not to shrink and stagnate. Accordingly, the Committee recommends that the 
Government to support ILI whole-heartedly with funds and otherwise, for its development 
and expansion, so that it lives upto its mandate and expectation.  
 
 
--- 
 

 
31 
CHAPTER IV 
 
THE RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH 
FINAL REPLIES OF THE MINISTRY HAVE NOT BEEN RECEIVED 
 
BAR COUNCIL OF INDIA 
 
Recommendation/Observation  
4.0 The Committee observes from the submissions made by both the Department of Legal 
Affairs and Bar Council of India that the Department releases grants only after receiving request 
from concerned organisa tion/Institution and no such application for seeking grants has been 
received from the BCI, hence there is no proposal for release of Grants to BCI by the 
Department. The Committee was apprised of the plight of lawyers due to covid -19 pandemic by 
BCI and i nfrastructural constraints of Bar Councils/Associations and request for recommending 
grants, including provisions for medical aid, health insurance etc. to undertake welfare activities.  
(3.52) 
Action Taken 
4.1 Reply from Implementation Cell, Department of Legal Affairs on the recommendations 
related to Bar Council of India (BCI) is still awaited and the same would be submitted as soon as 
the response / inputs are received from Implementation Cell / BCI. 
 
Recommendation/Observation  
4.2 The Committee observes from the submission of the BCI that many Bar Associations, 
especially in rural areas require proper infrastructure and basic amenities like toilets, drinking 
water, fans, good library for facilitating good practice of Advocacy, compu ters with internet 
facilities and proper sitting space for Advocates and their clients, and is of the view that without 
a conducive atmosphere, the justice system suffers and leads to delays and pendency of cases. 
The Committee feels that BCI needs to be p rovided with some grants by the Department for 
basic infrastructural and other facilities like sitting space, clean drinking water, electricity, 
libraries, etc. in various courts, and accordingly, recommends the Bar Council of India to 
approach the Department of Legal Affairs for Grants -in –aid. The Committee also feels that the 
Department may approach the Department of Justice, Ministry of Law and Justice for exploring 
the feasibility of recommending grants/or including infrastructure facilities for Bar As sociations 
under the Centrally Sponsored Scheme (CSS) for Development of Infrastructure Facilities for 
Districts and Subordinate Judiciary. The Committee, further, recommends the Department of 
Legal Affairs to explore the feasibility of providing grants to  the BCI and also submit a status 
note to this Committee while furnishing Action Taken Replies on the issue along with 
appropriate justifications. (3.53)  

 
32 
 
Action Taken 
 
4.3 Reply from Implementation Cell, Department of Legal Affairs on the recommendations  
related to Bar Council of India (BCI) is still awaited and the same would be submitted as soon as 
the response / inputs are received from Implementation Cell / BCI. 
 
Recommendation/Observation  
4.4 The Committee also feels that budgetary allocations for W elfare of Advocates during 
pandemic and natural calamities may be made in the budget allocation, and there should also be 
provisions to disburse interest free /low interest loans. It also feels that that there is a requirement 
for life/term insurance and h ealth insurance as well as for nominal/subsidized medical facilities 
for majority of Advocates and their families, who are under financial duress, more so, due to the 
pandemic. The Committee, accordingly, recommends the Department to explore available 
options and modalities in this regard and submit a status note while submitting the action taken 
replies. (3.54) 
Action Taken 
4.5 Reply may be sent while received from Bar Council of India/ Implementation Cell, 
Department of Legal Affairs. 
Recommendation/Observation  
4.6 The Committee appreciates the Bar Council of India‟s initiative to improve the standards 
of legal education, however, it is of the view that utmost care must be taken in granting 
recognition to law colleges/institutions to impart legal educatio n across the country. The 
Committee observes that legal education is being commercialized and many colleges without 
having proper class room, building, library etc. and ghost teachers are granting law degrees and 
candidates without attending law classes ar e enrolling as advocates thereby increasing the pool 
of sub-standard lawyers. (3.59) 
Action Taken 
4.7 Reply from Implementation Cell, Department of Legal Affairs on the recommendations 
related to Bar Council of India (BCI) is still awaited and the same wou ld be submitted as soon as 
the response / inputs are received from Implementation Cell / BCI. 
 Recommendation/Observation  
4.8 The Committee also feels that the BCI also needs to improve the standard of All India 
Bar Examinations (AIBE) and accordingly rec ommends that exit examination to practice law in 
the country should be made compulsory without any further relaxations. Further, the Committee 

 
33 
is of the strong view that to enhance the quality of legal education and preserve the credibility of 
legal profes sion, the BCI needs to improve its regulatory functions and therefore, law 
universities promoting malpractices needs to be strictly dealt with. (3.60) 
Action Taken 
4.9 Reply from Implementation Cell, Department of Legal Affairs on the recommendations 
related to Bar Council of India (BCI) is still awaited and the same would be submitted as soon as 
the response / inputs are received from Implementation Cell / BCI. 
 
Recommendation/Observation  
4.10 The Committee also feels that as part of improving the legal education and profession in 
the country, the BCI may explore the options of revisiting the earlier practice of compulsory 
apprenticeship of law graduates, and Department/BCI should apprise the Committee about their 
considered opinion on the issue. (3.61) 
Action Taken 
4.11 Reply from Implementation Cell, Department of Legal Affairs on the recommendations 
related to Bar Council of India (BCI) is still awaited and the same would be submitted as soon as 
the response / inputs are received from Implementation Cell / BCI. 
 
Further Observation 
 
4.12 The Committee notes that ATR has not been received from the BCI/Implementation 
Cell even after elapse of sufficient time given to them. The Department should impress 
upon the BCI/Implementation Cell to furnish the ATR on  the recommendations of the 
Committee, immediately, without any further delay.  
 
--- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
34 
Annexure-A  
Status regarding action taken for filling up the posts in Legal Advisers Cadre (As on 
01.10.2022) 
S. 
No. 
Designation  Sancti-
oned 
Filled  Vacancy  Mode of Recruitment  Remarks 
1. JS&LA 13 3* 10 By promotion of Addl. 
Legal Adviser with 02 
years‟ service or 
combined service of not 
less than 06 years as Addl. 
Legal Adviser and Deputy 
Legal Adviser, failing 
which by Direct 
recruitment. 
04 vacancies  - Out of 6 
reported vacancies under DR 
quota, 2 candidates have 
joined and result of 1 
candidate is in sealed cover. 
For remaining 3 candidates, 
decision of ACC is pending.  
  
05 vacancies  - This 
Department is considering 
one time relaxation for 
appointment of SAG level 
officers of other Group „A‟ 
organized services on 
deputation basis  
  
01 vacancy  – DPC proposal 
has been submitted to UPSC 
on 20.6.2022.   
  
2. Addl.LA 20 11** 9 90% by Promotion falling 
which by deputation 
10% by Direct 
Recruitment 
  
For promotion, Deputy 
Legal Adviser with not 
less than 03 years‟ service 
is eligible. 
02 posts (DR) – UPSC has 
not agreed to take up the 
direct recruitment proposals 
and is insisting on 
submission of proposals 
after amendment of ILS 
Rules.  
  
For remaining pos ts, 
presently no officer in feeder 
grade (Deputy Legal 
Adviser) is eligible for 
promotion. 

 
35 
3. DLA 19 8 11 50% by Direct 
Recruitment, 50% by 
promotion 
For promotion, Assistant 
Legal Adviser with not 
less than 03 years‟ service 
in the grade is eligible. 
01 post (DR) – Candidate 
will join this department 
after vigilance clearance 
from his present employer 
(CBI).  
  
03 posts (DR) (2 -existing + 
1 anticipated) – Requisition 
is to be sent to UPSC after 
identification of posts for 
PwBD. 
08 posts (DR) – This 
Department is considering 
ad hoc promotion of ALAs. 
UPSC has allowed only for 
the proposal of 3 posts of 
DLA through DR and is 
insisting on submission of 
remaining vacancies through 
DR proposal after 
amendment of ILS Rules. 
4. ALA 39 20 19 50% by Promotion of 
Superintendent (L) with 
06 years‟ service/ 
Librarian Grade -I with 07 
years‟ service and 50% by 
Direct Recruitment. 
13 posts (DR) – UPSC has 
agreed to take up the direct 
recruitment proposals. 
Proposal will be submitted 
once the posts are identified 
for PwBD categories.  
  
01 post (Promotion) – This 
vacancy can be filled in the 
higher grade only in an 
officiating capacity since the 
findings of the DPC in 
respect of the suitability of 
Shri N.A. Pande for his 
promotion has been kept in a 
sealed cover. 
  
05 posts (Promotion) - DPC 
Proposal for 5 vacancies will 
be submitted once the posts 
are identified for PwBD 
categories. 
Total 91 42 49     
  
*Ms. Sudha Rani Relangi - appointed as Director of Prosecution in CBI upto 18.8.2023 
**Ms. Haimanti Bhattacharya - appointed as Director (Cyber Laws) from 12.1.2022 to 11.1.2025 
against the post of Addl. LA. 

 
36 
**ShAvnit Singh Arora - appointed as Director (Arbitration & Conciliation Laws) from 3.2.2022 
to 2.2.2025 against the post of Addl. LA 
 
Status regarding action taken for filling up the posts in Government Advocates Cadre (As 
on 01.10.2022) 
  
S  
No 
Designation Sancti-
oned 
Filled Filled Mode of Recruitment Tentative time frame for filling 
up the vacancies 
1. Sr.GA 3 1 2 By promotion of Addl. 
Govt. Advocate with 02 
years‟ service or 
combined service of not 
less than 06 years as 
Addl. Govt. Advocate 
and Deputy Govt. 
Advocate failing which 
by Direct recruitment. 
2 Posts – DPC recommendations 
have been accepted by Hon‟ble 
MLJ. Proposal has been sent to 
DoPT for seeking  approval of 
ACC. 
2. Addl.GA 9 6 3 66.67% by Direct 
Recruitment 
33.33% by promotion 
failing which by 
deputation. 
For promotion, Deputy 
Govt. Advocate with 
not less than 03 years‟ 
service is eligible. 
  
2 posts (DR)  – UPSC has made 
observations for amendme nt of the 
RRs for taking up the proposals of 
direct recruitment. However 
despite repeated requests, UPSC 
has not agreed to take up the direct 
recruitment proposals and is 
insisting on submission of 
proposals after amendment of ILS 
Rules. The draft ILS Rule s were 
placed on the website of the 
Department on 11.3.2022 for 
stakeholders consultations. The 
UPSC has been apprised of this 
fact and requested for taking up the 
DR proposals pending actual 
amendment of ILS Rules which is 
likely to take some time.  
  
1 post (Promotion)  – No eligible 
officer is available in the feeder 
grade. 
  

 
37 
3. DGA 3 1 2 50% by Direct 
Recruitment, 50% by 
promotion. 
For promotion, 
Assistant Govt. 
Advocate with not less 
than 03 years‟ service 
in the grade is eligible. 
  
1 post (DR) – Requisition to UPSC 
is to be sent after identification of 
posts for PwBD. 
  
1 post (DR)  –     UPSC has 
allowed only for the proposal of 1 
post of DGA through DR and is 
insisting on submission of 
remaining vacancies through DR 
proposal after amendment of ILS 
Rules. 
  
4. AGA 4 2 2 50% by Direct 
Recruitment, 50% by 
promotion. 
For promotion, Ju nior 
Central Govt. Advocate 
with not less than 07 
years‟ service in the 
grade is eligible. 
  
1 post (Promotion) – Presently, no 
eligible officer is available in the 
feeder grade due to AOR 
qualification criteria. File is under 
consideration for relaxing th e 
criteria. 
  
1 post (DR) – This Department is 
considering one time relaxation to 
divert the vacancy into promotion 
quota. 
Total 19 10 09     
 
*** 
  

 
38 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINUTES 

 
39 
VII 
SEVENTH MEETING 
 
 The Department -related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public 
Grievances, Law and Justice met at 03:00 PM on 20.12.2022 in Committee Room No. 4, Block -
A, Parliament House Annexe Ext. Building, New Delhi – 110001.   
 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
 
(i) Shri Sushil Kumar Modi - Chairman 
 
 Rajya Sabha 
(ii) Shrimati Vandana Chavan 
(iii) Shri Mahesh Jethmalani 
(iv) Shri Kanakamedala Ravindra Kumar 
(v) Shrimati Darshana Singh 
(vi) Shri Vivek K. Tankha 
(vii) Shri P. Wilson 
 
 Lok Sabha 
(viii) Shri Kalyan Banerjee 
(ix) Smt. Veena Devi 
(x) Shri Raghu Rama Krishna Raju Kanumuru 
(xi) Shri Malook Nagar 
(xii) Shri Suresh Kumar Pujari 
(xiii) Shri Omprakash Bhupalsingh alias Pawan Rajenimbalkar 
(xiv) Shri Upendra Singh Rawat 
(xv) Smt. Sandhya Ray 
 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Vimal Kumar, Joint Secretary 
Shri P. Narayanan, Director 

 
40 
Shri Goutam Kumar, Deputy Secretary 
Shri Sunil Tripathi, Under Secretary 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the meeting of the Committee. He 
apprised them that the Committee will first consider and adopt two reports  *   
  *     *. 
3. The Committee considered a nd adopted the 124 th Report on Action taken on 114th 
Report of the Committee on Demand for Grants (2022 -23) pertaining to the Legislative 
Department and 125th Report on Action Taken on 115th Report of the Committee on Demand 
for Grants (2022-23) pertaining to the Department of Legal Affairs. 
4. *     *      *  
5.  *     *      *  
6. *     *      *  
7. *     *      *  
8. *     *      *  
9. A Verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept. 
10. The meeting adjourned at 04.05 PM.  
 
 
New Delhi                                                                                P. NARAYANAN  
20th December, 2022                                                                         DIRECTOR 
     
To 
 The Chairman and Members of the  
Department-related Parliamentary 
Standing Committee on Personnel,  
Public Grievances, Law and Justice. 
 
 
 
***                                   
 
 
 
 
 