REPORT NO. 
71
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
February, 2014/Magha, 1935 (Saka)
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
RAJYA SABHA 
ON PERSONNEL, PUBLIC GRIEVANCES, LAW AND JUSTICE
SEVENTY FIRST REPORT
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 17th February, 2014) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 17th February, 2014)  
Action Taken Replies of the Government 
on the Recommendations/Observationsth
contained in the 58  Report on Demands for
Grants (2013-14) of the Ministry of Law and Justice


Website: http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail: rsc-pers@sansad.nic.in

49
C.S.(P&L)-141
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
ON PERSONNEL, PUBLIC GRIEV ANCES, LAW AND JUSTICE
SEVENTY FIRST REPORT
Action Taken Replies of the Government
on the Recommendations/Observations
contained in the 58 th Report on Demands for
Grants (2013-14) of the Ministry of Law and Justice
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 17th February, 2014)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 17th February, 2014)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
February, 2014/Magha, 1935 (Saka)
Hindi version of this publication is also available

CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ......................................................................................... (i)-(ii)
2. I NTRODUCTION ........................................................................................................................ (iii)
3. A CRONYMS ............................................................................................................................ (iv )
4. R EPORT .................................................................................................................................. 1—31
(i) C HAPTER -I
Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the Ministry .... 2—7
(ii) C HAPTER -II
Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not desire to
pursue in view of the replies given by the Ministry ......................................... 8—22
(iii) C HAPTER -III
Recommendations/Observations in respect  of which  Committee  has not
accepted replies of the Ministry ............................................................................ 23—26
(iv) C HAPTER -IV
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final  replies  of the
Ministry have not been received ............................................................................ 27—31
5. R ECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE C OMMITTEE — A T A G LANCE ......................... 32—34
6. R ELEVANT M INUTES OF THE M EETINGS OF THE C OMMITTEE .............................................. 35—37
7. A PPENDIX ................................................................................................................................ 39—48
List of Reports Presented by the Committee ................................................................... 41—48

(i)
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(Constituted on 31 st August, 2013)
1. Shri Shantaram Naik — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Ms. Anu Aga
3. Shri Ram Jethmalani
4. Shri Sanjiv Kumar
5. Shri Parimal Nathwani
6. Shri Ram Vilas Paswan
7. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy
8. Shri Ramchandra Prasad Singh
9. Dr. Abhishek Manu Singhvi
10. Shri Bhupender Yadav
LOK SABHA
11. Maulana Badruddin Ajmal
12. Shri T. R. Baalu
13. Shri E.T. Mohammed Basheer
14. Shri N.S.V . Chitthan
15. Shri P.C. Gaddigoudar
16. Shri D.B. Chandre Gowda
17. Shri Shailendra Kumar
18. Shri Jitender Singh Malik
19. Shri Arjun Meghwal
20. Shri Pinaki Misra
21. Shri Abhijit Mukherjee
22. Shri S.S. Ramasubbu
23. Shri S. Semmalai
24. Shri S.D. “Shariq”
25. Shrimati Meena Singh
26. Shri Vijay Bahadur Singh
27. Dr. Prabha Kishore Taviad
28. Shri Suresh Kashinath Taware
29. Shri Madhusudan Yadav
30. Vacant
31. Vacant

(ii)
SECRETARIAT
Shri Alok Kumar Chatterjee, Joint Secretary
Shri K.P. Singh, Director
Shri Ashok K. Sahoo, Joint Director
Shrimati Niangkhannem Guite, Assistant Director

(iii)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel,
Public Grievances, Law and Justice, having been authorized by the Committee to present the Report
on its behalf, do hereby present this Seventy-first Report on Action Taken by Government on the
recommendations/observations contained in the Fifty-eighth Report of the Committee on Demands for
Grants (2013-14) of the Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions.
2. The Fifty-eighth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel,
Public Grievances and Pensions was presented to Rajya Sabha on 25
th April, 2013 and laid on the Table
of Lok Sabha on 26 th April, 2013.
3. The Ministry of Law and Justice (Legislative Department, Department of Justice and Department
of Legal Affairs) furnished the Action Taken Reply on the Fifty-eighth Report of the Committee on
19
th July, 2013, 11 th December, 2013 and 13 th January, 2014 respectively. The Committee considered
the draft Report and adopted the same at its meeting held on 13 th February, 2014.
4. For the facility of reference and convenience, the observations and recommendations of the
Committee have been printed in bold and italics letters in the body of the Report.
SHANTARAM NAIK
NEW D ELHI; Chairman,
13th February, 2014 Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee
on Personnel, Public Grievances, Law and Justice.

ACRONYMS
A2J Access to Justice
ADR Alternate Dispute Resolution
AIJS All India Judicial Service
A TR Action Taken Report
A TFE Appellate Tribunal for Foreign Exchange
BCI Bar Council of India
CSS Centrally Sponsored Scheme
EVM Electronic V oting Machine
FEMA Foreign Exchange Management Act
ICADR International Centre for Alternative Dispute Resolution
ICPS Institute of Constitutional and Parliamentary Studies
ICT Information and Communication Technology
IIIDEM India International Institute of Democracy and Election Management
IIT Indian Institute of Technology
ILDR Institute of Legislative and Drafting Research
ILI Indian Law Institute
ITAT Income Tax Appellate Tribunal
LLM Master of Law
MNREGA Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Act
NALSA National Legal Services Authority
NJA National Judicial Academy
NRI Non-Resident Indian
OLW Official Language Wing
SC Scheduled Caste
ST Scheduled Tribe
TFC Thirteenth Finance Commission
UNDP United Nations Development Programme
UC Utilization Certificates
VSP Vidhi Sahitya Prakashan
(iv)

1
REPORT
The Action Taken Report of the Committee deals with the action taken by Ministry of Law
and Justice on the recommendations/observations of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances, Law and Justice in its 58
th Report on Demands for Grants
(2013-14) of the Ministry. The Report was presented to Rajya Sabha on 25 th April, 2013 and laid on
the Table of Lok Sabha on 26 th April, 2013.
2. Action taken replies were received from the Ministry of Law and Justice (Legislative Department,
Department of Justice and Department of Legal Affairs) on 19 th July, 2013, 11 th December, 2013 and
13th January, 2014 in respect of the recommendations contained in the above mentioned report. These
replies have been categorized as follows:
Chapter–I – The recommendations/observations which have been accepted by the Ministry
in respect of Paras 1.3, 2.2, 3.2, 4.2, 5.2, 6.2, 7.2, 8.2 and 9.2. The Committee is pleased
to note that the Ministry of Law and Justice has accepted its recommendations as dealt with
in the Chapter–I of the Report.
Chapter–II – The recommendations/observations which the Committee does not desire to
pursue in view of the replies given by the Ministry of Law and Justice, in respect of Paras
1.3, 2.2, 3.2, 4.2, 5.2, 6.2, 7.2, 8.2, 9.2, 10.2, 11.2, 12.2, 13.2, 14.2, 15.2, 16.3, 17.2, 18.2,
19.2, 20.3 and 21.2 of the Report. The Committee is convinced with the explanations advanced
by the Ministry and does not desire to pursue as of now.
Chapter–III – The recommendations/observations which Committee has not accepted replies
given by Ministry of Law and Justice, in respect of Paras 1.3, 2.2, 3.2 and 4.2 of the Report.
The Committee expresses its concern over non acceptance of its recommendations dealt with
in Chapter–III of this Report and desires that Ministry should furnish logical explanations in
respect of these recommendations.
Chapter–IV – The recommendations/observations on which final replies of the Ministry of
Law and Justice have not been received, in respect of Paras 1.3, 2.2 and 3.2 of the Report.
The Committee observes that Ministry has furnished interim replies. The Committee desires
that Ministry should furnish action taken notes in respect of recommendations categorised in
Chapter–IV .
3. The recommendations/observations of the Committee in its 58
th Report, the ATRs furnished by
Ministry of Law and Justice and the Committee’s further recommendations/observations have been
dealt with in the succeeding chapters.

2
2
CHAPTER-I
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS WHICH
HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE MINISTRY
Legislative Department
VIDHI SAHITYA PRAKASHAN (VSP)
Recommendation/Observation
1. The Committee takes note of the increase in the overall Budgetary allocation to the
Legislative Department. The Committee appreciates the austerity measures undertaken by the
Department following the directives of the Finance Ministry. The Committee suggests that the
VSP should upgrade on the quality of its publications in terms of layout, content and context.
It should also explore scope of bringing out e-books and e-publications. In Committee’s view,
active engagement of States in the promotion and publicity of its literature available in Hindi
by holding frequent competitions, seminars and conferences for school/college going students,
through the respective States, may increase the distribution of its books and journals among
more people.
(Para 5.8)
Action Taken by the Ministry/Department
1.2 Vidhi Sahitya Prakashan is engaged in upgrading the quality of its publications on the
suggestions of Editorial Board and Evaluation Committee regarding lay out, content and context
time to time. This Prakashan popularizes and promotes its literature by holding books stalls in
different places i.e. various high courts campus, district courts campus, law degree colleges and
universities for lawyers, law students and judges of lower courts. This Prakashan distributes its
books and journals among more people through agents in various places of the country. It holds
workshops, seminars and conferences for legal learning in district courts and various law degree
colleges.
Committee’s further observation
1.3 The Committee notes the reply.
VOTING RIGHT TO NON- RESIDENT CITIZENS OF INDIA
Recommendation/Observation
2. The Committee appreciates the initiatives taken by the Department in facilitating the
voting right to non-resident citizens of India and also the simplification of the process of
submission of application for registration. However, the Committee feels that these few
thousands registrations need to be increased to justify the voting rights that has been
conferred on the NRIs. The Committee recommends the Government to take more initiatives
in this regard.
(Para 5.18)

3
Action Taken by the Ministry/Department
2.1 The Government has not granted any privilege to the Non Resident Indians but restoring their
legal and statutory rights enshrined under the Constitution and election laws of the country. Thus the
question of justification does not seem to arise. However, at the same time, the need to increase
enrolment of “Overseas electors” cannot be gainsaid. The Government is committed to make every
effort in association with the Election Commission of India to enroll as many NRIs as “Overseas
electors”.
Committee’s further observation
2.2 The Committee notes the reply.
Department of Legal Affairs
APPELLATE TRIBUNAL FOR FOREIGN EXCHANGE (ATFE)
Recommendation/Observation
3. The Committee is seriously concerned about the pending vacancy of Chairperson, and
feels that it may severely affect the working of important body like the Appellate Tribunal for
Foreign Exchange (ATFE). The Committee urges the Ministry to immediately fill up the
existing vacancies in ATFE so that the work may not be compromised.
Action Taken by the Ministry/Department:
3.1 In exercise of the powers conferred by Section 18 of the Foreign Exchange Management Act,
1999 (FEMA), the Central Government has established the Appellate Tribunal for Foreign Exchange
(ATFE). Section 20 of the FEMA provides that the ATFE shall consist of a Chairperson and such
number of Members as the Central Government may deem fit . In terms of Rule 5 of the Appellate
Tribunal for Foreign Exchange (Recruitment, Salary and Allowances and other Conditions of Service
of Chairperson and Members) Rules, 2000, the ATFE shall have one Chairperson and Members not
exceeding four. The Chairperson or Members shall hold office for a term of five years or until he
attains the age of 65 years in the case of Chairperson and 62 years in the case of Members. The
post of Chairperson carries the pay of Rs. 80,000/- (fixed) per month and that of Member Rs. 67,000/-
79,000 per month.
3.1.1 It may mentioned that Dr. H.D. Mudgil and Dr. Satya Deo Singh, have been appointed as
Members of ATFE w.e.f. 9.7.2013 and 23.7.2013, respectively, for a period of five years or until they
attain the age of 62 years, whichever is earlier. Dr. Mudgil, who is the senior-most Member of ATFE,
has been designated as the acting Chairperson of ATFE, in terms of Section 26 of the FEMA, till the
date on which the regular Chairperson is appointed. As regards appointment of regular Chairperson,
ATFE, it may be mentioned that the post was advertised in the Employment News. The applications
received shall be placed before the Selection Board shortly for making recommendation for appointment
of regular Chairperson, ATFE.
Committee’s further observation
3.2 The Committee notes the reply and impresses upon the Ministry to fill-up the existing
vacancies as soon as possible and in a time bound manner so that the work of ATFE is not
compromised.

4
INDIAN LAW INSTITUTE
Recommendation/Observation
4. The Committee notes the infrastructural development works and the Diploma and
Certificate courses introduced by ILI and desires that more legal research activities should be
undertaken by the institute.
(Para 4.34)
Action Taken by the Ministry/Department
4.1 As desired by the Committee, the Indian Law Institute proposes to introduce more Diploma
Courses and also conduct research, seminars, conferences and training programmes for Government
officials on contemporary legal issues.
Committee’s further observation
4.2 The Committee notes the reply and hopes that some Diploma/Certificate programmes may
be introduced during the coming academic session. The Committee would also like to recommend
that emerging areas in legal education and research may be taken into consideration while
introducing the new Diploma and Certificate programmes.
Department of Justice
CENTRALLY SPONSORED SCHEME RELATING TO INFRASTRUCTURAL FACILITIES FOR
THE JUDICIARY
Recommendation/Observation
5. The Committee commends the work of the Department in reducing the number of
pending Utilisation Certificates (UCs) from State Govts., as informed by Department of Justice
to the Committee that out of Rs. 1245.35 crores released between 1993-94 to 2010-11, UCs of
only Rs. 31.84 crores are pending. The Committee desires that the pending UCs be obtained
from the concerned States/UTs so that further Grants-in-aid may be released on time.
(Para 6.24)
Action Taken by the Ministry/Department
5.1 Out of pending UCs of Rs. 31.84 crore, UCs for Rs. 20.03 crore have since been received.
Hence, out of Rs. 1245.35 crore released, UCs of only Rs. 11.81 crore are now pending. The States/
UTs are being actively pursued at regular intervals for submitting the pending Utilisation Certificates.
The last communication in this regard was sent to States/UTs in October, 2013.
Committee’s further observation
5.2 The Committee notes the reply of the Department of Justice. The Committee is of the view
that infrastructure development of judiciary is need of the hour and therefore, feels that the process
of receiving pending UCs may be expedited so that further grants are released to States without
further delay so that the development work of judiciary is not compromised.
Recommendation/Observation
6. The Committee takes note of the fact that infrastructure development for judiciary

5
represents a major component of the plan outlay of the Department of Justice in BE 2013-14
and the programme is in operation as a Centrally Sponsored Scheme since 1993-94. The
Committee is however, constrained to mind that certain States have not been able to take full
advantage of the Scheme and as a result, they have been able to draw comparatively lesser
funds. The Committee further notes that there are certain States which were not able to draw
funds under the Scheme consecutively for one or more years. The Committee is unable to
understand the reasons why certain States have not been able to take the benefit of the
Scheme, which is so much tilted in their favour. Further, the Scheme is in operation since
1993-94 and large funds of the Central Government are being spent under the Scheme in the
form of assistance to States for improvement of infrastructure for dispensation of justice by
them. Keeping these factors in view, the Committee feels that its high time for the Department
of Justice to go for review/audit of the said Scheme so as to ascertain on both these aspects,
namely, (i) the uneven and irregular drawal/utilization of funds by certain States and (ii) the
actual development in infrastructure that have taken place in the States and the extent to
which this has helped in speeding up the trial of cases. The Committee is, however happy to
note that the Ministry has sought the willingness of the ILI for evaluation of this scheme. The
Committee recommends expeditious action in the matter.
(Para 6.25)
Action Taken by the Ministry/Department
6.1 The matter regarding infrastructure development of Subordinate judiciary was discussed in the
Conference of Chief Ministers of States and Chief Justices of High Courts held on 7
th April, 2013,
and it was decided that the monitoring mechanism of District and State Committees created by the
Hon’ble Supreme Court in I.A. No. 279 in Writ Petition (C) No. 1022 of 1989 be made a permanent
feature and the Chief Justices of High Courts should actively utilise the said mechanism for ensuring
timely proposals for creation, furnishing, maintenance and development of infrastructure of Court
buildings and residences. The State Governments shall render assistance to the High Courts in the
matter and shall allocate adequate and suitable land/sites for purpose of Court complexes and residential
quarters, on priority basis.
6.1.1 The criteria for disbursement of funds to States/UTs under Centrally Sponsored Scheme of
Infrastructure Development of Subordinate judiciary is based on the (i) projection of requirement of
funds by the respective High Court for a time span of five years, (ii) requirement of funds for the
current year and (iii) utilisation of grants previously given to States/UTs. After receiving requisite
information from the States, funds are released taking into account the budgetary provision. Release
of funds gets affected sometimes due to delay in receipt of Utilisation Certificates from some States/
UTs which is a prerequisite for releasing Central assistance. The Department of Justice regularly
reminds States/UTs for submission of utilisation certificates in respect of the funds released.
6.1.2 The Department of Justice has assigned the Indian Law Institute (ILI) on 19
th July, 2013 to
conduct an evaluation of the Centrally Sponsored Scheme for Development of Infrastructure Facilities
for Subordinate Judiciary to inter-alia study the impact of development of infrastructure facilities on
reduction of pendency, identification of various factors enhancing the pace of infrastructure development,
and suggesting ways and means for further enhancing the effectiveness of the Scheme.
Committee’s further observation
6.2 The Committee notes the reply of the Department and feels that delay in receipt of UCs
from States affects further release of funds. The Committee feels that delay in receipt of UCs in
effect amounts to slowing down of activity which is not at all desirable. The Committee therefore,
urges the Department to take adequate steps to ensure that the UCs are received on time. The status

6
of the evaluation of the scheme being made by the ILI may also be furnished to this Committee
for its consideration at the time of furnishing Action Taken Notes.
National Mission-Action Plan Implementation
Recommendation/Observation
7. The Committee takes notes of the serious activities envisaged under the tentative
Action Plan of the National Mission. In Committee’s view, the various actions enumerated in
the Action Plan are complimentary and supplementary to each other and would definitely prove
to be helpful in not only in speeding up the disposal of cases but also enhancing the quality
of their disposal. The Committee recommends that the Ministry should work on the Action
Plan in all seriousness and at the right earnest to that there is considerable progress of action
in the financial year ahead. The Committee however, reiterates its recommendations on the
last year’s Demand for Grants that the Ministry should determine definite time-lines and
targets for the implementation of the Mission and put in place an effective monitoring also.
(Para 6.33)
Action Taken by the Ministry/Department
7.1 The National Mission has a time span of five years (2011-2016) to achieve its objectives. The
Action Plan of National Mission has been approved by its Advisory Council which is chaired by the
Minister for Law and Justice. The implementation of the Action Plan is being regularly monitored by
Secretary, Department of Justice as Mission Leader and Advisory Council in its bi-annual meetings.
Progress on Action Plan of the National Mission as well as timelines of its implementation were
reviewed by the Advisory Council in the meetings held on 24
th June, 2013 and 7 th November, 2013.
Committee’s further observation
7.2 The Committee notes the reply.
ACTION RESEARCH AND STUDIES ON JUDICIAL REFORMS
Recommendation/Observation
8. The Committee is happy to note that an allocation of Rs. 5 crore has been made for Action
Research and Studies under Judicial Reforms. The Committee is in agreement with the view of
the Ministry that the Scheme be implemented on a continuing basis through the 12th Five Year
Plan as an activity under the National Mission. The Committee hopes that the implementation of
the Scheme would definitely enhance the capabilities of all those involved in the dispensation of
justice including the mediators and conciliators and speed up the disposal of cases.
(Para 6.36)
Action Taken by the Ministry/Department
8.1 Observations of the Committee are noted. A scheme for Action Research and Studies on
Judicial Reforms has been formulated, approved and circulated to the Judicial Academies and Law
Universities in September/October, 2013 for submitting their proposals.
Committee’s further observation
8.2 The Committee notes the reply and desires that the response of the Judicial Academies and
Law Universities in the matter may be communicated to this Committee for its consideration.

7
NATIONAL JUDICIAL ACADEMY
Recommendation/Observation
9. The Committee takes note of the information given by the Director, National Judicial
Academy. The Committee is unhappy to note that NJA could not utilize its duly allocated funds
and the purpose behind the enhanced allocation for the succeeding years was thus not fulfilled.
The Committee desires that NJA should make optimum utilization of funds allocated to it. The
Committee urges the Ministry to work in close coordination with NJA to ensure that the
allocated funds for the year 2013-14 are utilized and the procedural impediments are not
allowed to obstruct the process.
(Para 6.17)
Action Taken by the Ministry/Department
9.1 The budgetary allocation to NJA and utilization of funds by them during the last five years is
given as under:–
(Rs. in Lakhs )
Financial Budget T otal Funds Funds utilized Unutilized
Year allocated A vailable by NJA Funds
2008-09 891.00 891.00 651.17 239.83
2009-10 670.00 909.83 720.15 189.68
2010-11 972.00 1 161.68 748.10 413.58
2011-12 678.42 1092.00 758.82 333.18
2012-13 633.42 966.60 761.04 205.56
9.1.1 Before the commencement of each academic year, National Judicial Academy prepares a
calendar which is finalised after discussions with representatives of High Courts and State Judicial
Academies. In order to ensure that the NJA Calendar is fully responsive to the needs and views of
the High Courts and other stake holders, their views on assessment of the impact and effectiveness
of past NJA programmes are also reflected therein. Suggestions received for improvement and changes
in the Calendar are duly incorporated in the Calendar which is approved by the Hon’ble Chief Justice
of India and Chairman, NJA.
9.1.2 The observations of the Parliamentary Committee of Rajya Sabha Secretariat in its 58
th Report
of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances Law and
Justice have been conveyed to Director, NJA who has assured that NJA would make efforts for
optimum utilization of funds allocated for the year 2013-14. A copy of the NJA calendar for the year
2013-14 is attached at Annexure-II.
Committee’s further observation
9.2. The Committee notes the reply.

8
8
CHAPTER-II
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES GIVEN BY THE MINISTRY
Legislative Department
OFFICIAL LANGUAGES WING
Recommendation/Observation
1. The Committee takes note of the activities being taken up by the Official Languages
Wing (OLW). The Committee feels that the OLW should also get translated the Bills/Acts in
more regional languages so that these can be used at the lower/subordinate level courts, where
the litigation work is done in regional languages.
(Para 5.7)
Action Taken by the Ministry/Department
1.2 The Regional Languages Unit of Official Languages Wing is taking steps for translation work
in maximum number in 11 languages enshrined in eighth schedule to the Constitution of India by
requesting to concerned State Governments to send more translation of Central Acts for approval and
publication.
Committee’s further observation
1.3 The Committee notes the reply.
INSTITUTE OF LEGISLATURE DRAFTING AND RESEARCH (ILDR)
Recommendation/Observation
2. The Committee appreciates the work undertaken by the Department during the last
financial year. The Committee also takes note of the shortage of drafting personnel at various
levels. The Committee takes serious note of the shortage of drafting personnel as submitted
to it and urges the Department to coordinate with the Institute of Legislature Drafting and
Research (ILDR) in this regard for creation of a strong pool of experts in legislative drafting
from where it can draw its requirement. It is also of the considered view that the quality of
drafting of legislations should not be compromised at any cost and therefore, such an
important Department should be allowed to increase its strength so that the quality of
legislations drafted may not be affected.
(Para 5.12)
Action Taken by the Ministry/Department
2.1 The advice of the Committee has been noted for future compliance. We are proposing to re-
organise the Department and every efforts would be taken to give effect to the directions given by
the Hon’ble Committee in this regard.

9
Committee’s further observation
2.2 The Committee notes the reply and hopes that the Government will take steps in this
direction in right earnest.
Recommendation/Observation
3. A good twenty four years has gone by since the establishment of the ILDR in January,
1989. In this context, the Committee is constraint to note that a mere 24 Basic Courses of
three months duration each and 14 Appreciation Courses of fifteen days duration each has
been conducted in these fourteen years. The Committee is of the opinion that the institute has
not performed to its optimum. In this context, the Committee wishes to refer to the oral
submission of Secretary, Legislative Department stating that there is urgent need for augmenting
the Department’s personnel for Legislative Drafting which reflects the urgency of requirement
of skilled manpower. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the ILDR should frame
target of conducting a minimum of two Basic Courses and two Appreciation Courses each
financial year in view of the importance and necessity of having a strong pool of experts in
legislative drafting.
(Para 5.13)
Action Taken by the Ministry/Department
3.1 The work of Legislative Department increase manifold. This Department has examined 75
Cabinet Notes involving new legislative proposals and 3012 subordinate legislations during the year
2012-13. The work of this Department is technical in nature, some of the legislative proposals may
be completed within short period and some of them may be require number of days because of their
technical nature.
3.1.1 Moreover, during the period of Budget all the officers would be involved in the Budget
preparation which starts from 1
st week of February and ending till the Finance Bill and other
appropriation Bills are passed. With small Skelton staff, we are managing the affairs of this Department
affecting health of the officers. The Institute of Legislative Drafting and Research (ILDR) does not
have separate specialized faculty. The serving and retired officers of the Legislative Department form
the training faculty of ILDR. It is, therefore, high time to re-organise this Department and the ILDR,
otherwise it would be very difficult for the officers of the Department to meet the challenges. In fact,
this was brought to the notice of the Hon’ble Standing Committee. In view of above and suggestions
given by the Hon’ble Committee to conduct a minimum of two Basic Courses and two Appreciation
Courses, we are proposing to re-organise the Department and every efforts would be taken to give
effect to the directions given by the Hon’ble Committee in this regard.
Committee’s further observation
3.2 The Committee notes the reply and desire that the Action plan drawn up by the Department and
the ILDR in this regard may be furnished to this Committee while submitting Action Taken Notes.
Department of Legal Affairs
INCOME TAX APPELLATE TRIBUNAL (ITAT)
Recommendation/Observation
4. At the same time, the Committee appreciates the introduction of e-courts and e-
Benches connecting Nagpur Bench and Mumbai Bench. It desires that other Benches should

10
also be connected so that appeals of similar nature pending in various Benches could be heard
in one sitting.
(Para 4.13)
Action Taken by the Ministry/Department
4.1 ITAT is contemplating setting up e-Benches in 11 other stations viz. Jabalpur, Patna, Guwahati,
Visakhapatnam, Jodhpur, Cuttack, Ranchi, Raipur, Agra, Rajkot and Panaji Benches. For this purpose,
a provision of a sum of Rs. 50 lakhs has been made in the Budget Estimate 2014-15. However, in
the light of the reluctance of the Bar Associations at Allahabad Bench, ITA T invited suggestions/
opinions/objections of the Bar Associations and Departmental Representatives at these stations and the
response received are being analyzed by them. Based thereon, a final decision shall be taken by the
ITAT in this regard.
Committee’s further observation
4.2 The Committee notes the reply.
NATIONAL LEGAL SERVICES AUTHORITY (NALSA)
Recommendation/Observation
5. The progressive increase in budget for National Legal Services Authority (NALSA) is a
welcome initiative although the allocation has been slightly lower than the actual demand made
by the NALSA. The Committee understands the role of legal awareness in a democratic
country like India and hopes that NALSA will keep-up its role of promoting legal awareness
and providing legal aid during the current financial year also. It recommends that a roadmap
and time-frame may be drawn up for the implementation of its programmes. The Committee
hopes that assessment of the impact of the working of Legal Aid Clinics and Para Legal
Volunteers, which is being done by NALSA periodically, will give an insight into areas that call
for improvement to the Government.
(Para 4.19)
Action Taken by the Ministry/Department
5.1 As a part of NALSA’s initiative to provide legal services to the marginalised and weaker section
of the society as envisaged in Section 12 of the Legal Services Authorities Act, 1987, NALSA has been
taking measures for promoting legal awareness and providing legal services. In some States, Legal
Literacy Programmes are conducted every year in schools and colleges and also for empowerment of
women regularly, besides the rural legal literacy camps.
5.1.1 NALSA has prepared its National Plan of Action and Calendar of Activities for the year 2013-14
for implementation of the Legal Services Programme. The highlights of the National Plan of Action
and Calendar of Activities are as under:
(i) Encourage SLSAs to adopt one project each for focused implementation;
(ii) Emphasis on quality legal assistance under the NALSA’s (Free and Competent Legal
Services) Regulations, 2010 and strengthening the selection process and training and
sensitization of panel lawyers;
(iii) S trengthening of the Para-Legal V olunteers Scheme through enhanced training, mentoring
and monitoring;

11
(iv) Encouraging legal aid clinics particularly in Colleges, Universities and other institutions
and building networks between the District Legal Services Authorities and such Legal Aid
Clinics;
(v) Encourage ADR methods of Lok Adalat, Mediation, Conciliation and Plea-bargaining;
(vi) Establishing greater coordination with Jails, Correctional Homes, Children’s Homes,
Observation Homes, Psychiatric Homes, Boarding Schools, Protective Homes, etc. to
ensure that legal rights of these categories are not lost on account of lack of information
and lack of assistance and support to enforce those rights;
(vii) Emphasis on visibility by participation in Melas/Exhibitions, Street-Plays, Radio programmes
and T.V . shows etc.
5.1.2 As on October, 2013 more than 13,300 Legal Aid Clinics have been established by the Legal
Services Institution in the country. The activities of Legal Aid Clinics and PLVs are being monitored
by the SLSAs/DLSAs concerned. As per the reports received from the State Legal Services Authorities,
the PLVs have been doing the following broad activities:
(a) Helping in rehabilitation of women thrown out of their matrimonial home.
(b) Awareness amongst Jail inmates about benefits of Alternate Dispute Resolution (ADR)
Mechanisms like Lok Adalats, Plea Bargaining and Mediation.
(c) Helping villagers in the legal aid clinics for their old age pension, widow pension,
handicap pension, ration card etc.
(d) Bring people to the Legal Services Authorities/Committees for legal aid.
(e) Assisting SLSAs for organizing legal awareness programmes and in making people aware
of the various legal aid programmes.
(f) Helping the people to get appropriate relief from the concerned authority.
(g) Creating awareness among the people regarding availability of free legal services.
(h) On receiving the information about the child marriage, alert the DLSA, CWC, Police etc.
Counselling about the consequences of the child marriage including penal provisions
under the enactment.
(i) Assisting the police for stopping of trafficking of girl child.
(j) Assisting in organising Mobile Lok Adalats.
5.1.3 To commend the work of the best para legal volunteer and best District Legal Services
Authority, NALSA organised a national meet on 26.10.2013 at New Delhi. In the aforesaid National
Meet one best national PLV , one best national DLSA, five best zonal PLVs and five best zonal DLSAs
were awarded on the basis of their performance.
5.1.4 During the period from 1
st April, 2013 to 31st August, 2013 more than 2.23 lakh persons have
benefited through legal aid services in the country. Out of them, more than 9791 persons belonged
to the Scheduled Castes, more than 7964 belonged to the Scheduled Tribes, about 23,000 were
women and about 2600 were children. During this period, 39,289 Lok Adalats were organised. These
Lok Adalats settled more than 9.77 lakh cases. In about 27,600 Motor Vehicle Accident Claim cases,
compensation to the tune of Rs. 488.78 crore have been awarded.
5.1.5 A National Lok Adalat for settlement of cases in all the courts right from the Supreme Court
of India to the Taluk Courts was held on 23.11.2013 throughout the country. The National Lok Adalat

12
was organised by Supreme Court/High Court Legal Services Committees, State/District Legal Services
Authorities and Taluk Legal Services Committees under the aegis of NALSA. During the National Lok
Adalat held on 23.11.2013, the Lok Adalat benches from the Supreme Court to the Taluk Courts have
had successful sittings and 71.78 lakh cases have been disposed of. Out of these 71.78 lakh cases,
9.75 lakh cases were criminal compoundable offence cases, 1.88 lacs cases were pertaining to
Negotiable Instruments Act cases, 47,855 cases were Motor Accident Claims cases, 27,670 cases were
matrimonial/family/maintenance, 8,000 were labour cases, 5,000 were land acquisition matters, 2.66
lacs cases were civil matters, 9.91 lakh cases were revenue matters, about 5,000 execution applications,
775 service matters, 3,484 cases were industrial disputes, 9,051 cases were Forest Act cases, 4.16
lakh cases were MGNREGA cases, 9,030 cases were miscellaneous appeals, 2.96 lakh cases were
pertaining to municipal department, 7,653 were cases were consumer disputes, 2.80 lakh cases were
petty criminal cases. 51 cases were also disposed of at the Supreme Court by three Lok Adalat
Benches and 5513 at the High Courts.
5.1.6 NALSA intends to monitor and record the impact of legal services activities in the community
through the clinics and PLVs and to coordinate with the Government in areas that call for improvement.
Committee’s further observation
5.2 The Committee notes the reply.
BAR COUNCIL OF INDIA
Recommendation/Observation
6. The Committee also takes note of the new One Year LLM programme introduced by
University Grants Commission and desires that BCI should help introduce this programme in
different law institutes/universities.
(Para 4.26)
Action Taken by the Ministry/Department
6.1 Introduction of one year LLM programme in different universities/institutions of legal education
is on the agenda of the Bar Council of India and it shall take steps to undertake the same.
Committee’s further observation
6.2 The Committee notes the reply.
Recommendation/Observation
7. The Committee also takes note of the journal ‘Indian Bar Review’ brought out by the
BCI. However, the Committee expresses its disappointment that the Journal has only 480
subscribers, despite being more than 30 years old. The BCI may make efforts to popularize
and increase its subscription base and also undertake some research works for the promotion
of legal education.
(Para 4.27)
Action Taken by the Ministry/Department
7.1 The recommendation of the Committee in this regard has been conveyed to the Bar Council
of India.

13
Committee’s further observation
7.2 The Committee takes note of the reply of the Ministry and solicits that appropriate steps be
taken by the Ministry and the Bar Council of India to raise the popularity of the Journal published
by BCI so as to have wide publicity and subscription. The Committee is of the view that the Journal
be sent to all the law universities/institutes in the country on a nominal charge.
Recommendation/Observation
8. In view of the various programmes envisaged by the BCI, the Committee desires that
it should approach the Ministry for the release of the grants allocated to it so that the
programmes proposed to be undertaken do not get derailed due to shortage of funds.
(Para 4.28)
Action Taken by the Ministry/Department
8.1 The operational details of the proposal, particularly the time-frame and financial implications,
shall be worked out by the Department in consultation with the Bar Council of India.
Committee’s further observation
8.2 The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry and desires that the response of the BCI in
the matter may also be furnished to the Committee for its consideration.
INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR ALTERNATIVE DISPUTE RESOLUTION (ICADR)
Recommendation/Observation
9. The Committee is constrained to note that the grants earmarked for the construction
of ICADR building is pending with the Ministry, leading to undue delay in the construction of
building. From the last three financial years only a token amount of Rs. 1 lakh has been
allocated which has not been released. The Committee desires that the matter may be looked
into by the Department in consultation with the ICADR and necessary steps be taken for the
immediate release of funds to the ICADR.
(Para 4.40)
Action Taken by the Ministry/Department
9.1 After considerable effort by the Department, in consultation with the Ministry of Finance, a
budgetary provision of Rs. 5.50 crores has been made in the Revised Estimates 2013-14 relating to
the Ministry of Law and Justice, for the ICADR towards completion of construction of Block C and
D (Convention Centre and Business Centre) and Block E of its building. The amount shall be released
after completion of the requisite formalities.
Committee’s further observation
9.2 The Committee notes the reply.
Recommendation/Observation
10. To the query of the Committee, the representatives of ICADR submitted that the
Centre at New Delhi charges Rs. 2500/- for one session of arbitration/conciliation which is very
nominal as compared to the amount charged by the private bodies in that field. The Committee

14
is unhappy that inspite of the Centre at New Delhi having nominal charges, it has not been
optimally used for arbitration/conciliation purpose by the parties. The Committee therefore,
desires that the facility offered by the Government at nominal charges should be popularized
so that private parties can be attracted to use it for arbitration/conciliation purpose.
(Para 4.41)
Action Taken by the Ministry/Department
10.1 The ICADR is making sincere efforts to approach Heads of the Government Departments,
Public Sector Undertakings, corporates, etc. for inclusion of Arbitration/Conciliation/Mediation clauses
and also for utilization of the facilities and expertise available with ICADR, for conduct of Arbitration
and Conciliation/Mediation proceedings, at nominal cost. The ICADR has again approached the Heads
of approximately 82 Government Departments, 92 Public Sector Undertakings and 99 leading corporates
for including Arbitration/Conciliation clauses of ICADR in their agreements to be entered into by such
Departments/PSUs/corporates with other parties, so that in case of future disputes arising between
them, the cases are referred to ICADR for settlement. The said Departments/PSUs/corporates have
also been requested to utilize the facilities and expertise available with ICADR for conducting
Arbitration and Conciliation/Mediation proceedings. As a result, some of the organizations have started
utilizing the ICADR’s infrastructural facilities for conducting their Arbitration hearings.
Committee’s further observation
10.2 The Committee notes the reply.
Department of Legal Affairs
INDIAN LAW INSTITUTE
Recommendation/Observation
11. The Committee also takes note of the gaps between the demand projected and grants
received. Also the financial statements show that from 2009-10 onwards, every year, there has
been a surrender of funds. The Committee is of the view that such surrenders reflect the
tardy approach of the institute towards utilization of allocated funds. At the same time, the
Committee also recommends that the Department should also insure timely release of funds
so that the Institute is in a better position to utilize them.
(Para 4.35)
Action Taken by the Ministry/Department
11.1 It is clarified that the Indian Law Institute has not surrendered any sum of grant-in-aid
received by it from the Department during the financial years 2009-10, 2010-11, 2011-12 and 2012-13.
The variation between the grant-in-aid allocated to ILI during these years and the grant-in-aid released
is on account of instructions of the Ministry of Finance (Department of Expenditure) relating to
austerity measures wherein a cut of 10 per cent in the grant-in-aid was mandated. Another reason for
the variation was on account of restrictions on release of grant-in-aid during the last quarter of the
financial year and also during the last month of the financial year.
Committee’s further observation
11.2 The Committee notes the reply.

15
Department of Justice
Recommendation/Observation
12. It has been observed that the Ministry of Finance has substantially slashed the grants
allocation in the Non-Plan demands for grants of the Ministry of Law and Justice. The
expenditure in the Non-Plan side can be anticipated, and therefore, the Committee recommends
that all the three Departments of the Ministry should make close monitoring of spending
under the various heads of the Non-Plan expenditure and make concerted efforts for further
saving in view of the technological advancements in Government work establishments that cut
on the requirements of manpower and resources as compared to yester-years. The Committee
hopes that with modernization of offices, the Non-Plan expenditure of these Departments can
be curtailed further so as to enhance the Plan projections and undertake more progressive and
developmental schemes and projects. The Committee, however, does not advocate reduction in
plan funds at the cost of efficient office management and service delivery.
(Para 2.10)
Action Taken by the Ministry/Department
12.1 The requisite information in respect of Non Plan Budget allocated for the year 2013-14 and
actual expenditure upto July, 2013 is indicated below:
(Figures in thousand )
Sl. Department BE RE Actual BE Exp. upto
No. 2012-13 2012-13 Expenditure 2013-14 July , 2013
1 Department of 39300 36600 30482 (till 50900 16254
Justice Feb., 13)
2 National Mission 60000 25300 9876 (till 34200 3815
for Justice Feb., 13)
Delivery and Legal
Reforms
3 Family Courts 50000 49000 7500 50000 34500
(as on
6.11.13)
4 National Judicial 107400 96600 63342 107400 25000
Academy
12.1.1 The budget provision at Sl. No. 1 and 2 above is meant for Secretariat Expenditure which
includes payment of salaries and allowances and other establishment expenditure.
12.1.2 Under the Family Court scheme (Non-Plan), Central Government provides a grant of Rs. 5
lakh per Family Court annually to the State Governments as 50% share as the recurring cost under
Non-Plan. This is for the salaries and allowances for the judicial officers of Family Courts and no
grant is earmarked separately for modernisation of offices. Further grant is also provided to the
National Judicial Academy as per their requirement for salaries, allowances, other office expenditure
and conducting training programmes.
Committee’s further observation
12.2 The Committee notes the reply.

16
Recommendation/Observation
13. As regards the Plan projections, the Committee appreciates that the Ministry of
Finance has allocated funds to the Ministry as sought by it. The schemes and projects proposed
to be undertaken by the Departments in 2013-14 are also commendable. The Committee
therefore, desires that the three Departments of the Ministry of Law and Justice should make
concerted efforts to realize the goals set by them for the financial year and closely monitor
the implementation of the schemes and projects funded by them. The Committee, however,
cautions the Departments that they should take a pro active stance in the execution and
realization of the goals under the schemes and projects of the spending units under their
administrative jurisdiction and not merely play the role of a fund disbursing agency. The
Committee is hopeful that the Plan side of the demands for grants of the Ministry will go a
long way in bringing about better delivery of services.
(Para 2.11)
Action Taken by the Ministry/Department
13.1 Noted.
Committee’s further observation
13.2 The Committee notes the reply.
NATIONAL MISSION FOR JUSTICE DELIVERY AND LEGAL REFORMS
Recommendation/Observation
14. The Committee deeply appreciates the initiative of the Department of Justice by bringing about
a National Mission for Justice Delivery and Legal Reforms in June, 2011. The Committee notes that
some allocations are made for certain activities under this Mission in the B.E. 2012-13 but, the work
could not take off and no expenditure took place under the Mission during the year 2012-13. The
Committee finds some modest allocations for different activities under the Scheme in B.E. 2013-14.
The Committee hopes that the Ministry would take action seriously under the National Mission, which
visualises a vast and laudable objective of ensuring to people, including the marginalised sections of
the Society prompt and quality service.
(Para 6.29)
Action Taken by the Ministry/Department
14.1 The thrust area of central assistance to States for development of judiciary relates to
infrastructure development and modernisation of subordinate courts. Modest allocations were made for
National Mission Action Plan Implementation and Action Research and Studies on Judicial Reforms. A
scheme for Action Research and Studies on Judicial Reforms has been formulated, approved and
circulated to the Judicial Academies and Law Universities in September/October, 2013 for submitting
their proposals. The implementation of Action Plan of National Mission requires co-ordination with
Government Departments both at Centre and State levels as well as with apex judiciary, in pursuance
of which the following intervention has been made:
(i) Making policy and legislative changes in the areas prone to excessive litigation is one of
the prime objectives for setting up of the National Mission. Based on the recommendations
of the Inter-Ministerial Group, the Department of Financial Services and the Reserve Bank
of India have undertaken a number of reforms, which includes removal of fee for
electronic transfer of funds and limiting the number of cheque leaves issued per customer.

17
These reforms measures have helped in achieving an impressive reduction in pendency of
cheque bounce cases from 38 lakh in 2008 to less than 22 lakh in July, 2013. Similarly,
the Ministry of Road Transport and Highways have been persuaded to issue necessary
guidelines to the State Governments to realise fines for violation of traffic rules under the
Motor Vehicles Act without taking recourse to litigation. As a consequence a number of
State Governments have introduced schemes for online payments of traffic challans.
(ii) Further, pendency in the subordinate courts has been a cause of great concern- particularly
in view of the annual rising trend in pendency. Since the last two years this increasing
trend has been reversed, and the total pendency has come down to 2.68 crore cases.
This has become possible in view of the fact that High Courts have enthusiastically
responded to the annual pendency reduction campaigns of the Government. The third
campaign has been going on since 1
st July, 2013 to weed out infructuous cases and de-
clog the subordinate courts.
Committee’s further observation
14.2 The Committee appreciates the reply and feels that the Department will positively
coordinate with State Gsovernments and judiciary to implement the Action Plan of National
Mission, which has a huge potential of reducing the pendency of cases in the various courts
of the country.
FAST TRACK COURTS
Recommendation/Observation
15. The Committee is more than convinced that speedy and efficient dispensation of justice
is the need of the country today and for meeting this objective, the fast track courts can play
a major constructive role. With the Central assistance of 75% (90% in case of North Eastern
States), the Committee does not foresee any hesitation on the part of the States to set up such
fast track Courts for speedy trial in serious crimes against society including those involving
children, the elderly or the vulnerable sections of the Society. The Committee is convinced that
in case we succeed in curtailing the trial period in the Courts, a definite message would go in
the Society creating a feeling in the mind of the common man to abide by the laws due to the
fear of being punished. Such a scenario in Committee’s view would help in bringing down the
rate of crime in the country. The Committee accordingly, recommends that the Department of
Justice should take all possible steps to ensure that the fast track Courts are set up in
appropriate situations in the States and the States do not face impediments in this regard.
(Para 6.30)
Action Taken by the Ministry/Department
15.1 The Eleventh Finance Commission recommended a scheme for creation of 1734 Fast Track
Courts (FTCs) in the country for disposal of long pending Session and other cases. The Ministry of
Finance sanctioned an amount of Rs. 502.90 crores as “special problem and upgradation grant” for
judicial administration. The scheme was for a period of 5 years. The Finance Commission Division
(FCD), Ministry of Finance released funds directly to the State Governments under the scheme of Fast
Track Courts. It is the primary responsibility of the State Governments to establish these courts in
consultation with the concerned High Courts. The Government accorded its approval for the continuation
of 1562 Fast Track Courts that were operational as on 31.3.2005 for a further period of 5 years i.e.
up to 31
st March, 2010 with a provision of Rs. 509 crores. The scheme was further continued upto
31.3.2011.

18
15.1.1 In the aftermath of Delhi gang rape incident, Government has written to the Chief Ministers
of all States and Chief Justices of all High Courts to set up Fast Track Courts for concluding trial
in rape cases. The States have been requested to utilize the 10% additional positions of Judges being
created in the Subordinate Judiciary in pursuance of the directions of the Supreme Court in Brij Mohan
Lal case, to be funded on a matching basis by the Central and the State Governments, for setting
up of Fast Track Courts.
15.1.2 Chief Justice of all the High Courts have also been requested to invite the attention of the
district judges to use of provisions under Section 157, 309 and 327 of the Code of Criminal Procedure
for expediting trial of cases involving heinous crimes such as rape.
15.1.3 The matter concerning setting up of Fast Track Courts for trial of cases, inter-alia, involving
offences against women was also discussed in the Joint Conference of Chief Ministers of States and
Chief Justices of the High Courts held on 7
th April, 2013 and it was decided that the State
Governments shall, in consultation with the Chief Justices of the respective High Courts, take
necessary steps to establish suitable number of Fast Track Courts for offences against women,
children, differently abled persons, senior citizens and marginalized sections of the society and provide
adequate funds for the purpose.
15.1.4 A meeting of Law/Home and Finance Secretaries of State Governments and Registrar Generals
of High Courts was convened on 31
st May, 2013 to discuss, inter-alia, the setting up of Fast Track
Courts and doubling of the number of existing district and subordinate courts in the country. Some
of the States requested for additional funds for setting up the proposed Fast Track Courts and for
doubling of courts. In response, it was emphasized that subordinate courts is a State subject and, thus,
the funds will be provided by the States, as per the decision of the Joint Conference of Chief Ministers
and Chief Justices on 7
th April, 2013. However, the States were advised to approach the 14th Finance
Commission for devolution of funds for the justice sector.
Committee’s further observation
15.2 The Committee notes the reply.
SETTING UP OF MODEL COURTS (PHASE-I)
Recommendation/Observation
16. The Committee is highly appreciative of this ambitious initiative of the Ministry to set
up Model Subordinate Courts at select places in the country on a pilot basis. The Committee
takes note that these Courts, set up under the pilot project would be a model in various
respects from the point of view of convenience of all concerned, efficiency and quality of
justice. The Committee is happy to take note of the allocation of Rs. 26 crore for purpose for
the year 2013-14. The Committee hopes that the Ministry would take action in this matter in
their right earnest.
(Para 6.40)
16.1 The Committee is optimistic that the setting up of Model Courts will result in higher
productivity in terms of reduced time lines and timely justice dispensation. However, it is
appalled to note that no fund was released in 2012-13 out of the Rs. 7.50 crore allocations for
the scheme. It, therefor, urges the Department of Justice to beef up its strategy in releasing
its proposals by assigning a strict time-frame. The Committee, therefore, hopes to be apprised
of the progress made in this respect at the time of submitting the Action Taken Replies.
(Para 6.41)

19
Action Taken by the Ministry/Department
16.2 Government of India has formulated scheme for setting up model courts during the 12th Five
Year Plan 2012-17, which envisages setting up of model courts in a period of five years within a
budget of Rs. 130 crore.
16.2.1 Model Courts are meant to set examples by demonstrating benefits of courts functioning under
optimum conditions. Model Courts are envisaged as pilots to be replicated across the country once
the models have been tested for their efficacy. The Model Courts will adhere to minimum standards
in terms of building, ICT enablement, staffing, training, and guidelines on how to function. They will
need to ensure, primarily, that justice is delivered on time by making use of court and case
management systems and technology to streamline processes and systems. E-processes shall be put
in place and infrastructure needs met in these courts staffing skilled human resources. These courts
will also aim to create systems for coordination between different justice delivery agencies.
16.2.2 For deliberating and making recommendations on various issues relating to model courts,
including design, location and implementation of the model courts project, on May 15, 2012, Advisory
Council of the National Mission for Justice Delivery and Legal Reform has constituted a Sub-Group
on ‘Model Courts’ under the chairmanship of Shri Justice P.V . Reddi, Retd. Chairman, Law Commission
of India. The Sub-Group has held meetings on 21
st August, 2012, 26 th September, 2012, 14 th March,
2013 and 19 th September, 2013 to discuss recommendations on design of model courts, their location
and implementation. The Chairperson of the Sub-Group has also held consultations on Model Courts
with the Chief Justices of Madras on 8 November 2012, Punjab and Haryana on 20 November, 2012,
Calcutta High Court on 17 January, 2013, Bombay High Court on 23 January, 2013, Gauhati High
Court on 13 February, 2013 and Madhya Pradesh High Court on 20 February, 2013 respectively. Draft
Report is being prepared.
Committee’s further observation
16.3 The Committee notes the reply and impresses upon the Department to expedite the
process of setting up of Model Courts within a strict time-frame so that justice delivery is
accelerated.
ACCESS TO JUSTICE – GOVERNMENT OF INDIA PROJECT (NEW SCHEME)
Recommendation/observation
17. The Committee takes note of the fact that for the Financial year 2012-13, an amount
of Rs. 5 crore was allocated for implementation of Scheme in the North Eastern States and
J&K. The Committee is constrained to note that Government have not been able to fully
utilize the budgetary allocations for the Scheme during the Eleventh Plan. Now, for the year
2013-14, the allocations have been raised to Rs. 8 crore. The Committee reiterates its earlier
recommendations that Government should sincerely speed up action under the Scheme so as
to achieve the desired results. The Committee hopes that Government would take concrete
action in the coming financial year.
(Para 6.45)
Action Taken by the Ministry/Department
17.1 It is submitted that budgetary allocations in the financial year 2012-13 could not be fully
utilized due to the following reasons:
1. Receipts of the necessary approvals were delayed.

20
2. EdCIL India Ltd. which was engaged to provide manpower to the Department had
advertised for the required positions but could not find appropriate candidates. They had
to re-advertise for the same positions, which delayed the initiation of the project.
17.1.1 It is further mentioned that the project has been operationalised with the commencement of
a “Needs Assessment Study” to identify the gaps in the legal empowerment of the people in the 8
States of North East. Preliminary reports of the pilot study have also been received. The Annual Work
Plan for the financial year 2013-14 has also been finalised. It is expected that the budgetary allocation
for the year 2013-14 would be substantially utilised.
Committee’s further observation
17.2 The Committee notes the reply.
ACCESS TO JUSTICE PROJECT - EXTERNALLY AIDED PROJECT (UNDP ASSISTED)
Recommendation/Observation
18. The Committee, even on previous occasions had shown concern on the effectiveness of
implementation of the project during the Eleventh Plan period when the Ministry had not been
able to exhaust the allocated funds all through. The Committee, however, appreciates the noble
objective of the project and it hopes that the Ministry would through proper monitoring and
coordination be able to achieve the desired results.
(Para 6.50)
Action Taken by the Ministry/Department
18.1 The Department of Justice, Ministry of Law and Justice, Government of India has taken many
steps to make justice accessible to the poor and marginalized sections of the society. Recognising the
fact that a key barrier to accessing justice is the lack of awareness of rights and entitlements, the
Department of Justice has, in collaboration with the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP),
been implementing a project on Access to Justice for Marginalized People – women, children, SCs,
STs, minorities, people living with disability – in seven States of Bihar, Chhattisgarh, Jharkhand,
Madhya Pradesh, Odisha, Rajasthan and Uttar Pradesh.
18.1.1 In the previous phase between 2009 and 2012 several activities related to legal aid and
empowerment have been successfully conducted. Project has reached out to nearly 2 million marginalized
people for legal awareness, besides training 7000 paralegal workers as local resources to assist the
marginalized communities, over 300 legal aid lawyers have been trained and sensitized. Access to
Justice Project achieved 100% target of its planned activities and in a duration of May, 2009 to
December, 2012 utilized total budgeted fund of Rs.14,29,13,653/-.
18.1.2 A new phase has commenced from 2013 for the next five years till 2017 and a total fund of
Rs.27,00,00,000/- have been budgeted for this duration. Department of Justice and UNDP are working
on a multi-pronged strategy consisting of:
1. Strengthening capacities of Legal Services Authorities and other justice delivery institutions
and intermediaries (CSOs, CBOs, paralegals, law schools, lawyers)
2. Supporting National Mission on Justice Delivery and Legal Reforms for policy and
legislative changes and efficiency in justice delivery
3. Developing effective legal empowerment models that can be replicated with government
resources
4. Providing evidence for improved justice delivery especially in the case of women.

21
Committee’s further observation
18.2 The UNDP assisted project Access to Justice for Marginalized People – women, children,
SCs, STs, minorities, people living with disability is essential for human development and ensuring
democratic governance in the country. The Committee accordingly urges the Department to
judiciously utilize the amount sanctioned for the project with a sound monitoring mechanism to
check leakage of funds.
COMPUTERISATION OF DISTRICT AND SUBORDINATE COURTS
e-courts Mission Mode Project Phase-I
Recommendation/Observation
19. A perusal of expenditure pattern reveals that except for the year 2010-11, the ratio of
funds released vis-à-vis the BE was less than 50%. The Committee wonders that since this is
100% Centrally Sponsored Scheme, the Department of Justice should not have faced the
problem that it faces in case of other Schemes. In the last two years the position in releasing
the funds has further deteriorated. The Committee regrets to note that despite the concerns
expressed by it in the report on Demand for Grants for the year 2012-13, the release of funds
in that year had remained very low, i.e., about 90 crores out of Rupees 213.66 crores. The
Committee, therefore, directs the Govt. to check this trend and remove the bottlenecks, if
any, in this regard.
(Para 6.54)
Action Taken by the Ministry/Department
19.1 The e-Courts Mission Mode Project involves a number of stakeholders including the State
Governments, High Courts and equipment vendors. Due to complexities in project execution, in order
to improve the pace of implementation, the Department has initiated target setting for each of the High
Courts on monthly basis from August, 2012 onwards.
19.1.1 Under the integrated e-Courts MMP, out of the allocated Rs. 233.66 crore, for the FY 2012-13,
Rs. 89.85 crore has been utilised. Break-up of expenditure is attached at Annexure-III. Funds have
not been utilized for the components like Video conferencing (Rs. 20 crore) as this is currently under
the consideration of the e-Committee of the Supreme Court, site preparation (Rs. 10 crore) as some
sites are yet to be confirmed by the e-Committee, computer hardware (Rs. 36 crore) and power
backup (Rs. 17 crore) as these are dependent on the sites which are to be confirmed.
19.1.2 FY 2013-14 is the last year for completing the project, ( i.e. computerization of 14,249 courts).
A Budget provision of Rs. 118 crores had been made for FY 2013-14. Overall, it is expected that the
total outlay for the Project would be approximately Rs. 690 crore.
Committee’s further observation
19.2 The Committee notes the reply.
e-courts Mission Mode Project Phase-II
Recommendation/observation
20. The Committee is happy to note that the Ministry are in the process of implementing
Phase-II of the e-Courts Mission Mode Project. The Committee also takes note of the new

22
components added under Phase-II. The Committee hopes that the employment of IT in various
fields associated with the functioning of the Courts, the advocates as well as the litigants would
go a long way in cutting on wasteful time and energy in the handling of litigation work which
is mostly handled manually at present.
(Para 6.58)
20.1 The Committee notes that no allocation has been made for the Phase-II of the Project
for the financial year 2013-14. Department has given justification that in view of the
Phase-I still in progress and slated to be completed only in March, 2014, the projection under
this component may be reflected from the financial year 2014-15. The Committee desires that
the Government may complete Phase-I as per the set Time-line so that Phase II of the Project
can be taken up without delay.
(Para 6.59)
Action Taken by the Ministry/Department
20.2 The current Stage (I) of the e-Courts MMP is likely to be completed by March 2014.
Currently, 13,211 courts have been computerized ( i.e.  92.7%) of the targeted 14,249. The
conceptualization of the next Stage (II) of the project has been entrusted to the eCommittee of the
Supreme Court of India. Once Stage I is completed, the second stage of the project will be taken up.
Committee’s further observation
20.3 The Committee notes the reply.
V ACANCIES IN SUPREME COURT AND HIGH COURTS
Recommendation/Observation
21. The Committee is happy to note the proposal to have High Courts in the States of Tripura,
Manipur and Meghalaya. This, in Committee’s view would provide a much needed relief to the persons
belonging to these three States. This move would not only save on litigants time and money but would
also help in quicker disposal of cases. The Committee would like the related modalities and procedures
in the setting up of these High Courts to be completed expeditiously. The Committee, in this context
also strongly recommends that the Circuit Bench of the Kolkata High Court at Siliguri should be made
functional without any further loss of time.
(Para 6.75)
Action Taken by the Ministry/Department
21.1 The Government has completed the process of setting up of separate High Courts in the State of
Manipur, Meghalaya and Tripura. All the three new High Courts have started functioning from March, 2013.
21.1.1 As regard to the setting up of Circuit Bench of Calcutta High Court, the proposed Circuit
Bench is being established at Jalpaiguri. The Calcutta High Court has informed that the infrastructure
facilities available are not sufficient at the moment and need further improvement. Necessary notification
will be issued after the Calcutta High Court intimates the readiness of the infrastructure.
Committee’s further observation
21.2 The Committee takes note of the reply furnished by Department of Justice and desires to
know, if any, other proposals are being undertaken to establish High Courts in the remaining
North-eastern States.

23
23
CHAPTER-III
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
COMMITTEE HAS NOT ACCEPTED REPLIES OF THE MINISTRY
Legislative Department
INSTITUTE OF LEGISLATURE DRAFTING AND RESEARCH (ILDR)
Recommendation/Observation
1. The Committee has also been continuously reminding the Department to expedite the
process of acquiring of land and construction of building for ILDR. However, the Committee
is again disappointed to note that only a token amount of Rs.1 lakh has been allocated to
ILDR in BE 2013-14. The Committee believes that an institution of such a stature needs to
have its own building to carry out its functions.
(Para 5.14)
Action Taken by the Ministry/Department
1.1 As part of the process of acquiring land and construction of building of ILDR, the Minister
of Law and Justice has since written to the Minister of Urban Development to allot a certain suitable
land for the purpose. However, the Department has not yet received a favuorable reply from the
Minister of Urban Development to allocate a suitable land in and around the Parliament.
Committee’s further observation
1.2 The Committee is of the view that such an important institute should be established soon
and urges the Department to pursue the matter seriously with the Ministry of Urban Development
so that a suitable land can be allotted to it for the construction of ILDR building.
Department of Legal Affairs
INCOME TAX APPELLATE TRIBUNAL (ITAT)
Recommendation/Observation
2. The Committee expresses its concern over the mounting pendency in the Income Tax
Appellate Tribunal (ITAT). The inability for some Benches to function regularly due to
vacancies in the posts of Members is seen as totally undesirable by the Committee. Accordingly,
the Committee urges the Department and the ITAT to make timely and concerted efforts in
filling up the vacancies. The Committee feels that the filling up of the vacancies, both in the
higher and lower grades along with the computerization of ITAT will go a long way in reducing
the pendency of cases. Thus, the Committee recommends that the vacant posts in ITAT be
filled within a period of three months.
(Para 4.12)

24
Action Taken by the Ministry/Department
2.1 The present incumbent to the post of President, ITAT, was appointed in officiating capacity.
Section 252(3) of the Income Tax Act, 1961, has been amended vide the Finance Act, 2013, w.e.f.
1.6.2013, whereby the zone of consideration for appointment of President, ITAT has been widened to
include sitting or retired Judge of a High Court who has completed not less than seven years service
as a Judge in a High Court, in addition to the Sr. Vice-President and Vice-Presidents of ITAT.
Consequential amendments to the Income-tax Appellate Tribunal Members (Recruitment and Conditions
of Service) Rules, 1963, are under consideration. In the light of the above amendments, action has
been initiated to appoint President, Income Tax Appellate Tribunal, in substantive capacity by writing
to the Registrar Generals of all the High Courts some time back requesting them to forward the names
and other particulars of the eligible sitting and retired Judges of the High Courts who are willing to
be considered for appointment as President, ITAT. In the light of the response received, the meeting
of the Selection Committee shall be convened shortly for making recommendation regarding appointment
of President, ITAT .
2.1.1 As regards filling up the vacant posts of Sr. Vice-President and Vice-Presidents, ITAT, it may
be mentioned that the last round of selection of Vice-Presidents in the year 2009 had been struck
down by the Madras High Court and an SLP has been filed by this Department in the Supreme Court
in the matter. A Writ Petition in this regard is also pending disposal in the Delhi High Court. Since
the matter is sub-judice, it is not possible to initiate action at this stage to fill up the vacant posts
of Sr. Vice-President and Vice-Presidents in ITAT.
2.1.2 As regards filling up the vacant posts of Members (Judicial/Accountant) in the ITAT, it is
submitted that based on the recommendations of the Selection Board, 14 new Members (Judicial/
Accountant) were appointed in ITAT in January, 2012. Thereafter, two more Judicial Members out of
this batch joined ITAT on 1.11.2012 and one Judicial Member out of this batch joined ITAT on
11.9.2013 (since their cases had to be re-submitted to the Appointments Committee of the Cabinet,
after reconsideration by the Selection Board). An advertisement dated 17.4.2013 was issued in the
Employment News inviting applications from eligible candidates for appointments to 20 posts of
Judicial Members and 28 posts of Accountant Members. The applications received in response to the
advertisement are under process. After the exercise of processing is completed, a meeting of the
Selection Board shall be convened to evolve the procedure and adopt the criteria for short-listing of
candidates, who shall be called for viva-voce.
2.1.3 Action to fill up the vacant posts of Registrar, Dy. Registrars and Asstt. Registrars in the ITAT,
is underway in consultation with the ITAT and the Union Public Service Commission.
2.1.4 As regards filling up the vacant posts in the lower grades in ITAT, these are done by the ITAT
itself and they have been advised to fill up these posts expediously.
Committee’s further observation
2.2 The Committee notes the reply. It, however implores the Government to devise a way to plug
the vacuum created due to the legal lock horn in the filling up of the posts of Sr. Vice President/
Vice-Presidents at ITAT.
BAR COUNCIL OF INDIA
Recommendation/observation
3. The Committee appreciates the activities of the BCI and takes cognizance of the
schemes and programmes proposed to be taken up by it in 2013-14. The BCI had proposed

25
Rs. 5 crore for the establishment of ‘Central Law library’. The Committee however, is of the
view that instead of a new library, the BCI should establish an online database of law libraries
and establish a sharing mechanism with the existing libraries for optimum utilization of the
resources. The Committee appreciates the proposal of setting up the ‘Directorate of Legal
Education’ and desires that operational details of the proposal be worked out for its efficient
implementation by the Ministry.
(Para 4.25)
Action Taken by the Ministry/Department
3.1 (a) Continuing Legal Education Programme for advocate trainees;
(b) Programmes to improve the quality of Law Teachers (Teachers Training Programme);
(c) Educations programme for Indian students seeking registration after obtaining law degree
from a Foreign University;
(d) To undertake research on legal matters, compile datas, publish Newsletters – to be
supplied to each college/university for the benefit of law students – Publication of case
law books/journals;
(e) Law lectures and Regional Moot Court Competitions;
(f) Continuing Legal Education Programmes, Global Interface for Legal professionals;
(g) Curriculum Development;
(h) Establishment of Law Library in the Bar Council of India;
(i) Computerizing of functioning and digitization of records of the Bar Council of India;
(j) Stipend to Junior Lawyers;
(k) Legal Services Programme, Legal Aid Programme;
(l) To promote/oversee functioning of a Central Advocate Academy at par with National
Judicial Academy of India and one State Advocate in each State set up with Central/State
Government assistance.
Committee’s further observation
3.2 The Committee is of the view that no clear replies have been received on the matter from
BCI and accordingly feels that the BCI has no plans to establish virtual library, which is not
appreciative. The Committee directs the Ministry to take appropriate steps in this regard.
INSTITUTE OF CONSTITUTIONAL AND PARLIAMENTARY STUDIES (ICPS)
Recommendation/Observation
4. The Committee takes note of the problems faced by Institute of Constitutional and
Parliamentary Studies (ICPS) due to paucity of funds and accordingly, directs the Ministry to
release the funds allocated for the construction of building for the ICPS, so that the construction
work can be started. The Committee is, however, disappointed that huge surrenders of funds
recur in every financial year, starting from 2009-10. It, therefore, desires that the ICPS should
make all out efforts for utilization of allocated funds.
(Para 4.31)

26
Action Taken by the Ministry/Department
4.1 A proposal was received from ICPS for sanction of a sum of Rs. 24.92 crores for
construction of building on the plot of land allotted to it at Chanakya Puri, New Delhi, by the Ministry
of Urban Development. However, the sum has not been provided to ICPS since there is no consensus
between the ICPS and Ministry of Law and Justice on the issue of sharing of space in the proposed
building.
4.1.1 Recurring grant-in-aid is provided to the ICPS by the Department for meeting its expenses
towards salary, etc. of its employees and also towards office rent, office expenses, publications,
administrative expenses and other day-to-day activities. It is clarified that the ICPS has not surrendered
any sum of recurring grant-in-aid received by it from the Department during the financial years 2009-10,
2010-11, 2011-12 and 2012-13 (except the amount of Rs. 10 crores allotted to it in 2011-12). The
variation between the grant-in-aid allocated to ICPS during these years and the grant-in-aid released
is on account of instructions of the Ministry of Finance (Department of Expenditure) relating to
austerity measures wherein a cut of 10 per-cent in the grant-in-aid was mandated.
4.1.2 Another reason for the variation was on account of restrictions on release of grant-in-aid
during the last quarter of the financial year and also during the last month of the financial year.
However, the amount of Rs. 10 crores allotted to ICPS in the year 2011-12 for the construction of
its building could not be utilized due to the reasons given in the proceeding para.
Committee’s further observation
4.2 The Committee expresses its dissatisfaction over the entire issue of construction of building
for the ICPS, earlier due to non-availability of suitable land and fund, and now due to disagreement
over sharing of space between the Department and ICPS. This reflects the unprofessional attitude
and unwillingness of the Department in constructing the ICPS building. The Committee urges the
Department to sort-out the space sharing issue with the ICPS early so that the Construction of the
building can take place.

27
27
CHAPTER-IV
THE RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
FINAL REPLIES OF THE MINISTRY HAVE NOT BEEN RECEIVED
Department of Justice
FAMILY COURT
Recommendation/Observation
1. Family Courts are an important instrument to reduce the pendency of cases. Under
Section 3(1)(a) of the Family Courts Act, 1984 it is mandatory for the State Governments to
set up a Family Court for every area in the State comprising a city or a town whose population
exceeds one million. In other areas of the States, the Family Courts may be set up if the State
Governments deem it necessary. However, the Committee is not satisfied with the slow pace
of establishment of Family Courts in different parts of the country even after two decades of
the enactment of the Family Court Act, 1984. The Committee is given to understand that lack
of finances is one of the main cause for slow pace of setting up of Family Courts. There is
perhaps a persistent demand from the States for higher assistance for setting up such Courts
both for meeting the expenditure for establishing such Courts and also for meeting the cost
of running them. The Committee impress upon the Ministry of Law and Justice to review the
funding pattern so that more Family Courts are set up.
(Para 6.11)
1.1 The Committee reiterates its view expressed in its earlier Reports that, the Ministry
should envisage ensuring setting up of maximum number of Family Courts across the length
and breadth of the country and continuously pursue with the State Governments to come
forward in setting of the Family Courts to meet the objective of Family Courts Act, 1984. The
Committee is optimistic that the Family Courts can meaningfully keep on sharing the work
pressure on the Subordinate Judiciary.
(Para 6.12)
Action Taken by the Ministry/Department
1.2 As per Section 3(1)(a) of the Family Courts Act, 1984, it is mandatory for the State
Governments to set up a Family Court for every area in the State comprising a city or a town whose
population exceeds one million. This does not of course preclude setting up of more than one court
in such areas, if the number of cases so justifies. In other areas of the States, the Family Courts may
be set up if the State Governments deems it necessary. From time to time, State Governments have
been requested to set up at least one Family Court in each district. Last such request was made vide
Secretary (Justice) letter dated 26
th August, 2013. A copy of the letter is attached at Annexure-I.
1.2.1 Administration of Subordinate Courts is a State subject and, therefore, Family Courts being part
of subordinate judiciary, funds for setting up these courts should be provided by the State Governments.
Despite periodic reminder from the Central Government, the response from the States has not been
satisfactory. However, the Department of Justice will keep up its efforts to encourage States to
establish Family Courts.

28
Committee’s further observation
1.3 The Committee appreciates that Family Courts are a part of the Subordinate Judiciary, the
administration of which is a State subject. The concern of the Committee is as much in the
strengthening of the infrastructural and logistics of setting up of Family Courts. Therefore, it
reiterates its views that the Government should review the funding pattern for setting up of Family
Courts in States.
THIRTEENTH FINANCE COMMISSION (TFC)
2. The Committee notes that the TFC had given a target of disposal of petty cases to the
tune of Rs. 225 lakhs per year and 75 lakhs cases by Lok Adalats in five years. By this
standard, the 20.57 lakhs cases cleared by Lok Adalats in 2012-13 is far from close to target.
The Committee also wishes to point out that the TFC had recommended a grant of Rs. 5000
crore for the period 2010-15 out of which a mere Rs. 1425.23 crore has been released till
December 31, 2012 which is not encouraging. Therefore, the Department of Justice should
review its performance in this respect and make holistic efforts to encourage States in setting
up of more shift Courts, Lok Adalats and ADR Centres to clear petty cases which are clogging
the Courts.
(Para 6.70)
Action Taken by the Ministry/Department
2.1 Against the allocation of Rs. 5000 crores for above activities over its award period of 2010-15,
the instalment related to first year (2010-11) has been released to all States. For release of the
subsequent instalments from 2nd year onwards, the State Governments are required to comply with
the following pre-requisites:
* Constitution of a High Level Monitoring Committee (HLMC)
* Formulation of a State Litigation Policy (SLP)
* Formulation of Annual Action Plans and a 5 Year Perspective Plan approved by HLMC
* Submission of Utilisation Certificates of the Grant released under the TFC.
2.1.1 As the States took time in meeting the pre-requisite conditions for release of funds or have
not utilised the already released funds, release of subsequent instalments could not be done expeditiously
due to which only Rs. 1426.47 crore could be released up to March, 2013. In the current financial
year 2013-14, Rs. 11.33 crore have been released upto 30.9.2013.
2.1.2 Activity-wise allocation, release and utilisation of funds up to 2012-13 is summarized below:
(Rs. crores )
Schemes Allocation Release Utilisation % release
1 2345
Operation of 2500 713.97 32.99 4.62%
morning/evening
courts/shift/Holidays
courts
ADR centres/Training of 750 214.03 139.33 65.10%
mediators

29
12 3 4 5
Lok Adalats and Legal Aid 300 85.68 42.42 49.51%
Training of judicial 250 71.69 64.88 90.49%
officers
State Judicial Academies 300 84.00 74.60 88.81%
Training Public 150 43.02 24.67 57.36%
Prosecutors
Court Managers 300 85.38 1 1.29 13.22%
Maintenance of Heritage 450 128.70 58.63 45.55%
Court buildings
TOTAL: 5000 1426.47 448.80 31.46%
2.1.3 It may be seen that though the utilisation against the release for morning/evening courts
has been only 4.62%, for ADR Centres and Lok Adalatas, it is 65.10% and 49.15% respectively.
Number of cases cleared by the Lok Adalats have also increased from 20.57 lakh to 45.58 lakh as
on March, 2013. Barring utilisation against morning/evening courts, the utilisation has been Rs. 415.81
crores against a release of Rs. 712.50 crore for the rest of the activities, which is around 58%.
2.1.4 The under-utilisation of funds for morning/evening/shift courts by the States have been due to
constraints in these initiatives such as (i) resistance from Bar Associations; (ii) Geographical and local
constraints particularly in North–Eastern States; (iii) non-availability of Judicial Officers of appropriate
status for these courts; and lack of coordination amongst different departments of State Govts. and
High Courts.
2.1.5 In order to expedite implementation of the Thirteenth Finance Commission award, Department
of Justice regularly reviews the utilisation of TFC grants with the State Governments and Registrar
Generals of High Courts in its periodical meetings/discussions. Meetings with Law/Finance Secretary
of States and Registrar General of High Courts have been held on 5 th May, 2011, 18-19 April, 2012,
26th June, 2012 and 31 st May, 2013 under the Chairpersonship of Secretary, Department of Justice for
implementation of the TFC award. In order to address the problems and bottlenecks being faced by
the States, Government has provided additional flexibilities so as to optimise the utilisation of the TFC
grant by the States in the remaining award period i.e. 2013-14 and 2014-15. The flexibilities provided
for utilisation of TFC grants are as below:
(i) Fund Utilisation:
(a) Overall flexibility to move funds from one non-infrastructure component to the other
except to the component on infrastructure development.
(b) Diversion of funds from one category of infrastructure item to another category of
infrastructure items with the approval of HLMC.
(c) Relaxing the requirement of fund utilization of previous year from 100% to 60%
from second year onwards for considering further release.
(ii) Morning/Evening/Shift Courts:
* Setting up of other type of temporary/special courts to clear the backlog cases in
lieu of Morning/Evening/Shift Courts

30
(iii) ADR Centres:
(a) ADR Centres to be set up as per actual requirements subject to the condition of full
ADR mechanism coverage.
(b) Limit of Rs. 1 crore per ADR centre relaxed depending upon the requirement but
within overall allocation.
(iv) Appointment of Court Managers :
Deputation from employees of Government/PSUs/Government and semi-Government
autonomous bodies/Government Law Universities and Colleges having the minimum
qualification included as mode of recruitment.
(v) Construction activities:
State Government to incur expenditure according to actual requirement and further
releases depending on the utilization of earlier releases.
(vi) Fast Track Courts:
(a) In Brij Mohan Lal Case, Supreme Court has directed the States to either close the
Fast Track Courts or continue them on permanent basis; and to create 10%
additional posts in Subordinate Judiciary.
(b) Central Govt. has approved funding of salaries of these 10% additional judges on a
matching basis from 13
th Finance Commission Award upto 31.03.2015.
(c) To provide secretarial support to Court Managers, an amount of Rs. 20,000 per
month per Court Manager allowed.
2.1.6 W ith the flexibilities now provided and the fact that all the pre-requisites have now been
fulfilled by all the States, it is hoped that release and utilisation of TFC grant in the remaining award
period will improve further.
Committee’s further observation
2.2 The Committee is constrained to note that the gap between the funds released and utilized
is too vide. Therefore, it exhorts the Department to beef up its monitoring of the implementation
of schemes envisaged by the TFC. The Committee further urges the Department to continuously
appraise the set-backs encountered in the proficient implementation of the various units of the
scheme so that the objective of the TFC award is realized to its optimum.
V ACANCIES IN SUPREME COURT AND HIGH COURTS
Recommendation/Observation
3. The Committee is unhappy for the large number of vacancies that exist at present in
the Supreme Court and the High Courts in the country. The Committee is convinced that one
of the major factors for such large number of vacancies in the higher judiciary is the
prevailing system of selection of Judges for appointment in the Supreme Court and the High
Courts. The Committee reiterates its often stated view that the present system of appointment
of Judges in the higher judiciary calls for a review. The Committee accordingly, recommends
to the Government to initiate action in the right earnest for reviewing the present system of
filling up posts of Judges in the Supreme Court and the High Courts. The Committee hopes
that with Judges in position in the Supreme Court and the various High Courts, the pendency

31
of cases would lessen. Incidentally, the Committee would also like to impress upon the
judiciary to fill up the vacancies of the clerical staff in the Supreme Court and the High
Courts in the interest of efficiency by reinforcing the secretarial support to the Judges.
(Para 6.74)
Action Taken by the Ministry/Department
3. Of the 31 sanctioned posts of Judges in the Supreme Court, 30 posts have been filled. At
present, only 1 vacancy remains to be filled up.
3.1 As on 18.10.2013, 110 cases for fresh appointments are under consideration. The High Courts
are periodically reminded to send the proposals for filing up the existing vacancies as well as vacancies
anticipated to arise in the next 6 months.
3.1.1 W ith a view to instituting reform and ensuring transparency in the appointments of Judges to
the Supreme Court and High Courts, the 99
th Constitutional Amendment Bill, 2013, as an enabling
legislation for the Judicial Appointments Commission was passed by the Rajya Sabha in
September, 2013. The Bill will be placed before the Lok sabha for consideration and passage during
the forthcoming session. The more detailed Judicial Appointments Commission (JAC) Bill has been
referred to the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee. This Committee has been having
in depth discussions with relevant stakeholders, and its report is awaited.
Committee’s further observation
3.2 The Committee has already examined the Judicial Appointments Commission (JAC) Bill,
2013 and recommended for the creation of Judicial Appointments Commission for the appointments
to higher judiciary. The Committee is of the opinion that the huge pendency of cases in higher
courts are due to the large number vacancies in higher judiciary and accordingly feels that the
creation of JAC will help to expedite the process of filling up the existing vacancies and introducing
much needed transparency in the appointment process, which in turn will have positive impact in
reducing the huge pendency of cases. The Committee is not satisfied with the reply given by
Department of Justice as pace of filling up of vacancies in High Courts has been very slow. The
Committee believes that though Judicial Appointments Commission is yet to be set up, this does
not mean that Government should not expedite the filling up of posts under the existing procedure.

32
32
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE — AT A GLANCE
CHAPTER-I
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE MINISTRY
Legislative Department
VIDHI SAHITYA PRAKASHAN (VSP)
1. The Committee notes the reply. (Para 1.3 and 2.2)
2. The Committee notes the reply and impresses upon the Ministry to fill-up the existing
vacancies as soon as possible and in a time bound manner so that the work of ATFE is not
compromised. (Para 3.2)
3. The Committee notes the reply and hopes that some Diploma/Certificate programmes
may be introduced during the coming academic session. The Committee would also like to
recommend that emerging areas in legal education and research may be taken into consideration
while introducing the new Diploma and Certificate programmes. (Para 4.2)
4. The Committee notes the reply of the Department of Justice. The Committee is of the
view that infrastructure development of judiciary is need of the hour and therefore, feels that
the process of receiving pending UCs may be expedited so that further grants are released to
States without further delay so that the development work of judiciary is not compromised.
(Para 5.2)
5. The Committee notes the reply of the Department and feels that delay in receipt of
UCs from States affects further release of funds. The Committee feels that delay in receipt
of UCs in effect amounts to slowing down of activity which is not at all desirable. The
Committee therefore, urges the Department to take adequate steps to ensure that the UCs
are received on time. The status of the evaluation of the scheme being made by the ILI may
also be furnished to this Committee for its consideration at the time of furnishing Action
Taken Notes. (Para 6.2)
6. The Committee notes the reply. (Para 7.2)
7. The Committee notes the reply and desires that the response of the Judicial Academies
and Law Universities in the matter may be communicated to this Committee for its consideration.
(Para 8.2)
8. The Committee notes the reply. (Para 9.2)
CHAPTER-II
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT DESIRE TO
PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES GIVEN BY THE MINISTRY
9. The Committee notes the reply. (Para 1.3)
10. The Committee notes the reply and hopes that the Government will take steps in this
direction in right earnest. (Para 2.2)

33
11. The Committee notes the reply and desire that the Action plan drawn up by the
Department and the ILDR in this regard may be furnished to this Committee while submitting
Action Taken Notes. (Para 3.2)
12. The Committee notes the reply. (Paras 4.2, 5.2, 6.2)
13. The Committee takes note of the reply of the Ministry and solicits that appropriate
steps be taken by the Ministry and the Bar Council of India to raise the popularity of the
Journal published by BCI so as to have wide publicity and subscription. The Committee is of
the view that the Journal be sent to all the law universities/institutes in the country on a
nominal charge. (Para 7.2)
14. The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry and desires that the response of the
BCI in the matter may also be furnished to the Committee for its consideration. (Para 8.2)
15. The Committee notes the reply. (Paras 9.2, 10.2, 11.2, 12.3, 13.2)
16. The Committee appreciates the reply and feels that the Department will positively
coordinate with State Governments and judiciary to implement the Action Plan of National
Mission, which has a huge potential of reducing the pendency of cases in the various courts
of the country. (Para 14.2)
17. The Committee notes the reply. (Para 15.2)
18. The Committee notes the reply and impresses upon the Department to expedite the
process of setting up of Model Courts within a strict time-frame so that justice delivery is
accelerated. (Para 16.3)
19. The Committee notes the reply. (Para 17.2)
20. The UNDP assisted project Access to Justice for Marginalized People – women, children,
SCs, STs, minorities, people living with disability is essential for human development and
ensuring democratic governance in the country. The Committee accordingly urges the Department
to judiciously utilize the amount sanctioned for the project with a sound monitoring mechanism
to check leakage of funds. (Para 18.2)
21. The Committee notes the reply. (Para 19.2, 20.3)
22. The Committee takes note of the reply furnished by Department of Justice and desires
to know, if any, other proposals are being undertaken to establish High Courts in the
remaining North-eastern States. (Para 12.2)
CHAPTER-III
THE RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES OF
THE MINISTRY HA VE NOT BEEN RECEIVED
23. The Committee is of the view that such an important institute should be established
soon and urges the Department to pursue the matter seriously with the Ministry of Urban
Development so that a suitable land can be allotted to it for the construction of ILDR building.
(Para 1.2)
24. The Committee notes the reply. It, however implores the Government to devise a way
to plug the vacuum created due to the legal lock horn in the filling up of the posts of Sr. Vice-
President/Vice-Presidents at ITAT. (Para 2.2)
25. The Committee is of the view that no clear replies have been received on the matter
from BCI and accordingly feels that the BCI has no plans to establish virtual library, which

34
is not appreciative. The Committee directs the Ministry to take appropriate steps in this
regard. (Para 3.2)
26. The Committee expresses its dissatisfaction over the entire issue of construction of
building for the ICPS, earlier due to non-availability of suitable land and fund, and now due
to disagreement over sharing of space between the Department and ICPS. This reflects the
unprofessional attitude and unwillingness of the Department in constructing the ICPS building.
The Committee urges the Department to sort-out the space sharing issue with the ICPS early
so that the Construction of the building can take place. (Para 4.2)
CHAPTER-IV
THE RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES OF
THE MINISTRY HA VE NOT BEEN RECEIVED
27. The Committee appreciates that Family Courts are a part of the Subordinate Judiciary,
the administration of which is a State Subject. The concern of the Committee is as much in
the strengthening of the infrastructural and logistics of setting up of Family Courts. Therefore,
it reiterates its views that the Government should review the funding pattern for setting up
of Family Courts in States. (Para 1.3)
28. The Committee is constrained to note that the gap between the funds released and
utilized is too vide. Therefore, it exhorts the Department to beef up its monitoring of the
implementation of schemes envisaged by the TFC. The Committee further urges the Department
to continuously appraise the setbacks encountered in the proficient implementation of the
various units of the scheme so that the objective of the TFC award is realized to its optimum.
(Para 2.2)
29. The Committee has already examined the Judicial Appointments Commission (JAC)
Bill, 2013 and recommended for the creation of Judicial Appointments Commission for the
appointments to higher judiciary. The Committee is of the opinion that the huge pendency of
cases in higher courts are due to the large number vacancies in higher judiciary and
accordingly feels that the creation of JAC will help to expedite the process of filling up the
existing vacancies and introducing much needed transparency in the appointment process,
which in turn will have positive impact in reducing the huge pendency of cases. The Committee
is not satisfied with the reply given by Department of Justice as pace of filling up of vacancies
in High Courts has been very slow. The Committee believes that though Judicial Appointments
Commission is yet to be set up, this does not mean that Government should not expedite the
filling up of posts under the existing procedure. (Para 3.2)

35
MINUTES

37
XV
FIFTEENTH MEETING
The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances,
Law and Justice met at 10.00 A.M. on Friday, the 13 th February, 2014 in Room No. ‘63’, First Floor,
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Shantaram Naik — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Ms. Anu Aga
3. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy
4. Shri Bhupender Yadav
LOK SABHA
5. Shri Shailendra Kumar
6. Shri Arjun Meghwal
7. Shri Abhijit Mukherjee
8. Shri S.S. Ramasubhu
9. Shri S. Semmalai
10. Shri S.D. Shariq
11. Shri Vijay Bahadur Singh
SECRETARIAT
Shri Alok Kumar Chatterjee, Joint Secretary
Shri K.P. Singh, Director
Shri Ashok K. Sahoo, Joint Director
2. The Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee. The Committee then considered the
draft Seventieth and Seventy-first Reports on the Assam Legislative Council Bill, 2013 and Action
Taken by Government on the recommendations/observations contained in the Fifty-eighth Report of
this Committee on the Demands for Grants (2013-14) of the Ministry of Law and Justice, respectively
and adopted the same.
3. The Committee decided to present the Report to both Houses of Parliament on the
17
th February, 2014. It also authorized its Chairman, and in his absence, Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy
to present the Report to Rajya Sabha and Shri Shailendra Kumar and in his absence, Shri Arjun
Meghwal to lay the same in Lok Sabha.
4. The meeting adjourned at 10.30 
A.M.

APPENDIX

41
1st
2nd
3rd
4th
5th
6th
7th
8th
Report on Demands for Grants
(2004-05) of the Ministry of
Personnel, Public Grievances and
Pensions.
Report on Demands for Grants
(2004-05) of the Ministry of
Law and Justice.
Report on the Right to
Information Bill, 2004.
Report on the Andhra Pradesh
Legislative Council Bill, 2004.
Report on Demands for Grants
(2005-06) of the Ministry of
Personnel, Public Grievances and
Pensions.
Report on Demands for Grants
(2005-06) of the Ministry of
Law and Justice.
Report on the Hindu Succession
(Amendment) Bill, 2004.
Report on the Scheduled Castes,
Scheduled Tribes and Other
Backward Classes (Reservation
in Posts and Services) Bill, 2004.
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
26.08.2004 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 26.08.2004.
-do-
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
21.03.2005 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 21.03.2005.
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
24.03.2005 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 24.03.2005.
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
20.04.2005 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 20.04.2005.
-do-
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
13.05.2005 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 13.05.2005.
Presented to Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya
Sabha on 29
th  June, 2005 and
forwarded to Hon’ble Speaker, Lok
Sabha on 29
th June, 2005.
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
26.07.2005 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 26.07.2005.
23.08.2004
-do-
16.03.2005
22.03.2005
11.04.2005
-do-
10.05.2005
07.06.2005
203
203
204
204
204
204
204
204
APPENDIX
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON PERSONNEL,
PUBLIC GRIEVANCES, LAW AND JUSTICE
LIST OF REPORTS PRESENTED BY THE COMMITTEE
Report
No.
1
Subject of the Report
2
Date of
Presentation
4
Date of
Adoption
3
Session
No.
5

42
12 4 35
9th
10th
11th
12th
13th
14th
15th
16th
17th
18th
19th
28.07.2005
02.08.2005
02.08.2005
23.08.2005
27.10.2005
17.05.2006
-do-
02.08.2006
09.11.2006
27.02.2007
08.05.2007
Report on the Arbitration and
Conciliation (Amendment) Bill,
2003.
Report on the High Court and
Supreme Court Judges (Salaries
and Conditions of Service)
Amendment Bill, 2005.
Report on the National Tax
Tribunal Bill, 2004.
Report on the Contempt of
Courts (Amendment) Bill, 2004
Report on the Prevention of
Child Marriage Bill, 2004.
Report on Demands for Grants
(2006-07) of the Ministry of
Personnel, Public Grievances and
Pensions.
Report on Demands for Grants
(2006-07) of the Ministry of
Law and Justice.
Report on the Representation of
the People (Amendment) Bill,
2006.
Report on the Administrative
Tribunals (Amendment) Bill,
2006.
Report on the Electoral Reforms
(Disqualification of persons from
contesting elections on framing
of charges against them for
certain offences)
Report on Demands for Grants
(2007-08) of the Ministry of
Personnel, Public Grievances and
Pensions.
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
04.08.2005 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 04.08.2005.
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
04.08.2005 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 04.08.2005.
-do-
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
29.08.2005 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 29.08.2005.
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
29.11.2005 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 29.11.2005.
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
22.05.2006 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 22.05.2006.
-do-
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
04.08.2006 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 04.08.2006.
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
05.12.2006 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 05.12.2006.
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
15.03.2007 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 15.03.2007.
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
10.05.2007 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 14.05.2007.
205
205
205
205
206
207
207
208
208
208
209

43
12 4 35
20th
21st
22nd
23rd
24th
25th
26th
27th
28th
29th
Report on Demands for Grants
(2007-08) of the Ministry of
Law and Justice.
Report on the Judges (Inquiry)
Bill, 2006, Ministry of Law and
Justice (Department of Justice).
Report on the Gram Nyayalayas
Bill, 2007, Ministry of Law and
Justice, Legislative Department.
Report on the Government’s
Policy of Appointment on
Compassionate Ground Ministry
of Personnel, Public Grievances
and Pensions (Department of
Personnel and Training)
Report on Working of Central
Bureau of Investigation (CBI)
Ministry of Personnel, Public
Grievances and Pensions
(Department of Personnel and
Training)
Report on Demands for Grants
(2008-09) of the Ministry of
Personnel, Public Grievances and
Pensions.
Report on Demands for Grants
(2008-09) of the Ministry of
Law and Justice.
Report on Action Taken Replies
on Law’s Delays : Arrears in
Courts (85
th Report of Home
Affairs)
Report on The Supreme Court
(Number of Judges) Amendment
Bill, 2008
Report on Public Grievances
Redressal Mechanism
-do-
01.08.2007
29.08.2007
06.09.2007
04.03.2008
24.04.2008
-do-
-do-
01.08.2008
21.10.2008
-do-
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
17.08.2007 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 17.08.2007.
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
06.09.2007 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 06.09.2007.
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
07.09.2007 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 07.09.2007.
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
11.03.2008 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 11.03.2008.
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
29.04.2008 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 29.04.2008.
-do-
-do-
Presented to the Hon’ble Chairman,
Rajya Sabha on 04.08.2008. Laid on
the Tables of the Rajya Sabha and
Lok Sabha on 22
nd October, 2008
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
23.10.2008 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 23.10.2008.
209
210
210
210
213
213
213
213
214
214

44
12 4 35
30th
31st
32nd
33rd
34th
35th
36th
37th
Report on Constraints being
Faced by Kendriya Bhandar
Action Taken Replies of the
Government on the
Recommendations/Observations
contained in the 25
th Report on
Demands for Grants (2008-09)
of the Ministry of Personnel,
Public Grievances and Pensions
Action Taken Replies of the
Government on the
Recommendations/Observations
contained in the 26
th Report on
Demands for Grants (2008-09)
of the Ministry of Law and
Justice
Report on the Representation of
the People (Second Amendment)
Bill, 2008
Report on the High Court and
Supreme Court Judges (Salaries
and Conditions of Service)
Amendment Bill, 2008.
Report on the “Action Taken
Replies of the Government
on the Recommendations/
Observations contained in the
29
th Report of the Committee on
“Public Grievances Redressal
Mechanism”
Report on “The Constitution
(One Hundred and Eighth
Amendment) Bill, 2008”.
Action Taken Replies of the
Government on the
Recommendations/Observations
contained in the 24th Report on
“Working of Central Bureau of
Investigation (CBI)”
21.10.2008
16.12.2008
16.12.2008
16.02.2009
16.02.2009
14.12.2009
14.12.2009
03.03.2010
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
23.10.2008 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 23.10.2008.
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
19.12.2008 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 19.12.2008.
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
19.12.2008 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 19.12.2008.
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
18.02.2009 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 18.02.2009.
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
18.02.2009 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 18.02.2009.
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
17.12.2009 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 17.12.2009.
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
17.12.2009 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 17.12.2009.
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
9.03.2010 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 9.03.2010.
214
214
214
215
215
218
218
219

45
12 4 35
Report on Demands for Grants
(2010-11) of the Ministry of
Personnel, Public Grievances and
Pensions.
Report on Demands for Grants
(2010-11) of the Ministry of
Law and Justice.
Report on The Personal Laws
(Amendment) Bill, 2010.
Report on Action Taken Replies
of the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations
contained in the 23
rd Report of
the Committee on “Government’s
Policy of Appointment on
Compassionate Ground”.
Report on Action Taken Replies of
the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations
contained in the 30th Report of
the Committee on “Constraints
being Faced by Kendriya Bhandar”.
Report on Action Taken Replies
of the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations
contained in the 38
th Report on
Demands for Grants (2010-11)
of the Ministry of Personnel,
Public Grievances and Pensions.
Report on The Constitution (One
Hundred and Fourteenth
Amendment) Bill, 2010.
Report on The Marriage Laws
(Amendment) Bill, 2010.
Report on The Public Interest
Disclosure and Protection to
Persons Making the Disclosures
Bill, 2010
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
29.04.2010 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 29.04.2010.
-do-
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
04.08.2010 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 04.08.2010.
-do-
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
29.11.2010 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 29.11.2010.
-do-
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
9.12.2010 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 9.12.2010.
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
1.03.2011 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 1.03.2011.
Presented to the Hon’ble Chairman,
Rajya Sabha on 09.06.2011. Laid on
the Tables of the Rajya Sabha on
11.08.2011 and of Lok Sabha on
10.08.11.
38
th
39th
40th
41st
42nd
43rd
44th
45th
46th
27.04.2010
-do-
29.07.2010
-do-
16.11.2010
-do-
07.12.2010
02.02.2011
11.05.2011
219
219
220
220
221
221
221
222
223

46
12 4 35
Report on the Judicial Standards
and Accountability Bill, 2010
Report on the Lokpal Bill, 2011.
The Administrators-General
(Amendment) Bill, 2011
The Prevention of Bribery of
Foreign Public Officials and
Officials of Public International
Organisations Bill, 2011
Report on Demands for Grants
(2012-13) of the Ministry of
Personnel, Public Grievances and
Pensions.
Report on Demands for Grants
(2012-13) of the Ministry of
Law and Justice.
Report on The Right of Citizens
for Time Bound Delivery of Goods
and Services and Redressal of their
Grievances Bill, 2011
Report on The Administrative
Tribunals (Amendment) Bill,
2012.
Report on The Registration of
Births and Deaths (Amendment)
Bill, 2012
Action Taken Replies of the
Government on the
Recommendations/Observations
contained in the 51
st Report on
Demands for Grants (2012-13)
of the Ministry of Personnel,
Public Grievances and Pensions
47
th
48th
49th
50th
51st
52nd
53rd
54th
55th
56th
25.08.2011
07.12.2011
24.01.2012
26.03.2012
15.05.2012
-do-
23.08.2012
11.12.2012
22.02.2013
13.03.2013
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
30.08.2011 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 30.08.2011.
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
9.12.2011 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 9.12.2011.
Presented to the Hon’ble Chairman,
Rajya Sabha on 02.02.2012. Laid to
Rajya Sabha and Lok Sabha on
20.03.2012.
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
29.03.2012 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 29.03.2012.
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
21.05.2012 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 21.05.2012.
-do-
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
28.08.2012 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 28.08.2012.
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
17.12.2012 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 17.12.2012.
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
27.02.2013 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 27.02.2013.
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
21.03.2013 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 20.03.2013.
223
224
224
225
225
225
226
227
228
228

47
12 4 35
Action Taken Replies of the
Government on the
Recommendations/Observations
contained in the 52
nd Report on
Demands for Grants (2012-13)
of the Ministry of Law and
Justice
Report on Demands for Grants
(2013-14) of the Ministry of
Law and Justice.
The Readjustment of
Representation of Scheduled
Castes and Scheduled Tribes in
Parliamentary and Assembly
Constituencies Bill, 2013
Report on the Demands for
Grants (2013-14) of the Ministry
of Personnel, Public Grievances
and Pensions.
Report on the “Electoral
Reforms—Code of Conduct for
Political Parties and Anti
Defection Law”
Report on the “S tatus of Women
Government Employees, Service
Conditions, Protection against
exploitation, Incentives and other
related Issues”
Report on the Rajasthan
Legislative Council Bill, 2013
Report on the Judicial
Appointments Commission Bill,
2013
Report on the Representation of
the People (Second Amendment
and Validation) Bill, 2013
Report on the Right to
Information (Amendment) Bill,
2013
-do-
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
25.04.2013 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 26.04.2013
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
2.05.2013 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 2.05.2013
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
3.05.2013 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 3.05.2013
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
26.08.2013 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 26.08.2013
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
30.08.2013 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 30.08.2013
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
09.12.2013 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 09.12.2013
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
09.12.2013 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 09.12.2013
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
09.12.2013 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 09.12.2013
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
17.12.2013 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 17.12.2013
57
th
58th
59th
60th
61st
62nd
63rd
64th
65th
66th
13.03.2013
23.04.2013
29.04.2013
02.04.2013
19.08.2013
29.08.2013
27.11.2013
27.11.2013
06.12.2013
13.12.2013
228
228
228
228
229
229
230
230
230
230

48
12 4 35
67th
68th
69th
70th
Report on the Infrastructure
Development and Strengthening
of Subordinate Courts
Report on the Action Taken
Replies of the Government on
the Recommendations/
Observations contained in the
60
th Report on Demands for
Grants (2013-14) of the Ministry
of Personnel, Public Grievances
and Pensions
Report on the Prevention of
Corruption (Amendment) Bill,
2013
Report on the Assam Legislative
Council Bill, 2013
03.02.2014
03.02.2014
05.02.2014
03.02.2014
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
06.02.2014 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 06.02.2014
-do-
-do-
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
17.02.2014 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 17.02.2014
231
231
231
231

Printed at : Bengal Offset Works, 335, Khajoor Road, Karol Bagh, New Delhi-110005.