PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA 32
DEPARTMENT -RELA TED PARLIAMENT ARY STANDING
COMMITTEE  ON PERSONNEL,  PUBLIC  GRIEVANCES,  
LAW AND JUSTICE
THIRTY SECOND REPORT
ON
ACTION TAKEN REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ON
THE RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED 
IN THE 26TH REPORT ON DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2008-09)
OF THE MINISTRY OF LAW AND JUSTICE
TH 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 19 DECEMBER, 2008)
TH 
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 19 DECEMBER, 2008)
TH 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 19 DECEMBER, 2008)
TH 
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 19 DECEMBER, 2008)
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
DECEMBER, 2008/AGRAHAYANA, 1930 (SAKA)DECEMBER, 2008/AGRAHAYANA, 1930 (SAKA)

Website : http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail : rsc-pers@sansad.nic.in

45
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA  SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON PERSONNEL, PUBLIC GRIEVANCES,
LAW AND JUSTICE
THIRTY SECOND REPORT
ON
ACTION TAKEN REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ON
THE RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS CONTAINED IN
THE 26TH REPORT ON DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2008-09)
OF THE MINISTRY OF LAW AND JUSTICE
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 19TH DECEMBER, 2008)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 19 TH DECEMBER, 2008)
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
DECEMBER, 2008/AGRAHAYANA, 1930 (SAKA)
CS(P&L)-63

CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ........................................................................................ (i)-(ii)
2. I NTRODUCTION ........................................................................................................................ (iii)
3. R EPORT ................................................................................................................................... 1
(i) C HAPTER –I
Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by
the Government ................................................................................................... 2—6
(ii) C
HAPTER –II
Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not
desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies ................................ 7—15
(iii) C
HAPTER –III
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of
of the Government have not been accepted by the Committee ................ 16—28
(iv) C
HAPTER –IV
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies
of the Government are still awaited ................................................................ 29—40
4. R
ELEV ANT MINUTES OF THE MEETINGS OF THE C OMMITTEE .............................................. 41—44

(i)
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2008-09)
(Constituted on 5th August, 2008)
1. Dr. E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shrimati Jayanthi Natarajan
3. Dr. Abhishek Manu Singhvi
4. Shri Balavant alias Bal Apte
5. Dr. (Shrimati) Najma A. Heptulla
6. Shri Virendra Bhatia
7. Shrimati Brinda Karat
8. Shri Tariq Anwar
9. Shri Ram Jethmalani
10. Sardar Tarlochan Singh
LOK SABHA
11. Shri Raj Babbar
12. Shri N.S.V. Chitthan
13. Shri Chhattar Singh Darbar
14. Shrimati Tejasvini Gowda
15. Shri N. Y . Hanumanthappa
16. Shri S.K. Kharventhan
17. Shri A. Krishnaswamy
18. Dr. C. Krishnan
19. Shri Shailendra Kumar
20. Shrimati Kiran Maheshwari
21. Shri Harin Pathak
22. Shri Dahyabhai V allabhbhai Patel
23. Shri Varkala Radhakrishnan
24. Prof. M. Ramadass
25. Adv. P. Sathedevi
26. Shri Bhupendrasinh Solanki
27. Shrimati Krishna Tirath
28. Shri Devendra Prasad Yadav
29. Shri Dharmendra Yadav
30. Vacant
31. Vacant

SECRETARIAT
Shri Sham Sher Singh, Joint Secretary
Shri K.P. Singh, Joint Director
Shri K.N. Earendra Kumar, Deputy Director
Shrimati Niangkhannem Guite, Committee Officer
(ii)

(iii)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel,
Public Grievances, Law and Justice, having been authorised by the Committee to present the
Report on its behalf, do hereby present this Thirty-second Report on Action Taken by Government
on the recommendations contained in the Twenty-sixth Report on Demands for Grants (2008-09)
of the Ministry of Law and Justice. The Action Taken Report contains only those paragraphs which
entailed recommendations/observations of the Committee.
2. The Twenty-sixth Report of the Committee was presented to Rajya Sabha and laid on the
Table of the Lok Sabha on 29th April, 2008. Draft Report on the replies of the Government to the
recommendations/observations contained in this Report were considered and adopted by the
Committee in its meeting held on the 16th December, 2008.
DR. E. M. SUDARSANA NATCHIAPPAN
N
EW D ELHI; Chairman,
16th December, 2008 Committee on Personnel, Public
Grievances, Law and Justice.

1
REPORT
The Action Taken Report of the Committee deals with the action taken by Ministry of Law
and Justice on the recommendations/observations of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances, Law and Justice in its 26th Report on Demands for
Grants (2008-09) of the Ministry. The Report was presented to Rajya Sabha and laid on the Table
of Lok Sabha on 29th April, 2008.
2. Action Taken replies have been received from the Ministry of Law and Justice (Department
of Legal Affairs, Legislative Department and Department of Justice) in respect of the
recommendations contained in the above mentioned report. These replies have been categorised as
follows:
Chapter – I – The recommendations/observations which have been accepted by the Ministry in
respect of Paras 5.8, 5.38, 4.49, 4.69. The Committee is pleased to note that the Ministry has
accepted its recommendations as mentioned in the Chapter–I of the report.
Chapter – II – The recommendations/observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue
in view of the replies given by Department of Justice in respect of Paras 5.9, 5.19, 5.20, 6.28,
6.93, 6.94, 6.98, 7.2,4.12, 4.13, 4.40, 4.43, 4.54, 4.55, 4.66, 4.67, 4.68, 4.82. The Committee is
convinced with the explanations advanced by the Ministry of Law and Justice and does not want
to pursue as of now.
Chapter – III – The recommendations/observations in respect of which Committee has not accepted
replies given by Ministry of Law and Justice with regard to Paras 5.10, 5.11, 5.14, 5.24, 5.36,
6.24, 6.33, 6.42, 6.43, 6.46, 4.6, 4.7, 4.9, 4.16, 4.21, 4.26, 4.27, 4.48, 4.76. The Committee
expresses its concern for not accepting the recommendations of the Committee contained in
Chapter–III of this report and desires that Ministry should furnish logical explanations in respect
of these recommendations.
Chapter – IV – The recommendations/observations in respect of which final replies of the Ministry
of Law and Justice have not been received with regard to Paras 5.27, 5.33, 6.12, 6.51, 6.65, 6.72,
6.73, 6.75, 6.81, 6.89, 6.96, 6.36, 6.37, 6.38, 4.36, 4.56, 4.61, 4.83. The Committee observes that
Ministry has furnished interim replies and the Committee desires that Ministry should furnish action
taken notes in respect of recommendations categorised in Chapter–IV .
3. The recommendations/observations of the Committee in its 26th report, the ATRs furnished
by Ministry of Law and Justice and the Committee’s further recommendations/observations have
been dealt with in the succeeding chapters.

2
CHAPTER-I
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY
THE MINISTRY
DELIMITATION COMMISSION
Recommendation/observation
1. The Committee notes that the President of India has issued notification specifying
the dates of implementation of the Commission’s order and future elections of all the said
States will now be held on the basis of new Delimitation Order. The Committee feels that
the delimitation work with respect to the North-Eastern States of Arunachal Pradesh,
Assam, Manipur and Nagaland which was deferred will also be completed as early as
possible. The Committee impresses upon the Ministry to submit the status report in this
regard at the time of furnishing the Action Taken Replies. (Para 5.8)
Action Taken Reply
1.1 The Delimitation Act, 2002 was amended to insert two new sections 10A and 10B in the
Act. Section 10A of the Delimitation Act, 2002 empowers the President to defer the Delimitation
exercise in a State, in view of the situation whereby unity and integrity of India is threatened or
there is a serious threat to the peace and public order. The situation in respect of North-East States
of Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, Manipur and Nagaland have been assessed by the Ministry of Home
Affairs and they have suggested the deferment of delimitation exercise in those States, as the
conditions prevailing there have not been conducive for the conduct of delimitation exercise by the
Delimitation Commission. Accordingly, four Orders to defer delimitation exercise in the above said
States have been issued on the 8th February, 2008.
1.2 Now, consequent upon the completion of the delimitation exercise in the entire country, the
Chairman, Delimitation Commission has demitted office on the 31st May, 2008 and Ministry of Law
and Justice vide notification dated 23rd May, 2008 has specified the first day of June, 2008 as
the date on which the Delimitation Commission shall cease to exist.
1.3 Further, as a consequential requirement, the Representation of the People (Amendment) Act,
2008 (10 of 2008) amending the Representation of the People Act, 1950 was enacted and made
effective from the 16th April, 2008. As per sub-section (1) of section 8A of the Representation of
the People Act, 1950, if the President of India is satisfied that the situation and the conditions
prevailing in the States of Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, Manipur or Nagaland are conducive for the
conduct of delimitation exercise, he may, by order, rescind the said deferment orders in relation
to that State and provide for the conduct of delimitation exercise in the States by the Election
Commission. Further, as per sub-section (2) of section 8A of the Representation of the People
Act, 1950 the Election Commission of India is empowered to undertake fresh delimitation in respect
of the aforementioned four States as soon as may be after the deferment orders in respect of these
States are rescinded.
1.4 In  view of the aforesaid fact, it may be stated that a fresh delimitation exercise will be
initiated as and when conditions prevailing in these States become conducive for the conduct of
delimitation exercise.
2

3
Recommendation/observation
SIMPLIFICATION OF LEGISLATIVE LANGUAGE
2. The Committee is happy to note that the Ministry has taken steps in the direction
of simplification of laws. But still the Committee feels that it is an ongoing process and
efforts should be made for simplifying the legal language, which is quite often difficult to
understand. It feels that, laws should be drafted in national or regional languages to convey
the purpose and intent thereof rightly comprehended by those meant for. The Committee,
therefore, recommends that the Ministry should find ways and means to simplify laws so
as to be understood even by the people having no specialized knowledge of legal
formulations. (Para 5.38)
Action Taken Reply
2.1 With a view to find out ways to simplify laws so as to be understood by the common man,
the subject matter has been deliberated upon by the Government draftpersons under the guidance
of the Secretary. In this connection it was considered appropriate to issue instructions to the
draftpersons to take it as an ongoing process in simplifying the texts of the draft legislations
prepared and finalised by them. In addition, it has been decided to conduct regular workshops on
monthly basis to discuss, train and develop the skills of legislative drafting in simple language
amongst the officers of the Legislative Department to simplify the legal language so as to be
understood by the general public easily. In the said workshop some of the important and social
welfare laws having frequent interface will be taken-up for transforming/drafting into simple legal
language and thereafter, the draft of the simplified law will be forwarded to the concerned
administrative Ministry for their comments. Once the draft is finalised, the approval to replace the
existing law with the newly prepared simplified law, by following due Parliamentary procedure, will
be obtained. This whole exercise will be beneficial in two ways; firstly, identifying certain laws
with complex language and redo it in a simple text and secondly, the draft person will be adequately
trained for the purpose in undertaking any future legislation in simple and plain language.
2.2 Further, the terms and expressions used in Hindi version of Central Laws were decided and
approved by the various experts of the then Official Languages (Legislative) Commission. This
Commission consisted of legal and language experts of all India repute and finalized translation of
most of the major Acts. We cannot deviate much from these terms and expressions as it would
result into affecting the interpretation of law. However, now a days, we are simplifying the
language where the strict compliance of the earlier settled technical words is not necessary so that
Hindi text may be more comprehensible to the extent, common man could be in a position to
understand the spirit of law. Since law making process is a continuous one, no drastic changes
can be made. Official Languages Wing, earlier Official Languages (Legislative) Commission, is not
drafting the laws in Hindi, but is translating them into Hindi and other regional languages.
2.3 Information regarding simplification of legislative language, as far as it relates to Regional
Languages Unit, is given below:—
2.4 The translation of Central Acts in certain regional languages as enshrined in the 8th
Schedule to the Constitution is undertaken by the respective State Governments through the
Agencies/Departments under their control by using the terminology prevalent and understandable in
that particular region so that the common man is able to understand the law in the language, he
understands. Moreover, while finalizing the terminology used in the translation of “a particular
Central Acts in the Working group meeting, which is attended by the representative from the
respective State Government, the weightage is given to their suggestions for using simple language
in order to fulfil the purpose of rendering translation of Central Acts into regional languages.

4
Recommendat ion/observation
LEGAL EDUCATION AND RESEARCH
3. The Committee also recommends that Indian Law Institute which is country’s
premier research institute in the field of law should carry out research on the subjects like
needs and difficulties faced by the subordinate judiciary, revamping our legal education,
research on Judicial Impact Statement etc. which will not only help the institute to grow
but also help their studies to be utilized by others. Regular or short terms courses should
allow the serious participants rather than casual persons for getting certificates. Quality of
faculty, course material etc. should be of international level. The students and in service
trainees should be made to do research and give papers, rather than whiling away the time
and get certificates. It should work more as think tank to the State. (Para 4.49)
Action Taken Reply
3.1 It is indeed true that Indian Law Institute (ILI) is a premier research Institute in India.
Right from its inception, it has been the aim of the Institute to conduct research into the area,
which are of interest of the legal fraternity including the functionaries in the subordinate Judiciary.
When the research on the appellate judiciary is conducted naturally the needs and difficulties of the
subordinate judiciary are also enquired into. During 2007 in pursuance of advice by the then
President of India, the ILI undertook an empirical study involving the subordinate judiciary to
identify the causes for delay in the Administration of criminal justice in the country. The areas of
difficulties were identified and the Hon’ble Chief Justice of India/President, ILI wrote to all Chief
Justices of the High Courts in the country urging the need for avoiding delay and suggesting
various measures therefor. The Institute continues to take interest in the affairs of the
administration in the subordinate judiciary.
3.2 As regards revamping legal education, it may be noted that recently ILI has written to the
National Knowledge Commission to initiate steps for conducting an International seminar on Indian
Legal Education, so that new ideas on the subject may come up for discussion and adoption. The
ILI has been considering the possibility for adopting various measures for revamping legal
education. Its LL.M. programme which is research based has become very popular. Its products
are finding employment as teachers in various law schools. Training they receive at the Institute
make them to work hard for revamping legal education and research. The Institute have recently
devised a LL.B. LL.M. (integrated) 4 years programme to produce enough law teachers. This is
intended to avoid our students seeking foreign shores in search for LL.M. degree. The idea is to
offer LL.B. curriculum of 3 years after graduation and to offer advanced courses for one year to
enable them to get LL.M. within a year i.e. during the final year of 4 year course. The approval
of BCI and the U.G.C. is awaited. We think it will go a long way in producing enough law teachers
for our country.
3.3 There is already a Committee which went into the question of judicial impact statement.
Depending upon its recommendations and the Government of India’s follow-up action ILI would
be very much happy to get involved in undertaking research connected with judicial impact
statement.
3.4 Recently ILI has conducted three major projects having national importance. The report
made in pursuance of the directions Minorities Commission was very much appreciated. The World
Bank Project on ADR Systems in India is a major one. They are also engaged in a study on
“Judiciary’s Impact on Parliamentary Practices in India” on behalf of the Rajya Sabha Secretariat.
It will be of much importance in nation-building.

5
3.5 ILI’s academic programme have always been associated with the requirement of students
doing ample research before they obtain a degree from the ILI whether it is LL.M. or PG Diploma
course offered by it. In almost all the PG Diploma courses it is necessary for the certificates to
do research and produce a dissertation before he/she is granted the certificate. The requirement is
very important in the case of LL.M. Course. Some of the research papers produced by its students
in the LL.M. class have already been published in the internationally reputed journal of the JILI.
It is a matter of satisfaction that some of its student have started publishing their articles in foreign
journals also.
Recommendation/observation
INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR ALTERNATIVE DISPUTE RESOLUTION (ICADR)
4. The Committee is happy to note that its recommendation for timely audit of accounts
of ICADR is now being carried out regularly. The Committee further hopes that ICADR,
which is the premier institute in the field of arbitration, should be made fully accountable
and transparent in terms of every aspect of its functioning to enhance its appeal to the
public, and for that matter, every effort should be invested by the Ministry. The Committee
further desires that the ICADR should optimally utilize the building constructed for the
purpose. The Committee also recommends that ICADR, which has the ability to be the best
institute of the world, should make all out efforts to attract foreign arbitration cases and
try to become the hub of international arbitration. (Para 4.69)
Action Taken Reply
4.1 ICADR is making sincere efforts to attract both international and domestic arbitration cases.
The World Bank has given a grant of US $ 4.80 lakhs for “Strengthening ADR in India”. Under
the said project of the World Bank, the Indian Law Institute has been given the work of preparing
a Report on “ADR Status/Effectiveness Study”. The draft final Report of the Indian Law Institute
has been already discussed by the Officers of the World Bank and the Members of the Committee
of ICADR with the Director of Indian Law Institute and the Research Professors associated with
the preparation of the draft Final Report. The draft Final Report has been extensively discussed and
various suggestions have been made to the Indian Law Institute to revise the said Report. The said
Report contains various suggestions/recommendations, e.g., creation of public awareness, training
of arbitrators and mediators, further research on ADR, adoption of ADR as a part of formal
education, conducing community mediations, establishing good rapport with V oluntary
organisations/Universities in spreading the message of ADR and evolving a Code of Conduct and
Professional Ethics for arbitrators, mediators and others, etc. On the presentation of the said
Report, ICADR will prepare further plans for upgrading its services and implementation of the
suggestions made by the Indian Law Institute. Similarly under the aforesaid project of the World
Bank, ICADR has given to the Centre for Effective Dispute Resolution (CEDR), London, U.K. the
work relating to preparation of Business Plan for development of ICADR and for conducting
training of mediators in India. The CEDR have already conducted the programme for Training of
Mediators in India from April to June, 2008. Two Foundation Courses for training of about 60
mediators were held in the premises of ICADR located at Plot No.6, Vasant Kunj Institutional Area,
Phase-II, New Delhi from 9th – 12th April, 2008 and 14th – 17th  April, 2008. An Advanced Course
for Training of Mediators was conducted from 12th  – 14th May, 2008, wherein 24 candidates
(selected out of 60 candidates who attended the Foundation Courses) were given further training.
Thereafter the Masters Trainer Course was held from 3rd - 5th June, 2008, wherein 12 candidates
selected out of 24 candidates who attended the Advanced Course were given Training. In addition
to these 12 candidates 13 Additional District and Sessions Judges and one Advocate, nominated by
the Mediation Committee of the Supreme Court, were also trained. Thus as a result of the said

6
programme for Training of Mediators, 26 Mediators for giving further training of mediation are
available.
4.2 The draft Final Business Plan for the Development of ICADR, as prepared by CEDR, has
also been discussed by the Officers of the World Bank and the Members of the Committee of
ICADR with the representatives of CEDR and a number of suggestions for revising the said draft
Final Business Plan have been made. The said draft Final Business Plan also contains a number of
suggestions for upgrading the services of ICADR so as to attract international arbitration cases and
international mediation cases in India. Further the Members of Committee of ICADR have also
undertaken a Study Tour of Singapore International Arbitration Centre, Singapore, CEDR,  London
Court of International Arbitration (LCIA), Chartered Institute of Arbitrators and Eversheds (a
leading law firm dealing in international arbitration and mediation), all located in London, U.K. We
sincerely hope that the cumulative effect of the aforesaid activities undertaken by ICADR in
association with Indian Law Institute, CEDR  and the World Bank will show result over the next
few years in upgrading the services and other infrastructure of ICADR which will attract
international arbitration cases and international mediation cases and enable ICADR to emerge as an
Institute of repute in the field of arbitration and mediation in India.

7
7
CHAPTER-II
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE
DOES NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES
GIVEN BY DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE
Recommendation/observation
PHOTO ELECTORAL ROLLS
1. The Committee appreciates that Election Commission has taken many steps like
introduction of Booth Level Officers, Computerisation of electoral rolls, introduction of
photo electoral rolls etc. to hold free and fair elections in the country. The Committee
hopes that with the introduction of these innovative methods the Commission would
certainly put a check on number of issues like duplicity, mistaken identity, faulty electoral
rolls etc. The Committee further feels that though the Commission has taken some
measures but it should also send its team of officers on a surprise visit to cross check the
working of BLOs. On computerization of electoral rolls, the Committee feels that with the
computerization of electoral rolls the Commission would be able to solve the problems of
the electorate in a better and efficient manner. (Para 5.9)
Action Taken Reply
1.1 The Election Commission has taken note of the Committee’s observation about sending its
team of officers on a surprise visit to cross check the working of BLOs. The Commission has
started deputing senior officers as “Roll Observers” who, inter alia , check and report on the
quality of BLO’s work. However, issues like mistaken identity (of voters) leading to impersonation
and bogus voting can be addressed much better only if the EPIC is made compulsory.
Committee’s further observation
1.2. The Committee takes note of the reply furnished by the Ministry. The Committee may be
apprised of the status as the time frame as set up by Election Commission is already over. The
Committee desires a status note including Assam, J&K and Nagaland on the subject may be
furnished along with ATN.
Recommendation/observation
ELECTRONIC VOTING MACHINES
2. The Committee is happy to note that the technical committee formed to decide the
technical worthiness of the 1989-90 model EVMs has submitted its report to the
Government. The Committee therefore, recommends the Government should immediately
start the weeding out of old EVMs and chalk out a definite time-frame for upgradation and
procurement of new EVMs. The Committee hopes this will help to get the election results
early and in a speedy manner. (Para 5.19)
Action Taken Reply
2.1 Identification process of less reliable EVMs of 1989-90 batches is going on. The inputs

8
received from the manufacturers and the field functionaries involved in this exercise indicate that
a large number of such EVMs may no longer be usable in future elections. However, the final
figures will be known very shortly.
2.2 The Election Commission has approached the Government of India for procurement of 1.80
lakhs of upgraded EVMs and replacement of roughly 1.5 lakh 1989-90 models EVMs, in order to
save the time and to be in readiness to handle the Lok Sabha poll of 2009 without any difficulty.
Committee’s further observation
2.3 The Committee impresses upon the Government to meet the requirement of Election
Commission for conducting the 2009 Lok Sabha elections smoothly.
Recommendation/observation
3. While taking note of the steps taken by the Commission in educating the people in
the use of EVMs, the Committee desires that the Ministry may focus more attention in
educating the rural poor and the masses in the far flung interior villages of the country.
It further opines that propagation of the usage of EVMs by way of flyers and posters will
go a long way for areas that have no access to audio-visual means. (Para 5.20)
Action Taken Reply
3.1 The Election Commission has taken all necessary steps in educating the voters. Propagation
of the usage of EVMs by way of flyers and posters is one of them. During Lok Sabha Election
2004, some Compact Discs were prepared through DAVP for voter awareness and training of
officials. The same are being reviewed and is under active consideration of the Commission for
further improvement.
COMPUTERISATION OF JUDICIARY
4. The Committee records its appreciation with the pace of computerization. However,
it feels that Ministry should fix a target for completion of computerization in a time-bound
manner. The Committee is of the view that computerization of judiciary would be an
effective tool to bring down pendency of cases as has been experienced in the Apex Court.
The Committee, therefore, reiterates its recommendation that the Ministry should ensure
that necessary budget allocations for this purpose should be made and the targets set to
computerize the entire judicial system are met. (Para 6.28)
Action Taken Reply
4.1 The Central Government is implementing the Central Sector Plan scheme of computerization
of District and Subordinate Courts as a Mission Mode Project.
4.2 Under the scheme laptop computers have already been provided to 13365 Judges and 12074
laser printers have also been provided. 11005 judicial officers and 44020 court staff have been
trained in the use of ICT tools. Internet connectivity through broadband or dial-up facility has been
provided at the residences of 9524 Judges. 478 District Court complexes and 1203 Subordinate
Court complexes have also been provided with such connectivity.
4.3 The site preparation in the court complexes has commenced with the National Informatics
Centre having disbursed funds to those High Courts that have furnished the estimates for site
preparation work as per the guidelines. The matter of obtaining complete information on site
preparation estimates from all the High Courts is being pursued. The Department has been closely

9
monitoring the progress of site preparation work which is a key component in the implementation
of the project and is making efforts to sort out the issues/problems with a view to implement the
project on time.
4.4 A budget provision of Rs.125 crore has been made for the year 2008-09 which will ensure
that the requirement of funds of the National Informatics Centre for implementing the scheme
through 2008-09 is fully met.
4.5 The scheme is scheduled to be implemented by February 2009. The key activities
under the scheme are also being monitored regularly against specific timelines.
Recommendation/observation
ROLE OF REGISTRY OF SUPREME COURT
5. The Committee recommends that Registry, Supreme Court should work out some
mechanism like annual conference/forum where Registries of High Courts and
Administrative Head of Subordinate/Lower Courts can participate to ventilate and narrate
the problems faced by them. (Para 6.93)
5.1 The Committee also recommends that some mechanism should be worked out or
developed so that some kind of control over the District, Subordinate and High Courts in
the states should be there. Mere acknowledgement that the Registry doesn’t exercise or
have any control on the working of other Courts will not serve the purpose but rather
complicate the whole issue. The Committee therefore recommends that the Ministry of Law
and Justice in consultation with the Chief Justice of India should try to formulate some
means/mechanism to exercise some control over the Munsif, District, Subordinate
Judiciaries and High Courts in the States which would work as a watchdog and keep tab on
their functioning. (Para 6.94)
Action Taken Reply
5.2 The above recommendations were forwarded to the Supreme Court Registry who have
informed that no further action is required to be taken by the Supreme Court Registry.
5.3 In so far as exercising control over the District, Subordinate and High Courts in the State
is concerned, it may be mentioned that whereas the Ministry of Law and Justice organizes regular
conferences of the Registrar Generals and the Law Secretaries of the States to discuss various
aspects related to the functioning of the courts, such conferences are meant as participative fora
for improving administration of justice.
Recommendation/observation
CHANGING THE NAMES OF SOME HIGH COURTS
6. The Committee is happy to note that to begin with the name of at least one court
has been changed according to the name of the State. The Committee therefore impresses,
upon the Ministry to consider initiating necessary action for bringing about changes in the
names of the Madras, Calcutta, Bombay High Courts in line with the official names of these
metropolitan cities or States. The Committee feels that this is an administrative matter and
must be carried out as early as possible, as recommended by the Committee in its previous
Report. (Para 6.98)
Action Taken Reply
6.1 The proposal regarding change of name of existing High Courts requires Parliamentary

10
Legislation. No request has been received in this regard either from Government of West Bengal
or the Government of Maharashtra to change the names of the Calcutta High Court and Bombay
High Court. A proposal in this regard has, however , been received from the Government of Tamil
Nadu. It has been decided to process all the cases together.
Recommendation/observation
DEMAND NO. 63 : SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
7. The Committee also feels that the Supreme Court Journals, containing all important
judgements and cases should be publicized and commercialized to get wider publicity and
even unreported cases should also get references in the journals. In the same way, different
High Courts of the country can also publicize and commercialized their judgements and
cases through their journals and can make reference of unreported cases. (Para 7.2)
Action Taken Reply
7.1 The above recommendation has been forwarded to the Supreme Court Registry for action
at their end. It is also being brought to notice that pursuant to the computerisation of the Supreme
Court and the High Courts, their reported judgements are available on their respective websites.
Recommendation/observation
COMPUTERISATION
8. The Committee is appalled to note that the Ministry’s inability to undertake the
work of computerization and interlinking of zonal offices on the lame plea of non-
availability of adequate funds while the Ministry has reduced its Demands at the RE stage
in 2007-08 and has in 2008-09 sought for a meager amount of Rs. 1.73 Crore. As it appears
from the information made available to the Committee, the Ministry has made proposal for
the said allocation without working out the likely requirement for the work while proposing
its RE [2007-08]. It is, therefore, apprehensive that the proposal will also meet similar fate
of non-performance in the current financial year on account of exhaustion of funds. The
Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry should chalk out stringent plans for
the works in question and accordingly propose for adequate funds in the RE [2008-09] stage.
(Para 4.12)
Recommendation/observation
8.1 The Committee further recommends that the Department should complete the
process of computerization of ITAT, Delhi in the set target so that the expansion of
computerization in the Tribunal and its interlinking through LAN/Internet with all its
Branches takes place as per the target set up by the Ministry. The Committee also
recommends that bottlenecks like non-availability of adequate funds should not come in the
way of achieving the target. (Para 4.13)
Action Taken Reply on paras 4.12 & 4.13
8.2 The work is already in progress and unabated efforts are being made to complete the
process of computerization of ITA T, Delhi and expansion of Computerization in the ITAT, and inter
linking of all its Benches through the LAN/Internet during the current financial year 2008-2009.
8.3 In case, existing provision of Rs. 1.73 crores is found inadequate, required additional
provision of funds will be proposed in R.E. 2008-2009, for this purpose.

11
Committee’s further observation
8.4 The Committee has taken note of the Ministry’ s reply and awaits the action taken note of
the Ministry.
Recommendation/observation
LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA
9. The Committee is happy to note the Ministry has started laying of the statement of
pending Law Commission’s Report once in a year in the Parliament. The Committee express
its unhappiness with regard to pending implementation of 57 Reports of the Law
Commission and feels that the reports of the Commission should be implemented in letter
and spirit and the Government should make efforts to ensure timely implementation of its
recommendations. (Para 4.40)
Action Taken Reply
9.1 The department in pursuance of the recommendations of the Committee has been laying
annually a Statement on the pending Law Commission reports in the Parliament since 2005. This
Department has also started practice of forwarding extracts of the Statement laid in the Parliament
to the concerned Ministries/Departments so as to make them aware of the status of the reports
pending with them as known to the Parliament. This practice has prompted defaulting Ministries/
Departments to respond to our request of expediting implementation of the reports.
9.2 This Department immediately on the receipt of a Report from the Law Commission forward
it to the Ministries/Departments concerned for examination/implementation. The matter has been
taken up at the level of the Secretary for expeditious implementation of the report. Reminders have
also been issued from time to time to the Ministries/Departments concerned with the reports. DO
letters at the level of Law Secretary containing aforesaid observations of the Standing Committee
are being issued to the Ministries/Departments concerned asking them to furnish a statement
containing full details of the Report(s) pending with them, steps taken for the implementation of
the recommendations contained therein and reasons for delay in implementing them.
Committee’s further observation
9.3 The Committee desires that the Ministry should continue pursing with the concerned
Ministries/Departments and hopes it would certainly reduce the pendency of implementation of Law
Commission Report.
Recommendation/observation
10. The Committee records its appreciation that the Ministry has started working in the
direction of giving statutory backing to the Law Commission of India on the pattern of the
other countries like U.K. and Canada as recommended by the Committee on its earlier
Reports. The Committee expects that the Ministry will soon introduce the proposed Law
Commission of India Bill in the Parliament, with the provision that the matters referred to
the Law Commission should be substantive and it should be on the basis of Parliament
debates and recommendation of Standing Committees, rather than making the Law
Commission as parallel Parliament to make its new proposals, but never acted upon by
either executive or Parliament. The Committee feels that increasing number of Reports in
archives, made by expending people’s tax money is totally unwarranted and uncalled for.
Hence concerned Departments should also be heard by Law Commission and report should
be on the consensus and compelling necessity to the Nation. (Para 4.43)

12
Action Taken Reply
10.1 Department of Legal Affairs has already started the process for giving statutory backing to
Law Commission and the same is under process.
Committee’s further observation
10.2 The Committee hopes that the Government will introduce the Bill at the earliest.
Recommendation/observation
BAR COUNCIL OF INDIA
11. The Committee notes with concern that the Ministry is reconsidering the
recommendation made by the Committee for the establishment of National Law University
and Law Schools in the country, in the light of the recommendation made by the Knowledge
Commission. The Committee is not satisfied with the reasons advanced by the Government
that because of the recommendation of Knowledge Commission they have started re-
examining the whole thing. The Committee feels that all the good work done by the
Ministry right from the beginning in the establishment of National Law University and
Schools has come to naught. From the casual reply received from the Ministry it appears
that the recommendation of the Committee was not given due consideration. Instead they
would have advanced some solid reasons for such a deviation. The Committee, Therefore,
recommends that recommendations given by the Parliamentary Committee should be given
due attention and the Government should immediately take urgent steps in this directions
while also considering the recommendation given by Knowledge Commission. The
Committee believes that the Government is seriously examining the issue and this will not
be a way to further delay the whole thing. (Para 4.54)
Action Taken Reply
11.1 The proposal for establishment of the National Law University (NLU) alongwith three
National Law Schools in Eastern, Western and Northern region of the country was taken up on
the basis of the recommendations contained in Chapter IX of the Report of the Special Subject
Group on the Administrative and Legal Simplification relating to Judicial Reforms. The said special
Group was constituted as a task force on the basis of the decision taken in the meeting of the
Prime Minister’s Council on Trade and Industry on 19.09.1998.
11.2 The Department of Higher Education, Ministry of Human Resource Development while
concurring in the Draft Cabinet Note for the proposed NLU also suggested to have one more center
in the Central region. The Department of Expenditure advised to formulate a plan scheme and get
the approval of the Planning Commission after having the proposal examined under the Expenditure
Finance committee. The CPWD though provided a tentative layout plan and area statement of the
proposed NLU but expressed its inability to provide the cost estimates due to technical reasons.
The CPWD, however, provided very rough cost estimates of the construction of NLU projecting
an expenditure of Rs. 80 crores but categorically stated that the estimates are totally tentative and
cannot be used for any sanction etc. The Department, therefore, could not make any headway in
the matter.
11.3 The Hon’ble Minister of Law and Justice vide his minutes dated 24.09.2007 desired to
review the whole case. In the meantime this Department have also got recommendations of
National Knowledge Commission (NKC), which recognized legal education as an important
constitutent of professional education. The NKC had constituted a Working Group of experts

13
including distinguished members of the Bar, the Bench and Academia under the Chairmanship of
Justice M. Jagannath Rao to suggest necessary measures to meet the quality of legal education in
India. The said Working Group has identified various key reform proposals including one
establishment of four autonomous well-networked Center for Advanced Legal Studies and Research
(CALSAR), ONE in each region to carry out cutting edge research on various aspects of law and
also serve as think tank for advising the government for National and International fora. The
recommendation of the NKC for establishment of CALSAR is in harmony with the earlier
recommendations of Special Subject Group whereby a proposal for the establishment of NLU was
under consideration. The purpose of establishing CALSAR as recommended by the NKC is nothing
but assimilation of the original proposal of establishing NLU. In these circumstances, the proposal
of NLU was re-examined in the light of the recommendations of the NKC and it was decided with
the approval of the Hon’ble Minister of Law and Justice to formulate a plan scheme for setting
up of CALSAR in the four region of the country as recommended by the NKC. This Department
has also communicated its stand on the establishment of CALSAR to the Planning Commission.
11.4 This Department has also circulated a Feasibility Report for the establishment of Northern
region of the CALSAR at Maneser, Gurgaon (Haryana) to all the concerned Ministries/Departments
and solicited their views/comments on it. It is pertinent to state at this juncture that the
Government of Haryana had already earmarked 25 acres of land for the erstwhile proposal of the
NLU, therefore, it was also decided to utilize that space for our present proposal of CALSAR.
Recommendation/observation
12. In the wake of the recommendation of the Knowledge Commission for setting up
four autonomous, well networked Center for Advanced Legal Studies and Research
[CALSAR] one in each region to carry out cutting edge research on various aspects of law
and also serve as think tank for advising the Government for National and International
fora, the Committee feels that the Government should immediately take certain steps for
the establishment of CALSAR without wasting more time on it. The Committee further
recommends that if any decision for establishment of CALSAR is taken due weightage
should be given that CALSAR should work under the Ministry of Law and Justice instead
off being an autonomous centre of repute. (Para 4.55)
Action Taken Reply
12.1 This Department has also circulated a Feasibility Report for the establishment of Northern
region of the CALSAR at Maneser, Gurgaon (Haryana) to all the concerned Ministries/ Departments
and solicited their views/comments on it. It is pertinent to state at this juncture that the
Government of Haryana had already earmarked 25 acres of land for the erstwhile proposal of the
NLU, therefore, it was also decided to utilize that space for our present proposal of CALSAR. It
is also stated that this Department has also clarified to the Planning Commission in reference to
the follow up of inter-ministerial meeting of the National Knowledge Commission that the CALSAR
should come under the administrative control of this Department subject to usual rules and norms
of Ministry of Human Resource Development vide its OM NO. 6(3)/2007-IC dated 9th April, 2008.
Recommendation/observation
INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR ALTERNATIVE DISPUTE RESOLUTION (ICADR)
13. Incidentally, this was the same reply given by the Ministry in the Demands for
Grants 2006-07. Which actually means that the ICADR was not able to attract or solve any
cases of Arbitration/Conciliation during the last financial year. (Para 4.66)

14
13.1 The Committee, while expressing its appreciation for the provision of well equipped
facilities of ICADR in view of the crucial role it has been assigned in promotion of
alternative dispute resolution methods, is perturbed to know that the facts given with
regard to cases referred to and resolved by it to the Committee are actually misleading and
ICADR has failed considerably in its effort to attract Arbitration/Conciliation cases in the
last financial year or rather the information furnished by the Ministry was not correct. The
Committee therefore, recommends that necessary instructions in this regard be passed that
correct information should be made before the Committee. The Committee also instructs
the Ministry to furnish a status note in this regard at the time of furnishing the Action
Taken Report. (Para 4.67)
Action Taken Reply
13.2 At the time of consideration of Demands for Grants for the Financial Year 2007-08, it was
reported that the total number of five new arbitration cases and one new conciliation case have
been referred to ICADR during the Financial Year 2006-07. This represents the actual number of
cases referred to ICADR during the said Financial Year. The figures of total number of cases
referred to ICADR so far i.e. from the very beginning and up to May, 2008 are 34 arbitration cases
and 4 conciliation cases. It is just a coincident that the new arbitration cases referred to ICADR
during the Financial Year 2007-08 also happen to be almost the same. Thus in fact the reply relates
only to fresh arbitration cases referred to ICADR during the Financial Year 2007-08. The mistake
is inadvertent. It will be appreciated that the ICADR or for that matter the Ministry cannot even
dream of misleading a Parliamentary Committee and furnish incorrect information. Thus the status
report in regard to total number of arbitration/conciliation cases referred to ICADR so far is as
under:—
Financial No. of No. of Total Cases Pending
Year Arbitration Conciliation No. of Disposed Arbitration
cases  cases cases off cases
referred referred
Upto 2003-04 18 3 21 19 2
2004-05 4 Nil 4 2 2
2005-06 3 Nil 3 – 3
2006-07 5 1 6 3 3
2007-08 4 Nil 4 1 3
T
OTAL: 34 4 38 25 13
Committee’s further observation
13.3 The Committee takes note of the reply and hopes that ICADR would be able to play crucial
role in alternative dispute resolution.
14. The Committee desires that the Ministry may take serious note of the issues
highlighted in the excerpt of the Hon’ble Chairman of the Committee reproduced above and
recommends that the Government should immediately take some concrete steps to check
the mushrooming of Arbitration/Conciliation/Mediator centres coming up in India in order
to maintain the quality and standard of Arbitration centres in India by creating statutory
regulatory authority of Arbitration. (Para 4.78)

15
Action Taken Reply
14.1 It is felt that keeping in view the Constitutional provisions, e.g. fundamental rights, etc., it
may be difficult to stop certain persons or organizations from setting up arbitration/mediation
centres.
Committee’s further observation
14.2 The Committee takes note of the reply and would like to review the issue at the time of
consideration of DFG for 2009-10.
Recommendation/observation
MUSHROOMING OF ARBITRATION CENTRES IN INDIA
15. The Committee, however, would desire that Ministry should look into the issue and
provide a status report in this regard while submitting the Action Taken Reply in view of
the replies furnished by the Ministry being incomplete as the Committee was made to
understand that the premises were rented out to various other Governmental organizations
as well. Seriously disapproving of leasing out of its building constructed from the Grants of
the Government with a view of earning, the Committee reiterates its earlier
recommendation that the ICADR should take all efforts in attracting more cases of
arbitration, both national and international, and make a turn around in evolving itself to
be in a position to give financial and strategical support to develop new Centres by Private
Participation such as Palkivala Center of Arbitration in Chennai. The Committee further
opines that the Ministry has a strategic role to play in this matter by way of providing
adequate funds for the development and upgradation of the infrastructure and facilities
befitting international arbitration centres. (Para 4.82)
Action Taken Reply
15.1 ICADR has apprised that some portions of the Administrative Block Building of ICADR have
been given on rent so as to augment the financial resources of ICADR. It may be mentioned that
the temporary renting of building has not been made with a view to earning. The said income will
be used ultimately for promotion of ADR in India and upgrading the services and infrastructure of
ICADR. It may also be mentioned that keeping the portions of the Administrative Block building
vacant also entails extra expenditure for its maintenance, which will be difficult to meet out of the
present resources. It is reiterated that no part of the said income will be diverted for any other
purpose, as the aims and objects of ICADR do not envisage any purpose other than promotion of
ADR in India. Further in view of the projections of funds of about Rs. 25 crores required by
ICADR, over a period of next five years, to implement the suggestions/recommendations which will
emanate from the forthcoming Reports of the Indian Law Institute and the CEDR, the necessity
of generating funds by ICADR cannot be overlooked. The said funds will go a long way in taking
necessary steps for upgrading the services and infrastructure of ICADR which will be necessary
for attracting both domestic and international arbitration and mediation cases in India.

16
CHAPTER-III
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH COMMITTEE
HAS NOT ACCEPTED REPLIES GIVEN BY DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE
Recommendation/observation
PHOTO ELECTORAL ROLLS
1. The Committee appreciates that the Commission has completed the exercise of Photo
Electoral Rolls in 11 States and 1 U.T. The Committee hopes that the Election Commission
will make all out efforts to complete the exercise in the remaining States and UTs within
a time frame. The Committee feels that with the introduction of Photo Electoral Rolls it
would be easier for the Election Commission to conduct and carry out the exercise in a
smooth manner. But, Committee also advises the Election Commission to take extra
measures to ensure that the Photo Electoral Rolls are error free and serve the purpose for
which it has been made otherwise the whole exercise will be a failure. Each year there are
numbers of complaints regarding faulty rolls, missing names etc. In such cases, a person
having a bonafide “Voter Identity Card” should have legal rights to vote. (Para 5.10)
Action Taken Reply
1.1 The Election Commission has set an initial time frame of 31.08.08 to complete the exercise
of photorolls. Some States/Union territories however, due to prevailing ground situation may need
more time. The Commission is closely monitoring the exercise. Due to prevailing circumstances,
PER is not being taken up in Assam, Jammu and Kashmir and Nagaland for the present.
1.2 According to the extant provisions of law (sub-section (1) of section 62 of the RP
Act, 1951), only those who are enrolled as an elector in the electoral roll of a constituency can
exercise their vote. Therefore, to be registered as a voter in electoral roll is the first and foremost
requirement for exercising the right to vote. EPIC are issued for the purpose of verification /
identification of the bonafide of that registered voter. Electors Photo Identity Card, once issued is
a valid identity for the purpose of exercising ones franchise irrespective of whether a person has
moved from place where EPIC was originally issued provided the person is registered as a voter
at that point of time in that place. On the date of poll, a person is allowed to vote in a particular
polling station of a constituency if his/her name is in the Electoral Roll and his/her identity is
established through a bonafide document (EPIC). For polling purposes, the basic document used
would be the Electoral Roll and EPIC is only an instrument of identification to ensure that the
person appearing in a polling station to vote is same what he claims to be. Every person who is,
for the time being entered in the electoral roll of any constituency shall be entitled to vote in that
constituency. Therefore, if the “V oter Identity Card” holder is enrolled in the electoral roll in force,
only then he can exercise his vote, otherwise not.
Committee’s further observation
1.3 The Committee’ s concern was that a registered voter having the valid voter identity card
should not be denied of his right to vote. It is the responsibility of the State to remove the
inaccuracy in the electoral rolls and that can be done by taking extra measures/precautions ensuring
16

17
that photo electoral rolls are free of errors. The Committee is keen to know what extra measures
have been taken to remove the errors and what has been its outcome.
Recommendation/observation
2. The Committee, while appreciating the efforts taken by the Commission in
computerization of the data for electoral rolls of the entire country, desires that feedback
reports on its use by the State CEOs may be procured and the level of satisfaction of the
working of the software communicated to the Committee. (Para 5.11)
Action Taken Reply
2.1 The Election Commission had not prescribed any common software for maintenance of
Electoral Roll in the country but had only prescribed the underlying data structure and the
processes. Each State has computerised the Electoral Rolls in accordance with the basic parameter
and structure laid down by the Commission.
Committee’s further observation
2.2 The Committee is not satisfied with the reply as the Committee was not apprised of the
feedback received from the State CEOs. The Committee desires to know the efforts made to get
that feedback and what action was taken by the EC. Whether at any time evaluation was made
to ensure the efficacy of the system. The Committee may be given the details.
Recommendation/observation
POST OFFICES FOR VERIFICA TION/REVISION OF ELECT ORAL ROLLS
3. The Committee is perturbed to know that the Election Commission has replied that
the Commission does not see the necessity of another office for electoral roll revision at
district level. The reason to stress for opening an office of Election Commission at district
level is for better monitoring and working as a facilitation center to the less educated
people living in rural areas/villages, for them registering their names means loosing one
day wages/earning. Every year there has been numerous complaints like missing names,
wrong entries, different photographs which speak a lot about the working of ERO/BDO. The
Committee feels that there is a need for it and to begin with the Election Commission
should at least on trial basis start establishing its offices for the purpose at the district
levels and district level officer would be made accountable for revision of the rolls. The
Committee further recommends that the Commission should set some target for the
purpose of revision of the electoral rolls. (Para 5.14)
Action Taken Reply
3.1 Revision of Rolls is done through a large number of EROs who are the statutory authorities
to prepare rolls. The manpower required for the purpose will be huge and managerial dimensions
of handling such work force will require further manager level workforce.
Committee’s further observation
3.2 The Committee is of the firm view that a permanent office at district level for electoral
roll revision is necessary as this activity is of continuous nature. The Government needs to review
their stand in the light of Committee’ s recommendations. These offices can be set up on trial basis,
as suggested by the Committee. The Committee therefore impresses upon the Government to take
necessary action in this regard.

18
Recommendation/observation
ELECTORS PHOTO IDENTITY CARDS (EPIC)
4. The Committee is perturbed to know that 28% are yet to be issued/covered under
the EPIC programme. The Committee feels that the Election Commission has not achieved
the desired goals despite the fact that considerable time has elapsed since the inception of
the EPIC scheme. The Committee understands that for being photographed at a particular
Centre, only few selected dates are announced and are hardly publicised. If a voter for
whatever reasons, fails to get him photographed during that period, he is not issued EPIC.
If a provision is made for being photographed on all working days during the revision of
rolls, the problem can be solved to a great extent. The Committee, therefore reiterates its
earlier recommendation that the Commission should devise a time-bound programme for
achieving 100% EPIC coverage and make a provision for getting photographed of the voters
on all working days while revising the rolls. (Para 5.24)
Action Taken Reply
4.1 The Election Commission has taken note of the concern expressed by the Committee to
maximize the EPIC coverage. To maximize the EPIC coverage, normally special field campaigns at
Designated Photography Locations (DPL) are carried out with publicity. The periods of campaigns,
which are generally dependent on number of residual electors in the area has been increased. The
scale of publicity to such campaigns is also increased further. In fact, the Commission has also
allowed alternate method of submission of photographs already available with the residual electors
for getting EPIC. Thus, it is continuous method and there are no off-days for preparation of EPIC.
4.2 To address the situation, the Commission has also directed the States to establish permanent
EPIC Centres to function round the year. However, the Commission reiterates that unless EPIC is
made compulsory document, the EPIC coverage will have some shortfall.
Committee’s further observation
4.3 The Committee’ s concern shall remain unanswered as the Ministry did not categorically state
as to by when 100% coverage under EPIC programme will be achieved. The Committee would
certainly like to know what targets have been set out by the EC in this regard and how the
problems in this regard would be overcome.
4.4 The Committee however appreciates the measures being taken by the EC for maximizing the
EPIC coverage. But going by this pace, much has to be achieved. The Committee therefore
impresses upon the Election Commission for a time bound programme to be undertaken.
Recommendation/observation
THE INSTITUTE OF LEGISLATIVE DRAFTING AND RESEARCH
5. The Committee is happy to note that ILDR had organized a training programme on
Legislative Drafting in which participants from 13 countries of the world participated.
Similar courses may also be run for the participants coming from the different States
including the officers of both the Houses of Parliament and State Legislatures and
reiterates its earlier recommendation that the Institute should devise a proper fee structure
for running these courses. Also that the Institute should not confine itself to imparting
training in the Country only, rather it should think on expanding its area outside India. The
Committee also recommends that the Institute should try to explore means by which
legislative drafting can be made popular and done in other regional languages so that it can
greatly benefited by the State Governments. (Para 5.36)

19
Action Taken Reply
5.1 In this connection, it may be mentioned that since the year 1988, when the cabinet decided
to establish the Institute of Legislative Drafting and Research (ILDR) for the purpose of providing
training for the officers of States and Union territories there is no fees for the trainee officers
coming from States/Union territories. There is no fee for the trainee officers of foreign countries.
Earlier foreign trainees came for two weeks but last year, it reduced to only one week. In fact,
foreign trainees come to the Institute due to and under an arrangement made by the Bureau of
Parliament Affairs. The Institute may take steps for expanding its area when the same starts
functioning in full fledged manner in its own building.
5.2 With regard to legislative drafting in Regional languages, it may be mentioned that,
preparation for providing training for legislative drafting in Hindi in the Institute is under active
consideration by this Department.
Committee’s further observation
5.3 The Committee feels that the Institute would run in full swing only when it gets its own
campus which is yet to be set up. The Committee also feels that institute should make all out
efforts imparting training in other regional languages in addition to Hindi.
Recommendation/observation
CENTRALLY SPONSORED SCHEME RELATING TO INFRASTRUCTURAL FACILITIES FOR
THE JUDICIARY
6. The Committee feels that the Centrally Sponsored Scheme relating to infrastructural
facilities though started with zeal has suffered due to lack of planning. Moreover, State
Governments have failed miserably to provide their share. The Committee therefore
recommends that there should be proper monitoring of the scheme in terms of achievement
of the targets, allocation of funds etc. This is because even the basic infrastructural facilities
like transport and housing are not available to the Judicial Officers at lower judiciary level
and they have to face many difficulties. These infrastructural related issues hamper the
functioning of the Judicial Officers. The Committee, therefore, reiterates its earlier
recommendation that the Ministry should consider all these components seriously and include
them in the perspective plan. The Committee opines that the focus should be on achieving
targets earmarked and relax the means of achieving them in so much as even funding 100%
for the schemes in question and sees no difficulty in development of infrastructure for
transport facilities and then handing it over to the administration branch of State Government
for further regulation so that they can function more effectively. (Para 6.24)
Action Taken Reply
6.1 The development of infrastructure facilities for the judiciary is being implemented as a
Centrally Sponsored Scheme on a 50:50 basis between the Central and State Governments since
the inception of the scheme in 1993-94. Under the scheme, the central share is determined by the
Planning Commission and budget provision for that financial year is provided to the State
Government who are under an obligation to put in from their own resources at least an equal
amount as their share. The Union Territories are not required to match the Central share provided.
The scheme is being continued in the Eleventh Five Year Plan on the same basis as approved by
the Planning Commission, earlier.
6.2 At the stage of finalization of the Eleventh Plan outlay for the scheme, a proposal was made
to the Planning Commission for incorporating a component of transport facilities for the judicial

20
officers as part of the scheme as recommended by the Committee. The Planning Commission has,
however, not included this as part of the scheme.
6.3 The total outlay for the scheme for the Eleventh Five Year Plan is Rs.701.08 crore. This
scheme is exclusively for construction of court buildings and residential accommodation for the
judges and judicial officers. In the period from 1993-94 to 2007-08, an amount of Rs.894.30 crore
had been released to the States and UTs as central share.
6.4 In the year 2007-08 as against a Budget Estimate of Rs.65 crore, Government provided a
total amount of Rs.103.80 crore by making re-appropriation of funds, thus ensuring that the States
have more funds for implementing the scheme.
6.5 The budget provision for 2008-09 is Rs.133 crore which is considerably higher than the
budget provision for the year 2007-08.
6.6 Government attaches utmost importance to the implementation of the scheme and monitors
the utilization of the funds allocated and released to the States/UTs as also the physical progress
through the UCs and progress reports furnished by the States.
Committee’s further observation
6.7 The Committee appreciates the enhanced budget allocation for the current year. The
Committee is however constrained to note that the Department of Justice have not informed the
Committee of measures taken to motivate the State Governments who have failed to contribute their
share under this scheme. The Committee would like to have the information in respect of all the
States covered by this scheme along with the details of monitoring mechanism ensuring the effective
implementation of the scheme; the targets set, their achievements and the expenditure made in the
last three years and the relaxation, if any, given to the States in this regard.
Recommendation/observation
FAMILY COURTS
7. The Committee express its disappointment with the pace of establishment of Family
Courts in the country. It feels that the Ministry should take up the matter with State
Governments and fix a target for establishing at least one Family Court in each district so
as to resolve family disputes and related matters expeditiously and if need be amend the
relevant provision of the Family Court Act, 1984 pertaining to eligibility criteria of
population exceeding one million for setting up of a family court, so that at least one family
court is set up in each district particularly. (Para 6.33)
Action Taken Reply
7.1 In so far as the matter of establishing more Family Courts is concerned, Minister for Law
and Justice has written to the Chief Ministers/Administrators of all State Governments/Union
Territories pursuant to a request received from the Chief Justice of India that Family Courts may
be established in all Districts of the country.
7.2 The Government has also written to the State Governments requesting for the cost
estimates for setting up such Family Courts.
7.3 A number of States and UTs have responded over a period of time. While some Chief
Ministers have informed that they are having the matter looked into, the Governor of Karnataka
informed that the matter was under consideration of the High Court. The Chief Minister of West
Bengal has informed that steps are being taken to establish Family Courts in five Districts in

21
consultation with the High Court of Calcutta, his Government having decided to set up Family
Courts in the remaining Districts. The Chief Minister of Delhi has mentioned that the matter of
setting up of Family Courts is under active consideration of a Committee of Judges in the Delhi
High Court, the premises for setting up of Family Courts at two locations is likely to be ready
shortly. The Chief Minister of Maharashtra has informed that his State agrees in principle to set
up Family Courts in all the Districts and the concerned High Court has identified eleven places
where Family Courts can be set up. The Government of Rajasthan has informed that fourteen
Family Courts are to be set up.
7.4 The Administrator of UT of Andaman and Nicobar Islands has informed that the
infrastructure for a court building for the Family Court has already been built and a proposal is
shortly being submitted for establishing Family Court. The Administrator of the UT of Chandigarh
has informed that they are awaiting the framing of the rules by the State of Punjab that is expected
to be completed shortly.
7.5 The Chief Minister of Arunachal Pradesh has mentioned that the State does not have a
single town or city whose population exceeds one million and also that all family disputes are
settled as per customary and personal law of the indigenous population of Arunachal Pradesh.
Establishment of Family Courts in Arunachal Pradesh is not considered necessary.
7.6 The Government of Goa has mentioned that it has no town or city having a population of
one million. All matters pertaining to family disputes are being dealt with by regular civil courts
(senior divisions) in accordance with the common civil code applicable throughout the State
irrespective of caste, race, religion and that there appeared to be no requirement for establishment
of Family courts in the State of Goa.
Committee’s further observation
7.7 The Committee feels that with this speed, it will take long time to set up at least one family
court in each district. Responses from the State/UT Governments are not very encouraging as only
a very few of them have initiated the process. The Committee impress upon the Department of
Justice to vigorously pursue this issue with all the State and UT Governments to set up family court
in each district. The Committee desires that Government may explore the possibility as to how the
process can be expedited.
Recommendation/observation
PENDENCY OF CASES
8. The Committee notes with concern that year after year, the pendency of cases has
been steadily increasing. The trend is continuing even after taking recourse to other
alternative measures like setting up of fast track courts, family courts and permanent Lok
Adalats. The Committee has also been apprised that the Government has been constantly
reviewing accumulation of the arrears in Courts and the problem is sought to be tackled
by constitution of specialized benches and organizing Lok Adalats at regular intervals;
encouraging alternative modes of disposal, establishing Fast Track Courts even at the level
of Magistrates Court etc. The Committee finds that specialized. (Para 6.42)
8.1 Lok Adalats and Fast Track Courts, though created as an alternative mode of
disposal of arrears of cases, have been suffering due to infrastructural lacunae or financial
constraints and thus are not able to meet the desired targets. The Committee hopes that
with the establishment of Gram Nyayalayas the pendency will come down drastically. The
Committee therefore reiterates its earlier recommendation that the Ministry should
carefully analyze the factors responsible and look for viable solutions in addition to the

22
existing arrangements. The Committee further desires that since the pendency is mounting
by the day despite various measures taken in that regard, the Government, should request
the Law Commission of India to look into the whole gamut of the problem in an holistic
manner with help of ILI and Research Departments of Law Universities and submit its
Report as expeditiously as possible. (Para 6.43)
Action Taken Reply
8.2 The Committee’s recommendation that the Ministry should carefully analyze the factors
responsible for increasing pendency is one which has been the concern of the Government for
quite some time. Various Committees in the past have gone into the question of arrears, delay in
disposal and pendency of cases in courts. The Law Commission has also gone into the question
of pendency of cases in courts and made recommendations in this regard in the 77th and 79th
Report given in 1979 and 124th Report given in 1988. The Terms of Reference of the 18th Law
Commission inter-alia include “to keep under review the system of judicial administration to ensure
that it is responsive to the reasonable demands of the times and in particular to secure elimination
of delays, speedy clearance of arrears and reduction in costs so as to secure quick and economical
disposal of cases without affecting the cardinal principle that decisions should be just and fair”.
In view of this, the matter of requesting the Law Commission to look into the whole gamut of
the problem of pendency in a holistic manner is being examined in the Department.
8.3 Further, the Department has taken up a new Plan scheme which is shortly to be taken up
for approval in the Standing Finance Committee. This scheme proposes a component of studies by
reputed institutions in the country like the Indian Law Institute, research departments of various
Law Universities on different facets of judicial reforms including one on causes of increasing
pendency and measures to be taken to reduce it. This initiative of the Government is likely to fulfil
the Committee’s desire mentioned in Para 6.42.
Committee’s further observation
8.4 The Committee takes note of the initiative taken by the Government to address the problem
of pendency of cases. However, the reply does contain the details of new plan scheme. The
Committee directs the Department of Justice to furnish the details of scheme.
Recommendation/observation
V ACANCY OF JUDGES
9. The Committee notes with concern that there has not been any worthwhile
improvement with regard to filling up of vacancies of Judges in Supreme Court and High
Courts. The Committee impresses upon the Ministry to immediately take steps to fill the
remaining vacancies so that the same can help in reducing the mounting level of cases at
various levels. The Committee, therefore, calls upon the Ministry to come forward with an
alternative like the pre 1993 arrangement by involving the Executive, instead of allowing
the judiciary alone to choose the Judges. The aspirants of various vacancies should be
allowed to apply and appear before the Selection Committee. The closed system prevailing
now is not getting meritorious persons called to the Bench. Transparency, inclusiveness and
merit should be the way of appointing Judges. Till the warrant of appointment is issued by
President of India, it is maintained as secret. It is against democratic principles. The
aspirants’ names, merit and selection process should be made public and transparent,
through the High Court and Supreme Court website. The Report, at various levels in
Departments of Justice and Home and other stages, should be on the website of their
department till the final stage of issuing warrant of appointment. (Para 6.46)

23
Action Taken Reply
9.1 Filling up of vacancies in the High Courts is a continuous process. Vacancies do keep
arising on account of retirement, elevation or resignation of Judges. The Central Government has
been making every effort to fill up the existing vacancies in the Supreme Court and High Court.
The Minister of Law and Justice has been periodically reminding the Chief Justices of the High
Courts, to initiate proposals for filling up all vacant posts of Judges in the High Court. The
proposals received by the Department are processed expeditiously for approval of the competent
authority.
9.2 The existing system of appointment of Judges of Supreme Court and High Courts is in
pursuance of Supreme Court Judgment dated October 6, 1993 in the Supreme Court Advocates-
on Record and Anr vs. Union of India read with the Advisory Opinion of October 28, 1998. Any
change in the present system would require amendment of the Constitution or a review of their
judgment by a larger Bench of Supreme Court. There is at present no proposal before the
Government for bringing any change in the system of appointment of Judges.
9.3 It is the view of the Department as taken in the court that the records of deliberations
between the Chief Justice of India, Minister of Law and Justice, Prime Minister are in the nature
of advice tendered by the Cabinet to the Hon’ble President and hence, being privileged, cannot be
disclosed.
9.4 So far as making the appointment process transparent is concerned, it is the view of the
Department that public disclosure of names of candidates during the appointment process may be
an impediment in the dispassionate consideration of the names.
Committee’s further observation
9.5 The Committee is not convinced with the reply given by the Department of Justice. The
Committee has already addressed the issue of appointment, accountability and transparency in
appointment of Judges of Supreme Court and the High Courts in its 21st Report on ‘Judges
(Inquiry) Bill, 2007’, 27th Report on ‘Action Taken Replies on Law’ s Delays: Arrears in Courts’,
and 28th Report on ‘Supreme Court (Number of Judges) Amendment Bill: 2008’ and impressed
upon the Government to take necessary steps in restoring the pre-1993 arrangement by involving
the executive.
9.6 In its report on ‘Judges (Inquiry) Bill, 2007’ the Committee suggested for bringing a
comprehensive legislation not only providing for the appointments of Judges by entrusting the
appointment to a body other than the collegium with representation both from the judiciary and the
executive. The Committee is of the considered opinion that it could be entrusted to the proposed
“Empowered Committee” which could initially screen the names and thereafter, refer the same to
the National Judicial Council for final recommendations.
9.7 Similarly the Committee in its 27th Report recommended for the restoration of the primacy
of the Executive in the matter so that judicial vacancies are filled up promptly and expeditiously.
9.8 Again in its 29th Report the Committee stressed on the Government to ensure the
compliance to the recommendations of the Committee in its previous Reports. The Department of
Justice while furnishing their action taken reply to the Committee’ s recommendation (para 6. 5)
stated:
“The appointment of Judges of the High Court and Supreme Court is being made in
accordance with the Supreme Court’ s judgment of October 26, 1993  and their Advisory
Opinion of October 28, 1998.  Any Change in the present system may required amendment
of the Constitution. The matter is being examined in the Department.”

24
9.9 The Committee takes note of the reply furnished by the Ministry. It is noteworthy that the
Law Commission of India, in its 214th Report, widely endorsed the recommendations of this
Committee in this regard. The Committee gathers that following the recommendations of the
Committee, the Government is pondering to review the existing system of appointment of Judges
in Supreme Court and High Courts as the collegium system has failed. The Committee strongly feels
this is the time the Government should take initiative. The Committee therefore hopes that
Government will now give due consideration to the Committee’s recommendations made in its
reports to save the judiciary by strengthening transparency and accountability regime to which it
has prime status and respect of the citizens.
Recommendation/observation
INCOME TAX APPELLATE TRIBUNAL [ITAT]
10. While applauding the commitment of the Tribunal in its efforts for reducing the
Pendency of appeals as highlighted in its Annual Report, the Committee expresses its
concern over the wide variation reflected in total number of sanctioned posts and the actual
filled up positions in various levels of services of the Tribunals as can be seen in the
document ‘Detailed Demands for Grants [2008-09]’ of the Ministry of Law and Justice. The
Committee, therefore, is of the view, that si ncere efforts to fill up these vacancies will go
a long way in further improvement of the outcome of the Tribunal. (Para 4.6)
10.1 In this regard the Committee consider that amendments to the Income Tax Appellate
Tribunal Members [Recruitment and Conditions of service] Rules, 1963 is a welcome step
and recommends that the Ministry should amend the Recruitment Rules expeditiously to
meet the requirement of ACC and fill up the vacancies without any further delay and make
concerted efforts to make the additional Benches functional. (Para 4.7)
10.2 As regards, the filling up of vacancies arising on account of retirement of Members
etc., the Committee feels that the Ministry should have anticipated such vacancies and had
taken some measures in advance in case of vacancies arising out of retirement of some
Members, which could have been filled up by the time it arises. The Committee therefore,
strongly observes that the process of filling up vacancies is an ongoing process and such
anticipation must be there well in advance. The Committee therefore, recommends that
such things are unwarranted and should not be repeated again and Ministry should make
all out efforts to fill up the remaining vacancies before submitting the Action Taken
Replies. (Para 4.9)
Action Taken Reply
10.3 As already apprised by this Department, a Note proposing certain amendments to the
Income Tax Appellate Tribunal Members (Recruitm ent and Conditions of service) Rules, 1963 has
been submitted to the Committee of Secretaries on 25.02.2008. The approval to the same is
awaited. The proposal for filling up of vacancies will be undertaken only thereafter.
Committee’s further observation
10.4 The Committee expresses its concern over the inordinate delay in fulfilling the vacancies of
the Members of ITAT. The Committee is not at all satisfied with the pace of action being taken
by the Ministry at their end as the Committee of Secretaries is yet to approve the proposal of the
legislative department. The Committee directs the Ministry to impress upon the Committee of
Secretaries to expedite. In its action taken note, the Ministry should apprise the Committee of the
progress made in this regard.

25
Recommendation/observation
NATIONAL LEGAL SERVICES AUTHORITY [NALSA]
11. The Committee notes that its recommendation in [20th Report on the Demand for
Grants [2008-09], that more and more States and UTs should raise the income-ceiling limit for
providing free legal aid under  NALSA’s Scheme has re sulted in 24 States and 4 UTs raising
the limit to the prescribed level of Rs.50,000 per annum. The Committee, therefore,
reiterates its earlier recommendation (Para 7.7 of the 20th Report) that the Ministry should
speed up the entire process so that the income-ceiling limit throughout the Country remains
uniform and larger number of persons can get benefit under the scheme. (Para 4.16)
Action Taken Reply
11.1 The remaining State Legal Services Authorities have time and again been requested by
NALSA to persuade their respective State Governments for raising the income ceiling limit to
Rs. 50,000/- per annum so that the income ceiling limit remains uniform throughout the country
and larger number of persons can be covered under the legal aid scheme.
Committee’s further observation
11.2 The Committee directs the Ministry to impress upon the NALSA to continue to persuade the
State Governments and then legal services authorities for raising the income ceiling limit to
Rs.50000/- in all the States.
Recommendation/observation
12. The Committee appreciates that its recommendation for raising of fee structure of
Legal Aid Counsel has resulted in revision of fee structure. The Committee, however, feels
the enhancement was not upto the level of competitiveness. The Committee therefore,
recommends that the fee structure of Legal Aid Counsels should be suitably enhanced so
that the experienced and competent lawyers are also attracted and motivated to take up/
accept the cases of the legal aid beneficiaries with full enthusiasm. The Committee feels
that higher fee such as Rs.20,000/- in the case of Sessions Cases which ended in acquittal,
and Rs.5000/- in the case of conviction, will motivate the counsel to work hard in favour
of the accused who cannot afford a lawyer, with all sincerity. Other wise, a meager amount
without accountability, will make the advocate to work mechanically. Moreover, the data on
the result of cases disposed through legal aid should be prepared and reviewed as
performance report for utilization of funds. (Para 4.21)
Action Taken Reply
12.1 V igorous steps are being taken up by the NALSA with regard to revision and rationalization
of fee structure of Legal Aid Counsel for providing competent legal services. The Report containing
recommendations of the Committee constituted for the purpose was earlier sent to the State
Authorities for taking follow up action and compliance. In the meanwhile, the State Authorities have
been requested to provide the necessary input data on the result of the legal aid cases which would
form part of performance appraisal in the matter of utilization of funds.
Committee’s further observation
12.2 The Committee is keen to know the steps taken by NALSA with reference to revision and
rationalization of fee structures along with the follow up action taken by the State authorities. The

26
Committee desires that NALSA may analyse whether it has resulted in competent lawyers assisting
the beneficiaries on the basis of input data made available by the State authorities. The Committee
directs the Ministry to furnish these details to the Committee.
Recommendation/observation
13. The Committee notes that NALSA has launched a laudable mission for legal
empowerment of all the sections of the society, yet certain grey areas need to be addressed
by the Ministry like non-utilization of grants by States Legal Services Authorities therefore
the Ministry should effectively monitor not only utilization of the funds but also
implementation of the schemes and programmes of NALSA. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that the Ministry should send fact-finding teams in the States to have on the
spot study of the schemes and programmes of NALSA and why the actual benefit of this
scheme is not gaining access to the poor litigants. (Para 4.26)
Action Taken Reply
13.1 V arious policies have been formulated and are being implemented keeping in view the
objectives of the Legal Services authorities Act, 1987. Hon’ble Patron-in-Chief, Hon’ble Executive
Chairman, NALSA and the Hon’ble Chairman, Supreme Court Legal Services Committee are
actively involved and monitoring the activities and functioning of the State Authorities. The officials
and representatives of the State/National Authority are usually present at the venue of programmes
to oversee the implementation of Legal Aid Programmes.
Committee’s further observation
13.2 The Committee finds that reply given by the Ministry is not satisfactory as it does not
clearly state to what extent the problem of non-utilisation or under utilisation of grants has been
addressed, what has been the outcome of the initiatives taken by the State authorities. The
information State-wise may be made available to the Committee.
13.3 In its recommendation, the Committee desired to know the reasons why the actual benefit
did not reach to the poor litigants. The Committee should have been informed of the measures
taken by the NALSA or State authorities to achieve the objective of the Legal Services Authorities
Act. The Committee accordingly directs to furnish the requisite information in their action taken
notes.
Recommendation/observation
14. The Committee has been apprised by the Ministry that there is no scope for evolving
any Centrally Sponsored Scheme with component to provide hundred percent funding by the
Centre for operationalising NALSA’s plans since under the provisions of the Legal Services
Authorities Act, 1987 the Central Government is releasing grants to NALSA (Section 14 of
the Act). The Committee feels that the vision with which the various programmes will be
launched by NALSA could be achieved only by way of proper planning. The reason behind
stressing cent percent funding by way of Centrally Sponsored Scheme is that the
programmes launched can be easily monitored, targets set can be achieved, and the
financial crunch should not be a problem. Moreover there will ‘be a vision to achieve the
set targets in a time bound manner. The Committee, therefore, reiterates its earlier
recommendation contained in its 20th Report that if required, necessary changes in the
Legal Services Authorities Act, 1987 may be made for incorporating the idea of evolving any
Centrally Sponsored Scheme with component to provide cent percent funding by the Centre
for operationalising NALSA’s plans. (Para 4.27)

27
Action Taken Reply
14.1 As regards the Hon’ble Committee’s recommendation for cent percent funding of the
various schemes, it is submitted that keeping in view the programmes/schemes being run by
NALSA, in the Budget Estimate for the current financial year i.e. 2008-2009, Rs. 20 crores have
been allocated to NALSA compared to Rs. 17.5 crores in the previous financial year i.e. 2007-2008.
Committee’s further observation
14.2 The Committee feels that allocation of Rs.20 crore may not be enough keeping in view of
the objectives to be achieved under Legal Services Authority Act. The Committee in its earlier
reports also observed that schemes under this Act suffer from lack of uniformity of rates of fee
structure, absence of good and reputed lawyers taking up the care due to poor fee structure, not
providing the uniform criteria for selection of knowledgeable lawyers and State legal authorities
failing in utilizing the grants. It indicates the lack of proper planning and also ineffective
execution of scheme on the part of NALSA and State Legal Services authorities. That was the
reason why Committee suggested for 100% funding by Centre and also for amending the Act, if
needed. The Committee therefore strongly recommends for enhancement of allocation so as to
provide 100% funding and directs the Ministry to take necessary action.
Recommendation/observation
LEGAL EDUCATION AND RESEARCH
15. The Committee feels that the grantee institutions should not confine themselves to
regular issues rather, they should organize/undertake research programmes or projects to
explore new worthwhile areas in their respective fields. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that the Ministry should form a special audit team to do critical appraisal of
working of these institutions. (Para 4.48)
Action Taken Reply
15.1 The Institute of Constitutional and Parliamentary Studies (ICPS) has informed that they have
been undertaking Research on important topics in its thrust areas and contemporary areas of IPRs
and Environment law. Some of the findings are published in the journal. The indicative list of the
areas of research was communicated vide our letter dated March 13, 2008. It includes: Coalition
Governance, Intellectual Property Rights, Political Parties, Grievance Redressal, Environment Law,
Election Reforms and Election Law, Legislative Drafting, Police, Human Rights etc.
15.2 The Indian Law Institute (ILI) is organizing and undertaking research programmes and
projects to explore the new worthwhile areas in their respective fields. Recently the Institute had
completed the research project on ADR: Status and Effectiveness Study and submitted its Report
to Government and to World Bank.
15.3 The Bar Council of India (BCI) is a statutory Regulatory Body of the Legal profession and
Legal Education in the country. BCI is not exclusively devoted to academic pursuits and has many
other functions to carry out as prescribed under the Advocates Act 1961. However, BCI has been
taking effective steps to undertake projects/research programmes. BCI as a preliminary step has
established a Research Library in its premises. This Library is a unique one which is exclusively
devoted to “Judiciary, Legal Profession and Legal Education”. BCI has recently sent out a circular
to all the State Bar Councils in the country enclosing a questionnaire meant for collecting vital data
and information concerning legal profession to enable the Bar Council of India to conduct an
“Empirical Studies” on the legal profession.

28
15.4 The accounts of grantee institutions such as ILI, ICPS and BCI are audited by their
respective Chartered Accountants. Further, the accounts of these institutions are already open for
inspection by C&AG under provision of CAG (DPC) Act, 1971.
Committee’s further observation
15.5 The Committee takes note of the request made by ICPS that the grant-in-aid to the Institute
may be enhanced to Rupees 1.6 crore which may further be raised to three crores after the
construction of the proposed building. They have submitted that this increase is needed for salary
to be granted to Professors, Readers, Lecturers, Administrative Staff; Library and other
miscellaneous expenditure. The Committee recommends that the Ministry should revise the
allocations to the Institute taking into account their requirements.
15.6 The Committee is well aware of the fact that audit of the accounts of these institutions is
carried as per provisions of CAG (DPC) Act, 1971. What the Committee intended was the critical
appraisal of working of these institutions preferably by an outside agency which is, the need of
the hour. The Committee therefore suggests that Ministry should take appropriate steps in this
regard.
INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR ALTERNATIVE DISPUTE RESOLUTION (ICADR)
16. The Committee recommends that the ICADR may frame its proposal for devising
schemes and work out the required expenditure and the Ministry may seek for the
budgetary allocation in the form of Supplementary Demands for grants so as to enable the
ICADR to exploit its utility to the maximum and reiterates its earlier recommendation that
necessary Budgetary provisions for grants-in-aid to ICADR be made for setting up of the
Regional Centers of ICADR in the States, which in turn would not only facilitate in easing
of the arrears in Courts but would also make India the hub of International Arbitration.
To start with, Mumbai, Chennai, Kolkata Regional centres of ICADR should be established
to address the need of commercial dispute Resolution. (Para 4.76)
Action Taken Reply
16.1 ICADR has apprised this Department that the recommendations of the Committee for
devising schemes and working required expenditure will be placed for consideration of the
Governing Council/General Body of ICADR in the ensuing meetings in this year. The ICADR will
definitely require funds of about 25 crores for implementing the various suggestions/
recommendations emanating from the aforesaid Reports of the Indian Law Institute and CEDR. It
may not be out of place to mention that the CEDR in its draft Final Business Plan, have estimated
a total investment of about US $ six million over a period of five years for upgrading the services
of ICADR and promoting arbitration/mediation in India and making ICADR a Centre of excellence.
16.2 In case the funding for setting up the Regional Centres of ICADR in Mumbai, Chennai and
Kolkata is to be made by the Deptt. of Legal Affairs, further funding of about Rs. 5 crores for
each Regional Centre will be required. Out of the said Rs. 5 cores, Rs. 3 crores may be by way
of Corpus Grant and Rs. 2 crores may be for renting of suitable accommodation, setting up and
furnishing of the Regional Centre and employment of suitable staff.
Committee’s further observation
16.3 The Committee takes note of the reply and would like to review the issue at the time of
consideration of DGF for 2009-10.

29
29
CHAPTER-IV
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL
REPLIES OF THE DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE HA VE NOT BEEN RECEIVED
Recommendation/observation
ELECTORS PHOTO IDENTITY CARDS (EPIC)
1. The Committee feels that the Government should immediately issue directions to
mandate EPIC as an all-purpose identity card. The Committee feels that with the
introduction of this multi purpose card one can verify the identity of a person easily. This
move would also encourage that class of urban dwellers who have not shown enthusiasm in
getting the cards made. This card can carry information like card for identification, proof
of residence, citizenship, date of Birth, P AN number etc. The Committee therefore,
recommends that Government should mandate either the proposal of Election Commission
of India for considering EPIC as multi purpose card or ask the Home Ministry to
immediately expand the working on their ambitious project of Multi Purpose Cards through
out India. (Para 5.27)
Action Taken Reply
1.1 The Election Commission agrees with the observation of the Committee.
Committee’s further observation
1.2 The Committee feels that Ministry of Law and Justice should take up the issue with the
concerned Ministry and work out the possibility of printing EPI card as an all purpose card.
Recommendation/observation
THE INSTITUTE OF LEGISLATIVE DRAFTING AND RESEARCH
2. The Committee is unhappy to note that no concrete decision has so far been taken
with regard to construction of building for Institute of Legislative Drafting and Research in
spite of the considerable time that has already lapsed. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that the Ministry should vigorously pursue the matter and ensure that the
vacant land in the ICADR premises should be allotted to the ILDR for construction of its
building without further delay. (Para 5.33)
Action Taken Reply
2.1 In this connection, it may be mentioned that Legislative Department is processing a note,
soliciting approval of the Cabinet for entering in to a Memorandum of Undertaking (MoU) with
International Centre for Alternative Dispute Resolution (ICADR) for construction of building for the
Institute of Legislative Drafting and Research on the vacant land of Plot No. 6, Vasant Kunj
Institutional Area, Phase II, New Delhi – 110070 and shifting of the Institute of Legislative Drafting
and Research from its present location at Shastri Bhawan, New Delhi to ICADR premises.

30
Committee’s further observation
2.2 In its action taken note, the Ministry may inform the Committee of the status of the note
and what action has been taken by Government thereon. The Committee desires the Ministry to
pursue it vigorously.
Recommendation/observation
DELINKING OF DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE FROM THE MINISTRY OF HOME AND
CREATION OF A SEPARATE DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE WITH A FULL TIME SECRETARY
OF JUSTICE
3. The Committee feels that the rationale behind keeping Department of Justice under
the control of Home Secretary was logical at the time when this decision was taken during
the year 1971 but in view and of the drastic changes in last ten fifteen years, the rise in
the incidents of terrorism, birth and growth of naxalism in the country; the growing
complexity of modern crimes, handling natural calamities throughout India are becoming
difficult for the Home Secretary to devote time specifically for the Department other than
the Home. In nearly all the Government Departments there is a separate post of Secretary
to carry out the work of the Department in an efficient manner. Moreover, the Department
of Justice has been assigned a distinct task under the Government of India (Allocation of
Business) Rules, 1961, and the Department has been performing sensitive functions
pertaining to judicial appointments, service conditions of Judges and the administration of
justice. Viewed in this context and also of the fact that there are about 3 crore cases
pending in different Courts and about 100 High Court vacancies are to be filled and
thousands of vacancies exist in subordinate judiciary, thus corroding the faith of the people
in the judicial system, it would be more appropriate if the Department is accorded a distinct
identity including strong administrative structure of its own. It is in this context that the
Committee is of the considered opinion that for the sake of administrative efficiency and
exigency, the Department is separated from the Home Ministry and provided with a full-
fledged Secretary. (Para 6.12)
Action Taken Reply
3.1 The administrative efficiency and the service delivery of the Department of Justice have not
been compromised on account of the Department not having an independent Secretary and the
Home Secretary also being the Secretary of the Department. As has been mentioned earlier in
respect of the 20th Report, though the administrative arrangements of the Department of Justice
are through the Ministry of Home Affairs, the Department of Justice is an independent Department
delinked and separated from the Home Ministry in terms of its functions and functional
independence as also in respect of budgetary allocations for both Plan and Non Plan schemes. The
Department of Justice is implementing Plan and Non Plan schemes for improvements in
administration of justice independent of any restrictive/budgetary control from the Home Ministry.
These schemes are aimed at reducing the pendency of cases in the courts and facilitating
improvements of efficiency of courts. Reduction of pendency is a matter predominantly within the
domain of the judiciary. Filling up vacancies in the subordinate judiciary is a matter with which
State Governments are concerned. These are matters which are not affected by the Department not
having an exclusive separate Secretary. On the contrary since the Ministry of Home Affairs is
responsible for Criminal Laws such as Indian Penal Code and Criminal Procedure Code and for
Prisons, it is advantageous to the Department of Justice to have the Home Secretary also as the
Secretary of Justice, more so as a lot of coordination is often required between the judiciary, the
police as also the prisons. Further the Ministry of Home Affairs is responsible for issuing advisories

31
to the State Governments and thus having the Home Secretary as Secretary (Justice) facilitates
better coordination with State Governments. The fact of the Home Secretary also heading the
Department of Justice as Secretary allows the Department of Justice leverage while dealing with
the other Ministries and Departments of the Government. This considerably facilitates the resolution
of issues and problems for the Department of Justice. The Department of Justice often needs and
use the services of agencies which work under the Ministry of Home Affairs. The fact of Home
Secretary as Secretary (Justice) facilitates cooperation of these agencies in the performance of
tasks assigned to the Department of Justice.
3.2 In view of the above distinct advantages in having the Home Secretary also as Secretary
of the Department of Justice, the Committee is requested not to press for a change in the existing
arrangement.
Committee’s further observation
3.3 The Committee is not in agreement with the view of the Government and still firmly
believes that Department of Justice has to be independent of the control of Ministry of Home
Affairs and needs to be headed by separate Secretary. The Committee is however constrained to
observe that Government has not given any weightage to the Committee’ s recommendations made
in this regard.
3.4 The Committee strongly believes that judicial administration is all together different affair
than the general administration and it needs to be managed by a professional who is exclusively
trained and experienced in handling judicial matters. Contrarily, the Justice Department has been
deprived of independence in managing its own affairs. Instead, the government of India has
preferred to club this department with the Home Ministry depriving to have a separate Secretary,
as nearly all the Government Departments have, to carry out the work of the Department in an
efficient manner and thereby ignoring the distinct task it has to perform under the Government of
India (Allocation of Business) Rules, 1961, and the sensitive functions pertaining to judicial
appointments, service conditions of Judges and the administration of justice.
3.5 The Committee further observes that the Central Government provides for the grants for
development and regulation of judiciary and the funds from International Institutions are also
earmarked for certain institutions/activities. Besides, there is a strong need for making more funds
available to judiciary by enabling the Supreme Courts and the High Courts to generate revenue
themselves which can also be utilized by the subordinate judiciary in the States. Further, the
vacancies in the Supreme Court and the High Courts remain un filled for a long time which needs
to be filled in on the date of retirement as it can be closely monitored and planned in advances.
Judicial reforms have to be implemented. The Committee feels that such matters calls for instant
and continuous involvement of the Head of the Department. The Home Secretary being the incharge
of Internal Security supervises the law and order in the country. Besides this he is involved in
numerous responsibilities like managing natural calamities and because of this he does not find
enough time to manage the affairs of Justice Department. It is in this context the Committee
recommends that Justice Department must be headed not only by separate Secretary but also
professional, exclusively trained in judicial matters.
Recommendation/observation
BENCHES OF THE SUPREME COURT
4. The High Court benches in various places in addition to the State capital is much
appreciated by people for easy accessibility to justice to the poor and needy, on reasonable
expenditure. The Committee is not happy with the persistent opposition for establishing

32
benches of the Supreme Court in other parts of the country without advancing any
convincing reason or justification therefore. Even the Constitution of India makes
provisions for it under Article 130 of the Constitution. The Committee, therefore, endorses
its earlier view that establishment of benches of the Supreme Court atleast in Chennai on
trial basis and then in other parts of the country would be of immense help to the poor who
cannot afford to travel from their native placed to Delhi. The Committee, therefore, feels
that the Ministry should come forward with a necessary Constitutional amendment to
address this deadlock. (Para 6.51)
Action Taken Reply
4.1 Article 130 of the Constitution provides that “the Supreme Court shall sit in Delhi or in such
other place or places as the Chief Justice of India may, with the approval of the President, from
time to time, appoint”.
4.2 The matter of setting up of Supreme Court Benches outside Delhi has been taken up the
Chief Justices of India from time to time, However, the Supreme Court has not agreed to setting
up of Bench of Supreme Court at any place outside Delhi. The Chief Justice of India, in his letter
dated 12th August, 2007, informed that after reconsideration of the matter, the Full Court, in its
meeting held on 7th  August 2007, found no justification for deviating from its earlier resolutions
on the subject.
4.3 The Supreme Court of India have recently introduced a system enabling the Advocates-on-
Record/petitioner-in-person to file cases in the Supreme Court of India through internet to obviate
the difficulties faced by the litigants.
4.4 The recommendation of the Committee is being examined in consultation with the Ministry
of Law and Justice.
Committee’s further observation
4.5 The Committee reiterates its recommendations vide para 6.51  of 26th Report. However, the
report and action taken as per para 4 of the action taken reply is awaited. The Committee will
like to make its observation in the light of that report.
Recommendation/observation
SEPARATE HIGH COURTS FOR NORTH EASTERN STATES
5. In that backdrop, the Committee feels that there is a valid justification for each of
the North Eastern States for a separate High Court in each States. The Committee also
feels that when re-organisation of the North-Eastern region by the North Eastern Area
(Re-organization) Act, 1971 was passed, a common High Court was established for the five
North-Eastern States, i.e. Assam, Nagaland, Manipur, Meghalaya and Tripura and the two
Union Territories (Union Territory of Mizoram and the Union Territory of Arunachal
Pradesh) and called as the Guwahati High Court which was established for administrative
convenience. Though, six outlying benches of the Guwahati High Court were also established
in the other States they are but benches of High Court. Moreover, nearly 3 crore of cases
are pending in different courts of the country which needs immediate attention which has
in turn diffused people’s faith in the judiciary. The law prevailing in the North Eastern
States is mainly the tribal laws existing in that area and mostly uncodified. The Committee,
therefore, recommends that the government may, after thoroughly studying all the issues,
explore the possibility of establishing separate High Courts for each of the North Eastern

33
State which will, in turn play the role of evolving codification of the tribal laws existing
amongst the people of those States. It further feels that such a step would ensure that the
judgments of the High Courts will be treated as precedents, which with passage of time, can
evolve into written law. The interpretations given to the existing uncodified rules/laws by
the High Courts, can in future, be consolidated and this will result in codified laws and
uniformity of judgments. (Para 6.65)
Action Taken Reply
5.1 The recommendation of the Committee regarding establishing separate High Court for each
of the North-Eastern States is being examined.
Committee’s further observation
5.2 The Committee awaits the final decision of the Ministry in the matter and would like to
make its comment in the light of that report.
Recommendation/observation
FAST TRACK COURTS
6. The Committee is of the opinion that, the Department of Justice should devise
concrete ways and means to increase the efficiency of Fast Track Courts. It has come to
the notice of the Committee that Fast Track Courts are very often criticized for taking
decisions in a hurried manner, the Committee impresses upon the Ministry to monitor
performance of Fast Track Courts so that innocent persons are not convicted for the
offences not committed by them. The Committee also recommends that necessary Central
financial support may be accorded to the Fast Track Courts and their numbers may also be
augmented for speedy dispensation of cases. The Committee further exhorts the Ministry
to ensure that the FTCs resort more to fair trials and judgements and not only focus on
raising the statistics of disposal of cases. (Para 6.72)
6.1. ...This has not addressed the future of Judges after the ad-hoc period is over. Hence
Committee recommends to regularize the ad-hoc  judges and make FTC being managed
by the sitting judges rather than ad-hoc Judges, using the funds under the head of FTC.
[Para 6.73]
6.2 The Committee expresses its disappointment that the Fast Track Courts which were
made functional as a major reform initiative to lessen the burden on the already
overburdened Judiciary were not fully functional. The Committee fails to comprehend that
on one hand the Government has made tall claims that the FTCs have played a vital role
in reducing the ever mounting pendency of cases and on the other hand it has allowed some
functioning FTCs to dwindle out to the status of being non-functional and opines that if the
pillars of justice are shaken like this what would be its impact on the over all judicial
system. The Committee directs the Ministry to immediately look into the matter and
ensure that by the time of furnishing the Action Taken Reply all the non-functional FTCs
should start working. The Committee also recommends that in order to make these FTCs
functional, the Government should immediately start providing infrastructure, lucrative
salaries, permanent posts of Judges etc. otherwise the purpose with which it was established
would be defeated. (Para 6.75)
Action Taken Reply
6.3 The Government provides financial assistance to the State Governments for Fast Track

34
Courts (FTCs) and also has commenced providing support for enabling the judges with laptop
computers, broadband/dial-up connectivity for accessing the internet and has taken up both training
of both judicial officers and the staff in the courts with the overall view of improving the
efficiency in the courts including the FTCs.
6.4 The Government is committed to providing financial support to the FTCs upto 2010 and
also to facilitate improvement of court efficiency through application of Information and
Communication Technology.
6.5 The individual performance of the Judges of the FTCs and judgement delivery is a matter
outside the domain of the Government being entirely with the respective High Courts. The
Committee’s feelings on the issue of fair trials and judgements in the FTCs are, however, being
brought to the notice of the Chief Justices of the High Courts.
6.6 Judges of the Fast Track Courts (FTCs) are appointed by the State Governments in
consultation with the concerned High Courts in accordance with the directions given by the
Hon’ble Supreme Court in the Brij Mohan Lal case. The scheme of FTCs is presently up to
31.3.2010 a date up to which the Central Government will provide funds to the States.
6.7 State Governments have been requested to make all the non-functional FTCs functional on
priority basis. Financial assistance is being provided for FTCs as per the norms of the scheme
approved by Government on the lines of the recommendations of the Finance Commission. The
number of FTCs being assisted by the Central Government is restricted to 1562 i.e. the number
of FTCs operational on 31.3.2005.
Committee’s further observation
6.8 The Committee takes note of the reply furnished by the Department of Justice but is
constrained to observe that impact of FTCs is far from satisfactory. The desired results are yet to
be achieved. The Committee apprehends that with this pace of performance the status of pendency
is hardly going to clear by the year 2010. Hence there is need to augment the number of FTCs.
6.9 The Committee agrees that performance of FTCs comes within the domain of respective
HCs. The Committee wishes that Department of Justice continue to pursue with the respective State
Governments and HCs to ensure that FTCs not only expedite disposal of cases but also ensure fair
trial.
Recommendation/observation
RETIREMENT AGE OF JUDGES
7. The Committee therefore, reiterates its earlier recommendation that Government
should immediately bring forward a Constitutional Amendment Bill to raise the retirement
age of Judges of High Courts from 62 to 65 i.e. at par with the retirement age of Judges
of the Supreme Court without any further delay. (Para 6.81)
Action Taken Reply
7.1 The concerned Departments have been consulted on this issue and the proposal is currently
under examination for seeking Government’s approval.
Committee’s further observation
7.2 The Committee will like to comment only after the final reply of the Government is
received.

35
Recommendation/observation
LANGUAGE OF THE COURTS
8. The Committee feels that the Chief Justice of India had rejected the proposal
without considering the benefits for those people who are poor, living in rural areas and who
cannot afford education and cannot speak any language other than their mother tongue.
The Committee feels that these factors should be borne in mind while making any
observation. Even Tamil language also contains legal terms/terminologies and the
Constitution of India has been translated in Tamil. Since the matter has been referred to
the Law Secretary for his comments, the Committee would appreciate if the Ministry would
furnish details thereof at the time Action Taken Reply by implementing the
recommendation. (Para 6.89)
Action Taken Reply
8.1 Department of Justice has again requested Department of Legal Affairs to provide their
comments on the subject matter which are still awaited. As soon as comments are received from
the D/o Legal Affairs, further necessary action will be taken.
Committee’s further observation
8.2 The Committee awaits the final reply of the Government and will like to make observation
after the receipt thereof.
Recommendation/observation
ALL INDIA JUDICIAL SERVICE
9. The Committee notes the views of the States for establishment of All India Judicial
Service as furnished so far. However, the Committee is of the view that creation of All
India Judicial Service on the line of Civil Services Examination in the country will attract
the best of talent in the country to join the prestigious Indian Judicial System and will
naturally improve upon the deteriorating quality of language used in judgments delivered
these days by the Courts excluding the Apex Court. The Committee also notes that the Law
Commission of India had in its 1st, 8th and 11th Reports had inter-alia recommended the
formation of All India Judicial Service and even the Supreme Court of India had also
recommended vide its judgments delivered on 13th November, 1991 in W.P. No.1022 of 1989
and 24th August, 1993 in Review Petition No.249/92 in the matter of All India Judges
Association for setting up of an All India Judicial Service in the country. The Committee
reiterates its earlier recommendation that all out efforts, including an amendment in the
Constitution, if necessary, may be taken up expeditiously to set up All India Judicial
Service. Till the consensus is arrived by the States and High Courts, the selection at State
level by the participation of Judicial Member, Pradesh Public Service Commission Member
and State should be formulated and followed uniformly in all States. This State Judicial
Services will further blossom as National Judicial Services for all National, Regional
Tribunal Chairman and Member appointments of various discipline. (Para 6.96)
Action Taken Reply
9.1 The suggestion that “till the consensus is arrived by the States and High Courts, the
selection at State level by the participation of Judicial Member, Pradesh Public Service Commission
Member and State should be formulated and followed uniformly in all States” is presently under
examination.

36
Committee’s further observation
9.2 The Committee awaits the final reply and would like to comment after the receipt of the same.
Recommendation/observation
NATIONAL JUDICIAL ACADEMY
10. The Committee expresses its anguish that despite its recommendations as contained
in its 15th Report and 20th Report, the NJA has so far failed to furnish its comments in
respect of the adverse observations/queries made by the Statutory Auditors in their Audit
Report. The Committee reiterates that the NJA should furnish its comments expeditiously.
(Para 6.36)
10.1 The Committee further feels that National Judicial Academy, which imparts training
to the judicial officers, court administrators and ministerial officers of the Supreme Court,
should open its gates/run programmes for Government officers dealing with administration
of justice. (Para 6.37)
10.2 The Committee is constrained to note that the grants given to the National Judicial
Academy were not fully utilised and were kept in a bank. The Committee desires that
the grants given in the year for a particular purpose must be utilized to its optimum.
(Para 6.38)
Action Taken Reply
10.3 The above recommendations/views of the Committee have been forwarded to the National
Judicial Academy for appropriate action.
Committee’s further observation
10.4 The direct the Department of Justice to pursue with the National Judicial Academy and
apprise the Committee of action taken in the matter.
Recommendation/observation
LOK ADALATS
11. In so far as the observation in Para 6.36 is concerned, the National Judicial Academy
(NJA) has commented that it is making efforts to furnish its comments to the Auditors.
(Para 6.36)
11.1 The NJA has informed that the amendment of the NJA Memorandum of Association
to include training of Government officers dealing with the administration of justice is not
currently envisaged as NJA is now focusing on fulfilling its core mandate. However, NJA will
continue to involve, as appropriate, Government officers in NJA academic programmes for
the judiciary in the capacity of resource persons and experts and foster a dialogue amongst
all of them on administration of justice. As part of NJA’s research and policy development
work, NJA has also held conferences and sponsored programmes along with Government
agencies in which such Government officials have participated. This will continue. In the
longer term, NJA will consider expanding its activities to provide training to other officials
involved in the administration of justice. (Para 6.37)
11.2 The NJA has informed that the comment is fully accepted and all necessary action
is being taken to comply with it. NJA has a clearly identified programme to utilize available

37
funds and a time table to complete utilization as much as possible within the current
financial year has been drawn. However, approval procedures required to be followed by
NJA take their own time. NJA will do its part in ensuring expeditious utilization of funds.
(Para 6.38)
Committee’s further observation
11.3 The Committee is constrained to note that NJA is yet to furnish the comments to the
statutory authority and wonders how long it will take to do so. This is a reflection on the State
of affairs in NJA. The Committee directs the Department of Justice to impress upon NJA to
expedite the matter.
11.4 The Committee also expresses its concern over the non-utilisation of funds by NJA and
impress upon it to rationalise its procedures to avoid delay in taking decision. The Committee
further directs the Department of Justice to advise/assist the NJA in improving its procedures so
that funds are not only properly utilised but also within the stipulated time. The Committee would
like to apprise of the steps taken by Department of Justice and NJA in this regard.
Recommendation/observation
12. The Committee notes that some States could not establish permanent Lok Adalats
due to paucity of funds and infrastructure. It is of the view that Government should explore
the possibility of establishing permanent Lok Adalats in all the States, so that common man
has access to speedy, inexpensive and substantial justice. (Para 4.36)
Action Taken Reply
12.1 The remaining State Legal Services Authorities have been directed by NALSA to take
necessary steps and persuade their respective State Governments for creation of infrastructural
facilities for establishment of Permanent Lok Adalats for Public Utility Services under the said Act.
Committee’s further observation
12.3 The Committee directs the Ministry to apprise the Committee of the steps taken by NALSA
along with the outcome thereof while furnishing the ATN.
Recommendation/observation
BAR COUNCIL OF INDIA
13. The Committee also recommends that in order to check the mushrooming of law
colleges coming up in different parts of the country and to maintain the standard of legal
education in India, the Bar Council should take immediate steps like uniform system of law
examination in the country, etc., with this the Committee believes that the deteriorating
standard of legal education in India can be checked to some extent. If possible, the proper
training for the lawyers who entered the profession may be given after according degree and
after enrolling in the Bar. (Para 4.56)
Action Taken Reply
13.1 It is certainly necessary to check the mushrooming of law colleges in the country. Bar
Council of India is taking all possible steps to put a break to this tendency. State Governments are
also responsible for mushroom growth of law colleges as the State Governments under political or

38
other compulsions forced to grant NoC to institutions which lack basic infrastructural facilities
and’” the Universities without taking these short comings into proper consideration grant affiliation
to such institutions.
13.2 When the matters come before the Bar Council of India it becomes difficult for the Council
to deal with these colleges as they resort to litigation. In spite of this unpleasant situation, Bar
Council of India has been taking utmost care in granting approval of affiliation to new law colleges.
BCI’s policy is to weed out sub-standard law colleges and establish only institutions which have
adequate infrastructure for imparting proper legal education. They have been advocating for
reintroduction of training for law graduates before their enrolment. In fact they had introduced
such a scheme some time ago but the scheme was challenged in various High Courts in the
country and ultimately the Hon’ble Supreme Court struck down the scheme on the ground that the
Advocates Act does not empower the Bar Council of India to prescribe a training programme for
law graduates as a pre condition for enrolment. Bar Council of India suggests that necessary
amendments in the advocates Act be carried out to enable the re- introduction of pre enrolment
training to the law graduates.
Committee’s further observation
13.3 The Committee expresses its concern over the deteriorating standard of legal education
throughout the country and is not satisfied by the efforts being made for improving the standard.
The Committee strongly feels that Bar Council of India has a definite role to play in checking the
mushrooming growth of Law Colleges without adequate infrastructure. The BCI must not allow such
colleges to have affiliation with it. BCI should also approach the State Governments impressing
upon them to check the growth of such colleges.
13.4 As regards the issue of training for the lawyers before entering the profession, the Committee
impresses upon the Ministry to bring out a bill proposing requisite amendment in Advocates Act.
Recommendation/observation
INSTITUTE OF CONSTITUTIONAL AND PARLIAMENTARY STUDIES (ICPS)
14. As it appears, there is total lack of co-ordination between the Ministry and the ICPS,
which is disappointed. The Committee, therefore, exhorts the Ministry that it should take
all out efforts to bridge cordial co-ordination with agencies under its administrative control.
The Committee recommends that the Ministry should take up the issue with the concerned
agencies and the Secretariats of Parliament who are facing space crunch and may share the
costs in case some space is provided to them and ensure that the construction work is
started at the earliest. The Committee also direct Ministry to furnish a status report at the
time of Action Taken Reply. The Committee further recommends that Institute of
Constitutional and Parliamentary Studies (ICPS) should regularly organize capsule courses
in Parliamentary Privileges, Debates, Questions etc. for the benefit of newly elected
Member of Parliament. (Para 4.61)
Action Taken Reply
14.1 ICPS Building — As this Department has already informed to Hon’ble Committee that a
meeting was held on 14.08.2007 by the Department of Legal Affairs with ICPS in association with
the officers of  Land and Development office, M/o Urban Development, Legislative Department and
officer of integrated Finance Wing of Ministry of Law and Justice to discuss the further course
of action in respect of construction of ICPS building and arrangement for the sharing of the space.
The meeting ended with the understanding that a detailed proposal for Grant-in-aid in this regard

39
will be submitted by the ICPS which will be considered in this Department as per the rules relating
to Grant-in-aid. The ICPS has recently submitted a draft EFC proposal for sanction of funds for
construction of building for ICPS in some detail to this Department on June 17, 2008. The same
is being examined in this Department.
14.2 Capsule Courses– As recommended by the Committee, ICPS has planned to organize
following capsule courses for the benefit of elected MPs. It is proposed to invite senior — i.e.,
three time MPs or those who have already volunteered, to lecture.
14.3 The secretarial assistance in preparation of materials is being explored before the dates can
be finalized. If ICPS get relevant authorizations and funds from within or outside the Institute, they
may be able to hold the programmes as follows:
Topic T entative Dates
1. Parliamentary Privileges During Monsoon Session — August – September, 2008
2. Questions and Debates During Winter Session — December, 2008
3. Election Laws Budget Session — February, 2009
Committee’s further observation
14.4 The Committee takes note of the status report on the action taken in respect of construction
of building for ICPS. However, the Committee is worried over the inordinate time being taken by
the Ministry in the matter. The Committee would like to review the progress in the matter at the time
of consideration of demands for grants of the Ministry. The Committee hopes that by then the
Ministry would approve the EPC proposal for sanction of funds for construction of ICPS building.
14.5 The Committee in its meeting held on 4th December, 2008 heard the Secretary, Legislative
Department and Director, ICPS and impressed upon them to take initiative in the matter. In the
course of deliberation, the Secretary stated that ICPS would be given money for the preparation
of the plan of the building and that token money will be given after the procedural clearance by
the Standing Finance Committee. The Director, ICPS stated that ICPS was agreeable to share the
space with Law Ministry/Parliament against rent as determined by CPWD norms instead of market
rent which would be exorbitant seeing the location of plot. The Committee recommends that the
Ministry and ICPS should arrive at a consensus on this issue at the earliest in order to ensure that
the functioning of ICPS does not suffer due to space crunch.
14.6 The Committee heard the Secretary, Ministry of Urban Development on 16th December, 2008
on the issue of allotment of land to ICPS. The Secretary informed the Committee that land was
handed over to the Institute in 1976 and possession was handed over to them. As per the terms
and conditions of the lease deed, the Institute was given two years’ time to construct the building.
Thereafter, the ICPS was granted extension of time for fourteen times, the last being upto
20th March, 2008 for completing the construction of the building. The Institute has sought further
extension for three years, which is pending before the Ministry of Urban Development.
14.7 The Director, ICPS then apprised the Committee that they had already entrusted the task of
preparation of maps and drawings to the School of Planning and Architecture, which is scheduled
to complete the job by 15th January, 2008. Besides, the Ministry of Law and Justice has also
assured to assist and provide requisite funds for the building.
14.8 The Committee expects that the Ministry of Urban Development will facilitate the ICPS and
Ministry of Law and Justice in the construction of their building and accordingly consider their
further request for extension of time.

40
Recommendation/observation
MUSHROOMING OF ARBITRATION CENTRES IN INDIA
15. The Government should direct that all departments and PSEs should refer ICADR as
arbitrator in the Arbitration clause in the event of dispute between the parties in the
commercial contracts entered between them. More so, dual role played by working officials
as arbitrators should be converted as reference to ICADR. (Para 4.83)
Action Taken Reply
15.1 In pursuance of a decision taken in the meeting of Committee of Secretaries held on
4th March 2008, instructions have been issued to all ministries/departments relating to settlement
of commercial disputes between Government. Departments/Public Undertakings and private parties
recommending utilization of the services of ICADR vide this Department’s OM No.F.32(2)/05-Judl.
Dated 24.04.2008 (copy enclosed).
Committee’s further observation
15.2 The Committee wishes that the Ministry should continuously impress upon the Ministries/
Government Departments and also the PSEs to refer ICADR in respect of dispute arising with their
parties.

41
MINUTES

42

43
43
IX
NINTH MEETING
The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public
Grievances, Law and Justice met at 3.00 P.M. on Thursday, the 16th December, 2008, in
Committee Room ‘A’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
1. Dr. E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Virendra Bhatia
3. Shrimati Brinda Karat
LOK SABHA
4. Shri Chhattar Singh Darbar
5. Shrimati Tejasvini Gowda
6. Shri S. K. Kharventhan
7. Dr. C. Krishnan
8. Shri Shailendra Kumar
9. Shri Bhupendrasinh Solanki
10. Shrimati Krishna Tirath
11. Shri Devendra Prasad Yadav
SECRETARIAT
Shri Sham Sher Singh, Joint Secretary
Shri K.P. Singh, Joint Director
Shri K.N. Earendra Kumar, Deputy Director
Shrimati Niangkhannem Guite, Committee Officer
WITNESSES
I. Ministry of Urban Development (Land and Development Office)
1. Dr. M. Ramachandran, Secretary
2. Dr. M.M. Kutty, Joint Secretary (D&L)
3. Shri Rajesh Kumar Sinha, Land and Development Officer.
II. Ministry of Law and Justice (Department of Legal Affairs)
Shri M.A. Khan Yusufi, Joint Secretary and Legal Advisor.
III. Institute of Constitutional and Parliamentary Studies (ICPS)
1. Prof. Ashwani K.R. Bansal, Hony, Director
2. Shri K. Anand Singh, Hony. Treasurer

44
3. Dr. Ravindra Singh, ARO
IV. * * *
V. Ministry of Law and Justice (Legislative Department)
Shri Diwakar Singh, Deputy Legislative Counsel.
A. ATRs regarding construction of building for ICPS in land allotted in Chanakya Puri
area
2. At the outset, Chairman welcomed the Secretary, Ministry of Urban Development and his
colleagues, Hony. Director, ICPS and representative of Department of Legal Affairs. He, then
invited Secretary, Ministry of Urban Department to make his presentation.
3. Secretary, Ministry of Urban Development gave a brief overview of the issue highlighting
on the aspects relating to allotment, purpose and capacity of the allottees, guidelines followed for
the purpose of delay in construction, etc. Director, ICPS also apprised the Committee of their
position in the matter. Then Members sought certain clarifications on various issues which were
responded to by the witnesses.
(The witnesses then withdrew)
B. ** *
4. * * *
5. * * *
C. Consideration and adoption of draft 31st and 32nd Report
6. The Committee considered the draft 31st and 32nd Reports of the Committee on the Action
Taken Replies on 25th and 26th Reports of the Committee, respectively. After a brief discussion,
the draft 31st and 32nd Reports were adopted. The Committee authorized Chairman, and in his
absence, Shrimati Brinda Karat to present the Reports in Rajya Sabha and Dr. C. Krishnan, and in
his absence, Shrimati Tejaswini Gowda to lay the same in Lok Sabha on 19th December, 2008.
D. ** *
7. * * *
8. * * *
9. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
10. The meeting adjourned at 4.15 
P.M. to meet again on 29th December, 2008.
*** Relate to some other matters.

Printed at : Bengal Offset Works, 335, Khajoor Road, Karol Bagh, New Delhi-110005.