 
 
 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON PERSONNEL, 
PUBLIC GRIEVANCES, LAW AND JUSTICE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
September, 2020 /Bhadra 1942 (Saka) 
 
 
REPORT NO. 
105 
ONE HUNDRED FIFTH REPORT 
ON 
ACTION TAKEN ON ONE HUNDRED FIRST REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
ON DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2020-21) 
PERTAINING TO 
THE MINISTRY OF LAW AND JUSTICE 
 
(Presented to Hon'ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha on 11th September, 2020) 
 (Forwarded to Hon'ble Speaker, Lok Sabha on 11th September, 2020) 
 
(Laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 18th September, 2020) 
 (Laid on the Table of  Lok Sabha on 18th September, 2020) 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Website : http://rajya sabha.nic.in 
E-mail : rs-cpers@sansad.nic.in 

 
 
CS (P & L) - 209 
 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON PERSONNEL, PUBLIC GRIEVANCES, LAW AND JUSTICE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
September, 2020 /Bhadra 1942 (Saka) 
ONE HUNDRED FIFTH REPORT 
ON 
ACTION TAKEN ON ONE HUNDRED FIRST REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
ON DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2020-21) 
PERTAINING TO 
THE MINISTRY OF LAW AND JUSTICE 
 
(Presented to Hon'ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha on 11th September, 2020) 
 (Forwarded to Hon'ble Speaker, Lok Sabha on 11th September, 2020) 
 
(Laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 18th September, 2020) 
 (Laid on the Table of  Lok Sabha on 18th September, 2020) 
 
 
( 
 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on …………., 2020) 

 
 
C O N T E N T S 
 
PAGES 
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE                                                                              (i) 
 
2. INTRODUCTION                                                                                                                  (ii)     
 
3. ACRONYMS                                                                                                                         (iii) 
 
4. REPORT                                                                                                                                1-46 
(i) CHAPTER I                                                                                                          
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY 
THE MINISTRY 
(ii) CHAPTER II                                                                                                             
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES GIVEN BY THE MINISTRY 
(iii) CHAPTER III                                                                                                            
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH COMMITTEE 
HAS NOT ACCEPTED REPLIES OF THE MINISTRY  
(iv) CHAPTER IV                                                                                                           
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES 
OF THE MINISTRY HAVE NOT BEEN RECEIVED 
 
5. RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE AT A GLANCE                               47-53 
 
*6. RELEVANT MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF THE COMMITTEE                                               54-55 
 
7. ANNEXURES                                                                                                                                                    56-69
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
*To be appended at later stage. 

 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2019-20) 
 
1. Shri Bhupender Yadav              ⎯     Chairman 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Naresh Gujral 
3. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Ray 
4. Shri Shiv Pratap Shukla 
5. Shri Vivek K. Tankha 
6. Shri P. Wilson 
7. *Shri Abhay Bharadwaj 
8. *Shri Rajendra Gehlot 
9. *Shri K. R. Suresh Reddy 
10. *Shri Deepender Singh Hooda 
 
LOK SABHA 
11. Shri Pradan Baruah 
12. Shri Pradeep Kumar Chaudhary 
13. Shri Vinod LakhamshiChavda 
14. Shri MohanbhaiSanjibhaiDelkar 
15. Shri P. P. Mohammed Faizal 
16. Shri Jasbir Singh Gill 
17. Shri Chowdhury Mohan Jatua 
18. Shri Suresh Kumar Kashyap  
19. Shri Mohammad Akbar Lone 
20. Shri Jyotirmay Singh Mahato 
21. Shri B. Manickam Tagore 
22. Shri Malook Nagar 
23. Shri Chirag Paswan 
24. Shri Suresh Pujari 
25. Shri A. Raja  
26. Shri Omprakash Bhupalsinh alias Pawan Rajenimbalkar 
27. Shri Upendra Singh Rawat 
28. Shrimati Sandhya Ray 
29. Shri Kuldeep Rai Sharma 
30. Shri Mahendra Singh Solanky 
31. Vacant 
 
SECRETARIAT 
Dr. P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Secretary 
Shri Pradeep Chaturvedi, Joint Secretary 
Shri Mahesh Tiwari, Director 
Shri Ashok Kumar Sahoo, Director 
Shri Goutam Kumar, Deputy Secretary 
Shri Anurag Ranjan, Under Secretary 
Shri Mohammad Amin Ansari, Assistant Research Officer 
 
____________________________ 
Nominated w.e.f. 23rd July, 2020 
(i) 

 
 
INTRODUCTION 
I, the Chairman of the Department related Parliamentary Standing Committee on 
Personnel, Public Grievances, Law and Justice, having been authorized by the Committee to 
present the Report on its behalf, do hereby present this One Hundred Fifth Report on Action 
Taken on One Hundred First Report of the Committee on Demands for Grants (2020-21) 
pertaining to the Ministry of Law and Justice. 
2. The One Hundred First Report of the Department related Parliamentary Standing 
Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions, Law and Justice was presented to 
Rajya Sabha and laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 6th March, 2020.  
3. The Legislative Department, Department of Justice and Department of Legal Affairs  
of the Ministry of Law and Justice furnished the ir Action Taken Replies on the One Hundred 
First Report of the Committee on 1 st June, 14 th July, and 8 th August, 2020, respectively. 
Further, Action Taken Replies of the Supreme Court of India and the Election Commission of 
India were received on the 4 th and 16th June, 2020, respectively. The Committee considered 
the draft One Hundred Third  Report and adopted the same in its meeting held on 8th 
September, 2020. 
4. For the facility of reference and convenience, the observations and recommendations 
of the Committee have been printed in bold letters in the body of the Report. 
 
 
 
New Delhi    BHUPENDER YADAV 
8th September 2020 Chairman, 
 Department-related Parliamentary Standing  
 Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances, 
                                                                                                                            Law and Justice 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(ii) 

 
 
 
 
CRONYMS 
 
 
A2J  Access to Justice 
ADR  Alternate Dispute Resolution 
AIJS  All India Judicial Service 
ATR  Action Taken Report 
BCI  Bar Council of India 
CoS Committee of Secretaries  
CSS  Centrally Sponsored Scheme  
ECI  Election Commission of India  
ECIL   Electronics Corporation of India Limited 
EPIC Electoral Photo Identity Cards 
EVMs Electronic Voting Machines  
ICT  Information and Communication Technology 
ILDR  Institute of Legislative and Drafting Research  
ILI  Indian Law Institute 
ITAT  Income Tax Appellate Tribunal 
LAN  Local Area Network  
NALSA  National Legal Services Authority 
NIC  National Informatics Centre 
NJA  National Judicial Academy 
OLW  Official Language Wing  
SLP  State Litigation Policy  
SPV  Special Purpose Vehicle  
UC Utilization Certificate  
WAN  Wide Area Network 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iii) 

1 
 
REPORT 
 The Action Taken Report of the Committee deals with the action taken by the 
Ministry of Law and Justice on the recommendations/observations of the Department -
related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances, Law and 
Justice contained in its One Hundred First Report on the Demands for Grants (2020 -
21) of the Ministry. The Report was presented to Rajya Sabha and laid on the Table of 
Lok Sabha on the 6th March, 2020.  
2. The Committee had made as many as 54 recommendations/observations in its 
One Hundred First Report. Replies of the Ministry of Law and Justice thereto have 
been categorized and scrutinized under four chapters on the basis of satisfaction of the 
Committee. Final replies in respect of three recommendations/observations are 
awaited from Departments of the Ministry. Further, five paras i.e., para nos. 2.12, 
2.28, 3.56, 3.67, and 5.20 of the report on the Demand for Grants (2020 -21), Ministry 
of Law and Justice relates to general observations of the Committee on the 
functioning of Departments/Supreme Court of India/Election Commission of India. 
Out of 46 recommendations where final replies have been received as many as 26 (57 
percent approximately) of total recommendations are satisfactory. 
3. The recommendations/observations of  the Committee have been accepted by 
the Ministry contained under paras 2.36, 2.39, 2.59, 3.14, 3.18, 3.27, 3.31, 3.39, 3.46, 
3.55, 3.68, 4.11, 4.13 and 5.4 of the Report. The Committee is pleased to note that the 
Ministry has accepted its recommendations.  Those are dealt under Chapter -I of the 
Report. 
4. The recommendations/observations which the Committee does not desire to 
pursue in view of the replies given by the Ministry relates to paras 2.11, 2.44, 2.51, 
3.28, 3.64, 3.65, 4.17, 4.18, 4.25, 4.32, 5.21  and 5.30 of the Report. The Committee 
has accepted the explanations furnished by the Ministry and does not wish to pursue 
those further as of now, under chapter II of the Report. 
5. The recommendations/observations in respect of which Committee has not 
accepted replies given by the Ministry. T hose are under  paras 2.53, 2.42, 3.13, 3.15, 
3.22, 3.26, 3.29, 3.35, 3.45, 3.50, 3.54, 4.10, 4.12, 4.14, 4.24, 4.36, 5.3, 5.6, 5.14 and 
5.28 of the Report. The Committee expresses its concern over non -acceptance of it s 
recommendations.  Those are dealt under Chapter – III of this Report and reiterates its 
recommendations.  
6. The recommendations/observations on which final replies of the Ministry of Law 
and Justice have not been received  relate to paras 2.19, 2.23 and 4.20 of the Report. 
The Committee asked the Ministry to furnish the final replies to these paras at the 
earliest, under Chapter IV of the Report. 
  

2 
 
CHAPTER - I 
RECOMMENDATIONS / OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN 
ACCEPTED BY THE MINISTRY 
DEPARTMENT OF LEGAL AFFAIRS 
Recommendation/Observation of the Committee 
1. It was also pointed out that notaries appointed under central quota are not 
evenly distributed in the State. Some of the districts are over - represented while some 
of the districts are under -represented. The Committee, therefore, desires that while 
making appointment, focus should be given to appoint notaries in those districts of the 
State, which are under-represented or not represented.                               (Para 4.11) 
Action Taken / proposed to be taken by the Department 
1.1 The Notary Cell of t his Department is appointing Notaries for taluka, district 
level in each of the State, however the Notary Cell is deeply examining the issue of 
even distribution of central quotas of notaries in respective State/UT. In the 
forthcoming exercise for holding interviews for selection of notaries in various 
States/UTs, it will be ensured that notaries are appointed in under-represented districts 
which have fairly less number of notaries. The applications will be scrutinized 
minutely to ensure that under - represented districts will also have sufficient strength 
of notaries public, so that public will not have to travel towards cities/districts for 
notary work.  
Committee’s further observation 
1.2 The Committee notes the reply of the Department . The Committee feels  
that under representation of notaries in certain Talukas/ Districts affects the 
justice delivery process at grassroots level and desires to be apprised of the 
outcomes of actions/ initiatives undertaken to appoint notaries from under 
represented Districts and States in its Action Taken Notes.  
Recommendation/Observation of the Committee 
1.3 The Committee, therefore, desires that while making appointment due 
consideration should be given to inclusiveness of the notaries and desires that the 
Department should furnish the data of social category of notaries to the Committee 
while submitting its Action Taken Replies.                                     (Para 4.13) 
Action Taken/proposed to be taken by the Department 
1.4 In terms of Rule 3 of the Notaries Rules, 1956, persons who had been 
practicing for at least ten years are eligible for appointment as notary. Persons 
belonging to Scheduled Castes/Scheduled Tribes and other backward classes who had 
been practicing for at least seven years are eligible for appointment as notary. Further, 
women who had been practicing for at least seven years are also eligible for 
appointment as notary.  In the selection process for notaries, members of the interview 
boards give due weightage to each of the above noted categories. B esides these, 

3 
 
reasonable due representation are also given to senior citizens, physically challenged 
persons. 
1.5   In the year 2018 -19, a total number of 8960 notaries were appointed by the 
Central Government, which included 963 belonging to Scheduled Caste, 76 belonging 
to Scheduled Tribes and 3530 belonging to OBC category. 
Committee’s further observation  
1.6 The Committee is pleased to note that the Department is following policies of 
positive discrimination while considering appointment of notaries.  
DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE 
Recommendation/Observation of the Committee 
1.7 The Committee observes that both act ual requirements and expenses of 
National Judicial Academy (NJA) are more than allocations for the last few years. 
The Committee notes that the NJA is a premier institution of the country for the 
training of judges of Higher Judiciary, judges of neighborin g countries, /District 
Courts and Tribunals, etc. and plays an important role in leveraging soft power of the 
country in the field of judicial training and research. The Committee, accordingly, 
recommends the Department to approach Ministry of Finance for enhanced 
allocations to NJA as approved by it at RE stage during the Financial Year 2020 -21, 
so that on -going training and research activities of the Academy are not hampered 
due to financial constraints. The action taken on the recommendations of the 
Committee may be apprised by the Department in its Action Taken Replies.  
                                                             (Para 2.36) 
Action Taken / proposed to be taken by the Department 
 
1.8 The observations of the Committee have been noted and necessary action will 
be taken at the time of formulation of Budget proposals at RE stage for the coming 
Financial Year 2020-21. 
 
Committee’s further observation 
 
1.9 The Committee notes the reply of the Department. 
Recommendation/Observation of the Committee 
1.10 The Committee notes that there is no under utilization in the current Financial 
Year. The Committee is also of the view that National Legal Services Authority 
(NALSA) needs to rationalise its expenses relati ng to Legal Counsel Fee by engaging 
more and more Senior Lawyers on pro-bono basis. Further, expenses relating to Mass 
Awareness Programme needs to be rationalized to eliminate wasteful expenditure, if 
any.                                                                                               (Para 2.39) 
 Action Taken / proposed to be taken by the Department 
 
1.11 DRSC has observed that NALSA may engage more and more senior lawyers 

4 
 
on pro-bono basis.  It is submitted that various SLSAs are requesting  senior lawyers 
to take up cases on pro -bono basis and are successful in many cases. NALSA shall 
further advise all the SLSAs to make efforts to involve more and more senior lawyers 
on pro-bono basis, so as to reduce the financial burden in making payment to 30,000 
panel lawyers having practice of more than 10 years who are being paid as per the 
declared fee schedule. 
 
1.12 Regarding Legal Awareness program, it is submitted that from April 2019 to 
February 2020, 2.13 lacs awareness programmes were held thro ughout the country by 
various SLSAs/DLSAs which were attended by 2.91 crore persons. NALSA will be 
taking steps towards promoting use of technology for such legal literacy programmes 
so that similar number of people may be covered with lesser expenses. This will result 
in the reduction of expenses to some extent. 
 
Committee’s further observation 
 
1.13 The Committee has noted the reply of the Department and recommends 
that social networking websites which are economical and accessible to many 
should be utilized for legal awareness campaigns.   
Vacancies in Courts  
Recommendation/Observation of the Committee 
1.14 A judgment delivered by a Division Bench of the Supreme Court on 17 th 
February, 2020 in the case M/s PLR Projects Pvt. Ltd. vs. Mahanadi Coalfields 
Limited & others has been brought to the notice of the Committee. The apex court has 
observed that the High Courts must make endeavours to recommend the names 
against the vacancies as early as possible and High Courts should keep on 
recommending names without waiting for the result of the earlier recommendations 
till all recommendations are made.  The C ommittee appreciates the aforesaid 
judgement of the Apex Court and expect that concerned High Courts should 
recommend the names well in advance so that the appointees to the post of judges in 
the High Courts are available on the very date of the retirement of the judges.  
                                                                                                 (Para 3.14) 
Action Taken / proposed to be taken by the Department 
1.15 The Hon’ble  Supreme Court vide Order dated 17.02.2020 requested the 
Registrars General of different High Courts to file their responses regarding vacant 
position, date of their occurrence, number of vacancies likely to arise in next six 
months and the time period for  making recommendation for filling up vacancies with 
4 weeks to hear the case again on 23.3.2020.However, the matter could not be heard 
on 23.3.2020 in view of COVID-19 pandemic. 
Committee’s further observation 
 
1.16 The Committee has noted the reply of th e Ministry and would like to be 
apprised of the further development in the matter. 

5 
 
Recommendation/Observation of the Committee 
1.17 The Committee is concerned with the large number of vacancies of Judicial 
Officers in Subordinate Judiciary. As per the data  made available to the Committee, 
as on 20 th February, 2020, around 21 percent of sanctioned strength (24,018) of 
Judicial Officers in Subordinate Courts is vacant in different States. Out of 5,146 
vacancies a large number of vacancies are in the States of  Uttar Pradesh (1,053), 
Bihar (776), Madhya Pradesh (370), Gujarat (308) and Rajasthan (309). Despite, the 
Supreme Court monitoring vacancy positions of Judicial Officers in Subordinate 
judiciary through hearings on Malik Mazhar Sultan and Anr vs. UP Publi c Service 
Commission (2007) case, a large number of vacancies of Judicial Officers are 
existing in various States.  The Committee, therefore, recommends the Department of 
Justice to impress upon the State Governments/High Courts to expedite the process of 
filling up of the vacancy positions of Judicial Officers in Subordinate Courts as per 
the directions of the Supreme Court in the Malik Mazhar Sultan and Anr vs. UP 
Public Service Commission (2007) case.                (Para 3.18) 
Action Taken / proposed to be taken by the Department 
 
1.18 The Government has been taking up the issue of filling up of vacancies in 
District and Subordinate Courts with the respective High Courts and State 
Governments. A  series of meetings were held with Registrars General of all High 
Courts and Law Secretaries of all State Governments / UTs through Video 
Conferencing in the month of January, 2018, July, 2018 and November, 2018 and 
September-October, 2019 to follow up on filling up posts of Judicial Officers in 
District and Sub ordinate Courts.  The Department of Justice has hosted a web -portal 
on its website for reporting and monitoring of sanctioned and working strength, and 
vacancies of Judicial Officers of District and Subordinate Courts on monthly basis. 
 
As on Sanctioned Strength Working Strength Vacancies 
31.12.2013 19,518 15,115 4403 
31.03.2020 24,037 19,167 4870 
  
1.19 To ensure that the vacancies at the District and Subordinate Courts level are 
filled up on time, High Courts in consultation with the State Governments are 
required to adhere to the time frame prescribed by the Hon’ble Supreme Court in the 
case of Malik Ma zhar Sultan and Anr Vs U.P. Public Service Commission  [Civil 
Appeal No. 1867 of 2006 decided on January 4, 2007]. The process for recruitment of 
judges in subordinate courts should commence on 31st March of a calendar year and 
end by 31st October of the sa me year. State Governments and High Courts have been 
again requested on 30.04.2020 to expedite filling of vacancies in District and 
Subordinate Courts as per guidelines of the Supreme Court which is also being 
monitored by Supreme Court in Malik Mazhar Sultan case. 
 
1.20  Secretary (Justice) discussed the matter in his meetings taken through Video 
Conference with Registrars General of all High Courts and Law Secretaries of all 
State Governments/UTs from 18th to 22nd May, 2020 and requested them to 
expeditiously fill up the vacancies of Judicial Officers in District and Subordinate 
Courts. 

6 
 
Committee’s further observation 
1.21 The Committee notes the reply of the Department. 
Pendency in Courts 
Recommendation/Observation of the Committee 
1.22 The Committee has noted that Department of Justice could not furnish Case 
Clearance Rate of Courts to it as the institution and disposal of cases year -wise is not 
maintained in the National Judicial Data Grid by the courts. The Committee, 
therefore, desires that the registry of different courts may be requested to collate and 
maintain the Case Clearance Rate of the Courts in order to assess the performance of 
the Courts in dispensation of justice.                 (Para 3.27) 
Action Taken / proposed to be taken by the Department 
 
1.23 A request in this regard has been sent to all the RGs of all the states to collect 
and maintain this data. 
 
1.24 Economic Survey 2018-19 defines Case Clearance Rate (CCR) “as the ratio of 
the number of cases disposed of in a given y ear to the number of cases instituted in 
that year”. Data relating to instituted or disposed cases during a year is not made 
available on web portal National Judicial Data Grid (NJDG) in respect of High Courts 
and District and Subordinate Courts. Hence, th e Department is unable to calculate 
Case Clearance Rate in the manner mentioned above. No such data is available on the 
website of Supreme Court regarding instituted and disposed cases during a year. 
 
1.25 As recommended by the Committee, Department of Jus tice has requested the 
Registrars General of High Courts vide DO letter dated 30.4.2020 to provide 
information on the Case Clearance Rate of high Courts and District and Subordinate 
Courts and also to collate and maintain the Case Clearance Rate of the cou rts in order 
to assess the performance of the courts in dispensation of justice. 
 
1.26 Secretary (Justice) has taken up the matter with High Courts in his meetings 
taken through Video Conference with all High Courts and State Governments from 
18th to 22nd May, 2020 and has requested them to expeditiously provide necessary 
information to the Department of Justice for placing before the Department related 
Parliamentary Standing Committee. 
 
Committee’s further observation 
1.27 The Committee notes the replies of the Department. 
Recommendation/Observation of the Committee 
1.28 The Committee understands that there are Constitutional provisions for 
appointment of qualified Retired Judges under Article 128 in Supreme Court and 224 
(A) in High Courts with the previous consent of the President of India but this 
provision cannot be in voked to appoint Retired Judges to expedite pendency of cases 

7 
 
as Supreme Court Collegium is of the opinion that these provisions can be invoked 
only after filling up of sanctioned strength of Judges. However, the Government has 
engaged 100 Retired Judges c alled ‘Nyaya Mitra’ to render advice and assistance to 
the serving judges in High Courts (7), District and Subordinate Courts (93) to 
expedite ten year’s old pending cases.  The Committee appreciates the initiative of the 
Government to take the service of retired judges as Nyaya Mitra to clear pendency of 
cases in various courts.  The Committee desires that more Nyaya Mitras may be 
engaged in other courts where cases are pending for more than ten years.   
                                                                           (Para 3.31) 
Action Taken / proposed to be taken by the Department 
 
1.29 Department of Justice, with the objective to facilitate reduction of more than 
decade old pending cases in various courts in the country started Nyaya Mitra 
programme in the year 2017. 15 Nyaya Mitras (NM) were engaged in 15 districts of 5 
States in 2017-18 who were able to contribute in disposal of 423 cases. During 2018 -
19, only 5 Nyaya Mitra could be engaged and   they were able to dispose of 186 cases.  
In the year 2019-20, 9  Nyaya Mitra were engaged. These 9 Nyaya Mitra contributed 
in identifying 26507 pending cases and disposed of 1764 cases. The recommendation 
of the Committee to engage more Nyaya Mitras will be given serious consideration 
while it is perti nent to mention that the response from eligible interested persons in 
associating with Nyaya Mitra programme has been lukewarm. A third party 
evaluation of the Nyaya Mitra programme is also underway and their 
recommendation will be examined to determine th e future contours of the 
implementation of this programme. 
 
Committee’s further observation 
1.30 The Committee notes the reply of the Department and desires to be 
apprised of the main findings of the third party evaluation report of the Nyaya 
Mitra programme. 
Recommendation/Observation of the Committee 
1.31 As per information furnished to the Committe e, the sanctioned strength and 
working strength of Subordinate Judiciary are 24,018 and 18,872, respectively and a 
total of 22,321 court rooms/halls and 19,090 residential units would be available for 
the Subordinate Judiciary. It means that the availabili ty of court rooms/halls is 
eighteen percent surplus as compared to working strength of Judicial Officers and 
there is a seven percent deficit as compared to sanctioned strength of judicial officers. 
Similarly, the residential units is one percent surplus a s compared to working 
strength of the Judicial Officers and twenty percent deficit as compared to sanctioned 
strength of Judicial Officers. The Committee has been informed that during the period 
from 15 th January 2020 to 20 th February 2020, 236 posts of judicial officers have 
been created leading the sanctioned strength to 24,018. The State Governments will 
be filling these vacancies as per the direction of the Supreme Court of India on the 
Malik Mazhar Sultan and Anr vs. UP P ublic Service Commission (2007) case in due 
course. Therefore, the present situation of surplus of court rooms and residential 
quarters for Judicial Officers would be deficit in future. The Committee accordingly, 

8 
 
recommends the Department to release funds and impress upon State Governments to 
construct courts room and residential accommodation as per sanctioned strength so 
that there would be 100 percent satisfaction on both accounts.                          
(Para 3.39)     
Action Taken / proposed to be taken by the Department 
 
1.32 A sum of Rs.710.00 crore was allocated under the Scheme during last 
financial year (2019-20), which was released among the States/UTs. Funds under the 
Scheme were enhanced to Rs.982.00 crore at the RE stage, an additional amount  of 
Rs.272.00 crore, which were fully utilized. Rs.754.00 crore has been allocated under 
the Scheme in the current financial year (2020 -21) which were communicated to the 
State Governments vide letter dated 30.01.2020, out of which Rs.120.00 crore has 
been released in the months of April and May, 2020 while keeping in mind monthly 
ceiling under Cash Management System as per the directions of Ministry of Finance 
vide their OM dated 09.04.2020. The Utilization of almost 100% under the Scheme 
has been a trend for the last few financial years. During the current financial year also, 
funds will be fully released/sanctioned to the States/UTs. Efforts will be made to get 
additional funds at RE stage by requesting Ministry of Finance at appropriate time. 
 
Committee’s further observation 
 
1.33 The Committee is pleased to note that the utilization under the Scheme 
has almost been 100% during last few financial years. The Committee observes 
that the funds as per requirement may be allocated/ enhanced under the scheme 
at RE stage. 
e-Court Mission Mode Project (MMP)-Phase-II 
Recommendation/Observation of the Committee 
1.34 Digitization of work in the portal of National Judicial Data Grid (NJDG) will 
help in avoiding duplicity of work by Government Departments/Institutions.  The 
pendency data of a few States and UTs are not available in NJDG. The Committee 
recommends the Department to apprise it, of the observations of the Arrears 
Committee of the Supreme Court on the non -availability of pendency data in respect 
of Arunachal Pradesh, Nagaland and UTs of Lakshadweep, Puducherry and 
Andaman and Nicobar Islands in NJDG, in its Action Taken Replies of the 
Department.                             (Para 3.46) 
Action Taken / proposed to be taken by the Department 
 
1.35 As recommended by the Committee, Department of Justice has requested the 
Registrars General of High Courts vide DO letter dated 30.4.2020 to provide 
information on the Case Clearance Rate of high Courts and District and Subordinate 
Courts and also to collate and maintain  the Case Clearance Rate of the courts in order 
to assess the performance of the courts in dispensation of justice. 
 
1.36 Secretary (Justice) has taken up the matter with High Courts in his meetings 
taken through Video Conference with all High Courts and S tate Governments from 
18th to 22nd May, 2020 and has requested them to expeditiously provide necessary 

9 
 
information to the Department of Justice for placing before the Department related 
Parliamentary Standing Committee. 
 
Committee’s further observation 
1.37 The Committee notes the reply of the Department and desires that the 
Department may pursue with respective High Courts for furnishing relevant 
data and uploading the same on the portal of National Judicial Data Grid, at the 
earliest. 
 
National Legal Services Authority (NALSA) 
Recommendation/Observation of the Committee 
1.38 The Committee is happy to note that NALSA has provided legal assistance to 
prisoners during remand stage and bail applications. However, as per prison 
statistics-India ( 2018) published by National Crime Record Bureau (NCRB), New 
Delhi, the average occupancy rate of prison in our country is 117.16 percent which is 
reportedly due to presence of a large number of undertrials ( 69% of the Prison 
inmates) in the prison. Legal Aid is a constitutional obligation under Article 39A of 
the Constitution and NALSA has been created to fulfill this Constitutional mandate. 
However, only 1122 Legal Aid Clinics are functional in various prisons which means 
that 217 prisons are yet to get a  legal aid clinic. The Committee, accordingly, 
recommends NALSA to establish Legal Aid Clinics in remaining prisons in the 
Country to fulfill the mandate for which it is created. The Committee appreciates the 
initiative of NALSA to conduct impact evaluatio n study on its activities in the coming 
Financial Year. The Committee feels that there should be regular impact evaluation 
study of its programmes and activities to identify shortcomings in the implementation 
of programmes and activities.                 (Para 3.55) 
Action Taken / proposed to be taken by the Department 
 
1.39 Legal Aid is provided to the prisoners for representing them at remand, trial 
and appellate stage and for filing their appeal and other miscellaneous applications. 
 
1.40 As per Section 12 of the Legal Services Authorities Act, 1987, all persons in 
custody are entitled to free legal aid. Apart from providing legal assistance through 
jail clinics, any person who is produced before the courts in custody, who has not 
engaged own lawyer, is provided legal aid by the District Legal Services Authority / 
Taluk Legal Services Committee. 
 
1.41 The total number of jails in the country includes very small jails, sub jails etc., 
which may have very few inmates. Even in such sub jails wh ere there are no clinics, 
legal aid lawyers are deputed to regularly visit such jails to provide legal assistance to 
the inmates. Legal aid is provided to all inmates who do not have their own lawyer.  
The recommendation of the Hon’ble Committee has been taken note of.  
 
Committee’s further observation 
 
1.42 The Committee notes the reply of the Department. 

10 
 
SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
Recommendation/Observation of the Committee 
1.43 The Committee further recommends that translation of judgments in 
remaining Scheduled languages may also be undertaken and any challenges, 
including financial, in this regard may be communicated to the Committee through 
the Action Taken Replies.                                                                          (Para. 3.68) 
Action Taken / proposed to be taken by of the Supreme Court of India 
 
1.44 The translations of judgments in remaining Scheduled languages are under 
process.  
 
 
 
 
Committee’s further observation 
1.45 The Committee notes the replies of the Supreme Court of India. 
Recommendation/Observation of the Committee 
1.46 While observing the pattern of expenditure and allocations of the Supreme 
Court from the above mentioned table, the Committee observes that the Supreme 
Court of India has been making optimum utilization of allocations made to it under 
various Heads. The Committee appreciates the Supreme Court for proactively 
utilizing allocations made to it.                (Para 2.59) 
Action Taken / proposed to be taken by of the Supreme Court of India 
 
1.47 The figures of Budgetary Allocatio n for the financial year 2020 -21 pertaining 
to the Supreme Court of India, Demand No. 66 have been checked and verified which 
are found to be correct as the reasoning/reply has alr eady been submitted. However, 
the reasoning/ reply is attached herewith as Annexure-I. 
 
Committee’s further observation 
1.48 The Committee notes the replies of the Supreme Court of India. 
LEGISLATIVE DEPARTMENT 
Recommendation/Observation of the Committee 
1.49 The Committee also observes that out of 463 sanctioned positions in the 
Department, the post related to drafting officers are only 44. The sanctioned strength 
of Secretariat of the Department, Official Languages Wing and Vidhi Sahitya 
Prakashan is 237, 151  and 75, respectively. The committee expresses its concern as 
the Department has given incomplete information with regard to vacancy positions in 
the Secretariat. The Committee recommends the Department to furnish complete data 
of sanctioned positions in t he Department vis-a-vis vacancy position in Action Taken 
Replies of the Department.                                                   (Para 5.4) 
 

11 
 
Action Taken / proposed to be taken by the Department 
1.50  It is informed that total number of drafting officers in the Department is 44 
which includes the officer of level from Secretary to Assistant Legislative Counsel in 
the main Secretariat. The total sanctioned strength of the Department including 
Official Languages Wing and Vidhi Sahitya Prakashan is 463. Out of these 463 posts, 
295 posts are filled up and 168 are vacant. The details of sanctioned strength and 
vacancy positions in the Main Secretariat, Official Language Wing and Vidhi Sahitya 
Prakashanare at Annexure II, III and IV, respectively. 
 
Committee’s further observation 
1.51 The Committee notes the reply of the Department. 
 
 
 
 
  

12 
 
CHAPTER - II 
RECOMMENDATIONS/ OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE 
DOES NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES GIVEN BY 
THE MINISTRY 
DEPARTMENT OF LEGAL AFFAIRS 
Appointment of Law Officers 
Recommendation/Observation of the Committee 
2. The Committee is happy to note that positions of Attorney General for India 
and Solicitor General of India are filled up. However, six posit ions of Additional 
Solicitors General of India are vacant. The Committee is of the view that when there 
is no difficulty in the existing rules and procedures for appointment of Law Officers, 
there should not be any vacant positions. The Committee according ly, recommends 
the Department to expedite the process of filling up vacancies of Law Officers.  
(Para 4.17) 
Action Taken / proposed to be taken by the Department 
2.1 Recently, some Law Officers were appointed / reappointed in Supreme Court 
of India and various High Courts. An updated list of Law Officers is placed at 
Annexure-V. Now, there is no vacancy of Law Officers in the Supreme Court of 
India while ASGI for High Court of Calcutta and High Court of Gujarat have also 
been appointed and now only one position of Additional Solicitor General of India for 
the High Court of Jharkhand is vacant and efforts will be made to fill up the same as 
soon as possible. 
Committee’s further observation  
2.2 The Committee notes the reply of the Department. 
Recommendation/Observation of the Committee 
2.3 The Department submitted that Panel Counsels for the Supreme Court of India 
is 684, while only 1146 Advocates are empanelled to appear  on behalf of Union of 
India in different Courts across the country. The Committee feels that the figure is 
highly disproportionate and the Committee desires that it requires re -evaluation by 
the Department. The Committee would like to know the rationale b ehind 
discrepancies in appointment of panel counsels and advocates in different High 
Courts and accordingly, recommends the Department to furnish High Court wise 
panel of counsels and advocates appointed in Action Taken Replies of the 
Department.                     
(Para 4.18) 
Action Taken / proposed to be taken by the Department 
2.4 The figures regarding number of panel counsel for the Supreme Court of India 
as 684 and for other courts/tribunals across the country as 1146 reflect only those 
Advocates who were empanelled by the Department during the year 2019 only 

13 
 
because the questionnaire was asking for work done by the Department for specific 
period i.e. year 2019 only. Therefore, the advocates empanelled before 2019 were not 
included in the above figures. Empanelment of Advocates is an ongoing process and it 
is made as per requirement for a particular court/tribunal and for a limited term, 
however panel counsel are not treated as civil post due to which there is no sanctioned 
strength of panel counsel for any court/tribunal.  
2.5 It is also stated that at present there are total 689 panel counsel for Supreme 
Court of India and total 2263 panel counsel for various High Courts in the country. 
The High Court wise segregated figures of panel counsel are enclosed as Annexure- 
VI. 
Committee’s further observation 
2.6 The Committee notes the reply of the Department. 
Litigation Policy and Expenses  
Recommendation/Observation of the Committee 
2.7 The Committee is of the view that the Department of Legal Affairs cannot 
afford to remain data deficient in a data driven economy and therefore, the 
Committee recommends the Department to collect regular data relating to 
Government cases from various States/UTs as these data may help the Department 
while projecting number of Government Advocate /Panel counsel required for a 
particular State/UT, which in turn may save government resources.           (Para 4.25) 
Action Taken / proposed to be taken by the Department 
2.8 Steps are being taken to implement the Committee’s recommendations. 
Committee’s further observation 
2.9 The Committee notes the reply of the Department. 
Income Tax Appellate Tribunal (ITAT) 
Recommendation/Observation of the Committee 
2.10 The Committee is concerned about the pendency of 89,398 appeals in ITAT as 
on 1st February, 2020. The Committee was apprised that president of ITAT has set a 
target of disposal of 50 cases per Member per month. The tribunal has also prepared 
action plan to clear pendencies by 50 percent by the end of the year 2022, with a 
target of 63, 300 (in 2020), 67,800 (in 2021) and 70,200 (in 2022). The Committee 
observes that there is still 41 vacancy positions of members pending out of total 
strength of 126. The Ministry has initiated action plan to fill -up 37 vacancies in the 
coming financial year. However, the Committee feels that even if these vacancies are 
filled up, still there will be large number of pendencies. The Committee notes that 
9.32 lakh crore amount is locked in dispute respecting direct taxation. The Committee 
appreciates tax amne sty proposal of the Government under Direct Tax Vivaad se 
Vishwas Bill, 2020. The Committee recommends the Government to introduce pre -

14 
 
mediation provisions in direct tax disputes in the provisions of relevant Acts to settle 
tax disputes, on the lines of the Commercial Courts Act, 2015.            (Para 4.32) 
Action Taken / proposed to be taken by the Department 
2.11 The Income Tax Appellate Tribunal (ITAT) is committed to the early disposal 
of the appeals pending before it.  They have prepared an Action Pla n to clear 
pendency of appeals by 50% by the end of year 2022.  The efforts to reduce pendency 
will be expedited by the recruitment against pending vacancies which are under 
consideration of the Competent Authority.  As regards the Vivad se Vishwas  Scheme 
is concerned, the Tribunal shall diligently play its role of striking off those appeals 
from its pendency where the tax payers settle their disputes with the Income Tax 
Department.  However, the invocation of the appellate mechanism before the Tribunal 
is the decision of the parties/litigants which is outside its purview.  ITAT on its part is 
also ready to undertake the task of mediation, if it is  so entrusted to it, with a view to 
reduce the pendency of appeals/ cases.  In this regard, it may be no ted that ITAT had 
already recommended through the Department of Legal Affairs (Ministry of Law & 
Justice) for introduction of mediation at ITAT level in relation to tax related disputes. 
However, Department of Revenue is of the view that it has been adopti ng various 
initiatives, aimed at improving the quality of assessment, minimization of discretion 
in the assessment/first appeal, viz. e-assessment scheme, e-appeals at the first appeals 
level, Vivad se Vishwas Scheme. These schemes will enable them to reduce litigations 
with Ministries/ Departments/ CPSEs to a large extent in the short and long term.  
Department of Revenue, therefore, is of the view that setting up of a mediation panel 
for resolution of tax disputes with Ministries/ Departments/ CPSEs may n ot be 
needed. 
Committee’s further observation 
2.12 The Committee notes the reply of the Department. 
DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE 
Recommendation/Observation of the Committee 
2.13 The Committee observes that out of the total allocation of Rs.  3055.11 crore 
in the current Financial Year, the Ministry has been able to utilise Rs. 2307.77 crore 
(75.53%) of the total allocations. Further allocations to the Ministry has reduced by 
27.99 percent in BE 2020 -21 over BE 2019 -20. The allocations under Legislative 
Department and Department of Legal Affairs have been reduced by 54.42 percent and 
10.86 percent, respectively, whereas, the allocation for Department of Justice has 
increased by 0.08 percent.                  (Para 2.11) 
Action Taken / proposed to be taken by the Department 
 
2.14 So far Department of Justice is concerned, it is stated that the Department 
received an additional amount of Rs. 272.00 crore  in view of healthy pace of 
expenditure under the Centrally Sponsored Scheme for Development of Infrastructure 
Facilities for Judiciary in the time the Revised Estimates for 2019 -20. The additional 
amount too was fully utilized efficiently. As a result, th ere was 99.95% expenditure 

15 
 
against RE during 2019 -20 in respect of Department of Justice, as evident from the 
table given below: 
                            (Rupees in crore) 
Scheme BE 
2019-20 
RE 
2019-20 
Expenditure 
2019-20 
CSS 710.00 982.00 981.90 
Gram Nyayalayas 10.00 8.00 8.00 
Fast Track Special Courts 100.00 140.00 140.00 
e Courts 256.53 180.00 179.26 
Action  2.00 1.25 1.25 
Access to Justice 33.73 28.75 28.91 
Total 
 
1112.26 1340.00 1339.32 
2.15 In addition, there was 97% expenditure from Non -Scheme Heads of the 
Department. 
Committee’s further observation 
 
2.16 The Committee notes the reply of the Department. 
Recommendation/Observation of the Committee 
2.17 The Committee observes that allocations for e -Courts Project Phase -II in BE 
2020-21 has increased by 39 percent approx. over RE 2019-20. Further, as compared 
to projections made to the Finance Ministry for Financial Year 2020 -21, the 
allocations have decre ased by 10.17 percent. However, the Committee is pained to 
note that out of Rs. 180 crore allocations in RE 2019 -20, only Rs. 37.31 crore was 
spent by the Department as on 31 st January, 2020.  Thus, despite under utilisation of 
allocations, the Departments  made projection for higher allocations for the next 
Financial Year. The Committee, therefore, recommends the Department to improve 
the ratio of funds allocations vis -à-vis utilisations as under utilisation implies under 
performance of the project.                          (Para 2.44) 
Action Taken / proposed to be taken by the Department 
 
2.18 The total budget allocation for the e-Court project Phase-II in RE 19 -20 was 
Rs 180 Crore. The initial delay in the expenditure flow was due to delay in 
finalization of the works program and project proposals by the e - Committee of the 
Supreme Court which is chaired by a Hon’ble Judge of the Supreme Court. However, 
by 31 st March 2020, Rs 179.26 Crore  which is 99.58% has been spent for 
implementation of the various components of the e Courts Phase -II in the financial 
year 2019-20. 
 
Committee’s further observation 
 
 
 
2.19 The Committee appreciates the Department for utilizing almost 100 
percent of funds allocated for the e-Court project for the Financial Year 2019-20. 
The Committee feels that the ongoing crisis of Covid -19 pandemic requires 
augmentation of judicial infrastructure particularly digital infrastructure for 

16 
 
running virtual courts and e-Court project will be of immense help in this regard. 
Recommendation/Observation of the Committee 
2.20 The Committee understands that judiciary is independent and integrated and 
justice delivery depends upon the judiciary by getting timely support from police, 
legal aid Institutions and the Bar in addition to financial support for infrastructure 
and human resources from Government. All these institutions/ bodies need to act 
harmoniously to reduce pendency of cases in various judicial forums. In the 
cooperative an d competitive federal scheme, the Union Government has been 
supplementing States for creating physical and digital infrastructures for subordinate 
courts and Fast -Track Courts on sharing basis under Centrally Sponsored Scheme.  
The digitalization of court system from lower to apex is being monitored by E -
Committee of the Supreme Court.                          (Para 3.28)  
Action Taken / proposed to be taken by the Department 
 
2.21 By 31st March 2020 out of the allocated budget of Rs.180 cr, Rs.179.26 cr 
which is 99.58% of the amount has been spent for implementation of various 
components of e-Courts Phase II in the FY 2019-20. 
 
2.22 As regards Fast Track Special Courts, Central Share of Rs. 140 crores was 
released to 28 States/UTs during 2019-20. 
2.23 Close coordination is being maintained with the e -Committee of the Supreme 
Court in all respects. 
 
Committee’s further observation 
2.24 The Committee notes the reply of the Department. 
Enforcement of Contracts 
Recommendation/Observation of the Committee 
2.25 The Committee observes that District and Subordinate Judiciary are clogged 
with 3.17 crore cases.  Delay, pendency and backlog of cases in Subordinate Courts 
in particular has a major reason of slow progress  in the enforcement of contract 
parameters.  The Committee notes the findings in India Justice Report, 2019 
according to which the Judicial delay costs around 0.5% of GDP of our country 
annually.   Disposal of cases is within the exclusive domain of the Ju diciary.  
However, the Executive has been constantly trying to take reformative measures in 
the nature of bringing amendments to legislations i.e. the Arbitration and 
Conciliation Act, 1996 and the Commercial Courts, Commercial Division And 
Commercial Appe llate Divisions of High Court Acts, 2015, the Specific Relief Act, 
1963, etc. But, such measures have not shown any perceptible improvement in the 
reduction of pendency.                   (Para 3.64) 
Action Taken / proposed to be taken by the Department 
 
2.26 World Bank Report on Doing Business measures regulations that enhance 

17 
 
business activity and those that constrain it. Indicators relate to business regulation for 
small and medium sized firms located in Delhi, Mumbai, Kolkata and Bengaluru 
based on stan dardized case scenarios. Enforcing Contracts is one such indicator, 
which measures time and cost to resolve a standardized commercial dispute as well as 
a series of good practices in the judiciary. This Department is the nodal department 
for the Enforcing Contract indicator. The reformative measures being undertaken are:- 
 
a. Time taken to resolve commercial disputes: 
 
• 22 (21 functional) Dedicated Commercial Courts have been established in 
Delhi; 4 Dedicated Commercial Courts in Mumbai; 2 Dedicated 
Commercial Courts in Bengaluru and 8 more to be set up; 2 Dedicated 
Commercial Courts in Kolkata and 2 more to be set up.  
 
• All these Dedicated Commercial Courts have adequate infrastructure (with          
e-Court facilities) and support staff. 
 
• Pecuniary limit of  3 lakhs in District Commercial Courts of Delhi, 
Mumbai and Bengaluru but not in Kolkata. 
 
b. Random and Automatic Allocation of cases to judges: Delhi and Mumbai are 
 randomly allocating cases.   
c. Case Management Hearing: As per Order XVA CPC (as amended by the 
Commercial  Courts Act, 2015) provides for case management hearing in all 
commercial cases.  Case Management Hearing is happening in all commercial 
cases in Delhi, Mumbai,  Bengaluru and Kolkata.  
 
d. e-Filing: Electronic Filing available in all commercial cases in Delhi with 
effect from  01.03.2020 and Mumbai w.e.f. 07.03.2019.  
 
e. e-Summons: Summons through SMS, fax, email and courier operational in 
Delhi; and  Summons through email operational in Mumbai. 
 
f. Electronic Case Management Tools for Judges and litigants/lawyers:  
• Electronic Case Management Tools (e -CMT) are available th rough e -
Courts Services web portal, e -Courts Services Mobile App and JustIS 
Mobile App. Following facilities are available through these Electronic 
Case Management Systems (e-CMS). 
 
• Common e-CMTs: (a) Access laws, regulations and case law; (b) Send and 
receive notifications; (c) Track the status of a case; (d) View & manage 
case document; and (e) View court orders and judgments in a particular 
case. 
 
• e-CMTs for Judges: (a) Access forms to be submitted to the court; (b) 
Assist in judgment writing; (c) Semi-automatic generation of court orders. 
 
• e-CMTs for litigants/lawyers: (a) Automatically generate a hearing 
schedule for all cases on their docket; (b) File briefs & documents with the 
court. 
 
• All judges of commercial district courts in Delhi, Mumbai, Bengalu ru and 
Kolkata are using JustIS App. 
 
• 4.1 Million litigants and lawyers have downloaded e-Courts Services App.  

18 
 
Committee’s further observation 
2.27 The Committee notes the reply of the Department. 
Recommendation/Observation of the Committee 
2.28 The Union Government has been releasing grant under centrally Sponsored 
Scheme for Court rooms, residence for judicial officers and computerization of 
Subordinate Judiciary to increase its productivity. In this connection the Committee 
feels that there is requirement of collaborative approach between the Judiciary and 
the Executive to improve pendency position in various judicial forums. The 
importance of effective, efficient and expeditious contract enforcement has direct 
bearing on economic growth and dev elopment. Therefore, the legal ecosystem needs 
to be transformed for timely contract enforcement and resolution of commercial 
dispute to achieve aspiration of our country to become a five -trillion dollar economy. 
                    (Para 3.65) 
Action Taken / proposed to be taken by the Department 
 
2.29 The Department of Justice is the nodal Department in Government of India to 
make reforms under the parameter of 'Enforcing Contracts' for Ease of Doing 
Business. Following reforms are being made for the purpose: 
• Established 22 Dedicated Commercial Courts in Delhi and 4 in Mumbai 
• Established 2 Dedicated Commercial Courts each in Delhi and in Mumbai 
• Introduced E-Filing in 22 Commercial Courts of Delhi and 4 in Mumbai 
• Implemented e-summons in 22 Commercial Courts of Delhi and 4 in Mumbai 
• Introduced Automatic and Random Allocation of cases in 22 Commercial 
Courts of Delhi and 4 in Mumbai 
• Implemented Pre - Institution Mediation settlement System of cases in 22 
Commercial   
• Courts of Delhi and 4 in Mumbai 
• Implemented Case Management Hearing or Pre Trial Conference in 22 
Commercial Courts of Delhi and 4 in Mumbai 
• Electronic Case Management Tools for Lawyers and Judges made available in 
22 Commercial Courts in  Delhi and 4 in Mumbai Training of Judges and  
Lawyers  
 
Committee’s further observation 
 
2.30 The Committee notes the reply of the Department. 
ELECTION COMMISSION OF INDIA 
Recommendation/Observation of the Committee 
 
2.31 The Committee observes that the expenditure of the Commission till 
31stDecember 2019 was only Rs. 191.24 crore, out of allocations of Rs. 286.68 crore 
in the current financial year.  Further,  out of  the total allocations of  Rs.25  crore  

19 
 
for  the  adver tisement  and  publicity,  only Rs.11.7 crore was spent by the 
Commission despite the year 2019 being year of General Election for Seventeenth Lok 
Sabha.                                                                                                       (Para 2.51) 
 
Action Taken / proposed to be taken by the Department 
 
2.32 As per the records available in the Commission and  as  mentioned  in the 
101st Report of the Parliamentary Standing Committee, out of total allocation of 
Rs.286.68 crore was utilized upto 31.12.2019 during the financial year 2019 -20. Also 
out of total all ocation of Rs.25 crore under the sub -head ‘Advertising and Publicity’ 
an amount of Rs.11.77 crore was utilized upto 31.12.2019. Bills from various vendors 
were received in the third and fourth quarter of the financial year 2019 -20. In view of 
this an amoun t of Rs.284.13 crore was utilized upto 31.03.2020 including Rs.25.53 
crore under Advertising and Publicity. 
 
Committee’s further observation 
 
2.33 The Committee notes the reply of the Commission. 
 
Paperless Election for Local Bodies 
 
Recommendation/Observation of the Committee 
 
2.34    The ECI has also unequivocally been reiterating that EVMs are tamper proof 
and integrity of electoral process is well preserved with its use accompanied with 
VVPATs in the participatory democracy.  Booth capturing and casting of invalid votes 
have become the thingof the pastwith the aforesaid digital revolution. In this regard, 
the Committee points out that in  most of  the  States,  election  to  Panchayati  Raj  
Institutions  and  Municipal Bodies are still being  held  thro ugh  ballot  papers.  The 
advancement of technology in election process needs to percolate to local bodies.  
The Committee is of the view that election to local bodies should also be held through 
Electronic Voting Machine accompanied by VVPAT. The Committe e, therefore, 
recommends the Election Commission of India to impress upon the State Election 
Commissions for use of EVMs and VVPATs available with ECI for paperless election 
to local bodies for ease of the electors.                                                      (Para 5.21) 
 
Action Taken / proposed to be taken by the Department 
 
2.35 In  respect  of   the recommendation of the Parliamentary Standing 
Committee regarding impressing upon the State Election Commissions for use of 
EVMs and VVPATs by the Election Commission of India, it is pertinent  to  mention  
that  the  Election  Commission   of   India   is  entrusted for conduct of elections to 
the  Office  of  the  Hon’ble  President  of  India, Office of the  Hon’b1e Vice -
President of India,  the  House of the  People and  the State Legislature. Elections to 
the House of  the  People  and  State Legislative  Assemblies  are  only  being  
conducted  using   EVMs  and VVPATs. 
 
2.36 Further, the conduct of elections to the Panchayats and Municipal bodies are 
entrusted with the State Election Commissions, which are independent bodies and 
have their own laws and procedures for conducting such elections. 
 

20 
 
2.37 It is also mentioned here that EVMs being used by the Election Commission 
of India can be used only for single post elections. However, elections to the local 
bodies are generally multi -post elections.  Some SECs use EVMs in their elections 
and have their own protocols so far as the storage, security, transportation and usage 
of EVMs. However, State Election Commissions had been provided ECI -EVMs by 
the ECI, whenever, they made request to loan ECI -EVMs for conducting the lo cal 
body/ Panchayat elections. The ECI has no authority over the SECs  and hence, has 
no say in their  handling  or  usage  of  EVMs  but  has  always been looked upon for 
answers in case of any allegation on  the  EVM operation / functioning, Since EVMs 
belonged to ECI and were of the same type. Of late this has become very frequent. 
Also,  the  loaning  process entails several costs and responsibilities like inventory 
management, warehousing at both ends,  and  transportation  cost  for  to  and  fro 
movement of machines. Above all, in the present  day  highly  charged political 
atmosphere, it would be extremely difficult to  defend  any aspersions on EVMs 
which are  neither  in  ECI’s  control  nor  handled  by the people over whom the 
Commission has auth ority. Hence, the Commission has decided to stop loaning and 
instead transfer the ownership of the M2 EVMs and VVPATs to the SECs and to 
sever all tieswith these machines so that the onus of answering questions on the 
performance and integrity of the SEC m achines lies squarely on the respective SEC. 
The Commission has decided that it will not be using M2 EVMs and M2 VVPATs 
and will be using M3 EVMs and M3 VVPATs only and these will not be allowed to 
be supplied to any other organization by the manufacturers. 
 
2.38 In the constant endeavor to conduct the local body elections through electronic 
means and to ensure the transparency of voting through use of VVPATs is 
maintained, the ECI  had  already  requested  the  Ministry  of Law and Justice to 
grant No Obj ection Certificate for the transfer of ownership of 5,57,000 BUs, 
5,30,000 CUs of M-2 make and 2,71,000 VVPATs of M -2 make to the State Election  
Commissions  at  a  nominal price of Rs. 1/ - per BU, CU and VVPAT each. The M-2 
make VVPATs are compatible with the CUs and BUs of M-2 make EVMs only. 
 
2.39 It is further stated that the proposed transfer is a Government to Government 
transfer and no private party is involved. The transferred machines will be used for 
conducting elections only so that people’s ma ndate is judged in a 'free and fair 
manner.  All the States do not have the same purchasing power so only the capital 
cost of the machines will be borne by Government of India and the States will be 
responsible for the transportation, storage, security and  repairs of the machines. 
Further, as per the prevalent practice, the States buy the consumables like paper roll, 
power packs, security seals etc whenever they conduct local body elections. 
 
2.40 Hence, the transfer of ownership of the M -2 EVMs and VVPATs to the State 
Electoral Commissions, at a nominal price of Rs. 1/ - per BU, CU and VVPAT each 
may be done to ensure the conduct of free fair and transparent election, provided 
NOC is granted to the Commission by the Ministry of Law and Justice. 
 
Committee’s further observation 
 
2.41 The Committee notes the reply of the Commission. 
  

21 
 
Systematic Voters’ Education and Electoral Participation Programme (SVEEP)  
 
Recommendation/Observation of the Committee 
 
2.42 The Systematic Voters’ Education and Electoral Participation Programme of 
the Election Commission of India was launched in 2017 to enhance electoral 
participation and ethical voting. Door to door information and motivation through 
Aaganwadi Workers, ASHA, Siksha Mitras, Self Help Groups etc. 360 degree 
campaign through  print  media,  electronic media, digital  media,  hand -outs,  
pamphlets,  banners,  brouchu.res  and  booklets to increase voters awareness  and  
education  was  made  by  the  Commission. F orms 6, 7, 8 and 8 (A} for registration 
and alteration in voters list were made available in Post Office, banks, hospitals for 
revision in  the  Electoral  Roll. The ECI has also introduced electronically 
transmitted postal ballot for convenience of certai n absentee voters’. These are  the  
praiseworthy  measures  taken  by  the ECI to increase voters’ participation and 
eventual turnout  ran  the  Election  Day. The Committee appreciates innovative 
measures taken by ECI for the purpose under the said progra mme, and recommends 
the Government should appropriate budgetary support to the Election Commission of 
India.                                                                                                         (Para 5.30) 
 
Action Taken / proposed to be taken by the Department 
 
2.43 ECI shall continue to work towards improving its awareness and accessibility 
initiatives for holistic and effective voter awareness and facilitation. ECI’s range of 
interventions shall be continuously updated to  incorporate new technological tools 
and platforms. 
 
Committee’s further observation 
 
2.44 The Committee notes the reply of the Commission and observes that such 
awareness programme by the Election Commission of India will enhance 
participation of citizens in democratic process of the country. 
  

22 
 
CHAPTER - III 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH 
COMMITTEE HAS NOT ACCEPTED REPLIES OF THE MINISTRY 
DEPARTMENT OF LEGAL AFFAIRS 
Streamlining of Appointment Procedure and Filling up of Vacancies of Notaries 
Recommendation/Observation of the Committee 
3. The Committee appreciates the initiatives of Department of Legal Affairs to 
invite online application for appointment of notaries. However, the Department has 
expressed its difficulty in providing online tracking of fresh and renewal of 
application for not ary-ship certificate due to infrastructural constraints. Instances of 
online applications not being received and acknowledged by the Department have 
come to the notice of the Committee. The Committee, therefore, desires that the 
infrastructural capacity of  the Department may be overhauled for streamlining 
issuance and renewal of certificate of notary. The applicant should be given an 
opportunity to track his/her application and there should be a moratorium period for 
the applications received after which th e applicants may be required to file fresh 
applications.                      (Para 4.10) 
Action Taken / proposed to be taken by the Department 
3.1 The Notary Cell of this Department receives Online Applications for 
appointments of Notaries for all of States/UTs. Vide Notaries (Third Amendment 
Rules) 2019 published in GSR 821(E) dated 05.11.2019, the Rule 8B of the Notary 
Rules 1956 has been amended a nd procedure for renewal for Practice of Certificate 
has been amended and an application for Certificate of Practice shall be submitted 
online in Form XVI to the appropriate Government before (six months) from the date 
of expiry of its period of validity.  
3.2 Further, provisions relating to submissions of returns in terms of Rule 14 of 
the Notaries Rules, 1956 also stand amended thereby every notary shall in the first 
week of January every year, submit to the appropriate government, an annual return 
online in form XIV of the notarial acts done by him during the preceding year.  
3.3 The above noted amendments have been carried out in the Notaries Rules, 
1956 for making certain notary applications processing work online and NIC unit of 
this Department is requ ested to coordinate and develop necessary infrastructure for 
carrying out the same to operationalize the above noted amendments. NIC has also 
been requested to develop and devise necessary modifications in software for tracking 
the online applications by the applicants. 
Committee’s further observation 
3.4  The Committee appreciates the initiatives of online applications and 
inviting renewal certificates of notaries six months before its expiry, however, the 
Committee reiterates its recommendation that onlin e tracking of applications 
should be operationalised to enable candidates to check status of their online 

23 
 
applications. The Committee also feels that the Department should process the 
applications for renewal of notary certificates within this six months p eriod to 
avoid accumulation of pendencies. The Committee is also desirous to be apprised 
of the number of applications processed and notary certificate renewed within 
six month of their receipt during the last two years. 
Recommendation/Observation of the Committee 
3.5 The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that digital initiative may be 
resorted to minimize human intervention in the appointment/renewal process of 
notaries. The Committee also desires that option of introducing digital signature for 
notaries on the lines of facility provided to Chartered Accountants may be introduced 
to rule out the scope of using seal of notary by any person on behalf of the notary 
certificate holder. Further, it would also completely eliminate the malpractice of 
antidating or/ and attestation of blank document, etc.                      (Para 4.12) 
Action Taken / proposed to be taken by the Department 
3.6 The process of inviting applications for the appointment of notaries is already 
through online Mode. For online ren ewal process, necessary amendments in the 
Notaries Rules, 1956 have also been made and NIC is being coordinated to 
operationalize these amendments. Once, necessary infrastructure is developed 
(updation of software by NIC), the process for renewal of Certif icate of Practice will 
be prompt. As regards introducing options of digital signature for the notaries on the 
lines of facility provided to Chartered Accountants, NIC will be consulted for 
infrastructural requirements. 
Committee’s further observation 
3.7 The Committee notes the reply of the Department . The Committee feels 
that unless digital signatures for notaries are introduced, the cases of fake 
signatures, anti-date or/and attestation of blank documents etc. cannot be 
completely eliminated. The Committee, therefore, recommends the Department 
to expedite the process of introduction of digital signature facilities for notary 
attestations and apprise the Committee of the action taken and further 
development in this regard in the Action Taken Notes. 
Recommendation/Observation of the Committee 
3.8 The Committee is concerned that 35% (11,226) out of 32,403 notaries are 
lying vacant in various States/UTs. There are hundred percent vacancies in the 
States/UTs of Telangana, Nagaland, Mizoram, Mani pur, Jammu and Kashmir, 
Ladakh, Daman Diu and Andaman Nicobar Islands. Large numbers of vacancies also 
exist in the States of Gujarat (1,422), Madhya Pradesh (858), Telangana (800), Bihar 
(747) and Uttar Pradesh (710). The Committee in its 96th Report on D emands for 
Grants (2018-19) of the Ministry of Law and Justice had discussed the said issue in 
detail and recommended the Department to streamline appointment procedure of 
notaries as well as fill up vacancy positions of notaries in various States. Despite  its 
recommendation, the Department could not come up with concrete proposal to fill up 
vacancy positions of notary till now. However, the Law Secretary during his 

24 
 
deposition before the Committee on 20th February, 2020 has assured the Committee 
to fill up existing vacancies within a period of four to six weeks. The Committee also 
desires that due consideration should be given to the candidates belonging to the 
category of SC, ST, OBC while making fresh appointment of notary in order to ensure 
that the notar y appointment is inclusive and reflects the social composition of our 
society.                              (Para 4.14) 
Action Taken / proposed to be taken by the Department 
3.9 As regards the vacant position of the notaries in the States and UTs it is 
submitted that the     process   for   selection of   notaries through online   mode is 
always open and eligible candidates can apply for appointment. Pertinently for the UT 
of the J&K, the Notary Cell has issued advertisements in the leading newspaper for 
filling up vacancies of Central Government Notaries. For the States/ UTs where 
hundred percent vacancies are lying vacant, similar advertisement in regional 
newspaper will be issued for inviting the applications. Similarly, for the States of 
Gujarat, Madhya Pradesh, Telangana, Bihar and Uttar Pradesh, the interview process 
will be initiated in due course of time.  
3.10 In so far as the observation of the Committee that “the Law Secretary during 
his deposition before the Committee on 20th February, 2020 has assured the 
Committee to fill up existing vacancies within a period of four to six weeks” is 
concerned, it is clarified that the deposition of the Law Secretary was categorical for 
issuing the remaining certificates to the Notaries who were selected for such 
assignment in 2018 and 2019 and not with respect to the filling up of the en tire 
vacancies of Notaries as per Schedule of the Notaries Act, 1952.  This fact was also 
conveyed to Rajya Sabha Secretariat vide OM No.A -20011/1/2020-Coord dated 
17.03.2020 (Annexure-VII) 
Committee’s further observation  
3.11 The Committee is of the view  that any type of pendency/ vacancy relating 
to notaries, whether due to non -issuance of renewal certificates or new notary 
certificates leads to suffering of the common people by depriving them of services 
offered by notaries like notarized certificates a ffidavits, etc. Therefore, the 
Committee feels that the Department should timely process the applications 
received and issue renewal and new certificates of notaries in a timebound 
manner.  
3.12   The Committee is in receipt of OM No.A -20011/1/2020-Coord d ated 
17.03.2020 from the Department clarifying its position with regard to issuance of 
notary certificates. The clarifications of the Department have been noted by the 
Committee. However, the Department has not furnished its replies with regard 
to issuance  of remaining certificates to notaries who were selected for such 
assignment in the years 2018 and 2019. The Committee accordingly, 
recommends the Department to apprise the Committee of the present status of 
issuance of notary certificates, along with reas ons, if any, for non -issuance of the 
remaining certificates.  
 

25 
 
Litigation Policy and Expenses 
Recommendation/Observation of the Committee 
 
3.13 The Committee observes that there is a 260 percent approx. increase in 
payment of fees to the legal counsels/advisers by the Ministry in the last eleven years 
and around 4,32,000 cases relating to government are pending. Further, the National 
Litigation Policy is yet to be finalised by the Government and there is no concrete 
roadmap from the Department t o check pendency of cases and increasing 
expenditure. The National Litigation Policy was drafted in 2010 and the Department 
during the Demand for Grants (2018 -19) had submitted that it is under active 
consideration of the Government. The Committee, accordi ngly recommends the 
Department to expedite the formulation of National Litigation Policy.   
                    (Para 4.24) 
Action Taken / proposed to be taken by the Department 
3.14 The National Litigation Policy is under the consideration of the Government. 
Efforts are being made to expedite the finalization of the National Litigation Policy. 
Committee’s further observation 
3.15 The Committee is of the view that when almost all the States have 
finalized State Litigation Policies, there cannot be e ternal timeline for 
finalization of National Litigation Policy (NLP). The Committee accordingly, 
recommends the Department to finalize National Litigation Policy and also 
apprise the Committee of the concrete action plan and progress made in this 
regard in its Action Taken Notes. 
Indian Law Institute 
Recommendation/Observation of the Committee 
3.16 The Committee in its previous Reports has recommended that ILI should move 
towards making itself financially independent from Government grants and again of 
the considered opinion that ILI needs to generate its own resources from research 
and consultancy for its functioning. The Committee also feels that instead of 
concentrating in its core activities in Delhi, ILI need to expand itself to other parts of 
the count ry also by establishing extension centers in cities like Chennai, Mumbai, 
Guwahati etc. On the issue of grant to Institute of National Importance status to ILI, 
the committee recommends that the Department to make a cost benefit analysis and 
submit a repor t to the Committee in its action taken replies. The Committee also 
recommends the Department to look into the demand of ILI for enhanced allocations, 
as the Committee feels that shortage of financial resources should not hamper the 
functioning of the Institute.                                     (Para 4.36) 
Action Taken / proposed to be taken by the Department 
3.17 Indian Law Institute, in its recent presentation, requested for higher allocation 
in Grant -in-Aid (Salary) as the expenditure under salary head is Rs.6.50 Crores in 
2019-20 (provisional). It may be mentioned that as against actual expenditure of 

26 
 
Rs.5.97 Crores under salary head in 2018 -19, a grant of Rs.3.50 Crores was provided 
to ILI (including Rs.1 Crore additional grant for implementation of 7 th CPC). Out of 
Rs.5.97 Crores salary component, the Annual Report of ILI (2018 -19) reflects that 
actual expenditure on salaries and allowances was Rs.4.47 Crores and the rest of the 
expenditure is on various contributions as expenses on social security heads like 
provident fund, gratuity, medi -claim premium etc. It reflects healthy percentage of 
more than 75% grant to ILI under Salary Head. As per the Ministry of Finance 
guidelines on Autonomous Bodies and General Financial Rules (GFR), ILI is required 
to strive to be self -sustainable, enhancing generation of own funds through wide 
spread activities in the field of L aw. Hence, for the present Grant -in-Aid (Salary) 
given to ILI is considered to be reasonable. However, the Department as in the past, 
may consider any additional and emergent requirement of funds by ILI, having 
sufficient justification. 
3.18 ILI, as an ind ependent institution, is striving to become self -sustainable 
through wider educational/ project activities and generation of revenues. The further 
outreach of activities in various parts of country can be considered after its current 
consolidation phase. I LI has informed regarding the expansion of activities of the 
Institute on PAN-India basis, that the Institute has already set up 17 (seventeen) State 
Units/Chapters under various State High Courts and various conferences, and 
seminars are being organised b y such State Units. The Institute is also exploring the 
possibilities of opening of Chapters in other states and expansion of activities by all 
State Units.  
3.19 The recommendation of the 96 th Report of the Departmental related 
Parliamentary Standing Comm ittee on Personnel, Public Grievances, Law & Justice 
on Demand for Grants (2018 -19) for providing INI status to ILI is under examination 
in Department of Legal Affairs, in concert with ILI. In this connection, ILI on 
31.05.2019 was requested to first consi der increasing their activities and academic 
courses to provide legal knowledge to large number of students. Thereafter, ILI may 
approach the Department of Legal Affairs for providing Institute of National 
Importance (INI) status to the ILI. Further inputs / comments of ILI in the matter are 
awaited. 
Committee’s further observation 
3.20 The Committee has noted the reply of the Department . The Committee 
feels that as per the information furnished by the Department, the Indian Law 
Institute (ILI) needs to expa nd its activities, research and outreach before 
applying for Institute of National Importance status. The Committee feels that 
for expanding its activities/research, the ILI may require additional manpower 
and financial resources and therefore, it needs to  generate funds from research, 
education and consultancy, etc. The Committee also understands that the 
existing revenue generation model of ILI may not be able to sustain requirement 
of financial resources for upgrading its infrastructure and research acti vities. 
The Committee, therefore, recommends that the ILI should prepare a blueprint 
in this regard and submit the same for the consideration of the Department. The 
Department may apprise the Committee of the actions taken by it on the 
blueprint submitted by the ILI. 

27 
 
Recommendation/Observation of the Committee 
3.21 The Committee observes that as against the projection of Rs. 1490 crore for 
CSS Scheme for Infrastructure Development of Subordinate Judiciary, only Rs 754 
crore was allocated, which is a telling  reduction of 50 percent approx. over the 
projections made to Ministry of Finance and 23 percent approx. over RE 2019 -20. 
The Committee feels that reduction of funds may adversely affect optimal execution of 
schemes and the shortfall of 50 percent approx. over projections is too large to be 
ignored. The Committee, accordingly, recommends that the funds allocated may be 
reconsidered during the RE 2020 -21, depending upon the progress of the work.          
                                                   (Para 2.42) 
Action Taken / proposed to be taken by the Department 
 
3.22 It is the primary responsibility of the State Governments to provide adequate 
judicial infrastructure for the Subordinate Judiciary. The Centrally Sponsored Scheme 
for Development of Infrastructure Facilities for Judiciary is being implemented to 
augment the resources of the State Governments in this regard. The assistance of the 
Central Government under the Scheme is always subject to availability of the funds. 
The projection was initially done based on the large funds requirement received from 
the States/UTs under the Scheme. States are advised to spend additional funds from 
their own resources. Rs. 710.00 crore was allocated under the Scheme during last 
financial year (2019-20), which was released among the States/UTs. Funds under the 
Scheme were enhanced  to Rs. 982.00 crore at the RE stage, an additional amount of 
Rs. 272.00 crore, which were fully utilized. Rs. 754.00 crore has been allocated under 
the Scheme in the current financial year (2020 -21). Efforts will be made to get 
additional funds at RE stage by requesting Ministry of Finance at appropriate time. 
 
Committee’s further observation 
 
3.23 The Committee appreciates the optimism of the Department in terms of 
approaching    the   Ministry   of Finance for  additional funds for  Centrally 
Sponsored Scheme for Development of Infrastructure facilities for Subordinate 
Judiciary. The Committee is of the view that inadequate infrastructure of 
Subordinate Courts are one of the major causes of delayed justice and therefore, 
paucity of funds should not hamper the ongoing projects under the scheme of 
Centrally Sponsored Scheme for Development of Infrastructure facilities for 
subordinate Judiciary. 
Recommendation/Observation of the Committee 
3.24 The Committee feels that there should not be inordinate delay in filling up of 
vacancies of judges in High Courts. As on 20 th February, 2020, 37% (appx.) (397) of 
the sanctioned strength of judges (1079) in High courts are lying vacant. The 
Committee has expressed its concern in the past in its Eighty -seventh, Ninety-first and 
Ninety-sixth Reports on the issue. Every year approximately 35 to 40 percent of posts 
of High Court Judges remains unfilled, which is a shared concern. Except High Court 
of Sikkim, all 24 High Courts have number of vacancies. The vacancy position of 
judges is very high in High Courts of Allahabad (55), Calcutta (32), Punjab and 
Haryana (30), Rajasthan (29), Gujarat (25), Delhi (25) and Bombay (23). It is 

28 
 
understood that initiation of process of appointment should commence six months 
prior to the occurrence of vacancy by the concerned High Court as   per the 
Memorandum of Procedure (MoP).  Even though dates of the retirement of judges are 
well known in advance to the Registry  of the High Court, the recommendation by 
High Court collegium generally takes six to fifty two months, which result in eventual 
delay in the issuance of warrant of  appointment by the President of India, as the 
Department of Justice is required to consult the Governor and the Chief Minister of 
the concerned State and verify antecedents of the proposed candidates  before sending 
the name along with intelligence inputs  to the Supreme Court Collegium for 
consideration. There are also instances of high rate of rejection by the Supreme Court 
Collegium.                                                                  (Para 3.13) 
Action Taken / proposed to be taken by the Department 
 
3.25 As per the Memorandum of Procedure for appointments and transfers of Chief 
Justices and Judges of High Courts, the initiation of proposal for appointment of 
Judges of High Courts vests with Chief Justices of concerned High Courts.  The 
Government only considers those names which have been recommended by the Chief 
Justice of India and Chief Justices of High Courts. 
 
3.26 As on 12.05.2020, there are 02 posts of Judges vacant in the Supreme Court 
and there are 381 vacancies of Judges in the various High Courts.   
 
3.27 Filling up of vacancies in the High Courts is a continuous, integrated and 
collaborative process, between the Executive and the Judiciary. It requires 
consultation and approval from various Constitutional Authorities. Hence, the time for 
filling up of vacancies of the Judges in the higher Judiciary cannot be indicated.  
3.28 While every effort is made to fill up the existing vacancies expeditiously, 
vacancies of Judges in High Courts do keep on arising on account of retirement, 
resignation or elevation of Judges and also due to increase in the strength of Judges.  
 
3.29 Due to combined efforts of the Government and Judiciary, the following 
appointments (calendar year -wise) have been made in the Supreme Court and High 
Courts:- 
 
 Appointment of Judges in 
Supreme Court and High 
Courts 
2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 
(1.1.2020 to 
12.5.2020) 
Total 
Judges appointed in the 
Supreme Court 
04 05 08 10 - 27 
Judges appointed in the High 
Courts 
126 115 108 81 44 474 
Additional Judges made  
Permanent in High Courts 
131 31 115 68 34 379 
 
Committee’s further observation 
3.30 The Committee has noted that as on 1 st August, 2020, out of total 
sanctioned strength of 1079 posts of judges of High courts, 294 are vacant. The 
Committee is of the considered view that high number of vacancies in High 

29 
 
Courts are causing large number of pendency of cases in High courts. The 
Committee accordingly, feels that the Department should impress upon the High 
Courts, especially High Courts of Allahabad, Calcutta, Punjab and Haryana, 
Rajasthan, Gujarat, Delhi and Bombay to follow the timelines prescribed by the 
Apex Court in the Second Judges case while recommending names of judges. 
Recommendation/Observation of the Committee 
3.31 The Committee acknowledges apprehensions expressed by some High Courts 
with regard to filling up of vacant positions of judges due to infrastructural 
constraints. The Committee, accordingly, recommends the Department to request the 
State Governments to create infrastructure facilities for High Courts so that 
infrastructural constraints do not become a hindrance in the appointment of Judges. 
                              (Para 3.15) 
Action Taken / proposed to be taken by the Department 
 
3.32 The Department has been administering the Centrally Sponsored Scheme for 
the Development of Infrastructure Facilities for Judiciary since 1993 -94. It covers the 
construction o f Court halls and Residential Units of Judges and Judicial Officers 
covering District and Subordinate Courts. High Courts are not covered under the 
Scheme. Presently, 19,719 Court Halls and 17,451 Residential Units for Judicial 
Officers of District and Sub ordinate Courts are available in the country and 2698 
Court Halls and 1810 Residential Units are under construction. 
 
8.33 Financial requirements of High Courts are met from State Government funds. 
However, States have been requested vide DO letter dated 01.5.2020 to create 
infrastructure facilities for High Courts as suggested by the Committee. 
  
Committee’s further observation 
 
3.34 The Committee notes the reply of the Department. The Committee is 
aware of the fact that as per the entry 11A of the Concurrent List under Seventh 
Schedule of the Constitution of India, administration of justice is responsibility 
of both the Union and States, however, the Committee feels that infrastructural 
constraints where the centre can contribute immensely, should n ot come in the 
way of filling of vacancies of judges in High   Courts   as it   contributes  to 
pendency of cases in high courts thereby, depriving  litigants of timely delivery of 
justice. Accordingly, the Committee recommends the Department to undertake 
an in-depth study to understand infrastructural requirement of each High Court 
of the country and apprise the Committee of its findings within six months. 
 
Recommendation/Observation of the Committee 
3.35 The Committee notes that pendency in courts is on th e rise.  It understands 
that the cases instituted in particular year are not disposed in the same year leading 
to addition of further pendency to the existing backlog. The pendency in Subordinate 
Courts, High Courts and Supreme Court has increased by 21 pe rcent, 29 percent and 
8 percent, respectively.  The Committee also takes into account the findings of the 
Economic Survey (2018 -19) about the national average of Case Clearance Rate 

30 
 
(CCR) of courts whichis 87.5 percent.  However, District and Subordinate C ourts in 
the States of Gujarat, Odisha and Tamil Nadu have reportedly achieved 100 percent 
CCR as per the India Justice Report (2019). Himachal Pradesh High Court has 
reportedly the highest Case Clearance Rate at 109 percent             (Para 3.22) 
Action Taken / proposed to be taken by the Department 
 
3.36 This Department vide DO letters dated 30.04.2020 has requested the 
Registrars General of all High Courts of India that the Case Clearance Rate with 
respect to the High Court and District and Subor dinate Courts under the jurisdiction 
of that High Court may please be made available as desired by the Parliamentary 
Standing Committee by 15.05.2020. Case Clearance Rates of the High Court and their 
subordinate Courts from all High Courts are awaited exce pt for High Courts of 
Gujarat, Chhattisgarh, Jammu and Kashmir, Kerala and Patna, as given below: 
 
S.No. High Court Details 
1.  High Court of Gujarat High Court – 2019 – 82% 
Subordinate Courts – 2019 – 92% 
2.  High Court of Jammu and 
Kashmir 
High Court – 2017-2019 – 76.24% 
Subordinate Courts – 2017-2019 – 92.60% 
3.  High Court of Kerala 
High Court: 2016 – 89.54% 
2017 – 88.40% 
2018 – 84.79% 
2019 – 95.28% 
Subordinate Courts: 2016 – 89.67% 
2017 – 87.50% 
2018 – 97.04% 
2019 – 103.95%  
4.  High Court of Patna High Court – 2019 – 86.29% 
Subordinate Courts – 2019 – 67.73%  
 
3.37 Secretary (Justice) has taken up the matter with High Courts in his meetings 
taken through Video Conference with all High Courts and State Governments from 
18th to 22 nd May, 2020 and has  requested them to expeditiously provide necessary 
information to the Department of Justice for placing before the Department related 
Parliamentary Standing Committee. 
 
Committee’s further observation 
3.38 The Committee appreciates the Department for furni shing Case 
Clearance Rate (CCR) data of some High Courts and Subordinate Courts. The 
Committee desires that CCR data of remaining High Courts and Subordinate 
Courts may be collated and furnished for its consideration. The Committee feels 
that CCR data need s to be periodically collected and integrated with the 
National Judicial Data Grid (NJDG) as it will maintain transparency and ensure 
judicial accountability. 
  
Recommendation/Observation of the Committee 

31 
 
 
3.39 The Committee observes that pendency of cases in Supreme Court, High 
Courts and District and Subordinate Courts have increased by 8%, 29%, and 21%, 
respectively, from the year 2018. The highest number of cases in Subordinate courts 
are pending in the State of Uttar Pradesh (76,44,642), followed by Maharashtra 
(38,09,995)   Bihar (28,62,829), West Bengal (22,85,005) and Rajasthan (16,81,942).  
In the case of High Courts the highest numbers of cases are pending in High Courts 
of Allahabad (7,31,647), followed by Punjab and Haryana (5,34,524), Rajas than 
(4,68,402), Madras (4,03,407), Bombay (2,67,809) and Karnataka (2,47,812). The 
Committee is of the view that pendency of cases and vacancy positions of judges are 
closely linked with each other as some High Courts having high number of vacant 
positions of judges like High Courts of Allahabad (52), Punjab and Haryana (30), 
Rajasthan (29) and Bombay (24) are  also having  high number of pendency of cases. 
The Committee, accordingly, feels that vacancy positions of judges needs to be filled 
up so that pendency may be reduced.                (Para 3.26) 
Action Taken / proposed to be taken by the Department 
 
3.40 As per the Constitutional framework, the selection and appointment of judges 
in subordinate courts is the responsibility of the High Courts and Sta te Governments 
concerned. However, the Union Government, on its part, has been taking up the 
matter of filling up of vacant positions in District & Subordinate Courts with the 
States and High Courts from time to time. This Department vide DO letter dated 
30.04.2020 has requested the Registrars General of all High Courts of India that 
necessary action may please be taken by the State Government/High Court for 
expeditious filling up of vacancies in District and Subordinate Courts as per the 
guidelines made by  the Supreme Court in the Malik Mazhar Sultan Case. The 
Registrars General were further requested to furnish an Action Taken Note on the 
above lines as desired by the Parliamentary Standing Committee by 15.05.2020. 
Action Taken Notes on expeditious filling up of vacancies in District and Subordinate 
Courts are awaited from all High Courts except for High Courts of  Gujarat, Manipur, 
Karnataka, Uttarakhand, Bombay, Punjab & Haryana, Jammu & Kashmir and Patna. 
3.41  Secretary (Justice) discussed the matter in his meetings taken through Video 
Conference with Registrars General of all High Courts and Law Secretaries of all 
State Governments/UTs from 18th to 22nd May, 2020 and requested them to 
expeditiously fill up the vacancies of Judicial Officers in District a nd Subordinate 
Courts. 
 
Committee’s further observation 
 
3.42 The Committee has noted that majority of cases in the country are 
pending in District and Subordinate Courts and accordingly recommends the 
Department to impress upon the State Governments and H igh Courts to  fill up 
the vacancies of judicial officers as per the guidelines issued by the Supreme 
Court in Malik Mazhar Sultan Case. The Department is further requested to 
apprise the Committee of the actions taken in this regard in its Action Taken 
Notes. 

32 
 
Recommendation/Observation of the Committee 
3.43 The infrastructure for High Courts has to be met from the Budget of the State 
Government.  Some of the High Courts face an infrastructural constraint which comes 
in the way to fill up sanctioned strength in those High Courts.  The Committee notes 
that the expenditure of both the Union and States Governments on administration of 
justice hovers around 0.08 to 0.09 percent of the GDP.   The State Governments, may, 
therefore, be impressed upon to spend the amount from the enhanced devolution of 
fund from the Un ion to State Government upon recommendation by Fourteenth 
Finance Commission, to support judiciary to increase its productivity.   It not only 
ensures the speedy justice to the people of the country, but also helps to enhance 
image of our country in the Ru le of Law matrix as well as ease of doing business 
matrix.                                           (Para 3.29) 
Action Taken / proposed to be taken by the Department 
 
3.44 The Department has been administering the Centrally Sponsored Scheme for 
the Development of Infrastructure Facilities for Judiciary since 1993 -94. It covers the 
construction of Court halls and Residential Units of Judges and Judicial Officers 
covering District and Subordinate Courts. High Courts are not covered under the 
Scheme. States h ave been asked vide letter dated 26.09.2016 to utilize funds for 
justice delivery from the enhanced devolution of funds  as recommended by 
14th Finance Commission. 
 
3.45 Secretary (Justice) emphasized on this aspect in his meetings taken through 
Video Conference with Registrars General of all High Courts and Law Secretaries of 
all State Governments/UTs from 18th to 22nd May, 2020. 
 
Committee’s further observation 
 
3.46 The Committee feels that infrastructural constraints should not come in 
the way of filling  of vacancies of judges in High Courts as it contributes to 
pendency of cases in high courts thereby, depriving litigants of timely delivery of 
justice. Accordingly, the Committee recommends the Department to undertake a 
study to understand infrastructural  requirement of each High Court of the 
country and apprise the Committee of the findings of this study within six 
months. 
Fast Track Courts and Fast Track Special Courts 
Recommendation/Observation of the Committee 
3.47 The Committee appreciates the initiative of the Department for setting up Fast 
Track Special Courts in the country for expeditious trial and disposal of cases 
relating to rape and cases under POCSO Act, 2012 pending in various courts.  The 
Committee is of the view that adequate resources, bot h financial and human 
resources, may be provided in a time bound manner to achieve the objectives of the 
FTSC scheme. The Committee further recommends that the impact of the scheme may 
be evaluated after the completion of one year of the scheme to identify  the challenges 

33 
 
and the same may be apprised to the Committee in the Action Taken Replies of the 
Department.                                                               (Para 3.35) 
Action Taken / proposed to be taken by the Department 
 
3.48 In furtherance to The Criminal Law (Amendment) Act, 2018 and in keeping 
with directions of the Hon’ble Supreme Court in Suo Motu Writ Petition (Cr) No. 
1/2019,   1023 Fast Track Special Courts (FTSCs), including 389 exclusive POCSO 
Courts are to be set up across the country for expeditious trial and disposal of pending 
cases pertaining to Rape and Prevention of Children from Sexual Offences (POCSO) 
Act, 2012, in a time -bound manner under Centrally Sponsored Scheme. The Scheme 
is for one year spread over two  Financial Years i.e. 2019 -20 and 2020 -21. The total 
cost of the project is estimated to be Rs.767.25 crore which has a Central Share of 
Rs.474 crore (to be met from Nirbhaya Fund). 
 
3.49 Central share of funds to the tune of Rs. 140  Crore, allocated duri ng the F.Y 
2019-20) has been released to 28 States for setting up of 823 numbers of  FTSCs 
including 363 exclusive POCSO courts. While Arunachal Pradesh has conveyed its 
inability to join the scheme, the State of West Bengal and UT of A&N Island have 
been r eminded and are being pursued vigorously for setting up FTSCs/ exclusive 
POCSO courts expeditiously.  
 
3.50 As the fund release for the scheme started only in Oct 2019, as directed the 
impact of the scheme will be evaluated after completion of one year.  T he outcome of 
the evaluation report will be shared, as and when completed, with the Hon’ble 
Committee. 
 
3.51 The FTSC Scheme has Central share of Rs.474 cr, out of which Rs.140 cr. had 
been allocated and released in Financial Year 2019 -20 and Rs.150 cr is allocated in 
BE in 2020 -21. The balance amount of Rs.184 Cr (474 -140-150)   will be sought at 
RE stage in 2020-21. 
 
Committee’s further observation 
3.52 The Committee observes that out of the 1023 Fast Track Special Courts 
(FTSCs) proposed to be established in one year, financial allocations for only 823 
FSTCs have been released to States. Further, no data with regard to 
establishment, functioning and conviction rate of these courts, have been 
furnished. The Committee accordingly, is of the view that in ord er to assess the 
functioning of FSTCs, an impact evaluation should be conducted and a report 
should be brought out on such evaluation particularly their efficiency in terms of 
conviction rate in such courts vis-à-vis regular courts.   
e-Court Mission Mode Project (MMP) - Phase-II 
Recommendation/Observation of the Committee 
3.53 The Committee has noted that 95% of the jails have been linked to the court 
complex with video-conferencing facility.  Only remaining 67 jails, which is 5% of the 

34 
 
total has to be linked.  Simultaneous video-conferencing facility in the court complex 
and co rresponding jails, besides expediting trial of alleged accused alsoreduce 
footfalls in court complex and expenditure on the part of State Government on 
account of logistics and accompanying escorting officials.  The Department of Justice 
has inter -alia bee n providing grant -in-aid under E -court Mission Mode Project 
Phase-II for the purpose.  However, State Government should take steps to utilise 
10% enhanced funds released as share of State Government as recommended by the 
Fourteenth Financial Commission for  such purposes, which would undoubtedly 
expedite the justice delivery process.                                       (Para 3.45) 
Action Taken / proposed to be taken by the Department 
 
3.54 The facility of Video Conferencing between the Prison and the Court Complex 
merits special attention which would substantially reduce the burden on Police 
machinery with respect to the movement of Prisoners. This would also facilitate 
Police Officers in giving evidence without physically going to the Court unless 
absolutely necessary. 
 
3.55 As per available feedback, the inadequacy of the VC facility in the Prisons is a 
big stumbling block. As most Prisons have only one VC facility available, the virtual 
production of different prisoners before different courts on the same  time becomes a 
major challenge. 
 
3.56 Secretary/DoJ in his letter to Home secretary has requested him to take up the 
matter with various State Governments to install adequate number of Video 
Conferencing facilities including some redundancy to take care o f the malfunctioning 
units 
 
Committee’s further observation 
3.57 The Committee feels that the crisis of Covid -19 pandemic has made us 
realize that virtual court is new reality and augmentation and operationalization 
of video conferencing and other digital facilities in jails and courts have become 
essential for justice delivery institutions and process in the country. The 
Committee accordingly, recommends the Department to augment and 
operationalize video conferencing and other digital facilities in all jai ls, police 
stations and courts in the country. 
Gram Nyayalayas 
Recommendation/Observation of the Committee 
3.58 The pace of establishment of Gram Nyayalayas has been very slow as only 
353 Gram Nyayalayas have been notified by eleven States so far and out of these only 
211 are functional in nine States with cent percent operationalisation in the states of 
Punjab, Rajasthan and Kerala. The Committee observes that Gram Nyayalayas are 
yet to made operational in the States of Karnataka and Goa, even though they have 
notified the Gram Nyayalayas. Further, the ratio of notification vis -à-vis 
operationalisation is very poor in the States of Uttar Pradesh and Maharashtra, in 

35 
 
particular. The Committee recommends tha t for non -operationalisation of Gram 
Nyayalayas after their notification, views of High Courts of those States may be 
solicited and submitted to the Committee in the Action taken Replies to this Report by 
the Department. The Committee, further, recommends the Department to apprise the 
Committee of the actions taken by it on the Evaluation study conducted by Indian Law 
Institute.                                            (Para 3.50) 
Action Taken / proposed to be taken by the Department 
 
3.59 In terms of Section 3 (1) of the Gram Nyayalayas Act, 2008, it is for the State 
Governments to establish Gram Nyayalayas in consultation with the respective High 
Courts. As per information made available by State Governments / High Courts, 395 
Gram Nyayala yas have been notified so far by 12 States, out of these, 223 are 
operational in nine States at present. 
 
Sl. No. Name of the State Gram Nyayalyas 
Notified 
Gram Nyayalayas 
operational 
1 Madhya Pradesh 89 89 
2 Rajasthan 45 45 
3 Karnataka 2 0 
4 Orissa 22 16 
5 Maharashtra 39 24 
6 Jharkhand 6 1 
7 Goa 2 0 
8 Punjab 2 2 
9 Haryana 3 2 
10 UP 113 14 
11 Kerala 30 30 
12 Andhra Pradesh 42 0 
Total 395 223 
   
3.60 The difficulties faced by States in setting up of Gram Nyayalayas were 
discussed in the meeting of the Law/Home Secretaries and Registrars General of the 
High Courts held on 19 - 20 April, 2012. One of the main reasons for the slow pace 
has been the reques t by the States for more financial assistance. Besides, response of 
the Bar, reluctance of police officials and other State functionaries to invoke 
jurisdiction of Gram Nyayalayas, non -availability of notaries and stamp vendors and 
more importantly, proble m of concurrent jurisdiction of regular courts, are other 
issues highlighted by the States which are coming in the way of speedy 
operationalization of the scheme.   As per decision taken in the  Conference of Chief 
Justices of High Courts and Chief Ministers of the States on 7th April, 2013 it is left to 
State Governments and High Courts to set up Gram Nyayalayas wherever feasible, 
taking into account their local problems. Concerned States and High Courts have been 
requested vide DO letter dated 01.5.2020 to operationalised the Gram Nyayalayas 
which have been notified but yet to become functional. 
 

36 
 
3.61 Secretary (Justice) has taken up the matter with High Courts in his meetings 
taken through Video Conference with all High Courts and State Governments from 
18th to 22nd May, 2020 and has requested them to provide information on the status 
of operationalisation of the Gram Nyayalayas which have been notified but yet to 
become functional to the Department of Justice for placing before the Department 
related Parliamentary Standing Committee. 
 
3.62 Further evaluation of the Scheme is being undertaken by the third party 
selected by the NITI Aayog. The report is awaited by the Department.  
 
Committee’s further observation 
 
3.63 The Committee understands that the Gram Nyayalayas Act was enacted 
to ensure inexpensive and speedy justice at doorsteps to the common people. 
However, the Committee is not happy with the pace of establishment of Gram 
Nyayalayas as only 395 Gram Nyayalayas  has been notified, and out of which 
only 223 have been made operational. The Committee notes that a third party 
evaluation of the Scheme is being undertaken by NITI Aayog and hopes that the 
evaluation report will recommend necessary corrective measures re quired to 
fully utilize the potential of Gram Nyayalayas in the justice delivery system. The 
Committee desires that the main findings of the evaluation report may be shared 
with the Committee for its consideration. 
National Legal Services Authority (NALSA) 
Recommendation/Observation of the Committee 
3.64 The Committee was apprised that an impact assessment and evaluation studies 
of Para Legal Volunteer Scheme of 2009, is underway, the findings of which would be 
available by April, 2020.  The Committee desires that findings of the study alongwith 
observations of the Department of Justice may be submitted to it with Action Taken 
Replies to the Committee. The Committee feels that PLVs are harbinger of legal 
awareness and legal aid which cannot be undermined in the society.  They reach to 
the marginalised in th e remote corner of the country and reduce the scope of cases 
reaching the Alternate Dispute Resolution mechanism or regular courts.  The 
Committee desires that the scheme of Para -legal volunteers need to be further 
strengthened for timely justice delivery.               (Para 3.54) 
Action Taken / proposed to be taken by the Department 
 
3.65 Para Legal Volunteers are engaged for creating awareness about the 
availability of legal aid and for bringing legal issues faced by the public to the notice 
of the Legal Services Institutions for their redressal. Payment of honorarium is made 
to them only for the days they are so engaged. 
3.66 Para Legal Volunteers are engaged for specific works on day to day basis thus 
it is the number of engagements of PLVs which matter s and not the number of PLVs 
itself, in a particular district. 
3.67 The impact assessment and evaluation study of PLVs by a consultancy firm is 
underway and shall resume post lock -down. The report will be submitted to the 
Hon’ble Committee in due course. 

37 
 
Committee’s further observation 
3.68 The Committee is of the view that Para Legal Volunteers play important 
role in the legal aid services and accordingly, recommends that the important 
findings of the impact assessment and evaluation report along with action taken 
by the Department on the re port may be furnished to the Committee for its 
consideration. 
ELECTION COMMISSION OF INDIA 
Recommendation/Observation of the Committee 
3.69 The committee observes that the allocations to the Election 
Commission of India in BE 2020-21 is not as per the proj ection made to the 
Ministry for Finance. The allocations have been reduced under the Head 
Voters Awareness Programme, which may affect the digital outreach and 
awareness programmes of the Commission. However,  the  Committee  also 
observes that ECI has not  been able to utilize its funds under the Heads 
‘Voters Awareness’ during current Financial  Year  despite  the  year  being  
year  of General Election to the Seventeenth Lok Sabha. The Committee, 
accordingly, recommends the ECI to improve its funds utiliz ation ratio under 
the Heads where under utilisation persists. The Committee also recommends 
the Ministry to  enhance the allocations  for  construction  of  additional  
office  buildings  and Voters Awareness programmes at RE  stage,  so  that  
the  activities  and programmes of the Commission do not suffer.     (Para 2.53) 
Action Taken / proposed to be taken by the Department 
3.70 ECI has been working consistently to improve the scale and quality of 
its voter awareness initiatives. ECI’s digital outreach shall continue to grow, 
especially through its social media platforms and voter facilitation apps. 
Further, ECI has proposed to de velop six regional centers in different parts of 
the country. This has been suitably reflected in the Demand of Grants for the 
financial year 2020-21. One of the most important voter awareness initiative 
— Electoral Literacy Clubs — shall be strengthened t hrough a robust digital 
monitoring mechanism. 
 
Committee’s further observation 
 
3.71 The Committee appreciates the initiatives such as Electoral Literacy Club 
(ELC) for sensitizing voters regarding various electoral processes and their 
electoral rights. The Committee is of the view that more and more ELCs should 
be encouraged in rural areas and areas inhabited by disadvantaged 
groups/communities for their political empowerment. The Committee 
accordingly, recommends the Commission to optimally utilize the fu nds 
allocations made for voters’ awareness programme for a healthy and vibrant 
democracy. 
 
 

38 
 
Seeding of Aadhar with Electors’ Photo Identity Card (EPIC)  
Recommendation/Observation of the Committee 
3.72   The Committee understands that free and fair elections are the bedrock 
of democracy and the latter is a Basic Feature of the Constitution. An error -
free   Electoral   Roll   is   sine qua non of free and fair election. The 
Committee has been advocat ing linkage of unique Aadhaar ID card number 
with Voter I-card which would streamline alterations in EPIC during change 
of ordinary residence by the electors. The incidence of multiple entry could 
also be eliminated which is required in participative democ racy. The 
committee, therefore, recommends that the Government may undertake 
appropriate actions for the purpose of linking unique Aadhaar Card number 
with Voter ID card to purify the electoral roll, which is in larger interest of 
democratic policy.                                                                              (Para 5.14) 
Action Taken / proposed to be taken by the Department 
3.73     The Commission has already sent its proposals on linking of Aadhar 
Card Number with the voter Id to purify ele ctoral to the Ministry of Law and 
justice vide its letter No. 3/ER/2018/SDR dated 13 th August, 2019. Extract of 
the proposals sent to the M/o Law and Justice vide its letter dated 22/11/1999 
is as under. 
“In order to leverage the availability of unique ide ntification 
number by way of Aadhaar numbers for purifying the electoral 
rolls, the Commission had, in 2015, started collecting the 
Aadhaar Numbers of electors who volunteered to provide the 
same. However, the programme had to be suspended in view of 
the directions in the Interim Order dated 11 thAugust, 2015, of the 
Hon’ble Supreme Court in WP(C) No. 494 of 2012 (Justice K S 
Puttuswamy’s case), prohibiting using of information about 
Aadhaar details for any purpose other than the PDS Scheme and 
LPG Distribution Scheme. 
Hon’ble Supreme Court has since passed its final judgment in the 
matters relating to Aadhaar issue. The Commission has 
considered the matter further in view of the directions in the 
Judgment.  The Commission is keen to make use of the unique ID  
numbers provided by Aadhaar Scheme for cleaning the electoral 
rolls. An error free electoral roll forms the basis for a credible 
election. Therefore, it would be in national interest to use 
the Aadhaar  Numbers for verification purposes to ensure 
the identity of applicants and to prevent multiple enrolment 
of same person in the electoral roll. In view of the above  
quoted  observations   made by the Hon’ble Supreme Court 
it is not possible to link Aadhaa r with EPIC (Voter ID) 
without bringing appropriate statutory amendments.  
Accordingly, the Commission proposed  the  appropriate  

39 
 
amendments  may be made in the Representation of the  
People  Act,  1950 and  in the Aadhaar  Act  for permitting the 
election machinery  to  obtain  and  use  the  Aadhaar  
Numbers for the purposes of electoral roll as  a  back -end  
exercise.  It is, further, clarified  that the Aadhaar Numbers 
will not be put in public domain.” 
3.74     The proposal is yet to be approved. 
 
Committee’s further observation 
3.75   The Committee appreciates the initiative of the Commission to link Aadhar 
number with Electoral Roll and also recommending for initiating necessary 
amendments in the Representation of the People Act, 1950 and in the 
Aadhar Act to the Government. The Committee is of the view that linking 
of Aadhar number with Electoral Roll will purify electoral rolls and 
consequently reduce electoral malpractices. Accordingly, the Committee 
recommends the Commission to pursue the issue wi th the Ministry of 
Law and Justice for amending relevant laws for linking Aadhar with 
Electoral Rolls. 
One Nation One Electoral Roll 
Recommendation/Observation of the Committee 
3.76     The  Committee  observes  that  there  is  a  lot  of commonalities 
between the  elections   to   Lok   Sabha and  State Legislative Assemblies on 
the one hand and that of  to local  bodies  on  the  other.  The eligibility 
criterion of the elector for all  three aforesaid elections is the same. It is the 
same individual who is called upon by two different Constitutional authorities 
to cast his/ hour vote at different point of time for different bodies in the same 
territorial constituencies in which his/her names is registered in the Electoral 
Roll. Furthermore, the First- Past- the -Post system is followed to declare the 
winner in all three elections.  Even the wordings used about Electoral Roll in 
Articles 324 and 243(K) and 243 Z (A) of the Constitution ar e identical.  The 
Committee has been recommending   time and   again in its 88 th, 91st and 96th 
Reports for Common Electoral Roll from local body to Lok Sabha Elections. It 
would not only save time, energy and resources of concerned State 
Government but al so obviate confusion in the mind of voters. The data of 
electors available in National Voters Service Portal (NVSP) maintained by 
the Election Commission of India could be readily used by the State Election 
Commissions without hassle. Electronic Voting Mac hine  and  VVPAT  which 
are available with the Election Commission  of  India  can  also  be  utilized  
by  the State  Election Commission   for  election  to  local  bodies   having   
Common Electoral Roll. The Committee, therefore, again recommends for 
common electoral roll for local body to Lok Sabha Election.                                                                                                       
                                                                 (Para 5.28)
   
  

40 
 
Action Taken / proposed to be taken by the Department 
3.77     The Commission has already sent its proposal on use of Common 
Electoral Rolls at elections conducted by the Election Commission and the 
State Election Commissions vide letter dated 22/11/1999 and subsequentl y 
reiterated in several times. It was reiterated vide the Hon’b1e CEC’s D.O 
letter dated 26 th July 2019. Extract of the proposals sent  to  the  M/o  Law  
and Justice vide its letter dated 22/11/1999 is as under. 
 
“Use of Common Electoral Rolls at elections conducted by the 
Election Commission and the State Election Commissions"  
(Proposal made in Chief Election Commissioner's letter dated 22nd 
November, 1999 addressed to the Prime Minister)  
Superintendence, direct ion and control of the preparation and 
revision of electoral rolls for elections to the House of the People and 
the State Legislative Assemblies is the function entrusted to the 
Election Commission by Article 324(1) of the Constitution. Likewise, 
superintendence, direction and control of the preparation and revision 
of electoral rolls for elections to the Local Bodies has been entrusted 
to the State Election Commissioners by Articles 243K and 243ZA of 
the Constitution, as inserted by the Constitution (73rd and 74th 
Amendments) Acts, 1992. The preparation and revision of electoral 
rolls for Parliamentary and Assembly Constituencies are governed by 
the  provisions of the R.P. Act, 1950 made by Parliament, whereas,  
the preparation  and revision  of rolls for l ocal bodies elections are 
regulated by the State laws of the State concerned. Most of the State 
laws provide that the electoral rolls prepared by the Election 
Commission for Parliamentary and Assembly elections should be the 
basis for the preparation and r evision of rolls for local bodies 
elections. Whereas, in some of the States,  it is further  provided  that  
the Parliamentary and Assembly rolls will be adopted in toto for local 
bodies elections, in other States, the Parliamentary and Assembly 
Rolls are to be  adopted  only as  the draft rolls for local body 
elections and they are subjected  to  further modifications by way of 
inclusions and deletions. In some of the cases, even the qualifying 
dates for the Parliamentary/Assembly rolls and local body roll s are 
different. This not only creates confusion among the electors because 
their names may be present in one roll but absent in the other, or vice 
versa, but also results in duplication of effort and expenditure. In 
almost all the eases, the same machiner y at the field level is entrusted 
the job of preparing and revising rolls for both types of elections. The 
electoral rolls for Parliamentary and Assembly Constituencies are 
prepared, and revised under the strict superintendence, direction and 
control of the Election Commission, with due care and caution and by 
incurring considerable expenditure. It will be a huge national saving, 
if there are common rolls for all elections, and  the Parliamentary and 
Assembly rolls are used for local bodies elections also, by being 

41 
 
adopted and rearranged, by the method of ‘Cut and Paste'  according  
to the wards or polling areas of the local bodies. This will not pose 
any problems to the electoral machinery in the field as it is the same 
at the ground level. This may need so me minor amendments to the 
local laws of the States concerned, but will sub -serve great national 
interest of economy in government expenditure on elections. It may be 
important to note that in order to reduce such expenditure, many of 
the common items of p olling materials like, ballot boxes, are already 
being used for all elections to Parliament, State Legislatures and 
Local Bodies.” 
3.78 Further, in 2004, in Consolidated Proposals for Electoral Reforms, the 
Election Commission had proposed that there shoul d be common rolls for all 
elections, with the Parliamentary and Assembly rolls adapted to suit the needs 
of local bodies’ elections. This is primarily recommended by the Commission 
for the purpose of saving or expenditure and administrative effort and to m ake 
the process more efficient. 
3.79 Election Commission of India has  issued  instructions  to  the  Chief 
Electoral Officers of all the States /UTs vide its letter dated 10th December, 
2008 to share the computerized electoral database with the Stat Elect ion 
Commissions so that they could  generate  electoral  rolls according  to the  
extent  of their panchayat/local body wards from the same database. The terms 
and conditions for sharing of electoral roll database have also been specified. 
3.80 It is also stated that the common electoral roll for local bodies and Lok 
Sabha elections may need amendments to the relevant provision of 
Registration of Electors Rule 1960 and The Representation of the People’s 
Act, 1950. 
3.81 The proposa1 is yet to be approved. 
 
Committee’s further observation 
3.82 The Committee observes that the proposal for common Electoral Roll in 
the country was initiated by the Commission nearly 20 years back, however, it is 
yet to be materialized. The Committee is in agreement with the views of the 
Commission that creation of common Electoral Roll in the country from 
Panchayat to Parliament will  save unnecessary expenditure and reduce 
administrative works of various electoral agencies and at the same 
time making the electoral process more effi cient. The Committee, 
accordingly, feels that Commission and the Ministry of Law and 
Justice may examine and prepare a brief note on the issue of Common 
Electoral Roll, along with the reasons for not taking up the issue 
despite reiteration by the Election Commission in the year 2019 and 
apprise the same to the Committee.  
 
LEGISLATIVE DEPARTMENT 
Pre and Post Legislative Scrutiny of Laws 

42 
 
Recommendation/Observation of the Committee 
3.83 The Committee is apprised that the Institute of Legislative Drafting and 
Research (ILDR) of the Department trains draftsmen from Union and State 
Governments to improve quality of legislative drafting. However, the Committee 
observes that there is real dearth of good quality draftsmen in the Country. The 
Committee desires that drafting errors and ambiguity in the law may be avoided by 
making effective pre-legislative consultation with stakeholders. For that purpose, the 
Bills should be available in regional languages for wider consultation with 
stakeholders. The Committee also desires that Acts allocated to the Department under 
the Allocation of Business Rules, 1961 may be periodically reviewed on the basis of 
its use as part of post legislative scrutiny. The loopholes and infirmities pointed to the 
Department by the stakeholders of the law may be submitted to the Committee in its 
action taken replies.                                                                                       (Para. 5.3) 
Action Taken / proposed to be taken by the Department 
3.84 It is submit ted that so far as making availability of Bills in Regional 
Languages is concerned it is submitted that the regional language Unit is responsible 
for preparation of the regional text of the Central Acts only. If desired the Bills in 
Regional languages may also be prepared, if proper setup or infrastructure like Hindi 
Branch of O.L. Wing is made available or provided. 
 
Committee’s further observation 
3.85 The Committee notes the reply of the Department on the issue of 
availability of Bills in regional langua ges. The Committee also notes that the 
Department has not furnished its replies with respect to the post legislative 
scrutiny of Acts and accordingly, desires that replies pertaining to post legislative 
scrutiny of Acts may be furnished to it in the Action  Taken Notes of the 
Department. 
Recommendation/Observation of the Committee 
3.86 The Committee in its Ninety-sixth report on the Demands for Grants (2018-19) 
has recommended for bringing out authoritative text of the Constitution of India and 
other Central  Acts in all the language mentioned under the Eighth Schedule of the 
Constitution. The Committee observes that the Department has not been able to bring 
authoritative text of the Constitution of India and other Central Acts in all Scheduled 
languages of th e Constitution. The Committee, accordingly, recommends to the 
Department to expedite the translation works of Constitution/Acts/Subordinate 
Legislations in remaining scheduled languages.                                             (Para 5.6) 
Action Taken / proposed to be taken by the Department 
 
3.87  This wing is making all efforts to publish the Constitution of India in all the 
languages as enshrined in the Eighth schedule of the constitution of India and so far 
have succeeded to publish in sixteen regional languages and it is available on the 
official website on the Ministry . The Constitution of India in Dogri and Kashmiri 
Languages is at advance stage and efforts are being made to publish the same shortly. 

43 
 
The sixth and updated edition of the Constitution of India in Urdu, Eighth Edition of 
Marathi, third edition of Tamil and second edition of Punjabi is under progress. 
 
3.88 Due to non -availability of sufficient infrastructure and sufficient staff in the 
official languages wing of the Ministry of Law and Justice , the Official Languages 
Wing of the L egislative Department in the Ministry of Law and Justice in close 
collaboration and co-operation with the respective State Government has been getting 
the Central Acts translated in eleven regional languages by the concerned State 
Governments. Therefore, k eeping in view of the importance of Central Acts in the 
day-to-day functioning in courts, local authorities and Tribunals etc, as well as social 
importance in day -to-day life, the priority lists of Central Acts are prepared by this 
Department periodically and sent to the State Governments concerned for preparing 
their regional versions. The progress made so far in the preparation and publication of 
Central Acts in the said eleven languages is shown at (Annexure-VIII). As on date, 
regional version of 1160 Ce ntral Acts in different languages is available on the 
official website of the Department . However, Regional language Unit is expediting 
and progressing to publish the updated version of the Constitution of India and 
Authoritative Texts of the Central Acts in all the Scheduled languages enshrined in 
the Constitution of India. 
 
Committee’s further observation 
3.89 The Committee notes the replies of the Department. As on date, the 
Constitution of India has been published in only sixteen Scheduled languages 
and out of that no updated edition of Constitution of India has been brought in 
Telugu, Odia, Bengali since 1980, 1981, and 1987, respectively. Further, out of 
the 22 Scheduled languages of the Constitution, the Committee observes that the 
preamble to the Constitution is not available in Bodo, Dogri, Kashmiri, and 
Santhali on its website. With regard to preparation, publication and uploading of 
Central Acts in Scheduled languages, it has been observed that it is being 
undertaken in only 11 Scheduled languages. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends the Department to expedite updation, translation of Constitution of 
India and authoritative texts of Central Acts in all the languages contained in the 
Eighth Schedule of the Constitution.  
3.90 The Committee also observes that large numbers of posts of draftspersons 
are vacant in the Department, Official Languages Wing and Vidhi Sahitya 
Prakashan. Out of 44 sanctioned positions, 9 are vacant in the Department, out 
of 151 sanctioned positions, 56 are vacant in the Official Languages Wing, and 
out of 75 sanctioned positions, 24 are vacant in the Vidhi Sahitya Prakashan. The 
Committee feels that with the ever-increasing number of drafting of legislations 
year after year, the existing human resources of the Department needs optimally 
utilized and, if required, to be augmented for quality drafting. The Committee 
also feels that existing vacancy positions are directly related to the non-
availability of texts/ Acts in Scheduled languages and quality of drafting of 
legislations, and therefore, the Committee desires that actions undertaken by the 
Department in this year to fill up the vacancy positions may be furnished to it in 
the Action Taken Notes of the Department. 

44 
 
 
  

45 
 
CHAPTER - IV 
THE RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL 
REPLIES OF THE MINISTRY HAVE NOT BEEN RECEIVED 
DEPARTMENT OF LEGAL AFFAIRS 
Recommendation/Observation of the Committee 
4.  The Committee observes that an allocation of Department of Legal Affairs was 
reduced under the head ‘Income Tax Appellate Tribunal (ITAT) (Capital Outlay)’ due 
to non -utiisation of allocations. Further, the Committee is satisfied with the 
justification given for underutilization of allocations. The Committee also observ es 
that purchase/construction of office complex/building in New Delhi, Cuttack, Pune 
and Ahmedabad may be expedited in the coming Financial Year and if need arises, 
additional funds may be sought during RE stage. The Committee also recommends 
that the fund s allocated to ITAT may be utilized optimally in the coming Financial 
Year.                                                                                                              (Para 2.19) 
 
4.1 The Committee observes that in the last few years, the re have been wide 
variations in allocations to the Indian Law Institute. It was allocated Rs. 5.31 crore in 
Financial Year 2015 -16, Rs. 1 crore in Financial Year 2016 -17, Rs 2 crore in 
Financial Year 2017 -18 and Rs. 3 crore each in Financial Year 2018 -19, Financial 
Year 2019 -20 and Financial Year 2020 -21. The ILI has been requesting for more 
allocations year after year, whereas the allocations was first reduced after the 
Financial Year 2015 -16, and from the Financial Year 2018 -19 to 2020 -21, 
allocations to the Institute has been kept at Rs 3 crore. The Institute has been 
allocated Rs 3 crore in BE 2020 -21 as Grants-in –aid and its total earning is Rs. 413 
crore. The Institute had projected Rs 10 crore as tentative expenditure for the 
Financial Year 2020 -21 t herefore, again there will be a deficit of Rs. 3 crore. The 
Committee, recommends the Department to take into account the requirement as 
proposed by ILI so that its research and teaching activities are not affected. The 
Committee also suggests the ILI to g enerate funds for itself by taking up more and 
more research/consultancy activities and opening extension centres in major cities for 
imparting affordable quality legal education.                                              (Para. 2.23) 
  
Committee’s further observation 
4.2. The Committee desires that the Department should furnish Action Taken 
Notes in respect of above mentioned two recommendations/observations made by 
the Committee for its consideration.  
Bar Council of India 
Recommendation/Observation of the Committee 
 
4.3 The Committee desires that the Department of Legal Affair may collate the 
information from the Bar Council of India and furnish the same in Action Taken 
Replies of the Department.                             (Para 4.20) 

46 
 
Action Taken / proposed to be taken by the Department 
4.4 The Committee had desired to furnish the information relating to total number 
of advocates (State/UT wise) enrolled as on 31st December, 2019 and growth of 
lawyers per year during the last five years. Acco rdingly, BCI has been requested to 
provide the desired information.  However, response of BCI is still awaited.  Once the 
information is received from the BCI, the same shall be provided. 
Committee’s further observation 
4.5 The Committee recommends that th e Ministry should impress upon the 
BCI to provide the information sought and furnish the same to the Committee at 
the earliest.  
 
 
 
********* 
 
  

47 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE - AT A 
GLANCE 
CHAPTER - I 
RECOMMENDATIONS / OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN 
ACCEPTED BY THE MINISTRY 
1. The Committee notes the reply of the Department . The Committee feels 
that under representation of notaries in certain Talukas/Districts affects the 
justice delivery process at grassroo ts level and desires to be apprised of the 
outcomes of actions/ initiatives undertaken to appoint notaries from under 
represented Districts and States in its Action Taken Notes.   (Para 1.2) 
2. The Committee is pleased to note that the Department is following policies 
of positive discrimination while considering appointment of notaries.    
       (Para 1.6) 
3. The Committee notes the reply of the Department.    (Para 1.9) 
4. The Committee has noted the reply of the Department and recommends 
that social networking websites which are economical and accessible to 
many should be utilized for legal awareness campaigns.              (Para 1.13) 
5. The Committee has noted the reply of the Ministry and would like to be 
apprised of the further development in the matter.             (Para 1.16) 
6. The Committee notes the replies of the Department.    (Para 1.21, 1.27) 
7. The Committee  notes the reply of the Department and desires to be 
apprised of the main findings of the third party evaluation report of the 
Nyaya Mitra programme.                 (Para 1.30) 
8. The Committee is pleased to note that the utilization under the Scheme has 
almost been 100% during last few financial years. The Committee observes 
that the funds as per requirement may be allocated/ enhanced under the 
scheme at RE stage.                  (Para 1.33) 
9. The Committee notes the reply of the Department and desires that t he 
Department may pursue with respective High Courts for furnishing 
relevant data and uploading the same on the portal of National Judicial 
Data Grid, at the earliest.                 (Para 1.37) 
10. The Committee notes the reply of the Department.                        (Para 1.42) 
11. The Committee notes the replies of the Supreme Court of India.                    
           (Para 1.45, 1.48) 
12. The Committee notes the reply of the Department.             (Para 1.51) 

48 
 
CHAPTER - II 
RECOMMENDATIONS/ OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE 
DOES NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES GIVEN BY 
THE MINISTRY 
13. The Committee notes the reply of the Department.                                    
            (Para 2.2, 2.6, 2.9, 2.12, 2.16) 
14. The Committee appreciates the Department for utilizing almost 100 percent 
of funds allocated for the e-Court project for the Financial Year 2019 -20. 
The Committee feels that the ongoing crisis of Covid -19 pandemic requires 
augmentation of judicial infrastr ucture particularly digital infrastructure 
for running virtual courts and e-Court project will be of immense help in 
this regard.                                                               (Para 2.19) 
15. The Committee notes the reply of the Department.       (Para 2.24, 2.27, 2.30)  
16. The Committee notes the reply of the Commission.    (Para 2.33, 2.41) 
17. The Committee notes the reply of the Commission and observes that such 
awareness programme by the Election Commission of India will enhance 
participation of citizens in democratic process of the country.     (Para 2.44) 
CHAPTER - III 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH 
COMMITTEE HAS NOT ACCEPTED REPLIES OF THE MINISTRY 
18. The Committee appreciates the initiatives of online applications and 
inviting re newal certificates of notaries six months before its expiry, 
however, the Committee reiterates its recommendation that online tracking 
of applications should be operationalised to enable candidates to check 
status of their online applications. The Committe e also feels that the 
Department should process the applications for renewal of notary 
certificates within this six months period to avoid accumulation of 
pendencies. The Committee is also desirous to be apprised of the number of 
applications processed and  notary certificate renewed within six month of 
their receipt during the last two years.                                              (Para 3.4) 
19. The Committee notes the reply of the Department . The Committee feels 
that unless digital signatures for notaries are introduced, the cases of fake 
signatures, anti-date or/and attestation of blank documents etc. cannot be 
completely eliminated. The Committee, therefore, recommends the 
Department to exp edite the process of introduction of digital signature 
facilities for notary attestations and apprise the Committee of the action 
taken and further development in this regard in the Action Taken Notes.                                                                               
          (Para 3.7) 
20. The Committee is of the view that any type of pendency/ vacancy relating to 

49 
 
notaries, whether due to non -issuance of renewal certificates or new notary 
certificates leads to suffering of the common people by dep riving them of 
services offered by notaries like notarized certificates affidavits, etc. 
Therefore, the Committee feels that the Department should timely process 
the applications received and issue renewal and new certificates of notaries 
in a time bound manner.                 (Para 3.11) 
21. The Committee is in receipt of OM No.A -20011/1/2020-Coord dated 
17.03.2020 from the Department clarifying its position with regard to 
issuance of notary certificates. The clarifications of the Department have 
been noted by the Committee. However, the Department has not furnished 
its replies with regard to issuance of remaining certificates to notaries who 
were selected for such assignment in the years 2018 and 2019. The 
Committee accordingly, recommends the Department to apprise the 
Committee of the present status of issuance of notary c ertificates, along 
with reasons, if any, for non-issuance of the remaining certificates.  
                                                (Para 3.12)
  
22. The Committee is of the view that when almost all the States have finalized 
State Litigation Policies, th ere cannot be eternal timeline for finalization of 
National Litigation Policy (NLP). The Committee accordingly, recommends 
the Department to finalize National Litigation Policy and also apprise the 
Committee of the concrete action plan and progress made in  this regard in 
its Action Taken Notes.                     (Para 3.15) 
23. The Committee has noted the reply of the Department . The Committee 
feels that as per the information furnished by the Department, the Indian 
Law Institute (ILI) needs to expand its activities, research and outreach 
before applying for Institute of National Importance status. The Committee 
feels that for expanding its activities/research, the ILI may require 
additional manpower and financial resources and therefore, it needs to 
generate funds from research, education and consultancy, etc. The 
Committee also understands that the existing revenue generation model of 
ILI may not be able to sustain requirement of financial resources for 
upgrading its infrastructure and research activities.  The Committee, 
therefore, recommends that the ILI should prepare a blueprint in this 
regard and submit the same for the consideration of the Department. The 
Department may apprise the Committee of the actions taken by it on the 
blueprint submitted by the ILI.                             (Para 3.20) 
24. The Committee appreciates the optimism of the Department in terms of 
approaching the Ministry of Finance for additional funds for  Centrally 
Sponsored Scheme for Development of Infrastructure facilities for 
Subordinate Judiciary.  The Committee is of the view that inadequate 
infrastructure of Subordinate Courts are one of the major causes of delayed 
justice and therefore, paucity of funds should not hamper the ongoing 
projects under the scheme of Centrally Sponsored Scheme for Development 
of Infrastructure facilities for subordinate Judiciary.             (Para 3.23) 

50 
 
25. The Committee has noted that as on 1 st August, 2020, out of total 
sanctioned strength of 1079 posts of judges of High courts, 294 are vacant. 
The Committee is of the considered view that high number of vacancies in 
High Courts is causing large number of pendency of cases in High courts. 
The Committee accordingly, feels that the Department should impress upon 
the High Courts, especially High Courts of All ahabad, Calcutta, Punjab 
and Haryana, Rajasthan, Gujarat, Delhi and Bombay to follow the 
timelines prescribed by the Apex Court in the Second Judges case while 
recommending names of judges.                          (Para 3.30) 
26. The Committee notes the reply of the Department. The Committee is aware 
of the fact that as per the entry 11A of the Concurrent List under Seventh 
Schedule of the Constitution of India, administration of justice is 
responsibility of both the Union and Stat es, however, the Committee feels 
that infrastructural constraints where the centre can contribute immensely, 
should not come in the way of filling of vacancies of judges in High Courts 
as it contributes to pendency of cases in high courts thereby, deprivin g 
litigants of timely delivery of justice. Accordingly, the Committee 
recommends the Department to undertake an in -depth study to understand 
infrastructural requirement of each High Court of the country and apprise 
the Committee of its findings within six months.              (Para 3.34) 
27. The Committee appreciates the Department for furnishing Case Clearance 
Rate (CCR) data of some High Courts and Subordinate Courts. The 
Committee desires that CCR data of remaining High Courts and 
Subordinate Courts may be c ollated and furnished for its consideration. 
The Committee feels that CCR data needs to be periodically collected and 
integrated with the National Judicial Data Grid (NJDG) as it will maintain 
transparency and ensure judicial accountability.                     (Para 3.38) 
28. The Committee has noted that majority of cases in the country are pending 
in District and Subordinate Courts and accordingly recommends the 
Department to impress upon the State Governments and High Courts to  fill 
up the vacancies of judicial officers as per the guidelines issued by the 
Supreme Court in Malik Mazhar Sultan Case. The Department is further 
requested to apprise the Committee of the actions taken in this regard in its 
Action Taken Notes.                                                           (Para 3.42) 
29. The Committee feels that infrastructural constraints should not come in the 
way of filling of vacancies of judges in High Courts as it contributes to 
pendency of cases in high courts thereby, depriving litigants of timely 
delivery of justice. Accordingly, the Committee recommends the 
Department to undertake a study to understand infrastructural 
requirement of each High Court of the country and apprise the Committee 
of the findings of this study within six months.              (Para 3.46) 
30. The Committee obser ves that out of the 1023 Fast Track Special Courts 
(FTSCs) proposed to be established in one year, financial allocations for 
only 823 FSTCs have been released to States. Further, no data with regard 

51 
 
to establishment, functioning and conviction rate of thes e courts, have been 
furnished. The Committee accordingly, is of the view that in order to assess 
the functioning of FSTCs, an impact evaluation should be conducted and a 
report should be brought out on such evaluation particularly their 
efficiency in terms of conviction rate in such courts vis -à-vis regular courts.  
                             (Para 3.52) 
31. The Committee feels that the crisis of Covid -19 pandemic has made us 
realize that virtual court is new reality and augmentation and 
operationalization of video conferencing and other digital facilities in jails 
and courts have become essential for justice delivery institutions and 
process in the country. The Committee accordingly, recommends the 
Department to augment and operationalize video conferencing a nd other 
digital facilities in all jails, police stations and courts in the country. 
                              (Para 3.57) 
32. The Committee understands that the Gram Nyayalayas  Act was enacted to 
ensure inexpensive and speedy justice at doorsteps to the common people. 
However, the Committee is not happy with the pace of establishment of 
Gram Nyayalayas as only 395 Gram Nyayalayas has been notified, and out 
of which only 223 have been made operational. The Committee notes that a 
third party evaluation of the Scheme is being undertaken by NITI Aayog 
and hopes that the evaluation report will recommend necessary corrective 
measures required to fully utilize the potential of Gram Nyay alayas in the 
justice delivery system. The Committee desires that the main findings of the 
evaluation report may be shared with the Committee for its consideration. 
                                                               (Para 3.63) 
33. The Committee is  of the view that Para Legal Volunteers play important 
role in the legal aid services and accordingly, recommends that the 
important findings of the impact assessment and evaluation report along 
with action taken by the Department on the report may be furn ished to the 
Committee for its consideration.                (Para 3.68) 
34. The Committee appreciates the initiatives such as Electoral Literacy Club 
(ELC) for sensitizing voters regarding various electoral processes and their 
electoral rights. The Committee is of the view that more and more ELCs 
should be encouraged in rural areas and areas inhabited by disadvantaged 
groups/communities for their political empowerment. The Committee 
accordingly, recommends the Commission to optimally utilize the funds 
allocations made for voters’ awareness programme for a healthy and 
vibrant democracy.                                       (Para 3.71) 
35. The Committee appreciates the initiative of the Commission to link Aadhar  
number with Electoral Roll and also recommending for initiating necessary 
amendments in the Representation of the People Act, 1950 and in the 
Aadhar Act to the Government. The Committee is of the view that 
linking of Aadhar number with Electoral Roll will  purify electoral 
rolls and consequently reduce electoral malpractices. Accordingly, 

52 
 
the Committee recommends the Commission to pursue the issue with 
the Ministry of Law and Justice for amending relevant laws for 
linking Aadhar with Electoral Rolls.                                      (Para 3.75) 
36. The Committee observes that the proposal for common Electoral Roll in the 
country was initiated by the Commission nearly 20 years back, however, it 
is yet to be materialized. The Committee is in agreement with the views of 
the Commission that creation of common Electoral Roll in the country from 
Panchayat to Parliament will  save unnecessary expenditure and 
reduce administrative works of various electoral agencies and at 
the same time making the electoral process more efficient. The 
Committee, accordingly, f eels that Commission and the Ministry 
of Law and Justice may examine and prepare a brief note on the 
issue of Common Electoral Roll, along with the reasons for not 
taking up the issue despite reiteration by the Election 
Commission in the year 2019 and appr ise the same to the 
Committee.                 (Para 3.82) 
37. The Committee notes the reply of the Department on the issue of 
availability of Bills in regional languages. The Committee also notes that 
the Department has not furnished its replies with respect to the post 
legislative scrutiny of Acts and accordingly, desires that replies pertaining 
to post legislative scrutiny of Acts may be furnished to it in the Action 
Taken Notes of the Department.                                                 (Para 3.85) 
38. The Committee notes the replies of the Department. As on date, the 
Constitution of India has been published in only sixteen Scheduled 
languages and out of that no updated edition of Constitution of India has 
been brought in Telugu, Odia, Bengali since 1980, 1981, and 1987, 
respectively. Further, out of the 22 Scheduled languages of the Constitution, 
the Committee observes that the preamble to the Constitution is not 
available in Bodo, Dogri, Kashmiri, and Santhali on its website. With 
regard to preparation, publication and uploading of Central Acts in 
Scheduled languages, it has been observed that it is being undertaken in 
only 11 Scheduled languages. The Committee, therefore, recommends the 
Department to expedite updation, translation of Constitution of India and 
authoritative texts of Central Acts in all the languages contained in the 
Eighth Schedule of the Constitution.              (Para 3.89) 
39. The Committee also observes that large numbers of posts of draftspersons 
are vacant in the Department, Official Languages Wing and Vidhi Sahitya 
Prakashan. Out of 44 sanctioned positions, 9 are vacant in the Department, 
out of 151 sanctioned positions, 56 are vacant in the Official Languages 
Wing, and out of 75 sanctioned positions, 24 are vacant in the Vidhi Sahitya 
Prakashan. The Committee feels that with the ever-increasing number of 
drafting of legislations year after year, the existing human resources of the 
Department needs optimally utilized and, if required, to be augmented for 
quality drafting. The Committee also feels that existing vacancy positions 
are directly related to the non-availability of texts/ Acts in Scheduled 

53 
 
languages and quality of drafting of legislations, and therefore, the 
Committee desires that actions undertaken by the Department in this year 
to fill up the vacancy positions may be furnished to it in the Action Taken 
Notes of the Department.                 (Para 3.90) 
CHAPTER - IV 
THE RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL 
REPLIES OF THE MINISTRY HAVE NOT BEEN RECEIVED 
40. The Committee desires that the Department should furnish Action Taken 
Notes in respect of above mentioned two recommendations/observations 
made by the Committee for its consideration.    (Para 4.2) 
41. The Committee recommends that the Ministry should impress upon the 
BCI to provide the information sought and furnish the same to the 
Committee at the earliest.                                                               (Para 4.5)
  
* * * * * 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

54 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINUTES 
 
 
 
  

55 
 
XVI 
SIXTEENTH MEETING 
 
The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public 
Grievances, Law and Justice met at 11:00 A.M. on Tuesday, the 8 th September, 2020 
in Committee Room No. - 4, Block – ‘A’, First Floor, Parliament House Annexe 
Extension Building, New Delhi – 110001.  Following Members attended the sitting:- 
 
1. Shri Bhupender Yadav  - Chairman 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
2. Shri Naresh Gujral  
3. Shri Shiv Pratap Shukla 
4. Shri Vivek K. Tankha 
5. Shri P. Wilson 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
6. Shri Pradeep Kumar Chaudhary 
7. Shri Mohanbhai S.  Delkar 
8. Shri Jasbir Singh Gill 
9. Shri Malook Nagar 
10.  Shri Suresh Punjari 
11. Shri Omprakash Bhupalsinh alias Pawan Rajenimbalkar 
12.  Shrimati Sandhya Ray 
 
SECRETARIAT 
       Shri Pradeep Chaturvedi, Joint Secretary 
       Shri Mahesh Tiwari, Director 
       Shri Ashok K. Sahoo, Director 
       Shri Goutam Kumar, Deputy Secretary 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed Members of the Committee and 
apprised them the agenda for the day i.e., adoption of following four reports:- 
(i) *     *     * 
(ii) *     *     * 
(iii) *     *     * 
(iv) Draft One Hundred-fifth Report on Action Taken on One Hundred -first Report 
of the Committee on Demands for Grants (2020 -21) pertaining to the  Ministry 
of Law and Justice. 
3. Thereafter, Members deliberated on the Reports and the Repo rts were adopted 
without any alterations/modifications. Since both Houses of Parliament were not in Session 
and the present Committee’s term was going to expire on 13 th September, 2020, the 
Committee decided to present the above mentioned Reports to the Ho n’ble Chairman, Rajya 
Sabha, before they are presented/ laid before both the Houses of Parliament in the ensuing 
session. 
4. *     *     *  
5. The meeting was then adjourned at 11.30. AM.  
_______________________  
***relate to other matters 

56 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ANNEXURES 
 
  

50 
 
Annexure-I 


51 
 
 
 


52 
 
 


53 
 
 


54 
 
 


55 
 
 


56 
 
 


57 
 
 


58 
 
Annexure-I I 
Sanctioned Strength and vacancy position in  
Legislative Department (Main) (as on 23.06.2020) 
 
S. 
No. 
Name of the post Sanctioned 
strength 
Filled up vacancy Present Status R
e
m
a
r
k
s 
Draftspersons  
1. Draftspersons 44 35 09 DR 
02 vacancies 
01- result awaited (UPSC) 
02- candidates recommended by UPSC 
are yet to join 
01-Action initiated. NOC sought from 
DoP&T and Ministry of Defence 
Promotion 
03- No officer in the feeder grade 
eligible for promotion 
 
 
Others 
2. Group A Posts 20 12 08 These posts are to be filled up by 
DoP&T and Ministry of 
Home Affairs. 
 
3. Group B Posts 96 53 43 The proposals to fill up these posts have 
been submitted 
with UPSC, Staff Selection Commission 
and DoP&T. 
 
4. Group C Posts 77 49 28 The proposals to fill up these posts have 
been submitted 
with Staff Selection Commission and 
DoP&T. 
 

59 
 
Annexure-III 
 
 
Sanctioned Strength and vacancy position in Official Languages Wing  
(as on 23.06.2020) 
 
S. 
No. 
Name of the 
post 
Sanctioned 
strength 
Filled up vacancy Present Status  
1. Group A Posts 56 28 28 Recruitment Rules are being 
amended. Proposal to UPSC 
will be submitted based on 
revised RRs. 
 
 
2. Group B Posts 44 27 17 The proposals to fill up these 
posts have been submitted  with 
Staff Selection Commission. 
 
 
3. Group C Posts 51 40 11 The proposals to fill up these 
posts have been submitted  with 
Staff Selection Commission.  
 

60 
 
Annexure-IV 
 
Sanctioned Strength and vacancy position in Vidhi Sahitya Prakashan  
(as on 23.06.2020) 
 
 
S. 
No 
Name of the 
post 
Sanctioned 
strength 
Filled up vacancy Present Status  
1. Group A Posts 12 06 06 The posts have been circulated for 
deputation/ absorption. 
 
 
2. Group B Posts 28 17 11 The proposals to fill up these posts 
have been submitted  with UPSC 
and Staff Selection Commission. 
 
 
3. Group C Posts 35 28 07 The proposals to fill up these posts 
have been submitted  with Staff 
Selection Commission. 
 
 

61 
 
Annexure-V 
 
LIST OF LAW OFFICERS (i.e. AGI, SGI & Addl. SGIs) 
 
S. 
NO. 
NAME/ 
DESIGNATIONS/ 
SHRI 
CONTACT DETAILS DATE OF 
APPOINT- 
MENT/ 
RE-APPOINT- 
MENT 
DATE OF 
EXPIRY OF 
TERM 
1. K. K. 
VENUGOPAL 
ATTORNEY 
GENERALFOR 
INDIA 
A-144, NEETI BAGH, 
NEW DELHI. TEL. 
29244466/29243366
(R) 
01.07.2017 
(Reappointed w.e.f. 
01.07.2020) 
 
For a period of 
one year i.e. till 
30.06.2021 
 
2. 
 
TUSHAR MEHTA 
 
SOLICITOR 
GENERAL OF 
INDIA 
 
BUNGALOW NO. 28, 
CANNING LANE, (PANDIT 
RAVI SHANKAR SHUKLA 
LANE), FEROZ SHAH ROAD, 
NEAR MANDI HOUSE 
CIRCLE, NEW DELHI-
110001. 
 
PHONE: 011-23073696 
MOB: 09824009478, 
 
CHAMBER NO. 25A, 
2ND FLOOR, 
SUPREME COURT, 
NEW DELHI 
EMAIL: 
tusharmehta.asg@gmail.com 
 
10.10.2018 (AN) 
(Reappointed w.e.f. 
01.07.2020) 
 
For a period of 
three years i.e. till 
30.06.2023 
or until further 
orders whichever 
is earlier 
 
3. 
 
VIKRAMJIT 
BANERJEE 
 
ADDITIONAL 
SOLICITOR 
GENERAL, 
(SUPREME 
COURT) 
 
CHAMBER/RESIDENCE: C-
67, IIND FLOOR, 
NIZAMUDDIN EAST, NEW 
DELHI-110013 Mob: 
9910087714 
Tel. 011-24354746 
Email: vikramjit.b@gmail.com 
officeofvikramjitbanerjee@gmai
l.com 
 
05.03.2018 
(Reappointed w.e.f. 
01.07.2020) 
 
For a period of 
three years i.e. till 
30.06.2023 
or until further 
orders, whichever 
is earlier 

62 
 
 
4. 
 
AMAN LEKHI 
 
ADDITIONAL 
SOLICITOR 
GENERAL OF 
INDIA, 
(SUPREME 
COURT) 
 
C-98 A, SOUTH EXTENSION-
II, NEW DELHI- 110049. 
Mob: 9810330420 
Email: lekhiaman@gmail.com 
 
05.03.2018 
(Reappointed w.e.f. 
01.07.2020) 
 
For a period of 
three years i.e. till 
30.06.2023 
or until further 
orders, whichever 
is earlier 
 
5. 
 
Ms. MADHAVI 
GORADIA DIVAN 
 
ADDITIONAL 
SOLICITOR 
GENERAL OF 
INDIA (SUPREME 
COURT) 
 
9, NIZAMUDDIN EAST, 
GATE NO. 3, OPP. RAHIM 
KHAN TOMB, NEW DELHI-
110013 
MOB: 9873819504 
TEL. 011-41851375 / 43999800 
email: divanmail@gmail.com 
 
18.12.2018 (A/N) 
(Reappointed w.e.f. 
01.07.2020) 
 
For a period of 
three years i.e. till 
30.06.2023 
or until further 
orders, whichever 
is earlier 
 
6. K. M. 
NATARAJ 
ADDITIONAL 
SOLICITOR 
GENERAL OF 
INDIA 
(SUPREME 
COURT) 
 
Off. ROOM NO. SE-126, LAW 
OFFICERS’ CHAMBERS, 
SUPREME COURT, TILAK 
ROAD, NEW DELHI-110001, 
Tel: 011-23384630 
 
Res. BUNGALOW NO. 28, 
CANNING LANE, 
NEW DELHI-110001 
(M)-09845000171 Fax-080-
22254017 
EMAIL: kmnasgsc@gmail.com 
 
14.01.2019 (A/N) 
(Reappointed w.e.f. 
01.07.2020) 
 
For a period of 
three years i.e. till 
30.06.2023 
or until further 
orders, whichever 
is earlier 
 
7. 
 
SANJAY JAIN 
 
ADDITIONAL 
SOLICITOR 
GENERAL OF 
INDIA (SUPREME 
COURT) 
 
488, LAWYERS CHAMBERS 
BLOCK-II, DELHI HIGH 
COURT, NEW DELHI-110003 
 
Mob: 9810076012, 8860076012 
Tel. 011-23381821, 23382165 
Email: 
sanjayjain.chamber@gmail.com 
 
17.01.2019 (A/N) 
(Reappointed w.e.f. 
01.07.2020) 
 
For a period of 
three years i.e. till 
30.06.2023 
or until further 
orders, whichever 
is earlier 
 
8. 
 
BALBIR SINGH 
 
ADDITIONAL 
SOLICITOR 
GENERAL OF 
INDIA (SUPREME 
COURT) 
 
SUPREME COURT OF INDIA, 
NEW DELHI Mob: 9810404914 
Email: 
balbir.singh@bschambers.com 
 
30.06.2020 
 
For a period of 
three years i.e. till 
29.06.2023 
or until further 
orders, whichever 
is earlier 

63 
 
 
9. 
 
SURYAPRAKASH 
V. RAJU 
 
ADDITIONAL 
SOLICITOR 
GENERAL OF 
INDIA (SUPREME 
COURT) 
 
SUPREME COURT OF INDIA, 
NEW DELHI MOB: 
7926853003, 7926853005 
Email: 
svrajusenioradvocate@gmail.co
m 
 
30.06.2020 
 
For a period of 
three years i.e. till 
29.06.2023 
or until further 
orders, whichever 
is earlier 
 
10. 
 
RUPINDER SINGH 
SURI 
 
ADDITIONAL 
SOLICITOR 
GENERAL OF 
INDIA, 
(SUPREME 
COURT) 
 
SUPREME COURT OF 
INDIA, NEW DELHI Mob-
9811055523 
Email: surirupinder@gmail.com 
 
30.06.2020 
 
For a period of 
three years i.e. till 
29.06.2023oruntil 
further orders, 
which ever is 
earlier 
 
11. 
N. 
VENKATARAM
AN 
ADDITIONAL 
SOLICITOR 
GENERAL OF 
INDIA 
(SUPREME 
COURT) 
 
SUPREME COURT OF INDIA, 
NEW DELHI Mob: 9841019709 
Email: nv@nvenkat.com 
 
30.06.2020 
 
For a period of 
three years i.e. till 
29.06.2023 
or until further 
orders, whichever 
is earlier 
 
12. 
 
JAYANT K. SUD 
 
ADDITIONAL 
SOLICITOR 
GENERAL OF 
INDIA (SUPREME 
COURT) 
 
SUPREME COURT OF INDIA, 
NEW DELHI Mob: 9811179791 
Email: jayantsud@gmail.com 
 
30.06.2020 
 
For a period of 
three years i.e. till 
29.06.2023 
or until further 
orders, 
whichever is 
earlier 
 
13. 
 
Ms. AISHWARYA 
BHATI 
 
ADDITIONAL 
SOLICITOR 
GENERAL OF 
INDIA (SUPREME 
COURT 
 
SUPREME COURT OF INDIA, 
NEW DELHI Mob: 9350852003 
Email: 
aishwaryabhati@gmail.com 
 
30.06.2020 
 
For a period of 
three years i.e. till 
29.06.2023 
or until further 
orders, 
whichever is 
earlier 

64 
 
 
14. 
 
RAJDEEPAK 
RASTOGI 
 
ADDITIONAL 
SOLICITOR 
GENERAL 
(RAJASTHAN 
HIGH COURT 
AND ITS 
BENCH) 
 
B-346, 10-B SCHEME, OPP. 
NARAYAN NIWAS, 
GOPALPURA ROAD, JAIPUR-
302018 (RAJASTHAN) 
Ph.No.0141
-2760067 
(M)-
094140415
52 
rdrastogi.asg@ggmail.com. 
 
28.07.2014 
(Re-appointed w.e.f. 
01.07.2019) 
 
Further term of 
three years i.e. till  
30.06.2022 
or until further 
orders, whichever 
is 
earlier 
 
15. 
 
SATYA PAL JAIN 
 
ADDITIONAL 
SOLICITOR 
GENERAL OF 
INDIA (PUNJAB & 
HARYANA HIGH 
COURT) 
 
KOTHI NO.2224, 
SECTOR-15-C, 
CHANDIGARH 
TEL.0172-2772232 
Fax-0172-4632232 
E-Mail-
contact@satyapaljain.com. 
 
08.04.2015 
(Reappointed w.e.f. 
01.07.2020) 
 
For a period of 
three years i.e. till 
30.06.2023 
or until further 
orders, 
whichever is 
earlier 
 
16. 
 
ANIL 
CHANDRABALI 
SINGH 
ADDITIONAL 
SOLICITOR 
GENERAL OF 
INDIA, (HIGH 
COURT OF 
BOMBAY) 
 
IIND FLOOR, BUILDING 
NO.35, AMBALAL DOSHI 
MARG, OPPOSITE-HAMAM 
HOUSE,FORT, MUMBAI-
400023 
 
09.07.2017 
(Reappointed w.e.f. 
01.07.2020) 
 
For a period of 
three years i.e. till 
30.06.2023 
or until further 
orders, 
whichever is 
earlier 
 
17. 
 
SHASHI 
PRAKASH SINGH 
 
ADDITIONAL 
SOLICITOR 
GENERAL OF 
INDIA 
(ALLAHABAD 
HIGH COURT) 
 
SAVITRI NILAYAM, 2/22, 
TRIVENI NAGAR, 
KUNWAR CHANDRA 
PRAKASH MARG, 
LUCKNOW-226020 
MOB: 9415418194, 
7388418194 
EMAIL: 
shashiprakashsingh52@gmail.co
m 
 
09.02.2018 
(Re-appointed w.e.f. 
01.07.2019) 
 
Further term of 
three years i.e. till 
30.06.2022 
or until further 
orders, whichever 
is earlier 

65 
 
 
18. 
 
NARGUND M. B. 
ADDITIONAL 
SOLICITOR 
GENERAL OF 
INDIA 
(KARNATAKA 
HIGH COURT) 
 
247, 53RD CROSS, 4TH 
BLOCK, RAJAJINAGAR, 
BENGALURU-560010 
Mob: 9448510026 
Email: 
mbnargund@rediffmai
l.com asgi-
hckar@indianjudiciary
.gov.in 
 
18.12.2019 
 
For a period of 
three years i.e. till 
17.12.2022 
or until further 
orders, 
whichever is 
earlier 
 
19. 
T. SURYA 
KARAN REDDY 
ADDITIONAL 
SOLICITOR 
GENERAL OF 
INDIA 
(SOUTHERN 
ZONE) 
FLAT NO. 406, LOTUS 
ROLDANA APARTMENTS, 
ROAD NO. 5, BANJARA HILLS, 
HYDERABAD-500034 
MOB: 9848021385, 
6302576415 
EMAIL: thotakaran@gmail.com 
18.12.2019 For a period of 
three years i.e. till 
17.12.2022 
or until further 
orders, 
whichever is 
earlier 
 
20. 
R. 
SANKARANARA
YANAN 
ADDITIONAL 
SOLICITOR 
GENERAL OF 
INDIA 
(MADRAS HIGH 
COURT OF 
MADRAS) 
Res. No. 34, 
LAKSHMANAN STREET, 
MAHALINGAPURAM, 
CHENNAI-600034 
MOB: 9003299952 
 
EMAIL: 
SHANKLAWIN@GMAIL.CO
M 
30.06.2020 For a period of 
three years i.e. till 
29.06.2023 
or until further 
orders 
whichever is 
earlier 
 
21. 
YEZDEZARD 
JEHANGIR 
DASTOOR 
 
ADDITIONAL 
SOLICITOR 
GENERAL, 
(HIGH COURT 
OF CALCUTTA) 
18/25, 
BALLYGUNGE 
PLACE, EAST 
KOLKATA-
700019 Mob: 
9831107450 
Email: daxdastoor@gmail.com 
30.06.2020 For a period of 
three years i.e. till 
29.06.2023 
or until further 
orders, whichever 
is earlier 
 
22. 
 
DEVANG GIRISH 
VYAS 
 
ADDITIONAL 
SOLICITOR 
GENERAL OF 
INDIA (HIGH 
COURT OF 
GUJARAT) 
 
Res. A-101, GANESH 
MERIDIAN, OPP. KARGIL 
PETROL PUMP, S. G. 
HIGHWAY, AHMEDABAD-
60 
MOB: 9825175445 
EMAIL: 
devangvyas216@gmail.com 
 
30.06.2020 
 
For a period of 
three years i.e. till 
29.06.2023 or 
until further 
orders, whichever 
is earlier 

66 
 
 
23. 
 
CHETAN 
SHARMA 
 
ADDITIONAL 
SOLICITOR 
GENERAL OF 
INDIA (HIGH 
COURT OF 
DELHI) 
 
K-8, JANGPURA 
EXTENSION, NEW DELHI 
Pin-110014 
Mob: 9810010757 
Email: 
chetansharmamailbox@yahoo.c
om 
 
01.07.2020 
 
For a period of 
three years i.e. till 
30.06.2023 
or until further 
orders, whichever 
is earlier 
 
24. 
 
Dr. KRISHNA 
NANDAN SINGH 
 
ADDITIONAL 
SOLICITOR 
GENERAL OF 
INDIA (PATNA 
HIGH COURT) 
 
7, PATALIPUTRA COLONY, 
PATNA-800013 
Mob: 9471622028 
Email: 
drknsingh.senioradvocate@gmail.
com 
 
01.07.2020 
 
For a period of 
three years i.e. till  
30.06.2023 
or until further 
orders, whichever 
is 
earlier 
 
25. 
 
VACANT 
 
ADDITIONAL 
SOLICITOR 
GENERAL OF 
INDIA (HIGH 
COURT OF 
JHARKHAND) 
-- -- -- 

67 
 
Annexure-VI 
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
19. High Court of Andhra 
Pradesh 
20. High Court of 
Telangana 
63 
21. 
22. 
High Court of 
Sikkim 
 
Gauhati High Court 37 
Hlgh Court of Tripura 
High Court of 
Manipur 
Hugh Court of 
Meghalaya 
Total 
Strength 
226
3 

68 
 
Annexure-VII 
 


69 
 
Annexure-VIII 
 
